

TRANSPORTATION
NOT NECESSARY.
C. B. ADDERLEY, M.P.
IQ Lf j




I
/




TRANSPORTATION
NOT NECESSARY.




TRANSPORTATION
NOT NECESSARY.
C. B. ADDERLEY, M.P.
“Impunity and remissness for certain are the bane of a common-
wealth ; but here the great art lies ; to discern in what the law is
to bid restraint and punishment, and in what things persuasion
only is to work.”— Areopagitica.
LONDON:
JOHN W. PARKER, WEST STRAND.
MDCCCLI.


LONDON;
SAVILL AND EDWARDS, PRINTERS, CHANDOS STREET,
COVENT GARDEN.


CONTENTS.
Increase of Crime 7
More efficient Punishment required—Transportation neither effi-
cient nor required 9
Usual Argument for its Necessity 13
Based on two Assumptions, both questionable 14
First Question, —May not present Number treated as Criminals or
made such,, be greatly reduced? —Second Question, —Are
there not Punishments enough for the reduced Number?
Upon first Question. —Definition of Crime against human Laws . 15
The Laws themselves may be in fault 16
(1.) Either wholly responsible, as for Offences of Ignorance
or Necessity 17
(2.) Or stimulating to Crimes, of which Culprit must be respon-
sible . .' 19
(3.) Or failing of due Encouragement to honest Industry and
Virtue 25
Cases in which English Laws are wholly to blame; in which, there-
fore, the remedy should not be penal 29
Cases in which England wilfully retains rcmoveable causes of Crime 42


Upon second Question. —"Witli such. Numbers of Criminals capable
of being disposed of, there is no pressure forcing us to
anomalous penal expedients 67
Transportation utterly unreasonable as a Penalty 60
Even as an After-Punishment 61
But, on the contrary, available as a Prize to Industry, and a great
Pesource to this Country, if opened alike to all .... 68
Judges and all seem to look to Home, as the necessary Scene of
Punishment *
Home Eesources for Punishment sufficient, of three kinds ... 66
No more necessary, and any Expedients dangerous 67
Corporal Punishments
Punishment by Disgrace
Prison Punishments, of unlimited Variety and Capacity of Adapta-
tion 70
• 72
Conclusion * • * • '


TRANSPORTATION NOT NECESSARY.
CRIME is getting rampant in many parts of this country,
and in the same degree is gradually vindicating its com-
plete impunity. In the midst of all our law reforms and
police establishments, sanitary acts, and prison discipline
committees, the old days of Hounslow Heath are being out-
done. The murders and violences of the old regime are not
to be subtracted from, but added to, the new and more refined
delinquencies of this intellectual age. Meanwhile, our legis-
lators are become too delicate to inflict degrading punish-
ments; and though many crimes remain as coarse and brutal
as ever, yet all punishments must partake of the soft advance
of civilization. Our penal system seems almost wholly
brought within the scope of the benigner institutions of the
country. It is not the supplement, but the process itself,
of national parentage. Our criminals are our most favoured
children —we punish them with education, and sacrifice the
best interests of commerce and industry, in order to devote
all our extensions of empire to the exigencies of crime. To
be well instructed, a poor English child had better get into
gaol—if his father seeks to emigrate, he can only get a free
passage as a transported convict.
Surely there is something vicious in this. If we mean


our penal system to fall back and altogether subside into its
proper antecedent, a scheme of national education, let us give
honest industry at least an equal share in its advantages;
and those whom we dare not or cannot punish, we had better
cease to designate as criminals. If we suspect some of our
prisoners are really honest folk, or, at the worst, w r hat Sir
George Grey called his Cape cargo, ‘ technical convicts,’ by
all means let us abandon the idea of correcting them, and
supply them to any extent with better education, or the
means of emigration, or any other of the principal benefits
with which the nation can encourage an intelligent but ill-
furnished industry—but if any of them are really criminals,
we had better really punish them or let them go; for there
is no greater danger we can bring upon the country, than
treating such men with pseudo-punishments.
That transportation from England to her colonies should,
in the present condition of the country, be employed as any
portion of a penal system, is perhaps the most astounding
piece of folly any nation has ever been guilty of; and when
we are informed, by our law reformers, that ‘ Transportation
must be considered the highest secondary punishment,”
though we may concede the necessity of such an axiom for
the foundation of their proposed code, we cannot but consider
it as the readiest condition for the real subversion of all
punishment whatsoever. Bentham and Archbishop Whately
have long ago annihilated the last shift of its pretensions.
The conclusion to which an able and lengthened discussion
brought the Archbishop in 1832 was, that £ Transportation
may be said to unite in itself all the attributes of a bad
punishment —to furnish a model for a penal system, which
should be imitated by contraries.’ The House of Commons’
Committee of 1838 reported their unanimous conclusion that


* the two main qualities of the punishment of transportation
from this country were inefficiency for good, and efficiency
for eviland the Judges’ answers to the Lords, in 1847, which
alone have staved off the abandonment of transportation, we
shall by and bye find to have been entirely misappreciated.
I hear there is, at this moment, a return convict going
about this country who, finding his blasted character deprives
him of all other employment, earns a precarious but well-
deserved livelihood by giving lectures on the terrors of
transportation. His warnings are a good meter of the
absurdity of the system; for even if he gains credit for the
truth of all his representations, he can but succeed in exciting
disgust and irritation against a punishment which, under an
exterior of incongruous attractiveness, conceals so much
unseen and accidental horror.
But, it is said, we have no choice: the modes of punish-
ment in this country are exhausted. Englishmen will not
tolerate severe inflictions our prisons are choked up—
and such is the crowded state of the population, that our
liberated prisoners are not only dangerous, but a neces-
sarily recurrent burden on our hands. Transportation, if
not required as a punishment, is supposed to be absolutely
necessary for the disposal of our convicts. It is, indeed,
almost unanimously allowed to be an inefficient, unphiloso-
phical, and mischievous system,but it must not be criticised,
as it is unavoidable.
Now, it is of this last argument of necessity , to which the
system of transportation from this country has at length
been driven for its defence, that I wish to deprive it.
The proudest reflection I have is, that I believe I was the
humble instrument of a death-blow to the system, in the share
I took in the gallant resistance made to its infliction on South


Africa. It had, indeed, previously become so confused and
shaken, that Sir George Grey had ceased to defend it except
as a ‘ tentative system of punishment.’ I now believe the
coup-de-grace has been practically given to the experiment.
Nevertheless, it still has its defenders, and more ‘last
attempts’ may aggravate the mischiefs it has already heaped
upon this empire; and even by such men as Mr. H. Denison,
who hate the system, yet fail to see their way out of it, I have
been challenged to complete the Cape argument, by showing
the possibility of such colonial services being dispensed with
by this country.
I sit down, during the leisure of the recess, to reply to this
challenge, confident in every requisite for the task but my own
ability to do it justice; for I never could, for a moment, believe
that national corruption could be required for the purposes of
national correction, or that what is foully vicious in prin-
ciple and result can be a necessity in God’s economy. My
plan shall be, first, to state the argument of necessity as it is
commonly advanced in support of transportation, and, se-
condly, to show that it assumes two false suppositions—the
excessive number of criminals in this country, and the
exhaustion of other modes of penal treatment; whereas,
upon the strictest principles of the philosophy of crime and
punishment, the number in our community with whom we
now deal penally ought to be immensely reduced; and for
the punishment of that reduced number we have abundant
and efficient means, without resorting to a mischievous and
anomalous expedient.
There may, possibly, be some advantage in a plain
country gentleman publishing his ideas about the proper
treatment of crimes against the laws of his country. A
variety of views of any subject contributes much to its being


better understood, and persons in every different relation to
a topic of common interest contemplate it in a different
aspect. A moral philosopher regards crime as a dereliction
of the laws referred to, and classifies it by the extent of the
dereliction. A lawyer connects crime in his mind chiefly
with the artificial remedies against it with which he is pro-
fessionally conversant, and traces its gradations rather by a
co-ordinate line of legal provisions to which it is only acci-
dentally and ultimately related, than by the appearances of
any intrinsic characters of its own. Thus, Blackstone says,
‘ in ordinary language, when we speak of crimes , we under-
stand such only as are subjects for indictments, while
matters of summary jurisdiction are usually designated
offences .’ So, also, the word felony is a term applied by
lawyers to all crimes in common to which forfeiture is, or,
rather, used to be, attached. Her Majesty’s commissioners
for revising the laws ‘ assume the measure of punishment to
be the proper test of distinction between crimes’ (7th
Report, p. 16, 1843), and state that they think ‘liability to
transportation would constitute a proper and convenient
test of the relative magnitude of higher offences. All this
sort of language expresses a professional view of the subject,
and may have its use in professional treatises, but must be
guardedly adopted in more general discussion, as it tends
greally to restrain the freedom of analysis and the fair
exercise of judgment. For instance, a man who begins by
identifying certain crimes with the incidence of forfeiture,
precludes his mind against the previous question, whether
some of the crimes so designated might not be better classed
in another category altogether. He, in fact, commences all
discussion on the philosophy of crime at a second stage,
and, having stereotyped his nomenclature and identified his


subject with it, should the legislature ever disturb his classi-
fication, he erroneously implicates the essential nature of the
crime in the change of denomination, and fancies his subject
altered by the mere alteration of its treatment. For instance,
forgery in ceasing to be punished capitally, became less of a
crime in a lawyer’s view, though it was a keener sense of its
gravity that induced the statesman only more leniently, in
order the more effectually, to deal with it.
It has been said, that no subject ranks amongst the authors
who have written upon it, such a variety of classes and de-
scriptions of men as the theory of crime and punishment. Kings
and princes, professional men and philosophers, philanthro-
pists and statesmen, have all discussed it. It is a subject of
universal interest, and one in the results of the right treatment
of which all mankind are personally implicated. A plain
country gentleman’s inartistic views may contribute some-
thing to its elucidation. He is personally pre-eminently
interested in, and must be more or less practically acquainted
with, its social bearing; and if his philosophy be neither
profound nor widely illustrated, it may, perhaps, have a
peculiar licence of suggestiveness, and may compensate for
its shallower reasoning by a closer perception of social
exigencies than abstract science or professional habits are
likely to present to the mind. Far be it from me to presume
to fathom the depths of the philosophy of crime and punish-
ment. I address myself but to one point of detail, and upon
that make but one suggestion—an hypothesis of possible
freedom from a supposed dilemma, and of an alternative for
a supposed necessity; but to lay down a renovated system
for principles so emancipated from a fictitious thraldom, I
do not pretend.


No one denies that there are many and grievous evils No one de-
fends trans-
inseparable from the working of a penal system of transport- portation
ation,-but the necessity of such a mode of punishment in Eng-
indispensa-
land is invariably assumed, and the only problem suggested ble evlL
to men’s minds by the too apparent mischiefs is ‘given
the punishment, how to relieve it of its evils?’ The imagi-
nary attainability of this discovery lures us onwards and
onwards to an ever-receding horizon of vain expectation. I
propose to leave this problem unsolved, and I am only
anxious to suggest the possible needlessness of its being any
further attempted.
There are two ways of disposing of a difficulty—one by No use try-
ing to im-
meeting it, the other by showing that it need not be met at prove u.
all. It is often by a forgetfulness of the latter alternative
that men weary themselves with endless unsuccessful strug-
gles, or resign themselves to an unsatisfactory conclusion,
like the benighted traveller, debating between the danger of
pressing onward in the dark, or of lying down upon the
deepening snow, to whom the break of day revealed his
home, all the while wdthin a stone’s throw of his side.
Let me state the argument usually advanced in support
of the necessity of penal transportation :
It is said, ‘ there is a large mass of convicts in this Argument
ofitsneces-
country who must in some manner be kept under penal s ity.
restraint; the leniency of modern sentiment swells the
number by an increased substitution of secondary for capital
punishments; nor will this growing fastidiousness permit the
summary disposal of any portion of the number by igno-
minious inflictions. Home prisons are too small to contain
such numbers; the forgat system is exploded by the dis-
astrous experience of France; no resource remains but trans-
portation, and the distant dependencies of the Crown are the


fittest indeed the only places whose use we can command
for the purpose.’ It is further said that even if transportation
could be dispensed with as a punishment, it would be needed
for the disposal of our convicts after the completion of their
penal sentences, to prevent the return of criminals upon their
old associations, and to afford them means of earning an
honest livelihood. The entire abolition of transportation is
therefore supposed impossible, or at least to involve the
necessity of adopting perpetual imprisonment or other into-
lerable substitutes for the attainment of the necessary pur-
poses which it fulfils.
itsCoioniai I leave the cool, selfish, and tyrannical bearing of this
considered! argument in its relation to the colonies “used” in the system,
to the same parenthesis of passing notice, though not with
the same haughty indifference, or contemptuous recognition,
with which our statesmen and judges have employed it. I
address myself now to the single question of home-necessity,
as I have stated it.
Upon what doubt, given an excessive number of criminals, and
tions trans- given the rule for the disposal of a large proportion of them by
n°ight be expulsion from society, and, in so crowded a country as this,
the necessity of transportation follows from such premises:
perhaps even the use of colonies against, or irrespectively of,
their will or interests, as the only available depositories of
the ejected criminals, becomes an inevitable violence, for the
sake of self-preservation, even although the enterprise of
emigration—the main chance for this country’s continued
health and vigour—be crippled and degraded by the system.
But two But I premise two previous questions to these assump-
oue'stions tions: First, is not the number of our criminals greatly
questions nuxio. 0
bef °mption exaggerated by causes removeable, and by erroneous defini-
is admissi- ot]S c f crime? and if so,
hie.


Secondly, are there not punishments suitable and sufficient
for the whole amount of crime, so diminished by more correct
treatment and classification, without resorting to transporta-
tion as a penal makeshift ?
To discuss the first of these two questions, we must
commence bv a clear definition of crime, and investigation of ing these
J two previ-
its causes. °. us i ues ‘
To discuss the second , we must enter somewhat into the 10
theory of punishment.
We may then apply our conclusions practically to the
special case before us, and see whether they do not utterly
drive away the phantom of necessity from intercepting our
prospects of escape from a labyrinth of endless experiment
in penal discipline—a subject on which the uncertainty of
experimenting is far more disastrous than the most obstinate
perseverance in error.
For the first point—Crime is the wilful infraction of the First ques-
r tion. Is
law to which it relates. not the
, « number of
The laws which we are about to discuss, are those of criminals
• exaggerated
human society 5 the crimes, therefore, of which we treat, are needless
the wilful transgressions of those boundaries of social require-
ment which sometimes presenting the outworks of the moral de _
law for human purposes, sometimes lay down only conven- fined,
tional obligations of mutual convenience—which sometimes
are declaratory of the great universal principles of right and
wrong, as applicable to civil conduct, sometimes are siniplj
prescriptive of regulations of social consent.
In discussing abstractedly any question about crimes The^aws
against such laws, we may venture to implicate in the dis- may be in
& . , c , fault,
mission the fitness of the laws themselves; their nghttulness
when declaratory, and their justification when attaching
criminality to actions innocent in themselves; and further,


their correct discrimination even upon their own principles.
Natural or Divine law, deals with crime of a more distinct
and definite, as well as a deeper character, as the wilful
deviation from eternal and universal principles laid down
by Divine revelation, and instinctively recognised by the
human conscience, therefore of certain criminality and of
unquestionable definition.
Human laws, even when declaratory of Divine, are beset
with human imperfection.
Obedience to human laws may be criminal against the
higher code, and, vice versa , crime against human law may
be obedience to the higher code.
Human laws may so place the proper indefeasible rights
of men, or dictates of nature and common sense, outside
their limits ( hors la hi ), as to attach criminality to acts
absolutely justifiable and commendable.
Again, human laws may be based on such imperfect or
anomalous principles, so confound right and wrong, or by
their confusion become so unintelligible, and by the in-
stitutions representing them so vitiating in their influence
on those portions of the community most amenable to them,
as to become themselves the source and origin of crimes.
If not actually their own crime-makers, they often so
injuriously act upon human motives,and so create incentives
to transgress, and foster and stimulate evil propensities, spread
temptation, and prepare and multiply the occasions and
causes of crime, as indirectly to tend to their own infraction.
Thus may human laws, and the concurrent condition
and institutions of a community, overload a country with a
criminal population, either originally vitiated by the law’s
neglect, or ensnared by its evil influence and misdirection,
or falsely treated as criminal by its own confusion.


In considering, therefore, the crimes against our own inquiry
whether
social regulations, and searching for the cause and remedy o ur laws
. , ~ , and institu •
of an apparently disproportionate and undisposable num-
tions do not
her of criminals in our community, let us first arraign the
very laws and institutions themselves, and see whether
they themselves may not be wholly guilty of part of the
calendar of crimes they bring in; guilty also as seductive or
accessory to more, guilty by laches or misprision of the fall
of many of their more dependent subjects, guilty of stigma-
tizing others whom they should rather have relieved of their
own injustice than visited with the addition of terror to
neglect. Lamartine, talking of the state imprisonments of
Mirabeau during his childhood, says, ‘ Son arne y perd la
pudeur qui survit rarement a I’infamie de ces chatiments
precoces.’ How many Mirabeaus, in this sense, may not
our penal laws have produced ? What hecatombs of virtue
may we not have sacrificed, merely by a mistaken process
in punishing vice ! How much also may we not have mul-
tiplied sinners by an erroneous definition of sin !
To constitute a crime against any law, there must with CM
any criminal act be a conjunction of criminal will; indeed no sometimes
J . actually re-
act is necessary to complete the crime, except for the assist- sponsible
ance of imperfect human judgment;* but all laws require
mens rea
, which con-
the proof of criminal intention. stitutes a
* Mr. Hill, Recorder of Birmingham, lias lately (October, 1850)
excited great interest and attention by suggesting that even human
agency might anticipate second offences, and secure those habitues of
crime whose past misconduct and present mode of life sufficiently indicate
intention and likelihood to commit further outrages as opportunity may
occur. Our law already deals with criminal intent, overtly manifested
though failing of its purpose, as penal (see Seventh Report Grim. Law
Commiss.); and our Saxon system of prospective sureties, whenever there
is probable ground to suspect intention of future mischief, is really a
duress and almost fine imposed on the mere intention, anticipatory of
any criminal act. In Scotland ‘ habit and repute’ may be an offence,
and was once severely punished by itself.


When the will can be proved against one person, and
the deed against another, the latter (being the unwilling or
unconscious instrument of the former) has no criminality
attaching to him, but the former is wholly criminal. When-
soever the actual transgressor of a law can be shown to have
exercised no criminal intention in the act, no criminality
can attach to him. If there be any criminality at all, it
must attach elsewhere, wherever resided the influence caus-
ing the action.*
Suppose then a law which should place* orphan childien
in workhouses without schools, to waste away the instinctive
energies God had given them for virtuous industry, in invo-
luntary mental atrophy, and at last should turn them out into
the world to a powerless conflict with vice or an unprepared
imposition of duties, is not such a law as much responsible
for their future criminal course, as he who prepares a poison,
and lays it in the way of another, and allow r s him to drink it,
is his murderer, while his unwitting victim is in no way
guilty as a suicide ? It is of no avail to plead the absence
of any intention in the Legislature to breed up these infant
citizens to crime. Our present law-revising commissioners
class together with direct intention—vicious indifference as an
equal test of guilt.
This argument does not involve any denial, that in many
cases, even though the moral guilt may rest with the tempter
or neglecting guardian, yet the responsibility must never-
theless politically attach to the agent of the crime. f Human
judgment cannot so clearly detect and expose to general
* There may be no criminality, if the apparently criminal action
was a case of chance occurrence, or of defect of understanding, no will
having on the part of any one concurred in the act.
f See arguments of Archbishop Whately, and Bentham’s Peines et
Recompenses.


recognition the motives and causes of transgression as to
venture to attach the responsibility always to the actual
origin of crime. God alone can say, £ lf thou cause thy
brother to offend, at thy hands I will require it.’ Human
law r s, though discriminating to their utmost capability, and
broadly laying down as their principle that ‘ the will must
go with the deed to constitute a crime,’ yet cannot always
let the example of an overt act go by, though the blame may
morally rest elsewhere—where in a future and higher scru-
tiny it will inevitably be imputed. God alone so clearly
deals with motive and detects the originating will, as to need
not even the completion of the act to constitute a crime
which to His eye is consummated in the heart. But this
argument suggests that when the moral blame can also by
human eyes be clearly seen to rest in other quarters than
with the ostensible culprit, where the will which impelled
the crime is clearly and by all imputed elsewhere, then there
can be neither justice nor policy in treating him as criminal
whom the whole community recognise as free from blame,
indeed as rather sinned against than sinning. As publicity
of wrong is what renders a man amenable to human laws,
(Blackstone, i. 124,) so public recognition of innocence is
a warrant for impunity. In both cases, the example is most
to be considered. The rough maxim for always equalizing
punishments to the chances in favour of crime, assumes that
punishment is always the right mode of treatment.
But besides arraigning human laws and concurrent Laws, &c,,
sometimes
institutions for the whole culpability of many of their furnish the
own infractions, there is much crime which, even though fl nd occa-
wholly and completely both in will and deed committed crime? 1
by its immediate agents, is caused, induced, fostered, and
multiplied by a culpable influence, stimulus, and tempt-


ation, or by neglect and impolitic action, or by want of sa-
lutary provision, on the part of the general social regulation
and economy. In these cases the blame of the temptation 01
exposure only lies with the multipliers of inducing causes, the
culprit has to answer for the actual crime, having submitted
to the temptation and so acquired the evil will which, con-
curring with his acts, completes his criminality.
Let us consider what are the chief causes predisposing
to crime against social laws, which give occasion, impe-
tus, and sometimes almost compulsion to the motion of the
will.
The immediate and inherent inclinations to crime against
all laws, are the evil passions and propensities of a corrupted
nature, not only repulsive of order and right, but impatient
of all denial or control; the incentives to their action are
the predisposing circumstances into contact with which
these passions and propensities are brought.
There cannot, therefore, be a completer recipe for making
criminals, than first to vitiate, or permit to grow corrupt, the
motives of men’s actions, and then to place in their way the
occasions of seduction, removing from them alike the cor-
rectives of evil, and all stimulants to what is good. When
a man, abandoning all fear or love of God, and therefoie
unchecked by higher influences, moves in any grade of so-
ciety, under the impulse of his natural desires and self-will,
seeking the gratification of his temper, passions, appetites, and
covetings, there remains but one sole bar to his becoming a
criminal against society, as he has already become a repro-
bate before God, and that is the self-defensive regulations of
his fellow-men; but if they present neither appeal to his
fears, nor better occupation to his energies, if they even
stimulate his evil propensities, and provoke his lust, what can


come from him but violence and extortion, deceit and fraud ?
Suppose, further, the exposure of such a man to circum-
stances of destitution—or a needlessly severe alternative;
suppose all the higher incentives of honour and reputa-
tion, and knowledge of better things, by which society’s more
favoured members are raised above temptation, wholly re-
moved from him; suppose all the force of surrounding
example thrown in favour of the evil in him, and the very
salt of his correction itself a stimulant of worse corrup-
tion, it is clear that no mere fear of man’s authority will
prevent an overwhelming tide bearing all such classes
wholesale into the category of criminals against society. The
only virtuous citizens remaining, under such a system, except-
ing, of course, those acting altogether on higher principles,
will be those who, sufficiently supplied wdth the means of
self-gratification, feel none of the allurements to transgress
the boundaries they have consented to, and within which
they find themselves comfortably provided for; and at length
the punishments for all transgressions will become so wholly
anomalous, that even their very dispensers will become
ashamed and afraid of the sort of protection so afforded them
in the midst of a rotten system of alternate provocations and
chastisements of crime. ‘ Surround a man,’ says Mackay, in
his able remarks on American institutions, ‘ with good in-
fluences, and he will conduct himself accordingly. A man’s
conduct is thus not only the result of his moral character,
but to some extent also influences it. And what chiefly
influences his conduct? The circumstances in which he is
placed. The great object of sound policy, therefore, in the
government of mankind, should be to mould these circum-
stances so as to stimulate to good, instead of being provoca-
tive to evil.’ It is, at all events, clear that any mode of


government or social condition which surrounds the poorer
classes of the community with circumstances provocative of
offences, is itself the cause of its own disturbance; it cannot
abjure the parental theory, for it is not faineant , hut mal-
faisant; and though it may become necessary that the same
hand should castigate which has first corrupted, yet, from
very shame, it will be under a sort of reserve and internal
protest against a temporary injustice, and with resolution of
the greatest speed in removing the incrustation of vice from
the very scales of justice, before a paralyzing sense of wrong
unnerves the arm which should inflexibly uphold them.
The objects of human laws are the protection of
life and property, and social order. The chief ante-
cedents, therefore, of crime against such laws are brutal
degradation, destitution, ignorance, or social fermentation
and infection of vicious habit. If, therefore, the institu-
tions of this country are pregnant with great social con-
trasts of wealth and poverty; if destitution is the condition
of a large proportion of its community, and impediments
besides are placed in the way of its natural relief; if
large classes are allowed to spring up and grow in absolute
ignorance, except of vice, and the few laid hold of are
treated with only homoeopathic cures, i. e., with additional
infection; if the cant of liberty is made to cover the permis-
sion of vicious education, far more national in extent and
encouragement than any contemporaneous counter-education
in virtue or knowledge, and systems of life and occupation
are countenanced among the labouring multitudes which the
very refinements of advancing civilization render doubly
demoralizing,—why then the laws which the holders of pro-
perty (and of life, rendered worth attacking by its connexion
with property) make against the incursions of such well-


trained trespassers upon themselves, should not be severer
than the boxer’s retaliation of the blow which he has invited,
and only failed to parry. Penalties are pretended to be for
the purposes of deterring and reforming; but to deter and
reform with one hand the victims of the seduction and cor-
ruption of the other, is worse tyranny than Caligula’s.
To dilute the course of justice under a consciousness of this
mal-adjustment, is the process towards which the current
feeling of this country is now morbidly tending; would it not
be better to take the other alternative, and correct the impro-
priety, and so to render clear, firm, and unreserved the strict
dispensation of justice, inflicting appropriate penalties on
fewer, and on legitimate objects ?
In the higher regulations of the Divine law, and with its
better means of judgment, these general principles can be
unreservedly acted upon. Whether in regard to the crimes
in common against both codes, or those more peculiarly
belonging to the higher, of which the rich of this world, crime-
less against social law, are mostly guilty,— whether it be
wealth and luxurious repletion, the refinements of an age of
knowledge and the selfishness of artificial privilege and dis-
tinction which leads one man into moral evil and neglect of
duties towards God; or want and ignorance, the pressure of
necessitous circumstance, and exposure to violent seduction,
and the degradation of squalid penury, with which another is
overborne and led astray from social obligations,—in all cases,
the brunt of overpowering temptation, if innocently, involun-
tarily, and unwittingly incurred, is, by the Divine law, con-
sidered in diminution of the moral guilt of the transgression.
We read of fewer stripes being denounced against a blame-
less ignorance, and the punishment transferred to him who
ought to have warned, and (in relation to matters of institu-


tion, not mala in se) —we read of David innocently eating,
under the pressure of destitution, that which, under ordinary
circumstances, it was unlawful, and even impious to eat.
The sacred rest, which has an express commandment for its
sanction, was emphatically broken by its very lawgiver when
need or charity required its infraction, and his last prayer
embodied the whole principle of allowance for ignorance,
in the words, 1 Forgive them, for they know not what they do'
The great apostle, misled by the casuistries of his society
to employ his virtuous energies in the cause of error, was
forgiven because he did it ignorantly; and Tyre and Sidon
corrupted by circumstances of wealth and luxury, will have
more lenient judgment than Bethsaida, inasmuch as they
had a severer trial, and fewer helps against it.
But the misfortune of human laws is, that they are little
competent to make allowance for exculpatory circumstances,
while they are frequently themselves beset with their own
needless occasions, allurements, and multiplications of crime,
the victims of which, however blameless, cannot safely go
unpunished. The moral law and its concurrent institutions,
can never be themselves guilty either of the crimes, or
alluring causes of crime, against their own enactments. God
tempteth no man. Against His law, man is only led away
of his own lusts; for that law speaks the universal principles
of essential justice, and its dictates are revealed by perfect
wisdom. It can never make improper mandates, or need-
less and injurious conventional regulations, nor appeal falsely
to human motives, nor by its own confusion create its own
transgression. The occasions of its violation, are the natural
opportunities afforded to the action of free-will, the necessity
of which, though beyond our full comprehension, is obviously
part of any system of probation; but they are not presented


by the laws themselves. But human laws and institutions
may aggravate and multiply their own violations; and what
we have to consider is, how far a society which obviously and
notoriously creates its own disturbance can consistently carry
out the needful rigour of a penal system; whether on the
common principles of justice it has not the sole alternative of
either stanching those internal springs of crime, and so
cleansing its course for the administration of j ustice, or else,
if so it will, bearing the inconvenience of its own neglect,
taking as the price of easy indolence and laissez-faire all the
consequent injuries of an established impunity of crime.
Whenever the culpability and the criminal act are similarly The prin-
r , ciple is al-
divided between any other two parties, as we have supposed lowed as
between the state and individual subjects, the transference of
dividuals.
punishment from the agent to the responsible cause of ciime
is recognised as just. Our present law-reformeis suggest the
inculpation of negligent parents in their childien s ciimes,
and even during the feudal times of rough justice and impu-
nity of superiors, the country rose against the palpable injus-
tice of inflicting punishments on the actual perpetrators of
thefts and violence, who were known to have been the simple
tools andpnstruments of men of station; and Edward 111.
was advised by his parliament ‘ to charge the great men not
to maintain robbers and malefactors to infest the country.
But human institutions may not only multiply their
criminals by begetting and seducing transgressors against also fail in
J , , . . , encourag-
themselves, but they have positive responsibilities in the way i ng ho-
of encouraging and giving scope to the virtuous energies of y
their subjects, which as they actively fulfil or fail to meet,
they stand clear or not, on the score of their country s ills.
Social institutions cannot be neutral in their influence they
must either elevate or degrade a people. Whether the


parental theory of government be adopted or repudiated, it
matters not; the influence inseparable from power, superin-
tendence, management, and direction, must attach to the
machinery of national administration, and will inevitably
work out corresponding effects around. We have already
said, ‘ a man’s character is mainly formed by the circum-
stances by which he is surrounded.’ I shall have a word to
say, by and by, about the farce of national education carried
on, or rather talked of, in England; but here let us consider
the national education in a much larger sense, which is
always really going on, and not talked of. I mean, not the
extension of the arts of reading and writing, nor even instruc-
tion in lessons of morality or religion, but the institutions
and condition of the people. Every one who has become
actively acquainted with the poor, knows that to make them
comfortable, and to give them the means of honest, decent
livelihood, and prospects of advancement, will do more to
elevate their characters than endless lessons of the purest
religion upon an empty stomach and closed avenues of in-
dustrious employment; nay, every man who has studied his
own mind, knows that the practice of duties is the best
school and training alike in faith, in knowledge, and in
virtue.
Even the general character of the constitution of a
country is itself highly sympathetic and educatory of its
individual subjects. One may, for instance, concentrate its
functions, and so enervate or render apathetic the mass of
the community, blunting the edge of patriotism or even
setting the spirit of the people against the law. Another ,
by distributing the country’s detail of local administration
throughout its limits, may give energy and an elevating sense
of responsibility to all around. But whatever be the general


form of the government, at all events the character of the
several social institutions throughout the country may be
invariably taken as a safe exponent of a country’s morals.
In a perfectly free country, they may he simply the expression
of the people’s character, which, in a despotic country, they
stamp with the despot’s will; but whether they only designate
or actually impose the standard of virtue, there is invariably
a co-ordinate relation between the institutions and social
morality of every people; and wherever the institutions of a
country fail to educate and give fair play to what is good,
they must be chargeable, at least by culpable neglect, of
causing much that is evil.
I must crave a pause before proceeding to apply these
considerations to the present condition of this country,
and testing, according to the terms of our first question
proposed, what proportion of the weeds which we are vainly
and unscientifically attempting to eradicate, are of our
own wilful growth and culture. I wish, for a moment,
to reflect again on the nature of the crimes of which we are
treating, to prevent our judgment being warpea by the
terms we use, as though the criminals we are dealing with
were, as a class, morally degraded below the higher social
class who, in general, are the dispensers of this inferior code
of justice. We who are the legislators, the philosophers, the
sanctioners, the vindicators, and whose property is the chief
object of the laws to which these crimes relate, should never,
for one moment, cease to bear in mind the highei code of
universal application to which we are more amenable, and
against which, as a class, we are undoubtedly the most
frequent offenders. Let us, then, at once abandon the gross
affectation or blindness of supposing that class in the com-
munity which furnishes nine-tenths of the offenders against


our country’s laws,* as, on the whole, morally worse than our-
selves. Let us frequently consider how far the wealthy and
luxurious, who live upon a constant supply of excitement
and perpetual self-indulgence and gratification, would be
capable of standing the ordeal which many of our convicts
have long and gallantly struggled against, before they
succumbed. The records of Norfolk Island, or of some of
our prisons, would tell us of many thrown by the first con-
cession to an early and severe temptation, amongst herds ot
hardened wretches, themselves made vicious by a similai
process, whom savage threats and diabolical harassings long
failed to draw 7 on to the same excess of corruption. Many
efforts of virtue, under such circumstances, rank amongst the
highest achievements of human nature, and can only be
accounted for by the supposition of divine assistance. T-he
martyrdom of saints is but of a piece with such heroism.
Some have sunk under the trial; those Avho have undergone it
without yielding, stand higher far in the scale of virtue by that
further resistance, than they sank by the first transgression.
Let us consider also the share of blame in the actual
transgressions of the lower orders of society, which rests with
those raised above them for their guidance and example.
The lights are at least partly in fault, when there is dark-
ness around, and in only making darkness visible they
betray their own imperfection; while, then, we are consider-
ing how far our laws may be multiplying crime, let us also
bear in mind our own partnership individually in much of
the blame of which we seem to be only the adjudicators.
* There is a remarkable expression of Baron Alderson, in his
evidence before the Lords, 1847. He says, ‘ the inequality of punish-
ments on different ranks of society is not of much moment, as the class
out of which criminals generally come is for the most part the same.’


I am not pandering to the morbid sentimentality, too
current now, which palliates the gravity of crimes against
society, and increasingly deprecates all severity of punish-
ment, till the obvious requirements of common order and
security are represented as indefensible, and almost rendered
impracticable. All laws must have adequate sanction, or
become nugatory. I know, too, that we have a large class
of criminals in this country, both morally depraved and
politically dangerous, who are fit and necessary objects of the
rigorous severities of punishment; many whom it would be
wiser to subject to far bitterer inflictions than they now incur.
It is with this very feeling, gravely weighing on my mind,
that I am deprecating a mistaken classification and inap-
propriate treatment of crime, a blindness to its causes,
an unjust and indiscriminate distribution of its penalties.
I see criminals escaping, and encouraged with impunity,
and innocence often occupying our gaols. I see guilt and
misfortune, villany and ignorance, transports and emigrants,
young convicts and deserted orphans, coupled in the same
category, and consigned to similar treatment. I see the
recklessness so produced realizing its own confusion; and
innocence trained into the very vice it has been con-
founded with. I see the general aggregate of crime thus
greatly increased, and the country vainly struggling with
a self-inflicted burden. I see society reluctantly continuing
a poisonous remedy for a disease which it is unconsciously
nourishing.
We proceed to investigate whether there are not large
classes in this country, treated as criminals, who are far more
sinned against than sinners, and who might with truer
justice and better policy be at once removed from gaols, and
even from penitentiaries, and supplied, instead, with that
primary care and training, the want of which has made them


the almost passive and unconscious instruments of offence
against society.
We will then consider further, how far the removal of
corrupting circumstances from the chief crime-producing
classes of the community, and the more generous and
energetic infusion of a contrary tendency, might not (calcu-
lating by what has already been done, and is now proceed-
ing) be most certainly depended on, for a great diminution
of the amount of crime.
In following out the first inquiry, we shall find that there
is a considerable proportion of what are called juvenile
delinquents, who are, at all events, by no imaginable defini-
tion, morally guilty, and of whom the only possible question
is, whether for example’s sake, or from our having no other
equally powerful means of appealing to their motives, they
must be publicly chastised, though innocent.
We will cite some instances. The chaplain of Reading
gaol mentions in his work on Prison Discipline, a boy
committed for stealing wood, whom he questioned particu-
larly as to the cause of his offence; and the poor child,
crying, declared his mother would never let him have any
victuals, till he had gone and got the wood. In this case all
will allow, that morally speaking, the circumstances palliated
the offence even to the extent of exculpation. The question
is, whether nothing could counterbalance such instigation
as the boy was exposed to, but the fear of punishment, and
what possible mode of punishment could be decently, or
effectually used in such a case.*
I myself recollect, soon after Parkhurst prison was
opened, the Home Secretary visiting it, and the governor and
* See the recent circular from the Eeigate Philanthropic, and Kay’s
Social Condition, and the Liverpool Magistrates’ Reports, for evidence
of the number of such cases.


chaplain praying hard for the pardon of a child of eight years
old, who had just come there, the offspring of two thieves,
born and bred in theft, as the natural mode of livelihood,
by all philosophy incapable of wilful disobedience, as wholly
unconscious of offence. The chaplain said, in all his life he
had never met with a child of better natural disposition; so
gentle and affectionate, so grateful for his care and teaching,
so ready to follow proper leading. He wept himself at the
thought of such a child commencing life as a transported
felon. He said, ‘if u child in the higher ranks of society, with
no such excuse , had been detected stealing his brother s toy,
he would have been whipped by his father and sent back to the
nursery; must this little boy, whose only mode of keeping
the fifth commandment was by breaking the eighth, and vice
versa , and whose opening mind had never had the eighth
commandment hinted to it, much less the existence of the
statutes at large, must he be treated with ostensible punish-
ment, for example’s sake? He is wholly blameless; the
criminality of his action lies with his parents, and with our-
selves, for permitting such social corruption. Do you send
him here to correct what does not yet exist in him, the
faculty of discriminating between right and wrong,* or to
deter him by less terrors than have already led to his offence ?
Consider then the equity of his entire career in life. Born
in filth, and destitution, and, in common with all, in sin; un-
baptized, bred up a heathen and barbarian in the midst of
* Mr. Hill uses this same expression in his evidence; and Mr. Justice
Coltman, in his answers to the Lords, says, ‘ The offences of children
under fourteen are in a great degree from ignorance, and the immature
state of their reasoning powers. ‘ Nequeunt curvo dignoscere rectum.’
They are entitled to he treated with great indulgence until they are
able in some degree to understand the grounds on which the rules of
right and wrong are founded.’ Mr. Hill does not, however, himself
consider that many thefts are produced by the pressure of hunger.


Christianity and civilization, untaught the laws of God or
man, viewing, therefore, everything with different eyes and
ideas from those by which he has been judged, he uncon-
sciously transgressed the invisible boundaries about his path,
the pangs of nature dictated, his only recognised authority
commanded him to take food—why he should not was
unknown to him, till he felt a gripe from the hand of justice,
and found himself confronted with a startling apparatus of
social laws, and first ushered into a consciousness of citizen-
ship, and a branded criminal.’
I heard the Home Secretary himself lament that he did
not dare to obtain a pardon in this case —such was the
suspicion in the public mind of the first advances at
Parkhurst towards a better treatment of the younger out-
casts of society. Since that time a great progress has
been made. Leading men have taken a wholly different
view of the proper penal treatment of juveniles; but the
introduction of any novel idea in England is always slow
and piecemeal, and even France has her Mettray ,* while
* Mettray is a penitentiary near Tours, or rather an agricultural
colony of young convicts. Its purpose is stated to be the benevolent
tutelage of children who have committed illegal acts, but have been
acquitted as having acted sans discernement. ‘ Elle venait,’ says Dr.
Cochin, ‘ coxnbler une lacune de la loi, remplir un devoir du gouverne-
ment.’ These little undiscerning French culprits were formerly con-
signed to houses of correction, ‘ au double mepris,’ says the doctor,
*de la loi et de la justice. Violation de la justice, car on ne con-
damne qu’un coupable. Et de quoi ces enfants etaient-ils coupables ?
d’avoir commis un delit ? mais ils etaient declares depourvus de discerne-
ment; d’etre vicieux et paresseux? mais ils n’ont ni le moyen de s’instruire
ni la force de travailler; d’etre vagabonds P mais un enfant a toujours
le domicile de ses parents. ‘ Violation de la loi! car on transformait
une mesure de police en condamnation penale; on punissait un
enfant acquitte; au lieu de I’elever, on le corrompait. On faisait
tenir au juge ce langage: Cet enfant a commis un debt sans dis-
cernement; nous allons prendre tousles moyens pour qu’il puisse,
lorsqu’il sera plus age, en commettre de nouveaux avec discernement.


England halts between Hoxton and Parkhurst; and the
Home Secretary wonderingly inquires of the governor of
Bridewell (see Prison Discipline Report) how he has con-
trived to interpolate his admirable school into his ostensibly
penal establishment.
Sir John Pakington’s act has handed over most of our
young culprits to summary jurisdiction; by which, if punish-
ment must be inflicted at all, it will be at least rendered
speedy and less injurious to some, and the injustice of in-
appropriate punishment will not, in their case, be aggravated
by the injury of corruption. There is, moreover, a sort of
moral memoria technica imparted even by such indefensible
chastisement, of the elementary principles of meum and tuum.
Like bumping children on parish boundaries, it is a rough
mode of impressing lessons, omitted from the gentler but
more troublesome process of instruction, and it is not guilty
of that disastrous confusion of treatment which mixes up the
medicines with the food of moral life, making punishments
of postponed education. Still, however, many young children
continue to have their early training of neglect and destitu-
tion consummated In the corruption of our gaols, which all
opinion and evidence unanimously declare to be the unfittest
of all places for any children, however vicious they may be,
and grossly inappropriate for the wretched little victims of
inculture, whose case we are considering. The increas-
ing public sense of this wrong is evidently now receiving
additional stimulus from that frequent prompter of keener and
more judicious views—the rate-collector. It is more and
more suspected that the system doubly misdirects its aim,
maltreats and corrupts a class of innocents loudly calling for
a very different treatment, and wholly misses the real culprit
•the dishonest, negligent, and unnatural parent. The rate-


payers say, ‘ make them pay the maintenance of these
children while they are thrown upon our hands—they will
soon learn to take better care of them, and keep them out of
mischief. Others go further, as appears strongly throughout
the evidence before the Prison Discipline Committee, and
deprecate the consequence of such unnatural tutelage and the
influence of such depraving homes. They say, ‘Let us take
these children away from their parents, and compel them to
enter penal schools, to maintain which we will fine the
parents.’ I simply suggest a step further still, and ask,
‘Why send them to penal schools?” Why not give magis-
trates the discretion, whenever juvenile offences come before
them, under circumstances of ignorance and destitution, of
orphan pauperism, or parental neglect, to dismiss the charge,
and place the children in regular national schools, to which
the parents should be forced to contribute in common with
the rest of the community ? This would not stigmatize inno-
cence with guilt, nor corrupt misfortune by treating it as
crime, nor would it throw back on its causative degradation,
the incipient growth of evil.
Let us consider the objections and difficulties in the way
of such a plan. ‘ What,’ said Captain Pelham to the chaplain
of Bath gaol (Pris. Dis. Com. Rep.), ‘ do you think it a
judicious thing to have an establishment in which you are to
mix destitute children with those who have committed
offences against the law ?’ The chaplain suggested, in reply,
that separate schools might be placed contiguously—one for
reform, the other for the care of destitutes. Still, thought
Captain Pelham, it would be hard even so far to associate
misfortune with crime. The chaplain, however, rejoined,
‘ But the offences of children are very trifling at first, and
under such circumstances that you would be willing to


forgive them. 1 This last sentiment seems incieasing!y
prevalent, almost, to unanimity, amongst those who have
observed with enlightened minds the youthful committals to
our gaols. Mr. Sergeant Adams, in his evidence before
Lord Brougham’s committee, declares, * A great number of
the children that come before me are wholly and entirely
without friends or relations of any kind; others have piofli-
gate parents, who neglect them; others, step-parents, who
abuse and ill-treat them; some have parents who encourage
them, and almost all are quite uninstructed in religious,
moral, and social duties. I should say that the evil is far
more deeply seated than in the natural disposition of the
children themselves. Ido not think they are naturally worse
than other children, but that their offences spring from the
want of proper moral and religious education, and in the
want of proper friends to attend them.’ The general opinion
of the Judges given in the same Report, is that the boys
under fifteen brought before them are not hardened, except
in Scotland, where such bad cases alone are prosecuted.*
Now, I would only advance the suggestion of the chaplain
of Bath gaol, and obliterate the small interstice he proposes
to leave between the schools of destitution and reform; noi
would I hesitate to unite both with the general national
school. Of course, the magistrate’s discretion would be
supposed to keep real cases of depravity out of the categoiy
of juvenile inculture and neglect; and, for such cases, this
very process of discrimination would furnish the means of
severer castigation.
* Chief Baron Pollock said, ‘he recollected no instance of a previous
convictionand Baron Platt, ‘ I do not recollect any hardened offender
among the boys brought for trial.’ r .


As far as the interests of the country go, in the repression
of crime and encouragement of honest industry—as far as
the claims of charity and justice go, on the part of weak and
helpless childhood, unsupplied with requisite parental care, —
all is in favour of my proposal; but it is thought hard
towards the child of happier circumstances and of better
training, that he should be educated in company with one
whom neglect has led into the opening paths of crime.
Even the destitute must be placed in ‘ ragged’ schools, apart
from pharisaical independence, but the child who has been
led or let to go astray, and is so circumstanced, that public
instead of private notice has been taken of its first fault,
must have this publication of its parents and its country’s
negligence stamped as a brand upon its face, and it must be
separated wholly from other children, whose first faults are
screened in private decency, and even from those also
whose destitution is not yet incarnate in a tangible offence.
In the first place, this distinction can only be nominally
and not really maintained. How many children already are,
and remain in schools, who have committed faults equal to
these first indelible Gain-marks, which are to isolate the un-
fortunate subjects of magisterial versus pedagogue control!
In the second place, even if such a distinction were possible,
and eveiy parish, or union of parishes, could have three
schools, —one for children having committed an offence against
the laws, a second for children destitute of care and of all
means of honest training, and a third for those neither
publicly detected in their childish faults, nor destitute of
home and friends, such a distinction would be most injurious
and disastrous in its effects; for one or other must be the
best school, and an advantage must thereby accrue to one of
the three classes, both in education and in the chance of


getting subsequent employment: but there is neither national
policy nor justice in the inferiority of any of them, and there
is every probability that the advantage would lie with the
reformatories and refuges, rather than with the independent
schools, because they would be more specially the care of
the public authorities, and supported by the public purse.
But I turn to another set of objections against the common
education of these three classes, which bear equally strongly
against any separate establishments either of penal or of
ragged schools. It is said that the national undertaking of
any children’s education is a premium on neglect held out
to unprincipled parents. For my part, I cease to entertain
such fears, in the conviction under which I have written all
the foregoing argument, that the day is certain and close at
hand, when a general rate wdll be made to support an efficient
system of National Schools throughout this country. As
soon as that day arrives, all such difficulties as I have sug-
gested, among a thousand more, will vanish at once. There
will then be no discouragement to honest effort, no advan-
tage to neglect, no necessity to devise plans for recovering
the expense of any child’s education from a negligent parent;
for all will be taxed alike; only the children of real paupers,
and orphan destitutes, will be maintained at the expense of
their neighbours, who must otherwise support them as out-
casts.
The compulsory attendance at such schools, wdiich would
practically follow a compulsory payment, will have no penal
or prison look about it, for it will be of common and universal
application. The children of indigence and misfortune, and
those entering life in an almost inevitable position of offence
against the laws, will then alike be admitted with the chil-
dren of honest industry to the general training of citizens,


and what the well-to-do labouring folk may lose in distinc-
tion, will be compensated to them by the economy of a more
decently conducted neighbourhood, or else in the avoidance of
the only other alternative—that which would give the ragged
children a better education than their own.
We have thus already in anticipation cleared our gaols
of almost all our juvenile offenders, and transferred that
class of the community to the nurseries of honesty and
virtue.* The gap we have so created in our calendars for
trial, the vacancy in our prisons, the sterility in our semi-
naries of crime, already seem to unfetter our formerly per-
plexed judgments from the spell of necessity impeding the
revision of our penal code. Yet I have scarcely hitherto
advanced beyond the opinion years ago expressed by Sir
George Grey, in his admirable letter to Lord Grey (see ‘Blue
Book on Convict Discipline,’ 1847). He there declared that
the treatment of juvenile offenders required essential change.
He said, ‘ the system should be less penal, and morereformatory .’
I only further point out, that their case is not generally one of
reformation at all, but rather of primary formation; and that
their proper treatment is not corrective, but initiative—
imparting first principles, not their subsequent enforcement.
To teach such wretched children to reflect , in penitentia-
ries, on their past career, is only to teach them to reflect on
our neglect, and their own wrong. The less said about the
past to them, the better; we have to make, not mend them.
To propose, as Sir George Grey does, prison schoolmasters,
and penal schools for such cases, is merely to propose
* About one-fifth of our now-called criminals would thus be removed
from our gaols—and who shall calculate the consequent reduction of
the next generation of crime, on the maxim well urged by Archbishop
Whately, * Take care of the children, and the grown people will take
care of themselves.’


masters and schools with an qffiche of our previous national
negligence attached to them. It is to establish an essential
distinction on an accidental difference ; it is to separate
classes which ought to be united, and to confound two ideas
which are essentially distinct, though correlative, —namely,
instruction and correction, to the neutralization of both.*
But are there no other classes of pseudo-criminals, adult
as well as juvenile, choking up our gaols, and perplexing our
legislators, expiating their misfortunes as crimes, and endur-
ing in their persons the unmerited infliction of our blind
recalcitration against mischiefs of our own creation ?
Our law recognises three sorts of cases in which (the will
not joining with the act) offences are excusable, and offenders
considered incapable of crime, in which, therefore, any
punishment inflicted must be unjust, and doubly so if the
condition or institutions of the country themselves pro-
duced the circumstances causing the infraction of the laws.
1. Offences without discernment. 2. Offences of chance or
ignorance. 3. Offences of compulsion and necessity. The
children we have been considering seem defended by the
triple plea, but others come within one or other of these
justly exculpatory conditions, whom we nevertheless persist
in punishing.
The pauperism of old countries is a vitiating influence so
powerful, as may well make us pause and consider whether the
* As an instance of the mode in which such confusion inevitably
breaks down in practice, take Mr. Hill’s answer to Lord Brougham’s
question (168 Lord’s Ist Criminal Law Report): ‘ What punishment do
you generally give those children P’ ‘lam rather fortunately situated
in that respect, because many of the children at Birmingham have
either friends, or relations, or masters, who are kindly disposed, and a
considerable number of them I am enabled to return to their masters or
friends; under this guarantee, that they enter into an obligation to take
care of them.’


laws connected with the subject do not mistreat some of its
inevitable consequences by any sort of penal infliction. It is
another question whether we are not doubly to blame in also
possessing an obvious remedy for the evil and neglecting to
use it. This point we shall come to consider in discussing
the predisposing causes of crime, which we cherish in this
country to our own perplexity, and refuse to cure. Our
present question is, what classes of our present subjects of
imprisonment we might at once and wholly emancipate from
penal treatment, with every amende and apology for the mis-
take of which we have been guilty in considering them as
criminals.
A condition of life which has, by irresistible process of
effect from cause, broken down in a man’s bosom all
patriotism, all social affection, all sense of shame, precluded
chaste and honest satisfaction of strong natural appetites,
and presented the stern alternative of starvation or incarcera-
tion, is one in which offence against the laws of property
seems to border on unavoidable necessity. I know, indeed,
the difference between the judgment of Omniscience, and the
necessarily rough testing of human discrimination. I bear
in mind that the very circumstances favourable for the one
ordeal, are prejudicial to the other. The widow casting in
her last mite, appears in the noblest posture of humanity in
one history, just at the very crisis in her fate which would
lead our lawyers to conclude against the possibility of her
honesty. Mr. Hill’s proposal seems to me to go so far that
if a man, of whom mere poverty may have made a jury sus-
picious, cannot prove himself in possession of honest means
of subsistence, he would be adjudged ‘ a reputed thief,’ would
be put under high recognizances to be of good conduct,
and in default of responsible bail suffer imprisonment. The


absence of any means of living, whether of food, or of food-
earning occupation, is certainly a suspicious circumstance.
They may be criminal, and rough tests are needed for men to
deal with them, when concurrent with otherwise tainted cha-
racter. But I question whether a discretion might not be
allowed to magistrates, whereby the great mass of innocent
indigence, and of energies broken down by misfortune, which
now certainly finds its way into our prisons, to say nothing of
workhouses—the appropriate, but frequently unheeded objects
of private charity and assistance, might be provided for by
national institutions, furnishing decent repose to exhausted
age, encouragement to despondency, and the means of finding
employment and livelihood, at home or abroad, to our young
and vigorous supernumeraries. At all events, there is no very
evident use in branding all those as criminals whom the state
now undertakes to train as shoemakers and tailors. lam no
advocate for national workshops; on the contrary, I deprecate
our present system, which, while it engages the state in furnish-
ing industrial education and ultimate employment to a host of
men, towards whom the very process implies rather a sense
of neglect than of offence, whimsically affixes to those men,
at the same time, a stigma of criminality which only serves to
contradict and obstruct the first and kindlier intention. If
two men get into prison, one from utter destitution of the
means of livelihood, the other from a vicious preference
of theft to labour, it seems unphilosophical to address to
men actuated by such different motives the same remedial
process. The one wants supply, the other correction, and to
furnish both alike with additional means or skill of livelihood,
is to turn one out to degraded industry, the other to uncor-
rected and exporter villany. We know that the instant
there is plenty of employment, much crime ceases. Is all
the recurrence of crime, or the stagnation of work, attribut-


able to improvident habit and vicious motive ? Oh yes, says
the lawyer, for in England all can fall back on the work-
house, wherefore there can be no excuse for crime on the
score of distress. Unluckily many who do go under such
circumstances to the workhouse, to receive the bread of in-
voluntary idleness, acquire the vices there for which they
have been given credit, and pass on to the gaol; but how
much innocence, suddenly bereft of the means of industry,
goes direct to the gaol ? Is all the vagrancy,* mendicancy,
prostitution, I would almost add, is all the theft committed by
those thrown adrift and aside in the tides of redundant com-
petition, to be consigned wholesale, without discrimination, to
the same category of crime, and to similar penal treatment,
with the deliberate transgressions of the malicious, violent,
and fraudulent disturbers of society ? Is the half-true, wholly-
heartless dictum, ‘ the stronger the temptation the more
stringent the punishment,’ to be allowed, for mere brevity’s
sake, to confound all the different circumstances of tempta-
tion, and to take for granted the necessity of punishment
altogether ?
But the grand inquiry after all is, whether there be not
sources and causes of crime in the country, by stanching or
curing which, a diminution of the really criminal class may
be certainly calculated on. I need not postpone a search
into what is culpable in our national condition, laws, and
institutions, to dwell on the too palpable and prevalent
sources of evil in private life, with us, as with all communities
of advanced wealth and civilization. The owners of large
properties, and large employers of men, in old aristocratic
communities (though with many splendid exceptions),
* In England and Wales in 1847, tlie number of vagrants committed
to prison amounted to 19,621, or one-fifth of the whole number of
prisoners.—(See Fry s Penal Discipline, p. 57.)


hardly ever diffuse around them that personal moral influence,
or devote that careful and vigorous attention to each poition
of the population connected with them, without which the
whole system of aristocracy, and the gradations of rank and
position, are a defenceless and purposeless arrangement of
society, but with which the idea of patronage and attachment is
one of noblest brotherhood and of most benignant reciprocity.
If there were throughout this land that friendly and intimate
intercourse between masters and men, and between land-
lords, farmers, and peasantry, which would be the legitimate
descendant and progeny of the old feudal inter-dependencies
of our quarter of the globe, it would be impossible that so
many children would grow up in absolute inculture, or so
many men become degraded and depraved by resourceless
and friendless misfortune, that filth should breed crime in
our streets, or crowded dwellings banish chastity from oui
villages. I fear that wealth in the new democracies has
been found to the full as selfish, as rank has become neglect-
ful in this old world. The too general omission of such
important relative duties, has even led the philosophers of
the day to argue that the ‘ whole theory of dependence and
protection is no longer applicable to modern society,’ (see
Mill,) and that ‘ the wellbeing of the labouring classes must
in future depend on themselvesin other words, that the
social use of the upper classes, further than as mere in-
centives to rivalry and consumers of produce, is utterly
gone. For my own part, as long as I see the graduation of
ranks stereotyped in God’s order, and whatever the equality
of rights always the same inequality of condition , I cannot
suppose the use of upper classes gone while their existence
continues. No country, perhaps, exhibits their usefulness
more than England, or suffers more wherever they are
neglectful. Degerando, in his first chapter of the Visiteur


du Pauvre, thus beautifully describes the proper relation of
rich and poor, at least in European communities. He says,
‘ Trois ordres composent I’echelle de I’etat social: la condi-
tion de ceux qui jouissent de quelque superflu; la condition
ou les ressources balancent a peu pres les besoins de necessite;
celle enfin ou les besoins de premiere necessite ne peuvent
etre entierement satisfaits. La seconde aen quelque sorte
sa carriere propre; c’est le travail: et le travail a aussi sa
moralite. Les deux autres sont appelees Vune vers Vautre par une
sorte d’alliance qui appartient a une moralite encore plus elevee.'
‘La Providence a voulu que le raalheur futplace sous la tutelle,
sous le patronage de la prosperite. Ce n’est pas un patronage
vague, indefini, mais personnel, individuel, direct.’ &c. &c.
The clergy, moreover, have but of late in this country
begun to resume their proper posts and laborious offices
in the cause of national morality. There still remain,
in many places, in striking contrast with the almost apo-
stolic devotion so much reviving in the Church, holders of
these commissions in the warfare against social evil, whose
utter treachery to their cause, and incapacity for their duty,
would in another service incur the ultimate penalties of
desertion; but the children of this world grudge the needful
weapons of discipline to the children of light.
Would to Heaven one could see the way to impose
some public service on the idle rich, and some efficient dis-
cipline on the sleeping or mischief-making among the clergy !
There might then be fewer of my own class affording
the fair handle of faineance for the accusations of the
haters of a landed aristocracy, and fewer cases where the
vital interests of religion, especially in large towns, would
be sacrificed by the divisions, idle controversies, lethargy,
or absolute incapacity of its professed and recognised
ministers. In both particulars, fortunately, there is immense


apparent improvement, and loud demand for more. Still
greater is the progressive amendment of our laws and
institutions, by which we may somewhat calculate the
effects of past confusions —what proportion of our criminal
numbers is fairly attributable to them, and what ratio of
increased reduction in those numbers may be fairly antici-
pated from continued improvements.
It is not thirty years since Sydney Smith stood up
manfully for the old poor-laws, as the ‘ best possible,’
and ridiculed the simplicity of those who joined the outcry
against them. It was, however, ultimately confessed, to
use Carlyle’s description, to be ‘ nothing less than a bounty
on unthrift, idleness, bastardy, and beer-drinking.’ Is the
improved law faultless in breeding crime ? No one, surely,
can go through our workhouses, and see hundreds ol
young orphans boys and girls, confined in irksome idle-
ness and weary dulness, either seated in unnatural listless-
ness on the ‘ children’s room’ benches, or airing themselves
in sunless play-yards, but must acknowledge that a cruel
process of converting orphan children into idiots and
criminals, is a portion even of the present system.
There are indeed plans for Union Schools,* and the
further scheme of agricultural training is ably illustrated
by one establishment of Mr. Woolrych Whitmore’s devising.
In theory, it is allowed that such innocent misfortune is
at least entitled to be furnished with the means of earning
for itself an honest livelihood, and that those little ones
* Mr. Symons, Inspector of Parochial Union Schools, has just
reported that the mind-teaching and moral culture indispensable for
uplifting pauper children into the ranks of independent industry have
no existence in three-fourths of his Unions, and can never be attained
in the Workhouse ; and that the idle and contaminating domiciliation
of workhouse children tends to a recurrence of pauperism, or to
criminal means of future livelihood.


who are ushered into this world of selfish luxury destitute
and friendless, should not also be crippled in the sole resource
of their own faculties of mind and body, daring the natural
season of preparation for their unequal contest with life’s
difficulties. But, immensely as Mr. Whitmore’s good sense
and benevolence have carried him beyond the lagging consent
of the halt and one-eyed ratepayers, I venture to assert that
his wishes go much further still, and that he sees no
earthly reason against these orphan paupers being admitted
with other children into common institutions for national
education, and there bred up with no such unjustifiable
stigma cast on their misfortune, as should imply an inferior
destiny. Who can calculate the amount of crime we might
avoid, the intelligence we might enlist, the supply of honest
industry which the State might substitute for its present
self-inflicted burden of artificial incapacity and cherished
insubordination? The large institution for six hundred
pauper boys near Manchester errs in the magnificence of its
effort under the impulse of a similarly incomplete idea.
Pity, that such a palace should so strikingly memorialize
the immature philanthropy of that great and worthy city !
Why should the offspring of independent operatives be less
sumptuously housed for their education than pauper
children ? Is it not because a galling sense of prior
injustice or neglect has led this age into hasty and incon-
siderate compensation to the injured classes, and at the
same time to a vain display in isolated efforts at restitution ?
Hence, all our palaces of prisons and workhouses —startling
monuments interspersed throughout the country of great
ideas inverted under sudden impulse. The magnificent
building to which I have alluded, •'often mistaken by
strangers for Lord Ellesmere’s residence, contains only
the squalid products of neglected poverty, and becomes,


in fact, almost a similar institution to Dr. Howe’s idiot
asylum in the United States. In both nascent idiocy is
trained into humanity, apart from the general manufactures
of national intelligence. Now, with a certain elimination
of the pride of Manchester from its exterior, which (on the
principle that every building should suitably and simply
express its purpose) must there be out of place, and there-
fore offensive, I could wish that enormous pile were the
focus of national education for all that district, which
must ever retain the honourable distinction of having
been the first to offer itself to the legislature for general
educational taxation. Within its walls let primary educa-
tion be opened to the whole community, by the whole
community. Let not those whom neglect has already begun
to degrade into idiocy or deprave into crime, be uncharitably
excluded, nor their education perpetuate the very isolation
which first degraded them : nor, on the other hand, let these
unfortunate classes be unnaturally promoted to a superior
and exclusive care, stereotyping the wrong of separation,
even in the very ostentation of redress. Their inferiority
was caused by neglect; in removing the neglect, the stigma
of inferiority should simply go with it; and it will be found,
when all classes are provided with early industrial and
moral training, crime will no longer predominate so much
in one —with the abrogation of an unreal classification, the
apparent difference will cease. But, whatever better treat-
ment may be in store for the children now in workhouses,
there can be no doubt that the present system is fruitful in
crime. Colonel Chesterton, Governor of Cold Bath Prison,
at the close of his examination before the Prison Discipline
Committee, volunteered to call attention to the ‘ frightful
state of demoralization which he had seen result from the
workhouse training, which was of such a nature that it


made his mind revolt.’ He declared that the most aban-
doned women from the lowest haunts of the metropolis
are not so bad as the workhouse girls, and that he always
knew them as a class when they came into his prison.
I will not further proceed to investigate the influence of
the workhouse on the adult population. How far the sensi-
tiveness of real distress sinks into despair before its needful
tests, while the bold front of idleness obtains there a slovenly
maintenance in crime, any one may know, by contrasting
neighbouring cottage-life with that of the able-bodied inmates
of our workhouses lounging in the day-rooms, or chatting-
over their spades in the gardens. Of what use has been the
costly system of inspection ? and can no real work be found
for these able-bodied inmates, either at home or abroad —
but must they eat their neighbour’s bread, and mock their
neighbour’s toil ?
I now turn to another source of crime in the country. I
have quoted Sydney Smith in error —let me quote him now
in the right: ‘ There are,’ said he, ‘ in every county in England
large public schools maintained at the expense of the
county, for the encouragement of profligacy and vice, and
for providing a proper succession of housebreakers, profli-
gates, and thieves.’ The undoubted process of contamina-
tion in our prisons, to which he alluded, is still but very
partially cured; the cure is yet strenuously opposed even by
men of education and position, and from the present mixture
and confusion of national punishments and education, and
the indiscriminate castigation of misfortune and crime, it is
almost incurable, and must wait for its cure till that confu-
sion is redressed. Meanwhile, we must be content to acknow-
ledge that our prison system is the source of a large increase
of the criminal class, and that we continue to maintain
national institutions, which, under the very pretence of cor-


rection, educate the people in crime and spread the influence
of vice by the most effectual process of infection. If we
may hope, ere long, to carry out generally a better system of
imprisonment, separating prisoners from contaminating con-
tact, and applying a really penal and corrective treatment to
subjects for legitimate severity, we may confidently expect,
from such a reformation of but one kind of national institu-
tion, such an enormous reduction in the number of our
criminals as may wonderfully relieve us from embarrassment
in their disposal.
I must not passover, amongst the crime-breeding features
in the country, our beer-houses. The Rev. J. Kingsmill does
not hesitate to state his own conviction (see Prison Discipline
Committee) that our mode of excise—licensing, practically
taking these resorts out of proper control and injuriously
multiplying their number, may account for fifty per cent,
of our crimes of violence; and Mr. Justice Wightraan states
(Lords’ Report), that, according to his experience, at least
three-fourths of the criminal charges that are brought to trial
at the assizes, originate in habits of intemperance and the
spending all leisure time in public-houses. If one hundredth
part of the enthusiasm now exhibited by the moralists and
religionists of this country against the Pope, were directed
against this humbler instrument of antichrist, we might cut
off not the least voracious head of that devouring hydra.
Local acts have already shown a partial correction of this
evil. We are indebted to Lord Harrowby for extending
similar provisions throughout the country. Let the nation
urge the Government to support his further proposal next
session, to regulate efficiently these premises on which the
people now suppose themselves licensed to be drunk.
Whilst on the subject rather of the delassements than of


the discipline of the people, let me add my firm conviction
that enough has not been done in England to provide for
the innocent recreations and enjoyments of the lower and
poorer classes. i Pleasure trains’ are a new feature with
which steam has supplied its own peculiar age, and thereby
somewhat balanced its high-pressure propulsion of material
interests. But as this age emerges from the brutal and
sensual past to a more intellectual era, a certain refinement
in the pleasures, corresponding with the advance in all the
habits of the people, will be demanded by them. Many of
the aristocracy of the land have thrown open their parks and
gardens to the pleasure-seeking ‘ millions;’ the noble city of
Manchester, in one day, voted money enough to purchase
and lay out three public parks, in which its inhabitants
might freely enjoy that healthy renovation of mind and
body which fresh air and pleasant scenery naturally afford.
How much crime is avoided by such healthy vents to natural
appetites!—how much crime is created by the poorer classes
finding every enjoyment rendered either impossible or illegal
to them, especially while they see so many of the higher
classes wholly living on excitements and pleasures! Our laws
seem wrongly directed in these matters; as, for instance, in
making prize-fights unlawful assemblies: in which view they
confuse the innocent and guilty parts of such proceedings,
just as they lately confused benefit associations with illegal
conspiracies—an absurdity only this last session put an end
to, by the indefatigable perseverance of Mr. Sotheron.
Much more wisely did Lord Dartmouth, some years ago,
discriminate between the evil and the good in popular
amusements, and seek rather to regulate than to suppress
them. He succeeded, by his own good sense and liberality,
in substituting a well ordered race-course in the suburbs of


Birmingham, for the riotous and ill-conditioned assemblages
which previously were the constant concomitants of the
people’s games. There is no readier way of making any-
thing bad than taking for granted that it is so. Both physical
and mental recreations for the people should be provided or
secured quite as carefully as their needful food and labour.
They will have recreations of some sort, and, if impeded
from proper enjoyments, will take that, forcibly or stealthily—
certainly perniciously—which might be provided happily
and usefully both to themselves and the community. ‘ Young
England’ should have persevered more steadily in their
assistance to the mechanics’ institutes, soirees, cricket clubs,
and holiday amusements of the poorer classes. By their
immature philosophy and unsustained patronage, they have
thrown ridicule and an air of empty vanity over an important
subject of national interest. There is a vague fear in some
minds lest public patronage or provision of popular amuse-
ments should corrupt, or weaken, or unhinge the state ; and
the history of ancient Rome is appealed to in support of
such suspicions. But, be it remembered that it was only in
the healthiest times of Rome’s republic that the common-
wealth voted annual grants for the expenses of public
festivals and games. This payment ceased at the period of
the first Punic war; and from that time it was that wealthy
individuals began to undertake the charge. This led to
certain public officers making games a part of their official
ostentation; and the ediles took advantage of the opportunity
so afforded, to bribe the people’s votes for their own promo-
tion to higher offices, till at last the best possible edile could
not hope to obtain promotion if too poor to give splendid
games. This abuse of a good thing is vaguely remembered
against its use, and the wealthy votaries of undisturbed self-


indulgence pronounce the people too much engaged with
work, and the state with burdens, for such an innovation as
the establishment of national amusements and holidays.
The people, nevertheless, find time for vicious enjoyments,
and the state finds money for their consequent punishments,
and the national springs of health are corrupted into
fountains of crime, in the same abundance, and at greatei
cost.
This last consideration immediately brings to mind
another and most grand perversity by which, more than in
any other way, this country cherishes its crime. Is it
said, ‘ the people are too full of work?’ The truth is too
manifest. Some are slaving twelve hours a day, to earn a
bare subsistence for themselves, their wives, and children,
with no prospect of repose till death. Others cannot get
even the opportunity of so toiling for their maintenance, and
ar(i therefore cast into workhouses or prisons. The com-
petition is killing, and where is the chance of a moment’s
relaxation in the race ? True, there are some kinds of labom
less redundant, which provide larger remuneration and a
chance of easier life, but these being the exceptions, are not
provided for,—there is no national habit, mode, or provision
for healthy enjoyment. Any surplus wages are therefore
lavished in the alehouse, and the very means of advance-
ment produce additional degradation. But in other, distant,
yet very accessible, parts of her Majesty’s kingdom,—namely,
the colonies, the case is widely different; nay, the very
reverse. so completely are the employers at the mere}'
of the labouring classes, that they are glad to get their work
at high wages, and for a moderate portion of each day: half
of every day is there at the labourer’s own disposal, to enjoy
or improve for his own and his family’s comfort and advance-


ment, and this world’s prospects are so exhilarating—so
elevating to his mind as, perhaps, to be almost as much too
fascinating for his higher and spiritual welfare, as the condi-
tion of his over-worked fellow-countrymen here is too de-
grading. One would have thought any such opposite excesses
might be redressed by an easy interchange—an influx of the
competition-driven labourers into the districts of the ple-
thoric, might relieve the inequalities of each condition.
As things now are, it is clear that in England-proper , the
region of the unemployed, crime is redundant in exact pro-
portion to the want of work: while accounts from the colonies
describe the moral effects of plenty of both work and com-
fort, as even more remarkable than the concomitant physical
advantages. ‘ln this place, Wellington (writes Mr. Fox,
the Agent of the New Zealand Company), only five colonists
have been convicted of crime in the Supreme Court, which
answers both to assizes and sessions, in ten years! All the
crime in the place is committed by Sydney escaped convicts,
soldiers, or sailors. It all verifies Cobbett’s dictum, that it is
difficult to make an empty sack stand upright, but a full one
has no inclination to fall.’*
‘ In the United States, and in Russia,’ says the Edin-
burgh Review, £ two countries with few points of resemblance,
there is one thing in common—a sufficient territory, and in
* The governor of Lancaster Castle tells the Prison Discipline Com-
mittee, that he observes very great changes in the number of his
prisoners after seasons of distress, and that, after the late abundance of
work, they had become so scanty as quite to change his former opinion
that there was a considerable number of professional thieves —it seemed
they were very generally driven by necessity to commit crimes. It is,
however, true that wanton offences from drunkenness increase during
abundance amongst our improvident poor; still periods of non-employ-
ment present the double temptation to crimes of distress and idleness. —
See the Rev. J. Clay’s Preston Reports.


each there, is therefore a common absence of those signs which
forebode a social war, whilst the unemployed labourers of
Paris mainly contributed to the overthrow of the monarchy.’
England is, I believe, the only country in the world which
possesses a sufficient territory for the removal of a redundant
and over-competing population, and the means and qualifi-
cations for its successful appropriation, and yet neglects such
provisions, and the invitations of a benignant Providence,
cherishing the thousand social evils and misfortunes of which
she so abundantly enjoys the antidote.
It would be filling up too much my outline chart
of the country’s springs of crime, were I to trace more mi-
nutely the ramifications of this one great evil. I note it
down as fans maximus mali, and refer to a most able
discussion of it, in last January’s ‘ Edinburgh Review.’
The advantage to this country, in the great reduction
of crime, which (by the clearest evidence from other coun-
tries) w T ould certainly result from a free and open outlet of
its population to the colonies, is admitted with unexampled
unanimity. Our most influential statesmen and best econo-
mical writers all express this conviction. Every successive
Parliamentary Committee on the subject only repeats the
same opinion, and every recurrent period of social disturb-
ance only gives it additional confirmation. Yet we persist
in first degrading emigration into a nominal punishment, and
then rendering colonization distasteful by subjecting our set-
tlements to prison discipline, in the place of free constitutions.
Emigration, it is proved, would prevent much crime, but we
prefer fomenting the crime, and then applying emigration to it
as a corrective. We spoil our food to make a medicine of it,
and after all the medicine fails. To be sure, punishments
are scarce in these freethinking days, and perhaps we cannot
afford to give up one, even though the same process, otherwise


applied, would supersede much of the necessity of punishing.
We like our countrymen to spread over the outskirts of our
land as criminals, rather than as industrious enterprising-
settlers. It gives our hampered ministers an excuse for a
little despotic government in the extremities of the kingdom,
unheeded at home; whereas free and honest English emi-
grants would demand free institutions as their right, and natu-
ral requirement. Besides, the Emigration Commissioners can,
after all, send out as many free emigrants as they can com-
mand passage-money for; —they will not be of the higher
kind of settlers, to he sure,—but so much the better, they
may be more conveniently shipped in couples with our con-
victs, or transported cheaply as miserable paupers. Again,
if emigration were not degraded, and settlements turned into
prisons, no Commissioners or passage-money grants would
be needed, and patronage would be lost. Be it so; if this
country is really too supine to stop such suicidal folly, at
least let us fairly confess, that to save ourselves this trouble
we employ our most powerful resources to increase, instead
of to cure, our social evils.
In proceeding to enumerate other sources of crime, I will
not allow any scruples of personal predilections or class
prejudices to hinder a frank confession that I think the habit
of preserving game, in the most highly cultivated and densely
peopled parts of the country, deserves a place in the enume-
ration. Interested sportsmen pretend to argue that only
thieves are poachers, and that if there were no such thing
as game, the same depredators would attack other property.
I believe the temptation offered by such exposed and allur-
ing property has made many honest men thieves, and that
is my reason for thinking that country gentlemen should be
willing to sacrifice a personal gratification for the sake of


great moral interests; just on the same principle on which
Mr. Hill suggests, that the habit of tradesmen hanging goods
outside their shops should be made the subject of legislative
prohibition, because such exposure of property and facility
of theft is found to be the ruin of many. I do not indeed
think that the preservation of game can be prevented by
law, but I trust to the sense and good feeling of the larger
game-preservers to follow up the good example already set
of such an act of beneficent self-denial, which they alone can
render generally practicable, and for which the many in-
terests of landed property will offer them abundant means
of compensation. The newspapers of the very day on which
I happen to be writing this, recount no few r er than three most
violent conflicts in the defence of the artificial and incon-
gruous luxury of wild sports among the suburbs of towns
and in the precincts of nursery gardens. The list of
both killed and wounded in these affrays is considerable.
May be, the attacking party were lawless depredators, and
perhaps they were regular professional thieves. Neverthe-
less I have some misgivings as to the probable mode of their
original training in dishonesty, and doubts whether, without
the special allurement of game at their doors, they would all
have arrived at such lawless habits of life. I have, more-
over, a strong dislike to that portion of our laws which
finally hands over to the owners of such a peculiar sort of
property a summary adjudication of the penalties attached
to its spoliation.
I might proceed to multiply examples of other sources
of crime continuing amongst us, though removeable—many
of them already evidencing by the salutary effects of partial
cure, how large are the means within our reach, of reducing
the amount of crime against our laws. I have not touched
upon the questions of Sanitary reform—the intimate relation


between dirt and vice, and the multitudinous progeny ot
that connexion in this country, which the very scavengers
of the community might alone put to flight.
I have not specially treated the want of education, con-
sidering that the basis of my whole case; nor have I room
for the more disputed topic of restricted investments for the
savings of the poor, and the difficulties in the way of pos-
session and transfer of land.
But I hasten to the second question I proposed, namely,
whether, if the criminal population of this country be so
extensively reducible, both by recognising the innocence of
many now falsely treated as criminals, and by removing
many plainly removeable causes of crime, it is not clear that
the punishment of transportation has no right to its last
remaining plea, necessity, while there are sufficient and
more suitable punishments for the more manageable number
of criminals who, in spite of corrected definitions, and
diminished corruptions, will still supply our gaols and
judges with constant but more decent occupation.
I have disposed of most of the younger outcasts of
society, freed them from public disgrace, and redressed their
wrong by recognising their proper share in national tutelage.
Their punishment is acknowledged to be a mistake, by
many directly, by all indirectly, in the diluted kinds of
punishment expressly concocted for their case. I have
suggested that we might include others also in the same
impunity, as proper subjects for a kinder un-penal and dis-
graceless treatment. The object of all punishment is, to
deter the culprit from a repetition of his offence, and others
from following his example. It should therefore appeal to
the fears of the viciously inclined throughout the com-
munity, and to the fears or better motives of the culprit
himself. But where there has been no mens rea dictating


the action, punishment offers a false appeal, assuming bad
motive where there was none, and if the innocence be
obvious to the community, punishments may indeed appeal
to their sympathies , but not to their fears. Punishment then
is wholly inapplicable in all such cases. A large part of
Parkhurst should be turned into a Mettray, and both should
be resolved into the general components of national schools,
with which kind of institution they are now only mongrelized.
All the Philanthropies, Hoxtons, Bridewell refuges, et hoc
genus omne may come boldly out and show themselves, as
bojid Jide schools, and no longer skulk under the wink of
our legislature as permissive shams of penitentiaries. One
might well have been tempted to go further, and propose
the mitigation of punishments for those who have been hope-
lessly thrown amongst corrupting influences, and deprived
of the possibility of honest livelihood —‘ that considerable
part of the population’ (to quote the strong language of
Wilmot Horton’s Committee), ‘ which is compelled to resort
to habits of plunder and spoliation for the actual means of
subsistence,’ and those classes whose motives of action have
been passively corrupted, and their habits almost forcibly
depraved. The correction of such an anomalous condition
seems fairly to be sought for, not so much in individual
punishments, as in social reformation. Punishments are cor-
relative with education —the corresponding checks against
the infringements of the regulations to which they relate.
Where the normal system then habitually educates to crime,
the punishments appropriate to it should rather be directed
against inexpertness. When Sparta applauded adroit thefts,
she only punished clumsy detection, a State cannot
fairly punish the infringements of a discipline for which it
has failed to train its citizens, much less can it punish habits
of life which it has itself induced and fostered.


The nice adjustment of punishment to moral responsibi-
lity is, however, practically unattainable; we must not venture
to extend the positive enunciation of exculpatory circum-
stances beyond what is tangible and unmistakable such as
mental or bodily incapacity, ostensible coercion, &c. There
are plain reasons against a general admission of such excuses
as necessity, or strong temptation, or corruptive influences, or
the default of responsible tutelage, except as considerations
for a judge’s discretion. If our institutions have depraved
the people, we must yet punish them; only let us hope the
process of depraving them may be speedily stayed.
For the stock of criminals now in hand, then, and lor the
inevitable continuance of never-failing crime and violence,
punishments must be provided appropriate and sufficient.
We shall not, however, be so fastidious, as soon as we may
feel sure we deal with proper subjects for castigation; noi
need we then resort to fanciful inventions, endless gradations,
and complex combinations of punishment, to meet the miti-
gated emergency. — See the 45 classes of Penalties recom-
mended by the Law Commissioners.
We must indeed be prepared for a constant supply of
burglars, thieves, malicious injurers, depredators, violent
assaulters, ravishers, cheats, forgers, and other infringers oi
the laws and peace of the country. I will even allow that,
together with the supposed reduction of these crimes, an
increase of another sort of mischief must be anticipated,
namely, those more refined and ingenious villanies which
a rapid and unchastened development of the national intel-
lect is sure to produce. (See Prison Disc. Report, Q. 1973
and passim.) These, however, will not so swell the number}
nor be of the character, to call for the continuance of make-
helieve and anomalous punishments, under the pressure of
perplexity in their disposal. On the contrary, these times


will not tolerate unphilosophical punishments ; their mischiel
rushes through the veins of our susceptible bodies politic to
the very core. It would be far better to publish universal
amnesty to crime than treat it with false penalties. I need
hardly waste time in fixing such a character to the punish-
ment of transportation as applicable to the present condition
of this country. Its condemnation is granted—it is only
maintained on account of what Sir George Grey calls the
perplexity of the legislature. Its futility was, long ago,
unanswerably exposed by Archbishop Whately; and the
perpetual changes in the mode of attempting it ever since,
amount to a public confession of the fact. The letters which
our toiling labourers receive from their more fortunate
transported relatives exhorting them to find some means
of getting out to join them—the comparative difficulty of
obtaining free passages even on Lord Grey’s plan of coupling
free and convict emigrants in our arks of transportation
the entire ignorance of the people what the sentence implies
—the desperate efforts of the Judges, though assisted by the
itinerant oratory of return convict lecturers, to explain its
meaning, and give it a character of terror —the confessions
of the Judges themselves (see Lords’ Report, 1847), that for
the life of them they never can understand it; all these
circumstances, when rigidly contrasted with the acknow-
ledged requisites of proper punishments, as laid down by
the highest authorities, seem to condemn the punishment
of transportation from England to her colonies, as the very
acme of folly. Pernicious to England, as obstructing her
healthiest energies—only tolerated in those colonies which
it has first corrupted—creative of the crime wdiich it
pretends to punish—this wretched system still rears its
noxious head amongst our laws, and by perpetual trans-
formations still lures ns on to another and another trial.


It is, indeed, now at length conceded that the penal part
of the sentence must be all but completed at home, or in
government works: expatriation is therefore intended to be
only the completion or compulsory sequel of the sentence.
But will expatriation sustain even this mitigated character of
penalty, in the present state of England? In the first place,
the mere passage to a colony cannot be looked upon as expa-
triation at all—it is but a settlement in our more distant
states, tantamount to a New Yorker’s changing his residence
to Wisconsin, or the removal of a Brandenburger to Saxony;
which latter amount of locomotion is afforded as a kindness,
not a penalty, by voluntary associations under the Prussian
government, to liberated prisoners in those countries. We
have the means of real expatriation, severe as Siberian exile
if we please; as, for instance, in those North American
wildernesses called colonies by courtesy to the Hudson’s Bay
Company, and elsewhere; but a kind of transportation, so
real a substitute for death, would not be tolerated by this
country, while any other kind is clearly no penalty at all.
A final stage of punishment in the shape of gratuitous
emigration to the colonies would puzzle Bentham, were he
now alive. By all his rules he would class it amongst the
recompenses available in England, though by its designation
it would claim to be discussed among the peines. It be-
comes a fictitious punishment, and as Mr. Hill well observes
in the course of his late evidence, ‘ As a general principle all
fictions in the public administration of justice are most per-
nicious in their effects upon the public mind.’
Let it once for all be boime in mind, that in the present
circumstances and feelings of this country, transportation to
our colonies can be no punishment, and may become an
object of the highest and most eager ambition. The Athe-
nians used two sorts of exile, the actual banishment of


malefactors, and ostracism, which was a sort of permitted
escape of marked men in troublous times. When the two
became confused, and mean vile persons became ostracised,
the penal institution was abolished, as having lost its in-
tention. We might take the hint, and see that as by
change of times the transportation of felons, and emigration
at the public expense (which is our recognised escape from
pressure at home) have become confused in idea, it is
high time to stop the consequent frustration of punishment
and degradation of the resources of honest distress.
It is only by the connexion of extraneous terrors and
pains with transportation, that it may be converted into
an instrument and process of punishment. But such pains,
it is allowed, are better inflicted at home.
If, then, real expatriation would not be tolerated, and
colonial transportation is in itself more attractive than de-
terrent, and as an adjunct to penal process only serves to
neutralize the terrors connected with it, and degrade the
proper stimulants to enterprise, the entire system of remote
punishments becomes defenceless. Even if the exhaustion
of all other penal resources could be pleaded, it would not
justify such an anomalous expedient. But the argument
of overwhelming pressure has been proved groundless;
for the pressure is partly imaginary, and the rest may
be relieved.
As a bene- But if transportation be proposed, after the penal sen-
vitkTu of°' tence be wholly completed, for the benevolent object of
pl ac i n S a renovated character in a new career of honest
equally ]jf e —f ree alike from former temptations and incurred dis-
open to all,
and wholly grace—such treatment is no part of punishment. It be-
uncon- , s , _
nected with comes a part of our system of national education, and
Lent. of government tutelage —it matters not whether of chil-
dren or of new-born citizens. Such an object, moreover,


is frustrated by any connexion with penal process; nor
is there any just ground for making the colonies the sole
scenes for such experiments. The practice of Prussia
suggests the use of nearer portions of the empire, if not
exclusively, at least indiscriminately, with those of more
difficult access.
Such advantageous openings to industrious livelihood
should, also, clearly not be restricted to those who have
passed through a preliminary course of crime : that were
a monstrous injustice towards honest poverty. Indeed, the
system should be carefully guarded from depriving honesty
of its proper preference. The brand of disgrace, incurred
by just punishment, is a proper consequence and infliction
upon crime. To provide escape from it may be judicious
kindness, but not if carried to the extent of discouraging-
virtue. We are in danger of being actuated by the selfish
fear, lest our liberated prisoners, failing to obtain employment,
should become a burden to ourselves; and we have not
scrupled to secure to them even a preference in the labour-
market (see Pris. Disc. Report, passim ), which both in
justice and in policy should rather be the reward of toiling
honesty. The true extrication from this danger, is in the
most free and open access of colonial demand to our sup-
plies of labour, and the cessation of transportation and all
other discouragements to emigration. Our liberated pri-
soners would then find for themselves the new career which
we now undertake, needlessly and injuriously, to find for
them; and hard-working, decent folk, would have at least
an equal chance in the general competition.
We are told, however, that the Judges protest againsfT Judges ap-
. # # , prove
the abolition of transportation. Their approbation of the transporta
punishment, as far as appears in the Lords’ Report, seems


to rest on two grounds, both of which we have already
rejected. First, the fictitious terror of a distant punish-
ment ; and secondly, the necessity of removing criminals
from old associations. The experience of other countries
has suggested to us far safer ways of attaining the latter
object; and the stress which the Judges lay upon the
former, appears afterwards much qualified, by their unani-
mous admission that the terror of distance is not felt by
young men , and becomes a pleasurable excitement to the
adventurous; and still further, by an evident reservation in
their minds in favour of a better substitute for the entire
system, as soon as there is leisure and experience sufficient
for its complete elaboration.
All that the Judges assert in favour of transportation is,
that it is a more deterrent process than lax and luxurious
imprisonment; but they all distinctly allow that a stringent
and severe prison discipline would be greatly preferable
to either; and of transportation, in its relation to the
colonies, they are unanimous in honest condemnation.
But I question whether the best judges of the meaning of
the law, must be the best judges of the effects or terrors
of its sanctions. Others, who see the world outside their
courts, and walk about in a more ordinary dress than
ermine, may give a better opinion upon the common
appreciation of various punishments, and their influence
on the minds of men in general. The Judges, moreover,
exercised a wise discretion in declining to condemn one
of our chief modes of punishment before they were ready
to recommend a better substitute; and for the condemna-
tion of transportation one has but to refer back from the
formal opinions to the detailed evidence given in the same
Report. The practical absurdity, unintelligibleness, and


uncertainty of the punishment is there clearly manifested;
not to mention its occasional complete abandonment during
fits of judicial despair, and the discretionary substitution
of other kinds of treatment under the fictitious cover of its
name, Mr. Hill suggests that ‘it would be a great im-
provement if those who, like himself, are obliged to pass
the sentence of transportation, had the means of knowing
what would be the effect of their sentences/ The late
Mr. Law, even after professing approbation of the punishment,
declared that for several years he had always made a point
of explaining each successive meaning of the sentence,
whenever he passed it, ‘ in order,’ said he, ‘to satisfy the
people that it was not the trifling thing they thought; for
many were in total ignorance what the punishment was,
and were rather desirous of encountering it than of re-
maining here without any means of employment.’ Another
Recorder seems to have taken upon himself to abandon
all use of the punishment with respect to juveniles, and
to have preferred impunity, sending all such offenders back
to their parents; whilst, on the contrary. Judge Alderson
‘makes a point of passing sentence of transportation on
all juveniles;’ but only ‘because the sentence means, what
it does not profess, an ordeal in penitentiaries previous
to the removal from this country.’
One need not, then, attach much weight to a very quali-
fied and extremity-driven verdict for transportation, so much
contradicted by most damnatory evidence. We must find
all our punishments at home, now that the removal to our
colonies has come to mean, in the people’s minds, an ex-
change of skim-milk and potatoes for the rapid possession
of land, cattle, sheep, and horses.
The only remaining question then is, whether there are


not adequate means of punishing offences against our laws
at home ?
To discuss such a question fully would, of course, be to
write a complete treatise on the theory of punishments. I
seek merely to point out the large supply of penal resources,
which remain to us after the subtraction of one which has
been too long maintained by an undue traditional apprecia-
tion ; and the very possible extension of the use of some of
them, should need require.
Three kinds of secondary punishment would remain on
our statute-books, on the abolition of transportation,—namely,
corporal inflictions, fines, and imprisonment. But under
the varieties of these three heads almost all legitimate
secondary punishment ranges. As all our crimes must be
committed against either person, reputation, or property,
so all their co-relative punishments may partake of a
similar threefold division. Under the first head our laws
deprive of liberty or inflict pain, under the second they
subject to shame, under the third they pronounce partial or
total forfeiture of possessions.
The first mode of punishment, namely, imprisonment, is
itself capable of an infinite number of gradations and varieties,
from simple deprivation of freedom, through all sorts of ag-
gravations, by combined inflictions of labour or mortification,
up to the climax which England ever shrinks from—per-
petual incarceration,*
Ignominious and indeed all bodily inflictions are reduced
* Dumont makes Bentliam say, ‘ Sous un nom qui ne rappelle a
I’esprit qu’une simple circonstance de confinement dans un lieu particu-
lier, V cmprisonnement pent renfermer tons les mttux possibles, depuis
ceux qui en sont une suite ndcessaire jusqu’a d’autrcs, qui s’el&vent de
rigueur jusqu’a la mort.’


in England to the one sole head of flagellations, but that of
most useful application. The stocks, the pillory, the duck-
ing-stool, and brand, have properly passed away with the
more servile times to which they belonged ; yet lam not
optimist enough to suppose all use of disgraceful punishment
wholly superseded.
Fines and forfeitures are of limited applicability as
punishments of crimes chiefly committed by the poor ; but
are useful as the alternative sentence to be used in many
cases of rich offenders, in which imprisonment would appear
the lesser evil. They are, however, most applicable for
state offences, and in the sense of official degradation and
deprivation of offices and station.
One can hardly conceive it needful to evoke from civiliza- No more
tion’s burial-places the punishments of bygone ages to re- necessary
emit these lists, nor to conjure up the spectres of fictitious
terrors to supply their want of vigour, nor to intersperse
with childish scarecrows, or clothe with false disguises the
plain intelligible boundaries of our laws. On the contrary, increasing
it would be highly dangerous for us to resort to any such mere ex
devices. The punishments employed by any community dangeroi
must be congenial to its present social condition—its standard
of education, to which all punishments necessarily bear a
constant co-ordinate relation—and its measure of developed
freedom. To attempt the imposition of unreal penalties on
the criminals of an intelligent community can only serve to
bring contempt on the administration of justice, and by per-
petual shifts to superinduce the paralysis of vague uncer-
tainty, and render the fear of punishment utterly inadequate
to meet the motives to crime.
In all secondary punishments, we have first to set up a Objects of
deterrent example before the public, and, secondly, to in- m^nt'*
timidate and correct the criminal himself. The general


interests of society are of larger importance than any con-
siderations solely connected with the individual criminal;
and as regards the criminal, his intimidation being the strict
province of his penal treatment, becomes paramount for the
moment to the anterior and larger object of his general train-
ing to what is good, which, nevertheless, should be the current
idea and substratum of his correction also, and apparent
wherever there is space for its admission.* r lhe very first
consideration, therefore, in penal legislation for a free country,
is, what are the current feelings, notions, and ideas, of the
community; and the second, the ordinary motives of offenders.
Of the three usual motives to which punishments may appeal
—namely, fear, shame, and self-interest, the first becomes less
available the more intelligence advances, but the second and
third become increasingly sensitive. The class of corporal
punishment, therefore (except as ignominious and not merely
painful inflictions), becomes less and less applicable; but
imprisonment offers indefinitely new resources in work-
ing upon more developed motives, and in its capacity
for adaptation to every conceivable variety of case and cha-
racter. Nevertheless, it is certain that, even in the highest
stage of civilization, there will always remain a considerable
class who have no higher motives to which punishment may
appeal than the most slavish and brutal fear, whose minds
are incapable of shame, whose reasoning faculties are non-
receptive of the most cogent arguments of self-interest; and
* The idea of purely reformatory punishments seems mistaken. Crime
is the result of either a want of knowledge of what is right, or of vicious
impulse overhearing a sense of right. In the first case, education is
wanted, not punishment; in the second, punishment with something
more stringent than the mere education which has already failed. But
most punishments, while counteracting the impulse to wrong, may also
be made available to strengthen the sense of what is right, and espe-
cially punishments of detention and surveillance.


to discard the use of severe corporal punishment altogether,
would be to throw away all means of influencing that class
by example, or of correcting those of them who may become
subjects for punishment. This is one penal resource of
which we have ceased to avail ourselves adequately in
England, both in the case of reprobates whose intellects are
brutalized, and in the case of little boys, whose intellects
are undeveloped. Our legislators have yielded to the
remonstrance of a morbid sentimentality utterly unphilo-
sophical and practically mischievous. It would be difficult
for these maudlin reasoners to disprove the fitness of a
dog’s chastisement for those criminals whose characters
and crimes indicate no higher motives of action than impel
the brute creation; they would moreover be puzzled to defend
their arbitrary distinction between the fitness of refrac-
tory sailors and soldiers, and unfitness of the most desperate
civilians for the deprecated flagellation, or to account for the
happy effects of the argumentum adposterior em in the case of
their own boys in the nursery and at school, and the different
effects supposed to result from similar appeals to the backs
of little larcenists, or why the most efficient exemplarity of
such inflictions should fail only in the latter case to influence
the surrounding community.
Corporal punishments appeal efficiently to two very dif-
ferent characters of men; to those who act upon low motives,
and to those who are sensitive to disgrace. The fear of pain
deters in the one case, of humiliation in the other.
That the special use of corporal punishments ad igno-
miniam may increase with the growth of civilization, has
been strikingly illustrated of late years in this country, by
the success of its mere threat in stopping that criminal
pursuit of notoriety, from which the aspect of the madhouse


and the scaffold had failed to deter. It is a grave question
whether, at our present stage of civilization, the punishments
of disgrace, and degradation, and infamy, should not be more
largely resorted to. That is to say, whether the growing
force of opinion, the keener sense of decency prevalent in
the public mind, and the increased value of character and
credit in the calculations of many, even amongst our
criminals, might not be put to more account.
It is, however, clear that the gaol, with its various em-
bitterments, is our Pandora’s box of penal resources. But
our physician must first heal himself. We must correct our
House of Correction. Pandora’s treasury of ills had hope ,
not malice , lying at the bottom, and it would be monstrous
indeed were we so to prepare our principal resource for punish-
ment, that it should not correct, but only increase, the evil it
is meant to cure.
It has been said, ‘ L’Emprisonnement peut renfermer tous
les maux possibles,’ and without discussing all the capabili-
ties and varieties of prison discipline in detail, which would
be impossible in a mere parenthesis of a general argument
against the necessity of Transportation, one may readily
conceive that, whatever modification the great improvement
of the cellular system may receive, it possesses, with its
adjuncts and combinations of labour, of mortification, and of
distasteful orderliness, penal resources of every possible
gradation, from a parallel with death itself down to the lowest
fiction of Transportation terrors.
We must first secure the general adoption of the panoptic
shape in the construction of our prisons. We shall have
then supplied this species of punishment with that im-
portant character of exemplarity of which hitherto it has
been mainly deficient. The opportunity so afforded for the


admission of the public to the coup d'oeil of its terrors, should
not be lost; nor, when that is provided, should most of its
effect be otherwise neutralized, as has been done in the case
of some of our best new prisons, by such splendid and
attractive styles of architecture as gave Carlyle fair scope for
a sarcastic contrast with the more repulsive aspect of the
neighbouring dwellings of honest toil. Surely the features
of a prison’s front should be of such sombre massiveness and
loathsome dulness, as to dispel alike all thoughts of comfort
or escape, so that he who once sees one in his youth shall
not forget the rugged lesson all his life. He who has so
built a prison, has made a chef d'oeuvre of that kind of work;
but our architects build castles, prisons, theatres, pump-
rooms, and workhouses, with so perfect an indifference
of design, that one would suppose they recognised no such
thing as fitness, meaning, or expression, in their art. In
the important point of equalizing the apparent to the real
suffering of punishment, in which transportation is so signally
and monstrously deficient, no method is really so capable of
perfection as imprisonment. It is now well known that by
cellular separation, and by various enforcements of labour,
and by legitimate severity, the real sufferings of prison life
may be aggravated to any amount of bitterness, and there
seems no reason why they may not also in all their grada-
tions be made sufficiently apparent to public recognition.
Mr. Pearson has further proved the possibility of costlessness
in this penal process; a consideration of no mean importance,
as democracy gains the ascendant, whose highest philosophy is
economy, especially at a time when the advocates of elective
financial county boards are already urging a fair claim to a hold
on our administrative purse-strings. The extravagant costli-
ness of transportation, on the other hand, is fully admitted
when it is treated under the name of emigration; it is only


in its favourite penal character that we fondly forgive its pro-
digal waste. To assert that our penitentiaries cannot as
fully defray their own expenses as the American are known to
do, is only to avow a resolution to persist in neglecting the
resources of which they avail themselves. Yet, I will not
deny that even the expenses of imprisonment may have their
use, and may salutarily act upon the good old Saxon principle
of mulcting the public for their laches, in not taking better
care to keep their fellow-citizens well trained and well
employed, and out of mischief’s way. It is very questionable
whether Mr. Pearson’s plan of self-supporting prisons might
not too much neutralize these useful influences of the punish-
ment, and render the public reckless, if not actually interested
in a sustained supply of lucrative prisoners. *
Again, the proper process of correction is a quick and
cogent arrest of evil courses; the progressive training
into better ways, is of the larger province of education of
which punishment is but the occasional weapon. Yet 1 have
already urged repeatedly the necessity of preserving homo-
geneity between the corrective and the ductive process, lest
the very hand which undertakes to heal should be found to
lacerate and fester the wounds of our social system. Ihe
hours of discipline which transportation claims for its
punitive process, produce a thousandfold more horrible
corruption than the punishment first addressed itself to cure.
* It was the substance of an able article in the Spectator, some
time ago, that so long as country gentlemen can get the cost of
criminals thrown upon the Consolidated Fund, (which they do by
Transportation,) they will be reckless of their duties, and hostile to
other modes of treatment. It is of great use, that the districts which
grow the crime should reap the consequence in augmented rates.
Perhaps the most strikingly injurious application of the self-paying
principle of punishment, is Lord Grey’s new device of selling pardons
to transported felons, at the price of their passages out.


The hours consumed in prisons—which, however we may
succeed in shortening by sharpening the infliction, must
still be many, will not exhibit this inexcusable incongruity
of corruptive tutelage. The process is genuine, and cor-
responds throughout. The woof of correction is worked
upon a warp of virtuous influences, which gives the tone
and colour of a new design in the mere act of transfer
from the old. In the intervals of and throughout his
punishment, the criminal may find himself undergoing a
course of reflection, and of instruction, and of moral in-
fluences, all conducing to the general renovation of his
character, whilst a particular failing is in process of cor-
rection.
Such are some of the infinite capabilities of the prison
penalties—a resource more susceptible of adaptation to
every variety of delinquents and delinquency than any
other.* Even of its ultimate extension to perpetual incar-
ceration, I would not shrink from recommending an occa-
sional use. It would be a suitable substitute for capital
punishment in cases fit for such mitigation. The statement
that transportation was first adopted to fulfil such substitu-
tion, is a marvellous record of history; the persuasion that
it still fitly occupies that stage in our penal code, is an
almost inconceivable amount of mental delusion.
I now suppose my task is finished. I have addressed
myself to those who argue that transportation, however
unphilosophical as a punishment or injurious as a sacrifice
of our transmarine empire, is yet an unavoidable expedient
for getting rid of an overwhelming mass of’Criinin&ls at home.
* To enter on the wide questions relating to Prison Discipline
here, would be impertinent; hut I hope the few suggestions I have
ventured to make indicate generally the nature of the improvements
and various uses of which I think Prisons susceptible.


I have shown that criminals do not abound so much else-
where, and that for reasons which might equally apply to
our own case. I have shown that one-fifth of those we treat
as criminals, we in our very treatment confess deserve a
wholly different estimation. I have shown that there are
causes of a large proportion of our crimes which might im-
mediately be stopped, and counter-stimulants of industry
and virtuous action, now dormant, which might be called into
play. The last defence of transportation fails when we can-
not even plead our own necessities for our brother’s injury.
Thank Heaven that we see daylight through so foul a cloud
upon our national honour! But as the incubus relaxes its
imaginary pressure, we almost stare for a remnant of the
dream. Necessity of reciprocal injury!—what absurdity! That
we should so long retain a poisonous remedy for our own dis-
eases, at the cost of others’ infection; that we should pre-
serve and multiply our most noxious vermin to hunt them
over a patrimony fraught with our offspring’s wealth, —herein
is a perverseness beyond comparison. But further still, as
the ratio of crime invites its own reduction, the elasticity of
legitimate punishment, pari passu, presents increased re-
sources. The extrication from perverse perplexity seems to
expand, with geometrical rapidity, under calm confronting.
On the other hand, the retention of a rotten system can
be only attempted by a succession of vain expedients aggra-
vating the gratuitous evils of a wilfully assumed necessity.
the end.


NEW BOOKS AND NEW EDITIONS
PRINTED FOR
JOHN W. PARKER, West Strand.
Fraser’s Magazine for
or by post, 35., contains :
January,
1851. Price 25. 6c?.,
1. The First Half of the Nineteenth
Century.
2. Phantoms and Realities. An Auto-
8. W. M. Thackeray and Arthur Pen-
dennis, Esqs. Bell’s Ladder of
Gold.
biography. 1. Morning.
3. Commerce with Africa.
9. Sketches of American Society. By
a New Yorker. Life at a Water-
ing-Place. —The Lionne.
4. A Gossip about the Christmas
Books.
5. Elegy on the Death of the Old Year.
By Swynfen Jervis.
6. Abbe de Yoisenon and his Times.
7. The Cenci. Five Scenes. By
Walter Savage Landor.
10. Louis de Saintaine.
11. Railway Companies and Railway
Law.
12. A Carol for the Times,
History of the Whig Ministry of 1830. By J. A.
Roebuck, M.P. Octavo. Yols. I. and ll.—to the passing of the Reform Bill.
The Histories of Normandy and England. By Sir
Francis Palgrave, K.H.
The First Volume, Octavo : —General Relations of Mediaeval Europe; the
Carlovingian Empire ; and the Danish Expeditions in the Gauls until the esta-
lishment of Rollo.
Young Italy. By Alexander Baillie Cochrane, M.P.
CONTENTS:
Cannes —The First of March —Pied- Golden Rose—The Temporal and Spi-
mont and the Battle of Novara—the ritual Authority of the Pope—The
Madonna of Genoa—The History of the Murder of Rossi—Monte Casino —The
Roman Republic—The Two Artists— Prisons of Naples—The Pope’s Return
The Mount Quirinal —The Feast of the to Rome.
On the Influence of Authority in Matters of Opinion.
By G. Cornewall Lewis, M.P. Octavo, 10s. 6d.
Gazpacho; or, Summer Months in Spain. By Wil-
liam George Clark, M.A., Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. Post Octavo,
7s. 6d.


Auvergne, Piedmont, and Savoy. A Summer Ramble.
By Charles Richard Weld. Post Octavo, Bs. 6d.
Wanderings in some of the Western Republics of
America. By George Byam (late 43rd Light Infantry). Post Octavo, with
Illustrations. 7s. 6d.
Hesperos; or, Travels in the West. By Mrs. Hous-
toun. Two Volumes, Post Octavo, 14s.
A View of the Art of Colonization; with Present
Reference to the British Empire. In Letters between a Statesman and a
Colonist. Edited by (one of the writers) Edward Gibbon Wakefield, Octavo,
12s.
The Colonies of England; a Plan for the Govern*
ment of some Portion of our Colonial Possessions. By J. A. Roebuck, M.P.
Octavo. With Map. 7s. 6d.
Port Philip in 1849. By Dr. Clutterbuck. With a
Map. 3s.
The Handbook for New Zealand: The most recent
Information, compiled for Intending Colonists. By a late Magistrate of the
Territory* 6s.
Canterbury Papers. No. VIII. 6d. Containing
the Archbishop of Canterbury’s Sermon, preached at St. Paul’s Cathedral,
before the Intending Emigrants, and Published with his Grace’s Permission.
Also, Nos. I. to VIII. 4s. In a wrapper by Post, 4s. 6d.
Discourses on Colonization and Education, viewed in
their bearing on the Increasing Population of this Kingdom. By James Cecil
Wynter, M.A., Rector of Gatton. Is.
By the same Author,
Hints on Church Colonization. 6d.


A System of Logic. By John Stuart Mill. Third
and Cheaper Edition, with Additions and Alterations, 2 vols. octavo, 255.
Elements of Logic. By R. Whately, D.D., Arch-
bishop of Dublin. Reprinted from the Ninth (Octavo) Edition, With all the
Author’s Additions. Crown Octavo, 4s. Qd.
Archbishop Whately’s Elements of Rhetoric. Reprinted
from the Seventh (Octavo) Edition. With all the Author’s Additions. Crown
Octavo, 4s. Qd.
Copies of the Demy Octavo Editions of Logic and Rhetoric (10s. Qd.), uni-
formly with the Author’s other Works, may still be had.
Discourse on the Studies of the University of Cam-
bridge. By Adam Sedgwick, M.A., F.R.S., Woodwardian Professor, and
Fellow of Trinity College. One thick Volume, Crown Octavo, 12s. Fifth
Edition.
*** The present edition is enlarged by the addition of a Preliminary Disser-
tation and Supplement; and consists, altogether, of 770 pages.
Correspondence of Sir Isaac Newton and Professor
Cotes; including Letters of other Eminent Men, now first published from the
originals in the Library of Trinity College, Cambridge ; with other unpublished
Letters and Papers by Newton, With Synoptical View of Newton’s Life, Notes,
and a variety of Details, illustrative of his History. Edited by J. Edleston,
M.A., Fellow of Trinity College. Octavo, with a Portrait of Newton, from the
Original Drawing at Cambridge, 10s.
The Homilies, with various Readings, and the Quota-
tions from the Fathers given at length in the Original Languages. Edited for
the Syndics of the Cambridge University Press, by G. E. Cobbib, 8.D., Master
of Jesus College, and Norrisian Professor of Divinity in the University; Ex-
amining Chaplain to the Lord Bishop of Ely. Octavo, 10s. Qd.
The Church a Family. Twelve Sermons on the Occa-
sional Services of the Prayer Book, preached at Lincoln’s Inn. By F. Denison
Maukice, M.A., Professor of Divinity in King’s College, 4s. Qd.
The Mission of the Comforter. By Julius C. Hare,
M.A., Archdeacon of Lewes. Second Edition, Octavo, One volume, 12s.


Notes on the Miracles. By R. Chenevix Trench,
8.D., Professor of Divinity in King’s College, London, Octavo, 12s.
History of the Royal Society. By C. R. Weld,
Assistant-Secretary of the Royal Society. Two Volumes. Octavo, 30s.
History of the Church of England. By T. Yowler
Short, D.D., Lord Bishop of St. Asaph. Fifth Edition, 16s.
Burnet’s History of the Reformation, - abridged.
Edited by the Rev. Professor Corrie, Master of Jesus College, Cambridge.
Octavo, 10s. 6d.
Manual of Christian Antiquities. By Rev. J. E.
Riddle. Second Edition. Octavo, 18s.
History of the Christian Church. By the late Dr.
Burton, Regius Professor of Divinity, Oxford. Eighth and Cheaper Edi-
tion. ss.
The New Cratylus: Contributions towards a more
Accurate Knowledge of the Greek Language. By John W. Donaldson, D.D.,
Head Master of King Edward’s School, Bury St. Edmund’s. Second Edition,
revised and enlarged. Octavo, 18s.
Homeric Ballads: the Greek Text, with a Metrical
Translation and Notes. By the late Dr. Maginn. Collected from Fraser’s
Magazine , and carefully revised. 6s.
Shipwrecks of the Royal Navy, between 1793 and
1849. Compiled principally from Official Documents in the Admiralty. By
W. O; S. Gilly. With a Preface by W. S. Gilly, D.D., Canon of Durham.
Post Octavo, 7s. 6d.
Chance gnd Choice; or, the Education of Circum-
stances. Two Tales: 1. The Young Governess.—2. Claudine de Soligny. Post
Octavo, 7s. 6d.


Brampton Rectory; or, the Lesson of Life. By the
Author of Compton Merivale. Second Edition, revised. Post Octavo, Bs. 6d.
The Professor’s Wife: a Tale from the German of
Auerbach. 3s. 6d.
The Philosophy of Living. By Herbert Mayo, M.D.,
Late Senior Surgeon to the Middlesex Hospital, Third and Cheaper Edition,
with considerable Additions. Foolscap Octavo.
Chemistry of the Four Ancient Elements, Fire, Air,
Earth, and Water. An Essay, founded upon Lectures delivered before the
Queen. By T. Griffiths, Professor of Chemistry at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital.
Second Edition.
Recreations in Chemistry. By T. Griffiths, Professor
of Chemistry at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital. Second Edition, much enlarged,
and almost enirely re-written. ss.
Instructions in the Use and Management of Artificial
Teeth. By J. Tomes, F.R.S., Surgeon-Dentist to the Middlesex Hospital.
With Woodcuts. 3s. 6d.
Classical Examination Papers of King’s College,
London. By R. W. Browne, M.A., Professor of Classical Literature in King’s
College. 6s.
Natural Philosophy for Beginners. Third and
Cheaper Edition, with 143 Woodcuts. 9e.
Hints for an Improved Translation of the New Testa-
ment. By J. Scholefield, M. A., Regius Professor of Greek, Cambridge. Third
Edition, 3s. 6d.


The Statutes relating to the Ecclesiastical and Elee-
mosynary Institutions of England, Wales, Ireland, India, and the Colonies. By
Archibald John Stephens, M.A., F.R.S., Barrister-at-Law. Two large Volumes,
Royal Octavo, with Copious Indices, 3 1. 3s. boards.
Observations on the Statutes of the University of
Cambridge. By G. Peacock, D.D., F.R.S., Dean of Ely. Octavo, 9s. 6c?.
Wales: the Language, Social Condition, Moral Cha-
racter, and Religious Opinions of the People, considered in Relation to Educa-
tion. By Sir Thomas Phillips. Octavo, 14s.
The Holy City: Historical, Topographical, and An-
tiquarian Notices of Jerusalem. With numerous Illustrations and Additions,
including Professor Willis’s History of the Holy Sepulchre; and a Plan of Jeru-
salem, from the Ordnance Survey. By G. Williams, 8.D., Principal of St.
Columha’s College, Ireland; Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge. Second
Edition. Two large Volumes, Octavo, 21. ss.
Professor Willis’s Architectural History of the Holy
Sepulchre. Reprinted from “ Williams’s Holy City.” With Original Illustra-
tions. 9s.
A Plan of the Town and Environs of Jerusalem,
Copied, by permission, from the Drawing of the Survey made by the Royal
Engineers in Syria; with an Historical and Descriptive Memoir, reprinted from
“ Williams’s Holy City.” 9s. Also, Mounted on Canvass, with Rollers, for the
use of Libraries, Schools, &c. 18s.
*** The Survey of which this is a copy is the only one that has ever been
made by professional Surveyors, and is beautifully engraved by Mr. Lowry.
The forms of the mountains and valleys are for the first time rendered with the
accuracy of a model from the contour lines of the Original Drawings.
LONDON : JOHN W. PARKER, WEST STRAND.




Muo
f 12^77
M tON




NEW BOOKS AND NEW EDITIONS.
Principles of Political Economy.
By John Stuart Mill, '
Second Edition. Two Volumes, Octavo. 305.
A View of the Art of Colonization,
With Present Reference to the British, Empire. Iji Letters
between a Statesman and a Colonist. Edited by (one of the
writers) Edward Gibbon Wakefield. Octavo. 12s.
Port Philip in 1849.
By Dr. Clutterbuck. With a Map. 3s.
The Hand-Book for New Zealand.
The most recent Information ; compiled for Intending Colonists.
By a late Magistrate of the Territory. Gs.
Canterbury Papers.
No. VIII., 6d. ; containing the Archbishop of Canterbury’s Ser-
mon, preached at St. Paul’s Cathedral, before the Intending
Emigrants, and Published with his Grace’s Permission. Also,
Nos. I. to VIII., 45. ; in a Wrapper, by Post, 4s. 6c?.
London: JOHN W. PARKER, West Strand.
PRICE TWO SHILLINGS.
