

TRAPS FOR YOUNG SOLDIERS
AND CIVILIANS
IN CHEMICAL (GAS) WARFARE
By
ALAN BROOKSBANK
AUSTRALIA
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LIMITED
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY
1937


the same author :
“Chemical (Gas) Warfare,” address to Victorian phar-
macists, The Australasian Journal of Pharmacy,
March 1936, pp. 238-46 ; condensed report in The
General Practitioner, May 1936, pp. 2-10.
‘Some Medical Aspects of Chemical (Gas) Warfare,”
address to honorary instructors, St John Ambu-
lance ; condensed report in The General Practi-
tioner, September 1936, pp. 162-9.
“Police Duties in a Gas Attack,” Victorian Police
Journal, July 1936, p. 187; September 1936, p. 244.
“Civilian Defences of Height and Outflanking,” Vic-
torian Police Journal, April 1937, pp. 107-8.
“Chemical (Gas) Warfare and the Law,” publication
pending in The Australian Law Journal.
“Sixty-six Tactical Rules for the Offensive Use of
Gas,” 1936.
“Gas-resisting Rooms.” {Lecture.)
“How Gas Attacks Are Made and the Detection of
Gas.” {Lecture.)






TRAPS FOR YOUNG SOLDIERS
AND CIVILIANS
IN CHEMICAL (GAS) WARFARE
ALAN BROOKSBANK
AUSTRALIA
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LIMITED
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY


Set up and printed in
Australia by
Halstead Press Pty Limited,
9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney


PREFACE
The message of hope I wish to convey in this address is that
the menace to health and life inherent in gas warfare dimin-
ishes proportionately as the nature and properties of individual
gases become better and more widely known, and as the gas
defensive organization based on that knowledge, steadily grows.
Although government booklets, such as those published to
date, may be issued by the million, they will reach the minds of
only a small percentage of the people. Indeed, apart from the
subject of decontamination, the booklets are, in this first stage
of national anti-gas organization, necessarily addressed to
administrative officials. The second stage is to address the
people who have actually to do the work; and the third involves
reaching the general public by all available means.
This contribution is intended for practical men on the job,
who look for ideas and substantial information, rather than
literary polish, and who do not want to confuse themselves with
the multitude of fine technical distinctions which abound in gas
warfare. •
The bulk of the subject matter is taken from the notes I
made in France and Belgium in 1916-18, whilst I had the
honour to serve as an anti-gas N.C.O. to an infantry company,
a battalion, a brigade, a division and as an attached member
of the special Anti-Gas Services. To bring the matter up-to-
date and to obtain independent confirmation, I have made much
use of the works appearing in the bibliography on the last page.
My aim has always been to try to help 99 per cent of the
people to avoid becoming gas casualties and to save 90 per cent
of the remaining one per cent from death. However good the
anti-aircraft defences might be, it is not unlikely that ten bomb-


ing planes could get through, and they could carry enough of
the modern gases to endanger 100,000 people in a big. densely
populated city. The danger from gas is not limited to the
neighbourhood of the individual bomb-bursts; it extends for
miles, to wherever the gas will drift in casualty-producing
strength. A ton of the modern gases will cover a square mile
in effective strength; but, fortunately, it is not practicable
to gas the whole of cities like Sydney and Melbourne and their
suburbs.
In a densely populated section of a city, twenty tons of gas
could endanger 100,000 people. Adopting these figures as an
illustration, I think that, if there be proper administrative anti-
gas organization, and systematic training of anti-gas wardens,
and if information about gas defence be passed on to the public
by all available means, then the casualties could be limited to
1000 in such an attack and the deaths to 100. This would be
no mean achievement, for in 1918, after three years’ experience
of gas, although their troops had respirators, and although they
were alleged to be trained in gas defence, yet some units sus-
tained as many as 50 per cent casualties in a single gas attack.
Obviously, it would be better to prevent war and save 100
per cent of the people; but an armour of golden platitudes, all
decorated with gems of ethical brilliance and scintillating pious
hopes, is not gas-proof. In cold reality, part of the price of
modern life is a knowledge and understanding of the insidious
traps of vile gases.
Alan Brooksbank.
14th May, 1937.


TRAPS FOR YOUNG SOLDIERS AND CIVILIANS IN
CHEMICAL (GAS) WARFARE
The art of gas warfare is to take a mean advantage of ignorance
and to trap the innocent and unsuspecting. The history of it
is an account of trickery and deception. It is a battle of wits in
which you young soldiers and civilians have to match your know-
ledge and understanding of gases and their behaviour against
the cunning of the enemy.
You can easily be shown how to put respirators on; but when
are you going to put them on, and when do you propose to take
them off? Further, you can be shown how to make a room
gas-resisting, but how will you know when to enter it, and when
do you propose to come out? There are colourless gases; you
can’t always see them. There are odourless gases; you cannot
smell them. Many gases have a delayed awareness of action;
you breathe them painlessly to-day; you sleep well to-night
and to-morrow you are a casualty—seriously gassed.
With incendiary shells and bombs the enemy hopes to hit
the building you occupy; with high explosive shells and bombs,
with shrapnel and bullets, the enemy hopes to hit you immedi-
ately, indeed their danger is limited to a few seconds; but with
gas he hopes to trick you later on. Further, to cause casual-
ties, bullets, high-explosive and incendiary shells and bombs,
must land in the right places,* but wherever gas shells and
* Since going to press, Frank Morison’s painstaking work War on Great
Cities has reached me. His detailed statistical tables (pp. 235-6) “show-
ing consequences of the 354 incendiary bombs” and “597 explosive bombs
brought to the notice of the London Fire Brigade, 1915-18” reveal that
339 incendiary bombs and 349 explosive bombs “failed to cause casu-
alties.” Desnite the fact that (p. 197) “the average density of the
London population to the square mile is not fewer than 37,000,” not
many incendiary bombs landed in what I term “the right places.” The
Germans refrained from using gas bombs. Doubtless the efficiency of
all types of bombs has -been- improved.


bombs land in an occupied city are the right places, because the
danger is not limited to where they land but extends to where
gases drift. If you are advancing, the enemy may release some
“persistent” gases the day before, and you innocently walk into
the trap; if you are in camp, he may drop gas shells and bombs
some miles up-wind; minutes, or even an hour, later the gases
may silently, invisibly drift on to you and give no warning by
smell or sense of pain that they are present in lethal strength.
A knowledge of bullets won’t help you much to dodge them,
but an understanding of the nature and behaviour of warfare
gases will assist you to avoid becoming a casualty. Gas falls
down into trenches and goes around corners; it is all-pervading.
It will sneak quietly into buildings through crevices in the floors,
and, obeying chemical laws of diflfusion, it will of its own motive
power completely saturate an area.
I am to tell you the story of the gases, to instruct you briefly
how to detect gas and to warn you of some traps. It is a fascin-
ating story with a bit of detective work thrown in; you must
know how to recognize small clues, and understand how to make
the most of them.
Very fortunately for us in the Great War many of the Ger-
man artillery commanders used gas in a dull, stodgy sort of
way; they wasted tens of thousands of rounds of perfectly good
gas shells; but, when an artillery commander did show a little
imagination, we sustained hundreds of casualties we should have
avoided.
I don’t ask you to remember the names of gases, hut I do
want you to understand what the subject is about; I do want
you to realize that there is more in it than mere respirator
drill.
CHLORINE
(Lung gas)
The first gas used was chlorine. It caused 4900 deaths among
the French troops in the first attack; in the second, the deaths
were 389, and, in later attacks, there were no deaths, and
chlorine became obsolete in the war. It is no good against


trained troops. You can’t trick people with chlorine. You can
always see it; it has a greenish-yellow colour. You can always
smell it; it smells like strong chloride of lime. It hurts you
immediately. It at once causes a hot dry burning sensation in
the nose and throat, and you painfully gasp for breath. If you
have a respirator, you will put it on without waiting for orders,
and you will keep it on as long as the gas is present. The
respirator gives complete protection.
PHOSGENE C. O.
(Lung gas)
Phosgene caused more deaths than any other of the thirty
gases used in the war, and it has such valuable properties that
it is likely to be used again whenever gas is employed exten-
sively.
It has a faint smell like damp straw or mouldy hay. If it be
very strong, it will pain the nose and throat; but in every attack
there is an area, remote from the place at which it is liberated
from shells, bombs, or cylinders, where it will be so diluted by
admixture with the air that it will not be strong enough to ad-
vertise itself by hurting the nose or throat, but it will be strong
enough to injure the lungs. With each breath you take some
gas into the lungs, but you do not breathe it all out again and
it goes on adding up in the lungs. Little by little, hour by hour,
water is painlessly abstracted from the blood coming to be
aerated; the lungs fill with water and you die of drowning.
The blood itself is concentrated by the loss of serum. There
is a doubt whether the blood is attacked directly or indirectly,
but the blood is affected in the lungs. The process may go on
for twenty-four hours without your knowing anything about it.
When your lungs are say, half full of water, if you do violent
exercise, you may drop dead. Old Dame Nature, not expecting
this form of attack, has provided no nerve endings to communi-
cate the danger by the sense of pain. It was the failure to
understand this delayed action—or delayed awareness of a de-
structive action that was continuous and progressive—that
caused so many deaths in the early days of gas warfare. As


soon as we found it out, the death-rate was greatly reduced.
I want you to realize that the information I am giving you was
obtained at the cost of men’s lives; if you will learn these les-
sons, then they did not die in vain.
The first lessons are (a) if you can smell the stuff at all, it
is present in dangerous strength and you must put on your
respirator and keep it on until the “all-clear’’ signal is given,
although you may feel no immediate pain if you take your res-
pirator off; ( h ) if by any mischance you do inhale an appreci-
able quantity, you are a stretcher case. It is not safe to walk
to a dressing station with only half of your lungs working.
In 191*8 an American raiding party, some 300 strong, re-
turned in triumph after a successful raid. They walked through
some of their own drifting phosgene which had been dropped
half a mile to a flank; they did not adjust respirators,and five
hours later the entire party was gassed. Many died, but the
others were saved by the brilliant work of the American Medical
Services. No one ought to have been gassed.
Phosgene is classed as an invisible gas. The respirator gives
complete protection.
SIMPLE TEAR GASES
The next advance was the introduction of the eye-irritants or
tear gases. They were put in shells and many were bromides.
If a minute quantity, a dilution of 1 part in^f,ooo,ooo parts of
air, comes in contact with the eye, it causes spasms and such a
copious flow of tears that it is impossible to sight a rifle. The
simple bromide tear gases have a strong fruity odour some-
what resembling pineapple. It is not unpleasant. They can
be recognized by the odour and the immediate effect on the
eye; the tears stop a few minutes after the gas has drifted by.
Hospital treatment is not necessary.
EARLY TYPE OF RESPIRATOR
At this stage of the war the respirator in general use was a
fabric bag which fitted right over the head and had to be tucked
Ur under the collar. It was dipped in a phenol solution and was


called the “P” helmet. It was sticky, clammy, messy and nasty.
The air had to be sucked in through the damp fabric and it was
very hot to wear. It was quite effective against chlorine and
phosgene, but would not keep out tear gases.
Goggles had to be issued in a hurry, and there was not time
to secure them to the P helmet. For a time there were two
forms of protection, namely an uncomfortable bag and nice
goggles. Not unnaturally troops ignorant of danger preferred
to put on the comfy goggles; but, alas, the Germans soon took
advantage of this.
EARLY TRICKS
When the German artillery used a simple tear gas by itself,
the troops merely adjusted their goggles and all was well.
Then the Huns would start a gas attack with the strong-smelling
tear gas and slip in a few weak-smelling phosgene shells. The
strong smell of the one masked the weaker odour of the other
and troops were trapped. The phosgene, of course, caused no
immediate pain and the men were caught by its delayed action.
Everyone was warned to keep his nose open for phosgene
whenever tear gas was used; but the wily Hun chemists brought
out another gas. It has a long name. It is brominated ethyl-
methyl-ketone. The German artillerymen introduced her to us
and we soon got to know her well enough to call her “Ethel.”
Ethel, naturally enough, could turn on the tears; she had the
characteristic sweet perfume of the bromide tear gases. When
she came over to visit us, troops merely adjusted their goggles
and sniffed for phosgene, but, as none was present, they did
not put on their uncomfortable sticky helmets. Alas! Ethel
could also suffocate. She was a strong tear gas and also a lung
irritant.
DUAL-PURPOSE TEAR GASES
(Lung and tear gas)
I want emphatically to warn you about Ethel and five other
dual-purpose tear gases. Since the war, I have yarned to many
troops in hospital, who believed that a tear gas would not hurt


the lungs, and they were in hospital because of their ignorance.
The police use simple tear gases for dispersing crowds, we em-
ploy simple tear gases for testing the fit of your masks; but you
can take it for granted that the enemy will use dual-purpose tear
gases—gases which hurt the eyes and the lungs.
The eyes are more sensitive than the lungs, and, instead of
these double purpose gases being a trap, you can use them as
a warning. If you feel your eyes smarting, take that as a warn-
ing of the presence of a gas that will hurt your lungs, and put
on your respirator and keep it on, although you may feel no
pain in your nose and throat, and although you may not smell
any gas. The eyes give a quicker reaction to this type of gas
than the nose or throat, and, to that extent, give you advance
warning.
PRUSSIC ACID
At this stage of the war, we were relying on the odour of
gases to give us warning of their presence. Prussic acid was
then put in shells; it was believed that this acid would paralyse
the sense of smell. The scheme was to toss some of it over,
and, when the olfactory nerve of the nose was paralysed, to
send over some phosgene which we would then be unable to
smell. It was a bright idea, but, in the field, it did not work
well. Before the smelling nerve was paralysed, it first regis-
tered a strong odour of bitter almonds. We knew that, if we
smelt the almonds, our noses were no longer reliable.
Prussic acid was thus an auxiliary gas ; although it is a poison,
it needs to be very strong to kill. If it be strong enough, it will
kill inside two minutes, but otherwise it won’t harm you. It
will not add up in the lungs like phosgene. Its object was to
stop us smelling phosgene. Later on in the war, when the
chemists mixed prussic acid with arsenic and compounded them
with another poison, they did produce an odourless chemical.
This is such a good trick, that we can take it for granted
that much post-war research work has been devoted to prepar-
ing odourless gases, not necessarily having a prussic acid base.


CHLOROPICRIN (C.L S C.C *4)
(Nitro-chloroform) (Lung and tear gas)
The gas chloropicrin, which is nitro-chloroform, introduces
three new tricks. It smells like chloroform, is a tear gas, a
stomach pump and a lung poisoner. Like chloroform, it often
causes vomiting. If you be slow in adjusting your mask and
get a few good whiffs of it, then in a few minutes time, after
you have put on your respirator, you are sick. The scheme
is to make you spew your mask right off and then catch you
with this gas or phosgene. The British artillery appears to
have used this gas with judgment, for German prisoners feared
it more than any other gas we employed until the last few
months of the war. It was often called the “vomiting gas.”
It will not dissolve in water and can be used in the rain.
Unlike jDrussic acid, it has the power of accumulation. At
the end of an attack after the shelling has ceased and the amount
available is diminishing, you might breathe fifty breaths of it
with safety, but five hundred breaths would make you a casualty;
it accumulates. Unlike phosgene, it will persist, or remain
present for some hours after the shelling has stopped. As soon
as phosgene is released from the shell or bomb where it is stored
in liquid form, under pressure, it turns into gas; for the liquid
of phosgene boils at eight degrees centigrade. The liquid of
chloropicrin, however, requires a temperature of 112 degrees
centigrade to boil it; in mild temperatures the heat generated
by the explosion of the bursting charge is not enough to boil
all the liquid and some hours may elapse before all the liquid
is converted into gas. Danger persists.
THE BUTTER EXPERIMENT
I first tried this experiment with an ounce of fresh butter,
but half an ounce of bad rancid butter is more economical and
convincing.
I put half an ounce of bad butter into a clean saucepan, I
turned over an electric radiator and heated the butter away from
a chimney and watched developments.


i 4 TRAPS IN CHEMICAL (GAS) WARFARE
As the solid butter became hot, it turned into a liquid.
Warfare chemicals are put into shells and bombs in either
their liquid or solid form, according to chemical properties and
convenience of manufacture. Coinciding with temperature and
pressure, we have ice, water and steam. Steam is a gas. We
also have vapour and mist, but need not bother about the dis-
tinctions in these terms as warfare chemicals are effective as
mists, fumes, vapours and gases.
As the liquid butter became hotter, I could see a vapour
arising, it soon spread into the surrounding air and became
invisible. I next smelt a nasty odour. It was bad butter. After
a few minutes, I went around the room and everywhere I could
smell the odour. Vapours and gases diffuse or spread of their
own accord; they supply their own motive power, but the rate
of spread is increased by the wind and air currents. Heavy
gases take longer to spread over a given area.
The odour soon extended beyond the room and went down
the hall and into other rooms. By this time my parents com-
plained. I opened the front door and went out into the garden.
Two people passed by in the street. I heard one say: “That’s
a nasty smell.” Whenever and wherever gas drifts, it always
sends out advance eddies or outposts in front of the main body
and to this extent there is advance warning of drifting gas. The
gas in the advanced eddy would not be dangerous. But. if a
shell or bomb bursts near at hand and the gas arrives as a result
of the force of the explosion, one whiff of it may cause a
casualty.
The experiment shows the enormous expansion of liquids
and solids; half an ounce of a solid, when converted into
vapour, expanded so enormously that it went through the house
and out into the street via the front garden. There are 71,680
half-ounces in a ton. I do not suggest that in a raid a ton of
gas would fill 71,000 houses, but I do say that it will travel a
long way; as much as 20,000 yards according to the War Office
book, Defence Against Gas , 1935. It fills every unprotected
nook and cranny in its path.


INVISIBLE GASES
When the expression invisible gas is used, it means that
when the gas is well diluted down by freely mixing with the
air, it cannot be seen. But every type of gas can be seen im-
mediately the shell or bomb containing it bursts. A white
vapourish steamy cloud is visible for several seconds in the case
of all gases used in their liquid form. Later I will tell you of
solid gases.
It stands to reason that near the shell- or bomb-burst the
gas is very thick, thick enough to be seen.
At night if some gases drift between a sentry and a distant
light, the light will appear to the sentry to twinkle in a manner
more pronounced than stars do.
It is, of course, the gas sentry’s duty to watch each Shetl-
and bomb-burst, because sight gives advance warning of the
use of gas.
TWO SMALL GAS ATTACKS IN MAY AND JUNE 1917
I want to tell you about two small gas attacks in which the
gases I have mentioned were used. In May 1917* a few tear
gas shells and phosgene shells were used by the Germans in
counter-battery work against the Divisional Artillery.
The gunners all had respirators and all had been trained to
put them on—but not sufficiently trained in firing with respira-
tors adjusted. These few gas shells silenced each gun crew
that was affected by drifting gas. A month later much more
gas was used against the same gunners on the eve of the Battle
of Messines and they fired as though no gas were present. It
is only a matter of training.
In the second attack, troops making the approach march to
the hopping-off line had to go through a belt of gas about half
a mile wide. Of the 180 men of one company in my battalion
who set out, only twelve arrived on time and the whole battle
plans of the battalion had to be altered so that there was one
wave instead of two.


' TRAPS IN CHEMICAL (GAS) WARFARE
These men had never done a night march with masks on;
nor had they been given respirator drill in the dark.
I put it to you very frankly—what is the use of being a
trained artillery gunner, machine gunner, sapper, sniper, sig-
naller or anything else if a little bit of gas will stop you from
using your training?
1 hat disaster was the best thing that happened in the brigade,
because everybody then realized the importance of gas train-
ing.
Whatever job you have to do in the event of war, you must
be trained to do in peace time with your respirator adjusted.
Whatever training you may be required to do, you can do with
a respirator on. It is necessary to take up a little of your time
on respirator drill and lectures, but the balance of gas training
should be carried out in conjunction with your own special
training; because that accustoms you to wearing the mask and
putting it on quickly in the actual conditions in which you
would have to work in war time.
At this point we must resume our story of the gases.
MUSTARD GAS
(Lung and blister)
A great deal of information has been published about mustard
gas and I will not weary you by repeating it, for we are dealing
with traps and tricks and how to recognize and avoid them.
In the other gases the vapour was the danger, but with mus-
tard the liquid is equally dangerous. Chloropicrin persists for
a few hours, but mustard lasts for days. Its liquid has such
a high boiling point that more than twice the temperature re-
quired to boil water is necessary to boil it and turn it into steam,
vapour, or gas. When the shell or bomb containing the liquid
explodes, the heat boils some of the liquid and the force of
the explosion splashes the balance of the liquid about; this
splashed liquid continues to give off poisonous vapours for some
days until it all evaporates. In simple language, evaporation
means turning into gas; I repeat that you need not worry about
the difference in meaning in the terms fumes, mist, vapour and/


or gas, because warfare gases are effective in all these forms.
If you spill some petrol on a hot day, it evaporates more quickly
than water; but if you spill mustard, it lasts for days.
The stuff is called mustard, because to some noses it smells
like table mustard, but it has no chemical relation to mustard.
It is di-chlorethylsulphide. Warfare gases are not made 100
per cent pure, and, according to the impurities, di-chlorethyl-
sulphide smells like garlic, water-cress or mustard. If you smell
any of these odours, you have an indication that mustard is
present,
We will go back to France in July, 1917. On a warm night,
a working party, after it had finished its job, had to go through
a gully into which some mustard shells had fallen a few hours
previously. The men felt no pain, but next morning the whole
party were sent to hospital gassed—all were badly blistered and
all were blind. Notwithstanding this, I tell you that the res-
pirator, if you give it a chance, will save your eyes and lungs.
Here then is another trap. Mustard vapour readily dissolves
in sweat, and sweaty clothes act as a filter of mustard-laden
air, just in the same way as a filter stone will clean mud-laden
water. As you walk along, air passes through your clothes;
if the air contains mustard,, the air passes through, but the
mustard vapour remains in the clothes and goes on aggre-
gating or accumulating in the clothes. That is what happened to
the men of the working party; they picked it up in their sweaty
clothes and went to bed in small bivouacs; the heat of their
bodies dried out the sweat and liberated the gas, so that they
were gassed whilst they slept. Mustard has a delayed action
on the skin, and on the lungs, like phosgene. With the vapour
you feel no pain for many hours. The only way to get out of
this trap is to have a change of clothes and a hot bath to get rid
of any mustard that has already started to attack the skin.
You can also pick up the liquid on your boots, deposit it in
a warm room and gas the occupants. If you get a fraction of
an ounce of liquid, it expands over one thousand times as pure
gas, but it is effective when this gas is diluted down to one
part in a million parts of air. The principle here is the same


as in our experiment with the solid and liquid butter; the ex-
pansion is enormous when the liquid is converted by heat into
vapour.
The greatest success of mustard in the war was against the
city of Arnientieres —the mademoiselle city. This city was
situated about a mile behind the trenches and though it had
been subjected to bombardment with all sorts of high explo-
sives, much of it was still habitable after three years of this
treatment; but, in 1918, a three hours’ bombardment with mus-
tard gas shells necessitated its complete evacuation. If you be
trained, you can wear a respirator for six hours, but in France
the danger from mustard persists for three days. On this occa-
sion, since it was not possible to arrange regular reliefs and
to supply the men with successive changes of clothing, the whole
city had to be evacuated and very extensive fortifications
abandoned.
The Germans attacked on the flanks and the story is that,
though the city was soon within their lines, they would not
permit their troops to enter it for over a week.
That is the next trap. Never go into an area contaminated
by mustard until it has been certified all-clear.
Mustard vapour is very heavy and will fall down into cellars
of its own weight (like water) ; once in a cellar it is free from
the dispersing action of the wind and air currents and can re-
main there for weeks. Sniff carefully before you enter under-
ground dug-outs.
On the day following the bursting of the shells or bombs,
evaporation may be so slow that not enough gas comes off at any
one time to reach the nose level; but there may be quite enough
to cause blisters at the waist level. If you suspect the presence
of mustard, bend down and sniff for gas at the ground level. On
four occasions when our brigade took over sectors, the out-
going brigades failed to let us know that mustard had been used
and I tell you frankly, I walked right into it, before I realized
it was there. Wherever mustard falls, put warning notices up
and date them.
In 1918, I did not know that paint would store mustard


liquid for a week or more. I was yarning to someone and was
leaning against a painted rail. I felt no pain, but next morning
I had a blister; and after eighteen years the skin is still faintly
discoloured and rough to the touch. The blister still discharges.
The liquid is readily absorbed by bricks, stone and concrete;
and it temporarily dissolves in paint and in the tar on roads,
from which it is transferable by contact.
If the vapour be in the clothes, it is transferable by personal
proximity, as the medical personnel in base hospitals in France
found to their cost. In other words, the liquid and the vapour
can remain dormant until they find a suitable target for attack.
Suitable targets are eyes, sweaty skin, fat, muscle, sinews, and
perhaps bone. I saw a horse that had apparently put its foot
into a mustard shell crater. Its hoof was all right, but the skin
had gone from its fetlock, and the veterinary officer who
ordered the animal to be shot, explained to me that the sinews
had been attacked and the bone, then visible, did not appear to
be normal.
In 1918, some German artillery commanders regarded mus-
tard as portable fortifications. If roads be shelled in half-
mile stretches, infantry cannot safely use them, unless there is
a proper system of change of clothes and hot baths readily
available.
A post-war development in the use of mustard is for storage
tanks to be secured to aeroplanes. As the plane travels along,
valves may be opened and the liquid pours out; the momentum
of the plane and the swirl and eddying of the air ensure its
being broken up into a fine spray and its weight brings it to
the ground like a misty rain. This is more likely to be effec-
tive in colder climates than warmer ones.
The liquid can be spread on the ground by motor vehicles
as they go along roads or travel across country.
Detectors have been made to show a visible chemical reaction
to the liquid, but, alas, they are not sensitive enough for
vapour. / Ij ,:V/


The liquid is somewhat oily, and, if it falls on dust, it forms
“dust balls”; if the liquid falls on a wet road it shows an
iridescent effect. If it falls on any solid object, it leaves a stain.
You observe that a stain is there and do not attach too much im-
portance to the colour of the stain, as it varies according to the
impurities in the liquid. Mustard is not used too per cent pure.
If you see a stain, you sniff it.
I mentioned that mustard was put in shells and bombs in
liquid form; that is to say, the liquid replaces the bulk of the
explosive and there is provided a mere bursting charge to open
the casing. Naturally this makes a distinctive popping sound
quite different from the devastating crump and crash of a shell
filled with high explosive. If, then, you hear a small noise of
explosion, it is a warning that some form of gas shell is being
used. Further, at the seat of the explosion, the gas is so con-
centrated that it is visible for a few seconds as a vapourish
steamy cloud.
All these signs are mere clues and you have to be trained to
recognize them and to interpret their meaning.
Subject to the qualification that the gas may not rise up to
the nose level, the nose is the last and final warning, but the
vapour must then and there be encompassing the nose for it
to function. I must warn you in your capacity as fathers, if
you take a small child out with you sight-seeing, the child may
be inhaling fatal doses of mustard whilst you, being taller, can-
not' smell anything.
Mustard has the delayed action. It attacks tissue more readily
than the sensory nerves which communicate pain. There is a
continuous and progressive destructive action of tissue which
gives no warning until a part of the body is so injured that it
can only function with difficulty.
LEWISITE
,r. (Lung and blister)
Afi American chemist, named Lewis, made this gas so late in
the war that it could not be used. American authors, however,


try to discount this by claiming that it was the most talked
about gas. We can graciously concede this point.
It does not persist as long as mustard, and water breaks it
up. You must not use that water as it will contain arsenic.
Lewisite smells like the geranium plant.
NOSE OR NERVE GASES
We come now to our final group of gases, the so-called nose
or nerve gases. There is a big group of them and all contain
arsenic. Like butter, these gases are solids at ordinary tem-
peratures. They need so much heat to turn them into vapour
that they are put in ordinary high explosive shells and there
is no noticeable diminution of the sound of the explosion.
Sound does not give you advance warning.
The heat of the explosion temporarily converts the solid
into vapour, and the force of the explosion scatters the poison
far and wide. But the relative coldness of the air solidifies
the vapour into minute microscopical particles of powder and,
by the time the poison reaches you, it is in the form of powder.
It is for this reason that it is now more correct to speak of
chemical, rather than gas, warfare. The particles of powder
are smaller than the smut you may find in smoke; sometimes
these arsenic compounds are called poisonous smokes.
The effects of these solid arsenic smokes are most nerve-
wracking and distressing. They produce violent sneezing; some
cause vomiting and dry-retching. They attack the nerves,
causing toothache, dopiness, dejection, melancholia and even
temporary insanity. Notwithstanding all this, they are, in my
opinion, mere auxiliary chemicals. They did not kill any one
in the war, and recovery from them was rapid, a matter of a
few hours or days. They are auxiliaries, because they develop
the idea of chloropicrin. That gas, you remember, produced
vomiting. The arsenic chemicals produce sneezing, vomiting
and dry-retching. If you be slow in adjusting your respirator,
you may get it on and then displace it by sneezing and vomit-
ing, so that you are at the mercy of phosgene.


You may recall that the pure prussic acid scheme did not
work well. But when you mix prussic acid and arsenic with
some other poisons, you do get a product which you are unable
to smell. Although these composite chemicals have no odour,
they do cause a tickling sensation in the nose. In plain lan-
guage, you want to pick your nose; you have the sensation as
though some mucus had set hard and was pressing against the
membrane of your nose. If, then, you see a few men up-wind
from you simultaneously picking their noses, you know that a
nerve gas is coming towards you and you would be foolish to
await its arrival before adjusting your mask.
Apart from this preliminary tickling sensation, many of the
arsenic gases have a delayed action. As they may drift, as
much as 20,000 yards, this sensation of solidified mucus may
be the only clue you get.
If, however, a shell containing one of them burst near you,
you may observe three things. There will be the uplifting of
the earth and debris; the dark smoke of the explosive (due to
incomplete combustion) which will rise, and the white-grey
coloured powder. As soon as the uplifting force of the explo-
sion is spent, this powder, owing to its weight, will fall and
drift down-wind; it may continue to be visible whilst it drifts
as much as 100 yards. Two shells containing these arsenic
smokes on one occasion burst up-wind on a road 1000 yards in
front of me. Even at that distance I could see the white powder
falling. I deliberately waited, as the wind was blowing straight
down the road. About five minutes later, I felt the tickling in
my nose and then I began to sneeze. I put on my mask, but
sneezed it off. I obtained relief by moving across-wind and
outflanking the drift. I don’t recommend you to try this experi-
ment, because had a lethal gas come, I must have been caught.
The arsenic compounds are effective in minute particles—as
small as one part in 20,000,000 parts of air. as against the one
part in 5000 for carbon monoxide. If a Baby Austin car went
down a crowded street emitting from the exhaust as much of
these arsenic smokes as it does carbon monoxide, everybody
in the street would sneeze and all would get violent headaches.


I don’t ask you to remember these names, but I want you to
listen to them:
ethyl clichlorarsine ethyl dibromarsine ethyl dicyanarsine
methyl dichlorarsine methyl dibromarsine methyl dicyanarsine
phenyl dichlorarsine phenyl dibromarsine phenyl dicyanarsine
There you have a list of nine gases, all with slightly different
properties. It is quite possible to have hundreds of different
gases, but all of them would fall within the four divisions I
have mentioned, namely, lung gases, tear gases, blister gases,
and nose or nerve gases.
There is a fairly widespread belief that the new gases are
going to be much more terrible than anything we had in the war,
and there is a popular doubt as to whether respirators can be
made to give protection. I don’t share the belief or the doubt.
RESPIRATORS
The principles of the modern service respirators are such that
in the field they will save your life against all gases that attack
your lungs. Remember, the service respirator-does not supply
oxygen; if you get into a burning building and the fire uses up
the oxygen, the respirator will not save you—you will die as
a result of the absence of oxygen. The respirator filters and
absorbs irritants and poisons in the air. It is designed for
ordinary, normal, quiet breathing, and you have to suck in the
air through a filter, and force it past what is termed activated
charcoal. Charcoal has the property of absorbing all types of
warfare gases; the more ingredients the gases contain, the
bigger are their molecules, and the bigger the molecule the more
efficient is the charcoal. The charcoal finds less difficulty in
keeping out mustard than it does chlorine. Chlorine is a simple
element; but in mustard you have chlorine and also sulphur,
hydrogen, and carbon in different proportions. In other words,
as mustard is made up of four ingredients, its smallest particle
is much bigger and heavier than the smallest particle of chlorine,
and the bigger it is, the easier it is to keep out, by filtering and
absorption.
All the simple poisons are known; the new gases will con-


tain possibly as much as ten different ingredients, and they will
be such big fellows when measured by charcoal pores, and,
being so heavy, will diffuse so slowly that the respirator will
have an easy task to absorb them.
NEW GASES NOT MORE TERRIBLE
We have seen that the new gases, on account of the size and
weight of the smallest molecule of them, will be easier to keep
out; but what of their properties? Let us consider the list of
gases used in the Great War. It is like the song “Old King
Cole.” Chlorine, attacking the nose, throat, bronchial tubes
and lungs; phosgene, when strong, attacking the nose, throat,
bronchial tubes, lungs and blood; chloropicrin, attacking the
eyes, nose, throat, bronchial tubes, lungs, blood and stomach;
mustard, attacking the eyes, nose, throat, bronchial tubes,
stomach, skin, fat, muscles, tendons and possibly bones; the
arsenic compounds, with their dire effects on the nerves. Here
we have eyes, nose, throat, bronchial tubes, lungs,' stomach, skin,
fat, tendons, muscles, blood, bone and nerves. . . . What’s left?
The new gases will merely be stronger in the sense that a
smaller quantity will cover a greater area for a longer time
in a casualty-producing strength and be more difficult to detect.
The principles of gas defence will be the same; but the clues
giving warning of the presence of gas will be harder to recog-
nize.
I suggest to you that there is enough in gas defence to
interest intelligent men. The progress of chemical research
will make it more and more a battle of wits; the subject will
become more fascinating.
THREE BIG GAS ATTACKS IN 1918
Three infantry brigades, holding contiguous sectors not far
from Amiens, were in turn subjected to big gas bombardments
in April and May, 1918. I was then attached to the special
Anti-Gas Services and was interested in all three attacks. 1 was
detailed for duty with a brigade. By 1918, I should mention, it
was realized that gas was more effective in big shoots having


10,000 gas shells as a minimum. It would then operate as a
continuous stream and cover too big an area to be safely evacu-
ated from a military point of view. (Civilians, not having to
stay put, can get out of the way.) Isolated shelling with gas
was recognized to be a waste of good material.
One brigade was attacked with 10,000 mustard shells and
the tactical situation was believed to be such that the troops
could not even temporarily evacuate the area shelled. This bri-
gade sustained, in round figures, 1000 casualties. The other
two brigades each had the same class of shells, but no mustard,
and fortunately my brigade* was the last to be attacked. The
second attack was of 12,000 shells, and the casualties were
900; the third attack was of 20,000 shells, and my brigade’s
casualties were only twenty-three. That is roughly one casualty
per 900 shells as against one per thirteen shells. The only
explanation is gas discipline; we had suffered a disaster at
Messines and we had the advantage of seeing what happened
to adjoining brigades.
Causes of the twenty-three casualties in my brigade. —ln the
opening salvo, some gas shells landed on the roofs of houses
men were occupying and liquid gas fell on to sleeping men; nine
were caught in this way, but none died. Seven recent rein-
forcements were unable to endure the keeping of their masks
adjusted for three and a half hours; it is not safe to give en-
durance training within range of gas, lest gas arrive near the
end of the training. Four respirators were damaged beyond
repair during the bombardment. Two men were too drunk to
worry about gas; they died. One man was caught with his
respirator off on four occasions by the company gas N.C.O. as
he made his rounds during the bombardment; this man was
court-martialled for self-inflicted wound.
The above are the types of casualties you might expect in
a big gas attack; there are plenty of explanations, but no ex-
* I must ask to be pardoned for using the possessive pronoun “my" in
“my battalion” and “my brigade,” to describe the units in which I had
the honour to serve. An N.C.O. is a very small part of a battalion, but
the battalion becomes a big part of him, and in time he regards it as his
own.


cases for hundreds of men being gassed. In the last fifteen
months of the war, my brigade headquarters and signal section,
numbering about seventy ranks, had officers, N.C.Os and men
killed and wounded by bullets and high explosives, but none
went to hospital gassed. However, you cannot give to a batta-
lion the personal care you can give to a smaller unit.
I had the task of interviewing casualties from the other
brigades. The traps to which I have drawn your attention are
those which caught the men of these brigades; but there are
more of them.
STATEMENTS OF GASSED CASUALTIES
At the risk of wearying you, I propose to read from my notes
made in the field in April and May 1918. If you will listen and
learn, then these men did not suffer and die in vain.
1. Dozens of men said, in effect: “My eyes started to water.
I smelt the sweet fruity odour and thought it was a harmless
tear gas. I closed my eyes instead of putting on my mask.”
A few days later many closed their eyes for ever. Caught in
the tear gas trap.
2. “The shells landed a long distance away. I smelt the
phosgene, but did not think it strong enough to hurt me.”
Caught by the delayed action of phosgene. I must emphati-
cally warn you that the nose soon gets tired and won’t register
a gradual increase in the strength of gas. As soon as you smell
the odour of musty hay, put on your respirator, although you
are feeling no pain.
3. “I noticed a chloroform smell and was slow in putting on
my mask. A few minutes later I spewed it off.” One chloro-
picrin trap.
4. “After the shelling ceased, I took a sniff and smelt chloro-
form, but as it did not seem to do me any harm, I left my mask
off.” Caught by the power of aggregation of chloropicrin.
5. “I was on a working party and forgot my respirator.” It
is the duty of the officer or N.C.O. in charge to see that every


TRAPS IN CHEMICAL (GAS) WARFARE 27
man has carried out standing orders by having his respirator
with him.
6. “I had to go to the latrines in such a hurry that I forgot
my mask.” You can wash your clothes, but you can’t wash
your lungs.
7. “We had bad luck; a number of us were sleeping in a
group of dug-outs and there was no gas alarm or sentry near
us.” That is criminal neglect. In my brigade no man was
permitted to sleep beyond twelve seconds’ reach of a sentry.
8. “We are stretcher-bearers and we took off our masks to
dress wounded men.” The bearers and the wounded men had
to be carried out.
9. “After the gas was clear in the open, I went into a dug-
out and thought that I must be imagining that I smelt gas.”
Gas remains longer in dug-outs than in the open. It is there
protected from the dispersing action of the wind.
10. “My respirator was no good.” I inquired when it was
last inspected and received the amazing reply—“ About two
months ago.” In my brigade, the company gas N.C.Os in-
spected the respirators once a week and I checked their work
once a month. Here I read from a carbon copy of a report
I sent in on 5 July 1918: “I inspected 1791 respirators and
found seventy unfit for use.” If gas had come, we would have
started off with seventy casualties.
11. “I heard the all-clear sounded some distance away and
took off my mask.” All-clear signals must be regarded as
purely local.
If you critically examine the above eleven causes of casualties
you will find that all are due to ignorance, insufficient training
and carelessness; all of them could have been avoided.
12. “I washed my hands in water in a shell crater after
a mustard attack and got blistered.” Never wash in exposed
water in an area that has been shelled with mustard. The
mustard can lie dormant for weeks.
13. “I was tired and sat down and now I have a blistered


seat.” You always look at a chair before you sit on it; after
a gas attack look at the ground before you sit down.
14. “I trod in some liquid mustard and brought it into my
dug-out on my boots.” If you have any clue that mustard is
present, rub your boots in chloride of lime and take them off
outside.
15. “I appear to have picked up enough in my clothes to
gas myself and the other fellows in the dug-out whilst we
slept." Change your clothes outside and leave them out to
air.
16. ' “I was a long way off from the shelled area and the gas
seemed to come in two waves, one about an hour after the
shelling started in the morning and the other in the after-
noon, hut, as no shells fell in the meantime, I thought I had
imaginitis and did not put my box of tricks on in the after-
noon.” Probably he did get two waves; the first was due to
the heat of the explosion releasing much gas and the second
was caused by the heat of the afternoon sun accelerating the
rate of evaporation so that more vapour was available to
spread.
17. “I am a signal linesman. I blistered my hands repairing
a break near a shell crater.” If you have no special gloves,
use plenty of wire and effect the repairs well away from the
shell crater.
rB. I have confessed that I was caught with mustard through
my ignorance of its property of storing itself in paint. To
bring the list up to twenty, I will mention casualties’ state-
ments after other attacks. Whenever possible I interviewed
casualties to learn something.
19. “We were raided and Fritz covered the raiders’ retreat
with what I thought was a smoke barrage, but the b . . . put
some gas in it.” Gas readily mixes with smoke.
20. “Some high explosive shells landed near me and I did
not smell any gas, then some gas shells came, but by that time
I sneezed so hard I could not keep my mask on.” This man
did not know the mucus clue.


THE ALARM TRAP
After men have been in action for some time, they become
accustomed to noise; they often get very tired; their dug-outs
are usually underground. You cannot rely on a gas alarm to
wake tired men who are sleeping underground. The gas
sentries should know where all the men under their care are
sleeping. They must wake one man per dug-out, and rely
on him to wake the other occupants, whilst the sentries hasten
on to the next dug-outs. Gas alarms do little more than
warn the next sentry posts to be alert and so give them a flying
start.
A SERIES OF GAS ATTACKS IN 1918
I find, on referring to my war-time notes, a carbon copy of
a return of gas shelling to which my brigade was subjected
on the 29th and 30th of September and on the Ist and 2nd of
October. In these four days it was estimated that an aggregate
of 25,000 gas shells landed in the brigade area. This was
on the final advance and the German artillerymen tossed over
whatever shells they had; phosgene, dual-purpose tear gases,
mustard and the arsenic gases were used indiscriminately in
numbers per shoot from as low as twenty shells, up to a
barrage of 5000 shells. The gas was not used intelligently.
The only gas casualties we sustained were the few due to
respirators being damaged by flying metal.
RESPIRATOR TRAPS
1. An American working party was digging trenches in a gully
when it was suddenly shelled with gas. Very properly the
officer in charge ordered the men to climb the hillside and
wait. When the shelling stopped, he ordered the men to
race down into the gully, pick up the shovels and picks and
race back up hill again. The men did this and all were gassed.
In racing the men puffed so hard that they did not give the
charcoal time to act and the poison came through. It is pos-
sible to make a respirator suitable for racing purposes, but


that would so increase the resistance to breathing that wear-
ing the respirator for some hours tfrould prove exhausting.
2, In our brigade we had weekly inspections of respirators
by company gas N.C.Os and I had to check over their work
once a month. On referring to carbon copies of my returns of
inspections, I see that I found in one month, fifty defective
respirators in the brigade, and, in another month, seventy faulty
respirators. This means that if gas had come then we would
have started off with seventy casualties. It was noteworthy
that the majority of defective masks were in possession of
men in companies who had dud gas N.C.Os. I have the
details of the defects and the bulk of them comprised perished
face-pieces. The face-piece of the modern mask is of much
stouter material.
3. A small supply of adhesive tape was issued with each
respirator satchel, for temporary repairs. This tape proved
quite effective for emergency repairs during a bombardment.
I have used it to repair holes in canisters and face-pieces, but
it would not stick on to the flexible tube.
It is dangerous to regard a hole patched with adhesive tape
as a permanent repair; some gas may come through it. It makes
the difference between life and death during a bombardment,
and the respirator should be replaced as soon as possible.
4. Respirators are made by mass production in a few sizes.
They are not tailor-made, but fit like “hand-me-down-suits”;
they have tapes to make minor adjustments. The fit and com-
fort varies according to the contour of the face. They must
fit tightly so as to prevent the air coming between the face-
piece and the skin.
They are deceptively comfortable for a few minutes. People
must be trained to wear them for some hours by progressive
stages; in hot weather they irritate the skin. In any weather
the air has to be sucked through a filter and past activated
charcoal; for a few minutes this is easy, but, after hours, it
becomes exhausting.
The power of endurance must be prolonged by training.


5, Chlorine is so soluble in water that in the first attacks
some men did save their lives by breathing through garments
they made wet by natural means; at first the arsenic powders
were kept out by cheesecloth packed tight; but it is a mistake
to suppose that a home-made respirator will give efficient
service. Chloropicrin will not dissolve in water.
It is a trap to buy a respirator because it has, in comparison
with the service respirator, a better appearance. The whole
utility of a respirator depends on what is stored out of sight in
the container; the value of it depends upon chemical analysis.
I won’t go so far as to tell you not to buy a respirator; but I
do say, before buying it, get advice from competent chemists.
6. An efficient respirator gives protection to the eyes and
lungs, but I bid you remember that is not enough; the casual-
ties I interviewed had good respirators, but, nevertheless, they
were trapped.
GAS-RESISTING SHELTERS
What were termed “gas-proof-dug-outs” proved their value in
France and Belgium for headquarters, signal offices and medi-
cal aid posts. Since the war they have suffered at the pens of
extremists.
The principle is simple. It is to offer to the main body of
drifting gas a resistance to discourage its entry. This is effected
by covering over all means of access by wet blanket or other
suitable material. It is better to use special frames to fit
right over doors and windows and ventilators, because the
ordinary window frames and door jambs were not designed for
anti-gas purposes; wood shrinks and jerry-building is not un-
known. Brick walls are to a certain extent porous. It is
a trap to suppose that all gas can be kept out indefinitely; but
a casualty-producing strength can be shut out for some hours
and this is enough if the gas-resisting shelter be not under-
ground or on the ground level. Mustard persists on ground
level for days.
Each time people enter a gas-resisting shelter, they bring in


some gas in their clothes; traffic must be cut down to a mini-
mum.
The occupants have to rely on the oxygen imprisoned in the
shelter when the gas-resisting curtains are lowered. It is a
mistake to light candles, to smoke, have a fire, or any heating
appliance. The shelter soon gets hot and stuffy. People may
read with the aid of electric torches; they should not lie down
on the floor, because the gas that does come in will occupy the
lowest level available to it.
If a shelter be made draught-proof, it is gas-resisting.
SMELL TRAPS
When I obtained London leave, after I had deliberately trained
my nose for a couple of years, I was amazed at the number
and variety of smells in a city coming from drains, factories,
shops, hotels, household cooking and unwashed people. I
used to amuse myself by looking at the road and getting my
nose to tell me the kind of shop I was passing. Believe me, a
sensitive nose is not an asset for ordinary civilian life. I
want to warn you of ten traps arising from the diversity of
chemicals available.
(i) A strong smelling gas may mask the presence of a
more deadly gas that has a weaker odour—simple tear gases
and phosgene, (ii) Five different chemicals were put in mus-
tard shells, (iii) It is possible to make chemicals to diminish the
sensitiveness of the nose, if not to paralyse the smelling nerve,
(iv) Warfare gases are not made 100 per cent pure and the
presence of the impurities may alter the smell, (v) The nose
is not an exact instrument and quickly suffers from fatigue.
It will not register accurately a progressive increase of the
concentrations of gas. (vi) The odour of some chemicals
changes after exposure to the air for a few minutes, (vii)
Gases do not spread or diffuse at the same rate —hydrogen
will diffuse four times as rapidly as oxygen; to ascertain what
gases are present, tests must be taken frequently, (viii) Until
the advent of gas warfare, apart from the perfume and several
other trades, there was little occasion to describe odours with


exactness; we have few descriptive terms. At best, the odours
ascribed to warfare gases are rough approximations, (ix) In
a mixed gas attack, odours may blend for the time being, (x)
As hundreds of chemicals may be used and as the tricks are
so many, the rule is better expressed; Wherever you be, if you
smell an odour strange to that locality, treat it as a warning
of gas; if the nose cease to function, treat that cessation as a
warning of the presence of a gas which diminishes the sen-
sitiveness of the olfactory nerve. Remember that the nose
soon gets tired and to take the tests at the lowest level.
Chemical Detectors. —Reasonably efficient paints have been
made for giving a visible reaction on contact with mustard
in liquid form; as yet the chemical detectors are not sensitive
enough for vapour; as yet they operate one way only, they do
not visibly advise when the gas has gone away. Unless they
be protected, they would warn of the first attack and not
subsequent attacks on the same day.
There is such a wide variety of warfare gases having such
fundamentally different properties, that it is unlikely that it
will be possible to devise a universal two-way detector that is
readily transportable.
It is at present a mistake to place complete reliance on
detectors composed of chemicals; at most, they may give an
additional positive clue, but the absence of that clue must not
be interpreted as meaning that no gas is present.
ALL-CLEAR SIGNALS
All-clear signals must be regarded as purely local. I remember
that a distance of fifty yards outside the Ploegsteert Wood made
a difference of an hour in the all-clear. Gas remains in
effective strength much longer where it is protected from the
dispersing action of the wind, sun and air currents. It can
remain in basements for weeks. In general, it would stay
longer in a garden surrounded by hedges and in enclosed court-
yards than it would in an open street.
With persistent gases, an area that is all-clear in the morn-


ing may be dangerous in the afternoon; the heat of the sun
would cause a greater quantity of liquid to be converted into
vapour, thus at any given period in the afternoon more vapour
would be released, and the greater quantity would spread
further.
Naturally, a change in the direction of the wind would carry
gas into an area previously free; in level country, if there be
no wind and no obstacles, gas will diffuse in a circle. If there
be a wind of, say, three miles per hour, gas will drift fan-
wise, but it will have time to eddy out on to low-lying flanks.
It searches out low-lying areas in much the same way as flood
waters do. To climb hills, it requires the assistance of a fol-
lowing wind. Great care has to be taken in the detection of
“gas pockets” in undergrowth and on the lee side of buildings,
trees, and in valleys. The all-clear must be given separately
for each occupied area.
THE “HUMANE GAS” TRAP
Early writers claimed that gas is a humane weapon;
triumphantly they pointed out the undoubted fact that the
percentage of men admitted to hospital gassed (and who did
not die), was lower than the percentage of those admitted for
wounds due to bullets and high explosives. It was possible
to infer that a soldier who was fed-up with a war and wanted
a cheap bed in hospital had merely to become gassed. This
is a trap; he might never leave the hospital alive.
For a time it was believed that gas provoked tuberculosis,
but the balance of medical evidence is rather against this.
There seems, however, to be a fairly general agreement that
in the lungs gas makes wounds somewhat similar to skin
wounds, in that it leaves a sensitive scar and a weakness. The
weak part is easily irritated and the patient spontaneously
coughs to try to relieve the irritation.
For several years I was a visitor to a repatriation hospital
and the sights I saw there in winter among men who had been
gassed fourteen to seventeen years ago satisfied me that bullets
and high explosives were more humane for the very reason that


they did kill. I suppose that it is a matter of opinion, but I
should certainly prefer a speedy death to a hopeless living
misery wherein I should be a permanent nuisance to my friends
and a burden to my country.
There is more substance in the eugenists’ claim that gas
defence depends so much on knowledge and understanding
that the next war will wipe out, not only mental defectives, but
also those who are slow of apprehension; and thus we shall
get a race more mentally alert.
THE AGGRESSIVE-PACIFISTS’ TRAP
There are some earnest, high-minded, but misguided, idealists
who contend that teachers of gas defence are in favour of
war, and, therefore, are creatures to be execrated. lam such
a being, and, doubtless, there are many grounds for execrating
me, but teaching gas defence is not one of them. I have seen
hundreds of men who were trapped into losing their health
by inhaling gas; indeed the traps I am pointing out are those
into which many thousands of men fell through ignorance, care-
lessness and lack of training. Warning people of unsuspected
danger is not an action to be condemned.
The nature of my duties as an anti-gas N.C.O. to an infantry
company, a battalion and a brigade, were such, and my future
duties in the unhappy event of a gas attack would be such,
that for selfish as well as humane reasons I also am very much
opposed to war. lam opposed to accidents, but my opposition
to accidents does not make me antagonistic to people conduct-
ing safety-first campaigns; and the fact that some accidents
still occur does not appeal to me as a reason for urging that
safety-first work is of no value.
Warfare gases are always terrible harassing agents; in the
absence of adequate defensive preparations, they are also
obliterating agents. On the defence side, we want to limit
their action to harassing: our opponents would have oblitera-
tion.
A knowledge of gas defence is not like a knowledge of box-
ing, for the defensive organization cannot be used for aggres-


sion. Our weapons are—a knowledge of gases and an under-
standing of their behaviour, organized systems of wind vanes,
alarms, gas-resisting rooms, and possibly respirators and
traffic control. It is true that lam bombarding you with know-
ledge and for reasons not unconnected with politeness and
discipline you have the appearance of listening to me, but I
can’t inflict this misfortune on the enemy. We gas defence
people have no incentive or means to provoke an enemy, or to
hurt him; our sole function and purpose is to diminish the effect
of the injuries the enemy may attempt to inflict on our men,
women and children.
In opposing gas defence, the aggressive-pacifists are in fact
setting a trap for their fellow citizens. In some States their
vociferations have helped to delay the inception of gas defen-
sive preparations. In other States, they have helped to apply
brakes when a move has been made. They are supplying in-
dolent officials with excuses for doing little dwindling down to
nothing. With the world constituted as it is to-day, to do
nothing in gas defence is criminal neglect; to do little and give
a sense of false security is to set a trap.
In bristling up as soon as gas defence is mentioned, and in
writing snorting letters to the daily Press, the aggressive-
pacifists are adopting the wrong tactics. They ought to realize
that the more the people know about gas, the greater will he
their aversion to war.
At present, we gas defence exponents have to try to make a
horrible subject entertaining; we emphasize the percentage of
people we can save; it is easy to take the figures and say how
many are going to get caught.
I think that the aggressive-pacifists must misunderstand the
nature, scope and duties of gas defence. I find it hard to
believe that a body of civilized Christian beings should oppose
even the partial protection of men, women and children from
insidious assaults by vile chemicals. By limiting the number of
casualties, we at least ensure that those who become gas cas-
ualties will receive more prompt medical treatment and we
diminish overcrowding in hospitals.


We can’t stop war, but we can do the next best thing; we
can limit the number of deaths and casualties.
DUTIES OF GAS DEFENCE PERSONNEL
1 have selected a dozen out of the many traps into which the
gas defence personnel are likely to fall. In order that you may
understand them, I give a brief outline of the duties some anti-
gas N.C.Os actually performed in gas attacks in the Great War.
It should be remembered that post-war chemical research has
enlarged those duties, particularly in relation to decontamina-
tion.
Immediately the gas bombardment began the anti-gas N.C.O.
had to dash around and make certain that the gas sentries had:
(a) wakened everybody up; ( b) correctly adjusted anti-gas cur-
tains. The N.C.O. had to satisfy himself that every one out-
side gas-proof dug-outs was wearing his respirator.
Throughout the gas bombardment the anti-gas N.C.O. had
to: (a) Make frequent sniffs to ascertain what gases were be-
ing used; ( b ) visit each group of men to repair any respira-
tors damaged during bombardment; (c) inspect and repair any
anti-gas curtains damaged during bombardment. In a pro-
longed bombardment of some hours, he had to help to main-
tain morale by increasing the frequency of his visits.
After gas bombardment the anti-gas N.C.O. had to: (a)
Measure the strength of gas present by the discriminating
power of the olfactory nerve of his nose in order to ascertain
the earliest minute the all-clear could be given for each
occupied locality in his sector; (b) visit each cook-house to test
food (in case of doubt, by taste); (c) arrange for gas to be
cleared out of dug-outs by Ayrton fans and/or fires; (d)
examine shell craters and, if he found a gas unknown to him,
take samples of gas-impregnated earth; (e) look for dud shells
and examine their markings (if the markings were unfamiliar,
he had to carry the shells to a place where they could be for-
warded on to analytical chemists) ; (/) if men were gassed,


diagnose cases, and arrange for stretcher-bearers for casualties
affected by lung gases.
Seconds are so valuable at the start of a gas attack that
the anti-gas N.C.O. had always to sleep on the ground level
in order that he might get earliest warning of gas (popping
sound of liquid gas shells and noise of alarms). When every-
body else very properly ducked for cover he had to be “out
and doing.” He was without the moral support that numbers
give; he had to be capable of forming his own judgment and
had to take the responsibility of acting on it; there was no
time to push responsibility on to someone else.
TRAPS ARISING OUT OF THE DUTIES OF THE
GAS-DEFENCE OFFICER
I. Dashing around must not degenerate into a blind rush. The
anti-gas N.C.O. must avoid treading in liquid on ground and
must fit in his movements with the enemy’s gas tactics. (In a
gas barrage it was usual for the Germans to allot target areas
for batteries and for the guns to fire to a time-table to ensure
a proper distribution of gas and continuity of concentration.)
He must visit a centre just after a shell has burst there.
2. He must regulate his pace so as to prevent puffing, parti-
cularly when a shell bursts within a few yards of him—other-
wise gas may come through his mask.
3. Before sniffing, he should take a deep breath through his
respirator to limit the amount he can inhale per sniff.
4. In sniffing to ascertain what gases are being used and
also for giving the all-clear, he must not take more than
five sniffs in the first five minutes, and thereafter he must
allow two-minute intervals. The nose gets tired (see (n)
hereunder).
5. In testing food, he should first concentrate on bread, fresh
meat, etc. in each cook house before tasting any non-essential
food with a strong flavour, lest it weaken his sensibility. He
should suspend judging foods whose flavour lasts..


6. He must not swallow contaminated foods, and must
rinse out his mouth with uncontaminated water.
7. When blister gases are employed, he must change his
clothes at frequent intervals and rub himself all over with
anti-blister ointment.
8. Unless he is wearing special clothing, he must not take
samples of blister-gas-impregnated-earth.
9. He must avoid taking possession of leaking dud shells,
or bombs.
10. In ascertaining whether dud shells or bombs contain
liquid, he must not shake them, lest they explode. The hori-
zontal alignment must be gently altered so that the liquid will
move, like a spirit level, and betray itself by the feel.
11. Although this is disputed, I think it is safer to say that
successive inhalations by sniffing weaken resistance. The quan-
tity of gas which would merely give a gas expert a headache
early in the war, would make him a casualty later on, when he
was suffering from the accumulated effects of sniffing in previ-
ous attacks.
12. I remember visiting on my rounds a company of unfor-
tunate men in the trenches an hour after the all-clear signal
had been correctly given by the company gas N.C.Os on each
side, and I saw the troops still wearing their respirators. I
at once put mine on (suspecting a gas pocket) and tested for
gas, but could not find a trace. I located the company gas
N.C.O. and got him to test again; he pronounced gas present.
1 then ascertained that, during the bombardment, he went into
a gas-proof dug-out and took a big swig of encouraging liquid.
Every time he stooped down to test for gas, he not unnaturally
belched, and the gas that he smelt was—his own alcoholic breath.
FOUR DEFENCES FOR CIVILIANS
For some years I have stressed my belief that, even when
civilians have no respirators and no gas-resisting rooms, only
a small percentage of them is at the mercy of gas. Persons,
who hear gas bombs and shells bursting all around them, must


seek safety in height, lest, in avoiding the gas from one bomb,
they run into that of another. People who hear bombs burst-
ing at a distance (there must be some limit to an attack) should
at once ascertain the direction of the wind, and if it be blow-
ing from the sound of the bombs to them, they should move
across-wind and outflank the gas —they will have from five
minutes up to an hour to do so. A system of co-ordinated
alarms will help them and the prompt institution of one-way
traffic, leading out sideways from the path the gas will take,
will prevent other people walking into danger and expedite the
exodus of those within the danger area. Obviously no good
purpose is served by allowing people to go into an area that
presently will be saturated with drifting gas. One-way traffic
diminishes the chance of panic, because all will be moving in
the one direction and it is of little consequence that people get
out of danger minutes sooner than is really necessary. In a
big attack, having a front of several miles, an imaginary line, or
preferably a street, would be taken as the centre of the drift
and there would be two lots of one-way traffic leading from that
line outwards across-wind. The police and wardens would set
a few people moving in the right direction and rely on the
instinct of “follow the crowd.”
For outflanking, I select a line 1000 yards away from the
nearest shell- or bomb-burst, for that allows a space big enough
for flying bricks and metal to tumble into; and, as gas drifts
slowly, it gives enough time to estimate the limits of the parti-
cular attack and to estimate where the gas is going to drift.
Outflanking may be undertaken by the people occupying the
area commencing 1000 yards from the nearest bomb-burst and
extending down-wind for as much as 20,000 yards. The huge
district thus formed is big enough to make outflanking worth
while in cities where the anti-aircraft defences are so limited
that falling metal is a minor problem.
If people be in, say ten story buildings, they will use the
third, fourth and fifth floors and the topmost floors will give
some protection against bombs and shrapnel.
I am dealing with percentages and numbers and not individ-


uals; despite what my critics may say, it does not seem to me
inhuman to try to help the greatest possible number to survive.
As yet my belief in outflanking and height commands no
general acceptance, but I am sufficiently tenacious (or obstin-
ate enough) to maintain that it is only a matter of time before
it will be generally realized that there are four defences open
to civilians, namely, respirators, gas-resisting rooms, height
and outflanking.
When these beliefs are accepted, when traps are recognized
and when the literary resources of the nation are mobilized for
teaching gas defence, then my claim in the preface that 99 per
cent of the people can be saved will be within measurable
distance of being realized. If little be done, we may expect
people to fall like grass before a plough and the casualties to
be numbered by the ten thousand, as the gases slowly and
silently sweep over those who were never taught that gases are
detected by sound, sight and smell, who were not warned of
gas traps and were ignorant of the elementary principles of
gas defence.
All Clear


57^3
BIBLIOGRAPHY
I wish gratefully to acknowledge that I have obtained ideas, facts
and corroboration from the undermentioned sources and to the authors
and compilers I express my thanks.
Air Raid Precautions Department: Memoranda, July 1935-September
1936, Handbooks 1,2, 4,6, and 7.
War Office; “Defence Against Gas,” 1935; Field Service Regulations,
1935, Volume 11.
Fries and West: “Chemical Warfare.”
Foulkes: “Gas,” 1934.
Lefebure: “The Riddle of the Rhine.”
Auld: “Gas and Flame.”
Caven; “Gas and Gases.”
Haldane, J. B. S.: “Callinicus.”
Fradkin; “Chemical Warfare: its Possibilities, etc.'
British Red Cross; “First Aid in Chemical Warfare.”
Medical Research Committee: “Atlas of Gas Poisoning.’
St John Ambulance Brigade: Notes of Lectures on- Air Raid Pre-
cautions. ()
Socialist Medical Association: “Gas attacks, is there any protection ?”
Cambridge Scientists: “Protection of the Public from Aerial Attack.
(February, 1937.)
Protar: Swiss Monthly Gas Journal.
The Times: Weekly Edition, London, April 1, 19 37> P- 4-
Chemists’ Journals
Engineers’ Journals
Medical Journals
Police Journals f Articles, comments and notes.
Health Bulletins
The Spectator
Reviews
Australian War Museum: British. American, French and a few trans-
lations of German army orders, pamphlets and instructions on gas.
Official war histories "and indexed references in war diaries and
unit histories. (Kindly made available to me for research work.)
(Final note. The developments in, and extended ramifications of, gas
warfare are such that the author believes that the above works will
comprise about one per cent of the mass of material the gas expert
of ten years’ time will have to read.)
Halstead Press Pty Limited, 9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney
