

Tree Carving by Robert Louis Steves on




R. L. Stevenson and Swanston Cottage
Middleton Family
Notable Men and Women of Aberdeenshire
The Surname of Bett
Rebellions of 1715 and 1745
Inventories of Northern Records
The Origin of Adam Lindsay Gordon
129
130
13 2
134
13s
138
139
140
Minor Notes :—
The Original Manuscript of “ Auld Lang Syne ” ....
The Greek Branch of the Skene Family
The Picture of the Queen’s Landing at Aberdeen in
1848 —The Buchan Field Club—A Begging Letter
of Last Century
131
134
137
139
140
Lord Rosslyn on the Stage
Queries : —
The Duchess of Gordon and the Premier Earl of
Aberdeen —Ballad Wanted —Kenmore Church Bell
and Clock
The Cumines—“Crabe of the Greine ” —Dr. Glennie
of Dulwich—James Whyte or White
142
143
Answers :—
King’s College Gown — George Romney and the
University of Aberdeen —Court Books of Discher
and Toyer—The Founders of the Dick and Milne
Bequests
M3
Literature
143
Scots Books of the Month
144
SCOTTISH
NOTES AND QUERIES
Vol. XL] No. 9.
MARCH, 1898,
Registered. 4 d.
CONTENTS.
Notes :
ABERDEEN, , MARCH,\ iBgB.
R. L. STEVENSON AND SWANSTON
COTTAGE.
paper dealt with the Covenanting conflict which
was fought at Rullion Green on the Eastern
face of the hills. Three of the essays in
Memories and Portraits have their locale in
the same district, and, last of all, he sends his
hero St. Ives more than once to the house that
nestles at the base of Kirkyetton, as Stevenson
calls it, or Caerkettan, as it is commonly known.
This house is named “ Swanston Cottage,”
both in reality and in St. Ives , and was for some
years his home. He thus describes it in St.
Ives —“ The cottage was a little quaint place of
many rough-cast gables and grey roofs. It had
something the air of a rambling, infinitesimal
cathedral, the body of it rising in the midst two
storeys high, with a steep-pitched roof, and
sending out upon all hands (as it were chapter-
houses, chapels, and transepts) one-storeyed and
dwarfish projections. To add to this appearance,
it was grotesquely decorated with crockets and
gargoyles ravished from some mediaeval church.
The place seemed hidden away, being not only
concealed in the trees of the garden, but ....
buried as high as the eaves by the rising of the
ground. About the walls of the garden there
went a line of well-grown elms and beeches, . . .
and the centre was occupied with a thicket of
laurel and holly, in which I could see arches cut
and paths winding.”
The illustration which accompanies this num-
ber is an exact copy of a carving on one of the
trees in the garden of Swanston Cottage. The
tree grows out of the rock just where a wall
rises from it. If the date is 1874, and if
Stevenson executed the carving, he must have
been 24 years of age at the time. It is, I
suppose, useless to speculate on what may have
been his motive in thus leaving visible evidence
of his personal connection with the place, or
why his memorial took the particular form it
did. When the Stevenson family were about to
move into Swanston Cottage, the children of its
former tenant gave audible expression to their
hatred of the little boy who was to do as he
liked in their pleasant garden. He has, at least,
made it a shrine of literature.
Stevenson has done his best to immortalise
the district lying at the foot of the Pentlands
where they approach nearest to Edinburgh.
One of the most pleasant chapters in his Edin-
burgh Picturesque Notes is devoted to its praise
and the record of its points of interest in history
and topography. The scenery of Weir of
Hermiston fits its lonesome character, and the
Church of Clencorse, in which the incidents
connected with Christina’s Psalm Book occurred,
is actually within its borders, His first printed
Kirkurd. J. Calder Ross.


MIDDLETON FAMILY.
By Emma F. Ware, Milton, Mass., U.S.A.
( S. N.&Q., X., 65, 81.)
IN a list of subscribers to “Prince’s Chronology”
{New Eng. Hist, and Gen. Register, vol. vi., page
196), appears this item : “ Middleton, Mr. Alex-
ander, Merchant (for two).”
Alexander Middleton, Jr., belonged to a family
prominent for many generations in Aberdeen-
shire and Kincardineshire. His grandfather’s
grandfather, Robert Middleton, of Cauldhame
(“ Caddam ”), was killed while sitting in his
armchair in his own house by Montrose’s
soldiers. The son of Robert of Cauldhame,
Rev. Alexander Middleton, D.D., graduated at
King’s College, Aberdeen, in 1630, and was
made Sub-principal of the college in 1641. He
married in 1643 “contrary to the foundation of
the college, for he was the first regent that
entered into a marriage condition in this college.”
{Sketches of Early Scotch History, Cosmo Innes,
p. 304.) Removed by Cromwell, he was at the
Restoration made Principal, and held the place
until his resignation owing to old age and
infirmities in 1684 ; he died two years later.
“ In his time the college flourished, as he caused
good order to be kept therein.” (Biscoe, Earls
of Middleton, p. 123.) Principal Alexander’s
brother was the famous Major-General John
Middleton (created Earl of Middleton by Charles
II.) who was so prominent on both sides in the
troubles of the time, and is so often mentioned
in the annals and histories of the period (Pepys’s
Diary, Burnet’s History of His Own Times, etc.)
His son Charles, second Earl, was one of James
IP’s chief counsellors during his exile at St.
Germain. (Biscoe, Earls of Middleton.)
Principal Alexander was succeeded by his
son George Middleton, D.D., Dean of the
Diocese of Aberdeen, who held the office of
Principal until 1717, and died in 1726. Principal
George’s son, Alexander Middleton, Sr., was
“Comptroller of Customs” at Aberdeen, and
in 1705 married Elspeth Burnet, of what family
is not known. It was on the farm of A. Mid-
dleton, Sr., that the celebrated astronomer,
James Ferguson, served as shepherd boy, and
while watching his master’s sheep studied the
stars and made diagrams of the constellations,
as described in his autobiography. When he
was somewhat older, Ferguson drew many por-
traits of his neighbours (see Memoir), and in
the possession of the descendants of Alexander
Middleton in this country are still preserved
portraits of A. Middleton, Sr., his wife, his two
daughters, and his son A. Middleton, Jr., drawn
by the astronomer.* These portraits were pro-
bably made about 1733, and therefore just
before A. Middleton, Jr., left Scotland, for his
marriage to Ann Todd took place in Boston in
November, 1735. He died in August, 1750, and
his widow two years afterwards married David
Fick, foreman in Mr. James Smith’s sugar
refinery in Brattle Street. It is supposed to
have been on account of this marriage that the
surviving daughters were adopted by Mr. Smith
and his wife (who was their mother’s sister), and
were brought up at Mr. Smith’s place on Brush
Hill, Milton. Of the five Middleton sisters, two
(Helen and Diana) died unmarried ; Prudence
married Dr. Joseph Whipple, surgeon in Paul
Revere’s regiment, and left no descendants ;
Ann married Rufus Bent, of Milton, and was
the mother, among other children, of Miss Ann
Bent, well known to the last generation of
Boston ladies (Teele’s History of Milton, p. 536),
and of Mrs. Charles Barnard, the mother of
Rev. C. F. Barnard,t late of the Warren Street
Chapel, James M. Barnard and George M.
Barnard.
The eldest daughter, Mary, married James
Lovell, son and assistant of Master John Loved
of the Boston Latin School. Though the Master
was a Tory, his son was a “rebel,” and during
the siege of Boston kept his absent friends
informed of the doings of the enemy within the
town. A letter found in the pocket of Gen.
Warren after the battle of Bunker Hill led to
James Lovell’s arrest and imprisonment in
Boston jail for nine months until the Evacuation
(Diary of John Leach, Reg., vol. 19, p. 255), when
he was taken to Halifax (it is said in irons) in
the same vessel which carried his father as a
refugee. While in Halifax, James Lovell shared
the prison of Ethan Allen. He was exchanged
in November, 1776, for Gen. Skene, and on his
return to his native town was sent to Congress by
his grateful fellow-citizens. He was Chairman
of the Committee of Foreign Affairs during the
war, and on the return of peace filled the office
of Collector of the Port until 1789, and of Naval
Officer until his death in 1814. He had several
sons who left descendants .(one of whom, Joseph,
was Surgeon General of the United States), and
one daughter, Mary, who married Mark Pickard,
an Englishman. Their only child, Mary Lovell
Pickard, married Rev. Henry Ware, [r„ and
died in 1849.
* Reproduced in A. N. Q. for November, 1896.
t In a Memoir of Rev. C. F. Barnard, lately published, his
descent is erroneously derived from Arthur Middleton, of South
Caroling.


MIDDLETON
' OF MIDDLETON.
Charters, etc.,
from the nth Century to
Gilbert.
Lawrence de Middleton.
Gilbert, Sheriff of Angus.
1
John “of Kilhill.”
John “of Kilhill.”
Robert “of Caddam.” f 1643.
1
John, ist Earl, 1660.
t i6?3-
1
Alexander, D.D., Prin. K. Coll,
f 1686.
1
Charles, 2nd Earl. Forfeited,
t J?i9-
George, D.D., Prin. K. Coll,
f 1726.
i
Two Sons,
oh. s. p.
i 1 .1
Alex.,- Sen. John Patrick (Poland),
f 1751. “of Seaton.” y
1 |
*1
Janet.
V
Robert.
V
i
John (Barbadoes).
t i79 2 -
1 1
Alex., Jr. George
f 1750. “ of Seaton.”
V
Master Lovell died in Halifax, but his youngest
son Benjamin, H. C. 1774, settled in England,
and became rector of Ash in Surrey. One of
Master Lovell’s daughters married in Boston a
Hessian Baron. Another (or perhaps the same
daughter), by her beauty so turned the head of
I
John.
Richard.
Mark Pickard. Barnard,
Mary=Jas. Lovell. Ann=Bent. Pmdence=\Vhipple.
Mary=
■=Rev. Henry Ware.
Emma,
The Original Manuscript of “Auld
Lang Syne.” —Mr. Cuyler Reynolds contributes
to the February Century an article on “The
Manuscript of ‘Auld Lang Syne,”’ the article
being accompanied by a facsimile of the auto-
graph. The late Chancellor John V. L. Pmyn
of Albany, New York, was a lover of curios,
and particularly of the kind connected with an
interesting past. In 1859 the centennial of
the birthday of Robert Burns was made the
occasion for a celebration in different cities of
the United States; and the literary people of
Albany decided to observe the day by memorial
the young ordnance officer, Col. Cleveland, that
he neglected his duty of supplying suitable
ammunition for the British guns, thereby per-
haps rendering the victory at Bunker Hill less
complete than it might otherwise have been.
exercises. Previous to the event Mr. .Pruyn
planned that it would be a feature if he could
secure this autograph copy of the poet’s “Auld
Lang Syne.” He bought it from Henry Stevens,
the London bookseller, who bought it at Picker-
ing’s sale in 1855. Mrs. Pruyn, who now owns it,
has refused £7 50 for the cherished page, which is
bound within Russia-leather covers, along with
a letter to Dr. Richmond from Burns, dated
February 7, 1788, proving the identity of the
writing in the poem, and also the,letter written
to Chancellor Pruyn by Henry Stevens when
sending the poem to him.


NOTABLE MEN AND WOMEN OF
ABERDEENSHIRE.
685. Moir, fames, LL.D. : Born at Kildrummy
in 1845. Attended Keith Parish School, then taught
by the late James Smith, who educated Professor
Black, Dr. Walter Gregor, and other distinguished
scholars. Mr. Moir entered King’s College in 1865,
and graduated 1869, after a brilliant record at the
University, with highest honours in classics. Acted
as Assistant Professor of Greek in 1870-71. Appointed
Head Classical Master in Stewart’s College, Edin-
burgh, 1871 ; Rector of Banff Academy in 1873 ;
and Plead Classical Master of Glasgow Academy in
1875 > Rector of Aberdeen Grammar School in 1881;
Co-rector in 1893. Mr. Moir has published Continuous
Latin Prose, and edited Blind Harry’s Wallace for
the Scottish Text Society, and Boece’s Lives of the
Bishops of Aberdeen for the New Spalding Club.
Mr. Moir ably fills the post of Secretary to the
Aberdeen Philosophical Society, and in 1891 Aberdeen
University conferred on him the degree of LL.D.
686. Moir, F. F. Maitland, M.D.: Younger brother
of No. 685. A public spirited citizen. Plad also a
brilliant career in Medicine at Marischal College,
where he graduated M.B. with highest honours in
1873. Besides conducting a very large practice as a
physician, Dr. Moir entered public life both as a
member of the Town Council and School Board.
For the latter position, he was elected at the top of
the poll. As a radical in politics, Dr. Moir was a
popular speaker. He died in 1891 at the early age of
43-
687. Moore, Andrew, M.D. (Prof.): Sixth
Teacher of Medicine in King’s College. Dr. Moore
was appointed to his chair in 1649, and died 1692.
See Anderson’s Kings College Off dais, Lfc., 36.
688. Morgan, Patrick: Local Plistorian. Born
in Woodside in 1824, he died in 1887. Besides
writing some local verse, Mr. Morgan was the author
of a volume entitled The Annals of Woodside and
Newhills, published in 1886.
689. Morice, George T. : Judge. During the
recent troubles in South Africa this gentleman’s name
came to the front. Though a Scot and a native of
the city of Aberdeen, he is a Judge in the Transvaal.
690. Morison, George, D. D.: Divine and Author.
Father of the Church of Scotland. Son of James of
Elsick, Provost of Aberdeen, he was born in 1757, and
graduated M.A. atMarischalCollegeini776. Ordained
to the parish of Oyne in 1783, he was translated to
Banchory-Devenick in 1785. He got a new church
built in 1822, had D.D. from King’s College in 1824,
and died Father of the Church in 1545. He conferred
a lasting boon on his parishioners by the erection of
an iron suspension bridge across the Dee, as also by
establishing a school at Cairnhill. He published A
Brief Outline of the External Framework and
Internal Constitution of the Appointments of the
Church of Scotland as by Law Established, 1840; also,
State of the Church of Scotland in 1830 and 1840
contrasted, 1840. Also two single sermons in 1830
and 1832 respectively, and Accounts of the Parish in
the Old and New Statistical Accounts of Scotland.
691. Morison James: “The Hygeist.” Writer
on medical subjects. A native of Forgue, and scion
of the Bognie family, Mr. Morison, who was born in
1770, after receiving his education at Marischal
College (1783-4), at Edinburgh, and at Hanan,
became a merchant, first in Riga and then in
the West Indies; but settled in Bordeaux in 1814.
Having suffered personally from ill-health, and given
a good deal of thought to medicine and physiology,
he, about the year 1822, invented, as he believed, a
panacea for most physical ailments, in what he called
“ The Vegetable Universal Medicine.” In 1825 he
published an account of his discovery, under the title
Important Advice to the World on the Way to Prevent
and Cure Diseases. This volume, and others that
succeeded it, had a large sale, and as, by judicious
puffing, he got the ear of the public, his medicines for
a time became extremely popular, and made their
discoverer a wealthy man. He died in 1840. For
list of his publications see K. J. in S. N. &• Q.,
ix., 154. The positivist author, James Cotter Morison
(1831-1888), whose book, The Service of Man, made
a sensation when published, was his son. See The
Thanage of Formartyn.
692. Morison, Jolm, D.D.: Divine and Poet.
Born in Cairnie parish in May, I7s°>he graduated M. A.
at King’s College, Aberdeen, in 1771. Ordained to
Canisbay parish in 1780, he received his D.D. from
Edinburgh in 1792, and died in 1798. He was a
good hymnist, and several of the Paraphrases are
from his pen.
693. Morison, John, M.P. : Public Man. Brother
of No. 691. He was of the family of Bognie, Forgue,
and was born about 1767. In early life he was a
merchant in Russia, where he made a fortune. On
returning home, he became a large landed proprietor.
He also served for a time as M.P. for Banffshire, and
died in 1835. See Temple’s Thanage of Formartyn.
694. Morison, Robert, M.D.: Eminent Botanist,
&c. Born at Aberdeen in 1620, and educated at
Marischal College. A Royalist, he was wounded in a
skirmish at Bridge of Dee in 1639. On recovering he
retired to France, when he studied at Paris, and then
took the degree of M.D. at Angers in 1648. His
reputation as a botanist led to his appointment in
1650 to the charge of the Royal Gardens at Blois.
He afterwards published an accurate catalogue of the
plants contained there. On the restoration of Charles
11. he removed to London, where he became one of
the physicians to the King, and was also nominated
Royal Professor of Botany, with a salary of £2OO.
In 1669 he published his Praeludiurn Botanicum,
and soon after was elected Professor of Botany in
Oxford University. In 1672 appeared his Plantarum
Umbelliferarum DistrUmtio Neva, the substance of


which is incorporated in the Plantarum Historia, 2
vols., 1678. Ur. Morison died in 1683. In his time
he was recognised as the leading botanist in Europe.
He is said to have been the first to delineate the
separate parts of plants. See Anderson’s Scottish
Nation and S. N. & Q., ix., 155 ; xi., 38.
695. Morison , Thomas, M.D. : Learned Physician.
Born at Aberdeen, probably in the 6th decade of the
sixteenth century, he studied at the University of
Montpelier, where he is supposed to have taken his
degree. He was one of the physicians to James VI.
An alchemist, he published, at Frankfort, in 1593, a
curious treatise entitled De Metallorum Causis
et Transubstantiatione. He also wrote a work on the
Popedom , published in Edinburgh in 1594. This
volume, which is very rare, is said to be highly
prized for its erudition. He was the friend and
correspondent of the famous Sir Francis Bacon. He
must have died subsequent to 1603, as Bacon wrote
to him that year as still alive.
696. Morison, William (Sir): Chief Justice of
the Bahamas. He was of the family of Bognie,
Forgue, and educated at King’s College, Aberdeen.
He does not seem to have graduated, as his name does
not appear in Mr. Anderson’s King’s College Officials
and Graduates. He became a barrister, and practised,
first at Quebec, where he married a French lady, then
at Grenada, in the West Indies. He was subsequently
appointed by Mr. Pitt, Chief Justice of the Bahama
Islands, when he was knighted by George HI. He
died about 1790.
697. Morren, Nathaniel, M.A. (Rev.): Divine
and Author. Born on 3rd February, 1798, in Aber-
deen, he graduated at Marischal College in 18x4.
He was one of the ministers of Greenock from 1823
to 1843, and died as minister of the first charge of
Brechin, in 1847. Mr. Morren, who was a very
accomplished scholar, published two volumes of
Annals of the General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland. In x 835 he published Biblical Theology, a
work which did not proceed beyond the first volume.
He was a good linguist, and translated Rosenmuller’s
Biblical Geography. See Agnew’s Theology of Con-
solation, 404; also K. J. in S. N. & Q., xi., X 54,
for a number of other writings.
698. Morrice, John: 1 Two sons of the parish
699. Morrice, George: j minister of Lumphanan,
who became prominent and successful merchants in
London, in the early part of the 19th century. They
were born in the manse some time in the seventies of
the eighteenth century.
700. Morrison, John, D.D. : Congregational
Divine and Author. Born at Millseat of Craigston,
King-Edward, Bth July, 1791, he became an eminent
Congregationalist minister in London, and acted for
many years as Editor of The Evangelical Magazine.
K. J. gives in S. N. Sf Q., ix., 154, a list of his
numerous writings. One of his most interesting
works is his Fathers and Founders of the London
Missionary Society. He died in 1859.
701. Morrison. John: Musician. A noted fiddler
and composer of last century. He published, in 1793,
A Collection of Original Reels and Strathspeys.
702. Mortimer, Thomas (Rev.): Divine and
Poet. This distinguished author, who was an
evangelical minister of the Church of England in
Southwark, London, is claimed by K. J. (S. N. Q.,
ix., 153) as a native of Aberdeenshire. A long list of
his writings is given, and it is added that his wife,
Mrs. Mortimer, is the authoress of the famous Peep of
Day books for teaching the Bible to children, which
have been so widely circulated during the last 50
years. I am far from certain that Mr. Mortimer was
an Aberdonian, and have no other evidence except
that of K. J. in the place cited ; but I cannot omit to
notice him here, as K. J. seems to have proof of his
local connection.
703. Mossman, William : Artist. Probably born
about the beginning of the 18th century in Aberdeen.
He painted portraits, See., in Aberdeen from 1730
onward. He died in 1771. See S. N. & Q., iii.,
141, 159.
704. Munro, Alexander, D.D. (Very Rev.
Monsignor) : Professor and Roman Catholic Author.
Born in 1820 in Aberdeen (another account fixes his
birth in 1818), this distinguished Roman Catholic
ecclesiastic was bred a printer. Originally a Pro-
testant, he became a Romanist at the age of 20, and
proceeded to study, first at Blair’s College, and after-
wards at the University of Valladolid, for the
priesthood. Here he acted for some years as
Professor in the Scottish College, and received the
degree of D.D., as well as other honours. He was a
keen and powerful controversialist on the Romanist
side of all questions during his long residence in
Glasgow, where he was one of Rome’s most trusted
champions. He died in 1892. In addition to the
work noted by K, J. in S. N. & Q., ix., 155, Dr.
Munro published a trenchant controversial work,
entitled Calvinism in its Relation to Scripture and
Reason, 1856.
705. Munro, Alexander M. : Noted Antiquary
and Genealogist. This accurate investigator was born
in Aberdeen, 1861, and was educated at Gordon’s
Hospital there. Having entered the City Chamber-
lain’s department in his native city, he is recognised
as one of the most valuable public servants possessed
by any community. His principal works are given
by K. J. (S. N. & Q., ix., 155). He has, however,
contributed many important papers to this periodical,
and has been one of its most attached friends and
useful helpers from the beginning. Mr. Munro is at
present engaged editing a work for the New Spalding
Club on the Records of Old Aberdeen.
706. Murker, John, M.A. (Rev.): Congregational
Divine and Evangelist. Fie was born at Burnside of
Craigies, Tarves, on the xoth December, 1802, studied
at Marischal College, and graduated M.A. there in
1831. Giving himself to the ministry of the Congre-
gational Church, he became one of the most devoted


and successful ministers in the north of Scotland,
until his death, as minister in the church in Banff,
in 1881. His life, which is extremely readable, has
been written by Dr. Stark of Aberdeen. K. J.
specifies one production of his that appeared in 1866.
707. Murray, Alexander, D.D. : Benefactor to
King’s College. Born at New Deer about 1725, he
entered at King’s College, 1742-3, and graduated M.A.
in 1746. He seems to have emigrated to the United
States of America, for when he received the degree of
D.D. from his Alma Mater, in 1784, he was designated
late Missionary at Reading, Pennsylvania. He died
at Philadelphia in 1793, having bequeathed a con-
siderable sum to endow a course of Sunday morning
lectures during the winter session in the College
Chapel, and for other academic purposes. For a
sketch of the history of this endowment, and of the
lectures published in connection with it, see P. J.
Anderson’s Notes in S. N. & Q., i., 13c, 15?. See
also S. N. H Q.,x., 68.
708. Murray, Alexander: Minor Poet. Born in
1856 at Peterwell, in the Howe of Fyvie, he was
bred a gardener, and for some time was employed in
that capacity at Harvieston Castle, near Dollar. In
1885 he published a handsome volume of his poems.
See Edwards’ Modern Scottish Poets.
709. Murray , George, alias James Bolivar Manson:
Poet, Journalist, &c. Born at Boghead of Kinnoir,
Huntly, in 1819, he was educated at Marischal
College, where he graduated. During his college
course he was noted for his knowledge of classics and
his gift for poetry. After being tutor in a family,
schoolmaster in Bannockburn, and occupying various
other positions, he joined the press as editor of the
Stirling Observer. Thence he passed to the New-
castle Daily Express, and finally, in 1862, joined the
editorial staff of the Edinburgh Daily Review, on
which he continued till his death. At an early period
of his career, for some cause, he dropped the name
George Murray, and adopted that of James Bolivar
Manson. He was remarkable for power and facility
as a writer, and was an excellent critic of literature
and art.
W. B. R. W.
( To be continued.)
The Greek Branch of the Skene
Family. —Under the title of “A Noble Life,”
Miss F. M. F. Skene devoted an interesting
illustrated article to the January number of the
Argosy to “Curlinda” Skene, who married the
Greek politician, Alexander Rangabe. Her son,
M. Cleon Rangabe, is now the Greek Ambas-
sador at Berlin. The article is charmingly
written, and the portraits are very good. Miss
Skene, the writer, lives in Oxford. She is one
of the last of our contemporaries who can
remember Scott.
THE SURNAME OF BETT.
There is a tradition—it is questionable if such
is the correct word to use in this case —of
uncertain antiquity, so far as could be gathered
from the narrators, among some bearing the
surname of Bett, of Forfarshire descent, that
their proper name should be Rattray, but “ how
or why they don’t understand.”
Recently in going over the Perthshire portion
of Inquisitionum retornatarum Scotice , as
abridged in the volumes published in 1811,
the following entry was lit upon :
Ratray, alias Bait
Nov. 2. 1622.
Thomas Ratray, alias Bait, hseres Joannis Ratray,
alias Baitt, patris in jure, officio et privilegio
cymbse transportatorias de Kinclevin vocatse ferriebait,
super aquis de Taya et Hay, cum toftis, &c. dictae
cymbse vocatis Baitlands spectantibus, extendentibus
ad 2 acras terrarum, infra baroniam de Kinclevin.
E 335. qd.
Here at once was the origin of the “tradition.”
But the name of Bett, under various forms, is
of much greater antiquity in Scotland than the
time of either John or Thomas Rattray, the
ferrymen of Kinclevin ; and, to show this, the
following notes from a MS. volume of Collections
in the hand of Robert Mylne , preserved in the
Advocates’ Library, may only be quoted :
1344. Andrew and William Bets, burgesses of
Edinburgh, witnesses.
1400. Andrew Bett dispones his tenement in
Edinburgh to Andro Leper.
1492. Thomas Bet is superior of Monastery of
Arbroath. (Arbroath Abbey papers.)
1549. William Butt, portioner of Giblireston and
Issobell Lindsay his spouse get Auch-
linthries in Barony of Kynaltrie in Forfar in
excambion for sunny 4th part of Cartistoun.
It is doubtful if Butt is the same as Bett, as
there are English and Irish families of that
name. It is given here on account of the
similarity and the Forfarshire connection.
It is a matter of conjecture if the name has
any affinity with others such as Beattie, Beatson,
&c., or the English “ Betts.” Heraldry does not
add to the elucidation, for there is no record of any-
one of the name ever having borne Coat Armour.
However much the primary name may puzzle
etymologists, there can be no difficulty with the
derivation of the name as borne by those who
may claim to be descendants of the Rattrays,
and it would be exceedingly interesting, and
would put the tradition on a sound basis, were
anyone of them to prove his descent. Until such
is done the so-called tradition must be looked
upon pretty much as a doubtful piece of lore
caught up at one time or another and appropriated
to make family history. J. Christie.


REBELLIONS OF 1715 AND 1745.
(Continued from page 123.)
Forres, 29 April 1746.
No presbyterial exercise by reason of the trouble-
some times.
[A good excuse, but in reality there had been “ no
presbyterial exercise ” at the meetings for many years
before this, but generally on the plea of there being
too much business to transact.]
The presbytery, not having been able by reason
of the confusion of the times to enter upon ordinary
business at either of the two last meetings, agreed
now to proceed to read the minutes, &c.
As to the ‘Paraphrases, &c.,’ tho’ the several
members have read it yet as the general confusion of
the times has not allowed the brethren in this place to
weigh the same with that deliberation that would be
necessary for an affair of such importance, agreed to
instruct their members to move that it be transmitted
again to the presbytery for further consideration.
The appointments as to preaching at Auldearn
were not obeyed, because the brethren could not
venture from their own houses.
The presbytery agreed upon the following in-
structions to their commissioners to the General
Assembly :
Imo It being surmised that some ministers and
elders of this church have not acted, in time of this
wicked and unnatural rebellion, agreeable to their
character and office, the presbytery therefore instruct
their commissioners that they insist for the Assembly’s
enjoining the different judicatories to make the proper
enquiry and report in such manner as shall unto them
seem most proper.
2<30 That the Paraphrase, &c., transmitted by last
Assembly be again transmitted for further considera-
tion.
3 tio That the Assembly appoint a publick thanks-
giving for the late glorious victory obtained by His
Majesty’s Forces under the command of His Royal
Highness the Duke of Cumberland over the rebells
and the begun deliverance from the many fatal effects
of such a horrid and unnatural rebellion.
Forres, 10 June 1746.
The commissioners chosen by the presbytery for
the Assembly not having gone up, they gave their
excuses, which were sustained.
Forres, 15 October 1746.
The presbytery having met this day for prayer
and privy censure according to appointment, and the
several brethren having prayed, and the ordinary
questions being asked at them, and likewise whether
they had been at due pains to warn their people against
joining or having any hand in the late unnatural
rebellion , and they being removed in their turns and
their conduct enquired into and nothing being found
censurable, they were approven and encouraged in
the Lord.
PRESBYTERY OF ABERLOUR.
Aberlour, 9 August 1715.
The presbytery appoints some time to be set apart
for prayer in the afternoon upon the account of the
threatned invasion by a popish pretender.
Aberlour, 13 September 1715.
[Only three members present, who proceeded with
part of a student’s trials and then adjourned to meet
at Aberlour on the first Tuesday of October,]
Inveraven, 4 October 1715,
The moderator represented that in regard of the
present confusions in the country the presbyterie could
not meet with safety hi Aberlour according to appoint-
ment, and therfor finding a quorum in this place he
had called them together, which the brethren approved
of.
[The presbytery met at Inveraven on 19 October,
at the meeting of Synod at Forres on 22 November,
and at Aberlour on 13 December, these meetings being
in connection with the translation of Rev. Daniel
McKenzie from Kingussie to Aberlour. The presby-
tery adjourned to meet at Inveraven on 21 December.]
Inveravin, 10 February 1716.
The storminess of the weather and the troubles in
the countrey did hitherto hinder the presbytery’s
meeting.
Aberlour, 17 Apryl 1716.
The presbytery agrees on the following instructions
to their commissioners to the Assembly :
i°. To propose that ane humble address be made
to his Majesty, congratulating the success of his armes
in suppressing the late unnatural rebellion.
2 do . That a publick thanksgiveing be observed
throughout this Church for God’s great mercy and
goodness in delivering us from the cruel designs of
enemies.
Aberlour, 15 May 1716.
Mr. Bannerman, minister of Inveraven, represented
that the house and most valuable effects of one,
Robert Stuart, liveing in the countrey of Strathawn,
were burnt by the influence of the papists there,
whereby he, his wife and children are reduced to
great straits. The presbytery takeing the said re-
presentation to their serious consideration appoints
a letter to be written in his favours to their com-
missioner now at the Assembly, deduceing his case,
and that he, with the advice and concurrence of the
other commissioners from the bounds of the Synod,
represent it as they judge most convenient; which
was done. Also appoints the several members to
contribute for his relief.
Aberlour, 3 September 1745.
The presbytery considering the trouble and dangers
at this time by a rebellion breaking out in an insur-
rection in the Highlands against the government,
agreed to have a meeting for prayer and conference
about the state of times upon the 17th current at this
place.


Aberlour, 17 September 1745.
The presbytery having met were employed in
prayer and conference agreeable to the present cir-
cumstances of the times.
Aberlour, 10 February 1747.
The presbytery find nothing exceptionable in the
brethren of this presbtery, they all having behaved
very loyally during the late rebellion.
HIS-
Rothes,
[No minutes of session extant at this date.]
Inveraven.
[No reference in the minutes to the rebellion.]
Boharm.
5 Feb. 1716. This day the minr read from the
pulpit His Majesties Proclama°n requiring all his
subjects to attend his camp at Perth. Also the
Proclama°n for a thanksgiving for his Maties King J.
safe aryvall to Scotland cam not to our handes till
this day qch ought to be keeped on the 26 Jary last
by past, and yrfor was not read the day being past.
26 Feb. 1716. There was no sermon because the
minister was inhibited to preach by the order of
Brigadier Generali Grant and that for his reading
from the pulpit the forsaid Proclamation qch required
all K. Ja’s subjectes to repair to his camp at Perth.
4 March 1716. No sermon nor reading
II II II It II
18 it ii n ii
25 11 ti No sermon, but reading, yet no
collection because the elders which used to collect
deserted from coming to the kirk.
1 Aprile 1716. No sermon, but reading, no collec-
tion.
[8 Aprile to 13 May. The same entry.]
20 May 1716. Mr. Daniel McKenzie, min r at
Aberlour, preached. He also served ane Edict for
comprising the Ministers manse upon the 31 May
instant because he was about to leave the parish and
to lay down his charge as minr of Boharme.
8 July 1716. Mr. David Strang preached. He
also declared the kirk of Boharme vacant and that
by order from the Presbytrie.
Rothes.
Dec. 15, 1745. Minister read this day from the
pulpit a proclamation from our soveraign King George
appointing a fast to be observed Wednesday next
being the eighteenth of this instant December in order
to humble ourselves for our sins which have provoked
God to send a devouring sword and to beg of him the
pardon of our sins and that he would bless our Kings
arms with success.
Feb. 9, 1746. The session deferred the further
consideration of this affair [a case of discipline] till
the times be more settled. And in regard that the
country is just now alarmed with a report of the
Highland army’s marching westward some by the
Highland rod and others by the Laigh rod, the Session
thought fit to commit to John Thomson, one of the
elders, such silver as is in the box, which amounts to
£lO n 8 11 o Scots.
Feb. 16. Day cold and stormy.
Feb. 23. Day cold.
March 9. Day stormy.
March 23. There were severalls of the Highland
Army this day in the church, a party of them having
come into the parish on Friday’s evening, and were
billeted through the country. They were commanded
by one called Colonel Chisholm.
March 30. Day cold and the congregation thin.
The Highland Army still continuing in the country.
April 6. No lecture, the minister being desired to
have but one exercise by reason of more of the High-
land Army being this day expected into the parish
and it was thought proper that the publick worship
should be over against they should arrive. The
Chissolms still continuing in the parish. Sermon
Judges 10, 15-16. (Same text as on five preceding
Sundays.)
April 13. The Chissolms and other highlanders
on the water side being all removed and His Royal
Highness the Duke of Cumberland being come over
the water with his army. The minister lectured from
Jeremiah 5:15v. to end. Sermon Judges 10 : 15-16.
June 22. The minister intimated an Act of the
General Assembly appointing a Thanksgiving upon
Thursday next for the late signal victory obtained by
his Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland over the
Rebels at Culloden.
June 26. The Thanksgiving day. Minr preached
from 2 Chron. 20 : 26.
Boharm.
1746 March 2d. Minr lectured from Prov. 19. No
collection the people being frighted by a body of
Rebels.
[No further reference, even the General Assembly
Thanksgiving omitted : probably because the
minutes of this time were engrossed at a later
date by another Session clerk.]
Inveraven.
8 Sept. 1745. Mr. Walter Ponton preached, having
no access to preach in Glenlivate, the people being in
arms in rebellion against the King.
[Mr. Ponton was S. P. C. K. missionary in Glen-
livet, then part of Inveraven parish.]
10 Nov. 1745. The Session, considering that the
delinquents in Glenlivate by reason of the present
rebellion refuse to answer the Session, think fit to defer
their procedure with them for some time.
6 April 1746. A Glenlivet delinquent appears, and
it is noted that “ there could be no session kept for a
long time before because of the violence of the
rebellion.”


20 April 1746. No sermon this day, the minister
having gone to Inverness with other ministers in the
neighbourhood to waite of his Royall Highness
William Duke of Cumberland after a signall victory
that he obtained over the rebels Wednesday last at
Culloden where there was four thousand of them
killed and taken and the rest dispersed.
22 June 1746. There was an Act of the Generali
Assembly read before the congregation appointing
Thursday next to be observed as a day of thanksgiving
to God on account of the quelling of the rebellion.
26 June 1746. This day being observed as a
thanksgiving day, the minister Lectured on Psalm 138
throughout, and Preached on Psalm 126 verse 3rd
the Lord hath done great things for us wherqf we are
glad.
12 Oct. 1746- There was read publickly an order
from the Sheriff of Banf and Commanding Officer
there that no person should entertain rebels in their
houses or any loose people without testificates and
requiring that information should be sent concerning
such if there are any in the country.
The Picture of the Queen’s Landing
at Aberdeen in 1848.—Mr. R. Crossley Allan
has issued a neat brochure on this subject, the
chief value of which is the identification of the
principal figures making up the composition,
fifty-four in all. This, although only a fifty-year
old story, has not been an easy task, but the
pains that the investigator has been at to achieve
his purpose is altogether admirable. The original
of this fine picture, which was painted by Mr.
Cleland, and who has helped greatly in the
preparation of this work, is now one of the
treasured possessions of the town. Altogether,
Mr. Allan has done a real service to local history,
which we hope will be appreciated. A replica
of the picture accompanies the pamphlet.
The Buchan Field Club. — The annual
meeting of this enterprising club took place at
Peterhead on the 15th ult. The Secretary,
Mr. J. F. Tocher, gave a review of the year’s
work, in the fields of History, Antiquities,
Philology, Ethnology, and Astronomy. An
abstract of a paper by the late Mr. Aiken,
President of the Club, on “A new theory of
the great secular changes in the climate and
temperature,” was read to the meeting. The
office-bearers for the ensuing year were ap-
pointed, consisting of Professor Reid, Aberdeen,
President; Mr. John Gray, B.Sc., Vice-President;
Mr. W. L. Taylor, Peterhead, Acting President;
Mr. J. F. Tocher, Secretary and Treasurer, with
a large Committee,
A Begging Letter of Last Century.—
The following begging letter was received by a
nobleman, upwards of a century ago, and passed
on, without reply, to his factor, as being, as his
lordship expressed it, “ a body that likes curious
things ” ;—■
My Lord,
Plaving heard much of your munificence ; and
readiness to serve the distressed : and having also
some knowledge of your Lordship in Scotland. I
(an Illegitimate Son of the late Prince of Wales by a
Scotch Lady of Title long since deceasd ; and ruined
from having voted at an Election which much
displeasd the King my Brother tho not with such an
Idea on my part :) now presume after four years
confinement for trifling debts to Solicit some little
aid to procure me Food : as I really am Naked and
Starving—
I Come to your Lordship recommended by the
Lords Hardwicke, Dover, Warwick, Guildford,
Dartmouth : Westmorland, Cavendishes, Duncannon,
Bessborogh, &c., by recommendation I mean My
Lord to convey no further in point than that those
Noblemen distinguished for their Eminent virtues
have been my only support during my long Confine-
ment : as I was Obliged to sell my Half pay ; after
receiving five severe wounds in America particularly
at Bunkers Hill.
About a month since Her Majesty in her Royal
Clemency was graciously pleasd to take my Children
intirely off my hands : they are well provided for :
but whether I shall ever Overcome His Majestys
displeasure is a dreadful doubt with me : it is whisperd
about this Palace that a provision is again to be made
for, but of that I have my doubts also : tho God
knows the time was when I little expected ever to
Inhabit a Prison, but lacta est alea—
—Quaeque ipse miserrima vidi :
Et quorum pars magna fui !
My unwillingness to be too troublesome to my Old
Friends induced me to seek fresh Ones. In some cases
My Lord I have been successful, in others, not: by
some my Tale of Woe has been unmovd, to such I
might justly quote the language of Shakespeare—
“ Take Physic Pomp :
Expose thyself: to feel what wretches feel:
That thou may’st shake the superflux to them
And shew the Heav’ns more just.”
Should your Lordship in your great goodness be
induced to send me some trifling relief: I shall ever
with a proper sense of gratitude acknowledge the
Obligation.
Your Lordships
Most respectful
& obd‘ F. Augustus S. Murray
a Son of ye late Prince of Wales.
Tower in Windsor Castle
June ye nth 1789.


INVENTORIES OF NORTHERN
RECORDS.
The Sheriff Court of Banffshire.
Inventory of Records, &c., in the custody of the
Sheriff-Clerk.*
1. —Ordinary Court Diet Books :
Vol. 1. —12th August, 1652, to 18th January, 1655.
11 2.—Bth February, 1655, to 18th August, 1659.
n 3. —November, 1664, to July, 1674.
11 4. —March, 1674, to June, 1684.
„ 5. —June, 1699, to February, 1706.
„ 6.—l3th June, 1706, to 12th March, 1722.
11 7. —July, 1722, to October, 1724.
„ B.—7th January, 1725, to 31st January, 1734.
„ 9.—l4th Feb., 1734, to 21st Feb., 1743.
„ 10. —24th Feb., 1743, to 19th March, 1748.
1. 11.—5th April, 1748 to 29th June, 1760.
11 12. —29th July, 1760, to 3rd October, 1767.
" 13- —3 rd Nov., 1767, to nth January, 1772.
„ 14.—14th Jan., 1772, to 18th August, 1775.
„ 15.—nth Nov., 1775, to 24th February, 1778.
1, 16.—3rd March, 1778, to 30th Nov., 1779.
n 17. —7th December, 1779, to 22nd June, 1782.
11 18. —25th June, 1782, to sth July, 1785.
,1 19. —12th July, 1785, to 23rd December, 1788.
„ 20. —13th Jan., 1789, to 30th Nov., 1790.
11 21. —30th Nov., 1890, to 24th Feb., 1792.
i, 22.—2nd March, 1792, to 22nd Nov., 1793.
,1 23. —29th Nov., 1793, to 12th Dec., 1794.
11 24. —9th January, 1795, to Xlt h April, 1796.
n 25. —13th May, 1796, to 16th October, 1797.
„ 26.—10th Nov., 1797, to 15th March, 1799.
1, 27.—22nd March, 1799, to Bth October, 1800.
Vols. 28 to 56. —15th October, 1800, to 31st Dec.,
1887.
2. —Diet Books of Small Debt Court
17th June, 1825, to present date.
3 .—Diet Books of Debt Recovery Court :—
Bth October, 1867, to present date.
4. —Registers of Deeds and Probative Writs :
FIRST SERIES.
Vol. 1. —1616 to 1629.
1, 2. —1672 1, 1681.
n 3.—1682 11 1685.
11 4.—1686 11 1691.
„ 5.—1693 " 1697.
,1 6. —1700 1705,
*This Inventory was prepared in 1888 by Mr. Garden M.
Hossack, Sheriff-Clerk of Banffshire. A corresponding Inven-
tory, prepared by Mr. David Littlejohn, of the Records in his
custody, as Sheriff-Clerk of Aberdeenshire, is printed in Mr. P.
J. Anderson’s Charters and other Writs of the Royal Burgh
of Aberdeen, 1890, pp. 425-432.
Vol. 7. 17 I I M 1716.
11 8.—1716 11 1719.
9. —1719 11 1722.
10. —1734 1. 1742.
1X.—177S 1783.
12. —1783 ,1 1785.
13. 1785 „ 1790.
SECOND SERIES.
Vols. Ito 9. 12th November, 1809, to Ist July, 1883.
5. —Principal Deeds :
1627 to present date.
6. —Minute Books of Deeds :
16th December, 1809, to present date.
7 —Registers of Protests on Bills :
FIRST SERIES.
Vol. 1. —1775 to 1779.
.1 2. —1779 I, 1781.
„ 3.—1781 II 1783.
„ 4-—1783 " 1790-
second SERIES.
Vols. I to 18.—16th Nov., 1809, to Bth May, 1883.
8. —Principal Protests :
1719 to present date.
9. — Services of Heirs
Vol. 1. —1625 to 1764.
n 2.—lsth Nov., 1847, to 31st Dec., 1859.
11 3. —1860 to 1880.
n 4. —lBBl to present date.
10. — Registers of Entail Improvements : —
Vols. 1 to 5. —Ist June, 1801, to 3rd Sept., 1853.
11. —Register of Sasines :
1781 to 1887.
12. —Register of Sasines—lndexes of Places :
1872 to 1880.
13. —Minute Books and Indexes of Inhibitions
and A djudications :
1872 to present date.
14. —Criminal Records :
25th June, 1748, to present date.
15 .—fudicial Renunciations :
Years 1623, 1628, 1630,1637, 1645, 1646, 1648,
16 to, 1651, 1663, 1665, 1669, 1670, 1676,
1678, 1683, 1687, 1693, and 1694.
16. —Mercantile Sequestration Registers :—
27th December, 1848, to date.


17. — Mercantile Sequestration Principal Peti-
tions :
iB6O to date.
18. — Bonds of Caution (Judicial)
1801 to date.
19. —Bonds of Caution (Advocations ) :
1841 to 1849.
20 .—Bonds of Caution (Executors)
1824 to date.
21. — Commissary Records :
Vols. 1 to 40. —7th April, 1824, to 23rd June, 1888.
22. — Confirmations and Inventories :
Printed volumes, 1876 to present date.
23. — Record of Fiars 1 Prices
1791 to present date.
24 .—Record of Qualifications of those entitled to
bear and use Arms in Banffshire —1748.
“The Poetical Portfolio” {S. N. H Q.,
Vol. XL, page 118).—If W. B. R. W., the
talented compiler of the interesting papers on
“Notable Men and Women of Aberdeenshire,”
will kindly refer to Vol. I. of S. N. H Q., page
150, he will there find the above “Semi-Private
Magazine of Poetry, Original, Instructive, and
Interesting,” noticed by Mr. J. M. Bulloch. The
writer of this paragraph chanced to be the
possessor of No. I. of this rare periodical, and
brought it under the notice of our chief. My
friend, 684 of “Notable Men and Women of
Aberdeenshire,” presented me with an advance
copy of Timothy Twig , which was printed by
Mr. William Bennett, Publisher, Castle Street,
Aberdeen, in the early “sixties,” when he was
contributing to The Northern Telegraph News,
published by Mr. Bennett, the first penny daily
paper issued from the Aberdeen Press, its editor
from 1854 to 1859 being Mr. Alexander M.
Mowat, son of Mr. James Mowat, clothier, St.
Nicholas Street, both dead years ago; the
literary department of that spirited little news-
paper, which specially encouraged young and
budding poets, being from iB6O to 1867 under
the supervision of Mr. John Fullerton (“Wild
Rose”).
THE ORIGIN OF ADAM LINDSAY
GORDON.
Several writers have directed my attention to
biographies of Adam Lindsay Gordon ; but in
none of these are the real facts of his descent
given. I am indebted to Colonel Wolrige
Gordon of Esslemont for the connecting link
between the poet and his northern ancestors as
follows :
I. “Tam” Gordon of Ruthven, the illegitimate
cousin of Elizabeth Gordon, who founded
the ducal line, was twice married, and left
eighteen sons. By his second spouse, a
daughter of Sir Walter Innes of Inver-
markie, he had four sons. The youngest
was—
11. George, who acquired the lands of Cushnie.
By his first wife, a daughter of the laird of
Craigellie, he had issue. By his second,
a daughter of Mortimer of Craigievar, he
had (besides a daughter Margaret, who
married Alexander Leslie, third laird of
Kincraigie) two sons, who died during their
father’s lifetime, and—
111. John Gordon of Cushnie and Hallhead, who
died about 1553, leaving a son—
IV. John Gordon, born 1507, who fell at the
battle of Pinkie, 1547, in his father’s life-
time. He had married a daughter of
Duguid of Auchinhove, and left a son—
V, Robert Gordon of Hallhead, who succeeded
his grandfather before 1554. He married
Janet, daughter of Innes of Touchs or
Toux (now Pitfour), by whom he had—
VI. Patrick Gordon of Hallhead, who had four
sons—
VII. Patrick succeeded 1617, died 1620,
leaving one child, Elizabeth, who
died without issue after 1641.
VIII, Robert succeeded 1620, died 1622,
without issue.
IX. George Gordon of Hallhead succeeded
1622, and was succeeded by his son—
X. Patrick Gordon of Hallhead, who married
Margaret , and had issue (1) John
Gordon, (2) Robert (who succeeded as
XIII.), (3) Patrick, (4) Charles, (5) Maria.
XI, John Gordon of Hallhead married Mary
Ross of Auchlossan, and had three sons,
Patrick, Robert, William.
XII. Patrick Gordon of Hallhead made over the
estate to his uncle—
XIII. Robert Gordon, who in 1728 purchased the
estate of Esslemont from James Gordon of
Ellon, Baillie of Edinburgh. He married
Isabella Byres of Tonley, by whom he had
two sons, George and Alexander.
XIV. George Gordon of Hallhead and Esslemont
(out in the ’45) married Anne Bowdler, by
whom he had—


Robert Gordon of Railhead and Esslemont,
married (i) a French lady, Babutin,
by whom he had a daughter. (2) Lady
Henrietta Gordon, daughter of 2nd Earl
of Aberdeen, by whom he had —
(1) George, who succeeded him, and left issue.
(2) William Gordon, born 1764, married
Elrington, by whom he had—
(A) Adam Durnford Gordon, H.E.1.C., mar-
ried his cousin, Harriet Elizabeth Gordon
(daughter of Robert, third son of Robert
and Lady Henrietta Gordon, born 1768),
by whom he had several daughters and
Adam Lindsay Gordon.
(B) Robert Gumming Hamilton Gordon, of
the 3rd Foot Guards: married Frances
Freer, and had issue—
(a) George Hamilton Gordon, Colonel
R.E., married a Miss Hormslow,
without issue. On her death he
married Blanche Case, “and has
issue,” Edward Hamilton Gordon
of the Highlanders ; George,
Alexander, Lilian and Mabel.
(/>) William Elrington Gordon, Rear
Admiral of the R. N., married
Emily Gorst, and “has” one son,
Hamilton.
(r) Rev. Adam Charles Gordon, Rector
of Doddleston, Cheshire, married
Georgina Frances, daughter of the
Hon. and Rev. Fred. Anson, D.D.,
Dean of Chester.
XVII
XVIII
(d) Richard Goodenough.
(e) Francis (es?) Freer.
(f) Hamilton Thomas, o.s.p.
Robert Gordon (son of XVI.) married Jessie,
daughter of Walter Little Gilmore of Craig-
millar, and was succeeded by his daughter—-
Anne, who married Henry P. Wolrige, now
Wolrige Gordon.
J. M. B.
Lord Rosslyn on the Stage.—Apropos
of the recent articles in these columns on the
Sinclairs, it should be noticed that the Earl of
Rosslyn has become a professional actor, for he
is now appearing nightly (under the name of
Mr. James Erskine) as Arthur Gower in Mr.
Pinero’s new comedy, “Trelawny of the Wells,”
produced at the Court Theatre, Sloane Square,
London, on 20th January. Lord Rosslyn, who
was born on 16th March, 1869, has long been
keen on amateur theatricals, and his present
step is due to his financial difficulties, about
which he talked frankly to a Pall Mall Gazette
interviewer (February 1). Lord Rosslyn is
married to a daughter of Mr. Robert Vyner,
and his heir, Lord Loughborough, is five years
old. The Countess of Warwick is his half-sister,
and the Duchess of Sutherland his whole sister.
“THE KINGIS QUAIR AND THE
NEW CRITICISM.”
During the many centuries when the inhabitants
of the Southern portion of this island were to
those of the Northern, “the auld enemy,” we
have but three instances of a marriage alliance
between the two countries. The first is the
union of King Malcolm Canmore and the Saxon
princess, Margaret, who had fled to Scotland for
refuge from the foreign conquerors of England.
It was a union fraught with momentous issues
for Scotland, for St. Margaret was the author of
not a few important changes in Church and
State alike. The last is the union of “ The
Thistle and the Rose,” the marriage of King
James the Fourth to Margaret Tudor, the
daughter of Henry VII. of England. It is not
necessary to remark that it was this marriage
that led to the union of the Crowns a century
afterwards. Four hundred years after St. Mar-
garet had been laid to rest in the ancient Abbey
of Dunfermline, and almost a century before the
second English Margaret was conducted with
pomp and ceremony to Edinburgh, there took
place an English alliance which was barren of
political consequences. To the loves of King
James the First and Joan Beaufort we have
been wont to trace no great national movement.
But we have hitherto imagined that we owe to it
a noble poem, composed by a royal lover, in
the most romantic of situations a prisoner,
detained, against every tradition of international
law and international courtesy, in a foreign
country, where he loses his heart to the heroine
of the poem. That nothing may be wanting to
complete the picture, the wicked uncle, who
appears in all good fairy tales, is present in the
person of the Duke of Albany, the Regent of
Scotland, who has already done to death King
James’s elder brother, and to whose interest it
is that his nephew be kept in England as long
as possible. The love of James and Joan is
rewarded by his taking her with him to Scotland
as his bride. But the romance of the story does
not end here. The sequel is to be found in the
tragedy enacted in Perth at Christmastide, 1437,
when the king fell a victim to a band of turbulent
and revengeful nobles.
It is one of the most attractive and touching
stories to be found in all the records of history;
and, up to 1896, we have been able to think of
it as indubitably correct. Mr. J. T. T. Brown,
of Glasgow, is the first to question its authenticity.
He is willing, indeed, to leave us the history ;
but he tells us that The Kingis Qtcair was
written some thirty or forty years after King


James’s death. And this, surely, is “Hamlet
with the Prince left out.” The present paper
aims at examining Mr. Brown’s theory. Such
historical investigations are somewhat lacking
in general interest, and one would rather refer
to the poem itself—
“ More sweet than ever a poet’s heart,
Gave yet to the English tongue.”
In opposition to the orthodox theory, approved
so lately as 1884, by so distinguished an authority
as Professor Skeat, that The Kingis Quair
was written by King James the First, in England,
about the year 1423, Mr. Brown is of opinion
that it belongs to a “group of Scottish poems
exhibiting the same artificial dialect, written
between 1440 and 1480, when there was a vogue
among Scottish poets to engraft Midland inflec-
tions on the Northern dialect.” We shall follow
Mr. Brown’s division of the subject into (1)
External evidence, (2) Internal evidence from
the dialect, and (3) Internal evidence from the
auto-biographical details, except that, as a matter
of arrangement, it will prove more convenient
to consider the auto-biographical question im-
mediately after the external evidence.
1. The External Evidence.
The only MS. of The Kingis Quair is in
the Bodleian Library, Oxford. It is part of the
valuable collection presented by Selden to the
University of Oxford, and is quoted as Arch.
Seld. B. 24. A marginal note mentions that the
date of the birth of King James IV. was 1472,
the words “Jacobi quarti” proving that this note
cannot have been written before 1488, when
James IV. succeeded, and 1488 is an approximate
date which we may safely take for the MS. The
title of the MS. runs—“ Heirefter followis the
quair Maid be King James of Scotland the first
callit the Kingis quair and Maid quhen his
Maiestie Wes In Ingland.”
The colophon is “Quod Jacobus Primus,
scotorum rex Illustrissimus.”
The MS. contains eleven other poems. Five
of these are correctly ascribed to Chaucer; five
incorrectly. The colophon of the remaining
one is hopelessly mutilated. It would seem,
then, that the chances are equal for and against
the accuracy of the ascription. But, in balancing
considerations, it must be remembered that to
attribute a poem by John Walton or Lydgate to
Chaucer is a natural and almost unavoidable
error. The same remark cannot be made if it
is true that a Scottish scribe mistook the work
of a contemporary for a poem by a Scottish
king who had died only forty years before. The
suggestion of Professor McCormick, of Dundee,
that “ be,” in the title, means “ about,” is incon-
sistent with the colophon, and makes nonsense
of the second part of the title, “ and maid quhen
his Maiestie wes In Ingland.”
We pass from the MS. to historical references
to the king.
The contemporary historian, Walter Bower,
the author of the Scoto-chronicon , speaks of
King James’s attainments as a musician, and of
his love for literature —“operi artis literatoriae
et scripturae”—“incredibili aestu, amabat scien-
tiam scripturae.” About eighty years later, John
Major, in an obscure passage, in his History of
Greater Britain , sqys—“ln vernacula lingua
artificiosissimus compositor; cujus codices
plurimi et cantilenae memoriter adhuc apud
Scotos inter primes habentur. Artificiosum
libellum de Regina dum captivus erat composuit,
anteq. earn in conjugem duceret: et aliam
artificiosam cantilenam ejusdem. Yas sen &c.,
et jucundum artificiosumq.: ilium cantum : at
beltayn &c., quern alii de Dalketh et Gargeil,
mutare studuerunt: quia in arce ant camera
clausus servabatur in qua mulier cum matre
habitabat.”
These descriptions are varied by Boece, Bel-
lenden, John Lesley, and George Buchanan.
The last-named criticises James’s Latin poetry,
and adds: “ Anglico quidem sermone poemata
ab eo conscripta nonnulla adhuc extant; in quibus
ingenii praestantia elucet, expolitior doctrina
fortasse requiramur,” clearly implying that he
had seen vernacular poems by King James. It
cannot, then, be gainsaid that the testimony of
historians is that King James composed poetry,
and, if Mr. Brown is right, the king’s work has
disappeared. The credibility of Major is, in-
deed, lessened by the facts that At Beltayn is
not by King James, and that Yas sen is a
disputed point. But, in the first place, the
ascription of At Beltayn (i.e., “Peebles to the
Play”) shows that King James, less than a
century after his death, held the position of a
Scottish Chaucer. How was this reputation
acquired ? And, in the second place, the details
regarding the Kingis Quair furnish strong
evidence that Major is right in this instance.
Lastly, in this connexion, Mr. Brown tells us
that Dunbar does not mention King James in
his Lament of the Makars among his twenty-one
poets of Scotland; that Lindsay does not men-
tion him in the Testament and Complaynt , where
he names eight poets ; and that James VI. does
not name his ancestor or quote from his poetry
in his Reulis and Cautelis to be obseruit and
eschewit in Scottis Poesie. From this Mr. Brown
argues that Dunbar, Lindsay, and James VI.
seem “not to have known James the First to be


among the poets.” It is certainly a curious
circumstance. But, if we are to accept Mr.
Brown’s conclusion, we must be prepared to
believe—
(1) That Dunbar, a contemporary of Major,
was ignorant of the tradition that led
Major to write as he did.
(2) That Dunbar had never seen the Scoto-
chronicon j that Lindsay had seen neither
the Scoto-chronicon, nor Major, nor Boece,
nor Bellenden ; and not only that James
VI. had never seen the Scoto-chronicon ,
Major, Boece, Bellenden, and, in addition,
Lesley; but that he was likewise ignorant
of the work of his own tutor, George
Buchanan.
However we explain the facts, he will be a bold
man who accepts an explanation involving such
inferences as these.
It is interesting also to note that Dunbar says
of Death—
“ Sen he has all my brether tane ”
ignoring his own contemporary, Gavin Douglas.
Moreover, there is, at least, one piece of positive
evidence to indicate that King - James VI. did
know of his ancestor’s poetical work. In the
preface to the collected edition of King James’s
works, published in 1616, the Bishop of Win-
chester, who acted as editor, wrote: “James
the first writ divers Bookes both in English and
Latine Verse : He writ also, as Baleus saith,
De uxore futura.” The reference to John Bale’s
Catalogue is itself of some interest.
It is really very dangerous to lay too much
stress upon mere omissions. A writer may omit
what seems to us an important fact, because it
did not seem important to him, or because he
did not consider it relevant to his purpose, or
from personal whim, or simply through inad-
vertence. One might hazard guesses at the
reason of the omissions, but it is not necessary
for our purpose to explain the phenomenon.
Our point is that James VI. did know ; and
that it is very difficult to imagine how Dunbar
and Lindsay could have escaped knowing.
The external evidence, we submit, seems to
point to the authenticity of the poem.
Robert S. Rait.
(To be contiti tied.)
During the past month the late Mr. Alexander
Lamb’s notable collection of books was sold. The
most remarkable item was that of his fine copy of the
first edition of Burns, which was knocked down at
the record sum of 545 guineas, for an American buyer,
being four or five times more than it has ever fetched
before.
Queries.
1133. The Duchess ok Gordon and the
Premier Earl of Aberdeen. —l wish some reader
would help to unravel a mystery mooted in Mr. Vere
Foster’s Two Duchesses. Writing on April 5,
1805, to her son, Lady Elizabeth Foster (afterwards
Duchess of Devonshire, says—“ You find Lord
A[berdeen] braves the Duchess of Gordon, and flirts
with Harriet Cavendish [daughter of the fifth Duke of
Devonshire, afterwards Countess Granville] more than
ever.” In a note the editor adds that the Duchess of
Gordon “ probably wished the Earl to marry a
daughter of her own.” Writing to his mother on
July 30, 1805, young Foster says Aberdeen “ is very
young, but he has shewn some character with regard
to the Duchess of Gordon.” As a matter of fact,
Lord Aberdeen married (28th July, 1805) Lady
Catherine Hamilton, daughter of the first Duke of
Abercorn (by Lady Louisa Russell, the niece of the
last Duke of Gordon). The only daughter of the
Duchess of Gordon free to mairy at this date was
Lady Madelina, who had married Sir Robert Sinclair
of Stevenson, on 2nd April, 1789, and was left a
widow in 1794. I am inclined to believe that she
was the damsel intended for Lord Aberdeen, because
on 25th November, 1805, three months after his
marriage, she was married at her sister the Duchess
of Manchester’s house, Kimbolton Castle, to Charles
Fysche Palmer of Luckley Park, Berks, who died in
1843. Was there any issue of this Palmer marriage?
J. M. B.
1134. Ballad Wanted. —ln my youth, spent in
an upland parish, I used to hear an old farm servant
repeat a ballad, of which the following is the only
verse I can recall:—
An’ Donald tottered to the door,
Whom I left in his prime,
An’ he grat to see the lad come back
He bore about lang syne.
It is part of a narrative of the return of the young
laird (?) from foreign parts. “ Donald ” is an old
retainer of the family. Can any one identify or
reproduce this pathetic piece ? M, M. B.
1135. Kenmore Church Bell and Clock.—
This bell has three coins of George 11. let into it,
and round the outside is—
THOS. JANAWAY OF LONDON FECIT 1763.
Inside the clock is engraved—■
JOHN PEATT
17 82
CRIEFF.
Peatt was paid in 1781 for the clock, less £2
which he allowed for the old one, which he then
removed. 1 should be glad of any information re-
garding the founder of the bell and the maker of the
clock.
J. Christie,


1136. The Cumines. —Have any of your readers
ever heard this family-characteristic phrase—“ While
there’s a tree in the wood there will be guile in a
Cumine ” ? Chambers does not quote it.
J. M. B.
1137. “ Crabe of the Greine.”— ln a manu-
script scrap-book recently offered for sale in a Liverpool
second-hand book shop, one piece (the oldest in the
collection) is the fly-leaf of an old book, on which is
written in a hand, circa 1550, the following curious
rhyme :
Had I eatt ever when I lyst
And drank when I soyr thrist
And fowght when I was teine
Then had I never beine
Called Crabe of the Greine
Wretten in Aberdene on ye grave of one called Crabe
of the grene and merchante of ye forsaid towne of
Aberdene.
Is anything known of this old Aberdonian or his
tombstone ?
Dollar. R. P.
1138. Dr. Glennie of Dulwich.— ln August,
1799, Lord Byron was sent to school at Dulwich,
where Dr. Glennie undertook the charge of him for
the yearly sum of 10s. Dr. Glennie was a
Scotsman, who had “travelled a good deal.” Was
Dr. Glennie a member of the well-known Aberdeen
family of that name ? B.
1139. James Whyte or White. — Can anyone
say who the “James Whyte,” occasionally spelt
“ White,” was, whose name appears in some keys to
Hay’s view of Castle Street, published in 1839? He
is there represented arm in arm with James Andrew
Pauli Sandilands of Cruives.* R. C. A.
Hnswers.
644. King’s College Gown (V., 171). —At
King’s College we had no velvet at all on our collar,
and the sleeves had a short piece of the material
hanging down at the back in shape something like a
bag. We used generally to cut off this hanging part,
as it seemed useless, and so we just made the sleeve
enough for our arms to go through—three or four
inches, I suppose, in depth. I remember very well
after the Union, when it was being discussed in the
Senatus what kind of a gown should be used, that
one evening my father remarked that Principal
Campbell had suggested a black velvet collar. I
said to my father that that would be taken for
mourning over Marischal College, and that it would
be better to combine the two gowns taking the
King’s sleeves and the Marischal collar ; and he told
me after the next meeting that something like this
was to be adopted.
Monymusk Manse. Wm, M. Macpherson,
The following resolution is extracted from the
Minutes of the Senates of the University of Aber-
deen, 19th September, iB6o:—“Thereafter it was
agreed by a majority that the students of the first
year next session should wear red gowns with crimson
velvet collars and close sleeves with crosscut openings;
and that the other students in Arts should continue to
wear their former gowns.” P. J, Anderson.
894. George Romney and the University
of Aberdeen (VIII., 13, 47). —-From Romney’s
Memorandum or Cashbook it appears that the portrait
of Henry Dundas was commenced on Nov. 1, 1793,
and that in March, 1798, the artist “received in full
” for the portrait.
Carlton Villa, Clapham. W. Roberts.
1114. Court Books of Discher and Toyer
(Vol. XL, 93, no). —Apparently “ W. S.” has not
paid attention to the last portion of the paragraph
containing my query. It is not at all likely that
Cosmo Innes would have known anything of the
missing volumes, unless he would have come across
them in Edinburgh, and in commencing his preface
to the Black Book of Taymouth he says “ The
materials of the present volume, all taken from the
Charter Room at Taymouth,” &c. The extracts he
gives from the records of the Baron Courts only
extend from 1621 to 1642, shewing thereby that his
material was limited. J. Christie.
1122. The Founders of the Dick and Milne
Bequests (XI., 108, 126).—A full and most interest-
ing account of the career of Dr. Milne is given in the
Weekly Free Press of sth February. But for a
plethora of material at present we would have
reproduced the article. We may do so later.
Extracts from the Records of the Kirk-Session of
Elgin , 1384-1779. With a Brief Record of the
Readers , Ministers and Bishops , 1367-1897. By
Wm. Cramond, LL.D., F.S.A., Scot., School-
master of Cullen. [359 pp.] Price 1/6.
Having spent several hours over this goodly volume,
one willingly endorses the editor’s prefatory note that
“ the Parish was one of more than ordinary interest.”
Dr. Cramond’s wide experience of such records justi-
fies him in also saying that “ few, if any, Session
Books illustrate as fully the various phases of social
and religious life in the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries,”
as do those of Elgin. But not only has Elgin had a
story to tell; she has been fortunate in possessing
Session Clerks who could tell it. It requires but a
very slight acquaintance with such matters to know
that there are Session Clerks and Session Clerks, men


with the true historic faculty who do their work
lovingly, and men who “set naught down” that can
conceivably be omitted, or but with tantalizing
brevity or inaccuracy. Here again Dr. Cramond’s
experience enables him to pass a high tribute to the
successive Session Clerks of Elgin as “men possessed
of exceptional qualifications for their office.” To all
this the critic should add that there are Extractors
and Extractors. Dr. Cramond has bettered his
instruction, with the result that the book does not
present one uninteresting page. Especially for who
can read between the lines there will be found a
greater variety of knowledges and suggestions than
can be enumerated in this brief notice.
The Royal Dee, A Description of the River from
the Wells to the Sea, written by Alex. Inkson
McConnochie, illustrated by J. G. Murray,
A.R.E. William Jolly & Sons, 1898. [l6l pp.
10 x 7a in.]
We are not sure but Mr. McConnochie in titling this
lovely volume has introduced an epithet that has come
to stay. The many Dees needed distinguishing, and
no one will grudge the title Royal to the river which
Victoria has so delighted in. Two qualifications
possessed by the author have gone to making this
book a marked success. There is his long and
intimate knowledge of the whole subject from “Well”
to Sea. He knows not only every bend and pool in
the river, but every crook of the roads on its marge,
as well as all the history, traditions and poetry of the
district. Then there is his whole-hearted enthusiasm.
He loves his subject, and tells its story with interest
and vivacity, laying things new and old under tribute
in its delineation. This naturally suggests mention of
the illustrations of the volume, and we heartily con-
gratulate Mr. Murray on his beautiful brush work.
They are all good, and many of them exquisite, and
thoroughly representative of the spirit of the scenery
of Deeside. Messrs. Jolly & Son are the printers,
and they never executed anything better. As a
standard work it will sell well, and when another
edition is in demand the author would enhance its
value by adding both an index and a map of the
course of the Royal Dee.
The Battle of Sheriffmuir: Related from Original
Sources. Illustrated by 20 original pen and ink
drawings by an F.S.A. (Scot.). Stirling: Eneas
Mackay, 1898. [64 pp.]
This quaint little quarto makes the very most of
Sheriffmuir, and it is not too much to say that the
public may rest satisfied that the story is now accurately
told in the 22 pages of text devoted to it. The
illustrations are ample, and the most of them tastefully
executed. We are glad to see that there is a long list
qf subscribers,
Scots Books of tbe /ifcontb.
Early Fortifications in Scotland: Moats, Camps and
Forts. (Rhind Lectures in Archaeology.) D.
Christison. Fscap. 4to. 21/- net. Blackwood.
Memoirs of a Highland Lady. The Autobiography
of E. Grant of Rothiemurchus, afterwards Mrs.
Smith of Baltiboys, 1797-1830. Edited by Lady
Strachey. Bvo. 10/6. J. Murray.
The Highlands of Scotland in 17go, from Manuscripts
104 in the King's Library, British Museum. With
an introduction by Andrew Lang. Cr. Bvo. 5/-
net. Blackwood.
Tituli Hunteriani: an Account of the Roman Stones
in the Hunterian Museum, University of Glasgow.
James Macdonald. Annan (Glasgow).
The Royal Dee: a Description of the River from the
Wells to the Sea. A. I. McConnochie. Illustrated
by J. G. Murray. Cr. qto. 10/6 net. Jolly.
A Girl Bejant. I. K. Campbell. Cr. qto. 1/6.
Digby Long.
A story of Life at St. Andrews University.
Historical Manuscripts Commission igth Report.
Part 8. The Manuscripts of His Grace the Duke
of Buccleuch and Queensberry, preserved at Drum-
lanrig Castle. Bvo. 1/4. Stationery Office.
George Thomson, the Friend of Burns: His Life and
Correspondence, J. C. Hadden. Bvo. 10/6 net.
J. C. Nimmo.
Carlyle on Burns. John Muir. Bvo. 2/6. Hodge.
Burns, from Heaven ; with some other Poems. Bvo.
Hamish Henry. 5/- Bryce.
Annual Burns' Chronicle and Club Directory. No. 7.
Bvo. 1/6. J. Llorn (Glasgow).
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Correspondents will greatly oblige by sending us
their full name and address (not necessarily for
publication) along with their contributions.
All communications should be accompanied by an
identifying name and address. As publication day is
the 25th of each month, copy should be in a few days
earlier. Ed.
Published by A. Brown & Co., Booksellers, Aberdeen.
Literary communications should be addressed to the “Editor,”
23 Osborne Place, Aberdeen. Advertisements and Business
Letters to the Publishers, 83 Union Street, Aberdeen,


Ladies’ Companions
Glove and
Handkerchief Sets.
As above, fine Leather Case, plush lined.
Warranted Sheffield Cutlery, 9/6. A larger
size with extra fittings, 17/6.
In various Patterns and Leathers, 7/6 to 25/■
This pattern, plush case, plush lined 5/6.
A. BROWN & CO., 83 and 85 Union Street, Aberdeen.
Scarf Cases with Fixture for Collar Studs
and Scarf Pins, Morocco Leather, 9/6.


From 45/- to 7 Guineas.
FITTED MOROCCO BAGS.
Ladies’ Hand Bags with Purse,
from 7/6 to 21 /-
Ladies’ Hand Bags from 3/6.
Cigar and Cigarette
Cases, 2/- upwards.
Letter Wallets, 1/- to 12/-
Cigar and Cigarette Cases,
2/- to 12/6.
A. BROWN & CO., 83 and 85 Union Street, Aberdeen.
SBa& (?
FITTED TRAVELLING BAGS,
