

vR H 2ri JniJ >
PpW ’^Sp
/ ig; if J^S»
'■' vwiSh/mL
>« il 'w? TBm§»#
V V ,||Jif V / *-- / ‘i ' / /
Ml -■
X
k


0




_


k P Wt <
l^lfw
TREFOIL


'


*


arts could not discvz’er exa<


Trefoil
The Story of a Girls’ Society
M. P. Macdonald
With Six Illustrations by W. H. Margetson
Thomas Nelson and Sons
London, Edinburgh, and New York




PtO^/7i
<3 . 6 ■
CONTEXTS.
I. THE BIRTH OF THE SOCIETY, .... .... ... 9
11. A DAT TO BE REMEMBERED, .... .... .. . 24
111. “GROWN up” AT LAST, .... .... .... 40
IV. THE LEAVES ARE DIVIDED, .... .... .... 55
V. MR. MURRAY AGAIN, .... .... .... .... 71
VI. THE TROUBLES OF A LANDLADY, .... .... 87
VII. IN TWO YEARS’ TIME, .... .... .... .... 103
VIII. TOGETHER AGAIN, .... .... .... .... 119
IN. INTO AN UNKNOWN WORLD, .... .... .... 136
X. AT “THE WILLOWS,” .... .... .... .... 151
XI. AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE, .... .... .... 165
XII. HOLIDAY-MAKING, .... .... .... .... 179
XIII. THE END OF THE “FRIAR,” .... .... .... 192
XIV. BREAKING THE NEWS, .... .... ... ... 204
XV. “WILL YE NO COME BACK AGAIN?” ... .... 217
XVI. IN A WORLD OF TROUBLE, .... .... .... 235
xvii. susie’s vocation, .... .... .... .... 252
XVIII. WHAT THE WINTER BROUGHT, .... ... .... 266
XIX. A DAY OF MISFORTUNES, .... .... . .. 2SO
XX. A DAUGHTER OF CONSOLATION, .... .... .... 293
XXI. LOVERS AND FRIENDS, .... .... .... . .. 308
XXII. IN ARCADIA, .... .... .... .... .... 321
XXIII. IN THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW, .... .... 336
XXIV. “ THIS DAY FIVE YEARS HENCE,” .... .... 350




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
TXX. Ib. /Ibargctson.
THEIR UNITED EFFORTS COULD NOT DISCOVER EXACTLY
THE NAME THEY WANTED, .... .... Frontispiece
“ AND YOU’LL REMEMBER ‘THE LEAVES OF THE TREFOIL, ’ 61
TRlx’s LETTER WAS READ AND DISCUSSED, .... .... H"
HE DRANK A LONG DRAUGHT, THEN LAY BACK AGAIN, ... 200
SHE KNELT DOWN BESIDE THE SOFA AND TOOK MISS SNOW’S
HAND IN HERS, .... 251
SHE HELD HER FATHER’S HAND TIGHTLY, .... ■■■• 34 ‘




TREFOIL.
;♦
CHAPTER I.
THE BIRTH OF THE SOCIETY
“ IRLS, can you believe that by this time to-morrow
we shall be grown up ? ”
“ I don’t expect to be any taller, Nell,’’ Trix Beresford
answered lazily.
•/
She was sitting half in and half out of an open window,
her foot on a chair, and her hands busy with a piece of
fancy work. Nelly Lawrence had curled herself up in the
corner of a very comfortable sofa, and her only occupation
was her favourite one of talking. The third person in the
room was Susie Snow. She sat at a little round table,
copying extracts from a learned-looking volume into a
very neatly-kept notebook. For the last twenty minutes
her pen had scarcely stopped—any one who looked over
her shoulder would have seen no mistakes and no erasures
—yet she had heard every word that her companions had
said, and would have been very sorry if they had stopped
their chatter; for she could not forget that this was their


last evening at school, and that they might never be so
much together in the future as they had been in the past.
These three girls were now the oldest at Stormont
House, and their friendship had passed into a proverb.
They were very unlike one another. Some people who
did not know them well wondered what could be the bond
of union, Susie was a bookworm, and always had been a
quiet, grave-faced, steady-going girl, very much respected
in the school, but very little known by most of her
companions. She was older than her years in many ways,
and found her equals more among the teachers, who, it
was a well-known fact, had one and all an admiration
for her. Trix and she had been the keenest rivals once,
though rivalry had never seemed to hurt their friendship ;
CD C
but now the former was outdistanced altogether, and had
lono- am) forgotten to regret it. Susie was her friend, and
O CD CD O
she could grudge her nothing. Susie was the cleverest
girl she knew, and anybody might be proud to take the
second place beside her; so Trix had taken it, and kept it,
in all the ordinary school-room work. In everything else
she was first and foremost —the girl whom everybody
liked and everybody followed. As for Nelly, she de-
tested work of any kind, and did as little of it as she
could. She was a leader, too, as well as Trix, but scarcely
such a safe one. Her school life had been marked by
many scrapes, and some of them were pretty serious. It
was ancient history now, but once at least she had very
nearly been expelled ; and years had not as yet brought
with them wisdom—in fact, her teachers sometimes told


her that her conduct was suggestive rather of the nursery
than the school-room. And yet these three were the closest
allies. Nobody could fail to see their love for one another.
Trix was the dearest to each of her friends, but nobodv
could tell whether Susie or Nelly stood first with her.
They had gone through the school together, they had
come now to the last day of their last quarter, and when
the other girls met again their places would be empty.
No wonder they could think or talk of very little else.
It was a beautiful afternoon, and the other boarders
were out in the garden. All the work of the year was
over, and all school discipline relaxed. There would be
a supper to-night in the largest of the school-rooms;
there would be dancing and charades, and what Nelly
called “a general jollification.” But in the meantime
nobody had anything in particular to do except Susie
Snow, who hoped to go to the university next year, and
was expected to distinguish herself when she got there.
She had an insatiable appetite for work, and Mr. Murray,
the English master, was quite ready to gratify it. He had
brought her a book upon Homan law that morning, and
advised her to make an abstract of several sections before
to-morrow afternoon ; so she had shut herself up in the
boarders’ sitting-room, but was scarcely surprised when
the others had followed her thither. She had taken
hardly any part in the conversation, yet she had enjoyed
it as much as any one. She did not seem particularly
disturbed even when Nelly sent a cushion spinning into
Trix’s lap, as a protest against her last remark.


“ What a stupid, good-for-nothing set you are 1 ” Miss
Lawrence exclaimed in her indignation. “ Here am I
doing my level best to get up a little sentiment, and you
won’t help me a bit. Susie sits there and scribbles as
if her life depended on it, and Trix is nearly as bad.
Do pitch that sachet out of the window; I’m sick of the
very sight of it.”
“ So am I,” answered Trix, with a shrug of her shoulders,
“ but I must get it finished somehow. I’m going to give
it to Mrs. Lorraine to-morrow, if I have to sit up all night
and stay out from supper into the bargain.”
“ I can’t see what possessed you to begin it. You’ve
got plenty of money to spend. Why didn’t you buy her
something ? She would have liked it just as much.”
“ No, indeed, she wouldn’t, Nell. Don’t you know how
she has always been trying to teach me to sew, and tell-
ing me that ‘ every young lady, my dear, should know
how to use her needle.’ I can’t say much for the stitches
in this elegant article, but she’ll like them all the better
O '
because I’ve put them in.”
“ So there’s a piece of sentiment for you if you want it
Nell,” Susie remarked, as she turned a page.
“ And you’re writing out all that rubbish to please dear
Mr. Murray, I suppose. What a self-sacrificing couple
you are! Susie, how do you suppose your teachers will
get on without you next year ? They won’t find any one
else to slave for them like that in a hurrv.”
“ How do you suppose the whole school will get on
without us ? ” Susie asked; “ and how shall we ever get on


without it ? I don’t know how sentimental you’d like us
to be, Nell: for my part, I feel utterly miserable whenever
I remember that it’s our last evening.”
“ Yes, that’s about the case with all of us,” Trix chimed
in, with a sigh such as was seldom heard from her. “ I
I
can’t believe it’s the last—it hardly seems possible; and
I’m awfully sorry to leave the dear old place. Girls, I’m
afraid it’s quite true, as Aunt Kate says sometimes, that
our school days are the happiest part of our lives.”
“ Then all I can say is, I’m sorry for the prospect before
us,” Nelly answered emphatically. “ I don’t mean I haven’t
had a lovely time here, and—oh dear, I can’t talk about
* *
it, but you two ought to understand. I believe I’d do
anything in the world for Miss Lorraine, except stew at
the rate Susie does. Mrs. Lorraine’s an old darling, and
so is Fraulein; even Miss Temple has her good points.
Yes, strange though it may appear, I begin to see several
good points in Miss Temple, now that I’m going to see
the last of her. But I hate and detest and utterly abhor
Mr. Murray and everything about him. I nearly danced
for joy to-day to think I was out of his clutches for ever.”
“Nearly?” repeated Trix, and raised her eyebrows
interrogatively. “ From the way you and Maude went
on in the veranda, I should have thought it was ‘ quite.’
Mr. Murray thought so too, I suspect, for he was watch-
ing you from the window.”
“ He’s welcome to think what he likes, the mean little
wretch I Did you hear what he said to me ? No, you
weren’t in the room. Susie was, though, so she can bear


witness. I went up to him after English, as sweetly
as you like, because, as we have all confessed, we are
feeling pretty sentimental to-day, and I wanted to part
on good terms with every one. He went on doing some-
thing to his mark-book, and took no notice for a minute.
Then he looked up, with his horrid, sarcastic little smile,
and asked me what I wanted. I had begun to think by
that time that I had been a goose to bother myself about
him, so I told him I’d been thinking he might like to say
good-bye to me; and what do you suppose he said, Trix ?
—Susie, wasn’t it horrid ? ”
“It was rather; but you know, Nell, what you said to
him did sound a little impertinent as you said it. At least,
I suppose he must have thought so.”
“ He’s always thinking detestable things, and you’re
always standing up for him. Anyhow, Trix, he got up
from his chair and made me a killing little bow. ‘lt gives
me sincere pleasure, Miss Lawrence,’ he said. ‘ I only
wish I could flatter myself that I had succeeded in teaching
you something.’ Now what do you think of that ? ”
“ I think it was simply mean,” said Trix indignantly.
“ He needn’t have been so nasty on our last day ; but then
there’s not a bit of doubt that he delights in saying dis-
agreeable things. I wouldn’t bother myself about him,
Nell; he’s not worth it.”
“ There’s just this to say, though,” Susie put in quietly :
“ I am afraid he is a good deal worried to-day about his
wife. He told me she had found the heat very trying,
and Mrs. Lorraine saw her yesterday, and said she was


looking dreadfully ill. She told me something else too,
girls. I wonder if I might tell you.”
“ Oh, do, do ! ” cried Nelly. “ Mrs. Lorraine would tell
any one anything.”
“ She didn't say you were not to repeat it, did she ?
Trix asked, looking eager also.
“Oh no, she didn’t do that; and I suppose she would
just as soon tell you as me, except that I know Mrs. Murray
a little. She was her husband’s cousin, it seems, and like
a little sister to him, long ago in England. She used to
live with his mother, because her parents were dead, and
I don’t think she had any money of her own. She was
about fourteen when her aunt died, and then Mr. Murray
came out here as tutor to some family. I think he must
have been very poor. I know he used almost all the
money he had in sending his cousin to a good school, so
that she might be able to do something for herself after-
wards. Then, when he went away, he promised her that
he would either come back some day, or send for her to
come out to him, and they should be married.”
“ And I suppose it never entered into his head that she
might have any objection,” said Nelly..
But Trix stopped her indignant!y.
“ Nelly, you never will see anything good in him.—Go
on, Susie; this is awfully interesting. Fancy Mr. Murray
with a love story!”
“ I really haven’t much more to tell you, except that he
did send for her, and they were married; and, Nell, you
cant imagine how nice he is in his own home.”


“I don’t suppose I can, for I can’t imagine him nice
anywhere. I never pitied any woman on the face of the
earth as sincerely as I’ve pitied Mrs. Murray, ever since I
first heard of her existence. No wonder she gets ill, poor
thing; any one would who had to live with that ogre 1 ”
“ But she doesn’t think him an ogre, you know, and I
shouldn’t suppose she has any reason to. You never saw
anything like the way he waits on her and takes care of
her. I got quite a new idea of him the first time I saw
them together. I wish you could have been there too,
Nelly.”
“ I don’t, then, I can tell you. He always rubs me up
the wrong way, and I daresay Ido the same to him. If I
had been there, I’m sure he would have been as horrid as
possible, and given his wife a new idea of him. Let her
keep her illusions, poor thing, if she has any. Anyhow,
we’ve talked about him quite long enough. I vote we
change the subject. O girls, we won’t have many more
chances for talks. Isn’t it dreadful to think of it ?
“ O Nell, stop ! Whatever yon do, don’t begin to be
dismal. I’m going away, I know, but Ido expect to come
back again, and I don’t think any one of us will change so
much in two years.”
“Won’t we just ? That’s all you know about it. \ou
and Susie will, at any rate, and I’ll be left lamenting.
You’ll come back a travelled lady, with all sorts of grand
ideas in your head, and you’ll look down with supreme
contempt on us poor stay-at-homes. Or perhaps you’ll
marry some English duke, and never come back at all.


As for Susie, just imagine what a blue-stocking she’ll be
by that time—a perfect dungeon of learning! Common
people won’t be able to speak to her. I put it to you
seriously, Trix, my dear—can I ever hope to associate on
anything like equal terms with Miss Susannah Snow, M.A. ? ”
“ She won’t be that yet a while,” Trix answered com-
fortably, “and she’ll never be anything else but herself.
I’m not afraid of her changing, and I shouldn’t think
you need be—unless, of course, you mean to alter very
much yourself. Tell us your fate, Nell, while you are
about it. I’m to be a duchess, and Susie a blue-stocking;
what are you o-oincv to be ? ”
•/ O O
“I’m sure I don’t know, and I rather wish I did. I’ll
have to look after that little mother of mine, for one
thing, and cheer her up a bit. She’s been worrying
worse than ever lately ; some business things have been
bothering her—l don’t know what—and I don’t know
what the boys are thinking of to let her be worried
by them. Then, I suppose, I’ll come out pretty soon,
but I won’t care for it half so much because you won’t
be there, Trix. Oh dear, it’s awfully mean of me to
talk like this; but I somehow can’t help feeling as if
you were both going to leave me behind, and I don’t
like it a bit.”
“Poor old Nell!” said Trix compassionately. “It is
hard lines for you; but you needn’t get any such rubbish
as that into your head. Susie and you will have each
other, and I’ll be the odd one—awav from you both.
•/
But I’m coming back, so I don’t break my heart about
(i.ooo) 2


it; and we’ll write such delightful long letters that they’ll
be almost as good as talks. Then when we are together
again, just think of the good times we shall have !”
“ Yes, we are none of us likely to change, Nell,” said
Susie, stopping her writing again. “ Two years is not
such a long time after all, and I’m sure in ten years we
three will be as great friends as ever, or perhaps greater.”
“ Let us make a solemn agreement,” cried Trix, suddenly
jumping down from her perch. “ I’ve heard of people
doing such things before, and why shouldn’t we ? We’re
all leaving school, and we’re all going in different direc-
tions, and we can’t tell what may happen to us. Let us
promise one another that we’ll always be friends, and that,
this day ten years hence, we’ll meet again and renew our
agreement. Susie, put away that writing, please ; you’ve
done enough to satisfy any one. Draw up a document for
us, and we’ll all sign it.”
“Trix, that’s a brilliant notion! I always said there
was no one to beat you for ideas.-—Yes, Susie, draw it
up quickly, before any of the rest come in. Let us have
it for our three selves, and nobody else at all. Nobody
else has any right to be in it. Don’t they call us ‘ The
Three Graces,’ and ‘ The Angles of the Triangle,’ and any
other name they can think of, to express the fact that
we are three and there can’t be a fourth.”
“ Shall I put that in the agreement ? ” asked Susie,
looking up, with a pen in her hand, and a smile on her
lips. She seemed less excited than the other two. but
she was really none the less interested.


“No, I wouldn’t do that exactly,” said Nelly, laughing;
“ I wouldn’t borrow any ideas from the common herd.
Besides, we might find a prettier name while we are
about it.”
“We must have a name,” cried Trix, “ and we must
form ourselves into a society. W e’ve got a mission, you
know. Some people say that school friendships never
last, and some others are even foolish enough to say that
two women can’t be friends for long without quarrelling.
ere going to show the world that three women can.
W hat are you laughing at, Nell ? We will be women
presently; we can’t help ourselves. And you’ve just been
telling us that we’ll be grown up to-morrow.”
All right, Trix ; I apologize. T ou’re correct as usual,
my dear, and lam your humble admirer. Set your wits
to work as fast as you can and get us the name we want
something that will be an expression of ourselves, and,
therefore, unlike anything ever heard of before.”
But that, unfortunately, was easier said than done.
Trix’s wits worked quickly, and both Susie and Nelly
came to her assistance; yet their united efforts could not
discover exactly the name they wanted.
How would the Union Jack do?” Susie suggested at
last, biting the top of her pen, as though to help her
meditations.
“Not a bit,” Nelly replied promptly. “It’s not par-
ticularly poetical, and no one could call it original; besides,
its not appropriate either. Trix has a craze for red, I
know T , and w’ears it whenever she can; you are blue, of


course, and going to be bluer —darkly, deeply, beautiful!}
blue, and all the rest of it. But where do I come in,
and where does the white? If anybody’s to have ‘the
white flower of a blameless life,’ it must be you as well,
Susie ; I’m sure your teachers would all vote for you. ’
“ Nonsense,” said Susie, flushing as if the red, too, might
have been her portion. “You’re in a very poetic mood
to-day, Nell Well, I give it up utterly. Can’t we do
without a name ? ”
“ Oh no ; that’s not to be thought of for a minute ! ”
exclaimed Trix. “Wait just one second, girls; I want
to consider. Yes, I believe I’ve got it at last. How
would ‘ The Leaves of the Trefoil do ?
“ Magnificent! glorious ! nothing could be better ! Trix,
you’re a genius of the first water! —Susie, you patient
scribe, take your pen and write ‘The Leaves of the
Trefoil,’ or find a better name if you can.”
“ Oh, I can’t, I know, so I won’t pretend to try. That s
done, girls ; what comes next ? ”
“‘We the undersigned,”’ began Trix, “‘do hereby solemnly
form ourselves into a society bearing the abo\ e title, and
we do accordingly make the following promises:
“ ‘ First, we undertake to remain true and faithful to each
other, and to let nothing interfere with our friendship.
“ ‘ Second, we agree to meet this day ten years hence
“Oh no, no,” interrupted Nell; “ that’s too far ofi
altogether. I can’t imagine myself ‘ this day ten years
hence.’ Let us say two ; that’s quite long enough.”
Trix shook her head.


“ I can’t say I agree with you then. It makes it much
more interesting, I think, to put the time a long way in
the future.”
“ Very well; suppose we split the difference and say
five ? ” Susie suggested. “Go on, Trix ; I’ve got that down :
‘We agree to meet again this day five years hence— ’ ”
“‘lf we are all alive, and all in the same country, and
renew our covenant for five years more,’ ” Trix dictated
slowly.
“ ‘ Third, we promise never to divulge the name, object,
or membership of this society to any one, and, at the
same time, never to forget our own connection with it.’
“ There, that will do, won’t it ? I can’t think of any-
*/
thing more we want to say. Date it, Susie, please, and
sign it. Then we’ll sign after you.”
So the document was duly drawn up and the signatures
affixed, and all three girls looked at it with a great deal of
interest.
“ I wonder where we shall meet in five years’ time,”
Susie said dreamily, “ and what we shall all be like then ?
W ouldn’t it be nice to get one peep into the future ? ”
“Perhaps we might not like what we saw,” Trix re-
marked. “ Never mind; we’ll be friends whatever comes,
and nothing can alter that.”
“ Nothing in the world,” cried Nelly dramatically. She
had calmly torn a leaf from Susie’s notebook, and was
very busy with Susie’s pen. “ Floreat trifolium, and so
say all of us. By the way, don’t you admire my Latin ?
It won t flourish much when once I leave these classic


shades. Mind, girls, even if we get married, it’s not to
make any difference.”
“ Who wants to get married ? ” asked Trix scornfully.
“ You’ll probably be the first yourself, Nell. Of course,
no man in the world could ever come between us; and
if we have husbands in five years’ time, they won’t spoil
us for each other, or stop us from keeping our promises.
What are you about now, Nell ? I never saw such a girl
for scribbling.”
“ No, no; you’re not to look. Wait a little, and don’t
be impatient. Be good children, both of you, and you
shall see a pretty picture. By the way, who’s going to
take charge of that same precious document ? ”
“ Susie had better, I think,” pronounced Trix, who was
quite accustomed to thinking for her two friends. “ She
is the most careful one among us, and besides, she is the
secretary of the society.”
“ And I’m the artist. Look at that, both of you, and
grow green with envy. W hen will either of you draw
like that ? ”
And Nelly triumphantly flourished her paper in their
faces.
It was indeed a clever little sketch. It represented a
fdorantic clover, and in each of the three leaves was a face,
o O
quite sufficiently recognizable for the purpose in view.
Trix had the central position, and above her coils of hair
Nelly had lightly sketched a coronet. Susie, grave and
thouoffitful as usual, wore what was intended for a
trencher cap ; and the artist had modestly crowned herself


with a dunce’s cap. This last was the only point in
the picture that her friends made any objection to. As
a whole, they gave it their heartiest admiration; and
Susie was duly instructed to lay it up among the archives
of the society, and produce it for inspection when the
agreement was renewed.
o
“ Then Nelly can sketch us again,” said Trix, “ or paint
us, if she likes that better. She may be a famous artist
when that time comes, and she’ll have to represent herself
with a wreath of laurel leaves. We should have a badge
for our society, girls, but you may as well let me look
after that.”
Nobody had thought of declaring Trix president; but
nobody had any doubt as to who filled the position.
On Christmas Eve Nelly and Susie each received a little
packet. This packet contained a brooch—a clover leaf in
green enamel, set on a bar of gold. When they saw Trix
again, she wore at her throat a brooch of the same pattern.


CHAPTER 11.
A DAY TO BE REMEMBERED.
THESE three girls had come from three very different
homes. They all lived in Melbourne—Trix at
Toorak, Nelly at Elsternwick, and Susie at Richmond.
But they would probably never have met, nor even known
of one another’s existence, if they had not all been sent to
school at Stormont House.
Trix’s father was a wealthy squatter, and she was his
only child. She would be a very rich woman some day,
and meanwhile she had every good thing that money could
buy for her. There are some things, however, which even
money cannot purchase, and there were times when Trix
felt the want of some one very keenly. Her mother had
died ten years ago, and she could barely remember her.
She used to watch other girls with their mothers, and
wonder what it would feel like to have one of her own.
She hoarded up all her vague memories and every scrap of
information which she had ever heard, and sometimes she
wove a picture out of them—a beautiful dream-mother,
who sat at home and waited for her by a window in the
drawing-room where Mrs. Beresford used often to sit, or


stole in at night to kiss her daughter in bed, as Trix could
remember being kissed very long ago. But, as a general
rule, she had little time or fancy for day-dreams. If she
had no mother, she had a father—the best and dearest, she
believed, in all the world. He was her closest and most
familiar friend; she had hardly a thought that she could
not share with him; and she knew that she was worth
more than all his wealth in his eyes—his one ewe lamb, as
%j *
he had once tenderly called her. Next to him she put
these two girl friends, who were, she often thought, as
good as sisters; and next to them, perhaps, Miss Lorraine
the beloved and admired of all her pupils.
Miss Lorraine kept a specially warm place in her heart
for Trix Beresford, and Trix had been very happy at
school. No other girl at Stormont House was ever so
popular, or such an acknowledged queen among her school-
fellows. Susie might be cleverer, and they were all very
proud of Susie Snow; Nelly might be the leader in a
madcap prank, or some such piece of folly ; but whenever
the school had to act as the school, the girls with one
accord would turn to Trix for direction. Her swav was
absolutely unquestioned; her influence never failed to turn
the scale. No one could tell exactly what had given her
this power ; some people explained it in one way and some
in another. She was very pretty, she was very charming,
she was very sympathetic, she had one of the sweetest
natures in the world, and, at the same time, she had a
most determined will of her own. She had an utter scorn
for anything which she considered mean or underhand.


Yet girls who were in trouble, especially through their
own fault, instinctively turned to Trix Beresford. She
was never so happy as when she could do a kindness to
some one; and it was often said of her that she could get
on with anybody. Finally, she had been a little queen
ever since she left her cradle, and was thoroughly at home
in the position. She did feel sorry now that her school
days were at an end; but, on the other hand, she had
wished to be “ grown up,” as far back as she remembered.
Her father had always promised that, when that time
came, he would take a holiday, and they should then go
home together. The time had come, and in a couple of
months they were to start upon their travels.
Nelly had no father and no sister, but she had a mother
and half a dozen brothers. She was almost the youngest
of the family, and they had all combined to spoil her. It
was rather a happy-go-lucky sort of household, and would
have been much the better of a stronger hand to guide it.
Mrs. Lawrence was, as a rule, more or less of an invalid
a gentle, little woman, only the nominal head of the family,
and generally like wax in the hands of her children. They
were very fond of her, and very good to her too, in their
various fashions; but they all considered themselves much
wiser and more capable in every way. Nelly, perhaps, had
more respect for her mother than any of the others ever
showed. She had given a great deal of trouble, she knew,
but she meant to make up for it all when her school days
were over. She was going to be a model daughtei then,
a model sister too, and keep all her brothers in order.


They were certainly the nicest boys she knew, but she
could see quite well that they were lazy, also selfish now
and then, and several other things which she objected to in
them, though she did not mind so much about them in
herself.
The Lawrence lads were all among Trix Beresford’s
admirers; but Susie Snow had always been afraid of them,
and she had shown it by her manner.
Susie had lived all her life with an aunt, who had been
to her both father and mother. She had had a very quiet,
uneventful life before she came to school; most people
would have thought it a very dull one, and even Susie had
grown weary of its monotony. Miss Snow had been a
Quakeress, and she still retained many of her old preju-
dices. The last few years had modified some of them ; but
she was often a little uneasy about the books that Susie
read, and the amusements that Susie shared in. Yet she
had great confidence in her niece; and she had realized
by degrees that no one could be an infallible guide for
another. She realized, too, that the girl must some day
go out into the world and discover for herself what it was
made of. Miss Snow was not a strong woman, and she
did not come of a lons-lived family. When she died, the
greater part of her income would die with her. There
would be a provision for Susie, certainly, but only enough
in itself to save her a verv meagre home. So it was far
O %J O
better, her aunt recognfzed, that she should be allowed to
follow her bent now and cultivate all her talents. By
Miss Lorraine’s advice, she was to go on to the university


as soon as her school days were over. The idea of such
a thins: had startled Miss Snow at first, but now she had
given a cordial consent, and she was deeply interested in
all Susie’s plans and ambitions. She was interested in
Susie’s friends, too, but none of them was so great a fav-
ourite as Trix Beresford.
Miss Snow came to the “ breaking up ” at Stormont
House quite prepared to take her niece home with her.
Susie had been a weekly boarder for the last two years,
and henceforth she would be always at home in the
evening, although she might be out all day. Her aunt
was looking forward to the new life with a good deal of
eagerness, and was not a little impatient to begin it. So
it cost her something to grant a request which Trix made
as soon as the chief business of the day was over, and the
o-uests had o-athered for afternoon tea in the dining-room.
o Yd
Miss Snow did not know many people there, and she
looked a little unlike most of them. She wore nothing
but greys and fawns, and there was always something
about her which suggested the Quakeress. She was small,
and slight, and daintily neat, with a pure, placid face and
mild, benignant eyes. Trix had once said it made one
' CD %}
want to be good to look at her.
Trix herself was well worth looking at that afternoon.
All the girls wore white frocks, and she was decidedly
proud of hers. That was not because it was so pretty
and fresh, and made as only one or two people in Mel-
bourne could make it. But her aunt, who chose most
of her frocks, had said it would be absurd to get this one


in a school-cnrlish style ; she had better have somethin"
O « ' o
which she could wear at dinner on shipboard. So Trix
felt herself quite a grown-up young lady when she put it
on that afternoon ; and, in spite of her sorrow at leaving
school, the sensation was a pleasant one. She had felt
constrained to put up her hair also, that she might be, as
Nelly told her, en suite. She had beautiful hair and a
great quantity of it, a rich chestnut brown in colour. She
had beautiful eyes, which were brown, also regular, well-
cut features, and a pretty rose-leaf complexion. More
than one person thought that there was nobody in the
room to equal her. She had not Susie’s load of books to
bear away, yet she had won enough prizes to satisfy her.
She knew every one of the guests, and every one seemed
to have something to say to her, so it was some time
before she could make her way to Miss Snow’s side. Susie
was not with her aunt then; she was being talked to by
Mrs. Lorraine.
“ M ell, dear child,” said Miss Snow’, holding out her
hand, with a smile, “ I hoped I should have a chance of
congratulating you upon your prizes.”
“ And I want to congratulate you upon Susie’s. Didn’t
she do splendidly ? Don’t you think we ought to be proud
of her ? I’m coming to see you soon and tell you all
about everything, for I’m sure she won’t do it properly
herself. May I? ”
“ Surely you may, my love. You know you are alwavs
welcome. Susie and I will miss you sorely w hen you are
away from us.”


« And I’ll miss you both, more than I can tell you. O
Miss Snow, could you spare me Susie for to-night? Do
you know why father is not here ? He got a telegram
about some business this morning, and he had just to catch
a train and go off at once. He wont be back till nine
o’clock, and I don’t want to be alone all the evening. It
seems awfully selfish to ask it, but might Susie come
home with me and stay for the night? You know you’ll
have her all to yourself soon, when I can’t get the chance
of seeing her.”
o
So Miss Snow, after a second’s struggle with herself,
gave the permission that Trix wanted, and Susies consent
was not hard to win. She, too, had looked forward to her
first evening at home, but then Trix was going away so
soon. She could not be sorry to find herself by Trix’s
side in Mr. Beresford’s brougham, when the last good-byes
had been said, and they were no longer pupils at Stormont
House.
“ Dear old place ! ” said Trix, wiping away a tear or
two which she had not been able to keep back. I don t
believe there’s another school in the world like it, Susie.
I’m glad Miss Lorraine packed us off in such a hurry. I
should have made a goose of myself in another minute
and cried like a baby. It’s rather mean, lin afraid, but
I wasn’t sorry to see you were just as bad.
“ I couldn’t help it either,” said Susie; “ I have been so
happy at school, and I do so love Miss Lorraine. Tou
can’t quite understand, Trix, what a difference you and
she and Stormont House have made in my life. O Tiix,


do you remember the first day I went home with
you ?
“ I should think I do, and all that came after it, too.
I haven’t forgotten much that concerns you, Susie. Oh
dear, oh dear! to think we are actually done with school!
I can’t imagine the place without us, and Fraulein says
she can’t either. Miss Temple actually kissed me, did you
see ? I never should have thought she could kiss any one.
0 Susie, by-the-bye, isn’t Mr. Murray’s house in that
street ? Don’t you think we ought to ask for his wife ?
1 am afraid she must be very ill, or he wouldn’t have been
away to-day. Will you go to the door, as you’ve been
there before ? ”
Susie made no objection. She was rather proud of
being the only girl whom Mr. Murray had ever asked to
his house. Besides, like every one else, she was afraid
that something must be seriously wrong. He had never
before been absent from his post, and his note of apology
that afternoon had given very little information. She
came back to the carriage presently with a pale, startled
face.
“ 0 Trix, isn’t it terrible ? She died about an
hour ago.”
O
“ Who ?—Mrs. Murray ? O Susie ! Poor man, how
dreadful for him ! What will he do ? And he has no
children ! ”
“ No, he has nobody at all,” Susie answered. “ It’s too
awful! It somehow doesn’t seem possible. The house-
maid said she had been very ill all day, but they never


thought she was dying until a few minutes before it
o «/ ~
happened. Oh, poor Mr. Murray !he must be nearly dis-
tracted. Nelly may say what she likes, hut he was good
to her, and they were very happy together.”
“ I’m sure they were. He’s really good and kind at the
bottom of his heart, although he has such disagreeable
ways. I suppose it must be all the harder for people who
don’t make many friends, when they lose some one they
care for. And you have always said she was very nice.”
“So she is,” Susie replied, unable yet to speak in the
past tense. “Of course, I don’t know her much, but you
never saw any one sweeter or gentler. She reminded me
a little of Aunt Sarah, only, you know, Aunt Sarah can
always think, and act, and decide for herself; and some-
how I had a feeling that Mrs. Murray needed some one to
lean on. Perhaps it was because she was so delicate, and
her husband never let her be worried or excited about
anything.”
“Yes, I know you always said he was quite different in
his own house from the Mr. Murray we knew at school.
• *
I remember seeing her once, just for a minute, one day
when she was calling on Mrs. Lorraine. The only things
that struck me about her were, that she was so tiny, and
that she had beautiful eyes.”
%J
“ Oh, weren’t they lovely! I thought her so pretty the
first time I saw her! I don’t know what her real name is,
but I’ve heard Mr. Murray call her ‘ Birdie.’ She was so
bright, and yet so shy; and she had such pretty ways. I
thought the name suited her exactly.”
o •/


“ Yes; but fancy Mr. Murray making up pet names for
anybody! It doesn’t seem a bit like him. Oh, poor man,
I don’t know how he can hear it! Just think of all the
girls and all the other teachers going home for their holi-
to-day. and so glad to be done with work ! And
think of all the people who are shopping for Christmas,
and getting up parties and picnics, and making plans for
going away. Doesn’t it seem horrible that the rest of
the world goes on as usual, whatever happens to any-
body ? Don’t you feel sometimes as if you had no right
to be happy about anything when other people are so
miserable ? ”
“ 0 Trix, I think it is a good thing we don’t know how
miserable other people are. I don’t believe we are meant
to know, or to be always thinking about it either. Why,
one could not bear to live at all.”
“ No, it would spoil everything for us, and I don’t
suppose it would make us fitter to help them. But lam
sure we ought to think of these things more than we do—
more than I’ve thought about them, at any rate. There’s
Mr. Murray, for instance. I did think him very cross and
disagreeable yesterday; I wondered what was the matter
with him, and whether he was sorry the holidays had
come. I suppose it really meant that he was very anxious
about his wife. Perhaps that was the reason too, a good
many other times, when we thought him horrid. Then
next year, when he comes back, the girls will all be sorry
for him at first, and be as good as they can; but after a
while they’ll forget, and never think that when he says
(1,000) 2


disagreeable things it may be only because be is unhappy=
We’ll forget too, Susie ; even you will. We are as sorry
for him just now as we can be, but in a little while every-
thing will be just the same to us again, and it never can
be that to him.”
Susie looked away to the blue sky in the distance. She
did not know what answer to make. She could not talk
as freely as Trix about her inmost thoughts, and she was
very shy of using her own words to express them. But
presently she turned again to her friend.
“Trix,” she asked, “don’t you remember that song in
< Pippa Passes ’: ‘ God’s in His heaven —all’s right with the
world ’ ? It does make things seem different, doesn t it,
when we remember that there is One in heaven who
does know all about them, and cares too ?
Trix nodded emphatically, but she did not speak, and
they were a very silent couple during the rest of their
drive. Susie was almost sorry that she had said as much
as she had, and she wished that Trix would begin to talk
about something. But Trix did not seem disposed to do
so. It was only when they came in sight of her own
gates that she began to propound a plan for getting a
wreath bought next morning, and sent from Mr. Murrays
pupils at Stormont House.
“ I think he would like it,” she said, as they walked up
the stone steps to the door, “ and I am sure all the girls
will want to show how sorry they are.”
The hall door stood wide open ; there was nobody in
sight, except indeed a big St. Bernard dog, which lay


stretched out upon an Eastern rug at the foot of the stair-
case. He was a great friend of Trix’s, and came forward
to welcome her with every demonstration of dignified
delight. Susie believed he was quite good-natured, but
she generally preferred to keep at a respectful distance.
Leo, Leo, you bad dog; don’t you know you are not
allowed in the house ? ” was Trix’s greeting to him. “ Yes,
I am very glad to see you, sir, but you must come away
with me at once; I’m the mistress of the house now, and I
mean to keep everybody in order.—Go into the drawing-
room, Susie, please ; I’ll be back in a minute. Doesn’t the
house feel deserted ? lam so glad I have you.”
Susie was glad too; she thought it seemed rather a
desolate thing to come back to a house where there was no
one but sen ants. Then she opened the drawing-room
door, and started to find that the room was not empty.
F°i a ' ery tall, broad-shouldered man had risen from a
chaii at the farther end of the room, and was coming
forward to meet her.
“ Cousin Trix,” he began, “ don’t you know me ? ”
Then he stopped short suddenly, as much confused as
she.
1 1 beg your pardon,” he said hastily; “ I thought you
were my cousin, Miss Beresford.”
“Oh no, lam not; lam only a friend of hers. But she
is in the house; she will be here presently. She said she
would be back in a minute,” Susie answered, almost in one
breath, and felt she was behaving very awkwardly and
doing small credit to Miss Lorraine’s training. She did


not know whether it would be correct to leave the room at
once, but she did know that that was what she would have
liked to do. So, under these embarrassing circumstances,
she stood irresolute upon the threshold.
The man—he was quite a young man, and very boyish-
lookino- —seemed almost as much embarrassed as she. He
looked for a moment as if he too were wondering what
was the proper thing to do next. Then the instinct of
courtesy came to his assistance.
“ Won’t you sit down ? ” he asked, pulling forward a
chair. “ It’s been an awfully hot day, hasn’t it ? ”
“ Oh, thank you. Yes, very hot,” Susie responded, and
thereby did not help him much.
“ I think it’s hotter in Melbourne than in the country,”
he went on bravely. “At any rate, you seem to notice it
more ; don’t you think so ? ”
« I don’t know,” Susie answered; and then she managed
to add, “ I have never been in the country.”
He looked as if he pitied her profoundly.
“ Oh, haven’t you ? Well, really, I was just thinking
this afternoon that I wondered how people could stand
these hot pavements and narrow streets every day of their
lives. I’m a regular country cousin, you must know, and
I never come to town if I can help it.”
“ What an extraordinary taste ! ” Susie thought, but she
said nothing, so he was obliged to go on unaided in his
task of making conversation.
He explained that he w'as only in Melbourne now for a
couple of days, and was very anxious to see his uncle on


business. He had heard that his cousin was expected
home that afternoon, so he had waited to meet her, partly
in the hope that she might tell him something about her
father’s plans for to-morrow.
“ I haven’t seen her since she was about as tall as that
table,’ he added, “so you must excuse my mistake when
you came into the room.”
But even so, how could any one mistake her for Trix ?
Susie wondered. Trix’s last photograph stood on the
table; it did not do her justice in her friend’s partial eyes,
but it vas a great contrast to Susie’s own reflection in a
mirror opposite. She could not flatter herself that she
vas even looking her best, for she was too colourless to
" ear white with advantage, and she saw to her horror
that her hat was a little awry. She heaved an audible
sigh of relief when her hostess came into the room.
Trix was troubled with no embarrassment. She had
evidently heard her cousin’s voice, and her face was
beaming with welcome.
“Cousin Harry,” she exclaimed, “you are an astonishing
. . °
visitor ! I never was more surprised in my life than when
I heard you were here. I’m so glad you waited for me.
Is Aunt May in town too ? Oh, I beg your pardon ; I
ought to have introduced you.—Mr. Stevenson, Miss Snow.
Susie, you must have been rather astonished to find him
here.”
“ \ es, rather,” Susie murmured, and made up her mind
to escape as soon as she could. But no good opportunity
came, so she had to sit and listen while Trix poured out a


string of questions about her aunt, her cousin’s home, the
different people and places in the neighbourhood, even the
doo-s and horses and birds she had seen there several
years ago.
“ Why, how well you remember it all! ” Mr. Stevenson
said in astonishment. “It must be nearly ten years since
you were up. I wish you d come back, Trix. Mother
would be awfully glad. Couldn’t you pay us a visit
before you go home ? ”
“ I’m afraid there’s no chance of that, especially as Aunt
May is coming to Queenscliff so soon. We’ve got such a
lot to do before we start. O Harry, why didn’t you put
off your travels until we could all go together ? Wouldn’t
you like to be going with us now ? ”
“ Yes, in some ways very much, but not in others.
You’ll never see any place to equal Australia, Trix; you
can make up your mind to that at once. People talk a lot
about fine scenery in the old country: I never saw any
view to equal the one from our drawing-room window s,
across the creek to the wool-shed. Hon t you re-
member ? ”
“ Of course I do.—Yes, it is such a pretty place, Susie.
The creek is lovely, and you should see the willows! —
Harry, what has become of the one I planted ?
“ It’s growing splendidly. You’d better come and put
in another.”
“So I shall some day.—Susie, they were all planted
originally from a slip that came from Napoleon s grave
at St. Helena. Uncle Harold put cuttings all over the


station. —I suppose that was why the place was called
! The Willows/ Harry ? ”
“ Yes, I expect so. Father was very proud of his trees.
Well, anyhow, Trix, you must pay us a good long visit
when you come hack again.—Perhaps Miss Snow would be
so good as to come too ? ”
O
Susie did not know what she answered for herself, but
Trix accepted for both of them with enthusiasm.
“ Yes, that’s a perfectly delightful idea. I won’t let
you forget it, Harry. Miss Snow is going to the univer-
sity next year; so by the time we come back, you and
she will be able to compare notes about Melbourne and
Cambridge.”
“ Oh, I never was much good at Cambridge,” her cousin
answered, with a short laugh; “ I only went there to
satisfy the mater. She had to see pretty soon that I
wasn't cut out for anything but a squatter.”


CHAPTER 111
“GROWN UP ” AT LAST.
HARRY STEVENSON did look like a squatter, cer-
tainly—a man who was used to live in the open
air, and to enjoy his life. He had nothing of the country
bumpkin about him, though, in spite of his boyish shy-
ness ; and Susie, studying him closely, came to the conclu-
sion that, as far as appearances went, he was almost worthy
to be Trix’s cousin. There was a decided family resem-
blance, and most people would have described him as a
very fine-looking fellow. He was almost unusually tall,
and he knew how to carry his height; he had brown eyes
that were not unlike Trix’s, a brown, sunburnt face, and
a very pleasant, friendly smile; he looked and moved
and spoke like a gentleman, and also, Susie fancied, like
a man who was accustomed to give orders and have them
obeyed. He was different, somehow, from any man she
had ever met before; but then she had known very few
men, and these were chiefly of one type. She thought
that she liked Mr. Stevenson —as long as he talked to
Trix and not to her.
As a matter of fact he did talk to Trix, and troubled


Susie very little. The two cousins seemed to have a great
deal to say to each other, and a great many old stories to
revive. The silent listener got a glimpse of a sort of life
she had never known ; she began to feel, as she had not
felt yesterday, that Trix and she might possibly drift apart
when they had no longer school interests in common. How
little she understood of those things which her friend knew
all about! How nice it must be to be one of a large cousin-
hood, who all appeared to have plenty of mone} 7 ", and to
have most of them stations somewhere! Susie had come
from another world, and it seemed narrower than ever
now and more restricted.
She liked listening to Trix’s talk, and yet she was glad
when Mr. Stevenson rose to go. He had been invited to
stay for dinner, and his cousin was rather disposed to be
vexed because he insisted on leaving.
o
“ I don't see why you shouldn’t stay,” she said, with a
little pout. “ I don’t believe your engagement can be so
very important. When you consider that you haven’t
been in the house for years, you must admit that it’s rather
mean to stay for such a little while. Why, I had almost
forgotten what you were like, and I am just beginning
to make your acquaintance again. How tremendously you
have grown ! ” she added, looking up at him with frank
admiration. “ Father told me you had developed into a
giant.”
“ And you have developed into a young lady,” he an-
swered. “If there weren’t a little of the old Trix left, I
should be quite afraid of you.”


“ Poor boy ! Is that why you’re running away ? Never
mind, Harry ; when you come to-morrow, father will .be
here to protect you. Be sure you stay for dinner, or I
never shall forgive you.”
Trix went to the front door with her cousin, and Susie
could hear them laughing and talking - in the hall. She
OO O
was not a vain or an envious girl, and, as a rule, her
appearance troubled her little ; yet she rose now and went
over to the fireplace, and studied her face in the mirror
above it. It was not at all a pretty face, and rather too
old for her age. The features were well enough in their
o o
way, and the eyes were like her aunt’s, but lighter in tint,
and grey instead of blue. Her hair was almost as abund-
ant as Trix’s, but no one would have thought so; it was
heavy, straight hair, a pale-brown shade, without any gloss
or sparkle. Her face was pale, too, and generally grave
and sober. She sighed a little wistfully as she turned
away. No one would ever think her pretty, and it was
just as well to make up her mind to that. It did not
matter much, she supposed ; and yet, what a wonderful
thing it must be to see what Trix saw when one looked
in the glass !
The dinner-bell rang at that moment, and Trix came
back to the drawing-room.
“ Come along, Susie,” she said hurriedly; “ we’ll just
have to fly upstairs. It’s awfully late already; but that
doesn’t matter, as father is not here. "Won't it seem funny
for us two to dine alone together ? ”
It did seem somewhat unnatural, and Susie always felt


very small and insignificant when she sat in the Beresfords’
dining-room —everything around her was so stately and
handsome, and she was apt to find the attentions of the
dignified servants somewhat embarrassing. She liked
Trix’s father very much, and had quite got over her early
shyness with him. Yet she enjo3 T ed this evening all the
more because she had Trix to herself.
They lingered a long time in the dining-room, for Trix
had a great deal to say. She seemed quite excited about
her cousin’s visit, and was anxious to hear what Susie had
thought of him.
o
“ I used to be awfully fond of him when I was a little
thing,” she said, “and he was quite like a big brother.
He was always big, you know, Susie; you couldn’t imagine
him anything else, could you ? He is exactly seven years
older than I am; our birthdays are in the same week, and
we always send each other presents. But I haven’t seen
him once since the time I stayed at * The Willows.’ He
•/
has been in town, of course, and in this house, too; but I
have always been away, or at school, or something has
happened. It is really rather funny how we never man-
aged to meet; but there seemed to be a fate against it,
I didn’t even see him before he went away, because we
were in New Zealand ; or when he came out again, because
his sister was ill up at the station, and Aunt May and he
went on at once without waiting in town for a day.”
“ Has he a sister ? ”
“ Yes; Mabel Fender. I’ve often told you about her,
Susie. You know she lives in Brisbane. She was very


ill then—they thought she was dying; but she got better.
She is older than Harry, and clever, like her mother. It’s
an awful disappointment to Aunt May that Harry does
not care more for books. He never did, though, and she
couldn’t make him. He was at school in Melbourne for a
while, and used to come here every Saturday. Oh, what
fun we had! I shall never forget it. Then people thought
he might get on better with a tutor at home, so he didn’t
come back, much to my sorrow. The next year mother
died, and I was with Aunt May for three months. She
was very good to me, and so was Mabel; but I liked
Harry the best. I was always to have gone up again,
but somehow it never fitted in.”
They went out into the garden then, and again Trix
was the chief speaker. It was not so much of her cousin
that she talked now, as of his mother, and her own. The
sight of him seemed to have brought back a great many
o o o «/
memories of her childhood, and as they paced up and down
the avenue she told one story after another for Susie’s
benefit.
“ I often wish I could remember mother better,” she said
regretfully. “ She was ill so long before she died that I
did not see much of her. Sometimes I wonder what I
really remember myself, and what I have heard from other
people. Father talks about her often when we are alone
together. I thought of him to-day when I heard about
poor Mr. Murray. Do you know, Susie, he once told me
that when mother died, if it had not been for me, he
would have gone away from Australia at once, and


never come back again. Perhaps that is what Mr. Murray
will do.”
“ I am not sure whether he could, Trix, though I dare-
say he might want to. I think he must be poor, or he
would not teach, for he doesn’t like it—as Miss Lorraine
does, for instance.”
“ No; that makes all the difference between his teach-
ing and hers,” Trix answered wisely. “ I am very sorry
for him, Susie; I can’t get him out of my head. You
see, father has me. I don’t say that I am much worth
having; but he thinks so, at any rate.”
Mr. Beresford did think so ; that was very evident when
he came home, half an hour later. The girls were sitting-
on the veranda, when Trix heard the click of the gate.
She sprang up at once, and flew down the avenue to meet
him. Susie sat still where she was until they came up to
her together, walking slowly arm in arm, and looking more
like a pair of lovers than a father and daughter. Mr.
Beresford had married young, and Trix had been all the
world to him since her mother died. In her baby days
she was his pet and plaything, and he her devoted wor-
shipper. Now they were friends and comrades, almost on
equal terms.
Trix’s friends were her father’s also, and Susie got a
warm welcome from him, with many thanks for taking
care of his little girl in his absence.
“ Little girl indeed! ” cried Trix, in mock indignation.
“ I should like you to remember, father, that you are only
half a head taller than I am. And you can’t call me a


child any longer, because I’ve left school. lam grown up
now, and the mistress of your house, sir : so you must treat
me with proper respect.”
“ I beg your pardon, Miss Beresford,” he responded, with
a sweeping bow. “ Yes, I begin to perceive that there is a
change in my daughter. Shall I see you wearing a train
to-morrow morning, my dear ? ”
“If you want to very much, I might borrow one of
Aunt Kate’s wrappers. But you can see me with my hair
up now, if you like; and I wish you would come into the
drawing-room and look at me properly.”
She led the way indoors through the open French
window. The gas was turned down in the room for the
sake of coolness; there was little more than a glimmer.
“ We must have light enough to see each other’s faces,
o o 7
at any rate,” Mr. Beresford said, and turned to the nearest
bracket.
Then Susie saw him start as he looked at his daughter,
and there was a tone in his voice such as she had never
heard before.
“ Child,” he exclaimed, “ you are just your mother over
again! I could almost believe that she had come back to me.”
Susie slipped out to the veranda again, and left them
alone together.
“Susie, are you in a great hurry to go home?” Trix
asked, after breakfast next morning.
“ No, not particularly; but I should like to be back in
time for dinner—our one o’clock dinner, you know.”


“ Oh, I won’t be so selfish as to try to keep you till the
afternoon, much though I should like it. But I was going
to propose that we should pay Nell a visit, and then I
could drive you home afterwards. It's a perfectly lovely
morning, and I'll order the ponies at once if you like.”
“Yes, that would be delightful; but we couldn’t stay
long, you know.”
“We wouldn’t need to. I only want to talk to her
about that wreath.”
Trix was very proud of her pony-carriage; it was her
own property —her father’s gift to her last Christmas—and
she took every opportunity of using it. She was very
fond of animals, too, and the little cream-coloui’ed ponies
—Balin and Balan—ranked only second to Leo in her
affections. They seemed as much delighted as she when
V o
she came tripping down the steps, all ready for her drive.
“ The darlings, aren’t they beautiful! ” she cried proudly.
—“ Dear old fellow, are you glad to see me again ? —I always
fancy he is the more affectionate of the two, Susie.—Now,
don’t be jealous, Balan ; I like you quite as well as your
brother, you know, and you are ever so much steadier.—
Y hat a beautiful gloss you’ve given them, John ! ”
John grinned from ear to ear with gratification. He
was not much older than Trix herself. The ponies were
his especial care, and, like the rest of the household, he
was devoted to Miss Beresford.
How pretty she looked this morning, Susie thought, and
what a pretty picture she made as she stood there and
fondled her pets! Her coat and skirt of blue serge, her


white shirt and sailor hat, seemed the most becoming dress
she could wear, as her soft white frock had seemed so last
night. The morning sunshine kissed her happy face, and
touched her hair with a golden glow. The wide stretch
of the smooth lawns, the fresh green of the trees, the bright
colours of the flower-beds, and the gleaming white of the
house behind her, all made up a most harmonious back-
ground. Even the sharp-faced little groom, as he stood
by the ponies’ heads and admired his mistress, fitted into
the picture very appropriately. Susie lingered on the steps
and watched it all, and thought how she would remember
it when Trix was far away.
“You talk to them as if you expected them to answer
you,” she said at last, as she came down to her friend’s
side.
“So I do sometimes, I believe ; and so they do answer
me in a sort of way.—Don’t we understand each other,
you beauties ? There now ! we really mustn’t waste any
more time, or even Susie will lose her patience.—Good-
bye, Leo. I suppose you’re far too lazy to come with
us—and, anyhow, we don’t want you.”
Leo had come slowly round by the side of the house,
“as if he wanted to see us off the premises,” Trix
remarked. She was in the gayest mood as she drove
swiftly down the Toorak Load, delighted to have her friend
by her side, delighted to have her ponies in front of her,
rejoicing in the sunshine, in the fresh morning air, and
the rapid motion.
“ Here we are at last, and I am almost sorry,” she


said, as they reached the Lawrences’ gate. “I do like
driving—very nearly as much as riding. Susie, you
really must take your tinm going home. If you would
only practise a little, you’d soon give up being nervous.
Isnt this a pretty place? No wonder Mrs. Lawrence is
so proud of her garden ! ”
The Lawrences house was a long, low, old-fashioned
villa, with wide verandas almost too much overgrown
with creepers. It was very old—as age is counted in
Australia—and sometimes its owners talked of pulling it
down and putting a more commodious one in its place.
But the plan had only ended in talk; they were all
too fond of their home to seriously wish for a change.
Even its inconveniences and imperfections were so many
charms in their eyes. Mrs. Lawrence had come to it
as a bride, and her children had lived there all their
lives.
The garden was even more charming. It was very
large—so large that only the portion in front of the
house was really kept in order. The beds were bright
to-day with all sorts of sweet, old-fashioned flowers;
the rose-trees in front of the drawing-room windows
veie a perfect blaze of colour; the birds were twittering
in the elms ; a fresh salt breeze came up from the sea
and fanned the girls’ cheeks as they stood on the veranda.
A white-capped maid opened the door for them, and
seemed to hesitate a little when Trix asked for Nelly.
res, shes at home, Miss Beresford; but I’m not
sure if she can see you. Mrs. Lawrence has a bad head-
(1,000) 4


ache this morning, and Miss Nelly is with her. But
if you’ll come into the drawing-room, I’ll let her know
you are here.”
“ Oh, don’t disturb her, please, if she is in her mother’s
room. It’s nothing of any importance, and we can
only stay for a minute or two. I am very sorry Mrs.
Lawrence is not well. She has had a good many head-
aches lately, hasn’t she ? ”
“ Indeed she has, miss; and she’s very bad to-day.
But Miss Nelly will be vexed if you don’t come in and
she isn’t told you’re here. I won’t need to disturb
Mrs. Lawrence a bit if I just knock at the bedroom
door.”
Mary had been in the house for years, and had nursed
Mrs. Lawrence through more than one illness. Trix
was sure that she meant what she said, and that her
judgment might be relied on. So the girls went into
the drawing-room, and sat down to wait till Nelly
should come or send a message.
It was a pretty drawing-room that matched the
house. There was an old-fashioned sofa, covered with
green chintz; there were two quaint walnut cabinets,
and a third of inlaid wood which had come from India.
There were other Indian things in the room also; there
was some fine old china, and any number of delightful
chairs. A long, low bookcase almost filled one end of
the room; a writing-table stood in front of one window,
J O
and a stand of flowers beside another. A sketch of
Nelly’s father hung above the mantelpiece.


“ Don’t you always like to come into this room ?
Trix asked, as she sank down among the sofa-cushions.
“ But it doesn’t seem quite itself without Mrs. Lawrence.
Do you know, Susie, one day I came here and found
her all alone. Nell had gone into town, and did not
come back as soon as her mother had expected. So I
sat with Mrs. Lawrence for more than two hours, and
she told me the history of nearly everything in the
room. She used to live in India before she was married,
and her brother is there still; so that’s how she got all
these beautiful embroideries and Indian ornaments. The
china in that cabinet belonged to Mr, Lawrence’s mother;
some of it is very old. And that picture of Mr, Lawrence
over the fireplace is one she did herself—our Mrs. Law-
rence, I mean—the year they were married; so it must
be from her that Nell inherits her artistic talents.”
Then the door was opened, and Nell herself came
in—such a different Nell from the bright-faced girl
they had bidden good-bye to yesterday. Her cheeks
were pale, and her eyelids were red. She looked as if
she had done her best to remove the traces of tears,
but it was quite evident that she had been crvino-.
J O
“ You two delightful girls ! ” she exclaimed, with a not
quite successful attempt at her usual manner, “What
good fairy made you think of coming to see me to-day ?
couldn t have known how badly I wanted you,”
she added, with a quiver of her lip.
“ Why, Nelly dear, what is the matter ? ” asked Trix,
and made room for her on the sofa. “Is it your mother


you’re worried about ? Mary told us she had a head-
ache.”
“ Poor little Miitterchen! Yes, of course she has;
and I wish she hadn’t as good a reason for it. If it
were only an ordinary headache that would go away
to-morrow and leave everything where it was before,
how thankful we should be ! The real truth is, if you
want to know, that we’re all beggars together.”
“ Nelly ! ” exclaimed both her friends in unison; and
Trix added, —
“ What on earth do you mean ? ”
“Just what I say, and nothing else—worse luck!
That was the lovely piece of news we found waiting
for us when we got home last night. No, I don’t suppose
you can believe it—l couldn’t myself when I heard it
first; but I’ve got used to the thought of it now. It’s
queer how fast you do get used to things! And yet
I needn’t talk about fastness either, for it seems quite
a hundred years since this time yesterday. If you two
had come in with grey hairs, I don’t believe I should
have been surprised.”
“ But what has happened ? ” Susie asked anxiously.
“ Oh, I can’t tell you exactly. I don’t understand
myself; we none of us do. Charlie and Tom have gone
into town to see about things, and I suppose they’ll be
able to tell us a little more when they come home.
Everything has been going wrong for a long time, though
I didn’t know it; and mother has been awfully worried
about investments. She thought that most of her money


was safe, though, because it was in Mr. Hunter’s com-
pany. Tou know C. B. Hunter, the tremendously rich
man who lives near us here ? Well, he’s not rich any
longer, for he’s failed; and it is a very bad failure, too,
Mr. Unwin says. Mr. Unwin is our lawyer; he came
to see us yesterday and tell us about it. He was here
when mother and I came home. Nearly all the money
that father left us is there, and Mr, Unwin doesn’t think
that any of it will be saved. He’s an old croaker, but
he may be right for once; and what’s going to become
of us I don t know. I tried to believe, when I woke
in the morning, that it had all been a bad dream ■ but
there it was in the papers, sure enough.”
\es, exclaimed Trix; “Mr. Hunter’s failure was in
the papers this morning.—Don’t you remember, Susie,
father said it was a bad business, and would affect a
great many people? —But I don’t think he had any
idea that your mother was one of them.”
“No, I don’t suppose he had. Mother did believe in
that man, too; and his company seemed such a safe thing.
She’s asleep now for a while, and you can imagine I’m
glad. We had an awful night with her; she went into
one fit of hysterics after another, and we didn’t know what
to do with her. Then she would go over papers, and try
to understand things, until she brought on the worst head-
ache she s had for a long time. It doesn’t matter so much
for us, I suppose; but it’s dreadful for her. She never
was poor in her life, and she oughtn’t to be worried
about things. Why, if there were nothing else, we’re


sure to have to leave this house, and I can’t iraao-ine
her in any other.”
There seemed to be trouble everywhere, the two <nrls
* J O
thought, as they drove sorrowfully away. They had
said nothing at all about the object of their visit; they
had almost forgotten Mr. Murray and their plans about
the wreath. Nelly’s sorrows touched them much more
nearly. Trix was so rich that she had only a vague
idea of what poverty meant, but the thought that the
Lawrences might need to leave their home seemed to
her too terrible for words. She wondered if her father
could not help them in some way.
Susie was very thankful that they had gone to Elstern-
wick that morning. She did not think that she herself
had been of much use, but she knew that between them
they had comforted Nelly, and left her at least a little
less unhappy than they had found her.


CHAPTER IV.
THE LEAVES ARE DIVIDED.
IT was a hot forenoon in the end of February, and
the deck of the Ophir was crowded. Several
hundred people were leaving Melbourne; the others had
come to see the last of them. The great ship lay at
anchor beside the Port Melbourne pier; the decks looked
like a moving mass of hats and bonnets ; the gangways
were packed, and every cabin seemed full to overflowing.
Trix Beresford was holding a reception at the door of
hers, and those who wanted to say good-bye had great
difficulty in getting near her. The little room was
filled with flowers, and photographs, and boxes of bon-
bons, until it had become a problem to find a vacant
corner. All her friends seemed bent upon bestowing
parting gifts.
Two of her friends kept very close beside her, as if
they were determined to lose none of the few minutes
that were left to them. The three girls looked a greater
contrast than ever. Trix was a good deal excited, and
excitement always made her prettier. It was dreadful
to have to say so many good-byes, but it was very


nice to think that so many people were sorry to see
her go. Besides, she would be back again soon, and
she could not be very sad to be starting off on her
travels at last. She had dreamed of it for years, and
now her dream had come true. So, though there were
sometimes tears in her eyes, there were generally smiles
on her lips ; and Trix was never anything but charming
under any circumstances. Susie, watching her, thought
it was wonderful how she always managed to say the
right thing to everybody.
Nelly had that happy knack also, as a general rule ;
but Nelly was very miserable to-day. The last two
months had been hard for her, and Trix’s departure
seemed the finishing stroke. She was almost inclined
to wonder whether life were really worth the living.
She had left her mother in bed, barely recovered from
one of the terrible headaches that had become such
frequent things. Her brothers, she knew, were in town
to-day, trying their hardest to find some work. Percy
had had to leave school, and Charlie to give up all
thoughts of the university; Willie was thinking regret-
fully of the place in the country which he had thrown
up three months ago as “ not good enough ” for him;
Tom was wondering whether he must resign all hopes
of being a barrister now, when his course was so nearly
over. There had been a family conclave the night before,
to discuss plans for the future. All Nelly’s ideas had
been laughed to scorn, and the decision arrived at was
one which she hated with all her heart. She had been


making her first attempts at housekeeping, too, under
very trying conditions, and “ the boys ” had said hard
things about her want of success. Ready money had
suddenly become so scarce in their house that she had
almost doubted whether she could come into town and
see Trix off. Altogether she was a saddened and sub-
dued Nelly; and Mr. Murray, had he been there, would
hardly have recognized her.
o
Susie was sorrowful, too, and wondering what life
would be like without Trix. She was better off than
Nelly, for no change had come into her home, and she
was entering on the career she had longed for. But
she had been working hard in prospect of it; she had
a bad headache this morning, which she was sternly
repressing until the boat had sailed. She looked pale,
and tired, and heavy-eyed—a sort of foil to Trix’s
sparkle and April face.
“ hat has Susie been doing to herself ? ” Miss Temple
whispered to Miss Lorraine. It was Saturday morning
«/ O y
and the two teachers had come together to see the last of
their old pupil. “If she looks like that at the beginning
of the year, what will she be at the close ? Could you
not give her a hint that she will defeat her own ends
if she insists upon working so hard ? ”
>£ She does look knocked up, and I wish she had had
a longer time at the seaside. But lam not much afraid
for Susie, she is stronger than she appears, and she gener-
ally works wisely, I suppose she has been fretting about
Trix’s going and Nelly’s troubles. Poor Nelly! Did you


ever see such a change ? She is growing positively thin.
I must go and speak to the child.”
But Miss Lorraine was intercepted by Mr. Beresford,
who wanted to thank her again, he said, for all her good-
ness to his daughter; and Trix, having a minute to spare,
seized upon Miss Temple.
“ Oh, do tell me, please —I meant to have asked
you before —how is Mr. Murray ? Is he back at
school ? ”
“ Yes, Beatrix ;he was back in his place the day we
opened. He looks older, and rather ill, I thought; but one
would hardly notice any other change. He told Miss
Lorraine how much gratified he was by the wreath which
you sent.”
“ I am so glad he was pleased. —Oh, there is Harry
Stevenson at last; don’t you see him, Susie ? And yes,
actually, Aunt May is with him. How good of her to
come through all this crush ! ”
Mrs. Stevenson was a tall, slight, graceful woman, who
looked young to be her son’s mother, in spite of the white
hair that was gathered back from her brow in a way that
made Susie think of an old picture. She was Mrs.
Beresford’s sister, and very fond of her motherless niece,
though she had not seen much of Trix for years. But
she had just spent six weeks at Queensclifi, and the two
had renewed acquaintance there. Harry had paid his
mother a long visit also, and the cousins had quickly got
back to their old footing.
“ Yes, dear child, I felt I must have another glimpse of


you,” Mrs. Stevenson said, in answer to Trix’s exclama-
tions and questions. “ No, I am not in the least the
worse for it, and I got through the crowd even more
easily than I had expected. Harry makes an excellent
escort, you know.”
“Yes, there are advantages in being so big,” Trix
' O o O J
answered, with a laughing glance at her cousin. “ 0
auntie, I want to introduce my two special friends. This
is Susie Snow, and this is Nelly Lawrence; and you know
you have heard all about them.”
“ Yes, no one is likely to know Trix very well without
hearing that,” Mrs. Stevenson answered, as she shook hands
with Nelly. “ I am very glad to meet you, my dear.—
And you are Miss Snow—the young lady who is going to
the university. I don’t think I ever made the acquaint-
ance of a girl student before. It is exactly what I should
have liked to be, if I had had the good fortune to be born
thirty years later.”
“ And it would be some consolation if you had a
son with brains—wouldn’t it, mother ? ” that young man
remarked.—“ Tou must know, Miss Snow, I’ve been an
awful disappointment to the mater. She thinks me no
end of a duffer.”
“\ou needn’t malign yourself, Harry, or me either.
Tou are not exactly all I could wish in every respect,
but you do very well upon the whole.—o Trix, my dear,
I wanted to say to you—”
Susie could not hear the rest, and looking round, she
saw that Nelly had been taken possession of by Miss


Lorraine. A fresh influx of people had come, and she
was borne back against the wall of the saloon.
“ Look here, Miss Snow; you’d better take a seat while
you can get it,” Mr. Stevenson said, making a way for her
to reach one. “ You’re awfully tired, aren’t you ? This
crush is something tremendous. Why on earth do all
these people come and buzz round the Beresfords ? They
can’t care for them so much as all that, and people who do
want to see them can’t get a word in edgeways.”
It was rather an involved remark, but Susie had no
difficulty in understanding it. She saw him look across
at Trix over the heads between them, and she thought it
was really good of him to stay and talk to such an in-
significant person as herself. At the same time she felt
disposed to bid him leave her and go back to his cousin.
He could make his way through easily enough, though she
could not.
But Mr. Stevenson had evidently no intention of trying
to. He stood beside Susie for fully five minutes, and
talked to her with greater success than at their last inter-
view. She managed to reply in something more than
monosvllables, and though none of his remarks were
%j * O
particularly brilliant, they were all sensible and kindly.
Then, when a good chance came, he piloted her safely to
Trix’s side.
Trix was delighted to get her back.
“ O Susie, father says we’ll all have to go up on deck in
a minute. I have such a lot to say to you both, and I
haven’t got a chance of doing it. Can’t we go into the




.


cabin for a second?— Yes; this way, Nell. Oh dear, did
von ever see such a crowd ? ”
J
They had literally not much more than a minute in the
cabin, but that was enough for what Trix wanted to say.
She clasped her friends’ hands, and looked from one face
to the other, as if she would print them on her meiliory
for ever. Her own eyes filled with tears, and her voice
was far from steady.
“ Girls,” she said, “ there’s no need to ask you not to
forget me, is there ? And you may be sure I won’t forget
you. We’ve said all we want to say about writing, too.
But you’ll wear your brooches, won’t you ? ” (They were
all three wearing them just then.) “ And you’ll remember
‘ The Leaves of the Trefoil.’ I’m sure I’ll always think of
you when I look at mine.—And, Susie, remember I leave
you Nell as a legacy. Please be very good to her for me,
as well as for yourself.—Nell, I leave you Susie. Don’t
let her grow too wise and learned to speak to me when
I come back.—Good-bye, you dear old girls; there never
will be any one like you.”
It was time to say good-bye, indeed, and this was the
only chance Trix got of saying it quietly to anybody. Her
father’s voice was heard callino- her, her aunt and cousin
took possession of her, other people pressed forward, and
Susie and Nelly were left behind. It was only at the last
moment that they got near their friend again, and then
there was time for nothing but a hurried kiss and pressure
of her hand.
One o’clock had struck, and all visitors had been warned


off the ship ; the crowd on the deck swayed backwards and
forwards, there was a crush and struggle at the gangway,
and the pier was lined with people, shouting, gesticulating,
and waving hats and handkerchiefs.
O
Susie and Nelly would have had some difficulty in
making their way on shore, if Mr, Stevenson had not
returned for them after he had seen his mother safely off
the ship. The four stood together on the pier until the
Ophir moved off. Trix and her father were in prominent
places, side by side, and leaning over the bulwarks. She
was smiling still, and waving her handkerchief, but every
now and then she was forced to raise it to her eyes. Then
suddenly the great ship began to move in the water; the
people on shore raised a ringing cheer, the people on board
responded. Susie turned away her head quickly. Nelly
was sobbing with little attempt at concealment, and when
they looked again Trix was being borne away from them.
They had intended to stand there and watch until she was
out of sight, but Mr. Stevenson suggested that it would be
more sensible to get seats while they could in the train
which was waiting alongside the pier. It was already
impossible to find room for four people in any one carriage,
so the little party was divided.
“ Poor children, how unhappy they are ! ” Mrs. Steven-
son said to her son, when he came back to her after seeino-
the girls safely seated elsewhere, “ I wish we could have
kept them with us, Harry. There is nothing more miser-
able than this journey back to town. The three seem all
as fond of each other as if they were sisters.”
•/


“So Trix always said,” he answered. “ I’m sure she
has told us enough about them, and they seem just as
much devoted to her. It’s rather queer to see three
girls such great friends. I wonder if there isn’t an odd
one sometimes.”
“ Not according to Trix’s account, or to appearances to-
day. They are nice girls, I should think, and worth mak-
ing friends of. Miss Snow has a sweet face, and Miss
Lawrence is decidedly pretty, though she is not looking
her best to-day, lam sure. Your uncle told me something-
«/ 7 o
about that family. They have lost all their money through
the Hunter failure, and Trix has been in great trouble
about them. But I need not tell you that; no doubt she
has given you the w r hole history herself. Harry, I wish
we had not that engagement at Hawthorn; I should like
O O '
to ask these two poor girls to lunch with us.”
Meanwhile these two poor girls were both feeling de-
cidedly miserable—too unhappy, in fact, to try to talk at
all. But there was some consolation in being together,
o o 7
and neither had forgotten w 7 hat legacy Trix had left her.
“We’ve got to be better friends than ever,” Nelly said,
with a pitiful sort of smile, when they stepped on to the
platform at their journey’s end.
“ Yes, we must remember that,” Susie answered ; and
then, struck by Nelly’s mournful face, she added, “Won’t
you come home to dinner with me ? Aunt Sarah will be
very glad to see you, and it takes such a long time to go
down to Elsternwick. Besides, I want to show you my
gown and trencher cap.”


“ Oh yes, I must see you in them, and there’s no saying
when I’ll get another chance. I’ll come, Susie, and be very
glad to. I can do it to-day, and I’m sure I don’t know
when I’ll be able to again. It’s awful to have to think
whether you can afford your fare into town.”
“Poor Nell, it is hard for you! We must make the
most of to-day, at any rate. Do you mind walking up ?
Aunt Sarah said she wouldn’t expect me until she saw me,
and she wouldn’t mind how long I kept dinner waiting.
I don’t like trains when I have a headache, and I think
it’s cooler now than it was.”
“ Yes, a walk would be delightful. I want to work off
steam somehow or other. Ido hate sitting still when I’m
feeling miserable; and you and I haven’t had a decent
talk for ages. Are you sure, though, it won’t make your
head worse ? ”
“ Yes, certain ; and there are ever so many things I want
to ask you. Are your affairs a little more settled ? They
are not quite so bad as you thought, Trix said.”
“ No, not quite; at least the boys say they’ll be better
in a year or two, and that’s always something to look
forward to. But we’re pretty poverty-stricken just now,
I can tell you, and it’s a very horrid sensation. Mother
can count on a little over a hundred a year, and we have
the house, and the boys are all looking for work. Ned is
out of it, for he can keep himself, at any rate; but the
other seven of us have got to be provided for somehow.
There’s a nice problem to solve—worse than any old
Euclid ever thought of.”


“ But your brothers will get something surely. They
are all so clever, and you have a great many friends.”
“ I don’t know, I’m sure. It’s just when you want
something that you generally can’t get it. Willie came
down from Queensland in November, because he didn’t
like it, and he didn’t think he had much chance where he
was. He’d be glad enough to go back again to-day. It
will be an awful pity if Tom can’t finish his course, now
that he’s in his last year; and he’s always done so well.
*/ ' %/
We want him to go on if he can possibly manage it; but
it’s so frightfully expensive. He’s going to try to get
some teaching. Isn’t it horrid ? ”
“ Poor Nell! ” was all that Susie could find to say.
J
“ Charlie’s not going on with medicine—that’s settled;
and I don’t think he’s particularly sorry. I would never
have had him for a doctor, I know ; I’d be afraid of his
poisoning me by mistake. I don’t suppose he would really
do it on purpose, though I sometimes think he’s mad
enough for anything. Anyhow, he’ll have to steady down
now. He heard of a place in a warehouse yesterday, and
he’s gone to find out about it this morning. Percy’s look-
ing out for something too. He’s had to leave school, of
course; but we’re going to try to keep Fred there a little
longer. He’s pretty sure to get through this year, it
seems. Ido wish I had gone up for ‘ matric.’ when I had
the chance.”
“ But, Nell, you hadn’t a notion of what was £oin£ to
•/ O o
happen. We should all do some things differently, I
suppose, if we could only take a peep into the future.”
(1000) 5


“ Oh, don’t talk of peeps into the future. You make
me think of that last afternoon at school. If I’d only
known then what was going to happen before the next
day was over, I’m sure I don’t know what I should have
done. Do you remember how I talked about being grown
up ? I feel as old as Methuselah now, I can tell you. I
look in the glass every morning for grey hair and wrinkles.”
“ Nelly, you do talk nonsense,” said Susie, laughing.
“ I can’t imagine you with either. A great many things
will happen before you get them ; and you don’t know
what is cominor no w any more than you did then. The
o «/ •/
next thing may be as good as this has been bad.”
Nelly shook her head ruefully.
“ I don’t see much chance of that. If some one would
leave us a fortune, it might put everything right; but
that doesn’t often happen now, except in story-books.
The boys used to say that Uncle Charlie would leave us
all his money; but he’s married now, and has two children
*/ * *
of his own. Susie, I know I am grumbling dreadfully,
but it is a relief to say things out. At home, when one
of us begins, it sets the others off, and everything looks
blacker than ever. Of course, when I’m with mother, I
have to make the best of the business and pretend I see
some fun in it; she’s quite down-hearted enough already.
It’s not for myself or the boys that I mind so much ; it’s
for her.”
“ 0 Nell, what a good thing it is that she has got you.
Boys are all very well in their way, I suppose, though I
don’t know much about them, and I am sure your brothers


are very good to her. But you can be always with her,
and take care of her, and cheer her up, as they can’t. I
never knew any one better than you, either, for cheering
people up when they are miserable.”
“ It’s very nice of you to say so, Susie, and I wish I
could believe it was true. Anyhow, if it is, I’ll have
plenty of use for my talents in the next year or two. By
the way, I wish I had some talents that I could make
money out of. Oh, if I had only known what was going
to happen, I’d have worked at school like a galley slave—
or like Susie Snow herself.”
“ Thank you for the compliment, Nell. I didn’t feel like
a galley slave in the least. But do you mean that you want
to get something to do yourself—teaching, for instance ? ”
“ I might want, if it would be any good; but I’m per-
fectly sure it wouldn’t. Who’d have me for a teacher ?
and what sort of one should I make ? If I had bio 1 girls
O o
to look after, I’d never be able to make them obey me,
and they would find me out in some mistake before I had
been an hour in the room. If I had little brats of chil-
dren, I’d lose my temper in no time, and box their ears
all round. Oh, wouldn t there be lively times for every
one concerned! ”
“ Then I should not advise you to try it, certainly.
There are other things to do, though, if you must do
something. You paint very well, Nelly.”
“\es, well enough for a school-girl, I suppose. Oh, I’ve
thought of that; I’ve thought of everything, I believe. I
might paint plaques and teacups and things, and I might,


by great good-luck, find somebody to buy something once
in a while. I might give lessons, too, and I will if I get
a chance. But I couldn’t exactly set up a studio, you
know, and there seem to be more drawing and painting
teachers in Melbourne than any one wants already. That’s
a very commonplace notion, Susie, I’ve had much more
brilliant ideas, but they’ll never be carried out either.”
“ Why not ? What are they ? ”
“ Well, for one thing, I wanted to learn massage. Ido
know a little about it, and mother savs I always ease her
V «/
head as much as any professional rubber. But then I
can’t be a professional rubber without a great deal of
training, and training costs money, so that’s out of the
question, even if the boys would hear of it, which they
won’t. Then I thought I might take lessons in millinery
and dressmaking, and see if the girls I know wouldn’t
give me some work. I’m sure Mrs. Lorraine would let
me try her bonnets and caps, and I’m sure I could
manage them, too. You know I’m very modest, Susie ;
but I'm quite certain I’ve got good taste, and I always
could use my finders.”
«/ O
“ Yes, you can, Yell; we all know it. But could you
really manage to get work like that to do ? Wouldn’t
you have to set up a shop, or something of the kind ? ”
“ Well, I wouldn’t mind a bit, if I could manage it. I
think it would be very good fun in lots of ways. But
the boys come in there again, and they say they never
heard a more ridiculous notion. As for the poor little
Miitterchen, she nearly wept at the thought of a daughter


of hers in a shop. That wasn’t quite my idea either, for
I wanted to go out by the day. 0 Susie, it’s dreadful
altogether; but sometimes it does seem too funny for
anything.”
J o
And Nelly sat down on a bench in the park through
which they were passing, and went into peal after peal of
laughter.
O
“ If I were to laugh like that at home,” she remarked
presently, “ they’d all think I was heartless, or else crazy.
But I can’t help it, and it’s better than crying, anyway.
Well, Susie, that scheme wouldn’t do, and then I brought
forward another. We had a regular family council last
night, you must know, a committee of ways and means.
I proposed that I should open a tea-room, with Mary’s
assistance. Mary makes lovely scones and cakes, you
know, and she says she is going to stay, whether we can
give her any wages or not. Of course we won’t keep her
without paying her something, but I thought that she and
I could go into a sort of partnership. Another partner-
ship I thought of was with W illie—he to turn market
gardener, and Ito sell flowers. But not one of these
beautiful plans would one of my brothers hear of. The
amount of cold water poured on poor little me was enough
to damp me for life.”
“ And didn’t you come to any decision at all ? ”
“ Indeed we did, and a perfectly hateful one, too. We
are not likely to find a tenant for the house—it hasn’t
exactly all the latest improvements, you know—and we
can tgo and take another while we have it on our hands.


The boys say it couldn’t possibly be kept in order without
a servant, and we none of us want to lose Mary. Besides, I
had to admit that the great objection to all my plans was
that I’d have to be away so much from mother. So the
long and the short of it is, Susannah my dear, that the one
thing we can do is—to take boarders. Isn’t that a highly
original and delightful plan ? ”
“It doesn’t sound very nice ; but I really think, Nell,
that it’s better than any you mentioned. You and Mary
will be able to manage between you, won’t you ? And you
are such a big household already, that a few more people
won’t make so very much difference. Then you have the
house, and you will be with your mother.”
“ (Jh yes, I know all that; I've heard it till I’m sick of
it, and I’m quite resigned to my fate. There’s not much
good in being anything else. Imagine me, if you please,
in a big apron, with my hair in curl-papers, presiding at
the breakfast table, and inquiring, with a seductive smile,
‘ Chop or steak, sir ? Tea or coffee ? ’ Oh, it’s all settled,
and the only tiling to do now is to find the boarders. I
o
told the boys I would only have men, because they’d be
out all day and leave me in peace. You’d better give
me the benefit of your ‘ decided literary gift,’ as Mr.
Murray calls it, in drawing up a most awfully enticing
advertisement.
‘ Will you walk into my parlour ? ’ said the spider to the fly.
‘ Tis the prettiest little parlour that ever you did spy.’
Susie, there’s your aunt at the door, looking out for you.
I hope she won’t think you’ve brought a lunatic home.”


CHAPTER V.
MR. MURRAY AGAIN.
TV \ ISS SNOW did not think so, by any means. She
IVi. had not known Nelly as well as Trix, nor been
so much attracted by her; but she was always specially
kind to any one in trouble, and she could see that Susie s
friend carried a sore and anxious heart under all her
apparent brightness. She herself lived in an atmosphere
of serenity and peace that was very restful to burdened
people. She was very good to both the girls; she seemed
to know exactly the right thing to say about Trix. Her
little dining-room was cool, and dark, and quiet, the dinner
that awaited them so dainty and inviting, that even Susie
found an appetite.
As for Nelly, she soon began to wonder why she had
thought that Susie’s home was a poky little place, or
Susie’s aunt a trifle too good for her taste. At the
bottom of her heart, perhaps, she had always been a
little afraid of Miss Snow, and had hardly known exactly
what to say to her. She forgot about that altogether
that day, and she never remembered it again. She went
away feeling that she had a friend whom she had never
thought much about before.
o


It was nearly five o’clock when she left, and she had
spent most of the afternoon in pouring out her troubles
and cares. She felt a little ashamed sometimes of saying
so much, and afraid of boring her listeners; but neither
Miss Snow nor Susie looked in the least bored or uninterested.
The three sat together in the parlour—which was never
called the drawing-room—or rather, Miss Snow and Nelly
sat, and Susie lay on the sofa, with a wet handkerchief
upon her brow, and an odour of eau de Cologne around
her. She had had to admit that her headache was very
bad, but she insisted that Nelly’s talk made it better
instead of worse. Nelly found a corner of the sofa to sit
on, fanned her friend diligently, and tried her vaunted
powers of massage. Miss Snow sat by her work-table
and sewed at a little garment which was to go away in
some missionary’s box. She did not say much—she was
not given to talking—but her gentle sympathy stole like a
balm into Nelly’s troubled heart, and soothed it more than
the girl realized at the time. Poor Nelly had had to be
brave for other people, and she had found it hard work.
She had been made to feel, too, the night before, that all her
plans were very foolish and impracticable, and her advice
utterly valueless. She had been doing her best for her
mother and brothers; it was hard to be treated like a
silly child who did not know what she was talking about,
and whose only duty was to obey her elders and betters.
Nelly had no great liking for sermons, and she did not
feel that she had got one from Miss Snow. But she did
feel, before she left Laburnum Cottage, that life had a


meaning which she had thought very little about, and
might have a beauty that she had scarcely dreamed of.
Some of the things that were said in that pleasant room
seemed to her then as if they were spoken in an unknown
tongue; but they lingered in her memory, and in after
days she understood them better. Before she left she
managed to fling away the thought of her troubles, and
for a while to be her old happy self again. She insisted
on pouring out tea when the maid brought in the tray;
she waited on Miss Snow and Susie as she was accustomed
to wait on her mother. When Susie declared herself cured,
and produced her trencher cap and gown, Xelly helped
her to robe, turned her round and round for inspection,
paid her the most extravagant compliments, and made
Miss Snow laugh heartily at her criticisms. Finally, she
sat down at the table to make a sketch there and then
for Trix’s benefit.
“You have been good to me,” she said, as she bade them
good-bye. “ I don’t in the least know how to thank you.
It has been like a little haven of peace,” she added, with a
glance round the prim, pretty old room.
“ Then you must come back to us again as soon as you
can,” Miss Snow replied, and kissed Xelly as tender!}' as if
she were Trix.
“ do try to come as soon and as often as you can,”
said Susie earnestly. “ And, Xelly, may I go down to
see you next Saturday afternoon ? Then I can give you
my impressions of the university.”
“Of course you may, if you’ll be so good. I’ll be


awfully glad to see you. We’ll stick together, Susie,
won’t we—even when you’re a lady professor and give
lectures in the town-hall, and I’ve grown grey with
counting my boarders’ shillings ? ”
“ They are awfully good,” she said to herself, as she
walked down to the station.
Nelly had often got into trouble at school for her use
of her favourite adverb, but she had proved incorrigible.
“ I wonder why I didn’t like Miss Snow more the last
time I was there. What a donkey I must have been !
I wish mother knew her.”
The thought of her mother recalled Nelly to home
worries, but she was able to consider them more cheer-
fully than had been possible in the morning. She had,
as she had once remarked, “ a corky nature,” and she
“ couldn’t stay down very long,” She had had a rest,
she had eased her mind by talking, and she felt she had
laid in a fresh stock of courage and brightness. Then
she suddenly discovered that she had lingered longer
than she thought, and she forgot everything else in her
anxiety to catch the train. She reached the station in
time and no more, and she sprang into the first carriage
she came to without any further consideration. It was
not until she sank panting into her seat that she glanced
at her only companion—the man who sat in the opposite
corner, and had held the door open for her. He was a
small, slight man, with keen eyes and dark hair. Nelly
knew him very well; he and she had fought many a
battle.


“O Mr. Murray!” she gasped, and then her eye lighted
on the black band on his hat, and she remembered that
he had had a worse trouble than hers.
“ How do you do, Miss Lawrence ? ” he said, and held
out his hand very amicably. “ I trust you are none the
worse for your active exertions. Your tennis-playing
has evidently taught you to run, at any rate.”
Nelly laughed, and was not offended.
“ I didn’t want to lose my train,” she answered ; “ I
wouldn’t have got another for twenty minutes, and that
would have made me late for dinner. I suppose you
think I am not likely to mind being late for anything;
but my mother has not been well lateH, and I am house-
keeper, and I have a lot of hungry brothers.”
Mr, Murray looked at her critically, and thought she
had grown a <rreat deal older since he had seen her last.
O O
She was, as Mrs. Stevenson had remarked, decidedly a
pretty girl, and she looked better and brighter now than
she had in the forenoon. She was not very tall; she
was thinner than she had been two months ago. She
had a few freckles which troubled her sadly; her cheeks
made one think of apple blossom, and her lips of a ripe
cherry. Nobody except herself objected very much to
the size of her mouth, or the upward tendency of her
nose. Her eyes were blue, and her hair was fair and
wavy. She wore it now in a coil at the back of her
head instead of a mane over her shoulders. That give
her an older appearance, but that was not the only
thing. It suddenly struck Mr. Murray that his trouble-


some pupil of a few weeks ago was a woman now with
troubles of her own; and he remembered having' heard
something from Miss Lorraine which would probably
account for the fact.
“You appear to be a busy member of society,” he re-
marked dryly; but there was more kindliness in his tone
and look than Nelly had been accustomed to.
“ Indeed I am,” she answered ruefully. “My idle days
are over, Mr. Murray—as, I suppose, you will be glad
to hear.”
“No, I can’t altogether say that I am, and I hope
your statement is slightly exaggerated. Idleness is an
excellent thing in its own place, though I don’t approve
of it anywhere else. You have, let us hope, a long life
before you. I trust you will occasionally find time for
a holiday.”
Nelly laughed again.
“ Oh, I didn’t quite mean that, you know. I only
wanted you to understand that I have turned over a
new leaf, or it has been turned for me, since I saw you
last, and I am now a reformed character. Aren’t you
sorry the change has come too late for you to benefit
by it ? ”
“ I am indeed,” he replied. “ I assure you I find an
uncomfortable number of changes at Stormont House
this year. I hardly recognize the first class with so
many well-known faces wanting. Was it not to-day
that Miss Beresford expected to sail ? ”
“ Yes; she went this morning in the Ophir. Miss


Snow and I saw her off. I don’t know how we are to
get on without her for two whole years. Then I had
o **
lunch with Miss Snow, and saw her in her gown and
trencher cap. She looks very nice, and more learned
than ever.”
“It is a becoming dress for most ladies. I hope to
see Miss Snow at the ‘annual commencement/ and have
an opportunity of judging for myself. Have you ever
been at one of those functions, Miss Lawrence ? ”
“ Yes, once or twice. I have two brothers at the
university ;at least, I had two last year. One of them
has had to give up altogether, and I don’t know what
the other will do. Perhaps Miss Lorraine may have
told you that we have lost nearly all our money.”
“ Is it really so bad as that ? ” he asked, in genuinely
shocked tones. “ She did tell me that you were among
•/ O
the sufferers by C. B. Hunter’s failure, but I did not
realize that 3*oll had lost so heavily. Can nothing be
recovered ? ”
“ Oh, I hope something will some day; and, of course,
we’re not exactly starving. But we are very much
poorer, and we shall have to live in quite a different
way. My brothers are looking for something to do that
will bring in a little cash; and I have been wishing
with all my heart that I had taken your advice and
gone up for matriculation. You can hold me up as a
solemn warning to all your future pupils, Mr. Murray
—a terrible example of the folly of wasting time and
opportunities.”


Mr. Murray looked really a little hurt, as Nelly could
not help seeing.
“ I am afraid you think I have always been very hard
upon you, Miss Lawrence, and I am also afraid that I
may have given you some reason. Please try to believe
that even a schoolmaster may have a little of the milk
of human kindness. lam more sorry than I can tell
you to hear of your misfortune, and I wish I could do
anything to help you. As for matriculation, it is not
too late to think of that.”
“Oh yes, it is for me. I should have no chance of
working for it now ; my hands will be quite full enough
of other thino-s. You see, my mother is not strong, and
all this trouble has told upon her. Then there is
another thing—”
Nelly stopped short, and her cheeks grew suddenly
crimson. She swallowed down a lump in her throat,
but she went on bravely, determined not to lose an
•/
opportunity.
“We are thinking of taking hoarders, so perhaps you
will hear us in mind if ever you hear of anv one wanting
anything of that sort. Of course you may think lam
not an experienced housekeeper, and it is quite true.
But mother will be there to direct things, though she
can’t do much herself, and we have a very good servant,
who is determined not to leave us. It’s an old house,
but we like it ourselves, and everybody who has stayed
with us seemed to like it too. There is a lovely garden,
we get plenty of fruit and vegetables, and we have a


cow and some fowls. Then we’re quite near the sea,
and we’d do our best to make any one comfortable.”
She concluded with a catch in her voice, and wished
that Mr. Murray would say something.
«/ O
Mr. Miirray had sat silent, from utter dismay and
astonishment. Here was a change indeed; he could hardly
imagine his old pupil under such altered circumstances.
“ Miss Lawrence, I am very sorry that there should
be any such necessity,” he said at last. “ I hope it may
not be of long duration. Still, I have no doubt that
any one who does come to you in that way will be
exceedingly comfortable. ‘ltis an ill wind,’ people say,
‘ that blows nobody any good.’ lam specially interested
in hearing of your plans, because I am anxious to give
up my house and take rooms somewhere myself. Perhaps
you would allow me to call next week, and we might
•/ 7 o
come to some arrangement.”
O
Nelly declared afterwards to Susie that she had never
been more surprised in her life. But the sensation she
was most conscious of at the time was one of utter
horror. Mr. Murray to be their boarder, Mr. Murray
to live in their house, to look upon it as his home, to
come back to it every evening, and appear at breakfast
every morning—how could she possibly endure that ?
She had disliked him so intensely, she had fought him
7 o
so persistently, and she had always felt that he provoked
her into being her very worst and most disagreeable
self. Her chief pleasure at leaving school had been
in the thought that she was done with him for ever.


Now they would meet on a different footing, indeed;
but she would be bound, as she never had been before,
to consider his wishes and convenience. No, she really
did not think she could stand Mr. Murray at such close
quarters.
“ Thank you very much,” she managed to stammer
out; “it is very good of you to think of it. But are you
sure you won’t find it rather inconvenient ? We are so
far from town, you know,” she added, bringing forward
the objection which she had made the night before to
her brothers’ plan.
“ That is not altogether a disadvantage, especially this
year, as I have no classes before ten o’clock. For many
reasons I should like to leave St. Kilda, and I seldom
care to go far away from the sea. Do you think you will
be able to give me a sitting-room as well as a bedroom ? ”
“Yes, we could manage that quite easily; but its an
old house, you know, and it’s a quarter of an hour’s
walk from the station. I told my brothers last night
that I knew we’d find it very hard to get any one to
come to us.”
And then she stopped herself again, remembering how-
important it was that they should get some one, and
how foolish it w-ould be of her to object to taking
Air. Murray.
“ You are very honest in stating all the draw-backs,
Miss Lawrence,” he said, with his own peculiar smile.
“ I think it is hardly necessary to depreciate your w-ares
in that fashion. People can make these discoveries for


themselves, you know, before concluding a bargain, and
decide for themselves, too, how far they are worth con-
sidering. But perhaps it would be just as well to be
honest with each other in another way also. Are you
wondering, in light of past experiences, whether you and
I can live in peace under the same roof ? If you are
willing to make the experiment, I assure you I am.”
Nelly’s cheeks were red again, and she was afraid that
she must have been rather rude.
“ 0 Mr. Murray,” she began, and did not know how to go
on. “It is very good of you,” she could only repeat; and
then she managed to add, “If you do come to us, I’ll
do my best to make you very comfortable.”
“ Then I think we shall be able to arrange matters.
When can I see Mrs. Lawrence ? Would Tuesday after-
noon about five o’clock be a convenient hour for her ? ”
“Yes, I am sure it would,” Nellv answered: and then
7 «/ *
two other people, old acquaintances of hers, came into
the carriage, and Mr. Murray at once unfolded his news-
paper.
But as he opened the door for her again at the Elstern-
wick station, he took' care to say that he would make a
point of calling on Tuesday.
“ And I haven’t given him the address, or told him
how to find the house,” Nelly reflected, with a start
of dismay. “He didn’t ask either, and lam "lad he
didn’t, with these inquisitive old cats in the carriage.
M ouldn’t they have wanted to know all about it ? Per-
haps he thought of that; it’s queer how he sometimes
UOOO) g


seems to read people’s thoughts. I never liked him so
much in my life, though, and he was awfully kind.
Perhaps Susie’s right about him after all. What will
Trix say when she hears, especially if he does come to
live with us ? I wonder how he’ll find his way on
Tuesday; I suppose he’ll ask Miss Lorraine.”
In the carriage she had left, the two ladies were busily
discussing her.
“ I do feel sorry for that girl,” Mrs. Smith remarked to
her daughter; but there was no particular sign of sorrow
either in her voice or in her face. “ I expect they’ve lost
every penny they had. She’ll have to go out as a gov-
erness, you’ll see, and she won’t like that, after the way
she’s been brought up. As for that poor, delicate creature,
Mrs. Lawrence, I’m sure I don’t know what’s going to
become of her. I shouldn’t be surprised, Meta, if she never
held up her head again.”
“ She can’t be much good to them just now, at any rate.
She never seems to he out of her room.”
“ No; it’s a pity she doesn’t rouse herself a little, and
think what she’s going to do. She can’t go on like that
much longer, and she can’t let a chit of a girl have the
management of everything. Nelly’s just a little too ready
to take things upon her, too. I’ll not forget in a hurry
how she kept me out of her mother’s bedroom the last
time I was in the house.”
“ Nelly Lawrence always did like her own way,” Meta
responded.
“ Oh, well, she’ll have to do without it now pretty often.


She’s been spoiled all her life, and that’s the truth, but
she’ll soon find out what the world’s made of. It will do
them all good to have a lesson.”
With this comfortable conclusion Mrs. Smith dismissed
the subject, and never guessed how she had roused Mr.
Murray s indignation. He had heard almost every word
she had said, and his heart was filled with a great pity for
Nelly. He was going through a great sorrow himself,
and that had already softened him. Besides, he had
always had more of the milk of human kindness in his
nature than most of his pupils would have given him credit
for. He had done an impulsive thing this afternoon which
was contrary to his usual custom, but he was not disposed
to regret it. It was quite true that he wished to give up
his house; to live there alone was proving intolerable. He
had decided to leave the neighbourhood, too. and he had a
real love for the sea, but he had not intended to go so far
out of town, and the Lawrences’ household was not quite
the sort of home which he had been looking for.
“There will be inconveniences,” he had told himself
while Nelly was being questioned by Mrs. Smith. “I have
no doubt that I could be more comfortable elsewhere, but
what does it really matter ? All places will be much alike
to me now, and I may as well go where my money will be
welcome, even if lam not. I daresay I have been hard on
the girl sometimes, and I should like to give her a helping
hand now. She is evidently bearing her troubles bravely,
I hardly gave her credit for so much courage and common
sense/’


Mrs. Smith’s remarks confirmed his determination to be
the Lawrences’ first boarder.
On Tuesday afternoon he called accordingly, and was
received by both mother and daughter. Poor Mrs. Lawrence
was very nervous ; her old life had been so completely over-
turned that she hardly knew how to bear herself in those
trying times. She had been recalling all her past experi-
ences of boarding-houses; she had been racking her brains
to decide on a sum which would not be too much to ask
from Mr. Murray and yet not too little. Her sons had
exhorted her, or rather Nelly for her, to make a distinct
and business-like bargain—to know exactly what they were
expected to do and what they were not. That might save
a great deal of trouble in the long-run, they said.
“And don’t be too soft, mother,” Tom adjured her.
“ That’s the difficulty with you ; you’re always apt to be too
soft with people. It will be his business to get all he can
out of you, and you must look after your own interests.
Don’t be too anxious, either, and make him think he’s
doing you a favour by coming. He’s sure to take advan-
tage of you if you put it like that.”
“ Really, Tom, you do say horrid things about people,”
said his sister indignantly. “ I wouldn’t have your nasty,
suspicious mind for anything.”
“ Don’t be so silly, Nell. As usual, you don’t know
what you’re talking about. I understand the world a
little better than you, my dear, though perhaps you mayn’t
think so. Besides, you’ve never given us a very flattering
picture of Mr. Murray. As far as I can remember, you


haven't had a good word to say of him, so such remarks
come rather strangely from you. Only, do take care
what you’re about,” he added, struck by a new fear.
“Do behave decently to him, Nell, however little you
like him. Remember we’ve got to get boarders somehow,
and try to think of other people besides yourself.”
“ Tom, you are unfair; I do think you are horribly
mean. Do you suppose I don’t understand as well as you
do, and do you suppose I’m going to be rude to a man in
mother’s own drawing-room ? You’d better come home
and see him yourself, if you’re so much afraid well go
wrong.”
“ Children, children, don’t quarrel, please,” said Mrs.
Lawrence plaintively. “I am sure we have no need to do
that; there is trouble enough without. Indeed, Tom, Ido
wish you could manage to come home in time. I have no
head for business, you know, and Nelly, poor child, is so
young.”
•/ O
“ She is old enough to be a help to you, mother, and she
ought to be. You will have that sort of thing to do pretty
often, I hope, and you may as well make a beginning.
Anyhow, I have some reading to do at the library, and I
can’t be home till after six.”
Then he had given some more parting directions, and
his mother had rung the changes on them all through the
day, and worked herself into a state of nervous misery
before Mr. Murray did appear; so Nelly had to feign a
calmness which she did not feel, and make most of the
arrangements on her own responsibility. She was very


grave, very proper, and very business-like—so much so,
indeed, as to astonish Mr. Murray afresh.
He had keen eyes, and he saw more than most people
suspected. He gathered a good deal of family history
during the half-hour he spent with the Lawrences; he
realized that the daughter and sister had a heavy burden
to carry. His respect for her increased with every sentence
she uttered, and even had the plans she proposed seemed
much less satisfactory, he would have accepted them with-
out objection. He was charmed with the view, with the
garden and the veranda, with the large airy bedroom that
was to be allotted to him, and the smaller room opening off
it which could be transformed into a study. He was not
at all exacting in his requirements, and he made them
known so pleasantly and courteously that Nelly found the
whole business infinitely less disagreeable than she had
expected.
“If I had never seen him before,” she said to herself,
“ I should think him as nice a boarder as any we could
get. He’s really awfully considerate. Ido hope he’s not
doing it all because he’s sorry for us.”
It was a great pity that the thought had occurred to
her, because it poisoned a good deal of her satisfaction in
the prospect of earning money.


CHAPTER VI.
THE TROUBLES OF A LANDLADY
TWO years is a long time, and a great deal may happen
in it. The three girls, who had been so much to-
gether during their school days, went through a good many
different experiences before they met again. Things were
rather unequally divided in this world, Nelly sometimes
thought, as she read Trix’s letters. She did not grudge
her friend any pleasure or excitement —she was not the sort
of erirl to do that—but she did wish that some of these
good things would come her way. Her own life was far
from an easy one ; she grew utterly tired of it sometimes,
and almost lost all courage when she allowed herself to
look forward. For matters did not improve much with
the Lawrences, and “ keeping boarders ” turned out quite
as unpleasant an occupation as Nelly had expected.
This was not in any degree Mr. Murray’s fault; no
one could have given less trouble than he. Nevertheless, his
presence in the house was a continual irritation to her.
She could not get rid of the thought that he had come to
them as a favour, and she hated having to take favours
from Mr. Murray. She did not suggest that idea, though, to


the others, and it did not seem to occur to them. Her
mother was pleased with Mr. Murray from the outset;
that first interview had stamped him in her mind as “very
gentlemanly and considerate.” Her brothers had been glad
to hear that he was coming to them, though they had set
him down as “ a stick ” as soon as they saw him. But
then they seldom did see him except at meals, and almost
forgot at times that he was in the house. It seemed to
o
them only a matter of course that any trouble taken for
boarders should devolve upon the women of the family.
Nelly was often tempted to think in those days that
“ the boys ” were far more selfish than she had ever sup-
posed. She tried to make allowances for them ; to remind
herself that they were doing their best to earn money,
and meeting with continual disappointment; that they were
for ever chafing against their changed circumstances, and
O O O '
discovering day by day that poverty was even more irk-
some than they had expected it to be. But then she could
not but remember that she had these things to put up with
also, and that they were quite as hard for her as for them.
Why could not her brothers see it sometimes, and give up
talking to her as if she had nothing to bear and nothing
o o o
to do without i
By degrees, as the weeks went on, the family prospects
brightened a little. Torn got some teaching to do in a
boys’ school near them, chiefly through Mr. Murray’s
influence. He did not like the work, he thought the
salary almost insultingly small, and he was very angry
with his sister for reminding him that something was


always better than nothing. Charlie, after a month of
waiting, fopnd a place in a warehouse, and earned enough
money at first to pay his railway fares. Percy, who had
always been the fine gentleman of the family, was offered
a post in a bookseller’s shop, and had to bring himself to
accept it. It cost him a terrible struggle to stay there,
and he felt acutely what he chose to consider the degrada-
tion of his position. He found it wise to be obliging and
cheerful during working hours, but he revenged himself by
being as disagreeable as possible after them. Willie was a
greater trial still to his sister. He was fit for nothing but
a country life, and it was almost a year before he found
what would suit him. He lived on at home, sometimes
walking into town to answer an advertisement, sometimes
O '
doing a day’s work in the garden, sometimes lying in bed
till noon, or spending hours on the drawing-room sofa.
He grumbled continually about his enforced idleness, but
he seldom put himself to the trouble of helping Nelly, or
making her work a little lighter where he was concerned.
O O
When she took to ironing her brothers’ collars, no one
abused her first attempts more vehemently" than Willie;
and yet he grew so slovenly in his dress that she was often
ashamed to see him at table. She lost patience altogether
sometimes, and then there would be a quarrel, and their
mother would cry-, and the other boy's would lecture them
both, and the poor little housekeeper would think herself
the worst-used girl in the world.
She got other boarders, too, and they' were not so easy to
please as Mr. Murray. There was a dyspeptic old gentle-


man who drove Mary to desperation with his fads and
fancies; there was a younger man who made vulgar jokes,
and set Nelly s teeth on edge; there was a younger still,
who chose to consider himself in love with her, waylaid
her at all sorts of inconvenient times, and finally went off
to Coolgardie, leaving a fortnight’s board unpaid.
It was not easy to cater for so many people, and Nelly
often made mistakes which a more experienced housewife
would have avoided. Sometimes she found that one week’s
expenses were greater than she could afford, and then she
would take a penurious fit for the next. Her brothers
would grumble at her economies, her boarders would talk
of going, and she would fly to the opposite extreme, and
the round had to be gone through again. Sometimes she
had to do some of the cooking, and her first attempts were
scarcely successful. Sometimes she forgot things which
o o
she should have remembered, and mislaid other things
when they were specially wanted. Sometimes every
tradesman she dealt with seemed to unite in a conspiracy
to bother her, and the rain took a perverse delight in
coming down upon washing days and spoiling all her
plans for the week. She swept, and dusted, and made
beds, and washed dishes until she gave up all hopes of
doing anything else for the rest of her life. She seldom
found time to touch a piano ; she locked all her painting
materials away, and tried to forget their existence. She
made her own frocks, and trimmed her own hats: but she
had sometimes to sit up half the night to do it. Her
friends came to see her, and sent her invitations; but she


often wished that they would leave her alone. She was
too busy and too poor to go anywhere or do anything.
Mrs. Lawrence w T as, of course, the nominal mistress of
the house, and her presence made such an establishment
possible. She was very sorry for her daughter, and very
anxious to help her in any and every way. But, through
no fault of her own, she was sometimes an added burden.
She had not much more experience than Nelly herself;
she had far less courage and energy. She was often ill,
and unable to leave her bedroom. Her love and gratitude
O
were very sweet and consoling; but the daughter always
tried to keep her cares to herself, and not to worry the
mother.
However, as Nelly sometimes told Susie, she had three
great consolations; and after a while she was inclined to
add a fourth to the list. To begin with, there was Susie
herself, to whom she could write long letters, which served
as a safety-valve. She wrote to Trix also, but Trix was
far away, and it seemed a shame to tell her a dismal tale.
Susie was close at hand, and equally sympathetic. Nelly
did not write to her any the less freely because she knew
that Susie shared those letters with her aunt. Miss Snow
sometimes inspired the answers that were sent; she often
put in a message from herself, and she always gave Nelly
the warmest of welcomes to Laburnum Cottage. She gave
her a great deal of helpful advice as well and sympathetic
encouragement. Nelly looked forward to a talk with her
as one of the chief pleasures of her visits; but she seemed
to consider Miss Snow as somehow part of Susie, and


included them both under the head of her greatest
comfort.
Next to them she put Mary, without whom she could
scarcely have managed at all. Mary had been housemaid
before, but she was everything now by turns, as the needs
of the household required it. She was only some dozen
years older than her young mistress, and equally full of
energy. She was never frightened by anything; she
never seemed to grow tired or discouraged. She brought
o 00
Nelly safely through many a difficulty; she was a most
invaluable person in almost every respect.
Then there was Fred, the youngest of the family, who
was still at school and working hard to pass matriculation,
but who managed, nevertheless, to spare some time and
thought for his sister. He did odd jobs for her at odd
times. He carried out her commissions at one or two
shops which he passed on his way to school; he brushed
boots cheerfully, and was not above cleaning knives or
lighting fires. He was very sympathetic, too, at times,
though he generally showed it by deeds and not by words.
Nelly was quite ready to admit that the former was the
better way, but she would have liked the other as well.
She had always thought her youngest brother rather a
curious, old-fashioned kind of boy; she found now that
he had a wisdom beyond his years, and she got into the
habit of consulting him in many of her perplexities. Even
on the subject of puddings and breakfast dishes he seemed
to have some sensible suggestions to make. As for his
occasional—very occasional—remarks of “ Poor old girl! it’s


hard lines for you,” or, “ I say, Nell, you’re a regular
brick 1 ” they were more soothing and gratifying than she
could have managed to tell him.
But before the year was half over, Nelly began to dis-
cover that she had another friend in the house—some-
body, too, who took every opportunity of being friendly.
She had never felt the least desire to quarrel with
Mr. Murray since he had come to live with them, but
she had tried to have as little to do with him as possible.
It was true that he was always pleasant and considerate
—more so than she would once have believed he could be;
but she felt ill at ease when she was in the same room
with him, and perfectly certain that none of her failures
ever escaped his notice. She was astonished to find that
he was so easily satisfied; she had expected him to be
quite as exacting about his meals as he had been about
his pupils’ work. Then she would wonder afresh whether
he were staying out of charity, and feel as if she could
«/ O v
not bear to see him or do anything for him again. And
v o o
when he offered to lend her books, or tried to get up a
conversation, she chose to believe that he was playing the
schoolmaster still, and resented it angrily.
O v
Sometimes, indeed, she was seized with compunction :
she would remember that he was reallv very kind, and
%/ %/ '
that her mother liked him ; or she would look at his wife’s
photograph when she was dusting his study, and think
that he must be very unhappy and lonely. Then she
would take even more trouble than usual to make him
comfortable, but she was still glad that she saw so little


of him. He had his time fully occupied. He taught in
several schools; he had a number of private pupils. He
spent his evenings in reading and writing, and he took
long walks on Saturday afternoons. He went to church
twice on Sundays—a thing which nobody else in the house
thought of doing; and, as if he had not teaching enough
during the week, he took a class at a mission school also.
So there was little need for Nelly’s crossing his path.
Gradually, however, she found that her mother and he
had a good deal to say to each other. Mrs. Lawrence had
a bad attack of influenza that winter, which left her weak
and depressed. She spent her mornings in bed, and her
afternoons in the drawing-room. She was generally alone
when Mr. Murray came home from his day’s work. So he
fell into the habit of paying her a visit, and spending a
little time by her sofa. He sometimes brought her a new
book, and sometimes a spray of flowers. He had always
something cheerful to say, and seemed to bring a breath
from the outside world into her narrowed life. Mrs. Law-
rence never found him cynical or sarcastic. She talked of
him to her daughter more approvingly than ever, and
Nelly began to be really grateful to him for his attentions
to her mother. She felt that she would like to do some-
thing to show it; and, with this end in view, she thawed
a good deal in her manner towards him. She talked to
him more at table, and got into the way of asking ques-
tions about the girls at Stormont House. He seemed
quite pleased to tell her all that he could, and surprised
her so much by the information which he brought home


that she sometimes wondered whether he had collected it
for her benefit. At last he came upon her one evening
crying over her account books, and from that time their
friendship dated.
“He was just as nice as he could be,” Nelly told Susie
afterwards. “ I had got into such a muddle, and made a
lot of utterly stupid mistakes. I could hardly believe I
had been such an idiot when he showed me where I had
gone wrong. If any one had brought him a sum worked
like that at school, I don’t know what he would have said.
But he seemed to understand that it wasn’t a case of
figures v ith me any longer; it was one of pounds,
shillings, and pence in stern and sad reality. He gave
me quite a lesson in book-keeping, Susie, and you may
imagine I was glad to get it. He was awfully kind
altogether; I never shall forget it as long as I live.
\ou weie quite right, I believe, when you used to sav
that Mr. Murray in school and Mr. Murray out of it were
two different persons.”
\ es, I always thought the girls would like him better
if they knew him better,” Susie answered. “ I don’t mean
that I don’t think it’s chiefly his own fault that he’s so
unpopular, for he has a horrid manner.”
“ Not half 80 as we made out,” said Nelly, almost
indignantly. ‘ I daresay we nearty drove him crazy some-
times. I’m sure I always did my best to make his life a
misery. If we had worried other people in the same wa} 1 -,
Perhaps theyd have had horrid manners too—even Miss
Lorraine herself. Oh, you may stare if you like, Susie,


my dear; I’m finding out by sad experience that it’s
precious hard work not to fly at people and give them
a piece of your mind when they worry you all day long.
And what’s more, I’m going to write to Trix to-night, and
take back every word I ever said against Mr. Murray, as I
hereby do now to you.”
“ Very well,” said Susie, smiling, and finding it a little
difficult to believe her own ears. “ I’m very glad to hear
it, Nell, and I’m sure she won’t be sorry. What a lovely
time she has been having in London ! I suppose they are
in Scotland now.”
“ Yes, they must be, I should think. She said they had
any number of visits to make, and her father expected to
get a lot of shooting. Doesn’t it make your mouth water
sometimes to hear all about it ? ”
“The shooting, for instance?” asked Susie. “No; I
don’t think I should like that particularly. I never saw
a gun except in a shop window; and I can’t see where
the pleasure of killing creatures comes in. A man might
as well be a butcher at once.”
Nelly opened her eyes to their widest extent.
“ Susie Snow, you do say queer things sometimes. I
don’t know what my brothers would think if they heard
you. What are some creatures good for except to be
killed, I wonder ? Anyhow, I didn’t mean that I han-
kered after shooting them, and I don’t suppose Trix does
either. But haven’t you read all sorts of lovely stories
about Scotch and English country houses, and all the fun
people have in them ? Oh dear me, it must be perfectly


delightful! I wish I were in Trix’s shoes, and yet I
wouldn’t have her out of them for anything.”
“ That’s exactly what I feel,” Susie said, with an an-
swering sigh. “ I don’t care particularly about country
houses, but I think I’d give ten years of my life to see
the things that Trix has seen. Just think of her having
been in Rome, and Florence, and Naples, and Paris—the
girl who used to go to school with us and sleep in the
same bedroom ! Think of her looking at Raphael’s pic-
tures and walking about in the Forum ! And think of
her in Westminster Abbey, too, and standing beside
Browning’s grave ! ”
“ And think of her going to the Tower, and seeing the
crown and the royal jewels; and being presented at
court, and actually kissing the Queen’s hand; and riding-
in Rotten Row, and looking at princesses and duchesses,
and any number of other grandees! Think of all the
balls she s been at, and all the shops she’s been in, and
all the people she’s met, and all the lovely frocks she
must have had, though she doesn’t say much about them !
That’s the sort of thing I should care about most. I like
living people a great deal better than dead ones, and
Mr. Murray sickened me of Browning. There, I beg his
O ' o
pardon; I beg both their pardons. I forgot. I apologize ;
so you needn’t laugh, Susie. I suppose it was my own
fault that I couldn’t stand those lectures on English
literature. I think there must be something wantino-
O O
in my composition, because I can’t appreciate all these
wonderful people It’s very good of you to put up with
(1000) -


rae, Susie, for all the brains I ever had are ex-
O 5
hausted with ordering dinners. I wonder how you can
come down to my level.”
“Nelly, dont talk like that,” cried Susie quickly. “I
come down to your level! I don’t believe I could get
up to it. I think it’s wonderful how many things
you have done this year; you often make me feel
ashamed of myself. Trix and I are both enjoying our-
selves in our own ways; and you are keeping a home
together, and taking care of your mother, and doing
as cheerfully as possible a hundred things that you hate.
I couldn’t do it in your place, I know. Why, there
was the giving up of your own room even! If I had
to turn out of this dear little bedroom of mine and co
into Aunt Sarah’s, I should feel it terribly hard lines,
and wonder how I could get on at all.”
“ Oh, that’s different! You’re different; you do your
work in this room too. There’s not a bit of comparison.
Besides, it wasn’t only to give Mr. Tate the room that
I turned out, but because the Miitterchen had to have
some one with her at night. And you needn’t imagine
I was so virtuous either. I was about as cross as I
could be; and I am still, whenever I see the way he
is knocking my things about. No, I’m not a bit of
a saint, or a heroine either, Susie; so you needn’t sup-
pose it. I don’t see myself how you could, considering
I worry your life out with my grumbles.”
“ I won’t tell you what I suppose, then, or what I
know either. 111 only tell you what your mother thinks


about the matter, and what Miss Lorraine said to me
yesterday. Your mother told me, the last time I saw
her, that you were the greatest possible help and comfort;
she did not know what would have become of them all
without you. And I can give you Miss Lorraine’s exact
words if you like. ‘I am proud of Nelly Lawrence,’
she said, when we were talking about you. ‘ I always
knew she had the making of a fine woman in her, and
now she has proved it.’ So, Miss Nelly, perhaps you
can understand why I am proud of being your friend.”
Nelly’s cheeks had flushed, and there was a mist in
her eyes before Susie had finished speaking. She had
been sitting coiled up like a kitten on the foot of the
bed, but she sprang to her feet now and went over to
the window. She stood for nearly a minute looking
out across Miss Snow’s daffodils before she turned back
to her friend.
“ You are a goose, Susie,” she said, “and Miss Lorraine’s
another, and mother, the darling, is the biggest of the
three. What else should I do, I should like to know,
but try to be a comfort to her ? I would be a wretch
if I didn t. lam a wretch as it is sometimes; for I
get so utterly cross, and discontented, and diso-usted
with e\ erybody all round, and I do the silliest things
O *
and waste money, and make any number of mistakes.
Its all rubbish to pretend I’m a success, when I know
all the time I m a dismal failure. Aou ask the boys
what they think about the matter. Mother’s a saint
herself, and she puts on rose-coloured spectacles when


she looks at me. She’s been talking to Miss Lorraine,
I suppose, as well as to you. And as for you, Susie,
can’t you understand you’re worth any two of me, and
always were, and always will be ? I’ve been proud to
be your friend ever since that first quarter that you
came to school, and I’ve often wondered how you could
be friends with me. Oh, I can’t talk about it; but
you know I owe you more than I can tell, even if it
were only for the w r ay you’ve helped me all this year.
You can say what you like about my getting on well.
I suppose you do really think it, and I can’t be sorry;
but I just wish you would remember this—l never
could have managed it at all without you. You seemed
to put new heart into me often, you and your aunt.
I do think she’s the best woman that I ever came
across. O Susie, do you suppose she would come and see
mother some day ? I know they’ve never called, but
I should like them to know each other; and poor mother
doesn’t have many visitors now.”
“I am sure she would. I’ll ask her; or it would
be better still if you did.”
Then Susie came over to the window too, and put
her arm round her friend’s waist.
“Nell, don’t talk nonsense,” she said softly. “It is
nonsense; and you are not to say such things to me.
I know what you are and what you’re doing better, I
believe, than you can know yourself. And if it is hard
work, and if you do hate it, and feel you are making
a lot of mistakes, I think it’s all the braver of you to


go on. I’m sure many a soldier has won the Victoria
Cross for less. I don’t feel so sorry for people, what-
ever it costs them, who do grand, glorious, difficult
things in the face of all the world. I don’t feel so
much admiration for them either, as for the people who
are always making mistakes, and always trying to go
on again, and never getting much credit for it, from
themselves or anybody else. I don’t mean that you are
one of them exactly, but you may feel very like it
sometimes.”
“Never when I’m with you,” said Nelly, laughing a
little unsteadily. “ I get credit enough then, in all
conscience, for all the good I’ve ever done. Now, Susie,
we’ve had nothing but my affairs ever since I came
into this room. \ou might as well tell me about your
own for a change.”
O
Susie’s affairs were very engrossing just then. She
was drawing near the end of her first year at the uni-
versity. She had justified her friends’ hopes so far as
she had gone; she delighted in her work, and was
daily growing more absorbed in it. She sometimes felt
as if she had never really lived before, even when she
was at Stormont House. She dreaded the thought of
the time when her three years’ course would be finished.
She had made a position for herself already, and she
was a power among the women students as she never
had been among her school-fellows. She was learning
to assert herself, to set a higher value on her own
opinions, and to hold them more tenaciously. She did


not make many intimate friends at the university, but
in a quiet way she was very popular. She was sure of
a “ pass,” as every one agreed; but there was a certain
exhibition on which she had set her heart, and she almost
felt she would have lived in vain if she did not get it.
One of the cleverest men at one of the colleges was her
chief opponent, and she was straining every nerve to
beat him, for her own sake, for Miss Lorraine’s, and for
the credit of her sex as well.
Miss Snow was sometimes a little anxious about her
niece, and a little mystified too. She was afraid that
Susie was learning to worship intellect, to think that
there was nothing in the world so well worth having
as university honours—or rather, to be strictly correct,
the knowledge that had won them. She had never
understood her niece’s’ hunger for books, though she
O 7 O
had taught herself to sympathize with it. She still
thought it was rather unnatural for a girl to know so
many things, and she was more afraid than ever that
it might be a little unsettling. She was not unlike an
anxious mother-hen standing on the brink of a pond,
and watching a duckling she had nursed disport itself
on the water. She sometimes feared that Susie’s head
had been a little turned by her success in her strange
surroundings; but she could still believe that Susie’s
heart was in its right place, and was comforted ac-
cordingly.


CHAPTER VII
IN TWO YEARS' TIME .
P' IME flies fast when people are busy, when every
day and almost every hour has its own special
duty. Two years had seemed interminable when they
were still in the future. The three friends could hardly
believe that they would still be their old selves at the
end of such a period—so many things were sure to
happen, so many others might. It was almost incredible
that the old life could be taken up again where it had
been broken ofi'.
To some extent they were right. There were changes,
but they came by degrees, and nobody was altered beyond
recognition. The years that had seemed so long to look
forward to passed more rapidly than any one had expected.
As a matter of fact, the Beresfords were not away for
two years. They came back—partly on account of
business matters, partly because they had grown tired
of travelling—three months earlier than they had at
one time intended. And Susie and Nelly were both
astonished to find that the long separation was so nearly
over, and that Irix would be with them so soon.


Susie had had a brilliantly-successful year. She had
done all she had hoped to do; she had failed in nothing
she undertook. She was a much more important person
now than she had been when Trix went away, and she
was modestly conscious of the fact. She had gauged
her own powers, and she knew that in her own line
there were few things which she could not do. In
other directions she had no desire at all for distinction.
Her thirst for knowledge had grown as it was satisfied ;
o o *
she hoped to spend her life in learning, and in teaching
others. Her manner was more assured; her confidence
in herself had increased; her old nervous shyness seldom
troubled her. She worked hard, but not unwisely;
and it was exactly the sort of work which she would
have chosen. She was very happy in it, as all who
knew her could see.
Xelly had grown and developed too, but in a different
way. She was quite a capable housewife now; she
had far fewer mistakes to lament. She might have
O
forgotten all the Euclid she had ever learned, but her
accounts were always in excellent order. She could
scarcely have construed a line of Cfesar, but she was a
capital judge of mutton and beef. Her French had
grown decidedly rusty, but her puddings and pastry
were seldom failures. She had hardly looked at a paint-
brush, she seldom touched her piano ; but she had become
an adept at patching and darning. She had practised
the art of saving money and spending it to the best
advantage, until her proficiency surprised herself as well


as other people. She had grown quite used to her re-
sponsible position, and she found a great many things
to enjoy in it. Her brothers told her that she liked to
“ boss ” everybody, and she could not but admit that
there was truth in the charge. It did give her sfreat
o O O
satisfaction to manage things, to feel herself at the head
of affairs, to keep the wheels of the household moving
smoothly, to make sixpence do the work of ninepence.
She was growing proud of her powers, and sometimes
inclined to think that she was very decidedly the right
person in the right place. Some of her old friends pro-
fessed to be greatly surprised at the change in her.
“\ou will hardly know Nelly Lawrence,” one of them
wrote to Trix ; “ she has grown as sober as a judge and
as steady as old Time. The last day I went to see her
she took me with her to do her marketing. You should
have heard her bargaining over cabbages, and she knew to
a halfpenny the proper price of potatoes. It astonishes
me to remember that at school she was never supposed to
have any head for mathematics. Perhaps living in the
same house with Mr. Murray has had a beneficial effect
upon her. Are you not surprised that the arrangement
has gone on so long ? But I really do not think that
Nelly could do anything so undignified now as quarrel
with any one.”
On the whole, things were better with the Lawrences
now than they had been since their great calamity. Mrs.
Lawrence was rather stronger; the boys were all earning
something; a very little of the lost money had come back


to them ; they had three boarders, and though they would
have liked two others as well, they felt that they had
no right to grumble.
Mr. Murray was with them still, and on excellent
terms with them all. Mrs. Lawrence believed in him
thoroughly; Nelly and he were excellent friends, and
only quarrelled for the sake of amusement. The boys
thought him a most satisfactory member of the household,
and Fred was full of gratitude towards him. Fred had
left school last Christmas, and had found less difficulty
than his brothers in getting emploj’ment. He had felt
it a great privation, though, to leave school and go into
business; and Mr. Murray had mapped out a course of
reading for him, lent him the books that were necessary,
encouraged him to join classes at the Working Men’s
College, and had often given him a little coaching in
the evening. Mr. Murray had never liked boys before—
even when he was a boy himself—but he took a great
fancy to Nelly’s younger brother. Nelly was grateful to
him for it, just as she was for his kindness to her mother.
Meanwhile the two girls who stayed at home had
heard regularly from the other girl who was travelling
all over Europe. Trix had been very good and very
mindful of them; one or other had a letter by almost
every mail. No matter where she was or what she was
doing, she never forgot them. Her letters were long, too,
and full of information; she had the art of telling a story,
and bringing before the eyes of her correspondents a pic-
ture of what she had seen. r lhen she had seen so many


things, and met with so many interesting people. She
had found herself in a large circle of relations; she had
done a good deal of the country-house visiting which
Nelly thought must be so delightful. She had gone for
a yachting cruise along the west coast of Scotland, and
a driving tour in the lake country of England. She had
been in Ireland also, and sent glowing; accounts of its
3 O o
beauties. She had paid two visits to Paris, and written
long descriptions of the shops and boulevards to Nelly,
and of the Louvre and Versailles to Susie. She had spent
half a winter in the Riviera, and had had a glimpse of
Brittany. She had been at Bruges, and had thought of
«/ O ' o
Longfellow" there; she had seen Nuremberg, and remem-
bered Hans Sachs and Albrecht Diirer. She had sailed
down the Rhine, and wrote of it in a sort of rapture.
She had spent days in Dresden, and hours before the
Sistine Madonna. She had gone to Switzerland, and her
letters had brought to her friends a wonderful vision of
mountain peaks and smiling lakes, glaciers and snow Melds,
and glorious sunrises. She had been in Norway, too, and
she wrote of fiords, and waterfalls, churches and stolcars,
Thorwaldsen’s statues and Lapp encampments. She had
expected to see something of Egypt on her way back to
Melbourne ; then she had written that they had suddenly
changed their plans, and were coming home as quickly and
as directly as they could.
<£ Now that we have made up our minds, we are quite
delighted,” she said in her letter to Susie. “ I hardly
realized that I was home-sick before, but now I know it.


I can’t tell you how much I have enjoyed myself; it has
been even better than my expectations. There are some
things that you simply cannot imagine, Susie, until you
see them. But I shall be delighted to be back in my own
country. I don’t feel as if even the Nile and the Pyramids
were worth losing three extra months in Australia for.
Anyhow, Egypt will keep till next time, and I am crazy
to see you all. Harry Stevenson is quite right: there is
no place in the world like Australia ; and I would not have
my home anywhere else for a great deal. By the way,
Susie, we must carry out our plan of a visit to * The
Willows ’ this Christmas. He must be reminded of his
invitation, and Aunt May will be charmed to have us.
You will need a holiday badly after all your hard work,
and poor Nell has not had one for a long time. I hope
she will be able to get away. Ask her to try her very
hardest, and to begin trying now, so that there may be
more chance of succeeding. Don’t think me very cool to
ask you to other people’s houses in this fashion. Aunt
May will really be delighted to have you both ; and, in
any case, she won’t get me without one or other of you.
Only think of all the arrears of talk we have to make up !
Oh, isn’t it glorious to think that we shall all be together
so soon—the ‘ Leaves of the Trefoil ’ united once more ?
What a meeting we shall have, and what a rate we shall
chatter at! ”
Susie got this letter at mid-day, one Wednesday in
November. Trix had started already; she was at that
very moment on her way home. It was almost impossible


to believe ; and vet, as Susie told herself, it was gloriously
and delightfully true. She had been feeling rather un-
happy that morning. The strain of work was over for
the year, and time hung heavy on her hands. She missed
her usual occupations; she was not much inclined to help
her aunt in making jam. She had little interest even in
her summer dresses. She was not exactly overworked,
but she was tired, and flat, and dull; there was no doubt
that she did need a holiday. She had had a rest for the
last few days, but she would have been the better of a
little more recreation.
This news from Trix seemed to put a different aspect
on life. She read the letter in gleeful tones to her aunt,
then she made up her mind to pay Xelly a visit at once.
She had not seen her friend since before the examinations,
and they must lose no time in discussing this new develop-
ment. It was just possible, though not very likely, that
Nelly had not heard of it yet. It was Susie’s week for a
letter, and these long epistles were always understood to
be common property. In any case, it was Susie’s duty, as
much as her pleasure, to go down to Elsternwick without
loss of time.
She looked round her bedroom as she dressed, and she
thought how many mementoes of her friends it contained.
She was very fond of that little chamber. She had spent
many a happy hour there; it was study as well as bed-
room to her. Her bookcase filled one end of it; her
v riting-table stood near the window. It was not a
luxurious room, but everything in it was daintily neat,


from the white curtains of the bed to the braided mats
on the toilet-table. A group of women students, taken in
front of their rooms, hung upon one wall; facing it was
a photograph of the boarders at Stormont House. There
was a print of a Madonna, which Trix had sent her from
Florence; and beside it a sketch of a Breton church, which
was Trix’s own handiwork. Tire box from which she took
her gloves, and the scented sachet where she kept her
handkerchiefs, had both been embroidered for her by Nelly.
The photographs of her two friends stood on a bracket
opposite to her bed ; they were the first things she saw
when she opened her eyes in the morning. She stood for
a moment to look at them now, and wondered what Trix
would be like when thev saw her again. Then, as she
•s o
passed her looking-glass, she stopped short suddenly, and
wondered whether Trix would see much change in those
O
who had stayed at home.
On the whole, Susie was glad to think there was some
change in her appearance, and that it was for the better
and not for the worse. She was conscious that she was
looking her best this afternoon, and that the big black hat
o c
which Xelly had chosen for her suited her better than
anything she had worn for many a day. She had
%> O •/ J
grumbled a little at the length of time that had been
o o
spent in choosing it; she had declared that there was no
satisfying some people, and that, for her part, she had
something better to do with her afternoons than spending
them in milliners’ shops. But she was willing now to
admit that the result had repaid the trouble. Her dress


was becoming too, though it was not in the latest fashion
—a summer tweed of the shade of green that went best
with her pale complexion. No, she was not pretty—she
always acknowledged that to herself; and the fact did not
trouble her much—she had far more important things to
think of. But it was certainly pleasant to feel that she
was not as plain as she had been.
As she walked up from the Elsternwick station to the
Lawrences’ house, she could not help recalling the last day
that Trix and she had been there together. What a
number of changes there had been in Nelly’s life ! Trix
had spoken of the “ Leaves of the Trefoil,” and Susie had
fastened her collar to-day with the brooch of the order.
It had sometimes seemed to her rather a silly, school-
girlish sort of proceeding to make such an agreement as
theirs had been, yet she did not repent of her share in it.
Two years out of the five had almost gone; she wondered
' ery much whether the next three would brino - fewer
changes or more.
Mr, Murray was passing out at the gate as she reached
it, and he stopped for a minute or two to speak to her.
Outwardly there was no change at all in him, and yet
these two years had largely altered his life. Susie thought
of the day of his wife’s death, and of Nelly’s delight when
*/ O
she left school at being, as she believed, done with him
for ever. It was curious to remember these things now,
O *
as she shook hands with him in the sunshine outside the
Lawrences gate, and glanced at the rose in his button-
hole, v Inch had come from the Lawrences’ garden.


“ How do you do, Miss Snow ?” he said cheerfully. “ I
am gdad to see you have the good sense to be out of doors
on such a beautiful day. I hope you mean to take a
thorough holiday this vacation, and go out of town for
a while.”
“ Yes, I daresay I shall,” Susie answered, thinking of
Trix’s plan. “Do you know if Miss Lawrence is at home,
Mr. Murray, and do you know if she has heard the news ?
The Beresfords are coming back sooner than we had
expected.”
“So she has just told me. Yes ; she was in the garden
a minute ago, and in the seventh heaven of felicity also.
I suppose you will all three be equally delighted to meet
again. I hope Miss Beresford has made as good use of
the time as the two who stayed at home have. May I
congratulate you once more upon your new success ? Of
course your friends never expected anything else; still,
it was satisfactory to see that our expectations had been
realized.”
“ Thank you very much,” Susie said, with a smile and
a blush. “It was very good of you to write to me,
especially when you are as busy as you must be just now.
a ays feel that I owe a great deal of my success to
you, and to Miss Lorraine. How is she, Mr. Murray ?
I had a nice little note from her last week, and I have
been meaning to go to see her, but I have never managed
it yet.”
“ She is very well, and very proud of your exhibitions;
in fact, she wanted to give the whole school a holiday in


honour of them, but I persuaded her that we really could
not spare the time at present. When you take your
degree, I promise to make no objection. I should advise
you, though, to pay your visit as soon as you can. The
old lady is very feeble—l see a change in her whenever
we meet; and it is quite evident that you are a special
favourite of hers. If you can persuade Miss Lawrence to
accompany you, you will be doing a good action. It seems
to me that she gets very little chance of seeing her fellow-
creatures outside her own household. But lam keeping
you from her now, and that is unpardonable, so I had
better sav good-bye at once.”
J C 1 4/
Susie smiled more than once as she walked up to the
door. Mr. Murray’s opinion of Nelly seemed to have
changed as much as hers of him. What would Trix think
of that when she actually saw it ? Then Nelly appeared
at a window with a work-basket in her hand, saw her
visitor, dropped her basket, and the next moment was out
on the veranda.
“ Behold the reward of virtue ! ” she exclaimed dramat-
ically. “ Susie, I did want to go to see you this afternoon.
Mr. Murray has just been trying to persuade me that it
was my duty to do it, when I knew all the time it wasn’t.
And if I had gone, I should have missed you ; and as I
did stay, I shall have you, and get on with my darning as
well. Isn’t that a moral for a Sunday-school story ? ”
“ Quite,” Susie answered, laughing. “ Then, Nell, you
have heard from Trix ? ”
I should think I have ; not a lonsf letter—it was your
O 1/
Ciooo) 8


turn for that—but a little note to tell me the joyful news.
Isn’t it lovely ? Can you believe it yet ? I had to read
the letter through three times, to make sure that my eyes
hadn’t deceived me. Come in, Susie, and take off your
hat, though that really seems quite a pit} r when you look
so nice in it. Be sure you wear it, and that tweed too,
when you go to meet Trix. lam certain she will approve
of them both. By the way, lam actually going to have
a new frock again, and I’m not going to make it myself
either. It’s a blue crepon—such a pretty thing; I bought
it yesterday. I wish I had it here to show you. It will
be ready just in time to do honour to Miss Beresford.
That young lady herself will probably be a sight to see
in her Paris and London toilets. Is that a pair of the
gloves that she sent you from Naples ? I have some that
I haven’t put on yet; I don’t get through as many gloves
as I used to. What heaps of presents she has sent us, and
what long descriptions of everything she has seen! It’s
been almost as good as travelling ourselves, hasn’t it ?
Are you ready ? Then I think we might go out on the
veranda, if you don’t mind, and enjoy the sunshine.
Mary and I had the house to ourselves when you appeared.
Mrs. Williams has taken mother for a drive, and Mr. Murray
has just gone'out.”
“ Yes; I met him outside the gate,” Susie said, when
Nelly’s tongue had stopped at last. “He looked quite
smart and spring-like, I thought. Hasn’t he any teaching
to do this afternoon ? ”
“No, my dear; he has a holiday like you—happy


people that you are ! It’s his afternoon for the Grammar
School, and they have their sports to-day instead. Oh,
do you know, Tom is to have six hours a week there,
instead of four, next year, so that will mean a little more
salary for him. I’m getting awfully mercenaiy, Susie; I
always think of the main chance at once. Sit down and
make yourself comfortable. I can recommend that chair
with a clear conscience; it’s not one of the invalided set.
You’ll stay for dinner, of course ?”
“ If you will have me,” Susie replied, “ and let me get
away immediately after. Aunt Sarah is always nervous
about me when I am out after dark, though I try to
persuade her that I am quite able to take care of
myself.”
“ Tou’re a lucky girl to be taken care of by her. How
much beef-tea and jelly has she made you swallow lately ?
I’m sure she thought you were running a risk of brain
fever when I saw her last. \ou don’t look much like
it to-day, I must say. \ou have a colour in your cheeks
which is very becoming. I don’t know whether it’s due
to the heat, or whether all the congratulations you’ve o-ot
of late have left permanent blushes behind them. Be sure
you look just as you do to-day when you see Trix again,
and you’ll delight her heart.”
“ I m %ht say the same to you,” Susie answered, and
thought how pretty Nelly was this afternoon, and how
fresh that blouse still looked, though it had often been
worn at Stormont House. “ I’m glad you’ve got another
blue dress; that’s you’re colour, Nell—there’s no doubt


about it. Do you think we shall be able to go together to
meet Trix, as we went to see her off ? ”
“Not as we went then exactly,” Nelly said, with a
smile. “We were utterly miserable that day. I don’t
think I was ever more wretched all through the year
than I was on the morning she left, and that’s saying a
good deal. You and your aunt were awfully good to me,
Susie, though you had a bad headache, poor girl, and my
talk must have made it worse. Then I met Mr. Murray
on my way home, I remember; and I did hate telling him
that we wanted to get boarders. Wasn’t I taken aback,
too, when he offered to come himself! And ever since
then he’s been our ‘ stand-by,’ as the boys say —the one
boarder we’ve had who has hardly ever been a bother.
No, Susie, my love ; you need not stretch out your hands
towards these socks, for you won’t get any to darn.
You won’t find any needles there either, and I don’t
intend to lend you a thimble. But, if you like, you may
tell me what is in Trix’s letter, or read it to me instead if
you happen to have it in your pocket.”
“By the strangest of chances I have,” Susie answered.
“ It’s written from Devonshire; she was staying with that
old aunt of hers near Taunton.”
“ Oh, Lady Marshland. Yes, I know ;go on.”
“ No, not Lady Marshland; so you don’t
know. I don’t think her ladyship is an aunt either—l
suppose she is one of the numerous cousins ; but as Trix
seems to get rather confused amonof her relations herself,
cD O 7
it’s not wonderful if we are. I have an idea that she


P *,,„
"■- •-,,


.


wouldn't much care to stay with the Marshlands ayain. I
o
rather fancy that one of the sons wanted to marry her.”
“ And people are horrid nuisances when they want to do
that,” Xelly said, snipping a thread viciously, and thinking
of the boarder who had been most of a bother. “I do
hope Trix is bringing back a whole heart with her. I’m
so glad she didn’t fulfil my old prophecy and fall in love
with a duke. Now that I come to think of it, I don’t
remember her ever mentioning that she had met one.
But go on, Susie, do, like a good-natured girl, and don't
keep me in suspense any longer.”
So Trix’s letter was read, and discussed, and commented
on ; and the two girls began to realize more clearly that
Trix’s return would soon be, as Xelly said, un fait
accompli.
“ I can’t imagine where the time has flown to,” Nelly
remarked, as her needle flew swiftly from edge to edge of
a big and jagged hole. “ The days seemed long enough
sometimes, in all conscience ; though, on the other hand,
they’ve often been a great deal too short for all that had
to be put into them. But now that they’re gone, I’m
puzzled to know what has become of them. I haven’t
much to show for them either. I’m not like vou, younsr
woman, who will be a B.A. this time next year.”
“"W ell, you couldn’t have darned like that two years
ago, anyhow ; and what is more, you wouldn’t have had
the patience to try. I don’t wonder you didn’t want me
to interfere with your mending. Your stitches are nearly
equal to Aunt Sarah’s.”


“ Compliments, my dear, are like sugar-plums, and
should be given in moderation. I wish you would bring
3*our Aunt Sarah with you next time you come, though
not for the purpose of comparing stitches. It always does
mother good to see her. As for yourself, Susie, don’t you
think that the last two years have made one difference at
any rate? You and I are infinitely better friends at the
end of them, aren’t we, than we were at the beginning ? ”
“Yes, I am sure we are, I was thinking of it only
* o •/
this afternoon. We both accepted Trix’s legacy, and we
understand each other a great deal better than when we
were at school, though we were good friends then too.
Ah, well, well all be together again soon. We must
' ' C O
manage somehow to go to meet her.”
O O


CHAPTER VIII.
TOGETHER AGAEV.
\\7 HEN the time came, they did not manage it.
V V The mail steamer with the Beresfords on board
arrived in Melbourne late in the evening, and Susie and
Nelly were not on the pier to meet their friend. Trix had
written to them from Adelaide, and asked them both to
afternoon tea on her first day at home. She had a great
deal to say to them, she wrote, and any number of things
to show them. She supposed she would not have much of
her unpacking done by that time, but at any rate they
could have a good long talk.
It seemed very strange to Susie to get a letter from
Trix again with an Australian stamp upon it. It seemed
more wonderful still to wake up in the morning and
realize that they were actually in the same city. She
could hardly believe they would meet again within the
space of a few hours. The day she had longed for had
come at last, and now she was half afraid of it—half
disposed to wish that it could be put off a little longer.
If Trix were really changed, if she were not her former
self, if something had come between them, if the old


friendship could not be renewed, Susie did not know how
she should bear it. It would be better to keep the
memory of the past undimmed than to find that the
present fell short of her hopes. Perhaps she had hoped
for too much, perhaps she had been foolish in her expecta-
tions. Nothing ever could be exactly as it had been
dreamed of; nothing ever came back exactly as it used
to be. She would do wisely, she feared, in the hours that
remained, to make up her mind that Trix had altered,
as she and Nelly had doubtless altered, and that they
would have to make each other’s acquaintance over again.
Never had any morning passed more slowly in all
Susie’s experience. The hours seemed to drag by on
leaden feet. She could not settle to anything, she could
not fix her mind upon anything. For once in her life a
spirit of restlessness and idleness had taken possession of
her. She spent most of the forenoon in wandering aim-
lessly about the house and garden, and as soon as dinner
was over she went to her room to dress. She recalled
Nelly’s injunctions about her toilet, and did her best to
carry them out. She wanted to look as well as she could
when first she met Trix’s eye.
The journey out to Toorak seemed interminable also,
yet Susie lingered at the Beresfords’ gate and hardly dared
to go in. She had never passed the place since Trix went
away; it seemed like an old, familiar friend. There was
the house itself gleaming white through the trees, and
she could catch a glimpse of the smooth, green lawns
before it. The trees were green, too, and fresh in their


summer dress; the gates stood wide open; there were the
marks of wheels on the gravel. The gardener’s wife came
out to the door of the lodge, and nodded and smiled as
she recognized an old acquaintance. Susie could hardly
believe that it was so two years since she had been
there last.
She walked slowly up the avenue, and felt as if she
were walking back into her school-girl days. She could
almost fancy that it was Saturday afternoon, and that she
would go back to Stormont House on Monday. Leo lay
in the sunshine in front of the hall door, as she had often
seen him lie before. He got up slowly, looked at her
inquiringly, then wagged his tail in welcome, and lay
down again in peace. He, too, knew her, and she patted
his big head affectionately before she rang the bell. The
housemaid was an old acquaintance also, and seemed quite
glad to see Miss Snow once more. Miss Beresford was at
home, she said, and Susie was ushered into the familiar
drawing-room.
o
It hardly had a lived-in appearance as yet, but every-
thing seemed to be exactly where it had been two years
ago, and every vase and jar was filled with flowers. Trix
had a perfect passion for roses, her friends had been used
to tell her. Susie wondered whether she had gathered
these herself this morning, or whether the room had been
decked for her arrival. The next moment the door was
thrown open, there was a glad cry of “ Susie, Susie! O
my dear old friend I and the two girls were in each
other’s arms, clinging to each other as if they never meant


to be separated again. All fear of change and alteration
vanished from Susie’s mind; such a meeting made up for
all the months of absence.
What they did or said exactly in these first few min-
utes, neither of them could afterwards tell. When they
began to think and talk coherently again, they were sitting-
on a sofa, with closely-clasped hands, and eyes that saw
nothing but each other’s faces. They were as near as
they well could be, and yet they could scarcely believe
that they were really together once more. They were
their old selves still, there was no doubt of that, and yet
y 7 J
there certainly were changes.
“ Susie, you are grown up ! ” Trix exclaimed, half laugh-
ing and half crying. “ I like that way of doing your hair.
Take your hat off, please, and let me see you properly.
You don’t look so dreadfully learned after all. I don’t
think I need be afraid to speak to you, though I have
forgotten my Latin and I don’t know any Greek. 0
Susie, I must congratulate you ! I got your letter and
newspaper at Adelaide, and a letter from Kelly as well.
Two exhibitions! You are a wonderful o-irl I Of course I
knew that you could do anything you wanted to, but you
never told me exactly what you were trying for. Father
has been teasing me dreadfully about my classical friend,
and trying to make me believe that you probably think
and dream in Greek. I don’t mind in the least, provided
you will talk to me in English; and lam as pi’oud of you
as I can possibly be. How is our dear old Kell ? ”
“ She was very well when I saw her last, about a week


ago. We should both have gone to meet j’ou yesterday if
you had not come in at such an inconvenient time. She
will be here this afternoon too, won’t she ? ”
“ Yes, we’ll all be together again. I’m sure she would
have written if she couldn’t come. What a busy person
she must be nowadays. I can hardly imagine her at the
head of a boarding-house, for I suppose it practically comes
to that. Poor Mrs. Lawrence can’t be fit to do much her-
self. Susie, Nell’s letters are always very cheerful; but
«/ %J 1
hasn’t she had a terribly hard time of it ? ”
“ I am afraid she has. In some ways she really does
manage everything, and there has been a great deal of
trouble and worry now and then. You can hardly believe,
though, how well she has done. She says she made an
awful muddle of her housekeeping at first, but she seems
to have mastered the business now pretty thoroughly.
Every time I go to see her I feel as if the whole house
went by clockwork. Do you remember how dreadfully
unpunctual she used to be ? She’s given that up alto-
gether, and she does her best to keep every one else up
to the mark as well. She takes any amount of trouble to
have things nice, and to do it as cheaply as possible too.
M ait till you taste her puddings and cakes, and you’ll find
you have quite a new respect for her. And when you
see her darning and patching you will open your eyes in
astonishment.”
“ Nell’s darning and patching ! I should as soon expect
to see my own. Do you remember how poor Fraulein
used to try to teach us, and think that Australian girls


were shockingly ignorant of needlework ? I was always
her worst example, but I believe Xell came second when it
was a question of mending. She never would take the
trouble to try; she used to say it would he easier
to make something new. Susie, is she much changed ?
Her letters don’t read like it, for she always manages to
make a joke of everything; but Emily Barton told me a
oreat deal about her that did not seem like the old Xell
at all.”
“ Oh, Emily Barton turned up her aristocratic nose at
the notion of buying vegetables, I think; and she has a
fixed idea that Xell is a household drudge, and the most
unfortunate girl she knows. So, as you may imagine,
Xell did put on a little for her benefit, and gave me a very
funny account of it afterwards. Yes, she is changed; she
is older in a great many ways. I often feel as if she knew
ever so much more than I of real life, and she has done far
harder things than you or I have ever attempted. I don't
believe I could tell you how good and unselfish she’s been;
and one of the strangest things is, that she and Mr. Murray
are such great friends.”
“ Yes; I can’t realize that a bit. I never was more
surprised in my life than when I heard he had gone to
live there. Xell did not seem half to like it either, and
when I thought of how she had always detested him, I
o «/
didn’t wonder. I felt sure they would have a quarrel
before very long, but somehow it never appeared to come
off. Then she wrote a most amusing letter, setting forth
that she solemnlv retracted all she had ever said against


him, and that she was never going to make fun of him
O O
any more."
“ Oh, she has not kept to that,” said Susie, laughing.
“ She does make fun of him often, but she thinks a great
deal of him too, and he returns the compliment. Miss
Lorraine says he seems to have a thorough respect and
admiration for her.”
“ That’s really more wonderful still. I can’t take it in,
in the least. But how are the Lorraines, Susie, and your
aunt, and all the old girls ? Fancy Connie Curzon’s beino-
o •/ O
married ! ”
“ Yes; doesn’t it seem strange ? You are not o-oino- to
o O o
follow her example, are you, Trix ? ”
“I' Not at all, I assure you. Oh, are you looking at
that ring ? Father gave it to me in Florence. He got a
cameo for you the same day, with a head of Pallas Athene
on it; so it is quite appropriate. We thought of you as
soon as we saw it. 0 Susie, I did think of vou often
%/
on our travels; you would have enjoyed some things so
much ! But I must not begin to talk of them yet; I have
heaps and heaps to show you, when our luggage once gets
through the custom house. Father will have to pay a
small fortune in duty. But oh, it is delightful to be at
home again ! I felt as if I could have cried for jov when
I saw this dear old home once more.”
“ I wonder you call it old after all the antiquities you
have seen, Trix. I can hardly believe that vou have gone
round the world and come back again. Do you remember
o %,
how you told me, the first time that I stayed with you


here, that you were going home some day ? It seemed
such a wonderful thing to expect. We sat on the rug
there in front of the fire, and you nursed a little black
puppy. You have changed since then, Trix, and yet not
so very much; I believe you could sit on the floor and
nurse a puppy still.”
“ I believe I could,” Trix answered. <! But tell me all
the news, Susie; I’m dying to hear about every one.
Begin with your aunt, please. How is she ? ”
“ Quite well, and just the same as ever. I don’t think
vou will see the least difference in her. She sent you her
love, and wants vou to come and see her some day when
you have time. Miss Lorraine has not altered either, but
you will be sorry to see her mother, dear old lady. She
seems to have suddenly got very old, and she does not
always know what she is talking about. I went to see
them after I got your letter, and told them you were
coming back. She seemed quite to understand at first,
and was very glad ; but after a while she asked how you
«/ o /
were, and said you had not been to see her for a long
time—she was afraid you must have forgotten her. I saw
Miss Temple too, and Fraulein, and most of the girls; but,
oh dear, there are changes! You’ll feel like a ghost
revisiting its former haunts when vou go back to Stor-
O %/ CD
mont House.”
So Susie talked on, and all the time she sat and looked
at her friend. Trix was so pretty ! Was she actually more
beautiful than ever, or was it only that Susie had forgotten
what she really looked like ? She was grown-up too, very


decidedly. She had an air of finish and distinction which
had not been hers before—everything about her seemed
so daintily perfect, from the soft curls that touched her
forehead to the little bronze shoes that peeped out beneath
her skirt. Her silk blouse was of a dull shade of pink,
which Susie remembered Trix had always liked to wear;
her belt was fastened with quaint silver clasps which she
had picked up somewhere in Norway. Her school-fellows
had been wont to say that she made them think of a fairy
princess ; she looked more like one than ever this after-
noon. She seemed to have every gift that a girl could
o o
desire—at least, so Susie was disposed to believe. There
was no one like her, and there never had been ; there was
only one Trix in the world, and her equal could never be
found.
After a while Nelly came in, and then the group was
complete. Nelly looked very pretty too, and very much
like her old self in her ecstatic delight and excitement.
She asked a dozen questions in the space of a single
minute; she poured out a stream of information and ex-
clamation ; she kissed Trix again and again: she laughed,
O O ' O '
and she almost cried for happiness; she did, as she said
herself, behave in rather a crazy fashion. But then, as
she also said, Trix did not come home again every day in
the year.
“ Oh, it is lovely to see you back 1 ” she cried for the
sixth or seventh time. “I’m afraid it’s all a beautiful
dream, and I’m going to wake up directly.—Susie, can
s’ou believe it ? Isn’t it too good to be true ?—Trix, how


did we get on without you for so long, and how ever did
you get on without us ? ”
“ Really I don’t know,’’ Trix answered. “ I missed you
most dreadfully. I wanted to tell you about all sorts of
things, and ask you what you thought of them, oftener
than I can remember. Your letters were as delightful as
letters could be; it was good of you to write so regularly
when you were both so busy; but they weren’t quite a
satisfactory substitute for the long talk we are going to
have now.”
“ No, I should think they weren’t,” said Nelly emphati-
cally. “ What are pen and ink, I should like to know, in
comparison with tongues ? You were awfully good too,
Trix, to w T rite to us in the wav vou did. I don’t believe
J xj %J
you ever missed a mail. We hadn’t the least excuse for
thinking you had forgotten us.”
“ I hope you never felt disposed to think anything so
foolish. I should need to forget myself first. It must be
o •/
a poor sort of friendship that can’t stand the test of time
and absence, and I don’t think anything else will ever
come between us.”
“ No; were not likely to quarrel, are we ? We never
were given that wav. Trix, do you remember the legacy
o i- ' o •/
you left us? We’ve done our best to carry nut your direc-
«/ •/ «/
tions —haven’t we, Susie ?—Behold the dignified Miss Snow
—your attention, please, Miss Beresford—behold her, the
learned lady, the logician, the classical scholar, the distin-
guished exhibitioner, the pride of her professors, the credit
to her sex, the joy of Miss Lorraine’s heart, the paragon


pupil of Mr. Murray, the glory of Stormont House! Look
at her, talk to her, examine her carefully in every possible
way. Remember she will be a B.A. by this time next year
—a Bachelor of Arts, Trix Beresford; think of that, and try
to take in its meaning. Ihink of the weight of learning
which she wears so lightly; think of all her achievements,
and tell me whether, in spite of them all, she isn’t the old
Susie still. Then you can give me the credit I deserve
for my superhuman exertions.”
“In keeping her Susie?” Trix asked, with a smile.
“ Was it such hard work, Nell ? ”
“ Terrible, Trix, terrible. Now that you have come
home, the strain will be lightened. Next year will be the
critical time, you know ; it’s well there are two of us to
keep her in order. When you see a certain dreamy, absent
look come into her eyes, you may know that her mind
is far away. I don't think it goes to Africa, like Mrs.
Jellyby s; I should say it was more at home in Rome or
in Athens. She’s quite familiar now with those old Latin
and Greek individuals who spent their time in writing
books about t\\ o thousand years ago. I don’t remember
any of their names at present, though I have had the
privilege of hearing her discuss them with Mr. Murray.
It was hard to say which of the two seemed on more
intimate terms with them. She even got the length of
disagreeing with him sometimes. Trix, think of that.
Susie thinks she has a right to an opinion of her own
now, e\ en if it doesn t happen to be Mr. Murray’s. I was
so astounded to hear her one day lately that I nearly
(1000) 9


dropped off my chair. The only thing I could think of
in the emergency was to entice her out to the pantry
and get her to help in covering my gooseberry jam. Then
I took her to my bedroom, and showed her my new frock,
and asked her advice about trimming a hat; and, to my
relief, she didn’t quote Horace or Homer about the one or
the other. I felt I had brought her back to earth again,
and to the nineteenth century. What would you have
done, Trix, if she had calmly looked over your head when
you met her again, and talked about ‘ Frogs not the
creatures that commonly go by that name, but a Greek
play, so far as I can gather ? ”
“ O Nell, you do talk nonsense,” Susie declared, with a
lauch and a blush. —“ Trix, you will have to make allow-
ance for her well-known habit of exaggeration. I’ve not
been able to cure her of that yet, so I can t claim credit
for as much success as she can.”
“ Poor, dear, modest creature ! She’s not quite spoiled
yet, you see, Trix. She admits there are one or two things
that she hasn’t succeeded in doing. —Then I’ll be generous,
Susie, and I’ll tell Trix what you have done for me; only
I’ll choose my time and my place, for fear you’ll interrupt
me in your usual disrespectful manner. —Whenever I
wanted a grumble badly, I used to go and see her,” Nelly
added confidentially, turning towards her other fxdend.
“ Then she put her books away like a saint and a maHyr,
and heard me to the close. She let me abuse everybody
and everything to my heart’s content, and I felt ever so
much better afterwards. I don’t think she did much in


the lecturing line. I’m afraid she didn’t improve the occa-
sion in anything like the proper style; but she always
sent me home feeling as if I had been a selfish wretch
and must turn over a new leaf at once. And when I
poured out my housekeeping troubles, you should have
heard how the learned lady discussed the price of coals
and potatoes. It was wonderful to think that her great
mind could descend to such small details. Oh, I did a
great deal to keep her from turning into a blue-stocking,
Trix; and she did a great deal to pull me out of many
a fit of the blues.”
Yes, it was the old Nelly still—Trix could have no
doubt of that now ; and yet she was changed in some ways,
too. She was a very busy young woman, with a respon-
sible place in the world, and a pretty heavy burden to
carry. There was nothing in her dress or appearance to
suggest poverty—Nelly had planned for weeks to provide
against that; there was nothing in her chatter either to
suggest a real discontent with her lot. But there were
several indefinable things which made her friend feel that
a great gulf lay between the Nelly of to-day and the lio-ht-
hearted school-girl of Stormont House. She realized it
more than ever before the afternoon was over.
The three girls went upstairs presently to Trix’s special
domain, the pretty bedroom and boudoir that had been her
mother’s before her. She had a great deal to show her
guests, though most of her luggage was still to arrive.
She and her father seemed to have spent half their time in
making purchases. Nelly told her it was a wonder that


they had not chartered a ship for themselves. She had
become the mistress, too, of a smart-looking maid, a fact
which duly impressed her friends; and they found that
functionary hard at work unpacking and arranging Miss
Beresford’s possessions. She did not seem to relish the
interruption, which was scarcely to be wondered at, for
she was speedily turned out of the room, and told to leave
things anywhere—on the bed, on the floor, it did not
matter in the least; and Trix at once proceeded to add to
the confusion by turning out the contents of her wardrobe
for Nelly’s benefit.
“ The delightful thing about you, Trix, is that you suit
us both,” the latter remarked. “ You are a connecting-
link between Susie and me. I used to notice it in your
letters. She liked to hear about the churches and pictures
and ruins you had seen, and she used to get quite senti-
mental over graves and monuments. I wanted to know
about the shops you were in, and the people you met, and
the dresses they wore, and the parties you went to. You
told us both exactly what we wanted, and seemed to enjoy
the one set of things as much as the other. The fact is,
no two of us will make a perfect pair; we want the third
to be complete.”
“ So we do,” assented Trix, dropping down on the floor
amidst a heap of blouses, and opera-cloaks, and lace-
trimmed underclothing. “ That’s a very sensible speech.
Nell, you do say a wise thing once in a while, I notice,
and therefore I hope you’ll be good enough, both of you,
to come up to ‘ The Willows ’ with me in about a fort-


night’s time. Father has to go to Queensland at once.
It was business about a station there that hurried him
home, you know; and he is polite enough to say that he
has had enough of my society for the present. So lam to
be packed off to stay with my aunt; and she, good lady, is
quite prepared to receive me, and you also, for an indefinite
time. I found a letter from her waiting me here. She
remembers you both quite well. You know you met her
the day I left, and she sends you both a warm invitation.—
Susie, you need a thorough badly. Don’t attempt
to deny it. Itou haven t had one for three years, and you
must be taught to appreciate the country.—Nelljq you
poor old girl, you can get away for four or five weeks,
can’t you ? ”
“ Four or five weeks ! ” repeated Nelly. “ You might as
well say four or five months at once. There’s not a ghost
of a show, Trix, as we used to say at school when Miss
Temple was not there to hear us. I'm the mistress of the
house now. My mother has resigned in ray favour, and
I simply can’t get away. She and I think of going
somewhere together for a fortnight in January, but we
could not stir a step before then. There are boarders
to consider, my dear, and we can’t conveniently put
them to sleep and wake them up when we want them
again.”
“ And can you really not get away for more than a fort-
night ? O Nell, that is dreadful! Are you perfectly sure
you couldn’t manage it somehow ? ”
“ Sure and certain, my love; there’s no use in talking


about it. Ask Susie; she understands. Only don’t expect
me to waste my precious time in explanations; this after-
noon can be used to much better purpose. I’m a working
woman, Miss Beresford, and don’t you forget it. I haven’t
much time for holiday-making, especially at the end of the
year, when I’m deep in mince-pies and plum-puddings; so
if you want to see me, as a general rule you’ll have to
come and pay me a visit. Have you got your ponies
still ? ”
“ Yes; the dear little fellows ! I went to see them this
morning, and I’m sure they knew me well. At any rate,
Nelly, if you have got only a fortnight to spare, you may
as well give it to us. You could bring your mother with
you, you know. I’m sure she would like it, and I know
my aunt would be glad to have her.—There’s the tea bell,
girls, and I daresay father has come home. Who wants a
race downstairs ? I believe I could slide down the banis-
ters with pleasure, I feel so like a baby again.”
“ Lead the way, Trix, and I’ll follow, and sing ‘ Auld
Lang Syne’ into the bargain,” Nelly answered, with her
old rino-infT laugh. “ ‘ Seas between us braid hae rolled,’
O o O
—it’s all as appropriate as possible.”
“ ‘ And here’s a hand, my trusty frien’,
And gfe’s a hand o’ thine,’ ”
Trix chimed in gleefully. “ Come and let us drink tea
and eat strawberries for the sake of auld lang syne.
Don’t believe all the nonsense people tell you about English
strawberries being better than Australian ones. Ours are
O


as good as they can be, I know, for I sampled them this
morning.”
So the three girls went downstairs hand in hand, and
the house that had been silent so long was filled with the
echoes of their laughter. Mr. Beresford watched them
from the library door, and thought that he had not seen
a prettier picture in all his travels.


CHAPTER IX.
INTO AN UNKNOWN WORLD.
IT was about four o’clock on a sultiy summer afternoon,
and Susie Snow sat in the corner of a railway carriage,
feeling very thankful that her long journey was so near its
end. She had been travelling all day for the first time in
her experience, and the care of her luggage, the business of
changing trains, of giving directions to porters, and getting
a meal at a refreshment room, had, all combined, proved
rather trying. She had made up her mind that travelling
alone was very nervous work. She hoped, but not very
confidently, that she had forgotten nothing she should
have remembered. She also hoped she might never have
to take such a journey by herself again. Another thing she
had begun to discover was that already, ridiculous though
w * o
it might appear, she did feel decidedly home-sick. Aunt
Sarah and Laburnum Cottage seemed very far away. She
was inclined to remember regretfully what she had been
doing twenty-four hours ago, and to look forward appre-
hensively to an indefinitely long stay at “ The Willows.”
Mrs. Stevenson had endorsed her niece’s invitations in
the most cordial and charming of fashions. She seemed


willing to entertain any number of Trix’s friends. She
knew all about Susie’s successes, and she made it quite
evident that a distinguished girl student would be an ex-
ceedingly welcome guest; indeed, the impression was con-
veyed in such a delicately flattering manner that the
student in question, to say nothing of her aunt, could not
but be decidedly gratified.
Miss Snow’s worst enemy —supposing she had possessed
one of any degree —could hardly have accused her of pride ;
yet that was a sin which she felt specially called to guard
against in those days. Any praise of Susie, or any com-
pliment paid to the girl, always filled her with intense
delight and gratitude, and a great wonder as well that
O o ' O
anybody so extraordinary should belong to her. She often
wished that her brother were here to see what his daughter
was doing.
Mrs. Stevenson’s letter had pleased her exceedingly, and
Mrs. Stevenson was Trix’s aunt, therefore Miss Snow was
quite clear that her invitation should be accepted. It
would be an excellent thing for Susie to have such a
holiday, and at the same time she would get a glimpse of
a new world ; yet at the last thought her heart some-
' o
times sank. She did not like new things for herself; she
rather dreaded them for her niece. She talked of and
planned for this visit to “ The Willows ” until it seemed
almost as great an upheaval as that which had come upon
them five years before, when she went home with an
invalid cousin, and Susie went to Stormont House. She
insisted on making so many preparations that it proved


quite impossible for her niece to travel with the Beresfords.
Nelly did not expect to leave Melbourne for another month.
She had come to see Susie the day before that young
woman’s departure, to say good-bye, and to entrust two
packets to her care.
“ One is for yourself and one is for Trix,” she said.
“ Try to restrain your curiosity till Christmas comes, and
then spare a tender thought for me. Good-bye, Susie;
be sure you enjoy yourself properly. Don’t flirt too much
with Mr. Stevenson. Don’t get thrown from your horse
oftener than you can help, and don’t let your Greek grow
too rusty for want of use. Be a good girl generally, and
you are sure to be happy. Meanwhile, take my blessing
with you, and forward the same to Trix.”
With which parting benediction Nelly had gone her way
as cheerfully as if she had not been struggling against a
•/ OO o O
bitter sense of being left out in the cold and missing all
o o
the good things that were going. What would she have
given for Susie’s chances ? Almost anything, in fact, that
did not involve deserting her mother.
She was thinking of Susie now, as she compounded
a salad for dinner, and calculating that she must be near
her journey’s end. Curiously enough, though they were
never to know it, Susie was also thinking of her, and
almost wishing that they could change places.
“ Poor old Nell,” she said to herself, as she looked out
at the carriage window, “it is hard on her to be left
behind. She needs a holiday quite as much as I, if not
more ; and yet I can have one now, and she must wait for


another month. It sometimes seems as if things were very
queerly arranged in this world. I am sure it would be
much better for every one if Nell were in my place to-day.
She would enjoy the whole aftair, and the onH thing I
care about is being with Trix. The rest of them wont
know what to do with me. I can’t ride, I hate tennis,
and I’ve nearly forgotten all my music. They will think
me dreadfully stupid, I know, and they’ll wonder what
Trix can see in me. Nelly, now, would he just in her
element, and she always knows what to say to everybody.
I wish I could borrow some of her powers for the next
few weeks.”
Altogether she was feeling more like the shy and
awkward Susie of Stormont House than the clever and
capable student who was considered such a credit to her
instructors.
But now the long stretches of paddock, which had
seemed so monotonous, began to give place to a few
scattered houses. A little town appeared in the dis-
tance, the train perceptibly slackened its pace, and the
unaccustomed traveller sprang up in an unnecessary hurry
and began to collect her possessions. She was standing at
the door of her carriage, with a portmanteau in one hand
and a luncheon-basket and handbag in the other, a cloak
thrown over her arm, and a fear in her heart that she
would not be met, long before the train steamed into the
station. Almost the first thing she saw was a little pony-
carriage outside the barrier. Almost the first person was
Trix herself, in a fresh cambric frock, with a big white hat


over her sunny hair. She caught sight of Susie, too, and
reached the carriage door as soon as the porter.
“O you poor girl, you are burdened!” was her crreet-
ing. “ Let me take some of your things. Aren’t you
dreadfully hot and tired ? Never mind: the worst is
over now. Come and see about the rest of your luo-o- a we
These things will be safe enough here.”
She seemed quite as much at her ease here as any-
where. She knew exactly what to do and how to do it.
Susie’s possessions were transferred from the train to the
platform, and from the platform to the waiting-room, with-
out any further trouble to Susie herself. One of the
grooms had come in for the letters. She was told he
would take her things out; there was no need for her
to bother about them.
Aunt May’s ponies were not so well trained as Trix’s,
and were getting impatient, so they had better make
haste.
“ They’re nice little fellows, aren’t they ? ” Trix remarked,
as they drove through the town. “ But they’re not equal to
mine. Aunt May spoils them. She’s a little too good to
everybody around her. It’s very good of her to lend them
to me, for instance. Harry offered to drive me in, but I
thought we d rather be without his company, though, of
course, I wasn t rude enough to say so. Doesn’t this re-
mind you of old times, Susie ? When did I last have the
pleasure of driving you anywhere ? ”
Oh, it must be ages ago—the day after we left school,
I believe. Do you remember how we went to see Nell ? ”


“To be sure I do. Poor Nell! I wish we had her here
at this moment. I wonder what she’s about. When did
you see her last ? and how is your aunt ? and did you go
to the ‘ breaking up ’ ? and what did you think of Mrs.
Lorraine ? and, in short, what is the news generally ? ”
Trix had developed a talent for asking questions, Nelly
said. In the course of her travels she seemed, indeed, to
be consumed with a desire for information concerning all
that had happened in her absence. She was interested
in the smallest details of her friends’ affairs. She was
always trying to gather up the threads of this story or
of that, to see how one thing had followed another, to
make sure that she was missing nothing of any impor-
tance. She was very glad to be at home again, and more
certain than ever that there was no place in the world like
Australia. All her old friends had been delighted with
her. She seemed to them to be brimming over with
pleasure in life and goodwill towards everybody. Miss
Lorraine had told Susie that Trix’s visit to Stormont
House had been like a burst of sunshine.
The week she had spent at “ The Willows ” had ap-
parently not had a sobering effect. Her father had left
her that morning, indeed, and it was dreadful to think
that he would be away so long. They had been so much
together of late, she said, that she supposed it had spoiled
her for parting with him. But now Susie had come to
console her, and what a delightful time they would have
together ! Aunt May was sweeter than ever ; the whole
place was even prettier than she had been used to think it.


She had recognized a great many old haunts, and renewed
acquaintance with quite a number of old friends. Harry
had had a new tennis court made for her benefit; he had
given her the use of a beautiful little mare, and she was
quite eloquent about the gallops he and her father and she
had had together.
“ We must teach you to ride,” she told Susie ; “ we really
must, don’t you know. There’s a horse here that will suit
you exactly, and we’ll take the greatest possible care of you.
I won’t say anything about myself—modesty forbids, etc.;
but you couldn’t have a better instructor than Harry. I
think he must have learned to ride about the same time that
he learned to walk, and what he doesn’t know about horses
isn t worth the knowing. You ought to get on very fast
under his tuition, and we all know you can learn anything.”
“ I don’t think you do know it, Trix, and I imagine you
must have forgotten a good deal. Even you never suc-
ceeded in teaching me to play tennis decently, and I suspect
I shan’t be more of a success at riding. My talents don’t
lie in that direction, and I hate making a fool of myself.”
o J
“ Nonsense, my dear; you won’t do that under any cir-
cumstances. Tou’re a queer girl in some ways, Susie; you
used to make up your mind sometimes that you couldn’t
do a thing because it was out of your ordinary line, and
then you simply wouldn’t attempt it. Excuse my plain
speaking, but it was silly of you now and then, and Nell
and I were rather relieved to find you were not altogether
angelic.”
“ I shouldn’t have thought it was much of a discovery,”


said Susie ruefully. “ Indeed, Trix, lam afraid you will
all think me rather a stick during the next few weeks.
I’m not in the least the sort of girl to shine in a visit
to the country. You know I’ve had a different life alto-
gether from you and your friends, and you really must
forgive me if I seem very stupid sometimes.”
“My beloved Susannah, what a goose you are ! Y hat
on earth are you afraid of—the horses, or the tennis court,
or Aunt Ma} r ? She is prepared to make a lion of you —
or a lioness, if you like that better. She thinks you some-
thing wonderful, and quite a model to ordinary frivolous
people. Harry, too, is ready to stand in awe of you and
your learning. He is not learned, you know, except in
his own line, and he does not profess to be clever. But
he’s thoroughly good and thoroughly sensible, and lam
very well pleased with my cousin. He is a man, at all
events, and is doing a man’s work in the world, which
is more than can be said of some more showy people.
Look, Susie; do you see that red gate in front of us ?
When we pass that, we shall be on his ground. All his
gates are painted red, and Major Perry’s are white. All
the land about here belongs to one or other of them.
I haven’t gone to call on Connie yet. Do look at that
clump of wattles, Susie. It must he lovely in spring.
Uncle Harold had a perfect passion for trees. He used to
plant them everywhere, and the consequence is that ‘ The
Willows ’ is the prettiest place in the whole district.”
It was a pretty place, certainly; it astonished Susie
altogether when she came in sight of it. The house


itself stood on a hill that sloped gently down towards
a little creek. She had expected something of the nature
of a slab hut roofed with bark; here instead was a lono-
' O’
low, irregularly-built villa, with wide verandas covered
with creepers, and white walls gleaming in the sunshine.
A long avenue led up to the front door; the turf on either
side was as fresh and green as if it were part of the
Beresfords’ garden ; the trees that shaded it were the chief
glory of the place. Glimpses of the creek shone here and
there as the carriage passed ; the sight of water was a
wonderfully refreshing one on the afternoon of such a day.
The sky above their heads was blue and cloudless, but a
light breeze had sprung up in the last half-hour ; everything
combined to make “ The Willows ” seem a very pleasant
resting-place after a long and tiresome journey. Susie’s
surprise and admiration gave Trix unbounded delight.
“ I knew you would like it when you saw it,” she said.
“Uncle built that house just before he died. The old one,
or part of it at any rate, is down by the creek—such a queer
old place ; you must see it to-morrow. Some of the houses
about here are quite like town ones. I’m glad ‘ The
Willows ’is not; I like the old, straggling, bungalow style.
Here we are at last, and you must be glad. Never mind
the dogs; they have a bad habit of barking, but they don’t
mean anything by it. Harry has a craze for dogs, I
think ; I’ve given up trying to count the number I’ve seen
in the last week.”
This was scarcely reassuring news for Susie, and the
half-dozen barking creatures that gathered around her as


she stepped on to the veranda rather spoiled her first
impressions of the house. She had hardly time to notice
that the hall was large and airy and cool-looking—furnished
more like a sitting-room than an entrance-hall, she thought
—when a door to the right was opened, and a lady came out
to meet them. She was a tall, slender woman, with grey
hair, but a girlish figure. She had a tiny lace cap on her
head, though caps had gone out of fashion ; she wore a
tea-gown of shimmering silk, made in a quaint, old-world
st\de. Her eyes were large, and soft, and dark ; the colour
on her cheek was almost like the bloom on a peach ; her
whole face was full of brightness and vivacity. Few
people who had once seen Mrs. Stevenson found much
difficulty in recognizing her when they met a second
time.
'■ Welcome to ‘ The W illows,’ my dear,” she said, as she
took Susie’s hand in hers, and astonished the girl by
kissm a her cordially. “ I can’t feel you are a new ac-
quaintance, I have heard so much about you from Trix.
How hot and tired you must be, you poor child ! You have
had a dreadful day for your journey. But I flatter myself
that I have kept this room comfortably cool, and you shall
have a cup of tea in less than five minutes.”
Her voice was very like Trix’s, Susie thought; and
then for a little she could think of nothing else but the
delightful drawing-room in which she found herself. It
was very large, and it was certainly cool, and so dark
that at first she found it rather difficult to tell what was
in it. She was guided somehow to one particular corner,
(iooo) 10


and set down in a big cushioned chair. A little table
stood near, covered with a white cloth, and arranged for
' O
tea. Mrs. Stevenson seated herself behind it, in a fanciful
wicker chair piled with pink cushions; a tall palm in a
brass pot tilled up the corner beside her. Trix had sunk
down on a luxurious-looking divan, caught up a couple of
fans, and offered her friend her choice of them.
By degrees, as her eyes became accustomed to the
dim light, Susie could see that everything in the room
was beautiful in its own way, and everything in harmony
with its surroundings. The colours were all soft and sub-
dued ; it would have been difficult to say which of them
predominated. There were plenty of wicker chairs, but
no two of them were exactly alike. There were others
also of a more massive make, intended especially for the
master of the house. There were little tables in odd
corners; there were books, and flowers, and photographs
everywhere. There was no carpet on the floor, but cool
white matting instead, scattered over with rugs and skins.
The windows were draped with fresh white muslin; every-
thing looked simple and summer-like. There were some
fine pictures on the walls, some china and glass stowed
away on shelves and brackets, which even Susie could see
must be very valuable. But nothing looked as if it were
meant for show, or for anything else but free and constant
use. The whole room had a generally home-like aspect.
Susie felt tempted to look around her and take stock
of everything, as she answered Mrs. Stevenson’s questions
about her journey and listened to Trix’s talk about their


drive. But when tea was brought in, she was not disposed
to do more than lean back in luxurious ease and admire
her hostess. Mrs. Stevenson had her nieces knack of
doing everything gracefully, and she never looked more
thoroughly in her proper place than when she presided
at her tea-table. She had beautiful hands and beautiful
rings; she was a picture altogether which Susie thought
she could never tire of looking at, though she might be too
hot and too weary to do much justice to the cake and fruit
which Trix pressed upon her.
“ I think, my dear, your friend wants nothing so much
as a thorough rest,” Mrs. Stevenson said presently. “We
are teasing her by trying to make her eat. Take her to
her own room, and get her to lie down and be comfortable.
She may develop an appetite before dinner-time.—We
dine at seven, Miss Snow, so you will have a chance of
recruiting a little. Don’t let Trix talk too much ; she is a
worse chatterbox than ever.”
“ How can you be so rude, auntie dear, or so unjust
either ? lou know it is your own fault as much as mine.
You encourage me shamefully, and so does Susie.—Come
away at once then, you poor, dear, tired creature, and you
shall see how well I can take care of you.”
“ N °w, wha f do you think of that aunt of mine ? ” Trix
asked triumphantly, as she closed the drawing-room door
behind them. “Isnt she worth coming all this distance to
see ? Don t you feel inclined to fall in love with her at
first sight, just as I fell in love with Miss Snow ? ”
Indeed I do,” Susie answered warmly. “ This is second


sight, to be sure, and not first; but I was so much taken
up with you, the day you went away, that I hardly noticed
any one else. What pretty grey hair she has! ”
“ And yet she is not old, you know—only about fifty.
Her hair turned grey when she was quite young. I like it;
it seems to set off her face so well. I tell her sometimes
that it looks as if she powdered it—her face is so young
still, and she has such a lovely complexion.'’
“ I think she is perfectly beautiful,” Susie answered. “ I
don’t quite know how to describe her, but she does look
as if she had stepped down from some picture a hundred
years old. I don’t think any one who sees her can help
admiring her.”
“ That’s a very pretty speech, Susie ; I must remember to
tell it to Harry. Nothing delights him more than a com-
pliment to his mother. It is amusing sometimes to see
his admiration of her, but it’s very nice too. Look, Susie;
this is your room, and this is mine. We can leave the
door between us open or shut as we please, and nobody
else is likely to use this veranda at present. Don’t you
think we shall be very cosy ? ”
Susie did think so, certainly. Her bedroom looked as
comfortable as it was charming, and, like the drawing-
room, utterly different from her preconceived ideas of a
bush homestead. Evidently she had been even more
ignorant than she had supposed. In some respects the
reality of things was more alarming than her expectations;
in such a home as this, awkwardness and stupidity would
seem terribly glaring and out of place. However, she was


here now, and she must make the best of it. She had not
disgraced herself as yet, and for one happy hour, at any
rate, Trix and she would be alone together. So she gave
herself up to the pleasures of resting and being waited
upon, talked to her friend, and troubled herself little about
any ordeals before her; she forgot all about them, in fact,
until Trix suggested that it was time to dress for dinner.
“ “What are you going to wear, Susie ? ” she asked
briskly. “ I mean to take you in hand while you are here
and look after your dress. You never do make the best
of yourself; I suppose you have more important things to
think of. Let me do your hair for you now, just to see
what I can accomplish. You would rather have my help
than Norah’s to-day, wouldn’t you ? ”
“ To-day and every day, if I want any help at all,”
Susie answered, laughing. “I am more than half afraid of
your smart maid. I don’t want to have anything to do
with her.”
“ And I want you to have a great deal. I should like
her to wait upon you as much as on me, as long as we’re
here together. Let us pretend we are sisters for the time
being. lam sure plenty of sisters are not such good
friends.”
Then another thought seemed to strike Trix, and her
eyes grew grave, and soft, and dreamy. Susie wondered
for a moment at her sudden silence and change of expres-
sion, then she understood it.
“ Aunt May has been talking to me a great deal about
mother,” Trix told her friend. “ They say lam very like


her, and I am just as old now as she was when she was
married. It is strange to think of it, it all seems so long
ago. Aunt May and she were great friends, and did every-
thing together when they were children; and after Aunt
May married, mother lived with her. They are so far
away now, it does seem very strange.”
“ But they are sisters still,” Susie answered, “ and they
will be together again some day. There is always that to
look forward to.”
“ Yes ;it would be too terrible if there were not. This
world is very nice indeed, and it is delightful just to feel
oneself alive; but if we hadn t heaven to hope for too,
I don’t think life would be worth the living—one would
always be so much afraid of a change. I have often won-
dered whether mother or Aunt May was the better off of
the two. On the whole I think that mother was, and of
course lam sure that she is to-day. It must be so much
easier to go first than to be left behind. And anyhow,
we haven’t to choose for ourselves, and that’s a very good
thing for all of us. Come, Susie; take this chair, and let
me begin. We really must make haste, for Aunt May
does not like people to be late for dinner. Harry does not
come home for lunch, as a general rule, and he is always
ravenous when seven o’clock draws near.


CHAPTER X.
AT “ THE WILLOW ST
MUCH to Susie’s relief, Trix and she were not late
for dinner, and Mrs. Stevenson was not annoyed
by their non-appearance. In fact, she had not yet left her
own room when the two girls came back to the drawing-
room. Her son was sitting alone by an open window,
deep in the study of his newspaper, and to all appearance
waiting very patientl}” for the summons to dinner. He
looked so comfortable, in fact, that his cousin told him it
was quite a pity to disturb him. Susie was impressed
anew with his height when he rose to shake hands with
her; it also seemed to her that he looked less boyish and
more at his ease than he had at their first meeting. She
hoped, too, that she acquitted herself more creditably.
Yet she was somewhat taken aback when Trix was seized
with a sudden desire to see what her aunt was doing, and
left them to their own resources. Susie had answered all
the regulation questions about her journey, and wondered
what they could find to talk about next. She wished that
Mr. Stevenson would sit down again instead of standing
there in front of her ; it gave one quite a crick in one’s neck
to look up at him. She turned her chair a little, to see


more of the view from the window—a terraced garden
O
bright with flowers, sloping down to the willows that
bordered the creek.
“ How very pretty ! ” she exclaimed, in genuine admira-
tion ; and Mr. Stevenson was perceptibly pleased.
“Yes; it makes a good picture, doesn’t it? Trix says
she is going to paint it. Do you paint, Miss Snow ? ”
“ No, not at all,” she answered. “ I wish I could; but
I am not clever at that sort of thino-.”
o
“ I suppose you can’t have much time for it,” he
answered, looking down at her with a very respectful
glance. “My cousin has been telling us about your
doings, and of course we’ve seen your name in the papers.
\ou must have to work tremendously hard. Do you
never get tired of it ? ”
“ No, never,” Susie answered. “ It’s the most delightful
O
work in the world. I don t think I could wish for any-
thing better than to go on with it all my life.”
“ Well, I suppose that comes of being so clever at it,”
he answered, with something that sounded almost like a
sigh. “ I never was, so I can’t see where the pleasure
comes in. But you surely don’t mean that you would
really like to go on with it for ever.”
“ Y ith the same sort of work, certainly, if only I had
the chance. I don’t exactly want to fail next year, but I
am very sorry to think it will be my last, in all proba-
bility, at the university.”
“\ou’ll be a B.A. at'the end of it, I suppose; but
what are you going to do next ? ”


“Go up for final honours the February after, and win
my M.A. degree if I can. One has to hold the one for
two years before taking: the other, but the examination
may be passed at once.”
“ Yes, I see; but what’s the good of it all, Miss Snow,
when you do get it ? Do you mean to be a doctor, or
a lawyer, or anything of that sort; or is it just for the
pleasure of the work that you’re going in for it ? ”
“ Partly for the pleasure,” she answered, with a smile,
“ and partly because I want to teach, and a degree has
always a market value.”
Before he could make any reply, Mrs. Stevenson and
Trix came in together, and the first sounds of the gong
were heard from the hall. Susie was rather appalled once
more to find that she was expected to take Mr. Stevenson’s
arm; she was not accustomed to going in to dinner in
such a ceremonious fashion. She could hear Trix’s laugh
behind her as they crossed the hall. That young lady
was escorting her aunt, and Susie would have liked to
change places with her.
“ The amount of style they keep up in this house
is something astonishing,” she wrote to Nelly next day.
“ Even the Beresfords never went in for anything like it,
though I suppose things may be different now that Trix
is grown up. I think it must be Mrs. Stevenson’s doing;
she looks as if she were particular about that sort of thing,
and I should hardly expect her son to be. There is a good
deal of the schoolboy about him still, I should say, though
he can talk when he thinks it his duty.”


Susie might have added that he had talked rather
well at dinner the night before. He had read his paper
to some advantage before he was interrupted, and was
quite willing to share the information he had gathered.
He wanted to know what Miss Snow had thought about
the leading article, and seemed anxious to hear her opinion
on various questions of European politics. She had never
taken much interest in such matters, unfortunately; modern
history always seemed to her far less interesting than
ancient; and though she had had an Argus beside her all
through her journey, she had not mastered the news of the
day as thoroughly as her host.
“Thats the only sort of literature he cares for/’ Trix
was cruel enough to say. “He says he never has time for
anything else, and he’s of an essentially practical nature.
If you will examine his bookcase in the office, Susie, vou
3 7 %/
will find all the newest and most excellent works on dogs,
and horses, and sheep, and station management generally;
but you won’t come across anything else, not even a
yellow-backed novel. These things are not in his line,
you know.”
«/
“ they’re not, if you mean the novels and poems
that mother and you think so much of. But you’re out
for once about the bookcase, Miss Trix. You’ll find two
or three histories in it, too, if you’ll take the trouble
to look through it properly instead of laughing at my
ignorance. I never was much of a dab at anything at
school; but histories always seemed to me to have some
sense in them, and to be worth the trouble of readino - .”
O


“Yes; history and geography, Trix,’ his mother said,
smiling at him across the table ; “ they were his strong
points, if he had any, poor boy, because they dealt with
real people and real places. He is severely practical, as
you have said; he never has been able to develop any
imagination.”
o
“ It’s hard lines on you, isn’t it, mother ? ” he answered
good-humouredly, and then changed the subject completely,
and grew quite eloquent over the merits of a horse which
he had bought that morning. Trix seemed almost as much
interested as he. His mother listened, and asked a ques-
tion, and made a remark, then turned to Susie and began
to talk about Professor Drummond’s latest book. It was
not until dessert was on the table that the conversation
became general again, and by that time Susie had quite
decided that Mrs. Stevenson was an infinitely more interest-
ing person than her son. They went out of doors after
dinner, and staj'ed in the garden until the mosquitoes
drove them in again. Mrs. Stevenson and Susie sat on
o
the veranda facing the creek, Mr. Stevenson walked up
and down on the terrace and smoked his cigar, while Trix
flitted backwards and forwards as the fancv seized her, her
%/ '
white frock gleaming against the dark trees, her blithe
laugh ringing out in the night air.
O o O O
“How pretty she is!” Susie said once, almost without
knowing that she had said it aloud.
“ Trix ?—yes ; I never saw any one prettier, not even her
mother,” Mrs. Stevenson answered. “ She was very much
admired at home, her father tells me. I think it is rather


■wonderful that she is so utterly unspoiled by it all. For
one thing, she is the apple of his eye. I don’t know how
he would live without her. I sometimes wonder what he
will do when she marries.”
“ She says herself she is never going to do that,” Susie
replied, with a smile.
“ Yes, she says so. Other girls have said it before her.
I have no great faith in such protestations. Where have
these two people vanished to ? Do you see them any-
where, Miss Snow ? I begin to think that we shall be
devoured alive if we stay here much longer. Don’t you
think we might go in at once without waiting for them ?
They both profess not to mind mosquitoes in the least, but
lam always tormented by the wretches. I hardly dare to
go into the garden at all in the evening.”
Mrs. Stevenson rose as she spoke and led the way
indoors. The drawing-room looked prettier than ever by
lamp-light. She sank into her favourite chair, and
motioned Susie to another beside her. She had a great
many questions to ask about university work and ways;
she talked about books, and pictures, and people in a way
that showed she had kept herself in touch with the world.
Sometimes Susie’s eyes wandered to a picture on the wall,
representing a young mother with a rosy-cheeked baby.
She decided that Mrs. Stevenson must be even lovelier now
than she had been in her girlhood. Another and a more
disquieting thought had flitted across her mind, and some-
what spoiled her enjoyment of this pretty room and this
pleasant talk. Mrs. Stevenson was evidently pleased to


leave the cousins to themselves. Could it be possible
that she had made her own plans about Trix’s marriage ?
The two came in at last, both of them in rather an
apologetic mood. Trix said they had had a quarrel; Harry
described it as a difference of opinion. She asked his
mother what made him so dreadfully dogmatic; he com-
plained of the time it took to make a girl see reason.
Mrs. Stevenson laughed at them both, scolded them
impartially for deserting other people, and suggested that
the least amends they could make was to give Miss Snow
and her a little music before bedtime.
“ All right, mother,” her son replied ; “ I’m agreeable, if
Trix is. All the same, I think we’d better have prayers a
little earlier than usual to-night, for Miss Snow looks tired,
and I daresay she’s found the day long enough already.”
“ That’s a very sensible suggestion, Harry,” Trix told
him, with an approving smile. “ But you'll have plenty
of time for your song, you know ; and you need such an
amount of practice that I can’t afford to let you miss a
nio-ht. We’re to have a concert in the wool-shed, Susie,
o
on New Year’s Day. I hope you have not forgotten how
to play accompaniments; and we shall expect at least one
recitation. No, you need not shake your head so decidedly.
I know perfectly well what you can do, and we won t
take any denial—will we, Aunt May ? ”
“ You are not accustomed to being denied anything,
I think,” Mrs. Stevenson said, with a smile.—“ Trix is
director-in-chief of this concert, Miss Snow. She has
kindly taken the office upon herself; and she is rather an


exacting task-mistress. You need not hope to escape ;
but we won’t worry you about it to-night.”
“ I’ m afraid I shall not be of much use,” Susie made
haste to assure them all. “ I haven’t recited since I left
school, and I have scarcely touched a piano either. I
never was very musical.”
“ Wait till to-morrow, my friend, and then we shall see
about that,” was all the answer Trix would vouchsafe as
she seated herself at the piano.
When to-morrow came, Susie was disposed to see most
things from a different point of view. She had slept off
her weariness, though she took so long to do it that nine
o’clock had struck before she woke to find some one
bending over her.
“ 0 Trix, you are dressed! Am I late ? ” she ex-
claimed in consternation.
“ Yes, awfully. You’ll lose a conduct - mark, you
naughty girl. Didn’t you hear the bell ? Lie down
again, my dear, and don’t worry yourself. We had break-
fast an hour ago—they are early people here—and I’ll
bring you yours immediately; after that you may dress
as soon as you like, for it’s a lovely morning, and I want
to show you the garden before the sun gets hot.”
And what must your aunt think of my laziness ? ”
“ She approves of it thoroughly. She was quite pleased
to hear you were still asleep ; and Harry seemed to think
I shdw ed more sense than might have been expected of
me in not waking you. He has a fixed and rooted idea
that every girl is a chatterbox, just because she Is a


girl, and that I am a little worse than most of them.
Besides, he was quite concerned about you last night—he
thought you looked so dreadfully tired.”
“ I’m very sorry I showed it so plainly,” Susie an-
swered, with a flush of annoyance. She was not as
grateful as she might have been for Mr. Stevenson’s con-
cern. “At any rate, Trix, lam not in the least tired
now, and I am longing to see the garden.”
“ And your breakfast must be quite ready, so I’ll go
and get it.”
It was an appetizing little breakfast, and served in the
most appetizing manner. Susie fell in love with the pretty
china, and thought how much her aunt would have ad-
mired the fine napery. She enjoyed her meal none the
less because Trix sat on the foot of the bed and talked to
her; though the prospect of concerts, picnics, and parties
of various kinds was not as pleasant to her as it would
have been to most o-irls.
O
“ We shall be quite gay,” she was told, “ for the next
fortnight. The Perrys have a houseful of people, I
believe. Aunt May does not go in much for that sort of
thing. She is not strong enough to entertain, and Harry
does not care for it either. lam not sorry myself, and I
don’t suppose you are. It’s much pleasanter to be a com-
fortable little quartette. Still, I am glad the Perrys are
so near, for several reasons. Connie has promised a good
deal of help for the concert. lam sure we shall make it
a success.”
“ Is it your idea, Trix ? ” Susie asked.


“ Not entirely. Harry is as much responsible for it as I
am. He likes to do something for the station people every
Christmas. He takes a great deal of interest in his
‘ hands ’ —more than most squatters, I think—and they all
seem more or less devoted to him. The same men stay
on year after year, Aunt May says; he hardly has any
trouble with them even at shearing time. He must be
rather a particular sort of master, too; everything will
have to be done in his way or not at all, and he won’t
stand any nonsense. But I believe he is very kind to
them when they are ill, or in trouble, or go wrong in any
fashion.”
“ I should think he would be kind,” Susie said, chiefly
for the sake of saying something.
“ Yes, he’s really very good, you know, though he has
his peculiarities. Aunt May says that when she is ill he
is as useful as a daughter; and she was quite indignant
when I told her I thought he was too big for a sickroom.
O O
She laughs at him herself, and she doesn’t object to other
people’s doing so, up to a certain point; but in her heart
of hearts she thinks there is nobody like him.—Couldn’t
you possibly eat another apricot ? Then I’ll leave you to
dress, and come back in half an hour. That will give me
plenty of time to feed the fowls—some of the chicks are
such little darlings ! ”
Trix was perfectly happy here, Susie thought as she
dressed : and she seemed to have a great liking for her
' o O
cousin. Possibly Mrs. Stevenson’s plans might prosper,
always supposing they were what her guest had suspected.


“ But I daresay it was very silly of me to think of such
a thing,” Susie concluded. “ Anyhow, there is no need to
bother about it just now. Trix must marry some day, I
suppose, and I am sure there is no man in all the world
who is good enough for her; but it may not happen for
years, and I need not make myself miserable beforehand.”
So she threw open her windows, and sat down to begin
a letter to her aunt, but did not get beyond the first sen-
tence before Trix appeared again. That young woman
had a big sun-bonnet on her head, and another swinging
by its strings from her hand.
“ Bear me, Susie, have I kept you waiting ? I am so
sorry. It was Aunt May’s fault; she invited me into the
storeroom. This is a sun-bonnet, my friend, as you may per-
ceive, and quite the correct thing to wear in the country.”
“ For people who have left the nursery ?” Susie asked,
a little dubiously.
Trix did look very fascinating in hers, but Trix was no
rule for the rest of the world.
“ For everybody, without exception, grandmothers in-
wears one herself, so you needn’t ob-
ject to following her example. Put it on at once, please,
and consider it your property henceforward.”
Susie obeyed, as she obeyed most of her friend’s injunc-
tions ; and the two girls went out to the garden together.
O o
There was a fine Moreton Bay fig-tree in front of one of
Susies windows, and Trix was much interested in the
birds that haunted it, and had a vast amount of informa-
tion to give about mynas and mopokes and parrots.
uooo) 11


“ Where did you manage to learn all that ? ” Susie
asked at length.
o
Trix laughed merrily, and provoked a pair of jackasses
into an attempt to copy her.
“ I put all my wares in ray front window, as father
sometimes tells me ; you hide yours in the back of your
shop, and they have to be dragged out by degrees. That’s
the difference between us, Susie, in ordinary life. I’ve
been brushing up my knowledge about country matters
lately, and Harry is a good master to study under. He
may not be clever, but he knows the note of every bird
and the leaf of every plant in the whole district, I believe.
But come and explore the garden properly. I never saw
one I liked better anywhere, and I have seen some lovely
places.”
It was worthy of all Trix’s praise, Susie thought, even
then, and she thought so more decidedly the more she
saw of it. It was older than the house; it had had plenty
of time to mature ; it had been laid out by a man whose
hobby was landscape gardening. It was looking its best
just then, for, until the day before, the summer had been
a cool one, and dry heat and scorching wind had hardly
yet had time to touch it. There was seldom any lack of
water, even when the hot weather was at its hottest, for
the creek was close at hand ; and Mr. Stevenson prided
himself on his irrigation works. Mrs. Stevenson had
O
great love for sweet, old-fashioned flowers, so she grew
them here in rich abundance. Her husband had brought
trees from all parts of the world to beautify his Australian


home. There were terraces and lawns, winding paths and
magnificent hedges, rustic seats in shady places, an arbour
here and a fernery there. There was one walk in par-
ticular which roused Susie’s warmest admiration. It was
called the rose alley, Trix told her. It was covered in
with trellis work, and the trellis in its turn was covered
with roses. The kitchen garden lay beyond it. They
found Mrs. Stevenson there, in close consultation with an
old Chinaman whose special province it was. She wore
a sun-bonnet too, Susie Avas relieved by seeing, and it
seemed to suggest a mobcap somehoAV, and a fairy god-
mother as well.
“ Good-morning, Miss SnoAV,” she said briskly. “ There
is no need to ask you whether you have rested Avell.
Don’t let Trix over-tire you now. What do you think of
our garden ? ”
“If is the most beautiful I have ever seen,” Susie
eagerly. “It looks like a garden out of a
book.”
\ es, it is really picturesque, I think. We are very
proud of it, and a little extravagant over it also, I fear.
It takes a great deal of water to keep that grass looking
green in summer, as you may imagine. There is not
much to see here, unless you are interested in cabbages
and apple-trees. I think you can find a few strawberries
still, though Trix has been rather hard upon them.”
“ And the mulberries are just ripe,” Trix added. “ Isn’t
this a splendid tree ? I remember falling from it lono-
ago, and giving Harry such a fright. John thinks I do


more damage than the birds when I get among his precious
fruit; but he’s always rather glad to see me, all the same
-aren’t you, John?”
John’s puckered brown face broadened into a smile,
which seemed quite to confirm the statement; and Trix
led the way to the strawberry beds.
At the foot of the garden stood the old house, the
orio-inal homestead of the station —the same size now as
O
it had been fifty years ago. All later additions had dis-
appeared ; only two rooms remained. Here Susie found
something which approached her childish idea of a bush-
house. It was built of logs and roofed with bark, but
covered with creepers now until the rough walls had
become a thing of beauty. There was a little veranda
o
before and behind, with seats hollowed out of the trunks
of trees. The glass had gone from the windows, the
boards of the flooring creaked horribly, even under the
girls’ light footsteps; it was quite evident that the whole
place would have fallen to pieces if it had not been care-
fully preserved.
“ What a number of stories it would tell if it could only
speak!” Susie said, as she stood at the back-door and looked
into the empty rooms.
“ That’s just what I’ve often thought, Miss Snow,” a
voice said behind her ; and she started and turned round
quickly. Mr. Stevenson was standing at the corner of
the veranda, and Trix and she had been talking so busily
that they had not heard his approach.


CHAPTER XL
AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE.
“ T T ARRY, what are you doing here at this time of
A A day?” Trix demanded. “I thought you were
miles away.”
“ You made a mistake, then, for once,” he replied coolly.
“ I hope you're not very sorry to see me.”
“ No, not particularly, if you are disposed to be obliging.
Miss Snow wants a great deal of information that I can’t
give her. For instance, what is the date of this venerable
building ? ”
“About 1840, I think. I can’t give you the day or the
month it was begun, as there’s no authentic record. I
don’t know whether my grandfather kept a notebook ; but
if he did, it has not been preserved. Besides, in the early
days he seems to have got his houses burned as fast as he
built them.”
“ Bush tires ? ” asked Trix.
“ Bush tires, and bush-rangers, and blacks. Squatters
had lively times fifty years ago.”
“ Don’t you wish you had lived then ? Wouldn’t it
have suited you exactly ? Why did you come into the
world so much too late ? ”


“ For the pleasure of knowing 3’ou, I suppose.—This
cousin of mine is always chaffing me, Miss Snow. Travel-
ling has sharpened her wits so much that there’s no know-
ing what to say to her.—You wouldn’t have suited those
earlv days, Trix: you’re far too fine a lady.”
“ Indeed, sir; you’re very complimentary. Don’t you
suppose that some fine ladies lived in houses like this, and
showed they could rough it as well as the men ?—This was
a favourite playroom of mine, Susie, when I was here be-
fore. Sometimes the Perry boys came over to spend a
day—Connie’s step-sons, you know—and then we had
great fun. I remember one afternoon in particular, when
they acted bush-rangers, and Harry and I held the fort
against them for a couple of hours. The game was get-
ting rather like earnest, I am afraid, when a summons to
tea made a happy diversion.—You did not love the Perrys
in those days, Harry.”
“ And did you ever have real bush-rangers here ? ” Susie
inquired.
“ Not in our time,” Trix answered gravely. “ But
Harry’s grandfather saw quite enough of them, by all
accounts. They had a famous fight with them here
when Uncle Harold was a boy.”
“ Yes; one fellow was shot just about where you’re
standing, Miss Snow,” Mr. Stevenson remarked.
Susie started, and turned a shade paler.
“ How horrible ! ” she exclaimed. “ Was he killed ?
“As dead as a door nail, and it saved the hangman a
job. They were a bad lot, that gang, and he was about


the worst of them, with as many murders on his conscience
as he had fingers on his hands. My father was a youngster
then, but he had a good share in that night’s work. I
remember he brought me here once and told me the story.”
“ The man who was killed was an old convict —wasn t
he, Harry ? —who had come over from Tasmania and done
all sorts of dreadful things. What was it they called
him ?— ‘ Black ’ something or other.”
“ ‘ Black Bill,’ ” her cousin answered. “ Nobody knew
his real name. He must have been a regular terror, and
no mistake.—He wasn’t the captain of the gang, though,
Miss Snow. A fellow Harcourt was—a sort of fine gentle-
man like Starlight; but there wasn’t much to choose be-
o J
tween him and the rest of them. He was the only one
who got off that night: the others were all killed or made
C* O '
prisoners. Our people knew they might expect a visit
from the gang, so they weren’t taken by surprise; but
they had a pretty hot time of it till the troopers came up
to help them.”
“ And were there any women in the house ? ” Susie
asked.
“ No, there wasn’t one about the place—except a ‘ gin ’
or two.”
“ What a paradise it would have been for you, Harry,”
Trix remarked—“ plenty of fighting, plenty of sport, no
women to speak of, and no use for a black coat. And
now you can’t even get up a little excitement at shear-
ing time. It is hard upon you.”
“So it is, Trix; but I don’t give up hope. We may


have a row with the shearers yet, you know ; there’s no
saying what may happen. You’ll come up and help me,
won’t you, and show how well you can use a revolver ?
Have you seen all you want to see here, Miss Snow ? It’s not
much to look at; but we don’t care to pull it down, for
the sake of old times. There were other four rooms once,
two at each side; but my father got rid of them when he
built higher up. He wanted to have the place as he
remembered it first. This was the kitchen, as you can
see from the fireplace, and that was the bedroom. They
didn’t bother about drawing-rooms in those days.”
“No, I suppose they didn’t,” Susie said, with a smile,
as she thought of Mrs. Stevenson’s drawing-room. “I am
glad I didn’t live fifty years ago. But I’m very glad, too,
that you have kept this place as it used to be ; it is so
nice to see something moderately old for once.”
“ Yes; that’s a thing one does miss in Australia, Harry,
and not all your arguments can get rid of the fact. We’re
too new altogether; we haven’t any history, or any an-
tiquities worthy of the name.”
“ And no great loss either, as far as I can see. We’ve
got a fair show, and we’re making history for other
people. You’ll be an antiquity yourself, Trix, if you live
long enough ; and your great-grandchildren can make as
much fuss as they like about anything that belonged to
you. There’s a precious lot of nonsense talked about old
countries, and old places, and old stories, in my opinion.
It’s no great credit, pretty often, to have to do with them.”
Harry, you are a Goth and a Vandal, and you haven’t


such a thing as sentiment about you. You are shocking
Miss Snow utterly. You may be interested to know that
she has never been spoiled by leaving Australia, but she
has just as much fancy for antiquities as I have. Let us
change the subject before we begin to quarrel, and go and
see something that is unmistakably modern. Come and
show us the stables and kennels.”
Mr. Stevenson made no objection, and it was quite evi-
dent that he was in his element among his horses and dogs.
He was on excellent terms with them all, and had a great
deal to say about their special virtues and peculiarities.
Susie did her best to be interested, but she did not much
enjoy that part of the morning's entertainment. She did
not understand half the information she got, and she found
it hard work to control her nervousness. She was shown
a horse which she was to ride, and promised a lesson as
soon as she pleased. Trix had two habits, she was told,
and “ Captain ” was as quiet as a lamb. There was no
escaping her fate, that was plain, and her heart sank at
the prospect before her.
She was interested, however, in watching Trix and
Mr. Stevenson together. They were not behaving like
lovers, she thought, though she did not profess to be
learned in the ways of such people. They were more like
two children, in fact, and seemed to take a pleasure in
teasing and tormenting each other. Yet they were very
good friends and comrades, and Harry did his part in the
war of wits more skilfully than Susie would have ex-
pected. He was not stupid, at any rate, and he seemed


less commonplace than she had supposed, but he would
never be good enough for Trix.
Susie’s correspondence was much upon her mind, and
she escaped to her own room immediately after luncheon.
She knew her aunt would be uneasy until a letter came,
and she wanted Nelly to have one as soon as possible.
She was left in peace for about an hour, then Trix knocked
at the door, charged with an imperative summons.
“ Susie, put away your writing, please, and come to the
drawing-room. Connie has ridden over to see you at the
head of half her family, and it is the second time she has
been here in the last week. Don’t you feel yourself highly
complimented ? ”
Mrs. Perry, who had been Connie Curzon, was an old
school-fellow of both girls. Trix had been more intimate
with her than Susie ; but the latter had always looked
upon her as an important person, whose friendship was
somewhat of an honour. This was the character Connie
had borne at Stormont House ; it was one which seemed
likely to cling to her wherever she went. She had always
been a grave and dignified damsel, who never forgot what
o o 7 o
was due to herself, nor allowed other people to forget it
either. None of her old associates were greatly surprised
when they heard of her marriage, though Major Perry was
a widower with children as old as herself. It seemed to
them all exactly the sort of thing that Connie was likely
to do. She had been married for some months now, and
she was the Stevensons’ nearest neighbour. Susie had
been greatly interested in hearing all she could about her,


and Trix had reported that Connie was “ the same as ever,
only more so.”
This lucid description was really very applicable, Susie
thought, when once she had shaken hands with her old
acquaintance and found a seat beside her. The drawing-
room seemed very full of people—uncomfortably so for a
shy stranger. Quite a large party had ridden over from
Youlong. The old major was not among them, but two of
his sons were—one a schoolboy at home for the holidays,
the other a fashionable young man who seemed to have a
great deal to say to Trix. Miss Perry was there also —a
pretty girl, about her step-mother’s age —and two other
ladies from Melbourne. But Susie had eyes for none of
them but Mrs. Perry. The tall, stately, composed young
woman, sitting perfectly upright in a straight, high-backed
chair, and talking in clear, measured tones with her host-
ess, was easily recognizable. She looked cool and fresh,
though the ride had been a hot and dusty one ; not a hair
was out of place, and her habit fitted her like a glove.
She was hardly more dignified than she had been as a
school-girl, and she seemed very little older. The sight of
her carried Susie back to her first year at Stormont House.
Her greeting was very cordial, almost affectionate, but a
trifle patronizing. She said several pretty things about
' Susie’s university successes, and asked one or two questions.
Then she turned her attention to Mrs. Stevenson again, and
the girl beside her was glad to sit and listen. Mrs. Perry
had a good deal to say upon subjects which evidently seemed
very important to her. She carried her new dignities with


the greatest ease, and talked of “my sons ” and “my
daughters ” as if she were a matron of twenty years’ stand-
ing. Susie wondered whether the particular “ son ” now
talking to Trix could be one of the boys who had played
the part of bush-ranger long ago, and whom Mr. Steven-
son had not loved.
Mr. Stevenson had come in now ; his mother had sent
for him. He looked very big and manly beside the almost
effeminate Mr. Perry ; and, judging from appearances, the
old enmity had cooled, but not quite disappeared. Harry
watched his cousin closely, even while he talked to Miss
Perry and her Melbourne friends. Susie was so much
interested in watching them all that she was almost
startled when Connie addressed her again. That young
lady had put up her eyeglass, and was surveying her old
acquaintance in a characteristically deliberate fashion.
“You are really very little changed,” she remarked;
“ I should have known you anywhere. I have often
wondered whether I should ever see you again, and
whether you would be much altered. You are watching
these people now, just as you used to watch the girls at
Stormont House. You were always such a silent, thought-
ful person, you quite gave one the impression that you
would rather sit in a corner and look on at things than
take any active part in them yourself.”
“It was a true impression then,” Susie answered. “ I
am afraid I never quite belonged to your world, either then
or now.”
“Ah ! of course. You have been a blue-stockino- as lono-
O O


as I have known you—never really happy away from your
books. It does not do to be too retiring, though, in this
world, whatever it may in yours. We must see if we can-
not charm you out of vour shell. You ought to be some-
thing of a celebrity, don’t you know. Is Miss Lorraine
tremendously proud of you ? ”
“ She is pleased that I have got on so well, at any
rate,” Susie answered, with a smile.
“ Yes ; that is the modest answer to make. I should
have asked that question of Trix and not of you. You
must be quite an advertisement for Stormont House,
though I don’t know that it needed one specially. It
is the best-managed school that I ever heard of, and
Miss Lorraine is an ideal teacher. I intend to send my
youngest daughter to her in a year’s time. Alma will
be twelve then—quite old enough to begin boarding-school
life. Mr. Murray is still there, is he not ? ”
“ Yes; and he is living with the Lawrences, you know.”
“So I heard some time ago. I must say I was sur-
o %j
prised. Trix tells me that Nelly and he are very good
friends now. I suppose she must have altered a great
deal in several ways. I have not seen her since I left
school. I was very sorry to hear of the change in her
life.”
Connie Curzon, the model of propriety, had always
had a soft spot in her heart for Nelly Lawrence, the
madcap and scapegrace. The old liking was still there,
and prompted her to ask so many questions with so
much kindliness and sympathy that Susie grew every


moment more at her ease and more willing to talk.
She was almost sorry when tea was brought in, and
their tete-a-tete put an end to. She shrank back into
her shell again, and sat still and silent while other people
talked. Even Trix seemed too much occupied with the
party from Youlong to notice her, or make any attempt
to draw her into the conversation. Miss Perry was
fully employed in keeping her host at her side; and
the two matrons sat a little apart from the rest, and
discussed the iniquities of their domestics. Once more
Susie felt that she belonged to a different world.
It was not Mi'S. Perry’s way to do anything in a
hurry; and she had been in the house for some time
before she made known one of the special objects of
her visit. She was getting up a riding picnic for
Boxing Day; the young people wished it, she explained
to Mrs. Stevenson, and she hoped that that lady, her
son, and her guests would join the expedition. There
was a certain gully some miles off which, it seemed,
was well worth seeing; and if the weather were only
moderately cool, she thought they might have a very
pleasant day.
“You do ride, don’t you?” she asked, turning again
to Susie.
“ Not yet, but we mean to teach her,” Trix made
haste to answer for her. “ But she mustn’t attempt too
much at first. I’m sure Aunt May will be glad to have
her company in the pony-carriage.”
“ Very glad indeed,” Mrs. Stevenson answered kindly


!< I always preferred driving to riding, even when I
was younger than I am now,” she added, apparently for
Mrs. Perry’s benefit.
But Susie’s heart was not greatly cheered. She listened
to all the talk about horses and buo-o-ies and luncheon-
DO
baskets with a miserable prevision that she would be out
of her element, and could add nothing to other people’s
pleasure by the sacrifice of her own. What had she in
common with these gay young folk ? They would only
think her a drag and a difficulty. Trix would take
care of her, certainly; but Trix was sure to be much
in request, and must not be hampered with impedimenta.
The best Susie could hope for was that she might be
allowed to remain by Mrs. Stevenson’s side, and, like
Connie, pose as one of the seniors of the party.
When the picnic had been finally arranged for, Mrs.
Perry rose to go. But her step-daughter was by no
means ready. She seemed to be an enthusiastic horse-
woman, and Mr. Stevenson had just invited her to come
out to the stables and give her opinion upon his latest
purchase. Susie fancied that she would have preferred
to go alone ; but other people also professed a desire to
see the animal, and the end of the matter was that the
whole company went out together. Susie was wondering
whether she might without incivility make her escape,
when she found her hand drawn through Trix’s arm, and
realized that she must go where she was taken. She
was not even permitted to remain upon the outskirts
of the crowd, but was kept by her friend’s side, and


therefore near the centre of attraction. She could see
that the horse was a pretty creature, grey in colour, with
a fine, intelligent head; but her chief opinion about him
was that she would not care to be upon his back. How-
ever, she was clearly in no danger of such an experience.
Whatever might be said of him, nobody claimed that he
was, like Captain, “ as safe as a rocking-horse.”
“ He’s a bit poor,” Miss Perry said, examining him with
the air of a connoisseur.
“ But as fit as possible,” Mr. Stevenson made haste to
assure her, “ and his actions just perfect. I never saw
better. What do you think of him, Mrs. Perry ? ”
“ I am not quite sure,” she answered. “ I think, on
the whole, I had rather not attempt to ride him. He
shows too much of the white of his eye for my taste,
and takes too keen an interest in all that is going on
around him. I prefer a more sedate animal for my own
»
use.
“No, he wouldn’t suit you, Connie,” her step-son re-
marked. —“ By the way, Stevenson, did you say you
o-ot him from old Taylor ? ”
o •/
“ Yes, I did. What of that ? ” was the somewhat de
fiant rejoinder.
“ Oh, nothing, except that the brute has a reputation,
and I daresay he’ll live up to it. He’s an incorrigible
outlaw, and most people would be afraid to tackle him.
I hope you got him cheap, anyhow.”
“ I paid a fair price for him, and I expect he’ll suit
me all right. When I want to get rid of him, I’ll give


you the first offer, since you seem to know so much
about him.”
“ Thanks awfully. That’s just the very reason whv I
wouldn’t have him at any price.”
“ Nonsense, Rex ; you don t consider yourself as good
a judge of horses as Mr. Stevenson, do you ? ” his step-
mother said, rather more quickly than it was her custom
to speak.
But if her intention were to spare Mrs. Stevenson’s
nerves, she might have saved herself the trouble. That
lady had perfect confidence in her son’s horsemanship.
She had long ago given up being anxious about him.
Trix seemed more ready than she to defend his judgment.
My cousin has rather a fancy for creatures that
nobody else Mould dare to mount,’ she remarked to
Mr. Perry. “No harm has happened to him, though,
that I ever heard of, so I think our minds may be at
rest. He generally knows pretty well what he is about
when a horse is in the quastion.— What a beautiful
creature he is, Harry ! What do you mean to call him ? ”
Anything you like to fix upon. I suppose he had
a name, but I don t know it.—Miss Snow can vou su^^est
one ? ”
Susie had been keeping at a distance, as far as lay
in her power, and hoping that the inspection would soon
be over. She was somewhat startled by this direct
appeal, and answered on the spur of the moment,
“ 1 think if he were mine I should be inclined to call
him ‘ The Friar of Orders Grev.’ ”
uooo) 12


“In allusion to his colour ? asked Trix. There,
Harry; there’s a nice poetic notion for you ! Can you
do better than adopt it? The name’s rather too long
for common, everyday use; but you might call him the
‘ Friar ’ as a general rule, and add another profession to
the list you have in your stables. A ‘ Doctor,’ a ‘ Captain,’
a ‘ Rajah,’ and now a ‘ Friar.’ You should be well off.”
Mrs. Perry laughed and shook her head.
“ That horse does not suggest a friar to me, I must
say, Susie. A little more sedateness and sobriety will
be necessary before he can live up to the name }Ou ha've
given him.”
“ Oh, he’ll settle down right enough,” Mr. Stevenson
said confidently. “Miss Snow’s notion’s a very good
one, I think.—What do you say, mother? Shall we
call him the ‘ Friar ’ ? ”
Mrs. Stevenson made no objection, and the hoise was
the “ Friar ” henceforward.
Susie went back to the house feeling that she had
come out in a new character.
“ Fancy you christening a horse ! Trix said, as they
went together to dress for a drive. “ That will be one
piece of interesting information for Xell. M hat are
you going to tell her about Connie ? By-the-bye, Susie,
do you feel as if you dared to say ‘ Connie ’ any longer ?
Mrs. Perry should be treated with more respect, shouldn’t
she? Don’t you feel like a child in the schoolroom
beside her ? ”


CHAPTER XII.
HO LI DA Y-MAKING.
letter to Xelly was not finished until she
had been forty-eight hours at “ The Willows,” and
then she was able to give an account of her first riding
S e had on so much better than she expected
that she wrote of it in quite a cheerful mood. She
described her sinking of heart when she saw her horse
at the door, her terrors in trying to mount, and the
astonishment with which she had at last found herself
in the saddle. But she was able to add that the ordeal
had not been so terrible after all, and that she thought
she might in time come to discover what people found
so delightful in riding. As a matter of fact, she had
been very nervous, but she had made up her mind to
do her best and not disappoint Trix. It was quite
tiue, she was afraid, that she had always avoided at-
tempting anything which she was not likely to excel
in. That certainly had been silly and ill-advised, and
it was time to make a new departure. But she was as
much determined as ever not to make a fool of herself
if she could avoid it, and therefore she went through


her first ride with an amount of courage which Mr.
Stevenson thought was much to her credit. He had
taken care to be of the party, and had, indeed, been
instructor-in-chief. Susie wrote to Nelly that she sup-
posed he objected to his guests risking their necks, and
wanted to be at hand in case of accidents.
■‘Miss Snow seems quite a promising pupil,” Mrs.
Stevenson remarked to her son a day or two later. “ Trix
says you will make quite a horsewoman of her before
her stay here is over.”
“Yes; she doesn’t get on badly. Shell pick it up
pretty quickly if she likes to try, and it seems to me
she’ll try almost anything if Trix asks her to.”
« Yes; this is entirely to please Trix, I am sure, though
it’s none the less a good thing for herself. I am glad
that she is succeeding so well; I should have expected
her to be more nervous.”
“Poor girl, I’d be sorry for her if she were. Mhy,
mother, she was as frightened as she could be the day
she began, but she had made up her mind not to show it.
She’s got plenty of pluck, and it will take a lot to beat
her when once she means to do a thing.
“ Or when your cousin intends her to do it, which seems
to mean much the same,” Mrs. Stevenson answered, with
a smile.
Mrs. Stevenson was disposed to like Susie, and to find
her a highly-interesting study. She was fond of study-
ing her fellow-creatures, and she had reason for believing
herself a good judge of character. She was a woman


who would naturally have been more at home in a
crowded city than on a country station. She chafed
now and then against the narrowness of her life, and
longed for a wider horizon. Yet at the same time she
was never actually dissatisfied with her lot. She had
chosen it when she chose her husband; she loved it
now because she loved her son. She did occasionally
think that when she saw him safely married, she would
take a house in Melbourne, and spend most of her time
there, or start again upon her travels on the other side
of the world. She was over fifty now in years, but she
was quite two decades younger in most of her thoughts
and feelings. Like Charlotte Corday, she had never
wanted for energy, even when she had been practically
an invalid. She was much stronger now. She felt
better able to enjoy life than she had for many a day;
she was sometimes conscious of a strong desire to make
the most of what remained.
Mrs. Stevenson had read a oreat deal; books had lono-
o ' O
been her chief resource. She had travelled, too, both in
her girlhood and in her later life. She had keenly enjoyed
any pleasure that came her way, and her mind was stored
with vivid and various memories. She liked any little
change or distraction; she was always glad to see a new
face or get a glimpse of a new world. Susie meant both
to her, and therefore she never tired of talking with
o
Susie.
The two got on together well enough to satisfy even
Trix, and seemed to have endless interests in common.


They discussed all manner of questions. The third person
who listened to them sometimes complained that she felt
like a dunce in their company. They did not always
absolutely agree, and Mrs. Stevenson did not scruple to
say that Miss Snow would not be quite so sure of some
thin era when she was a little older. Nevertheless it was
O
very plain that she was pleased with the girl, and had a
decided respect for her opinions; while Susie, on her side,
thought that Trix’s aunt grew even more charming the
better one knew her. Each praised the other to Trix, and
she agreed with them both, and congratulated herself
anew on having brought them together. But she heard
o o O
nothing, naturally enough, of the idea that sometimes
flitted through the mind of her aunt. When Harry was
married, Mrs. Stevenson thought she certainly must go
back to Europe for a year or two. She would not care to
go alone, and she could not wish for a better companion
than Susie Snow. But then she had always intended that
Harry should marry Trix.
She was not in any hurry for such an event, and she
did not mean to hasten it in any way. It seemed so very
suitable, that she felt it must come about; it seemed so
very desirable, that she often thought she did desire it.
But in her heart of hearts she knew that she did not want
her son to marry anybody yet. Some day he must, no
doubt- and then he could find no better wife than Trix.
Meanwhile he was his mother’s only son, and she was a
widow.
Susie’s first fortnight at “ The Willows ” was a busy
O *


and, for her, rather a bewildering time. Holiday-making
seemed to be the chief business of life, and in some respects
she found it hard work. Yet she enjoyed many things,
and found others less terrible than she had anticipated.
She was not troubled with much tennis, but Trix taught
her to play golf. Trix was practising photography, too;
and whatever she did she insisted upon her friend’s doing
also —even to making butter and feeding poultry. Susie
learned to fish and to row; she was taken for long drives,
to visit at the neighbouring stations, and to see the beauties
OO '
of the district. She was taken to see a cricket match
also, where she had an opportunity of watching her host
distinguish himself, and of being instructed by Trix in the
rules of the game. As for the riding lessons, they went
on apace. Sometimes the two girls set out together, but
Mr. Stevenson generally managed to join them ; and when
the party was a larger one, he made Susie his special care.
Susie thought him very good-natured to take so much
trouble with her; but she never felt quite at ease in his
company, and was always wondering what they could find
to talk about next. She made such good progress, how-
ever, under his tuition, that when the day came for the
Perrys’ picnic, she was able to ride all the way to the
gully, since a change in their arrangements rendered it
desirable.
The day was all that could be wished for, and Connie’s
guests seemed to enjoy themselves thoroughly. They
were quite a large party, and she had catered most
carefully for their comfort. Her step-son Rex kept


closely at Trix’s side, but Miss Perry sighed in vain for
Mr. Stevenson. He was determined to watch over Susie
and give her all the instruction she needed. The two
were half an hour later than the rest in reaching their
destination; but he assured his pupil that time was no
object. The great thing was to take it easy and not hurry
themselves, and then she would not be tired out for the
rest of the day. It was the first time that Susie had been
left so completely to Mr. Stevenson’s society, and she was
surprised to find him such a pleasant companion. He
gave her a great deal of information concerning birds, and
plants, and the country through which they passed; he
told her several stories about horses, and dogs, and other
creatures that he had possessed. He was riding his new
purchase that day, and the “ Friar ” behaved to perfection.
As for the “ Captain,” Susie had almost conquered her terror
of him.
“You’ve got on awfully well, Miss Snow,” her instructor
remarked, when they came in sight of the gully and the
fire which Trix and Mr. Perry were kindling. “ You’re
not so nervous as you used to be, are you ? ”
“ No, not nearly,” Susie answered, with the smile that
sometimes made her face so pleasant to look at. She was
feeling very well pleased with herself, though, at the
same time, very thankful that she would soon be out of
the saddle. “Riding is still rather a fearful joy, I confess;
but the joy is beginning to overbalance the fear. I see
now where the fascination comes in that I used to think
so incomprehensible. Will you be able 'to give me a


certificate of competency in riding before I go home, Mr.
Stevenson ? ”
“ Yes, if you’re not in too big a hurry about going.
You’ve got a lot to learn yet, you know.”
“ I am surprised that that girl is not more tired,” Mrs.
Stevenson said to her son a couple of hours later. “ She
seems almost as fresh as Trix.”
“ I don’t know about that,” he answered. “ Trix wanted
her to go and get ferns, and that was enough for Miss
Snow, tired or not tired.”
“ Apparently it was not enough for you,” his mother
remarked, looking rather curiously at him, as he lay
stretched on the grass at her feet.
“ No, it wasn’t. I’m not so obliging; and I preferred
to stay with you,” he answered calmly. “ You’d better
take Miss Snow home with you, anyhow. She’ll be tired
enough before the day’s over.”
“ I suspect most of us will be. I hope Trix means to
let you and herself off practising this evening.”
“ She’ll probably find she has to. We’ll have rehearsals
enough next week; that ought to satisfy her. For my
part, I’ll be rather glad when the concert is over.”
“ You will have reason to be grateful to your cousin
also,” Mrs. Stevenson said. “I am sure it will not be her
fault if the thino- is not a success.”
o
“ Oh, it will be a success right enough. You needn’t
have any doubts of that, mother. I'd back Trix to carry
anything through. She’s looking awfully pretty to-day,
don’t you think ? ”


“ She always does, if you want my opinion. I never
knew another girl who did to the same extent.”
“ Well, no; I don’t suppose I’ve known one either,”
Mr. Stevenson answered meditatively; and his mother
wondered whether he would not have said more still on
the subject if their talk had not then been interrupted.
Susie, also, felt that she would be glad when the concert
was over. The thought of it had been a terror to her
ever since she first heard of Trix’s plans. She had had
no good music lessons until she was fifteen, and her talents
in that direction had never been remarkable. Still, she
had made the most of her opportunities as long as she
remained at Stormont House, and had often played Trix’s
accompaniments in Miss Lorraine’s drawing-room. The
Lorraines believed in inviting their pupils to spend an
evening with them from time to time, as the best means
of training the girls to take their places in society.
Every one was expected to contribute something to the
entertainment of the others. In her last year at school,
Susie was always called upon for a recitation. She could
recite very well, there was no doubt of that; but it
always cost her an effort. Her teachers had seen her
capabilities, and had done their best to develop them.
But they had never succeeded in curing her of stage-
fright ; and when she had to appear before a larger
audience, the attacks were sometimes agonizing. School
concerts had always been dreadful days in Susie’s life,
though she had never failed to acquit herself well when
the critical moment arrived. She had not attempted


anything of the kind since she left school, and the
prospect before her now was somewhat overwhelming.
Trix, however, was inexorable.
“ I think you really will have to let me off,” Susie said
at last, and said it only a short time before the concert
was to begin. Trix and she were together in her bed-
C? O
room—Trix’s having been given up to two girls who had
come from some distance to help, and were to stay for the
night. They were lively neighbours, who kept up a
constant conversation through the open door, burst in on
some errand or other every five minutes, and added
considerably to Susie’s misery. Her hands were shaking
so that she could hardly fasten Trix’s frock—the maid’s
services were much in request in the other room—and her
head was aching from nervous excitement. She had been
hard at work rehearsing all the morning, and decorating
most of the afternoon; an hour’s rest had only given her
more time to realize what lay before her. She thought of
all the unfamiliar, critical people that would soon gather in
the wool-shed, and she felt now that she could not face
them from the platform.
“Do get Miss Grieve to play your accompaniments,
please,” she pleaded. “ She knows the songs, and she
won’t mind.”
“ Indeed, I’ll do nothing of the sort. I want them
decently played, and I know I can trust you when the
time comes. That was always the way with you, Susie.
You never did yourself justice at rehearsals, but at the last
moment you astonished us all. This won’t be any worse


than a Stormont House function; indeed, it won’t be
nearly so bad, for we shall not have such a critical
audience. You needn’t look at anything but your music
when you sit down to the piano, and you probably won’t
see the people at all when you stand up to recite. You are
o-nincr to be a success, whatever you may think; and I
can’t spare my best performer. My dear girl, do try to
stand still until I get these flowers fastened in. Fancy
Harry taking the trouble to gather them for us! He
actually asked me what colours we meant to wear, so that
he might be sure not to make a mistake. Don’t you
o v
think we may consider ourselves highly honoured ? ”
But Susie could think of nothing except the trial before
her. She was not so much afraid of her own recitation;
she knew that if she could only get through the first verse
safely, she need have no further fears of breaking down.
The very length of the poem was an advantage. She
could always trust her memory, and her confidence would
grow as she went on. During her last year at school she
had learned “ The High Tide on the Coast of Lincolnshire.”
Miss Lorraine had been very much pleased with her
rendering of it, and Trix had insisted now on giving it a
prominent position in the progi’amme. If she had only
not insisted also that her friend should play the accom-
paniments for both her songs, Susie would have looked
forward to the evening with more equanimity.
“ Susie Snow seems almost ill with nervousness,’ Mrs.
Stevenson whispered to her niece when they all met in
the drawing-room, “ She admits having a headache, and
O


really, my dear, I am troubled about her. Do you think
she will get through the evening without breaking down?”
“ Yes ;as well as any one. Susie’s not of the breaking-
down sort, or the giving-in sort either. I’m awfully sorry
she’s so nervous. I didn’t think she would be when it
came to the point, or I wouldn’t have bothered her with
my accompaniments ; but I am certain she would be vexed
afterwards if we made any change now, and I am not in
the least nervous about her—l know her too well.”
The event proved that Trix was right. Trix’s first song-
had been given an early place upon the programme, and
Susie forgot herself altogether in her desire to do justice
to her friend. She played very softly and sympathetically,
and went oft' the platform with a considerable access of
courage. Her turn to recite was reached soon after, and
Mrs. Stevenson was quite astonished to see how calm and
composed she looked. The one thing she had stipulated
for was permission to sit down; so she sat accordingly,
and spoke her piece in a sweet, clear voice, and in the
simplest, most natural manner. The audience listened
spell-bound : several eyes were wet before she had gone
far; and the thunder of applause that broke out when
she had finished, proved conclusively what people thought
of it. She had astonished most of her acquaintances again,
and Trix was triumphant accordingly.
“ Yours was the best of the lot, Miss Snow,” Mr. Stevenson
said, later on in the evening. The concert was over then.
f o
It had been a great success throughout, and the room was
cleared for dancing. It was full to overflowing, for people


had come from far and near, and the atmosphere was be-
coming unpleasantly close. Susie’s headache had vanished
completely during Trix’s first song. She feared it was
returning now, and all the compliments she had listened
to had not charmed it away. Connie had just left her.
She was standing in a corner of the room, feeling a little
flat after so much excitement, and a little lonely as well,
when she heard Mr. Stevenson’s voice beside her.
“ Don’t you think w T e’d be better out of here ? ” he
suggested. “ There’s hardly room to turn round in. You
don’t care much about dancing, do you, Miss Snow ? ”
“About as much as you do, I think, Mr. Stevenson,
judging from your behaviour the night we were at
Youlong,” Susie answered, with a smile. “ Isn’t it your
duty, though, to find a partner now ? ”
“ Not that I know of,” he replied, in the downright fashion
that was rather a habit of his. “ I’d be sorry for the
partner, wdroever she was. The fact is, Miss Snow, I never
dance. I hate it. I’m too big, and I’m always treading on
somebody’s skirt, and getting into messes generally, if I
try it. Besides, I think people look like a set of fools
spinning round like that. Trix and that fellow Perry
seem to get on awfully well together.”
“ Yes, they do,” Susie answered demurely, and Avondered
if her companion were jealous. Mr. Perry would be her
choice for her friend even less than Mr. Stevenson ; but she
did not think there was much danger in either direction.
Y ith a spice of mischief she added, “He dances very
well. Trix says he is one of the best partners she ever had.”


“ Oh, his dancing’s all right,” Mr. Stevenson responded,
in a tone which seemed to hint that other things about him
might not be. “ Come this way, Miss Snow, and we’ll get
a breath of fresh air. I suppose you’re as glad as I am
that this affair is over. It’s been a great success, though,
O 7 “ '
hasn’t it ? —the best concert we’ve ever had, I think. It
was a treat to watch some of these men’s faces.”
“ Yes, I am glad it is over, and over so well. Trix
must be satisfied, I should think. How splendidly she
managed everything ! ”
“Yes, it was she who ran the show, whatever other
people did. I’m very glad she got you to recite, Miss
Snow, It was awfully good of you to do it. What made
you choose such a sad piece, though ? My mother says
you nearly made her cry.”
Susie shrugged her shoulders imperceptibly under her
opera-cloak. She knew that Mr. Stevenson did not profess
to care for such things, and she hardly expected him to
appreciate the beauty of Jean Ingelow’s pathetic poem.
“ I learned it when I was at school,” she answered, “ and
it is one of the loveliest things I know.”
“\V ell, you know how to make other people see the
loveliness of it, anyhow,” he said, somewhat to her surprise.
“ I never saw much in poetry before, and I never could
understand why people shouldn’t say what they wanted to
in prose ; but to-night I nearly made a fool of myself.
\ou’ve had plenty of compliments, Miss Snow; but if you
only knew it, that’s about the biggest of them.”


CHAPTER XIII.
THE END OF THE “FRIAR.”
“ OUSIE, it’s much cooler now. Do you feel inclined
for a drive ? ”
Susie was sitting in a corner of the veranda, with a
book upon her knee. It was one of her text-books for
next year. She had intended to do a certain amount of
reading at “ The Willows,” and she was annoyed to find
how little she had accomplished. She had always been
rather a hard task-mistress to herself, setting a piece of
work to be done in a certain time, and allowing nothino- to
O O
turn her from her intention. Here, however, there seemed
to be something in the air that made it impossible for her
to give her mind to classics and moral philosophy. Whether
it were due to Trix’s constant company, or to her absence
from her own room and her own writing-table, or to the
atmosphere of the house generally, she did not know; but,
at all events, she felt demoralized. It was nearly four
weeks since she left Melbourne, and she had next to
nothing to show for her time in the way of preparation
for her year’s work. On this afternoon, to be sure, she
had done something, but that was only because there was


little else for her to do. Mrs. Stevenson had gone to her
bedroom with a bad headache after luncheon, and Trix
had been nursing her, therefore Susie had the veranda to
herself. When the blinds were down, this sheltered corner
was one of the coolest places to be found in or about the
house. It was one of the quietest, too. There was scarcely
a sound to be heard except the drowsy buzzing of flies.
The heat of the afternoon had silenced every other creature.
Perhaps it had made Susie lazy also ; at any rate, she had
grown weary of her work far sooner than she felt she
should have done.
As far as work -was concerned, indeed, it seemed hio-h
time for her to go home; yet she was in no hurry to do so,
and she was rather glad that it was out of her power for
the present. Mrs. Stevenson would not hear of her leav-
ing before the Lawrences, and they were not even expected
to arrive until the end of that week. Trix and she had
just returned from a few days’ visit to Connie, and “The
Willows” seemed now quite home-like. Mrs. Stevenson
was more delightful than ever, and her son contrasted very
well indeed with any of the men at Youlong. The major
himself was the only one of them whom Susie had man-
aged to like, and Miss Perry had inspired her with a great
aversion to “ horsy ” young women. Yes, it was very
pleasant to be back again in her old quarters. She
had enjoyed this last month a great deal more than she
had anticipated. She had done quite a number of things
she had never expected to do. The world was worth
living in, even beyond university walls. She was begin-
(i.ooo) 13


ning to fear, indeed, that she had a natural predisposition
to idleness. At all events, she was very glad when Trix
appeared at the drawing-room window, and she knew that
her chance of study for that afternoon was over.
She sprang up quickly and closed her book.
“Have you been with your aunt all this time, Trix?
How is she now ? Better, I hope.”
“ Yes, much better, thank you; neaidy all right, I think.
She wouldn't have me any longer, but told me to look
after you instead, and see that you weren’t working too
hard.”
“ Indeed, you needn’t have been afraid of that,” Susie
answered dolefully. “ I haven’t much to show for my
afternoon. I don’t know what spirit of laziness has taken
possession of me lately.”
“ I don’t know either,” Trix answered, with a silvery
lauo-h. “ I wish you would introduce him to me, and I’d
O *
ask him to call a little oftener. It is delightful to see you
doing a * loaf,’ as Harry would say. lam afraid lam get-
ting as slangy as Nell used to be. Dear old Nell! Isnt
it nice to think she will be here so soon ? I am sure she
will say that idleness has agreed with you, Susie. You
are looking ever so much stronger than when you came up.
Aunt May begins to think that all the cream she has made
you swallow has worked a transformation. W hat an atro-
cious book ! No wonder you can’t get through much of it
on a hot afternoon. Do put it away and pour out the
tea, and I’ll go and order the ponies.”
Half an hour later the two girls were sitting side by


side in the phaeton. The weather was certainly cooler
than it had been, but Susie was inclined to think they
would still have felt more comfortable indoors. There had
been a wave of heat since the beginning of the year, and
already it had worked a disastrous change. The grass
was brown and dry, the ground hard and parched. The
cieek was steadily falling, and the winds that came over
the plains made one think of the breath of a furnace. The
long, winding road through the paddock lay white and
glaring in the sunshine. The sheep had gathered in the
shade wherever they could find a clump of trees. There
was scarcely a sign of life anywhere. Every creature
seemed to be silent and languid on such an afternoon—
every creature, indeed, but the flies, which drove Trix
almost to distraction by getting in under her bonnet, and
\ isiting mouth, and ears, and eyes with their unwelcome
attentions.
“ You really would be better off in a hat,” Susie told
her. “ They can’t get through my veil. Besides, I always
think a sun-bonnet such a hot, close sort of a thino- ”
O*
“Xonsense, Susie; you are prejudiced against them,”
Tnx replied, with unwanted asperity. “ Oh! the little
wretches will drive me crazy. I think flies are really
worse than mosquitoes. It will be a little cooler over
there, Susie, at that clump of wattle-trees. We’ll give
the ponies a rest for a while in the shade, and then we’ll
go home. It’s too hot still for any one but Harry or a
salamander.”
“ Mr. Stevenson does not seem to mind any sort of heat,”


said Susie. “ I suppose he likes spending the whole day
in the saddle, whatever the weather may be. I wonder
how the ‘ Friar’ is behaving to-day.”
“ I daresay he knows better by this time than to try
any tricks with his master. I shouldn’t like to ride him
myself, I admit, though I don’t think I’m specially timid;
but Harry can do anything he pleases with any sort of
four-legged creature, and he likes a horse that every one
else is afraid of.”
Susie made no reply ; it was too hot for unnecessary
talking. The trees looked very inviting, but she wished
O •/ O'
that Trix would turn the ponies’ heads at once and let
them go home. Then suddenly she took hold of her
friend’s arm.
“ Look, Trix, look ! ” she exclaimed. “ There’s some-
body lying on the ground by these bushes near the fence.
Do you think there can have been an accident ? ”
Trix looked, turned her ponies’ heads, and drove swiftly
forward.
“ What a good thing you noticed it, Susie ! ” she said.
“ I hope nothing dreadful has happened. Oh, there is a
horse too. And lam almost afraid it is Harry.”
It was Harry, as they knew beyond a doubt in another
minute. He was lying near a clump of salt-bush, his eyes
closed, his face white, his hair matted with dust and blood.
His horse lay, a few yards off, close to a heavy log-fence.
It was clear enough that there had been an accident; it
was not so clear how much mischief had been done.
For the first time since Susie had known her, Trix


seemed to lose her head altogether. She flung the reins
to her friend, sprang out of the phaeton, knelt down by
her cousin’s side, then started up again with a cry of
horror and a face as white as his.
“ 0 Susie, he’s dead; I know he is. Come and look
at him, quick! Oh, what shall we do? That horrid
horse has thrown him, and he’s killed.”
Xo, no j it can tbe that. A ery likely he has only
fainted,’ Susie answered with an assurance that she was
far from feeling.
O
She too sprang out of the phaeton, and knelt down
beside that strangely stiff and motionless figure. It was
terrible to see him, the man who had always seemed so
full of life and energy, lying there helpless and unconscious
of everything around him. One hand still grasped his
v hip, his hat had fallen oft. There was a cut above one
temple w Inch did not look very deep, but there was no
saying how many other injuries might have been done.
There came into Susie s mind some vague reminiscences of
some ambulance lectures she had once attended, and her
common sense told her that one of the first things to do
vas to find some shield from the pitiless sunshine.
Tiix, gh e me my sunshade, please. I’m sure he is
still alive. W here can we go for water ? Yes; I can
feel his heart beating. Don’t be frightened : we’ll manage
CD? £3
to bring him round. No ; I don’t think you ought to raise
his head. I’m certain we were told not to do that when
people had fainted. \\ e must get some water somewhere.”
“ The creek’s the only place,” answered Trix, who was


still pale and trembling. “ I’ll drive over at once. What
can we carry it in ? Oh, there is his hat. He must have
been thrown right into the bushes. 0 Susie, isn’t it
dreadful!”
She did not waste much time in lamentations, though.
In another moment she had secured the hat, and was
hurrying across the paddock to the creek. Susie was left
alone, feeling helpless and bewildered in spite of her brave
words. Mr. Stevenson looked so ghastly and death-like,
he must have been terribly injured; he might die at any
moment, and there was no one now, not even Trix, within
sight or hearing.
o o
She could not think of anything else to do for him.
She had opened his coat and loosened his collar; she was
afraid to chafe his hands, for it seemed to her now that
one arm must have been injured. She had taken out her
handkerchief and bound up his head, though the sight of
blood had almost sickened her. She was terribly afraid of
doing something wrong. It seemed really safer to do
nothing but sit still and shield him from the sun. Would
it be possible, when Trix came back, to drag him into a
more comfortable position ? Could he have been lying
here long ? Surely not, for he had talked of coming
home early. What would she not give now to remember
some of the instruction which she had received at Stor-
mont House, and hardly thought about again since getting
her certificate ?
Would Trix never return ? Surely she had had time
enough now to get anything. Could she possibly have


gone somewhere else to get help ? That would he needed
too, but water was the first necessity. Every moment
might be of priceless value now. Poor Mrs. Stevenson!
Who should tell her, and what would she do? Was he
really beginning to come to himself, or was it only Susie s
fancy ? No, it was no fancy ;he stirred a little, a faint
moan came from between his parted lips, and his eyes
opened and closed again.
“ Water,” he muttered hoarsely. Oh, why had not
Trix come back ?
“ You shall have some in a minute, Mr. Stevenson,”
Susie answered quickly. “ Trix has gone for it; she will
be back directly.”
He opened his eyes once more and looked up at her.
“ You here, Miss Snow ! What has happened ? Have I
had a spill ? Oh ! ” >
He had made an attempt to move, and the change that
came over his face, and the cry that was wrung from his
lips, convinced Susie—if she needed convincing—that
some damage had been done.
“ Oh, lie still, lie still! ” she cried, in terror at the harm
lie might do himself. “ There is Trix coming now. You
will be better when you have had a drink. Yes, you were
thrown from your horse, and we found you here. —O
Trix, you see he is better ; he has come to himself without
the help of the water.”
“ I thought I should never have got it over here with-
out spilling some,” Trix answered, as she knelt down
beside her cousin again, carefully holding her precious


burden. That s whit ms.de me so long.—See, Hairy j
can you manage to drink out of your hat ?—Susie, if
you’ll raise his head. Yes, that’s right.”
Between them the operation was completed. Susie
helped him into another position, though she saw him
wince as he moved, and Trix held the water to his lips.
He drank a long draught, then lay back again. The next
moment he seemed to have pulled himself together, and
e mana o ed to summon up a smile that was wonderfully
cheerful under the circumstances.
Thanks awfully, he said; “ that’s made a new man of
me. I’m as sorry as I can be to give you so much trouble.”
“Never mind that, Harry,” Trix cried eagerly. She
was kneeling by him still, looking down into his face with
hers full of pity and sympathy. “ Where are you hurt ?
Y hat do you think has happened? Do you feel any
easier now ? ”
“ I expect I have broken my arm,” he answered. “It
feels like it anyhow, and there’s something wrong with mv
shoulder. That horse was one too many for me, after all.
I daresay I could get into the phaeton if you’d bring it a
bit nearer.”
Do you really think so ? ” Susie asked doubtfully ; and
Trix made haste to add, —
“ I’ m sure you’d better not try. I’ll go at once and get
them to bring a wa^on.”
o o
But Mr. Stevenson was not to be dissuaded; he in-
sisted on having the phaeton brought up beside him. He
took a tirm grasp of the bushes with his uninjured hand,


He drank a leng draught , then lay lack again.'




and managed to drag himself up into a sitting position.
But he could go no farther, and fell back again, frowning
and biting his lip with pain.
“ No, Harry, it’s no use; you mustn’t attempt it,” Trix
said authoritatively. “ Take some more water. Just be
sensible, and lie still for a little longer. Susie will stay
with you, and I'll be back immediately with some help.”
“ Take care how you tell mother, then,” he answered.
“ Don’t give her a fright if you can help it. Be sure you
tell her yourself.”
“ Yes, I will, I promise you, and I’ll be as careful as I
can. Don’t worry, Harry, but lie still. —Susie, this will
do to put under his head.”
“ This ” was a light carriage-rug which the girls had
brought out with them. Trix handed it to Susie as she
spoke, and Susie rolled it up and put it under Mr. Steven-
son’s head.
“ She will do everything properly, you may be sure,”
she said soothingly. “ That is better, isn’t it ? You don’t
feel the sun in your eyes ? ”
Not in the least,” he answered gratefully. “ It’s
awfully good of you both. I don’t know what possessed
me to be such an idiot. I never fainted before in my life,
but I suppose I must have done it now.”
“ You couldn’t have helped it, you know,” she said gently.
“ The fall must have stunned you, Mr. Stevenson. Can I
get at your handkerchief ? I think that perhaps I might
be able to do something for your arm. Have you a pen-
knife ? and would you mind if I ripped up your sleeve ?”


“ Not a bit,” be assured her, with a glimmer of a smile
on his face; and he managed to supply her with both the
articles she wanted. Her fingers trembled a good deal as
she set to work, and her knowledge was not very ex-
tensive. But she had some idea of what to do, and she
did manage to make a fairly respectable bandage. She
was not nearly so terrified now to make the attempt, since
Mr. Stevenson had recovered consciousness. He thanked
her warmly, and declared himself much more comfortable.
“ I didn’t know you learned that sort of thing at the
university,” he said presently.
“We don’t,” she answered —“at least I didn’t. I went
to an ambulance class at school—first aid to the injured,
you know —and I wish I could remember a little more of
what I learned there. One forgets things of that sort so
easily when one has no reason to put them into practice.
Perhaps I need not have sacrificed your sleeve, after all.”
“ Never mind; it’s no great loss. I’m sure you did
the best thing that could have been done. You’re a
regular good Samaritan, Miss Snow; and I feel a long
way better now. I believe I could get home well enough
in the phaeton, if Trix hadn’t driven off in such a hurry.
I don’t mind the pain so much; it’s that horrid dizziness I
object to. I must have gone right over on the top of my
head, I suppose. The last thing I remember is tumbling
straight into these bushes, and thinking it was all up with
me. By the way, do you know what became of the
horse ? ”
“ He’s lying over there by the fence; he’s quite dead, I


think. Your saddle and hat were among the bushes.
Trix and I came out for a drive after tea, and we found
you lying here. I am sure you ought not to talk, Mi.
Stevenson; and you know you should keep your arm
still.”
“ All right; I’ll do as I’m told,” he answered, and closed
his eyes again. Susie sat and watched him, using a little
branch of a tree as a whisk to keep oil the flies. She
wondered when, at the soonest, help could come. He
seemed to her very much as if he were going to faint
ao-ain, and she did not trust herself to think of what he
must be suffering. How bravely he was keeping up!
She almost wished he would groan or grumble a little;
she was sure it would be some relief to him. How glad
she would be if she could only do something else to help
him! She would go to the next course of ambulance
lectures that she heard of, and try to remember better
what she was taught there.


CHAPTER XIV.
BREAKING THE NEWS.
IT OW slowly the minutes dragged on; How very hot
it was out here ! How could it take so lono- to
O
carry the news to the house and bring down a wagon ?
There was no sign of its coming as yet. From where
Susie sat she could see nothing but the long stretches of
o o
paddock and the white, dusty road. A flock of cockatoos
flew by above her head like a white cloud crossing the
sky; a lizard wriggled across a patch of bare ground just
beyond Mr. Stevenson’s foot; a little colony of ants
crawled in and out, under and over, a fallen log which lay
beside her. Susie was seized with a terrible sense of lone-
liness and desolation. She looked down at her com-
panion’s face once more, with a sudden fear of what she
might see there. If he were fainting again, or dying,
what could she do for him ? how could she help' him ?
And other help was so long in coming.
To her relief he opened his eyes and looked a little
more like his usual self, as he turned his head slightly to
O J
speak to her.
“ You’re keeping the sun off me, Miss Snow ; but aren’t


you getting all the benefit of it yourself ? You’d be
much more comfortable if you would move a little to the
right.”
And he would be much less so, as Susie quite under-
stood, and therefore declined to stir.
“ I don’t mind the sun,” she insisted. “ I only wish I
could do something to make you a little more comfortable.”
“ Oh, I’m all right; don’t worry about me. It’s not
such a bad smash as it might have been. The thing that
o o
bothers me most is the fright my mother will get. I
hope Trix will manage not to scare her.”
“ I’m sure she will do her best not to. She will have
plenty of time to think of the right thing to say before-
hand, and then Mrs. Stevenson won’t have long to wait till
7 O
she sees you for herself.”
“ I wish I had managed to go home, though. You don’t
OO ? O
know how bad it is for my mother to get a shock of any
kind, and she always fancies that things are worse than
they are. She won’t believe that I’m not dead till she
sees me.”
“ Perhaps she won’t know anything about it till she does
see you,” Susie suggested. “ She may be asleep. She was
lying down in her own room when we left. There’s some-
body coming now, Mr. Stevenson—a man on horseback.”
It was one of the grooms on his way for the doctor, but
he had been told where to find his master, and directed to
bring him the news that a wagon was coming. He had
brought a flask of brandy, too, and nothing could have been
more acceptable.


“ It’s a bad business, Joe,” Mr. Stevenson said; and Susie
noticed how much stronger his voice was, now that he had
had a mouthful of stimulant. “ But it might have been
worse, and the wonder is it wasn’t. Just have a look at
the horse, will you ? I expect the poor brute is done for.”
“ He’s broke his neck, sir,” the man reported after a
minute’s inspection, and then mounted once more and
rode off.
“ So that’s the end of the * Friar,’ Miss Snow,” Mr. Steven-
son said, with a sigh. “ I wonder what the Perrys will say
about it. It was a bit of regular bad luck, too. He’d been
playing up a little all the afternoon, but I’d have got him
home all right if we hadn’t met one of those reaper-and-
binders that was being; carted down to town. As soon as
I saw it I knew I might look out for squalls. I had got
him nearly past it, though, with no trouble at all, when all
of a sudden he flung back his head and shot up in the air.
I never knew a horse to go so high. He went up three
times, and the third time I was all ready to throw myself
off, because I knew he was a beggar to rear ; but he snatched
the bridle away, and flung himself forward, and bucked
twice, and pitched me right into these bushes. I went
down headfirst, and that’s all I know about the business.”
It seemed to be some satisfaction to Mr. Stevenson to
talk about his mishap, and therefore Susie listened, though
she had an uneasy feeling that he might be doing himself
harm. She was very thankful to see the wagon appear at
last, and then her responsibilities were over. Every pre-
paration had been made for his comfort during the home-


ward journey, and it was accomplished as quickly and as
easily as was possible under the circumstances. When
they reached the house Trix was waiting for them on the
veranda, and Mr. Stevenson’s first inquiry was for his
mother.
“ She’s fast asleep,” his cousin answered, “ and I thought
that it would be a shame to wake her. So you see she’ll
know nothing about it until she hears you’re safely in the
house. I’ll go and tell her presently. Your room is ready,
and we’ll hope that Joe will get the doctor quickly.”
Trix seemed, indeed, to have arranged for everything, and
the servants had seconded her very helpfully. Susie went
off to her bedroom at once, feeling as if days instead of
hours might have passed since she left it. She was very
thankful to take off her hat and then lie down upon her
bed. Trix joined her presently, but did not dare to linger.
She had something else to do before she could afford to rest.
“ I must go to Aunt May at once,” she said, looking very
much as if she did not like the prospect. “ I can’t leave it
any longer now. It’s a great blessing that she’s slept so
long, but she’s almost sure to be awake again by this time.
We can’t risk her coming out of her room and making dis-
o o
coveries, though I’m sure I don’t know how I’m going to
tell her.”
Mrs. Stevenson was awake, and was sitting before her
looking-glass, when Trix knocked at the door. Her long,
grey tresses—as abundant still as they had been twenty
years ago—fell about her like a silvery veil. She turned
round with a smile as her niece came in.


“ Why did you let me sleep so long ? ” she asked. “It
is nearly dinner-time, and I have just wakened. \ou are
not dressed either. Have you only now come in ? ”
“ Never mind me,” Trix answered, taking care to keep
behind her aunt’s chair. “ I’ll have plenty of time for all
I want to do. Let me put up your hair for you. Ido
like to handle it, it is so soft and fine. How does your
head feel now ? ”
“ Quite well again, thank you. My long sleep has done
me a world of good. Did you have a pleasant drive ?
Didn’t you find it rather too hot ? ”
“ Yes, it was, I must admit. If we had known how hot
it would be I think we should have stayed at home.”
“ And yet you must have been out for a very long time.
Where did you go ? omy dear child, what are you
about ? You are not a very skilful maid to-night,” Mrs.
Stevenson said, with some annoyance in her tones, for
Trix’s hands were trembling so that she could scarcely do
her work, and she was gathering the hair into one loose
knot instead of the elaborate rolls and puffs in which it
was usually arranged.
“Do you mind my doing it like this ? ” she asked. “ It’s
much more comfortable, isn’t it, and much quicker ? Yes;
we were out longer than we expected to be. Harry and
Susie have just come home. He wants to see you as soon
as you are ready, he says, and that is why I want you to
hurry. Do you know, we ought all to be very glad and
thankful this eveningr. He has had an accident, but it
might have been a very much worse one. He was hurt—he


has had his arm broken, we think; but he is safely in
his own room, and the one thing that worries him is
that he is afraid you will be more frightened than you
need be.”
Trix had spoken rapidly when she once began to tell her
stoi y for she was eager to get it over as soon as possible.
She was afraid that she had been too abrupt, when she saw
her aunt’s face.
“ What is it ? ” Mrs. Stevenson asked hoarsely. “ What
has happened ? How was he hurt ? ”
, He was thrown from his horse,” her niece answered
hurriedly—“ that new one, you know, the ‘Friar.’ His arm
is broken, they say, and his head cut; but he talks quite
cheerfully about himself. Susie and I came across him,
fortunately. We thought at first of bringing him home in
the phaeton, then we made up our minds it would be better
to get a wagon. So I came home for help, and Susie
stayed with him. I sent for the doctor, too, and he should
be here soon. Jackson has been helping Harry into bed
its much the best place for him, of course—and we may
have an invalid on our hands for a while; but it is not
half so bad as it might have been. Ton had better just
put on this tea-gown again, I think.”
“ \ es; give it to me, quick. Let me go to him, Trix.
I'U never forgive you if you are deceiving me. Tell me
outright—is he dying ? ”
Xo, auntie dear, no indeed. Why, he talks very much
like his ordinary self; and he looks ever so much better
now, even after that troublesome journey, than when we
(1,000) 14


saw him first. He does not seem at all frightened about
O
himself either.”
“ Frightened ! No, of course he is not. That was never
Harry’s way,” Mrs. Stevenson answered, fastening her gown
with feverish haste. “Let me alone, Trix; you only hinder
me. You don’t know what you’re talking about, or you
won’t tell me the truth-—either the one or the other.
How should a child like you understand ? Harry would
make the best of things even if he were dying. Why on
earth didn’t yon tell me before ? ”
She was half-way down the passage to her son’s room
before she had finished speaking. Trix ran after her and
stopped her.
“ Try not to look like that, auntie dear,” she said beseech-
ingly. “You’ll frighten Harry. He will think you are
going to be ill. He really is not so much hurt, lam sure;
but any excitement is certain to be bad for him. He is
awfully worried about you already, and afraid you will be
upset.”
Mrs. Stevenson pushed her away impatiently.
“Yes, yes; I quite understand. YYm needn’t be afraid,
Trix; I know perfectly well what to do. I ought to have
been with him all along. I hope they have made him
comfortable. Y'es, I know you meant it for the best, but
you should have wakened me sooner. Run away now,
child.—Harry, may I come in ? ”
“ Come in, mother,” he was heard to answer, and Ti’ix
was left alone outside the door.
She leaned up against the wall, feeling suddenly that


she was very tired, and very miserable, and very much in-
clined to cry. She had been so little used to making mis-
takes, so much less so to being blamed for them, that her
aunt’s words had seemed like so many stabs. It was not
Aunt May’s wont to speak to any one in that tone. For a
moment Trix felt hurt and a little indignant; the next she
blamed herself for thinking of herself at all and blaming
any one who was in such trouble. She knew how nervous
and excitable Mrs. Stevenson was, and how much bound up
in her son. It was not wonderful that, in the first shock
of surprise, she should be for once harsh and unreasonable.
Xo; the worst thought of all was that perhaps she had only
too good reason for her anger. Perhaps, with the best in-
tentions in the world, Trix had made a mistake, and taken
too much upon herself.
Meanwhile Susie was lying upon her bed with closed
eyes, and a delicious sense that she had a right to rest.
Dinner was not likely to be punctual to-night, she supposed,
so she had thrown on a loose dressing-gown, and thankfully
accepted the tea that Trix’s maid had brought her. The
room was dark and cool; she was beginning to feel re-
freshed and comforted. She hoped that Trix would come
back to her soon, and that Mrs. Stevenson would not be
' er y much alarmed about her son. Trix’s door was
opened and closed, and Susie roused herself and sat up.
Then the sound of a curious, choked sort of sob came from
the next room. She ran in quickly, and found her friend
in a big arm-chair which stood beside the bed, with her face
buried in the pillows.


“ Trix dear, what is the matter ? ” she exclaimed in con-
sternation.
Trix looked up, tried to laugh, and only succeeded in
crying the more irrepressibly. She was rapidly losing all
control of herself. The harder she tried to retain it, the
less possible it seemed to do so. The one thing she could
say coherently was, —
“ Don’t let any one in. Don’t let any one else know.”
But she was not a hysterical young woman, as a general
rule, and after a little time she was able to lean back in
her chair and summon up an unsteady laugh at her own
stupidity.
“ Poor Susie, have I frightened you ? ” she asked.
“ Could you have believed that I should be such an idiot ?
I don’t know what came over me in the very least. I
used to think that hysteria was only another name for
humbug, but I’ve been on the verge myself now, and I
really couldn’t help it. Why didn’t you throw cold water
on me, or something ? ”
Susie could not help laughing in her relief and thankful-
ness. To have Trix break down utterly, Trix take a fit
of hysteria, would have seemed to her the culminating
point of the day’s misfortunes. She did not know what
she should have done in such an extraordinary and unex-
pected emergency.
“ Cold water would have been cool and refreshing, at any
rate,” she answered. “ I don’t know that it would have
done much good otherwise. I should recommend some tea
instead, for internal and not external application. Norah


brought me a delicious cup. Let me ring for some for you.
Lou had better get into your dressing-gown, too, and lie
down for a while. I suppose we won’t have dinner just yet.”
" I don t know when we’ll have it, or what we’ll do
about anything. I seem to have made a mess of it all bv
%/
trying to manage matters. Aunt May is vexed that I
didn’t tell her about Harry before, and perhaps I have
done more harm than good by keeping it from her. Still,
it would hardly have done to have waked her, would it ? ”
“No, I’m sure it wouldn’t,” Susie answered. “Never
mind about it now, Trix. Icon did your best, you know,
and your best is generally very good. When you have
had a rest and a cup of tea, you will be able to tell me
the whole story.”
And when Susie had heard it, she held to her opinion
that Trix had done only right. She was sure that Mrs.
Stevenson would see it, too, when she had time to think
about it calmly.
She must have got a dreadful shock, you know, and
very likely she hardly realized what she was saying.
\ oui cousin himself said that she would not believe he
was not dead until she saw him. He was glad, at any
rate, to hear she was still asleep, and that you had told
her nothino-.”
“Yes, so he was; that’s one comfort,” Trix admitted.
“ 0 Susie, do you think he is very badly hurt ? Nothing-
matters in comparison with that. I wonder when the
doctor will come. That’s the worst of living in the
country—one has to send so far for a doctor.”


“ How soon do you think he can be here ? ”
“ Oh, I don’t know, I’m sure. It all depends upon
where he is. If Joe manages to find him at home, and
they ride pretty quickly, he might be here before long.
It’s dreadful to have to wait in this way. Do you think
there can be any internal injury ? I wonder how long he
lay there unconscious. It’s a mercy he didn’t get sun-
stroke. 0 Susie, I did think he was dead when we found
him. lam sure I shall never forget it as long as I live.
o O
That horrid reaper-and-binder ! I always hated the thing ;
it’s enough to frighten any horse. I wonder why the
man who was driving didn’t look back to see if he had
done any mischief. Susie, when the doctor comes, one of
us should be ready to see him.”
“ Very well, then ; I shall be,” Susie answered. “ Lie
still, Trix; you won’t be fit for anything till you have had
a proper rest. I’ll go and find out whether there is any-
thing I can do, as soon as I have made myself presentable.”
It turned out that there was a great deal. The doctor
came sooner than any one had expected. Joe had been
fortunate in finding him, and the first thing he did was
to order Mrs. Stevenson out of her son’s room. She was
very unwilling to go, and pleaded hard for permission to
stay. But she realized that the doctor ought to set to
*J O
work as soon as possible, and she came to see that his
work would be easier for every one concerned if she were
out of the way. So she allowed herself to be led off to
the drawing-room and consigned to Susie’s care.
Dr. Dudley had met Miss Snow before ; he had heard


her recite at the concert, and had been introduced to her
afterwards. She had not made any particular impression
upon him then, but she had struck him to-day as a young
woman of sense. She seemed to have had all her wits
about her, and she looked calm and capable. It was a
great relief to him to have her there, and to be able to
O y
hand Mrs. Stevenson over to her.
Mrs. Stevenson thought herself that she would rather
have been alone during that time of suspense. It worried
her to have any one else in the room ; yet if she must
have some companion, she felt that there could not have
been a less trying one than Susie. The girl was so quiet,
and so calm, and so sympathetic, that her presence was
less irksome than might have been expected. And Mrs.
Stevenson had more command of herself now than in her
first shock of surprise and terror. She asked Susie what
had become of Trix; and when her niece came into the
room, she greeted her as affectionately as she had done
that morning. Trix had been informed at once of the
doctor’s arrival, and had made haste to dress. But her
courage failed her when she thought of facing her aunt
again, and she had lingered for a minute or two outside
O 7 O
the drawing-room door before she brought herself to
o o
open it.
“ Poor child!" Mrs. Stevenson said compassionately.
“ You do look white and worn out. lam afraid that both
of vou girls must have had a verv trying afternoon. lam
very much obliged to you, too, for managing everything so
well. Harry cannot say enough in your praise. Hush !


Isn’t that the doctor’s step ? Surely he must have finished
at last.”
“No, it is only Jackson,” Susie answered. “I don’t
think the doctor can be ready to leave Mr. Stevenson just
yet.”
“ Then you had better go and have some dinner, girls,
and not mind me,” Mrs. Stevenson said; but they both
felt that food would choke them.
They waited together in the drawing-room, saying very
little to each other, and furtively watching the clock,
until Dr. Dudley came back to them. He came in quite
cheerfully, rubbing his hands, and looking well pleased
with himself.
“ W ell, Mrs. Stevenson,” he said briskly, “ I’ve left your
son more comfortable than I found him. He’s got off very
well, too, let me tell you. The broken arm’s the worst
part of the business, and his shoulder was pretty badly
bruised. But the cut on the head hasn’t done any damage
to speak of, and he’ll be all right again before long. You
can go to him now for a few minutes if you like; but it
must be a very few, because I want him to rest and not
be disturbed. After that, 111 be glad if you’ll give me
some dinner.”


CHAPTER XV.
“ WILL YE NO COME BACK AGAIN?”
MR. STEVENSON had indeed, as he more than once
reminded his mother, got off a great deal better
than might have been expected. He took his misfortune
very philosophically, on the whole; he was not the sort of
man to make vain lamentations. But there was no doubt
that he did not enjoy having to lie still and be taken care
of, for almost the first time since his babyhood. Even
more humiliating was the knowledge that one horse in the
world had beaten him, and was now beyond his power to
conquer. However, he kept all such thoughts in the depth
of his heart, and made the best of the inevitable.
He utterly refused to stay in bed, or to consider him-
self an invalid. He took up his quarters in the drawing-
room, where he was as well waited on and sympathized
with as the most exacting of men could have desired to
be. His mother had got over her first fears about him,
but the shock had left its mark behind. She could hardly
bear to have him out of her sight for a moment; she did
not like any one to do anything for him but herself. She
seemed almost jealous of Trix, and took care never to
leave the girl alone with her cousin. Apparently she had


no such feeling about Susie, for she was disposed to en-
courage all Susie’s attentions and accept all her offers
of service.
But then Trix was in rather a strange mood during
these days, and not quite like her usual self. She was
very uncertain —sometimes so silent and listless as to
astonish them all; sometimes in the wildest spirits, for
which there seemed no special reason. She looked wist-
fully at Harry every now and then, when there was
no chance of catching his eye. She was eager to do any-
thing for him; yet she chaffed him unmercifully about his
accident, and teased and tormented him in a way that
he scarcely relished. Mrs. Stevenson was quite indignant
at times, and even Susie was puzzled.
Mr. Stevenson had been ordered to lie still and keep
quiet for some days. He was suffering so much pain, and
moving about proved such a troublesome business, that he
was not unwillinsr to obev. But he had never been used
o %J
to confinement indoors, and he soon found that time hung
heavy on his hands, while his mother began to wonder
what they should do next to amuse him. It was a great
relief to her when he suddenly developed a for
reading, and a still stronger one for being read to. Nor
was it very difficult to provide him with the sort of litera-
ture he cared for. He was always interested in the news
of the day, and he liked to know what people were doing
in other parts of the world—whether it were cattle-
ranching in Colorado, or coffee - planting in Ceylon.
Anything Australian was almost sure to appeal to him;


and “ Geoffrey Hamlyn ” and “ Robbery Under Arms ” were
the only novels he had ever cared to read through twice.
So Susie was seized with the bright idea of trying him
with Australian poetry. It succeeded so well that his
mother looked on in amazement, and wondered what
would happen next, when Harry took to such amuse-
ments. Trix made great fun of this new development,
and made numerous inquiries about his rate of progress.
She congratulated him on going back to school, and advised
Susie to complete his education by a course of Browning.
It could hardly be said that either of them much enjoyed
her comments.
But what Mr. Stevenson really liked best in the way
of literature was some story of adventure, of hard fighting
and hairbreadth escapes, read aloud to him as one person
only could read it. And Susie was quite ready to indulge
these tastes of his, however little she might share or under-
stand them. She was glad to feel that she too might do
her part in making his imprisonment less irksome. She
could not sing for him like Trix, or play chess for hours
together like his mother; but she could and did make
him feel as if he had seen what he had only heard of,
and almost led him to forget that he was still a captive
on his sofa.
If she found some descriptions a little too realistic, she
did not, as a rule, betray it. But one afternoon her
powers of self-control proved themselves unequal to the
strain upon them. Mrs. Stevenson had found in an old
magazine a wild tale of adventures in Central Australia,


which purported to be a true one, though her son was
sceptical upon several points. The heroes of it passed
through any number of dire perils, and quite early in
their career ran an imminent risk of benm tortured and
killed by the natives. It was at this point that Susie’s
composure deserted her; and, to the consternation of her
audience, she got up hurriedly, said something inaudible
about her own room, and left them to themselves.
“ What on earth is the matter ? ” Mr. Stevenson asked
in astonishment.
“ Perhaps these horrors were a little too much for her,”
his mother suggested. “ They are rather ghastly, Harry.
I was thinking myself of beating a retreat.”
“ Oh, I wish I had thought of that before! ” Trix
exclaimed in dismay. “We should never have let her
read it, especially aloud. Aunt May, I don’t think you
know that Susie’s father was killed on an exploring
expedition, when she was a baby.”
“Poor girl, I am sorry,” said Mrs. Stevenson. “Yes,
that was the last thing in the world to give her to read.
I wonder she kept up so long.”
“ Hadn’t you better put it out of the way before she
comes back ? ” her son asked. “ The kitchen fire would be
the best place for it, I should say.”
“ I’ll take it there at once,” Trix said, seizing on the
magazine, as if it had a personal responsibility in the
matter. “ You don’t want to keep it, do you, auntie ?
Weren’t you going to tear it up when you noticed this
and thought that Harry might like it ?”


“I’m awfully sorry that has happened,” Harry said
uneasily, when his cousin had left the room.
“So am I,” Mrs. Stevenson answered; “ but our best
plan will be to say nothing more about it. If I know
anything of Susie Snow, she would rather have no allusion
made at all.”
M hen Susie did come back to the drawing-room she
found it empty, except for the long figure on the sofa.
His mother had been wanted in the kitchen, Mr. Stevenson
explained; something had gone wrong with some pre-
serves, and the cook was in a flurry about them. Trix
had gone out to the garden to get flowers, that she might
fill the vases for dinner. Susie looked round for the
magazine that she had been reading—she was ashamed
of her weakness now, and was determined to finish what
she had begun—but it was nowhere to be found. Mr.
Stevenson had his mother’s volume of Gordon’s poems
in his hand, and seemed to find it at least equally
interestinsr.
“ That ‘ Sick Stockrider ’ is an awfully good poem,” he
said enthusiastically. “Trix says I only like it because
I’m a bit of an invalid myself just now; but that’s just
some more of her ladyship’s nonsense. It’s exactly the
sort of thing you’d expect the poor beggar to feel like.
Gordon was a wonderful chap. If I had known before
that he v rote like that, I d have had some of this book
by heart long ago. It takes me a while to see what
he’s driving at sometimes; but when I once find out,
I m not likely to forget in a hurry. And when a man


has the sense to write about Australia, and knows what
he’s talkino- about too, he’s worth taking a little trouble
O * o
over.”
“ You are very patriotic,” Susie answered, with a smile.
“ For my part, you know, I prefer Kendal to Gordon;
and when I first made his acquaintance, I was astonished
to find that any one could write so beautifully about
Australia. I think we must trv Browning some dav,
%/ O •/ '
Mr. Stevenson, as Trix suggests. There are one or two
poems of his that lam sure you would like. Ah ! there
are the letters already. Surely they are earlier than
usual to-day.”
•/
There was always a good budget for the station ; and
J O O *
since Mr. Stevenson had been tied to the house, he had
quite looked forward to the arrival of the post-bag. He
liked to unlock it and arrange its contents himself, though
that was a duty which, under ordinary circumstances, fell
to his mother’s share. Susie watched his operations now
without much curiosity. She had heard from her aunt
a day or two ago, and had no reason to expect a letter
from any one else. Miss Snow had not the pen of a
ready writer, and if she wrote once a week her niece
was satisfied.
“A letter for Trix from uncle,” Mr. Stevenson remarked,
as he laid the correspondence in piles on the table beside
him. “ That ought to satisfy her at last. Here’s a tele-
gram for her too; I wonder if he’s on his way down.
Two, three, four letters for my mother; I’m glad I’ve not
got to answer them. And here’s one for you, Miss Snow."


“Forme! I didn’t expect one. Why, what remarkable
writing! I don’t recognize it in the least.”
It was only remarkable in the sense of being laboured
and illiterate-looking. Susie did not at all admire the
appearance of the envelope, and the smudged sheet of
notepaper within only matched it. But a single glance
was enough to master the news it brought. Her face
grew a shade paler; she sprang to her feet as if she
should have liked to start at once.
My aunt has been ill,” she said ; “ I must go home
immediately. This is from our servant.”
Mi. Stevenson put down the papers he was slowly
sorting with his one available hand. If Susie had been
thinking of him at all, she might have seen the look of
dismay that came over his face.
“ 0 Miss Snow, I’m awfully sorry. There’s nothing
seriously wrong, I hope. Does the woman say what is
the matter ? ”
Hot very clearly; but I think I can understand.
Aunt Saiah has had some sort of heart disease for years.
She never says much about it: and I have grown so
used to her having to be careful that I have not thought
much about it either. But she did frighten me rather
some months ago, and this seems to have been another
attack of the same kind, only worse. I am so thankful
that Martha wrote and told me about it. She is a good
old creature ; but I ought to be with Aunt Sarah myself.
She is sure to be knocked up for a day or two, and
need to be taken care of. This was written yesterday.


I only wish Martha had thought of telegraphing, but I
suppose such an idea would never occur to her. It is
a dreadful scrawl, but perhaps you can read it.” And
Susie, in her anxiety and longing to he reassured, handed
' c/ O O
the letter to him. Mr. Stevenson studied it intently for
a minute or two.
“ She says your aunt is better, and that she wouldn’t
hear of sending for you. I don’t think you need be so
very anxious, Miss Snow ; but I suppose you wouldn’t be
satisfied not to go to her.”
“ No, I couldn’t, indeed. Martha is very good, but she
doesn’t always understand, and she makes such a noise
going about a room. I know Aunt Sarah would be glad
to see me, though she might not like to send for me; and
she can’t feel now that she has cut short my holiday.
I have had a most delightful, long one.”
o 7 o
“If you mean your visit to us, we don’t call it long,
I can tell you. Couldn’t you just go down and bring
your aunt back with you ? ”
Susie smiled and shook her head.
“It is very good of you, Mr. Stevenson, but I don’t
think that would do at all. I may get her to go out
of town for a few days—though she is really never very
happy out of her own house—but such a long journey
would be too trying for her. I suppose I can easily get
away to-morrow morning ? ”
“Of course. Somebody will drive you in, and send off
a telegram to let them know you are coming. I only
wish I could do it myself. We’ll all miss you terribly,


Miss Snow. It will make quite a hole in the house to
have you out of it.”
It was not a very elegantly expressed compliment, still
it was unmistakably sincere, and Susie could not but be
gratified.
“ Thank you very much for saying so,” she answered.
“ You have all been wonderfully good to me, and I have
been very happy here.”
“ Have you ?” he asked eagerly. “ I’m awfully glad to
hear it. Miss Snow, won’t you come back to us some day
—for good ? ”
Susie looked at him in amazement, "What on earth could
he mean ? One explanation came into her mind for a
moment, but only to be dismissed as too utterly improbable.
“ I shall be very glad to come back again sometime and
Pay you another visit, if Mrs. Stevenson is good enough
to ask me,” she answered as calmly as she could.
“ Its not that I mean, and it’s not my mother who will
ask you—though I’m sure she’ll be glad enough to have
you. Don’t you understand, Miss Snow ? The place will
never be the same again without you ; and I want you
I want you for my wife. I know I’m a stupid, rough
sort of fellow, not up to a girl like you, and I can’t make
fine speeches either, but I would do my level best to
make you happy. Do you think you could possibly come
to care for me ? ”
“ Oh, I don’t know. Don’t say such things, Mr. Steven-
-3 you cant possibly mean them. M hy, we have only
known each other a few weeks, and—”
(1.000) 15


“ No, we haven’t,” he contradicted her flatly enough;
“we’ve known each other for more than two years. Do
you suppose I’ve ever forgotten the first sight I got of you
in uncle’s drawing-room ? I don’t mean to say I fell in
love with you then; but it seems a long enough time to
me since I made up my mind you were the only girl in
the world I’d ever care to marry. I know you’re a great
deal too good for me, and clever and intellectual and all
that, and I’m a regular duffer beside you. I don’t want
you to say anything yet, one way or the other; but I
couldn’t let you go out of the house without telling you
you are just all the world to me.”
And yet the next moment he asked again whether she
thought she could learn to love him.
Susie was hardly less bewildered than when she had
heard the question first; and now, too, she was seized
with an insane desire to laugh. She could not yet
believe that he was in earnest—it seemed too ridiculous
altogether; and at any moment the tea-tray might be
brought in, or Trix or his mother return.
“ I don’t think we should suit each other at all,” she
said hastily. “We don’t care for the same things, or the
same sort of life. Mr. Stevenson, I’m sure you have made
a great mistake. You can’t possibly mean what you say.”
“ Mean it! I never meant anything more in my life;
and I’m not the sort of fellow to change either. I haven’t
said the thing properly, I know ; but I mean it —I mean
every word. I’ve been in too big a hurry, too, I suppose;
and I quite understand that we’re different enough in a


lot of ways. I would change myself for your sake if
I could, but I can’t; and you may be sure that no man
in the world could think more of you than I do.”
He spoke with so much energy and determination that
Susie could not but believe him, and therefore she was
all the more anxious to stop him.
“ Oh, you will change your mind, you surely will,” she
cried distressfully. “ You mustn’t think of it any more.
Indeed, indeed, I am not at all the sort of girl you ought
to marry.”
“ You’re the only girl I ever will, if I live to be a
hundred. I’ll make you see whether I mean it or not.
I won’t say anything more about it just now, if you like;
but you may change your mind some day, and I can
manage to wait.—Hallo, Trix ! Don’t break the glasses.
Here’s a fine fat letter for you, and a telegram as well.”
Mr. Stevenson liked plenty of fresh air, and two windows
were wide open. Trix, with a tray of vases in her hands,
had found some difficulty in opening the door, and there-
fore had overheard nothing. She put down her burden
on the nearest table, picked up a little specimen glass
that had fallen, and came over to the sofa, intent only
on her share of the post-bag.
“ A letter from father at last! He owes me a dozen
apologies for keeping me waiting so long. And what is
the meaning of this ? O Susie, it’s from Nell. They’re
not coming, after all. She doesn’t give any reason; she
only says there’s a letter to follow. Did you ever know
anything more disgusting ? ”


But misfortunes never come singly ; and so Trix thought
when she heard the news that the post had brought to
Susie. For the last five minutes, indeed, Susie had almost
forgotten it herself. She was quite glad now to have it
to tell, since it meant that she need talk and think of
nothing else that night, and that she must go home
to-morrow. Even Trix could make no attempt to detain
her; though, Trix-like, she looked at the bright side of
things, and was quite sure that Miss Snow must be much
better already, and would be well as soon as she got her
niece back.
Mrs. Stevenson was very encouraging too, as well as
sympathetic, and seemed equally sorry to part with her
guest. She bade Susie remember that they were being
defrauded of a fortnight now, and would expect her to
add it on to her next visit. But Susie thought it most
unlikely that there ever would be another.
Susie spent most of the evening in packing, assisted by
Norah, and rather hindered than helped by Trix.
Poor Trix was terribly cast down, though she did
her best not to show it; and now that she was to lose
her friend so soon, she grudged every moment that they
could not spend together. She was obliged, however,
to sit up to finish a letter, while Susie went to bed
early, ostensibly in preparation for her journey, really
to escape from Mr. Stevenson. For the first time that
evening she was left alone to think her own thoughts,
and bewilderment began to give place to vexation. Her
visit to “ The Willows ” had been utterly spoiled, as well


as brought abruptly to a close; she wished that she
could blot out the memory of it for ever when once she
found herself at home again. This was the point she
had reached when Trix came in and seated herself on
the foot of the bed in the darkness, for a last talk before
saying good-night.
“ I think the Fates have been horribly hard upon us,”
the latter remarked. “Instead of seeing Nell arrive
to-morrow, I shall have to say good-bye to you. And
we had been looking forward to such a delightful fort-
night, the three of us together again, as we used to be
in the good old days. Alas for the change that a single
hour may bring ! ”
“Alas indeed!” thought Susie; “and how little Trix
knows of the changes that hour did bring ! ”
The craving to tell her grew too strong to be resisted.
“ Trix,” she said suddenly, “ I want to talk to you.”
“Is that a gentle hint that I keep most of the con-
versation in my own hands ? Well, you shall see what
a good listener I can make when I like. Go on, my
friend, and don’t keep me in suspense. What is to be
the subject of your discourse ? ”
“ Something that I wish had never happened. I really
don’t know how to tell you, and I am sure you will
hardly believe it. Trix, can you imagine your cousin is
wanting to marry me ? ”
“ Harry! ” cried Trix, with a sharp note of surprise
in her voice.
“ Yes; Mr. Stevenson. You can’t be more astonished


than I was. Do you remember how you came into the
drawing-room that time with the flowers ? You didn’t
notice anything, did you ? ”
Susie was genuinely sorry that there had been any-
thino- to notice, but for the first time she felt a certain
amount of added dignity in consequence.
“ No, I didn’t,” Trix answered. “ I was not thinking
much about either of you, if you want to know the
exact truth. I was more concerned about my flowers.
Was it then that—the thing happened ? ”
“Yes, it was then. We were alone in the room, you
know ; your aunt and you had both gone out.”
And having; once made a beginning, Susie did not take
O o O'
long to tell the whole story —-what he had said to her,
and what she had said to him; how little she had ever
thought of such a thing, and how utterly impossible it
was that she ever should think of it. To no one but
Trix could she have been so communicative ; and she
would not have said as much even to Trix if she had
not been more excited than she knew.
I never expected that such a thing could ever happen
to me; I never wanted it either,” she said pathetically.
“ I always supposed that Nell and you would marry
some day, and I hoped you would manage somehow to
care as much for me as ever. But I remember Nell
told me once that I was cut out for an old maid ; and
I thought she was quite right, and I think so still. I
wish your cousin had had the sense to see it.”
Yet even as she spoke Susie was glad he had proved


conclusively that it was not his cousin whom he had
wanted to marry, and that her mind might be at rest
upon that point.
Trix listened meanwhile in silence. She could not
quite realize what she was hearing, it seemed so strange
and unexpected. She too wished it had never happened,
but she did not understand why. She wished Susie
would go on talking for ever, so that the time need not
come for her to answer. And yet she also wished that
Susie would stop and let her go away.
Susie stopped at last, indeed, but it was only when
she had asked a question, or rather a series of questions,
that must be replied to in some way.
“ Isn’t it dreadful, Trix ? I can’t tell you how sorry
lam about it all. I do hope Mr. Stevenson will forget
it soon. I can’t think why he should care for me. Do
you really believe he means what he said ? ”
“Of course he does. I never knew Harry do any-
thing else.”
“Yes; but I mean about waiting and trying again. He
surely might believe that I was in earnest too, and that
I am not likely to change my mind either. I can’t
help hoping that he must see soon what a mistake he
has made. You know, Trix, it would never do at all.
We are not in the least suited to each other, are we?”
“ No, I shouldn’t say you were —exactly. And yet
if two people love each other—”
“ But I don’t love him—not in the very least, I tell
you,” cried Susie impatiently. “ I don’t know what


that sort of love means, and I don’t want to know either.
I think some girls take leave of their senses when they
get married. I can’t see how they can do it myself.
Men are never so nice as women, even the best of
them.”
“ Nonsense, Susie,” Trix answered sharply. “ You don’t
know what you’re talking about. You don’t know
much about men, and you had better wait till you do
before you make such sweeping assertions. I should
like to see any one, man or woman, who was nicer than
my father.”
“I beg your pardon,” Susie replied meekly, a little
astonished by Trix’s outburst, and wondering what she
had done to provoke it. “ I was thinking of young
men, I believe, and of girls. I suppose, to tell the truth,
I was thinking of myself and your cousin, and of Nell,
and of you. Could I ever reach the point of preferring
his company to yours ? It would be a curious state of
affairs.”
I don t suppose he would think so,” Trix said, with
a half laugh. “ Well, really, Susie, I don’t know what
to say to you ; I don’t quite know what you want me
to say. \ou can t be made to marry Harry against
your will; that is quite certain. He may change his
mind, thoi gh that is not a habit of his; and, on the
other hand, you may change yours, though it is not a
thing you often do. Anyhow, you are going home
to-morrow, and you had better try to go to sleep to-
night,”


Trix was not quite so comforting as usual, Susie
thought vaguely; hut she made no attempt to account
for it. She had relieved her own mind by talking, and
she fell asleep almost as soon as her friend left her.
Trix herself was in no hurry to go to bed. She was
glad to he alone, and free to think in peace; yet at
first she was not inclined to begin to think. She had
a curious feeling of being about to open a door and
let out something which she dreaded to look at. She
remembered reading a story, long ago, of a man who
was shot by an archer in battle, and could live on only
as lono- as the arrow remained in the wound. When
O
that was pulled away, his life-blood gushed out after
it. So she busied herself with a dozen little things,
both necessary and unnecessary, before she put out
her light and lay down. How hot it was here ! No
wonder her father found it so in Queensland. She
was glad to think she should see him again in less than
a week. She would get him to take her home at once,
she believed. After all, it was just as well that the
Lawrences were not coming; she did want to go home.
And then she made the discovery that she was crying,
and could not stop herself.
Poor Trix! She had fairly opened the door now; she
was looking the skeleton in the face, and realizing that
it would haunt her henceforward. She had pulled the
arrow out of the wound, and the pain had almost over-
whelmed her. She had read the secret of her own
heart, and she knew what had come upon her. She


would not think of it, if she could help herself; she
would not look at it; she would not acknowledge it in any-
way. She surely had not ceased to be her own mistress
altogether. But it was there, it was still there, and she
did not know how to get rid of it.


CHAPTER XVI.
IN A WORLD OF TROUBLE.
ARLY next morning Susie left “The Willows.”
-»— She was heartily thankful to go. She had been
seized with a new fear when she woke that morning.
It seemed quite possible that Mr. Stevenson might have
told his mother of this strange idea which he had taken
into his head, and that she might blame her (Susie)
for it.
“It will be most unfair if she does, but she may,”
the girl thought indignantly. “I am certain she has
set her heart on his marrying Trix. It’s a good thing
that the two people who have most to say in the matter
are not inclined to gratify her. And as for me, I shall
be back with Aunt Sarah to-night.”
Mrs. Stevenson was very kind and very thoughtful
in making; all arrangements for the comfort of the
O o
traveller. The change in her manner was so slight
that no one would have noticed it who had not been
specially on the watch. But it was there, and Susie
saw it, and went away feeling hurt and indignant.
Trix was her usual self, and no one suspected the


effort it cost her. She drove in with her friend to the
station, and talked all the while about everything - under
the sun, except that one subject which neither of them
could forget for a moment.
“ Oh, it was too bad of Mr. Stevenson to spoil every-
thing like this,” Susie was saying to herself when they
went into the little waiting-room and found Mrs. Perry
there before them. She, too, had come to see the last
of a guest.
Connie looked, as usual, very fresh and neat and im-
maculate. Everything about her was perfect in its
way, and perfectly suited to a summer morning and a
country railway station. Susie had seen enough now
of her old school-fellow’s life to know that it was an
easy and dignified one, with few cares and many en-
joyments. She thought of Youlong, the big hospitable
house, with its wide verandas, and cool rooms, and pleas-
ant, shady garden. Then it suddenly struck her that she
might have been, if she pleased, the prospective mistress
of “ The M illows ; ” and Mr. Stevenson would be a much
more presentable husband than stout, red-faced, sixty-
years-old Major Perry. The thought filled her with
amusement. A\ hat would Connie say if she only knew ?
Could she be quite so patronizing and superior ?
“ By the way, Susie,” Mrs. Perry remarked, a minute
before the train came in sight, “ there is one little
matter in which I thought you might be able to help
me. My sister-in-law, Mrs. Hugh Perry, who lives near
Swan Hill, is anxious to hear of a governess for her


three girls. The eldest is fifteen, the youngest about
Alma’s age. It struck me that one of your university
acquaintances might be glad to hear of such a situation,
or even that you might think of it for yourself.”
“ Thank you. I am afraid I don’t know of any one
just now, and I couldn’t afford to lose a year myself,”
Susie answered, and made up her mind there and then
that she would not like to be Alma’s governess, at any
rate.
“ Yes; I was afraid you might look at it in that light.
I am sorry, too, for I am sure you would have suited Mrs.
Perry, if she had agreed to overlook your want of experi-
ence. Are you quite sure that it would be a lost year,
since you mean to make teaching your profession ? I
suppose you could easily take up your university work
again where you had left it off. However, of course you
must be the best judge of your own affairs. There is the
train at last, a little behind time as usual. Good-bye ;so
glad to have seen you and renewed our old acquaintance.
I hope we shall meet in Melbourne next winter. Re-
member me to the Lorraines, please, and to Nelly
Lawrence.”
“ Good-bye, Susie dear,” Trix said in her turn. “ I’m
glad you won’t have that long journey alone. Mrs.
Marshall and you can take care of each other. I suppose
you’ll see or hear something of Nell pretty soon, and I
may be in town again before long. Give your aunt my
love, please. I’m sure you’ll find her nearly well.”
Trix stood on the platform and waved her handker-


chief until the train was out of sight. Connie did not
go in for any such demonstration; it would have been far
too undignified. She stood very still, and very straight,
and very stately, looking after the long line of carriages
until the last was out of sight. Then she turned to her
companion.
“ There is one great advantage about railway travelling,”
she remarked, with her serene smile: “ you can always
depend upon a certain amount of punctuality. Ido dis-
like seeing people off by a steamer. I suppose you will
feel quite lost now without Susie, especially as Nelly has
deserted you. Suppose you come back to us for a day or
two ? ”
“ Thank you very much, but my father will be here on
Tuesday, and I don’t care to leave my aunt. I think I
shall very probably go home, too, about the end of next
week.”
“ Really ! That is rather a sudden determination, is it
not ? We hoped you were here for quite an indefinite
time. And your cousin is much better, you say. How
thankful Mrs. Stevenson must be ! What an unfortunate
accident it was, and what a wonderful escape ! What a
fright you must have got when you found him ! ”
But Trix was in no mood to discuss Harry’s accident or
anything else just then. She had a little shopping to do
for her aunt, and she made that an excuse for escaping
from Connie. She got through it as fast as she could, and
was glad that she need talk to no one all the way home.
She wanted to think instead, to gather together all her


energies, to make up her mind what she must do. If
she were to carry this ache in her heart about with her
for the rest of her life, at least no one but herself should
ever suspect its existence. She could surely be strong
enough and brave enough to hide it from all the world.
o o
But just at first it would be difficult; and she could not
now be sorry that Nelly was not to arrive that day.
Mrs. Stevenson was thankful, too, to have no more
visitors to expect. Her son, who was never wont to keep
a secret from his mother, had spoken to her the night
before of the hopes which he cherished, and the inten-
tions that he meant to carry out if possible. She had
shown so much surprise at this that he was inclined to
be indignant on Susie’s behalf, and to wonder what there
was that struck .her as so strange about the matter. He
also realized that he would have done more wisely to wait
until the girl had left the house before he made his con-
fidences. Mrs. Stevenson had said very little, because she
was afraid of saying too much ; but her opinions had been
none the less apparent. She had lain awake longer than
Trix, and her meditations had been very painful. She had
felt herself robbed of her son; she had known all along
that she would feel it some day, but she never had
supposed that it would be so bitter. If he had only
chosen Trix, she was sure she would have felt delighted.
With his cousin in the house, how could the foolish fellow
put another girl before her—and Susie Snow of all
girls, that little bookworm and blue-stocking ? What an
ill-assorted couple they would make ! And what a mis-


fortune it was that they had ever met! The thing preyed
upon Mrs. Stevenson’s mind until she could not help
speaking of it to her niece.
“ I suppose you have heard something of this extraor-
dinary idea of Harry’s ? ” she said abruptly one afternoon
when the two were alone together. Mr. Stevenson, who
was fast shaking oft’ invalid ways, had betaken himself to
his office, and was busy with his book-keeper.
Trix was taken by surprise, but she had been dreading
some such remark as this, and now her self-control did not
desert her.
“ I can’t see anything extraordinary in his wanting to
marry Susie,” she answered, with all her loyalty to her
friend aroused, and driving every other feeling into the
background.
“ Then, my dear child, all I can say is that I am
astonished to hear it. Susie is a nice girl, no doubt, and
one of your two dearest friends. I have a great liking for
her myself, but she is not exactly the sort of wife I
should choose for my son. Harry and she are not in the
least suited to each other, and I wonder they haven’t the
wisdom to see it.”
“ Susie has, at any rate,” Trix answered, with a note of
defiance still in her tone, “ You needn’t be afraid, Aunt
May; Susie has not the least intention of marrying him ;
she is very sorry he ever thought of such a thing.”
“ That is exactly what I should have expected from a
girl of her common sense. She has other matters to think
about, and she would be very foolish to let anything


interfere with her work. Please don't suppose that lam
blaming her in the least. I think Harry put her in a
very awkward position, and I told him so on Friday
evening. He might at least have waited till she was back
in Melbourne before he troubled her in that way. She
must have felt most uncomfortable, poor girl. The only
excuse for him is that she was leaving so soon in any
case.”
“ Yes, it was rather hard upon her,” Trix replied.
“ But perhaps it was just as well that he didn’t put it off
any longer and interrupt her at her work. Susie’s whole
heart is bound up in those beloved books of hers. I wish
the post would come; lam very anxious to know how
Miss Snow is.”
Mrs. Stevenson was not anxious either to discuss the
question any further. She had found out what she wanted
most to know. Susie was a sensible girl, after all, and
had not been dazzled by the proposal made to her. The
mischief might be mended yet; Harry’s infatuation might
pass away in time. Trix was the person best fitted to
cure it, and most fervently did Mrs. Stevenson wish that
she would. Meanwhile there was nothing for a wise
mother to do but sit still and keep silence.
Nelly’s non-appearance had been accounted for in a
very satisfactory fashion. No one was ill; no new mis-
fortune had befallen the family, as her friends were half
inclined to fear. On the contrary, matters seemed to be
improving all round. Mrs. Lawrence’s brother had ffot a
position for one of his nephews in a large mercantile
(1,000)


house in Calcutta. The family held a council, and decided,
easily enough, that Percy was the one to go. He hated
his present work more, rather than less, as time went on;
he had smaller pay and fewer prospects of rising than any
of his brothers, and he had wanted all his life to go to
India. This was a good opening, and he was likely to
make as good a use of it as any one. But he had to start
at once, and there was much to do beforehand. His uncle
was prepared to pay his passage-money; but his outfit
would absorb all the funds available just then, and leave
none behind for other people’s travelling. Nelly did not
put the latter fact into so many words, but Trix was quite
capable of reading between the lines.
Susie wrote also in due time, and gave a satisfactory
account of her aunt. Miss Snow had been very glad to
see her niece again, but she seemed very much like her
usual self, though perhaps a little more easily tired, and a
little less inclined for any exertion.
“ The heat in itself would quite account for that,” Susie
wrote, as much for her own peace of mind as for Trix’s.
“ Summer always tired her, and it is very hot here. The
Lorraines want us to pay them a few days’ visit at Queens-
cliff, and she is quite disposed to go. I am sure it is
exactly what she needs, and I mean to take the best
possible care of her. I told her about Mr. Stevenson this
morning. I thought I ought to let her know, but lam
O O o
afraid it troubled her a little. She did not say much,
except that marriage was a solemn thing, and two people
should know each other very well, and love each other


very dearty, before they agreed to spend their lives to-
gether. I assured her that I had no desire to marry anv
one, and that she and I were never going to part. Then
she shook her head and smiled—you know the way she
has—and told me it was not wise to make assertions about
the future. All the same, I think she will find I am
right.”
Trix sighed as she folded up the letter. Life seemed a
strange, mixed-up sort of thing, she thought, and she
wished she had some one to tell her story to. She hoped
that Susie would not talk about Harry to her. She was
afraid she could not stand much of that. She was afraid
of something else, also, when she looked forward to o-oino 1
home. Would she be able to meet Susie again in exactly
the same old way? Would there not always be this
secret between them ?
Then Trix pulled herself up quickly, in her dread of dis-
loyalty to her friend, and her determination to think as
little as possible of her cousin. She reminded herself that
she would see her father again next day, and she won-
deied how she could wish for anything else while she had
him. She wrote Susie the gayest and most amusing of
letters that evening, and Susie read it aloud to her aunt.
They both agreed that it was almost as bright as Trix
herself, and that she seemed to bring sunshine with her
wherever she went.
Mr. Beresiord came back to his daughter in safety, and
she gave him exactly the sort of welcome that he had been
looking forward to. He missed nothing in her greeting


in the brightness of her smile, nothing in the
o o
gladness of her laugh. He thought her looking very well
and very bonny, and he was rather pleased than otherwise
by her strong desire to go back to Melbourne with him.
“ For, you know, father dear,” she said in her most
' V
caressing tones, “ you and I have had quite enough for a
while of living in other people’s houses. I want to be at
home in our own. I want to show you what a good
housekeeper I am going to be ; and I am just longing to
begin a dozen things that I have always thought of doing.
And after all, you know, there is no place in all the world
to equal Melbourne.”
Like Susie some days earlier, Trix was very anxious to
be crone, to leave “ The Willows ” behind her, to escape to
a different world. When she was back in her old home
she might succeed in finding her old self. She was
hungry for occupation, and there were always things to do
in Melbourne. She clung to her father, too, as she had
never clung before ; she could not let him go away from
her again. So she set her heart upon returning with him,
and had an answer at once for every objection.
It was early in the season. Yes, she admitted it; but
she had never been in town in January before, and she
would like to get a new experience. It was absurd to tell
her that every one would be away, since Nelly was certain
to be at home, and Susie might only spend a week at
Queenscliff. The house was still in the hands of deco-
rators ; it might be a little uncomfortable to live in, but
who caved for that ? Not Trix, certainly. She wanted to


see what the men were about; she was not sure how far
they were to be trusted; she had liked their designs, and
been quite satisfied before to leave things in their hands,
but she was sure now that they would be much the better
of a little supervision. Then she had some things to buy,
and ever so many to arrange about, and two new servants
to engage ; and altogether she would have her hands full,
and quite enough to do before people in general came
home and began to call on her. Accordingly she carried
her point, and went back to Melbourne only a week later
than Susie.
Her father and she had a carriage to themselves all
the way down, and the journey did not seem long to
either of them. Mr. Beresford had got into the habit of
talking very freely to his daughter of all his business
plans and arrangements. He had a great deal to tell
her now about this trip to Queensland —about a mine he
was interested in, and about the prospects of two of his
stations. Everything was flourishing with him; all his
affairs had prospered during his absence. He was a richer
man now than he had been when he left Australia, in
spite of all the money his daughter had managed to spend
for him. He was quite ready to let her spend some
more forthwith; and when they went over the house
together that evening, Trix had several new suggestions
' Oo
to make. Her father had never known her so fastidious,
but he was more than satisfied to do all that she asked.
It was she herself who first took fright at the magnitude
o O
of their plans.


“ But what dreadful extravagance, father! ” she pro-
tested. “It pleases you to talk about mine; lam sure
yours is far worse.”
“No extravagance at all, my dear. If a thing is to
be done at all, it had better be done properly. The men
won’t object to a little more work, I assure you. They
find it hard enough to get in those bad times.”
“ I suppose they are very bad times for most people,”
his daughter answered, and wondered what it would feel
O 7
like to be poor. She had heard of poverty all her life,
but she had hardly ever come into close contact with it.
Nelly’s troubles had made her realize it more than any-
thing else, and Nelly must be very well off compared with
some people. She knew that while she had been enjoying
herself in Europe, her native city had passed through a
terrible time of loss and depression. While her father
was growing steadily riche'r, others once as wealthy as
he had lost all they possessed, and dragged down many
people in their fall.
“ There is a great deal of trouble in the world,” she
told herself before she fell asleep that night; “ I must
not grumble too much at my share.”
So she set herself to bear her burden bravely, and tried
to believe that it was growing lighter. She was at home
again; she had plenty of occupation both for body and
mind, and these two things went far towards making life
easier for her. But she had carried her cares back with
her; she was no longer the Trix who had gone away.
Yet she felt that she had no right to think herself


specially unfortunate. On the contrary, she thought a
Treat deal more than she ever had done about all the
trouble there was in the world, and all that she could
do to lighten it.
Trix came home on Saturday evening, and early on
Monday morning she went down to Elsternwick. She
had a great deal of shopping to do, and she wanted
Nelly’s help and advice. But she found the Lawrences’
house in a state of confusion. Percy had gone away
two days earlier, and his mother had not yet recovered
from the effects of the parting. She was almost certain
that she should never see her boy again. She was
oppressed with all sorts of evil presentiments. All the
boarders were away also, and Nelly had seized the oppor-
tunity for a thorough house-cleaning. She was looking
tired and harassed; there were black rings under her
eyes. She confessed to having sat up late a good many
evenings last week to get through her sewing for Percy.
“ I suppose I don’t manage properly,” she said, with a
sigh. “ I never seem to get through things as fast as
I ought to.”
She was very glad to see Trix again, and would have
enjoyed a long talk with all her heart; but she had also
her mother to think of, the weekly bills to pay, and two
dismantled bedrooms waiting for her duster. Mary was
obliged to interrupt them more than once, and finally to
call her mistress out to interview the butcher. Before
Nelly could return, Mr. Murray walked in. He had come
back from the country by an early train, and was


spending a few hours in Melbourne before starting off
again for a little sea-coast town where he talked of
spending the remainder of his holida}'. Trix had not
seen him since she left school, and at any other time
she would have welcomed the chance of a conversation.
Now she began to think that she might give up all hope
at once of having Nelly to herself for even five minutes at
a time. Mr. Murray was thinking at that moment how
strangely things were divided in the world they lived in;
some girls’ lives seemed to be a perpetual holiday.
“ I used to hope once that I should see those places
for myself some day,'’ he said, when Trix told him how
she had recalled his lessons on Roman history when she
visited the Forum and the Capitol. “ I wish I could
borrow your memories for a little while, Miss Beresford.”
“ I am afraid they are not worth as much as yours
will be when you have seen Rome. You surely will,
some day, Mr. Murray.”
“ I see very little likelihood of that at present—about
as much, in fact, as there is of my doing a good many
other things I had once intended to accomplish. As
people grow older, Miss Beresford, they lose their am-
bitions, and learn to accept the inevitable. It appears
to be my lot in life to teach schoolboys and schoolgirls,
and be heartily detested by them for my pains. I may
consider myself happy if they have an occasional grateful
remembrance of me when once they are safely out of my
clutches.”
“ Poor Mr. Murray ! He can’t have had a bright sort


of life,” Trix thought, as she left the house. “I suppose
it has made him rather bitter. What drudgery teaching-
must be for those who don’t like it! And poor Nell
looks worried and tired to death. I wish I could do
anything to help her. At all events, I’ll know better
than to go to see her in the mornino- ao-ain.”
<-> 00
She gave up the idea of shopping, and, after she had
had some lunch, went to call on the Snows. Susie had
just gone out, but her aunt was lying on the sofa in
the parlour, and was very glad to see her visitor. It
struck Trix that she was looking very fragile, and much
in need of a change. Presently the girl said something
of the sort.
Miss Snow smiled in her serene and gentle fashion.
“ No; it is true lam tired, and I feel that I have very
little strength. Perhaps the sea breezes at QueensclifF may
give me some.”
“ But if you’re only going for a few days, you’re hardly
giving them a chance. Don’t you think you ought to
have a longer change ? ”
o o
“ No, I do not, dear child; and the doctor does not
urge it. In many ways I am better at home. I am
thankful that Susannah has had so long and so pleasant
a holiday.” (Susie was generally “ Susannah ” to her
aunt.) “ There is one matter, though, about which I
should like to speak to you, Trix. She tells me that
your cousin has asked her to marry him.”
A moment earlier Trix had taken up a fan from the
table, and her face was still hidden behind it.


“ Yes ; she told me too,” she answered calmly. “He
is a very nice fellow, Miss Snow. I think she might
be very happy, if she could care for him enough.”
“ She does not love him now ; but she is young, and
time brings many changes. Would you tell me some-
thing about him, Trix ? Do you think that they are
suited to each other, and that he is likely to be faithful
in his love for her ? ”
Trix scarcely knew how she did it, but she managed to
satisfy Susie’s aunt.
“ Thank you, my love,” Miss Snow said when she had
finished; “it is very good of you to answer my questions
so kindly. I am very glad to know something about
Mr. Stevenson, as you may easily understand.”
“ He must come to see you himself when he is in town.
I know he will wish to.”
“ And I shall wish to make his acquaintance. I know
very little of men, still less of young men. I am very
ignorant about many things, and Susannah has no other
near kindred.”
“ I am sure she has not missed them much, since she
has always had you.”
“ But she cannot have me always, and life is very
uncertain. It sometimes seems to me that my day is
nearly done, and that makes me more troubled about
her. I should be glad to think that some one would
care for her when I am gone.”
“ Dear Miss Snow, you must not talk like an old
woman,” cried Trix. “ You must not think of going


Ill “ * 'lljP*




yet for a long, long time. What has put such notions
into your head, I should like to know ? ”
Miss Snow gave no very definite answer, and a sharp
pang of fear shot through Trix’s heart. Could it be
possible that a terrible trouble lay before Susie ?
That thought had a twofold effect on her. On the spur
of the moment she knelt down beside the sofa and took
Miss Snow’s hand in hers.
“ Whatever happens, Susie won’t be alone in the world
as long as Nell and I are left,” she said eagerly, “ Poor
Nell has her hands pretty full already, I know, but I
promise to take care of Susie if ever she needs any one
else to do it. You may safely trust her to me.”
“Yes, my dear; I know you have always been a good
friend to Susannah.”
Then Susie herself came in, and Trix found to her
infinite relief that her friend was as dear to her as ever.
They could meet again on their old footing; the old
love was untouched and unchanged. Nothing had come
between them; nothing would ever come now. Trix
could carry out her promise with all her heart, and put
Susie’s happiness before her own, if there were any need
for doing so.


CHAPTER XVII.
A US lE’S VO C A TION
SUSIE’S last year at the university promised to be a
full one, and she came back from Queenscliff with
every intention of making the most of it. All her old
enthusiasm bad revived and increased durino- her talks
with Miss Lorraine. The bond between teacher and pupil
had long been a close one; and the latter lost none of
her love for Stormont House, and none of her admiration
for its principal, when she passed from it into the wider
world of the university. She still went to Miss Lorraine,
rather than to any other of her friends, for advice and
sympathy in all that concerned her work.
“\ou are a happy girl,” Miss Lorraine said one after-
noon, with a touch of wistfulness in her tones. “ What
would I not have given at your age for your chances ?
Alas ! I was born more than ten years too early. Such
things were not done in my day.”
“ I think it was almost as good to go to France and
Germany instead,” Susie answered loyally. “ How much
you must have enjoyed it! ”
Miss Lorraine shrugged her shoulders. That was a


trick she had learned during those travels of hers, and
some of her pupils had learned it from her. She did
not greatly admire it in them, but she had never suc-
ceeded in curing herself.
“ It was an investment,” she replied, “ and it repaid me.
Yes, I got a good deal of enjoyment out of it too; but
that was not my primary object. I had to learn my
business and serve my apprenticeship. I had a pretty
hard time of it sometimes. I should be sorry to think
that any of my teachers should find as much to put up
with. You will fare better, I hope, when you follow
my example.”
“ If I ever do,” Susie said, with a sigh.
“ I think you should consider the question, at any rate.
Even a year in Europe would be a great advantage. I
don’t think I have ever told you of my pet plan for
you, Susie.”
“No, Miss Lorraine; I should like very much to
hear it.”
“ First, then, this classical scholarship ; that goes with-
out saying, of course. Then, if it can possibly be man-
aged, your aunt and you should go home together. The
trip might be a good thing for her, and would certainly be
the best thing for you. If you could let your house, the
expense should not be prohibitive ; and I believe I could
get you a position in a German school with very little
trouble. I have a friend in Berlin who has great influence
in the educational world, and your degree should be valu-
able anywhere. I want you to make a study of teaching,


and the German methods are the best I know. You should
have some time in Paris, too, and, of course, in London. I
used to know a lady who is now at the head of a large
school in Naples; perhaps she might be of use to you also.
Indeed, there are several people whom I might write to
on your behalf; and you must let me give you that and
every other help I can. Then you will come back to Mel-
bourne .well equipped on every side, and I shall know
where to look for my colleague and successor. I have
always hoped that you would come and help me at Stor-
mont House.”
Susie thought that she had never received such a com
pliment in her life.
“ 0 Miss Lorraine,” she cried, “ I should like nothing
better. I think it would be glorious.”
“ And I think it would be very satisfactory. You have
the makings of a good teacher, Susie, though you must not
suppose that you can learn all your work in a day. It is
tiresome work sometimes, and brings a great deal of anxiety
with it, but a great deal of real enjoyment as well. I have
had more satisfaction out of my life than most people, I
am sure; yet in some respects it has been a hard one. I
never doubted, at any rate, that I had found my vocation,
and I never wished for a better. I think that is the secret
of most successful work.”
“ I don’t think that many girls look at teaching in that
light,” Susie answered meditatively. “ No, they don’t,
indeed, and very few men do either. So much the worse
for their teaching. Most of them take it up in such a


half-hearted sort of fashion : they must make a little
money somehow, and fill in their time until they can get
something better. Half the men are waiting for briefs,
and nearly all the women are hoping to get married. They
never seem to realize that it is almost the grandest work
that can be done in this world, and quite enough of an
end in life for anybody under an angel. For the matter
of that, it takes a considerable number of angelic qualities
to make a really good teacher.”
“ I should think it must very often,” Susie said, with a
smile; “ but, Miss Lorraine, would you like all your gover-
nesses to take the veil when you engage them ? ”
“ No; but I should like them to be so enthusiastic about
their work that they would be quite content to go on with
it all their days. Oh, I know that most people find that
idea very amusing, and want to know where such women
are to be met with. I quite admit that they are few and
far between, but I have come across one or two of them.
I think I am a case in point myself, for I am thoroughly
satisfied with my lot in life, and would not change it for
any other. I feel as if I had a very large family of
daughters, and I am greatly interested in everything that
concerns them. lam thoroughly proud of some of them,
too, and thankful to think that I had a share in their
training. For instance, I always feel about you that you
are doing all I should have liked to do in your place, and
therefore an old desire of mine is satisfied at last.”
Susie listened, and made up her mind that Miss Lorraine
should not be disappointed in her. She was sure that she


would be quite content to follow in the footsteps of her
friend and her ideal. She began to look forward beyond
her university course to the life for which it was a pre-
paration. She felt, more strongly than ever before, that
she had found her vocation ; so she opened her books again
when she went back to Laburnum Cottage, and gave her-
-0 er rea
very busy when she came to pay the Snows a visit and
hear the latest news of the Lorraines.
Trix herself had been busy also, and was very eloquent
about her doings. The house was almost out of the painters’
hands; some of the rooms were quite ready now for in-
spection. She had been laying carpets, and hanging pic-
tures, and arranging furniture, or, at any rate, superintend-
ing these operations, until she felt herself qualified to write
a manual on household adornment. She had spent hours
in shopping, and had been fortunate enough to get Nelly’s
help occasionally. Nelly was a most useful person to
have at hand when such work was to he done. She
always knew her own mind, and her suggestions were
sure to be good.
She says she simply loves spending money and looking
at pretty things, and that she has not had such a holiday
for a long time; so she would hardly let me thank her at
all, though I don t know what we should have done with-
out her. Father was very much impressed with some of her
ideas. It was she who chose the drawing-room curtains.
We should never have hit upon anything so original and
ctenstic looking. I was a little afraid of them at


first; but now, every time I go into the room, I think that
Nelly Lawrence is a genius. You must come soon and
see them for yourself, Susie. There are quite a number
of things which I want your opinion upon. All my friends
may expect to be victimized in that way for some months
to come.”
“ You must feel quite like a bride,” Susie said, with a
smile.
Trix caught up Miss Snow’s little black kitten,
“ What a little darling it is ! ” she exclaimed. “ I can’t
think why you don’t like cats, Susie. Do you know,
father has been insulting me terribly. He wants me to
have a housekeeper, or chaperon, or companion, or some-
thing. Such nonsense ! As if I could not take care of my-
self, and as if Aunt Kate were not close at hand to play
propriety whenever she is wanted ! I don’t see why I
shouldn’t be independent, even though I am not an under-
graduate. I suppose your beloved professors will give you
some sort of holiday at Easter, Susie. \\ e are to have
the Tracys’ house at Macedon for a fortnight, and the
Lawrences have solemnly promised us a visit. Nothing
is to be allowed to stand in the way this time. Couldn’t
Miss Snow and you come too ? ”
Susie shook her head decidedly.
“ Not I, certainly. If you can persuade Aunt Sarah, I
shall be delighted. Her week at Queenscliff did her so
much good that she might think of it, perhaps; but I
must stay at home and work. You see, Trix, this is rav
last year at the university, and I want to make the very
(1,000)


most of it. I don't intend to waste a single day if I can
help it.''’
And then, for more reasons than one, she proceeded to
sketch Miss Lorraine’s plans for her. Trix was duly
impressed.
“ Fancy you the joint-principal of Stormont House ! ” she
said, laughing. “ How very funny it sounds ! It’s a pity
you couldn't grow another inch, Susie, to be on an equality
with Miss Lorraine. You can go about in your academi-
cals, though, to overawe the girls; and that reminds me
of a question I want to ask, When am I to see you in
your cap and gown ? ”
“ When you come up to the university to pay me a
visit. I shall be delighted to show you round. I never
forget that it was you who first put the idea into my head,
though I must say it was Miss Lorraine who kept it
there. One of your cousins went to the university, didn’t
1/ '
she ? ”
“ Yes; much good it did hex*. She failed in her first
year, and couldn’t be bothered to try again. She’s married
now, and spends all her time in the nursery, if Aunt Kate
is to be believed. I remember I went to a ‘commencement’
once, and saw her sitting among the other girls, and felt
ti’emendously proud of her, as well as awfully anxious to
wear a trencher cap myself. I must go again this year, and
admire you from a distance, and think of the time when
I used to sit next you in class, and sometimes even knew
as much about the lesson as you did. ‘ Alas, alas! these
good old days shan’t never come back no more,’ as our


mutual friend has often remarked. Really Nell is wonder-
fully little changed. It is quite a relief of mind to me.”
“ You are not much changed either,” Susie rejoined.
Y ell, be sure you don t forget about ‘ commencement,’
Trix, and don’t let anything else prevent you from coming.
I don’t know the date yet, but it will probably be some
Saturday in March.”
Trix did not forget, and she did not fail to keep her
promise when the time came. Her father went with her,
and so did her cousin. Mr. Stevenson had appeared un-
expectedly the evening before, and his uncle had invited
him to make one of the party.
“ The 7 always have a big function in the Wilson Hall,”
Mi. Beiesfoid said. “It is worth seeing for once, and we
have an extra ticket. If you have no better plan for the
afternoon, you might as well come with us. We are
special!} interested in university matters at present, for
the sake of Trix’s friend, Miss Snow.”
“ 1 es, it makes a difference when you know some
one, Mr. Stevenson replied. “I’ll be awfully pleased to
go, sir.”
Then he turned to Trix and asked several questions
about Susie and her aunt, with a coolness and composure
that she found difficult to copy.
Mr. Stevenson lunched at Toorak next day, and the
three e into town and up to the university together.
The} had tickets for the dais, and were earlv enouo-h to
get good seats. Mr. Stevenson looked down the crowded
hall, and up at the graceful carvings of the roof, and back


at the and hoods around him. He was sit-
O C 5
ting behind a row of professors, and most magnificent people
he thought them. Trix whispered irreverent criticisms
upon the mixture of colours, but he wondered what
amount of learning each of them carried packed in his
brain, and whether that was the only sort of man that
one young woman could take any interest in.
There were students on the dais too, several rows of
them behind the throne-like chairs which were waiting
for the chancellor and the other grandees. Some of their
o'owns were rather the worse for wear, but their hoods
were fresh and new. He looked for Susie, but she was
not among them. Then he realized that they were the
graduates who would take their degrees this afternoon,
and that he must seek for her elsewhere. But he sought
for some minutes in vain, and then he began to wonder
what Trix found so amusing in the singing of comic songs,
the waving of remarkable banners, and the other per-
formances wherewith the students beguiled their time
of waiting.
At last, however, he did see the person whom he was in
search of. She came into the hall with an elderly lady, who
he supposed was her aunt, and made her way up the lane
between the rows of chairs. She found a seat for her
companion somewhere, and then walked on to take her
place with the other girls among the undergraduates. She
wore her black gown over a simple white fi'ock, and car-
ried her trencher cap in her hand. She looked entirely at
her ease, and thoroughly at home in her surroundings. It


seemed to Mr. Stevenson that there was a great gulf be-
tween them, and he had never fully realized it before.
Trix’s eyes were fixed on Susie too, but her thoughts
were not busy with memories of their school days. The
present was far more vivid than the past, and far more
engrossing. She wondered if there were many other
people in that crowded hall who looked as if they had
all that they could desire, and yet carried a gnawing pain
at their hearts.
Susie was not thinking of either of them just then. She
was sitting beside a girl in her own year, who had a great
deal to say to her, and had not said it all when the chan-
cellor came in and the business of the afternoon began.
It was worth seeing, as Mr. Beresford had said, and yet
it was not intensely interesting to mere outsiders. Trix
grew rather weary of the speeches, and she did not recog-
nize one of the graduates. She supposed they must all
feel very well pleased with themselves, and she hoped that
their degrees would be worth the work which had won
them. She wondered why some people got such an ova-
tion, while other names were passed over almost in silence.
She felt sorry for the less-popular people, and hoped that
Susie would be well applauded when her turn came to
stand before the chancellor. She was amused, too, by
watching a mother and sister who sat in front of her,
and who made it quite apparent in which MB. they
were specially interested. It was nice to see people
look so proud and so happy, Trix thought, and she stilled
a sigk


At that moment Susie first caught sight of her friend.
She had looked about for the Beresfords before, but her
position was not a good one for seeing people at the back
of the platform. And she had been watching the confer-
ring of degrees with very different feelings from Trix’s.
She had plenty of acquaintances among the actors in the
scene, and next year she would wear a blue hood herself,
and be presented to the chancellor. That had been the
goal of her ambition for years, and it would be the close
of a very pleasant chapter in her life. She was glad
that it was still so far in the future, and she hoped that
teaching would prove as delightful as learning. Just then
she saw Trix, and felt a thrill of satisfaction at the thought
that her friend had not forgotten her promise. A second
later she saw Mr. Stevenson too, and all the brightness
went out of her face. What was he doing there ? why
had he appeared again to trouble her ? She had thought
he was miles away ; she was beginning to forget his exist-
ence. The rest of the afternoon was spoiled, as far as she
was concerned.
The proceedings came to an end at last, and every one
rose to go. Most people had acquaintances to speak to,
and took a lono- while to reach the door. Susie would
have liked to escape without loss of time, but she found
herself stopped at every turn. One girl wanted to intro-
duce her to her mother; another was anxious to borrow a
book, and took a very roundabout way of making her
request. The secretary of the Women Students’ Debating
Society had set her heart on securing Miss Snow for a


speech, and would also have liked a few suggestions for
her syllabus. Miss Lorraine and Miss Temple had been
sitting side by side, and they were not likely to go until
they had spoken to Susie. But before she reached them
Susie had given up all thoughts of hurrying away. Her
best plan now was to linger as long as she could, so that
the Beresfords might be tired of waiting for her. She
knew that Trix’s father was a somewhat impatient person,
and she felt sure he would soon be eager to go. It was
most provoking that she should miss seeing Trix in this
fashion, but anything was better than encountering Mr.
Stevenson. She was just beginning to feel herself safe,
when she heard his voice behind her.
“ How do you do, Miss Snow ? Excuse my interrupting
vou, but would you mind coming down to your aunt ?
She is tired, and wants to go home.”
“ Oh, I’m sorry I have kept her waiting,” Susie said,
and shook hands with him hurriedly.
How had he managed to meet her aunt ? she wondered,
and what was she to do next ?
“ How is Mrs. Stevenson ? ” she asked. “ I hope she is
well. She is not down with you, is she ? And you have
quite recovered ? ”
“ Yes, I’m all right again, thanks, and mother is wonder-
' o o 7 7
fully well. She didn’t come down ; it wasn’t worth while,
as I’m only in town for two or three days. But she’s offer-
ing Trix a long visit in the winter. She doesn’t care much
O O
for a winter in the countiy.”
“ Xo, I suppose not,” Susie answered; and then she for-


got all about her companion when she caught sight of her
aunt’s face.
Miss Snow was not very strong just now; there could be
no doubt of that. Susie, however, could find a good many
reasons for it, which made the fact less alarming. The
weather had been so close and disagreeable lately, it was
enough to try even strong people. Her aunt had not had
a proper change for a long time. She must really go away
somewhere for a month or so; that would soon make her
her old self again. She had been doing far too much lately
*7
in that district of hers ; it was no wonder at all if she
were tired or had a headache. And yet Susie had some-
times to admit to herself that she was anxious about her.
This was one of these times, and she blamed herself for
having lingered so long. But she was still more disposed
to blame Mr. Stevenson. If he had not been in the hall
she would have reached her aunt five minutes earlier, and
Miss Snow would not ha,ve come so near a fainting-fit
She was much better now, she assured them all, and quite
able to go home at once—in fact, very anxious to do so.
The atmosphere had been rather close, and she had grown
veiy tired. It was really nothing more. She was ashamed
to trouble people so much ; she was very sorry to have
prevented Susie from seeing her friends; she was quite
distressed, too, to have attracted so much attention. One
lady had lent her smelling-salts; Mr. Beresford had got a
glass of water; Trix was fanning her carefully and watch-
ing her closely.
I saw she was looking very white, and so I came over


to speak to her,” Trix told Susie. “ She is ever so much
better now, and when we once get her into the open air
she will be better still. I am going to drive you both
home, and we’ll put her to bed forthwith if she hasn’t
quite recovered. So you know what you have to expect,
Miss Snow.”


CHAPTER XVIII.
WHAT THE WINTER BROUGHT.
MISS SNOW was much better before she reached
home, and better still when Sunday morning
came. Yet, for the first time in Susie’s recollection, she
did not go to church. In fact, she lay upon the sofa all
day, and not merely for a couple of hours in the afternoon,
as had been her usual custom. Susie praised her wisdom
strongly, but she did not like going out by herself. Aunt
Sarah had always been well enough to go to church in the
forenoon, even though she had not felt equal to doing
anything else. It was much more sensible, of course, to
stay at home and rest, but it seemed so like a confession
of weakness.
“ I hardly like to leave you again,” Susie said, when
she was ready to start for Sunday school.
She had lately been persuaded to take a class of little
girls, and she had found them very interesting. She had
o
gathered together her books, and was busy buttoning her
gloves, but at the last moment she did not feel at all
disposed to go.
“ dear child, you may set your mind at rest. You


know I am never dull, and this quiet time is very pleasant.
I should be sorry indeed to keep you away from your
duties.”
So Susie had to be content with piling her aunt’s little
table with books, and charging Martha to look after her
well. And thus it happened that she was not in the room
when Mr. Stevenson was shown in.
Martha had strong views on some subjects, and she did
not approve of Sunday visiting. She did not approve of
young men either, and was not used to seeing them come
to the house. She would hardly believe that Mr. Steven-
son had not made a mistake, and would scarcely consent
to take him in to her mistress. But Miss Snow was not
so much surprised to see him. It did not seem strange to
her that he should come to visit her, especialty when he
told her that he was leaving town the next morning.
He looked very big as he sat in the little room, and, to
Miss Snow’s eyes, he looked very true, and strong, and
reliable. She studied his face carefully as they talked,
and their talk was very confidential. Susie’s aunt was
satisfied with him, and even he could not be sorry that
Susie was out of the house. He sat by the sofa until she
came home. He was determined not to go without seeing
her. Yet he did not gain much by waiting. Susie was
o %J o
taken aback by finding him there, and too much annoyed
to feel very hospitable. She hoped he did not mean to
develop a habit of appearing where he was not wanted.
She was so curt in her replies, and so constrained in her
manner, that her aunt thought her hardly civil. Miss


Snow felt herself obliged to be still more cordial to Mr.
Stevenson, in order to atone for it.
“ I am very glad to have seen you,” she said, as she
bade him good-bye; and he knew that her words were
neither empty nor conventional.
He went away feeling that he had seen a good woman
and gained a friend.
“He reminds me a little of your father,” Miss Snow
said to her niece. “ I like him, Susannah.”
“Do you, Aunt Sarah ? Well, you know, you do gen-
erally manage to like all the people you have to do with.
I thought he showed rather bad taste in coming here at
all, and Trix could have told him that you did not care
for visitors on Sunday. I hope he has not tired you too
much, at anv rate.”
3
So Miss Snow said no more about Mr. Stevenson, and
was careful not to discuss him henceforward unless Susie
herself took the initiative. Yet she thought of him a good
~ O
deal, and was always glad to hear of him from Trix. She
would have been very thankful to know that her niece
had a home of her own in prospect, and a right to some-
body s care and protection. There were times when she
felt troubled about the future, and needed all her faith to
sustain her.
She had more and more opportunity for thinking as the
year went on. She was never considered an invalid, but
it came to be understood that she must rest a great deal
and take care of herself. Her old occupations were dropped
one after another, now tor this reason and now for that.


The winter was a very wet one; it was scarcely wise for
her to go out in all weathers ; she was growing old, and
could not stand so much walking; she had better give
place to younger and more active people. It always
seemed to be a wise precaution rather than an absolute
necessity, and Susie took care to talk of the change as
a temporary one which was easily accounted for. Some-
times, too, she talked of a sea voyage and a trip to Europe
as the best panacea; but she gave that up after a conver-
sation she had with her aunt’s doctor. A complete change
was an excellent thing for most people, she was told, but
it was not what he should prescribe for Miss Snow at
present. Rest and quiet and plenty of care were likely
to be the most useful remedies in her case.
His patient was quite content to follow his advice. Her
niece and her servant between them gave her all the care
she needed. Even Susie’s university work had to take the
second place that year. Books were dear to her, and know-
ledge was precious, but her aunt was dearer and more
precious still. Lectures were not quite the most impor-
tant thing in life, after all. She could give up all idea of
taking honours, and be content with a simple pass, if her
company would give Miss Snow any pleasure. But Miss
Snow was the last person likely to make selfish exactions.
She was grateful for Susie’s society when she could get it;
she was glad when the girl brought her books from her
bedroom into the parlour ; but she was determined that
there should be no interruptions, and no interference with
necessary work. She had set her heart on Susie’s finish-


ing her university course in peace. No one could tell
what next year might bring forth.
The parlour at Laburnum Cottage was a pleasant room
to visit in those dull, wintry days. Martha always kept
up a cheerful fire, and Susie saw that the vases were
well supplied with flowers. Miss Snow sat in her arm-
chair, or lay on her sofa, with her favourite books beside
her—she was not a great reader, hut there were some that
she never tired of—and an overflowing work-basket close
at hand. It was wonderful how many warm, comfortable
garments went out from that little room during these
winter months. It was wonderful, too, or it seemed so to
her, how many visitors dropped in to see her. She had
not realized before that she was so rich in friends. As
she told Susie, she had no chance at all to be dull.
She had a warm welcome for each one who came. She
seemed more interested than ever in all that was conm
o o
on out of doors. Her smile was as bright and as ready
as before ; her face seemed to have gained in sweetness
and serenity. Yet most of her visitors went away with
heavier hearts.
“ Trix, when did you see Miss Snow last ? ” Nelly
Lawrence asked one afternoon, when the two were to-
gether for a few minutes.
<l The day before yesterday. She seemed so glad to
have had a visit from you.”
J
“ Yes; I was quite ashamed of myself. I had not been
near her for an age. I mustn’t stay away so long again,


though it is so difficult to find time for everything. Don’t
you think she’s looking dreadfully ill ? ”
“ Did you see so much of a change ? ” Trix asked gravely.
“ Yes ; indeed, I got quite a start when I went into the
room. She looks almost like the ghost of her old self,
except when she smiles and begins to talk. Her hands
really frightened me ; I felt I should see through them
presently. Susie talks about her quite cheerfully. Do
you think she sees what is going on ? ”
“ I suppose she does not notice the change so much, as
she sees her aunt every day. Besides, Miss Snow always
brightens up when Susie comes in, and looks her best.
The doctor doesn’t say anything very alarming about her
either.”
“ All the same, if she were my aunt, I should feel that
she needed looking after.”
“ And Susie does look after her very carefully; you
mustn’t suppose anything else for a moment. Miss Snow
says that no one could be more thoughtful and attentive;
she is only afraid that Susie is giving her too much of her
time, and her own work too little. As for her talking
cheerfully about things, I suppose the poor girl feels
afraid to do anything else. Don’t you think she would feel
as if she had really more reason to be anxious after she
had once admitted that she had some cause for alarm ? ”
“ Well, I suppose there is something in that, though I
can’t say it would ever have occurred to me. I generally
feel ever so milch better for talking about things. But
Susie was always different, I know; she liked to keep her


troubles to herself as long as she could, and not admit
that they were there at all. What would be your way,
Trix, I wonder ? ”
“ That I shall leave for you to find out. Your troubles
are getting less, aren’t they ? I was so glad to hear that
these deposits had been released.”
“ Yes; it makes a very comfortable difference to us.
We thought the money was gone for ever, too ; or, at the
very best, that our great-grandchildren might get some
good from it. I, for one, much prefer the half of it now.
I can’t get up any interest in such a far-away future. If
things go on as they are going, it’s just possible that we
may some day be able to turn out our boarders and retire
into private life again. But that prospect is so delightful
that it isn’t safe to think much about it at present. It
makes one hate the whole business too utterly.”
“ And yet you seem to manage everything so well. Is
it still so very disagreeable ? ”
«/ O
“ Not quite as much as it was at first, I suppose, because
I’ve got more used to it. But it’s horrid enough in more
ways than one. Oh, if ever we get the house to ourselves
again, I’ll patch and darn and screw and scrape, and never
call myself poor any longer. Here comes the Mutterchen
at last. Don’t you like her pretty new bonnet ? I never
was so successful in my life. I believe mother thinks
she’s got a genius for a daughter, and I, of course, agree
with her. Good-bye ; I’m sure you’ll have a lovely drive.”
“ I °nly wish you were going with us, dear,” Mrs. Law-
rence said.


“ You will be glad I stayed at home when you see my
beautiful marmalade. Take care of yourselves, both of
you. It’s a treat to get a fine day for once.”
Trix had come, as she often came, to take Mrs. Law-
rence for a drive. Nelly knew that there were few
things which her mother enjoyed so much, and few com-
panions who were so good for her. Trix was always so
bright, and took such a cheerful view of things, that her
enjoyment of life was quite infectious. She was so sym-
pathetic, too, and listened with such real interest to a
chronicle of ailments and anxieties, that Mrs. Lawrence,
like her daughter, found it a great relief to talk to her.
“ A visit from you always does the Miitterchen a world
of good,” Nelly told her friend that afternoon ; and Miss
Lorraine had said almost the same thing about her mother
only a week before.
But, best of all, Trix liked to visit Miss Snow. No-
body came so often as she. She always brought brightness
with her, but she felt that she carried peace away. Susie’s
aunt was so good that it made one feel better to be with
her. She seemed to live in a beautiful calm, away from
all the turmoil and restlessness of everyday life. She
was not without her cares, and she spoke of them to this
visitor more freely than to any other; but none of them
were for herself, and none were unbearable, because none
were borne alone. She had been living for others all her
life, and her own happiness was among the last things she
had considered. Therefore happiness had never left her;
and now she was learning, too, how dearly she was loved.
d.coo) IS


Trix often studied her, and tried to learn her secret; she
found it such hard work to tread in the same path. Some-
times she grew angry at the thought that even those who
knew her best believed she had hardly a care in the world.
In her calmer moments she was glad; for why should
their lives be darkened by hers ? But it was a difficult
thing to wear a mask continually, to fight a battle every
day, and look as if life were a holiday pageant. The
strain seemed to relax a little when she was with Miss
Snow. She had a strange feeling that, by some subtile
sympathy, her old friend understood her better than other
people, and knew that there was something else than
sunshine in her davs, without knowing where the shadow
*■ 7 o
came from.
“ Every one can’t have everything,” Trix often reminded
herself. “ I am richer than most people, and I have no
business to cry for the moon. It’s nobody’s fault but my
own that I have been silly enough to want it, and nobody
else should be made to suffer. It’s to be hoped I’ll get
more sense as I grow older. I wonder if I could ever
make such a dear old maid as Miss Snow.”
Most people did think Trix very rich and very fortu-
nate. She was a busy young woman that winter, leading
a full life, with many interests and many claims upon her.
She made a very gracious mistress for her father’s house,
and he was intensely proud of her. The two were to be
seen almost everywhere together. Miss Beresford was
much admired wherever she went, and as popular among
women as among men. Nelly sometimes said that she


believed Trix had more friends than any other girl in
Melbourne. But neither she nor Susie ever felt herself
neglected. They were both delighted to hear all that
Trix had to tell about dances and dinners, tennis and golf,
bazaars and concerts, and the many other things that
filled up her days. They tried to count the number of
her costumes, they read her long lectures upon extrava-
gance, and teased her about her many admirers. Susie
told her she had been born with a silver spoon in her
mouth, and Nelly begged for a loan of her fairy godmother.
They were working hard from morning till night, and each
had her own cares and anxieties. But they were glad
to think that Trix had all these good things, which they
could only enjoy at second hand. Her being in Melbourne
made a great difference to them in many respects, though
they could spare time for very few of the gaieties which
she put in their way. And as long as Mrs. Stevenson
stayed with her niece, Susie went to the Beresfords’
house as seldom as possible.
Mrs. Stevenson enjoyed her visit exceedingly, and, on
the whole, she was satisfied with the result of it. Trix
was more lovable than ever, more womanly, and more
sensible. She was not quite so frank and unconstrained
in manner, she treated her cousin in a somewhat different
fashion ; but Mrs. Stevenson put her own construction on
the change, and found little to complain of. She was
only vexed that Susie Snow avoided her so persistently.
From one point of view that was satisfactory also, but
from another it was disappointing. She liked the girl,


and -would have been gdad to see more of her. She would
have been glad, too, to feel that Susie saw no need for
keeping away from her.
Mr. Stevenson was in town, too, pretty frequently that
winter. His affairs seemed to call for a good many flying
visits. He went about with his mother and cousin to an
extent that delighted the former and astonished the latter.
He always made a point, too, of going to see Miss Snow.
That generally meant seeing Susie also; and he sometimes
felt that he had an ally in his cousin, because she found
so many ways of bringing them together. But he never
seemed to profit much by his opportunities. He had an
unfortunate knack of interrupting Susie’s work whenever
he went to Laburnum Cottage, and of spoiling her enjoy-
ment of a holiday whenever he met her elsewhere.
Nelly was perhaps the happiest person of them all at that
time. Life was easier for her than it had been since she
left school. The future, too, began to look more and more
hopeful. The boys were all provided for and earning a
little money, other bank shares began to yield some in-
terest, and prospects were improving all round. In the
course of the winter, indeed, two out of their three boarders
left them. One had been transferred to Broken Hill,
while the other thought that an inland suburb might suit
his health better for a time. He would certainly like his
old rooms again when the weather grew warmer. Miss
Lawrence had made him most comfortable, he was pleased
to say. Therefore Miss Lawrence had a problem to settle
sooner than she had expected. Should they or should they


not attempt to get other boarders ? If they could till
their rooms once more, then they might engage a second
servant, get another carpet for the dining-room, and give
the house a coat of paint, which it stood much in need of.
If, on the other hand, they decided to keep their home to
themselves, they would need to be as careful still of every
sixpence as when things were at their worst. Their income
would be enough for the necessities of life, but would leave
small margin for luxuries. The boys were tired of having-
other people sitting down to dinner with them, and Mrs.
Lawrence longed for the time when there should be no
strangers in the house; but Nelly was general manager
now, and she had most to do with deciding the question.
Nelly’s wishes were as strong as ever. She could not
imagine anything more delightful than freedom. House-
keeping would be really like play, she thought, when she
had only her own family to provide for. But she was
very much afraid of making some mistake, and allowing
her inclinations to overpower her prudence. She hoped
that the boys understood all that the change would in-
volve. And she wanted to know what they were to do
about Mr. Murray.
“ Ask him to go too, of course, ” Tom said. “Ne may
«/
as well do the thing properly when we’re about it, and you
cant make much profit out of one man. That study of
his would suit me all to pieces.”
No doubt it would, and that’s a most important con-
sideration,” his sister answered; “ but, all the same, we
should miss Mr. Murray in more ways than one. He gives


us a very comfortable addition to our week’s income, and
he always pays it punctually too.”
“ My dear Nelly, that sounds such a mercenary way of
putting things,” Mrs. Lawrence objected. “We should miss
him dreadfully, I am sure; in fact, he seems quite like
one of ourselves. I never think of his going, children, as
lono- as he is satisfied to remain.”
“ Well, I wouldn’t be so crazy as to ask him to go, at
any rate,” Nelly assured her. “ We’re not such million-
aires yet as that comes to. We might wish him back
pretty soon, and wonder why we threw away a good thing
when we had it.”
Thus the matter was settled, and Mr. Murray was not
requested to find another home.
But Mr. Murray had seen some things for himself,
and had drawn his own conclusions. He came into the
drawing-room on the following Saturday, determined to
ask a direct question and insist on a definite answer.
It had come to be a custom that if he were at home on
Saturdays he should appear in the drawing-room in time
for afternoon tea. He was the only one of the boarders
who was ever seen there. Nelly had insisted that her
mother must have one corner of the house for herself.
To-day Mrs. Lawrence had gone out to call on an old
friend who lived in the neighbourhood, and Nelly was
alone, sitting on the rug in front of the fire, and doing
nothing for once in her life. She sprang to her feet when
Mr. Murray opened the door, ashamed to be caught in such
an undignified attitude.


“Is it tea-time already ? Yes, to be sure. I bad no
idea it was so late. Mother should be in soon; she has
only gone to see Mrs. Brown. Sit down, Mr. Murray,
please, and I’ll go and put the kettle on.”
“ Can you spare me a few minutes first, Miss Lawrence ?
There is one question that I particularly want to ask you.
I am delighted to think that your circumstances have
improved so much, but is it the case that 5 011 l° n o ei
intend to take boarders ? I spoke to your brother Torn
about a man whom I know, and who would be glad to
take Mr. Owen’s room, and I understood him to say that
you had no wish to let it.
“ Xo; it is quite true we have not. Things are better
with us now, and the boys think we can manage without
any one extra.”
“I am very glad indeed to hear it. I hope that means
an easier life for you, Miss Lawrence. But does it also
mean that you would like to get rid of me as well ?
%j
“ Not unless you want to go, Mr. Murray, As my
mother says, you stand on a different footing from the
rest. We shall be very glad to keep you, if you are
willing to stay.”
“ Willing !” he repeated. “ I should be most unwilling
to be uprooted. I was really afraid that you wanted me
out of the way, and were wondering how you could give
me a hint. lam very thankful to find myself mistaken.
I don’t think I could feel at home anywhere else.


CHAPTER XIX.
A DAY OF MISFORTUNES.
had come round once more, the beautiful
spring month of sunshine and flowers, and fresh
green, and singing birds. The winter had seemed very long
and \ ery dreary ; but it was over at last, and every one
was rejoicing in the brighter days. The gardens were a
blaze of beauty, and the florists’ windows a sight to behold.
Painters were hard at work in suburban streets, and house-
cleaning seemed the order of the day. The shops were
full of spring stuffs, and Paris hats, and other “ novelties
for the Cup, and people were making their plans for their
summer holidays. But to Susie of late years October had
only suggested examinations.
She said good-bjm to her aunt one afternoon, and
walked down to the garden gate in a mood that was not
much in accord with the gladness of new life around her.
She had made a most absurd, an unaccountably silly mis-
take in her Greek prose that morning, and she was dis-
gusted with herself beyond expression. The paper had
been very stiff, and she had never sat down to any one for
which she was so ill prepared. She had made the mistake


of working too closelv during the last fortnight, because she
o o o
had lost so much time earlier in the rear. She was more
worried about her aunt than she cared to put into words,
though she still clung to the hope that the brighter
weather might work wonders. She was feeling tired and
O O
disappointed and generally out of tune—so much so, in fact,
that she had seen she could do no more work that afternoon,
and must have a holiday. It would be a relief to forget
examinations for a while, and she yielded with hardly a
show of reluctance to her aunt’s proposal that she should
pay Trix a visit.
Trix lived in a different world altogether, and her
cheerful optimism was certain to be soothing. She could
not understand the utter heinousness of such a blunder as
Susie had made, but that was rather a comfort than other-
wise. She knew at least, from her school experiences,
what hard work meant, and examinations, and ambitions,
and unaccountable slips and mistakes. She would be thor-
oughly sympathetic, and quite certain that Susie Snow could
not go very far wrong, whatever other people might do.
Then she would probably have a great deal to tell about
her own doings—the grand wedding at which she had been
a bridesmaid, the frock she was getting for the ball at
Government House, the last concert she had gone to, and
the garden-party that her father was planning. Susie
would forget all about the little tables in the Wilson Hall,
and the slips of printed questions, and the piles of blue-
lined university paper. Yes, it was a good thing to have
a Trix to turn to. Her spirits began to rise already at


the thought of a long, cosy, gossiping talk over cups of
afternoon tea.
But Trix was not at home, she was told, and her spirits
sank again. Miss Beresford had gone out to lunch, the
servant said; she was sure to be in soon. Would Miss
Snow wait for her ? Miss Snow was entirely willing.
She was quite at home in the long drawing-room, where
the decorators had done their work so well, and where
Trix had gathered the best of all the beautiful things that
she had brought back with her from Europe. She sank
down with a sigh of satisfaction into a low, luxurious chair.
She looked up with new delight at a smiling Italian land-
scape which hung on the wall beside her. She glanced
across the room at a quaint old cabinet filled with treas-
ures of china. Then she picked up a book from a table
near her—the last volume of William Watson’s poems —
nestled down amon? her cushions once more, and lost all
o '
count of time. She was almost sorry to hear the door open,
even though she looked up in expectation of seeing Trix.
And it was a double annoyance to behold Mr. Stevenson.
•/
It seemed such a short time since she had seen him last.
He had been in town barely two months ao-o. He had
%/ O
come to Laburnum Cottage and spoiled her work for a
whole afternoon. She had found him here, in this very
room, when she came to take tea with Trix, and had lost
all chance of a tete-a-tete. How well she remembered it
all, and how provoked she had been! And now history
was about to repeat itself, apparently. It gave one some
excuse for feeling cross.


However, here he was, and she was obliged to get up
and shake hands with him, and sit down again and try to
make conversation. It was easier than it had been on a
day nearly three years ago. Aet Susie found the situation
even more embarrassing. This was the first time that
they had been alone together since Mr. Stevenson had
asked her to marry him. She had never been in his
company since without feeling that his mind was still un-
changed on that subject. She could not tell what made
him so foolish and obstinate. Instead of being flattered,
she felt herself only provoked. Now that they were really
alone together, a dreadful fear seized upon her, and seemed
to drive away all her self-possession. She talked very fast;
she hardly knew what she was saying. She asked ques-
tions and left no time for answers. She inquired for
everybody at and around “ The Willows ” whose name she
could possibly remember. She grew more nervous every
minute, and more annoyed with herself and him. He sat
there with a look on his face which made her feel that,
when his own time came, he would say what he pleased,
and she could not stop him. Oh, why did not Trix come
in and release her ?At last she felt she could bear this
no longer. It might be cowardly, and it probably was
undignified, but she must make her escape from him in
some way.
It is getting quite late,” she said, glancing at a clock
in a corner, and failing to see that it had stopped. “ I
must go, lam afraid. Will you tell your cousin, please,
that I am sorry I could not wait ? ”


Mr. Stevenson had risen also, and was standing between
her and the door. All of a sudden she felt that the mo-
ment had come, and she could not avoid it.
“ I’ll tell her that if you like. But are you quite sure
you’re in such a hurry ? If it’s I that you don’t want to
see, I’ll go out of the house and leave you in peace. I
don’t want to make a nuisance of myself, and yet I sup-
pose you can guess that I just came down for the chance
of seeing you.”
“ Well, then, I wish you had stayed at home,” Susie
answered, scarcely knowing or caring what she said.
“You might see it’s not the least use, and I never can
do what you want.”
“Do you really mean that, Susie ? ” he asked, and her
eyes fell before his. At that moment she was sorry for
him, but at the next she was more angry still.
“ Of course I meant it, and I never gave you any right
to call me by my Christian name. I wish you would
believe that my mind is made up, and that I am never
likely to change it. It would he much more comfortable
for both of us. I hate to he bothered in this way, and I
have plenty of other things to think about. lam a great
deal more certain now that I can’t marry you than I was
when you asked me first, and I wish with all my heart
you would leave me in peace. I never shall change my
mind, though I live to be a hundred.”
“ In that case, of course, there is no more to be said,” he
answered very quietly, and turned and held the door open
for her. I didn’t know I had bothered you so much,
%j 1


Miss Snow,” he added as she passed him. “ I can only say
I am very sorry.”
The hall door stood open as usual, and Susie was half-
way down the steps before she realized that they had not
shaken hands or said good-bye. She could not be quite
sure which of them was responsible for that; she supposed
that Mr. Stevenson must be mortally offended with her,
and would never want to see her again. As far as she
could remember, she had said every disagreeable thing she
could think of, in her anxiety to be perfectly convincing.
He must have thought her a selfish wretch who could only
look at her side of the question. Oh, why were there
some days in one’s life when everything seemed to 00
* •/ O O
wrong ?
Outside the gate Susie met Trix. It struck her afresh,
as it often had done lately, how pretty this friend of
hers was, and how much more womanly and dignified she
had grown. She always did things properly. She would
have been both graceful and kind under any circumstances
whatsoever.
“ Why, Susie, in which direction are vou going ? ” she
•/ O O
now inquired. “ Did you come to visit me ? and have you
lost all patience ? lam so sorry; I should have hurried
home, you may be sure, if I had only known I might
expect you. As it was, I looked in to see Eva Bewick;
she has something the matter with her eyes, poor girl,
and is having a dreadfully dull time. Are you really not
coming back with me ? ”
“ Trix, I can’t indeed; please don’t ask me. I must


go home. I had no particular reason for coming, except that
I wanted to see you.
“ Well, I call that a very good one, and I certainly
wanted to see you. We haven’t had a decent talk for
ao-es and I want to hear all about the ‘ exams.’ How have
O *
you been getting on ? ”
« Oh, horribly ! Don’t ask me. I think I must be getting
softening of the brain, or something of that sort; I have
been doing such utterly ridiculous things. And, Trix, I
can’t go back with you, really and truly. \oui cousins in
the drawing-room, and I assure you we dont want to see
any moi'e of each other.”
“ My cousin ! ” Trix repeated, thinking of the girls who
lived near, and wondering what had happened. Then a
light broke in upon her.
“ Do you mean Harry Stevenson ? ” she asked
Susie nodded.
“He came in while I was waiting for you, and I wish
with all my heart I had never seen him in my life. Good-
bye, Trix. I’ll come some other day instead, or you had
better come to us. You owe us a visit, and Aunt Sarah
always likes to see you.”
“ Yes ; I’ll come as soon as I can. How is she ? ”
“ Better on the whole, I think. Those bright days seem
to suit her. I was sure she would get up her strength
again as soon as she could go out a little. Many thanks
for sending your carriage yesterday; she did enjoy her
drive. There’s my tram ; I mustn’t lose it.”
Trix walked slowly up the avenue, and wished that it


had been twice as long. She wished, too, that she were
much wiser and more unselfish than she was. At any
rate, she was glad that she had met Susie and knew what
had happened—Harry had developed such a habit of ap-
pearing suddenly and taking them all by surprise.
It was Harry himself who was taken by surprise that
afternoon. He knew, indeed, that his cousin might return
at any moment, and he was supposed to be waiting for her
in her own drawing-room. But, as a matter of fact, he
had almost forgotten her very existence. He was pacing
up and down the room with long, swift strides ; he stopped
short at the sound of her voice, and showed her a face so
disturbed and troubled that it could not be calmed all
at once to its ordinary expression. A great desire to com-
fort or help him took possession of Trix’s heart; and
Mr. Stevenson was in a mood for sympathy. He could
not sit down again quietly and talk of ordinary, common-
place matters; his mind was full of Susie, and as soon as
he could get an opening he could scarcely help speaking
of her. Trix generally avoided any mention of the Snows
to him, but she took another course to-day. If he wanted
to talk about one of them, he should have an opportunity.
Susie Snow told me you were here,” she said presently.
“ I met her just outside the gate.”
\es ; I drove her away, I suppose,” he answered, with a
laugh that had nothing mirthful in it. “It seems I’ve
been a fool, Trix. I might have known I wasn’t the sort
of fellow she would care for, and yet I used to hope she
would marry me some day.”


“ Why don’t you go on hoping then ? ” Trix asked.
“ Well, I suppose I will when I’ve had time to get over
this a bit. You wouldn’t have thought I had much reason
to hope, though, if you had heard her to-day. She says
I’ve been bothering and tormenting her, and she wishes I
would leave her in peace. She’s got other things to think
about, and she’s a great deal more certain that she won't
marry me now than she was when I asked her first—the
day before she left “The Willows,” he added by way of
explanation.
“ Yes, I know,” Trix answered. “I am afraid you didn’t
choose a good time, Harry, neither then nor now. She has
a great many other things to think about. She is anxious
about her aunt, and her mind is full of her examinations.
I am afraid they haven’t been going as smoothly as she
would like. I only saw her for a minute, but she told
me that.”
“ I suppose she tells you most things,” he answered, and
already his face had brightened. “ Honestly, Trix, do you
think there’s any chance for me ? ”
“ I don’t know—l don’t like to say anything too definite ;
hut I believe there may he, if you will only have patience.
Susie is much more interested in her work than in any-
thing else just now, but that can’t go on for ever. I
wouldn’t give up in despair if I were you, Harry, I
can’t help thinking it will all come right in the end.”
“ Thanks awfully, Trix. I’m sure I hope you’re a true
prophet,” he answered gratefully. “ You’ll wish me luck,
won’t you, and help me a little if you get the chance ?


though I don’t suppose you'll think much of your friend’s
taste if she does take me in the long-run. I don’t know
myself why she should, and yet I can’t help believing that
she will. It seems as if she must, because — You would
only laugh at me, Trix, if I were to tell you what I think
J O 7 7 •/
of her.”
“No, I am sure I should not,” his cousin said gravely.
“ You can’t think too highly of her. I know I have always
thought Nelly Lawrence and her the best and nicest girls I
O J o
have ever had anything to do with. I can’t tell you how
good Susie is, or how much she has done for me. I think I
would do anything in the world for her, and I should like
very much indeed to help you to be happy.”
“ Thank you, Trix,” Harry said again; “ it’s awfully
kind of you. You’re as good as another sister.”
Trix laughed as she rose from her seat, apparently to
move a photograph from the mantelpiece to a table.
“You are rather a blundering sort of brother, Harry:
O 7 %!
I’m afraid I should have enough to do if I tried to keep
you in order. But take my advice, and let Susie alone for
a while. She is going up for honours in February, and
then her examinations will all be over. I hope her aunt
will be better, too.”
“ Is she reallv stronger, do you think ? ”
%/ o 7 J
“ I suppose she is, on the whole. At any rate, she is very
glad to get out of doors again a little. It must be very
hard to be shut up in a house all through the winter.”
“ I don’t know how anybody could stand it. It would
take the patience of a saint, I should think ; but I am sure
0,000) 19


Miss Snow has got that. I should like to go to see her
to-morrow, hut I suppose I had better not.”
“ No; I hardly think it would be wise. I’ll try to go
myself, and I’ll give Miss Snow any message you like.
Are you to be long in town ? ” ,
“ I’ll likely go home again on Saturday. I didn’t need
to come down at all, except that I wanted to; but as I
made some business, I had better do it. Has uncle gone
to Sydney yet ? ”
“ No; he is going on Thursday, just for a week. You’ll
stay for dinner, won’t you, and see him ? ”
“ I’ll come back if you like, and be glad to do it; but
there are one or two things I ought to see about first.”
o o
“ Yes, do,” Trix answered, and was glad to see him go.
“ I think I managed very well,” she said to herself when
she was left alone.
Miss Snow thought her visitor looked very tired, and
not so bright as usual, when Trix came to see her the next
afternoon. She lectured her a little on dissipation and
the folly of living at too high a pressure; and the girl
listened and laughed and defended herself gallantly.
“It is Susie you should scold, not me,” she said. “ I’m
sure she’s attempting a great deal too much. What has
bothered her about her examinations this time ? ”
“She has made some foolish mistakes,” she says, “especially
in her Gi'eek paper. She is generally so clear-headed that
she is vexed with herself. I fear she has not been able to
give all her mind to her work I cannot help regretting


that Mr. Stevenson and she met yesterday. She had
enough to try her and distract her attention before.”
“ \ es, I know. I was very sorry too. I don’t think
Harry helped his own cause, and it was hard on poor Susie.”
“ She is very much troubled about it. She thinks she
spoke foolishly and unkindly. I believe she hardly knew
what she was saying. I wish she could have loved him.
He is a good man, and I should like to know she had some
one to care for her after lam gone. She will be lonely,
poor child, and she is so young.”
“ But, Miss Snow, why do you talk as if you were going
to die ? I hoped you had given up that bad habit. You
look so much better to-day, too, than you did last week.”
“ I am better, dear; I feel decidedly stronger. But I
cannot live for ever, you know, and it is quite possible that
I have only a short time to stay here. If it were not for
Susie s sake, I should be glad to go. I get weary some-
times, and long for rest.”
“ Ob, you mustn’t say that; you must think of getting
strong again instead. \ou are sure to go on improving,
now that you have once begun. You will be your old
self again before lonsf.”
0 O
“No, my love; that is never likely to be. If I live—and
I may live for years—l shall always be more or less of an
invalid. Susie does not realize it yet, and Ido not care
to tell her. But soon she must be made to understand.”
M hat is there to tell her?” Trix asked anxiously.
M hat does the doctor say ? Does he really think you
can’t expect to be strong again ? ”


“ Me says very little 1 it is rather what he lea\ es unsaid
*7 J
that makes me sure of it. I have felt for the last two
years that I was losing strength, and that I must give up
by degrees most of the things I cared for. At first it
seemed very hard, especially when I thought of Susie. It
is only of late that I have felt quite content to go or
to stay, and quite sure that in either case it will be better
for her. It makes life so much easier when we once
realize that nothing happens by chance, and everything
has a o-ood reason behind it.”
“Oh yes, one knows that; but it is dreadfully hard to
believe it sometimes —things seem so strange and so per-
plexing, and one wonders why they have to be. If we
could only see the reason now and then, I think it would
make all the difference.”
“ And so we shall, dear child, if we can only be patient
and wait a while. There is heaven to look forward to,
and there we know that all our questions will be answered
and all our wishes satisfied.”
Trix sighed, and thought that heaven was very far off,
and there were some things very hard to wait for. Then
she remembered that she was thinking of herself and not
of Miss Snow.
“ I am glad you can feel like that,” she said softly,
“ though it seems so strange to me. But I hope it will
be a very long time before you go away from us. More
people than Susie would miss you dreadfully. Ah, there
she is at the gate. I wonder how she has got on to-day.”


CHAPTER XX.
A DAUGHTER OF CONSOLATION.
MR. BERESFORD started for Sydney on Thursday,
and his daughter was left alone. She could not
ask either Susie or Xelly to keep her company, and she did
not want her cousins. On the whole, she was not sorry
to have a little solitude, though it was a new experience
for her, and the house did seem depressing]}" empty.
She sat for a long time at the breakfast-table on Friday
morning. The Argus was more than usually interesting,
and she had a pile of letters to read. She gave more
attention to them than to coffee or toast, or any other dish
upon the table. The first meal of the day was generally
the pleasantest, in Trix’s opinion, for it was then that she
had most of her father’s society. She could not remember
the time when she had last sat down to breakfast by
herself, and she was thankful to have plenty of literature
wherewith to beguile her loneliness. The maid, waiting for
o ' O
her mistress’s ring, felt herself somewhat ill-used, and was
glad of an excuse for going into the room. She looked
reproachfully, first at the clock and then at the table,
when she brought the message that a boy was waiting
O %j o
in the hall to see Miss Beresford.


“ What sort of boy ? Do you know him ? ” Trix asked,
hardly glancing up from her paper.
“ No, ma’am,” the grave, elderly woman replied. She
had given up saying “ Miss Trix ” now, and was always
most respectful to her mistress, even when she had the
strongest desire to scold her. She had been Trix’s nurse
once upon a time, and one of the few people of whom
that young lady had ever stood in awe, “He looks a
decent, respectable boy, and he says his business is im-
portant,” she added pointedly.
Trix took the hint and gathered up her letters.
“ Then I suppose I had better see him at once. He’s in
the hall, you said, didn’t you ? ”
He was sitting on a carved bench, his shabby cap in his
hand, his patched boots resting on a bearskin rug, his
eager eyes taking in every detail of the grandeur around
him. He rose to his feet, with an awkward attempt at
a bow, when a door opened and a young lady in a pink
frock came forward to speak to him.
“ Good-morning,” she said, with that frank, bright smile
that seemed to belong to her eyes as much as her lips, and
to light up her face whenever she spoke. “ You wanted
to see me, I think ? ”
“ Yes, please, miss,” he answered, shuffling his feet un-
easily. He w r as quite a respectable boy, no doubt, but a
most uncouth-looking specimen. “ I’ve got a message for
you from the servant at Miss Snow’s in Richmond. She
wants to know if you’ll be so good as to come down at
%J o
once, because her mistress died this morning, and she don’t


know what to do with Miss Susie.” He had evidently
prepared his speech beforehand, and carefully conned it
during his journey. He delivered it now in an even,
sing-song tone, and at first Trix could hardly take in
O u 7 *
the meaning of his words.
o
“ What are you saying ? ” she cried in horror. “ Miss
Snow dead! Whv, I saw her on Wednesday ! When did
%/ * •/
she die ? How do you know ? Did Martha send you ?
How did it happen ? ”
“ I don’t x’ightlv know, miss. I think she died in her
O K '
sleep. Martha came in in an awful state when father
was having his breakfast, and asked me to run for the
doctor. Then when I came back she sent me up to you.”
“ When ? ” asked Trix, catching at a gleam of hope.
“ When did she give you that message for me ? ' Was it
after the doctor had come or before ? ”
“As soon as he was gone, miss. She made me wait in
the kitchen, and when she came down she was crying like
anything. She just told me where you lived, and said I
must hurry as fast as I could.”
“ And you can’t tell me anything else ? You don’t
know what the doctor said ? ”
No, the boy knew nothing, and could tell nothing; so
presently Trix realized that the quickest way of getting
information was to go at once, as she had been asked to.
o 7
There seemed no doubt of the dreadful truth, though it
was almost impossible to believe it. Could it have been
only on Wednesday that she had seen Miss Snow last ?
Already it seemed to her such a long time ago I And
•/ O O


yet how clearly and distinctly all their talk that day
came back to her. She could remember exactly how
Miss Snow had looked, and spoken, and smiled; how she
had worn a white shawl round her shoulders, thouo-h the
day was so warm, and had a new pink cushion under her
head which seemed to give a delicate colour to her face.
She had made Trix go to the window and look at her
ferns, and out to the garden to gather some pansies. Then
she had shown the jacket she was making for the baby
next door, and seemed a little horrified at her visitor’s
ignorance of crochet. She had talked about the book she
was reading, too, and wondered what she should give Susie
for a birthday present. And now this boy said that she
was dead.
Trix looked at him again, and saw that he was a thin,
hungry-faced boy, and that his clothes were very old and
shabby. She remembered something Miss Snow had said
about the people who were living at the back of Laburnum
Cottage. They were honest and respectable, but struggling
hard to make a living. She wondered whether this could
be one of them, and if he had had any breakfast. When
she found she was right in both her surmises, she sent him
round to the kitchen, and bade the servants look after him
well. She ordered the phaeton for herself, and hurried
upstairs to dress. Her heart was aching for Susie, and
she was trying to wonder what the world would be like to
her if she had to live without her father. She could not
bear to picture anything so terrible, and yet it was just
such desolation that had really come to her friend.


Trix knew 7 very little of death ; it had never touched
her since her mother w 7 as taken aw’ay. That seemed very
long ago now 7 , and she had been too young at the time to
understand all she w 7 as losing. Would Miss Snow meet
her mother ? she wondered; had they met already, and
talked about her ? People knew so little about heaven
that they could scarcely help imagining things. And yet
what good did it do after all ? It did not make the mystery
clearer, or really answer any question. Yesterday Miss
Snow 7 had not known much more than Trix ; now—ah
well, Trix herself w 7 ould know as much some day. There
w 7 ere some things one could be sure of even now, and they
ought to be enough.
O o
The blinds w’ere dow 7 n at Laburnum Cottage; the garden
w’as flooded with sunshine, but the house seemed already
set apart in its sorrow 7 . Trix w 7 as almost afraid to ring
the bell, and started at the sound of it. She turned round
quickly, and her eye w T as caught by the stand of flow 7 ers
in the veranda, and then by the fuchsia bushes that Miss
Snow had loved.
How dreadful to die and miss such a beautiful
day ! ” she said to herself with a shudder. “ And yet, I
suppose, the land that is very far off must be more beauti-
ful still.”
Then Martha opened the door—poor Martha, so unlike
her usual self, her hair rough, her cap crooked, her face
swollen and tear-stained.
“0 Miss Beresford ! ” she cried, “I hoped it w r as you.
I’m that glad to see you. I’ve been just at my wits’ end


about Miss Susie. She won’t believe that her poor aunt’s
gone, though the doctors told her as plain as could be; and
she’s driving us crazy trying things to bring her round.
If you can get her out of the room, I’m sure it’ll be a
mei’cv.
J
“ I’ll do my best,” Trix answered, with white lips; “ but
tell me first, please, how it happened. When did you
know ? ”
She had turned in at the door of the parlour, and
Martha had followed her. In two minutes she heard the
whole story. There was very little to tell. Miss Snow
had died in her sleep, without a sound or a movement, as
far as any one knew. Martha had gone into the room in
the morning with a cup of tea, and found her lying “so
natural-like ” that she had carried the tray out again, and
shut the door softly, so as not to disturb the sleeper. Half
an hour later she had returned; then something aroused
' o
her suspicions, and in a moment she guessed the truth.
“ I woke Miss Susie, and I didn’t tell her it was more
than a faint, and I got Charlie Jones to run for the doctor;
but, bless you, miss, I knew as soon as I’d pulled up
the blind. There’s that look that you can’t mistake—
the dear lady lay there smiling like a baby; and I’m
sure it would be good for all of us if we were as ready
to go.”
And Martha flung her apron over her head and wept
afresh.
Trix spent the whole day in that desolate house, for she
would not leave until she could take Susie with her. Poor


Susie gave her friends a great deal of trouble at first. As
o o
Martha had said, she would not believe that her aunt
was dead, and tried one restorative after another in a
frenzied attempt to bring Miss Snow back. The doctor
had done his best for her; and when he was forced to go,
he had sent his wife to comfort the girl. But Mrs. Grey
was not a woman with whom Susie had ever had much
to do, and she would not listen to her now. She would
listen to no one, indeed, except Trix, and no one else could
do anything with her.
It was Trix who coaxed her out of the bedroom at last,
and it was in Trix’s arms that she broke dow T n and
realized the truth of her bereavement. It was Trix who
sat by her side, and held her hand, and coaxed her to eat,
and soothed her with tenderest words and caresses, until
at length she cried herself to sleep. It was Trix who
thought and planned and made every arrangement as far
as she could. Ever after, when Susie thought of that
7 o
dismal day, she wondered what she should have done
without Trix.
“Is she asleep, Miss Beresford ? ” Martha asked, putting
her head in at the door about twelve o’clock. “ Well, I’m
sure it’s a blessing to see it. Poor lamb, she’ll be more
like herself when she wakes up again. Come into the
parlour, miss, and see the doctor, and then I’ll get you a
bit of dinner. You must be tired out yourself.”
Trix drew her hand away from Susie’s grasp, and
followed Martha down the narrow passage. Her brain
had been busy while she sat by the bedside, afraid to move


lest she should disturb her charge. She had decided to
write to Miss Lorraine at once, and to Nelly Lawrence as
well; but Susie must have some man to act for her. In
her father’s absence, Trix could think of no one but Harry
Stevenson. Five minutes’ talk with the doctor convinced
her that the best thing she could do was to telegraph at
once to her cousin.
When she had pleased Martha by eating some luncheon,
and satisfied herself with another glimpse of Susie, she
crossed over to the opposite bedroom. The door had been
locked ; she turned the key with a trembling hand, and
shuddered involuntarily as she looked towards the bed.
Yet there was nothing terrible there —only a very quiet
and peaceful sleeper, whose gentle, busy life was over, and
who had entered into rest. Miss Snow looked wonderfully
like her usual self, only younger than Trix had ever seen
her. All the lines of care and pain had smoothed them-
selves away from her brow ; the shadow of a smile still
lingered about her lips. Trix stood and gazed, and felt as
if she dared not shed a tear. It would have seemed like
an insult in the presence of such peace.
“ Oh, how happy you look ! ” she could not help saying.
“ How good it must be to be done with all trouble, and at
rest like you ! I am sure you are perfectly satisfied
now.”
Then she bent her head and reverently kissed the dead
woman’s brow.
“ I will be very good to Susie,” she whispered ; “ I will
—I promise you that. I won’t grudge her any happiness ;


I'll do all I can to help her to get it. You may trust
her to me, Miss Snow.”
A ring at the door bell sounded through the still house,
O O >
making Trix start, and hope that Susie had not heard it.
The cares of life seemed to come back upon her with
almost overwhelming- weight as she closed the door of
O O
the bedroom behind her. Miss Snow had laid down the
burden for ever, but those who were left had to carry
it still. Then Trix recognized her cousin’s voice, and
hastened to meet him.
“ I am so glad you were able to come, Harry,” she said,
as she led him into the parlour. “ I hoped my telegram
would find you. You will come to our help, won’t you ?
Miss Lorraine is sure to be here sometime this afternoon,
but I could not think of any one else to send for.”
“ I’ll do all I can for you or for Susie ; you know that,
' %/ *
I’m sure. How is she ? When did it happen ? ”
In a few short sentences Trix told him the whole story,
and together they made all plans for that day and the next.
Harry was quite ready to make arrangements and take
responsibilities, and he fully approved of Trix’s wish to
carry Susie off with her.
“ She can’t stay here with no one but you and the
servant; it’s out of the question, and uncle wouldn’t like
it for you either. Mind you don’t knock yourself up,
Trix. This is awfully hard on you,” he added kindly.
“ I am all right,” Trix replied somewhat brusquely;
“ you needn’t trouble about me. We have only to think
of Susie.”


Yet she was a little troubled, too, when she thought of
what she had done in sending for her cousin. She
wondered whether Susie would be annoyed, and think
that she had taken too great a liberty. It was with
rather a guilty feeling that she went back to her
friend’s bedroom. To her astonishment, Susie was stand-
ing at her table and turning over the contents of a
O O
drawer.
“ I know I have some black ribbon somewhere,” she
said, in answer to Trix’s exclamation. “ There isn’t much,
but I wish I could find it. I suppose there are a great
many things to arrange about.”
Susie was herself again, as Martha had predicted, quite
calm and collected, and able to think clearly once more.
She was just as meek and obedient now as she had been
intractable before—willing to swallow Martha’s soup, to
obey Trix’s orders, and to acquiesce in all the arrange-
ments that had been made for her.
“ No, I don’t mind,” she answered slowly, when she was
told what Mr. Stevenson was doing, and asked if she had
any objection. “It is very good of him to take so much
trouble, and Aunt Sarah always liked him. It is good of
you too, Trix, to think of everything; but I can’t thank
you properly, and I needn't try. Must I see your cousin,
though ? I should so very much rather not.”
“ No, of course you needn’t. You are not to be troubled
with seeing any one just now. I can give him any mes-
sage you like, and you may trust the whole business to
him. He is father’s representative, you know. Lie down


again, and don’t worry about anything. Shall I read to
you for a while ? ”
But Susie preferred to talk, and seemed to find that a
greater relief than anything else—Trix knew so well how
to listen, when to speak, and when to be silent.
“ It seems such a long, long time since yesterday,” Susie
said sadly. “ I can’t believe that it’s only twenty-four
hours. And the strange thing is, Trix, that it was just
a day like any other day. Nothing special seemed to
happen, and Aunt Sarah was not in the least different.
You would have thought she would be, wouldn’t you ? ”
“ I don’t know,” Trix answered. “ She could not have
any idea of what was coming. I suppose she felt quite as
well as usual ? ”
“ Better than usual, I think. And she was so bright,
O ?
too ! This time yesterday—yes, just about three o’clock
—Mrs. Hay came in to see her, and brought her baby.
You know how fond Aunt Sarah was of babies. She
had been knitting a little jacket for him; it was just
finished. She got Mrs. Hay to try it on, and she was so
pleased with the way it looked. Then I read to her all
the evening. You know I had my last ‘ exam.’ in the
morning, and we were both so glad to have them over.
Miss Lorraine had lent me a book, and Aunt Sarah liked
it very much, though it was a novel. You should have
heard how she laughed! Doesn’t it seem strange that she
should have been knitting, and laughing, and playing with
a baby only yesterday, and now she is so far away from
us all ? ”


“ Perhaps not so very far after all,” Trix suggested.
“ Xo, perhaps not. I wonder if she sees us, and knows
what we are thinking about. I wonder if she under-
stands some things that she didn’t yesterday—without
being told. If I had only known, there are so many
things that I might have said. It seems so dreadful not
to have had a proper good-bye. Why, the last thing
she said to me was that I must sleep soundly, and not
dream of examination papers. I did mean to have a good
long talk with her last night; but she seemed so bright
that I didn’t care to worry her. And now I have lost the
chance of it for ever.”
“ Never mind,” Trix said soothingly. “ No, I needn’t
o «/
say that; but try not to mind so much. It was for her
sake that you didn’t have the talk you wanted, and you
%/ 7 «/
will never be sorry to think of that. You spared her all
the trouble you could, and gave her all the happiness.
Now, perhaps, she can help you better than she ever did
before. I know she felt that if she had to leave you, it
would only be because it was best for you.”
Susie did not answer, but she lay very still, looking
towards the darkened window, and Trix saw there was no
need to say more. Her friend had a better comforter than
any earthly one. Miss Snow had known that her niece
would not be left altogether desolate.
Susie was very passive during the days that followed.
She gave nobody any further trouble that she could avoid.
She was very grateful to all her friends ; she did things,
or left them undone, exactly as she was desired to. She


cried very little—when any one was there to see her—
and she talked still less. She clung closely to Nelly and
Trix, and seemed to find a comfort in their presence.
Trix took her back to Toorak that Friday evening,
after a long visit from Miss Lorraine ; and Nelly appeared
next morning, prepared to stay as long as she was needed.
The funeral was on Saturday afternoon ; it seemed better
for Susie to get it over quickly. There was a very short
service in Miss Snow’s parlour, and a very small attend-
ance. Harry Stevenson’s tall figure towered above all the
company, but Susie scarcely seemed to see him. She sat
in a corner with bowed head and downcast eyes ; she held
*/ '
Trix’s hand, and sheltered herself behind Nelly. She was
thankful to go away with them both as soon as the
service was over.
Laburnum Cottage was a home for her no longer ; she
could not bear to see it looking so familiar and yet so
strano-e.
O
Thus one chapter in Susie’s life came to a close with
startling abruptness. It was a complete close, too, for the
last two months of the year seemed to sweep away all
tiaces of the past. She came of age a few days after her
aunt s death, and Mr. Beresford offered her a home in his
house as long as she chose to stay there. Laburnum
C ottage was dismantled and let; a good tenant had been
found for it, and wanted to take possession at once.
Martha had saved money enough to make her indepen-
dent, even without the small legacy which her mistress
had left her. She had a brother in the country, and she
(1 000) OQ


was o-oino- to keep house for him. Susie, too, had an
income of her own —not a large one, certainly, but enough
for one woman with no expensive tastes or habits. She
might add to it now in any way she could ; she was free to
order her life as she chose. That very freedom made her
wonder sometimes whether life were worth living.
Trix was sadly puzzled now and then about her friend.
Her love for Susie had come to have a good deal that was
motherly in it, and yet she had not a mother s wisdom to
guide her. She was sure that something should be done,
but she dared not run the risk of making a mistake.
Susie seemed to have little interest in things around
her; she was always listless and languid, or making an
effort, more brave than successful, to be like her old self.
Her B.A. degree brought her no pleasure; all thoughts of
taking honours seemed to have passed out of her head.
Sometimes she talked of travelling, and sometimes of
teaching at Stormont House, hut never with her old
enthusiasm. She seemed to have lost the power of
making plans for herself; she shrank from any more
changes. She was always afraid of being a drag upon
Trix, and outstaying her welcome, as far as Mr. Beresford
was concerned. She felt very painfully alone in the
world, and yet there were times when every one’s com-
pany was irksome hut her own. She spent a great part
of the day in the pretty bedroom which Trix had given her,
and where she had collected all the special treasures from
Laburnum Cottage. She liked to sit alone at an open
window, with a book or a piece of work lying on her


lap, but with little inclination for either the one or the
other.
I can t understand her in the least,” Miss Lorraine
remarked to Irix; “such listlessness and idle broodino-
O
are not in the least like Susie. Of course this has been a
terrible bereavement for her; but if I did not know her so
well, I should say she has some other trouble also. We
must manage to rouse her somehow. It is a great pity
that she has nothing to do.”
o
Lrix thought that she knew Susie better even than
Miss Lorraine. She made up her mind at last that the
boldest course might be the wisest, and that she must take
the risks. She did not think it necessary to make a con-
fidant of any one, but it was about this time that she
wrote to her cousin.


CHAPTER XXL
LOVERS AND FRIENDS.
SUSIE, Eve got such a piece of news for you ! You’ll
never guess it, if you try for half an hour.”
Trix burst into Susie’s room with this piece of infor-
mation one December afternoon about six o’clock. Susie
was sitting in her favourite window seat, nestling back
among the cushions, with her hands clasped upon her lap.
A minute earlier she had been gazing out at the sky, her
eyes fixed on a white cloud which showed itself away on
the horizon. There had been a story in her face for those
who could read it, but Trix came in full of her own tale,
and noticed nothing- At the sound of her voice Susie
seemed to come slowly back to common life again.
“ Then, if I can’t guess it, I suppose I needn’t try,” she
answered, with a smile of amusement that delighted her
friend’s heai't. “ AVhat is it, Trix ? Something nice, I
hope.”
“ That depends entirely on what you call nice, mo chere.
For my own part, lam not quite sure as yet. Something
astonishing cei’tainly.”
“ Does it concern us specially ? ”


“ Very specially indeed, Miss Snow. At first you will
scarcely believe your ears, and then you will have to
readjust your ideas on more than one subject.”
“ What an amount of trouble! ” said Susie, laughing.
1 o O
“ I can’t imagine what you can have heard this afternoon
to make it necessary. Pray, how does it affect you ? ”
“With astonishment, utter and unbounded. Now that
I look on your familiar face again, and recall all the
memories that are conjured up thereby, I am inclined to
think that I have dreamed the whole story. Do make
one or two attempts at guessing, Susie, just to restore
my self-respect, and prove that you were as much in the
dark as I was. My character for discernment is at stake,
if it is not gone already.”
“Which might be just as well for your humility, Trix.”
“Do vou mean to insinuate something: insulting: ? If
** O o
I could spare time to quarrel with you, you should be
taught a little more wisdom. Oh, do show some curiosity,
you provoking creature ! What do you suppose I have
heard ? ”
“ I haven’t the remotest idea. It seems to have put
you into an extraordinary state of excitement. I can’t
imagine any adequate cause for such an effect, and you
tell me yourself that I needn’t try to; so what can I do
but wait for enligditenment ? ”
o
“ M hich you don’t deserve to get, when you take things
so calmly. However, prepare to have your breath taken
away. Nell is engaged to be married!”
O O
“Nell!” cried Susie, and sprang to her feet, as much


excited as even Trix could desire. “ You don’t mean to
say —it can’t be—it is surely not to Mr. Murray ? ”
Trix sank back in her chair, as if it were her breath
that had been taken away.
“ 0 Susie, Susie Snow, you extraordinary girl! I
never came across your equal. What in the name of all
that’s wonderful put that into your head ? ”
“ Two or three things I have noticed. But it seems so
absurd. You don’t mean to say it is true ? ”
“ But I do mean it, and it is true —at least she says
so, and I suppose she ought to know. I didn’t believe
her at first, I must confess. I thought it was a gigantic
joke, and the queerest she had ever been guilty of. I
laughed, I am afraid, and I certainly told her not to talk
nonsense, before she made me see it was sober earnest.
Then I had to put apologies before congratulations,
which was somewhat embarrassino-. Indeed, I am not
o 7
sure yet whether I really can congratulate her. Of
course I hope she will be happy, I hope it with all my
heart; but Mr. Murray is such an extraordinary person
for her to choose. Why, think of how they used to
fight, and think of how she hated him! Nearly all
the scrapes she got into at school were due to her feud
with him.”
“But that’s ancient history, Trix, you must remember.
I am sure both she and I have changed enough since our
O O
school days, though you are wonderfully like your old self.
Mr. Murray has changed too ; and they know each other
so well, they must realize what they are about. I don’t


think you have ever quite understood what good friends
they have been for the last two years.”
“ I suppose you’ve seen more of him than I, and you
were with her so much when I was at home. But isn’t
it almost incredible, Susie ? How can she care for him—
that ugly, little man, with his sharp, sarcastic tongue ?
Oh, I know he’s very clever; but then she’s not the sort
of girl to care so much for that. If it had been you,
now—”
Trix stopped short, bit her lip, and hastily changed the
subject.
“ Had you any suspicions at all, Susie ? Did you ever,
in your wildest dreams, think it might come to this ? ”
“ No, I didn’t, I admit; and I can hardly believe it
now. Tell me all about it, Trix. I didn’t know you
were going down to Elsternwick.”
“ I didn’t know it myself till I met Nell in Collins
Street. She had rushed into town in her usual hurry to
get something for her mother. She had just made up her
mind that she couldn’t possibly come out to see us to-day,
when we almost ran into each other’s arms at the corner
of the Block Arcade. She told me she had a wonderful
piece of news which she couldn’t possibly tell in the
street, and managed to excite my curiosity so much that
I let everything- else go, went down to the Elsternwick
Station with her, and came back by the next train. By
«/ •/
the greatest good-fortune we got a carriage to ourselves.”
“ And then Nelly told you ? How did she do it ? how
did she look ? do you think she is really happy ? Surely


she can’t have been engaged long, or we should have heard
before now.”
“It was only settled this morning, before Mr. Murray
went out to his teaching. I wonder what his classes
thought of him. But I suppose he took matters quite
calmly, and gave as many ‘ impositions ’ as usual. Oh,
think of the number Xell has written for him ! Susie,
Susie, are we in our sober senses ? ”
“ I don’t feel like it, and }’ou don’t talk as if you were.
The question is, though, was she ? ”
“ Yes, as sober as you please; that’s the queerest part
of the business. She could scarcely make out why I
should be so much surprised. She says that it seems to
her the most natural thing in the world; he has been
such a good friend to them all, and such a help in so
many ways, that she can hardly imagine life without him.
She can’t imagine either how she ever misjudged him so
terribly, and she thinks she must have been the horridest
girl in Melbourne when she went to Stormont House.
Oh, she’s thoroughly and genuinely in love; there can’t
be any doubt about that. She’s not half so excited,
though, as one would expect her to be. That really
astonished me most in the whole business. It’s not in the
least like Xell to take things so calmly. I declare, she
talked about Mr. Murray as if she had been married to
him for a year 1 ”
It s very strange, especially for her. But you are
quite sure that she cares for him properly ? ”
As certain as I can be of anything so surprising.


She told me quite coolly that for a long time she has
thought there was no one in the world like him. I
suppose it has all come on by such slow degrees that they
have had plenty of time to get used to the thought of it.
I should say too, from what I could gather, that they
must have understood each other pretty well even before
this morning. It gave me rather a shock, I must sav.
O O 7 %j
It shows how little one may know of the lives of one’s
dearest friends.”
“ And when are they to be married ? What about
Mrs. Lawrence ? I suppose they will go on living to-
gether. Nell always says she couldn’t leave her mother
under any circumstances.”
“ Nell is going to come out in quite a new light, my
dear. She seems to find that the most incredible part of
the whole affair. Can you imagine her a schoolmistress
as well as Mrs. Murray ? ”
V
“ No, I can’t, indeed. Trix, what do you mean ? The
wife of a schoolmaster is not necessarily a schoolmistress,
you know.”
“Well, perhaps I used the word in too wide a sense. How-
ever, you must understand that Mr. Murray is anxious to
have a school of his own, and to manage things in his own
O o
way instead of other people’s. He thinks that something
of the kind is now within measurable distance. There is
some man in Brisbane, whose name, I grieve to say, I have
forgotten now, and never heard of till to-day, though Nell
assures me that he has the best girls’ school in that city.
At all events, he wants to go to England for a year, and


lie wants Mr. Murray for his locum tenens. Xo, you
needn’t start so; it is not proposed that Xell should go
with him. But if he takes this appointment, he will
have to give up all his work here; and as the salary is
very good, he thinks he will be able to set up for himself
when he comes back again. Then they can get married;
and I have no doubt Xell will make a most efficient
housekeeper, and look after the boarders, and dose them
when they are ill, and perhaps take the drawing classes,
and teach the little ones sewing, and make herself generally
useful. Could any one have foreseen such a fate for her
three years ago, when we all left Stormont House ? ”
Susie did not answer all at once. She seemed to have
fallen into a brown study, and Trix watched her curiously.
“ Yes, it’s very strange,” she said at last. “ Life is very
strange altogether, and things seem to turn out exactly
as one would not expect them to—people change so much
sometimes, even when they don’t realize it themselves.”
“"V ery true, most sapient Susie ; and after this nothing
will surprise me. Do you remember the day Mrs. Murray
died, and how sorry we felt for the poor man ? And do
you remember, too, how Xeil’s greatest delight in leaving
school was at the thought that she would never need to
see him again ? If any one had told us then that she
would marry him some day, and love him, too, with all
her heart, I wonder what we should have said.”
“ I suppose, that it wasn’t possible. But other things
have happened, too, that one would have said once were not
possible either. Trix, you think that after this nothing


will surprise you again. Do you know that your cousin
has been here to-day ? ”
Trix’s face changed; she caught her breath, and in
stinctively rose to her feet.
“ Susie, what is it ? ” she asked, with a catch in her
voice. “ You saw him ? You have something to tell
me ? ”
Susie threw her arras round her friend’s neck, and hid
her face against Trix’s shoulder. Trix clasped her tightly,
and held her so for a moment, hardly realizing herself
what she was doing. She was trying to remember that
O J o
there was only one person in the world whom she must
think of just then. She succeeded so well, that when,
presently, Susie raised her head and looked up into her
friend’s face, she saw nothing there to startle her.
* o
“ Trix,” she asked, “ I wonder if you knew me better
than I knew myself. I always had a kind of notion that
you thought I would end by doing what he wanted, and
it used to make me very cross. I don’t understand it in
the least, but quite suddenly I found out that I really
did love him, and I thought I had been so detestably rude
that he would never care to see me again. It was the
week that Aunt Sarah died, and after she was gone I
wished I had told her all about it. Yet if she had lived
I don’t believe I could have, I felt so unhappy and ashamed
of myself. But now—l have seen him again, and all the
world is different.”
“ I am so glad of that, m} T friend. Then it is all
settled ? ”


“ Yes, I suppose it is,” she answered, blushing and
smiling, and looking like a transfigured Susie. “At any
rate, we have had a long talk, and he seems to understand
everything. And, Trix, he is so good 1 There can’t be the
least doubt that he is a great deal too good for me.”
“ Xobody could be that, Susie,” Trix answered, and
kissed her friend again. “I am very glad that you are so
happy, and that you have made him so happy too. I
shall feel now as if you were really my sister.”
“ Yes; isn’t it delightful that he should be your cousin,
and will make us really relations ! But we can’t be better
friends than we are already, for that is impossible.”
“ I don’t know about that, Susie. Don’t you think our
capacity for loving may grow with other things ? I hope
you two girls won’t be so much absorbed in your fiances
as to feel you can do without me.”
“ Oh, nonsense ! That could never be, under any circum-
stances whatever. Xell is not that kind; and as for me,
I never enjoyed anything properly, Trix —ever since I
knew you first—until I had told you all about it. Besides,
you will have a fiance of your own some day soon. The
duke has not appeared yet, has he ? But perhaps he is
even now on his way.”
“ Rubbish ! I don’t want him. Let me give you one
o •/
piece of advice, Susie : don’t, for pity’s sake, turn into a
match-maker. Some girls, when they get engaged them-
e? 7 J O OO
selves, think there is nothing else worth living for; and I
have no patience with them. I hope neither you nor Xell
will ever be so utterly silly.”


Susie looked a little astonished at this outburst.
“ Very well—l’ll do my best to bear that in mind ; only,
you know, Trix, when one is very happy oneself, one
naturally wants one’s friends to be too.”
“ Like the fox who lost his own tail, and tried to
persuade his brothers to cut off theirs. Oh, never mind
me, Susie ; I’m talking nonsense, I know. You must make
allowances for my state of collapse after two such astonish-
ing pieces of news. You and Harry haven’t surprised me
in the same way as Nell and Mr. Murray, but I never
guessed that you would be in such a hurry. I thought
O v v O
it would take all the summer to bring things to a satis-
factory conclusion, and I quite intended to be the pre-
siding genius myself. It’s rather startling to find it all
settled up in this fashion. You see, I have been doing
a little match-making too ; but you can’t accuse me of
inconsistency, because I am not engaged myself, and don’t
mean to be either.”
Trix was talking fast and recklessly. As on another
o %J
evening, she wanted to make her escape ; and yet she did
not want Susie to think her lacking in sympathy.
“ I don’t accuse you of anything except wonderful
goodness and wisdom, Trix. I’ll never forget, as long as
I live, how kind you have been to me during the last two
J o
months. lam afraid you must have thought me un-
grateful sometimes, but I wasn’t, really. I felt too
wretched to talk about things; but I don’t know what I
O 1
should have done without you. Harry says you have
been very good to him too. He told me all about it, you


know—your letter and everything. We have a great
deal to thank you for, dear.”
“ It’s very nice of you to say so, hut I’ll try not to
get too conceited on the strength of it. By the way,
Susie, did you ask Harry to stay for dinner ? and if so,
what have you done with him ? ”
“ No, I didn’t ask him ; but he said he would come
in the evening. He really wasn’t in the house at all,
because I happened to be in the garden when he came.”
“ What a good thing that you were lazy, and wouldn’t
come into town with me, and that I was merciful, and
didn’t make you do it. Poor Harry would have been
disgusted if he had found you out, or some one else in
o %/ J
the way. Really, the Fates have been most propitious.
And now, my friend, if you can think of commonplace
matters, I should like to suggest that we ought to be
dressing for dinner. Be sure you put on your pretty
new blouse, and I'll try to get you some white roses.
And if you want to please me very much, you’ll wear
your trefoil brooch.”
“ Of course I will,” Susie answered : “ though I don’t need
* ' O
that to remind me of our covenant. We can be quite
sure now, Trix, that nothing will ever spoil our friendship.”
“ Yes, I think we may; and that means a great deal
of happiness for all three of us,” Trix said, and kissed
her friend again, and left the room.
When Susie found herself alone, she took out the blouse
of black “ liberty ” silk which Trix had recommended, and
made other preparations for a specially elaborate toilet.


She might have had the use of Trix’s maid every day if
she pleased; but she was an independent person, and
never inclined to spend much time upon her dressing.
This evening, however, when Norah knocked at the
door and offered her assistance, she was not sent away
as usual. Susie was glad to let her do as she pleased,
and the result was satisfactory to both of them. Norah
left the room thinking that she had never seen Miss Snow
look so well, and Miss Snow herself was of the same
opinion. She was not beautiful like Trix, she was not
even pretty like Nell, but her face was often lovely in
the eyes of those who loved her. That was all she cared
for, and therefore she w T as well content.
“ Harry took me for Trix the first time he saw me,”
she said to herself, and smiled at the memory. “ I wonder
how he could have made such a mistake, even under
the circumstances. I wonder if he has taken me for Trix
all through. Somehow it seems as if she should have
been the wife for him, and yet I am very glad that
neither of them thought so. lam afraid his mother
will not care to have me as a substitute.”
She took up the little green brooch and fastened her
roses with it. To-morrow would be “ breaking-up ” day
again at Stormont House. Very likely Nelly and Trix and
she would meet once more in that familiar schoolroom.
It was strange to think how things had turned out, and
how different their fortunes were from those they had
sketched three years ago. Susie wondered what all the
girls would say —and Miss Lorraine.


“ I am afraid she will be disappointed, as far as I am
concerned; and I'm sorry, but I can’t help it. Everything
has changed so completely that I hardly know myself.
Nell is the one who will have most to do with teaching
now. I wonder what will happen to Trix. Something
very good and very beautiful, I hope. It always seems as
if the best of everything should come to her.”
Just before Susie went downstairs, she took a photo-
graph from her mantelpiece and kissed it.
“ You know all about it, don’t you, you dear, good Aunt
Sarah ? ” she said. “ You know, and are glad for me.”
Trix in her bedroom was looking at Miss Snow’s photo-
graph also. She had finished her dressing without assist-
ance, glad of any excuse for being alone. She looked
brilliantly beautiful, for she had put on her prettiest
frock, and rubbed her cheeks hard to bring back their
colour. She had gone through a bitter struggle, but that
O O GO 7
was over now. She had gained command of herself again,
and she knew she could play her part and keep her secret.
She hoped that some day she might be so happy in other
people’s happiness that she would be quite content for
herself.
“ I wish I could live a life like yours,” she said, and
looked long and earnestly at Miss Snow’s pictured face.
“ Nobody could say that you missed the best things. And
now, if you do know about Susie, I am sure you are quite
satisfied. She is going to be the most perfectly blessed
woman I know.”


CHAPTER XXII.
IN ARCADIA.
“ 0 you’ve had a finger in the pie too, Trix. It’s
something new for you to take to match-making.”
Mr. Beresford had detained his daughter when she
O
would willingly have said good-night, and stood looking
OJO O 3 ©
at her now with a certain quizzical expression which she
knew quite well and had never dreaded before. It always
meant that he was disposed to make merry at her expense.
“ Don’t you think it will be a very satisfactory match,
father ? ” she asked.
“Of course—since you had a hand in it. Don’t I
always approve of my daughter’s doings ? ”
“ I shouldn’t have supposed so, but I’m glad to hear it
on such good authority. Father dear, have you all that
pile of letters to answer to-night ? Then I really think I
had better go away at once and leave you in peace.”
“You are not generally so considerate, my dear; and as
it happens, I’m in no special hurry this evening. So you
may as well sit down and answer one or two questions.
It seems to me you’ve been treating your old father with
a great want of confidence.”
(i.ooo) 2 1


Trix could not help starting a little.
“ How do you mean ? ” she asked.
“ How long has this love-making been going on ? and
o O O O
how much have you known about it meanwhile ? Harry
seems astonishingly grateful to you for something—l can’t
quite make out what.”
“ I knew that he asked Susie to marry him a year ago,
and again just before her aunt died. I promised to help
him if I could, because I thought he had not managed
things very well so far, and I wasn’t at all sure that Susie
would go on refusing him for ever.”
Mr. Beresford looked greatly amused.
“You must have been a very useful ally. What was
your mode of operation, madam ? Did you run him down,
or praise him up ? Did you laud his virtues, or magnify
his faults ? Did you tell her she couldn’t do better than
take him, or did you hope she would never throw herself
away so foolishly ? With the girl in the same house with
you, you must have had plenty of opportunities.”
“ You are quite mistaken, father. We have hardly
talked of him at all. I don’t believe I have mentioned his
name for a month.”
“ But it was you who brought him to town to-day.
You gave him a hint of the lie of the land—didn’t you,
now ? Confess ! ”
“ Well, I did write to him last Saturday—a very inter-
esting letter, father, with a great deal of news about other
people and not much at all about Susie. But at the end
of it I did say that, if he happened to have any business


in town just now, we should be glad to see him; and I
also told him that we were all going up to Macedon on
the twentieth.”
“I see; that meant, ‘You may come as soon as you
like.’ He took you at your word, anyhow. Harry always
believed in promptness. He got your letter on Monday
evening, I suppose; and this is Wednesday. Yes, he
hasn’t lost much time about it. I wonder what he told
his mother about the business that brought him to town.”
“He wouldn’t tell her anything he didn’t choose to;
but she knows perfectly well that he wants to marry
Susie.”
“ Oh, she does, does she ? So she was taken into con-
fidence too. TV ell, and what are her views on the subject ?
Will the marriage meet with her approval ? ”
“ I hope so, father. She liked Susie very much last
summer, and I am quite sure it will be all right in
the end.”
I m not at all sure that she’ll be quite grateful to you
for your share in the business. Since you know so much,
Trix, perhaps you know her pet scheme for you and
Harry as well. I can t say I ever quite agreed with
her myself.”
“ I hope you weren’t so rude as to want to get rid of
me, sir.”
I wasn t, I assure you; and when I choose a husband
for you, 111 choose some one different from Harry, fine
fellow though he is in many respects. Do you know, I
am rather surprised at Miss Susie. I thought she was


o-oino- to be a ’varsity don, or something of that sort.
What will Miss Lorraine say to her ? ”
«She may say what she likes; it won’t make any
difference now. Besides, she will surely forgive her.
Aren’t you very glad for Susie, father ? She won’t be
alone in the world any longer.”
“ No; she’ll be well taken care of. Harry’s a good
fellow, there’s no doubt of that; though I shouldn’t have
thought he was exactly her sort. She and Miss Nelly
seem each to have taken the wrong man.”
“ There’s no accounting for tastes, father,” Trix answered
wearily. She was wondering when she would be allowed
to make her escape.
Mr. Beresford put his arm about her tenderly,
“ Poor little woman! it’s rather hard on you to lose
them both in a day. You must feel quite left out in
the cold, with all this love-making going on around you.
Never mind, daughter mine, I'll keep you as long as
I can, and be glad to do it; but when the right man
comes, we’ll know what to say to him. There, run off
to bed, my dear, and don’t lose your beauty-sleep. Tell
Susie to-morrow, with my compliments, that I don’t mean
to let her out of my hands until I give her to her husband.
We’ll have a first-class wedding for her, Trix; and you
shall choose the smartest frocks in Melbourne.”
“So we shall; we’ll surpass ourselves. And, father, you
might just as well write a few lines to Aunt May, and say
all the nice things you can think of about Susie—she has
O v
such a belief in your judgment, you know.”


Trix’s one aim in life just then seemed to be to make
things as smooth as she could for her friends. Nelly found
her delightfully sympathetic when they met again, and
soon forgave her for being so surprised to hear of the en-
gagement. Indeed, Miss Nelly had far more strongly
expressed and incredulous surprise to encounter when some
others of her old school-fellows learned that she was going
to marry Mr. Murray.
That “ breaking-up ” day at Stormont House became a
very memorable one for the three girls whose friendship
was still a tradition in the school. They were all there,
and the news of the two engagements became common
property before the afternoon was over.
Miss Lorraine found it a little difficult to devote her
usual attention to her programme and her guests, though
Trix had softened the shock by sending her a note after
breakfast, and giving her time to get used to the idea. A
shock it undoubtedly was in both cases. She had realized,
indeed, that Nelly Lawrence and Mr. Murray were on better
terms than of old, but never had she dreamed of such a
tinale. Her memories of past conflicts made it very hard
for her to offer her congratulations with a proper degree of
gravity. Nelly’s embarrassment, too, was quite evident as
she received them, but she had made up her mind before-
hand to defy criticism. It was this determination which
had brought her out that afternoon.
“ They’ll be awfully surprised,” she told her mother;
“ but it’s just as well to get all that over at once. When
Trix thought it such a queer thing, it’s no wonder if other


people can’t believe their ears. Miss Lorraine and Miss
Temple will remember a great deal that I wish all the
world would forget, and the girls who were there in our
time will remember a great deal more. I can just imagine
how some of them will look, and what they will say.
They won’t realize that I’ve changed so much myself that
I can hardly believe I’m the same person; but if I don’t go
to-day, and if Trix tells them what’s happened, they’ll all
think I’m afraid to face them, and I’m not.”
So she went, and looked very sedate and dignified,
too, receiving all Mr. Murray’s attentions with becoming
graciousness, and generally impressing her old friends with
her new character.
“ I can’t get over Nelly Lawrence,” Emily Barton said to
one of the teachers. “ Miss Temple, did you ever in all
your life hear of anything more extraordinary ? ”
“ No, Emily; Ido not think that I ever did. I find it
difficult to believe the evidence of my senses.”
“ She looks so cool and dignified over it, too, as if she
were daring us to say she wouldn’t make a correct and
proper Mrs. Murray. And as for him, I never saw the
little man look so human. Susie Snow is just a shade less
astonishing. Mho would have expected her to marry a
commonplace squatter ! And what does Miss Lorraine say
to it ? ”
“ Miss Lorraine is almost too much astonished to say
anything, but I have no doubt it will be a great disappoint-
ment. For my own part, I think it is the wisest thing
tnat the girl could do, and every one may consider her very


fortunate. It is hard to be left alone in the world at her
age; hut if she were going to be Mrs. Murray, I could
understand it better.”
“ She’ll have a much better-looking husband, at all events,
and she seems perfectly satisfied with him. I suppose
Trix is acting as chaperon. I wonder if that is why she
has put on that becoming little bonnet. It’s very pretty,
but rather old for a girl of her age, don’t you think ? ”
“It did not strike me. She is certainly more womanly-
looking, but that is rather an improvement than otherwise.
I never meet Beatrix Beresford without thinking how much
she has improved since I saw her last.”
“ Well, the strangest thing to me is that these two
are engaged before her,” Emilv answered. “ There’s Mrs.
O O 7 %/
Lawrence. I suppose I had better go and congratulate
her. Any one can see that she is pleased enough.”
Trix had indeed taken up the role of chaperon, and she
discharged it with more dignity than Mrs. Lawrence. Her
congratulations to Mr. Murray and warm good wishes were
very prettily spoken, but he noticed with some amusement
that she talked as if she were greatly Nelly’s senior. To
Miss Lorraine, and indeed nearly every one else in the room,
she characterized the two engagements as two such delight-
o O o
ful and satisfactory things that they found themselves one
and all disposed to agree with her, whatever might have
been their previous views upon the subject. She hovered
round the two fiancees with affectionate solicitude, keeping
carefulh r in the background when she saw she was not
needed, but always ready to interpose between them and


embarrassing remarks and questions. She looked so bright
the while that every one remarked it, and so pretty also in
her dainty bonnet that other people thought with Miss
Temple how much she had improved since last they had
seen her.
That evening, too, Trix sat down at her table, while her
cousin and Susie were out in the garden, and wrote a long
letter to Mrs. Stevenson. She gave a glowing account of
their happiness. She said everything she could think of in
praise of her friend, and she seemed to take it for granted
that his mother ■would be pleased with Harry’s choice.
She had not forgotten that lady’s remarks on the subject
less than a year ago, but she thought it better to ignore
such inconvenient memories.
“ You will be quite rich, won’t you, with two daughters ? ”
she wrote. “ And lam sure you could not have nicer ones.
Susie is so fond of you already, and so anxious to please
you. She is quite afraid that you will not think her good
enough for Harry, and refuses altogether to listen to me
when I tell her that he could not possibly have found any
one better. She is absurdly humble-minded sometimes, and
she thinks there is nobody in the world to equal that
son of yours. So you and she have one point of agree-
ment, at any rate. I wish you could see Harry. He
looks quite radiant, but I don’t think he will be perfectly
happy until he has gone home and told his mother all
about it. I am going to trust him with this letter for
you. I shall tell him it is for you, and about Susie, and
then I shall have no fear of his it ”
O O


Mr. Stevenson did not forget it; he handed it over to
his mother the following evening, and she read it as she
dressed for dinner. She read it through twice, and then
laid it down with a sigh.
“ No; it is quite evident there never was any chance of
that Trix had no more thought of it than he, and prob-
ably I have been a foolish old woman to indulge in such
day-dreams. I had better take the goods the gods provide
me, and be thankful for the daughter-in-law I am to have.”
Yet Mre. Stevenson took some time longer to consider
her son’s marriage before she felt that she could give it her
full approval. He had not waited until he reached home
to tell her the news; he had written to her on Wednesday
evening a brief note and soberly expressed, but to his
mother eloquent enough. It was only what she had ex-
pected, yet it came upon her as a shock. She had waited
and watched all through the year; she had hoped against
hope that the thing would be averted. Perhaps it was for
Harry’s happiness, but she could scarcely see it. For her-
self it meant an aching sense of loss and desolation, and
she felt still that it would have made a great difference if
Trix had been in Susie’s place.
Her sense of propriety came to her rescue, and the
wisdom which had always taught her to submit grace-
fully to the inevitable. She began a letter to her future
daughter-in-law, though she did not succeed in finishing it
for twenty-four hours. On Saturday morning she went
l»ack to it again, and added a few’ sentences which she
could not have written before. There was a warmth and


a ring of sincerity in them that had been wanting in other
well-turned phrases. They made Susie a very happy girl
when she read them.
A week later, Mrs. Stevenson accepted her niece’s invita-
tion to join their party at Macedon. Mr. Beresford had
taken a cottage for a couple of months—a bio- ramblino-
place with plenty of rooms, and a delightful old garden.
Harry had already arranged to spend a good part of the
summer there, and his mother thought it was quite
necessary to provide a more efficient chaperon than Trix.
And then Trix took possession of her, and used every art
she was mistress of to bring the tw T o who w T ere to be
mother and daughter together, and bind them so closely to
each other that the new relationship might be a reality
and not a name. Mrs. Stevenson was too shrewd a woman
not to know that Susie was alw r ays being presented in the
most favourable light, and her ow T n approval persistently
wmoed. She was amused at her niece, but she did what
she was expected to do, all the same. She took Susie to
her heart of hearts, and freely forgave her for not being
Tiix. She had forgiven her son already for making such
a choice; it would have been very hard for her to be long
in opposition to him. He had, months ago, registered a
vow that if he did win the desire of his heart, his mother
should still miss nothing of all that he had been used to
give her. In every one of his plans for the future her
comfort was most carefully considered; and she could not
but see it, and feel that she a fortunate woman. As
ior Susie, she was nervously anxious to find favour in Mrs.


Stevenson’s eyes, and her wonder was almost as great as
her pleasure when she saw how well she had succeeded.
She was as much in love with Harry, too, as even the most
exacting mother could desire, and every day she seemed to
develop some fresh qualification for making him happy.
Altogether Mrs. Stevenson was soon as satisfied as she
could well have been, and her interest in all the arrange-
ments for the wedding was only equalled by Trix’s own.
These were days of wonderful brightness for Susie. She
knew, as they passed, that the memory of them would
always be a treasure. Whatever the future might bring,
she, too, had been in Arcadia. It was true that Miss Snow
was terribly missed. Even in her overflowing happiness
Susie often felt an ache at her heart, and longed with a
passionate longing for the gentle presence that had left her
side. But she knew that it was well with her aunt —better
by far than if she were still alive to face the thought of
losing her niece. There was heaven to look forward to
with all its happy meetings, and meanwhile this world
was wonderfully rich and beautiful. Harry made a very
devoted though not specially demonstrative lover, and Susie
was almost surprised to find how completely he satisfied
her. They were so unlike in many ways, and yet they
suited each other so well. They had long walks and rides
together, and discussed every subject under the sun, some-
times taking the same side, sometimes disagreeing almost
as strongly as of old, but always full of admiration for
each other. She learned to take an interest in horses and
sheep, and he in pictures and books. He would listen for


hours to Susie’s reading, and even discovered both sense
and beauty in Browning ; but then, for her sake, he would
have done his best to learn Hebrew.
Everybody, too, combined to make life pleasant for the
lovers. They were the centre of the household; all plans
were made and all pleasux-es arranged with a view to their
special benefit. If they had been people easily spoiled,
they would have run some risk of it now. Mr. Beresford’s
persistent teasing was the only crumpled rose-leaf that
Susie could find in her lot, and even that seemed powerless
to trouble Mr. Stevenson.
A good many arrangements were made before they left
Macedon. Harry was eager for an early marriage, and
Susie was longing for a home of her own, though at the
same time very anxious not to show any disrespect to her
aunts memory. She was tired of being a guest always,
even where Trix was hostess. She was persuaded, too,
without much difficulty, that Miss Snow would have been
the last to wish her to wait. Mrs. Stevenson believed that
when a change had to be made, the sooner it was accom-
plished the better. She announced her intention of spend-
ing the winter in Queensland, and begged Susie not to doom
Harry to loneliness. Trix, too, for some reasons that con-
cerned the others and one that concerned herself, was
anxious to hasten on the wedding. So a date in April was
fixed. Mrs. Stevenson went back to “ The Willows ”to
gather her own possessions and prepare the house for its
new mistress, and the two girls came to town to plunge
into the business of buying the trousseau.


“Susie is the most unsatisfactory bride I ever came
across,” Trix told her cousin one morning. “ I believe she
would be quite content to be married in a black skirt and
cotton blouse, if she hadn’t Nell and me to look after her.
If that’s what a B.A. degree does for a girl, I’m very
thankful I never took one.”
Susie was wearing a black skirt and a cotton blouse at
that moment, and Harry looked at her as if he too would
have been quite satisfied with such a costume. He had
come to town the day before, and the lovers had met again
after a separation of a whole fortnight. He thought his
cousin a little excited this morning, and wondered why
she made such a fuss over frills and furbelows. He pre-
ferred Susie’s indifference. But Susie herself was not
content to let such a statement pass unchallenged.
“ Don’t listen to her, Harry; she’s exaggerating dread-
fully. I’m sure I have been as good as gold, and gone
wherever they chose to take me. I’m not used to getting
a dozen dresses at once, and I can’t take a vehement in-
terest in more than three or four at a time. That’s all she
has against me, and I’m sure it’s not much, is it ? ”
“ I don’t see why you need take such a lot of bother
at all. Who wants you to be dressed up and made a show
of, just because you’re going to be married ? It won’t do any
one any good,” Harry replied, with masculine ignorance.
But Susie was as little disposed to agree to anything
that might seem a reflection on Trix.
o
“ Oh yes ; it will do the dressmakers good, and the milli-
ners, and all these other estimable people. Besides, it will


provide me with a wardrobe that will do credit to Trix’s
taste, and satisfy Mrs. Perry’s artistic eye when she comes
to call at ‘ The Willows.’ It’s just possible, too, that you
will approve of the result when you see it, and be properly
grateful to the people who have brought it about.”
“And we’re getting her such a swagger habit, Harry!
\ou 11 like that, at any rate. I’m going into town partly
to see about it this morning, but I won’t be so cruel as to
tear her away from you. You shall have the whole fore-
noon in peace, and nobody will come near you. Then you
really must be good, and come down to Elsternwick after
lunch. Poor Nell needs all the cheering up that she can
get. Think of what Susie would be like if you had crone
to Brisbane for a year.”
“ Couldn’t you leave the shops alone for a day ? ” Susie
su oo es f e d. It s going to be so close and disagreeable
Trix, and you 11 be dreadfully tired if you try to do every-
thing. You’re taking altogether too much trouble about
me.”
“ Nonsense ! I like it, and it’s no trouble at all. Good-
bye, my friends. Be good children, and don’t quarrel till
I come back, I ought to be off already, I see.”
“Why, how are you going, Trix?” her cousin asked.
Don t you mean to take the ponies ? ”
“ No; I want them to be fresh for the afternoon. They
ha\ e had a lot to do of late. I’m going to walk to the
station; I like trains better than trams, and I haven’t any
time to waste. I daresay I’ll catch the half-past twelve
from town, Susie; so you’ll see me back for luncheon.”


“ I’ll go down to the station with you, Trix,” Mr. Steven-
son said, and would not listen to her protestations that she
did not want to rob Susie of him.
Susie stood at a window and watched them as they set
off together. The railway made a circuit round the hill
on which the house stood, and a station was within five
minutes walk of a little gate at the foot of the garden.
She said to herself that she had never seen a handsomer
couple. She looked after them with loving eyes—these
two who were dearer to her than any one else in the
world. There were no people anywhere to equal them ;
of that she was very certain. What was she, and what
had she done, that both of them should love her so well ?
Rather more than two hours later, Harry and she came
up from the tennis court together. They had not been
playing it was scarcely a day for violent exertion—but
the little summer-house under the shade of the trees was
the coolest place in the garden. They had had a delightful
morning; they had almost arranged their plans for their
honeymoon, and both faces were full of peaceful happiness
a great contrast to the face of the maid who met them
as they reached the hall. Her cheeks were as white as
her cap.
“ 0 r • Stevenson,” she. gasped, “ there’s been a terrible
accident just outside the station. Do you think it could
be Miss Beresford’s train ? ”


CHAPTER XXIII.
IN THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW.
IT had been a wet, stormy morning, but the rain had
ceased now, and the sky was clearing in every direc-
tion. Yet to Susie Snow, as she stood forlornly at the
drawing-room window, it seemed as if the clouds had
gathered closely above her and wrapped her round with
the blackness of desolation. She could scarcely believe
that the sun would shine again; she knew that, for her,
some of its brightness was gone for ever. For in the
o o
bedroom above her Trix Beresford lay dying.
Dying—Trix Beresford dying ! It could not be; it surely
was not possible. Trix so full of life and energy, Trix
with her light step and her ringing laugh, her flower-like
face and her shining hair—how could any one connect the
thought of darkness and silence with her ? Trix Beresford
—how were those she loved to live without her ? It was
like a horrible dream, and yet Susie knew that it was true.
She did not fight against the truth, either, as she had
fought and struggled when her aunt left her. Death had
touched her once before ; it did not seem so strange that he
should come again. Besides, she had behind her more than


four-and-twenty terrible hours, first of sickening fear, and
then of still more awful certainty. Was there some fate, she
had wondered, on all who were dear to her, which reft them
away so suddenly and cruelly ? Would Harry Stevenson
be the next ? But even Harry had slipped into the back-
ground now ; her thoughts had room for no one but Trix.
She was almost too weary, indeed, and too unhappy, to
think at all. She was quite alone in the great drawing-
room, which tortured her with all its traces of its mistress.
Harry had gone to meet his mother; Nelly was upstairs in
the sickroom, where only one visitor now was allowed at
a time. Mr. Beresford was out of that category altogether :
O J O '
he had never been long away from his daughter’s side
since yesterday afternoon.
Oh the horrors of that afternoon ! Like a terrible pano-
rama, the memory of each separate scene passed before
Susie’s mind. First of all there had been the sight of the
housemaid’s face, and the hideous thought that her words
suggested. Harry had exhorted them to keep cool and
tki thin 0 s for granted, but his face had been pale
also when he started on his run to the station. It seemed
to Susie now that even then she had known the worst.
E\en then she had been quite sure that Trix was in the
train and among the injured.
Later on they had brought her home, and Susie had
rushed to her side. At first the icy grip at her heart had
loosened a little. Trix was still alive; she spoke to them
almost in her ordinary voice. She was a good deal bruised,
she told them, and too stiff to move, but not in much pain ;
d.ooo) 22


she was very sorry to have given them all such a terrible
fright. No, she would not be carried into the librarv or
O 7 *
the breakfast-room; she was quite able to bear being taken
upstairs, and she did not want to be ill anywhere but in
her own bedroom. She had talked about the other in-
jured people also, and hoped they were being as well looked
after; and she had begged them all to be very careful not
to alarm her father.
Then Mr. Beresford came home, looking as if he had
suddenly grown an old man ; a nurse arrived about the same
time, and one doctor followed another in rapid succession.
There had been hurryings to and fro, long consultations,
grave faces, and anxious inquiries. Nelly Lawrence had
come, and Miss Lorraine, and dozens beside ; but at first
no one had any very definite information to give them,
Trix’s aunt, Mrs. Hanson, and her daughters, were still in
Tasmania; that was the only thing Susie could find to be
thankful for. If they had been here, pervading the house,
talking and sobbing and shaking their heads, she felt it
o o o *
would have driven her mad. As it was, she could only
' V
long and pray to know the worst, for anything must be
better, she had thought, than this suspense.
At last the blow fell. They had been waiting all the
afternoon for an old friend of the Beresfords, who was also
the greatest surgeon in Melbourne. Susie saw his buggy
drive up to the door, and watched him mount the stairs,
with the knowledge that before he left the verdict would
be spoken. Nelly and she were alone in a room. The
minutes seemed as if they would never pass. Nelly


longed to scream aloud, and Susie to silence the tick of
the clock. At length they heard steps on the stairs, but
neither could move; voices in the hall, and they held
their breath; the closing of a door, and they knew that
the fiat had gone forth. The next moment Harry came
into the room, and his face was more eloquent than words.
Nelly, as well as Susie, seized his hand, and implored him
to tell them everything. Then they heard that Trix was
dying; it could only be a question of hours—twenty-four
at the least, thirty-six at the utmost. The very absence
of pain, which had comforted them so much, had really
been the worst possible sign. She was dying, and nothing
could save her.
“If she did live, she would never walk again. Dr. Green
told me so before,” Harry said, in a choked voice. “ Can’t
you be thankful, girls, that she has been spared that ? ”
Could they be thankful for anything then ?
“ Does she know ? ” Susie managed to ask.
“ Not yet. They have sent her to sleep ; but the nurse
will tell her when she wakes. I must go back to uncle.
If ever you prayed in your lives, pray for him now.”
That was yesterday, and another afternoon had come
round. Trix was still alive, and still calm and composed.
She had been taken by surprise when she learned her fate—
almost stunned at first, and altogether incredulous ; then
she had cried a little, and begged to be left alone. But
when her father came back to her, she was strong for his
sake, and put aside everything else in her lonoino’ to com-
* c ' £3 O
fort him. She asked for Nelly and Susie next, and they


34 o IN THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW.
had been allowed to come Perhaps they would
have shrunk from coming alone. But Trix was so like
her usual self, that they could hardly believe she was going
to leave them. After a while she grew drowsy again, and
the nurse hurried them out of the room.
She had slept a good deal through the night, and when
she woke her mind was quite clear. She had made her
will that morning, and disposed of all her possessions. She
had dictated one or two letters, and sent a number of mes-
sages, forgetting none of her friends. Susie and Nelly went
in and out of the bedroom, forcing themselves to be calm,
too, as long as they were there. They managed to talk in
almost their ordinary tones; they promised to remember all
the directions they got; they even succeeded in summoning
up a smile when they spoke to Trix. She seemed to smile
without any effort.
“ How is she ? ” Susie breathed, rather than spoke, when
Nelly came back to the drawing-room.
“ Asleep ;so I was sent away. I had been reading to
her the Twenty-third Psalm—-you know she was always
fond of it—over and over again. She said it soothed her.
I think she must have been suffering, though she wouldn’t
say so. O Susie, is it all a horrible dream ? ”
Nelly sank down on a sofa, and buried her face in the
cushions. Her whole body shook with her sobs, Susie
knelt down beside her, and stroked her hand, without
speaking. At that moment she envied Nelly more than
any one else in the woxdd. Her eyes were dry and burning;
she could not shed a tear.


Upstairs, Trix lay and dozed, and woke and dozed
again, sometimes forgetting for the first moment of con-
sciousness why she was there and what had happened.
It was such a strange thing to be lying still and dying.
Now and then she seemed to be quite another person,
looking down at Trix Beresford, and feeling vaguely sorry
for her. When she saw her father’s bowed head the pain
became acute, and therefore the nurse had made him sit
where he was, half hidden by a curtain. Sometimes he
rose and bent over the bed and spoke to her ; sometimes
he could control himself no longer, and hastily left the
room. But as a rule he sat silent, devouring her with
7 O
his eyes, and often holding one of her hands. So silent
and motionless was he, that the others who came and
went almost forgot his presence.
The room was very bright, and dainty, and fresh. Trix’s
eye wandered over every familiar feature. Her mother’s
portrait smiled down upon her from above the mantel-
piece, and Miss Snow’s photograph was placed beneath
it. They seemed both to tell her how easy it was to
die. A beautiful print of “ The Light of the World ” hung
opposite her bed. She had always loved it, and liked
to look at it first when she woke in the morning. The
o
nurse was a comely, gentle-faced woman, with something
soothing in her very presence. Trix was glad there
were no medicine bottles to be seen, and gladder still
that the sun had come out once more.
The clock by her bedside struck an hour. Aunt May
would be here soon—Aunt May and Harry. How good


he had been to his cousin all through ! She had thought
of him when the crash came and the carriage swayed
and fell on its side. His face was the first she saw
when she woke to consciousness. She had no fear when
they raised her to carry her home, because he w T as there.
She knew he would direct everything; he would not let
her be hurt if he could help it. He was so strong and
so calm, it rested her and made her bi'ave to have him
near her. Now that she w 7 as so ill, now that she was
dying, his thoughts were as full of her as of Susie. Surely
she had a right to think of him too. How glad he had
been all day to do anything for her ! How thankful she
was that he had been in town when the accident happened !
How she would have longed for him if he had not
been here !
There was another thing for which she had longed
o o
with a yearning that sometimes seemed as if it must
master her. Could she die and keep her secret to the
end ? Might she not share it with some one ? It would
be such a relief. Yesterday morning she would have
said that she would die rather than let any one know it.
Now she was dying in any case, and that made all the
difference.
Yes, she was dying. Might she not have the privi-
lege now of those who were passing away ? What
did the world and its customs matter to her ? Would
it do Harry any harm to know what his cousin had
felt for him ? He could not be sorry for her now
that all was so nearly over; he certainly would not de-


spise her. He would be very kind and gentle, and she
should like to feel that he knew. But then he would
be sorry all his life to think of what she had suffered ;
and if Susie ever came to hear, it would hurt her ter-
ribly. No, Susie must never hear, and therefore neither
Harry nor Nelly could be told. It was true they might
both be trusted to keep the secret from her, but there
should be no secrets like that between husband and
wife; and Nelly, in the first bitterness of her bereave-
ment, might feel almost as if Susie had wronged Tiix
in being preferred before her.
Now, as she lay awake, she thought of the others to
whom she might speak. Her eyes were closed again;
her father, and even the nurse, believed her asleep. She
preferred that they should believe it; she w anted to
think, and the time must be growing short. The nurse
had said that it might be to-morrow, or it might be on
Thursday, that the end would come. That meant to-day
now, or to-morrow T . If she had been in Susie s place,
Death might have seemed dreadful; now: she w T as sur-
prised at herself because she found him so friendly.
It was very good of God to let her die; she had never
thought of that out of her troubles. She had
found living hard work lately. The only way to get
through it all was not to allow herself to think. She
had wanted to hurry on Susie’s marriage, that every-
thing might be irrevocably settled. She had wanted
an elaborate trousseau, partly for love of the bride, and
partly to fill her own days to overflowing. Poor Susie 1


how determined she had been that none of her gowns
should be gay in hue ! Would she insist now on wearing
nothing but black ? Would she feel that she could
scarcely bear to put on the things which Trix had chosen
for her ?
“ She will remember all the nonsense I talked when
we were buying them ,” said Trix to herself. “ She won’t
know how wretched I felt sometimes.”
That brought her back again to her starting-point.
It would be such a relief to tell some one before she
died ! But who should that some one be ? Not her
father; he was out of the question. Not Aunt May
either; it would destroy all her pleasure in her son’s
marriage, and Trix would have undone her own work.
There seemed to be only two people to whom she could
tell her story; they were the nurse and Miss Lorraine.
She liked that nurse so much, she was so gentle and
looked so reliable, and then she was always at hand. It
would be quite easy to tell her everything. She was a
stranger, too, and never likely to come into contact
m ith Susie or Harry again. She must have learned
many other secrets in sickrooms. Why should not a
girl who was dying unburden her heart bv talkino- to
such a woman ? But no; Trix could not make up her
mind to do it. How could she let a stranger hear
what she would not tell to her dearest friends ? Had
she sunk so low that she must seek for sympathy from
one whom she had known only for a night and a day ?
No , in spite of everything, she was not quite so weak.


Then there was Miss Lorraine, and Trix’s heart turned
to her old teacher with passionate longing. Miss Lor-
raine had always been so easy to talk to; she under-
stood things almost at a word; she was so wise and
so sympathetic, and so thoroughly trustworthy. She was
never unjust or unfair to any one, and she loved both Trix
and Susie dearly. Yes, the secret would be safe with
her; the one girl would never suspect it, and the other
would die more happily because some one else knew it also.
But as Trix lay there and planned how she should
tell her tale, a new question came into her mind. Why
should she tell any one, even Miss Lorraine? Was it
not selfish of her to wish to? They all thought she
had had such a happy life, they would be glad to think
of it when she was dead. Mhy should she give any one
the pain of hearing such a story ? What good would
it do her to tell it ? She would get the pity she had
longed for; she would make one person know what a
fio-ht she had fouo-ht when all the world believed her
O o
so lio-ht-hearted. But she would lose something from
her victory ; she would humble herself in her own eyes
by her weakness. In a little while, too, in a very little
while, she would be where there are no more secrets, and
where all the sorrows of life are swallowed up in glad-
ness. Yes, she could be patient a little longer; she would
give no one a heavier burden to bear for her sake. If
she must tell her story to some woman, she would keep
it for her mother; perhaps her mother knew all about
it already. How much did people know in heaven of


what went on here ? That was one of the questions
which had always perplexed her. Well, it would soon
be answered now.
She sank into a long reverie, which almost turned
into sleep. She came back to the consciousness of things
around her by feeling her father’s hand laid upon hers.
She looked up at him with a smile, and yet with a pang
of self-reproach. Why had she wished for any other
love when she had his ? Why had she thought of her-
self so much, and her own troubles that were so nearly
over, when such a grief was coming to him ? Oh, how
glad she was that she had always tried to be brave and
cheerful, that he knew and suspected nothing.
“ Poor father! ” she said to herself; “ I should be
thankful to live for his sake, even if I had to be a
cripple. I always meant to put him first for the rest
of my life, and not to make other people unhappy just
because I couldn’t have all I wanted. One comfort is
that I m not going to die of a broken heart, and no one
will ever suppose it.”
After that she thought much less about the world
she was going away from. Her mind was at rest about
those whom she loved, except her father; and she knew
she must leave his Father and hers to comfort him. She
remembered how Miss Snow had faced the parting from
Susie. She astonished her aunt presently by her bright-
ness and serenity.
“ 1 never expected to see her like that,” Mrs. Steven-
son said to Susie. “ I can’t understand it at all a


She held her fa




girl of her age, with everything that heart could wish,
struck down so suddenly, and yet so perfectly resigned.
No, resigned is not the right word; I can’t find one to
* O o '
suit her. I wondered more than once whether she
quite realized she was dying; one could hardly have
suspected it from the way she talked. She seemed
quite disappointed because I had not seen Mrs. Perry’s
baby, and could not tell her what he was like. Her
mother was always unselfish too, and thought of other
people up to the last; but then poor Sophie had such
a long, trying- illness, we were all thankful for her sake
o ' o '
when the end came. At first, too, she nearly broke her
heart at the thought of leaving her husband and Trix.
o o
Well, she will have one of them very soon again.”
Then Mrs. Stevenson caught Susie to her heart, and
kissed the girl with a passionate tenderness that she
had never shown before. She could not help thinking
how terribly stricken her son would have been to-day
if her dreams for Trix and him had come true. She was
grateful to the woman he loved, for being alive and well.
So the hours crept on one after another, each bringing
the end a little nearer. The awful hush that pervaded
the house deepened as night came on; it seemed as if
every one were watching for the wings of the Angel
of Death. But still he delayed his coming, or drew
near so tenderly and gently that they could scarcely
discern his presence. Trix dozed a great deal now, and
talked very little. She held her father’s hand tightly,
and opened her eyes with her old smile when the others


spoke to her. Sometimes she asked a question, or
begged them to go to bed and not tire themselves out.
Sometimes she seemed to grow restless, and wished for
the morninof.
“ 1 iiate the night,” she said once, in almost petulant
tones. “I can't sleep, and I’m tired of thinking I
wonder when the sun will rise. Ido want the day
to come back.”
Then she suddenly seemed to realize thino-g ao- a in
and asked with rather a frightened face if she had been
talking nonsense.
Most of the time she lay very still, and with her
eyes closed. Little snatches of her favourite psalms
were running through her head. She was in the vallev
now, but the hill was before her, crowned with the city
of light. The road was new and unknown, but her
mother and Susie s aunt seemed to beckon her onward,
and the King in His beauty was waiting to bid her
welcome. Xo, the Good Shepherd was beside her in
the valley of the shadow, and she could fear no evil,
not even the river that had to be crossed.
They were all around her when the river was reached.
Their love encircled her to the last, and she knew it
and was glad. The night had dragged itself away, and
another day was dawning, when Harry Stevenson sum-
moned his mother. He had persuaded her to lie down
three hours before by a solemn promise to wake her as
soon as the change should come. But none of the rest
who were round the bed had thought of sleeping that night.


Trix was lying with closed eyes when her aunt came
in and joined the group. A smile hovered about her lips,
as if she heard some music which other ears were too
deaf to notice. She seemed already to belong to a dif-
ferent world. But she came back for a while to the
one she was leaving, and bade them all good-bye. She
had not many words to spare for them now; all that
she wished most to say had been said already, and she
was very tired. She closed her eyes again, and the long
lashes lay motionless on the pale cheeks. So still was
she that Nelly thought it was all over; but the white
lids were lifted again, and the brown eyes looked be-
yond them all, towards the glowing pink of the sunrise.
What was it they saw far away in the eastern sky ?
Or was it a vision of another dawn that they beheld?
She never told her friends. A peaceful, satisfied smile
came over her face; she stretched out the hand that lay
on the quilt, as if to touch another. “Yes, mother dear,
I’m coming,” she said, as though she were a little girl
again.
'o
And the morning sun poured in at the window and
flooded the bedroom with light. Out in the garden
the grass was glittering with dewdrops, the flowers had
opened their petals, and all the birds were singing to
welcome the new-born day. But Trix had gone away
from them all, and these things were nothing to her.
Her eyes had seen the King in His beauty, and the land
that is very far off.


CHAPTER XXIV.
“ THIS DA V FIVE YEARS HENCE*
IT was Christmas, and Nelly Lawrence paid her first visit
to “ The Willows.” As she sat in the railway carriage
and looked out on the miles of paddock around her, she
was thinking how, three years ago, she had hoped to travel
this very road, and of the friend who would then have
been waiting to welcome her. How well she remembered
how and where and when the invitation had first been
given, how disappointed she had been to find that she
must stay at home, and how hard it seemed now to think
of what she had missed. Her thoughts were more with
Trix than with Susie when she stepped out upon the plat-
form and shook hands with Mr. Stevenson.
The eighteen months of married life which had passed
over his head had left little perceptible trace behind them.
He was somewhat boyish-looking still—most ridiculously
so, Nelly Lawrence thought, when she compared him with
Mr. Murray; nor did he appear to be a more brilliant talker
than of old. When he had assured Miss Lawrence that he
was very glad to see her, and that Susie and the baby were
both as well as possible; when he had collected all her


luggage, and taken his seat beside her in the dogcart;
when they had passed through the little town, and hei
attention had been called to the churches and banks, he
seemed to have little or nothing more to say for himself.
But then Nelly was not in a mood to make conversation
either; and though the idea did not occur to her, it was
quite possible that he saw this. At any rate, he left her
alone to look around her and think of Trix. Trix had
often driven over this smooth, white road. These pad-
docks and gates and clumps of trees had all been familiar
to her. She had probably sat in this very dogcart, and
taken a friendly interest in that beautiful chestnut horse.
Three years ago she would have met Nelly herself, and
driven up from the station, talking all the way, and mak-
ino - it seem short indeed. Now the grass was green above
her grave, and the flowers of the second summer were
bloomino- over her head. Her friends had learned to live
without her, and even her father had put away all outward
signs of mourning. But every foot of the road to “ The
Willows” was sacred in Nelly’s eyes for her sake.
Thev came in sight of the house at last—the house where
she had spent so many pleasant days, and which she had
brightened so much with her presence. There were plenty
of changes since Trix had died. Its new mistress stood
on the veranda waiting to welcome her guest —such a
happy, matronly-looking Susie, the picture of health and
prosperity.
“ Married life seems to agree with you, at any rate,” was
Nelly’s comment as she kissed her.


“As it will with you, I am sure,” Mrs. Harry Stevenson
answered gaily. “ It’s really very pleasant, on the whole,
■when one’s husband doesn’t take too much upon himself.
—0 Harry dear, I’m very sorry to say that Mr. Menzies
is waiting in the office to see you, and has been for
nearly an hour. But can’t you come in and have some
tea before you go to him ? ”
“ Thanks, no; I think I’d better not keep him any
longer. Tou can send some round, if you like. Where’s
the little lady ? ”
“In the nursery, sound asleep. She simply would not
wake up, and I had to leave her in peace. Wasn’t it pro-
voking of her, Nell, when I had set my heart on having
her here to welcome you ? But babies are most ‘contrairy’
creatures, as nurse says. You have to let them follow
their own devices, up to a certain point, at any rate.”
“Tou seem to have grown quite learned about them,”
Nelly said, with a smile at this altered Susie, as she
stepped through the French window and into the draw-
ing-room.
O
Nelly looked around her, and thought what a beautiful
room it was, and how abundant the wealth must be that
had furnished and adorned it. Traces of wealth were
evident, too, in Susie’s dress—a figured alpaca, soft and
changing in colour, with nothing very striking, but with
every little thing perfect about it, as much so as if Trix
herself had chosen it. Nelly’s e} r e was quick to note
all these details—specially quick just now, because she
had been busy planning her trousseau ; though, like the


economical young woman she had become, she was waiting
for the January sales to make her purchases.
Her marriage had been delayed longer than she had
expected. So, indeed, had Susie s, though that was an old
story now. After Trix’s death, Mrs. Stevenson had taken
a furnished house in Toorak for the winter, giving up all
her other plans in order to be near her brother-in-law,
though her instinct told her that he preferred the loneliness
of his own house to any society there. Susie spent a good
deal of time with her, and it was in her house that the wed-
ding finally took place. A very quiet wedding it could
only be under such circumstances. Nelly was there, but
not a bridesmaid, because Trix could not stand beside her.
Susie wore her grey travelling dress, and almost her only
ornament was a little green brooch in the form of a trefoil.
There were only half a dozen guests, and neither speeches
nor decorations. The bride and bridegroom were very
happy in each other. Their friends rejoiced with them ;
but one person was terribly missed.
Since that day Susie’s time had been spent at the station,
with the exception of six weeks at the seaside during the
hot weather. Nelly had seen her as she passed through
Melbourne, and had got many invitations to pay her a
visit; but she had never been able to come until now,
and this was the last visit she would ever pay as Nelly
Lawrence.
Mr. Murray’s year in Brisbane had lengthened into two.
He might have stayed there altogether, with excellent
prospects opening before him, if the climate had only been
a,coo) 23


suitable for Mrs. Lawrence. He was a happier man than
he had been of old, and, perhaps for that reason, a more
popular teacher. He had quite made up his mind to spend
the rest of his life in a schoolroom, and found the prospect
by no means unpleasant; but nevertheless he was thank-
ful to give it up for ever, when a chance came to him of
teaching men and women. A lectureship at the university
was offered to him—a piece of good fortune that he had
often wished for but never expected. The work would be
congenial, and the salary was considerable. Whether he
ever became a professor or not —and Nelly Lawrence had
no doubts on the subject—he would look upon himself as a
successful man. At all events, he had found his place in
the world, and he knew he could fill it well. He was to
be married early in February, and when Susie heard the
news she wrote to Nelly, insisting so strongly that the
promised visit must be paid that Nelly could not, even
if she would, have said her nay.
“ It is nice to see you there,” Mrs. Stevenson said, beam-
ing at her friend across the tea-table. “ I have so often
imagined you in this room, that I can hardly believe my
dreams have come true. I only wish you could give me a
longer visit, but of course that is out of the question, and
I must not be selfish. How was your mother this morn-
ing ? It must be a great comfort to you to see her so
much stronger.”
o
“Yes, she is very well indeed, thank you—better than I
ever knew her. You should have heard all the compli-
ments she got at the ‘ breaking up r yesterday. And she


is so active; she seems to be quite renewing her youth. I
think it is due as much to relief from worry as anything
else.”
“Yes; her troubles are quite over, I hope. I suppose
you will all live together at Elsternwick, Nell.”
“Of course. I could never dream of going away from
her, and Robert would be the last person in the world to
ask me to. Oh, we shall be a very happy family, and get
on quite smoothly together; no one need have any doubts
about that. You see, we all know each other pretty well,
to begin with.”
“To be sure you do. You are used to living together.
Yes, I think it will be an ideal sort of life for you, Nell.
And how Mr. Murray will enjoy his new work ! ” Susie said,
finding it a little difficult to recognize him in “ Robert.”
o o
“ Yes, it will suit him a great deal better in every way.
I can’t tell you how glad lam it has come to him. You
J O
know, he really is not the sort of man that ought to be
wasted on teaching school-girls. He never reallv liked it,
O O */ '
though he could do it so well; and it never was good enough
work for him.”
“ Miss Lorraine would say that was heresy,” Susie re-
marked, with a smile. “ She told me her views about
teaching school-girls long ago, when she and I thought
000 o 7 o
that that was going to be my work. By the way, how is
Miss Lorraine ? You said you were at the ‘ breaking up ’
yesterday. How is she looking ? and did you miss the old
lady very much ? ”
“ Oh, it was much better that she should not be there at


all than as she was last vear. You can’t imagine how
*/ o
painful it was to see her, and hear the nonsense she was
talking, and her poor daughter’s attempts to stop her. Miss
Lorraine does look dreadfully done up. I'm afraid you
will be rather shocked when you see her. She said she
was coming to see you next month.”
o %/
“ Yes; I am hoping for a good long visit, as we have
decided not to go to Lome till February. That is alwavs
o •/ *
the worst month here. Poor Miss Lorraine, lam afraid
she will feel very lonely, now that the holidays have
begun. I always have a sort of yague hope, Yell, that
Mr. Beresford and she may some day make up their minds
to take care of each other. Haye you seen him lately ? ”
“ Yes : I met him a week ago. He looked very well,
’ o J
and he was to start yesterday for Xew Zealand. I think
he takes care to be always very busy. He said he would
not be back for some time, so he sent me a wedding
7 O
present before he left—such a lovely travelling bag; I
shall feel like a duchess whenever I use it. 0 Susie, do
you know, Molly Smith was there yesterday, and we had
%> ' «/ %J '
quite a long talk. She has grown so thin, you would
hardly know her. She says Laura Beid is married, and
gone to Coolgardie. Don't you envy her—and her
husband ? ”
So Xell talked on, and Susie asked eager questions
about her old friends and the school life that had once
been so much to her. But she only gave half her atten-
o
tion to what she was hearing; and presently she sprang
to her feet, and her whole face lit up with pleasure. Xelly


was sitting where a screen was between her and the door ;
but she had only to look at her friend to know that the
nurse had appeared with baby. The next moment Susie
came proudly forward with her little daughter enthroned
on her arm.
There, Nell; what do you think of her ? Isn’t she a
beauty ? ”
A beauty she certainly was. Fortunately for Nelly, there
could be no two opinions about that. Nor was there any
answer possible but one, when Susie asked softly,
“ Don't you see the likeness ? ”
“To Trix ? —yes; nobody could miss it. lam so glad.”
“So are we. There’s nothing we could have liked
better; though, of course, I am delighted that it also
means her having such a strong look of her father. Harry
insists that she has my chin, though I’m certain he never
saw me with a double one like this wee womans. Isnt
she bio- for her age, Nell ? And you will be astonished to
OO * v
see how strong she is. Just look at her firm, plump little
limbs, and tell me if you ever saw more fascinating
dimples ? ”
Susie had seated herself once more, with the air of a
proud priestess exhibiting the treasure of her shrine ; and
Nelly knelt before her, a most admiring worshipper.
Mistress Baby smiled graciously upon them both, and
permitted them to kiss her rose-leaf palms and stroke her
sunny hair, while she accepted all their lavish compliments
as the merest matter of course. She had been used to
admiration all her short life through.


“ She is a darling ! ” said Nelly enthusiastically. “ What
beautiful big brown eyes she has, and such long lashes !
They are exactly the same.”
And Nelly looked up at the large silver-framed photo-
graph which had the most prominent place on the mantel-
piece.
“ Is she to be Trix ? ” she asked.
“ No, no; there could only be one Trix in the world,
though there couldn’t he any names but Beatrix and
Sarah for this dear little daughter of ours. I should
have liked to add Mabel, too, for the sake of her grannie
O *
Harry’s mother has been a mother to me, especially since
March of last year. But she wouldn’t hear of it, and
Harry began to think he might sandwich in Susannah
somewhere; so I had to decide in the most determined
fashion that two names were quite enough for any one.
Beatrix Sarah Stevenson—don’t you think it makes quite
a euphonious combination ? ”
“ Yes > they go very well together. I’m glad you didn’t
put in another. What do you generally call her ? ”
“ An J Pretty name we can think of ; ‘ Little Sweetheart ’
is the favourite at present, I think. M hen she grows too
old to be ‘ Baby,’ we’ll cut off a syllable and call her ‘ Bee.’
Did you see your father coming then, my darling ?—Look
how she jumps, Nell; she knows him as well as possible,
and she thinks, with her mother, that there’s nobody like
him. I’ll give her to him for a minute or two—he makes
a very good nurse, and is tremendously proud of his
daughter—and then I’ll take you to your room. I have


given you the one that Trix had when I was here first. I
& *
thought you would like to have it.”
O J
Nelly looked around her again when she was left alone;
and then, by a sudden freak of memory, the vision of
another room rose before her—a pretty fire-lit study filled
with school-girls, and one shy, shrinking figure, forlorn and
friendless, at the door. That had been her first impression
of Susie. What a long way they both had travelled since
then !
Nelly was reminded of Laburnum Cottage, too, and its
modest menage, when she sat at the Stevensons’ dinner-
table. The sense of contrast seemed to strike her on
every side. Susie looked so thoroughly at home in her
place of mistress of “ The Willows,” so well accustomed to
all this wealth and luxury, that her old friend could only
watch her in wonderment. She had taken on a dignity
and an ease of manner that were new to Nelly. She
seemed to have lost all her old shyness, and to be quite
capable of holding her own with any one. She looked
what she was—a happy, satisfied woman.
Susie had not forgotten her old interests either; she
o
showed Nelly, with great pride, her well-filled bookcase,
and described the pile of papers and magazines which kept
her in touch with the world.
“ Grannie and I get a great many together,” she said,
O O %/ CD '
“ and she sends me all the new books from Melbourne.
I told you we expect her on Tuesday, didn’t I ? She
hasn’t seen baby for four months, and we are wondering
very much what she will say to her. She has made up


her mind to buy that house she is in. She says she won’t go
to England again till we can all go together. We mean to
do that, you know, as soon as the w’ee o-irlie is old enousdi
0 C 5
We shall have a house in town too some day, I suppose, to
keep us from getting countrified and rusty. But I am
quite content to be here for the present. I like country
life a great deal better than I ever expected to, and I take
advantage of my leisure to get through quite an amount of
reading.”
“Do you have so much ?” Nelly asked.
“ Yes, really a good deal. My share of the housekeeping
is easily done, and though I go out with Harry as much as
I can, and baby’s society is very engrossing, still I have
enough time on my hands to make me glad that I have
plenty of resources. I believe I have practised more since
my marriage than I ever did since my first year at school,
because Harry is so fond of music, and I am sure his
daughter has inherited his taste for it. I want to make
the most of all my advantages for her sake, you know. I
shall always be glad that I was trained with a view to
teaching people ; but now that I have a daughter to brino-
up, I begin to see how much I need to learn. But here am
I talking of my own concerns continually, wdien yours are
at a much more interesting stage. Do sit down and let us
have a good, long gossip. Harry is safely disposed of for
the next hour, so we can discuss our own affairs to our
hearts’ content.”
iNelly was not sorry that Mr. Stevenson was hard at work
in his office. A little of his society seemed to her quite


enough for a while. She supposed that Susie must find it
interesting, but she rather wondered at her friend’s taste.
o 7
She did not profess to be clever herself, but, for her part,
she liked a man with brains. However, she was wise
enough not to say so to Mrs. Stevenson.
Nor did Mrs. Stevenson tell what she had been thinking
during dinner. She also had been drawing comparisons,
and the conclusion she arrived at made her more than ever
content with her lot. Mr. Murray had his good points,
certainly; she had never been blind to them. She was
very glad that Nelly was so happy, but —people did do
strange things sometimes. Nevertheless she discussed
O e?
Nelly’s trousseau and future plans with a great deal of
interest, and gave a solemn promise to be present at the
wedding.
“Do you know what Emily Barton said to me yester-
day ? ” Nelly asked at last, breaking off in the middle of a
long discourse about hats and bonnets. “ She told me that
she always feels as if you and I had changed places. That
seems to me rather ridiculous, and yet I can see what
makes her say it. It is very strange how things have
turned out. Susie, you are wearing your trefoil brooch.
Do you remember what day it is ? ”
“Do you think I could ever forget ? That was the
chief reason why I made such a point that you should
be here to-day. So far, at least, we have kept our
agreement.”
Susie went over to her writing-table, opened a drawer,
and now returned with a sheet of foolscap paper.


“Do you recognize it ? ” she asked, though she knew
there was no need for the question.
Nelly received it reverently, and read over once more
the clauses of that old covenant.
“‘We undertake to remain true and faithful to each
other, and to let nothing interfere with our friendship.’
Well, we’ve kept that promise, at any rate. ‘We agree to
meet again this day five years hence, if we are all alive,
and all in the same country.’ It was Trix herself who
made us put that. How little we supposed then that any
one of us would not be alive ! Do you remember how you
wished you could take a peep into the future, Susie ? And
now that future is the present.”
“ Yes, I remember ; and do you remember this ?”
It was a page torn out of a notebook which she ex-
hibited now, and on it was a sketch of three heads, one
crowned with a coronet, another with a trencher cap, and
the third with a dunce’s cap.
Nelly’s eyes grew dim with tears as she looked at it.
She seemed to hear Trix’s voice once more, and Trix’s
ringing laugh.
OO o
“ 0 Susie, what would it be to have Trix beside us
again ? ”
“ Nell dear, if we only knew, I’m sure we couldn’t be so
selfish as to wish it. Your sketch was prophetic in one
»
point at any rate: she has won her crown, and a better
one than we had devised for her.”
“ Yes, better for her ; but for us, what a difference her
going has made ! Oh, lam glad we couldn't look into the


future that afternoon. We should have felt as if we
couldn’t get through the years, in spite of all the happiness
they have brought us.”
o
In spite of all the tears that were in her eyes also, Susie
could not help smiling as she wondered what Nelly would
have said five years ago if any magic mirror had shown
her her picture as Mrs. Murray. Nelly did not see the smile,
however, for she had risen, and was standing in front of
the fireplace, gazing into Trix’s photograph.
“Do you remember how she said that we would be
friends whatever happened, and nothing could alter that ?
I don’t believe myself, Susie, that what has happened has
altered it in the least. I don’t know whether she sees
us and hears us to-night—l don’t believe it does us much
good to puzzle our heads about such questions—but I’m
perfectly certain she is our friend still as much as ever,
or more.”
“So am I,” Susie answered with all her heart. “ And I
can’t help being glad sometimes that she went first, and
was spared the pain of staying behind. She had such a
bright life all through, it only seems natural that she
should go away before any clouds came.”
“ Yes; I have felt that too, often. She looks very bright,
doesn’t she, in this photograph ? It is nice to think how
happy she was, and now she is happier still. ’
“Yes; I haven’t a doubt of that either. \ou and I are
very fortunate people, Nell, but Trix is better off than
either of us. She always was the first and the best of the
three, and now she is waiting to welcome us when we join


her. She was going away when we made that agreement,
and we were a little afraid, you know, that she might
change before she came back to us. Now we know that
we’ll have to go to her, and we may be old women before
that time comes ; but she will be our Trix still, and the old
friendship will last for ever.”
THE END.


Young Lady’s Library.
Crown Bvo Volumes. CL ex., 4s. each; gilt edges, ss. each.
“ Sister ” A Chronicle of Fair Haven. By E. Everett-Green, author
of “Molly Melville,” “Olive Roscoe,” “Temple’s Trial,” etc., eto
With Eight Illustrations by J. Finnemore.
Olive Roscoe ; or, The New Sister. By E. Everett-Green author
of “The Heiress of Wylmington,” “Temple’s Trial,’ “Winning
the Victory,” etc. With Eight Illustrations.
In “ Olive Roscoe,” Miss Ecerett-Green has struck upon a novel situation. It is
that of a girl who is allowed to grow up to the age of twenty in the belief that she is
an orphan, and that she has no relations in the world but the childless aunt and
uncle whose adopted daughter she has been, and by whom she has been brought up
in a quaint and quiet Devonshire rectory.
Molly Melville. By E. Everett-Green, author of “ Olive Roscoe, ’
“The Heiress of Wylmington,” “Temple’s Trial,” etc.
“A story of modern life, the characters firmly and interestingly draicn, and the
parts played changing in locality from the rugged North to the softer South.
‘ Molly Melville will ratxk with Miss Everett-Green’s best productions in delightful
stories for girls passing into their twenties.” — Sheffield Telegraph.
The Heiress of Wylmington. By E. Everett-Green, author of
“ Fighting the Good Fight,” etc.
“Itis a story girls will read with pleasure and with profit. It is needless to say
that the book is very handsomely got up—it comes from the press of Messrs. Nelson
and Sons.” — Scotsman.
Temple’s Trial. By E. Everett-Green, author of “ The Heiress of
W T ylmington,” “ W'inning the Victory,” etc.
"The story starts with a commercial incident relating to one of the great York-
shire mills. It is a vigorous tale, and its interest is maintained to the last chapter.”
—Newcastle Chronicle.
On Angels’ Wings; or, The Story of Little Violet of Edelsheim.
By the Hon. Mrs. Greene, author of “The Grey House on the
Hill,” etc.
“ Is interesting from the intensity of human feeling and sympathy it develops.’’—
Literary World.
“ The exquisitely pathetic story ‘ On Angels’ Wings.’ ” — Truth.
Mine Own People. By Louisa M. Gray, author of “Nelly’s
Teachers,” etc.
“ Altogether ‘Mine Own People’ is lively and entertaining, fresh in its thinking,
and the whole tone and spirit if it singxdarly beautiful and pure.”— Dundee
Advertiser.
Rinaultrie. By Mrs. Milne-Rae, author of “ Morag: A Story of
Highland Life,” etc.
“IFe heartily commend this fresh, healthy, and carefully-written tale, with its
truthful and vivid pictures of Scottish life”— Aberdeen Free Press.
T. Nelson and Sons, London, Edinburgh, and New York.


Tales of History by E. Everett=Green.
Crown Bvo, bevelled boards, cloth extra, gilt top.
Price ss. each.
A Clerk of Oxford, and His Adventures in the Barons’ War. By E.
Everett-Green, author of “The Young Pioneers,” “In Taunton
Town,” “Shut In,” etc.
The Young’ Pioneers ; or, With La Salle on the Mississippi. By E.
Everett-Green, author of “ Shut In,” “ In the Days of Chivalry,”
“In Taunton Town,” etc.
“A thrilling tale of a persecuted French family of two hundred years ago, who
joined La Salle in seeking to found a new France on the shores of the mighty Missis-
sippi. Stories of love and war are Mended with the records of the ‘ Home of Feace'
established by Father Fritz among the friendly Indians.” — Sword and Trowel.
Shut In. A Tale of the Wonderful Siege of Antwerp in the Year 1585.
By E. Everett-Green, author of “In the Days of Chivalry,” “The
Lost Treasure of Trevlyn,” etc.
“A vigorous and lively picture of the siege of Antwerp in the sixteenth century.
Scenes of lore and of fighting alternate to give a charm of variety to the life of the
sturdy burghers whom the tale depicts.”—Scotsman.
The Lost Treasure of Trevlyn. A Story of the Days of the Gun-
powder Plot. By E. Everett-Green, author of “Shut In,” “In
the Days of Chivalry,” etc.
“A romantic plot, full of incident and changing fortunes, set against an inter
esting historical background.” — Scotsman.
In the Days of Chivalry. A Tale of the Times of the Black Prince.
By E. Everett-Green, author of “The Lost Treasure of Trevlyn,”
“ In Taunton Town,” etc.
“A historical romance of substantial merit, telling a story full of adventurous
movement, and valuable for the idea it gives of feudal England.” — Scotsman.
In Taunton Town. A Story of the Rebellion of James, Duke of Mon-
mouth, in 1685. By E. Everett-Green, author of “ Shut In,” “In
the Days of Chivalry,” etc.
"A historical romance, charmingly written.” — Scotsman.
In Taunton Town’ is another of Miss Evelyn Everett-Green's admirable his-
torical tales, and is marked by the author's usual graphic descriptions and historic
fidelity, while infused with romantic interest.” — Glasgow Herald.
Loyal Hearts and True. A Story of the Days of “Good Queen Bess.”
By E. Everett-Green, author of “In Taunton Town,” “The
Church and the King,” etc.
This is admirably told by Evelyn Everett-Green, who in a picturesque manner
brings before us the court and time of the Maiden Queen and the stirring incidents
of the Spanish Armada." — Glasgow Herald.
The Church and the King. A Tale of England in the Days of Henry
VIII. By E. Everett-Green, author of “Loyal Hearts and True,”
“In Taunton Town,” etc.
“ The plot involves many romantic situations of love, adventure, patriotism, and
religious zeal; and the spirited interest is well maintained throughout.” — Scotsman.
1 Nelson and Sons, London, Edinburgh, and New 7 York.


Select Library of Historical Tales.
Crown Bvo, cloth extra. Price 4s. each.
La Rochelle ; or, The Refugees. A Story of the Huguenots. By Mrs.
E. C. Wilson'.
“ A most excellent historical novel, presenting a realistic and truthfully accurate
picture of the Huguenots .”— N. B. Daily Mail.
Monk and Knight. A Tale. By Frank W. Gunsaulus.
“This is a brilliant and powerful historical tale. It is remarkable for its
strategic delineation T>f causes and effects in the period of the Renaissance and the
Reformation; for its somewhat intricate and yet clear and alluring plot; for its
variety of scenes and characters; for its vivid pictures of customs and scenery; for
its inspiring sympathy with the theology of the Reformation; and for its epigram-
matic, luminous, and graceful style."— Our Day.
Pendower. A Story of Cornwall in the Reign of Henry the Eighth.
By M. Filleul.
A tale illustrating that stirring period of English history previous to the Refor-
mation.
The Spanish Brothers. A Tale of the Sixteenth Century. By the
Author of “ No Cross, no Crown.”
A tale of Spanish life, presenting a true and vivid picture of the cruel and stormy
time during the period of the Inquisition.
The Czar. A Tale of the Time of the First Napoleon. By the Author
of “The Spanish Brothers,” etc.
An interesting tale of the great Franco-Russian war in ISI2-13.
Under the Southern Cross. A Tale of the New World. By the
Author of “The Spanish Brothers,” etc.
For Her Sake. A Tale of Life in Ireland. By Gordon Roy.
“ Well written and interesting, with plenty of incident. We can heartily com
mend it." — Nonconformist.
In Palace and Faubourg. A Story of the French Revolution. By
C. J. G., author of “Good Fight of Faith,’ etc.
“The stirring incidents of that terrible time are graphically represented, and
apart from its historical suggestiveness the story is extremely interesting.”-
Glasgow Herald.
Right at Last; or, Family Fortunes. A Tale. By Edward Garrett,
author of “ Occupations of a Retired Life.”
A story in vchich are depicted the ups and doicns in the domestic life of a Scottish
family; showing how great trials may be overcome by consistent faith and invincible
strength of will; and also the reward of honesty, patience, and industry.
T. Nelson and Sons, London, Edinburgh, and New York.


Select Library of Historical Tales,
Crown Bvo, cloth extra. Price 4s. each
THREE BOOKS BY ANNIE LUCAS.
The City and the Castle. A Story of the Reformation in Switzerland.
A tale of a noble family and one in humble life becoming connected by circum-
stances. the relation of which faithfully portrays the state and character of society
at the time of the Reformation (in Switzerland).
Leonie ; or, Light out of Darkness: and Within Iron Walls, a Tale
of the Siege of Paris. Twin-Stories of the Franco-German War.
Two tales, the first connected with the second. One, of country life in France
during the war; the other, life within the besieged capital.
Wenzel’s Inheritance ; or, Faithful unto Death. A Tale of Bohemia
in the Fifteenth Century.
Presents a vivid picture of the religious and social condition of Bohemia in the
fifteenth century. The story is one of suffering and martyrdom borne for faith’s sake.
Alison Walsh. A Study of To-Day. By Constance Evelyn.
An extremely interesting and suggestive character study. The heroine, losing faith
in the Christian religion, passes through great tribulation and anguish of soul.
By the persuasion and example of loving friends, and by earnest effort on her own
part to follow the precepts of our Lord, she finds at last in His religion that “peace
which passeth all understanding.”
Arthur Erskine’s Story. A Tale of the Days of Knox. By the Author
of “ The Spanish Brothers,” etc.
f Another tale by that accomplished lady writer whose ‘Spanish Brothers’ and
Bark Year of Dundee ’ are fair samples of her really superb handiwork,” —
Christian Leader.
Dorothy Arden, A Story of England and France Two Hundred Years
Ago. By J. M. Callwell.
A story of the dragonnades in France in the time of Louis the Fourteenth: also
of the persecutions in Engla;id under James the Second, the Monmouth Rebellion,
the Bloody Assize, and the Revolution. While a stanch Protestant, the author shows
great fairness in recording and judging the actions of both parties.
Helena’s Household. A Tale of Rome in the First Century. With
Frontispiece.
Illustrates the mode in which the very persecutions of the primitive ages of the
Church were made instrumental, through the Spirit of God, to the promulgation of
the faith.
How They Kept the Faith, A Tale of the Huguenots of Languedoc.
By Grace Raymond.
A ofiner, more touchingly realistic, and truthfully accurate picture of the Lan-
gnedoc Huguenots than this by Grace Raymond have we met, TTe most heartily
commend this book. It is beautifully got up by its publishers.” — Aberdeen
Free Press.
T. Nelson ant> Sons, London. Edinburgh, and New York-




3 1508 00142442 8
9 1 (59


923 -4 i 2,
H CSS' + r
I \j C O '(p


