

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY
OF H.B.M. GOVERNMENT.
NOTE.
The information given in this document
is not to be communicated, either directly
or indirectly, to the Press or to any
person not holding an official position in
His Majesty’s Service.
TRENCH WARFARE.
NOTES ON ATTACK AND DEFENCE.
COLLATED BY THE GENERAL STAFF,
FEBRUARY, 1915.
REPRINTED BY AUTHORITY, FOR THE DEFENCE
DEPARTMENT, AUSTRALIA.
1915.
C.4998.




FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY
OF H.B.M. GOVERNMENT.
NOTE.
The information given in this document
is not to be communicated, either directly
or indirectly, to the Press or to any
person not holding an official position in
His Majesty’s Service.
TRENCH WARFARE.
NOTES ON ATTACK AND DEFENCE.
COLLATED BY THE GENERAL STAFF,
FEBRUARY, 1915.
REPRINTED BY AUTHORITY, FOR THE DEFENCE
DEPARTMENT, AUSTRALIA.
1915.
€.4998.


PREFACE.
The notes herein contained mainly consist of, or are drawn
from, memoranda which have been published for the informa-
tion and guidance of the troops at the front. They prescribe
no hard and fast methods for attack or defence, and they deal
exclusively with the conduct of those operations as limited by
the conditions under which the fighting has assumed much
of the character of siege warfare. This phase may not endure;
but, in any case, so far as general principles are concerned, the
doctrine expounded in Field Service Regulations holds good.
Among the salient points which are brought out are the
necessity for systematic preparation, down to the smallest
detail, before the delivery of an attack; the vital importance
of the most intimate co-operation between artillery and in-
fantry; the fact that, since the capture of trenches is gene-
rally easier than their retention, means whereby the difficulty
of the latter may be overcome require the most careful pre-
paration and consideration in advance; and, finally, the neces-
sity for counter-attacking without a moment’s delay, whether
in defence against the enemy’s attacking troops, or against
his counterstroke after an attack has been successfully de-
livered.


TRENCH WARFARE.
NOTES ON ATTACK AND DEFENCE.
I.—AN EXAMPLE OF INSTRUCTIONS ISSUED REGARD-
ING LOCAL ATTACKS WHEN THE OPPOSING
FOECES ARE AT CLOSE QUARTERS.
The general considerations which should guide a commander
in organizing and preparing a local attack against a strongly
entrenched enemy have been pointed out in previous memo-
randa. The present instructions aim at laying down in detail
the steps to be taken in the carrying out of such an attack,
with special reference to the infantry.
It appears, from reports recently received, that many of the
assaults made by the infantry on the enemy’s trenches are
launched and developed on lines similar to those of an ordinary
attack. A few scouts advance first and reach the line of the
enemy’s wire entanglements, where they are very soon put out
of action in full view of the leading detachments waiting in
the trenches. This does not tend to heighten the moral of
these detachments. They leave their trenches with reluctance,
move forward slowly, and often return more quickly. Some-
times they suffer considerable loss in passing through their
own barbed wire, through which perhaps only one passage has
been made. The attack fails, and is not renewed.
This is not the way to prepare and to carry out at close
quarters an operation which is rather in the nature of an
assault than of an ordinary attack.
It is essential that the most minute details should be
thought out and prepared, in order that the detachments de-
tailed for the assault may all leave their trenches at the same
moment and reach the objective at one rush without firing a
shot.
The steps to be taken are as follow: —-
(1) A definitely limited objective must be selected.
(2) The objective and the enemy’s means of defence, in-
cluding the flank defence of the trenches forming
the objective, must be thoroughly reconnoitred
(aeroplanes).
(3) Troops for the assault, and other troops for covering
the flanks of the assault by fire, must be detailed.
(4) The assaulting troops must be assembled opposite
their objective in several columns, each column in-
cluding a detachment of engineers provided with
explosives for destroying the defences.
(5) Supports for each assaulting column, and reserves,
must be detailed and organized.
A 2


(6) A different route must be allotted to each column.
(7) Means whereby trenches can be crossed (ladders or
gangways) must be provided, so that all the
columns may debouch rapidly and simultaneously.
(8) The barbed-wire entanglements must be arranged so
that there may be as many passages through it as
there are assaulting columns.
At a given signal the artillery must lengthen its range, so
as to build up a wall of fire behind the enemy’s first line,
while batteries posted on the flanks continue to bombard the
objective with high explosive shell.
On this signal being given the assault must be launched in
one rush; this is essential if it is to succeed.
The energy and courage of the troops will do the rest.
Lastly the special attention of officers commanding is drawn
to the absolute necessity for entrusting the carrying out of
the attack to reserve troops* coming from behind the line of
trenches. There is no doubt that troops occupying the first
line trenches have an instinctive reluctance to quitting their
accustomed cover. These troops should be used to afford
flanking protection to the attacking troops, to support them
by covering fire, and to constitute a body upon which they can
fall back if eventually it should be found necessary to do so.
II. —A LOCAL ATTACK.
(See Plate I.)
EXAMPLE OF ORDERS FOR THE ATTACK.
The attack, the orders for which follow, was carried out by
part of the troops of a division which held over 3 miles of
front. No additional troops were sent up to reinforce the
division in anticipation of or during the attack. Of the
twelve battalions available, six were detailed for the attack
(including the two battalions in reserve). Four battalions
held the trenches in the vicinity of the points attacked. Two
battalions were left to hold the remaining 1A miles of the
line.
The artillery bombardment began at 9 a.m. By 9.45 a.m.
the obstacles were sufficiently broken up to provide a lane for
each assaulting column through the wire entanglement. The
artillery was ordered to lengthen the range, the assault was
made at the same time, and the trenches were captured with
about sixty of the enemy in them.
* The troops detailed to carry out the assault must previously be given
ample opportunity to accustom themselves to their surroundings in the actual
positions from which the attack is to be launched, and to become familiar
with the various features in the objective assigned to them.


The enemy then opened a bombardment with heavy artil-
lery, which was very severe for about an hour. The troops
in D trench were eventually forced to give ground, but re-
occupied the trench after being reinforced from the reserve.
The enemy made no infantry counter-attack on this day,
and by the following evening the remaining trenches of the
group referred to in the Orders for the Attack had been taken,
and machine guns had been pushed down into the ravine run-
ning north-east of hill 180.
The attackers’ losses on the first day amounted to about 500
in all, and were almost entirely caused by artillery fire.
Orders for the Attack.
1. An attack will be made on the enemy’s position north of
8.. . .
2. Objective. —The objective will be the enemy’s trenches
marked D, B, E, M, on Plate 1., facing our trenches 5,6, 7,
8. 9.
3. Attaching troops. —The troops detailed for the attack
are—
-6 infantry battalions.
2 companies engineers.*
4. Distribution. —The attacking troops will be formed in
two columns (which will attack side by side) and a reserve
as follows: —
Left column. Right column.
2 infantry battalions. 2 infantry battalions,
company engineers. | company engineers.
Reserve.
2 Infantry battalions.*
5. Direction of attach. —The left column will cross trenches
5,6, and 7 by gangways; it will seize trenches D and E, drive
out the defenders, and occupy the communication trenches
sufficiently far forward for purposes of protection. A detach-
ment previously detailed for the purpose will face west;
another similarly detailed will face east, and will enfilade
trench B with a machine gun.
As soon as the left column has reached the hostile trenches,
the right column will debouch by trenches 8 and 9, and ad-
vance through the interval between them against trenches M
and W. Successive columns will be sent up at once to rein-
force, and every effort will be made to advance eastward.
At the same time the left column will attack trench B.
If the attack succeeds, the attacking force w r ill endeavour
to push on to the east by trenches S, T, V, Y, Z; it will thus
be possible to take trenches R and Q in front and flank, and
perhaps to capture them.
* In the copy of orders received, further mention of the second engineer
company is omitted. Presumably it was allotted to the reserve.


As soon as the engineers with the attacking columns are in
the enemy's trenches, they will search for mines and cut the
fuzes.
As each trench is successively captured, the infantry will
begin to place it in a state of defence with the utmost rapidity.
With this in view, all communication trenches leading to the
captured trench will be held by small bodies of picked men
about 50 paces from the point of junction, thus forming a
covering party behind which all other available men can
work at the conversion of the main trench. Materials found
on the spot will be used, and coils of barbed wire, sand bags,
chevaux-de-frise, &c., will be collected beforehand in the com-
munication trenches of 6,7, 8, and 9.
6. Machine guns. —The machine guns of the left column,
which will have been engaged in destroying the wire entangle-
ments, will follow the supports of the attacking columns, and
will take up a position in trench E to hold the front. One
machine gun will enfilade trench B. The machine gun sec-
tions of the right column will also follow the supports, and
will occupy trenches M and S, so as to fire on B, B, and Q.
7. Flank protection for the attack, —In addition to the
flanking detachments ordered to face outwards as soon as the
trenches are reached, the infantry attacks will be covered as
follows: —
(а) By fire from trenches 1,2, 3, and 4 (rifle and
machine gun).
(б) Bv fire from trench 9, so long as this is not masked
by the attacking columns, and from the trenches
on hill 180.
{c) By the naval and mountain guns on hills 180 and
165, and by the field batteries.
8. Organization of the attacking columns. —The assault will
be made in each battalion by three companies simultaneously.
Each company will be in four columns one platoon to each
column.* Each platoon will have one section leading, fol-
lowed by a party of engineers, then a second section; the
third and fourth sections, similarly organized with a party
of engineers between them, will follow almost immediately.
Every column will be given two light wooden gangways for
crossing each of our own trenches. .
Men will carry their entrenching tools in their belts. Every
third man will carry a pick or shovel drawn from the tool
carts, or from the engineers. Every man will carry a sand
bag. Six men of the leading section will carry a hurdle for
o-etting over wire entanglements. The leading six men of
each column will be given wire-cutters. All men except those
of the leading section of each column will wear their packs.
9 Assembly of columns before the assault. Companies will
be drawn up before the assault in the communication trenches,
and at places of assembly near the first line trenches. As-
saulting columns will be organized beforehand as shown.
• Line of platoons in fours or file is probably meant.








Special instructions have been issued regarding the place of
assembly of each battalion.
10. Preparation of the attack— The preparation of the attack
will be made as follows :
(a) Generally speaking, the field artillery will engage any
hostile battery that opens fire. Certain batteries have
been detailed for the destruction of the wire en-
tanglements by their fire, and for the demolition of
the enemy’s trenches.
{b) The naval and mountain guns will engage the enemy’s
machine guns. The trench-mortars will bombard the
enemy’s trenches.
(c) The fortress machine guns will, by their fire, make
breaches in the entanglements wherever the latter are
visible.
When the required effect has been produced by the above
means the artillery will lengthen its range. At a signal pre-
arranged between the officer commanding and the C.R.A. the
infantry will rush forward, led by its officers and non-com-
missioned officers.
11. The assault. —If the assault is to succeed it must be car-
ried out with all the and energy of which officers and
men are capable. The secondary defences must be destroyed
and crossed, the trenches must be carried, the defenders killer!
and a defence rapidly formed to meet a counter-attack, whether
delivered immediately or after an interval of delay.
12. The reserve. —The reserve battalions will be in the ravine
west of hill 180 during the attack. When the attack has begun
one battalion will be held in readiness to move by the com-
munication trenches, or in extended formation, to the places
of assembly near trenches 6 to 8. The other battalion will
remain under cover.
13. Should the attacking columns be forced to retire, in
which case heavier losses will be incurred than if they hold
their ground, they will fall back on the troops occupying the
trenches.
14. Engineer stores. —The engineer stores will be placed close
to the entrance to the communication trenches, and near
trenches 6 and 8.
15. Ammunition. —There will be carried on the man 200
rounds, and a reserve of 300,000 rounds will be formed behind
the trenches in the ravine west of hill 180.
Trench-mortars will have several reserve supplies placed at
different points in the deep casemates.
16. Troops in the trenches. —The role of the troops in the
trenches will be as follows :
(a) To cover the flank of the attack. This applies especi-
ally to the troops holding trenches 1,2, 3, and 4.
Those holding trenches 10 to 20 will cover the ground
to their front so long as their fire is not masked by
the attack.


{h) Troops holding trenches 20 to 26 will engage any
bodies trying to debouch from the valley north-east
of hill 180, or from the ravines to the north, and
will also maintain a heavy fire on the enemy’s
trenches, in order to force his troops to remain
under cover.
Detailed orders will be given to trench commanders, in
order to insure the distribution of fire from the moment that
the attack begins over those of the enemy’s trenches which
are not attacked. In trenches 25 and 26 special observers
will be stationed; they will watch the progress of the attack
carefully, and see that our fire against the enemy’s trenches
does not hamper it.
III.—MEMORANDUM ON METHODS OF ATTACK
WHICH HAVE PROVED SATISFACTORY.
Essential Factors . —The essential factors may shortly be
tabulated as follows:
(a) The objective must be chosen with a view to artillery
co-operation in the preparation of the attack, and
to the concentration of artillery fire thereupon.
(h) The fullest possible information with regard- to that
part of the enemy’s position which it to
attack must be obtained by meansydf 'reAmnais-
sance. / . y* X
(c) Arrangements must be made for distribu-
tion of artillery fire over the j-dr k&s defences, bat-
teries, trenches, &c., of the^ne^j?
( d ) Arrangements must be Jw protecting the in-
fantry by artillery fire x 4*ga?oSst counter-attack after
the position has beep-'tafei, and until such time as
the ground gainechdial? seen made good.
( e) The artillery shoptJlvVhnge repeatedly on the several
targets allotted Ttr it, until by careful observation
of the is clearly established that the re-
quired be produced.
(/) The the artillery and infantry must be
and combined.
( g ) make good the ground gained, the fullest
cooperation between engineers and infantry is
necessary.
1. Preliminary. —The present phase of the operations ap-
proximates to siege warfare; and methods of attack which are
not based on realization of this fact have proved not only
costly, but unsuccessful.
2. Objective. —The extent of the actual objective of each
attack must be limited by the necessity for insuring a suffi-
cient concentration of artillery fire upon it. Such an objective
CU998.-B.


may be a line of trenches not more than 500 yards in extent,
but other portions of the enemy’s line should be attacked and
bombarded at the same time, in order to keep the defenders
occupied and to distract their attention from the true objec-
tive.
3. Front. —The front should be divided into two sections,
an offensive section and a defensive section. The latter should
be lightly held, and the operations undertaken in this part
of the line (local attacks, saps, bombardments) should be
calculated to draw the enemy’s attention from the remainder
of the front. The section of the front on which the attack is
to be driven home should be selected with a view to securing
the most favorable conditions for the co-operation of the artib
lery, and its extent must depend upon the amount of artillery
which can be concentrated in that part of the line.
4. Reconnaissance. —Reconnaissances should be carried out
by day and by night, in order to obtain as detailed informa-
tion as possible with regard to the enemy’s defences, wire en-
tanglements, firing and communication trenches, natural ob-
stacles, the lie of the land, distances, enemy’s batteries, &c.
All information so gained must be marked on a map for the
use of the C.R.A. in the preparation of his arrangements, and
these form the basis of the plan of attack.
5. Role of the Artillery. —The role of the artillery is four-
fold —
[a] The engagement and silencing of the enemy’s bat-
teries.
( h ) The destruction of the enemy’s defences.
(c) The support of the infantry attack.
( d ) The protection of the infantry against counter-
attack.
In order to prevent counter-attacks, it has been found effec-
tive to increase the range of the lighter guns, so as to estab-
lish a wall of fire beyond the line of captured trenches, while
the heavier guns continue to engage the enemy’s batteries.
6. Rehearsal of the Attach. — After all the ranges have been
ascertained, the artillery should rehearse the part it is to play
on several consecutive days, without, however, arousing the
suspicion of the enemy by prolonged or intense bombardment.
On these occasions the infantry detailed for the attack should
be assembled in the positions from which it will have to start
when the actual attack is. made.
7. Final Preparation. —On the day of the attack, a final
rehearsal should take place, in order to eliminate any errors
which might otherwise arise owing to weather conditions, &c.
8. Orders *for the Attach. —Final orders for the infantry
attack should not be given until the artillery reports every-
thing in readiness. As a general rule, the attack cannot be


Plate II.




delivered on a pre-arranged day and hour, but must depend
upon the completion of the artillery preparations. The time
required for the infantry to reach their positions of readiness
having been ascertained beforehand, and the duration of the
bombardment having been decided on, the hour of the attack
can be fixed.
9. Infantry Attack. — (a.) The troops in the trenches should
not take part in the assault.
(&) The assaulting columns should be massed, under cover,
near or in the communication trenches.
(c) The strength of the force detailed for the assault must
be determined by the importance of the objective. Aa/L gene-
ral rule, on fronts of 500 to 800 yards, five battalioij/^ two
engineer companies have been found sufficient to cXrrfr .out the
assault and to provide sufficient reinforcements..^n^Ljfeserves.
10. Co-operation hetiveen Artillery and/imhntry. The
essential factor is co-operation between of the artil-
lery and the infantry attack. With this/ndom view repeated
rehearsals should take place, and all stations should
contain an infantry as well as an officer, both being
separately connected with their Jfc£ntres by telephone.
11- The Assault. —When the reports that all is pre-
pared, final orders should be the infantry to move up
to their positions of readiness* The destruction of the
enemy’s defences should be by the concentration of
fire on a small area, an^ 1 toj&r assault should then be launched.
As soon as the infanjd4 approaches the enemy’s trenches, the
artillery must range so as to establish the wall
of fire, to, behind the enemy’s position.
During the time that the attack is in progress, the
troops in the trenches on either fiank of the assaulting parties
must maintain an incessant fire with rifles and machine guns
on the enemy’s trenches to the right and left of the position
attacked.
IV.—DESCRIPTION OF A SUCCESSFUL ATTACK.
( See Plate II.)
The opposing lines were about 300 to 400 yards apart,
approximately as shown on Plate 11. Along the whole front
there was a wire entanglement which would have prevented
the troops from moving forward to the attack. A line of
trenches was therefore dug in front of the entanglement.
These trenches were not deep enough to prevent the infantry
from getting out of them very quickly.


A large force of artillery, including some heavy batteries
(about 150 guns in all) was brought up to support tne
attack. Artillery observers were posted in the trenches.
Orders were issued for the bombardment of the trenches form-
ing the objective to be carried out as follows:
20 minutes heavy bombardment.
10 minutes interval.
20 minutes heavy bombardment.
4 minutes intensive bombardment (by field guns only).
The bombardment, and, in fact, all the arrangements, were
worked by the clock, watches being carefully set beforehand.
The interval of ten minutes was ordered with a view to
leading the enemy to believe that the bombardment was over,
and in the hope that his troops would leave their bomb-proof
and support trenches, and move up into the fire trenches to
meet the expected infantry assault.
Towards the end of the second bombardment the infantry
detailed for the attack moved out of the front trench and lay
ready to advance.
At the exact moment fixed for the intensive bombardment
the infantry rose and advanced, and, under cover of the artil-
lery fire, pushed up as close to the enemy's trenches as pos-
sible, and lay down. Some of the shells of the supporting
artillery were falling short of the enemy's trenches, and
where this occurred the advancing infantry halted somewhat
further back.
The four minutes intensive bombardment stopped at the
given moment, and the infantry, after a short pause, rushed
to the assault. Some of the heavier guns continued to fire at
objectives further to the rear, and at certain other targets
on the flank (trenches, machine guns, and artillery positions).
The infantry rushed the front trenches and found them
practically empty, as the enemy during the artillery bombard-
ment had retired into support trenches and bomb-proofs.
Up to this moment the casualties had been slight. The
front line of trenches were all captured except a small section
on the right of the enemy’s line.
The support trenches and bomb-proofs were quite close up
to the front line, and communication trenches led into the
firing trenches.
As soon as the bombardment ceased, and the trenches had
been captured, the enemy began to appear, and within a very
few minutes had opened a heavy rifle fire on the occupants
of the captured trenches. The latter found it very difficult to
reply, on account of having to use the back of the trendies.
Attempts were made to advance up the communication
trenches, but in most cases the enemy checked this by plac-
ing a machine gun at the far end.


The enemy then began to attack with bombs, in some cases
throwing them from the support trenches, in others working
up the communication trenches. The enemy seemed to have
an unlimited supply of bombs, and the losses caused by them
began to be serious. Reinforcements were sent up, but lost
very heavily in crossing the space between the trenches. Two
long communication trenches were therefore dug, taking about
four hours to complete (AA on Plate II.).
In the meantime the enemy had succeeded in clearing the
captured trenches with their bombs, though the attacking
troops only fell back a short distance and dug themselves in
about 40 or 50 yards away. It is not clear how they were
able thus to entrench themselves in the open. Presumably the
enemy’s guns were unable to fire, since the opposing troops
were too close together; and while the new trench was out
of range of bombs, its occupants were probably able with their
own rifle fire to keep down that of the enemy in the trenches.
The fighting ended in the attackers establishing themselves
firmly on the line which they had dug just in front of the
enemy’s trenches (BB on Plate II.). The enemy continued to
hold his original line.
There are some important lessons to be learned from these
and other operations in which our troops have been engaged,
(i) A carefully thought out plan is essential. Every-
thing must be prepared down to the most minute
particular. Small details are often the most
important —in fact, no detail is too small to
merit attention.
In the instance described above, the timing of the
bombardments and the advance of the attacking
infantry worked without a hitch.
(ii) The effect of properly directed artillery fire is very
great. The artillery observers must be up in the
front trenches, and between them and the guns
there must be quick (telephonic) communica-
tion.
(iii) Some of the guns, at any rate, should be brought up
to close range. This enables the gunners to keep
their own infantry under close observation, and
the guns to be turned quickly on to counter-
attacking troops or any fresh target.
(iv) The capture of the enemy’s trenches often presents
little difficulty. The problem usually is how to
keep them. This requires much previous con-
sideration and preparation, and nothing should
be left to chance. After capturing a line of
trenches, efforts should immediately be made to
work outwards, so as to counter the enemy’s
attempts to retake it. The counter-attack is very


frequently made by working laterally from trav-
erse to traverse, and driving out the occupants
of the captured trenches by means of bombs and
grenades. The enemy’s trench-mortars assist in
this operation, and have been found very diffi-
cult to locate.
(y) The enemy’s wire entanglements usually present con-
siderable difficulty. If they are blown up —except
immediately before the attack —the enemy may
thereby be put on the alert. Machine guns have
sometimes been successfully used to demolish
obstacles of this nature.
(vi) The attacking troops were driven out of the captured
trenches by bombs. This happens very fre-
quently. It is essential that the attackers them-
selves should have a plentiful supply of bombs
and grenades, and there must be an organized
plan for keeping the occupants of a captured
trench amply supplied with these missiles, in
order to meet a counter-attack. The fullest pre-
parations must be made for dealing with the
communication or other trenches from which the
enemy can throw bombs into the captured trench.
If such trenches are straight, machine guns may
be posted to enfilade them; but everything de-
pends on whether the attackers or the defenders
are the first to establish their machine guns. If
they are zig-zag trenches, men should be pushed
down to block them (probably with sandbags)
far enough forward to keep the enemy beyond
bombing distance.
(vii) The enemy should be attacked without a moment’s
hesitation, either by fire or with the bayonet, as
soon as he emerges from his support trenches and
bomb-proofs.
(viii) Every detail must be prepared with regard to the
support of the troops in the captured trenches, by
artillery (single guns pushed close up can do
much to help), by concentrated machine gun and
rifle fire, and by every other possible means.
(ix) It will often be advisable to begin digging a com-
munication trench as soon as the enemy’s trench
is captured.
(x) Every officer and every man should know exactly
what he is to do. This is most important.
The defence requires equal consideration. Arrangements
must be made not only to prevent the enemy from capturing
trenches, but also to drive him out if he should effect a
lodgment.


Preparations must be made, and all must be in constant
readiness, for an immediate counter-attack with bombs.
All troops must understand what they are to do if the
enemy bombards the front trenches heavily. The bomb-proofs
and support trenches must be connected with the firing trench.
The possibility, in the event of the enemy making a lodgment,
of enfilading the captured trench with machine guns or artil-
lery, or both, must be fully considered.
It is unlikely that the enemy will be able to carry out a
successful surprise attack. Generally speaking, he will be
bound to give indications of his intention, either by a bom-
bardment, or by massing infantry in his saps, or by the close
approach of his saps. A careful officer will seldom be sur-
prised, and he will usually be well advised to move his reserves
as close as possible to the threatened point.
If the enemy makes a lodgment or pushes on beyond the
front line, he should be counter-attacked at once. There is no
time to be lost.
V.—MEMORANDUM ON THE ORGANIZATION OF
DEFENCE.
It is necessary to prepare the first line of defence in such
a way as to make it as nearly as possible unbreakable. The
following measures, which have already been carried out on
certain portions of the front, are communicated by way of
suggestion:
1. Whenever the situation permits, it is advisable to sub-
stitute for continuous trenches a system of centres of resist-
ance or 'points d’appui, either natural or constructed, sepa-
rated by spaces which must be well flanked and rendered ab-
solutely impassable by obstacles. The nature of those points
d’appui will vary with the circumstances; it will often be
advantageous, particularly in wooded country or on ground
little exposed to the enemy’s artillery, to make closed works.
Whenever it is necessary to retain existing trenches, endea-
vours should be made to break up the regularity of the front,
in order to obtain flanking positions from which the inter-
vening space may be swept by heavy fire. In this way not
only will economy of strength be assured, but also strong
flanking positions for the fire of infantry, machine guns, and,
if necessary, artillery. Daily experience has proved beyond
all question the desirability of such a course. Special care
should be taken to post machine guns in such a way that they
are not only protected and hidden, but also able to fire in
several directions.
The points d’appui should be protected by strong auxiliary
defences, which should surround them almost completely. The
wire defences should consist of two entanglements 10 or 12


yards broad, with a distance of 10 or 20 yards between them,
the second being hidden from the enemy’s sight as far as pos-
sible.
As many obstacles as possible should be arranged between
the points d’appui so as to make the intervals impassable.
These intervals should be watched with the greatest care, par-
ticularly at night. For this purpose listening posts, them-
selves protected by wire, and communicating by trenches with
the principal defence, may be posted in front of the wire
entanglement.
Care must always be taken to leave convenient exits for
reconnaissance and attack, by arranging openings protected
by easily movable obstacles, and commanded by the covering
trenches.
2. As a general principle, troops responsible for the defence
of a position should have a shelter behind them to afford
protection against shell fire and the weather. This shelter
would be reached by a ’well protected communication trench.
3. At a short distance (100 —200 yards) in rear, there
should be support trenches, made in sections and not con-
tinuous, designed to limit the retirement of a party momen-
tarily compelled to evacuate the first line trenches, and to
give time for local reserves to come up and counter-attack.
4. A first line, continuous and thinly held throughout, does
not allow of the assembly with ease and rapidity of a force
strong enough for an attack or a counter-attack. Narrow
communication trenches add a further difficulty. In order to
obviate these difficulties, places d’armes should be made be-
hind, but near the first line. They should consist of trenches
large enough to hold at least a company, and may advan-
tageously be subdivided into platoon trenches, connected by
communication trenches. They must be easy of access; steps
are required if the trench is open, a slope if it is covered.
5. Close co-operation between infantry and artillery is an
essential factor of defensive organization. Every effort
should be made to improve the means of co-operation. En-
deavours should be made to concentrate upon a single zone
the fire of as much artillery as possible. Batteries of guns of
all calibres should be placed close to the front line, the
strength of which will assure their security; they will then
be enabled to cope decisively with the German artillery, even
at long range. These guns should be protected by epaulments,
preferably with overhead cover. Dug-outs should be provided,
and, where necessary, trenches communicating with the ob-
servation posts. These posts themselves should be well pro-
tected,
6. The preparation of the second line (not to be confused
with the covering trenches) must not be neglected. In many
places wire entanglements have not been sufficiently strongly


made; they should always be constructed as recommended
above for first line entanglements. Shelters should also be
provided.
In every section artillery officers should study battery posi-
tions suitable for the defence of the second line.
7. These various improvements should be undertaken as
early as possible, and carried out with the greatest energy.
Apart from their proper use, they will have the further ad-
vantage of keeping the men occupied and interested, and of
maintaining their physical and moral condition.
VI.—NOTES ON RECENT GERMAN METHODS
OF ATTACK.
There are several points in connexion with recent attacks
from which useful lessons may be derived for future guidance.
Attack on Z . . . .
1. This attack was preceded by no artillery preparation.
The Germans, in strength about a battalion, emerged from
their trenches in daylight, about 8 a.m., and advanced in
close formation against the trenches opposite to them, which
were well protected by wire, and were between 200 and 300
yards distant. The enemy appeared to have a second bat-
talion in support and a third in reserve.
2. The defenders were on the look-out and well prepared.
The attack was met with rapid and sustained fire, under which
the enemy suffered heavy losses. Some of the Germans
reached the wire entanglement, but none of them succeeded
in crossing it.
3. The artillery of the defence kept the enemy’s supports and
reserves under a continuous bombardment, and, in conse-
quence, no attempt was made to reinforce the battalion which
had been launched to the attack.
4. The lessons to be learned from the defeat of this attack
are —
First, the necessity of being constantly on the watch, and
of being able to bring an overwhelming volume of fire to
bear on the enemy at very short notice. The careful selec-
tion of machine gun positions will enable commanding officers
to reduce the number of men kept in the fire trench. This
number should also vary with the state of the ground in front
of our trenches, i.e., whether it is deep and heavy, or hard and
in a state admitting of a rapid advance being made.
Secondly, the need of having a sufficient force of artillery
ia close support of the infantry line, and ready at short


notice to open rapid bursts of fire on any part of the ground
between the two lines of trenches or in rear of them where
the enemy’s supports and reserves are likely to assemble.
Attack on G . . . .
5. In this part of the front the two lines of trenches were
so close together that efficient wire entanglements had not
been constructed. The attack was preceded by a heavy artil-
lery bombardment lasting more than an hour, and the in-
fantry assault was delivered by four or five companies with
great dash and vigour. Several assaults were repulsed, but
finally the Germans succeeded in gaining an entrance into the
village, through which they advanced until they were checked
by the keep or reduit which had been thoroughly prepared
and protected by wire entanglements. They attacked, but
failed to capture it.
6. A counter-attack was at once delivered before the Ger-
mans had time to make good their position, with the result
that the enemy was driven out of the village again, leaving
about 100 dead and 100 prisoners in our hands.
7. The lessons to be learned from this attack are—
First, the need of good wire obstacles in front of the fire
trenches. If a proper entanglement cannot be constructed on
account of the proximity of the enemy’s trenches, then
chevaux de frise made of wooden supports, with wire twisted
across them, can be pushed out in front of the parapet and
anchored.
Secondly, the importance of providing a strongly constructed
keep or reduit as a supporting point and pivot of manoeuvre
in rear of the front line of trenches.
Thirdly , the imperative necessity of launching a counter-
attack at the earliest possible moment after the front line has
been broken, and before the enemy has been able to throw up
any kind of improvised defences.
Attack on C . . . .
8. The attack was delivered in daylight, at 8.30 a.m., after
very heavy and sustained bombardment by artillery, and was
immediately preceded by fire from a trench-mortar and by
the throwing of bombs. The front trenches were speedily
captured by the Germans, notwithstanding that the defenders
had half-an-hour’s warning of the impending attack.
9. The Germans followed up their success, but on reaching
the keep, some hundred yards in rear of the front line of de-
fences, they failed to make further progress.


10. The defenders had no guns in close support, so that
artillery fire was not brought to bear on the attackers after
their success, and the latter, therefore, proceeded at once
to entrench themselves. No counter-attack was made for four
hours after the assault. The keep held out, but when the
counter-attack was made, it failed to re-establish the line.
11. There were no bomb-proofs or shelters of any kind near
the front trenches in which the defenders could take cover dur-
ing the bombardment.
12. The lessons to be learned from this attack are—
First, the immense importance of a counter-attack being
delivered at the earliest possible moment after the line has
been broken.
Secondly, the imperative need of close artillery support and
of guns being brought to bear at once on the lost trenches
and the intervening ground, directed by artillery officers in
observation posts from which the ground can be well seen.
Thirdly, the value of a strong keep, well wired in all round.
Fourthly , the need of bomb-proofs in which the defenders
can take shelter during the artillery bombardment.
Fifthly, the value of bombs and hand-grenades with which
to reply to the enemy when they begin bomb throwing. A
good supply should be kept in the support trenches, 0 to be
available for a counter-attack should the fire trench be cap-
tured by the enemy. The positions of these supplies must be
known to all concerned.
By Authority : Albert J. Mtjllett, Government Printer, Melboarwe,


