

TMi'JDS
j'j
-A U r/j] ;li J j'J Ali 7
NOEL COUNIHAN.
DECEMBER 1966




World trends are reflected in Australia more repidly these days via
art magazines and greater, quicker travel.
The avalanche of sheer abstraction which gathered momentum during the
Cold War period, reflecting an intellectual flight from reality and from
humanist values, and whose extreme forms were the quintessence of art
for art's sake, has undergone change
It has also lost some ground to new art forms, some still largely
abstract, others of differing kinds of figuration. These changes have
been reflected in the Australian scene.
Whereas in earlier years, pre-war and war-time years too, our painting
was influenced primarily by British and French art, more recently American
influences have pressed heavily down on us and continue to do so, witness
Pop and Op following upon the Action Painting and Abstract Expressionism
of the American school of Pollock, Motherwell, Stil, Kline, Rothko and
company. There has also been the influence of Spaniards like Tapies.
The impact of these trends has been felt most directly in Sydney, where
they have affected the work of Hodgkinson, Olsen, Lynn, Upward and others.
At the same time it is interesting to observe the persistence of British
influences, especially of the sculptor Moore and the painter Bacon,
Moore and Bacon are the most internationally accepted British artists.
They are artists of ideas but of radically different attitudes. Moore
belongs to the humanist tradition, concerned not only with extending the
formal language of sculpture but also with the strength and dignity of the
human form and basic human values and relationships, including the family.
Francis Bacon, the most gifted and imaginative, along with Grahame
Sutherland, of modern British painters, has provided the most sensitive and
disturbing expression of the anxieties and fears of the British executive
class. Many of his images have been given over to hysteria. Even the
Robert Hughes has drawn attention to Bacon's portrayal of the modern
executive. One has only to compare Bacon's portraits and types with those
of the artists of Britain's heyday like Reynolds, Lawrence, the earlier
Dodson, to witness the remarkable change in mood. The confident, even
arrogant gaze and bearing has gone, replaced by pulverised flesh and a
shattered spirit.
Bacon came originally from the world of avantguarde interior design,
the rather hot house worlds of Rendon and Berlin in the late twenties and
early thirties.
Amongst the Australians influenced by Bacon are Nolan, Arthur Boyd,
Brett Whitely and Kevin Connor, It is also interesting to note that
although more or less pure abstraction remains still in the forefront of
modern art very much so in Britain and New York where it is still
fashionably promoted, it has thrown offshoots, some of them reactions
against much of the incoherent vehemence and loosehanded formlessness of
action paintings.


We have seen for example the emergence of a cold, rational, mathematical
art of circles, squares and hard edges.
The expressive brushstroke which was the hall mark of modern art, the
exultant symbol of the artists individual personality, has given way to
smooth, flat surfaces unruffled by the brush. The young South Australian
painter, Sydney Ball, won a major prize last year in Sydney with such work,
the result of recent training in New York.
Another §spect of this movement is Op, which uses the interaction of
colours and lines to create optical illusions of movement or of advance
and/or recession in space. It is an art of fooling the eye, of titillating
the retina, an art of calculation, albeit decorative calculation, and not
of the heart or feelings,.
Based on optical sensation, with its allegedly scientific overtones
replacing the romanticism of earlier movements, Op has influenced the
younger'painters in particular, like Watkins in Sydney, but older
practitioners include Adelaide’s Ostoia-Kotkowski. Victor Vaserely is the
leading overseas Op painter.
Developments in the direction of greater illusionism involve efforts to
create an art form embracing the element of time as well as of space and
physical movement, Kinetic art. Its forms combine in an intricate inter-
play three dimensional moving planes or screens, sometimes transparent,
with wires or strings, and through or between which the spectator moves
about. Not much has yet been seen in this country.
It was inevitable that relatively recent and fantastic advances in
nuclear science, electronic machinery and cybernetics, with the
characteristically modern shapes of their instruments would be incorporated
into painting and sculpture or into combinations of both by artists w r ho
feel that the problem of modernism is one of form rather than of ideas and
attitudes. Such art is by no means unimpressive in either form or
inventiveness or ingenuity. But it does seem to sum up some of the colder,
more antiseptic, over-hygienic and anti-human emphases in modern living.
The pointlessness of machines without function is disturbing.. It seems to
me' they reflect to an extreme degree the importance given to techniques in
contemporary western art.
Over emphasis on technique and,considerations of style has been a
characteristic or feature of decadence throughout the ages. It was such
emphasis in academic, official art, insisting on technique at the expense
of life which roused the moderns of the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries to revolt.
Today the techniques are not those of the pseudo classical aspirations
of the Victorian era or of its counterpart, photographic naturalism, but
of stream lined, illusionism and the elaborately concocted, mock scientific,
functionless machine.


. Both appear to me to stress externals at the expense of inner depth and
iite. They are the trappings of an age, not its heart and soul. Pop art is
an art of ideas, comment, with a satirical base. It developed in the USA
five or six years ago as a reaction against what its advocates regarded as
the ivory tower of abstract expressionism and action painting. It could
only have evolved in a world of commercial imagery and packaging. Its
forefathers were the Dada artists of Paris and their counterparts in Berlin
in he twenties, who rose in disgust against the false and broken promises
o xmperxalxsm and against its vulgar, nouveauriche materialism.
hB P ° P men . of today like Rauschenberg, Lichtenstein, Rosenquist and
others and Australians like Lancely, Hatching, Brown, have taken the
gxmcrac ery of modern gadgets, the cheap and vulgar bric-a-brac of everyday
Ixfe, the utensils of the bedroom and the toilet, the traffic and road signs,
the strxp cartoon, the cheesecake imagery of TV and newspaper advertising
and the magazine cover, and the entertainment values of Luna Park, and
accepted them as basic forms for art.
ihey xnyented sculptures and sculpted paintings and Heath Robinson
machxnes whxch "sent up" or "thumbed the nose" at the accumulated symbols
of a commercial world equipped with its in-built nuclear devices for self
es ruction. Pop will ,I believe, prove as ephemeral as its counterparts in
prevxous times. But basically it is an artistic rejection of the degradation
01 tne levels of taste and human values in a system of gross commercial
materxalism.
Along side these developments I have outlined there continues the
characteristic figurative art of our national tradition. It has assumed
forms xn modern times, influenced by post-impressionism, expressionism,
varying types of abstraction. In view of the post war promotion of the
abstract xt xs perhaps astonishing just how many of our most eminent artists
are concerned prxmarily with communicating, through different kinds of
xguratxon and symbolism, attitudes towards modern life; just how many still
ase themselves on natural or human forms, no matter how freely or how
Iv “S degrees of abstraction, to express ideas. Nolan, Arthur and David
Ticker Dickerson, Williams, Molvig, Jacqueline Hick, Perceval, Kemp,
M .,, n ’ r °° ke ’ Connor, as well as the older figures like the late Godfrey
’ l rat l r \ Rhees ’ to name 3ust a few without even mentioning the growing
number of artxsts exhibiting with the Realist Group based on Melbourne!
All of the abovementioned artists work variations on national themes of
one kxnd or another, of history or legendry, or the landscape, the aborigine,
the city, the nude fxgure and classical form, or themes of modern mysticism,
onelxness and alienation, of pain, anxiety or anger.
The committed artist, ten years ago and even less, was an object of
onl'i S rn^ ln i ntellectual circles. It was the thing to mention Marxism
j kiHgiy and as a spent force. Today it is impossible to avoid in any
serious dxscussxon on problems of modern life and culture, Marxism and
Marxxst orxentations,


The ABC has found it desirable to feature a special series of interviews
precisely on such artists of "commitment", either to the right or the left,
in its Sunday night TV programme "Spectrum". Of the intellectuals interviewed
up to the time of writing three, Frank Hardy, John Manifold and myself are
communists, theatre men Professor Wal Cherry and Peter o'Shaughnessy are
highly progressive, with Cherry an ardent protaganist for the ideas of the
communist playwright Bertold Brecht, Clifton Pugh is an interpreter of the
bush, Australian fauna, and, recently, the aborigine, a figurative painter.
A new feature of the art scene in the immediate past is the increased
impact on it of the war in Vietnam. Whereas for some time it has been left
to the artists of the recognised and organised Left to give expression to
any Australian conscience in this regard, only last month, following ,
exhibitions in which I myself and then Peter Miller exhibited in our one-man
shows, several works of protest against the Vietnam war, the directors of
the Princes Hill Gallery found it possible to organise within a few weeks
a show called "Viewpoint". It was devoted entirely to the theme of anti -
Vietnam protest. Sixteen painters and sculptors took part, many of them well
known. They included Clifton Pugh, Gareth Jones Roberts, Geof O'Laughlin,
Matcham Skipper, Robert Grieve, Peter Miller, Bernhard Rust, George Johnson,
Ken Scarlett, Udo Sellbach, lan Bow, Michael Morgan, Marcello D'Amico,
Ernesto Murgo, and myself, and Sydney's Mike Kitching was unable to complete
in time the work he was engaged on for the show.
ABV2 spent a day making film of this significant exhibition for the
programme "Watch this Space". A number of the artists concerned have now
expressed the wish to organise a similar but bigger and better exhibition
for display in other states. Two years ago or even less, such a protest
exhibition would have been regarded as unthinkable.
It appears now that despite the strong market position still occupied by
varying forms of abstraction the pressure of events, of the tensions,
conflicts and frustrations imposed on the imaginative spirit by the capitalist
system, this "affluent society", many artists are reacting with increasing
urgency and directness in their work. What used to be regarded as realism,
that is, the direct representation of visual experience, no longer fills
the bill. Modern taste demands with increasing insistence the imaginative
treatment of natural form and the imagimative interpretation of reality.
A generation familiar with, and in fact conditioned by the much freer
treatment of form for expressive purposes, possessed of a heightened
perception of pictorial design, and looking for a more imaginative ,and
emotional use of colour, expects from a painting an excitement which it can
no longer experience before the purely literal representation of nature
or of man. Experience shows that an art which strongly responds to vital
contemporary social issues including those which are not immediately or
directly political but which involve the artist's deep experiences and
feelings, can and does exert an influence on people.


. ,^ he or S anise d Left has been looked at askance, and understandably so,
in the world of art for interpreting the relationship between art and the
social needs of the people in a doctrinaire fashion. Our too often
mechanical applications of such slogans as "Art is a weapon", reduced the
c , j , 6 artlst to that of illustrator of current political campaigns.
oc rmaire attitudes weakened whatever influence we may have had with
ven more iberally minded artists, and it should be borne in mind that
MnS n f? ° r S ° ° f artists genuinely politically reactionary,
gard themselves at least as nonconformists and even as rebels.
OH _ F, We ? an _Present Marxist viewpoints with understanding and tact and in
ur own art aim at integrity and high standards, these men and women of
imagination will respond with more sympathy and will be able to
associate more closely with us in facing many mutual, urgent problems.
************
’Vf 2o\s~mx
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
a!, fO


