

lif 9
#
TRIAL
JOHN BARLEYCORN,
ALIAS
STRONG DRINK;
BY THE BEY. F. BE A BBS ALL
W. A. COOKE, ,
BOOKSELLER, STATIONER, AND ACCOUNT BOOK
MANUFACTURER,
570 George Street, Opposite the Cathedral.
1869.
7 H 532,


CHIEF JUSTICE :
HONORABLE M. IMPARTIALITY.
ASSOCIATE JUDGES :
G. PHILANTHROPOS i Hon. V. BENEVOLENCE
M. PATRIOT
Hon. J. HUMANITY
COUNSEL FOR THE PEOPLE:
M. SCRUTINY, Esq., ATTORNEY-GENERAL.
COUNSEL FOR THE DEFENDANT :
SENSUAL, Esq. | A. LUSTFLESH, Esa.
SHERIFF :
P. HATEVICE, Esq.
Mr. C. HOLDFAST, Deputy-Sheriff.
T. T. TEMPERANCE, Esq., Clerk of the Court.


TRIAL OR JOHN BARLEYCORN.
On the motion of the Attorney-General, John Barleycorn,
the prisoner, was brought into the Court by the Deputy-
Sheriff, and placed at the bar. The List of Jurors was then
•called over by the Clerk, and the prisoner, through his Coun-
sel, challenged Messrs. J. Piety, G. Lovetruth, and P. Con-
science. The following persons were then sworn to try the
cause, according to law and evidence.
JURYMEN-.
Mr. J. Scattergood, Mr. P. Reform, Mr. D. Careful,
B. Seeright, T. Goodwork, M. Judgment,
N. Confidence, A. Prudence, E. Charity,
G. Soundsense, T. Trusty, G. Sober.
The prisoner was then directed to hold up his hand; and the
following indictment was read to the jury :
John Barleycorn , alias Strong Drink, the prisoner at the bar,
stands charged with —-
Firstly —That he has annually, to an almost incredible ex-
tent, destroyed good and wholesome grain, given by a beneficent
Providence for food, by converting it into an unwholesome beve-
rage, which he has sold to the people for ‘ ‘ liquid bread, ” to the
great injury of the health and morals of the community.
Secondly —That he has long continued the practice of Sabbath
breaking, -by employing workmen in certain places called malt-
kilns, and causing them to labour on the Lord’s day.
Thirdly —That he has, in innumerable instances, obtained
money and other valuable property from persons under false pre-
tences.
Fourthly —That he has, to an alarming extent, practised a
system of Quackery, inducing individuals to take his Malt Liquor,
by which a great variety of diseases have been engendered and
fostered—habits of intemperance formed—health and strength
destroyed—and premature death brought about.
Fifthly —That he has been a common corrupter of our youth,
despoiling the hopes of the nation. He has, partly through the
bad example of Sabbath School teachers, who have acted as his
agents, led thousands of scholars into the paths of dissipation.
By him young men, and even females, have been led to Beer
Shops and Music Saloons, where frequent seductions have taken
place, and where robberies and murders have been plotted, in
which he has aided and abetted.
Sixthly— That he has destroyed the peace of many families
broken up the domestic circle—separated husband and wife


causing quarrels between the nearest relatives and friends, many
of which have proved fatal.
Seventhly —That he has influenced certain workmen to ne-
glect their employment, to the great inconvenience and loss of
their employers, and to spend their money and their time at the
public-house, to the great injury of their families, which have
become a burden to the community.
Eighthly —That he has deprived many thousands of families
of the means of getting a livelihood, and reduced them to a state
of starvation, by lowering the price of labour, through drunken-
ness, into which he generally leads his victims.
Ninthly— That he has, at certain times and places, caused
serious riots, by which the peace has been broken—much valuable
property destroyed—and many lives sacrificed.
Tenthly— That he has been an accomplice in several cases of
the most vile seduction, gaining, by false pretences, the confidence
of certain respectable families, and leading certain members of those
families from the paths of virtue and religion; he has ultimately
consigned them to a lunatic asylum, or left them to become vic-
tims to suicide.
Eleventhly —That he has, in connection with his accomplices,
Peter Porter, Delilah Wine, and Ardent Spirits, been guilty of
the most atrocious crimes which have stained the page of history,
causing, at least three-fourths of the poverty, crime, disease, and
immorality, which now oppress and disgrace our nation.
Twelfthly— That the prisoner has never been of any real
service to the community, and that there are no redeeming qua-
lities in his character; and that the community would be infi-
nitely advantaged by the banishment of Strong Drink.
The prisoner was then asked for his plea, to which he answered,
with a very tremulous voice —Not Guilty.
Clerk : Prisoner, how will you be tried ?
Prisoner: By the laws of my country.
The Attorney-General then opened the case with an eloquent
speech, of which we can only give a brief extract.
My Lords, and Gentlemen of the J dry,
The annals of the Court of Judicature have not recorded a case
more deeply interesting to the community at large, than that
which has convened us this day, and which places at the bar of
this court the prisoner now before you. The indictment road,
charges the prisoner with such a catalogue of crimes, as, without
unquestionable evidence, would appear to you, my Lord, and
Gentlemen of the jury, incredible; for, deep as human nature
has sunk in the scale of moral rectitude, it has not been thought
capable of some of the deeds contained in the indictment. But,
by the clearest and best attested evidence now about to be ad-
duced, I shall be able to substantiate and prove the whole of the
charges ; and I feel assured that I shall obtain, in behalf of the
people, such a verdict as will inflict on the prisoner condign
punishment, and thus rid society of its greatest pest. Such a


verdict, my Lord and Gentlemen of the Jury, is demanded by stern
justice ; and the accumulated woes of a deluded and suffering
population claim retribution at your hands.
Gentlemen of the Jury, I feel confidence in your judgment and
veracity—you will, I am assured, weigh well the merits of the
case, and give such a verdict as truth and righteousness demand.
My Lord, I know you will discharge aright the awfully re-
sponsible duties of the high office you have the honor to fill.
You will, I feel assured, give a patient hearing to the witnesses
now about to be examined, and give your impartial decisions in
every case of doubt or dispute in our appeal to the bench ; and
your charge to the Jury will leave no doubt on the minds of the
public at large, as to the propriety of the sentence, which will de-
termine the fate of the prisoner.
The Clerk of the Court then called for the—
First Witness —John Providence,.
Attorney-General. Mr. Providence, do you know the prisoner
at the bar ?
P. I do, Sir : I have known him for some considerable time.
A. G. Is not the name which he assumes a fictitious one ?
P. It is, Sir ; his proper name is Strong Drink —his father,
who has a very numerous family, was named Inebriating Drink.
The prisoner had his name changed at a wakes, where it was
agreed that he should be called John Barleycorn, in honor of a
very distant relation of that name.
A. G. You have heard the indictment read, can you give the
court any information relative to any of the charges contained in
the various counts?
P. Some of the charges I can bear witness to, especially those
relating to the abuse of the providential blessings of heaven, and
to Sabbath breaking. The prisoner has frequently been to my
father’s house to purchase barley ; he has also bought barley of
Mr. Hodge, a neighboring farmer. The grain was always sent
to the prisoner’s agent, Mr. Spoilgood, the Maltster, at Sprout
Hill, where it was converted into malt.
A. G. And have you ever seen the workmen employed in the
malt-kiln on the Lord’s day ?
P. Frequently ! and I have remonstrated with them, but they
told me that they were obliged to work on the Sunday, or else the
prisoner’s malt could not be made.
A. G. Ho you know what became of the malt ?
P. Yes, Sir ;it was always sent to Mr. Mashtub’s, at the Sin,
Brewery, and there it was used to make the prisoner’s drinks.
A. G. Have you any knowledge how the prisoner’s drinks
were made ?
P. I have, Sir. First the malt was ground ; then a decoction
was made by steeping it in hot water ; afterwards the grains were
sold to feed pigs and cows with ; and the liquor was fermented,
by which process nearly the whole of the nourishment left in the
decoction was converted into a poison called alcohol. Thus the good


grain which God gave to man for food, was converted into a
poisonous beverage, which is taxed and sold to the public at a
high price. I have a table here showing the great loss which is
sustained by the purchaser of the prisoner’s drinks, proving that
he must give the price of SOlbs. worth of good barley, for l|lbs. of
nourishment in the drink.
A. G. Please read it to the court.
P. I will, Sir. Two shillings’ worth of barley weighs SOlbs.
Buying two shillings’ worth of ale, is equal to giving the
Maltster l|lbs. of barley ;to the Government, 4|lbs.; to the
Brewer, lOlbs.; to the Retailer, 7|lbs.; loss in Malting, Brewing,
Fermentation, &c., 51bs.; leaving for the Fool’s Portion, l|lbs.
A. G. It appears that the consumer gets very little nourish-
ment for his two shillings ?
P. Such, Sir, is the abuse of the providential blessings of God,
that the consumer not only pays two shillings for two penny-
worth of an inferior nourishment, but he has to take with it as
much alcohol, or poison, as does him twelve times more injury
than the nourishment does him good; so that two shillings’
worth of the prisoner’s decoction is twelve times worse than
nothing.
A. G. What a wonderful delusion ! Can you tell the court
where the prisoner’s decoctions are sold ?
P. Yes, Sir ; at Mr. Soulslaughter’s shop, sign of Death, in
Doom-street.
A. G. I have done with the witness.
(Cross-examined by the defendant’s counsel.)
H. Sensual, Esq. Mr. Providence, it appears that you and my
client, Mr. Barleycorn, are not on such good terms as you were. I
suppose you have taken offence because he has ceased to purchase
your barley, and now you take this opportunity for retaliation.
Pray, Sir, have you not spoken of Mr. Barleycorn, to your friends,
in the most favorable and flattering manner ?
P. I have, Sir ; but it is some time since. I then thought
better of the prisoner ; but I have lately seen into his practices,
and my opinion of him has completely changed,
S. I suppose, Sir, your opinion would undergo another
change if Mr. Barleycorn were to become a good customer of yours
again ?
P. No, Sir ; I have resolved since my father’s death that I
will not grow another grain of barley to supply the purposes of
the prisoner. I would see my land laid waste, and beg my bread
before I would encourage such iniquitous practices.
S. I have nothing more to say to you.
Second Witness —Thomas Factman.
Attorney-General. Mr. Factman, what is your occupation ?
F. lam a mechanic, Sir.
A. G. Are you acquainted with the prisoner at the bar?
F. lam sir. I have known him many years.


A. G. Please to give tlie court what information you can, bear-
ing on the indictment read.
P. The prisoner has for some time, to my certain knowledge,
been in the habit of obtaining money under false pretences.
He has induced many of my workfellows to part with their hard
earnings for his drinks, with which he promised health and
strength ; but instead of being advantaged by them, they became
enfeebled and distressed. I believe many thousands have perished
by taking his advice ; they have died miserable drunkards, and
left their families chargeable to the parish.
A. G. Can you give the particulars of any case ?
F. I can, sir. 1 will notice more particularly my own. The
prisoner one day, when I was rather poorly, came to my house in
company with Peter A llowance, a shopmate of mine, whom he had
deceived. He began to talk about my laborious work, and he told
me it was necessary I should have some extra support, and that
if I did not take some I should soon be in my grave. He then
proposed to furnish me with it in his good ale, for which I was to
pay only sixpence per quart, and I was to have it fresh every day
from Mr. Soulslaughter’s, the publican, at the sign of Death, in
Doom-street. At first, I hesitated, but my wife had taken such a
fancy to the prisoner’s drinks, (for I found she had long taken
them on the sly,) that she, with Peter, pleaded so earnestly for
them, that at last I agreed to take the prisoner’s advice.
A. G. Well, sir, did it answer your purpose ?
F. Why, sir, at first I thought it did ;it seemed to strengthen
me, and T thought I did my work better ; but I soon found that
I became weaker at nights ; my sleep was unsound ; my stomach
got out of order; and I was always thirsty. The prisoner still
pressed me to go on drinking. On Saturday evenings, after
receiving our wages, we always found him at the shop door,
waiting for the workmen, and he persuaded us to go with him to
Mr. Soulslaughter’s, where we were wheedled out of our wages ;
and sent home half mad, to abuse our wuves and children.
A. G. And did you continue to go with the prisoner to Mr.
Soulslaughter’s.
F. No sir. I found this course of life would not do for me, so
I told the prisoner my intentions ; he seemed very sorry for me,
and said he was afraid Mr. Soulslaughter put some drugs into his
drinks, which was the cause of them doing me harm ; but he still
assured me that I could not do without them; and to accommo-
date me, he proposed to sell me the receipt for making them myself.
My wife was quite delighted with this arrangement, and she set
to work and made me some home brewed.
A. G. And did that do you any good ?
F. I really thought it did. My wife thought it did her good
too. I also gave some to my children to make them grow, and
they began to like it well, and the barrel was soon out ; and well
it might, for my wife, after every brewing, was always at it,
tasting, as she said, to see how it flavoured; then there was
always something extra to be done, such as washing days, which


required extra allowance ; and every now-and-then slie had a
party of neighbours, Betty Cant, Sally Slander, Polly Prattle,
Jane Littledrop, Nanny Supall, and others, (the prisoner was
generally one of the party,) who took care that my drink never
went sour.
A. G. And how did all this end ?
P. Very badly, Sir. We were nearly ruined ; we had to sell
our furniture, and pawn our clothes; we lived on credit, and
borrowed money where we could, to supply the demands of the
prisoner. Health, strength, credit, and character were all going.
A. G, Well, and how did you discover that the prisoner was
deceiving you.
F. Why, Sir, a gentleman named Mr. Tee-total, a member of
the Temperance Society, called at my house one day, and he
showed us how it was that the prisoner practised his arts. I knew,
from experience, that much of what he said was true, although I
could hardly believe all that he said, but he answered all my
objections well. At last Mr. Tee-total engaged to cure us with-
out fee or reward, and I was going to sign a paper which he called
a pledge, when my wife got in such a rage, and threatened to put
him out of the house ; she said she would have a sup as long as
she could get it. But Mr. Tee-total, by kind words, subdued her,
and we all signed the pledge.
A. G. What ! and did you leave off drinking good beer ?
F. Yes, Sir; we signed against all intoxicating drinks, and
we soon proved that Mr. Tee-total was the best doctor ; health,
strength, domestic comfort, all returned ; we once more became a
happy family ; we now go to a place of worship, and are beginning
to enjoy the pleasures of religion.
A. G. Do you really think that you are better without the
prisoner’s drinks than with them ?
F. 0 yes, Sir. I can work better, eat better, sleep better, in
short, all is better. I have proved the prisoner to be a complete
swindler ; and I know many who can witness to the same.
A. G. The counsel for the defence can have the witness.
Sensual. I shall decline at present asking Mr. Fact man any
questions—you may sit down, Sir.
Third Witness —Jane Poverty.
Attorney General. Mrs. Poverty, do you know the prisoner at
the bar ?
P. I do, Sir, to my sorrow.
A. G. Please to tell the court what you know of him ?
P. The time, Sir, would fail me to tell what I have known and
suffered through the influence which the prisoner has had over
my poor husband. I attribute it entirely to the prisoner, that I
and my family have been reduced from comfortable circumstances
to 'poverty.
A. G. Pray, ma’am, is your husband living ?
P. (She weeps. ) No, Sir ;he died a drunkard, after spending a
little fortune with the' prisoner, at the Hot Hell, kept by Mrs.


Womaker. I often tried to dissuade him from the prisoner’s
company, but all appeals were in vain.
A. G. How did your husband’s death happen ?
P. Why, sir, he was drinking with the prisoner at Mrs. Wo-
maker’s—a quarrel ensued—the prisoner knocked my husband
down ; he was then brought home in a fit, and he died the same
night; and now I and my fatherless children are left to subsist
on the allowance of the poorhouse.
A. G. I deeply sympathise with you. Do you know any other
families which have suffered through the prisoner ?
P. I do, sir. I know many in Sydney and other places. Indeed
there are very few houses where the prisoner has been admitted,
but some member of the family has suffered through him.
A. G. 1 have done with the witness.
Sensual. I will not trouble you with any questions : be seated.
Fourth Witness.— The Rev. Mark Lovesoul.
Attorney-General. I presume, sir, that you can testify to the
correctness of some of the various counts in the indictment read ?
L. I can, sir, for I have had a long and painful acquaintance
with the domestic miseries occasioned by the prisoner at the bar.
A. G. The court will be obliged by your testimony.
L. From personal experience and general observation, I can
confirm most of the statements made by the preceding witnesses.
At one time, I took the prisoner’s advice ; I then thought him to
be very skilful. I imagined that his prescriptions were beneficial
in sustaining me in my ministerial labors, and recruiting my
exhausted strength ; but I have since found it advantageous not
to follow his advice.
A. G. Was it, sir, from injury you had sustained, that you
were induced to reject his advice ?
L. At the time I gave up the use of the prisoner’s drinks, I
did not think that I had sustained any personal injury from
them ; though subsequently I proved that I had. I saw the
injury that was being done to others by such drinks; and as a
Christian, I felt myself compelled to abstain for the sake of my
weaker brethren, who were perishing around me by using them.
A. G. Can you refer to any individual cases ?
L. I can, sir. Mr. Littlesup, a fellow student of mine, had
the charge of a very interesting church at Backslide—he was a
highly gifted young man, and for some time his ministerial labors
were much blessed—many were added to the Church—and the
prospects were most cheering. One day Mr. Littlesup was invited
to a friendly party at Mr. Moderation’s, a deacon of the Church;
there he met with the prisoner, and from that time a strong attach-
ment was being formed. Mr. Littlesup was soon introduced by
the prisoner to his relations, Peter Porter, Delilah Wine, and
Ardent Spirits, in company with whom Mr. Littlesup spent much
of his time, to the neglect of his pastoral duties ; many of the
members of his Church, through his example, and the advice of
the prisoner, became drunkards. Mr. Littlesup was occasionally


overseen in drink ; the deacons frequently remonstrated with him,
and urged him to great moderation ; but it was all in vain—the
Church was soon broken up, and Mr. Littlesup died in an
asylum.
A. G-. Such cases are truly distressing ; do you know of any
in more private life ?
L. I know many, Sir ; I will mention one. Miss Social was
the daughter of one of my deacons ; she was a most interesting
young lady, and promised fair to become a useful member in the
Church of Christ; but her father was extremely fond of the pri-
soner’s company, and Miss Social spent occasionally an hour with
him. At length he succeeded in captivating her affections —her
father interfered when it was too late ; she left the paternal roof
in company with the prisoner—she fell his victim—became an
outcast in society, and at length died in a common brothel.
Her heart-stricken parents did not long survive the shock;
they sought comfort in drink, and died as the drunkard dies.
I know a great many cases connected with Sunday schools,
but I forbear to mention them : my heart sickens at the
recollection of the prisoner’s deeds of blood. ( Pauses , and appears
in deep distress.) I had a son—an only son ! ! a well-beloved
son ! ! ! he kept company with the prisoner; but now he is no
more. ( Weeps.) 0, my son !my son ! ! alas, my son !! !
A. G. I will not trouble you with any more questions.
Sensual. You may resume your seat, Sir.
Fifth Witness.— John Speedplough.
Attorney-General. Mr. Speedplough, have you had any deal-
ings with the prisoner ?
S. 0 yes, zur : Ize naun him mony a yer.
A. G. And pray, what do you know about him ?
S. Nea gud, ah’ll asseur yo : he’s a weary bad deceivin’ mon ;
he nearly ruin’d me and man woif, bur we’ll hae nae mare to dea
wi’ him.
Sensual. My Lord, I object to such personal reflections : they
are not evidence.
C. Justice. The witness had better confine himself to plain
matter-of-fact statements.
A. G. Will you state to the court how the prisoner has injured
you ?
S. Why, Sur, he cum wi’ mau nabor Hodge to man hause, to
see if au would sell him some barley to mack maut oh ; so he bout
sum that wur spoil’d ; it wur got in weet; he said it wur a pity
ta ha’ it spoil’d, and he said he could put me in t’way a gettin’ a
harvest in better ; he said we wur to drink his hoom-brewed ; sao
wee geed it to are men, and they worked harder for a whoile, but
they aulis wanted drink, and they geet drunk, and all things
wur dun worse wi’ drink than afore.
A. G. And could you get your harvest work done as well
without the prisoner’s drinks ?


S. Ah. varry deal better. Ah geet sum men what they callen
teetotal: they would na drink sike loike stuff; they loike water
and buttermeek ; they maw’d and shear’d better, and they wur
anlis sober and ready for wark. These tee-totallers are the chaps
for farmers.
A. G. I understand you to say that the prisoner had nearly
ruined you and your wife. How did that happen ?
S. Whoi he persuaded me and mah woif to tak’ his drink, an’
somehow or other it geet into are yeads, and we felt sea queer and
dizzy ; mah woif loiked it vastly ; shu tuke a soup naw an’ then,
and then shu wur anlis souppin’, and shu geet drunk and ne-
glected business ; then all things went wrang. Shu sometimes
went mad.
A. G. What did you do with her then ?
S. Woi, Sur r ah sent hur to the physicshon, Doctor Modera-
tion, an’ he tried to cure hur. He said John Barleycorn wur a
good doctor, and mah woif wur to tak a leetle oh his drink naw
an’ then. Well shu tried agean, an’ shu geet drunk first toime ;
sea ah thout ah would try to cure hur ; sea a kept the kay at
barrel, but she pu’ed tap aut an’ geet drunk agean. Then ah
kept kay at cellar door, bur shu brock it oppen. Then ah leet
aut’ drink run away, bur shu sent to Killman’s Jerry shop an’
geet drunk ; see ah fund at ah could nea cure hur. Ah thowt
ah would try if the Parson could do ony gud; he talk till shu
creed, and promised to be better, bur shu geet drunk agean. At
last Measter Abstinence, a temperance mon, cum, an’ he cured
hur an’ me anole. We signed a pledge ;we had nea mair to do
wi’ John Barleycorn, an’ an wur reet.
A. G. But did you not continue to sell the prisoner barley ?
S. Hoa, noa ! Ah grew nea mair barley for him. Ah thowt
it wur varry queer abaut him saying it wur a pity that mah
barley should be spoilt wi’ weet. Ah fund it aut after that he
aulis spoilt it wi’ weet, an’ spirt it, an’ made weary wark wi’ it.
A. G. The counsel for the defence can have the witness.
Sensual: Well, Mr. Speedplough, and where do you live ?
S. Ah lives at Breadhill, e Cheshire.
Sen. I suppose you rent your farm of some temperance man ?
S. Whoi, yes, ah believe mah landlord has lately joined the
Sosoity.
Sen. And I suppose he and you have had some little talk
about my client ?
S. Your cloient! nea, we had na talk obaut him. Ah canna
say ah ken him.
Sen. What, Sir, do you not know my client at the bar ?
(pointing to the prisoner.)
S. Whoi, his name is na Cloient, they caun him Barleycorn.
Sen. Well, Sir, he is my client.
S. Oh, varry weel! yo mah can him what you loik, and keep
him for yorsel’ : bur all’ll hea nae mare to dea wi’ him.
Sen. Then you had some talk with your landlord about the
gentleman at the bar ?


S. Yes, we talked about him.
Sen. And is it not true that you are carrying out your scheme
to ruin my client. Did not your landlord promise to do some-
thing for you if you would witness against Mr. Barleycorn ? and
did he not help you to get up this tale about your wife and work-
men?
S. Nowt at soart; whoi yo want to mack yan believe at
moun’s made o’ green cheese ; its an reet what ah sed; an’ here’s
mah woif somewhere obaut ; that there mon con foind hur,
(pointing to the Crier of the Court,) shu will tell yomare obaut it.
Sen. No, Sir, Ido not want to see your wife, and I have no-
more questions to ask you ; you may sit down.
S. Varry week Ah shall be obout if yo want me agean.
Sixth Witness. —Eliza Brolcenheart.
Attorney General. My Lord, the witness now in the box is in
a very delicate state of health. I ask the favour of the court to-
allow her sit while giving evidence.
C. Justice. That privilege is most cheerfully granted.
A. G. I presume, ma’am, that you have some knowledge of
the prisoner at the bar ?
B. Alas ! Sir, he is too well known to me and my ruined
family.
A. G. Will you favor the court with some account of him ?
B. I can assure you, Sir, it is no easy task to repeat my tale of
woe ; the chief cause of which is the prisoner at the bar. When
I entered upon the matrimonial state, my prospects were of the
most cheering kind. My husband was diligent in business, fer-
vent in spirit, serving the Lord. We were blessed with a lovely
family, and many years of bliss passed away. But alas ! alas !
one fatal day brought the prisoner to our house, in company with
the Pastor of the Church with which we were connected. My
husband complained of occasional exhaustion after a hard day’s
business ; our pastor then introduced the prisoner as a professional
gentleman, at the same time assuring my husband that he had
derived considerable personal advantage from his decoctions. The
prisoner soon induced my husband to take his advice, and he be-
came a constant customer of Mr. Poisonvender, ale, porter, and
wine merchant. It would be too tedious to relate the progressive
steps to ruin, but through the influence of the prisoner, my hus-
band neglected his business and family ; he spent his evenings-
with the prisoner at Mr. Poisonvender’s, and at length fell a
victim—he died in an Asylum! ( Appears to suffer distress of mind.)
A. G. You appear, ma’am, to have sustained much personal
injury; is it all attributable to the prisoner ?
B. It is, Sir ;he weaned the affections of my husband from
his family ; and although once one of the kindest of husbands
and fathers, he became the most cruel : my children are crippled
through his maltreatment, and my days have been embittered !
This body is enfeebled through long abuse and want of the neces-
saries of life—this heart has almost heaved its last deep sigh—•


a few days more will end my sorrows ; and though death may
rob my children of a broken-hearted mother, yet there is a Pro-
vidence ! (Weeps.)
A. G. I will not distress you with any more questions.
Sensual. The lady can retire.
Seventh Witness. — Dr. Cureall, Physician.
Attorney General. Mr. Cureall, I suppose you have some know-
ledge of the prisoner at the bar ?
Dr. C. I am, Sir, well acquainted with the effects resulting
from the use of his poisonous drinks.
A. G. It has appeared in court that he has been frequently
consulted as a medical man. Pray, Sir, is he recognised by the
faculty ?
Dr. 0. Not by the respectable and intelligent part. He is a
complete quack, his prescriptions are opposed to common sense,
and his nostrums have inflicted a fearful curse on society.
A. G. Have you, Sir, in your professional visits met with any
particular cases, in which individuals have sustained personal
injury by taking the prisoner’s compounds ?
Dr. C. I have, Sir, met with many cases, in which not only
has the health been injured, but the life endangered, and some
cases in which life has been sacrificed.
A. G. Will you be so kind as to state some one to the court ?
Dr. C. I will, Sir ;it was only last week that I was called in
by Mr. Drinkwater, to see his patient, Mr. One-Glass, who has,
for some time, been labouring under a most distressing affection
of the nervous system, brought on by using, daily, the prisoner’s
drinks. He was occasionally attacked by a fit of delirium tremens,
in which he was so fearfully haunted by spectral illusions, that it
was with difficulty he could be kept in his bed. At length he
succeeded in breaking through the restraint, and precipitating
himself from the window of the third story, he was taken up a
lifeless corpse.
A. G. Pray, Sir, does the disease you call delirium tremens
arise from the use of the prisoner’s drinks ?
Dr. 0. It does, Sir. It more frequently attacks those who use
the drink immoderately, but in some constitutions a moderate
quantity will bring it on ; such was the case with Mr. One-Glass.
A. G. How is it, Sir, that people are disposed to take the
prisoner’s drinks in such large quantities. I thought there was such
a general dislike to physic that the patient took as little as
possible ?
Dr. C. The reason, Sir, is because the prisoner’s drinks are a
very seductive poison; they create an appetite for themselves,
and the desire (which itself is a disease) for such drinks becomes
so strong, in most cases, that property, health, and life, as well
as moral principle and religion are daily being sacrificed to the base
and sensual appetite.
A. G. Would you favour the court with an additional case ?
Dr. C. Certainly, sir. About a month ago I attended the call
of Mr. Springwell. The case was an ordinary one. A Mrs. Sip
13
TRIAL OP JOHN BARLEYCORN.


was confined to her bed for about two months, she was suffering
severely from dyspepsia, occasioned by the use of the prisoner’s
drinks; she had unfortunately consulted the prisoner by the re-
commendation of her neighbour, Mrs. Womaker. Mrs. Sip was very
careful, at first, not to take much of the decoction ; but suffering
greatly from indigestion, and the prisoner’s drinks affording her
apparent relief, she repeated the dose so frequently, that at length
she took it as a common beverage, and thus confirmed the disease
which the decoction had produced. The result was, she lan-
guished under the most painful sufferings, and fell a victim to the
prisoner’s nostrums.
A. G-. Are there any cases of disease in which the prisoner’s
drinks might be taken with advantage ?
Dr. C. Not any, Sir; they are altogether useless and perni-
cious ; and they ought, for the sake of the public health, to be
prohibited.
A. G, I have no more questions to propose.
(Cross-examined.)
Sensual. Dr. Cureall, allow me, Sir. Pray have you not been
in the habit of recommending my client’s drinks in your profes-
sional visits ?
_ Dr. C. There are few instances in which I did, some years ago,,
give such advice ; but after careful observation, serious considera-
tion, and scientific deduction, I abandoned an opinion which I
found to be based on error.
Sen. But are you not aware, Sir, that there are some of the
faculty, of high standing, who continue to recommend my client’s
decoctions ?
Dr. 0. I am, Sir, and I deplore the fact that the faculty
should have laboured so long under a common delusion. The
darkness is, however, passing away ; and the time is not far distant
when no professional man will risk his reputation by sanctioning
the prisoner’s drinks. The most intelligent part of the faculty
have published opposite opinions.
De. Trotter says—“ Intoxicating liquors in all their forms, and however
disguised, are the most productive causes of disease with which I am acquainted."
Dr. Buchan. —“ Malt liquors render the blood sizy and unfit for circulation ;
hence proceeds obstructions and inflammations of the lungs.”
_ And the following declaration was signed by seventeen physi-
cians and surgeons at Manchester ;
Being of opinion that the use of intoxicating liquors is pernicious, we have
great pleasure in stating our conviction, that nothing would more tend to
diminish disease and improve the health of the community than abstinence
from inebriating liquors, to the use of which so large a portion of the existing
misery and immorality among the working classes is attributable. ”
Such, Sir, is the opinion of all intelligent practitioners, who are
agreed that the use of the prisoner’s drinks lay the foundation of a
whole host of diseases.
Sensual. Are there not some cases in which my client’s decoc-
tions have restored health and saved life ?


Dr. C. Not any case in which those decoctions have been
necessary ; in cases of apparent benefit, the patient would have
been more effectually restored by medicine.
Sen. Why, Sir, there are innumerable cases in which mothers
have been enabled to give support to their infants, by using Mr,
Barleycorn’s drinks, and many mothers have stated that they
could not suckle their infants without them.
Dr. C. It is altogether a delusion, Sir. All mothers would
be able to suckle better without such drinks ; they only disease
the milk, and injure the infant. The advantages of abstinence
have been demonstrated by hundreds of mothers.
Sen. But, Sir, if you could disprove the advantage of Mr,
Barleycorn’s drinks for the nurse, you must admit that the work-
ing part of the community are benefited by their use. Even our
legislature have denominated them liquid bread.
Dr. C. Liquid bread ! call things by their right names, and
the appellation of liquid fire would be more suitable. The labour-
ing class has derived no real ad vantage, but rather they feel the
infliction of a most fearful curse in their use. There are now
millions of teetotallers who, with one united testimony, say, we
are better without the drink than with it; consequently the mere use
of it is injurious.
Sen. You are at liberty to retire, Sir.
Eighth Witness— John Hackings.
Attorney-General. Mr. Dockings, what is your occupation ?
J. H. lam a blacksmith by trade, Sir.
A. G. Do you recognise the prisoner at the bar ?
J. H. 0 yes, Sir, I know him well; he was one of my jolly
companions. We have had many a spree together.
A. G-. Where have you been in the habit of meeting?
J. H. Why, Sir, we have had many houses of call: such as
the Blind Beggar, in Rag-street, kept by Mr. Criball, where
people become blind to their own interest, and are robbed of their
possessions. The Grapes, in Logwood-street, kept by Mr. Boni-
face, where they make port wine without grapes, and brew with-
out malt. The Leg of Mutton, in Bone-street, kept by Mr. Star-
vation, where the operative takes the money, earned by the sweat
of his brow, and gives it to the landlord to buy legs of mutton for
his family, while the drunkard seems content to carry home a
sheep’s head, or the drunkard's bullock , a red herring. Then there
is the King’s Arms in Law-street, kept by Mr. Killman, who has
a license to be drunk on the premises, and to poison and destroy her
Majesty’s subjects by wholesale. We have often met at the
Cathedral, in Hypocrite-street, kept by Mr. Graceless, where
Sabbath-breaking is regularly encouraged, and young people are
congregated in the music saloon to sing psalms, and drink the
drunkard’s drinks, on the evenings of the Lord’s day.
A. G. You give a fearful account of the places of meeting.
Pray what kind of drinks are being sold there ?
J. H. They sell John Barleycorn’s drinks, and make poor sots
pay smartly for them ; so that their pockets are soon emptied and


their bodies diseased. There is wine, which makes the gentry
sometimes whine most pitifully; there is champagne, which pro-
duces real pain ; there is cyder, which has made many a one sigh
deep ; there is punchy which makes smen and women act like Punch
and Judy ; there is gin, which besets the drunkard’s path with
snares and gins ; there is peppermint, which keeps the drunkard
so poor that he cannot pepper his meat; there is brown stout, alias
brown suds, which weakens and debilitates the stoutest men; there
is porter, which has brought some men down to be common porters;
there is ale, which fills the drinker with all kinds of ailments;
and there is beer, which carries the drunkard to the vault, and
finally to the hot hell. Such, Sir, are the drinks prepared by the
prisoner, and sold by his agents.
A. G. _ Why, Mr. Hookings, from your representation it
seems as if the drinks derived their names from the evils they pro-
duced.
J. H. There is a singular coincidence, although Ido not think
it was intentional. I have only named a few of the evils resulting
from the prisoner’s drinks ; their name is Legion, not only from
their number, but their diabolical character.
A. G. Do you know any cases of disorder in which the prisoner
at the bar has been personally engaged ?
J. H. Ido, Sir; for there are very few families in the kingdom
where he has not caused disorders ; breaking up the peace of the
domestic circle, and inducing a once fond husband to beat to the
ground the woman he had pledged himself, at the altar of God,
to love, cherish, and protect.
A. G. Please to detail some such case.
J. H. I will, Sir. There was Jack Tulip, a bonny chap for a
husband ;he was a regtdar soaker, a double dip’t’en, a trump. He
got into the hands of the prisoner, who kept him drinking at his
house until a late hour every night; he used to make Jack sing
Home, sweet home, there is no place like home ; and if his wife came
to ask him to go home with her there was generally a row ; the
prisoner would say, “Will you stand this, Jack, I would not
allow my wife to come sneaking after me; send her home with a
flea in her ear.” Then Jack would swear and storm, and order
her off; and if she did not go immediately, he would beat her to
the ground, and then kick her as if she were a dead dog. The
prisoner, all the time, hardening him on. At last Jack’s wife
died from the maltreatment of her husband.
A. G. Such a man’s home could not be very comfortable or
sweet. Pray what sort of a place was this home ?
J. H. Why, Sir, it was such a place that it would have made
a fine picture for Hogarth, only, you know, Sir, he could not put
the smells into his picture. It was as sweet as a pigstye, and
almost as clean. I saw his dirty wife and ragged children ; there
was a rickety old kettle, and a chair without a bottom. I looked
into the cupboard, and I thought the mice were starving as well
as the children, for there was not a morsel of bread of any kind.
I can give you a fine description of these sweet homes in the lan-


guage of our poet, Anderton, if my lord judge and tlie court will
allow it.
The Judge being much amused by the good humor of the witness,
smiled and nodded assent.
A. G-. Please to favor the court with your poetic description.
J. H. I will, Sir. It is called—
THE DRUNKARD'S HABITATION.
Hie you, hie you, come with me,
And a curious sight you’ll see ;
Come, without one if or but,
And inspect the drunkard’s hut.
Pins a piece to look at a show,
Lots of nothiug, all in a row.
Look within, and look without,
Look straight on, and round about;
Isn’t it supremely grand,
Straw for a bed, and grease for sand ?
Pins a piece to look at a show,
Tallow for carpets, all in a row.
Torn with winds, and soaked with rains,
Paper bags for window panes ;
Which, when through the weather pops,
Are block’d up with sods and cops.
Pins a piece to look at a show,
Strange contrivements, all in a row.
Snails are creeping up the wall,
Round the window spiders crawl;
A long-legged and grizzly throng,
Weaving muslin all day long.
Pins a piece to look at a show,
Cobweb curtains, all in a row.
Where’s the table ?—that old door,
In the middle of the floor ;
Lash’d with sundry hazel sticks.
Propp’d with legs composed of bricks.
Pins a piece to look at a show,
Family fixtures, all in a row.
All the pots my uncle sack’d
All but two, and they are crack’d ;
All the tools for dinner work,
Save one ancient one-legg’d fork.
Pins a piece to look at a show,
Tools on crutches, all in a row.


Where’s the dish from which they feed,
Bums have dish’d it up indeed ;
Girl and woman, hoy and man,
Stick their clutches in the pan.
Pins a piece to look at a show,
Two-legged grunters, all in a row.
Where’s the chairs on which they sit ?
Swallow’d in a drunken fit;
All below, arid all up stairs,
Bricks for stools, and stones for chairs,
Pins a piece to look at a show,
Stones for cushions, all in a row.
See the fender as you stoop,
Made of one old barrel-hoop ;
See the kettle on the hob,
Shedding tears for Gipsey Bob.
Pius a piece to look at show,
Jobs for tinkers all in a row.
Oh ! what high extatic bliss,
To possess a house like this ;
Clear’d of all its goods by some
Landlord, thief, or rascal bum.
Pins a piece to look a show,
Swill-tub scrapings all in a row.
The court laughed heartily, and the examination proceeded.
A.G. Thank you, Mr. blockings, for the little recreation
afforded to the court. Do you know any other case besides the
one named ?
J. H Ido sir. There was Tom Maddlebrain, a regular custo-
mer of the prisoner’s. I met Tom, one day, in company with him
at his uncle’s shop, where he went to put his coat up the spout.
A. G. Pray, sir, where is the shop you have just named ?
J. H. Perhaps, sir, the court does not understand what my
uncle’s shop is.
A. G. I think not. Please to explain.
J. H. Why, sir, John Barleycorn’s uncle is the Pawnbroker,
at the Three Balls, in Pop-street; and then he has other shops in
all the low, dirty, drunken neighborhoods in the town.
Well, Sir, Tom went there to get a trifle on his coat to give to
Mr. Barleycorn for more drink. I followed him back to the
Gaping Goose, where Mr. Barleycorn keeps his geese so long as
they will gape and swallow his drinks. Tom called for another
quart; and when he had spent all his money, he said he
would go home and see how things squared there. I heard the
prisoner persuade Tom to give his wife a good beating. Tom


replied “ That I will—if she’s up I’ll heat her for not going to bed
—and if she’s gone to bed I’ll heat her for not sitting up-—if sup-
per is not ready, I’ll heat her for that—and if it is, I’ll beat her
for getting it without my orders.—lf the fire is out, I’ll beat her
for not keeping it in—and if it is in, I’ll beat her for burning
coal. . I’ll let her know who’s master of my house. ”
A. G. Well, Sir, and did the man thus instigated by the
prisoner, do his wife any injury ?
J. H. He did, Sir ; and the prisoner went with him, and
urged him to abuse his wife so, that she died in three days after
the beating.
A. G-. It is very strange that in these cases, which appear to
be of frequent occurrence, that the verdicts recorded on Coroner’s
inquests are not wilful murder against the drunkard, implicating
the prisoner as accessory.
J. H. Oh ! I can explain that matter to you, Sir. The prisoner
has a very extensive acquaintance; and he has much influence
with the Coroner, at whose house he frequently visits. When an
inquest is to be held, the prisoner arranges to get his friends on
the jury. I know a man who was regularly sent for while he kept
company with the prisoner ; but when he associated with the tee-
totallers, he was never sent for again. The prisoner also arranges
to have the inquest held at the house of one of his agents, where
he treats the jury with his drinks, which so completely blind
them that they can never see any fault in the prisoner.
A. G. What are the general verdicts given at their inquests ?
J. H. They are such as the following:—died from injuries
sustained by a fall—died by the visitation of God—died by the
rupturing of a blood-vessel —and if the ease be a very glaring one,
then it is manslaughter, and the murderer escapes with a few
months’ imprisonment.
A. G. I have heard of many suicides and awfully sudden
deaths through drunkenness, Ho you know of any case in which
the prisoner was accessory ?
J. H. I do, sir ; many.
A. G. Please to name one ?
J. H. My neighbor, Delirium Tremens, was once a good hus-
band and a kind father; but he kept company with the prisoner,
and he thereby became a drunkard. One day, after he had been
drinking for a week, he became so melancholy, and sometimes he
raved like a madman ; the prisoner persuaded him to put an end
to his troubles by cutting his throat. Delirium took his advice ;
and the next morning he was found with his head nearly severed
from his body.
A. G. And what was the verdict in that case ?
J. H. It was, “ died, having cut his throat in a fit of insanity.”
There are many cases of suicide and sudden death by taking the
prisoner’s drinks —our daily papers abound with them. If a drug-
gist had sold the person so much laudanum or prussic acid as
would have caused such deaths, he would have been brought to
justice as an accessory to murder. Thus, while the law of the


land protects the lives of the people in the hands of the druggist,
it allows the prisoner and his agents to be “ poisoners-general to
Her Majesty’s subjects. ”
A. G. I have done with the witness.
(John Hockings Cross-examined.)
Sensual. Mr. Hockings, pray, sir, where do you live ?
J. H. I live at my Temperance Villa, near Birmingham.
Sen. My Temperance Villa. Why do you call it your villa ?
J. H. Because I bought it and paid for it. Besides I have a
good garden, and a piece of land on which my cow grazes.
Sen. And what might you pay for your property ? (Sneer-
ingly.)
J. H. My house and land cost me at the rate of five pints of
beer and a pennyworth of tobacco for the square yard.
Sen. And do yo*u mean to tell the court that you are a free-
holder ?
J. H. I do, Sir. Doubly free, since I took the reins out of the
prisoner’s hands; for I acknowledge, to my shame, that I was
once his slave. lam now my own master, and my vote and inte-
rest are being solicited by candidates for Parliament, who accost
me as Mr. John Hockings ; although, when I kept company with
the prisoner, they called me “ Drunken Jack.” I had been raving
and shouting at the public houses for twenty years, for reform
and my franchise, but it never came until I left the prisoner’s
company and reformed myself ; thus I took off the malt-tax at
once, and I pocketed the duty. I now bank here, ( pointing to his
pocket, ) instead of banking here, ( pointing to his mouth, ) now I
keep a pig in my stye instead of feeding a surly grunter at the
Pig and Whistle, where the landlord gets all the pig, and poor
drunkards have to whistle for their share.
Sen. (Interrupting Mr. H.) Stop, sir, do not talk so fast. Let
me ask you another question. Are you not aware that you have
stood on the debtor-side of my client’s book for some time ?
J. H. 0 yes, there have been some long scores against me
there.
Sen. And you have frequently been dunned for the payment
of the account ?
J. H. Yes, every Saturday night.
Sen. And you remember the dispute you had with my client’s
agent, Mr. Longscore, in Strap-place ?
J. H. Yes, I remember. The dispute was about his chalk,
which I found out made two strokes instead of one.
Sen. And do you mean the court to understand that Mr.
Longscore imposes upon his customers by making double chalks?
J. H, Yes; I mean that to be distinctly understood, and I
dare contradiction. And that is not the only way in which poor
drunkards are being cheated. The landlady can occasionally
forget to give the change when a shilling has been laid down ;
and, if the change be demanded, the scene is changed, and the
man who was accosted as a gentleman when he went into the


house, is now called a blackguard, and tumbled out, or given into
the hands of the police. This is a very common case, when the
poor drunkard has spent all his brass ; then the gentleman is
called a nasty, drunken sloich, and pushed into the street.
Sen. ( Again interrupting Mr. H. impatiently.) Not so fast,
Sir, I do not want to hear any more on that point.
J. H. ( Interrupting.) I dare say not; although I could tell
you many of the tricks of publicans, the prisoner’s agents, for
cheating and robbing the poor drunkard and his family.
Sen. Pray, Sir, did you not say, in a quarrel with my client’s
agent, “Mr. Cheat'em, I will pay you off;” and I suppose you
are now giving vent to your vindictive feeling, by witnessing
against Mr. Barleycorn ?
J. H. Wrong again, Sir ; you are quite mistaken. I fulfilled
my promise when I paid off my old score at Mr. Cheat’em’s ; and
I was enabled to do that soon after I refused to buy any more of
the prisoner’s drinks.
Sen. I understand, Sir, that you have been interfering with
the lawful business of my client’s agents, and persuading many
persons not to purchase his drinks ; and that you have, by preach-
ing up this new-fangled system called Teetotalism, caused the
wages of the operative to be lowered.
J. H. It is true that I have persuaded many operatives, and
gentlefolks too, to cease drinking the prisoner’s drinks ; but that
I have thereby lowered wages, is altogether false. Let common
sense decide the case. “If teetotalism lowers wages, then drink-
ing must keep them up. ” Everybody knows that drinking and
drunkenness have always lowered wages ; for the drunkard has
nothing to protect him against a tyrant master. He has neither
character, food, furniture, money, nor credit; but the teetotaller
has all these ; and, if his master says, if you will not work for
less wages, I will give you the hag, he can say, thank you, Sir, I
will save you the trouble, for I have a hag of my own ; and then
he shows his employer his bag of money, which makes him inde-
pendent.
I am, Sir, the best friend of my brother operatives. I always
say, “the operatives are the producers of the wealth of the
nation and I hope to see the day when they shall have a full
share of its comforts.
Sen. Well, Sir ; and I suppose you are well paid for advocating
teetotalism, and appearing now in court ?
J. H. lam well paid by teetotalism ; since I adopted its prin-
ciples I have exchanged rags for broadcloth. The poor drunkard
wears such a coat, that it would be difficult to say which was the
original piece. It is so varied, that you would think he had taken
it in numbers; he wears a hat without a crown, and shoes which
are neither proud nor saucy, for they eat mud and drink water. Such
are your client’s customers. Since I broke the bonds of John
Barleycorn, I have exchanged sickness for health ; a guilty con-
science for peace of mind, and the hope of Eternal life through
Christ. I have left the company of drinkers, and keep company


with the people of God. I spend my Sabbaths at a place of worship
instead of the public-honse ; and I have exchanged the drunkard’s
song for the praises of the Redeemer.
I have now a sweet home, a smiling wife, and happy children.
The only brewer I now keep is my cow, and I feed pigs instead of
publicans, and I drink nature’s pure beverage from the crystal
spring. While I kept company with the prisoner, my money was
like a wild colt —I had to run it up into a corner to catch it; but
now I catch it in a bag. ( Showing his purse.)
Sen. (Interrupting Mr. II. ) There, Sir, we have had plenty
of that kind of preachment.
J. H. {ln haste.) I dare say you have ; but lam never tired
of telling the blessings of teetotalism. {Looking shrewdly at Mr.
Sensual.) It would do you good, Sir; will you try it, Sir ?
Then you would find that my preachment would fill your parch-
ment with a better brief than it now contains.
Sen. {ln haste.) You can sit down, Sir ; I have no more oc-
casion for you.
J. H. I will retire, Sir, hoping you will allow me, at some
future time, to put a few plain questions to you ; such as, Why
do you take the prisoner’s drinks ? and why do you defend such
an abominable case ?
H. SENSUAL, ESQ., rose for the Defence.
Mv Lore, and Gentlemen op the Jury,—
Although the evidence adduced on the other side may have
made some impressions unfavorable to my client, I trust the evi-
dence now about to be brought forward will change those impres-
sions into sympathy for him as an injured man. I trust I shall
be able to disprove the various counts in the indictment, and to
establish the claims of my client on the good opinion and sanction
of the public ; and that the verdict of this court will vindicate his
character, and acquit him as not guilty of the foul charges pre-
ferred against him.
The Clerk of the Court then called the
First Witness for the Defence. James Mashtub.
Sensual. Mr. Mashtub, I suppose you are well acquainted
with my client, Mr. Barleycorn.
M. I have, Sir, had the pleasure of Mr, Barleycorn’s ac-
quaintance for about thirty years.
Sen. Will you be kind enough to tell the court what you know
of him ?
M. I know him to be a worthy tradesman. I have done
business with him for many years, and I never knew of him to be
guilty of any of the deeds laid to his chagre.
Sen. Have you ever employed him as your medical adviser ?
M, Yes, Sir ; I have taken his advice medicinally, and I
always found him to be correct. He has cured many thousands
who were weak and poorly, and many have perished for want of
his drinks. Mr. Barleycorn is a gentleman of the first rank;
his company is sought after by most of the nobility in the land.


Sen. I have done with the witness.
Attorney-General, Mr. Mashtub, you will please to answer
me a few plain questions. Pray, Sir, has there not being a long
acquaintance between your family and the prisoner ?
M. Yes, Sir, there has.
A. G. Your father and two brothers, now deceased, were in-
timate with him ?
M. I believe they were.
A. G. Is it not true that they died from the effects of alcohol ?
M. So the physician said.
A. G. So you know. Sir, they did ? and that the alcohol was
administered by the prisoner in his decoctions. Now. Sir, mind
what you say. Do you not know all this to be true ?
M. ( With hesitation and confusion.) I cannot say it is untrue.
A. G. Then you admit that your father and two brothers were
poisoned by the prisoner, and yet you have spoken favorably of
his practices. I understand, Sir, that you make up these drinks
for the prisoner, do you not ?
M. Why, yes ; I brew for him.
A. G. Very well; and you are what is called a sleeping partner ;
you have a per centage on his profits, have you not ? Now give
me a plain answer to that question.
M. It is not worth notice, it is so very little.
A. G. Oh !it is very little. Yet it is quite enough to estab-
lish the fact of partnership. I have no more questions to ask you ;
but, Sir. you will not leave the court. ( Addressing the Judge.)
My Lord, I move for a warrant to detain this witness as an ac-
complice with the the prisoner.
Chief Justice. The evidence before the court is sufficient; the
warrant is granted ; the Sheriff’s officer will execute it.
(The officer takes charge of Mr. Mashtub.)
Second Witness. — Demas Soulslaughter.
Sensual. Mr. Soulslaughter, do you know Mr. Barleycorn 1
S. I do, Sir ; I know him well.
Sen. Will you say what you know of his general character ?
S. A more industrious, honest, and worthy tradesman the
world cannot produce.
Sen. Do you know anything about his connexion with the
working classes ?
S. O yes. I know so many good things that the time would
fail me to tell them. The mechanic will never know how to be
sufficiently thankful for his assistance ; and the factory people,
poor creatures, (my bowels yearn over them,) would never be
able to stand the heat and labour of the cotton mills without Mr.
Barleycorn’s aid ; and as to out-door labourers, (poor things, I
pity them,) if they could not be well supplied with Mr. Barley-
corn’s liquid bread, I can’t see how they would be able to get any
bread at all.
Sen. The counsel for the other side can have the witness.
Attorney General. Mr. Soulslaughter, please to give the court


a little information about your pedigree ; bow did you come by
your present name ?
S. Why, Sir, it is the hereditary name of the property I pos-
sess in Doom-street, which was willed to me by my uncle Soul-
slaughter. I had to take this name when I took possession of
the property. My uncle willed much property ; and all my rela-
tions who possess any have had to adopt the name.
A. G. _ Do you know what were your uncle’s particular reasons
for requiring the adoption of his name ?
S. I believe it was on account of the traffic ; because it is said
to be the common employment of all Publicans, Spirit Dealers,
Wine Merchants, and all engaged in the traffic, to slaughter souls.
A. G. And are you not afraid of the dreadful consequences of
your traffic ; do you ever think of the day of judgment ?
S. Oh, Sir, it won’t do for us to think about such things. We
could not carry on our trade, or get a comfortable livelihood, if we
thought of judgment and poor drunkards.
A. G. And yet, Sir, you profess to pity your victims ; the
poor, it is evident, have nothing to hope from such merciless
hands. Pray, Sir, how long have you done business with the
prisoner ?
S. We have traded together ever since I went to the sign of
Death.
A. G. And there is a pretty good understanding between you ?
S. Why, yes ; we agree very well.
A. G. And you share the profits of your partnership annually?
S. ( Surprised .) Partnership!
A. G. 0 yes ; you were not aware that this fact was known.
S. Why—why—why—( Drawling .)
A. G. Yes, you may why and whine ; but come, Sir, tell the
court how much the partnership is worth annually.
S. Not much ;we don’t make much now.
A. G. Not much ! That is quite enough, Sir ; of course you
will not object to share the sentence of the law with him. My
Lord, I shall have to trouble you again for a warrant to detain
Demas Soulslaughter, as an accomplice with the prisoner.
Chief Justice. The warrant is issued ; the officer will see it
executed.
Third Witness — Judas Moderation.
Sensual. Mr. Moderation, are you acquainted with Mr. Bar-
leycorn ?
M. We have been on terms of intimacy for a long time.
Sen. Will you be so kind as to say what you know of him ?
M. I can bear for him the most favourable testimony ; he is
in every sense of the word a gentleman, and one of the most
useful members of society. He has long kept company with the
wisest and best of men ; I have frequently met with him at the
houses of ministers of the gospel, and at the tables of the no-
bility ; he had the honor of dining with his late Majesty. I have
frequently proved the good effect of his medicine, and believe
him to be a very skilful and successful practitioner.
Sen. I have done with the witness.


Attorney General. Mr. Moderation, I have a few plain questions
to propose to you. Was not the unfortunate Miss Social, named
by Mr. Lovesoul, your sister ?
M. She was.
A. Gi. Then, Sir, how does it happen that you now appear
in court to Witness in favour of the prisoner, when you know he
was the cause of the ruin of your niece, and also of your sister
and brother-in-law? And pray, Sir,were you not a Deacon in
Mr. Littlesup’s Church?
M. I must confess I was.
A. G. And was it not at your house where Mr. Littlesup first
became acquainted with the prisoner ?
M. I believe it was.
A. (1. Your evidence, Sir, must astound the court. It ap-
pears from your confession, according to Mr. Lovesoul’s testi-
mony, that you, with the prisoner, have been the chief cause of
the fall and ruin of your pastor; that you have been the chief
instruments in breaking up the Church of Christ; and that the
apostacy and final ruin ,of many members of that church, is
mainly attributable to you and the prisoner. Pray, Sir, have
you no pity for the souls of your brethren and near relations,
that you still, with these facts before you, continue to commend,
even in a public court, the man whose hands are even yet stained
with the blood of your own sister ?
M. They should have taken better care] to moderate them-
selves, as I have done.
A. Gr. Then you admit that there is great 'danger in keeping
company with the prisoner ? Pray, Sir, has he never deceived
you ? How often have you gone to bed with a faltering step,
after spending the evening with the prisoner, at Peter Porter’s ?
M. Hot very frequently. {Blushing.)
A. Gr. Not very frequently ! only now and then going to bed
drunk ! What a confession for a deacon of a Christian church !
I suppose you remember Rake Spendthrift, the son of one of your
brother Deacons, and John Bankrupt, one of your once wealthy
members ?
M. Yes, I knew them well.
A. Gr. And did you not first take them to the Hot Hell, kept
by Mrs. Womaker, and there introduce them to the prisoner ?
M. Yes ;we went to take a friendly glass, after the business
of the day, and to read the news.
_A. Gr. And you remember the awful end of those two indi-
viduals. How will you and the prisoner plead not guilty to the
charge of murder, at the bar of God ?
M. I did not murder them. If they had taken my advice and
drunk less, they might have been living now. I told them Mr.
Barleycorn would lead them astray, if they were not very
careful!
A. G. This, Sir, is another confession, not at all favorable to
the character of the prisoner; but well calculated to invalidate
your former testimony. It appears that you think the tempter
will not share in the guilt of his victims ; you did not learn such


sentiments from the word of God. You may sit down, Sir, in
your merited disgrace ; and think yourself favored if allowed by
this court to escape merited punishment.
Fourth Witness. — Mr. Lovedrink, Surgeon.
Sensual. Mr. Lovedrink, I presume you are acquainted with
my client, Mr. Barleycorn ?
_L. I am, Sir, I have known him many years, and in my exten-
sive practice I have witnessed many instances of the advantage of
his decoctions.
Sen. Will you please to state the general advantages resulting
from the use of my client’s decoctions ?
L. I will, Sir. They are used with great advantage as an
ordinary beverage. They will cool the system when it is over
heated ; and they will warm it when it is cold. They will excite
the nervous system ; and they will soothe and abate irritation.
They will allay hunger ; and create an appetite for food. They
will quench thirst; and increase the desire for drink. They will
excite to cheerfulness and vivacity; and, as narcotics, they
compose to sleep. They act as a purgative and sedative. Indeed,
Sir, they are the most useful medicines which we can prescribe ;
and, without them, the Pharmacopoeia would be of little use.
Sen. Can you state any individual cases, in which advantage
has been realised ?
L. I can, Sir. I have been the medical adviser of Mr. Guzzle’s
family, in Swallow-street, for some ten years. The whole family
use Mr. Barleycorn’s drinks for their beverage, and their health
is well preserved. Mr. Guzzle has occasionally had an attack
of the liver complaint, for which I have prescribed moderate
draughts of Mr. Barleycorn’s decoctions, and have found them
serviceable.
Mrs. Guzzle is sometimes indisposed ; being of a full habit and
corpulent, she has a difficulty of breathing, after a little exer-
tion. I always administer, with good effect, a few drachms of
Mr. Barleycorn’s essence.
Sen. Can you mention any case in which the laboring classes
have been benefited ?
L. It will be difficult to select out of the numerous cases I
have before me. [Pausing. ) Aye—-there is one or two I will just
name.
John Dryagain, in Pig-alley, Sot-street, has been under my care
for about two years ; he is a member of the sick-club held at the
Last Shift, kept by Mr. Foolspenee. He was on the funds of the
society until the box was closed; and then the parish had to
support him. He has been a hard drinker, and his constitution
is so broken up, that it is difficult to keep him on his feet. I
have found nothing which seems to do him so much good as Mr,
Barleycorn’s drinks.
Then there is William Boaster, a hard-working man ; he lives
in Dolittle-court, Idle-street. He is frequently on his club. He
is afflicted with distressing pains in his head, for which nothing
does so well as Mr. Barleycorn’s drinks.


Sen. Thank you, Sir. The court, I doubt not, Mull be per-
fectly satisfied with your testimony. I will not trouble you with
any more questions.
A ttorney-Gen. Mr. Lovedrink, 1 will trouble you with a fewinter-
rogations ? Pray, Sir, are you a regularly accredited practitioner ?
1 L. I am, Sir. I graduated at Bottle College, and am a licentiate
of the Apothecaries’ Hall. I took the degree moderate drunken-
ness, and practised five years in the City of Inebriety.
A. G. How was it you removed to this place?
L. Why, Sir, I -was unfortunate : and for want of professional
employment I was unable to meet my creditors.
A. G. I suppose Mr. Drinkwater took the greater part of your
practice ?
L. Why, yes Sir, he did ; for the people became so fond of
quackery, that they would not submit to a regular course of
medicine. The rage is all for Mr. Drinkwater’s Tee-total Pills.
A. G. As there is such a demand for the Tee-total Pills, I
suppose there will be an extensive agency. Can you tell me
where they are being sold ?
L. Why, Sir, Mr. Drinkwater has so completely lowered the
character of the profession, that the respectable pill-shops are
shutting up. He has actually made the Grocers, Butchers, and
Bakers his agents.
A. G. Then the people refuse to take Mr. Barleycorn’s drinks ?
L. Indeed, they do, Sir ; and they are so obstinate that there
is no inducing them to give the drinks another trial.
A. G. You have made a very singular and paradoxical state-
ment in court relative to the properties of Mr. Barleycorn’s drinks.
You say they cool and warm—revive and compose, &c. Please to
explain the matter ?
L. To be sure —it seems contradictory ; but I can assure you,
Sir, I have repeatedly heard my patients say they produce such
effects.
A. G. Then you have given your medical opinion to the court,
not founded on scientific deduction, but based on the mere asser-
tion of those who M-'ere not quite sober ; for such appears to have
been the general character of your patients. The court will know
what value to attach to your testimony.
L. (Much confused.) Why!—Why!—l a—l a—speak from
observation.
A. G. I now ask your opinion as a medical man, would not
the use of malt-liquor produce dyspepsia, the liver complaint, and
asthma ?
L. Yes, Sir ; I believe it would.
A. G. And yet you have, in your professional visits to Mr.
Guzzle’s family, recommended the very thing for a remedy, which
you now say will produce the complaint. Thus, Sir, you have
invalidated your own testimony. You have abundantly satisfied
the court that your evidence will only tend to the conviction of
the prisoner ; and if this exposure should preserve the public from
the injury which they have too long sustained from unskilful
practitioners, it will be cause for thankfulness. You may retire.


Fifth Witness. —Sapphira Womaker: [Very stout; and gaudily
attired, and with difficulty pressing into the witness box.)
Sensual. Make way for that lady. I presume, Mrs. Womaker,
you know my client, Mr. Barleycorn ?
W. ( Sighing for breath.) 0 dear ! let me get my breath ;
yes, Sir, I know Mr. Barleycorn—poor Mr. Barleycorn !
Sen. You have heard, Mrs. Womaker, what has been said by
the witnesses on the other side ?
W. ( Interrupting .) Heard ! indeed I have, Sir ; did you ever
hear such things before ? there must be a ’ spiracy against Mr.
Barleycorn. And then, Sir. it makes mention of my name' —how
dare they do such things ?
Sen. Pray, Ma’am, have you ever known anything detrimen-
tal to Mr. Barleycorn’s character in your long acquaintance with
him ?
W. Detrimental to Mr. Barleycorn ! No such thing ! Oh
how shocking ! Why, Mr. Barleycorn is the most ’ ponsibie gen-
tleman who visits my house; and you know, Sir, my house is
most respectable, and you have—
Sen. ( Interrupting Mrs. W., fearing she might he telling the
scenes and secrets of the bar parlour. ) Yon need not trouble your-
self to enter into any particulars, Ma’am. Do you know any-
thing of Mr. Barleycorn’s practice as a medical gentleman.
yf. O dear me ! yes, Sir. You know, Sir, he is very populous
as a medical gentleman. The ladies are very fond of him. Mrs.
Sly had “ such a sinking ” the other day, and she took a glass or
two of Mr. Barleycorn’s Essence, and she was quite revived. It
is most wonderful how soon Mr. Barleycorn’s Essence cures the
ladies. And then, Sir, you know how that, for suckling, Mr.
Barleycorn’s pale brown is the best thing imaginable. You re-
member how Mrs. Sensual —
Sen. ( Hastily interrupting Mrs. W.) Thank you, Ma’am, that
will be quite satisfactory, and enough on that point.
W. [Putting in.) Why, yes, Sir, I need not tell you of these
things, because you are well acquainted with them. I suppose,
Sir, I shall have'the pleasure of your company to-night. [Sensual
aside— Confound the woman, she will be getting me into a scrape.)
Perhaps, Ma’am, I may have to attend some business meeting at
your house.
Sen. I have no more questions to propose to you.
W. Thank you, Sir ; you are very kind. It will always give
me pleasure to serve you. ( Full of compliment and politeness, is
about to retire, when the Attorney-General calls her attention.)
Attorney-General.- —You need not retire, Mrs. Womaker, I have
a few questions to propose to you.
W. [lnterrupting the A. G. and politely bowing, with the usual
rub of the hands, and assuming an air of consequence.) To be sure,
Sir, I shall be happy to attend to you.
A. G. [Edging in.) Just allow me to ask you a question,
W. [Hastily.) Half-a-dozen, if you please, Sir; especially if
they are about Mr. Barleycorn—poor Mr. Barleycorn.


A. G. Really, Ma’am ! yon must not interrupt me in this
way.
W. {Again putting in a word.) Certainly not, Sir. I beg
your pardon. You see, Sir, I am so interested in Mr. Barley-
corn’s case, that I am anxious to speak a word for him.
A. G. Will you pay attention to me ?
W. You shall have my best attentions, Sir ; (imagining herself
in her own bar;) anything my house can afford. I have good
accommodations, and my wines are excellent.
A. G. ( Vehemently. ) What a tongue !
W. Tongue, Sir ! 0 yes ; I have some excellent tongues just
imported—beautifully smoked !
A. G. {Sharply.) Mrs. Womaker.
W. Yes, Sir; I’s Mrs. Womaker.
A. G. You say you know the prisoner at the bar.
W, I suppose you mean Mr. Barleycorn—l know Mr. Barley-
corn !
A. G. He frequented your house ?
W. O yes, Sir, daily.
A. G. And he often took company with him ?
W. Yes, Sir ; good company.
A. G. Ho you remember Mr. Poverty, one of his com-
panions ?
W. O dear me, yes ; poor Mr. Poverty ! he died suddenly:
but he is gone to rest; and his poor wife and children—how I
pity them.
A. G. Pity, Ma’am ! you might weep over your victims ; but
the tender mercies of a landlady are cruel! Pray, Ma’am, how
did Mr. Poverty’s death happen ?
Sen. {Rising, and addressing the Judge.) My Lord, I object
to that question.
A. G. The question, my Lord, is legitimate. The circum-
stances of Mr. Poverty’s death are evidence.
Chief Justice. You are at liberty to proceed with your inqui-
ries on that point.
A. G. Mrs. Womaker, you remember the quarrel between Mr.
Poverty and the prisoner ?
W. {Now tamed down, and somewhat confused.) Yes, they
had a little dispute.
A. G. A little dispute ! You saw them fight; and you stood
by when the prisoner knocked down Mr. Poverty ?
W. O dear me ! Mr. Poverty fell down.
A. G. You mean he was struck to the ground by the prisoner;
and he never spoke again ; but he was carried home and died the
same night. Was it not so? Now mind how you answer that
question.
W. {Much confused.) 0 dear me ! {Apart—what shall I say ?)
A. G. Now, Ma’am, your answer ?
W, {Perplexed.) You will perhaps excuse me, Sir. {Softly.)
Be so kind as to ask me some other question.
A. G. No, Ma’am, I demand a plain answer to ray question.
W. Well, if I must — {reluctantly.) —l suppose it was so.


A. G. And this you know, Ma’am, is not the only death
which has happened, by the hands of the prisoner, at your house.
The names of Spendthrift and Bankrupt will not be forgotten.
Mr. Melancholy, and Cut-throat, with Miss Suicide, received the
fatal draught at your hands.
W. Oh! dear, murder ! (Almost in hysterics.) Do you say
I murdered them ?
A. G. You and the pi’isoner will be found accomplices, I
have not done with Mr. Boverty’s case yet. Do you remember
giving him some alcohol just before the prisoner struck the fatal
blow ?
W. He asked me for some.
A. G. And you gave it to him, although you had seen so
many cases, in which the prisoner took advantage of his victims,
after taking the poison at your hands. Pray, did you not expect
the prisoner would take advantage of him, while under the influ-
ence of alcohol ?
W. I must confess I had some fears, and I kindly cautioned
him.
A. G. What an anomaly. Kind caution in one hand, and
poison in the other, and thus you deal with your customers. You
had some fears that he would fall a victim ; and yet, you gave
him the poison. There needs no other evidence to convict you.
My Lord, I move for a bench-warrant to detain Mrs. Womaker as
an accomplice with the prisoner in the murder of Mr. Poverty.
Chief Justice. The warrant is granted. Mr. Sheriff will se-
cure Sapphira Womaker.
W. ( Dreadfully alarmed.) Oh dear ! what shall Ido ? I will
run away. (Attempting to go out of court, hut is caught by the
Sheriff's Officer.)
After the confusion had subsided,
The Counsel for the defence delivered the following address ;
Gentlemen of the July. —lnclosing the defence of my client,
I have to remind you that Mr. Barleycorn has long had the sanc-
tion of the statute law for the preparing of his beverages; and
that if any of the evils named by the opposite evidence have oc-
curred, they are to be attributed to inattention to my client’s
‘moderation directions, and not to be charged upon him. My
client still enjoys the sympathy and confidence of the most re-
spectable part of society. Medical gentlemen, Ministers of the
Gospel, and others, are his constant companions ; and the most
virtuous females are deeply interested in his welfare. And is it
possible, gentlemen, that you can credit the statements made by
the opposite witnesses ? Ido not feel disposed to refer to the de-
tail of evidence, for I must confess it is rather perplexing ; but I
do entreat you, compassionately, to consider the case, and’ allow
me to indulge the hope that you will find a verdict of not guilty.
Closing Address of the Attorney-General:—
Gentlemen of the They.— You have a duty of vast import-
ance to perform this day in reference to the prisoner at the bar,


and the public at large ; the interest of the latter being most
seriously injured by the practices of the prisoner. There can be
no doubt on your minds as to the guilt of the prisoner, after the
evidence adduced ; every count has been clearly proved, and even
confirmed by the very witnesses brought forward oh the other
side, while those witnesses are now being detained by warrant as
accomplices with the prisoner. The case is too clear to need an-
other word from me. I will leave it in your hands, in perfect
confidence that you will, upon the whole indictment, find a ver-
dict of guilty against the prisoner.
The Chief Justice then proceeded to give the charge to the jury.
Gentlemen of the Jury. — lt will not be necessary that I
should detain you by entering into detail. The various counts in
the indictment have been plainly spoken to by the several wit-
nesses, and I do not consider it needful for me to refer to any
particular points of law to aid you in determining the precise
state of the case. The charges against the prisoner have been
definitely stated, and clearly substantiated, by evidence, which
the witnesses for the defence have confirmed, rather than invali-
dated. I have, therefore, only to say, that you will consider the
question, and give your verdict of guilty or not guilty free from
any bias. If there should possibly be a doubt on your minds on
any point, you will give the prisoner the advantage of such
doubt. You will regard the prisoner in his individual character,
apart from any other person with whom he may have neen associ-
ated; and according to law and evidence you will give your ver-
dict. Impartiality and firmness, without any reference to per-
sonal consequences, are necessary to the faithful discharge of the
duty devolving upon you, I now commit the fate of the prisoner
to you.
The jury, without retiring, after a few minutes’ deliberation,
found the prisoner GUILTY on the whole indictment. (Here
the prisoner fainted away, but was soon restored. )
The Lord Chief Justice addressing himself to the prisoner :
You have heard the verdict of the Jury. Have you any
reasons to assign why the extreme sentence of the law should not
be passed upon you ?
John Barleycorn (much agitated) spoke to the following effect; —
Mv Lord, I still urge my plea of not guilty. If I have been
associated with any of the evil deeds named, it is because I have
been dragged into them by others, and never of my own free will.
I find I am made the victim of the Devil’s agents, the Maltster,
Brewer, and Publican. No injury would have been done if they
would have left me alone with my relatives in the country, where
I spent my early days in the green fields, and played with my
cousins, Bye, Wheat, and Oats, There we were innocent and
happy under our little sheds in the stack-yard; but when I went


to Mr. Spoilgood’s school, at Sprout Hill, I was treated with great
cruelty, and made very bad. I was then bound apprentice to Mr.
Mashtub, and he trained me up in vice, and sent me out on his
errands, which, I confess, were disgraceful; but I did my master’s
bidding. ‘The guilt, then, lies with those who have made me
their victim. I was always dragged into company ; and, even
there, I should have been as still and quiet as any one, but the
people would not let me alone. I have many a time gone down
into the cellar, and hid myself in a cask, and I should have been
there now, as harmless as any body, but they dragged me
out, and compelled me to fight. My Lord, you might as con-
sistently pass a sentence upon a post, because some silly man had
run his head against it, and knocked out the few brains he had
in it. I have kept' company with the most respectable people in the
land, and there are many ministers of the Gospel who would have
appeared in court in my behalf, but they did not like to be seen
in public. If, then, lam become the victim of avaricious men, *1
crave, my Lord, the clemency of a merciful judge, into whose
hands I now commit myself.
The Chief Justice then proceeded to pronounce the following sen-
tence upon the prisoner ;
John Barleycorn, alias Strong Brink, after a fair and impartial
trial, you have been convicted of the most atrocious crimes which
have stained the pages of history, the recapitulation of which
would only tend more deeply to wound the feelings of the humane.
You have pursued, with unabated vigor, your work of devastation,
despoiling what is fair and lovely in creation, desolating the
Churches of the living God, depriving many of the highest enjoy-
ment and brightest hopes of eternal life, and consigning your vic-
tims to the poorhouse, madhouse, gallows, and finally to endless
woe. Your crimes are not mitigated by one single redeeming
quality : you cannot, therefore, expect mercy to be shown, or jus-
tice to be delayed.
The sentence which I, as the presiding officer of public opinion,
now pass upon you is—
1st —That all your property be confiscated and disposed of in
the following way : —All Malt-kilns and Brewhouses to be given
to the Temperance Society for the purpose of erecting therewith
Temperance Halls. One sixth of the Inns, Public-houses, Beer-
shops, &c., &c., to be given to the same Society, for conversion
into Temperance Hotels ; and the other five-sixths to be sold,
after the drink has been destroyed, and the proceeds to be equally
divided to the following objects ; —One fourth to the cause of
Christ; one fourth to the Temperance Societies, to defray the ex-
penses in erecting the Halls, and fitting up the Hotels ; one fourth
to the distressed families who have suffered through your drinks;
and one fourth to the reduction of the national debt.
2nd—That yon be taken hence, to the place from which you
came, to be prepared for immediate execution, and that you be
committed to the flames in this court.
