

ri3
TRICHOLOGY:
A STUDY OF
BALDNESS & FALLING HAIR
Dr. ALFRED NEALE,
Formerly Physician to the Hospital for Skin, Cancer and Scrofula,
Manchester.
Author of “Eczema," “Facts about the Skin,'’ “The Skin and
its Disfigurements,” “ Common Sense about Skin Diseases,”
" Consumption and Open Air Treatment.”
PRICE SIXPENCE.
COPYRIGHT.
TURNER AND HENDERSON.
1900.




TRICHOLOGY:
A STUDY OF BALDNESS AND FALLING HAIR.




TRICHOLOGY:
A STUDY OF
BALDNESS & FALLING HAIR.
Dr. ALFRED NEALE,
Formerly Physician to the Hospital for Skin, Cancer and Scrofula,
Manchester.
Author of “Eczema," “Facts about the Skin,'’ “ The Skin and
its Disfigurements,” “ Common Sense about Skin Diseases
“ Consumption and Open Air Tfeatment.”
PRICE SIXPENCE.
SpiUß:
TURNER AND HENDERSON.
1900.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
Hair Restorers—Reasons for Success and Failure-Restora-
tion lies in Scalp, not in the Restorer —“ Roots Gone
CHAPTER 11.
Causing of Falling and Baldness—Senile Baldness—Senile
Baldness in the Young— lll-treatment of the Hair-
Cutting Close—Hats—Women’s Hair
CHAPTER 111.
Premature Baldness —Debility—Syphilis —Alopcecia Areata
Non-contagious and Contagious —Illustrative Case ...
CHAPTER IV.
Alopcecia Furfuracea the Commonest Cause of Bai.dness
Concerning Dandruff —How Hair becomes Thin —
Illustrative Cases


CHAPTER I.
Ox Hair Restorers.
Remedies for baldness are of very ancient date. A
remarkable case of a bald head regaining his hair
soon attracts attention, the remedy is patented,
largely used, found to be successful in only a casual
case here and there, and it soon lapses into oblivion,
to be dug out by the next generation, and sold under
a new name.
Starting with the assumption that a remedy
which would cure one case of baldness, not a meie sud-
den falling of hair due to sickness, must contain some
real element of value, I experimented with many
hair restorers of reputation, and finally concluded
that there were many drugs which would force hair
when the hair follicles were open and the sprouting
hair lay Just below ready to emerge. But I was look-
ing for something better than that. There was a
sufficiency of drugs to hand which would make grow-
ing hair grow quicker, but for those baldheads, oyer
whose polished scalp the experienced hairdresser
shakes his head, and says: “ The roots are gone,” all
the hair restorers were useless. Therefrom I recog-
nised that if I expected success it must come from the
scalp itself, and not as a mere effect of something
rubbed on. The scalp must be cultivated as care-
fully AS A GARDENER TILLS THE SOIL.


Working in this direction, I found roots existing’
where they were supposed to be entirely absent. I
could expose them and reconnect them with the outer
surface, make them unfold their contents, and shoot
up afresh. Not, of course, in luxuriance all at once,
but gradually, some here and there until the bald
appearance was well hidden, and, in fact, unnotice-
able, beyond that the hair was a little thin.
When the roots or hair follicles are really des-
troyed, as in the case of scarring of small-pox, or on
the sites of head wounds,' it is manifest that hair can-
not be grown. So in senile decay, where all the fat
of the scalp has been absorbed, and it only remains as
a thin membrane stretched drum-like on the bone,
there is little hope of producing any hair, as the
follicles, if present (as some are sure to be), will be
withered down to a mere skeleton. The most hopeful
cases to treat are of men from thirty to fifty, well-
nourished and young in every way excent for advanc-
ing baldness.


CHAPTER 11.
Baldness and Hair-ealling.
The conditions giving rise to baldness I class under
two separate beads as follows:
I. Arising from advance in life, known as Senile
Baldness.
11. Premature Baldness, wbicli takes its origin
in:
1. Debility after fevers.
2. Temporary paralysis of nerves controlling the
nutrition of patches of hair, Alopcbcia Areata.
3. A fungoid growth in the hair follicles, occur-
ring in patches, spreading by contagion, and affecting
not only the head hair, but also the beard, eyebrows,
and body generally. (Contagious Alopcecia Areata;.
4. Disease of the scalp, especially of the hair
follicles, and the hairs (the most frequent of all
CAUSES OF FALLING HAIR) AIOPCECIA FuRFURACEA,
wrongly termed Dandruff.
I. —Senile Baldness.
One does not expect the general reader to be interested
in anatomy. Suffice it here to say that a hair can be
compared to a single blade of grass, with a single
bulbous root in a pot (hair follicle), which is fur-
nished with a self-acting, greasing and feeding
apparatus (sebaceous gland), the whole being a living


organism. The hair cannot exist without the follicle,
nor either without the gland, although the gland
can get along very well without either, and,
indeed, does so, existing in most parts of the
body as numerous independent organs, which
serve the purpose of lubricating the skin.
These sebaceous glands can be always .seen on
any face with a lens, often with the naked eye,
where they are known familiarly as pores, and are
when out of order, designated blackheads and
pimples. Now the sebaceous glands are the origin
of the hairs. From them is developed the pot or
follicle, and at the bottom of it develops the hair.
When the follicle, with its containing hair is well
developed the gland becomes a mere accessory. When
the gland exists alone it is comparatively large, as its
use is to lubricate its share of the skin ; but when it is
combined with a hair follicle and has only to lubricate
the hair it is smaller, in fact, a mere appendage. On
the head and other hairy parts the hair is the largest
third of the whole organ, the follicle comes next, and
the gland is comparatively small, being attached at the
side of the follicle, its shape resembling a few fingers
of a glove, the hollow being filled with its greasy
secretion (the sebum), which feeds and keeps soft the
hair. This leads to a clear comprehension of how
baldness is brought about. The case then stands
thus: —The hair to grow freelv must have plenty of
room in the follicle, the sebum must flow easily from
the gland, and the blood supply of the scalp, from
which the gland in its turn draws its nourishment.


must be unstinted. The contrary of any of these
conditions means deficient growth of hair. In ex-
treme old age, the heart loses its energy, the arteries
get harder, the blood supply of the whole body is
reduced in quality, the muscles get smaller from
want of use, and every part loses weight. The hair
follicles and glands, from which the hair has probably
long dropped, join in the general shrinkage, and
become mere threads. No longer could their vitality
be restored, still less their power of reproducing new
hair. Such is a picture of genuine senile baldness*
natural decay of hair and follicles. But such a
picture does not cover the man of middle age, whose
body is vigorous, whose circulation is good, and whose
beard is full.
You cannot call him an old man, nor say that his
hair has gone from advancing age. As a matter of
fact, there are unlimited cases of baldness after fifty,
where the hair follicles are present, in diminished
number may be (as organs will atrophy when
not used) but still there, and able to shoot
up if they only had the chance. The gland
is there, the follicle is there, even a hair
may be present, thin and small, but still
evident, but here comes the real reason of the
baldness. The follicle has lost its communication
with the outer surface of the scalp, no longer a “ pore”"
containing a flourishing hair with its root in the skin
and its shaft in the light, it exists buried in the skin*
a curled up ball, its path to the air cut off like a bulb
under an asphalt pavement. If to the head ot a man


of thirty we apply some conditions which will gradu-
ally, however slowly, strangle individual hairs, and
then obstruct the pore through which its successor
might have emerged (for a hair follicle can grow more
than one hair), then by the time he is forty he finds
his hair getting thin and himself fairly on the way to
join the baldheads, while his body has the vigour of
youth. Now, these conditions exist as an everyday
occurrence, and account for every case of early bald-
ness where disease and heredity have been eliminated.
They arise entirely from the sebaceous glands. In
consequence of the ill-treatment to which men sub-
ject their hair, the somewhat liquid contents
of the glands thicken, the debris of their living cells,
which in health undergo decay and renewal, cannot
get removed, being entangled in the viscid fluid of the
glands. The gland goes on adding to its contents,
which do not escape as fast as produced ; the gland
gets overful, its contents bulge into the follicle, which
is also overful, the contents dry at the margin, choke
up the mouth of the follicle, and strangle the hair;
the follicle and gland, by internal pressure, lose their
shape, the external opening is obliterated, the follicle
and gland entirely shut off from the surface of the
scalp. Although the hairs of the head may be un-
numbered, such a process continually going on will in
five to ten years produce a baldness that well simu-
lates old age. The sapient hairdresser looks at it
and pronounces the roots “ gone.” They are not
gone; they are in the condition of roots under an
asphalt pavement, lacking, however, that mighty


force by which a tree root will split and upheave such
a pavement. They are living seeds, capable of being
sought for and uncovered, by the hair gardener, who
knows how to look for them, free them from their
bondage, and make them fruitful once more. Of
course they may be left too long to grow again, even
under a fostering hand, as the tissues around are
always exerting a detrimental pressure on organs gone
out of use, yet it is a fact that these bodies may be
dissected from the scalp of extreme old age, whose
baldness has preceded death by many years. It is
quite possible that before long it will be proved that
the starting point of hardening and blocking of the
glands will eventually be traced to the entrance of a
minute living germ from without. When that is
proved it will only be a matter of mere interest, not of
any value to the practical physician, nevertheless I
mention it because it serves to throw light on the
words used above attributing baldness to the “ ill-
treatment to which men subject their hair.” I say
men advisedly, because it is well known that while
women suffer from baldness, it is to an insignificant
degree compared with men. Women do not ill-trear,
their hair by cutting it short, exposing all
that part of the scalp which intervenes between
the hairs to the dust of the world; neither
do they wear hats which, holding on by their
contraction, constrict the blood supply to their
hair, and deprive the hair of light and air.
They weave it into loose coils, which, while serving as
a filter, allow the air to freelv circulate; their hats


are mere ornaments, held on with a pin. They know
the ill effect of dragging the hair tight, and fixing it
with pins, though they may not be aware that the
same ill effects are a result of dragging the hair roots
too close up to the surface, and so kinking the canal
and obstructing the flow of sebum. Cutting the hair
too short, and wearing hats are the beginning of bald-
ness. Washing the head, to which men attribute the
loss of their hair is of no account. The facial and
body hair grows no less in spite of the daily bath. But
men wear their hats in season and out of season.
Reallv a hat is of no service except in the sun and the
rain, nor is there any reason why a man should be
regarded as an escaped lunatic if he chooses to walk
down the street without his head-gear. However,
fashion has decreed both hats and short hair, and it is
something to know that, notwithstanding such disa-
bilities, science can still come to the rescue and retain,
if they choose, the hair of the growing generation,
while greatly aiding those who are losing or have lost
their hair before their time.
I hope I have made it quite clear that what is
called senile decay of hair is often nothing of the sort.
In the past, men getting bald were said to be getting
old. To-day we have so many examples of men
getting bald who are in the prime of their years that
it is about time to pull up and see if this state of things
cannot be improved. In the succeeding chapters I
propose to consider baldness arising from other condi-
tions of the scalp.


CHAPTER 111.
11. Premature Baldness.
1. From General Debility.—The first form is
that which ensues from fevers such as typhoid,
small-pox, scarlet fever, &c. Here the nourish-
ment of the whole body is at low tide, and, as
a sequence, the organs essential to life will squeeze all
the nutriment they can get out of the blood to
the detriment of ornamental additions, among
which the hair ranks. It begins to fall, and that
rapidly, until the head may be as bare as a billiard
ball. However, there is no change of substance in the
hair follicles—that is no disease, the follicles are
shrunken and withered from lack of sufficient food.
Once the body regains its strength the hair follicles
partake of the better order of things, the hair shoots
up and gains ground as rapidly as it had previously
lost it. If convalescence be over-delayed, the follicles
are unable to recover themselves, and so the hair
be permanently lost. r Io avoid such a catas-
trophe it is as well to use some stimulating lotion,
which will assist the hair to grow. Nothing special is
needed for the purpose. The stimulation is not
required for the hair itself, but for the skin which
carries the follicles. Any stimulant which induces a
larger flow of blood in the skin brings indirectly a


larger share of nourishment to the hair. The need is
met by such remedies as follow:
Mustard, a teaspoonful,
Olive oil, one ounce.
Stir well and rub on scalp twice daily; or,
Tincture of cantharides, one teaspoonful,
Olive oil, one ounce.
Directions as last.
Under the use of these remedies the hair
sprouts as if by magic, but it must not
thereby be inferred that they will make hair
grow under other circumstances. In the afore-
said condition follicles are ready for theii
hair-producing work, which, with the slightest assist-
ance they will do. The same remedies in other
conditions of hair falling may do positive harm.
Many of the advertised hair remedies contain cantha-
rides in some form. The clients who use it for thin
hair after exhausting sickness are powerfully im-
pressed with the results. Others to whom it is recom-
mended only find their trouble aggravated. It is
impossible to find a drug which will force hair in all
those cases where hair is waiting to be forced. Each
case must be treated on its merits, or failure will
ensue.
In Syphilis there are two periods when the hair
may suffer, the first occurring in the earliest stage
after infection, even before any eruption of the skin is
manifest. The hair becomes drier than natural, and
easily breaks. A slight pull will take out a handful.
Recovery almost invariably follows appropriate


treatment, directed not so much to the hair as to the
constitutional condition. Baldness appearing in the
third stage of syphilis is of a more serious nature,
being due to disease of the parts around, such as the
membrane which nourishes the skull bones, or in the
nerves supplying the scalp, and other parts furnished
with hair. Indeed, I have several times seen the hair
all over the body, the eyebrows, eyelashes, &c., disap-
pear entirely as a result of tertiary syphilis.
No certain prognosis of recovery can then be
made, although the condition may not be altogether
hopeless.
2 and 3.— Eapid Baldness in Well-defined Circu-
lar Patches, or Alotcecia, Areata, Contagious
and Non-Contagious.
These two varieties of baldness may well be con-
sidered together as the appearances in both cases are,
to the naked eye, absolutely identical. In both the
process occurs very rapidly. There is no gradual
falling out of hairs, but pretty suddenly a man may
notice that he has a circular patch of baldness as big
as a sixpence or a penny. The spot is as smooth as
ivory, white and shining, no scales upon it, and differ-
ing nothing in sensation from the parts around.
There is no pain nor itching, simply an inexplicable
loss of hair in a patch, the unaffected parts being as
luxurious as ever. Then 4he hair just at the mar-
gin of the patch gets loose, and the patch grows bigger.
Other patches begin the same way. Soon they
coalesce, and irregular-shaped patches result. These


voids in the hair produce a very unsightly effect, the
unprofessional eye usually setting them down as
RINGWORM, FROM WHICH THEY TOTALLY DIFFER. It is
a common kind of baldness. I noticed three cases in
one day in Sydney tramcars, all of course men, as
women can hide them for a longer period.
The difference in the two varieties lies not in their
appearance, but in the fact that one is contagious,
the other not so. Even to-day many medical men
confound the two together. Both are called in the
text-books by the same name —alopcecia areata. The
non-contagious form mostly confines itself to the
head, but not necessarily so. Its cause is assigned to
loss of use in the nerve fibrils which govern the blood
supply of the patch of hair—in fact a temporary
paralysis, occurring in persons over-worked or living
under other unhealthy conditions. It affects adults
and children.
While due to lack of nerve power, this
kind of baldness is a very different thing
from that which is seen after injury to the
trunk of some particular nerve. For instance,
a heavy blow on the scalp may be followed
by baldness, either by destroying a number
of hair follicles, or by so injuring a nerve that the hair
refuses to grow along a regular track. The shape of
the patch is never so oval nor so clearly defined as in
alopoecia, the hair does not fall out in the same way,
nor is it even curable. Excess in living, as well as
the opposite, deprivation of sleep and food both con-
tribute their share to cases of nervous baldness. More


recently the wonderful X-rays have been discovered
to possess the power of temporarily destroying hair.
The contagious form (Alopcecia Areata Conta-
giosa) spreads with even more rapidity than the
nervous form, also more extensively. It seldom
uonfines itself to the head. After a few disc
shapes of baldness have appeared on the scalp,
it may be noticed that the hair of one
eyebrow is a little thin in one spot. A few
days more and half the eyebrow is gone, while
the other is commencing to be attacked, and patches
are forming in the whiskers and beard. Its conta-
giousness, which was long doubted, has been
thoroughly established by the records of epidemics
among Trench soldiers in certain barracks. In a
skin practice of many years I have met with a number
■of cases ascribable to no other cause but contagion.
Now both these varieties of baldness are quite curable.
Some may even go through the process of disease and
repair without the aid of any remedies, as if the
fungus destroying the hair had worked itself out or
been overcome by the natural forces of the individual
attacked. There is, however, no safety in trusting to
nature to effect a cure; for nature has as much
interest in preserving the vitality of a fungus
as in protecting the life of a human being,
and cares nothing which wins in the
struggle for existence. That is where the
physician comes in. His art, added to the natural
vigour, overcomes the enemy, the proportion of cures
being so great that it is the rarest possible thing to


find a case of incurable alopoecia. The time the cure
takes is somewhat variable, extending over a period
embracing from six months to two years. In the
contagious form the hair commences to grow imme-
diately the fungus in the follicle is destroyed. It
may be growing anew in a follicle side by side with
one still diseased. When the hairs are coming again
the first appearance is that of a woolly down almost
colourless. The down may come off before it is
replaced by a more natural growth, but usually the
down itself becomes thicker and stronger, takes on a
colour, and assimilates itself to the rest of the hair.
Pretty strong applications must be used at times for
the destruction of the fungus in contagious baldness.
Their application must be left to the experienced
physician, or the action may be overdone, the end
being defeated by too much energy. Clients
frequently ask me to put on a double dose to ‘‘ kill the
thing quicker,” unknowing that their anxiety to
destroy the fungus may result in destroying the hair
follicle.
Illustrative Cases
Mr. Gi. E., age 48, consulted me in May, 1897.
On the back and side of his head was a bald
patch as large as the top of a small teacup. It
had lasted four months, growing from a
spot no bigger than a threepenny bit, which his
wife had suddenly discovered. He had interviewed
several hairdressers, and been under his family
doctor for two months without improvement. I


found on the scalp three other small patches of bald-
ness just commencing.
In one month after treatment the hair had ceased
to fall, and a light down began to show in the centre of
the big patch. Gradually the down thickened to hair,
took on the normal colour and grew stronger. In all,
I had to treat him for six months, the latter
part of the time less for active treatment, than
for the satisfaction of certainty, as in the course
of treatment several other new patches appeared,
which I believe I traced to a skull cap, which he
casually wore, and which had been overlooked when
the hair brushes, hats, &c., had been overhauled for
disinfection.
Case 11. (I pick these out, not from any special
features, but as common illustrations) Avas a bank
clerk. In him the baldness consisted of several
patches not bigger than a sixpence. He had endured
them for over a year. As the older patches recovered
and hair grew on them, fresh spots of baldness would
break out. What brought him to me was the bald-
ness attacking both eyebrows simultaneously, other-
wise he had contented himself with collecting all the
different varieties of washes warranted to make the
hair grow, nor had he regarded the baldness as a hair
disease at all. For eight months I had him under
treatment, at first twice a week, then as the hair ceased
to fall and no fresh patches of baldness appeared I
only saw him at long intervals. It is over a year noAv
since his hair grew freely, and there was no need of
treatment.


CHAPTER IY.
Premature Baldness (Continued).
4.—From disease of the skin, especially of the hair
and hair follicles. This part of my subject is
the one which ought to interest most people, as it is
THE COMMONEST PREVENTABLE FORM OF BALDNESS,,
which makes the young and middle-aged man look
old before his time.
What has that to do with disease of the skin P
some may ask. “ Everything,” I reply, “ although
you may not have known it.” Skin disease is not
necessarily something horrible to look at or to men-
tion. His-Ease is simply something leading us dowm
hill, which is not old age, and may be no more repul-
sive than old age.
The study of the skin, the soil in which the hair
grows, must have due weight in the consider-
ation of hair disease. The follicle, or pot,
from which springs the hair, is itself a por-
tion of the skin, having undergone modifi-
cations to adapt it to its present use. Around
it the skin vessels branch and bring it nourishment,
while, connected with them, are threads of nerves
which govern the supply of blood in the vessels. Any
change in the usual appearance or the functions of
these parts implies disease, whether it is manifest on
the surface or hidden from sight after the manner of


other internal organs. Thus it is the business of a
physician, who makes the hair a study, to gain a
knowledge of these changes before they have time to
become irreparable.
Concerning Dandruff or Scurf.
This is a vague, loose term, generally taken by
people to mean a disease of the scalp producing scurf,
and involving loss of the hair. There are five well-
marked diseases of the scalp, all of which produce
scurf and thin the hair ; all of which require different
treatment. So that a person buying a lotion to cure
dandruff is buying something with which he proposes
to cure, not a disease, but a symptom which is common
to five different diseases. Such a proceeding is as if
one should buy a headache powder to cure typhoid,
measles, scarlet fever, and diabetes, on the ground
that a headache is a symptom common to them all.
The diseases that produce the symptom called dandruff
are—
1. Alopoecia furfuracea, the most frequent of all and
about to be described in full.
2. Seborrhoea, which means an over-production of
secretion from the oil glands of the hairs and a
consequent overflow on the head.
8. Eczema.
4. Psoriasis.
5. Erythema capilis, a dry, slightly irritating over-
production of skin scales on the head.


The skin disease which has real interest to those
getting prematurely bald is
ALOPGECIA FURFURACEA,
wrongly called dandruff. It does not necessarily show
on the scalp. It can, while the scalp is perfectly
clean, carry on its destructive work within the skin,
suffocating the hairs one by one. It is an affection of
the sebaceous glands, the automatic oil-cans attached
to each hair. There is no chance of overlooking it
when very pronounced, but I want to lay stress
on its prevalence without the appearance of much
scurf on the head. When thinning of the hair
progresses at an early age, say under 45, the first
thing a man should suspect is this mischievous
trouble at work in the sebaceous glands of the hair
follicles, and get it put right if he wants to keep his
hair on.
The progress of baldness from A. furfuracea is
much as follows. One notices for a year or two that
a good deal of hair .clings to the brush and comb.
Thinning is not noticed at first, as new iiajrs
continually replace the old. The new hairs are,
however, less thick and strong than the old ones,
and as the disease progresses he finds his hair thinner
to the touch, and cold is felt more easily in the head.
The hair does not fall all at once, in a definite bare
patch, as in alopoecia areata, nor does it affect the
whole scalp at once. A patch as big as three fingers
at the top of the head or the sides where the parting


usually comes is probably tbe first seat of the trouble.
It is there the hair thins, but before all has fallen off,
from the patch first affected the rest of the scalp is
gradually brought under the influence of the disease,
and the thinning becomes universal. During the
whole process from luxurious growth to actual
baldness there may have been no signs of disease of
the scalp visible to any one except a specialist, who
knows what to look for, and how to look for it. On
the other hand, and more commonly, the candidate for
baldness notices a little scurf on the special areas
pointed out, a scurf which, while not removed by
ordinary washing, will come away under the nail.
When pulled off thereby the scurf does not separate
right away, it traverses the length of a hair, coming
off like a ring gripping a rod, and if carefully handled
will show a projection at its base which corresponds
with an indentation in the scalp, the follicle itself.
This scurf is a mixture of scales from the thin inner
lining of the hair follicle and its attendant glands
also greasy matter, or sebum, the natural secretion
of the said glands, attached to the follicle. The
actual process is one of over-development in
the follicle of its lining membrane. Its scales
accumulate in the follicle, taking up room at the
expense of the hair, which is squeezed on all sides.
Then the oily secretion of the gland, which as a liquid
served to keep the hair lubricated, finds its exit
obstructed dries and hardens, still further increas-
ing the difficulties besetting the hair, which, having
no room to expand, naturally gets thin and emaciated.


both at its root in the follicle and in its shaft above the
surface.
When a scalp in such a condition is neglected in
the matter of brushing and washing the scurf accu-
mulates very rapidly, overflows from the follicle, gets
piled up on the scalp, it may be to the extent of
quarter or half-an-inch, when the patient is will-
ing to recognise that he has a skin disease,
obtains treatment and recovers. It is the care-
ful, cleanly man, with his regular shower
baths and free use of soap who keeps down
the superabundant discharge, whose accumulations
would soon convince him that something was wrong.
He it is who finds his hair gradually thinning, and has
not the least suspicion that the cause lies in a curable
condition of the scalp itself. He probably applies to
his hairdreser for something to take away the scurf.
Every hairdresser keeps such things, but they are a
complete delusion. Wliat such lotions do is to act a
trifle more energetically than soap. They remove the
external scurf quicker than soap does, but they do
NOT GET INTO THE FOLLICLE NOE, CONSEQUENTLY ERADI-
CATE the disease. By their cleansing and solvent
action, hair falling may receive a temporary check,
lulling the user into a false security.
There is no way by which a person untrained as a
general physician can successfully cope with such
cases. By a lucky hit only he may casually meet with
good results. Alopoecia furfuracea is a disease
depending so much on constitutional conditions that
any attempt to treat it as a purely local affair to be met


with by a wash like a sheep dip must be to court
failure.
Between the cases described of hair falling
without visible scalp disease, and those in which scalp
disease is very apparent, there is the medium condi-
tion where yellowish small scales are produced on the
head and drop on the shoulders, falling more freely
under the brush. They are cleaned off very readily
with soap and water or various lotions, but they still
form, and may be taken as evidence that the hair is
undergoing destruction. To simply clear them away
is not to cure the disease nor to help the hair to
recover itself.
Another very distinct complaint, also called
by that very loose term dandruff, exhibits
branny scales on the head. This particular disease,
erythema capitis, has always been confounded
with affections of the sebaceous glands. In
it the scales are of a bright silvery appear-
ance, absolutely dry and much smaller than
in other cases called dandruff. They contain a
certain amount of secretion from the sebaceous glands
adhering to them, but are mainly composed of scales
of scalp skin, and require different treatment from the
softer and moister variety. The sebum is an acci-
dental adjunct of the overgrowth of the skin binding
down and blocking the hair follicles, and preventing
exit of the hair, and so being equally conducive to
baldness.
The period of time during which hair falling
from alopoecia furfuracea may exist and yet recovery


ensue extends to about eight years. Up till then there
is every prospect, by careful treatment, of regain-
ing the hair. Its return will not be rapid. It must
follow the same course as its loss. The outer scalp
must be cleared of debris and the follicles emptied.
Then the hair roots, when they exist, and the
sebaceous glands must be stimulated. Any treatment
which does not embrace all these points will be time
and money thrown away. If the roots remain even
in an atrophied form they are capable of stimulation.
The first appearance promising a cure is not a mere
clearing away of the scurf, but an increase in the
number of follicles on the surface, a suppleness of the
skin and then a growth of fine points of hair, not all
over, here and there, indicating that the follicles are
free. Gradually the number of new hairs increases,
unnoticeable day by day, but evident enough when
compared with the condition of a few months before.
A couple of years may elapse before follicles cease to
■open up and add to the general growth.
Illustrative Cases.
Case I.
Mr. R., age 42, consulted me in 1898, about
some passing ailment, and casually mentioned
that he thought his hair was falling. I examined
the scalp and found that individual hairs yielded to a
slight pull, and that the newer hairs were thinner and
slighter in structure than the old. There was no
apparent scurf. In scraping here and there, I un-
earthed a few buried follicles, whose contents when


squeezed out showed traces of atrophied hair mixed
with sebaceous matter. Staining the mouths of the
follicles showed their scanty numbers. After
enabling the scalp to throw off its outer layer rapidly,
a reapplication of the staining displayed an increase
in the number of follicles, which I proceeded to empty
of their waste products before applying anything to
stimulate the growth of the hair. Two months
treatment were rewarded by the appearance of new
hairs growing freely. The old ones became firmer in
their follicles and ceased to fall even with a fair pull.
Though two years older at the time I write, his aspect,
as regards the hair, is more juvenile than it has been
for years.
Case 11.
A second case was a marked condition of scalp
disease in a young man who consulted me primarily
for the disease which he said was destroying
all his hair. The scalp presented between its
close-cropped hair a layer of shining scales
overlapping a softer layer, but all so dense
that it required more than the efforts of a finger
nail to exhibit the skin below. He said that he had
“ dandruff ” for years, but that about twelve months
since he answered the advertisement of a hair restorer,
which he had ever since used with the present result.
I examined the “ hair restorer.” It was a useful
stimulating lotion, and would have done well for
rubbing on his chest if he had bronchitis, but was so
little suitable for the condition of the scalp that it had
only aggravated the trouble.


After working at his scalp for six weeks, I got it
into a healthy condition. It was clean; the hair
ceased to fall, and a new growth was evident all over.
The follicles were not destroyed, merely choked, and
immediately the obstacles were removed allowed the
hair to spring up.
Case 111.
Mrs. M. Y., 45, came under treatment for
alopoecia areata, having lost hair over two patches,
the largest measuring two inches across. Treatment
having restored the hair, she asked me if I could do
anything for the hair over the temples, where it was
almost bald, not from disease, but from advancing life.
The methods I have since practised with success, and
which I believe are absolutely new as a means of
producing hair, were then only floating in my mind
as an untried theory. However, without promising,
or even anticipating much good result, my patient was
equally pleased with myself to find that a few months
treatment had the desired effect. The hair grew, not
in abundance, but quite sufficiently to obviate any
appearance of baldness.




1508
Turner and Henderson,
SYDNEY.
&l 6UO
reu-f
00062563
PRINTERS, LITHOGRAPHERS AND STATIONERS,
254 George Street,
