

: ■ . ■ ■ i—-
Sydney: W A. Guiuck, Government Printer.—l9o9.


¥F you are going to have a good house erected, you should
* pay as much attention to the inside as to the exterior.
Good fittings in a home make for comfort and content,
and it pays you well to specify in your contract that only
Consider first-class fixtures be put in.
For over half a century we have been engaged in the
Voiir — supply of builders’ materials, and that experience helps us
considerably to satisfy our customers.
Comfort Quality is the keynote of all our goods, and you practise
the truest economy when you place your orders with us.
When Steel Ceilings, Marble and Art Wood Mantelpieces,
Fireplaces, Gas Fittings, and Sanitary Ware, are a few of
ilOUSC our s P ec * a^ties.
HI Come in and see them at onr Show-rooms, or ring up No. 4 or 44«0,
Building asking our representative to wait on you with full particulars.
—__J G. E. Crane & Sons, Lm,
Hoad Office and Show-rooms:
33-35 PITT-ST,, CIRCULAR QUAY, SYDNEY.


•%* . . '
The “Sydney” State
REGENT-ST., SYDNEY. Tel. 1524
(ARTHUR C. J. WOOD, Proprietor.)
OUR NEW MOTOR DRAG
Is being requisitioned by tourist
parties desirous of viewing the
beauty spots and places of inter-
est in and around Sydney in an
up-to-date, quick, inexpensive,
and comfortable manner
The Motor Drag is in charge of
an experienced chauffeur-
Estimates and all information
supplied on application
The “Sydney” Stables are re-
plete with handsome Wedding
Carriages, Drags, Broughams,
Buggies, &c., which are all avail-
able at moderate charges.
THE SYDNEY STABLES,
REGENT-STREET, SYDNEY. Tel. 1521
Our Head Office —810 GEORGE-ST.,
Sydney, Tel. 726—may also be runs ui
for inquiries.


NEW HOME \'-m
Have Claims which SEWING MACHINES „ llll
must force themselves Jw
on your consideration. \
Do you fully realize the advantages of the self-tlireading BBT
open-end cylinder Shuttle, the absolutely self-setting Needle,
the flat-spring Tension, the double Feed (alike on both sides -vv- --
of the Needle), and the Ball Bearings—combined with finest
materials and workmanship ? ii •’ * M I ’ BpfEI P|^~jpMHBppH||BI
Style No. 14 (as illustrated) £9 9s. Cash, .Til ] I [ffSa./
*10 10s. on Terms. Other Treadle Styles from i||||||l =81^
Call or Write for our Illustrated Price List,
which will be given or mailed you Free ! /N'i 1
Terms, if required, and old machines allowed for. SLJawIi M pB^I
Genuine Needles and Parts for, and Repairs jl
JTw. JOHNSTON & CO., 746 S5S-&


Telephones—
Established,
1889.
T
M. Longshaw,
Central 3231
City ... 1706
Practical
Locksmith, &c., ♦ ♦
15
v LOCK AND KEY I
j
//" LJr/ /s'**'
S\ IMPORTER N
w\\
vfwo
)o°
w
f/fk
3®
V
f
m i / i, t ,
\IV| 279 & 281 PITT-STREET,
sj
Vi\ (
A ) /
/ 1" it I
lima next school of arts, SYDNEY.
cnoi
22
>o
Yale Locks & Key Fitting a s P“ alit s
>1
4'
9§
HS
&
Full Stocks
Locksmiths’
OF
M ATERIALS.
♦ OUTDOOR WORK DONE. SAFES OPENED. PORTMANTEAUS REPAIRED.
5


A World’s Record.
NEARLY
2,000,000
SINGERS
Are Sold
Every Year.
Being more than the
Output of all other
Makes put together.
Wiiy is the Singer So Popular?
BECAUSE The Singer is admitted by all
Experts to be the World’s best
Machine.
BECAUSE The Singer does first-class work
for a lifetime.
BECAUSE The Singer is permanent, and you
can always depend on getting
parts and needles in the future.
BECAUSE So-called cheap machines wear out
and makers go out of business.
BECAUSE We look after our business and
We Sell for Cash or Easy Terms. . .
study the wants of our customers.
Old Machines Exchanged
♦♦♦ ♦ ♦
City Showrooms 1 Corner George & Market Sts., City.
I Corner George & Hay Sts., Haymarket.


mt\ [ga
Trips around Sydney
NEW SOUTH WALES.
ISSUED BY
THE GOVERNMENT TOURIST BUREAU,
CHALLIS HOUSE, MARTIN PLACE, SYDNEY.
PERCY HUNTER,
DIRECTOR.


ANGUS & COOTE,
4-92-4 George-street,
Corner Royal Arcade,
/Right opposite the Barometer, \ CVHA/rV
f Q.V. Markets, ) O#ISI* C. V m
AN x 8 Prism Binocular for £4 17s. 6d. seems almost too good to be
true, yet the “ Store where quality counts ” has made arrangements
with the manufacturers that have made this possible.
We absolutely guarantee that these glasses are superior in optical
qualities to the Ross, Goertz, or Busch binoculars; yet, here they are
ready for you at the low price of £4 17s. 6d., just about half what you
would pay for any of the above-named glasses.
They are eight times power, which means that any object seen eight
miles distant would appear to the eye as only one mile off.
With them you can readily make out the numbers of the horses and
colours of the jockeys when right away on the far side of the course, or
if you are out on the run you can see straggling sheep on a Hillside with-
out going miles in search of them.
These beautiful glasses weigh but 12-Jozs., are 4 in. long by 3J in. wide,
and have a separate -eye-piece adjustment and bending bar complete, with
solid leather sling case, for £4 17s. 6d., post free, to your home.
Prism Binoculars
Of the x 8 Zeiss Pattern
For £4 ]JS. 6d.
Our well-known reputation for straightforward description of goods stands solid behind the article
and if you are not absolutely satisfied that the glasses- agree with our description, you may return them
and have your money back. This particular glass we have supplied to the Naval and Military Forces.


INDEX.
PLACE. PAGE.: PLACE. PAGE' PLACE. PAGE. PLACE. 1 PAGE.
Abbotsford 31 Fig Tree Point 39 Parramatta River ... 41 Yarra Beach 35
Addison-road 34 Five Dock 31 Parramatta Orange 41 Yowie Bay 41
Athol Gardens 38 Flat Rock 39 Groves. Zoological Gardens ... 34
Balmain 31 Folly Point 39 Pearl Bay 39
Balmoral ... ... 38-39 George’s River... ... 40 Pittwater ... ... 42
Bantry Bay 39 Glebe 31 Port Hacking 41 PLACES TO SEE IN 11
Bay View 38 Gore Hill 36 Port Jackson Shipping... 42 SYDNEY.
Bellevue Hill 36 Gosford 43 Randwick 36 „ .
Berowra 43 Killarney 39 Rifle Range 35 H “ rbour , Pleasure 15
Bondi 35 Hawkesbury River ... 42 Rock Lily 38 ' t» ro . lin( «.
Botany 34-35 Kuring-gai Chase ... 43 Rodd Island 40 V Q P M
Brighton-le-Sands ... 40 Kurnell 35 Roseville Par/ 39 * ne inealres
Bronte .... 35 La Peroase 34 , St. Peters 34 Racecourses. ... 15
Bull! Pass 43 Lane Cove ... ... 36 Sandringham 40 unices ... lo
Buraneer Bay 41 Lane Cove River ... 4L Sans Souci 40 tSI? r SEIl?b* \n
Chatswood 37 Leichhardt 31 Shark Island 40 ine UOCKS 17
Cleveland-street ... 34 Lilli Pilli ... 41 South Head 36
Clontarf 39 Little Coogee 35 Spit, The 37-38 T - TT T ..
Clifton Gardens ... 38 Manly 37, 38,' Suspension Bridge ... 37 places luvi&ii in oi
Clarke Island 40 42 Sylvania 40 N.S.w.
Coogee 34-35 Middle Harbour ... 37-39 Tareel Point 41 Illawarra District ... 51
Cook’s River 34 Milson’s Point 36 Tom Ugly’s Point ... 40 Down South ... 51
Cowan 43 Moore Park 34 Tourist Cars 44 Out West 53
Cronulla Beach ... 41 Mosman 37 Tourist Observation 42 Northwards 53
Drummoyne 31 Narrabeen 38 Steamers.
Dulwich Hill 31 National Park 40 Watson’s Bay 36
Enmore 34 Nepean River 43 Waverley 35-36 MAPS.
Erskinevilie ... ... 34 Neutral Bay 37 Willoughby 37 Ferry Routes 25
Fig Tree 42 Newport 38 Woy Woy 43 Tramway Routes ... 27
1 : ! aS


I&
p *•
The Australia Hotel.
Tariff of Charges ,
(Inclusive of all Meals, Baths, and Attendance.)
Single Rooms 131- per Day, and upwards.
Double Rooms (Two Persons) . 26!- „ „
Hotel Porter in attendance For f urther Particulars, apply to —
to all Steamers and Trains. J. LIRE SMITH, MANAGER.


ffSL ~ r " r ~ r " ” *
SYDNEY RAILWAY STATION


A L,sfe=lik:e Photograph Bearing one’s Autograph
» 1 constitutes an
Eminently Suitable Gift for distribution amongst
Friends and Acquaintances made
During One’s Travels
Such a token of remembrance and regard can be effectively secured by acceptance of
either of the two following offers in
High Art Photography at Liberal Prices :
Twelve Choice Art Photographs including a beautiful enlargement framed in
specially imported decorative wood, daintily embellished, and measuring 17 x 15
inches, the whole complete, 15/6,
Twelve Cabinet Bromide Photographs imposed upon elaborate American
mounts, and, in addition, a beautiful enlargement, in three-ply veneer frame, measur-
ing 26 x 22 inches, tastefully illuminated with floral designs of artistic character, the
enlargement and frame together providing a handsome souvenir, complete 261-.
We claim to hold the largest and most varied stock of American and Continental mounts
in the Commonwealth, and we challenge contradiction of this statement.
THE GREAT TESLA STUDIOS, Queen Victoria Markets {_“ r e * e j' s *:) t Ceorgc-st.


Some Places io see in Sydney.
Government Tourist Bureau, Challis House, Sydney.
Collection of Tourist Views. All information free.
Town Hall and Organ, George and Park streets.
Botanic Gardens, Farm Cove (off Macquarie-street).
Public Library, Bent and Macquarie streets (10 a.m.-
10 p.m., Sundays 2 p.m.-6 p.m.).
Hyde Park—Captain Cook’s Statue.
The Domain —Art Gallery; Robert Burns’ Statue.
Mineralogical and Agricultural Museums, Dawes Point,
George-street North.
Australian Museum, College-street (10 a.m.-o p.m.,
Mondays excepted).
Technological Museum, Harris-street, Ultimo. Mon-
day-Saturday 1-5 p.m.; Sunday 2-S p.m., (Good
Friday and Christmas Day excepted).
♦Post Office —View from Tower, 2-4 p.m., Wednesdays,
fßoyal Mint, Macquarie-street.
tParliameut Buildings, Macquarie-street.
{Sydney Hospital, Macquarie-street.
♦Lighthouse, South Head (2-4 and 7-9.30 p.m., Sun-
days excepted).
Zoological Gardens, Moore Park.
Agricultural and Cricket Grounds, Moore Park.
♦University Buildings, Victoria Park, George-street
West.
JTramway Power-house, Harris-street, Ultimo.
♦Model School, Fort-street, Observatory Hill (9.30 a.m.
to 12.20 p.m., and 2 to 4 p.m.).
Technical College, and High School, Harris-street,
Ultimo.
♦Observatory (Mondays, 2-4 p.m.), Church Hill.
♦Government Printing Office (Tuesdays 11 a.m.-
4 p.m.), Bent and Phillip streets.
♦lndustrial School-ship “ Sobraon ” (Mondays and
Thursdays 9 a.m.-12 noon, 1-3 p.m.).
The Docks. (See page 17.)
Centennial Park via Oxford-street.
Queen Victoria Markets, George-street.
♦Metropolitan Fire Brigade, 213 Castlereagh-street
(Display every Wednesday at 3 p.m., weather
permitting).
* Visitors may obtain official permits for inspection at the Tourist Bureau. f Permits must be applied for on the spot.
; Application to be made to the Electrical Engineer, Hunter and Elizabeth Streets.


l&ae also page /> « >
SYDNEY FERRIES (LIMITED)
Regular Service of High-class Steamers from Nos. 1, 4,5, & 6 Jetties,
[Sae also page 42.]
CIRCULAR QUAY, SYDNEY,
PARRAMATTA RIVER,
NORTH SYDNEY,
LAVENDER BAY,
NEUTRAL BAY,
CREMORNE,
MOSMAN’S BAY,
ATHOL GARDENS,
CLIFTON GARDENS,
BALMORAL BEACH,
THE SPIT,
MIDDLE HARBOUR.
Unequalled
Picturesque Scenery
and Holiday Resorts.
Kookooburra covering about
69 miles of Harbour Scenery,
Do not MISS this trip when
Adults, 2j~; Children, 1/-
AFTERNOON TRIP—
Adults,!)-; Children, -J 6
LUNCHEON EXTRA—
FOR PARTICULARS, SEE TIME-TABLES
TELEPHONE 98 & 794 CENTRAL.
in Sydney!
Adults, 1 6 ; Children, 1)-


Shipping Companies.
FERRIES ( continued):
Millers Point (Dalgety Road). —
FERRIES:
Ferry to Blue’s Point (North Shore) and Darling-
street, Balmain.
t Circular Quay-
No. 1 Jetty—Athol and Clifton Gardens, Balmoral
and The Spit. (Sydney Ferries).
2 Jetty.—Watson’s Bay.
3 Jetty—Manly steamers.
4 Jetty—‘Neutral Bay and Mosman’s Bay.
(Sydney Ferries.)
5 Jetty—Milson’s Point, Lavender Bay, and
McMahon’s Point. (Sydney Ferries)
6 Jetty—Parramatta River steamers. (Sydney
Ferries.)
7 Jetty—Lane Cove River steamers. (Bal-
main New Ferry Company.)
COASTAL S.S. COS.:
North Coast S. N. Co.—3 Sussex-street; booking
office, 261 George-street.
Newcastle and Hunter River Co. —147-9 Sussex-st.
Rlawarra S. N. Co. —11 Wharf-street, foot of Market-
street, Darling Harbour.
Allen Taylor & Co. —Miller-street, Pyrmpnt.
Tweed River S.S. Co.—L. Tullook, Wharf-street.
N. Cain’s Coastal Co-op. S.S. Co.—Kethel’s Wharf,
foot Market-street.
Langley Bros.—Wharf-street.
Hawkesbury River and Newport steamers —Russell’s
Wharf, foot of Bathurst-street, and Federal
Foot of Erskine-street—
Annandale and Rozelle.
Balmain.
Wharf, Millers Point.
Gosford and Brisbane Water—“ Woy Woy,” Foot of
Erskine-street. “ Erina,” Foot of Bathurst-st.
Drummoyne, Leichhardt, and West Balmain.
Pyrmont Ferry.
INTERSTATE AND OVERSEA; ,
Fort Macquarie—
Tourist Harbour trips as advertised.
Excursion steamers, as advertised.
Steam Horse Ferry to North Sydney.
A Currie & C 0.—63 Pitt-street.
Adelaide S.S. Co.—6 Bridge-street,,
Birt & Co.—7 Maoquarie-place.
Burns, Philp & Co.—lo Bridge-street. ’


Winter Excursions
to the Cora / Isies of
the Pacific.
UNION LINE.
THE new twin-screw steamers “Tofua” and “Atua” leave Sydney alternately for
Lautoka, Suva, and Levuka (Fiji Group), Apia (Samoa), Vavau, Haabai, Nukualofa
(Friendly Islands), and Auckland, every 28 days, transhipping at latter port for
Sydney ; or steamer, Sydney to Auckland, thence to Friendly Islands, Samoa, Fiji, and
Sydney, every 28 days by same steamers.
Time occupied on Round Trip about 30 Days.
There is also a Service every 28 days from Auckland to Raratonga and Tahiti,
and a Service at frequent intervals from Wellington to Raratonga and Tahiti, connecting
at latter port with regular Mail Steamer for San Francisco.
Passengers wishing to stop over at Raratonga or Tahiti can do so, returning either
to Wellington or Auckland.
Full Particulars and Descriptive Booklets on application to the various Offices in Australasia of the
Union Steamship Co. of New Zealand, Limited\
259 GEORGE-STREET, SYDNEY.


-T — - —*2
Shipping Companies — contd.
INTERSTATE AND OVERSEA (continued):
Dalgety & Co. —Bent and O’Connell streets.
German Australian S.S. Co. —5 O’Connell-street.
Gibbs, Bright, & C 0.—37 Pitt-street.
Gilchrist, Watt, Ltd. —7 Bent-street.
Houlder 8r05.—63 Pitt-street.
Howard Smith & C 0.—350 George-street.
Huddart, Parker, & C 0.—61 Pitt-street.
Melbourne S.S. C 0.—56 Pitt street.
Messageries Maritimes—s7 Pitt-street.
Nippon Yusen Kaisha—lo Bridge-street.
North German Lloyd—7-9 Bridge-street.
Oceanic S.S. Coy.—lo Bridge-street.
Orient Royal Mail Line—Mutual Life Buildings
Martin-place.
P. & 0. C 0.—67 Pitt-street.
Xyser & C 0.—12-14 Loftus-street.
Union S.S. Co. —George and Jamieson streets.
The Theatres, &c.
Her Majesty’s Theatre, Pitt and Market streets.
Theatre Royal, Castlereagh and King streets.
Palace Theatre, 259-261 Pitt-street.
Criterion Theatre, Pitt and Park streets.
Tivoli Theatre, 81 Castlereagh-street.
National Amphitheatre, 73 Castlereagh-street.
Race- Co arses.
Ascot, North Botany and Special Botany trams.
Canterbury, Rail from Sydney Station.
Kensington, Special and Long Bay Trams.
Moorefield, Kogarah, Rail from Sydney Station.
Randwick, Special and Coogee trams.
Rosebery, Bunnerong Road, Botany trams.
Rosehill, Rail from Sydney Station.
Victoria Park, Zetland, Special and Zetland trams.
Warwick Farm, Special trains from Sydney Station.
Harbour Pleasure Grounds.
Correy’s Gardens, Cabarita, Parramatta River.
Clifton Gardens, Chowder Bay.
Athol Gardens, Bradley’s Head.
Ferndale Pleasure Grounds, Mortlake.
Rodd Island, Long Cove.
Clarke and Shark Islands, Sydney Harbour.
Pearl Bay, Bantry Bay, Flat Rook, Killamey, Clontarf,
and Balmoral, Middle Harbour.
Railway Offices.
City Booking Office, Martin-place.
Sydney Station, George-street and Pitt-street West.


Australian
n4vWoC '•wk
Books
*
Written, Illustrated, and Printed
i* 1 Australia.
y\/ Published at a cheap rate to enable
the
ly VJ.
multitude to buy them.
Author.
Book. Price.
Postage.
Birtles (F. E.).. ..
Lonely Lands Cloth
3/6 ..
5 d.
“ Steele Rudd ”
The Pooh Parson Paper
V- ■■
3d.
Duncan McClure ,,
i/- ..
3d.
(The above two combined) .. Cloth
3/C ..
5d.
Sandy’s Selection Paper
1/- ..
3d.
Back at our Selection .. .. ,,
ii- ••
3d.
From Selection to City .. „
v- ..
3d.
For Life .. .. .. .. ,,
a- ..
3d.
Dad in Politics „
ii- ..
3d.
(The above two combined) .. Cloth
3/6 ..
5d.
De Boos (Chas.) ..
Settler and Savage .. .. ,,
S|0 ..
5d.
>*
„ .. Caper
11- ■■
3d.
Bloxham (H. K.) ..
On the Fringe of the Never
Never .. .. .. ,,
1/. ..
3d.
Green (James)
The Select r „
1/- ••
3d.
Dyson (Edward) ..
The Missing Link ,,
1/- ..
3d.
Websdale (C. D.) ...
Seafarers Cloth
V- ••
3d.
Pratt (A.) ..
Three Years with Thu dkr-
bolt .. .. .. Paper
1/- ..
3d.
Barry (A. J.)
Steve Brown’s Bunvu* .. Cloth
1/6 ..
6d.
»
The Luck of the Native Born Paper
V-
3d.
Spencer (T. E.)
How McDougall Topped the
Score .. .. .. .. ,,
ii- ..
3d.
„
The Spring Cleaning .. .. ,,
1/- ..
3d.
(The above are combined) .. Cloth
3)6 ..
6d.
»» • •
The Surprising Adventures of
Mrs. MoSwesny Caper
V- ••
3d.
„
Budgeree Ballads .. .. ,,
1/- ••
3d.
The Bulletin Recti
:r New Edition ,,
1/- ..
3d.
Harbour Guide
With Coloured Maps ., .. ,,
ed. ..
3d.
Guide to Sydney
With Coloured Maps .. .. ,,
i - ..
3d.
ANY OTHER
EQUALLY GOOD BOOKS TO FOLLOW.
N,S,W. Bookstall Co,,
47S GEORGE- STREET, SYDNEY,
And all Branches and Booksellers.


Churches.
For fullest particulars as to the
St. Andrew’s Cathedral (C.E.), George-street, next
door to Town Hall.
St. Mary’s Cathedral (R.C.), College and Woolloomoo-
loo streets, Hyde Park.
cost of travel and accommodation
St. Janies’ (C.E.), King-street, Queen’s square.
and methods of reaching the
Congregational Church, 264 Pitt-street.
Lyceum Hall (Methodist), 216 Pitt-street.
Tourist Resorts
St. Stephen’s (Presbyterian), 162 Phillip-street.
Baptist Church, Kent and Bathurst streets.
Jewish Synagogue, 187 Elizabeth-street.
Unitarian Church, 177 J Liverpool-street.
New South Wales.
Scots Church (Pres.), York-street and Grosvenor-street.
St. Phillip’s (C.E.), York-street and Grosvenor-street.
Christ Church (C.E.), George-street, Haymarket.
Ask the
The Docks.
GOVERNMENT TOURIST BUREAU,
Fitzroy and Sutherland Docks, Cockatoo Island, Parra-
matta River.
Chalks House,
Mort’s Dock, Balmain.
Sydney.
Mort’s Dock, Woolwich, Parramatta River.
Jubilee Floating Dock, Balmain.
Tel. 2321.


HGTEL
18


CH ALLIS HOUSE.
Offices of the Government Tourist Bureau on the Ground Floor.


_ While in Sydney stay at
Manager.


TRIPS specially recommended for Visitors on a short stay.
Round the City and Harbour.
Parramatta River—round trip ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41
Lane Cove River and Upper Lane Cove 36,42
Watson’s Bay, South Head, and Lighthouse—round trip 36
Manly, Narrabeen, and Newport... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38,42
La Perouse —ordinary tram daily and Tourist Car in summer ... ... ... ... 34
Bondi— do do ... 35
Coogee — do do ... ••• 35
Gore Hill, Lane Cove, and Chatswood 36, 37
Neutral Bay, returning via Military Road and Milson’s Point ... ... ... ... 37
Clifton Gardens, Balmoral, and The Spit, returning via Mosman’s Bay ... 38,39
Suspension Bridge ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37
One-day Trips.
Tourist Observation Steamer 42
Rational Park ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40
Hawkesbury River (Combination Trips in Summer—various) 42
Bulli Pass 43
U I TTA,, I I'll *1 1, 4-» 1 1 •! 1 \ A Q
Nepean River (Combination Trip) 43
Cronulla Beach 41
See also Daily Programme issued by the Government Tourist Bureau.


J f ' * ®R - " " • iK
to
to
s-jipaaaiML .
at-
_1 s * -
“Norwood," opposite Circular Quay.
Mrs. I. B. SKINNER, Campbell-st., Milson’s Pt.
“ Norwood ” is situated within beautiful shady grounds, with Tennis and
Croquet Lawns. A most charming and picturesque residence.
The panoramic views of the Harbour and surroundings are described by
sightseers as being unsurpassable.
“Norwood” receives the patronage of Australia’s leading Citizens and Squatters.
telephone TERMS— 30 1* to 50 1“ Single Rooms.
738 north SYDNEY. 63(- 105/- Double „


r
i
THE TEA GARDENS, COMO, RIVER


SYDNEY'S MCNIC GROUND MANLY BEACH I
JL /“S S Take one of the Port Jackson
/y' and Manly S.S. Co. Ltd.’s
ff/ tfjS&f- SIX Spacious Handsomely Appointed
** SAI^ 0> TEAMERS
NO* "• - j£*4 - f?// [ A d"l te 4«l.
FARES: i Children 2d.
' ■. . _A- Passenger and
Bicycle 6d.
Steamers every 15 minutes -— r -—-—'
Manly Beach is “The Favourite of all AUSTRALIA’S Pleasure Resorts.”


| c: : " r ■“ — x
■" j
\"'X- jjL ■{. v ;
f MANLY .
SKETCH MAP r , —4— ; . * '. "v. ?|
OF (i ! CW r / i „ I
FERRY ROUTES % ' , ' X T” “ hlB
’ Mjb^MeHead
*k . V* , ! ' ' t" i j A innerSoufh M*
' ; <5, - NORTH \ // (jy.
. . < ! f ‘ h SYDNEY f M&'A %^\
i)**A*o !T T-:'**" > > ■ . V~*-£
~ v " ’ A'' v :•• / / J d$ A'-'d) V%“ v > S '’A A •". < s \
/ • " . -r"V lXilr :V -
' , 1 x ; 1 . ‘-■'■(■CITY ■ \
£.-■ - <S of
V’ SYDNEY
/— ' A ?
< *
o
«5
f^..‘


ISITORS are cordially invited to inspect
the palatial Establishment of
W. H. PALING & Co.. Ltd.,
Where everything Musical is on sale.
Sole Agents for the World’s most famous
PIAINOS AIVD ORGANS
And the incomparable
Ronisch ♦ and ♦ Lapp
Combination Piano Players,
338 GEQRGE-STREET,-- = SYDNEY, Near G.P.O.


The electric tram-
way system, prob-
ably the most com-
prehensive, effective,
and cheapest in the
world, links together
all the famous re-
sorts round Sydney.
The beautiful har-
bour inlets and
ocean beaches lie
within 30 minutes
journey by the tram.


Mount*- Ms Giro ri a.
Cooper's Jenolan Caves Booking i Inquiry
Office, 108, Pitt-st„ opposite G.P.O.
Telephone
3578.
Trips to Jenolan Caves Daily, occupying about 2 to 4 days,
including Rail, Coach, and all Hotel accommodation can be
arranged at prices to suit Visitors on application. . .
Visitors to Sydney, N.S.W.,
Can obtain all Printed Information re Trips
in and around the City, Suburbs, and Blue
Mountain District, including the famous
Jenolan Caves, by calling at . . .


Under
the Patronage of the DUCHESS OF YORK during her visit to Sydney;
also a number of the Governors of New
South Wales.
i AmF<* >
ESTABLISHED
1858.
SHORT
GENTS’ LIST
Cleaned Dyed
& pres’d. & prs’d.
From From
Coats ... 3/- 41-
Vests ... 11- 18
Trousers 21- 3/-
Lrtl/ILO .
Save the Expense
of New Dresses
by having Old
Ones dry or
3
Telephone 1954
THE
LARGEST
’ ‘ %
t! -
wet cleaned
and
—
EQUAL to NEW
from
ONLY
Steam
Repairs
Undertaken.
4s. TO 8s.,
or
Dyed if tired of
the present
Dyeing and
Cleaning
Works
PANAMA and
FELT HATS
cleaned.
colour, from
- 6s. -
in the State.
PRICE LISTS on
. 4
’• ; • - ■ ~i' lian ■
RING UP 1954-
PARCELS
Application by
’Phone or Post.
ROGERS Bros., steam
sent for.
DYERS AND CLEANERS,
181, OXFORD-STREET, near Bourke-street ; 775, GEORGE-STREET, opp.
Christ Church. Work : LITTLE OXFORD STREET.
29


Soft and Hard Felts, as illustration, from 10 6 to 21-
SEND FOR MEN’S CATALOGUE.
DAVID JONES LTD., Opposite G.P.O., SYDNEY.


Trips ground Sydney
1. Circular Quay to GLEBE POINT
George-street)— through George-street West, past .Vic-
toria Park, University, and Glebe to Rozelle Bay
(2d.), Glebe Island lies opposite; return to city (Erskine-
street) by ferry steamer from wharf at foot of street
(Id.).
2. Circular Quay to DRUMMOYNE (tram, via George-
street) —through Forest Lodge, Johnstone-street at the
head of the Bay, whence a view of the Glebe Island
Bridge is obtained, to BALMAIN (3d.); ferry back to
Darling Harbour (Id.); or taking the Darling-street
extension at Gladstone Park (Id.) the journey may be
continued to the ferry which lands passengers at
Darling Harbour (Id.); from the terminus at Drum-
moyne (4d.), ferry may be taken back to Circular
Quay (3d.); Cockatoo Island with its large graving
docks. Spectacle Island, on which is situated an ammu-
nition magazine, and Mort’s Dock are all seen on this
route.
3. Circular Quay to LEICHHARDT (tram, vvi
George-street)—past Victoria Park, the University and
attendant Colleges, Annandale, and Leichhardt (3d.).
The Bay is reached by a short walk from the terminus;
and ferry thence to city (3d.), or boats may be secured
for an enjoyable outing on the water:' of the Bay (Is.
per hour).
4. Circular Quay to ABBOTSFORD —aIong the'same
route as Leichhardt tram to Marion-street; through
FIVEDOCK and Abbotsford; tram may be taken to
the waters of Hen and Chicken Bay, picnic grounds,
boatsheds, and baths at Abbotsford (4d.); returning
to Sydney by the Parramatta steamers (6d.).l If
desired, a trip may be made up the River to Ryde
(4d.), and Parramatta (7d.), and back by rail to
Sydney (lOd. and lid. respectively).
5. Circular Quay to DULWICH HILL (tram via
George street) —past Prince Alfred Hospital, Victoria
Park, and Deaf. Dumb, and Blind Institution, through


The Brighton of New South Wales.
Season Tickets.
Saloon Steamers leave Daily
from No. 3 Jetty, Circular
Quay, every Half-hour.
X s. d,
0 2 6
Weekly Tickets
Monthly—
A Beautiful Trip of 7 miles,
with Ocean and Harbour
Views.
Gent’s ... ... 010 0
Lady’s .... ... 0 5 0
Child’s ... ... 0 2 6
Quarterly—
Gent’s ... ... 1 5 6
Manly has the finest Beaches
in the Commonwealth.
Lady’s ... ... 012 6
Child’s ... ... 0 6 0
Half-Yearly—
The Home of Surf-Bathers.
Gent’s ... ... 2 6 0
Lady’s ... ... 1 3 0
Child’s ... ... 0 11 6
Daily Fares—
Adults, 4d.
Yearly—
Children, 2d.
Gents’ ... ... 4 7 0
Lady’s 2 3 6
Child’s 13 0
Manly
Beach.


Newtown and Enmore (2d).; Marriokville and Dulwich
Hill (3d.); the return journey may be made by return-
ing to Marriokville and joining the train for Sydney
(4d.), or by a short walk from the terminus at Dulwich
Hill, join the tram via Addison road (3d.), or by walk-
ing to Summer Hill (4d.), Petersham (3d.), or Stanmore
Railway Stations (3d.), join the train back to Sydney
Station.
A line branches off at ENMORE TO ADDISON
ROAD, traversing Addison Road, Marrickville, and
Canterbury Road, Petersham (Id.), following Addison
and Canterbury Roads through portions of Marrick-
ville and Petersham to the terminus of the Dulwich
Hill tramway.
6. From Newtown uridge branches off to
St. PETERS (Id.); rail back to city (2d.); or to
COOK’S RIVER (2d.) close to Tempe Station, and rail
fco Sydney (4d.). Boats may be hired and an enjoyable
row taken up the river or down to the waters of Botany
Bay (Is. per hour).
7. Circular Quay to ERSKINEVILLE, via Pitt-street
8. Circular Quay to BOTANY (tram, 4d.), via Eliza-
beth-street, skirting Prince Alfred Park and Exhibition
Building, through Redfem and Waterloo, Sir Joseph
Banks’ Grounds, passing en route many manufacturing
establishments, to the waters of Botany Bay, where
an enjoyable outing may be made by boat, and good
fishing procured, or steamer to KurneU (see trip No. 13).
Visitors may return via La Perouse and Little Bay
line back through Kandwick and Kensington to the
city (6d. from Botany, via La Perouse; sd. from La
Perouse to city, via Kensington).
9. At the end of Prince Alfred Park a branch line
runs along CLEVELAND-STREET TO MOORE PARK,
Cricket, Agricultural, and Zoological Grounds, meeting
connecting trams for Kandwick and Kensington Race-
courses (Id.); return to Sydney by the Randwick or
Coogee line (2d.). The trip on the other hand may be
continued out to COOGEE with its attractive beaches,
Aquarium, and ocean bathing (2d.); a delightful picnic
spot much resorted to by children’s parties.
Note. — Special fares are charged on Randwick and
Kensington Race trams, also on Cricket Ground trams.
li. n ± rvensingron naee trams, also on urieiret liround trams.
(2d.) passing the Centra! Railway Station. Railway
Mortuary Station, through the suburbs of Chippendale 10. Sydney to LA PEROUSE (tram), via Elizabeth-
and Golden Grove to the Erskineville Railway Station street (sd.) —through Moore Park, Kensington, Long
| on the Illawarra suburban line, returning by train Bay, and Little Bay. Tram also stops at the ZOO.
j (3d. and 2d.). Varied and interesting scenery is passed along this
& ,
-- a


route, and the Little Bay Sanatorium occupies a
prominent site near the terminus. At La Perouse the
Aboriginal Quarters are located, and a pleasant trip
may be continued back, via Botany line, to the city, a
distance of 21 miles in all for lid. YARRA PLEA-
SURE GROUNDS, La Perouse, afford every con-
venience for picnics. Kumell steamers call at La
Perouse wharf at intervals (see No. 13).
11. The RIFLE RANGE line branches off the La
Perouse Line at the Bunnerong Road. All first-class
Rifle Meetings are held here—visitors coming from all
over the Commonwealth to participate.^
12. Sydney to COOGEE (3d.) —following
route as La Perouse line till Kensington is reached,
then skirting Centennial Park, through Randwick (2d.).
At Coogee there are attractions for picnickers, and
commodious hotels for visitors. Charming walks may
be made in all directions. Splendid bathing facilities
for ladies and gentlemen, also Aquarium and pleasure
grounds.
13. COOK’S LANDING PLACE, KURNELL, BOTANY
BAY. —At frequent intervals on Sundays and public
holidays throughout the year, steamers make the trip
across the Bay from Botany pier or Brighton-le-Sands,
calling at La Perouse if signalled, to the historic
landing-place of Captain Cook. The reserve at the
landing-place has undergone much judicious improve-
ment under the direction of the Trustees, and the
numerous places of historic interest have been pro-
minently indicated for the information of the visitor.
Details are given in a special pamphlet dealing with
Kumell. Trips round Botany, visiting Kumell en
route, are also run on Sundays and holidays. Tram,
Circular Quay to Botany, 4d.; rail, Kedfem Station
to Rockdale and tram to Brighton-le-Sands, 1 Id. return.
Tram from Circular Quay to La Perouse, sd. Steamer
fare to Kumell from all wharves Is. return.
14. Circular Quay to WAVERLEY or BONDI, tram,
3d.—Along Oxford-street and through Paddington,
past the Victoria Barracks and main entrances to
Centennial Park. At Bondi Junction the tram-line
divides—one branch going to Bondi, with its glorious
stretch of beach and up-to-date swimming baths, and
the other, the Waverley line may be taken to its
terminus on the coast. A pleasant picnic ground at
BRONTE is reached by a short walk to the left, while
on the right is situated the Waverley Cemetery, and
further on is LITTLE COOGEE with fine natural swim-
ming baths. The walk from Bondi along the Military
Road towards South Head will enable visitors to enjoy
some of the finest views of Sydney Harbour and
Islands that can be procured.


By taking the WAVE RLEY-RAND WICK Branch at
Albion-street, Waver ley (Id.), a pleasant round trip
may bo made, either out to Coogee (2d ), or back to
town (3d.).
15. Circular Quay to BELLEVUE HILL via Eliza-
beth-street (3d.), through the suburbs of Woolloomooloo
and Woollahra to its terminus at the Bellevue Hill
reserve. Hyde Park, the Museum, Darlinghurst Gaol
and St. Vincent’s Hospital are near this line, which
passes through a dense residential population, and
has some very steep gradients, the line in one place
being carried above the houses on a substantial via-
duct. A return may be made by a short walk to join
the Bondi tram, fare to Sydney 3d.
16. King-street to SOUTH HEAD (4d.) Through
Darlinghurst, Edgeoliff, Woollahra, Double Bay, Rose
Bay, past the Macquarie Lighthouse, to Watson’s Bay
Wharf, traversing some of Sydney’s most beautiful
residential suburbs as well as the cliffs at South Head,
i which command fine views of the bold coastal pro-
| montories. By leaving the tram at Piper Loop, where
| there is a notice-board, a walk of half a mile along a
good track brings visitors to the Ostrich Farm, which
will be found extremely interesting. Visitors are
allowed to inspect the Lighthouse daily, Sundays
excepted, 2 to 4 and 7 to 9.30 p.m., on production of
i orders, which may be obtained at the Tourist Bureau.
The views along this route are attractive in the
extreme. The return trip can be completed via the
Harbour by ferry-boat to Circular Quay (4d.).
17. Circular Quay to WATSON’S BAY (ferry, 4d.) —
passing down the Harbour along the southern shore,
giving visitors an opportunity of viewing the attractive
waterside suburbs of Potts’ Point, Rushcutter’s, Double,
and Rose Bays, to South Head, Camp Cove being on
the north, and Parsley Bay to the south. A visit may
be paid to the Fortifications, Lighthouse (with orders),
and Gap, the return journey to Sydney being com-
pleted by tram (4d.).
18. Circular Quay to MILSON’S POINT (Id.), tram to
Gore Hill and Lane Cove (3d.), Chatswood (3d.), Mos-
man’s (4d.), or Spit (4d.) returning from Gore Hill by
train from St. Leonards (3d.), or from Mosman’s or
Neutral Bays by ferry (2d.), and the Spit (6d.).
19. From Circular Quay by ferry (Id.) and Milson’s
Point to GORE HILL and LANE COVE, tram (3d.)—
through North Shore, past the Oval, and Cemetery to
Longueville Road, affording extensive panoramic views
of the city en route ,* one of the finest panoramic views
of the metropolis is obtained from the summit. A
vast extent of country is comprised in the range of
vision, and an excellent idea of the extent of Sydney
and its Harbour is gained. The return trip should be


made by taking the ferry-boat at Longueville (3d.)
back to Circular Quay.
= 20. The WILLOUGHBY and CHATSWOOD LINE
(3d.) follows the same route to Lane Cove Road, thence
over Flat Rock Creek to Chatswood Station. By
alighting at Mowbray Road a short walk will enable
visitors to obtain excellent views of MIDDLE HAR-
BOUR. Passengers may return via Chatswood Rail-
way Station to Milson’s Point (5d.), ferry to Quay (Id.).
21. Milson’s Point to MOSMAN (4d.)—same route to
Falcon-street, then along the Military Road to the
Spit Road Junction, passing en route the branches to
The Spit (Id.), and Neutral Bay (Id.), from either of
which the journey back to town may be completed by
ferry (4d. and 2d.). Circular Quay to MOSMAN’S
BAY (2d.) by boat; one of Sydney’s prettiest bays;
tram thence to Military Road (Id.) and Spit (2d.), or
back to Milson’s Point (4d.) and ferry to Quay (Id.),
or return direct from The Spit to Circular Quay by
ferry (4d.'
22. Circular Quay to NEUTRAL BAY (2d.)‘by boat-
tram to Military Road (Id.), tram to Junction (Id.), or
back to Mosman’s Bay (2d.) and ferry to Circular Quay
I d.l; or Milson’s Point (2d.), and ferry to Quay 'ld.).
23. The SUSPENSION BRIDGE spans the waters at
the top of one of the arms of Middle Harbour, and may
be reached most conveniently by ferry from Circular
Quay to Milson’s Point (Id.), and tram from Milson’s
Point (2d.). It is a pleasant pull from the Spit boat-
sheds to the Bridge.
Note. —The trams to Willoughby, Chatswood, Lane
Cove, a id Gore Hill, will shortly run from McMahon’s
Point instead of Milson’s Point.
24. At Spit Road Junction the line branches off to
THE SPIT (Id.), opening out on some of the finest
scenery in the Harbour; pleasant rambles may be made
all about here, affording the most glorious views. A
favourite picnic and fishing ground. The waters of
Middle Harbour offer such facilities and are so easy of
access that their popularity is becoming daily greater.
Ample boating and bathing accommodation is provided.
The batteries of Middle Head may be inspected on
production of the necessary order from the Military
Authorities. This route is a favourite one for cyclists,
the roads being good although hilly in places. Sydney
Ferries (Ltd.) run a ferry service to and from Circular
Quay, calling at Balmoral, Athol, and Clifton Gardens,
and The Spit, so that an alternate route is available
to Circular Quay (6d. return, 4d. single).
25. Tourists can continue the journey from The Spit
to MANLY by crossing in the punt (Id.), taking the


coach to the wharf (6d.) at 12.20, 3.L0, and 5.20 p.m.
This is a delightful scenic route. Back to Sydney by
Manly steamer (4d.)
Note. —During the Summer months a steamer runs
regularly between The Spit and Manly on Wednesdays,
Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, fare 4d. single,
(id. return.
26. THE SPIT (by water) —Take steamer from No. 1
Jetty, Circular Quay to ATHOL GARDENS, CLIFTON
GARDENS, BALMORAL, and THE SPIT (4d. single, 6d.
return). The trip can be continued back to Sydney by-
coach to Manly (6d.), ferry to Circular Quay (4d.),
or tram to Mosman or Neutral Bay and Milson’s Point.
Fares: Tram and boat 4d., 5d., and 5d., respectively.
See also trips Nos. 21 and 25. By leaving the ferry at
Athol Gardens and walking along Bradley’s Head Road
via the knoll to Mosman, a magnificent series of views
are obtainable. Continue by tram to the Spit, and
return direct to Sydney by teamer or as suggested
above.
27. Circular Quay to MANLY (ferry 4d.) —a delight-
ful trip down the harbour (7 miles) past the Lightship,
Heads, and Quarantine Grounds on the right, to the
Village with its harbour and ocean beaches. Manly is
the most popular watering-place about Sydney. Its
numerous and varied attractions affording amusement
and pleasure to all. The home of dual surf-bathing, j
Good boating, fishing, and driving. The Cardinal’s
Palace and St. Patrick’s College are located here. Tram
meets each boat and conveys passengers through the
Village along the ocean beach to North Manly, whence
pleasant rambles in the bush or over Queenscliff to
Freshwater Beach can be indulged in. Motor-car rides,
6d. each.
28. Coaches run from Manly to NARRABEEN (Is.i,
ROCK LILY (Is. 6d.), BAY VIEW and NEWPORT (25.),
at 10.13, 11.15 a.m., and 4.15 p.m. daily, and more
frequently on Saturdays and holidays, enabling visitors
to view the variety of ocean scenes. Good cycling
road. Launches can be engaged at Newport to convey
passengers to the Hawkesbury Station if required,
thence back to Sydney by rail (2s, lOd.) single rail fare.
See page 42 re Hawkesbury-Newport round trips.
29. Visitors may return from MANLY TO SYDNEY
via THE SPIT, bus from wharf to Spit (6d.), at 11.15
a.m., 2.15 and 4.15 p.m., punt across Middle Harbour
(Id.), tram thence to Neutral Bay (3d.) or Mosman
(2d.), and ferry to Quay (2d.); or tram to Milson’s
Point (4d.), and across the Harbour to the Quay (Id.);
or steamer direct from The Spit to the Quay (4d.)’
via Balmoral, Clifton and Athol Gardens.
30. CLIFTON GARDENS have been acquired by the
Sydney Perries, Limited, and are now served by a


daily ferry from No. 1 Jetty, Circular Quay; return
fare, 6d., children, 3d. The Gardens which are one of
the most delightful spots in Sydney Harbour, have
extensive sandy beach, unsurpassed picnic grounds,
and cover over 12 acres. Boarders can be accom-
modated in a thoroughly up-to-date hotel, which is
within a few minutes walk of Bradley’s Head Road,
containing some of the finest private residences of
beautiful architectural dosim in Mosman, and com-
manding an unsurpassable view of Sydney Harbour,
the Heads, and the eastern suburbs. The Amp hi-
theatre baths are the finest in the State.
31. BALMORAL, on the south shore of Middle
Harbour, is reached by tram from Mosman’s wharf
(Id.), and a short walk from tram-line, passengers
alighting at Mandalong Road; or by direct ferry daily
from No. 1 Jetty, Circular Quay (4d. single, 6d. return).
Fine beach, pretty views, and commodious baths.
Becoming largely availed of as a residential suburb.
32. CLONTARF (6d.), Middle Harbour—delightful
trip from Fort Macquarie, east side of Circular Quay,
of 8 miles, by frequent steamer service on Sundays
and holidays. Large pavilion and commodious refresh-
ment rooms. It was at these grounds the man O’Farrell
shot at and wounded the Duke of Edinburgh, on 12th
March, 1868.
33. PEARL BAY (6d), Middle Harbour snugly
situated on the inside of The Spit, recently benefited
by considerable improvements at the hands of the
Balmain New Ferry Co.; suitable for private or public
picnics. Hot and cold water, refreshment room, and
large dancing pavilion. Grounds are for hire with or
without catering. Steamers from Fort Macquarie on
Sundays and Holidays.
34. FIG-TREE POINT, FOLLY POINT, KILLARNEY
and FLAT ROCK, Middle Harbour, are also popular
picnic resorts on this arm of the Harbour. Balmain New
Ferry Co’s, boats as advertised, or by arrangement or
tram to The Spit, where boats maybe hired (Is. perhour).
35. BANTRY BAY (9d.), Middle Harbour, by
steamer from Fort Macquarie every Sunday and
holiday. Situated on an inland lake, surrounded by
rugged hills, covered with virgin forest. The “ Look
Out" and 11 Fairy Bowers” are places of interest.
Refreshment room and dancing pavilion.
33. ROSEVILLE PARK and MIDDLE HARBOUR,
Ferry Circular Quay to Milson’s Point (Id.) and rail
to Roseville (fares 7d. and sd. single, lid. and Bd.
return), walk 2 miles to Roseville Park, boat to head
of Middle Harbour, 5 miles (4s. per day, 2s. 6d. half
day), or to The Spit. Return by tram and steamer
(5d.), or steamer direct to Sydney (4d.).


37. CLARKE AND SHARK ISLANDS aie beautiful
picnic spots on the southern waters of the Harbour, off
Darling Point and Rose Bay respectively. They are
usually reached by pulling boat from Rushcutter’s Bay
{ls. per hour), while steamers call on Saturdays and
holidays when required. The grounds are nicely laid
out with seats, fireplaces, and every convenience for
visitors. A splendid place from which to vi w the
ailing races and general harbour shipping.
38. RODD ISLAND— Picnic ground in lion Cove
(Parramatta River); pavilion and all conveniences for
picnickers. Balmain Ferry Coy’s, steamers from
Erskine-street wharf, call to pick up or set down as
required. Fare, 6d. return from Sydney, and 4d.
from Leichhardt.
39. BRIGHTON-LE-SANDS, Botany Bay— tram co
Rockdale and tram to Lady Robinson’s Beach, where
there are good bathing facilities, a beautiful sandy
beach some miles in length, extending along the whole
of the western margin of Botany Bay. Close by these
is a tastefully laid-out reserve and park. Tickets,
covering rail and tram journey and admission to baths'
Is. Steamers leave the wharf at regular intervals on
and holidays for Kurnell—the landing-place
of Captain Cook—fare, Is. return.
40 SANDRINGHAM and SANS SOUCI, near the
mouth of the Georges River—train to Kogarah (9d.
bathTnl an n r r t? f , to . bcach (*»•). good fishing and
bathing. Delightful picnic grounds. Steamer calls at
wharf on Sunday afternoon in Summer for a trip
round the bay. Ferry launch leaves Roekv Point as
required for SYLVANIA, fare 6d. -
41. GEORGE’S RlVER —train to Como (Is. 2d
return) attractive views of varied beauty, second only
la, MHcl 10 P S “ awkesbur y Boats, and fishing
facilities. Xopular uicme grounds and tea gardens.
42. TOM UGLY’S POINT- -train to Kogarah (9d.
hotTi T uT i to (6d.) ; a commodious
hotel and well hud-out grounds, with every convenience
Point oatm8 ’ PlCnlC ’ and fishin SP arties > located at the
tn 4 T 3 ’ff AT i°! ,A^ ) PA **K— tram from Central Station
to Loftus daily (2s. 6d. and Is. 6d.) or National Park
platform at week ends and holidays (Is. 6d. and Is,
return). Sydney has many beauty spots, but National
I ark excels them all. Splendid driving roads, fishing
swimming, and boating. Good accommodation for
visitors at Audley and Warumbul; furnished cottages
and camping sites. Launch leaves the dam at Audlev
on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays at 11.15 am
other days at 10 a.m., for Port Hacking, returning in
the afternoon—fare. Is. each passenger, with a mini-
mum or ss. per trip.


4s. PORT HACKlNG— reached from National Park
I by boat or launch, or tram from Sutherland (Is. sd.
return, thence by coach Is. 6d.), one of the finest
fishing grounds near Sydney; YOWIE BAY, LILLI
PILLI, BURANEER BAY, TURRIELL POINT are
served by the coaches.
45. CRONULLA BEACH, between Botany Bay and
Port Hacking—coach from Sutherland (Is.); good ac-
commodation for visitors, boating, and beach fishing.
Cronulla has sprung into prominence as a health resort
and has one of the finest ocean beaches in the State.
Notable for the State Fish Hatcheries (visiting days,
Wednesday and Sunday, by order from Fisheries Office,
Domain Terrace); for sea shells; for mounds of shell
debris left by aborigines; a remarkable volcanic dyke;
evidences of land elevation and other geological forma-
tions, shifting sand-hills, picturesque scenery in Port
Hacking Harbour, aboriginal rock drawings, and good
fishing.
4S. PARRAMATTA RIVER EXCURSIONS leaving
Circular Quay, calling at Woolwich (3d.), Drummoyne
(3d ), Gladesville Bridge (4d.), whence the tram may be
taken back to town (4d.); Hunter’s Hill (4d.), one of
the prettiest views around Sydney; Abbotsford (4d.),
when tranTmay be taken back to town through Leich-
hardt (5d.); Gladesville (6d.) Cabarita Park and
Correy’s picnic grounds at Cabarita (9d.); Mortlake,
with large hotel, picnic grounds, and pavilion (6d.);
whence tram runs to Burwood (3d.), and train back
to Sydney (6d.); Ryde (6d.), and rail back to town
(10d.); and Parramatta (Is.). On arrival at Parra-
matta passengers change into the tram, which conveys
them to Parramatta Park, old Government House,
Lady Pitzroy’s Tree, and other places of interest are
worth viewing. Short walk to railway station, and
train to Sydney—round tickets, 2s. first-class.
Sydney to Meadow Bank, by rail (Is. Id.), and ferry
from Ryde Wharf to Quay (6d.).
47. PARRAMATTA ORANGE GROVES -Ferry, Cir-
cular Quay to Milson's Point (Id.); rail to Hornsby,
via Milson’s Point (lOd.); or rail direct from Sydney
station to Hornsby (2s. first, and Is. 3d. second, single;
3s. and Is. lid. return) ;coach 9*50 a.m. Monday to
Friday to Galston (Is.), or Dural (Is. 6d.), connecting
at I*3o or 2 p.m., respectively, with coach for Baulkham
Hills Is. 6d.); tram to Parramatta (3d.); and rail to
Sydney (lid.);
Ferry, Circular Quay to Milson’s Point; rail to
Hornsby; coach to Galston; walk or drive (no coach
service) to Arcadia, Berowra Creek, and Berowra


Railway Station; rail to Sydney (Is. lid.). Extensive 2'15 p.m. on
OrailffG ATOVftR. rjfl.lfilfnn 7. irroorr nnr] ™ CLI i. mi .
orange groves, Galston Zig-zag, and magnificent scenery.
48 ; I ANE COVE RIVER —steamers to Greenwich,
Woolwich, St. Leonards, Longueville, Hunter’s Hill
Riverview, and Fig Tree, calling at the Avenue reerea-
non giounds of 17 acres, well wooded and cool, and
other delightful picnic grounds at every halting-place
(all wharves 3d.); splendid scenery on both banks-
extensive boating facilities at every wharf. A short
walk from Longueville wharf will take visitors to the
terminus of the Lane Cove tram, thence back to
Milsons Point (3d.), boat to Quay (Id.).
■ bPPLH LANE COVE RlVER. —Ferry from No. 7
jetty. Circular Quay, at 10 a.m. and 1-30 p.m. (Satur-
day, 1 -45 p.m.) to Fig Tree (3d.); change into launch for
all wharves as far as Killara at the head of the river,
fare, Is. single or return. If desired, passengers
may walk 2 miles to the North Shore line, and joining
the train at Killara Station, return to Milson’s Point
(»d. or 6d.) and Circular Quay (Id.).
50 PORT JACKSON S HIPPING. —The Port Jack-
son Sluppmg Ferry Coy.’s boat leaves Pyrmont Wharf
toot of Lrskme-street as required to visit the various
ships in Port, fare, 2s. 6d. per hour. Telephone 4278
51. TOURIBT OBSERVATION STEAMERS leave
Tort Macquarie (east of Circular Quay) at 10 a.m, and
i-'lo p.m. on r JiH«Miayi-and' Thursday in Summer, and
Thursday only in Winter, for a trip all round Sydney
Harbour, including Middle Harbour, Parramatta and
Lane Cove Rivers; fare, 2s. all day, Is. half day.
Lunch, Is. 6d., and afternoon tea 6d. Children, steamer
Is., lunch Is. The finest possible trip for the money
60 miles of Harbour scenery.
52. HAWKESBURY RIVER TRIPS by rail and
steamer are run every Wednesday, Friday, Saturday,
and holidays in Summer as advertised (6s. and 45.) i
giving passengers a pleasant run up the river, enabling
them to see the famous bridge (3,000 feet), and the :
beautiful scenery along the ‘’Rhine of Australia”-
Refreshments and bar on board. ' ’ i
53. SYDNEY - HAWKESBURY - PITTWATER -
MANLY ROUND TRlPS. —Combination rail, launch,
bus, and ferry tickets are issued every Tuesday and
Saturday throughout the year (fare, Bs. 6d. Ist class), I
being one of the most delightful round day trips. Rail |
Sydney to Hawkesbury, launch to Pittwater, coach j
from Newport to Manly, and ferry to Quay, or vice
versa by the 9'30 a.m. boat to Manly Dinner at I
Newport.
54. HAWKESBURY EXCURSIONS by Steamer
leaving Darling Harbour on Saturday afternoons and i


holidays (2s. on Saturdays, and 3s. on holidays),
viewing Hawke Head, Barrenjoey, and Lion Island,
to Broken Bay, and Cowan Creek; refreshments pro-
vided on hoard at reasonable rates. Summer only.
55. SYDNEY TO WOY WOY and GOSFORD and
return via Broken Bay to Circular Quay outside the
Heads. S.S. “Woy Woy” leaves footof Erskine-street
at 8 a.m. every Tuesday and Friday, and the S.S.
“ Erina” every Thursday at 7'30 a.m. from Russell's
Wharf, foot of Bathurst-street (either boat will pick up
at Dawes’ Point if signalled) for Blackwall, Woy Woy,
and Gosford (Brisbane Water), returning same after-
noon. Fares: 2s. 6d. single, and 4s. return. Passengers
could also return by rail from Gosford or Woy Woy
| by paying single fare/ _
56. KURING-GAI CHASE,' 3s,3oo'acres, including
Cowan, Coal-and-Candle, and Smith’s Creeks, branches
of Broken Bay. The Chase comprises a wealth of
rugged scenery, and affords splendid fishing and boating
facilities, good accommodation and house-boats. Pas-
sengers may proceed either to Colah (2s. 2d. return),
Berowra (2s. lid. return), or Cowan (3s. 2d. return),
thence walking by picturesque roads to waters of
Creeks, or from Hawkesbury by launch as arranged.
Launches meet passengers at Hawkesbury Station by
arrangement, conveying them to COWAN, CREEK
(Kuring-gai Chase).
PLEASANT DRIVES may also be made from Wai-
tara, Wahroonga, Turramurra, or Pymble on North
Shore Line, through pleasant country to the boat-
sheds at Bobbin Point and Foley’s Bay. Vehicles by
arrangement at Wahroonga.
i 57. BEROWRA CREEK is 3 miles Jroru, Berowra
on the opposite side of the line. Boating, fishing, and
house-boats. Coaches meet all trains from Sydney on
Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.
58. NEPEAN RIVER combination trips are run every
Wednesday, Saturday, Sunday, and holiday in Summer;
combination rail tickets to Penrith, coach to river, and
launch to the junction with the Warragamba are issued
at 6s. sd. and 4s. return. The bushranger Donohue’s
cave is seen at the Basin. Boating, fishing, swimming,
and camping grounds.
59. BULLI PASS— B,3O a.m. train to Bulb or inirroul
daily, fare 7s. Id. Ist class, 4s. 7d. 2nd return. Coach
meets train for Pass and Lookout, fare 2s. 6d to ss.
according to number in party, returning to Bulli for
lunch, or in time to connect with the 3.55 p.m. train
to Sydney, arriving at 6.5 p.m.
&
43


THE TOURIST CAR leaves St. James’ Road (Hyde
Park) at 2.10 p.m. in Summer (holidays excepted).
As under —
60. Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays for La
Perouse and Botany, passing the following points of
interest:—Oxford -street, Darlinghurst, Moore Park,
Cricket Ground, Show Ground, Zoo, Kensington Race-
course, Rifle Range, Long Bay (car waits 5 minutes
here), New Penitentiary, Coast Hospital, La Perouse
(stop here 35 minutes) —La Perouse’s Monument, Pere
Receveur’s Grave (Bare Island Forts are close to
tram line), Botany Cemetery, Botany Bay, Sir Joseph
Banks’ pleasure grounds, Old Waterworks, Rosebery
Park Racecourse, Redfern, Prince Alfred Park and Ex-
j hibition Building, Railway Institute, Sydney Station,
Elizabeth-street, arriving at Circular Quay (Young-
street) at 4.40 p.m. Time of journey, 2| hours. Fare
for round trip—Adults, Is.; all children under 12, 6d.
61. Tuesdays and Thursdays for Bondijand Coogee,
passing the following points of interest: —Oxford-street,
Victoria Barracks, Paddington Town Hall, Centennial
Park, Woollahra Reservoirs, Waverley Tram Depot,
Bondi Junction, Bondi Beach (car waits 13 minutes
here), Bondi Junction, Waverley Junction, Randwick,
Coogee (stop here 15 minutes), Randwick Tramway
Workshops, Randwick Racecourse, Centennial Park,
Zoo, Show and Cricket Grounds, Moore Park, Oxford
and Elizabeth streets, arriving at Circular Quay (Young-
street) at 4.40 p.m. Time of journey, 2J hours. Fare
for round trip—Adults, Is.; all children under 12, 6d.
62. From Erskine-street (King-street line) at 2.16
p.m. on Tuesdays and Thursdays for South Head and
Watson’s Bay by the following route:—Kkfg-street,
passing leading business houses, Suprep«e Court, St.
James’ Church (the oldest in AusteaHlTh Royal Mint,
St. Mary’s Cathedral (R.C.), and Domain,
Museum, Bay, Double
Bay, Rose Bay, Ostrich Farm, Macquarie
Lighthouse Signal Station, the Gap and
the cliffs ofji&lath Head, at which a stay of 68 minutes
is Magnificent harbour and ocean views.
Tickets do not include return by steamer. Fares—
Adults 9d., children 6d.
See also seperate Handbills.
Numerous other excursions may be taken around
Sydney, particulars of which are advertised from time
to time in the daily papers. The charge for boats is
usually Is. per hour, 3s. per half-day, and ss. per day;
holidays, Bs. per day.
Id. sections apply throughout the tramway systems.
In the case of fares quoted by tram or ferry the figures
given indicate the cost (by either) to that particular
point.


''' ' ’.
COVE RIVER
STEAMER ROSE.’
LANE COVE RIVER. —The claims made by its admirers on behalf of this water-way, that it possesses the most
beautiful and picturesque river scenery to be found even in a locality so richly endowed as Sydney is, will be
F readily admitted by all who have had the good fortune to
explore its winding loveliness.
Certainly its ready accessability by a frequent service of
fast and comfortable Ferry Steamers from Circular Quay is
a feature that commends itself to the present-day pleasure-
seeker. A fifteen minutes’ run from No. 7 Jetty, i.e., the
nearest Ferry Wharf to George-street, will bring the visitor
to this picturesque arm of water pursuing its course between
high hills and grassy flats for a distance of about 10 miles.
Charming free picnic reserves are to be found at almost all
the wharves touched at on the journey, and the varied choice
in this respect have, without doubt, popularised it immensely
for any kind of Afternoon, Gipsy or Billy Teas and Moonlight
Outings. As the steamer pursues its winding course and
visitors view for the first time the vista of secluded scenic
beauty they will find it hard to credit that they are so close
to the busiest city of the Southern Hemisphere. Towards the
end of the journey, which takes about three-quarters of an
hour, one comes to the Avenue Pleasure Grounds. A number
of summer-houses have been erected, in addition to a com-
modious dining-room, which will also be found a great
STEAMER ROSE,
convenience to children’s picnics. A well-drained flat affords every convenience for cricket, running, and similar
enjoyments. Hot and cold water is, of course, always available, and a well-appointed refreshment-room will,
no doubt, be found a great convenience to those who have not previously provided for themselves, especially as
the charges are moderate and the accommodation excellent. Kctuni fare, 6(1.; Children, 3d.
THE BALMAIN NEW FERRY CO., LTD.,
T ELEPHONES
Will be only too pleased to give Tourists and Picnickers all possible information. 2352 OR 994 CENTRAL.
A large Concert Steamer runs every SUNDAY, at 3 and 8 p.m., with first-class artists en board.


mu nfos. xv «& xe> imrtLtiiAL AHCAUt., p/tt-ST., Sydney .
5 — "—* ®
C §*l Carved Emu Eggs, from 4s. each. N3
Emu Egg Cameos, Candle Shades, and Fairy Lamps, at moderate prices.
K j ? Ostrich Eggs, plain and carved.
<0 5 Australian Curios. Boomerangs, Is. 6d. each. JO
t ? fel ; Satsurna Buttons, from 6d. each. , g
Satsuma Belt Buckles, Old Coins, Ivory and Silver Trinkets. T3
Emu Egg and Stand. ' .. _ . £ * d ’
£ Australian Packets. «vutotu*" .. .'. 11 020
S OA . .. _ . ** d ‘ 30 Tasmania 0 3 6 2
30 Vanet.es .. .. Price 0 6 Hpr « k? s* iBs ■•I
4Q 9 | 28 South Australia 0 2 0
100 ""50 .j 35 New Zealand 0 2 3 2}
264 Varieties y 5
— i If,
At Nos. 24 «& 25 IMPERIAL ARCADE , PITT-ST., Sydney.
Carved Emu Eggs, from 4s. each. *0
Egg Cameos, Candle Shades, and Fairy Lamps, at moderate prices.
Ostrich Eggs, plain and carved.
Australian Curios. Boomerangs, Is. 6d. each. *0
Views of Sydney, 3d. each.
Satsuma Buttons, from 6d. each. , g
Satsuma Belt Buckles, Old Coins, Ivory and Silver Trinkets.
5 Note the Address: 24 &25 IMPERIAL ARCADE, PITT-ST., Sydney fopp. Hordern Brothers). *
46


THE GAP, WATSON’S BAY.
Highest on the list of Australian “Beauty Spots” stands the Romantic-looking and Historical Region of
WATSON’S BAY, or officially (VAUCLUSE). The scene from every side is an interesting one ; fronting the
harbour is a beautiful bay, over the waters of which steamers, yachts, and pleasure boats are continually gliding,
and, at a distance of less than a few score yards, the Pacific Ocean lashes itself against precipitous rocks some
300 feet high
For interesting scenes and general pioturesqueness VAUCLUSE cannot be excelled. In the vicinity are
the Fortifications, Lighthouses, Life Boat, Signal Station, and the World-famed Gap, the scene of the wreck of
the ill-fated “ Dunbar,” artistically pictured above.
The WATSON’S BAY FERRY Co. have lately added to their fleet of spacious and magnificent saloon
steamers the “Vaucluse,” the “Cock o* the Walk,” leaving No. 2 Jetty, Circular Quay, every half-hour daily for
this charming spot; the time of journey is 25 minutes, and the fare, fid. Return, Children half-price.


Tourists 012 cl Visitors Should send or take t 0 their Friends at Home an
Australian Souvenir.,
An unset Black Opal makes a unique Australian Souvenir. Prices range according
to size and quality, from ss. to /50.
Black Opal is the Gem Novelty of the Twentieth Century, and is found in no other
part of the World except New South Wales..
Every other Gem is kept in great variety.
Beautiful Harlequin Fire Opals. Australian Sapphires of the following colours :
Yellow, blue, parti-coloured, and green. Tourmaline of many colours. Turquoise, Pearls,
Emeralds, &c., &c.
Please call and inspect. You will be favourably impressed by seeing what Australia
can produce in precious stones.
PERCY MARKS,
Vice-Regal Jeweller and Lapidary,
Only address : 41 MARKET-STREET, SYDNEY,
Near Ceorge-street
Under Distinguished Patronage.


LANE COVE RlVER.—Steamers at frequent intervals from No. 7 Jetty, Circular Quay. Return Fare, 6d.; Children, 3d.
t§>
49


Price
£ll
So does the quality of B & B Cycles. Not a single particle of
material goes into them if it doesn’t come up to the standard.
That benefits YOU and helps our reputation.
The B & B Mode! 3 Cycle
has never failed to satisfy its riders. It is simply full of points—
built of the best British parts, fitted with first-class tyres, and
guaranteed for a year.
Let us send you our Free Catalogue.
Money Ta Iks!
BENNETT AND BARKEUL,
Largest Cycle Building House in the State,
234 RITT-STREET, & 130-132 CASTLEREAGH-STREET.


A few of the Places to Pis it in New South Wales.
ILLAWARRA DISTRICT—The Garden ol the State.
Sans Souci, Sandringham, and Kuruell, Botany Bay.
Brighton-le-Sands.
Como, Sylvania, and George’s River.
Port Hacking and Cronulla Beach—favourite fishing
resorts.
National Park and its many attractions.
Waterfall with its delightful drives.
Stairwell Park—a quiet holiday spot, safe lagoon and
ocean bathing, waterfalls and glorious views.
Bulli Pass and Weber’s Lookout.
Wollongong, with Fairy Creek and Lake, golf links,
and baths; Mount Keira and Mount Kembla Look-
outs, Cordeaux Waterfall and Cave, and Bong
Bong Pass.
Lake Hlawarra for fishing and camping.
Shellharbour, Minamurra River, Whispering Gallery,
Little Lake, and Long Point.
ILLAWARRA DISTRICT — continued.
Kiama, and the Wonderful Blow Hole; Cambewarra
Mountains, Jervis Bay, George’s Basin, Sussex
Inlet, The Grotto and Caves, and the beautiful
district between Nowra and Eden, reached by
coach or steamer direct. Good shooting, swim-
ming, boating, and fishing.
SOUTHWARDS.
Campbelltown, Appiu, and Cataract Dam.
Picton and Burragorang—coach drives through wild
and grand scenery.
Mittagong—a delightful health resort. Chalybeate
spring, waterfalls, trout stream, and bathing pools.
Fitzroy, Twin, Grotto, and Macquarie Falls and Pass. .
Belmore, Carrington, and Gerringong Falls, Fairy
Bower, Erith Cascades, and Bundanoon Gullies.
The famous Wombeyan Caves with their scenes of
magnificence and splendour.
The Shoalhaven Gullies. Bungonia Caves.
Yarrangobilly Caves, Kiandra and Mt. Kosciusko.
The Australian Alps. Trout fishing and shooting.
Thermal springs.


——— —__ ;
I )
Australia’s Foremost Holiday Resort.
Hydro Majestic and Hotel, Medlow Bath, Blue Mountains, Australia.
W^ ed i° W Ba . th > 70 miles c from Sydney, and at an altitude of 3,300 ft., the Tourist finds a delightful palace
Hotel, surpassing m comfort and beauty anything in the Southern Hemisphere. The Government Tourist
MnZ OU O , % refers to it as “a. gigantic Palatial Hotel, which combines the splendour of the
(ydbino at Monte Carlo, with the comfort and homeliness of a first-class English Hotel.
MEDLOW BATH is the Key to the Mountains, and side trips
\i are many and delightful. j
: s^ zr '
Our delightful Round Trip from Sydney to the Jenoian Caves ... Our Coach Trip for
by Motor Car, occupying nearly four days, costs only 1 the same on/v
£4 ■' 0:10 A £3 ■ io . q
Tel 4349 Cal ' ** CUy ° fflCe ’ 42 CASTLEREAGH -STREET, (opp. Australia),
here full details will be gladly supplied you.


WESTWARDS:
Prospect Reservoir, Sydney’s great water supply.
Nepean River—the old championship course—com-
bination trips (6s. od. and 45.).
The Beautiful Blue Mountains with their wealth and
variety of scenery at every station: Madeline
Glen, Terraces and Horseshoe Falls, Lyre Bird
and Woodford Glens, Adelina, Junction, and
Amphitheatre Falls, Weeping Rock, Wentworth
Falls, Valley of the Waters, King’s Tableland,
The National Pass, Leura, Gordon, and Katoomba,
Falls, Three Sisters, Federal Pass, Govett’s Leap,
Evans’ Lookout, Rodriquez Pass and The Grand
Canyon, Fairy Dell, Mt, Victoria Falls and Pass,
Hassan’s Walls, Oberon and its numerous trout
streams, Kanangra Walls, The Great Zig-Zag,
Medlow Bath Hydro, Wellington and Abercrombie
Caves, etc., etc.
The World-renowned Jenolan Caves, from Mt, Vic-
toria, where the only daily line of coaches start.
Motor cars from Katoomba, Blackheath and Med-
low Bath, daily by arrangement.
NORTHWARDS:
Parramatta River combination trips (25.).
Orange Groves and drives, via Hornsby.
NORTHWARDS — continued.
Kuring-gai—a fine fishing-ground, house-boats, boat-
ing and driving.
Cowan and Berowra with their house-boats.
Hawkesbury’s famous bridge—fishing and boating
facilities, round and combination trips.
Woy Woy—Sydney’s favourite fishing spots.
Gosford, Point Clare—delightful holiday and camp-
ing spots.
Terrigal Haven, and the wonderful Skiilion.
Tuggeiah Lakes, Wyong Caves.
Lake Macquarie, the great fishing centre.
Newcastle, and its wealth of coal-mines.
Moree Hot Water Bore —a useful cure for rheu-
matism and other ailments.
The Great Lakes Route, including Port Stephens,
Myall River and Lakes, Smith and Wallis Lakes.
The Rich Northern Rivers District —Homs of the
Dairy Farmer.
Paterson, Williams, Hunter, Manning, Hastings,
Macleay Bellinger, Nambuoca, Clarence, Orara,
Richmond, Brunswick, and Tweed Rivers.
Full Information regarding these and all other
Tourist Resorts in New South Wales supplied by
the Government Tourist Bureau, Challis House, Martin
Place, Sydney.


SYDNEY FERRIES (LIMITED).
♦♦♦» ' * 1 '' I * |
TELEPHONE 98 & 794 CENTRAL. ' ' -J
WALKER CONVALESCENT HOSPITAL.


CIRCULAR QUAY —THE FERRY STEAMERS' RENDEZVOUS.


The Hotel Ceesham
YORK-ST. (opp. Town Hall),
SYDNEY.
I ELEPHONE 3705
One of the Handsomest Hotels in Sydney
Rebuilt, L p-to-date, Lofty, Well-furnished
Bedrooms. Excellent Table.
Tariff
- From (}/. per Day.
Mrs. LAWRENCE, Sole Proprietress.


T',?: A}^,-,'j>&mmwmffii£ ■- fS|ffW g -* VHHPBl
- 4 ' ItillHi**** % || *1 r yfr\jl I t ,.
SHADY NOOK AT BALMORAL BEACH —ONE OF THE HARBOUR’S INNUMERABLE DELIGHTFUL PICNIC SPOTS.


Home Dressmaking a Pleasure
Crowley’s Dress Models are indispensable as an aid to
good Dressmaking. 12jS 20j- 25 /-
Tel. Central 2718.
Glove Cleaning
Made easy by the use of our Wood Glove Hands. Movable Fingers
and Thumb. One will do for both hands. Price, 3/6
Brass & Nickel
Window & Shop Display
Fittings of ail kinds
Send for
60-page Catalogue.
C CROWLEY & SONS 5 queen victoria markets, george-st
SYDNEY.


bk ’y/j^Tjirffwi^^' V, „». .'■»yj mitfSMpJM^^Srfe'*28E^1r^*'^^^e®Ef^^Slfc
THE SPIT MIDDLE HARBOUR


The Best Camera for Tourists
is the “Kodak.”
Because the Kodaks are light, compact, and efficient, they are the
best Cameras for Tourists. You can put enough Kodak films in
your pocket to last through a whole trip, and you don’t have to
worry about a dark-room.
The No. 1 A Folding Pocket Kodak-Special is a beauty for all
kinds of Work. Its pictures measure x inches, and it has
a capacity of 12 exposures without ""reloading.
ihe lens and fittings are of splendid quality, and the price only
£3 3s. Od.
Call in and see the Kodaks, and if you want any developing or
printing done, we will do it promptly, economically, and well.
AUSTRALIAN KODAK, LTD.,
BAKER & Ltd., 37s GEORGE-ST., SYDNEY.


r- ——-
THE PRETTY DESCENT TO THE SPIT, MIDDLE HARBOUR,


GEORGE ADAMS’^
All Visitors to Sydney
should see the
MARBLE BAR.
The handsomest Bar
in Australasia.
PITT-STREET, SYDNEY,


BOATING ON SYDNEY HARBOUR - AN UNPARALLELED RENDEZVOUS FOR AQUATIC PASTIMES,


Saturdays.
Leave Manly—1015 and 1116 a.m., 316 p.m.
Leave Bay View and Newport—6'80 and 616 a,m„ 1, S16 and
6 p.m. (optional).
Sundays.
Leave Manly—916, 1016, 1015 and 1116 a.m.
Holidays.
Leave Manly—916, 1016, 1016 and 1116 a.m.
Returning.
Leave Bay View—315 and 6 p.m., and optional late trips.
Leave Newport— 4 and 6 p.m. „
Leave Rock Lily at intervals between 815 and 4-30 p.m. (optional).
Leave Narrabeen at intervals between 4 and 416 p.m.
Narrabeen
50
min. ..
7 miles.
Rock Lily
.. 1 hr.
15
min. ..
.. 10 miles.
Bay View
.. 1 hr.
30
min. ..
.. 12£ miles.
Newport..
.. 1 hr.
30
min. .,
12£ miles.
THE MANLY LIVERY STABLES. LTD.
ROYAL MAIL LINE OF COUCHES.
Run as follows (Saturdays, Sundays, and Holidays excepted):—
Leave Manly tor Narrabeen, Rock Lily, Bay View, and Newport—
-1015 and 11-15 a.m., 4-15 p.m. and 5-45 p.m.
Leave Bay View—6'Bo and 6'45 a.m., 8-15 p.m. (6'30, optional).
Leave Newport—6-45 a.m., 2 and 3'16 p.m. (6 30 „).
Leave Rock Lily—7 and 7-15 a.m., 2-16 and 3-45 p.m. (6 pm. ” ).
Leave Narrabeen—7-26 and 7'30 a.m., 2-30 and 4 p.m. (6 45 ” ).'
FARES: Single—Narrabeen, Is., and Rock Elly, Is. 6d.
Bay View and Newport, 2s.
Time of Journev and Distance.
Telephone— ( P. .1. Scahill.
No. 30 Manly. Directors j R. Forsyth.
3 ’ I. G. Bknmson.
Manly, Balgowlah, and Spit Coach Time Table.
Coach leaves Wharf .. 11*15 a.m. 215 p.m. 415 p.m.
Coach leaves The Spit .. 12-20 p.m. 3*20 p.m. 5’20 p.m.
FARES: Manly to Spit, 6d. Time of Journey, 30 minutes.
„ Balgowlah, 3d.
F. G. Bknmson, Secretary and Director.


’Phone 2196.
Furs & Curios. G)
Established 1860.
All Visitors to Sydney are invited to inspect
the Large Museum and Show Rooms of. ,
TOST &c BOHTJ
(WILLIS B. COATES),
2*2 605, George-si,.
SYDNEY, N.S.W.
Platypus, Opossum, Native Bear,
Wallaby, and Kangaroo Skins made
up into Carriage and Travelling Bugs,
Mats, to.
The largest collection in Australia
of genuine Native Implements and
other Curiosities. Land and Sea Shells
in large variety. Birds, Beasts, and
Reptiles prepared and mounted to
order. Carved Emu Eggs, Lamp
Shades, and other beautiful and inter-
esting souvenirs. Furs, Skins, Bugs,
Mats, Caps, &0., in large variety.
10,12, <S: 14, Moore-st. TAXIDERMISTS ' FURR,ERS ’
W&mli tanners, and
(near g.p.0.), island curio dealers.
LYRE BIRD (Mermra Superb*.)
Suitable Presents lor Friends Abroad Carefully Packed (free) and forwarded to any address In the World.


ANTHONY HORDERNS’ NEW PALACE EMPORIUM^
Every Trip Around Sydney should include a Tour through
Australia’s Mammoth Store.
The Home
of
Anthony
Horderns’
Famous
Prices.
Shops
under
One
Roof.
Three-quarters of a million pounds worth of the world’s choicest commodities
await the approval of the people.
ANTHONY HORDERN & SONS, i
Only Universal Providers, BRICKFIELD HILL, SYDNEY. U
