

issued by
Victorian Government
• ••Tourist Bureau- •
Corner COLLINS a SWANSTON STREETS,
MELBOURNE, VICTORIA




i \
KRUSE’S
Fluid
Magnesia
Indigestion
Biliousness
and Acidity
i
i
Recommended
by Medical Me
Medical Men
Allays Feverish
conditions due to
Vaccination and
Teething of
Infants
A Boon to Travellers by Land or Sea,
SOLE PROPRIETORS
Felton, Grimwade & Co.
MELBOURNE. •




You Should Drink
*6OOOO,
It is the Very Best.
USEFUL XMAS GIFT
“ They came as a boon and a blessing to men,
The PICKWICK, the OWL, and the WAVERLEY Pen.
THE NIB’S THE
reason of the Elasticity and
Perfection of the Gold
Waverley Nib , It does not tire the
hand as do the stubborn lifeless nibs
in ordinary Fountain Pens.
ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE FREE
Our Pens are Recommended by over 3,000 Newspapers.
SOLD BY ALL STORES AND STATIONERS
Macniven & Cameron Ltd., Edinburgh
Australian DePot: R. HUTTON, 321-3 FLINDERS LANE.
3


ORIENT LINE
Royal Mail Steamers.
CARRYING PASSENGERS: BETWEEN
Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne,
Adelaide, Fremantle, Colombo
(for India and the East), Port Said (for
Egypt, Palestine, &c.), Naples, Mar-
seilles, Gibraltar, Plymouth, and
London.
Transhipping to all Ports.
R.M.S. Osterley.
FLEET
Orsova - 12,036 Tons
Otranto 12.124 ~
Otway - 12,077 ~
Orvieto 12,130
Osterley 12,129 Tons
Orontes - 9,023 ~
Omrah - - 8,130
Ophir - - 6,814
All Twin Screw Steamers
Orama (building) 13,000 tons (triple screw)
Each Vessel carries a Surgeon, and Stewardesses
in all classes.
Wireless Telegraphy Equipment.
Cabines de Luxe, Bedstead Rooms, Single
Berth Rooms, Suites, Laundries,
Electric Elevators.
CUISINE IN ALL CLASSES A SPECIALTY.
THIRD CLASS IN 12.000 TON STEAMERS.
Spacious Promenade Decks. Smoke-rooms. Ladies’ Music
Rooms (on shelter deck). Two-berth and four-berth Cabins
on upper and main decks. Large well ventilated Dining
Saloon on main deck.
Write or call for Illustrated Pamphlets.
D. L. DOWDELL,
Branch Manager,
Equitable Building, 312 Collins St., Melbourne.
4


VICTORIAN
RAILWAYS
Government Tourist Bureau
CORNER OF
Collins and Swanston Sts.,
MELBOURNE.
Opposite Town Hall.
Tel. Cent. 174
Information r respecting' Travel and Tourist
Accommodation freely supplied
Tickets issued for principal Interstate and all Victorian
Country Stations, Sleeping berths booked. Parlor Car and
Limited Express seats reserved.
ASK FOR FREE BOOKLETS:—
‘‘Trips around Melbourne” and “Summer at
the Seaside” and for Tourist Maps and Hotel and
Boarding House Guide.
PURCHASE:—
“Picturesque Victoria,” the Tourist’s Hand-
book. Sixth Edition, Price, 6d..
Broadbent’s Road Guide to Victoria with
Maps, Price 1/-.
5


VICTORIAN
RAILWAYS
Parlor and Observation Car run
daily on the Sydney Express
between Melbourne and
Albury.
THE Car is equipped with every modern con-
venience for Railway Travelling, and contains
Library, Observation Platform, Smoke Room,
and Lavatories, constituting it the most luxurious
and up-to-date Car at present running in the Aus-
tralian Common ealth.
Seats in the Car may be reserved on payment of
4/- each in addition to the ordinary first class fare.
Magnificent Dining Car Service be-
tween Melbourne and Albury on
the Sydney Express.
Between Melbourne and Ararat on
the Adelaide Express.
TARIFF:
Breakfast from 8 a.m, to 9.30 a.m. —
3/- No. 1 saloon. 2/- No. 2 saloon.
Luncheon from 11.30 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. —
3/- No. 1 saloon. 2/- No. 2 saloon
Dinner from 6 p.m to 8 p.m. —
4/- No. 1 saloon. 2/- No. 2 saloon
Children under 14 years of age, 1/- less than
above charges
Light Refreshments, Cigars, etc., ob-
tainable at all times.
MILDURA LINE DINING CAR.
Meals obtainable on down and up
journeys, 2/- each.
Light Refreshments, Tobacco, Cigars,
etc., obtainable up till midnight.
Car available for first and second class
passengers.


Trips from Melbourne
to the Nearer Ranges
Warrandyte, via Ringwood
fe'fMwStffC ARRANDYTE, or Anderson’s Creek,
as it was formerly called, is a district
'greatly favoured by artists on account
of the charm of its surroundings. A
conveyance leaves Ringwood at 10
p „r a.m., and runs through pretty, undu-
lating country, and past numerous
orchards, to the village, a distance of six miles,
covered in an hour. Meals may be taken at either
of the local hotels, or picnic parties may encamp
amid the trees upon the Yarra’s banks. A few hours
may be pleasantly spent in wandering through the
bush, and in watching the working of the quartz
battery upon the stream close to the village.
Returning-, an afternoon coach leaves War-
randyte, reaching Ring-wood in time to connect
with a train due in Melbourne at about 6 p.m.
On Sundays a morning coach leaves Ring-
wood for Warrandyte, returning in the evening,
connecting with trains from and to Melbourne.
Railway Return Fares. —ist class. 1/8; 2nd
class, 1/2.
Coach Fares. —1/6 single, 2/6 return
Via HEIDELBERG.
Coaches run daily, Sundays included, from
Heidelberg to Warrandyte, passing through
Templestowe, one of the earliest settled dis-
tricts of the State, four miles from Heidelberg,
and reaching Warrandyte, 10 miles, in about an
hour and a half. The road passes through
splendid fruit-growing country, along the
Yarra valley for the greater part of the journey,
and in springtime the golden glory of the
wattle and the wealth of fruit blossom fill the
air with fragrance, and make the drive
thoroughly enjoyable.
Railway Fares.—ist class return, iosd. ; 2nd
class return, B£d.
Coach Fares.—l/6 single, 3/- return.
7


Starting from Flinders Street Station, the
passenger arrives at Bayswater, iB£ miles out,
after about an hour’s journey. Coaches con-
nect with certain trains at this station, and run
to beauty spots in the ranges, but the service is
curtailed during the winter months. From
Bayswater to Olinda the track runs through a
charming woodland abounding in beautiful fern
glades. About six miles from the railway
station a very pretty feature, known as
Sassafras Gully, is reached at about noon.
Foot tracks have been formed and bridges
erected here for the convenience of pedestrians.
From the head of the Sassafras Gully a mag-
nificent view is obtained for miles through the
ranges, and along its course enormous trees
spring from the groves of sassafras, hazel and
fern, while a crystal stream flowing down the
glen, o’erhung with ferns and native shrubs,
conveys a sensation of delicious coolness even
on the hottest day. There are many beautiful
walks around Sassafras, to Graham’s Falls,
One-Tree Hill, etc.
A mile and a half further on the coach road
terminates at Olinda, on the summit of Mt.
Olinda, at a height of 1800 feet above sea level.
The outlook is superb, and from Olinda as a
centre many enjoyable excursions are practic-
able—to Montrose and Croydon, to Monbulk
and Upper Fern Tree Gully, via Sassafras, to
Lyre Bird Gully and Lookout Rock, and many
other beauty spots.
A circular pedestrian trip may be made by
starting from either Bayswater or Upper Fern
Tree Gully Railway Station and walking though
Sassafras to Olinda, thence by cither of three
practicable roads, through splendid scenery, via
Montrose to Croydon Railway Station.
THROUGH FARES; RAIL AND COACH
(Issued from October 15th to April 30th each year)
Ist class 2nd class
return. return.
Forest Road 3/11 ... 3/5
Hazel Dell 4/11 ... 4/5
Sassafras 5/5 ... 4/11
Olinda 5/5 ... 4/1 1
Circular Trip.
A circular trip by rail and coach has been
arranged whereby passengers may travel via
Upper Fern Tree Gully to Sassafras, and return
from there by coach to Bayswater, and rejoin
the train for Melbourne at that station, or vice
versa.
FARES.—Ist class return, 5/7; 2nd class
return, 5/1.
Available for return for two months.




Melbourne to Upper Ferntree Gully,
Sherbrooke, Sassafras, and Olinda.
An alternative route to Sassafras and Olinda
is afforded by the coach service, run from
Upper Fern Tree Gully station daily.
The train journey between Melbourne
(Flinders Street Station) and Upper Ferntree
Gully occupies, roughly, about an hour and a
half either way.
The coach is compelled by the steepness of
the grades en route to follow a zig-zag road,
which, while lengthening the trip, gives greater
opportunities for the enjoyment of the pic-
turesque scenery traversed, and of the mag-
nificent series of views obtained at successive
stages of the journey. At one part of the trip
the outlook embraces Westernport and the
intervening country south of the ranges, and
from another spot Melbourne is overlooked.
SHERBROOKE, five miles from Upper Fern
Tree Gully, 1600 feet above sea level, is
reached by coach running from that station.
In one of the lovely gullies in close proximity
to the Post Office are the Sherbrooke Falls, on
Monbulk Creek, one of the choicest beauty
spots within too miles of Melbourne. Its fern
bowers are a very special attraction, and the
pedestrian tracks winding through the valley,
crossing and re-crossing the creek by pretty
rustic bridges, render this beautiful valley
easily accessible, By continuing down the
valley along the foot tracks, the tourist may
pass on to Belgrave Railway Station, about two
miles from the Falls, and return to Upper Fern
Tree Gully by the narrow-gauge line. From
an elevated position in the vicinity of Sher-
brooke very extensive views oyer French Island
and Westernport Bay are opqned up.
THROUGH FARES: RAIL AND COACH
Via Upper Fern Tree Gully, to;—
Ist class 2nd class
Ferny Creek 4/9 ... 4/2
Sassafras 5/3 ... 4/8
Olinda ~ ... 5/9 ... 5 12
Passengers to Sherbrooke Lodge book tickets as to Olinda )
FERN TREE GULLY Station is four miles
beyond Bayswater, and is the starting point of
the narrow-gauge line running beyond. Here
is the well-known National Park, in which a
pavilion and other conveniences have been
erected. For many years this Park has
deservedly been a great resort.
A quarter of a mile’s walk from the station
in the National Park is the famous Fern Tree
Gully. This beautiful dell is traversed by a
path, which winds its ascending way through
thickets of hazel, native laburnum, and mimosa,
interspersed with a profusion of fern growth.




Upper F. T. Gully
3/-
2/2
2/3
1/8
1/9
1/3
Belgrave
3/10
2/8
3/1
2/2
2/6
1/9
Aura
4/10
3/6
4/1
2/10
3/-
2/-
Paradise Valley
67-
3/6
4/3
3/-
3/-
2/-
Emerald
5/2
3/8
4/5
3/2
37-
2/-
Cockatoo
6/6
4/6
5/1
3/8
3/6
2/6
ranging- from the delicate sprays of the maiden-
hair to the towering tree-ferns spreading their
feathery fronds far overhead. A few minutes’
walk beyond the temination of the Gully, the
summit of One-Tree Hill (1523 ft.) is reached, whence
a magnificent panoramic view is obtainable. An
alternative coach service runs from Upper Fern
Tree Gully to Sassafras and Olinda by an easier
and equally picturesque road. Passengers
going out by Bayswater may return by this
road to the Gully Station, and thence to Mel-
bourne, or may travel out by Upper Fern Tree
Gully and return via Bayswater to the city.
There is a break of guage at Upper Ferntree
Gully, 225 miles from Melbourne, and from here
a 2ft. 6in. track winds a sinuous course to the
terminus—Gembrook —18 miles away. As the
train progresses along this narrow-gauge line
a series of most exquisite pictures from
Nature’s easel is unfolded to the view. From
every gully spring towering trees, around whose
gnarled bases nestle the lesser growth of hazel
and myrtle, _ while ferns of endless variety are
everywhere in evidence.
In the spring and early summer the bush is
ablaze with blossom, heath, and clinging
clematis, and the climate at all seasons is
delightful and invigorating.
At holiday seasons many pleasure parties
pitch tents on the banks of the Macclesfield and
Cockatoo Creeks, and in fishing and shooting,
or in the sheer beauty of the surroundings, find
ample enjoyment.
Within easy reach of every station en route y
and at Gembrook in particular, are many beau-
tiful gullies and ideal picnic spots. At the
terminus, from an elevated point at the rear of
the railway station, the outlook is superb—in
one direction across to Westernport Bay and
French Island, and in another to the Warburton
Ranges.
FARES.
Ordinary Week End Sunday
Return. Excursion. Excursion
Ist. 2nd. Ist. 2nd. Ist. 2nd.
Gembrook 7/6 5/2 5/11 4/2 3/6 2/6
Ordinary tickets are available for two months’
return.
Week-end tickets, issued by last train
Friday, all trains Saturday and Sunday, avail-
able for return till Monday night.
Sunday tickets available for return same day
only.
For trains, see Victorian Railways current
time table, or inquire at Government Tourist
Bureau.




Melbourne to Montrose and Mt. Dandenong.
Via Croydon.
MONTROSE is rapidly growing in favour as
a health and pleasure resort, not only on
account of its picturesque location on the
slopes of the Dandenong Ranges, but also by
reason of the very short time occupied in
reaching there. A journey of 18 miles by rail
to Croydon, a station on the Healesville line,
and thence three by coach, transports the
traveller from the vitiated atmosphere and close
environment of the city to the pure air and
freedom of the bush. Conveyances run between
Montrose and Croydon Railway Station thrice
daily, in connection with the morning, midday
and evening trains from Melbourne, returning
in time to catch a convenient evening train to
town, and on Sundays connecting with morning
and evening trains from and to Melbourne.
MOUNT DANDENONG. —The atmosphere
upon the mount, which rises to a height of
close on 2100 feet, is bracing and exhilarating,
and the views from the summit are calculated
to arouse intense admiration.
There is a daily coach service between Croy-
don, and Mt. Dandenong, meeting the morning,
midday, and evening Healesville trains on week
days, and a morning train on Sundays.
Returning, the coach connects with the con-
venient evening trains leaving Croydon for
Melbourne on week nights and Sundays.
Picnic parties, numbering over 20 members,
can arrange to be conveyed to the top of the
mount from the local railway station at 2J6 per
head return, or smaller parties at 3/- each.
Picnic requisites, such as hot water, milk, etc.,
are obtainable from local residents. The
journey by waggonette from the Croydon
station to the summit occupies about an hour
and a half, and the return trip is made in about
an hour.
There is upon the summit of the mountain
a trigonometrical station, recently rebuilt, and
here a shelter shed has been erected, with tables
and seats, and with provision for water, so that
picnickers may take their meals in comfort.
From the original station which stood upon this
site observations were taken to similar stations
on Mts. Macedon, Disappointment, Juliet, and
other peaks, when the trigonometrical survey of
Victoria was made. Within the range of vision
lie such places of interest as Port Phillip Bay,
Lilydale, Healesville, Warburton, and Mt. Baw
Baw. The station is reached by a road branch-
ing from the main coach road and running for
about half a mile along the top of the range.
At Montrose, and also at Mt. Dandenong,
there are numerous comfortable boarding-
houses, and those in search of accommodation
for week-end or longer periods can depend on
obtaining what they desire in this charming
mountainous district.
RAIL FARE.
Melbourne to— Ist. 2nd.
Croydon (day return), 1/11 J/5
Croydon (week-end) 1/10 1/4
Issued on Friday evening, or any train on Saturday or Sunday,
available for return till last train Monday.
COACH FARE.
Croydon to Montrose, and return, 21-.
Croydon to Mt. Dandenong, 2/- single, 3/6 return




The Upper Yarra—Warburton Line.
Passengers for the Warburton district leave
Flinders St. Station. The line, which branches
from the Healesville track at Lilydale, skirts
the wooded foothills lying just beyond the
junction station, traverses the rich fruit-
growing districts of Seville and Woori-Yallock,
and descends almost to water-level at
LAUNCHING PLACE. Here the River Yarra
runs, a fine broad stream, within a few feet of
the verandah of the Home Hotel, close by the
railway station. From this centre innumerable
jaunts, each full of delightful interest, may be
taken, chief amongst these being that across
the Don ranges to Healesville.
' A mile from Launching Place is YARRA
JUNCTION. Just below the station the
streams of the Yarra and Little Yarra unite
amid charming surroundings ; and seven miles
from here, amid the ranges, is GILDEROY,
with the Mt. Myrtalia Hotel, situated at a
height of 3000 feet above sea level. Further
along the valley the terminus (Warburton), 48
miles from Melbourne, is reached. During
this portion of the journey occasional glimpses
are to be had of the Yarra—hereabout a clear,
sparkling stream overhung by eucalypti, its
banks richly garnished with fern and flower and shrub.
WARBURTON, in close proximity to the
River Yarra, is the centre of a most picturesque
mountainous district. There are many points
of vantage from which views of exceptional
beauty are to be obtained, the height of the
hills in the vicinity ranging from 1400 to 2000
feet, and the several streams in the neighbour-
hood promote a wealth of lovely fern and native
shrub growth. About miles from Warburton
are the Wonwondah Falls, a series of rapids
descending in all about 100 feet, and close by
is the Seventh Day Adventist Settlement, with
its splendid electric installation.
Continuing along the Yarra valley, several
splendid fishing streams —Big Pat’s Creek,
O’Shannasy River, M'Mahon’s, Armstrong’s,
and Walsh’s Creeks—all tributaries of the
main stream, are passed. Comfortable accom-
modation may be procured at M'Veigh’s Hotel,
at the junction of Walsh’s Creek and the Yarra,
and this hotel is practically the starting point
for tourist parties making the interesting trip
across the Baw Baw Ranges to Walhalla.
A coach runs between Warburton and
Walsh’s Creek, and combined rail and coach
tickets are issued from Melbourne during the
summer excursion season.
FARES
Ordinary Week End Sunday
Return. Excursion. Excursion.
Ist. 2nd. Ist. 2nd. Ist. 2nd.
Launching Place 9/3 61- 71- 4/6 3/6 2/6
Yarra Junction 9/9 6/5 7/4 4/10 3/6 2/6
Warburton 1 1/9 81- 9/7 6,5 3/6 2/6
Ordinary tickets available for two months return.
Week-end tickets issued by last train Friday, all trains Satur-
day and Sunday, available for return till Monday night.
Sunday tickets available for return same day only.
THROUGH FARES: RAIL AND COACH.
Ist. return 2nd. return
Melbourne to Walsh's Creek 19/7 16/5
For trains see Victorion Railways current lime table, or
inquire at Government Tourist’s Bureau.




Melbourne to Healesrille and across
the Blacks’ Spur.
The township of HEALESVILLE, prettily
situated at the junction of the Graceburn and
Maroondah Rivers, is the terminus of the rail-
way over which travel tourists desirous of
visiting the picturesque district of Fernshaw
and the mountainous o untry beyond. Within
easy distance of the town itself are many beau-
tiful walks, which will well repay the taking;
but a more extended tour may be brought con-
veniently within the compass of a day’s outing
by taking advantage of the coaches run in con-
junction with the train service.
Daily (Sundays excepted), on arrival of the
morning train from Melbourne, a coach runs to
St. Fillans, 16 miles out from Healesville, and
on to Marysville. The first place of special
interest on the route is GRACEDALE HOUSE.
From the piazza of this magnificent and com-
modious house of accommodation is obtained a
commanding outlook over Healesville and the
Yarra Flats to Doncaster Tower and the distant
metropolis, whilst Mounts Riddell (2750 feet),
Juliet (3660 feet), and Monda (2974 feet) form
a semi-circle in the near background. From
this point many trips may be made, either on
foot or in the vehicles belonging to the house,
to beauty spots within easy reach, such as the
Myers’ and Mathinna Falls, the Graceburn and
Maroondah Weirs, and Condon’s Gully. Near
by, also, is Coranderrk Station, one of the
homes of the few remaining aborigines of this
State.
Onward past Gracedale House the coach
reaches FERNSHAW, seven miles from Heales-
ville, 750 feet above sea-level, where the
Maroondah, or Watts (old name) River is
crossed, and the scene is one of entrancing
beauty. From Healesville to Fernshaw and
back makes a pleasant afternoon bicycle run ;
the road is good all the way, and of easy
grades.
Shortly after leaving Fernshaw the ascent of
the Spur commences, and four miles further on
a height of iqoo feet is attained. En route
fern gullies and immense specimens of
eucalypti, some 280 feet high and 45 feet in
circumference, are continually in view, while
the sassafras and the Australian beech
flourish to perfection. Here and there a break
in the thick foliage permits of a glimpse of the
Cathedral Range (2120 feet), Mount Strickland
(4000 feet), and other mountain peaks. When
once the summit is attained, THE HERMIT-
AGE, 13 miles out, is soon reached. Built
after the fashion of a Swiss chalet, on sloping
grounds, with fountain, miniature waterfall and
lake, no more delightful combination of art
and comfort can be conceived.
There are within a short distance of The
Hermitage several fern gullies well worth a
visit. Blackfish and trout abound in a stream
close by.
18


Nyora Gully, via Healesville.


NARBETHONG, 14 miles from Healesville,
is the next point of call, where the local hotel
offers accommodation for a fair number of
visitors, and lunch is provided.
There are many beauty spots in this
vicinity, and here, or at any other place on the
road, passengers, if they so elect, may stop
over and re-join the coach on its return journey.
St. Fillans is the farthest point that excur-
sionists making - the day trip can reach. On
arrival there the return conveyance is taken for
home, and Healesville is reached in time to
permit of a meal being- obtained before the
departure of the evening- train to Melbourne;
but those desiring- to travel to MARYSVILLE
continue on in the same conveyance, and reach
their destination about 3 p.m.
RAIL FARES.
Ordinary Return. Week-end Excursion
Ist. 2nd. Ist. 2nd.
Melbourne to Healesville 8/3 5/3 6/3 4/-
COMBINED RAIL AND COACH.
Melbourne to— Ist. 2nd
Healesville and Gracedale 8/3 61-
The Hermitage ... 14/3 12/-
Narbethong 15/3 13/-
St. Fillans 16/3 14/-
Marysville 20/3 18/-
Issued from 15th October to 30th April
Tickets available for two months.
Week-end Excursion Tickets issued by last train Friday, any
train Saturday or Sunday, available for return till last train
Monday.
Healesville—Mount Toole-be-wong.
A coach runs daily to “ CLAVERTON ” and
“ NYORA,” upon Mt. Toole-be-wong (2600
feet), in connection with the morning train from
Melbourne, passing “ WADE’S LOOK-OUT ”
(three miles) and Malleson’s Look-Out (1450
feet), seven miles from Healesville. From these
elevated points magnificent panoramic views
are afforded of the Healesville township, the
Yarra valley, and over Doncaster to Melbourne,
and to Mt. Macedon beyond. Passengers may
alight and picnic at either of the above-
mentioned points, picking up the coach on the
back journey and returning by the night train
from Healesville. Through rail and coach
tickets by Robarts’ coach are issued daily
(Sundays excepted), for the connection with the
morning train only, throughout the summer, at
the following fares :
Melbourne to Healesville and ist. 2nd
Wade’s Look-Out 9 3.. 7 0
Claverton or Nyora 11 3 9 0
Tickets at special fares are issued to children
under 12 and under 14 years respectively.
SUNDAY TRIPS.
For those to whom the many beauty spots in
the immediate vicinity .of Healesville are a
sufficient attraction, the running of a train
from Melbourne at a convenient hour on Sun-
day mornings affords an opportunity for spend-
ing a restful day in guiet enjoyment of the


Graceburn Creek, Healesvijle
Watts River, Healesville


sylvan beauty of the surroundings of this
popular resort.
Those desiring it can obtain their meals at
any of the local establishments which cater for
visitors, whilst others may prefer to partake of
picnic meals in one or other of the many shel-
tered nooks on the banks of the Yarra or Watts
Rivers, or the Graceburn or Badger Creeks.
Vehicles may be obtained by those wishing to
enjoy a day’s drive.
Return Fares.—ist Class, 3/6; 2nd Class, 2/6.
BEAUTY SPOTS AND DISTANCES.
From the Healesville Post Office.
(To simplify directions for reaching places of interest, specific
letters have been adopted for each outing, which are painted on
trees, fences, etc., en route , as indicated in brackets hereunder).
Miles.
Mathinna Falls ... (White X) ... 7
Myers’ Creek and Falls (Red X) 5
Truganina Falls ... (White T) 8
Condon’s Gully ... (White C) 4
Malleson’s Gully ... (White G) 10
Malleson’s Look-out (White L) 7
Etta’s Glen 10
Jessie’s Bower 74
Blacks’ Spur ... 10
Fernshaw 7
Morley’s Track 74
Badger River ... 3
Coranderrk Aboriginal Station 24
Graceburn Weir 4
Maroondah Weir ... (White W) 5
Donnelly’s Creek Weir 3
Coranderrk Weir ... 44
Mt. Juliet, 3,600 ft. to top (White J) 94
Mt. Riddell, 2,600 ft. ~ (White R) 4
Mt, St. Leonard’s. 3,304 ft. to top 10
Mt. Monda, 2,974 ft. to top 11
Mt. Donnebuang, 2,600 ft. to top 8
Christmas Hills 1 1
Launching Place 14
Alexandra.
101 miles from Melbourne. There is a morn-
ing train from Spencer Street Station daily,
passengers changing carriages twice en route —
at Tallarook and Cathkin—arriving at Alexan-
dra about noon.
Alexandra is encircled by hills, and has
broad, well-planted streets. The surrounding
country is well calculated to attract tourist
traffic to this town, as trips in any direction
repay excursionists with extensive panoramic
views of great beauty.
Amongst other points worth visiting may be
mentioned the falls on the Snob’s Creek, six
miles out; the beautiful falls on the Rubicon
River, 16 miles distant, and the Puzzle Ranges,
from 4 to 10 miles distant.
Enjoyable drives may be made from Alex-
andra, along the valley of the Goulburn River,
to Thornton and Darlingford, or along the
course of the Acheron, a tributary of this
splendid stream, to the Cathedral Mount, at a
distance of about 12 miles from the township.
The many streams which water this fertile dis-
trict are well stocked with native fish, and, in
addition, large numbers of English trout have
been introduced into them, with the result that
excellent fishing may always be depended on.
Rabbits are always plentiful, and on the back-
waters and lagoons of the Goulburn wild-fowl


23


of various descriptions may be shot, whilst in
good seasons fine bags of quail may be made
upon the river flats.
Alexandra lies 720 feet above sea-level, and
enjoys an equable climate, and comfortable
accommodation may be obtained at one or other
of its hotels.
Through Rail and Coach Tickets are avail-
able for the journey, for tourists wishful to
make the round trip—Melbourne to Melbourne
—across the Blacks’ Spur and through some of
the finest bush and mountain scenery in the
State. The route is either by rail to Alexandra
and coach thence across the Dividing Range to
Healesville, and rail back to Melbourne, or the
reverse way.
Starting from Alexandra, the coach crosses
the Goulburn a few miles out, close to its
junction with the Acheron River, and its sub-
sequent course is along the valley of this beau-
tiful stream, passing through Acheron town-
ship, Taggerty, near which lies the imposing
Cathedral Mount and Buxton, from which point
to St. Fillans there are two routes, one via
Marysville, and a second, and shorter, way
following the course of the Acheron. Shortly
after leaving St. Fillans Narbethong is reached,
and during the next few miles the Blacks’ Spur
is crossed at an elevation of 1900 feet, and the
road thereafter is all downhill, through
exquisite forest scenery, to Healesville.
This is undoubtedly one of the most enjoy-
able trips it is possible to take.
FARES: Mountainous District Excursion.
Ist return 2nd return
Melbourne to Alexandra 21/7 14/8
(Issued from 15th November to 30th April inclusive)
CIRCULAR TRIP.
THE FARES: RAIL AND COACH.
Melbourne to Melbourne Ist return 2nd return
via Alexandra and Healesville 28/3 23/8
Beaconsfield.
28 miles from Melbourne on the main Gippsland line.
There are several trains daily to this station
on week days, and a morning- train all the year
round on Sundays. The township of LOWER
BEACONSFIELD lies adjacent to the railway
station, and Cardinia Park, within easy walk-
ing distance, is a popular picnic resort, afford-
ing opportunities to anglers, and providing
fresh water for making- tea, etc.
A considerable portion of the course of the
creek lies through private property, but no
objection is offered by owners to visitors using
the stream, so long as no vandalism is com-
mitted. Shelter is supplied by the native bush
growing in the enclosure. There are several
hotels and boarding-houses catering for visitors
at Lower Beaconsfield.
UPPER BEACONSFIELD stands upon the
hills at a height of about 1000 feet above sea-
level, and is nearly five miles distant from the
local railway station. Ctpnveyances run fre-
quently between the two points, and the drive to
the hills 'is full of interest. En route , three
miles out, a new mountain resort has recently
sprung into existence. Numbers of small, but
comfortable, houses have been built by towns-
people as week-end dwellings, and there is a


Cardinia Creek, Beaconsfield.


constant stream of holiday traffic to “Quamby,”
as the settlement is called. A splendid rustic
rotunda and room, replete with all the requisites
for picnickers, has been erected, and tanks
ensure a supply of fresh drinking - water.
Sunday visitors are invited to make use of
“Quamby” and the rotunda, where the facili-
ties afforded make families quite independent of hotels.
Upper Beaconsfield is reached in about an
hour, and on the hills are many comfortable
boarding-houses, a tennis court, and recreation reserve.
There are many beautiful walks through the
surrounding country, one within easy distance
to the Stony Creek bridge passing two fine fern
gullies, Bain’s and Walker’s. Immediately
behind Salisbury House, a leading boarding
establishment, there is another charming fern
glen. Other pleasant outings may be made
to the Haunted Gully and Welcome Gully, and
enjoyable drives may be taken to Nobelius’
Nursery at Emerald, to Gembrook, and to
Pakenham.
RAIL FARES.
Ordinary Week-end Sunday
Ist 2nd Ist 2nd Ist 2nd
Melbourne to Beaconsfield 4/11 3/3 3/8 2/6 2/6 1/9
Coach Fare, between Beaconsfield and Upper Beaconsfield
2/- each way.
Yarra Glen to Christmas Hills and Toolangi.
Yarra Glen is a railway station on the
Healesville line, with a week-day service of
three trains, taking about two hours to make
the journey. From this station a coach service
runs to CHRISTMAS HILLS, five miles dis-
tant, whose elevated position and invigorating
climate attract thither a yearly increasing num-
ber of holiday makers. There is a centrally
situated Free Library, and upon the hills are a
number of beautiful country residences of Mel-
bourne citizens, whilst accommodation for
visitors is provided by several comfortable
boarding-houses.
From the summit of the hills in the vicinity
many panoramic views of the Yarra valley and
surrounding country are obtainable.
TOOLANGI.—A second coach service from
Yarra Glen is run to Toolangi, which is distant
14 miles from the railway station, and lies upon
the crest of the Dividing Range, on the water-
shed of the Yarra and Yea Rivers. The coach
road, though steep in places, is generally
good. There is only one available boarding-
house, which provides comfortable accommoda-
tion and has its own tennis court. Within
easy walking distance of the house are the
Sylvia Creek, Smedley and Badham Falls; and
a beauty spot, called “The Canoe,” on the Yea
River, and Mt. St. Leonard make enjoyable
picnic excursions. There are several beautiful
fern gullies within a radius of three miles, and
a timber tram track leads into the heart of an
almost virgin forest, where giant trees abound.
RAIL FARES.
Ordinary Week-end
Ist 2nd Ist 2nd
Melbourne to Yarra Glen ... 5/6 3/8 4/2 2/9
COACH FARES.
Yarra Glen to Christmas Hills ... 1/6 each way
Yarra Glen to Toolangi 5/- each way


VICTORIAN RAILWAYS
The Buffalo Plateau
THE GARDEN OF THE GODS
A Region of Magnificent Outlook
THE BUFFALO FALLS
THE HORN. 5.640 feet
THE MONOLITH
THE LEVIATHAN
THE WALL OF CHINA
OG, GOG AND MAGOG
THE HUMP
The CA THEDRAL PEAK
The Government Chalet, Mt. Buffalo.
First Class Accommodation at the New
Government Chalet J. Newton. Lessee
Winter Sport and Summer Pastime—
The Lake on the Summit, 60 acres
in extent, with Boats and Bathing
Houses.
Nine Hole Golf Course, 2,800 yards
in length.
Special through Rail and Coach Tickets issued all the
year round to the Buffalo Plateau , via Porepunkah or
Bright, from Melbourne, Seymour, Benalla. Wangaratta.
Albury and Beechworth.
27


VICTORIAN lllljlll RAILWAYS
The Gippsland Lakes
LOVELY RIVER AND LAKE SCENERY.
FISHING, SHOOTING, ROWING.
SAILING AND MOTOR BOAT TRIPS.
An ideal way to do the Flakes is to hire a Motor Boat
and move Camp from point to point.
Lakes King, Victoria, Wellington,
and Tyers.
The Mitchell, Tambo, and Latrobe Rivers,
Famous Ninety Mile Beach.
Tickets issued for the Lakes trip via Sale or via
Bairnsdale, and for the circular journey outwards via
Bairnsdale returning via Sale, or vice versa.
Lake Tyers.
The Buchan Caves
Reached via the Gippsland Lakes Route or by Coach from
Bairnsdale via Bruthen.
The Fairy Cave, with its Splendid New Chambers.
THE MOON, KITSON, SPRING CREEK, WILSON.
KING, AND SLOCOMBE CAVES.
Superb Limestone Formations, Stalactites,
Stalagmites, Columns, Alabaster Couches, and
JeweKted Shawls.
THE CITADEL ROCKS, MURRINDAL, AND
THE SNOWY RIVER DRIVE.
Summer fares issued for both above mentioned routes.
28


PURVEYORS TO VICE ROYALTY
ALWAYS DRINK
ROWLANDS’
BALLARAT SODAWATER.
LITHIA WATER.
DRY GINGER ALE.
SELTZER WATER.
BREWED GINGER BEER.
AGENTS FOR
KOOMAH SPA
An Australian Natural
Water.
From the Rock Flat Springs,
Cooma, N.S.W.
E. ROWLANDS
PROPRIETARY LIMITED.
Telephones
Central 169: City 1872
29




Foy & Gibson
PTY. LTD.
Manufacturers
AND
Importers
The Best Place for Everything,
either for Personal Wear or
Household Requirements.
THE Largest Manufacturers in the
Commonwealth. We manufac-
ture nearly everything that is required
for personal wear or household use,
thus supplying goods direct to the
Customer and saving all Middlemen’s
profit.
BY our splendid system of Cata-
logues and Price Lists, Custom-
ers living at a distance receive all the
advantages of those residing in Mel-
bourne, and get a selection that it is
almost impossible to obtain elsewhere.
OUR Buying Terms are Prompt
Cash and our Selling Terms are
Prompt Cash, and it is the combin-
ation of the two that makes our
FAMOUS LOW PRICES
and our Trade what it is.
FOY & GIBSON
PTY. LTD.
Smith Street, Collingwood
TELEPHONES—CentraI 453, 488, 948. City 2226
Also at Finsbury Street, London, E.C.
Hay Street, Perth. Rundle Street.
Adelaide. Wickham Street, Brisbane.
31


AUSTRALIA.
Sold by all Leading Shoe Stores
in every State.
32




Leeming’s Boot Stores
109 Swanston Street, City.
257 Bourke Street, City.
303 Chapel Street, Prahran.
1 & 3 Errol St., Nth. Melbourne.
