

TROPICAL AUSTRALIA-
REPORT OF THE DISCUSSION AT THE AUSTRALASIAN MEDICAL
CONGRESS AT BRISBANE, 27th AUGUST, 1920.
1920-21.
THE PARLIAMENT 0E THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
(PREPARED BY DR. J. H. L. CUMPSTON, DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF HEALTH, BY THE
DIRECTION OF THE MINISTER OF HEALTH, THE HON. W. MASSY GREENE.)
Presented by Command ; ordered to be printed, Bth April, 1921.
[Cost of Paper. —Preparation not given; 850 copies; approximate cost of printing and publishing, £ls.]
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by Albert J. Mullett,
/ Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
No. 103.— F.5A73.— PbiceOd.




DISCUSSION ON TROPICAL AUSTRALIA
The discussion was opened by two speakers nominated by the Council of the Australian
Institute of Tropical Medicine—Dr. Cumpston and Dr. Breinh—and also by two speakers nominated
by the Executive Committee, Professor Osborne and Dr. T. A. Nisbet. Dr. Nisbet read a paper
embodying the views which were known by him to have been held by his father, the late Dr. W.
B. Nisbet, of Townsville. The subsequent speakers included Dr. Arthur, the Honorable J. B. Nash,
Dr. T. G. Ross, of Townsville, Dr. McLeod, of Gympie, Dr. Paton, of Broome, Dr. Murray-Prior,
and Dr. Priestley. Prior to the discussion there had been circulated the report of the sub-com-
mittee and the provisional resolutions drafted by the executive committee of Congress. These
are printed as appendices.
Dr. Breinl’s opening remarks embodied the results of certain statistical investigations and
physiological experiments performed by himself which had been presented in an extensive paper
read before the combined Section of Medicine and Public Health the previous day. This paper
is also printed in full as an appendix.
These conclusions direct attention to three important aspects :• —
(1) The highly satisfactory statistical and physiological results, which indicated no
factor in the tropical environment producing measurable changes in the
physiology or pathology of the white races in comparison with conditions in
temperate climates.
(2) A reservation must be made in respect of certain tropical diseases which are known
to be preventible and which should be prevented.
(3) The introduction of fresh exotic diseases from abroad must be prevented.
In another paper presented to the Public Health Section of Congress by Miss Freda Bage,
Principal of the Women’s University College, Miss Bage stated as a result of her experience she felt
it legitimate to say that there was no difference in average mental intelligence or in physical health
between young women students from tropical and non-tropical Queensland.
Dr. Gertrude Halley, relating her experiences in the examination of school children in
Central Australia (Oodnadatta, &c.), stated that there was no detectable difference in health
amongst the school children of that district when compared with those in the metropolitan area
Adelaide, with the single exception of a serious prevalence of trachoma and other eye diseases.
Mr. McLeod stated that, as a result of his long experience as Government Statistician for
Queensland, he knew of no evidence indicating that tropical Queensland was in any way unsuited
for the development of a virile white race.
Professor Osborne in a public lecture delivered some days prior to the Congress discussion
on this subject made the following statement :■ —
My conclusion, then, is that in the temperate and also the sub-tropical parts of
Australia, the conditions are eminently favorable for the development of a white race,
robust and energetic in body and mind and possessing that initiative and aggressiveness
that carry races to the seats of leadership. But certain things in my opinion remain
to be done.
(1) There should be in addition to the existing quarantine a national adminis-
tration of preventive medicine. This should include medical inspection,
which we have already in the schools and which is equally necessary
after school life.
(2) There should be some form of national medical service consonant with the
traditions of piedical science, one that would not rob the medical prac-
titioner of that responsibility, initiative, and individuality which play
so great a part in his efficiency.
(3) There should be a development of welfare work in all business houses.
Australia has not yet realized the immense progress which the war has
brought to welfare administration in Britain. Welfare should be an
integral department of every business, as much as packing and account-
ancy. Increase of wages is no substitute.
(4) There should be more flexibility in our habits and customs and greater
readiness to learn from other peoples. I am convinced, for instance,
that the adobe house of Mexico would be healthier in hot, dry regions
than the corrugated iron shack that one sees far too frequently. Have
colonists of British blood given a fair trial to the mid-day siesta ? Have
white women in the tropics been allowed a fair chance to keep healthy
owing to housing conditions ?


(5) No matter what salutary machinery is evolved, there will ever remain the
personal choice between indulgence and restraint, between folly and
wisdom, between virtue and vice. Here progress amongst the people
must be slow, but our hope rests firmly on education in its widest sense-
musical and artistic included* —and particularly in the extension of
secondary education. How far legislative safeguards and prohibitions
should be enforced remains with the people to decide, but such without
better education would, I fear, fail to bring about the desired#result.
About the temperate and sub-tropical regions of Australia we may entertain
a well-founded optimism. As to tropical Australia, I would plead for
caution of utterance and for patience in awaiting the results of scientifi-
cally conducted inquiry.
During the course of the Congress discussion Professor Osborne limited himself to the
physiological aspects of the question, and, while admitting the great importance of Dr. BreinTs
results and conclusions, pointed out that physiological and medical investigations in certain
directions had still to be carried out.
During the discussion, several of the speakers emphasized the economic environment of
women as being the most serious factor in the case. Dr. Nisbet specially emphasized this phase.
Dr. Paton indicated the same disability as being important at Broome. Dr. Ross, from his experi-
ence at the Townsville Hospital, referred to the absence of evidence of disorders of menstruation.
The Congress, at the close of the discussion, passed the following resolutions :■ —
1. That the Provisional Resolutions drafted by the Executive Committee be adopted as
Resolutions of Congress.
These Resolutions were as follow
(1) that it is essential to the effective settlement of the tropical Australia problem
that the results of scientific investigation and practical experience be closely
correlated with appropriate action ; and be made readily available for the study
of the various aspects of the problem, and for the guidance of those who are
settled, or propose to settle, in Tropical Australia.
(2) That to this end*—
(o) the Australian Institute of Tropical Diseases should be enabled to sub-
serve more directly the study of all the problems of health in Tropical
Australia, and to carry out inquiry and investigation into all the
conditions of life and work there. That the result of the work done
by the Institute should be made more generally available for a basis
of action.
(b) The Federal Government should appoint a special investigator for the
. collection of statistical and other data bearing on the health of white
inhabitants in the tropical parts of Australia, and on the conditions
conducive to healthy settlement there ; and for the co-ordination
of such data with the results of white settlement elsewhere in the
tropics. _ He should be attached to the Institute of Tropical Diseases
but special provision should be made for close co-operation in the work
by the Federal and State Statistical Departments.
(c) That in connexion with the above, provision should be made for the
utilization of the sources of information available from the medical
examination of cadets and of school children, and that the Government
Departments concerned be urged that in future these examinations
should be so conducted as to specially elicit data bearing on the
influence of tropical conditions on the physical development of the
white race.
{d) That the Governments concerned, Federal and State, should, without
delay, organize some system for the dissemination of exact scientific
and practical knowledge on the requirements, personal and com-
munal, essential to healthy life in the tropics ; such information being
bcsed on investigations and observations already made, here and
with" (a), e ’(6)! and \c) hereof! Cam6d ° Ut m the futUre m accordance


(e) That legislation, Federal, State, and Municipal, should be undertaken
with the object of insuring, so far as is possible by such means, that
the mode of life in Tropical Australia, personal and communal, be such
as best suits the conditions. Such legislation might embody, e.g.:
i. Discouraging extensive consumption of alcohol.
ii. Planning of towns and houses.
iii. Provision for recreation ; open spaces in and about towns ; play
grounds, &c.
iv. The most suitable hours for working (schools, factories, public
departments, &c.)
v. Provision for readily available periodical change from the coast
to the hinterland ; and for communication with the south
by land and sea at cheap rates.
vi. Encouragement of all industries specially suitable for Tropical
Australia.
vii. Assisted immigration of suitable persons of white races, e.g.,
domestic servants; and the combating of prejudice and
ignorance with regard to life and living conditions in Tropical
Australia.
viii. A land system calculated to encourage settlement by a working
white race.
ix. Steps calculated to promote an understanding with neigh-
bouring civilized races, other than white, whereby the mutual
advantage *of the avoidance of hybridism and the perpetua-
tion of pure races be made the basis of inter-national agree-
ment and mutual co-operation.
(3) That to effect these and other essential ends in connexion with the health of the
community in Australia, the appointment of a Federal Ministry of Health
would be the most effective system of organization, and is a measure of imme-
diate national importance.
(4) That the development and settlement of Tropical Australia ]?y a working white
race cannot be effected without expenditure. If the Australian nation wills
the end, it must also will the means.
2, That the final paragraph of the Report of the Sub-Committee be adopted as a Resolution
of Congress with the substitution of the word “ Congress ” for the words “ Sub-Committee,”
wherever appearing, and with consequential grammatical alterations.
The paragraph referred to, when so altered, reads as follows :
“ After mature consideration of sources of information embodying the results of
long and varied professional experience and observation in the Australian Tropics, the
Congress is unable to find anything pointing to the existence of inherent or insuperable
obstacles in the way of the permanent occupation of Tropical Australia by a healthy
indigenous white race. It considers that the whole question of successful development
and settlement of Tropical Australia by white races is fundamentally a question of
applied public health in the modern sense, such as has been demonstrated and practised
with success amongst civil populations, under far more difficult conditions, by the
American authorities in the Philippines prior to the great war, and throughout the military
forces of every allied power during that war. It considers that the absence of semi-
civilized coloured peoples in Northern Australia simplifies the problem very greatly.
But it desires to emphasize in the strongest manner that any considerable extension of
population and settlement under the existing loose conditions of sanitary administration
and sanitary practice, using these terms in their modern wider sense, which prevail at
the present time in Tropical Australia, cannot hope for lasting success, and cannot fail
to result in ultimate disaster. The Congress recognises that a large amount of work
still requires to be done in working out the practical details of any scheme of settle-
ment, but it considers that it presents no difficulties beyond those of organization, staff,
time, and money. It realizes that a great national question is involved, but it is unable
to discern any obstacles which cannot be overcome by earnest and skilful application of
the principles of statecraft.”
3. That the quarantine defence system be improved and made as complete as possible and
that for the purpose of providing urgently necessary public health and general clinical facilities
diagnosis laboratories properly equipped and staffed should be established without delay at such
places as experience shows to be necessary,


4. That the Hookworm Campaign should be extended so as to include amongst itsi actn ities
the determination of the geographical distribution of filana, and malaria and the demonstration
of the measures necessary for their eradication ; the Governments concerned being asked to make
arrangements to this end with the International Health Board.
In order to give practical effect to the resolutions of Congress it would be necessary to-
(r<) remodel the basis of administration of the Australian Institute of Tropica e icine
at Townsville, so that this should be able to subserve more directly the study
of all problems of health in Tropical Australia, and to carry out inquiry and
investigation into all conditions of life and work there , . , ~
(i b) appoint a statistical officer in connexion with the Institute to continue the collection
and analysis of all data likely to be useful in the future study of this question ;
(c) undertake an investigation into those matters directly affecting the health o
women resident in Tropical Australia—the principal phases of this question
being the construction and design of houses, the arrangement of kitchens,
methods of cooking without excessive heat, selection of dietary, economic
and labour saving production and preparation of food, reduction or re-arrange-
ment of hours of domestic and other work, facilities for recreation and readily
available periodical change from the coast to the inland districts ,
{d) establish laboratories for investigation and diagnosis at Darwin, Thursday Island,
Cairns, Mackay, Rockhampton or Maryborough ; >
(e) extend the field of operations of the Hookworm Campaign which is now well
organized, to include the determination of the geographical distribution ot
hlaria and malaria, and the demonstration of the measures necessary for their
eradication; .
(f) create a Federal Ministry of Health to effect these and other essential ends m con-
nexion with the health of the community in Australia, which, in the opinion o
the Congress “ is a measure of immediate national importance.”
(g) authorize the expenditure of such money as is necessary to accomplish the objects
stated above.
Probably no phase of the Tropical Australia question is more important than the study of
the conditions undec which the wives and mothers of families carry on their domestic activities.
It is beyond doubt that a wisely conducted investigation, with the erection of a limited number ot
experimental houses of various designs and materials, will succeed in demonstrating the type ot
domestic architecture which entails the least physical exertion and the greatest personal comfort
for the women concerned.
A specially qualified female investigator should be appointed who will collect the necessary
evidence, closely study existing conditions and, in consultation with the medical staff, will suggest
appropriate corrective measures.
The importance of protecting Northern Australia against a new invasion of disease, and of
simultaneously eradicating those preventible diseases now existing, cannot be exaggerated in their
relationship to the question of tropical Australia. As is stated in the report of the Sub-Committee,
as the population increases so will the risk of spread, and the difficulty of controlling introduced
disease proportionately increase.
The necessity of having facilities for immediate diagnosis and investigation and for the
preparation of vaccines and other necessary material points strongly to the need for properly
equipped diagnostic laboratories at the principal coastal centres. Should a case of cholera, for
example, arise as a result of infection from a recently landed healthy carrier, the delay involved in
sending material for examination from Thursday Island or Cairns to Townsville, or from Mackay
to Brisbane, would give time for an extensive epidemic to be initiated. The difficulty of working
under the present system was recently seen in the case of the steamer Roherto Figueras, on which
there was a number of cases with a large percentage of deaths which appeared to be typhus
fever, and it was only after the vessel had been sent on to Townsville that it was possible with
the aid of laboratory facilities to diagnose accurately the disease as cerebro-spinal fever.
The investigation of coastal fevers of uncertain nature, the urgent necessity for establishing
the underlying cause of sprue, the absence of any facilities for the diagnosis of venereal disease in
Queensland outside of Brisbane, and the necessity for having laboratories to investigate the con-
ditions associated with hlaria and malaria, are all evidence of the urgent necessity for establishing
small laboratories at each of these points.
The presence of malaria is a reproach to Australia, and the settlement of the tropical and
sub-tropical portions of Australia should not be seriously contemplated until the condition which
now exists, namely, a 15 per cent, infection by hlaria of all cases attended at Brisbane Hospital, is
entirely removed. For this purpose, in addition to the laboratories, held work of fundamentally
the same kind which is now being carried out by the Hookworm Campaign staff is essential.


REPORT OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE
AUSTRALIAN MEDICAL CONGRESS, 1920, IN CONNEXION WITH TROPICAL AUSTRALIA.
In accordance with the mandate of the 1911 Congress
held in Sydney, a Sub-Committee on Tropical Aus-
tralia was appointed in 1914. The wording of this
mandate was as follows:—“That it be a recommenda-
tion that the principal subject for discussion by Con-
gress at the Brisbane meeting in 1917 should be the
question of the possibility of the permanent occupation
of Tropical Australia by a healthy, indigenous white
race, and the conditions conducive or essential to such
occupation.’’ The Brisbane meeting in 1917 was
rendered impossible by the Great War.
The Sub-Committee has collected, analyzed, and col-
lated material bearing on Tropical Australia from the
stand-point of its suitability or otherwise for a work-
ing w r hite race.
Collective Investigation.
A collective investigation was begun in 1914, but
was interrupted by the Great War. This was re-
commenced in 1920, and a questionnaire was published
in the Medical Journal of Australia, conveying a
strongly-worded appeal for information from all prac-
titioners having experience in the Australian tropics.
Copies of the return were also posted to all registered
practitioners from Rockhampton northwards, and sup-
plies were sent to all State secretaries in Australia and
New Zealand, to Papua, German New Guinea, and
Fiji. Much interesting information was received, but
the replies from Tropical Australian localities, which
constituted the true basis and reason of the inquiry,
comprised only some 10 per cent, of tfie individual
forms forwarded. The Sub-Committee is forced to
the conclusion that the supreme national importance
of this matter of Tropical Australia is not understood
or appreciated by the largo majority of practitioners
in the Australian tropics.
Analysis of the returns received showed a markedly
favorable opinion on the suitability, climatic and
topographical, of North Queensland for successful im-
plantation of a working white race. None of the
classical tropical diseases were returned as exercising
any substantial influence on communal health or
physique, with the exception of filariasis in a few dis-
tricts, readily controllable by well-known measures of
protection and mosquito limitation. Malaria is a
rare phenomenon, and sprue is limited to a few well-
defined districts. In the few cases where an opinion
to the effect that deterioration of children or adolescents
has been expressed, it has been qualified by statements
ascribing this to dietary, housing conditions, or other
factors than climate. Nearly all returns state that
alcoholism is unduly prevalent. Collective opinion
indicates that post partum haemorrhage and uterine
inertia are no more prevalent amongst child-bearing
women than in temperate climates, and that fertility
is not affected in tropical Queensland. The collective
opinion is markedly in favour of drastic regulation or
prohibition of alcohol in tropical Queensland. The
constructive suggestions offered may he summed up
as—
(1) Kegulation or prohibition of the sale of
alcohol.
(2) Better conditions of housing and clothing.
(3) Better dietary.
(4) Hygienic education of the people.
The following extracts from notes by an observer
with 33 years of experience in North Queensland may
be quoted; “As regards health, North Queenslanders,
when acclimatized, or those horn in the north, can
hold their own with the rest of Australia, especially
those who live away from the coastal towns, and those
in the western parts. . . . The married woman in
North Queensland almost without exception is a slave
and drudge. She has to work, wash up, get the children
ready for school, wash their clothes, nurse the baby,
act as incubator and wife. . . . See the North
Queensland boys and girls racing their horses over
jumps and judge whether they are inferior to the rest
of Australia. They can hold their own anywhere.
, . . . If 100 boys were taken out for a week’s
hard military manloeuvring, I believe they would hold
their own with any other 100 boys from any part of
Australia. . . . Anybody wdio says the race will
not thrive in Tropical Australia, to my mind, is talking
rot.” —Dr. E. Humphry, Townsville.
Medical Examinations, Citizen Fokces and Cadets.
The Sub-Committee has analyzed the returns of
medical examinations for Citizen Forces for Senior
Cadets and for Junior Cadets under the National
Scheme of Compulsory Military Training, and has
established a comparison shown in the attached dia-
grams between the percentage of rejects for tropical
Queensland, non-tropical Queensland, and all other
Australian Military Districts. The results with respect
to examinations for Citizen Forces display for the
years reviewed a substantially smaller proportion of
rejections for tropical Queensland as compared with
non-tropical Queensland, and for the two years, 1918
and 1919, the proportion of rejections was less than
the average for all Australian Military Districts out-
side Queensland. With respect to Senior Cadets the
percentage of rejects for tropical Queensland was
greater than the average for Australia for all years
except 1919. In 1919, however, the percentages of re-
jections for tropical and sub-tropical Queensland,
and for other Australian Military Districts, varied only
within limits of 1 per cent.
For Junior Cadets the results for tropical Queens-
land showed a smaller percentage of rejects as com-
pared with non-tropical Queensland, but a larger
percentage than the average for all other Australian
Military Districts.
During this inquiry the Sub-Committee was struck
by the fact that the percentage of rejections for
tropical Queensland was exceeded by Tasmania with
respect to Junior Cadets in 1916 and 1918. The per-
centage of rejections amongst Junior' Cadets in tro-
pical Queensland was also exceeded in 1916 by hew
South Wales and Victoria, and in 1918 by New South
Wales, Victoria, and South Australia.
Amongst examinations for the Citizen Forces the
percentage of unfit for tropical Queensland was ex-
ceeded in 1917 and 1918 by New South Wales, and in
1919 by New South Wales and Western Australia.
Medical Examinations— A.l.F. Enlistments.
The Sub-Committee has analyzed, the records of en-
listments in the No. 1 Military District for the A.I.F.
during 1915 and 1918, covering 46,580 men. The re-
sults expressed in percentages for geographical groups
of centres covering North, Central, and South Queens-
land, and the Northern Elvers of New South Wales
respectively, are shown on the attached diagram in
terms of percentages of unfit. From this it will he
seen that the greatest percentage of unfit for each year
was returned by Brisbane and Ipswich, and that the
proportion of unfit in the tropical recruiting centres
was consistently below that for Brisbane and Ipswich,
although above that for the , other groups. A close
similarity appears between the returns for Central and
(Continued on p. 9.)


A.I.F. Enlistments 1915-18.
PERCENTAGES OF UNFIT
To Total Enlistments. 46,580 Medical Examinations.
Medical Examinations for Citizen Forces.
PERCENTAGES OF UNFIT
Tropical Queensland, Non-Tropical Queens-
land, and all other Military Districts
compared.


Medical Examinations for Senior and
Junior Cadets.
PERCENTAGES OF UNFIT
Tropical Queensland, Non-Tropical Queens-
land, and all other Military Districts
compared.
Senior Cadef s
Junior Cadsfs


Western Queensland and for the Northern Rivers
(Lismore) area when all figures are taken together for
the whole period, the percentage of rejections being
19.8, 19.5, and 18.8 respectively for these three groups.
The Sub-Committee is unable to present information
with respect to birthplaces or other individual details
which may have bearing on the ultimate interpretation
of these results from the stand-point of precise statis-
tical study, but the gross figures would appear to pre-
sent a cross section of the physical efficiency of the
effective manhood of tropical and non-tropical
Queensland, through all social grades. It has not been
possible to obtain comparative figures for other mili-
tary districts or for all Australia, but it is a matter of
experience amongst army medical officers that Queens-
land troops in the A.I.F. did not show any inferiority
to other Australian units under the test of actual war.
Actuarial Investigations,
The Sub-Committee has given particular attention
to a paper contributed to the Public Health section
by Mr. C. A. Elliott, chief actuary of the Australian
Mutual Provident Society, on “ The Life Insurance
Aspect of Residence in Tropical Australia.” It is
obvious that any substantial or even apparent influence
tending to curtail life in any part of Australia will be
of acute commercial interest to life insurance offices
doing business in that part of the continent. As Mr.
Elliott points out: “ Offices do not seek business in
unhealthy localities, nor issue policies in the case of
persons who they know are going to reside in unhealthy
localities.” It is common knowledge to medical men
that insurance offices “ load ” in various ways for extra
risks, and that their actuarial advisers are very much
alive to the necessity for locating risks and securing
corresponding protection. As a result of examination
of nearly 5,000 policies issued to adults during the ten
years from 1910 to 1919, inclusive, from the Cairns
and Townsville offices of the Australian Mutual Pro-
vident Society, Mr. Elliott arrives at the following
conclusions, after including exposures and deaths on
active service;
The rates of mortality deduced from the inquiry
were surprisingly low.
The actual deaths for the period reviewed were
68. The number of deaths expected from
A.M.P. experience, 1849-1903, if all policies
had been whole-life assurances, was 88, or if
endowment 81.
“ I have no hesitation in saying that as far as we
know at present there is no need for life assurance
offices to treat proponents who live in North Queens-
land differently from proponents who live in other parts
of Australia.”
Medical Inspection of Schools.
A special investigation of the recorded results of the
medical inspection of schools, which has been carried
out in Queensland during the past nine years, and to
a considerable extent in other public schools in this
State, was undertaken at the request of the Sub-
Committee by Dr. McDonald. The conclusion reached
has been that there is practically no difference between
the proportion of notifiable defects amongst children
in North and South Queensland, and that the difference
in individual defects is equally negligible. Tubercular
disease or its effects is a rarity in Queensland schools,
rheumatism and rheumatic affections are seldom en-
countered, rickets is rare, and skin diseases are rare
to an extent which is surprising in comparison with
records from colder climates. No difference from
other. States with respect to mental deficiencies could
be detected. Malaria is not mentioned in the reports
of school medical inspectors, and filariasis attracted
attention only once during the period for which pub-
lished reports are available. Dental defects are much
the same as in other States. Heart disease is rare,
and no cases of rheumatic origin were noted by the
medical inspectors in North Queensland. The Oph-
thalmic Inspector (the late Dr. Rodgers, A.I.F'.), notes
particularly the very small proportion of cases of de-
fective vision amongst Queensland school children as
compared with England or Victoria. Apart from acute
blight and trachoma in Western Queensland, both of
which diseases are capable of limitation and preven-
tion, and both of which are the subject of active mea-
sures, defective vision is rare in Queensland schools.
An apparent deficiency in weight of Queensland chil-
dren as compared with weight of children of corres-
ponding ages in colder climates is explainable by the
greater weight of clothing worn by the latter class.
The tendency to pallor noted by certain observers
amongst North Queensland children has been shown
by Breinl and Priestly to be a surface appearance only.
These observers found that the red corpuscles and
haemoglobin contents of the blood of northern children
were not different from those in temperate climates.
In this connexion it may be pointed out, to avoid
misconception, that ankylostoma amongst Queensland
school children is now, thanks to the work of the Aus-
tralian Hookworm Campaign, largely a thing of the
past, and that it constitutes at the present day merely
a warning and exemplification of the necessity for con-
tinued sanitary well-doing on the part of Governments
and local authorities when the Hookworm Campaign
in its present form discontinues operations.
Conclusion.
After mature consideration of these and other sources
of information embodying the results of long and
varied professional experience and observation in the
Australian tropics, the Sub-Committee is unable to
find anything pointing to the existence of inherent or
insuperable obstacles in the way of the permanent oc-
cupation of Tropical Australia, by a healthy indigenous
white race. They consider that the whole question of
successful development and settlement of Tropical Aus-
tralia by white races is fundamentally a question of
ajiplied public health in the modern sense, such as has
been demonstrated and practised with success amongst
civil populations, under far more difficult conditions,
by the American authorities in the Philippines prior
to the Great War, and throughout the military forces
of every allied power during that war. They consider
that the absence of semi-civilized coloured peoples in
Northern Australia simplifies the problem very greatly.
But they desire to emphasize in the strongest manner
that any considerable extension of population and settle-
ment under the existing loose conditions of sanitary
administration and sanitary practice, using these terms
in their modern wider sense, which prevail at the pre-
sent time in Tropical Australia, cannot hope for last-
ing success, and cannot fail to result in ultimate dis-
aster. The Sub-Committee recognise that a large
amount of work still requires to be done in working out
the practical details of any scheme of settlement, but
they consider that it presents no difficulties beyond
those of organization, staff, time, and money. They
realize that a great national question is involved, but
they are unable to discern any obstacles which cannot
be overcome by earnest and skilful application of the
principles of statecraft.
Brisbane,
20th August, 1920.


FIGURES AND FACTS REGARDING HEALTH
AND DISEASE IN NORTHERN AUSTRALIA
INFLUENCING ITS PERMANENT SETTLE-
MENT BY A WHITE RACE.
By A. Breinl , Director Tropical Institute.
The question of the possibility of a permanent settle-
ment of Northern Australia by a white race is one of
far-reaching importance, not only for the future of
this portion of Australia, but the outcome affects to an
equal extent the future of the whole of the Continent.
As may be expected, the matter has received a preat
deal of attention both in discussions and publications.
Many of the utterances were ruled by an utilitarian
spirit, and the keynote or others was personal prejudice.
Definite and far-reaching statements have been made
by men whose experience of “ Tropical Australia ” was
limited to an occasional journey to the much-maligned
northern parts of Queensland. Many of the visitors
to North Queensland coming from the cooler carts of
Australia, dressed in heavy southern clothes, walk up
and down the main street of Townsville, and after
their return to the boat, remark that hell could not be
more uncomfortable. This neglect to adapt one’s dress
to the climate has in many instances, after a, short stay
in one or other of the northern towns, made a new
partisan of the idea that North Queensland even in a
cool season does not enjoy a comfortable climate. Many
of the visitors, however, do not realize that the descrip-
tion of the personal comfort on a cold winter’s day by
a person in Melbourne, dressed in a light, white suit,
would perhaps be not any more flattering to that
climate. Even amongst the residents of tropical Queens-
land opinion is divided regarding the suitability of the
the climatic conditions for a permanent settlement by
a white race. The statements of two medical prac-
titioners before the Congress in 1911 may serve as an
illustration. Both had spent some twenty years in
coastal towns of North Queensland doing practical
medical work. One of them considered that-*' our race
is found in future generations dwindling away to a
few highly neurotic anaemic people incapable of repro-
ducing their species unless fed with a constant stream
of European immigration.” Whereas the other “ has
seen as fine children—not only a few, but numbers—
born and reared in North Queensland as could be found
in any part of the world.”
Other statements were made by men labouring under
the erroneous impression that North Queensland does
not differ from other tropical regions, such as the west
coast of Africa, where a uniformly hot humid climate
reigns during the whole of the year and where malaria
and other tropical diseases are rampant. Unless one
has experienced life in such a climate as well as in
North Queensland, one is apt to overlook the difference
caused by the absence of a large aboriginal population
in the latter place, which renders its position unique
among tropical countries from the point of view of
permanent occupation by a white race. Any one who
has done practical medical work in the tropics in
general realizes that the greatest number of “ interest-
ing cases ” are found amongst the aboriginal popula-
tion, and even a casual perusal of the journals devoted
to tropical medicine and sanitation shows that the
majority of new diseases have been and are still being
discovered amongst the native populations. The con-
trol of an outbreak of disease among' an intelligent,
law-abiding community is a comparatively easy matter ;
it is, however, difficult to stamp out disease in a scat-
tered native community, where even the most primitive
sanitary arrangements are absent and where prejudices
and superstitions ingrained through generations cannot
be overcome by a simple appeal to common sense.
The question of the permanent settlement of northern
Australia by a white working race will be considered
from two different aspects, viz., from the physiological
aspect, bv summarizing in brief the facts known up
to now about physiological acclimatization in North
Queensland, and further, from the aspect of prevalence
and distribution of disease, tropical and otherwise,
throughout this area. For this purpose, a statistical
inquiry into the health conditions of the population of
North Queensland has been undertaken, utilizing hos-
pital statistics, birth rate, infantile mortality, and
death rates. From the results, tentative conclusions
will be drawn, based on the observations and facts col-
lected and accumulated during an eleven years’ resi-
dence in North Queensland.
From a climatic point of view, North Queensland is
far from uniform; the climate is greatly modified by
the nearness or distance from the coast, by prevailing
winds, by the elevation above sea level, and last, but
not least, by the total amount and monthly distribution
of rainfall. Unfortunately, our present knowledge
does not enable us to describe climatic conditions accu-
rately as they are felt by the inhabitants. The read-
ings of the dry and wet bulb thermometers is perhaps
the most convenient method of expressing climatic con-
ditions in terms of personal comfort. Simultaneous read-
ings of these thermometers give the relative humidity,
i.e., the extent of saturation of the air with moisture,
and the degree of personal discomfort is found to in-
crease directly with an increase in relative humidity.
But, in addition, there are a number of other factors of
equal importance, chief of which is the effect of “ the
changing play of the wind.” This factor has been
studied in detail lately by Hill and his co-workers in
England.
The graphs show the average monthly dry and wet
bulb temperature taken at 9 a.m. over a period of five
years. In addition, the average rainfall is plotted on
each chart. The points are connected by lines for the
sake of distinctness. As during the month of April,
throughout North Queensland, a distinct change of
season takes place, the graphs begin with this month.
They are arranged according to the relative geographical
position of the townships, the coastal towns are on the
outside, and the inland towns on the inside. The
graphs demonstrate that there is, in all instances, at
first a distinct drop in temperature from April to July,
when the curve begins to show an upward tendency,
reaching a maximum in December which is maintained
during the following three months as a rule. During
these months, most of the rainfall is registered, and
this represents the “ wet season.”
Proceeding north from Rockhampton the thermo-
meter readings of the coastal towns show a steady and
slow rise, corresponding to the decrease in latitude.
This rise is more pronounced during the three months
which represent the dry season. The contrast between
the wet and dry season becomes thus less and less
marked the further north the observation station is
situated, and in Thursday Island the average tempera-
ture readings during the two seasons differ but slightly.
A glance at the graph makes it clear that the climate
of the inland towns differs greatly from that of the
coastal towns. They show higher dry and lower wet
bulb readings, and the contrast between the dry and
wet season is more marked.
The graphs representing the maximum and minimum
temperatures show analogous changes. In the inland
towns the average maximum readings are generally
higher, and the average minimum readings lower than
in the coastal towns situated in the same latitude.
Physiology in the Tropics.
The physiology of the white man in the tropics has
received a great deal of attention; hut, with a few ex-
ceptions, most of the observations have been collected
from a small number of individuals, and only after a
comparatively short period of residence. Por example,
the observations of the Americans in the Philippines
have been collected on a large number of soldiers; but
all their subjects were men especially chosen for service
in the tropics, and most of them had been living in
the Philippines for a comparatively short time only.
The results obtained are. therefore, inconclusive as far
as permanent settlement of white men in the tropica is
concerned.


A tropical climate differs from a temperate mainly
on account of the greater intensity of the sun’s rays,
which is due to the less oblique path of the rays in
striking the earth. On account of this the rays are
less scattered, and their physical and chemical activity
is greater the nearer one approaches the equator. This
increased activity of the sun makes itself felt in the
everyday life of the tropics, e.g., certain chemicals de-
compose more readily, and rubber perishes quickly.
Unfortunately, all attempts hitherto to obtain definite
figures capable of standardization have failed. And
even elaborate experiments to elucidate the nature of
rays producing the chemical and physical alterations
have proved inconclusive. It was found by Aaron that
the spectrum of the sun does not extend much if any
further into the ultraviolet in Manila than in a north-
ern climate, and any differences can only be attributed
to rays showing greater wave length than those in the
red and ultra red parts of the spectrum. In short, he
attributes such effects to the heat rays only. It is,
however, clear that it is impossible to study experi-
mentally the physiological action of light rays with the
entire exclusion of heat rays.
For life in the tropics the reaction of the warm-
blooded animal organism to the effects of the increased
external temperature is of the greatest practical interest
and importance. Under normal conditions the tempera-
ture of warm-blooded animals is maintained by heat pro-
duction and heat loss/ The former is brought about by
chemical means, namely, by the combustion of food
material inside the body; the latter by physical means,
namely, by radiation and convection, and by evapora-
tion of sweat. In the clothed human being in the
tropics, where the outer temperature is high and ap-
proaches, or may even exceed, that of the‘ body heat,
radiation and convection must play a far less important
’role than heat loss due to the evaporation of sweat.
The study of the question how far evaporation of sweat
under varying conditions can compensate for the loss
by convection and radiation is of scientific, and, more
important still, of great practical interest for tropical
colonization. It is quite clear that when evaporation
of sweat ceases, on account of the outer temperature
approaching that of Ihe body, it will prevent any
further cooling, and, in consequence, the body tem-
perature will rise, and the condition generally known as
‘‘ heat str oke ”or “ heat exhaustion ” will result, some-
times causing irreparable damage to the body.
Haldane was the first to carry out systematic experi-
ments m this direction. By exposing man to the dif-
ferent degrees of moist heat in artificially heated cham-
bers, and in deep mines, in still air. and in moving
air, he observed that the temperature of the body
exposed to high temperatures began to rise after periods
■varying according to the individual, this rise corres-
ponding to the rise in the wet bulb readings. He con-
sidered the critical temperature during complete rest
to be 88 deg. F. wet bulb. When the outer tempera-
ture rose higher the rectal temperature began to'rise,
which rise was accompanied by an increased pulse rate,
profuse sweating, and dyspnoea, until exhaustion set-
in. During muscular exercise in still air the critical
temperature was 80.6 deg.; in moving air, however,
higher temperatures were required to produce the same
symptoms.
In Townsville, similar experiments were carried out
under natural and artificial conditions. On the whole,’
the results obtained under artificial conditions con-
firmed Haldane’s observations. Exposure to wet bulb
temperatures of from 95 deg. to 102 deg. F. caused at
hrst a slow and gradual rise in rectal temperature the
ratio increasing with the length of exposure. At the
same time the pulse rate increased, and copious sweat-
ing set in. The blood pressure showed an initial rise,
but afterwards either remained constant or was followed
by a distinct fall.
. For comparison, experiments on the effect of exer-
eise on hot summer days (wet bulb temperature ranging
between 76 and 80 degs.) were undertaken. The exer-
cise consisted of hill climbing and walking on the flat
at a pace of about 4 hour. The rectal tem-
perature rose considerably during the first half hour or
so, and afterwards either remained stationary or con-
tinued to rise gradually. A body temperature of
102 degs. to 103 degs. was not a rare occurrence after
walking from 33 minutes to two hours. The blood
pressure showed an initial sharp rise, and in some in-
stances remained stationary there, but more often fell
gradually to the original level, or even below it. The
pulse rate rose rapidly at first, more gradually after-
wards, and in several instances showed a distinct fall.
The loss in weight owing to the profuse sweating was
considerable, and. amounted to nearly 4 per cent, of
the body weight in one instance, after talking for
three and a half hours. Blood examinations proved
that the water lost was mainly derived from other
sources in the body than the blood plasma, although a
small concentration of this fluid could be detected.
In continuation of this work, similar observations
were made on men doing actual manual work under
natural conditions in Townsville. The courtesy of the
shipping companies and the members of the Townsville
Waterside Workers Union enabled me to obtain pulse
rates, blood pressures, rectal and skin shirt tempera-
tures of groups of men working cargo in the ships’
holds or on the wharf; at the same time the atmospheric
conditions were estimated by utilizing dry and wet bulb
thermometer and dry and wet katathermometer read-
ings.
I he katatherm ometer is an instrument designed by
Professor Hill, primarily for the measurement of its
own rate of cooling, when its temperature approxi-
mates to that of the human body. It consists of a pair
of alcohol thermometers with long cylindrical bulbs
graduated in tenths of a degree of Fahrenheit. The
bulb of one of them is covered with a moistened muslin
glove and„gives the wet, the other not covered gives
the dry bulb kata, readings. Before use both thermo-
meteis are heated up to 100 degs. and the time is
estimated in seconds which the dry and wet katather-
mometer takes to cool from 110 degs. to 100 degs. F.
Altogether about 180 men examined on differ-
ent days under varying atmospheric conditions. Pulse,
rectal temperature, skin shirt temperature 'that is the
temperature between skin and shirt), systolic, and dia-
blood pressure were taken twice or three times
morning, noon, and afternoon—as opportunity offered,
and from the figures obtained averages were calculated
(which are presented graphically below. The graphs
are arranged according to degree of wet bulb tem-
peratures of the air, which ranged from about 84 degs.
to 71 degs. F. For comparison similar observations
were raade on men working at a temperature below
freezing point (frozen meat ship), and are presented in
the last column.
A glance at the graph shows that, in spite of varying
v, et bulb temperatures of the atmosphere, the wet
katathermometer readings are fairly constant, indicat-
ing that the cooling power of the air. does not vary to
a great extent. The graph shows, further, that there
is a general tendency for the rectal temperature to rise
s Ightly and remain at a higher level with wet bulb
readings It is notev/orthy that when the wet bulb
temperature reached 86 degs. the averages for rectal
temperatures were only between 100 and 101 with a
maximum of 101.8 and a minimum of 99.5.
The average pulse rate did not present constant
variations,perhaps it was slightly higher on a very hot
day. The skin shirt temperature did not var v T greatly,
but was, as one might expect, much lower in the man
working in the freezing room, where the men wore a
cow\ir° al m ° re clo ' thin £ for protection against the
The average systolic blood pressure did not show con-
anges > though it showed a tendency to fall
mth the progress pf the day concprp|tant with profuse.


sweating. The diastolic blood pressure followed closely
the course of the systolic pressure.
These observations, carried out on a larger scale,
prove that under the conditions prevailing on the wharf
in Townsville, the heat does not affect in a constant
manner the men working either in the hold of ships or
on the wharf as far as pulse rate and blood pressure is
concerned, but only causes a slight rise in rectal tem-
perature, which increases somewhat with higher wet
bulb readings.
Ihe observations on rectal temperatures of manual
labourers do not seem to be in agreement with our pre-
vious observations on the effect of exercise on hot sum-
mer days, when the rectal temperature frequently rose
to 103 degs. F. and higher. Harris and Benedicts, in
their work on metabolism, have proved that the energy
expenditure during one hour’s horizontal walking is in
all cases higher than that of even the hardest work on
the lathe, and the increased energy expenditure in our
walking experiments when compared with that of
manual labourers may explain the discrepancies in the
rectal temperature readings.
Unfortunately, we are unable to express the degree
of comfort and discomfort in figures. There is no
doubt that work on very hot days causes a great deal
more discomfort than on a cool day—the continuous out-
pouring of sweat alone, which necessitates a '-ontinuous
replenishment of the fluid of the body, makes work on
hot summer days trying.
On inquiring whether there existed a difference in
the working efficiency of the men during the hot and
cool season, the manager of one of the shipping com-
panies informed me that during the hot month of the
year (January), the working efficiency was about 11.3
per cent, less than in July, whereas information from
another source indicated that there is very little differ-
ence in the working efficiency during the hot months
when compared with the cooler months. A northerly
wind on an otherwise hot day, however, causes a 10 to
20 per cent, reduction in the efficiency according to the
humidity of the air.
The foregoing observations prove that normally
under climatic conditions as prevailing in Townsville
the human organism is capable of maintaining a tem-
perature equilibrium, and the comparatively rare in-
cidence of heat stroke and heat exhaustion is a further
practical proof of this statement.
Alterations Observed in the Physiology of the White
Inhabitants of North Queensland.
Eor several years observations were carried out in
Townsville in order to determine whether any definite
alterations in the physiological functions could be ascer-
tained which could be directly attributed to climatic
conditions prevailing in and around Townsville. Body
temperatures were taken on a large scale, as observa-
tions in other parts of the tropics had vielded conflict-
ing results. Several observers noted a slight rise above
normal, whereas others decreed that normal body tem-
perature in the tropics did not vary from that con-
sidered normal for a temperate climate. The observa-
tions in Townsville proved that body temperature, at
rest, does not vary from that observed in a temperate
climate; but during the hot season, even with slight
exertion, the rectal temperature rises more quickly and
returns to its original level more slowly than in a tem-
perate climate. As an example, Young quotes, in his
publication, the rectal temperature of one of his ex-
perimental subjects, who took vigorous exercise every
morning before breakfast. It caused a marked rise in
rectal temperature, which remained high afterwards,
so that the temperature of this subject was always
higher at eight and ten o’clock in the morning than
that of any of the other subjects. On three occasions,
upon which this exercise was omitted, the rectal tem-
perature at 8 and 10 a.m. was only 99.6, s-'milar to
that of the other subjects. Observations on respiration
rate and blood pressure proved that in both respects
there was no deviation in the inhabitants of North
Queensland from figures considered normal for a tem-
perate climate.
Blood Conditions.
Much has been said and written about the
occurrence of tropical anaemia, and anaemia due
0 e I;llilieilc e' of climate only. Any one visiting
North Queensland, coming from a temperate climate,
is struck by the pale and pasty appearance of the skin,
especially of the women and children who have lived
there for any length of time, and on. many occasions
vve have been able to observe how the ruddy complexion
of new comers from temperate climates becomes after
some time changed into the same pale colour so charac-
teristic of the people resident for longer periods. The
pale skin colour naturally would lead the untrained
observer to tne conclusion that there exists an anaemia
for which no pathological cause can be found.
Blood counts on a large scale on school children as
well as on adult women and men however proved that
in children between the ages of seven and fourteen the
number of erythrocytes, and the colour index showed
no difference when compared with averages considered
normal for Europe; and in healthy adult women of
pale complexion the colour index was found frequentlv
very high. These observations thus prove that an
anaemia due to climate does not exist in North Queens-
land. and the pallor of the skin must, therefore, be
explained in a different way. It is just possible that
a tender skin, exposed to the sunlight, may seek pro-
tection against the sun rays in the formation of a
thicker horny layer, brought about by a more active
production of cells in the germinative layer of the
exposed skin. An extra thickness of the horny layer
would make the skin less transparent, and the real
colour due to the red blood in the capillaries would be
more diffuse, and the skin would apnear paler.
Perhaps the continuous and profuse pouring out of
sweat causes the cells of the epidermis to become sod-
den, and thus alters their transparency. It has been
frequently observed that a stay of a few months in a
cooler climate changes the pale, sallow skin to a pink
complexion, which however, disappears again some time
after the return to tropical North Queensland.
Although no definite alterations can be discovered
in the number of the formed elements in the blood,
there is without doubt a distinct alteration in the per-
centage of the various types of leucocytes. The per-
centage of the polymorphonuclear neutrophile leuco-
cytes is distinctly decreased 66.8 per cent., in compari-
son with 65-70 per cent, in Europe; the number of
lymphocytes shows a corresponding increase and the
percentage of eosinophiles is higher than that accepted
as normal for a temperate climate.
In a further respect definite alterations have been
found in the blood of children in North Queensland,
namely, in the percentage of polymorphonuclear
neutrophile leucocytes containing one or more nuclei
or nuclear fragments. It was found that the per-
centage oif this type of leucocytes as opposed to those
containing three or more nuclear fragments was higher
than the percentage usually observed in Europe.
The significance of this observation is uncertain. As
the leucocytes with the smaller number of nuclei are
generally regarded as the younger stages in the life his-
tory of these cells, their prevalence may merely indi-
cate a greater activity of the bone marrow in the
tropics.
Observations on the specific gravity of the blood have
given results analogous to those regarded as normal for
a temperate climate.
A large number of experiments on the metabolism of
inhabitants of North Queensland showed that the total


nitrogen in the urine was constantly below the Euro-
pean normal standard, indicating that the amount of
protein not metabolized is decreased. In every other
respect the results obtained in the study of the protein
metabolism did not exhibit any marked variations from
the averages considered normal in a temperate climate.
Distinct variations W’ere found in the amount of
urine excreted during the wet or hot season, when com-
pared with the amount voided during the dry or cool
season. At the same time the quantity of sodium
chloride in the urine during the former period was
much smaller. These observations can be readily
explained by the fact that in a hot climate a compara-
tively large amount of water leaves the body in the
form of sweat, which carries with it a certain amount
of sodium chloride.
An investigation in the respiratory metabolism under
such conditions as prevail in North Queensland was
carried out, and it was found that the ventilation of
the lungs—carbon dioxide expired and oxygen con-
sumed, were greater during the hot than during the
cool weather, showing that the pulmonary ventilation
and the amount of carbon dioxide produced varied
directly with the external temperature. During the
hot season, therefore, a greater metabolism was
observed than during the cooler season, which fact may
be attributed to the effects of the activities of every-
day life, which during the hot, moist w'eather produce
an increase in the body temperature, and consequently
in the metabolism, when compared with the figures
obtained for the cooler season.
Work carried out in Townsville has shown that the
physiological changes in the inhabitants of the coastal
regions of North Queensland —as far as investigated—
are only of a quantitative, and not of a qualitative,
nature. The nitrogen excreted in the urine is below
the European standard. The amount of urine excreted
is decreased as well as the sodium chloride content,
which is amply compensated by the increase of fluid
and sodium chloride lost in the sweat. The carbon
dioxide content of the expired air and the amount of
oxygen consumed is slightly higher during the hot
season, on account of the slightly raised body tempera-
ture. The amount of heat created by internal combus-
tion is not reduced in tropical Queensland, and for
cooling the body must still rely entirely 0 n the physical
means for regulating its temperature, which is mainly
brought about by the evaporation of the perspiration.
Blood examinations on a large scale have shown that
there does not exist in North Queensland an amend a
brought about by climatic conditions only.
All these facts tend to show that as far as physio-
logical functions hitherto investigated are concerned,
that there is no reason why a population of European
descent should not live and work under climatic condi-
tions such as prevail in tropical Queensland.
It _ must be emphasized, however, that before a
definite judgment can be pronounced, a great amount
of detailed physiological work on a much larger scale
than was possible hitherto, must be carried out. The
functions of the nervous system must be investigated,
fatigue tests carried out on a larger number of indi-
viduals _ during the hot and cool seasons, enabling a
comparison of the mental and physical efficiency under
varying climatic conditions, which observations would
furnish conclusive evidence in how far the physical
discomfort felt on a hot, moist day influences the work-
ing efficiency.
Statistical. The effects of climate and surroundings
find their expression in the vital statistics, such as birth
and death rate, infantile mortality, and case mortality
rate,, and in disease incidence, for which hospital
admission rates are the only definite figures available.
Up to the present, no separate statistical data were
taken out for the northern parts of Queensland, and
conclusions hitherto were based on figures for the whole
State.
It was therefore considered that it would he of greal
practical significance to obtain vital statistics for
separate parts of Queensland, in order to ascertain how
North Queensland in respect of health and disease com-
pared with Central and -South Queensland.
It is clear that a statistical inquiry may lead to false
conclusions unless they are based upon figures of suffi-
cient magnitude, namely, upon those obtained for large
districts and over a number of years. For the present
inquiry, the figures for the ten years from 1902 to 1911
were utilized, and the averages calculated according
to the census of 1901 and 1911. A census takes place
in Australia every ten years only; and the further
they are removed from the census year the less reliance
can be placed upon figures representing the estimated
population. For comparison, only corresponding
average figures for 1901 to 19.18 for the different parts
ol Queensland were calculated. For the present in-
quiry, the whole of Queensland was divided into six
districts, three coastal and three inland. The coastal
and inland districts, situated in pairs approximately
in the same geographical latitude, each area comprising
a number of registry districts, for which separate data
are available. The far north of Queensland, which
comprises the district between Port Douglas and Thurs-
day Island, has not been included in the inquiry. The
admissions to the Thursday Island Hospital published
in the vital statistics include the admission of the
numerous coloured population, and any calculation
based upon these figures would give totally erroneous
results in respect of the white population. The admis-
sion rates to the different hospitals situated in the
different districts and case mortality rates for the same
hospitals were calculated; and, in addition, death
rates, infantile mortality and birth rates for the same
districts were taken out. The figures were calculated
for typhoid, influenza, dengue, dysentery, tubercu-
losis, syphilis, cancer, rheumatism, alcoholism, and
a number of groups of diseases, namely, diseases of the
nervous system, heart, vascular, respiratory, digestive,
and genito-urinary systems, for puerperal conditions,
old age and violence.
It was deemed advisable to consider the diseases in
the above groups on account of the small number of
cases of the various individual diseases in several of
the districts which, when calculated per 1,000 of popu-
lation, would have yielded erroneous, and, in many
instances, extraordinary results.
It was practically impossible to study the death rate
according to agb groups, since figures in this respect for
the districts have not been published. The rates calcu-
lated per 1,000 of the population have been plotted in
the form of graphs. The graphs for the total hospital
admissions have, for convenience sake, been plotted per
100 population. Th© grey column represents Southern
Queensland, the white column Central Queensland, and
the black column North Queensland.
m^V g \ anCe at tilG k° s P ital admission rates for 1902 to
1911 shows that the admission rates in the northern
coastal districts are f a r and above those for either
Central or Southern Queensland; the admission rates
show the same relative increase for each disease or
disease group, with the exception of dengue and
violence which present a much larger relative increase.
ihe hospital admission rates for the throe inland
districts show, however, different relative percentages.
Ihe central district has, with few exceptions, practi-
cally the same admission rates as the north, but both
are relatively much higher than those for the southern


The averages for hospital admissions from 1901 to
1918 for the various diseases and disease groups yield
a graph similar to that for 1902 to 1911; the admis-
sion rate for violence in the third inland district is
the only exception increasing from 9.0 per 1,000 to
13.3.
The average case mortality rate, i.e., the number of
deaths in the hospitals per 100 admission for the same
diseases and groups of diseases prove that, with very
few exceptions, such as death from cancer in the
second inland district, cases of about the same severity
arc admitted to the hospitals in the various districts;
and, in consequence, the total average case mortality
calculated per 1,000 admissions is practically the same.
The graphs, representing the average case mortality
rate for the years 1901 to 1918, are practically identical
with that for the decade 1902 to 1911.
The question arises as to the significance of the
relative higher proportion hospital admission rates in
the northern districts. Are the higher figures an indi-
cation of a greater incidence of disease in general, or
are they merely an expression of the greater utilization
of hospital facilities? The consideration of these
figures in connexion with district death rates and case
mortalities should give a definite answer. The figures
for the average case mortality prove that, on the whole
cases admitted to the hospitals of the various districts
are of a similar severity. If the same proportion of
the sick population utilized the hospitals, the average
death rates for the different districts should be higher
in the northern districts. If, however, the death rate
were the same or lower, it would prove definitely that
the increased hospital admission rate is merely due to
a greater utilization of hospital facilities. A glance at
the graphs, showing the average death rate for the
coastal and inland districts proves that the total death
rates are practically the same, and vary only slightly
(by one in a 1,000 for the coastal districts, and only
vary by three in 1,000 for the inland districts). A
consideration of the hospital admissions in conjunction
with the case mortality and district death rate proves
therefore, beyond doubt, that there is no marked dif-
ference between the different districts in Queensland
as far as disease incidence is concerned.
The district death rate graph shows that there is an
increase in the relative number of deaths due to tuber-
culosis in the northern district, which may possibly find
its explanation in the greater incidence of miner’s
phthisis in this area. It is difficult, indeed, to account
for the much greater proportion of deaths due to
violence in the northern districts when compared with
Central and South Queensland.
The corresponding death rates for 1901 to 1918 are
practically the same as far as the decade 1902 to 1911.
It was coifsidered of interest to compare the hospital
admissions case mortality and district death rates for
the whole of Queensland with the corresponding
figures for Victoria and Tasmania.
The graph shows that hospital admissions for Queens-
land are twice as high when compared with Victoria,
whereas Tasmania occupies an intermediate position.
The hospital case mortality rate, on the other hand, is
highest for Victoria and lowest for Queensland. The
total average death rate is highest for Victoria, 12.3;
lower for Queensland, 11.0; and lowest for Tasmania
10.0 per 1,000 population.
According to these figures, Queensland compares
favorably with either Victoria or Tasmania, and there
is not one disease group which causes an outstanding
morbidity or mortality.
The birth rate was calculated for the same districts
from 1902 to 1911. The graph proves that the birth
rate is practically the same for the three coastal dis-
tricts. For the inland districts, however, the birth
rate for tlie south is far in advance when compared
with the centre and the north, which may perhaps find
its explanation in the fact that there is a smaller
number of women of child-bearing age living in the
central and northern inland districts, in comparison
with the coastal and southern inland districts.
The Commonwealth Statistician pointed out that
“ another test of salubrity often applied is that derived
from a comparison of the death of infants under one
year of age with the total birth.” Unfortunately, it
has been impossible to compare the infantile mortality
for the years 1902 to 1911, since figures for the true
infantile mortality for districts in Queensland have
only been published separately from 1907 onwards;
prior to 1907, only figures for the death of infants two
years and under have been tabulated.
Taking the coastal districts with the exception of
1909 and 1914, the infantile mortality in the north is
lower than either of the other two; the infantile mor-
tality for the inland districts, however, varies; but in
the total average for the ten years the northern and
southern are identical.
A conclusive proof of the conception that infantile
mortality is greatly influenced by other factors besides
climate is the following graph. In this graph the in-
fantile mortality of children under two years of age is
calculated according to the number of births for two
years, for the three decades 1882 to 1911; and the
figures arbitrarily chosen for comparison indicate that
there has been a steady and marked improvement in
the infantile mortality from decade to decade, probably
due to improved living and sanitary conditions. Were
the infantile mortality only influenced by climate, such
an improvement could not have taken place.
Graphs comparing the birth rate of Victoria, Tas-
mania, and Queensland shows that Tasmania has the
largest birth rate and Victoria the lowest. The in.-
fantile mortality for the three States is practically the
same.
The statistical inquiry has proved that North
Queensland, as far as incidence of diseases common to
all climates is concerned, does not differ essentially
from Central and South Queensland. The question
arises next whether tropical diseases are prevalent in
the north which at present, or possibly in the near
future, are likely to retard its development. Unfor-
tunately, detailed figures showing the incidence of the
different tropical diseases are not available; but the
number of people of European extraction admitted to
the Townsville Hospital for tropical complaints should
give an approximate idea of the occurrence of tropical
diseases, especially as these patients were drawn from
the whole of North Queensland. Within the last five
years, 279 persons were entered to the hospital suffering
from hookworm infection, 87 suffering from indefinite
fevers, 45 suffering from sprue, 31 from filariasis, 2G
from dysentery, and 10 from beri-beri. In addition,
a small number of patients suffering from complaints
limited to North Queensland, such as ulcerative granu-
loma, barcco rot, and others, came under observation.
The number of cases of malarial fever treated in
Townsville who had contracted the disease in North
Queensland is not available, as many of the patients
came from New Guinea, and adjoining islands. With-
out doubt, hookworm infection is the most serious
menace for the future development of North Queens-
land, a fact which has been pointed out by myself be-
fore the Medical Congress in 1911. The result of the
investigations by the members of the staff of the Hook-
worm campaign has proved definitely the correctness
of my statement.
111-defined fevers occur in most of the districts of
North Queensland, They are known under various
names, such as scrub fever, coastal fever, mossman
fever, &c., and are difficult to investigate on account of


the small number of cases occurring in the same district
and their irregular, scattered incidence. The prognosis
of most of the fevers is, however, favorable, except
when the sufferers have been invalids before contracting
the fever.
Sprue takes the third place in numbers in our hos-
pital admissions. Sprue is endemic in Mackay, Ing-
ham, Innisfail, and in some parts of the Cairns district,
mainly in Babinda. On rare occasions, cases entered
the hospital who had contracted the disease in iowns-
ville and in Cairns. Sprue is one of the diseases of
unknown etiology. In spite of the great-amount of
research work done in Queensland, as well as in other
tropical countries, such as Java, China, India, and
Port Pico, no definite results have been obtained as
yet to enable the undertaking of preventive measures.
Most of the observers are agreed that sprue is in all
probability a water-borne disease, but definite proofs
are still missing. Sprue is a serious disease, as patients
are prone to suffer from relapses, and the great majority
of persons who contract the disease after middle age
usually succumb to it finally after a varying period of
invalidity. It is fortunate that true sprue is not very
contagious and hardly ever attacks more than one mem-
ber of a household.
. Pilariasis, another u tropical disease,” is apparently
more prevalent in southern and central parts than in
the northern parts of Queensland. It is a well known
fact that a certain number of persons may harbor
filarial larvae in their peripheral blood without ever
showing any clinical symptoms. In Townsville, for
example, the blood of 650 patients who entered the
hospital suffering from other diseases and did not show
any of the usual symptoms of filariasis was examined,
and in 5.81 per cent, the typical filarial larvae could bo
detected. One hundred and nineteen blood samples
collected by Dr. Willis in llavenswood showed an in-
fection rate of 6.73 per cent. Two hundred and eleven
blood samples collected at random in the Ingham dis-
trict showed a lower infection rate, namely, 1.89 per
cent. One thousand two hundred patients examined
at the Brisbane Hospital in 1908 to 1910 showed an
infection rate of 15 per cent. Observations in Towns-
ville have shown that only 11.43 per cent, of all cases
which had filarial larvae in their blood showed clinical
symptoms typical of filariasis.
Cases of dysentery do not occur frequently; both
types, bacillary and amoebic dysentery, have been ob-
served, but only in such small numbers that dysentery
cannot be considered endemic in North Queensland.
Malaria is endemic in a few localities such as Cairns,
Port Douglas, and Innisfail. During my eleven years’
residence in Townsville I have not seen a single genuine
case of malaria—the clinical diagnosis confirmed by
blood examination—where the disease was contracted
whilst living in the Townsville, Lower Burdekin, or
Ingham districts. A malarial survey was carried out
in Cairns some three years ago; on this occasion 657
blood specimens were examined, most of them collected
from people living in localities where numerous cases
were said to have originated; out of these 88 blood
films contained malarial parasites. About eighteen
months later, after anti-malarial sanitation work, such
as filling in of swamps, &e., had been undertaken by
the Cairns Town Council it was noticed that tlm num-
ber of cases had considerably decreased. During a
six weeks’ stay in Cairns only a very small number of
malarial parasites were encountered in blood specimens
in spite of numerous microscopical examinations. In
the Innisfail district malaria is apparently confined
to one area only, and during a malarial survey out of
300 blood specimens examined only three contained
parasites; in Port Douglas two oases of genuine
malarial fever were seen. On the whole only a few
isolated cases from other districts of North Queensland
have entered the Townsville Hospital suffering from
malarial fever. It is always possible that outbreaks
may occur here and there in connexion with railway
construction, opening up of new promising mining
fields and on similar occasions. During my eleven
years’ residence in ISTorth Queensland I remember only
one such outbreak in a mining field north of Cairns
where a number of miners succumbed to malaria. Once
the diagnosis was established it proved an easy matter
to deal with the outbreak. Any one with experience
in North Queensland, and using a miscroscope, soon
realizes that malaria is a much misused term, and covers
a multitude of ailments, from alcoholism to influenza,
and the prevailing idea of the occurrence of malarial
fever does not coincide by far with the actual inci-
dence of the disease.
The incidence and prevalence of tropical disease in
North Queensland indicates that with the exception of
anchylostomiasis it should not militate under the pre-
sent conditions of sparse settlement against permanent
settlement of a white race in North Queensland. With
the advent of closer settlement improvement in the
sanitary conditions will make an effective control of
tropical disease an easy task.
The facts collected and the observations record 0 d tend
to prove that from the point of view of incidence of
diseases other than tropical, North Queensland does
not differ essentially from Central or South Queensland.
2. Tropical diseases with the exception of hookworm
infection are only scarce and easily controlled.
3. Our investigations into the physiology of the in-
habitants of the coastal areas of North Queensland,
when compared with those of a temperate climate, have
as far as carried out only shown a few quantitative, but
not qualitative changes.
4. Up to the present the investigations carried out
at the Tropical Institute have not brought to light
any fact indicating that health and disease as prevail-
ing in North Queensland should make a permanent
settlement by a white race impossible.
