

Trout Fishing
in New South Wales


TROUT FISHING
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES,
AUSTRALIA.
By J. E. PATERSON
Hon. Secretary,
N.S W. Rod Fishers' Society.
17949— a
Issued by . , .
the IMMIGRATION and TOURIST BUREAU,
Challis House, Sydney.
PERCY HUNTER,
SUPERINTENDENT.


First Rainbow trout caught at Prospect Reservoir by Mr. Critchley Parker 1901. Weight 4 [?] fbs.


Trout Fishing in New South Wales.
(Open Season—1st November to 13th April.)
" Only an idle little stream
Whose amber waters softly gleam,
Where I may wade through woodland shade,
And cast the fly, and loaf and dream."
Henry Van Dyke.
GPROUT of various species, chiefly of the game and acrobatic
1. " Rainbow ’’ variety, are now thoroughly established and
acclimatised in the mountain rivers of this State. This is
largely due to geographical conditions, as almost ever}?
stream containing trout flows west and south for hundreds of
niiles through the plain country before reaching the ocean vid
the Murray and Darling Rivers. This is important, as there
i$ no temptation for trout to leave their haunts and bolt to
sea as lias been the case in some parts of the world. They will
not travel through warm and discoloured waters, but keep to
the heads of the mountain streams where the climate is suitable.
If trout had spread out to the lower country it would be a
hard matter to find a day’s fishing.
As it is, the angler is able to visit towns in the Monaro
tableland which are fairly close to the heads and tributaries
of all the principal trout rivers.
THE SOUTHERN DISTRICTS.
It is a delightful experience to take the wings of the Night
Mail for the south in, say, the month of January, and wake
to find oneself in a new atmosphere—the clean cool air of
the mountains that stand round Lake George and Queanbeyan.
The contrast with the steamy heat of the coast is something
to remember.
The Murrumbidgee and Tributaries,
This is the largest river of the Monaro District, which
comprises all the mountain country from Queanbeyan to the
Victorian border line south of the Snowy River. Almost all
the tributaries of the Murrumbidgee are trout stocked;


wherever the angler goes in search of fish, he will not fail to
find the scene laid in mountainous country of the wildest and
grandest description, There is a saying that “no one who
has been on the Monaro and has smelt the burning gum
leaves of a camp fire, will ever miss the opportunity of retur-
ning to the mysterious fascination of the bush.” He will
say : —■
" I would fain go back to the old grey river,
To the old bush days when our hearts were light.”
Murrumbidgee River, below Cooma,
The Goodradigbee River.
The principal tributary of the Mumimbidgee in the Quean-
beyan centre is the Goodradigbee. In the Blacks’ tongue
this means “water running over rocks.” The title fits it
well, for its flow is broken by numberless reefs of limestone
and granite, as though placed there by Nature to fit it for
trout, for the conditions are ideal. It joins the Murrum-
bidgee at Burrinjuck Dam, the great irrigation reservoir, and
takes its rise in the ranges north of Kiandra, near the sources
of the Murrumbidgee itself. The latter name means “ plenty
water.” If the aboriginals could see it to-day at the dam,
they would indeed exclaim " plenty mob of water.” This
stream will later on become stocked with native fish, as well
as trout; Murray cod will undoubtedly reach an enormous
size in the already immense sheet of water which is impounded.
The Goodradigbee or Little River is reached from either


Yass or Queanbeyan. To reach the upper portion it is neces-
sary to drive from Queanbeyan to Brindabella, crossing the
Murrumbidgec at Uriarra. The distance is about 40 miles
through mountainous country and fine scenery. Accom-
modation is to be had at Brindabella Station. The river here
is heavily. stocked with Rainbow trout and is ideal wet fly
water, with some pools where the dry fly tactics may be
tried. It is possible here to take three fish at a cast.
An -important feature of the middle and lower reaches is
the almost continuous avenue of river oaks, whose deep cool
shade protects both the fish and the angler from the intense
heat of the midday sun. The sensation of relief in entering
this delightful refuge from glare and heat is such a charm
that we forgive the trees for hooking up our flies. The
novice who knows but the rudiments of the trout game may
be certain of filling or partly filling a creel while on this fine
stream. To get the best fishing it is a good plan to camp
somewhere upstream from Wee Jasper or down-stream from
Brindabella, and thus get on to the less fished water, " far
from the madding crowd.” At times these trout, the bigger
ones, will come at a larger fly than those ordinarily used,
such as " Durham Ranger ” or the old, reliable " Jock Scott ”
in small salmon sizes. This is valuable as a means of dodging
the innumerable small fry which are persistent in hooking
themselves on the ordinary flies, and may be taken two at a


Trout Angling on the Murrumbidgee below Gooma. H. Joseland, photo.


cast. The lower river can be reached by the narrow-gauge
railway which runs from Goondah on the Southern line
beyond Yass to Burrinjuck township, on the Murrumbidgee.
Pack-horses will be found useful after leaving main roads, as
part of the valley is in exceedingly rough country. The
broken cart road up the river is suggestive enough of what
the tracks are. Wee Jasper is 30 miles by good motor road
from Yass.
The Queanbeyan.
Leaving the main line at Goulburn„ the train takes us
through interesting country, past Lakes Bathurst and George,
Bungendore village is located near the latter lake, which does
not contain trout. The early morning coach takes one over
Dr. Barrington, photo.
A Trout pool near Brindabella, Goodradigbee River, via Queanbeyan.
a line road to Captain’s Flat, which is typical of a dead mining
township. It is apt to strike one as having been a long time
dead, its iron roofs being eaten and discoloured by fumes
from smelting works, Nevertheless, a road leads south
to good trout-fishing in the Upper Queanbeyan, where
fish run large. Nine miles from the town is Norongo, a
grassy flat where there is good camping ground and some
shady willows. Below Norongo the river enters a deep valley
of rocky gorges, whose pools are fringed with ti-tree, wattle,
&c. Upwards the stream is of a different type to the Good-
radigbee, the pools being still and reed-fringed as a rule,
joined by sometimes only a trickle. Here one must be. ready


for the sudden violent "run” of a big Rainbow of two to
seven pounds, who generally takes hold just when we " tied
that fly rather carelessly ” or when you " wish you had put
on that stronger cast.” Fine catches have been made here,
even when the Queanbeyan has nearly ceased running, for
Salmo irideus has learnt to accustom himself to warmer
and quieter waters than the home of his fathers at Mount
Shasta, the rushing M'Leod, and other famous trout streams
of U.S.A,
These large fish rise mostly in the evening or very early
morning if the water is clear, and when hooked fight most:
desperately to reach the thick weed-lied or the nearest snag.
In this they show the wonderful instinct of self-preservation,
also showing a clean pair of heels, so to speak, in many an
instance. These conditions of still-water fishing apply also
to the Big Badja River, referred to later, where it is often
necessary to fish fine and far off; hut the main thing is to
follow the old rules laid down by an Irish fisherman : First,
keep out of sight; second, keep further out of sight; third,
keep still further out of sight.
The Cotter River.
While at Queanbeyan a visit may be easily made to
Canberra, the site of the capital city of Australia. From the
fine rolling hills here, a magnificent panoramic view is seen
of the valley of the Queanbeyan River, and the distant
Murrumbidgee Ranges sleeping in the sun. The Cotter
River, which is to supply water for the city, joins the Mur-
rumbidgee a few miles to the south. It lies in very rough
country, and there is little settlement there, consequently it
is fished but seldom, and contains fine trout. Its banks are
heavily fringed with trees and scrub. In 1913 Colonel Miller
and a party of visitors from Melbourne were piloted out to
the Upper Cotter by a veteran angler from Queanbeyan.
They had good sport and took about 81 lbs. of fish for the day,
thirty-two fish to four rods. About the same number were
■caughtdn addition, and liberated, being under 1 lb. in weight.
Horses are necessary to reach the place, as nothing on wheels
can surmount Tidbinbilla Mountain.
The Gudgenby and Naas are short tributaries of the Mur-
rumbidgee above Queanbeyan. These and many other streams
are worth a trial by the adventurous angler, as new and
almost untried waters are being " discovered ” by pioneer
anglers every season.


As before mentioned, trout keep religiously to the upper
waters of every stream, and the motto of the sportsman
must be " higher, higher, higher.” It is very interesting to
try and locate the limits within which trout may be found in
the main stream of the Murrumbidgee. About 10 miles
south of Queanbeyan the railway enters the valley of the
river near Tuggeranong Station, and follows it almost to
Cooma. Trout may be found in gradually increasing number
upwards from Tuggeranong. At Williamsdale and Michelago,
native fish, cod, and perch are often taken by bait fishing,
and occasionally by spinning. The Murray cod is in reality a
perch ( Oligorus macquariensis). It reaches a weight of over
ioo lbs., but of late years, what with poisoned rabbits, and the
efforts of men who fish for the market, the fish which survive
to reach 60 lb. are few and lucky.
Bredbo —245 miles.
At Colinton Gorge, between Bredbo and Michelago, trout
fishing may be said to fairly begin. It is a remarkably
picturesque spot, with good camping ground on the flat
opposite the rapids at the bend. Above that it is a deep
gorge, which can be reached by walking at the water’s edge.
The writer had a nice basket of fish —trout and perch —from
the stretch opposite the platform at Colinton. The nearest
accommodation is found at Michelago or Bredbo. From the
latter village there is a good track to the river, which is distant
about three-quarters of a mile. The best water in the neigh-
bourhood will be found upwards to Billilingra woolshed. It
must be borne in mind that the river drains an immense
watershed, and is full of vagaries as to its condition for
fishing, as during the thunderstorm season, November and
December, it is liable to sudden freshets.
Umeralla—2s6 miles.
Here the ” ’Bidgee,” as it is familiarly styled, receives the
water of Umeralla and Badja rivers, both of which contain
trout, especially the latter stream. At and about the junction
there have been some good takes of Rainbow trout. This
fish is a bit of a bully, but the question as to whether he
molests or disturbs the native perch has never been deter-
mined. The fact is that both species exist, amicably or
otherwise, over a long stretch of the ’Bidgee and other rivers.
It is admitted, however, that the English trout and his
American cousin have no great degree of “ Entente cordiale ”
between them. The large rapids of the river at Umeralla
and Bredbo are suitable generally for wading.


Cooma.
Until recently Cooma was the terminus of the Monaro line.
It is situate in a valley about 6 miles from Mittegang bridge,
on the Murrumbiclgee, where there is a very pretty piece of
Typical open country near Cooma.
river lined with willows. From here down to Tarsus there
are bits of good water. Naturally, the fishing gets better
away from the vicinity of the town, whence the local anglers
come to spend the Sabbath in fooling or being fooled by the
trout. There is a vast stretch of the river to be fished by the
restless type of angler who loves to be always fishing “ new
Water " each day The other kind is the man ivho carries
more impedimenta, and, having selected his spot, settles down
at an establishment such as Franklin’s at Brindabella, and
stays his vacation out there. By ' learning ” the water and
studying the physical character of the local river for a few
miles each way he claims to do better work with rod and fly
than if lie wandered gipsy-like about the country.
Cooma is the principal town of the Monaro district. It is
a centre from which roads lead in all directions to many
trout rivers. There are many first rate anglers in the town
who have done their best in the cause of propagation and
protection of the various trout species. The town is prettily
situated in the valley of Cooma Creek, which -joins the 'Bidgee
about 6 miles out. A daily train arrives from Sydney in


good time for breakfast. Motors and horses may be hired
here to reach the streams further out. Motors run to
Jindabyne and Mount Kosciusko, and coaches to Kiandra, the
highest town in New South Wales, or for that matter in
Australia. Cheap round tickets are issued to tourists from
Sydney, available for return via Tumut, or vice versa. This
enables the traveller to cover a very large stretch of mountain
country, taking in the Yarrangobilly Caves en route.
The Big Badja River.
This is a 30-mile drive from Cooma, about north-easterly.
Accommodation may be had at Stewart’s Farm, where visitors
are well looked after. The Badja is one of the best streams
in the district, especially early in the season; it is seldom
discoloured, but provides still-water fishing only. Here the
"Rainbows” run very large and are in fine condition all
through the season as a rule. The river joins the Umeralla
near the village of that name and has a length of about x 6
miles only. The Kybean, another tributary of the Umeralla,
also contains "Rainbows.” Fishing is somewhat difficult on
account of the rough approaches to the streams. Arrange-
ments may be made with motor or coach proprietors in Cooma
for. conveyance to these streams.
Trout caught at Badja River. C. H. Go[?]ick, photo.
The Tuross River.
This is also a 30-mile drive from Cooma by motor or buggy.
The mail goes by sulky, which accommodates one passenger.
Arrangements can be made with Miss E. Ferguson, " The
Camp,” Tuross, for the use of a house. The features of the
river consist of mostly very large still pools fringed with weed


beds. Trout run large, and when they are hooked, the game
is to keep them from rushing these masses of weed growth.
In practice it will be found that they are certificated experts
Tuross River, N.S.W.
at the weeding game. Nevertheless some fine specimens of
3 lb, and thereabout were taken by an experienced angler last
season, and that was accomplished during most trying con-
ditions, which included many clays of snow and bitter gales of
unprecedented severity. A record fish of about ixi lb. was
taken from this river a short time ago. Tire Tuross flows
eastward to the Pacific, and with the Snowy, which—after
flowing in an easterly direction—turns south and flows through
Victoria, is the only stream of note which flows east from over
the Great Dividing Range containing trout in appreciable
quantity.
Delegate and Bombala.
Travelling by rail from Cooma as far as Nimitabel (and
thence by road to the sea at Eden if desired), the tourist can
sojourn at various streams which provide fair sport with both
brown and Rainbow trout; some of the latter run to Bor 9 lbs.
The streams here are liable to be low and weedy in dry seasons.
" Extra dry ” times are, however, the -exception. The
McLaughlin River is about a mile from the town; the Kybean


is 6 miles out and is a feeder of the Umeralla. The Tuross
can also be reached from Nimitabel, None of the above
waters can be said to be heavity fished. A fine stretch of water
runs through Burnima Station; it is as well, though not always
necessary, for visitors to ask permission at stations before
fishing streams which run through private land. It should be
here stated that while the wholehearted hospitality of residents
in Monaro is well known and appreciated, it should not be
imposed on. Bush hospitality has a kindliness in it which
travellers know is not found easily in other parts of the world,
and which cannot well be described in words.
There is a good road from Nimitabel to Delegate and
Bombala, therefore a bicycle or motor cycle would be a handy
companion on the Monaro. Several anglers have been able to
fish quite a variety of widely separatee! rivers during a short
holiday, by having the use of the latter “ bundle of energy "
for transport purposes. Bombala is a pretty, restful town,
which looks very attractive when the English briars around it
are in bloom. The Bombala River is near by, which receives
the water of the McLaughlin River and other streams. The
Nanuch Craigie and Creewah are also worth a trial in a good
season. Delegate is 32 miles from Bombala and Craigie 18.
Good accommodation can be had at Delegate. Both rivers
are well stocked, but are occasionally discoloured by mining or
Trout water below Cooma.


sluicing operations. The climate is most exhilarating. Many
heights enable one to see the snow-capped ranges, amongst
which " Kosciusko,” " The Boogong," “ The Pcrisher,” and
” Mount Townsend ” rear their peaks some 50 miles away.
In addition to the fishing, there is some good shooting to be had
in this district. Plover, quail, hares, rabbits, and occasionally
wild duck are to be found. There is a close season for quail
and duck. A most picturesque and enjoyable drive may be
taken along the route from Bombala down the " Black Jack ”
and Tantawanglo mountains to the coast at Eden, where
steamer may be taken to Sydney, or motor car may be taken
vid the coastal district to Nowra and train to Sydney.
Jindabyne, Dalgety, and the Snowy River.
The Snowy River, which takes its rise near Mt.
Kosciusko, flows east, then south, and, after a tortuous journey,
Trout water at Dalgety.
enters the ocean near Orbost in Victoria, It has been pro-
nounced by many anglers to be second to none as a trout
stream, owing to its remarkable natural features, so favourable
to the development of trout life, which is here to be found
under the most ideal sporting conditions, for it is fed by snow
water for a considerable part of the year. Its special features,
besides the above, are the extremely rapid fall over a con-
siderable part of its course, and its rough boulder-strewn and
gravelly bed. A 9 lb. Rainbow trout was caught in the Upper
Snowy this season and brought to Sydney.


From Cooma the road runs south-west over the high lands
dividing the watershed of the Snowy from that of the Mur-
rumbidgee River. A motor service takes passengers via
Berridale to Jindabyne and Hotel Kosciusko. At the top
of the last hill before Jindabyne there is a grand view
beneath of the valley of the Snowy, the greatest of the trout
streams of Australia. Rising below the highest peaks of the
Great Dividing Range, it gets the full benefit of the snowfall on
the eastern slopes of the Alps, being fed also by a tributary on
each side coming from the snow country. These are the
Eucumbene and Crackenback, or Thredbo, Rivers. They join
the Snowy a few miles above Jindabyne, The valley at
Jindabyne is one of those remarkably fertile flats which occur
along the roughest of our rivers. It is as though Nature " let
up ” for a few hundred yards on her hard treatment of the
landscape, and put these oases as a relief to the rocky
monotony of the gorges.
Jindabyne and Waste Point.
Half-a-mile below the tiny township, with its pretty bridge,
the river turns abruptly to the right into a rocky gorge. A
romantic-looking old flourmill once stood on this picturesque
spot in the days when roads were few. and supplied the settlers
for many ipiles around. Part of the weir is about all that
remains now, but the Snowy still flows through, and over it,
making a line riffle. From here downwards the fishing should
be good this season, Rainbows predominating over their brown
cousins in number. If Brown trout are sought for, small
sizes of flies should be used, as in England; and if the angler
watches from a point of vantage he will be able to see whether
they are present in any number, as they are more prone to
show themselves in swimming about than the Americans,
especially in early morning, when they may be seen " tailing ”
in quiet weedy water. At such times they ignore the fly;
but among boulders right in the fast water they will not say
no to a nice little " Red Governor,” “ February Red,” or
“ March Brown ” as it floats past, innocently enough, in the
" soapsuds ” of the rapid. This part of the Snowy, in the
direction of Merritt’s Gorge and Dalgety, is probably the least
fished portion of the river, partly owing to its roughness and
partly to absence of settlement. Attempts have been made
to go down by boat, mostly ending in disaster of some kind.
A canoe, well handled, might negotiate the passage, which
would involve at least one portage, at falls. Above the
township the river is easily fished for several miles, being in


The Snowy River at Jindabyne.


open country, the only obstacles to bank fishing are in the
form of briars, beloved (?) of anglers. The junction of the
Eucumbene occurs about 4 miles up-stream.
The Kosciusko road follows the south side of the Snowy
and ci-osses the Thredbo River at a point close to its junction
with the Snowy. " The Creel,” a Government accommodation
house for tourists, is situated here on the bank of the tributary.
The stream is somewhat of the Goodradigbee type, with rocky
bars and boulder-strewn bed. Very large trout have been
taken at times by residents of Jindabyne, and others. The
writer remembers well getting fast to his best fish here, a
Rainbow of y-l lb., which made a fine fight of it. The tendency
of the “ first generations ” of fish put into virgin water of this
Trouting on the Thredbo River, N.S.W.
and other streams is to grow rapidly on the abundance of
insect life. As they multiply the size becomes more even, and
the monsters of our dreams are fewer.
The Upper Thredbo and Upper Snowy are accessible from
the Hotel Kosciusko, which is distant about 3 miles from
either stream, and at which horses, tents and all camping gear
may be hired. There are first-rate spots about Friday Flat
and upwards on the former stream. Every little tributary
stream holds trout, and good baskets are the rule there.
Suitable ground for camping will be found along the banks;
camping parties should, however, be cautious about pitching


tents near the water, as most ot our streams are liable to come
down very suddenly and unexpectedly to such a height as to
flood the tents. Valuable rods, as well as other impedimenta,
have been lost through being left about the bank. The
Murrumbidgee and Snowy, also the Tumut, are dangerous in
this respect.
Waste Point and Upper Snowy River.
Just above the junction, 6 miles from Jindabyne, is the
last house on the Snowy, where Mr. James Spencer accom-
modates anglers. As guide to Kosciusko,. Mr. Spencer has
ridden over this wild region since boyhood; all that he does
not know of the Snowy country from “ The Perisher ” to
Kiandra is a negligible quantity- Horses and camp outfit,
with a ” grub-stake,” as our Yukon friends call it, may be
obtained here or at The Creel.
A Fishing Camp on the Upper Snowy River, N.S.W.
R. Fulter, photo.
Sapling Flat, Dead Horse Gully, and Long Comer are
favourite camping-places on the river, which is rough in the
extreme. It is necessary to ride the mountain track on
ponies used to the ranges, and only the physically fit should
attempt much of the boulder-climbing which is associated
with fishing in this .part (upwards to Digger’s Creek).
The Hotel Kosciusko.
The Upper Snowy and Upper Thredbo Rivers may, however,
be most conveniently fished from the Hotel Kosciusko—a
fine hotel erected by the Government, 9 miles beyond The


Creel, and 3 miles distant from either stream, and connected
to each by a well-constructed bridle track.
Another 17 miles brings one to the summit of Kosciusko,,
the highest peak in Australia. Visitors here find in summer a
delightful respite from the heat of the lowlands, while during
the snows of winter they revel in the alpine sports of skating,
tobogganing, and ski-ing.
Many of the larger trout have established themselves in
the tipper river, and appear to have driven the smaller fish
off or consumed them. Consequently anglers know that they
may expect large fish without the annoyance of having the
flies seized by small fry. It must be remembered that the
Upper Snowy is subject to snow freshets and storms, which
often render it almost unfishable in the early months. The
best time is generally from the middle of December to middle
of April, February being the best month. As it is the worst
month from the weather point of view elsewhere, especially in
Sydney, this is in accordance with the fitness of things, for in
the rarefied mountain air there is no such thing as mngginess,
and the nights are cool.
As the bed of the Upper Snowy is rocky and full of holes,
with sudden ledges, anglers must use care in wading any of
the rapids; the current is swift and deceitful. Brogues should
be made so that the soles will " bite ” on the granite boulders
instead of slipping. Boots such as bluchers, full of nails,
slip badly, because there are too many nails and the heads
are too smooth. Soles of tough felt are recommended.
Mowamba or Moonbah River.
This pretty stream is a small tributary of the Snowy,
joining it on the south side between Jindabyne and Dalgety.
It can be reached by road from Jindabyne, 6 miles. A bush
road goes over the range to Boloco and Dalgety. A cross-
country trip may be taken to Ingebyra, 20 miles, thence 10
miles on horseback to Jacob’s River, where there are good
shooting and mixed fishing. The Snowy takes a great sweep
round to the south and west, and meets the Jacob’s River.
The Gungarlin is a small tributary of the far Upper Snowy which
also contains trout. Except for a few eels and a small fish
called “ slipperies,” or native trout, the imported fish have
had almost a monopoly over the food supply of the Snowy
River, because the big falls at Paupong, below Dalgety, have
always kept the eastern perch or bass within the limits of the
lower river, where good sport is to be had fly-fishing for them


Dalgety District.
Dalgety, formerly known as Buckley’s Crossing, was the
principal crossing-place for stock to and from the country
towards the border of Victoria in the droving days. This
part, south of Dalgety, is without doubt the roughest and
wildest in this State. If the walls of the weatherbeaten old
hostelry could but tell us the tales of drovers and gold diggei-s,
their struggles with Nature in her roughest moods, what
good " copy ” it would make. The Snowy here contains,
besides trout, line gold so scattered in beds of sand as to be
hardly worth fossicking for in such cold water. Once it was
thicker, for the writer saw an old hand, many years track,
who was carelessly exhibiting a couple of pickle jars full of
the yellow grains and dust. Many an ounce of fine gold was
swapped away in those times in exchange for the rum which
bit like a serpent “ all the way down.”
Dalgety is reached by coach or car by a good road which
leaves the main Jindabyne road at Berridale. The township
is 12 miles from Berridale, and is situated almost on the river
bank. The hotel accommodation is very good, and the,
fishing, especially up-stream to Dodd’s Island and Merritt’s
Gorge, is geneially first-class in the later months of the
season—February, March, and early in April. The open
downs with their peculiar outcrops of granite are in strong
contrast to the steep rough gorges to be found about 12 miles
up-stream. Those anglers, who love to cast their Hies over
" big water ” will, as a rule, find a noble stream spreading-
over gravelly reaches or rushing in a white torrent over its
rocky bars into the deeper pools, which, in the angler’s eye,
are so full of mysterious-possibilities and big fish. See there,
at the tail of the rapid, where the current boils over a sunken
rock, or a stump maybe, just where the water begins to
deepen ! That is the choice position for a feeding fish, and,
if there is a “ whopper ” about, one might wager the Bank of
England against a China orange, that there he, or rather she,
will be found, for be it noted that males are scarce amongst
Rainbow trout, and are lean and weak, whereas the females
flourish amazingly and appear to have the last word in the
matter of choosing the best spot or " lie ” in a pool.
Down-stream from the township towards the Racecourse,
and at Ironmongie Crossing there is good water. At Banda
Station, further down, is a natural bridge of rock over the
Snowy, which river enters into the " rough country ” again a
few miles below Dalgety. Bobundarah Creek is a small
tributary which may be worth a trial at times. The Snowy


is liable to discolouration in spring when the snow water,
or storm waters, cause freshets. Dalgety waters are stocked
with three species of trout, English brown trout (Salmo fario),
Loch Leven {S. levenensis) and Rainbow (S. irideus). Some
thousands of Scotch burn trout have also been put in as an
experiment recently. The stocking of this and the Murrain-
bidgee River has been added to by the fry hatched from
ova obtained from New Zealand by the New South Wales
Rod Fishers' Society, consisting of Brown and Loch Leven.
The two latter species appear to thrive better in the Dalgety
district than in the far upper waters. Trout may be found,
in all probability right down to the big falls at Paupong;
below that point, bass or Eastern perch are plentiful; they
may be caught on salmon flies during the summer, as will be
described later.
Adaminaby and Kiandra.
From Jindabyne there is a cross country road to Adaminaby,
31 miles, but the main road from Cooma is the coach route,
viol Rhine Falls, where there is a stiffish climb up the range
of hills. Adaminaby is a pretty village perched on the moun-
tain slope. There are good hotels on the main road and one
can generally hire a vehicle or horses for a trip to the Mur-
rumbidgee, about 10 miles out on a good road which takes a
northerly direction to Rosedale Station, where one may camp
on the river side. There are brown as well as Rainbow trout
here, and the valley is a beautiful one. From Rosedale
upwards the fishing improves until Youack is reached. Mr.
J. West, of Gabraraatta, accommodates visitors, and will, if
desired, meet them at Adaminaby or Cooma with a vehicle.
The river will be found to be much less liable to discolour
after rain in these parts, which is a great advantage. Good
fishing is to be had at " The Gulf,” a deep gorge about 12
miles up, and reached on horseback.
The Eueumbene,
On one side of Adaminaby we find the Eueumbene, an
east flowing stream; on the other, the north, is the 'Bidgee, a
western river, which begins its course by flowing many miles
in an easterly direction also. It describes an enormous
semicircle on-its way to Burriniuck.
The Eueumbene, the principal tributary of the Snowy, is a
charming stream flowing in most picturesque surroundings.
The road from Adaminaby to Kiandra crosses its bed three
times. It has been much hindered, from the fisherman’s


point of view, in the past, by the hydraulic sluicing for gold
near Kiandra, also by dredging. As its waters become
normal and clear with the decrease of mining operations it
should be one of the very first of our streams; it is stocked
with " Rainbows.” On the way to Kiandra, 21 miles of
mountainous country and fine scenery, the emerald greenness
of the grass along the flats, also the forms of flora, not often
seen in lower regions, are striking features.
Kiandra -the Highest Town.
Kiandra, once the " Mecca ” of gold diggers, still looks
peacefully clown from its eminence upon the scarred foothills
that once were the scene of the struggles of thousands of humans
afflicted with “aura sacra fames.” Little now remains to recall
the days of theroaringfifties,theclaim is worked out, the curtain
rung down on the gold drama. However, the visitor, if he
be lucky, may perchance find an “ old hand ” who, if suitably
primed, will unfold-a tale of Kiandra "in the golden days ”
well worth hearing.
At present the tales told round the fireside of the old
fashioned inn parlours are of trorrt —big ones, taken in the
neighbouring dams and rivers, of which full information,
also horses and outfit, may be had in the village. It is said
that " all the winds in Heaven sweep round Kiandra.” That
may be true in winter, but that it has a delightful summer
climate is unquestioned. One cold night in January, the
writer examined his bed to see how he fared for blankets.
There were no less than nine, which was only three in excess
of requirements.
Rainbow trout have attained great size in the dams at
Kiandra, and a few miles out. Like most lake trout they
take a spinner better than they do flies, but a large " Peveril
of the Peak” or "Durham Ranger” (small salmon size),
would not be beneath their notice in the evenings. The best
sport in the neighbourhood is obtained by a trip to the Mur-
rumbidgee or Tumut, with pack-horse and tent outfit. A
brief account of a trip to the former river, which is 17 miles
out, may not be amiss here.
A Bush Pishing Expedition.
Mine Host of the Hotel, an angler of local renown, had
promised to make a small party for a one night camp. It
was to include my friend and his friend. While waiting
preparations next morning with such patience as keen anglers
can command, we were somewhat surprised at the array of


horses which stood at anchor outside the bar. Getting
impatient I went to investigate and found that Mine Host
was borrowing horses and gear from various friends, each
friend being invited, in true bush fashion, to join the party.
The consequence was that when we did start, we formed a
cavalcade which made no little stir as we rode out, the trained
pack-horse trotting ahead. We feared that there were over
many anglers, but it was not so, Such is the good nature of
bushmen that one man had given his aid as chief cook, and
another came “ for the fun of the thing.” Arrived at our
camp on the slope overlooking a beautiful open valley covered
with long tussock grass, disturbing a fox and a hare or two,
we hastened to kill off the snakes in the immediate vicinity,
and pitch the tent, as there was but an hour or two of daylight
left. We scattered in various directions, most of the men
going up-stream. We found a large rocky pool which was alive
with trout rising noisily; soon we were fast to a couple of
good fish, but the rises ceased for the time, the fish were not
very hungry, and much of the splashy rising was due apparently
to a sort of “ horse play ” amongst the well fed inhabitants of
that part, for grasshoppers were abundant along the banks.
Lower down we located fish in some faster water, where a
2-pounder almost ran me foul of a rabbit-proof fence which
crossed the river. In the meantime my friend, a novice, was
having a brief but animated straggle with a 5-pounder, in
fast water, it ran out a lot of line down-stream, and then
the cast parted from the line, leaving the angler disconsolate,
and the fish the victor. We made for camp then, with seven
good fish, and how we enjoyed that tea. The others straggled
home an hour later, most of them carrying good fish. After
hearing some first-class yarns round the fire up to a late hour
we turned in, but so keen were two of the party, including
our host, that only an extra heavy fog prevented them from
going down again " just to see if they would take it on at
night." They were too excited to sleep. In the morning our
hopes were not high, as the heavy mists hung till late on the
mountain sides opposite. This is always a bad condition for
fishing, and so it proved that day, for although we covered
twice the amount of water that had been fished overnight,
rises were few, and fish small. On the other hand, snakes
were so march in evidence that at noon we left them in pos-
session, had lunch on fried trout, and started for Kiandra.
Our experience with the fish showed the uncertainty of trout,
but had we stayed on we would no doubt have found them in
the mood for '' taking ” again towards evening, as the day
was warm. It must not be supposed that all trout streams


are as snake-infested as was this district. The writer has
been over a good part of this State and has never had a
similar experience. It is advisable to wear leggings, if not
waders, in places known to be " a bit snaky.”
Trout Fishing at Junction of Jounama Creek and Tumut River, N.S.W.
w. F. Gilbert, photo.
The Upper Tumut,
This grand stream has its origin in the Snowy Mountains;
it flows in a northerly direction, meeting the ’Bidgee above
Gundagai. Amongst its tributaries are the Goobarragandra,
Jounama, and Yarrangobilly.
From Kiandra there is a rough track to the Upper Tumut
River, which rises not far from the sources of the Snowy.
The fishing is first-class and may be said to have been only
opened in 1913-14, only one or two anglers having ever cast a
fly over the rushing waters of that wild and extremely pictur-
esque region. It is practically uninhabited, so that the gallant
" Rainbow ” flourishes in congenial surroundings, undisturbed
by the wiles of wicked man, and innocent of the trouble that
lies behind those fluffy things he calls " flies.”
Yarrangobilly—Caves and River.
Leaving Kiandra the road follows the last high ridge of the
Divide for a few miles out, and then descends by a winding
grade into the deep valley of Yarrangobilly. It is a fine piece


of road engineering. Towards evening one may sec the
wallabies hopping across or near the road, especially if he
comes quietly and rides a bicycle like " Mulga Bill of Eagle-
hawk," whose steel horse bolted and landed him in Dead
Man's Creek. Nearing the Caves House, the traveller may
be surprised to see steamy vapour arising from the flat near
the river—it is from a hot spring which fills a bath for the use
of visitors and the public generally. It is a delightful ad-
junct to the attractions of the locality, concerning which it
may be said that it would be difficult to find, in all Australia,
a more charming spot for a quiet holiday, combined with good
shooting and fishing possibilities. The Government Ac-
commodation House is situated handy to both the Caves and
Yarrangobilly River. The former are considered by many
tourists to be the equal of the world-renowned limestone
caves at Jenolan, while the latter is one of the finest trout
streams'in the Commonwealth. The " Glory Hole,” a cave
whose roof fell in, and the Jersey Cave, are alone worth a visit;
an inspection may be arranged in the morning, followed by a
trout excursion in the afternoon, when it should be noted, the
shadows fall early on the pools. It is quite impossible to put
in , words the beauty of the limestone gorge through which the
river flows; it must be seen at different times of day to get the
various light effects on the cliffs and under the big gum trees
One of the small tributaries of Craokenbaok or Thredbo River.
on the flats where the grass is of vivid green. The wild
raspberry vines cling to the rocky slopes and bear their red
berries in autumn, or about February, There are some


lovely spots near where the water of the river, disdaining its
original bed, has tunnelled clean through a spur of the hills,
rejoining the old channel below. Trout use the tunnel
when the river is normal; the top end gets partly choked with
driftwood, hut at the lower end the writer caught a trout by
casting as far inwards as was possible. Tire water is not
greatly subject to colouration from freshets, which is an
important consideration, and the trout are of good flavour,
being almost white-fleshed as compared with those in most
streams. Though not so large as in some of our rivers, they
take the fly well and are fighters to the backbone.
The Murrumbidgee Again.
A climb up the mountain and a mile or two back along the
Kiandra-Tumut road brings us to a gate opening into a grassy
valley known as Long Plain. Here we are once again on the
watershed of the Murrumbidgee, a fine stream running through
grassy flats almost devoid of trees. Rainbow trout run large
and are well fed in the grasshopper season. It is well to use
flies which resemble that prolific insect as nearly as possible,
whereas on the Yarrangobilly flies such as " Coachman.”
" Jindabyne,” and any green or olive tint are useful; the
latter is to imitate the green grasshopper which is to be found
near the water’s edge. As Rainbow trout are practically
omnivorous and will take, at one time or other, every fly that
is made, it is not necessary to give any dissertation herein
on fancy flies, but it may be said that tire " CocK-y-bonddu,”
" Coachman,” " Bredbo,” " Zulu,” " Expert,” and " Soldier
Palmer,” are among the standards for this State.
At the Caves House is a curiosity in the shape of a dis-
appearing stream. Rule’s Creek, which supplies the house
with water, is diverted into a hole in the cliffs of limestone,
its object in life being to dissolve the lime and form new caves
for the pleasure of future generations of tourists. About half
a mile south of the house will Ire found the hot spring already
referred to, the waters of which are at a temperature of about
80 degrees. The bath is 28 feet by 14 feet by about 5 feet
deep. Local people say that the water has marvellous
healing properties.
Having viewed the glories of the Jersey Cave, the Star
Chamber (where a ray of sunlight streams in from the roof 140
feet overhead), the " Castle,” and the ” Harrie Wood ” Caves,
tourists take the road to Tumut, 47 miles, mostly downhill.
At Yarrangobilly village, 7 miles out, the road crosses, the
river by a ford, below which there is a pretty bit of river with


fair fishing. There is no great difficulty in fishing it down to
the Caves House (cutting off some of the bends, of course), for
Nature, though in wild mood here, has left many convenient
flats and ledges as though to suit the angler. On the way to
Talbingo a branch road goes off to Lobb’s Hole, or Ravine, as
it is now called, a noted copper mine near the junction of
the Tumut and Yarrangobilly waters. Accommodation can
be obtained there and the fishing is good.
Talbingo.
It is a delightful drive across the Cumberland Range, cul-
minating in the descent to the Tumut Valley of 2,000 feet,
after some glorious views from the top have been obtained.
The country is heavily timbered with messmate and ironbark,
where dingoes, wallaroos and rock wallabies roam almost
undisturbed. The descent is made in the last six miles to
Talbingo Hotel on Jounama Creek.
Jounama.
This pretty mountain creek is full of trout, and has been
chosen for a “ nursery ” for the supply of yearlings to the
Tumut and other rivers. It joins the Tumut almost alongside
the main road at Talbingo. In the creek itself the fish are not
of great size as a rule, but many of them find their way into the
Tumut, where in the larger water they grow to great size.
Buddong Falls, in a creek of that name near by, a
of the Tumut, is a noted beauty spot.
Tumut and Goobarragandra.
Passing on to Tumut down the lovely valley, remarkable
for the rich green of its maize crops and its tall poplars, one
finds the town to be larger and more prosperous looking than
the average bush town. It is no wonder, for it is the centre
of a great and thriving district. It is situated on a rise at the
bend of the Tumut River, where is a lovely park-like reach
fringed with poplars and weeping willows. The stream is
here large enough to carry a few boats. The English oak
flourishes to a great size in the Park, which with the Show
Ground, is well worth a visit. Occasional large Rainbow
trout are taken above the town, though as usual, one must hit
the trail for “ further out ” (that vague locality where the
wild things go to when civilization comes along, with all that
it entails) —if one wants the real thing in trout fishing. In
this case, “ further out ” would mean going up the Goo-
barragandra, or to Gilmore Creek, where trout are said to be


coming on well. As regards the river with the Jong name,
which unites its clear sweet waters with those of the Tiunut
a short distance above the town, the writer would be inclined
to put it down as the prettiest trout stream in the State, which
is possibly a rash statement to make; but for sheer beauty of
mountain scenery, it would be very hard to beat it in N.S.W.
It rises in almost inaccessible ranges east of Tnmut, not. far
as miles go in the bush country, from Wee Jasper on the
Goodradigbee, thus completing the cycle, as it were, of the
southern trout rivers. The fishing for the first twelve miles up
from Tumut has been considerably affected by the demands
made on it by settlers and townsfolk, many of whom go,
probably not so much for the sport as " for all they can get ”
for the pot. If that is so, they have themselves to thank if
fish are scarce.
Goobarragandra River N.S.W.
Upwards from Goobragandra Station, near which it may be
possible to get farm accommodation, the fishing improves.
Some of the gorges are equal to the Snowy in grandeur, and
are so rough as to compel one to either wade the rocky bed
or to keep right up on the spurs in order to get along. At
the top of some of the " pinches ’’ one is glad to sit awhile
and drink in the panorama of river and mountain around him.
The, frivolous or earthly-minded may remark that it is well
to “ drink in ’’ other and less solid things on such occasions,
especially when luck has been good, and when it has not been
good.


A few miles above the station there is a tributary stream
with trout in it, but so rugged and overgrown with scrub as
to be practically impassable; but so romantic are the sur-
roundings that they tempt many lovers of Nature, and they
are generally anglers, to further exploration, and it may be
said here that the head waters of this river can be included
in the list of places headed “ unfished.”
Some of the Tumut folk have interested themselves in the
protection of trout and the destruction of their natural foe, the
cormorant; notably Dr. Mason and Mr. D. L, Maitland. These
would give information and advice to visiting anglers as to
where to camp and how to get there. Below and about the
town, which has fine hotels, native fish, cod and perch, are to
be found, for we are now on the lower levels, the boundary
line below which the water becomes warm; too much so for
the lordly and discriminating Rainbow. After overmuch
coaching one is apt to hail as a relief the sight of the iron
horse,, which takes us across the ’Bidgee to Gunclagai and to
Cootamundra on the main line to Sydney or Melbourne.
Anglers come all the way from Melbourne to the Gooharra-
gandra, and indeed they are credited with its discovery as a
trout stream.
Another " Terra Incognita,” the watershed of the Upper
Murray or Indi River, grander in scenery than the Snowy,
awaits more thorough exploration by anglers. It is known
that in Manus Creek, a tributary near the township of
Tumbariimba, trout of goodly proportions are taken. A
coach runs from Gilmore near Tumut, and the distance from
the railway station is 40 miles.
WESTERN DISTRICT.
Tourists who have done the sights of the Blue Mountains
and Jenolan Caves will find that a visit to some trout waters
can be included in the trip, so that when surfeited with under-
ground mystery at Jenolan, they may pack rod and reel and
" hit the breeze ” for the Oberon district. While at the
Caves, it will be seen that in the stream which passes through
Lucas Cave and goes east to join the Cox River, there are
hundreds of lusty trout. One may " look but not touch ”
them as both fishing and shooting are strictly tabooed within
the Caves area. In 1904 a fine trout was seen in the under-
ground portion, it had got there by leaping up two falls of S


and 10 feet in height. There is a hatchery 2 miles down this
stream, which latter is the source of Jenolan, or as old timers
call it, " Harry’s River.”
Oberon and Fish River.
From Jenolan tire road rises steeply for 1,500 feet by
zigzag to the Divide on the way to Oberon, where the streams
unite to form the Fish River, or Duckmaloi, which becomes
the Macquarie after its junction with Campbell’s River.
There is good accommodation at Oberon village, which is
within walking distance of Fish Creek, a tributary of Fish
River, the latter being a 7-mile drive from town. Conveyances
may be hired. At Gingkiu, 13 miles out, there is good shooting
with comfortable homely accommodation. The best fishing
will be found on the main river from near Elder Grove, Mr.
Lawrence’s farm-house, which is just below the junction of
McEwan’s Creek, downwards. Near the junction is a pool in
which lived an enormous trout, possibly he is there yet, for
though hooked many times by Mr. Lawrence, and at least
one other local angler, the big fellow has always escaped
capture by breaking the tackle or running to weeds. In all
probability this fish is one of the original lot that were planted
there by the late Police Sergeant-Major Lawrence, Its
weight is estimated at about 15 lb.
The river is heavily fringed with ti-tree. scrub in many
parts; the scrub is good cover from the fish, but makes casting
difficult, and the pools, though of a rocky nature, have fairly
thick fringes of weed in places which form a " sanctuary ”
for many a hooked fish —and how quick are they to avail
themselves of the refuge.
From Oberon to 'Parana runs one of the finest roads in the
State, so that motors and coaches make splendid time running
the x 8 miles to the latter, which is a railway station on the
main line. The road crosses Fish River a few miles before
the town is reached. Trout are taken here where the stream
is in good condition.
Further west Campbell’s River is joined, and the stream
takes the name of Macquarie, one of the principal rivers of
the Plains. Campbell’s River has been little exploited by
anglers, but those who have seen it report that trout are
plentiful there. The Abercrombie, another affluent of the
Macquarie, has been stocked also, its headwaters near Trunkey
may be included.amongst the " further out ” regions, and is
reached by a coach journey of 18 miles from Newbridge, the
latter being 165 miles from Sydney on the main Western
Railway.


The beautiful district of New England, which comprises
all the high country of the Dividing Range north from about
Tamworth, is a great health resort for the folk who live in
the hot plains of the north-west. People come long distances
from Queensland when they get a holiday long enough, to
enable them to recuperate in the glorious climate of towns
like Armidale and Glen limes. During the last thirty years
trout have been liberally supplied to most of the streams
worth stocking, many residents of New England having
given their time, labour, and money in the interests of game
fish protection and propagation, in the most patriotic and
unselfish manner to assist the Fisheries Department. Among
them are Messrs. McCreadie, G. M. Simpson, and J. F. Chaffey.
As much as £lO per 100 has been given for yearlings from
Killarney Ponds, Queensland, while some are hatched locally.
Ben Lomond, 401 miles from Sydney, is the highest station
on the Northern line, 4,473 feet above sea-level. The tem-
perature is sufficiently low to please the most fastidious of
the cold-loving trout family. It has been known to affect
even a locomotive, causing the crank pins to snap during a
snowstorm.
At Walcha, 320 miles from Sydney, the first trout streams
are to be found, the largest and best of these being the
McDonald and Cobrabald. The latter is the more accessible
and easily fished, the former the larger, bolder, and more
diversified water. The Tia and the Apsley rivers are eastern
waters, feeders of the Macleay. The massive gorges and
beautiful valleys in that direction provide grand scenery and
first-rate shooting for those who like a bit of climbing. Below
the Cundurang Falls, 30 miles from Walcha, the river has
native perch. The rough country north towards Armidale
where the fall from the tableland is very abrupt has not yet
been entirely explored, there the wallaby, dingo, and the
beautiful lyre-bird—the mimic of the bush —reign in peace.
One must wake early in camp to hear the latter in full voice,
he will be astonished to hear in quick succession the whistle,
as of a steam engine, the barking of a dog, the call of a magpie
or other birds, and perhaps a perfect imitation of the buzz
of a circular saw in varying tone. It is difficult at first to
believe that all these sounds come from one bird. The
Cobrabald is 7 miles from Walcha, it takes its name from a
mountain and means " naked head." Guides may be
procured—if the angler cannot find a local sportsman to
accompany him.
NORTHERN DISTRICT.


Armidale.
Though it is not situated'near a trout stream, this beautiful
town should be visited if only because it has in its vicinity
more fine falls of water than are to be seen near any city of
the State. There are the Ebor Falls, Dangar’s Falls, two
Guyra Falls, George’s River Falls, Styx Falls, Baker’s
Creek, and Wollomombi Falls, and others. Streams which
have been stocked with trout are Mihi Creek, Salisbury
Creek and Gostwyck Waters. They flow east through
remarkable country, making falls over the precipices.
Camping is necessary, and there is plenty of sport for
the gun on these and many other coastal rivers in a
radius of about 30 to 40 miles. On the western side of
the range are the Rocky River, Booroolay Creek, the Moredun,
and George’s Creek near Llangothlin. These may be worth a
trial with the fly if opportunity offers.
Hillgrove and Baker’s Creek mines should be visited on
account of the marvellous scenery, where there is a drop of
1,700 feet into the basalt gorge, which is negotiated by a
trolley way; the journey down is a unique experience.
Glen Innes Centre.
This pretty town with wide streets and a general air of
prosperity is a great tourist resort. Its keen clear air and
cool climate make it most desirable to all that dwell and
“ stew ” on the low country. Its attractions include many
trout streams, some of them close at hand. One can generally
meet “ an old angler mellowed by the stealing hours of time ’’
who will discourse on trout culture and fishing with but
little persuasion. The Bearcly River at about 8 miles from
town is an ideal stream; the river runs through private
property at Stonehenge, the land of strange boulders ®f
granite, where the trout interests have been well looked
after by Mr. G. W. Simpson. Trout were placed here about
eighteen years back, the “ Rainbows ” are hardy and provide
good sport. In a nursery some of these fish grew from an
inch to 9 inches in twelve months. Permission to fish has to
be obtained from land owners on private property, but at
Yarraford there is a long stretch where one may whip the
stream undisturbed. A fly, said to be effective on these
waters, is made up thus Body, orange with green tag,
greenish wings and hackle. Furracabad Creek is also stocked,
but is rather a sluggish stream with soil bottom. Waterloo
Creek, 14 miles west of Glen Innes, is reported to be showing
good fish. Mr. Ogilvie of Jepanan, and Mr. J, Sinclair report-
fine catches in the head waters, all Rainbows.


Moredun Creek, near Ben Lomond, was stocked some years
ago. Rainbows are showing up, and some good ones are
reported to have been taken last season.
East of Glen limes the Mann River joins the Nymboida.
There is a fine camping place 30 miles out, and the fishing
and shooting along these streams is said to be very good;
there are ducks, quail, hares, and Wonga pigeons, and several
varieties of parrots. There is always a chance for a shot at
a fox if the gun man goes quietly about in the early morning
or evening. The Grafton-road to the foot of Big Hill is itself
a fine sight. All who have been along there are most
enthusiastic about the scenery.
As in the south, all streams flowing west of the Divide have
native fish, cod, perch, and jewfish (a species of freshwater
catfish). These are considered by most bush people as supe
Typical trout water near Burrinjuck, Goodradigbee River, N.S.W.
rior to the aristocratic trout as table fish. The bait used is
varied, and includes the white grub which is found in river
oaks, shrimps, crayfish, worms, frogs, or fresh raw meat.
Deepwater River. —This is considered the best trout water
in the New England District. It is 26 miles north of Glen
limes, close to the township of the same name, on the railway.
It is heavily stocked, and the trout run to 7 and 8 lbs. Fine
Murray cod are caught below the township.
The streams described above are some of the best known,
but it may be noted by anglers that there are many others


on these tablelands which have trout, so that as these fish
develop and increase, new streams come into prominence,
many of which will be worth trying in the coming seasons.
Owing to the nature of the soil in some parts, the creeks
there are subject to discolouration, and these are not so
suitable for fly fishing, though they teem with fish; Sandy
Creek, Guyra, is an instance. Local conditions and recent-
rainfall must guide visitors in the choice of streams.
GENERAL REMARKS.
Cormorants.
The presence of trout in inland streams soon attracted a
host of fish-eating birds, which will travel great distances
from their " rookeries ” in search of trout. In spite of
attempts to defend the cormorant to some extent, as a neces-
sary scavenger, his fish-devouring proclivities have been
proved to the hilt. Many a trout taken by anglers is found
to be scored across the back, a memento of the last “ close
call ”it had in escaping from the enemy. It behoves all who
are expert with a fowling-piece.—or anything else that will
throw lead far and hard, to take every opportunity of dama-
ging a bird that can consume a bushel of fish in a week. So
greedy are they that one has been known to choke to death in
the attempt to gorge a 2 lb. fish, Steel traps can be used
with good results when laid on posts, rocks, &c., where the
birds are known to alight.
There are two varieties, the black cormorant, and the white
breasted shag; in appearance neither can be said to be
prepossessing, and their vocal attempts arc about as dismal
as mny sound on earth. The large grey water lizard, so
common on most of our rivers, is now proved to be a fish
eater, and should be kept in check, for his name is legion.
They, as well as the platypi, occasionally get hold of the
artificial fly, and cause a brief comedy before being discon-
nected. Anglers are warned to use caution in dealing with
snakes (bushmen sometimes call them " land eels ”). At the
same time it may be said to be remarkable that there is no
recorded instance of a trout angler being bitten, though
there have been narrow escapes. Probably, “ the sporting-
eye ” keeps a better lookout than others. The tiger, black,
and brown snakes are most to be avoided, the first-named
will attack, the others generally evince a desire to get out of
your way, but don’t tread on them I Use a supple stick.


The Nepean at Wallacia (Mulgoa) above weir.


Angler’s Gear.
As regards rods, experience has shown that on other than
the_largest streams, where there is plenty of room to cast a
Nattal Mountain, Wollondilly River, Lower Burragorang.
J. E. Paterson , phouto.
long line, the rod should not exceed xx feet. In such streams as
Fish River, Queanbcyan, Goodradigbee, Big Badja, Upper
Tumut and many others where scrub is thick, rods no longer
than g feet have been found to work well. Steel rods are not
much thought of here. Split cane is easily favourite. A
spare greenheart rod is very useful, as it is easy to repair a
break in it, as compared with bamboo. Landing nets should
be of the folding type; the ordinary loop is a nuisance when
one is scrambling over rocks and brush. Bags with two or
three divisions and wide shoulder strap are more convenient
than creels. The latter are best for carrying fish in a fresh
condition, but they fail to keep out flies. Fishing bags
should have a removable rubber lining. Wading breeches
are useful in cold water such as the Snowy River, but many
anglers use only woollen stockings and knee breeches, as the
waders are a great burden in a warm climate.
Fly Fishing for Bass (Freshwater Perch).
The only Australian fish which rise to artificial fly are the
bass {Percolates flimafilis ) and freshwater herring;, the
latter, though extremely plentiful, does not exceed a length


of'about io inches. Both are common to all eastern coast
rivers. The bass is a handsome iish, with the gibbous back
typical of the perch family. It is a voracious feeder on locusts,
grasshoppers, crickets, small fish, etc., but is extremely fickle
and moody as to times of rising, which vary with changes of
weather and barometer, as well as conditions of water. Like
trout they are difficult to raise when the water is low and very
clear, and a cold breeze will generally put them down. Bass
take the fly better in running rivers than in the still, deep,
weedy holes of creeks which seldom run; but no rule can be
followed in fishing for this capricious, and therefore fascinating
fish, which takes a large salmon fly when it is seductively
“ worked ” as in salmon fishing, As a rule, he takes best
morning and evening, but if a thunderstorm comes at any
hour of the day, he becomes ravenous and will seize anything
remotely resembling an insect, provided it moves, for the
bass will not take dead bait.
During the. day, if it is bright, he keeps to cover, and loves
to lie under ledges of rocks, stumps, logs, or the heavy shade
of basket willows or oaks. He will at times take, dry fly
better than wet, and will leap at the fly a few inches above'the
surface, after sundown. His fight, if brief, is very willing,
doubly so if there is any weed or other cover within reach, and
if he is not checked at once, all is lost, including the fly and
cast, unless he can be coaxed out of the stronghold,
Some of the best rivers, among hundreds along the coast,
arc the Bega, Tuross, Deua, Clyde, Shoalhaven, and Macquarie
Perch from Wollondilly River N.S.W An early morning catch.
J. E. Paterson, photo


rivulet, south of Sydney; the upper waters of the Hawkes-
bury, including the Wollondilly, Nepean, Cox, Grose, Colo,
Wollondily River above Upper Burragorang. J.E.Paterson.photo.
Macdonald and tributaries, The southern railway crosses
the Nepean at Menangie; the western at Penrith; and the
Richmond line ends within a mile of the Hawkesbury. The
Wollondilly, Cox, and Grose run through gorges of extra-
The Nepean at outlet of Norton’s Basin, Mulgoa District.


ordinary depth and beauty. The rivers north of Sydney are
considered the best for bass, but the heat on the North Coast
is more trying, of course, than that of the Illawarra and
Soirthern Coast. The latter can be reached by sea trip or by
rail and motor.
Nowra, a fine town on the Shoalhaven, is the terminus
of the South Coast Railway, where both sea and river fishing
may be had, with good accommodation. North of Sydney
are the Hunter, Paterson, Karuah, Myall Lakes, the Manning,
Hastings, Macleay, Clarence, Richmond, and Tweed, with
their host of tributaries. The Northern Railway crosses the
The Nepean at Mulgoa, above New Weir.
This is the site of the old home built by Gregory Blaxland, the explorer of the Bine
Mountains, The present house is the third, and was built after floods had carried away
portions of the others which were on lower ground. There are several historic homes
and churches in the district.
Hunter at Singleton; the North Coast line crosses the Paterson
at the town of that name, and at Gloucester the Bowman,
Barrington and other waters of the Upper Manning will be
found, where there is good bass fishing and grand scenery.
Salmon flies may be obtained in the Sydney tackle shops,
such as " Durham Ranger,” " Jock Scott,” " Butcher,"
“ Silver Doctor,” '' Boogong,” '' Hornet,” &c. Good flies
can be made with body of wool or chenille silk, black, red, or
brown, with wings of dark turkey feathers, on 1-0 and 2-0


hooks. Bass may be taken from a length of nine inches up-
wards, and often reach a weight of 6 lbs. or more. They are
armed on the gill cover with a spine which it is well to keep
clear of when handling them, as it inflicts a small but painful
wound. As against this it must be mentioned that they are
considered as nearly equal to the famous Murray perch and cod
as a table fish. Especially are they good when grilled on the
camp fire after rolling them in greased paper, which is placed
in the hot embers. This delicacy is an appropriate prelude
to many a good fireside fish story.
In conclusion, it should be stated that fishing in New South
Wales is free to all. The close season for trout extends from
14th April to 31st October inclusive in each year; for bass
in Richmond, Clarence and Hunter Rivers and their tributaries
from Ist May, and in other waters from Ist July to 31st
October. Where trout are plentiful it is customary among
most sportsmen to return to the water all fish under 1 lb.
in weight. These should be carefully handled to avoid injury
to the air bladder.
Big Game at Sea.
There are many anglers to whom the sea calls in a voice
which there is no mistaking; many men visit the beaches and
rocks, or the estuaries at week ends, to find fishing and the
tonic which the salt winds give to those who toil through the
week in the confinement of office life. The mild climate of
New South Wales favours the sport of sea-fishing, which may
be alternated with surf-bathing in summer. So mild is the
air that one need not fear the effects of a wet jacket.
One of the most popular forms of fishing is casting from a
beach with rod and reel, using as bait, mullet or other bait fish,
sea worms, or a shell fish known as pippies or yugaries (a
mollusc similar to a small clam). A rising tide in early
morning or _ evening is the best condition for beach fishing,
at which times the whiting and black bream—big " blue
nosers ” —are wont to feed close in to the break of the surf.
Other fish such as flathead, tailer, sea salmon, jewfish and
sand sharks are taken off the beaches. The sea jewfish run to
as much as 80 lb. weight, and put up a good fight. These
are often caught at night.
The sport, however, which most appeals to strong men to
whom the open sea calls, is trolling from a launch or power-
boat for big game fish such as tunny, kingfish, or Spanish
mackerel (Scomheromorus Commersomi). These voracious
predatory fish run large and are so game that the, sport is said


to equal that of Santa Catalina, famous for its leaping tuna.
The abovenamed fishes, especially the " Barred Spanish
Mackerel ” have powerful serrated teeth, which easily sever
anything less tough than a piano wire trace. Their chief
habitat appears to be the coast north of Newcastle. The
sport is tremendously exciting, and it may be added, some-
what exhausting, the strain of holding to a big fish for twenty
minutes being severe on arms and wrists. The following
excerpt from a recent address given by Dr. Mark Lidwill to
the Rod Fishers’ Society of New South Wales, will give an
indication of what is in store for the hardy enthusiast who
favours open sea fishing. He said that the sport with giant
mackerels and kingfish here beggared description.
" I hunted about the coast for a long while till I found
them. I went to Broughton Island and pretty soon all my
spinners (specially imported) proved to be useless. The big
fish came on the job and they smashed things to bits. The
first day out I got two kingfish, one weighing 40 lbs., and a
jewfisli of 36 lbs.; but that played the mischief with my reels.
Then I got a “ Vom Hofe ” reel, but did not find it suitable, so
I designed two or three kinds of reels until at last I made one
which gave all the break power I wanted, and which ran
freely when I wanted to reel in line. I had found the thumb
brake the biggest curse ever invented. It had been suggested
that it might be advisable to try towing a garfish on lighter
tackle and. smaller flights of hooks, so we went again to
Broughton Island. In Emerald Cove there is a little boat-
haven ; in twenty minutes I lost twenty piano wire traces and
baits. The fish were there thick, and I learned something new
every day. If the fish were hunting pilchards and gar at the
top of the water, there was no need to load the line with lead,
but if they were down a few feet it was necessary to put leads
two feet apart until as much as a pound was on, and then send
the boat along at a good rate —six or seven knots. I found
short towing the best for kingfish. They are not nervous fish,
and will come after a boat to see what is doing. Kingfish are
jolly knowing. They know every cavern in the deep, and if
they can’t run you ashore, they dive and find a convenient
rock to cut the trace on below. Eight-fathom water was the
best for them, and when hooked close to the shore I had to
head the boat away from it to have any chance at all.
" The best fight I had was with a 56-lb. kingfish, which I
did not get near enough to gaff until fifty .minutes had elapsed.
I was completely exhausted, as well as the other two in the
boat. We passed the rod along round the rigging when
necessary, and I can tell you, we were three blown men who


looked at the splendid fish in the boat. The maximum
pulling power of a man under such conditions is only 36 lbs.
This has been proved, and once a big fish gets you on the run
along the boat, you have no chance unless you fetch up against
something. I had my leg laid open in one run.
" We averaged from a hundredweight to a hundred and a
half of good fish while we were there every day, and the
snapper were beautiful. These red fish took the spinning
gear too, and for their size, they are magnificent fighters.
The best I caught weighed 28 lbs; the average was about
S lbs. The old man snapper was landed off the Gibbon on a
nine-cord cutty-hunk line. On one occasion we caught forty
snapper in forty minutes, and then the blue pointer sharks
came and we had heavier sport on light cutty-hunks, with a
breaking strain of 18 lbs.”
Dr. Lidwill went as far as 40 miles wide for game fish, but
did not get them so freely as close to the coast. He caught a
sword-fish—a most remarkable catch. Those aboard ex-
pected the boat would be scuttled by its sword. The rod
used was 14 oz., which he considers will kill any fish hooked.
Dr. Lidwill brought to the meeting three handsome
specimens—a Spanish mackerel, a kingfish, and a tunny.
They had been cold-stored and kept splendidly.
" One day off Broughton Island,” said the Doctor,, " I
caught six Spanish mackerel averaging about 65 lbs. They
were working in shoals, but directly two were caught the rest
sheered off, and we had to hunt for them in another place.
During the last few days of my stay, I struck the tunny.
One was hooked on a line 560 yards long, and I put all my
weight on it, but it was all out in two minutes; and then
there was a bang and I reeled up what was left of it.
" I found no shelter in Montague Island, and I do not
advise anyone to try Seal Rocks, as the currents and bumboras
there are very dangerous. Broughton Island has plenty of
bumboras, and it is dangerous fishing close in when there is a
break or joggle; you can’t catch many game fishes in a joggle.
I broke a Vom Hofe rod in one. The best place to catch
fish is called " the Death Trap ”by the fishermen. I caught
leather-jackets on the spinning bait and lots of other fish.
At Looking Glass the largest fish caught weighed 72 lbs.
There was no break in the deep water there right up to the
rocks,
" The sword-fish did not fight as well as an 18 lb, snapper.
The tunny is the king of them all. He fights till he dies;


and I reckon it takes a minute per lb. of his weight to get
him still enough to gaff him. A king-fish takes half the time.
The speed of the tunny is about 60 miles an hour at first.”
Dr. Lidwill has spent a great deal of time and untiring
energy in exploring and experimenting in the realms of deep
sea game fish. He exhibited the rods and tackle which he
had used in the various expeditions. It will be seen from the
above that we have on our coasts a class of sport which may,
when developed, rival even Catalina Island—the " Mecca "
of sportsmen the world over.
Addresses of the Associations in New South Wales interested
in Fishing Matters.
Amateur Fishermen’s Association of New South Wales—
Mr. H. Rosenbloom,
Hou. Secretary,
340 Pitt Street, Sydney,
New South Wales Rod Fishers’ Society—
Mr. J. E. Paterson,
Hon. Secretary,
Aaron's Exchange Hotel,
Gresham Street, Sydney.
Anglers’ Casting Club of New South Wales —
Mr. C. H. Gorrick,
Hon. Secretary,
5 Macquarie Place, Sydney.


LEGAL LENGTHS OF FISH.
In alphabetical order the legal lengths of fishes in New South
Wales are :
Inches.
Bass (eastern freshwater perch) q
Blackfish (river) y
Blacklist! (sea) q
Black Bream g
Brook Charr IO
Bony Bream (river) 6
Butterfish y
Catfish (river) , ( 8
Carp (sea) g
Cod (black rock) 13
Cod (red rock) q ■
Cod (Murray) j =
Eel 12 '
Flathead (Common, Sand and Tiger) 13
Flathead (long-spined) q
Flounder (large and small toothed) g
Flounder (long-snouted) 8
Gar (sea) 8i
Gar (river and short-bealted) y|
Grayling q
Groper J 3
Gurnard (red) 8
Gurnard (sharp-beaked) g
Herring (hair-backed) 5
Herring (fresh water) 3
Jewfish
Kingfish
Long Tom I 2
Mackerel (common) 6
Mackerel (horse) g
Morwong g
Mullet (fan-tail, flat-tail, yellow-eye, and freshwater) g
Mullet (silver) 8
Mullet (sea) JO
Nannygai q
Perch (estuary, golden, long-finned, short-finned, striped) g
Perch (Macquarie and silver) 8
Perch (English) 5
Salmon g
Sergeant Baker I 0
Snapper (red bream) g
Sole 8
Tarwhine 8
Tailer q
Toraglin I 3
Trevally q
Trout (brown, salmon) 12
Trout (cod and rainbow) 10
Whiting (sand and spotted) qj
Whiting (trumpeter and red-spotted) 8


SYDNEY
WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVEKNMENT PIUNTEI?.
1915.


FOR ALL INFORMATION
ABOUT-—:
NEW SOUTH WALES
AUSTRALIA
ITS RESOURCES,
ITS PROSPECTS FOR THE SETTLER, including
the GIGANTIC MURRUMBIDGEE IRRI-
GATION SCHEME,
ITS WONDERFUL TOURIST ATTRACTIONS.
Apply to . . .
THE ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT OF IMMIGRATION, New
South Wales and Victoria; Melbourne Place, Strand, London,
W.O., England.
THE AGENT-GENERAL FOR NEW SOUTH WALES, 123-5
Cannon-street, London, E.C., England.
THE TRADE COMMISSIONER FOR NEW SOUTH WALES, 419
Market-street, San Francisco, U.S.A.
TH ECOMMERCIAL COMMISSIONER FOR NEW SOUTH WALES
In the East, Kobe, Japan,
THE ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT, Immigration and Tourist
Bureau, Chains House, Sydney, New South Wales.
