

TROUT FISHING
IN TASMANIA
[Spurling.
Rambers Chalet. Tiamarra, North End Greal Lake
" The finest fishing grounds within the
Australian Commonwealth”
CRITCHLEY PARKER




An Angler’s Paradise.
Fish and Fishing Grounds
of Tasmania.
enthusiastic angler who came out from
) lingJand solely for the fishing, I can truthfully
] say that I, have never come across any finer
I, fighting fish in England, Scotland, Ireland, or
- 1 Wales than the Great Lake rainbow trout.”
, statement published in “The Mercury" Newspaper
of . h Match, 1905, by Mr. E. M. Mayes one of England’s
leading exponents of fly-fishing, may‘well serve as a text
on which to write the story of Tasmanian fishing facilities.
Mr. Mayes eulogy does not stop with the statement quoted,
lie has more to say, for in the same letter he indicates
that fishermen, besides coming in contact with
the lighting fish to which he alludes, can be most com-
fortably accommodated. This is what he says:
“ It is difficult to commend appropriately the service
and accommodation at the Great .Lake. Everything an
angler can wish for, the lessees most certainly do.”
_ Seeing that Mr Mayes travelled across the world from
Ms homeland for the express purpose of testing fishing
m lasmama, his conclusions may be accepted as being
correct, He confesses to some amazement that Tasmanians
themselves are almost indifferent to the future of fish-
ing which he calls “ a very great asset.” It may be that
lasmamans are modest, and the object of this pamphlet
is not to outrage the canons of modesty, but to present
a concise and truthful picture of what a fisherman may
see and expect in 1 asrnania, and what he should know.
It may not be generally realised that nearly a century
ago the people of 1 asmania were alive to the advantages
of stocking their magnificent waters with the best types
of sporting fish. It speaks volumes for the enterprise' and
pertinacity of those people of a century ago, as well' as
their successors of to-day, that the effort to make Tas-
mania pre-eminent in fishing attractions flag never ceased


[B. Sheppard Photo
A Rainbow Trout; Great Lake, Miena, Tasmania,


“ The Finest Fishing Ground.”
The result of this consistent endeavour may be judged
from the words of one of Australia's most discriminating
fishermen, Mr. Critchley Parker, who said “ if you take a
steamer from Sydney to Hobart, or Melbourne to a northern
Tasmanian port, you may rest assured you are on your way
to the finest fishing-ground within the Commonwealth.”
The value of this assertion by Mr. Critchley Parker is
enhanced when we know that he has not hesitated at
times to offer adverse criticisms on matters of fisheries
policy. From this point of view, therefore, he cannot be
accused of being what is vulgarly called “ one-eyed.”
Then again, Dr. li. J. Tillyard, sometime Chief of the
Division of Economic Entomology, Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research, said in his report on trout food
in the lakes and rivers of Tasmania (1933) : “ There
appears to be a general feeling that the Tasmanian trout-
fisheries reached their peak a few years ago, and that, more
recently, they have been declining. Personally, I am
inclined to think that the fishing in the Great' Lake is
still at its peak; at any rate, it is, in my opinion, as fine
as anything I know of elsewhere. A fishery where an
angler of only moderate skill can reasonably expect to
secure a ten-pounder with a dry-fly on a light rod appears
to me to be a wonderful asset for the State of Tasmania.
If such a fishery existed in the United States or in Canada,
I feci .sure that it would be blazoned from the walls of
every railway-station of any size in Great Britain, and would
secure a continuous stream of tourist traffic.”
The story of importing salmonichv to Tasmanian waters
is not merely romantic, but it contains the little appreciated
truth that in 1864, in Tasmanian waters, English fighting
trout first swam south of the equator. This lead°given
by Tasmanians 71 years ago has, of course, been followed
by other States and Dominions. New Zealand for years
past has advertised to the world her beautiful fishing waters
and their no leas beautiful striped and speckled inhabitants
and, while we must give credit to the Dominion for what
she has done in this respect, it is fair and reasonable to
reflect on Mr. Mayes’ assertion that in no part of the old
world did he come across better fighting fish than the
Great Lake rainbow trout of Tasmania. It is, therefore
just that Tasmania should let the world know the attrac-
tions she has to offer.


Story of Acclimatisation.
The first successful importation to Tasmania and to
the Southern Hemisphere of English salmon and trout
ova occurred in 1864, but during the previous quarter cen-
tury efforts, unfortunately unsuccessful, had been made in
that direction. So early as 1841 a scheme was propounded
by Capt. F. Chalmers and a Scotch fishing enthusiast, Dr.
McKenzie, to bring salmon fry to Tasmania. The effort was
Guest House, Interlaken, [Emmett Photo
one unique in character, and fishermen of to-day are not
surprised at its non-success. Seven years later Mr. J. L,
Burnett, a Tasmanian surveyor, while visiting the old
country, got in touch with the manager of the Duke of
Sutherland's salmon fisheries in Inverness-shire, and as a
result a consignment of salmon and trout ova was made
by the ship “ Columbus ” in 1852, This effort again was
unsuccessful. On the arrival at Hobart of the tub in which
the ova was packed, no trace could be found of either
spawn or fish, but those responsible agreed that the expend!-


tare of £3OO was not money lost, because it taught the
lesson that the successful transport of ova across equatorial
seas could only be accomplished with lavish use of ice. A
third effort was made in 1860, in which Mr. J. A. Yonl,
who was later knighted and became Agent-General, was
the moving spirit. With some associates, Mr. Youl raised
£6OO, and a consignment of ova was sent out on the ship
“ Curling ”in charge of Mm Alexander Black. This effort,
too, was doomed to failure, for on the 59th day at sea
the ice became exhausted and the ova perished. The next
[P. H. Thomas Photo
A Pleasant Afternoon on a Huon River, Southern Tasmania.
experiment, which was conducted under the auspices of the
Tasmanian Parliament, was in a small iron steamer “ The
Beautiful Star,” 'which sailed from England on 4th March,
1862, with 50,000 salmon ova. Failure on this occasion
was attributed to the excessive rolling of the small vessel
and the giving out of ice. Lessons of great value were
learned from these failures, and Mr. You! with his friend,
Sir Thos. Brady of the Irish Fisheries Board, together
with other enthusiasts, carried out careful tests, packing
ova in moss, the boxes containing which were lodged in
frozen vaults. These tests were continued for a period


of: 144 days, at the end of which it was officially reported
that the vitality of the ova was in no way impaired and
the ova of each lot was successfully hatched.
.Fortified by these experiments, Mr. Youl and his friends
secured 100,000 ova, which was consigned by the ship
“ Norfolk.” She left the old country in January of 1864
and .reached Melbourne on the; 15th April. Arrangements
|jad_ been completed for the Victorian Auxiliary Warship
Victoria to receive the ova boxes, which, on arrival at
Hobart, were immediately transferred to a barge which
was towed by steamer from Hobart to New Norfolk, and
enthusiastic people of that centre slung the cases on 'bam-
boos, and carried them over the seven miles of road to
the hatcheries on the River Plenty, where the ova were
deposited 91 Jays after having been put on board the
Not folk. Ihe first trout ova f rom this shipment was
hatched on the 4th May, and the first salmon ova on the
sth. From this beginning the waters not onlv of Tasmania
but of other Australian States and New Zealand, were
stocked, thus commencing a sporting attraction which is
now world famous.
The Angler’s Character.
Artists with rod and line visiting Tasmania have no
lack of choice as to fishing-grounds. Tasmania has been
called the " Switzerland of the South,” and the name is
appropriate in that the island is remarkably well watered.
On its central highlands are situated numerous lakes of
great extent, and In some cases immaculate beauty, and
these are the sources of great rivers which run 'north
south, east, and west to Father Ocean. These great lakes!
smaller lakes and tarns, the rivers, mountain streams,’
rivulets, and estuaries, as well as the seas bounding the
island, are stocked, with fish in greater or less quantities
and wide variety. From this it will tie seen that the fisher-
man has an ample choice and, although at times some
“ barren ” periods are experienced, the ardent angler will
soon come to regard Tasmania as the Mecca of fly-fisher-
men. It is, of course, well known that anglers are men
of sanguine temperament, with a marked ‘ capacity for
patience. Ihe latter quality was aptly described some few
ytais Imclc by Mi. Punch of London in two verses from


the prolific pen of “ E.V.L.” The lines, quoted from
memory, deal with the immortal Izaak Walton and his
friend, John Cotton : —-
“ The river Dee rims down the dell
And murmurs just as sweetly,
As when good Izaak Walton hied
With Master Cotton by his side
To angle there completely.”
“ And sometimes Izaak got a bite
And sometimes Master Cotton
And sometimes neither caught a fish
When Izaak gently muttered ‘ pish ’
But John swore roundly, ‘rotten!’”
This happily summarises the pacific nature of anglers,
for surely nothing could be more conducive to bad temper,
and possibly bad language, than to spend all day like the
immortal John Cotton without catching a fish! From
anglers in Tasmania, whether the fishing be good or bad
for the day, no language stronger than Cotton’s may be
warranted or expected !
Record Catches .
At various times in the history of Tasmania different
localities have claimed precedence as to the size of fish
caught. At present the Great Lake is conceded to afford
the best fishing, and some very large and line fish
have fallen victims to anglers in its waters. In this con-
nection it is interesting to note that no specimen of the
salmonidm weighing more than 30 lbs. has ever been
caught in Tasmania, but the State holds an enviable record
in the number of big fish accounted for. The record in
this respect was a beautiful brown trout caught by the
Governor of Tasmania, Sir Robert Hamilton, in the Huon
River- on 2nd November, 1887. This fish has been pre-
served as an exhibit in the Hobart Museum where its
dimensions are given as being 35-5 inches in length, 26
inches in girth, and the weight 29 lbs. This fish was
caught by Sir Robert at a point about one mile above the
Victoria Bridge at Huonville, and its capture caused quite
a sensation in the fishing world. Among other big fish
on record was a trout, which weighed 25j, lbs. caught in


1897 by Mr. M. Seal. In 1904 Mr. C. J. L. Smith caught
a fish of 20 lbs., and Mr. N. J. Wise in 1907 one of 23 lbs.
In the season ending 1900 the fish caught averaged 8-88
lbs.; in the season ending 1905, 9-85 lbs.; in the season
ending 1910, 8-15 lbs. The average of latter years has
decreased, partly through natural causes not yet elucid-
ated, and partly owing- to the great increase in the number
of anglers visiting the Lake. At the Great Lake in Febru-
ary of 1935, Lady Snowden, a “new chum” angler and
widow of the late Agent-General for Tasmania; landed
[Burrows, Photo.
Brown Trout caught in North Esk River.
Average weight, 3½ 1b.
211 lbs. weight of fish in one morning before breakfast.
.Figures of this type could easily be multiplied, but these
.sufficiently indicate the satisfactory size and quantity of
fish growing in Tasmanian waters.
The Great Lake.
The Great Lake, discovery of which was first recorded
by Mr. John Beamont between December Ist and 10th, 1817,
is the largest body of inland water in Australia. It lies


practically in the centre of the Island, and has an area
of 36,672 acres at an elevation of 3363 feet above sea-level.
The Annual 'Report of the North-Western Fisheries Associa-
tion for 1930 says “ 'Phis Lake in undoubtedly our most
valuable state asset from an angling - standpoint, and
deserves every attention from the authorities of this
Association in stocking and protective measures,” The
famous firm of Hardy’s (England), in their “Anglers’
Guide ” for 1934, stated of the Great Lake that it afforded
brown trout fishing “ that could not probably be rivalled
anywhere.”
The method of angling in Tasmanian freshwaters is
by easting fly, spinning with artificial minnow (natural
bait in places), and by trolling from a boat. The dry and
wet fly are successful lures in the more or less shallow
waters of the numerous bays of the lakes as well as in
the shallow lakes themselves, where wading is comfort-
able and safe; wet fly-fishing is adopted generally in the
absence of the “ hatch,” while spinning with artificial min-
now and trolling - in the bold water is resorted to.
Miena and Rainbow Chalet.
So large is the area of the Great Lake that, the Govern-
ment has provided two accommodation houses for the con-
venience of visitors. The post town at the southern end
is Miena, where one of the Government guesthouses is
situated. At the northern end there is the second Govern-
ment guesthouse called Rainbow Chalet, which is reached
by good road from ‘Deloraine, the distance being about 26
miles. Deloraine is 30 miles from Launceston. The Miena
accommodation house is 86 miles by road from Bothwell
township, which is 48 from Hobart, a total distance of
84 miles. Both these centres are now easily accessible,
as a motor service runs daily (Sundays excepted) from
Launceston to Hobart, via the Great Lake, The service is
good, and the fares are reasonable, while the route takes the
traveller over some exceedingly interesting country and
through some most beautiful scenery.


Penstock and Shannon Lagoons.
Associated in fishermen’s minds with the Great Lake
is the Penstock Lagoon, in which the waters of the River
Shannon are finally conserved before they pass through
pipes to the State Hydro-Electric power-house at Wadda-
rnana. At the Penstock, as an authority states, practic-
ally throughout the season a hatch of the Tasmanian
variety of May-fly takes place. During this period, accord-
ing to the same authority, the water is “ boiling ” with
rising fish. As indicating the consistent enterprise dis-
played by Tasmania and its angling enthusiasts previously
referred to, it is interesting to note that the Salmon
and Freshwater Fisheries Commissioners made inquiries
in 1933 as to the best method of importing eggs of the
English May-fly. These inquiries were conducted through
the’ Acting Agent-General for Tasmania (Mr. PL W. Ely,
1.5.0.), and something may yet come of the effort.
The Penstock Lagoon is about two miles long and one
and a half miles wide, with a bottom which consists of
rich alluvial soil, on which there is a good growth _of
water weeds, affording good cover for the fish and assist-
ing the maturing of insect life which forms fish food. The
Shannon and Penstock Lagoons are associated. The former
is bulb-shaped, and formed by the waters of the River
Shannon on their way to Penstock, and has a circumfer-
ence of eight or nine miles. The Lagoon, with an average
depth of 4 feet, affords first-class fly-fishing (wet and dry)
for a period of fully six months. The Shannon River, after
leaving the Great Lake until entering the Lagoon, for dry
fly-fishing, has no equal in the Southern hemisphere. This
fine angling takes place on the rise of the Snow Flake
Gaddis, or “ Shannon Moth ” as it is called locally. The
hatch commences in early December, and on suitable days
continues until well on in February. At this time the brown
trout leave the Lagoon and literally swarm the fast running
Shannon stream to feast upon the succulent moth. The
angler then has opportunity to pit his craftiness and skill
against the wiles of trout, and should he be successful in
getting the “ gentlemen of the spots ” to “ take,” the
result should be a fine bag of specimens up to 4 lbs. or 5
lbs. before the time arrives to put up the rod for the clay.
While the main hatch of the moth may be temporarily off,
fishing dry to trout rising to the local equivalent of May


fly, or angling wet, as fancy may guide, may be pleasantly
carried out in the course of comfortable wading in the
Lagoon. All popular waters have their “ ups and downs,’
but the Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries Commissioners
are seeing to it that the value of the Penstock Lagoon,
from a fishing point of view, will be preserved.
[Spurling Photo.
Scamander River, North- East Tasmania.
Waddamana Pouter Station.
The interest attaching to the Great Lake, the Penstock
Lagoon, and the Ouse and Shannon Rivers (the latter of
which has its source in the Great Lake) is much enhanced
by the fact that it is these waters which were selected
by the State for its hydro-electric scheme, which, when
inaugurated in 1910, was one of the largest hydro-electric
projects in the southern hemisphere. In this scheme
advantage is taken of a steep declivity at Waddamana,
some miles south of the Great Lake, which provides an
ideal “head” for hydro-electric power generation. The
turbine house is situated at the bottom of this declivity,
and the station provides electric current for Hobart, Laun-
ceston, and many country centres. These facts are of more


than passing interest to the angler, because he will realise
that, besides providing sport for himself, the waters in
■which he is fishing are of great economic value to the State.
Visitors also entertain themselves by an examination of the
power-stations at Waddarnana and elsewhere.
Lake St. Clair,
Another lake, stocked with rainbow trout by the Com-
missioners, and which doubtless will come into pi’ominence
as a fishing resort, is Lake St. Clair, From a scenic point
of view it is one of the most beautiful lakes in the world,
and is the deepest lake in Tasmania, having soundings of
600 feet. It is the source of the Derwent River, and lies
at an altitude of 2450 feet above sea-level at a distance
of 101 miles from Hobart. The West Coast Road, over
which excellent motor services run daily between Hobart
and Queenstown, crosses the Derwent River at Derwent
Bridge, a point two miles and forty-six chains from Lake
St. Clair. There is a new hotel at this point, and a road
leads from the hotel to the famous beauty spot of the
Lake, Cynthia Bay. The hike; was first sighted by the
notorious Danish character, Jorgen Jorgensen, the man who
proclaimed himself King of Iceland, who carried out
investigations on the Continent during the Napoleonic
troubles on behalf of the British Government, who gambled
away large sums of money, who lay a prisoner for debt
in the old Fleet Prison in London, who was transported
as a prisoner to Van Diemen’s Land for larceny as a bailee,
who wrote eight or nine books, who effected much survey
work for the Y.D.L. Company, who was chief officer of
H.M.S. “ Lady Nelson ” when in 1803 that vessel conveyed
the first establishment to Tasmania, and who died in
Hobart in 1846. While surveying for the V..D.L. Com-
pany, Jorgensen reached Lake St. Glair on 23rd October.
1826, and camped on its banks. The real examiner of
Lake St, Clair, however, was the Surveyor-General, Mr.
George Frankland, who, with a substantial party, arrived
on its shores on 1:1th February, 1835. He named the lake
after its Scottish prototype, and, being a classical scholar,
gave classical names to physical objects in the vicinity,
such as Mt. Olympus and Mt. Ida,
From a fishing point of view Lake St. Clair has not
yet come into its own, but authorities like Mr. A. Bing-
ham, Secretary of the Lyell Fisheries Association (West


Coast), are confident of the future. In the report of his
Association for the season 1988-1934, Mr. Bingham states
that in the previous year 160,000 rainbow fry were lib-
erated in the lake at Cynthia Bay. On one visit Mr. Bing-
ham took, on spinner and fly, 15 fish up to 2| lbs. in weight
and in fine condition.
[P. C. Andrews photo
South Esk River, at Longford.
If Lake St. Clair justifies the anticipation of its pro-
tagonists, visiting anglers will experience the double charm
of good fishing and lake scenery that is probably unsur-
passed in the world. Even Dr. Tillyard, a prosaic scientist,
calls Lake St. Clair “ a very beautiful lake,” and adds that
it resembles some of the smaller lakes in the South Island of
New Zealand. Than this, surely greater praise cannot be
given!


Romantic Twin Lakes.
Chief among other lakes are the twin waters named
Lakes Crescent and Sorell. These two lakes are close
together, separated only by a narrow tongue of land,
through which flows a connecting stream. This spot is
’known as Interlaken after its Swiss prototype, and here
stands another excellent accommodation house, 18 miles
only distant from Oatlands and the Main Road, and fav-
oured among fishermen and tourists. These accommoda-
tion houses are a feature of the Tasmanian, inlands, and
who can say how many thousands of people in all parts
of the world even at this moment are recalling- memories
of days and evenings spent within their hospitable walls?
What could be more pleasant than a foregathering of anglers
after a day’s sport ? The smoke from pipe or cigarette
curia upwards like incense from ancient altars, and, while
contentment is the keynote of such gatherings, long and
loud peals of laughter greet stories of past experiences
and future anticipations. All the world knows that fisher-
men’s stories are good and mostly accurate, albeit some-
times indicative of a glowing imagination!
Probably the first fish story told in Tasmania is
recounted by that unconscious humorist the -first Chaplain
in Tasmania, the .Rev, Robert Knopwood, M.A. The
Chaplain, lover of the good things of life, made several
trips in search of food and sport in the rivers adjacent
to Hobart, during the first year of the Island’s occupa-
tion, 1804. He records that on one of these boat trips he
observed a commotion in the water, and rowing' to investi-
gate was the delighted observer of an epic struggle between
two fish. The old cleric, although a graduate of Oxford,
was lamentably weak in both etymology and orthography,
and it is difficult to identify species from his ill-spelled
descriptions. He called one of the fighting fish a “ rnakril,”
which may be identified, and the other a “ boneta ” which,
of course, is impossible orthographically as well as physic-
ally. Still, hear his story. “So intent,” says the reverend
cleric, “ were these two fish on each other’s destruction
that they heeded not our approach, but continued to bite
each other to a most savage extent. The waters were tinged
with blood, and my men were highly excited. Thinking,
however, to put a stop to this fight, I leaned over the boat
and lifted the two fish into it. The ‘ makril,’ when weighed


[Bert Robinson Photo
Eighteen English Trout Caught Before Breakfast in Mersey
River, Latrobe. (Largest Fish, 3½ 1b.)


in my ‘ raarkee ’ (sic) weighed 9 lbs, and the ‘ boneta ’ ii.”
Doubtless the divine’s Sabbath meditations at that week-
end made amends for tiny lack of acciuacy in his tccoided
story.
Classic Rhapsodies.
Lakes Crescent and Sorell were favourite haunts, among
other' people, of John Mitchel, one of the famous Irish
exiles in the early fifties ot Tasmanian history. _ Mitchel,
than whom no Tasmanian has written more glowing piose,
lived at Nant Cottage, Both well, and made frequent visits
to a cottage on the banks of Lake Sorell, inhabited by a
shepherd named Cooper. Mitchel’s descriptions of Tas-
manian rivers and lakes have become classic. Learned in
the beautiful writings ot Pliny, Cicero, and other immoitals,
and endowed with the graceful diction native in many Irish-
men Mitchel’s pen traced historically beautiful phrases.
He delighted in rivers and rivulets, whether they were
fierce torrents tearing along rocky beds or the tinkling
murmur of more placid streams. He believed with Clarence
Mangan that the rhythm of the river waters had the power
to transport mere humans to more ideal realms: —
Roll on, thou loving river, thou ; lift up
Thy waves, those eyes bright with a riotous
laughing!
Thou makest me immortal. I am quaffing
The wine of rapture from no earthly cup!”
Doubtless, with Mangan’s lines in mind he wrote a
rhapsody on Lake Sorell. He says“ The air up in these
regions seems even purer and more elastic than in othei
parts of the Island, the verdure brighter, the foliage richer;
and, as we float here at our ease, wc are willing to believe
that no lake on earth is more beauteous than Sorell. _ in
another nlace he dilates again on the solitude of the situa-
tion. “ One charm.” he says, “of the lake country is its
elevation, high above all the odious stations and townships
of the whole world we find ourselves, as we float on these
aerial” waters amongst the very mountain peaks, two
thousand feet nearer to the stars than people who welter
and wither below.” These glowing sentences of Mitchel s
have been emulated in some degree by lesser mortals, but
all are unanimous in praise of the Tasmanian highlands,
with their lakes and tarns and rivers.


“Tickling Trout.”
This is not the place, nor is 'there scope in this pam-
phlet, to give more than a summary of fish and fishing-
grounds. The personal experience of interested persons
year by year is a much surer guide than any written word
can be’. 'Although anglers will concentrate their attention
on the brown and rainbrow trout, there are native fish
which will intrigue the fisherman. That ornamental ruffian,
Jorgen Jorgensen, to whom reference has already been made,
tells us how a native fish once saved his life and the lives
of his companions. In the services of the V.D.L. Company
he was marooned on the upper waters of a river, which
may have been either the Mersey or the Forth. They had
run out of food, but the resourceful Dane, stooping over
a quiet, secluded backwater in the river, observed a few
fish. With infinite care he was able to perform, an action
similar to that popularly known as “ tickling trout,’' and
eventually managed to transfer two fish from the waters
to the embers of a camp fire. These were possibly Tas-
manian black fish, a native delicacy and one highly esteemed
by country people, but the incident shows that one hundred
years ago Tasmanian fish were available for utilitarian
purposes.
Ova Collection and Exchange.
For many years Lakes Crescent and Sorell have been
the sources of supply of brown trout ova brought to all
the Tasmanian hatcheries. The creeks running into these
lakes were particularly favourable for spawning fish, and,
as a fact, annually nearly 3,000,000 of ova have been
transported from their waters. Just as the first ova brought
to Tasmania in 1864 on the ship “ Norfolk ” came from the
old world rivers Kibble, Dovey, Hodder, Severn, and Tweed,
so the ova of the descendants of fish hatched in 1864 has
been sent from Tasmania to practically all parts of Aus-
tralia and New Zealand, as well as other parts of the
world. From this point of view the Tasmanian hatcheries
are truly international, for on several occasions fresh con-
signments of ova have been introduced from the old world
and New Zealand, these effecting; a most satisfactory change
of blood which prevents inbreeding. Lake Sorell is well
stocked with brown trout, and is in process of stocking
with rainbow, so it affords good fishing, particularly dor


incr the spring months, when the trout readily take wet
fly 3 “ Matuka ” variety. Later in the season, spinner lush-
ing is indulged in with success.
Lake Leake.
Of the Tasmanian Lakes stocked with trout, Lake Leake,
in importance and popularity, ranks next to the Great
Lake the latter place being associated with the head waters
of the Shannon River and the Shannon and tenstock
Lagoons.' It is an artificial lake covering 1500 acres at
an elevation of 2100 feet above sea-level, and situated
miles "from Campbell Town. The lake was constructed
mainly for water supply; both brown and rainbow trout
thrive there, and provide fine sport lor anglers. A feature
vf the lake is its natural shelter afforded by surrounding
hills and forest growth down to the water’s edge, enabling
fishermen during the most boisterous weather to get out
every (lav to one or other of the shores adjacent to the
many favoured angling places. At the commencement of
the season, Ist November, a delightful lorrn of angling m
provided by wading in the shallows, and casting wet fly
to fish feeding on the lame of the indigenous fly. Wet
fly-fishing from a boat over the deeper waters is pleasing
and profitable, particularly with the rainbow he east-
ing is done from a boat drifting broadside with the wind
use being made of a “dropper” attached some 4 eel o
5 feet above the tail fly. The “ dropper,' when dabbled
in the lake, ripples to represent the hfe-hke inoveiiients
of the fly affords a pleasing and effective Un m ol anglui,,
at Lake'Leake The Commissioners ol: I' lshenes realising
the value of this lake as an angling resort, have given
much attention to stocking, with the result that there is
now a fine head of both rainbow and brown trout ol the
vigorous fighting type up to A, 5, and 6 Jbs. Lake Leake
now offers everything m Lie way of a chat ming place at
which to spend a delightful fishing holiday.
Other Lakes and Hatcheries .
In the district of Tasmania known as the North-
Western Tiers there are lakes at Chudleigh. w u ch have
provided excellent fishing for anglers, especially those who


combine sport with sight-seeing. There are numbers of
these lakes at Chudieigh, and all are worth enquiring about.
In short, it may be said that there are few lakes or tarn
waters in Tasmania which have not received the benefit and
attention from the Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries Com-
mission in the way of liberated fry of various species,
In this connection it is well to know that there are no
less than eight hatcheries controlled by the Commission.
These hatcheries have the following capacities:—
Plenty (Derwent) 3,500,000
Waverley (Launceston) 460,000
Lobster Creek (Ulverstone) , 450,000
Wynyard 350,000
Mountain Creek (Lake Sorell) 300,000
Geeveston 260,000
Miena 250,000
Lake Margaret (West Coast) 100,000
Great Lake, North End 100,000
Total 5,760,000
These figures do not represent the total capacity of the
hatcheries, for the ova of brown trout, which is hatched
first each season, is replaced by the ova of rainbow. As a
matter of fact, in the year 1933, 1,114,000, and in 1934,
1,449,000 fry and yearlings were distributed from, these
hatcheries and rearing ponds where connected therewith,
while in the years 1926 to 1934 no less than 16,564,990 fry
and yearlings were distributed. These impressive figures
indicate what has been, and is being, done. Naturally
a large percentage of the figures represented fry.
Fishing the Rivers.
It must not be thought that fishing is confined to lakes.
The rivers of Tasmania provide excellent angling. An
official publication of the Tourist Department of the Tas-
manian Government says:—
“ Tasmania is largely made of mountain, moorland,
and green valleys, through which flow streams of every
description, most of these containing trout, some of
which run to a large size. During the 1932-33 season
a perfectly conditioned rainbow, weighing 17 lbs, 10
ozs., was taken in the Ouse River. Good motor roads


lead to practically all angling localities, and land-
owners, if asked, seldom refuse -permission to intend-
ing anglers. Sportsmen from the Old Country would
do welTto consider exchanging the inclement northern
winter season for a summer in Tasmania, where they
will receive a hearty welcome, and obtain trout fishing
far superior to anything available at Horne. A_ dis-
tinctive feature in Tasmanian fishing is the exceptional
sport during the spring months in the estuaries of
most of the' principal rivers, including the Derwent
and Huon in the South, and many fine rivers on the
North Coast, in which the so-called migratory trout
give magnificent sport. The summer fishing in most
of the trout-stocked rivers inland is excellent.”
Sea Fishing.
Even the lakes and rivers of Tasmania do not by any
means supply the only fishing. The State is noted for the
estuary, as well as deep-sea, fishing round its coasts, there
are four localities on the East Coast which have acpuned
[Emmett Photo
Ouse River and Hotel Garden.


world-wide tame for bream fishing, these being Anson’s
Bay in the north, the Scamander River, and the rivers near
Swansea and Little Swanport. These all have their vot-
eries. and the districts adjacent to them also offer excellent
sport for anglers.
The coasts of Tasmania provides excellent deep-sea
fishing. The fish include the trumpeter, generally known
as a “ stripy,” the bastard trumpeter, the perch, the tre-
vally, and white fish, a most succulent fish resembling a
perch in appearance, but very white. Besides these well-
known varieties there are flounder, rock cod, perch, mackerel,
whiting, and the somewhat despised, but palatable, flathead.
Great sport may be enjoyed in catching barracoota.
An Angler's Eulogy.
As the opinion of an eminent angler provided the open-
ing text for these notes, so the definite statement of another
visitor may fittingly conclude them. Mr. Alexander Small,
a British Government official in the Far East, having con-
cluded a visit to Tasmania in March, 1935, expressed views
which were published in the newspapers of the 16th of that
month. Mr. Small is a very keen angler, and was loud in
his praise of the lakes as fishing-grounds, and of the stand-
ard of accommodation provided at places at which he
stayed “ Tasmania is a wonderful country,’’ said Mr.
Small, “ and I shall have no hesitation in recommending it.
The fishing at the Great Lake is excellent, and there can
be no doubt that anyone coming here can enjoy really good
fishing and spend a most enjoyable holiday.”
This is the opinion of an unbiassed visitor, whose words
will surely be sufficient to give food for thought to any
who, casting their minds about for suitable holiday and
fishing-grounds, may value the experiences of one who had
weighed Tasmania in the balance and found it not wanting.
Something about Finance.
Having regard to the toll exacted from anglers who
fish in the famous waters of the Old World, where sub-
stantial amounts of money are demanded for the right to
fish in the more important streams, the fishing in Tasmania


is to all intents and purposes free. That is to say, a visit-
ing angler may obtain for a fee of £1 a. licence which is
current for the whole season, and which entitles the holder
thereof to fish in any lake or stream in the State.
The tariff at the Lake accommodation houses, and at
country hotels, ranges from 10s. 6d. to 12s, 6d. per day, and
for this modest charge comfortable quarters are obtain-
able. In an earlier part of this booklet a visitor is quoted
as saying: “ . . . It is difficult to commend appropri-
ately the service and accommodation at the Great Lake
. . , ,” and this remark may be applied to many other
fishing resorts in Tasmania. The fares to some of the prin-
cipal fishing centres are shown in the table set out on the
next page.
The Fishing Season,
In the streams of Tasmania, with a few minor excep-
tions, the season opens on the Ist September. The early
spring fishing is mainly of interest to those anglers who
fish the larger river estuaries for sea-run brown trout.
This is carried on mainly by spinning a small minnow,
but in recent years the wet fly in these estuaries has become
popular. In waters stocked with rainbow trout, notably
the Great Lake and Lake Leake, fishing commences on the
Ist November-, and in all waters the season ends on the
30th April.


FARES TO SOME OF THE PRINCIPAL
FISHING
RESORTS
IN
TASMANIA.
Single Fare.
Place.
Accommodation.
Route.
F rom
Hobart.
Prom
Launceston.
GREAT LAKE—
South End; Ml ENA
Government Accommodation
House
Car
1.
O
0
0
IS
<3
North End: TIAGARRA
G ov e rn m e n t A cc o mm odation
House
Car
1
8
0
0
14
0
LAKE LEAKE, via Camp-
bell Town
■ Government Accommodation
Privately-owned House
House
Rail
and
car
1
3
9
0
15
6
LAKE ST. CLAIR
Hotel
Car
1
5
0
i
15
0
INTERLAKEN, via Oat-
lands
Government Accommodation
House
Rail
and
ear
0
17
3
1
i
3
HUONV1LLE
Hotel and Guesthouse
Car
0
6
0
NEW NORFOLK
Hotel and Guesthouse
Rail
0
3
6
SWANSEA
Hotel and Guesthouse
Car
0
15
0
SCAMANDER
Hotel
Rail
and
ear
1
11
3
1
0
3
ST, HELENS
Hotels and Guesthouses
Rail
and
car
1
14
9
1
3
9
LONGFORD
Hotels
Rail
0
2
9
DELORAINE
Hotels
Rail
0
5
9
LATRORE
Hotels
Rail
0
11
0
ULVERSTONE
Hotels and Guesthouses
Rail
0
IS
9
BURNIE
Hotels and Guesthouses
Rail
0
18
3
WYNYARD
Hotels
Rail
0
18
9
