

TROUT
in the
KARRI
COUNTRY


DAY BY DAY ITINERARIES FOR VISITORS
Firstly: WELCOME TO THE “KINGDOM OF THE KARRI”
The citizens of Pemberton are anxious to make your stay interesting and entertaining. Do not hesitate to seek their co-operation.
Your Stay. With Car.
HALF-DAY.
Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill ; Gloucester Tree ; Burma Road ;
Trout Trap.
ONE DAY.
Half-day Trip to Bush.
Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill ; Gloucester Tree ; Burma Road ;
Trout Trap.
TWO-DAY.
Ist A|l-day Trip to Bush.
2nd Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill ; Gloucester Tree ; Burma Road ;
Trout Trap.
Northcliffe Road ; Cascades ; Tobacco ;
Warren River ; Brockman Forest ;
National Park ; Hops. Return Graham
Road.
THREE-DAY.
Ist All-day Trip to Bush.
2nd Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill ; Gloucester Tree ; Burma Road ;
Trout Trap.
Northcliffe Road ; Cascades ; Tobacco ;
Warren River ; Brockman Forest ; National
Park ; Hops. Return by Graham Road.
3rd Nannup Road ; Valley of Giants ; Beedleup
Falls.
Re-afforestation ; Big Brook ; Rainbow Trail
(walk).
FOUR-DAY.
Ist All-day Trip to Bush.
2nd Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill ; Gloucester Tree ; Burma Road ;
Trout Trap.
Nannup Road ; Valley of the Giants ; Beedle-
up Falls.
3rd Northcliffe Road ; Cascades ; Tobacco ;
Warren River ; Brockman Forest ; National
Park ; Hops. Return by Graham Road.
Re-afforestation, Big Brook ; Rainbow Trail
(walk).
4th Channybearup ; New Forest.
Eastbrook Dairying Areas.
FIVE-DAY.
Ist All-day Trip to Bush.
2nd Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill.
Northcliffe Road ; Cascades ; Tobacco ;
Warren River ; Brockman Forest ; National
Park ; Hops. Return by Graham Road.
On Foot.
Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill.
Half-day Trip to Bush.
Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill.
All-day Trip to Bush.
Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill.
Gloucester Tree, etc., or Rainbow Trail.
All-day Trip to Bush.
Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill
Rainbow Trail.
Gloucester Tree ; Burma Road ; Trout
Trap.
Re-afforestation ; Pump Hill.
All-day Trip to Bush.
Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill.
Down Lefroy Brook (Government line).
Rainbow Trail.
Gloucester Tree ; Burma Road ; Trout
Trap.
Re-afforestation, Pump Hill.
Simper’s Electric Mill.
All day Trip to Bush.
Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill.
Rainbow Trail.
Your Stay. With Car.
FIVE-DAY —continued.
3rd Re-afforestation, Big Brook ; Rainbow Trail
(walk).
Nannup Road ; Valley of Giants ; Beedleup
Falls.
4th Gloucester Tree ; Burma Road ; Trout Trap.
Channybearup ; New Forest.
sth To Northcliffe or Manjimup.
Eastbrook Dairy District.
SIX-DAY.
Ist All-day Trip to Bush.
2nd Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill.
Northcliffe Road ; Cascades ; Tobacco ;
Warren River ; Brockman Forest ; National
Park ; Hops. Return by Graham Road.
3rd Nannup Road ; Valley of Giants ; Beedleup
Falls.
Re-afforestation, Big Brook ; Rainbow Trail
(walk).
4th Gloucester Tree ; Burma Road ; Trout Trap.
Channybearup ; New Forest.
sth To Northcliffe.
6th To Manjimup Butter Factory ; Fonty’s Pool.
On Foot.
Re-afforestation, Pump Hill.
Gloucester Tree ; Burma Road ; Trout
Trap.
Down Lefroy Brook (Government line).
Simper’s Electric Mill.
Over Swimming Pool Hill to Power Weir
from National Fitness Camp.
Moltoni’s Dairy Farm.
All-day Trip to Bush.
Trout Hatchery ; Swimming Pool ; Timber
Mill.
Gloucester Tree ; Burma Road ; Trout
Trap.
Rainbow Trail.
Re-afforestation, Pump Hill ; Big Tree.
Down Lefroy Brook (Government Line).
Simper’s Electric Mill.
Trip to Manjimup.
Over Swimming Pool Hill from National
Fitness Camp to Power Weir.
Moltoni’s Dairy Farm.
Having completed your Itinerary it is hoped that you will become one more ambassador to tell of the lovely country “WHERE KING KARRI REIGNS”
Bush Trips.
It is necessary to secure a permit and sign an indemnity at Kelly's Newsagency. Trips should be
confined to Tuesdays and Thursdays. Take a lunch on day trips. Wear old clothes.
Manjimup Trip.
W.A.G.R. Bus leaves each morning and returns each night. A special private bus runs each
Thursday.
Hops and Tobacco.
Visits in season only—Hops, January and February ; Tobacco, December to March.
Swimming Pool.
All facilities available to visitors at 2s. 6d., payable at Kelly’s Newsagency.
Trout Angling.
Season open from December to mid-April. Licenses 55., available at Hotel, Kelly’s Newsagency,
Fisheries Inspector.
Camp and Caravan Park.
As this goes to Press camp sites are being prepared at Pump Bridge. No fees are required until
establishment is complete No camping in Swimming Pool area.
Tennis Courts.
Open to all on payment of day fee.
Picture Shows.
Saturday and Tuesday each week.
Bridge Party.
Every Wednesday.
Dances.
As advertised.
Church Services.
Church of England, Roman Catholic, Methodist. Inquire from hosts.


Proceeds of sale to Trout Acclimatisation Society Funds, Price 3/6




FOREWORD
By
Hon. A V. R. Abbott, M.L.A., Minister for Fisheries
IF ANY doubts ever existed as to the advisability
of the introduction of trout in our inland
waterways it must be agreed that there can be
no doubt of its wisdom now. It has been proved
beyond all doubt that both Brown and Rainbow
trout flourish in many of our beautiful streams.
Trout fishing has a tremendous attraction for
many people, and I have no doubt that as the
result of the successful acclimatisation of these
fish many tourists will be drawn to our trout
streams, which are situate in some of the most
beautiful parts of Western Australia.
As Minister charged with the administration of
fisheries, I offer congratulations and thanks of the
Government and myself to all those who so freely
gave of their time, their labour and their money
for this national work. Not only the Govern-
ment, but also the people of the State as a whole
owe them a debt of gratitude. Posterity will
certainly be richer for their very fine
achievements.


INTRODUCTION
By A. J. Fraser, Chief Inspector of Fisheries
IN THE South-West of Western Australia is a great number of fast-running, perennial freshwater streams,, the vast majority of which until
recent years contained no fish of commercial or economic importance. Some desultory efforts to introduce brown and rainbow trout into waters
like the Avon River and the Preston River were made in the late ’nineties, but there was no really serious attempt to acclimatise these fine
food and sporting varieties until Mr. C. A. Clew secured a consignment of ova from Victoria in 1930, and made the first successful planting
of fry in the following year. I must pay tribute to the work that has been done since that day less than twenty years ago when the first batch
of eggs arrived from the Eastern States. To Mr. A. R. Kelly, who was associated with Mr. Glew in his early experiments, and who by assuming
control of policy and planning in 1937 piloted the Society through difficult days and brought trout acclimatisation to its
present high standard of excellence; to Mr. J. S. Simpson, who after learning all about trout culture the hard way, in the
school of voluntary labour, has, after a period as Curator of the hatchery, now been appointed to the staff of the Fisheries
Department as trout inspector; to Mr. S. E. Young, who handled the financial side and the angling interests with such
credit ; to the scores of others who supported their leaders through all the early trials and tribulations ; to all are due
the utmost praise and commendation.
It has been my privilege to be associated with these people in this work ever since my arrival in the State in 1938, and
by frequent visits to the Pemberton district I have been able to keep in very close touch with their activities. Nobody
knows better than Ido the amount of really hard work they have done in bringing their plans to maturity. Not only was
a great deal of thoughtful planning necessary at the beginning, but a colossal amount of heavy manual labour
was required in clearing the sites of the hatchery, holding ponds, water supply dams, and trout traps, not to
mention the actual work of construction. It would be difficult to compute the number of man-hours absorbed
in the various jobs, but they would run into many thousands. It would be more difficult
still to place a monetary value on the time thus voluntarily given.
The result is a monument
to voluntary effort. I have
had the opportunity of in-
specting trout hatcheries in
other parts of the Common-
wealth —in New South Wales,
Victoria, and Tasmania —and
I have no hesitation in saying
that the installations at Pem-
berton are second to none.


Trout Acclimatisation in Western Australia
THE work of stocking the waters of Western Australia with trout started in 1930, when a consignment of 10,000 ova was
donated by the Victorian Fisheries Department and brought over by boat. Contrary to high hopes, the parcel opened
up a mess of prematurely hatched eggs. The temperature of the ship’s refrigerator had not been low enough to delay the
incubation process. Another means of transport had to be found.
When the second attempt was made in 1931, it was decided to use the recently inaugurated W.A. Airways Service-
-20,000 were again donated from the same source. They arrived safely in Pemberton eighty hours_ after leaving South
Taralgon and were hatched at the back of the Pemberton School House in water from the then unreliable town water supply.
Probably 12,000 to 15,000 reached the fry stage and were planted in local waters. It would have been very valuable to
have held some of these for observation purposes but the attempt failed for lack of adequate facilities. No further im-
portations were made pending some indication of the results of the first experiments.
Over the next few years many specimens of fish were brought in from the local streams. They included perch, mullet*
and native species, but nothing that looked like a trout turned
up, until 1936, when a large fish was reported in a pool in the East
Brook. This proved to be an 11 Jib. brown trout.
In the same year, under the auspices of the Fish and Game Society
of Perth, 100,000 brown and rainbow ova were
brought from Ballarat, and hatched in their ex-
perimental station on the Big Brook. The sur-
vivors, numbering some 60,000, were released at
Pemberton and elsewhere.
The following year another small parcel of
20,000 was brought over.
In 1938 it was realised that it was impossible
to import the millions of ova required to stock
the potential trout waters of the State. As a
good number of mature trout were now evident
in the Pemberton streams, further importa-
tions were abandoned in favour of a long-term
policy of building up an ova supply within the
State. The first necessity was to secure
breeders.


SECURING BREEDERS
THE task of obtaining live trout from the streams for breeding proved far more difficult than the
original job of putting them there. Netting them up stream and down stream was tried but
the logs and snags proved too good a cover for the wily trout. Other methods adopted included baited
traps, tickling and hooking. Of these the last named was the most successful. Parties of half-a-
dozen would go out after work, spend the evening until midnight catching a few fish which they
would hold in a cage and bring in the next morning to the ponds. One enthusiast rode two miles
along a railway track at midnight with a solitary 12in. trout in a bucket on the handlebars, and
kept it alive in the bath until morning.
By 1940 it was evident that not enough trout would be taken by these means, so an attempt
was made to trap them on the spawning “ run.” Many week-ends were spent in building several
traps of an American design. This consisted of a boom with wooden slats one inch apart across
the main stream at the mouth of a small feeder. The idea was to divert the ascending fish up the
feeder into a cone trap made to receive them. This was a total
failure. The slatted grills collected the floating debris holding up
the water, which flowed over the top and allowed the spawners to
go over. One trout was taken for that season’s work !
In 1941, no trap construction was undertaken, and all efforts
were concentrated on the building of holding ponds.
The Chief Inspector of Fisheries of Victoria, Mr. F. Lewis, visited
Pemberton and provided information on the methods of trap con-
struction found successful in that State. For the 1942 run an
experimental trap was built on the Treen Brook. This consisted
of a netting barrier with a verandah down stream to prevent the
spawners going over the top while still allowing the water to pass.
A large cylindrical cord trap was placed upstream to receive the
fish. This cord trap was specially made by Mr. J. E. Bramley of
the Fisheries Department of W.A. Once more severe pressure of
winter water proved too much and another year’s work floated
downstream after catching two trout.


The Trap that Worked
It was now evident that something would have to be designed more suitable for local conditions —it had
to be of sufficient strength to stand the winter’s water, and at the same time stop the ascending spawners.
In the ultimate design, the wooden slats and netting were replaced with grilles of fin. round iron, l|in. apart,
in wooden frames. Four of these were set in slots in a heavy log frame across the stream. The cylindrical
cord trap was again used in 1943. The trap was a success inasmuch as it handled the water well, but it did
not catch the trout because the corded trap rotted out at the critical moment. However, progress was being
made and for 1944, the cord trap was replaced by a rigid wooden box arrangement. This worked splen-
didly and 107 breeders were captured and conveyed to the holding ponds.
While experiments in trap construction were going on, every endeavour was being made to nurse a few
fry through to two-year-olds in the ponds as a substitute for wild fish. These reached maturity in 1944, but
the artificial conditions affected their fertility,
and it was again necessary to resort to trapping.
Taking Trout from Lefroy Trap
It was a source of great satisfaction to the Society
that it had persevered with the problem of trap
design. Faced with the necessity of relying on
wild fish for 1945 and benefiting from past ex-
perience it set out on an arduous year’s pro-
gramme of trap construction. Ail resources were
staked on the success of this programme. 1,600
hours of voluntary manual work went into the
construction of three new traps. Electrically
welded grilles replaced wooden frames and lessons
from previous failures were applied with the result
that when the run commenced in 1945, 183 trout
were captured in four weeks. The season closed
then, owing to excessive winter waters.
In 1946, 274 were taken with little effort. To
the success of trapping for 1946 can be added the
recovery of the pond held breeders to something
like normal fertility. Following experiments with
diet and conditions, healthy eggs were produced
by almost every female in the ponds.


TAKING OF EGGS
THE first attempt at stripping ova from trout was made in 1937, when seven rainbow breeders secured by the tedious methods described,
ran from the swimming pool into a crude trap prepared to receive them. This was the Ist July, 1937. The only knowledge possessed
by those few enthusiasts had been gleaned from literature. Nobody had even seen a fish stripped ; nobody knew a male from a female.
Apparently this point was so elementary that experienced writers overlooked mentioning it.
Which were males and which were females ?
The latter were supposed to be noticeably deeper, but all looked long and lean
to the anxious band.
Perhaps the females would run later.
When would they be ripe ?
The rainbows came on in July in N.S.W. and in October in Tasmania.
When would they be ready in W.A. ?
Two week-ends went by and then it was decided to handle them. One fish
“ blew ” some eggs —that one at least was a female. This was unexpected. Buckets,
basins and gear were quickly assembled and a master of ceremonies sat on a stump
reading instructions while other enthusiasts endeavoured to interpret words into
actions. A few thousand ova were taken that year with creditable results (see
Hatching).
The experience gained since then is reflected in the 1946 take, when 85 per cent,
of the eggs reached the eyed stage.
Only long experience can teach when the females are ready, but this point is
vital to success. Once it has been decided to operate, the eggs are gently pressed
from the female into a bowl —thousands of them of a delightful salmon pink trans-
parency, perfect and symmetrical as only Nature can make them. In size they
approximate 25 to the square inch and 300 to the fluid ounce. They average 600
to each pound weight of trout. When they leave the female they are not fertile.
As soon as possible the male trout has to be manipulated in the same way as the
female and the milt mixed with the eggs. These two processes alternate until a
convenient number of eggs have been taken. After standing a few minutes, they
are then placed in a bucket and a small stream of water is passed through them
for some 20 minutes, while they go through the “ hardening” process. They are
then ready to be placed on hatching trays.


HATCHING
WHEN in 1931 the 20,000 eyed ova imported
from Victoria were successfully hatched,
it was thought that trout culture had been
accomplished. When later the Society took
their own ova and nursed them through the
early hazards, it was found that it was not until
the ova had reached the eyed stage that the
main troubles were over.
The only difficulty in the early operations
with eyed ova was due to plant. The initial
parcel which was hatched at the school house
almost perished when the town water supply
failed. They were rescued by a chain of school
boys with buckets of water from the tanks.
Similar difficulty was experienced with the
100,000 in 1936 in the experimental hatchery
Mr. C. A. Glew and School Eoys
with First Ova
constructed on the Big Brook by the Fish and Game
Society. This drew its water from the hydro-electric
power scheme and when- this too, failed, water had to
be brought in buckets from Big Brook right through the
night. A few eggs from the first stripping experience in
1938 hatched well and the fish were held for several
months until the hot weather and unsuitable conditions
in the experimental ponds caused them to develop fin rot. They were
treated in a salt solution and replaced in the hatching troughs. Next morn-
ing five thousand, the total survival, had jumped out and lay dead on the
hatchery floor. What a mess !
From 1941 to 1943 hatching was done with makeshift equipment in the
lately constructed holding ponds under very difficult conditions and with in-
different success. The reward, however, came in 1944, when the State
Government granted the Society £550 to construct a modern hatchery as part
of a post-war plan.


A Pair of Troughs of 80,000 Ova
The all-important consideration in hatchery practice is the water supply.
The ideal is from springs uncontaminated by fish life. Such conditions existed
within the Pemberton National Park boundaries and adjacent to the Ponds. A
spring providing 100 gallons per minute with a 20ft. head above the new hatchery
left nothing to be desired in this direction. The hatchery was designed by the
Society and the troughs of cast cement, made mainly by voluntary labour, proved
an interesting and successful innovation. To indicate the growth of production
and the elimination of difficulties previously experienced, the following figures are
of interest. In 1944, 20,000 were handled j in 1945, 250,000, and 400,000 in 1946,
1947 and 1948 which filled the hatchery to capacity.
After ova have passed the “ hardening ” stage, they are laid on trays, each
holding approximately 10,000. The trays have a specially woven wire mesh which
holds the eggs, but allows the newly-hatched trout (alevins) to drop thiough.
The trays are placed in troughs and water well aerated and at its natural tem-
perature of about 53 F. is passed through them at the rate of four gallons
per minute. From the Ist to the 15th day, the eggs are at their most delicate
stage. They are most susceptible to shock. One jar may kill thousands ! The
only movement attempted is the careful removal of the dead eggs by means of a
suction syringe. Those that die lose their salmon colour and transparency, and
become white and opaque. If they are left on the tray for more than two or three days, they develop fungus, which spreads
out and kills the adjacent good eggs. Two or three days’ neglect may mean a total loss. After fifteen days the embryo
trout can be seen, and two black dots mark the attaining of the eyed stage. The eggs can now be handled. They are
cleaned by washing and again laid on trays. If they are to be despatched elsewhere they are packed m moss lined trays
and placed in specially constructed boxes having an ice tray for cooling which holds up incubation.
Another fifteen days and the shell breaks and the young trout or alevin emerges. It is about the size of apm with
two black eyes and an egg sac, the size of a pea, under its throat. It slips through the mesh of the tray, shunning pub-
licity and light for another fourteen days, when it will have absorbed the nutriment from the egg sac. It rises a trout
“ fry ” to start life’s struggle for existence. This struggle, however, is not severe with the artificially bred fish for the
attendant will be waiting with finely minced raw liver, and will start our young trout on the way to maturity.


DISTRIBUTION
HAVING reached the fry stage the trout are now ready to place in their future habitat.
The perfect environment for this magnificent fighting fish is the cool, fast flowing,
tumbling waters of rocky rapids interspersed with quiet pools. Here the young fish
find food in abundance, activity, and protection. But all trout will not be so fortunate
as to find these ideal conditions. They can still thrive, especially browns, in quieter
pools, lakes, weirs, and dams with surface temperatures as high as 80 degrees F. pro-
vided some depth is present and water is free of injurious impurities.
From the hatchery the fry are transported in ten-gallon cream cans. Early in the
season, up to 1,000 per can, are carried. This number is reduced as the fry grow until,
as yearlings only 50 can be safely accommodated. Transport for long distances is pos-
sible provided temperatures are kept down and the water well aerated. The former is con-
trolled by the addition of ice and the latter by
introducing air with a pump. The rougher the
road the better the fish travel, smooth bitumen
road being a source of danger to the unwary.
On arrival at the destination, the youngsters
are planted into small feeder streams or weedy
shallows where they will be safe from their predatory
elders. Cannibalism is one of their worst habits.
The First Release of Fry
by C. A. Glew and A. R. Kelly
The distribution of trout in W.A. has been wide although in limited numbers in some
waters. Parcels have been sent as far north as Gingin, and as far south as Albany.
Chittering Brook, Yanchep, Bickley, Serpentine, Dwellingup, Pinjarra, Harvey, Bruns-
wick, Collie, Capel, Nannup, Balingup, Bridgetown, Denmark—all have had trout
placed in their waters at one time or another.
Generally speaking, with a few notable exceptions, there has been little perseverance
in stocking these waters. It is unlikely that any waters will become stocked by placing
a few thousand fry in them, and feeling that one’s duty to posterity has been done. It
should be remembered that in the Great Lake in Tasmania, fish had been continually
planted for fourteen years before good fishing was available. This lake today provides
some of the world’s finest trout fishing.


HOLDING
EACH year approximately 50,000 browns and rainbows are retained in the hold-
ing ponds for planting streams with yearlings and for brood stock. These are
fed on a modified meat diet and have to be graded for size periodically to combat
irregular growth and cannibalism. This holding is progressively reduced by plantings,
sales, and culling, finishing with about 2,000 yearlings. From these, carefully selected
brood stock is raised and further reduced as two-year-olds when the sex can be de-
termined, to a proportion of two females to one male.
The holding of the young trout is not as simple as is often imagined. All over
the world many millions of young trout are lost annually by the ravages of disease
which readily attack concentrations
of this or any other species in close
confinement under artificial and
thereby unnatural conditions.
These diseases are particularly
prevalent where high and fluctuat-
ing water temperatures are ex-
perienced.
It was fortunate that the ex-
periments in Western Australia
commenced at Pemberton where
favourable conditions lent a help-
ing hand. At the Society’s ponds
a water supply under complete con-
trol gives a minimum delivery of
140 gallons per minute at a maxi-
mum temperature of 65 degrees F.
This temperature varies only 12
degrees between summer and
winter.
Holding Pond and Races at Pemberton.


EAST BROOK TROUT
THE discovery of the first trout caught at Pemberton is a story in
itself. Its existence was reported by Mr. P. Collins some five years
after the first liberation in the local streams in 1931. If it really were
a trout which Mr. Collins had seen, what was its life history ?
It must have been artificially stripped from Victorian parents, probably
in South Gippsland, and after coming to the eyed stage, packed in ice.
It did the trip by air, train, and car to Pemberton, in 80 hours, where it
was hatched at the School House. After surviving the hazards of the
first experience in hatching, unexpected difficulties arose with silt
accumulating in the
trough. The problem
of cleaning out became
necessary and C. A.
Glew and A. R. Kelly
decided that the only
remedy was to shift the
fish from one trough to
another. In the process
however, one trough buckled and the trout spilt on the floor. Our East Brook specimen must
have been one of the lucky ones that was rescued by means of a teaspoon. So this was the
fish which caused enthusiasts, faintly suspicious that it might be another false alarm, to sally
forth. But sure enough, there was a monster trout! — long and 11 Jibs, in weight—a
brown female in all her pristine beauty. It could only have been one of the original liberations
five years earlier or a progeny thereof. To establish its age, condition and history, scales were
forwarded to the Eastern States. The experts’ finding was that this fine specimen was a five
year female that had spawned twice.
The Fish and Game Society was at this time in the formation stage and was battling hard
for public support. They were subject to the usual pessimism that trout would not thrive in
W.A., and here was the answer ! Here was indisputable evidence —if it could be caught!


So six men, armed with clearing tools, nets, a hundred-gallon tank, and a motor truck,
spent half a day catching one large trout in a pool 15ft. long by Bft. wide. Caught at last,
it was hurried into a tank and taken to Pemberton where it was held in a grading pond.
Two hours later came the news that it had died ! Still it was a valuable specimen. It was
packed in ice in a Peters’ Ice Cream churn and consigned to the Western Ice Company,
Perth there to await the attention of a taxidermist. But the enthusiasm of one of the
Joint’Secretaries of the Fish and Game Society, was too much for him. He showed the
treasure to all his friends, until it lost its attractiveness by reason of its age. It was,
however, not beyond preservation. After receiving expert attention at the Perth Museum,
it was shown in Perth windows for some months. Then, by mischance, it was lost
until 1946 ! When it eventually turned up, it was very rat-eaten, but nevertheless still the
East Brook Trout. What remains of it now reposes in its proper place in the Pemberton
Society’s Club room,
where it serves as a
fitting reminder of the
vicissitudes of trout
culture.
Truly a fish of
character. One might
almost say a fish of
destiny !
The “East Brook Trout ”


The Society ? Personality and Finance
It would not be fitting to end this survey of trout acclimatisation without some reference to the
organisation and the people responsible for the success attained to date
In 1927, Mr. C. A. Glew was appointed headmaster of the Pemberton School. He
was greatly impressed by the streams and waters of the district, and after returning from
a visit to the trout districts of Victoria, at once recognised the possibility of establish-
ing them at Pemberton. In this he was encouraged by the then Chief Inspector /
\ of Fisheries, Mr. F. Aldrich, who gave much timely advice and assistance. He
quickly inspired the Parents and Citizens’ Association and some local
citizens with enthusiasm for the project, and with the second attempt j
\ in 1931 successfully hatched and planted out W.A.’s first trout. In
the early stages, he was ably assisted by Dr. Abbott, A. R. Kelly,
G. Betty, and F. Goddard. In 1933, he was transferred to the
metropolitan area where he immediately set about organ-
ising support for trout propagation on a wider scale.
As a result, in 1935, the Fish and Game Society
was formed in Perth, and received support from
eminent citizens. Under the Chairmanship of J.
Charles, with C. A. Glew and Josh Simonsen as
Joint Secretaries, £5OO was raised by public sub-
scription and a grant of £5OO was received from
the Government. With this, an experimental
hatchery was built on Big Brook at Pemberton,
and J. Gregory was employed to operate the
'plant. The organisation functioned successfully
"during 1936 and 1937. During this period the
Society experienced extreme financial difficulties,
and was able to carry on only through the en-
thusiastic support of Mr. Charles, who personally
guaranteed its overdraft to the extent of £250.


However, the splitting up of the administration and the fact that
the executives were at Pemberton, together with the cessation of the
government grant led to difficulties of control, and it then ceased
to be active.
In 1938, Pemberton citizens took the initiative and A. R. Kelly in
order to consummate the work commenced by Mr. Glew, formed the
Pemberton Society and called to his aid J. Simpson, L. D. Mickle
and G. Brown.
The policy of creating a local ova supply was formulated. From
1938 to 1941, the local society battled along with no source of finance,
but the few pounds raised by its own efforts backed by unlimited
enthusiasm and untold hours of arduous voluntary labour. In
1940, the Fish and Game Society received from the late Mr. McCallum
Smith a bequest of £250. This was immediately made available to
the Pemberton Society, and together with a grant of £165 from the
Government, the present Holding Ponds were established.
From the time of his arrival in the State, and taking up the
position of Chief Inspector of Fisheries, Mr. A. J. Fraser has proved
a tower of strength and source of inspiration. His administrative
ability and personal interest has afforded the Society a strong voice
in government quarters. Due to his foresight an amended Fisheries
Act of 1941 gave Trout Societies autonomy in their own areas and
an official standing in the community.
The war years brought new difficulties. Service needs absorbed
good workers, but their places were filled by new enthusiasts man-
powered to the timber industry. Among the many who contributed
labour and service mention must be made of the continued enthusiasm
of M. Love, L. Graham, and R. Cave.
Financial support increased. Donations, collections, govern-
ment and road board grants, all contributed in varying degrees.
Thanks to the good offices of the then Minister for Fisheries, Hon. A.
A. M. Coverley, M.L.A., Mr. Byfield of the Treasury, and Mr. E. K.
Hoar, M.L.A., a grant of £550 for the new hatchery set the seal of
success upon a project that for many years had depended upon the
voluntary efforts of enthusiasts.
After the heavy programme of work carried out in 1945, and the
demonstration that the objectives which the Pemberton Society had
set itself had been attained, the case was put to the Government for
sufficient support to permit the employment of a full-time attendant
and means of transport. The then Premier, Hon. F. J.S. Wise, M.L.A.,


Voluntary workers build the Pond Caging.
proved most sympathetic, and an
annual grant of £4OO enabled the
Society to appoint Mr. J. Simpson,
who had been connected with its
work for many years, and had
learned trout culture by experience,
to the positions of Curator and
Fisheries Inspector. With the ad-
vent of the McLarty Government
in 1947, some apprehension was
felt as to future policy towards
Trout Acclimatisation. This was
quickly dispelled for not only was
the existing support continued but
there was a ready response to the
upsurge of interest throughout the
State and an additional Inspector
was attached to the Fisheries
Department to assist in State-wide
developments.
A singular feature is that not one of the persons responsible has ever seen another Trout
Hatchery, or had more than a casual contact with a Trout Culturist. Being completely isolated
from fellow workers in other States, the cult could only be learned by the painful process of “ trial
and error ” —one error and a year’s work was lost. The knowledge gained was the Society’s
greatest asset —intangible but very real. Not only has it mastered the technique of Trout
Culture but it has prepared a plan that will take the work forward for many years.
What has been achieved in trout acclimatisation at Pemberton stands as
An Epic of Community Effort


TROUT ANGLING
Nice Rainbow, Nice Water
The end of trout propagation is primarily to provide one of the finest forms of sport. Trout
angling is the most highly skilled of all fishing. The “ mug’s luck,” so common with sea fishing,
seldom holds good with trout. It is a skill and is to be learned by patience and application, as
is the case in every true sport. The reward is great for those who acquire the art. To outmatch
the cunning and superb fighting qualities of the trout in fair encounter is a thrill indeed. To
the joy of the kill is added an environment of flowing streams and forest scenery which is a source
of pleasure to lovers of nature.


For the Beginner
A Brace of Browns from the Power Weir
There are many people who would like to go trout fishing but who know absolute-
ly nothing about the subject. Many such show up at the stream side with sea tackle
and other equipment totally unsuited to the work in hand. The only thing they
ever catch is a cold. Such people often fish industriously for hours without getting
a “ nibble ” or seeing a fish, and finally convince themselves that there are no trout
in the streams. Three of the most pathetically bewildered people ever seen were in
this frame of mind, when a big kid strolled round the bend, went past them on the
other side of the brook, pausing every few steps to extract another trout. He caught
three almost under their noses, and strolled on around the next bend. Such an ex-
perience is apt to be heartbreaking and make the beginner give up in despair. The
affair savours of black magic. The expert produces trout from the empty stream
like a conjuror taking a rabbit from the hat, and the beginner has no idea how he
should act in order to do likewise.
fish out of a stream than a fairly good fisherman who is on his
own. What is more important is that a beginner under proper
guidance will soon learn enough to give him a good start so that he
will keep on learning—and learning fast when he is alone.
The Society will assist in providing guides and angling com-
panions whenever possible. It also has a special pamphlet on
trout angling which is available on application.
What he should do is to make friends
with some really good trout fisherman
who will take him-out, show him what
to do, what not to do, and explain
the why of each. A rank be-
ginner whose every move is
being coached by a real
expert will often get
more and bigger


Open
Season.
No.
of Li-
censes.
Total
Caught.
Average
Weight.
Heaviest
Caught.
Legal Tackle.
lb.
oz.
lb.
OZ.
1940
31
57
2
4
6
4
(Rainbow)
Fly only
Feb.
Mar..
1941 ...
76
143
2
4
6
0
(Brown)
Fly only
1941,
to
Feb.,
1942
94
241
2
0
5
4
(Brown)
Fly only
1942.
to
Feb.,
1943
120
455
1
14
5
8
(Rainbow)
Fly only
Dec.
1943,
to
Mar.,
1944
138
432
1
12
6
2
(Brown)
Fly and Spinner
1944.
to
Mar.,
1945
152
435
1
12
4
8
(Rainbow)
Fly and Spinner
Dec.
1945,
to
Apl.,
1946
190
1,240
1
8
4
12
(Rainbow)
Fly, Spinner and
Live Bait
Dec.
1946,
to
Apl.,
1947
175
1,200
1
5
6
2
do. do.
Dec.
1947,
to
Apl.,
1948
181
1,250
1
8
7
4
do. do.
Dec.
1948,
to
Apl..
1949
203
1,100
1
4
5
2
do. do.
The Pemberton Scene
5. Young takes a nice Rainbow
THE development of trout angling at Pemberton commenced in 1940, when an
open season was declared for a month to test the stream. The following table
will indicate the growth since that date :
it will be noted that there has been a steady increase in the numbers of trout
taken, and despite relaxed conditions, the stream population is still increasing. It
will be noted that the weight has fallen during the past few years, and this, of course,
is to be expected. 61b. rainbows may be natural to Lake Taupo in New Zealand,
but for stream fish it is doubtful whether it would be possible to maintain trout up
to 21bs. The legal length of rainbows in U.S.A. is 6in., while European trout are
weighed in ounces. It will be readily understood that when trout are planted in
waters that have not previously contained fish life, a large quantity of virgin food
is available to them, and the growth rate is very rapid. As the population increases
and the food diminishes a new balance of nature is struck and the fish settle down to
the size at which they can maintain good condition.
The whole future of trout population in W.A. depends upon the food value in
our streams and little is known in this regard, except that the young trout of 1 Jib.
weight are in excellent condition, highly coloured and fighting fit. If the Pemberton
streams can maintain this standard, the future is indeed bright for trout angling.


Angling Conditions
WITHIN ten miles of Pemberton there are 200 miles of streams
of sufficient volume to carry good trout. They consist of rocky
rapids, fast flowing runs, and large pools. No trout angler could
desire more, but unfortunately undergrowth on the banks and timber
in the streams make much of this valuable water inaccessible at
present. As timber milling operations pass along the rivers and
the re-afforestation programme provides service roads and fire breaks,
more and more of the waters will become accessible by car. With
the larger waters such as the Warren River, it is planned to create
camp sites at selected points for anglers, picknickers, and caravaners.
The Forests Department is giving excellent co-operation in this
regard. An early development will take the form of a scenic road
through karri forests of the Warren
National Park leading to selected points.
The river adjacent to campsites will be
intensely stocked and movement will be
possible up and down stream in small
boats and canoes. Casting will be done
towards the banks on either side, thus
avoiding the troublesome business of
scrambling along the edges. For fifty
miles the Warren River winds its way
in a series of rocky rapids and long pools
through a gorge of karri clad hills
rising 300 feet on either side. Nothing
in the State equals the virgin grandeur
of this almost unknown paradise.


There are excellent water and fishing conditions in Lefroy Brook,
for some two miles up and down stream from Pemberton, with select
points, such as Cascades and Lefroy Rapids. On the Brockman property,
where Treen Brook wends its way through totally cleared pastures for a
mile before it reaches the Warren River, conditions are such as to make
the trout fisherman jump for joy a typical English trout stream.
But the typical English “dry fly” angler will be at a loss to understand
why our trout scorn the floating fly. With the exception of the flying
ant there are not big hatches of flies in our waters. Some day a dry
fly purist may show the way to take the large brown and rainbows
which haunt the bigger waters —there’s fame and fun for the angler who
succeeds.
Lefroy Brook
More trout have been taken out of Treen area than any other section of
the system. With the exception of the mentioned sections, angling con-
ditions are hard, but while this militates against the angler until our stream
improvement programme takes effect, it provides a sanctuary and breeding
ground. The condition arrived at in many countries where totally
cleared streams and banks have made them almost untenable to trout,
thanks to Forestry policy, will never apply in the Pemberton streams.


THE FUTURE
The future acclimatisation on the propagation side depends upon
the degree of enthusiasm in all centres throughout the State. This
enthusiasm v/ill develop quickly when a few fish start to show up as
has been the case in the Dwellingup-Murray, Collie, Harvey,
Gingin, Yanchep, Serpentine and Blackwood areas.
In no country where conditions are reasonable has
trout acclimatisation failed to catch popular imagin-
ation, and nowhere has hatchery production of j
trout caught up on the demand for fish to stock /; *i
the streams.
In U.S.A., where the hatchery production
is numbered in billions of fish, the pressure
of the seven million license holders is so
great that the streams cannot grow the fish
fast enough, and a “ put and take ” policy
has been adopted. This means that the
trout are grown to takeable size in the
hatchery before planting out. The hatch-
ery man puts them in one day and the
angler takes them out the next. }
Having in mind the thousands of pounds- v a
that are wasted annually by day to day develop
ment of projects with the scrapping of one outfit
and the building of another, this Society in 1940
drew up a long term plan, which was submitted and
accepted by the Post War Development Committee. It
provided for the ultimate expenditure of £lO,OOO over a
period of years—half to be spent on the propagation side and half
on stream improvement. The plan aims at a million egg hatchery,
holding ponds, rearing races, wild fish traps, laboratories, and
curator’s residence. All construction to date has been portion of
this ultimate plan—the traps, the holding ponds, and half the
hatchery being now completed. No construction will be undertaken
unless it is in the total planning and is of a permanent nature and a
credit to the State.
On the angling side a wide policy of stream improvement
is envisaged. In co-operation with the Forestry Depart-
ment, fire-break systems will coincide with a plan to
select well-favoured spots on the streams and make
them accessible.
these points the water will be made fish-
, V able and well stocked. In the larger waters
sufficient clearing in the water will be done
to allow the movement of canoes or small
boats. The provision of campsites at
suitable places will give the visiting
angler and tourist quick and easy access
to vantage points.
As the angling pressure increases as it
assuredly will, more of these delightful
places will have to be made easier of
access. Such well known spots as the
mouth of the Treen, where hundreds of trout
are taken out every season from a few yards
of choice water, will not stand over-fishing and
f give the desired results. If the work done is to
be carried to its logical conclusion of making West-
ern Australia a trout angling State as Victoria and
Tasmania, systematic opening up of selected points is es-
sential. Another aspect which the Society has in mind is the provision
of high-class tourist accommodation. It is highly probable that
W.A. will have the parallel to Tasmanian “ Rainbow Chalet ” on
the Great Lake and the Government Tourist Houses on New Zealand’s
Lake Taupo.


PEMBERTON ...
“Backing down ” a Karri
THE purpose of this brochure is to tell
visitors about trout acclimatisation,
but because many will wish to see other
points of interest, a short summary of the
Pemberton scene is included.
The town was established in 1913, when
the State Government, to supply sleepers
for the Trans-Australian Railway, built the
“ Big Brook ” Mill in the centre of the
State’s purest karri forest. Irrespec-
tive of whether the traveller approaches
from Manjimup, Nannup, Northcliffe,
or Nornalup, 10 or 12 miles from
Pemberton, the country changes from
the comparatively uninteresting Jar-
rah-Red Gum
forest to the
Karri, with its
accompanying evergreen undergrowth. The approach from
Nannup is especially beautiful, passing the Donnelly River,
the Carey and Fly Brooks, the “ Valley of the Giants,” and
the regeneration of young Karri at Springfield. Equally
attractive are the immediate environs of the town, which
nestles in the valley of the Lefroy Brook- -among Karri-clad
hills, National Parks, and farm lands. It has been justly
claimed that within this 12-mile radius lies the richest concen-
tration of potential wealth in W.A., excluding mining. Here
is the State’s greatest forest wealth, its best agricultural
and horticultural lands, and unsurpassed scenic beauty


This threefold economic background—timber, agriculture, and tourist traffic—■
insures stability. Unfortunately, some industries based on forest wealth have
been divorced from the natural site. Several have yet to be exploited. Meanwhile
the mill remains—the largest in the Southern Hemisphere—and a source of never-
failing interest.
The agriculture potentialities, although great, are not fully realised. The district
has 300 miles of permanent streams which could be harnessed for irrigation. Much
of this country, after milling operations, could, with advantage be cultivated ; but
such is the value of the forest wealth that the whole area has been dedicated to pro-
Forest Scene.
vide the forest of the future.
This is not without its compensations. It
insures the maintenance of flora and the
natural beauty of the countryside. National
Parks, flowing streams, trout fishing, and
industrial activity make Pemberton the
State’s most attractive inland tourist resort.
The local citizens are proud of their dis-
trict and being without its own local govern-
ing authority to watch its interest, have
taken public projects into their own hands.
The development of the National Park and
Recreation Reserve, the Swimming Pool,
Trout Hatcheries, and sporting facilities has
called for £6,000 of local subscription and
much voluntary labour. They stand as
monuments to individual initiative backed
by fine community spirit.
Felling a Giant Karri.


SWIMMING POOL
Pool Site, 1928 Compare this with the scene on the back cover.
Note the Diving Tree on the right.
BECAUSE the Swimming Pool ranks next to trout acclimatisation as a
community effort and because it has risen from a paddling pond to a
Scenic Gem without peer in Western Australia, it is probable that the visitor
would like to know something of its origin. In 1928, the local Parents and
Citizens’ Association sent 140 children to Bunbury for a fortnight’s holiday
at a cost of £l5O. This gave rise to the idea that if this sum was to be spent
annually, why not put it into a civic asset which could be enjoyed by the
whole community the year round. The idea caught on. On Mill pay
day, November 4th, 1928, a collection was made, and almost to a man the
workers put in ss. each, other citizens in proportion, and £5B was raised in
one day. The same night the contract to build a dam
across the selected site was let. By February
Bth, 1929, a pool, Bft. deep, provided great
fun for the youngsters.
raised to 14ft. What a fine sheet of water it looked on the evening of 14th October, 1929, and then
next morning it wasn’t there. The water had seeped through the bank, and a gap 10ft. wide right
down to the foundations was washed out. More work and more subscription had to be found and
both were forthcoming. After four years of progress the sponsors of the project left the district and
the organisation fell into the doldrums. But it was too valuable an asset to decay. Under new
leadership the Swimming Pool Board was formed in 1938 and set out to consummate the work so well
started. A long term plan was drawn up and annual memberships reinstituted. Swimming Car-
nivals and Peso trains were organised to assist finance. A steady programme of improvement com-
menced, grass planting, a water scheme, boats and boat house, safety areas with concrete floors, all
moved toward the ultimate plan. And all the time the surroundings of giant karris and undergrowth
were bringing back to the Pool a natural environment.
The community became seized with
the value of the project and a further
subscription and much voluntary work
was forthcoming and a bigger and
better pool planned. The wall was


Building the Bank
Part of the policy is not to plant exotics but to retain the native
ruggedness—a symbol of the district it serves ; a symbol also of the
spirit of the little community that built it wholly by their own work,
and money ; no Government or Road Board money having gone into
the project. Assistance from the State Saw Mills in terms of timber
is appreciated. The year 1947 marked the completion of the Board’s
first long range plan. This was drawn up when the new Board took
over in 1937, and each year as a few pounds became available, some
part was executed. Although it had taken ten years to complete the
first objective had been attained.
A plan for the second decade is now in hand which envisages
bathing pavilions of modern design and the establishment of a National
Fitness Camp.
The Pool is maintained to-day by an annual membership of 2s. 6d. r
and it is to the great credit of the local residents that out of 168 houses,
160 maintain their memberships—to the Pembertonian, “ Our Pool ”
means as much as “ Our Harbour ”to the Sydneysider. The revenue
from memberships is supplemented by donations from various Bodies
in the town and profit on Carnivals. Its facilities and grounds are
open to visitors on the Membership terms and few will be adverse to
supporting such an enterprise.


Bush Workings of the Timber Industry
The felling of the karri
giants, cutting up, hauling to
the rail head, loading and
conveying to the Mill by the
bush “ rake ” is something no
visitor to the South-West
should miss. Of equal interest
are the personalities of the
men who work in the karri
forest —giants, too, in phy-
sique and endurance. They
have developed a cult of their
own ; to the skill at their
Loading Logs at Bush Landing
work is added a subtle touch of showmanship, due no doubt to their daily
contact with visitors. “ Rough Diamonds ” but justly proud of the
bigness of the thing they are called upon to grapple with and courteous
in their willingness to demonstrate their various skills. When a monarch
of the forest is brought down, great forces are let loose and great dangers
follow an error in judgment. To witness the ingenuity of the bush worker
and his mechanical aids is a thrill indeed. In most cases, the working is
accessible by car. Alternatively sightseeing trips have been organised
by the town’s people in co-operation with the State Saw Mills. Permits
are necessary and these are available at Kelly’s Newsagency. A small
charge of 2s. 6d. is made to cover organising expenses.
Similarly at the Mill the
spectacle of breaking up the
logs into the largest and long-
est pieces of hardwood pro-
curable in the world or into
tiny case boards, is well worth
inspection. The courtesy of
the State Saw Mills and the
Staff has become traditional
and everything is done to
interest visitors.


NATIONAL PARK AND RECREATION
RESERVE
Here again may be seen the result of civic foresight. When the Swimming Pool was constructed
in 1928 it quickly became so valuable to the community that some security of tenure had to
be sought. The Lands Department responded by granting a National Park of 118 acres.
This has since been added to as other public projects were undertaken, until today > ,
nearly 1,000 acres of public “playground” form the northern boundary of the
town. A
Its karri-clad hills, rising 300 ft. above the town, are divided by the
Lefroy Brook, which carries more permanent water than most Aus-
tralian rivers. Entering the Reserve with a mile of rocky rapids
it is a joy to the fly fisherman and nature lover. Its
career is steadied by the Hydro Scheme weir and the
water spreads out into a placid lake abounding
with trout. Up this delightful gully of
forest and stream scenery, a scenic road,
the “ Rainbow Trail,” is under construe-
tion. This will give access to camp sites
planned for campers, anglers, and car-
vanners.
Below the weir are more rapids and the
pipeline of the Hydro-Electric Scheme. This
creditable enterprise has brought many amenities
to the local residents. The harnessing of the v
permanent flow and natural head of the Lefroy
Brook is the only attempt to use water power for elec-
tricity generation in W.A. It is therefore, a point
of interest to visitors.
Weir and Pipe Line
(Hydro Electric Scheme)


National Parks of Virgin Karri
A Roadside Scene in Virgin Karri Forest
Few people in the State realise how great are our karri forests ; how
they compare with other forest areas in the world ; or how the reserves
selected as National Parks will ultimately return wealth through tourist
traffic greater than their value as timber. Only by knowing other forests
can a comparison be made. No less an authority than the World Forestry
Commission which visited Pemberton in 1928 judged the karri forest, in
majesty and grandeur as second only to the redwoods of California. It
is well that we should cherish our parks as a great national asset.
Unfortunately many visitors to W.A. spend a few days within 50 miles
of Perth and think they have seen the State. What a different impression
they would carry away with them if they could spend an hour in our
National Parks of virgin karri. The State’s best parks lie in the Pem-
berton area and 10,000 acres have been reserved at various points. Pos-
terity will thank those citizens and officials whose foresight has protected
these scenic gems. The Warren and Carey Parks are the finest patches
of virgin karri in the State. Through the former winds a leafy track,
part of the old Vasse Road which was at one time the only link between
Busselton and Albany. It is in this Reserve that the Forests Department
plans to construct a scenic forest drive which will link up with camp sites
on the Warren River. It already takes in much of the Lower Warren
but it is hoped that it will be extended to take in all of what is without
a doubt Western Australia’s grandest scenery—so rugged is this piece of
forest and stream country that not more than fifty people in the State
know its beauties. While it lies undisturbed in its virgin grandeur rain-
bow trout are breeding and thriving in its pools and rapids. Whether
this should be opened up or remain a sanctuary must be decided before
the timber getter advances too far.


“Valley of the Giants "
The photograph below depicts portion of the
Beedelup Falls, a9O ft. drop. Above this section is
a quarter of a mile of cascades, while below the Fall
goes on another 125 ft. The Fall, the Gorge and the
Vegetation defy photography.
This is a section of Carey Park some 11 miles from
Pemberton along the road to Nannup. Here the road
passes through a fertile valley of superb karri. The
forest is of the purest type, tall, slender trees supporting
a canopy almost 300 ft. above, so dense that insufficient
sunlight filters through to encourage undergrowth. Only
bracken ferns flourish and these grow Bft. high as if to
emulate their towering rivals. The roadside scenes in this
valley are beautiful beyond comparison, especially in
summer when the rich colouration of the karri trunks
reminds us that the tree’s botanical name is Eucalyptus
diversicolor. This is a popular haunt of artists at this time
of the year.
Beedelup Falls
In the same Reserve and a mile across country from the
“ Valley of the Giants ” are the falls on the Beedelup
Brook —one of the State’s scenic gems. They fall 350 ft.
in two stages. In an unrivalled setting of a steep gorge
with dense undergrowth and towering trees they attract
sightseers from far and wide. They are difficult of access
at the moment but with care can be approached by car.
Alternatively, a walk of a mile is well rewarded.
Above is a road scene in the “Valley of the
GiantsAs one looks at this section in reality
it can easily be believed that it is a forest almost
without peer in the whole world.


Lefroy Brook Rapids
These waters are within a mile and a half walk of Pemberton up
the “ Rainbow Trail ” which follows the old railway formation from
the Hydro Scheme Power House. The rapids start at the head of the
Power Weir and continue for a mile up stream. Although the sur-
rounding country has been cut over, the regrowth makes an appropriate
setting for the delightful piece of broken water. These rapids and
the weir are popular waters with trout anglers. This area has recently
come under the care of the local National Park Board which ensures
its future as a sanctuary and a “ playground.” The front cover
depicts a section of these rapids.
The Cascades, Lefroy Brook
Cascades
A section of the Lefroy Rapids a mile from Pemberton
and at the head of the “Rainbow Trail ”
This pretty spot is within walking distance of Pemberton, some
three miles down the Northcliffe railway line. This walk is interesting
as it follows Lefroy Brook all the way and rewards the hiker with
frequent glimpses of broken dashing water among the forest, a mirror-
like pool, or one broken by a rising trout. At the Cascades the water
leaves one of these pools and suddenly pours over a quarter of a mile
of granite boulders. This point is easily accessible by car.


Hop Gardens
The only hop gardens in the State are situated 11 miles from Pemoerton. They are very
spectacular in full growth during February and up to the time of picking in early March.
The succulent vines run up the trellises to 16 feet high and then in full bloom the bunches
of hops hang like festoons —a grand sight.
During the harvest pickers come from all over the State. Some have picked hops in Kent
and continue to make the hop season their annual holiday.
Hop Gardens
Tobacco Plantations
This industry is of interest to visitors. Messrs. Michelides, Ltd., have their best plantation
at Brockman Siding, a mile past the Cascades. Efficient methods, fertile land and ample irrigation
from the water of Lefroy Brook all helped to give this Plantation the State record yield. The
whole process, from the raising of the delicate seedlings in “ hothouse ” frames to the curing and
grading, is of great interest. It is also easily accessible by car and the supervisor enjoys showing
visitors the various activities.
Field of Tobacco


“Burma Road” Reserve
Typical Bush Road
During the war years this name was given to a par-
ticularly steep and tortuous piece of forest track some
two miles from Pemberton. It was fortunate that
this section was so precipitous that it could not be
milled and so became a National Park. The
“ Burma Road,” now reasonably good, has
been cut out of this steep hillside of virgin
karri, a jungle of indigenous plant life,
tree hovea, native wattle interlaced with
blue, white, and red creepers. At
the foot of the hill lies the valley of
the East Brook—a delightful spot
—where this noted trout stream
threads its way through a canopy
of karris, swamp cedar, casua- -
rina, peppermints, hazel, bank-
sia, and lesser flora. Here
the Trout Society has con-
structed a trap to catch
breeders in season.
Visitors to “Glouces-
ter Tree” should
continue another
half mile down
the “Burma
Road.”


Warren River
This comparatively short river has its rise as a small stream
between Manjimup and Mt. Barker. Its flow is limited until it is
joined by Lefroy Brook when the summer volume is greater than
that of any Western Australian river. For 10 miles up and 20 miles
downstream from Pemberton, it is overlooked by precipitous karri-
clad hills which drop almost sheer to deep pools. These pools are
Karri trees grow down to the banks of the Warren River and its tributaries
interspersed by fast runs and rocky rapids making the ideal in trout
streams. It is already well-stocked with trout, although they are
hard to catch because of the great amount of sub-aquatic food
available to these early inhabitants. The State offers nothing to
equal this forest and stream scenery. Unfortunately it is very in-
accessible at present. The most popular spot is where the Brockman’s
settled some 90 years ago at a point where the Treen
Brook joins the Warren. The picturesque old home-
stead is in beautiful surroundings of virgin karri, grassy
meadows, and flowing streams. Thousands of marron
and hundreds of rainbow trout have been caught at
the mouth of the Treen. Being only-
five miles from Pemberton on the
road to Northcliffe it is easily
approached.


" King Karri ”
" Then a rending crash like thunder as a giant Karrt
falls ”
To be a *’ King ” among a forest of kings is something worth
while. The large and beautiful specimen karri which have been
reserved by the foresight of the State Forest Service never fail
to thrill the sightseer. There are several of these sole survivors—
monarchs that started in the day of William the Conqueror, now
reigning alone with all their contemporaries fallen before the timber-
man’s axe. The domain of one of these regal specimens is found
through the National Park a mile and a half up the Pump Hill
Road. Here it towers 225 ft. over a new generation of karri re-
growth, 25ft. in girth five feet from the ground, and 130 ft. to the
first branch. It contains enough timber to build five houses.
Not the tallest, nor the biggest, but a fine tree. Another interest-
ing specimen is at Guppy’s farm. Here a gnarled giant 66ft.
around the base and 38ft. girth three feet up, rises 120 ft. to the first
limb, where the girth is still 20ft.
In the Warren National Park a specimen has been selected for
its beauty and grace. It stands 250 ft. high among hundreds of
other karris which rival its splendour. It is only 4ft. Sin. in di-
ameter, but rises a perfect, smooth-barked 159 ft. before its faultless
symmetry is broken by the first branch.


Re-Afforestation
A typical patch of virgin Karri
In this delightful spot the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester encamped
during their stay at Pemberton
After the timber industry has extracted considerable eco-
nomic advantage from the forest, the State Forest Service
takes over to re-establish a new forest for posterity.
The top storey gone, the lesser plant life, no
longer over-awed by the monarchs, springs to
life and clothes the countryside with a new and
beautiful garment ; a dense mat of varied
vegetation. For a few years there is a
frantic struggle for survival, until breeding
asserts itself and the young karri push
their heads above their less favoured
rivals, absorbing the life-giving sun-
light. Now the tussle of karri versus
undergrowth becomes karri versus
karri. Thousands of young seedlings
only a few inches apart race sky-
ward for light. Then one by one the
weaker fall behind and the new
forest that started off with thous-
ands of trees to the acre finishes up
with only 12 to share soil, moisture
and sunlight in the karri forest of
the future. There are 20,000 acres
of re-afforestation around Pem-
berton and through this v/inds
hundreds of miles of service
roads and firebreaks. In many
cases they are mere tunnels as
the new growth meets overhead.
Visitors must decide for them-
selves which is the more beauti-
ful—the virgin karri forest or
this new regrowth in all its
vigour. A typical piece of karri
regeneration is to be seen at the
old Big Brook Forest Station.


Look-out Towers
Visitors! Prevent Fires
and Save the Forests
Forester J. E. Watson
climbs “ Eastree ”
The karri and jarrah forests of Western Australia are a
tremendously valuable asset to the State and the Forests Depart-
ment is ever on guard to prevent and suppress fires.
To assist in this work look-out towers are constructed for
quick detection. In the karri forest, however, location of sites
for these towers is very difficult owing to the great height of the
trees, making visibility from the ground very limited.
A forest officer overcame this difficulty by climbing the
tallest tree on a known high place and making observations from
the tree top. If these observations were satisfactory a look-out
cabin was constructed in the tree tops. There are a number of
these in the Pemberton-Manjimup district.
On the right is a photograph of “ Gloucester Tree,” the world’s
highest fire look-out, situated one and a half miles from Pemberton
on the Burma Road. The cabin is 200 ft. above ground and its
construction demonstrates the skill of Western Australian forest
workers. The unlopped tree was known as “ Eastree ” and is
depicted on the left showing Forester J. E. Watson making a
record tree climb in Australia of 190 ft., using climbing irons,
safety belt and rope.
His Royal Highness, the Duke of Gloucester, witnessing the
superb skill and magnificent courage of the axeman who lopped
the branches 200 ft. above the ground for placing the cabin,
graciously assented to the look-out being renamed “ Gloucester
Tree.”
Gloucester Tree


Timber ... Trout ... Tourist
There's a wealth of scenic beauty to be gathered day by day,
By the Tourists who are passing should they tarry by the way.
The travellers from the city see the things of which they dream,
Be it hills of stately karri or some rushing mountain stream,
Or the restful, peaceful quiet of the rivers' grassy banks,
Or watch the flash of rainbows leap the rapids in their pranks.
There’s a galaxy of colour when the wild flowers are in bloom,
There’s the hazel and the ti tree o'er which forest giants loom.
You can hear the ring of axes where the falters swing their blades,
Or the swishing of the crosscut that comes floating down the glades,
You listen for a moment when you hear the warning calls,
Then a rending crash like thunder as a giant karri falls.
You can hike around the country you can frolic in the Pool,
You can bask in glorious sunshine or idle where it’s cool.
If you are keen on angling don't think that leaves you out,
For you can try conclusions with the wily rainbow trout.
So now you needn't worry when your holidays are due.
If anyone should ask you say it's Pemberton for yfuTjgEYPT
J. SIMPSON.


Acknowledgments
This Souvenir Brochure has been produced jointly by the
Pemberton Trout Acclimatisation Society and the State
Tourist and Publicity Bureau. We wish to acknowledge the
great assistance given by the late Mrs. C. A. Clew, and the
Forests Department on photographic production ; Mr. J. K.
Ewers for literary advice; and Mr. R. H. Miller in the
final production.








