

~~~T~ ‘ 1 ■ -f” ' 9 ’ r -■ - •."■'■'T- -I'- ■ ~ UJJ - ■ VJ
in.
R. w«Rni< Ik .. .«£t * ' ®k
’ R




TROUT FISHING
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Ihtbltaljab by Qlljiaf (Hammiaaimtrr far ißatlwaya anb
©ramuiaya.
January, 1908


I
*


CONTENTS.
Southern District.
The Queanbeyan Centre - - - 6
The Cooma Centre 9
The Bombala Centre - - - - - 12
The Tumut Centre ----- 2 5
The Kangaroo Valley Centre - - - 27
Western District.
The Tarana, Jenolan, and Oberon Centre 28
Northern District,
The Walcha Centre ----- 33
The Armidale Centre - 37
The Glen Innes Centre - - - - 40
An Appreciation 45
Cormorants - - 4 6
The Angler’s Equipment 47
Some Idea of the Cost ----- 48




Trout Fishing in Mew South Wales
(Open Season for Trout Ist November to 30th April,
As inward love breeds outward talk,
The hound some praise, and some the hawk;
Some, better pleased with private sport,
Use tennis, some a mistress court:
But these delights I neither wish,
Nor envy, while I freely fish.
IZAAK WALTON
Trout fishing in New South Wales
has reached the stage of being one
of the popular holiday occupations.
Over one hundred and forty
streams have been stocked with
fry, yearling or two-year-old trout, by the Fisheries authorities of the
State. The information herein presented will give trout fishermen
an idea of where they may expect to catch the fish, and what their
sport will cost.
It has long been a source of surprise to the dwellers in the trout-
stocked districts of the southern table-lands that anglers and tourists
of Sydney and elsewhere in the State should go in the summer to
Tasmania and New Zealand for a cold climate and trout fishing,
when these desiderata exist in New South Wales itself. It is not a
far call to the Monaro Plains, to Kiandra and Kosciusko, and to the
famous Yarrangobilly Caves; and near these great show places are
dozens of others where the sportsman and tourist may find congenial
and healthy occupation. Trout have increased in the cold streams
of Monaro to an almost incredible extent, and the locality can be
reached after a comparatively short journey from Sydney. Compara-
tively, that is, when Tasmania and New South Wales are talked of
together. The trip to Tarana, 120 miles by train from Sydney, for
fishing in the Duckmaloi and other streams near the pretty village of
Oberon, is by no means a tedious or expensive one, and the many


fishing streams and wonderfully wild scenery of the northern table-
lands near Walcha, Armidale, and Glen limes are worth a much
longer journey. The itinerary of the tourist engaged in an inspection
of the trout country is a simple one, involving, nevertheless, much
variety of locomotion. He is a fortunate individual who, possessing
sound limbs and lungs, can bestride a horse or bicycle and fare afield
to his destination.
SOUTHERN DISTRICT
THE QUEANBEYAN CENTRE.
The first centre on the southern table-lands to which the angler may
turn his attention is at Queanbeyan. Although 50 trout were liberated
in 1885, it was in the waters of the Molonglo, some 5 miles from
Queanbeyan, that, in the year 1888, the first fairly large stock of
trout was liberated in New South Wales waters. Three hundred
yearlings and a few other fish were turned into a suitable hole in the
river, not far from Burbong and the tunnel that lets daylight, air, and
trains pass through the mountainous country to the north-east of
Queanbeyan. In April of 1904, just before the close season for trout
began, in nine hours, thirty-seven rainbow trout were landed by one
rod-fisher from the Upper Queanbeyan River. Sixteen of these fish
brought into the township, cleaned and scaled, weighed 24 lb.
One great feature in Queanbeyan’s favour is that no time is lost
getting there and back, the journey both ways being made at night.
The Queanbeyan River is close to the town, and is fishable for miles
both up and down. A number of very fine trout were taken from
the River in the 1906-7 season, in spite of the fact that it practically
ceased running for some months during the summer.
There are several trout-stocked streams, besides the Queanbeyan,
in this district. These are the Cotter, the Gudgenby, and, above all,
the wild Goodradigbee. Except the Goodradigbee, all these places
are easy to reach. It is a 45-miles drive or ride to Goodradigbee.
Some people manage it on bicycles. All the others are near the town.
The rainbow trout likes the cold, clear waters best. When in the
height of summer the Queanbeyan is very warm, low, and discoloured,
the fish will only rise in the morning and evening. Boys and novices
with poles catch plenty of bottom fish at times, even up to 5 and 6 lb.,
while the angler with his book of flies cannot get a rise in some of
the pools near the town. The river is not likely to run dry; but it
is often very low, and the fish get fat and lazy in the warm holes
where the shrimps abound. When there is a nip in the air, and the
river is tumbling through the gorges, making a fuss about the


impediments to its progress, the trout are livelier. The upper waters
of the Queanbeyan River are well stocked. It and the Molonglo
River join half a mile from Queanbeyan, and ultimately connect with
the Murrumbidgee—the receptacle of so many mountain torrents
from the western slopes of the southern highlands.
It seems that the trout in this neighbourhood are very foolish.
They are not so fastidious as their forbears, and take anything in the
shape of an insect that is offered to them. The fish will sometimes
jump at thistle-down and water-spiders, but as time goes on they
are becoming more fastidious, thus testing the skill of the angler. In
the old cold countries, where one pays heavy fees for the right to fish
moderately-stocked streams, the angler carries with him a wallet of
multi-coloured flies, and tries one and another until he has hit upon
kis quarry’s particular fancy. Here the sportsman has no such worry.
He tries the first feathered travesty of the myriad-hued denizens of the
air that his hand falls upon, and, if that and others fail to give
satisfaction, he secures some worms, grasshoppers, crickets, shrimps,
■or wood-grubs, and fishes near the bottom for the sullen fish.
The ciooclmclioDce.
The trout stream par excellence of this district is the Goodra-
digbee, which may be reached by coach at Brindabella, about 40 miles
from Queanbeyan, and a day taken up in travelling over this country
will be more than compensated for by the enjoyment of the drive over
the mountains, and the excellence of the sport on arrival. Leaving
Queanbeyan the road is over plain and forest country till the
Murrumbidgee River is reached. This stream is crossed on a low-level
bridge, which is many feet under water in a big flood.
The altitude of Queanbeyan is 1901 feet, and no great rise occurs
till Uryarra is passed, but the road is on an upward grade from that
place to the top of the range, where an altitude of 4000 feet is
attained. The road winds around the mountains, through cuttings,
and along the top of almost perpendicular cliffs, with heavily-timbered
ravines many hundred feet below. The descent on the further side
of the range is one continuous drop for seven or eight miles, the
altitude of the Brindabella Valley being 2400 feet. Magnificent views
of Mount Coree and the mountain ranges are obtained from time to
time, also, as one descends, glimpses of the fertile valley of the
Goodradigbee.
The visitors may stay at the boarding-house at Brindabella, or
may camp on the bank of the river, admirable camping spots being
numerous.
The Goodradigbee is an ideal trout stream, fed by numerous
springs, and the water is clear as crystal, the bottom of the deepest
holes being plainly visible, and the trout may be seen at any time,


darting about in all directions. For every mile of the river all classes
of waterfalls, rapids, gravelly reaches, and deep holes are to be found.
The Goodradigbee at Brindabella runs through a beautiful, fertile
\ alley, bordered by wooded mountains, which come in places close
to the banks of the stream, and the crops of lucerne, maize, etc.,
testify to the fertility of the soil.
The river is in many places so thickly fringed with bushes that
fishing with the fiy is impossible from the bank, but one may wade
almost all along the stream, just coming out to avoid the deep holes
which occur at frequent intervals, wherein the largest trout
abound. Some of these holes are 15 feet to 20 feet deep.
The trout in the Goodradigbee are too easy to catch; in manv
cases even with the artificial fly they hook themselves, all that is left
to the angler being to play and land them; but after a couple of seasons
it is to be hoped they will become better “educated,” owing to the large
numbers being caught and returned to the water; and the advent of
numerous fishermen constantly disturbing them in their haunts, and
“pricking” them with their various lures, will doubtless tend to increase
their natural timidity, and to make their capture a pastime requiring
skill from start to finish.
Routes and Accommodation. — Rail to Queanbeyan and coach
to Uryarra, 25 miles, on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday at 8 a.m.,
returning on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. Fare, 6/- single, 10/6
return. Thence to Brindabella, 20 miles, by private conveyance, 15/-
return. Accommodation may be secured with Mr. Franklin or Mr.
Read, who meet visitors at Uryarra when desired.
Climbing towards mo snowy Mountains.
One thinks, as the train climbs southward from Queanbeyan, of
Edgar Allan Poe’s immortal lines:
Higher, higher, higher
With a resolute desire,
Now, Now, to sit or never
By the side of the pale-faced moon
The moon often hangs like a ghost of its mellow self in the western
sky, dimly visible against the sun glare. The foothills show plenty of
sheep and well-grown lambs. The air is fresh and bracing, and one
understands how physical exertion in these altitudes is not the
enervating business it is in the plains and coast districts. Everyone
says that Monaro is a place of many moods, that it ought to be seen
in summer and winter for direct contrasts, and in spring and summer
for its other beauties.


3 Slop at Michelago.
At Michelago a glimpse of the Murrumbidgee, a mile and half
away, is caught, and one learns with interest that the trout have got
their fins and tails well into the water —got a footing, so to speak—
and give promise of staying there. Shooting rabbits and cockatoos,
and catching trout, cod, and perch, are some of the holiday occupations
of Michelago; but the variety of fishing is not so alluring as it is
further on. The Murrumbidgee can be seen from the train two miles
south of Colinton, at a spot called “The Gorge.” Trout rise well in
the fast water at times.
Bred DO-
Excellent trout fishing is. obtained in the Murrumbidgee at
Billilingra. From here upwards the river is most suitable for fly
fishing, being a series of pools and ripples. At the back of the
Wool-shed the best of the fishing commences, and from there up to
Umeralla excellent sport can be obtained, the trout running up to 3
and 4 lbs. in weight. The distance from the hotel to the Wool-shed
(Billilingra) is about 6 miles.
Fairly good fishing water is to be obtained at the back of the
hotel (about three-quarters of a mile distant), but, being sluggish, it
does not afford the same sport as that higher up.
THE COOMA CENTRE.
Cooma, a graceful town of wide streets and coarse granitic sand instead
of dust, looms ahead at 9 o’clock in the morning. It is the terminus
of the Goulburn-Cooma branch of the Southern railway system, and
a centre from which many roads to trout rivers radiate. Cooma has
a number of first-rate anglers among its inhabitants, and these have
done great service, not only in connection with the stocking of rivers,
but in the inculcation of modern angling methods. Recently a strong
Society has been formed—“ The Monaro Fish and Game Protection
Society”—which is doing good work by assisting the Fisheries
Department in placing fry in suitable waters, supervising fishing
generally, and destroying cormorants.
Cooma, 266 miles, is the great rendezvous for the trout streams of
the Monaro district, being served by a daily train from Sydney.
Specially-reduced fares are allowed to trout fishermen and tourists.
Round tickets are issued from Sydney to Cooma, available for return
via Tumut, or vice versa —s8 7 - first-class and 39/6 second-class.
Visitors are driven to all the streams at reasonable rates.


Monaro Hospitality-
Monaro people are hospitable and kindly in the highest degree.
The angler, who may have bought his experience in New Zealand, the
land of many license fees, hakas, and tips, would experience the most
whole-hearted hospitality and kindly advice in his trout quest near
Cooma. There are many expert fly-fishers in the town and district,
and everybody who can hurl a line into a river has caught trout, cod,
bream, and perch in the Murrumbidgee, but most do it with a hook
baited with white grub, worm, frog, and other fish foods. The elite,
however, use the fly, the rod and reel, and the landing-net. They
also climb into waders, and perform feats of agility in dangerous
places; but they catch fish.
THE MURRUMBIDGEE RIVER AT BILLILINGRA, N.S.W
Where to go from Cooma.
In addition to being a centre of health and sport itself, Cooma is
a town from which one goes by coach to some of the great sights of
the State. To reach the Yarrangobilly Caves one drives via
Adaminaby and Kiandra, the highest town in New South Wales.
Kosciusko is reached via Jindabyne and Betts’ Camp. There are
many places near Cooma where one can strike the Murrumbidgee.
A 6-mile drive is a common indulgence of visitors who desire to visit
it at the Mittagang Bridge. There are some very pretty spots at this


place, the river being softly draped in many places with rich old
weeping willows. Some of these have been cut down to make fishing
vantage grounds. Sometimes the river is alive with trout, jumping
in all directions. Like their confreres in other lands, the fish are full
of wiles. Their glorious colours flash dazzlingly before the eyes of
the angler with his book of feathered deceits, and the rainbow trout
at times disdains the lot, while it greedily falls upon the luckless
wriggling worm or grasshopper that the bush-rodster has cast upon
the waters, and twitches them off.
Mawson’s Mill (7 miles), Riversdale (12 miles), and Rosedale (32
miles) are all good spots. The last-named is, however, more easily
reached from Adaminaby, distant 10 miles by a good road.
Pishing at the Mill.
One of the beauty spots near Cooma is called the “Flour Mill.’'
This is situated in a bend of the Murrumbidgee. The river doubles
back on itself through the mountains here in an astonishing fashion,
and a magnificent piece of bush engineering work has been accom-
plished through the tongue of land it nearly encircles. A great stone
weir has been built across the river, which, often foaming from an
influx of melted snow, tumbles over the boulders to a broken corner
below. From the weir a tunnel has been cut clean through the hill
to the river on the other side of the peninsula, thus creating a flow
which was once used to turn the wheels of a massive stone flour-mill.
The undershot water-wheel of the mill is now still, as the wheat crop
of the district is very small, and the train brings flour from other
parts of the State.
'Hte Umemlla River
can be reached at points 12 to 20 miles from Cooma, but the best
spots are between Countegang Road and Riversdale, at the junction
with the main stream, about 12 miles from Cooma. The tributaries
to the Umeralla drain from the dividing range to the east. The
country there is much more rocky, and the river-beds contain a
succession of extensive rock pools, where fish find favourable conditions
at all times. Accommodation at D. Roches, Umeralla.
The Big Badja, a tributary of the Umeralla, is about half a mile
distant from the Umeralla Post Office, and has a length of about 16
miles. This is one of the best trout streams in the district, and from
a point 4 miles from its junction with the Umeralla to Countegang
affords excellent sport. Fishing, however, is rather difficult, on
account of the rough approaches to most parts of the stream. Mr.
Stewart provides accommodation at Big Badja.
The Kybean also flows into the Umeralla, distant from the latter
6 miles, or 18 miles from Cooma.


Tuross River is 30 miles from Cooma, and may be reached by
special conveyance via Tuross Falls. Arrangements may be made
with Mr. L. Mylan, Counbagany, who has an accommodation-house.
At Rosedale the Murrumbidgee flows through many miles of
open plain country. It is snow-fed for a considerable portion of the
year, and always running. Large quantities of brown trout are
caught, averaging from 1 to 3 lbs. An odd rainbow is also met at
Rosedale, but this fish, preferring rough waters, is more plentiful
nearer Cooma.
Above Rosedale the river passes through very rough country, and
appears to be heavily stocked.
On Ihe Load lo ftomDaia-
Alluring is not the term that could be applied to the first 17 miles
of the 54-mile journey by coach from Cooma to Bombala. The rolling
hills are sometimes only brown, the dry barley grass forming no relief
to the eye, but in the usual good seasons the hills are all grass-clad
and pleasing to the eye. A shower or two of rain freshens Monaro
like magic, and when beneficent downpours have been experienced,
every angler’s pulse in the district throbs.
Near NimityDeile-
A little over a mile from Nimitybelle the M'Laughlan River wends
its way towards the Bombala, and the Kybean River is but 6 miles
away. The Tuross, too, is handy; and in all these streams rainbow
and brown trout sport happily, undisturbed by any but an occasional
angler. Eight-pounders have been caught close to this quiet little
hamlet, where a first-class hotel for the accommodation of tourists ; s
available.
An excellent stretch of fishing water runs through Burnima, the
property of Mr. H. T. Edwards, who for many years has foreseen
the angling possibilities of the district. This water has also been
stocked with a few English perch by the Fisheries Department.
TFIE BOMBALA CENTRE.
Nearing Bombala a marked improvement in the colour of the country
is noted, and the restful, pretty little town, with its briars in bloom,
suggests a sporting paradise. Like other towns in this tourist district,
Bombala has but few men engaged in meeting the requirements of
sport-seekers keen enough to make the most of their opportunities.
Nature and the Fisheries Department have done their share, and the


, •’ jXir^g^i hL ••*
SPiHMn - - ■ . . _ .I.
sportsmen of the place are doing theirs, but at that point commendation
must end. True the hotels are good, and the tariff not extortionate;
but one has to chase information regarding the district’s blessings in
the form of sport. The anglers of the district are increasing in
numbers greatly, and their methods are gradually being brought to
artistic perfection. It costs ii to get from Cooma to Bombala, and
trips out to the rivers can be made thence either afoot, on bicycle, or
in a vehicle. Cyclists, and those who engage private vehicles, would
find no difficulty in running between the towns in far less time than
the mail coaches, for the roads are generally excellent. The Bombala
CRAIGIE RIVER, BETWEEN BOMBALA AND DELEGATE.
River during the summer becomes rather low, and full of weeds in
places. The trout, which, like his rival the black bream, learns,
according to some authorities, to read and write, and study every
nook and snag and rushy clump in a river, here plays the fisherman
strange tricks. The biggest sulk badly when hooked and beaten after
an anxious half-hour, and either landing-net or gaff has to be brought
into play at the finish in most awkward places. Like their friends the
black bream of the seaboard, trout down here are affected by different
winds. Steady weather for two or three days always quickens their
appetites, and a whiff of sea-air drives them off their feed. The
southerly wind is also classed by experts as a bad thing. Indeed it ; s
generally recognised by fishermen that no fresh-water fish will bite


in southerly weather. A blackfellow, when too lazy to fish, will
always say: “To much south fellow wind.”
The rig Wallet.
The fly-wallet of the sportsman in the Snowy and Bombala
districts, says a local sportsman, should contain the following flies
Small coachman, cowdung, Jackson’s Fancy, bee fly, white moth, black
gnat, March brown, red ant, and the green grasshopper. Special flies
resembling diptera found over the rivers are made of feathers from
wings of various birds. For instance, the Cooma fly made by English
firms is a pretty thing in gold and black, the July dun is a brilliant
green, the Thredbo is made partly from the feathers of the English
pheasant, the Jindabyne is like the bee fly, and the Snowy is very like
a local grasshopper. Many other artificial flies are being added to
this list, -and a selection of, perhaps, thirty can be secured in Sydney.
Sport at Creewah, Bumlma, and Delegate-
Fishing at Creewah, on the Nunuch, recently, six rainbow trout,
running to 2j4 lb., weight, were caught. Certain holes are the hiding-
places of grand trout of from Bto 12 lb. weight. In these holes the
fish get butter-fat on the natural food. There is one great hole on
Burnima, in the Bibbenluke, where there are plenty of heavy trout.
This place is admirably protected through the care of the land-owner.
Other Sport in the District-
Trout, it may be parenthetically observed, are not the only sport-
givers of the district. There is plenty of game in the shape of
parrots of various kinds, plovers, quail, hares, native companions, a
few ducks, and other wild things along the banks of the Craigie,
Delegate, Bombala, Creewah, and Little Plains. Delegate is 22 miles
from Bombala, and Craigie 18 miles, the roads being excellent for
bicycling. The first-named place has been well stocked with fish, and
has good accommodation; but the Craigie is giving the best sport.
The gadopsis is plentiful both in the Craigie and Delegate Rivers.
Both the rivers near Delegate and Craigie are somewhat discoloured
from mining operations going on over the border-line between New
South Wales and Victoria, some 7 miles away.
the Way-
As one travels, by the coach, many heights enable one to see the
snow-capped mountains, amongst which Kosciusko rears its head some
50 miles away. The breath from the Snowy Mountains is
exhilarating in the extreme. The M'Laughlan, Craigie, Delegate, and
Little Plains streams, feeding the great trout river of the State, the
Snowy, are near Bombala and the beautiful little town of Delegate.


A feature in connection with this beautiful district of grass-covered
hills and mountains is that there are now acclimatisation societies and
angling or shooting clubs. The formation of such societies
and the necessity for placing the attractions of the district before the
public are primarily the business of the local people. The Govern-
ment Tourist Bureau and the Railway Commissioners are doing their
share in popularising visits to what should be the summer resort of
hundreds of people, and they do wisely, for this cold country is replete
with health and natural beauty. The people look the picture of health
themselves, and they should not neglect to let those less favourably
situated share in their good fortune.
On rite way to the orear Trout Wver.
Leaving Cooma for Jindabyne, a good road leads through
Berridale, 20 miles, a little hamlet, where a halt is made for lunch.
The nearest point on the Snowy River is 7 miles away, but one can
shoot hares and rabbits, quail, wallabies, gill birds, and ducks in
the wooded ranges. On the cleared Monaro Downs there is not so
much to shoot, except rabbits and quail in the season. Even brown
and monotonous as they are during drought time, the downs have a
strange charm of their own. Part of that fascination no doubt lies in
the vast distances over which one is able to look through the rare,
clear, bracing air.
The Snowy and iis Valiev-
The beautiful broad valley of the Snowy River spreads out before
the gaze, after a climb to a rounded mountain top, and the road then
winds gradually down for 3 miles to the river bank, where the
pleasantly-situated hotel of Jindabyne stands. It is not uncommon
for trout to figure on the board here. Many visiting anglers take
tent and camp on the river bank near the fishing spots they favour.
A rainbow trout weighing Bj4 lb. was landed here in 1904. The
snow and spring-fed river is regarded by all who have had an
opportunity of contrasting it with other famous trout streams of the
world as an ideal haunt for the speckled ones that fight to a finish,
and are never done till they are quivering on the bank.
The DaDDir warrens.
Brer Rabbit can well say to Brer Fox on the banks of the Snowy,
“bred and born in a briar patch. Brer Fox,” for the river is fringed
thickly in places with briar, which, although they may add to the
beauty of the scene, are deadly on one’s flies, and hide the holes the
rabbits make. Rabbits sit 10 feet away from the angler as he
passes—friendly little beasts that smile when the visitor puts his foot
in the doorway of a warren, and sustains contact with Mother Earth,


Plover, ducks, pigeons, foxes, and an occasional kangaroo afford
sport for the gun.
Pound aDout JindaDyne-
For 10 miles down and 15 miles up, the Snowy is fishable from
Jindabyne. The Thredbo, which is distinguishable from the Bredbo
previously mentioned, by its confluence with the Snowy, some 6 miles
away, is fishable for 10 miles. The Eucumbene, which swells the
flow of the main river some 4 miles away from Jindabyne, has its
head near Kiandra, and trout have been taken along nearly the whole
of it. A 6-mile drive also lands one at the Moonbah River, where
again the stream is well stocked, and at Gungarlin, 16 miles away,
the rainbow and brown trout are plentiful.
SNOWY RIVER AT JINDABYNE.
Fishermen who are not afraid of a rough trip will find excellent
sport in Jacobs River, reached from Jindabyne, via Ingebyra, 20 miles
by vehicle; and 10 miles further on horseback brings one to Jacobs
River. Splendid fishing is obtainable through 26 miles of water in
wild and rugged mountain country consisting of trout, perch, whiting,
and Slippery Jack. Bronze-wing pigeons, wallabies, kangaroos,
plover, and ducks are all plentiful, and the scenery is magnificent.
Accommodation may be secured at Woodhouse’s Station, Ingebyra,
and parties will be conducted to the River. There is no accommo-
dation at the river, and visitors must camp.


The ThredDo cmd Sworn-
Whilst good fishing is to be had around Jindabyne itself, the
cream of the sport commences at Waste Point, at the junction of the
Thredbo and Snowy Rivers. From here upwards the Snowy is a
fast-running stream tumbling over miniature falls and rushing
around huge boulders, forming one of the best trout streams in the
Commonwealth, and equal to any in the world.
In the summer of 1906-7 Mr. C. H. Gorrick, of Sydney,
spent some weeks on this river, and fished the whole of the
stream for 23 miles upwards, as far as ‘‘Long Corner.” He describes
it as being far ahead of any of the best New Zealand streams which
he has regularly fished for the last ten years. But it is necessary
to camp out, if the upper waters are to be fished. Horses and guide
can be obtained from the Snowy River House, at the junction of the
Snowy and the Tliredbo.
The Snowy is heavily stocked with rainbow trout for the -whole
of the distance, and occasionally a ‘‘brown” trout is caught, but
towards Long Corner the fish are less plentiful but larger. The best
fishing begins about ip2 miles above the junction of the Snowy with
the Thredbo, and continues for ten or twelve miles. The trout
appear to make up-stream at the rate of about one mile per annum;
hence it is only a matter of time for the Snowy to be well stocked
to its source. Here the trout will ravenously take the artificial fly,
the best patterns being “Gorrick’s Favourite,” “Governor,” “Coch-
a-bondhu,” “March Brown,” “Zulu” (Red tag), and “Bredbo,” and
numerous others tied on say No. 6 (New No.) hooks. The water
is clear, consequently the finest gut casts are necessary; still they
must be strong enough to hold a five or six-pounder if hooked. The
leading tackle .shops in Sydney now know the requirements for the
different streams, and can give any desired information as to the
necessary tackle. The rod should be from 10 to 11 feet in length,—
split cane for choice, —and the reel should be made of metal to hold
about 50 or 60 yards of waterproof line. A skilful angler can easily
catch more trout in half a day than he can comfortably carry-—when
the fish are in a taking humour —the average weight of which will
be over 2 lb.; but he can nearly always make sure of killing enough
fish for a family meal. As the water is very cold, waterproof wading
stockings and heavy hob-nailed brogues should be worn, to enable
the angler to negotiate difficult spots, and to ensure comfort and
health. The expert angler here generally returns to the water all
trout under 1 lb. in weight, otherwise they would be uselessly killed
and wasted.
The ThredDo or Trochenhaeh River-
The Thredbo, which should not be confused with Bredbo. joins
the Snowy at Waste Point, and carries a big head of rainbow trout.


which perhaps do not run so large as their brethren in the Snowy, but
average about 1% lb., and give excellent sport on the fly.
Some very large fish, averaging 6 lb., were caught on the
artificial fly during the 1906-7 season in the upper reaches near the
old gold diggings, about ten miles up stream. A few “brown” trout
are distributed through this stream.
An angler staying at the Snowy River House is practically
certain of sport during his whole stay. If the Snowy is flooded with
snow water, the Thredbo is not likely to be affected in the same
way, and is generally in good fishing ply. Both rivers very quickly
clear after “a fresh,” and then the fishing is even better than before.
Snowy River House.
The Government have recently erected an accommodation house
on the banks of the Thredbo River, a short distance from its
junction with the Snowy, and fishermen can now secure first-class
accommodation right in the midst of some of the finest trout waters
in the State. The Thredbo, Snowy, and Eucumbene are all within
a few minutes’ walk, and are all available to guests in the Government
House, while every convenience of an up-to-date hotel is provided. In
addition to this, parties are daily organised by the lessee, in conjunc-
tion with the coach proprietor, to visit the Snowy Mountains and
Kosciusko.
A SNOWY RIVER FORK NEAR JINDABYNE.


Mount KosciusKo-
Kosciusko, beautiful, fascinating, yet repellant, is the Mecca of
many tourists. From Jindabyne it is reached by vehicle or on horse-
back. After leaving the Snowy River House, a good road leads to
Betts’ Camp, six miles from the summit, and a circular bridle track
from the Camp to Mount Kosciusko and return embraces all the
principal peaks and lakes of this marvellous region. The new
Government shelter, called Betts’ Camp, is the resting place for the
first night, and the next day the summit of the mountain is reached.
In this bracing air, and amid the snow that lingers on the peaks and
in the ravines through the summer, one seems to be millions of miles
out of one’s ordinary rut. The change of scene and change of thought
somehow inspire the seaside dweller with a sense of lightness and a
feeling of ability to do great physical feats. Oxygen plays strange
freaks with the visitor; but the people of Southern Monaro, who are
used to the life-giving air. plod along contentedly, looking aggressively
happy and well. An effort is being made to stock the Blue Lake
and Lake Cootapatamba, and thus add another attraction to these
great altitudes. Naturally, on the heights of Kosciusko, over 7,000
feet above the sea, one has magnificent views of the surrounding
country. Clear away to Bombala on the east, Victoria on the south,
and across the Yarrangobilly country to the west, one can see
panoramas of surpassing loveliness, and it is with regret that the
visitor retraces his steps. It takes two clear days to “do” Kosciusko
inexpensively from the Snowy River House, the trip costing under
£1 per day for guides, horses, and food. The rest of the week may
be profitably spent on the river bank fishing, swimming, or hunting,
according to taste. An extensive hotel is at present in course of
construction at Digger’s Creek, 10 miles from the Thredbo Bridge,
10 miles from Betts’ Camp, and 16 from the summit of Kosciusko
where visitors to this region will be enabled to have the benefit of the
rarefied air during the hot summer, and Alpine snow sports in winter.
Rear Dalgetg-
Dalgety, the new name for Buckley’s Crossing and a suggested
Federal capital site, is on the Snowy. It has its beauty spots and its
tourist attractions, one of the best being the natural bridge near Banda
Station, not far from the junction of the M'Laughlan and Snowy<
During flood-time the Snowy climbs over its bridge, but generally
swirls noisily through the gap in the mountain. Brown trout and
some Loch Levens are more often caught here than at Jindabyne.
but unsportsmanlike practices go unpunished. An inspector and a
police officer could profitably spend a week watching the fishing
along the Snowy, and one or two convictions for shooting the fish


and set and cross-lining would have a beneficial effect. One leaves
Dalgety and Jindabyne and their splendid fishing with regret.
A bugged Ixil Cross-coimlru Trip.
Across the rugged country from Jindabyne to Adaminaby in a
special vehicle one finds the road very steep in places, but generally
good. Adaminaby is a pretty little town perched on the side of the
dividing range. It has three good hotels, and is the stopping-place
for the night after the 31-mile trip across country. Capital trout
fishing can be obtained in the Eucumbene River, about 2 miles distant;
also in the Murrumbidgee, about 8 miles away. This is a town in
which nearly all the men folk are anglers. The local hotel proprietor
will give the fullest information as to the best spots, and arrange
for horses or vehicles when desired. It is not a long run from
Adaminaby to Kiandra, the highest town in the State, but the 21-miles
trip is a heavy one. The road crosses the Eucumbene three times,
as well as several other streams, bubbling and growling their way
to join the large rivers, their banks bedecked with emerald grass
and vegetation. One notices forms of flora rarely seen in. other
parts of the State, the pretty sensitive wattle, which folds up its
leaves and retires for the night, being one of the most attractive.
The wild clematis also blooms luxuriantly.
EiGiKlm—me Highest Town in the Stale.
All the winds of heaven, it is said, sweep Kiandra and its vicinity,
and the man with stifling asthma and bronchitis, who stewed on the
coast districts, leans back as his vehicle climbs the mountain or as
he walks up the hills to lighten the load, and drinks in draughts of
clean air that exhilarate like ambrosia. Passing through Providence
Elat and its dredge working the alluvial gold deposits, the thought is
impelled that the muddied water is not beneficial for fish life. The
lustrous rainbow trout likes sparkling water, as he is a clean-living
creature, and it is, therefore, not surprising to find that the younger
fish have shaken the mud from off their tails in that neighbourhood
and hied themselves mountainwards. Only the least moral members
of the family stay in the disturbed waters to pick up the fat worms
that wash down the ranges. The angler may not care to stop near
these places, but the local people can point out clear streams near
Kiandra where the fish are obtained. The hotels at Kiandra are
clean and comfortable. One does not look for style in this part of
the world—plain, wholesome food, with a few luxuries, being all
that one can expect. The town is on the head waters of the
Eucumbene.


On the Road to me Caves-
Travelling from Sydney to Kiandra for the Yarrangobilly Caves
involves some exhilarating road journeying, and the traveller who
wants to appreciate that business most should walk up some of the
long hills, otherwise he gets out of the vehicle feeling like the letter
“Z” at the end of the journeys. There are mail coaches on the
roads, and it is preferable for a party of six to ten to engage a
special coach at Tumut or Cooma for the Caves or Snowy excursion,
both as regards expense and comfort. Vehicles can be obtained at
Kiandra for the 14-mile trip to the Caves. The road to the Caves
in from Kiandra and out to Tumut is a fine piece of road engineering,
winding round the sides of the mountains, and a driver of a five-
in-hand has to keep all his wits about him if he wishes to avoid a
journey over the unprotected side with his vehicle and load. As
the road nears the Caves House, charming views are obtained of the
valley below, with the Yarrangobilly River foaming and bubbling
over the stones, and one looks forward with pleasurable anticipation
to whipping its waters.
vciiTcmgoWllu River and Caves.
That the Caves will become popular with the sport-seeking tourist
from the Tumut side, as well as from Cooma, is a certainty, for the
fishing and shooting in the Yarrangobilly Ranges are exceptionally
good. The veriest tyro armed with a rod cut from the forest can
pull out a trout of 4 lb. or 5 lb. weight almost any evening on thick
lines, large hooks, and baits of worm, grasshopper, or wood grub,
ft is little use fixing a minimum weight of 12 oz. for the trout
caught by such means, as the fish gorge the bait, and in disengaging
the hook the bush angler kills his quarry. The fish constantly
figure on the meal tables round Yarrangobilly, and are highly
esteemed as food. Their capacity as an attraction for tourists has
just taken root in local minds, and, in order to protect the fish,
angling experts are to be made honorary inspectors.
The Varrangohillu Fishing-
Apart from the intrinsic beauty of the Caves in this wild spot,
the tourist should find much pleasure in the mountain climbing, 11
feeding the tame wallabies, in knocking over the nearly tame rabbits
with sticks and stones, in listening to the wonderful mimicry of the
lyre birds, and in his “fronting.” The Yarrangobilly can be safely
placed in the list of first-class trout rivers of the State. Put into
the river by the Fisheries Department in 1897, the fish have made
rapid progress, and five-pounders are not uncommon. Along the
river, with its slippery stones, its rapids, and its snaggy holes, the


trout finds a congenial home, and even the novice who throws a fly
for the first time can hook good fish at his first essay. Whether he
can land them is another matter, for the fish is a gallant fighter.
Very few sportsmen in the district use waders or landing-nets, but
such aids to a full creel are not to be despised. Amid scenes of
surpassing beauty the angler will find a week pass all too rapidly.
Large flies are recommended by the local fishermen.
TROUTING IN THE MURRUMBIDGEE.
At YarrangoDillv Caves-
The Yarrangobilly Caves are reached from Kiandra by a short
drive of 14 miles through picturesque scenery. Half-way the crest
of the Monaro Range is crossed. Here is a basaltic plateau which
divides the main sources of the Murrumbidgee River on the east
from the head-waters of the Yarrangobilly River, a tributary of the
Tumut, on the west. To the south is the watershed of the
Eucumbene, an affluent of the Snowy River.
The Yarrangobilly Caves, which each year are attracting more
attention from tourists, are undoubtedly equal in beauty to the far-
famed Jenolan Caves, and are probably even more extensive. They
occur in a belt of limestone, from half a mile to a mile in width and


6 or 7 miles long. The frontage of this belt to the \ arrangobilly
River is singularly impressive. For miles precipices and battle-
mented outcrops dip their toes in the crystal waters of the rapidly-
running river. They are weatherworn, carved here and there with
grotesque shapes, scored and pitted with holes and crevices, many
-of which indicate the entrances to unexplored caverns with which
the limestone is honeycombed. Two miles upstream from the Caves
House the river has cut its way through the limestone, and now
flows under it. Commodious buildings have been erected for the
convenience of visitors. They are pleasantly situated in a grassy
nook, sheltered by densely-wooded hills and limestone cliffs 200 feet
high. At the foot of these cliffs Rule’s Creek disappears under-
ground, and gives an example of the manner in which caves are
formed. One feature of the accommodation provided is found in
the hot spring. About half a mile south of the Caves House, a spring
gushes out of the mountain side, the waters of which have an
average temperature of about 80 degrees. A bath 28 ft. x 14 ft. x
5 ft. deep has been constructed here. Local residents affirm that the
water has marvellous healing properties, and it may not unreasonably
be expected that this spring will some day be the site of a luxurious
Spa.
Situated on the side of a rugged hill, overlooking the Yarran-
gobilly River, the points of entrance to the Caves afford a magnificent
view of the neighbouring valley, with its towering limestone bluffs.
The Caves themselves are full of scenes of magic loveliness, which
have a character all their own. A noticeable feature is the
predominance, in many places, of massive stalagmitic formations,
which recall the majesty of the best types of Indian architecture. Of
these, the Temple of a Thousand Idols and the Indian Bower give
excellent examples. The Glory Hole has been known to residents
of the locality for more than half a century, and in its many passages
the wombats, by ancestral right, still find secluded homes. This
peculiar cave has been explored in two directions for over 1,200 feet,
and in all probability there are other passages and chambers yet to
be discovered. Some of the formations are gorgeous beyond the
wildest dreams, and amongst them may be mentioned the frozen
waterfall in the left branch and the “Star Chamber” in the right,
where a dazzling star of sunlight shines in the roof 140 feet overhead.
The most important amongst the other caverns are the Jersey, the
Castle, and the Harrie Wood. Of these, the Jersey is perhaps the
most lovely, although it is rash to express any preference. The
whole cave is encrusted with formations of endless variety, the rich
colours ranging from white, through grey to black; and from deep
red, through apricot and flesh tints to lemon yellow; and there are
red and yellow pillars and fluted columns, clusters of crystals rising


like pineapple plants, and ceilings hung with rich and manv-
coloured stalactites. In the Harrie Wood Cave the prevailing
colour is a deep cream, deepening to a light brown; and the shawl
formations are magnificent. The Castle Cave is glorious in its
wealth of colouring, its mounds and walls of crystal, its graceful
draperies and oriental canopies.
Across TalDingo to Tumul
Having done the Caves, the visitor will, presuming he has
entered the Alpine district via Cooma, drive across the Cumberland
Range and the picturesque Little Talbingo, through the always
delightful Tumut Valley to Tumut, where the railway system is
again joined. This drive is 47 miles in distance, and is a most
enjoyable experience. A stay will probably be made at Talbingo,
for here excellent accommodation is provided at the Talbingo
Hotel. Very pleasantly situated at the foot of giant hills with two
bubbling trout streams—the Tumut and the Jounama —foaming along
and mingling their waters just behind the hotel, the halfway house
is very favourably located from a tourist’s point of view, and will
be sure to claim attention. The district is a pretty one, and the
Buddong Falls in the vicinity are well worthy of attention. From
Yarrangobilly Caves, after a steep ascent up a zig-zag road, the
Yarrangobilly Inn is passed at 7 miles. Thence the road, after
crossing the river at a ford, runs through comparatively level
country, along thickly-timbered ridges for a few r miles, until the
Cumberland Range is ascended. Soon afterwards on the top of
Little Talbingo, a glorious prospect is opened up. With Big
Talbingo immediately on the left, across a deep gorge, grand views
of valley and ravine are presented to the traveller’s vision. On the
Talbingo Ranges, dingoes, wallaroos, and rock wallabies sport almost
undisturbed. The Talbingo Hotel lies at the foot of Little Talbingo,
the road dropping 2,000 feet in the last 6 miles. A drive along the
valley of the Tumut River for 23 miles brings the tourist to the
point of termination of his coaching—Tumut. Tumut and its
beautiful district is destined at no distant date to be one of the most
popular tourist resorts in Australia. Possessing beautiful scenery,
somewhat English in character, the key to the Snowy Mountains
from the west, a number of splendid trout streams, and, in addition
to these attractions, really first-class hotel accommodation, it will
readily be understood that Tumut is splendidly endowed from a
tourist’s noint of view.


TalDingo
Talbingo, 22 miles from Tumut, has good fishing in the Tumut
River and Jounama Creek, which run within a hundred yards of the
comfortable little hotel. At the Jounama Falls, 24 miles from Tumut,
and 2 from Talbingo, some splendid trout have been caught. There
is another good water called Long Plain, on the Murrumbidgee,
some 50 miles from Tumut, where some of the largest trout caught
in the district have been landed. Tourists and anglers going to the
Long Plain water would need to put up at Yarrangobilly and drive
to the fishing ground, a distance of it miles.
THE TUMUT CENTRE.
A trout-centre of growing merit itself, Tumut has several successful
anglers. A prominent angler says: —“I expect the fishing in the
Tumut will be very good soon. The stocking of the Jounama, the
Goobragandra or Little River, the Peak River, and other streams that
tumble down through the Talbingo gorges, is having its effect upon
the Tumut. The Fisheries Department have • recently constructed
ponds for trout fry near Talbingo for distribution throughout the
district. Many canfuls of trout fry have been liberated in the
rivers for years. The Tumut will, undoubtedly, be a great fishing
river, but at present the Jounama, which is rough work, the Little
River, which is an ideal trout stream, and the Peak River afford
first-class sport. Already large trout have been caught 2 miles from
Tumut, and many have been seen jumping. Stocking is being carried
on every year. Contrasting the sport given by the brown trout m
Tasmania with that given by the rainbow in this district, I must give
the palm to the latter as being by far the gamer fish. The coachman
fly is one of the best I have tried. My best fish during my last try
at Yarrangobilly was a four-pounder, but bags up to fifteen,
averaging 1 lb. each, are not uncommon, and that average is much
higher than in Tasmanian stocked waters. Forty miles away at
Tumberumba, and in the Manus River, which feeds the Murray,
the fish are also plentiful.”
]\ Picturesque Tourist Town-
Of Tumut itself it must be said that the beautiful little town : s
most fortunately situated for a health and tourist centre of decided
attractiveness. Several of the hotels are of first-class quality, and
there is a snap and stir that show that wide-awake people have
given thought to the necessity for attracting tourists. The fertile


[■ ■ ' y • .-tfipe
[ A A. V?
valley, with its numerous fields of wheat, tobacco, oats, and maize,
its prettily-situated homesteads, its river, full of swimming and
fishing reaches, and its easy roads, leads the traveller away to the
Talbingo Range, where the dingoes roam in dozens, and there are
wallaroos and rock wallabies in abundance. Gold-seekers, men who
climb to the useful mountain-ash forests for paling and weather-
board splitting, and those in search of stock are the only ones to
keep the animals moving in alarm. The magnificent scenery at the
end of the valley, where one begins to climb the Talbingo Mountain,
is unequalled in the State. The snow lies on the mountain tops for
months during the winter, and even on the hottest days in the
summer the heights give cool winds, and even frosts up to
Christmas time. The Tumut River is a magnificent stream, affording
swimming and boating facilities. Merry gipsy-tea parties are often
TUMUT RIVER, FROM LACMALAC HILL.
arranged in Tumut for the summer afternoons on the river banks,
where, under the shade of the willows, the dreamer may while away
the hours, and “learning, wiser grow without his books.” The
country is almost rural British in character, and as green as the
Emerald Isle in spring time. Pleasant drives of a mile or two place
the traveller free of the town on heights from which the unfolding
panorama is seen in its infinite variety Through the lanes with
their avenues of giant poplars, luxuriant elms and acacias, to the
willow-clad river banks, the drives to the north and east are
exceptionally enjoyable, and, as in older countries, one can stop at
an orchard or blackberry hedge and gather the luscious fruit during


fe 1 1 \j> 1^ 3 S*.°-M / /\( * ' i
J } O | I d ' % J-- *V/ V ', *
*| 3 2 I \ j\ ) ; %
~r~ l< A \ __/ j? i /" '" v " y\ vx^j / ~' c-j^^L»- x y /( gn-tSSfc 1 —' ,/ J '*'"*-'^S$'
h
O
E
h
CO
5
z
OC
UJ
h
CO
LU
£


I i* |
* I
|| 0)
i !: o
* c* 1: C
° i
* fSi _« H
I, 3 I
U 2 m
|: s . j, 33
If I yg z
I 5 Z 3. 5
a o Zd ‘f x n
I 1 CD 5 i
1 f H 0)
2 S H
■ Fl *
3°
** o
I H


their seasons; in the one case for a modest consideration, and the
other for the taking. A longer trip lands one at the Bnddong Falls,
where some may fish and some explore. Away as far as the eye
can reach on either side the fields bearing verdant crops extend
amid their hedges of hawthorn, or more prosaic wire fences. There
i 3 no need to talk of closer settlement in this rich, cool country.
Small holders occupy the river valley. The population of the district
is over 4,000, and that the people look prosperous and contented is
a compliment to its natural endowment, for be it remembered Tumut
is 900 feet above the level of the sea. The traveller may make a
round trip from Tumut to Cooma via many of the places mentioned
in the foregoing pages at a comparatively small cost. The railway
travelling, especially if one uses the sleeping cars, is luxurious and
far from tedious. It is best to travel the roads in parties of three
or more, especially when using hired vehicles.
Near I he, Murray.
In the extreme south of the State, the Snowy, of course, has prece-
dence as a trout river; but Manus Creek, 3 miles from Tumberumba,
and about 40 miles from Tumut, is becoming a reputable trout water.
The largest fish reported in 1904 was a 5-pounder. The creek has
been lavishly stocked, and. as it runs through wild country in parts,
it will not be easily fished out. Humula Creek, near the border, has
been lightly stocked also. Jingellic Creek is another stream
flowing into the Murray, carrying with it young trout; so it will not
be long before the upper waters of the Murray itself will teem with
speckled, red-banded beauties.
THE KANGAROO VALLEY CENTRE.
Kangaroo Valley is a great place for perch, and comfortable
accommodation is provided for the angler at two hotels.
Coach daily, Sundays excepted, return fare, 7/6. The river runs
at the back of the hotel, not more than 150 yards distant. Perch
are plentiful in the river, and it is satisfactory to note that trout are
going ahead in one of the tributaries of the main stream, and the
residents have now every hope of getting them well established.
The Fitzroy Falls, where rainbow trout have been established for 5
or 6 years, are only ioy 2 miles distant from Kangaroo Valley.
Nowra is miles distant, the route going over the Cambewarra
Mountains.
Weir’s CreeK a! UoDerlsoii
Seven or eight miles of very fair trout fishing is obtainable in
Weir’s Creek, which empties itself into the Kangaroo \ alley at
Belmore Falls. The local residents make moderate baskets of


lainbow trout during the season averaging lb. The upper
reaches of the stream are rather badly overgrown with blackberry
bushes, but the lower parts are more open and easily fished.
This water is within a couple of miles of the township of
Robertson, where comfortable hotel accommodation is to be found.
Robertson is reached by coach (14 miles) from Bowral or Moss
Vale.
WESTERN DISTRICT
THE TARANA, JENOLAN, AND OBERON CENTRE.
All tourists who can use the trout rod and fly are advised to add to
their enjoyment in the beautiful Jenolan Caves country by fishing at
Oberon. The fairy king might have some excuse for leaving
Titania amid the limestone mysteries while he occupied some hours
during the “boyhood of the year” angling for trout in the district
that has been named after him. There are quite a number of
people who have not seen the Jenolan Caves, or their rivals at
YarrangobiHy and Wombeyan, yet they leave Sydney in hundreds
every summer for a holiday jaunt in Tasmania, losing four or five
days in uninteresting travel. They should no longer delay visiting
the Caves, so as to go abroad equipped for making comparisons;
and they may pack with their luggage first-class rods and reels, so
that when they are surfeited with the glories of Jenolan they may
get aboard the coach which runs daily to Tarana, and in two and
a half hours be wrestling with new waders, prior to going rod in
hand to a well-tried ripple.
The Caves Stream,
The trout fisher will bestow many envious glances at the Caves
Stream, which, after a mysterious passage through the Lucas
Cave, emerges near the Grand Arch, and bubbles and seethes through
tangled gullies, and over small falls, to join the Cox, and afterwards
the Wollondilly. It is a perfect miniature trout stream, and the
trout can be seen in it by the hundred, ranging from underweight
specimens to over 2 lb. The Caves caretaker states that in 1904 he
saw a fine trout in the underground river in the Caves. This fish
had evidently jumped an 8 and another 10 feet waterfall before : t
got into the Caves. In common with other anglers of repute in
the district, he cordially approves of the closure of the Caves Stream
to fishing. The river has been declared closed against angling until
further notice, and there are several honorary inspectors about who


will see that the closure is observed. A hatchery has recently been
constructed about 2 miles below the Caves House. The Cowmung,
or Tuglow, and Oakey Creek join the Caves Stream before it
reaches the Wollondilly. The Cowmung has been recently stocked
with trout, as also has Hollander’s Creek, an affluent of the first-
named river. These streams flow all ways, but at last easterlv to
the sea.
POOLS FULL OF TROUT IN THE CAVES RIVER, JENOLAN
One is not allowed to shoot near the Caves, except at rabbits
with a pea-rifle. Some of the local sharpshooters make easy work
of bunny-potting by standing on the Zig Zag road leading to Tarana,
and waiting for the hopping gentry to show up on the mountain
slopes. Then they administer the leaden dose with promptitude, and
wait for bunny to roll down towards them. They thus save them-
selves labour. On the way to the Caves from Mount Victoria the
Lett River is passed. It looks good water, but the kerosene refinery
at Hartley Vale has killed all the fish in it. There are plenty of rock-
wallabies, possessing a fine contempt for dogs, stones, and the
raucous voices of tourists, who desire them to show their paces,
about the Caves: but they may be as impudent as they please, having


mS/jam HnpjL; ■•' . , : */.~r ;' - *’,-V $?*** v 'tfeaKSBElMh
t> : ' - k < ffl l'.'-.- asl .*
W' y* -f-'V"C'* r? . *’ * ••■ *v *. , .^'' * r k :'' ■* * *>' t * , flB
,y'wkif.i ?^'>m
' Vi * r ' " •r^"^-'.
>\l. ' &V V .£* ; v 'P%
the law to protect them. Considering all things, it seems advisable
to declare the Caves Stream permanently closed to fishing, because
of its value as a nursery. The sportsman need not feel aggrieved
at this, for near it there are better fishing rivers, of which more anon.
A Pound Trip—OPeron and me DucKmaloi,
Anglers can make a round trip for sight-seeing, shooting, and
fishing, by leaving the Caves for Tarana, and climbing the 1,500 feet
of zigs and zags for the first 2 miles on foot. Soon they will reach
A REACH ON THE DUCKMALOI.
western-flowing waters, the best being the Duckmaloi. This
beautiful river is crossed about 7 miles from Oberon, which is the
great centre for anglers. Although 4,000 feet above the sea, and
exposed to every wind of heaven (snow included, in October, 1905),
Oberon is a delightful health resort.
There is a good hotel at Oberon, and one has not far to walk
for first-class fishing and shooting. Twelve miles from Tarana, and
about 20 from the Caves, Oberon is an established trout-fishing
centre. Many sportsmen have stayed at Lawrence's comfortable
farmhouse, situated on a hill about one mile above the banks of the
Duckmaloi, and have drunk of the waters of a medicinal spring that
bubbles out at the foot of a black sally eucalypt. The Duckmaloi


was stocked some yeais ago with trout fry by the late Police
Sergeant-major Lawrence, whose widow, now aged over 70, can tell
many tales of the stirring times when bushrangers terrorised the
country-side. Captain Battye was the superintendent of the police
in those days. The adventures of the police with Dan Morgan,
Gardiner, Foley, Humphreys, Lowrie, and Nevill would fill a
volume, as recounted by Mrs. Lawrence, who holds the opinion that
the police were, to some extent, responsible for turning cattle-lifters
and horse-sweaters into more turbulent gentry. Rolfe Boldrewood, it
is alleged, laid the scene of his stirring story, “Robbery Under
Arms,” in this neighbourhood. But all these tales are for the
fireside after the day’s catch of trout has been tallied.
The Oberon district is well watered with perennial streams, some
of which, in the opinion of our fisheries’ authorities, should be
permanently closed to fishing. Of these streams, McEwan’s, Tea-
tree, and Widgery might, with advantage, be so treated. This will
leave the Duckmaloi, Wiseman’s River, Brisbane Valley Creek, the
Little River, Fish River Creek, Fish River, Bindo Creek, and the
Abercrombie available for anglers.
Sport and Accommodation.
Hotel accommodation can be obtained at Tarana, and trout are
obtainable within 2 miles of the town. At Oberon, 16 miles from
Tarana, there are two hotels and a number of comfortable boarding-
houses, with trout streams within a mile of the town. Conveyances
may always be procured to convey parties to the outlying districts,
and a coach leaves daily for Jenolan Caves. Splendid shooting—
rabbits, hares, foxes, and wallabies—is obtainable.
On the banks of the Duckmaloi, 7 miles from Oberon, are the
farm-houses of Mrs. Lawrence (Elder Grove) and Mrs. Nunan
(Duckmaloi). At Gingkin, 13 miles from Oberon, are Mrs. Bates'
and Mrs. Brennan’s houses, where fishermen and sportsmen obtain
comfortable, homely accommodation. Kanangra Walls are 15 miles
distant, vehicles or horses by arrangement. Mrs. Wilcox, at Norway.
7 miles from Oberon, and Mr. T. Wilson, Fairview, via Oberon. are
adjacent to the trout streams.
OPeron Spooling.
Oberon as a shooting centre is worth praising. Even some of
the young ladies of the place have taken to using the gun on
rabbits. Snipe, ducks, quail, curlews, plovers, hares, wallabies, and
plenty of gillbirds are also to be shot, and there lives not a fly-fisher
who will refrain from putting lead into a shag’.


Me Ewan’s Creek.
Travelling up McEwan’s Creek for scenes, the tourist will find
two waterfalls that will make him pause. The stream rushes noisily
through rugged granite boulders, scooping out some curious potholes,
and effectually blocking the adventurous trout from leaping to
higher scenes. There is also a 14-foot waterfall on the Duckmaloi,
but the trout are found above as well as below it. In this stream,
on the second last day of the season of 1904-5, one angler caught
forty-eight weighable rainbow trout, and on the last day, thirty-six.
FALLS ON McEWAN's CREEK.
November is the best month for fly-fishing in the Duckmaloi. There
are not many insects moving over the river at that time, and the
trout are not gorged with natural food. There are few carp in the
Duckmaloi, but other streams in the district, and particularly the
Fish River and Creek, have plenty of them. Anglers only bestow
opprobrium and unwilling baits upon them. After the Duckmaloi
junctions with the Fish River Creek, it is called generally the Fish
River. It then receives the Bathurst, Campbell’s, and Abercrombie
Rivers, and under the name of the Macquarie meanders westward to
marshy country, whence it emerges to join the Darling.


Some Notes-
The road from Tarana to Oberon, like most roads in the district,
is a first-class one. Cyclists will only need to walk two hills and
the final zigzag.
There is good trout fishing near Tarana, but poisoned rabbits
have not helped it any. The poisoned pollard, too, has destroyed
many birds—a regrettable fact. Plagues of insects follow the
destruction of the birds. “Trout,” says one old angler, “will eat
anything but the log fences hereabout. They have cleared out the
bream, the cod, and the carp, but we will not mind that if they stay
themselves.”
NORTHERN DISTRICT
THE WALCHA CENTRE.
There are neither unemployed people nor unoccupied houses m
Walcha, and sundowners are almost unknown, the climate not
being conducive to their comfort. Fortunately for people who are
in search of sport and health, the prosperous township has first-class
hotel accommodation at reasonable cost. Anglers will be likely to
make Walcha one of their fishing resorts, for trout are plentiful u
the pellucid streams that flow westward to join the Peel or Namoi.
It is 320 miles from Sydney to Walcha-road Station, whence coach
is taken for an easterly run of 12 miles to the township of Walcha.
Cyclists will find nothing to make them walk after the first mile out
on Walcha-road, and touring parties awheel will ere long include
this lovely district in their itineraries. Those who do not care to
“angle at the brook the freckled trout to take with silken worms”
will find, in the season, quail-shooting, wallaby-hunting, and hare-
shooting, without running far afield for it. And there are other
attractions to be referred to anon. It is necessary first to understand
a little of the topogaphy of the Walcha tourist centre. There is a
mountainous cul-de-sac near the town, formed by the Great Divide,
the Moonbi Range, and the New England Range throwing waters
westerly, and another formed by the Hastings Range and the New
England Range diverting the easterly streams to the sea.
Good Pishing Waters.
The best trout waters will be found in the McDonald, Cobrabald,
Cockburn, and Rivers, and Smith’s, Swamp Oak, Caubon,
Shearing, Walcha, and Hall’s Creeks. Of these, undoubtedly the
finest are the McDonald and the Cobrabald, the latter being the more


! |V * .,... ; *■ M0Kt j* * ***T%
accessible and more easily fished,
the Cobrabald during several trips
McDonald is a harder stream to
diversified water —and very full of
One parfy caught 500 trout in
in the season of 1904-5. The
fish—larger, bolder, and more
indigenous fish called sometimes
blackfish, but more often the “slippery.” The “slipperies” clean out
the worm baits used by the district fishermen with expedition, and
thereby earn the unending gratitude of fly-fishers, who scorn to use
the natural bait for trout.
UPPER TIA FALLS, NEAR WALCHA.
The Tia River, like the Apsley, which runs through Walcha
township, is an eastern-flowing stream of great value. Both are
feeders of the Macleay, and there is no finer scenery in the world
than in the gorges where these and other upper waters of the
Macleay break from the ranges and splash in feathery spray into
wild valleys, where the brown rock wallabies look up in wonder at
the bipeds who venture into their haunts.
Wild Scenes and Grand Shooting.
It is about 15 miles from Walcha to the Tia Falls, where the
abrupt break from the tablelands into the massive gorges and fertile
valleys of the eastern slope affords the traveller panoramas of
surpassing beauty. The top formation hereabout is chiefly slate and
basalt, some of the spurs near the fall giving climbers an excellent


jr- * ■* ** -
5 *■ v. r* 1 - i t*’^^
opportunity to test their nerves on heights. No one should, how-
ever, attempt the climbs in ordinary boots, as a slip would mean
instant death. The bases of many of the wild gorges which extend
in a broken semicircle from the east of Armidale to below Walcha
have only been partly explored. There are reports of limestone
caves filled with incredible numbers of bats at the base of the Tia
break, and probably a wanderer will be rewarded by the discovery
of a rival to Jenolan some day. There are no tracks to the foot of
the falls, but the feet of visitors will soon make them, and no doubt
SHOOTING WALLABIES NEAR WALCHA.
the people of the township, whose business it is to take an interest
in tourists, will ultimately cut steps and erect ladders. Visitors who
have traversed the Rockies and devoted time to Switzerland have
been emphatic in their declarations that this State has natural show
places of surpassing grandeur on these highlands. The sportsman
will find the gullies and ridges amply stocked by Nature with
wallabies, hares, and rabbits, and additional zest may be given to his
appetite for slaughter if he joins in dingo drives and wallaroo hunts.
Amongst these ranges the beautiful Australian mimic of the bush,
the lyre bird, is plentiful. One is astonished to hear the sound of a
circular saw cutting timber, and the puff-puflF of the engine and its


whistle away in the ranges, but the lyre bird is the culprit, and he
gives accurately the little sound the wood makes as it touches the
side of the saw before being taken off the table. There are plenty of
birds, including ducks, snipe, quail, parrots, mutton-birds, and dozens
of other feathered things which, although they look prettier alive
than dead, are fairer game than lyre-birds.
A party of four in 1904 went to Cundurang Falls, about 30
miles away from the town, and camped on the river, in which they
caught perch up to 4 lb. weight, catfish, silver eels, and herrings.
Trout have been put in the river.
Another Pound Tri|).
A beautiful round trip may be made if those participating in it
are prepared to camp. The route may be by train to Walcha-road,
thence by road to Walcha, where a halt may be called if trout are
sought; thence down the long road to Port Macquarie, calling in at
selectors’ houses and the various stations to find out where the falls
and other great sights are. A month in a caravan along this route
would make a man be glad he was born, and add ten years to his life.
A Sportsman's Opinions
Speaking of the sporting capabilities of the district, a
resident of Walcha said that the matter of the close season for
quail was one of paramount importance. There were four kinds of
quail in the district—the stubble or covey, the partridge (a dark
variety which favours swamps), the king, and the bush quail.
Before the legal opening of the season for quail shooting in the
district the place was overrun with the little brown chaps, but when
it opened they went down to the warm plains, and local sportsmen
had to be content with stragglers. The Macdonald and the CobrabaU
were, in this gentleman’s opinion, the best trout rivers in the north.
The fish had been caught in the 1904-5 season in splendid condition
up to lb. weight. It was about 9 miles to fishing spots on both
rivers from Walcha. The town would soon be in telephonic com-
munication with Walcha-road, and the installation of the service in
the township would shortly be completed.
On the Macdonald,
Along the wattle and the verdure-clad banks of the Macdonald
the angler will need to obtain the permission of various runholders
before he can fish for trout or galaxias. On Nundah run the
Macdonald is a magnificent stream. The “slipperies,” as the
galaxias are called locally, are clearing the shrimps out, and the


trout are performing a similar office for the “slipperies.” One
angler, in 1904, caught a trout containing five of the little black fish,
which are excellent food, and may be eaten like a garfish.
The Cobrabald.
Cobrabald River is named after the mountain of the same name.
The word means “naked-headed mountain.” The turtles in this and
the Macdonald River are a source of constant wonder to visiting
anglers. The Cobrabald is full of trout, and is only about 7 miles
from Walcha. Vehicles or horses are cheaply obtained at both
Walcha and Walcha-road. Guides may be procured by the angler
if he cannot induce a local sportsman to accompany him to the
rivers. Considering that the country has paid for the trout placed
in the rivers about Walcha, local run-holders should allow fly-fishers
to angle during the season, although they may block worm-fishermen
or set and hand-liners.
THE ARMIDALE CENTRE.
Although not a great trout-fishing centre, Armidale is such a
wonderful health resort, on the northern tablelands, that it must be
mentioned, especially as many of the streams in its vicinity have
been stocked with trout fry. Viewing it even during drought time,
one can exclaim with Cowper, “God made the country, and man
made the town.” The tourist on sight-seeing bent may pass a day
or two away very pleasantly in the town itself—its ecclesiastical
buildings, its magnificent public and proprietary schools, its dams,
its mammoth store, and its recreation areas, all meriting attention.
The rare, pure air steadily inhaled through the nostrils quickens
every nerve and exhilarates like a new delicious perfume. No
wonder that Armidale has a name for being a natural sanatorium.
Armidale lashing.
One has to go out of the city to get fishing. Trout have been
placed in the rivers near for years, but one has to travel over 30
miles to obtain good sport. Many years ago trout ova were imported
privately from Tasmania, and successfully hatched on a local station.
Some salmon trout ova got into the batch by mistake, and these, too,
were hatched out. Some of the fry were freed in Gyra, or Gara,
Creek, which certainly looks an ideal trout water. Others were sent
to the Beardy, and others to the Macdonald.


The Ogra Fiver.
The Gyra is a most interesting stream. It flows down the
eastern watershed, thrown thither by the Macleay Range. It
junctions with the stream called Commissioners' Water, in which
rainbow trout fry have also been liberated. The Gyra, although it
rises near the town of Guyra, is called “Gaira.” About 15 miles
from where the trout were put in there are falls. It is possible that
the fish have gone over there, and ultimately made their way into
the Macleay. In the bed of the river at one place there are basaltic
boulders with curious potholes in them. Many of these are just
large enough to admit a man’s body, but are 10 and 12 feet deep.
There are plenty of bars and rapids in the river.
Other streams
Other streams which have been stocked with trout fry near
Armidale are Gostwyck Waters, near Uralla, Mihi Creek, Salisbury
Creek, and Blue Mountains Creek. These, with the Wollomombi,
Chandler, and Brookstead Rivers, and Cameron and Baker’s
Creeks, are all coastal river feeders. Some flow through remarkably
strange country, making falls over precipices on their way. There
are more fine falls near Armidale than at any other large city in the
State. Dangar’s Falls, Ebor Falls, on the Guy Fawkes River,
Wollomombi Falls, two Gyra Falls, George’s River Falls, Styx Falls,
and Baker’s Creek Falls are some of the best known; but there are
many more still to be photographed. The gorges hereabout are wild
and wonderful, and the natural conditions should certainly suit the
rainbow trout. Probably within a year or two the fish will have
begun to show that they own the river, and will serve perch and
catfish with a notice to quit. It is about 30 miles from Armidale
to this centre, and the sportsman must take a tent with him if he
intends to make a stay. There is ample sport for the gun.
To me Wes r.
To the western side of Armidale the streams are on the western
watershed of the great divide. All are perennial and suitable for
trout, and many of them flow through private property. The Rocky
River tumbles down in cascades to join the Gwydir, and Booroolay
Creek, which rises near Black Mountain, is another trout water.
George’s Creek, near Llangothlin, is clear and perennial, and the
Moredun is known as a cod stream. Although trout have been
plentifully liberated about this district, fly-fishermen have not tried
for them to any great extent. Armidale sportsmen are anxious for
a law which will permit the charge of a rod and gun license by


acclimatisation societies, the money received being devoted to the
improvement of river fishing, acclimatisation of animals or birds
that will not become pests, the payment of inspectors, and the
eradication of rabbits, hares, and foxes. It is not thought that the
tax will be oppressive, and the revenues being expended in the district
in which it is collected will be of great benefit. The protection of
•quail, which are extraordinarily plentiful at times in the district, wild
duck, wonga, pheasants, and trout, could, it is believed, by this
means be made effective.
Hillgrove-
Perhaps the greatest attraction to tourists near Armidale is
Hillgrove. The country resembles the land of the gnomes and
kobolds in the Talbingo Ranges and the vicinity of Kosciusko, but
instead of being of granite, it is of basalt. The traveller unused to
heights experiences a feeling of dizziness when a turn on the road
near Hillgrove gives him a glimpse of a great depth in the gorge.
Baker’s Creek washes noisily through the gorge, and from the heights
it looks like a narrow band of silver. Baker’s Creek mines have
been visited by tourists from all parts of the world. Some have
avoided the glorious ride down the incline in the Proprietary
Company’s trollies to the valley below, and have thereby missed a
treat. No switchback could ever rival the stupendous fall of 1,700
feet to the mine down that trolly way. Women and children do the
trip daily, so there is no danger, only a nearness to it. The
beginner at the business looks into a pleasant or an unpleasant
hereafter, according to his conscience, on his first ride. Afterwards
he drops into nonchalance, and merely surrenders to the intoxication
■of the upward or downward movement. It is something like going-
in an express lift in a high building from the top to the bottom
floor. The great mountains close and fold in on one as one descends.
There is nothing like Hillgrove at Katoomba or Mount Victoria.
Hillgrove is unique, and it is glorious when the mountain mists
begin to roll up from a valley and shroud the rugged scenery. The
wind tears the veil of mist at times, and affords momentary glimpses
of the great gorge. The scene is entrancing. It must be reiterated
and beaten into the brain-case of the people of this State, who rush
away to Tasmania and New Zealand for an annual holiday, that they
are missing things at home. No tourist’s education is completed
until he has seen Hillgrove.


THE GLEN INNES CENTRE.
Bound northward from the city's smoke and work to the
beautiful district of New England, the train traveller will wake in
time in the morning to see the fog rolling in soft billows along the
bed of the Mother of Ducks Lagoon at Guyra. Then he will wonder
why the lagoon that erstwhile was a grand stretch of fresh water
and the home of multitudes of ducks has disappeared, and he will be
almost prepared to believe that the artesian wells of the far West
have had something to do with it. Finally, he will give up wondering,
and start to gather his traps together as the train begins to make
the pace down the mountain from Ben Lomond to Glencoe, and he
will throw open the window to catch the delicious air whose fame
has spread. The Queensland people have been the first to recognise
that the keen and fragrant mountain air at Glen Innes is good for
those who stew and suffer by the seaside. One does not find many
sick people in Glen Innes, except a few who go there to be made
well. Even the hospital authorities in the town have made provision
for visitors who suffer from residence in less salubrious quarters.
They have private wards ready for the suffering.
Fortunately Glen Innes has something to offer in its district to
tourists. One meets in the pretty town with its wide streets and
general air of prosperity many “an old angler mellowed by the
stealing hours of time,” who will talk trout and acclimatisation to
him by the hour. The town has its Amateur Fishermen’s
Association, consisting of anglers who pursue the lusty speckled
rainbow during the season. This society protects the streams, and
discountenances all fishing except with the rod and fly.
Dozens or Trout Haunts-
The trout-fishing facilities around Glen Innes are unique. There
are dozens of ripples and reaches within a couple of hours’ walk of
the town where one can use the rod and fly and catch rainbow trout
that may turn the scale at 5 lb., but will average, perhaps, a pound.
“Spring hangs her infant blossoms on the trees” in October in the
district, and the trout then rise and begin to stir anglers’ pulses. At
Stonehenge, the playground of the giants when they indulged in
prehistoric bowls, the Beardy River is an ideal trout stream. Passing
the quaintly-poised granite boulders that are scattered about the
plain, one reaches the Beardy after an 8-mile trip from the town.
The river runs through private property, and, fortunately for the
trout, during the spawning season, the upper part is in the Stone-
henge station lands, owned by Mr. G. M. Simpson, whose beautiful
homestead overlooks the stream.


m Acci ima tisor-
“It is ten or twelve years since trout were first placed in this
river/’ said that gentleman, "and the largest we have seen was about
4 lb. weight. I received some fry from the Fisheries Department,
and three lots I kept in a nursery until they were yearlings, before
turning them out. The average number of yearlings was 80 per
cent, of the fry, which is much higher than if the fry were turned
into the river unprotected. I have also liberated carp, but do not
know how they have fared against the trout. The rainbow trout is
the most valuable of the trout species we could have. It is hardy,
adaptable, and good sport. In this nursery the fry grew from an
inch to 9 inches in twelve months. It would be better if we received
older fish; but I suppose the difficulty is in getting them here from
the hatchery during the warmer weather. I liberated 200 English
pheasants here some time ago ; but they have been shot out. There
was ample cover for them, and I saw some chicks one year ; but the
district guns have apparently cleared them all out. We want a gun
and rod license here.”
An object lesson is afforded the inquirer at Stonehenge in the
practical application of a hillside spring to the needs of the home-
stead. A strong conduit pipe conveys water from the spot where it
bubbles out of the hill to the house and its outbuildings, where it is
carried in smaller pipes everywhere. It not only waters the trout
pond, but works a turbine, which operates on a circular saw, a chaff-
cutter, a cream separator, a corn-sheller, and a corn-cracker, while
it also blows a beautiful organ in the dining-room. One almost
expects to find a hydraulic lift on the premises.
BROWN AND RAINBOW TROUT, SNOWY RIVER.


The RcarcJv.
The trout-stocked Beardy winds round the township curiously,
and can be tapped at various places. It carries plenty of trout in
the upper parts; but for some distance passes through private
property, and permission to fish has to be obtained from the land-
owners. At Yarraford, however, there is a long stretch, some 9
miles from the town, where one can angle to one’s heart’s content.
Equipped with various flies, one can tn r at the foot of the falls or in
the long, deep holes towards evening, or an hour before daybreak,
THE WELL-STOCKED BEARDY
with the certainty of catching trout. The trip may be made by
buggy, bicycle or afoot; but the train is used by many holiday-
makers from the town for a run to Yarraford Siding (7 miles). It
is an ideal picnic ground and sporting centre, for not only are there
trout, but cod and carp are catchable in the river; while the man
who would die if he did not shoot something may pot rabbits, hares,
and many birds. He will also earn the undying gratitude of the
sheep-owners if he slaughters a few foxes. The bonny briar bush
and the succulent blackberry will keep the angler from having too
great a conceit of himself, especially if he thinks he carries all the
hooks that will catch things.
Situated as it is 3,518 feet above the sea, and only 20 miles from
solemn old Ben Lomond, the most important eminence in the northern
tablelands, Glen limes has splendid bracing winters. Snow is not
uncommon, and is always welcomed. Some of the residents tell of
one winter when it snowed for fourteen days, but that was a record.


111 the Spring there is no snow in the mountain gullies as at
Kosciusko, but the streams are all full from the springs.
Cigiu Trout Streams.
When a Glen limes man tells you that there are eight trout
streams within a couple of hours’ drive of the town he must be
believed. Practical investigation during the trout-fishing season of
1905 revealed more than the ever-sanguine New Englander dreamed
of. Not only may the dainty rainbow trout be pursued and
captured, but a green-mottled cod is catchable on sunk baits of
worm, frog, and cricket, and other fish which may seek introduction
are silver eels (dainties merely dreamed of by city sportsmen),
catfish—here called jewfish—and perch.
An Opinion.
A local sportsman, asked concerning the piscatorial attractions of
the district, said: “I have seen fifteen rods on the Beardy within half
a mile, most of them getting trout with fly or the natural bait. I
think the Mann is the king of our streams, and will in the near
future, if we can get more yearlings, be the great trout water of the
district. I fixed up a nursery for the fry I received from the
Fisheries Board at Yarrow Creek, and after nursing them up to 6
inches in length, turned about 2,600 out. So far we have seen no
big ones, but I am told trout are like that. After three or four
years’ stocking they suddenly show up. We think we could hatch
the ova here. There is every facility for so doing, within sight of
the town, and moreover the members of our society are prepared to
support the proposal with our means. I took a can of fry out to
the Henry the other day, but 25 to 30 per cent, were dead when I
liberated them. We could do well with either ova or yearlings. I
hear that Mr. Cox, of Rawdon, Rylstone, is hatching ova with a
tank flow in his district. We have bought trout from the Killarney
Ponds in Queensland for our waters, but we cannot keep that up at
£lO per 100. The Severn is another beautiful stream worth stocking.
The divide between the head waters of the Beardy and the Mann is
only 3 miles across. The Fisheries Department might authorise the
transport of live trout from the Beardy to the Mann, from which
many eastern-flowing streams might be stocked.”
This is but a typical conversation, but it shows how carefully the
local people are watching the matter of fish acclimatisation.


The riy-risher’s List of Streams.
Enumerating the places to which the tourist may proceed from
the town, it may lie noted that the Mann joins the Nymboida, and
the fishing and shooting along these streams is exceptionally good.
It is about 30 miles from Glen Innes to the foot of the Big-hill,
on the Grafton-road. The great road is a sight in itself. All who
have travelled it are enthusiastic about its beauty, and camping parties
from the town often go out during the summer to the foot of the
hill for shooting and fishing. For the man with a gun there are
ducks, quail, hares, wongas, lowries, rosellas, parrakeets, and other
birds. Rabbits are also increasing; but their natural enemies—
foxes, native cats, and the district dogs —are holding them in check
to some extent.
A CATCH OF NEW SOUTH WALES TROUT.
Henry Falls, 26 miles from the town eastward, are a tourist’s
attraction. One can get to them by vehicle, or on horseback, or on
a bicycle. The famous Molybdenite mines are on the Henry.
First-class vehicles may be engaged in the town at ordinary rates;
but parties will find it a saving to engage waggonettes or sociables
for a visit to this wildly-picturesque country.
Going west from Glen Innes, Waterloo Creek is but 11 miles
away. It is trout-stocked, and generally runs through private
property. The Furracabad Creek is another trout water, and at the
Severn River and Clairevaulx Creek the speckled beauties will also
be found.
Fern Gully and Red Range are quite near the town, and are
bound to become as popular as Stonehenge.
If the visitor desires further excitement, he may run out to the
pretty village of Glencoe on a debate night, when the local


Parliamentary Debating Society is settling the affairs of the
country, or up to Ben Lomond. If still unappeased, a delicious ride
out to Shannon Vale (9 miles) for a camp, or to Ranger’s Valley,
which is but 18 miles away, or to Mount Mitchell and the tin and
gem country round Oban, may help the traveller to renew his youth.
Perhaps at Oban he may wash out a sapphire or ruby from amongst
the grain tin, and have a valuable memento of his visit. Topazes he
will find by the peck; but as they are mostly colourless, they only make
common brilliants when cut, and have no special value. And after
all this dissipation amid Nature’s wonders, he may come back to Glen
Innes itself, and rest in excellent hotel comfort that will almost make
him shake the dust of the city from his feet for ever.
AN APPRECIATION.
For nearly a generation hundreds of thousands of fry and
yearling rainbow and brown trout have been gently tipped out of
the hatchery cans into the State rivers, and have at once adapted
themselves to their new environment. It is, therefore, not astonishing
to learn that some of these fish now turn the scale at 12 lb., and are
capable of beating the best angler the State can produce. Everyone
who has ever experienced the exhilarating game of fly-fishing has
pronounced the sport a glorious one. The lovely rainbow trout is
amongst the gamest of our fishes—only the lordly bonito and king-
fish of the sea-coast, fished for with strong tackle and spinner, or
the black bream caught on' gossamer tackle, being in the same
category with it as a royal fighter. The rainbow trout, when nicely
hooked in the lip on a tiny hook with its artificial fly attachment,
spends a lot of its time out of the water. It necessarily has to be
fished for with fine tackle in the peculiar haunts it affects, and once
it is hooked on a fine gut trace, the angler has to exercise all his skill
in beating it. Already such a degree of angling ability has been
exhibited by many of the anglers of the northern and southern
table-lands, that fights of over an hour with lusty trout are common.
The fish, like John Bull, does not know when it is beaten. Sometimes
it beguiles the angler into believing that it has quitted the fight when
it is merely swimming up stream against a q-knot current, safely
hooked. Suddenly, like a flash, it turns and displays its beautiful
pink-streaked sides and iridescent greens and blues to the gaze of
the astonished angler as it leaps 3 feet into the air. Then does the
angler’s rod-point drop a little, and only then, for the jolt that may
break the gut has to be avoided. Anon, the fish streaks for a
sunken snag it wots of, and the angler follows as best he can along


fflj
rjx I/'■ J
i3| <j|^., x fc * *. 'J& * : -BffWBry jj|
X f g ?fHyrP»V * ‘ dhrhrr
-. §0* . 4^yMKoT&J
•*%«:*$• ■ A***- P^iiMH^it'3H
< r 1 v9^MSwl^^ill^«lxd x^E
the wild river banks, seeking for some vantage ground from which
he can better play his quarry. The chief drawback for the angler is
the character of the river banks. In some cases they are broken
with briars and tea-trees, in others by precipitous rocks. These
drawbacks, however, are met and encountered by anglers the world
over, and no one would ask that all natural obstacles should be remover!
FISH RIVER, BETWEEN OBERCN AND JENOLAX
to make the fishing too easy. On the other hand, the fish are so
plentiful, and so unsophisticated and willing to accept almost any
kind of feathered monstrosity that is offered them, that it is only
fair that some few disadvantages for the angler should aid them.
CORMORANTS.
The presence of trout in our inland streams has attracted vast
numbers of cormorants of both species. The quantity of fish
consumed by them is enormous, and must seriously reduce the supply of
young trout. All anglers should declare war against these birds,
and, by financial assistance or personal effort, help to dispute the
right of these croaking poachers to gorge at the public expense. The
Monaro Fish and Game Protection Society, the N.S.W. Rod-fishers’


Society, and the newly-formed Oueanbeyan Anglers’ Association are
spending considerable sums in the way of rewards. The latter is
doing good by holding “drives” on the river and hurling lead where
it will do most damage to the ghoulish-looking fish-eaters.
THE ANGLER’S EQUIPMENT.
It may be well to describe the necessary equipment of the angler.
Primarily he needs a good rod, and as these can be purchased at
prices ranging from a few shillings to as many pounds, the sports-
man can suit his purchase to his purse and get satisfaction. For
rivers like the Upper Murrumbidgee, Goodradigbee, Fish, Yarran-
gobilly, Cobrabald, Severn, and Duckmaloi, a 10-foot light but well-
balanced split-cane fly-rod is required; for the broader waters of the
Snowy, Macdonald, Beardy, Tumut, Bombala, and other streams
where the banks are clearer, a n-footer may be found quite long
enough. The beginner is advised to practise casting without anything
on the end of his line, not even a hook and fly, on land before
essaying a water-cast. On this point, however, there are scores of
angling books to refer to. A good supply of the best fine gut-casts
or strands is necessary, and cheap gut should be avoided as a
pestilence. A varied supply of flies of different sizes may be placed
in the wallet. The most popular flies are, however, the coachman,
cowdung, Governor, bee-fly, white moth, black gnat, March brown,
red ant, and the brown and green grasshoppers. The halcyon
spinner is also used, as well as several kinds of minnows and
phantoms for the deep reaches, but these are deadly on the under-
weight fish. They nearly always foul-hook the fish, as one does
with the natural bait, and the little chaps have no earthly chance of
surviving the tear of the hook in the tongue or gill. The rainbow
trout being such a grand fly-fish, it is surely not too much to ask
sportsmen to stick to the fly, and rigidly ban all other baits. The line
should be a dressed and plaited one of 60 to 100 yards in length.
Some men like the finest they can get, but it will pay to buy the best
at the outset, whether fine or coarse. The cheap sorts are sticky,
and will not run through the rod rings freely ; besides, they soon rot.
With a good line it is as well to rub it with a bit of suet every day
that it is used. The landing-net is a necessity, but most of the bush
anglers seem to prefer the gaff. If the landing-net be long enough,
and jointed so as to fit on the waist-belt, it should be less trouble
to carry round than a gaflf. Waders for fishing in the Snowy, and
near Kiandra, are desirable. The fly-hook and creel for the back
are so obviously required that there is hardly need to point out to
anglers that they are cheaply obtained at all the fishing tackle
emporiums.


SOME IDEA OF THE COST.
Our illustrations will prove some index of the character of the
waters in which the fish flourish. These by no means exhaust the
localities where the trout abound, but they are central, and around
them one can find plenty of magnificent streams quite as good as
those depicted. Taking the Monaro Plains, or Downs, as they
should be called, as a large district which has been lavishly stocked,
the angler may turn his attention first to the Snowy River at
Jindabyne. His route will be by train to Cooma (twelve hours),
£3 7s. lod. first-class, or £1 19s. nd. second-class, return, whence
he may travel, almost on his arrival, to Jindabyne (35 miles), through
Berridale, by coach at a cost of about 12s. 6d, or to the Government
Snowy River House, on the Thredbo, for 15s. single, 255. return.
Plenty of guides at 4s. per day can be got at Jindabyne to escort
sportsmen along the river and to its feeders. Rising near snow-clad
Kosciusko, this grand river is snow and mountain-spring fed. It
has many tributaries, many of which are reachable after a two or
three hours’ trip on horseback from Jindabyne, At all the hotels
in the district there are two tables and two classes of bedrooms. The
traveller is advised to take the better everywhere, the cost being 2s.
for a meal and 2s. for a bed. Indeed, one can safely put down his
hotel expenses at Bs. to 10s. per day, the extra 2s. being for
incidentals.
It is 194 miles to Queanbeyan by train, and the fare is £2 gs. 6d.
first-class, and £1 gs. sd. second-class, return. The angler will pay
£1 for a 54-mile coach trip to the beautiful town of Bombala from
Cooma. The coach trip from Cooma to Adaminaby direct is 12s. 6d.,
and the distance about 30 miles; but a vehicle and driver for four
days can be engaged at about 30s. per day, the driver paying for his
own keep and that of the horse at the hotels where the sportsman
puts up. If the angler desires to stay at the Snowy River House,
Thredbo, and make the trip to Mount Kosciusko, where the snow
lingers through the summer, he will not find it very expensive. It
is a two days’ trip, at something under £1 a day for guide, horse,
and food, from the Snowy River House to the top of Kosciusko
and back.
The sportsman desirous of visiting the Yarrangobilly Caves
should take a round ticket from Sydney to Cooma, available for
return via Tumut, 58s. first-class and 395. 6d. second-class. There
is telephonic communication from the Caves House to both Tumut
and Kiandra, and whichever way the traveller prefers to go. he is
advised to utilise the telephone or telegraph to announce his
prospective arrival at the Caves. Hire a vehicle at Tumut ot
Kiandra for the trip. Taking the Caves trip and its splendid


'; ,•■'•-< ■'*•). jBBp '.'»,
■ .;
■ * ♦• > _ ■/: ' ' * * ,. u . • ‘ '*“ *
' > ! ‘ i t'*fc ■» i
fishing as a special thing, then the best way the angler can travel is
by train to Tumut, 322 miles, at a cost of £4 2s. 6d. first-class, and
£2 Bs. 4d. second-class, return. The Caves House tariff is 6s. and
10s. per day.
The rivers about Jenolan, Oberon, and Tarana are easily and
inexpensively reached from Mount Victoria, Medlow Bath, and other
towns on the Blue Mountains. The excursion fare to Mount
Victoria is 12s. Bd. first-class, and 6s. 4d. second-class, return, on
Wednesdays, Fridays, Saturdays, and the tickets are available for a
BROKEN WATER ON THE FISH RIVER, NEAR TARANA.
month. A coach drive to the Caves costs 255. return, or by motor
car 355., and the tariff at the Caves House is 10s. per day. There
are small additional charges for inspecting the Caves.
To Tarana, by the holiday excursion trains on the days mentioned
above, the fare is 19s. lod. first-class, and 9s. nd. second-class,
return. The coach drive to Oberon costs 7s. 6d., and buggy hire is
arranged between the visitor and the owners of the vehicles.
Oberon hotel expenses are about Bs. per day.
To Walcha-road the fare is £3 15s. 3d. first-class, and £2 4s. 9d.
second-class, return. Buggies or horses have to be arranged for at
a cost of about 15s. per day for the former and 10s. per day for the
latter. The coach ride to Walcha costs 45., and the hotel expense is
Bs. for board and lodgings by the day. The trip to Glen Tunes costs
£5 ns. first-class, and £2 19s. 6d. second-class, return. Vehicles for
trips to the rivers are not expensive, and, as before stated, the hotels


are second to none in the State, the bare cost of living in them being
Bs. per day.
The train fare to Armidale is £4 ss. 46.. first-class, and £2 10s. 6d.
second. The total tariff is Bs. per day. Coach to Hillgrove costs
55., and vehicles for day trips are not expensive.
In conclusion, it may be added that the men who have recently
tried the fishing in the State, and whose previous holiday experiences
amongst trout had been gained in Tasmania and New Zealand, are
emphatic in their opinion that New South Wales is rich in trout
waters, and that the rainbow trout has grown, in congenial places,
to a most acceptable size; also that they have now recorded their
determination to be early in the field every trout season. From
November to April the fish are in splendid trim for giving the
angler a lively time. During the colder months the closure will be
applied, as the number of trout is always largely diminished during
the season, and the fish need peace when they come tamely up the
ripples to rub their spawn out on the gravelly races that are so
plentiful. To all who have never experienced the fascination of
fly-fishing, the hope is expressed that they will speedily avail them-
selves of the opportunity of proving what New South Wales can
afford them in the way of whipping the streams for trout.
CATCH OF TROUT AT SNOWY RIVER.


Sydney;
William Brooks and Co.’, Ltd,






THE ANGLER FOR TROUT
who wishes to spend a delightful holiday whipping the
Magnificent Trout Waters of New South Wales
Can obtain full particulars
of the rivers where the fish are biting best, the accommo-
dation available, the route, and the railway and coach fares,
At the - -
(gmirntmintt (Fmirist Ifomut.
MARTIN PLACE (opp. General Post Office), SYDNEY.
Telephone 2321.
THE GOVERNMENT TOURIST BUREAU
is posted with all the latest details regarding each and every
Tourist District in New South Wales.
THE TROUT WATERS of the Monaro and Northern
Tablelands, and the Western Streams.
MOUNT KOSCIUSKO —How to combine a visit to
Australia’s Mountain Giant with ideal fishing in the
teeming Snowy, Thredbo, and Eucumbene. ,
KlANDRA—where the Norwegian sport of Ski-running
flourishes on snow-clad hills in winter.
THE WONDERFUL CAVERNS—JenoIan, Wombeyan,
Yarrangobilly. A fishing excursion may be enjoyed in
connexion with a visit to Jenolan or Yarrangobilly.
CAMBEWARRA MOUNTAIN—The beautiful sunken
valley scenery between Moss Vale and Nowra.
THE BLUE MOUNTAINS—Bright days and cool, health-
giving nights, amid the gum-clad gorges.
THE BEAUTIFUL MYALL LAKES—Fishing of all
kinds. The Lakes in season are black with duck, and
there is excellent shooting —pigeons, wallabies, kanga-
roos, and opossums.
Itineraries of travel prepared, and Illustrated Guide-books
and Maps supplied, for these and many other districts,
at the GOVERNMENT TOURIST BUREAU.
