

TRUE EYES
AND THE
WHIRLWIND
Randolph Bedford
LONDON
DUCKWORTH & CO.
3, HENRIETTA STREET, W.C.
1903




ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


TRUE EYES
AND THE WHIRLWIND
CHAPTER I
“ Run, you silly ! ”
The smaller boy had already run himself into a sobbing
exhaustion.
“ I can’t, Billy! I can’t. He’ll catch us.”
“He catch us—old Swanneck’s done now.”
“Sto—op, sto—o—op, you young ruffians.”
The thin aristocratic accents of the pursuer ended in a
high shriek, like the voice of a woman in the beginning of
an hysterical fit.
Shaw ran, but wildly, over the flat across the little
sluggish creek where the plantains grew, and up the slope
towards the railway; and as he ran he gasped his com-
plaint of Billy Pagan, who ran easily, still holding the
green peaches from Brellaw’s orchard. For this theft
Brellaw pursued them on his long weak legs, with his
long neck extended as if he would anticipate the arrival
of his body and catch the fugitives with his chin.
“ Your fault,” gasped Shaw. “ Didn’t I tell you not to
wait’n crack the nuts ? ”
“The peaches are only yeller mondays,” grunted Billy
in reply, labouring up the slope and talking better as he
climbed the railway fence. “The kernel’s the best part
of them.”


They mounted the fence ; and Billy stopped on the top
rail to sing “ Swanneck Brellaw ” in that boy chant of
derision which drives most men frantic ; and Brellaw pro-
truded his thin neck further and saw blood and murder as
he charged up the slope.
They left the fence as he approached it; ran up the em-
bankment and on to the permanent way.
Brellaw squeezed his thin body between the sheep-proof
lower panels. The boys ran off the permanent way and
mounted the opposite fence as a very long and very slow
goods train came between them and Brellaw. Pro-
tected by the train between them, they sat on the fence;
and each ate one of Brellaw’s green peaches before
Brellaw’s eyes.
“Better scoot,” said Shaw, “old Swanny’s jumpin’
mad.”
“My word,” replied Billy—many troubles had taught
him that there are limits to valour, and as the last dozen
trucks passed, they left the fence and were running
steadily over the paddocks. The short rest had made
them fresh again. Brellaw felt hot and queachy—he
shrieked something after them and gave up the chase.
Billy’s early memories were of the long crooked red road
perforated with bull-ant nests that ran from the school
to Karula ; the fringes of dusty gums at Josephson’s re-
verberating to the drumming of locusts ; the crescents and
circuits of the suburb itself; the 'streets that began no-
where and returned on themselves.
Billy Pagan’s father was born before his time, or, at least,
selected the wrong place to spend his time in. Australia,
thirty years ago, was not for the dreamer, not even for
the mental doer. The age of development was a useful
and a brutal one. A man looking for success had to
develop a greedy jaw and get him bowels of clay; to be
satisfied with the successive steps of municipal councillor,
mayor, and Justice of the Peace, and having arrived at
these questionable honours through the presidency of a


football club or the Lord High Topnotch Chair of the
Order of Rechabites, to cast them all away and speed to
a seat in Parliament. Thence to a portfolio in an evanes-
cent ministry, and through gutters of cabled flattery of the
Empire to a cheap and shoddy title.
But for the dreamer (or the half-dreamer) of the fifties
and the sixties —for the man who read the message this
new yet ancient country had for him, there was but poverty
and heartache. Billy Pagan’s father had yet too much
strength in him to lie where he fell, so he gave himself to
the ruling commercial spirit of the time ; to the making
of money as unwillingly as a girl who marries for
money gives herself to aged wealth, and loathes it when
it is too late. He never forgave himself for the com-
pulsory prostitution. He palliated it by splurges of reck-
lessness and exaggerated wassailing; and worked hard
and knowledgably, and missed opportunities; and all
the while his family increased until the numbers were in
the teens, and another fly-leaf had to be pasted in the
ridiculously large family Bible.
Billy’s mother was the antithesis of her husband—one of
that fierce, hard, staunch old Puritan school that gives
to its fortunate conceptions a large quality of fortitude.
Human affection was a fine thing, she thought, but the
demonstration of it an unnecessary frivolity; and so
the home was holy, and hard, and clean, and desperately
dull. With a great capacity for love, she daily sacrificed
the substance of love to the shadow of what appeared to
be duty; on the principle that the nastiest things are the
best for us. No greater lie was ever yet invented.
But, as usual, principles gave way to instincts whenever
even a trivial hurt came to one of the children, who were
to be reared in the stony way known as “the fear and
nurture of the Lord. ” When Lucy Bennett died of scarlet
fever, and many other lights of many homes followed
Lucy Bennett, her mother-love, outleaping the poles of her
Puritanical repression, made Mrs. Pagan clasp her children


to her, saying that neither man nor devil should trample
these in the dust. And since then they have all been
trampled one way or other.
Yet this daughter of four generations of parsons loved
her wild husband very tenderly. He was for all the
purposes of romance the seventh son of a seventh son,
all of them wild from the womb. He was very strong
and very reckless ; vain-glorious in his strength, so that
one day seeing a man struggling with an erect ladder
he took up ladder and man in his arms and put them
where they would be ; sensitive of ridicule as a child ;
an angel to lead, and a devil to drive —for all men have
their price, and his was a hand-clasp and a kind word.
He loved his wife like an errant tide—with the moon
phases ; and she loved him with all the steadfast fixity of
an antarctic star.
The wild animalism of the average Sydney youth (said
animalism being the result of three big meat meals a day,
and of much fresh air and horseplay in a playground
bounded by Cook’s River on one hand and the Pacific
Ocean on the other) filled her with horror. Fresh from
an English village which had been refined to attenuation
by losing its working classes by first losing its agriculture,
where the greatest excitement possible was a change of
curates, and the kissing of even an engaged couple was
reckoned as one of the seven deadly sins ; the despairing
recklessness that the atmosphere of convictdom gave to
Hobart terrified her. After the birth of her first child, and
every succeeding eighteen months saw a new head at the
breast, and the family had removed to Sydney, she felt
that all her surroundings were conspiring to lead her boys
astray, and she fought her surroundings accordingly.
Billy’s mother did her unavailing best to compass
the impossible ; to keep them, as she said, unspotted
from the world ; and at least she managed to defer the
spotting for long after the time her neighbours’ children
began to mottle their souls. But the repression and


the beatings that followed rebellion made the boys act
like moral cowards at times, and caused their one
murder.
Near Pagan’s house there lived a beet-red Irishman
named Clooney; a man who, not content with infest-
ing himself with goats, allowed his goat supply to
overflow into the highways. With their usual contra-
dictoriness the goats essayed to climb into the hedges
and eat roses and thorns, although deep lush grasses
grew on the footways and in the channels. And one
day, when Billy and Arthur were playing with the great
honest brown-eyed dog, two goats—a big smelling billy
with the wicked leer of an impotent old man, and an
impoverished nanny with her two kids—invaded the
Pagan hedge. The aged goats were Billy’s and Arthur’s
enemies, but the two kids were brand new, and the boys,
with the cheerful cruelty of youth, prodded them with
sticks.
“ All bleat and legs, aren’t they ? ” said Arthur.
“ See me prod Clooney in the eye.”
Billy called the goat by the name of his master, because
the goat was very ugly, even for a goat, and Billy didn’t
like Clooney.
“ Tell you what,” said Arthur. “ Let’s sool Brownie
on to them.”
Brownie was the big honest-eyed dog. He had been
doomed to months of chaining, so that Pagan senior
might mete out justice to the Clooneys and other neigh-
bours. Now as the boys fumbled with his collar’s brittle
tongue, Brownie became an ecstatic lunatic, kissing the
boys’ hands, licking their faces; a very joyous devil of a
dog. They loosed him ; and Arthur taking him by his
neck-hair led him to the wicket in the hedge, pointed
to the enemy, and said “Sool ’em.”
The honest eyes became aflame with hate and rage,
each hair from neck to tail bristled with fury, as Brownie
saw his foes, who, knowing the length of his chain,


had daily insulted him with approximated stinks. He
hurled himself upon the he-goat and bit, and then upon
the she-goat and bit; and they ran to the home of Clooney
bleating their terror so loudly that Mrs. Clooney came out
in time to see one kid dead, and the other in the bloody
jaws of the dog.
And then ‘ ‘ Oh, me kid ! Me poor little nanny-gote!
Ah the curse o’ Crummle be on ye, ye ravenin tiger ye
bloody, murderin’ lion. Oh ! ’tis the Pagans that will pay.
Oh ’tis them that do be too great for us poor folks. Oh,
’tis' the Pagans, the great scholars—’tis them that can
keep a dirty man-eatin’ crockeydile to ate up honest
people’s goats.”
The two boys, horror-stricken at the discovery of the
evidence against the dog, had retreated unperceived ; had
climbed their orchard fence ; and executing a flank move-
ment round Clooney’s house, came to the road again and
joined Mrs. Clooney. . , .
She explained to them the crime of Brownie ; but they
begged so for the dog that he might have escaped then
and died hereafter had not Pagan senior come from his
house, and had he not been in his judicial mood.
Pagan senior heard Mrs. Clooney, looked at the dead
kids and then at Brownie, whose gaze was full of entreaty
and remorse. . . ,
But there was no forgiveness in Pagan senior just then.
A neighbour—and that neighbour a woman who was now
wailing of her poverty, keening for the dead goat-meat,
and generally acting as if death alone would terminate her
sufferings—had been injured ; and he had to be just with
this conscientious wall-eyed justice that was peculiarly his
own. ,
“Billy,” said he, “that dog belongs to you and
Arthur.”
“Yes, father.”
“ Didn’t I say he had to be kept chained?
“ Yes, father.”


“ Who loosed him ? ”
« I don’t know, father.”
“ Do you know, Arthur ?
<<No, father.”
Their terror made the lie glib.
,iyou should know! You are responsible for him!
you know the big water-hole on the Marigold Paddock?”
“Yes, father.”
Red fear began to grip them.
“You will take the dog there, put half a clothes-line
round his neck, fasten a couple of bricks to him, and
drown him.”
Billy protested brokenly— Arthur burst into tears.
“No use crying,” said Pagan senior; “ the dog deserves
punishment, or whoever let him loose deserves it.”
That was enough. Arthur got the clothes-line Billy
out it round Brownie’s neck—each of the boys carried a
brick— they led the dog away. For the quarter of a mile
to the Marigold Paddock they went without seeing or heed-
ine anything. They were stunned —incapable of feeling.
The dog, led by the rope Billy carried, licked first Billy’s
hand and then the hand of Arthur. They never thought
of disobeying—they had learned their granite lesson well;
they had to carry out the law, but their two small souls
felt the injustice of it all; and the condemned seemed to
know, licking their hands with affection, with resignation,
and in token of farewell.
They arrived at the water-hole, a clay-coloured pool
in an old clay pit. They tied the bricks to the loose end
of the clothes-line; and the dog half-understood, and
whimpered and fawned on them. Arthur hid his face in
the dog’s coarse hair and cried himself sick Billy choked
with sobs, but his obedience to the law never faltered; he
made the bricks secure, pulled his brother away from
Brownie, and using all his strength, pushed the dog over
the clay cliff into deep water.
Twice the dog came up—first with a look of surprise


and reproach In his eyes and sounding a short sharp bark
of annoyance ; next with a bursting vision of terror, and
then down to his undeserved fate, leaving them in the sun-
light with a sky as blue as a deep sea above them, and at
their feet a chrome carpet of dwarf marigolds, and under
their hearts the impression of their first crime—the crime
that Arthur Pagan ever afterwards regarded as his greatest.
Had not the sense of obedience been strong on them
they would have followed the dog. The killing of Brownie
had been so undeserved and so swift that the sense of
their own murderous cowardice and its results blotted out
the sun for them ; and made them feel that this was Dead
Finish, the end of everything, and the time to say the
words, neither youth nor man should ever learn, the worst
words, “never again.” Arthur sobbed himself sick, and
sneezed and blinked, for his sobbing in the marigolds had
given his nose and eyes to the pollen.
Billy spoke first.
“ Time to get home—it’s sun-down.”
“Shall we tell? ” asked Arthur.
“ Tell! said his brother in great scorn; “ you might as
well be with Brownie as tell.” And then with much force
and bitterness he added, “Oh, that old cow—Mother
Clooney.”
“ But we let Brownie out,” said Arthur.
Billy’s eyes filled with tears again.
“ Poor old Brownie—didn’t he want a run—and what’s
a goat or two ! They’ve got millions of ’em—it’s that
old mother Clooney—she hated poor Brownie.”
“ Let’s say Andibalongty at her.”
But for once Billy received the suggestion without
enthusiasm—the curse seemed inadequate.
“ Poor old Brownie.”
Their tears flowed again, and they came to Jordans’
orchard, filled themselves with Jordans’ fruit undiscovered;
and as the eventide fell Billy cut a long, lithe quince
sucker—a switch, far-reaching and stinging. They left


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND g
the orchard, and in the haze that followed the red sunset
they crossed Clooney’s unfenced paddock. It had at one
time been fenced, but Clooney’s sons were very weary
youths, and when it came to the turn of any of them
to light the morning fire, two or three fence pickets dis-
appeared for kindling. When the youngest of them
had reached the age of sixteen, and the menial duties of
fuel-lighting returned to Mrs. Clooney, there was no more
fence for kindling, and the paddock had again become
portion of the wide world.
Billy beat the paddock with his quince rod until in the
sudden dusk he located Clooney’s pastoral possessions.
Then he went among them silently with the quince rod,
beat the goats on to the highway, and chased them into
the Marigold Paddock, where Brownie lay dead in
his clay-coloured ocean. Arthur ran with him, never
questioning this unplanned scheme of revenge. They
rushed the goats to the steepest brink of the clay-hole;
and the half-blind patriarchal he-goat (the boys called him
Clooney) found his instinct too late, wailed his anguish
in mid-air, and went to join Brownie. The others turned
on the edge of destruction, ran the gauntlet of the terrible
quince rod and the booting of Arthur, and so escaped.
But as the boys found afterwards to their great joy the
fatalities were three. Two nannies, heavy in kid, died of
the long pursuit, giving Mrs. Clooney the belief that the
ghost of Brownie had returned to spirit-ride them. The
boys threw themselves, panting, among the marigolds,
and watched the blink of Venus and the minute flash from
the lighthouse on South Head. Having rested, they made
for home, stopping before Clooney’s as the big red-hot
moon arose, and chanting gibberish curses to the pulsa-
tions of the evening star —feeling when the gibberish
was said that the deed was done, and the Clooney’s ex-
communicate and accurst.


CHAPTER II
Billy was nearly thirteen, and had grown to be a writer of
wonderful romances ; being driven to such work by the
dulness of home, wherein he was imprisoned from dark to
dawn, except on “ Band of Hope nights,” which came
once a fortnight. The manifest injustice of brother
Arthur’s inability to always win the prizes for recita-
tions caused the two conceited babes in time to shirk the
meetings; and their mother agreed, glad that they were no
longer to be exposed to even the excitement of a temper-
ance address.
But before this time had arrived Billy had been half-
awakened by a little brown girl, Laura Bell, who looked at
him piteously whenever he scowled at her, which he did to
hide his discomfort and liking of her presence.
She had admired him from the first meeting, when her
father told her to marshal all the children for the opening
hymn.
She came to Billy, saying, “ You big boy, you’re to sing
‘ When He Cometh ’ with the other children.”
He scowled at her, saying, with melodramatic pride,
“ I’m not a child! ”
She looked at him in a frightened way, but forced the
hymn-book into his hand, and returned to her father.
“When He cometh, when He cometh,
To make up His jewels,
All the pure ones, all the bright ones,
His loved and His own."
The children’s voices, very shrill and clear, rang to the
galvanised iron roof; and at the sounds, Billy’s conceited


heart melted, and he lost his scowl. Encouraged by this,
she looked at him and soon smiled ; and in self-defence,
the bashful youth put on his scowl again, and again made
j, er puzzled and afraid.
When he left the Band of Hope their little commerce
of smiles and self-conscious scowling seemed to be ended.
However, Laura’s father “moved” —as the children
st yj e it —and his new house being nearer to the Sunday
School Billy and his brothers and sisters attended than
her old Sunday School had been, she came to Billy’s
Sunday School.
Billy and Laura were in one class. He received her
with his old scowl to hide his real feelings.
But a moment later their teacher, who was also the
maker of alleged music on the harmonium, a man named
Musby (who during the week conducted a Wesleyan book
depbt, and had found that that particular calling had a
natural affinity for Sunday School teaching), left the class
after giving out the hymn, in order to correct an unruly
boy at the other end of the schoolroom —an untamable
youngster simply bursting with meat. In his absence
Billy, knowing that all girls like displays of bravery,
removed himself to the harmonium seat and played some
unforgetable discords. Musby, having cuffed the untam-
able carnivora at the other end of the room, returned,
shaking in his rage, to his class ; and struck Billy with
his fist, knocking the boy off the form. Billy picked him-
self up, snatched a stone ink-well from a desk and threw
it at Musby’s head ; but he was blinded with the shame of
the blow, and the ink-well shattered on the wall behind
Musby. The boy ran hatless out of the school, and
Musby seated himself at the harmonium and commenced
the hymn ; the children, shaken and frightened by the
scene, singing tremulously:
“ When mothers of Salem
Their children brought to Jesus.”


Outside, Billy put his face under the tap. He feared
a black eye and explanations. His handkerchief became
a sodden rag before he knew that anybody stood with
him. The voice of the little brown girl said, “Take
mine. He turned when refusing the proffered handker-
chief and walked away from the school and towards the
church. But he did not refuse rudely ; and he even ex-
plained, That that fool Musby couldn’t hurt him.”
He walked on, but he heard her footsteps behind him,
and when he turned again he saw that she was crying.
That almost broke his pride; but he was perverse, even as
a man is under such circumstances. He had to unbend
a little, although his shyness prevented him going all the
way ; and so he took four gingernuts from his pocket and
threw them on the gravel at her feet, saying :
“You can have these, I don’t like them; but don’t
cry.”
She picked up the favours as humbly as any man could
desire. She even ate half one, too clever to push her
advantage too quickly; and he watched her, and his shy-
ness (which formed most of the components of his pride)
melted as he watched.
And then she said, “ I won’t eat any more if you don’t
have one.”
She came closer—he met her half-way—took the ginger-
nut from the densely freckled hand, and ate it.
Then he looked this way and that way ; and, seeing
nothing but the graves and the big sandstone church, he
kissed the little brown girl.
Here was another chapter for the romance, for three
people had seen the kissing—Arthur, and the third sister,
Elizabeth, the lumbering, clean-skinned, and clean-eyed
girl, slow, kind-hearted and simple, peaceful as an amiable
heifer and steadfast as granite. Musby had also seen it—
and Arthur and Elizabeth knew he knew. Musby had
looked over the harmonium through an open window; and
the same window had given the brother and sister the two


knowledges. And knowing that Mushy knew; and feeling
instinctively that Mushy would never forget the harmonium
discords and the throwing of the ink - well, they were
afeard for their brother. They sang the last verse of
“ Suffer little children to come unto Me ” very hurriedly,
and unnoticing the fact that when little children did come
unto Mushy they suffered exceedingly ; and chafed at the
prolix superintendent’s delaying prayer. But at last they
w ere dismissed. Dismissed—some of them to a quiet
walk home in the Sunday calm over the paddocks, past
the cattle at Mingay’s Dairy, waiting for the Mingay girls
to return from Sunday School and do the milking, the milk
being afterwards delivered to the customers by the same
stout damsels; past the Catholic Church where brotherly
love was demonstrated by the Protestant children insulting
the Catholics and the Catholic youngsters giving fancy
insults in return. Or, escaping the vigilance of old
Clark the sexton, they stayed in the churchyard when he
shut the gates and ate the fruit that grew among the
graves.
Firstly, there was a great avenue of Morton Bay fig
trees which, as everybody knows, produce a fig the size
of a marble, which is good eating. The youngsters
gorged themselves on this fruit, the reserves of which
were like a widow’s cruse for lasting, as each tree bore
tons. Then in the dense grass that covered the thousands
of graves grew inexhaustible supplies of five-corners,
geebungs and lilli-pillies. Occasionally there was a fight
if a stranger attempted to pirate a grave which had
already been selected. At the lower end of the great
cemetery, which was situated mostly on a table-like hill, so
that the dairy cows grazing in the paddocks below might
get the benefit of the cemetery drainage, was a big shallow
water-hole —a sweet spot, generally used for drowning the
superfluous Australian dog. The children, undeterred by
the unaesthetic surroundings, gathered millions of black-
berries from the wild tangle bordering three sides of the


water-hole; and in the Presbyterian section of the cemetery
every third grave or so had a loquat tree in full bearing.
What relation loquats hold to grief is not apparent,
probably the idea of growing fruit trees on the graves
sprang from the Presbyterian desire to waste nothing,
not even a corpse.
Arthur and Elizabeth followed Billy and Laura, and the
little brown girl showed a great desire to run; but
Elizabeth took her by the hand, and the four turned away
from the churchyard and passed through the broken fence
panel the usual exit broken by design—into the dairy
paddocks. The two girls walked ahead.
“ I won’t tell,” said Elizabeth, squeezing the little
brown girl.
“ Did you see us ? ”
“ Yes, through the window.”
Laura’s face was very red.
“ And so did Mister Musby.”
Laura’s face was very white.
Behind them Arthur and Billy
“ We saw you.”
Billy repeated Laura’s blushing performance.
“ So did Musby.”
“ Did he, though ? ”
“ Yes, and he’s sure to tell father.”
He s sure not to. He’d have to tell about me throw-
ing the ink-well at him. ”
“ Well, that would make it worse for you.”
“ I know, but it ’ud make it worse for him too—he’d
have to say he hit me.”
“ We’d best get home slippy, anyhow.”
Elizabeth squeezed the little brown girl again, and again
promised not to tell; and the brothers and sister left
Laura and charged down the paddock slope at a gallop.
Laura and Billy did not bid each other good-bye, nor did
either even look in the other’s direction. Laura was now
the shy one; and Billy, being a man of action, had no thought


true eyes and THE WHIRLWIND is
for a mere girl in the presence of a new danger. Further-
more, he wanted to reach home quickly to write this new
and heroic chapter of the romance, with Mushy for a new
character ; lower, and beaten oftener by the hero, than
Dirty Bell, or Clooney of the goats.
“Slippy” as P ace was ‘ n the homeward run, they
found that Musby had reached there before them, having
come by road in one of the rattling buses which gave the
Sydney Road an atmosphere with dust for its principal
breathing element. In the great flamboyant garden of
the Pagans’, Musby’s chinless face looked even meaner
than it did at the harmonium.
“Billy,” said Pagan senior, “ you threw an ink-well at
Mr. Musby.”
“ Yes, father.”
“ Go to your room and take off your clothes.”
Oh ! horror ! he was to suffer the degradation of being
beaten bare. But he went without a word.
“And I’m very sorry, Mr. Musby, that a boy of mine
should have shown such disrespect,” said Billy’s father.
Elizabeth could not endure the apology.
“ Mr. Musby is a brute,” she said.
Her father paled with anger, and immediately declared
the punishment.
“Go to bed, Elizabeth,” he said.
The girl looked at the beauty of the daylight in the
garden, and went away sobbing.
And then Arthur spoke :
“ It wasn’t Billy’s fault he threw the ink-well.”
“Who asked you to speak? Silence, sir.”
But Arthur, ready to be slain once he had said his say,
went on, speaking very rapidly :
“ Billy threw the ink-well because Mr. Musby hit him in
the eye with his clenched fist.”
Musby quivered.
“You struck my son with your fist?” said Pagan
quietly.


faltered the' P ' ay ' < ' ‘ he har ™" i ™' «'• Pa?an,"
jadicia, 1 T'
Arthur applauding - siien.ly, a „d Efc “™ j“ d
ing j°y f u]ly f rom the windows of their bedrooms, and Mrs
Pagan, fng'htened and
little Mushy by the neck ,™ ’ b « man & ras P
would h ‘ m ' ““ hta “ h «
as Tde h aLT ”d “'r'’ T “ ,he *“ te
“A summo „ s to-morrow^'and u words :
as the father Paga " ehirged„m' * nek ”« his fe "
walk. cnarged wildly down the gravel
mad'nfss' St ° PPed - bU * he >«" the baresark
after tte CgL
as if he suspected an ambush
JtT.'Zg Z ht dO Had btf CW: he gaee with the
neighbour who had ever complained of Billy o^Arth"
appeared then. Brownie would have been ricUy „e„td
Wheres mother? Why doesn't she slop hta'u
whispered Elizabeth to Billy across the window's btir-
veiling* space. inter-
‘‘She’s downstairs, but she daren’t stop him now
nobody dare stop him now,” said Billy very reverently’
gl ° ned m h!S fathCr ’ S Stre^th -if had been hS
he should call for his hat, and go out looking for ffght'with
the other enemies of his sons. But Arthur put his hTnd
silently into his father’s, and his father stoopeS and kissed
Er” VTu y ' and ' by tbe father called out to Billy and
Elizabeth to come down, and that he would tell them of how


he found his first nugget at the Ophir rush (a four-weight
slug that hung- on his watch-chain); a story they never
tired of. So downstairs they came, glad that the pace
home had been so “ slippy ” that Musby had not had time
to tell the story of the kissing.


CHAPTER 111
But the story of that kissing, and of the others that fol-
lowed it, did not long remain untold. Billy read his fearful
romances to Laura, and kissed her when she had listened
well; and she listened to all the frothings of the young
egoist that she might be kissed.
Then Mrs. Barden—Mr. Pagan’s cousin, although
under duress the children called her “aunt”—saw the
child lovers talking, and put on her best clothes and sallied
out joyfully to “ put Mr. Pagan on his guard.” She hated
Billy, and for that regarded his every action with suspicion.
She had for the boy that causeless hatred which is the
bitterest of all. Love at first sight is rare—but hate at
first sight is common. She hated his energy—he did
everything with a loud enthusiasm, and played the steam-
hammer with her nerves.
So she sought her cousin that she might tell all the
terrible facts and be happy.
When on the Sunday following Billy and Arthur set off
with Elizabeth for Sunday School, the pockets of the
brothers were bulkier than usual as the romance had
grown to a great size by this time, and the boys halved the
manuscript and carried it next their hearts. On the way
Billy told them his intentions for the day. Elizabeth and
Arthur were to sit in their accustomed places in the
gallery —they were to particularly notice the numbers of
the hymns, the first and second lessons, and the text of
the sermon, so that if Billy were cross-examined as to his
knowledge of the service he might make ready answer.
But the plan partly fell through, as Musby convoyed


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
them from Sunday School to church, and although Laura
escaped, Billy was yarded by old Clark and pressed into
the gallery. If ever a boy sang miserable “ Hallelujahs ”
and “Hosannas” full of agony it was Billy that day.
Laura waiting at the “Dunbar ” and he not there! and the
precious manuscript (he had taken Arthur’s half also)
bulging his waistcoat buttons until he wished his romance
had not been so facile. Mrs. Pagan turned to look at him
from the Pagans’ grown-ups pew in the main aisle of the
church. With her were the elder daughters, the elder
sons, and, strange to say, Pagan the father accompanied
them. Rarely did Pagan the father come to church—to-
day he looked searchingly at the gallery, and sharply
at Billy, and turned away as if satisfied. It was at that
precise stage in the church service, which everybody
who knew that church twenty years ago knows as “ dog-
time,” that Billy made his escape.
Mrs. Barden’s great dog—or, rather, the one-time dog
of Mrs. Barden—had, Sunday after Sunday, for many
months appeared at the sound of the second hymn at
the door under the gallery and uttered his well-known
howl. The Bardens, much shocked at this irreverence in
the dog of a highly respectable family, corned him with
beatings; but with no other result than to make the dog
leave his home. From that time he had lived in question-
able ways; sleeping in the cemetery during the week (it
was the only place where he was not stoned), and
respecting neither age nor sex whenever he wanted a
fowl, which was always, poultry being his principal diet.
Either his joy of organ music or pride of his own voice
brought him every Sunday to howl at the hymns.
Stoning could not keep him away ; he even braved old
Clark’s terrible stick. Old Clark used to leave the
gallery as soon as the minister gave out the hymn and
station himself at the door under the gallery, making
sweeping circles with his stick at the dog, but rarely
getting in a blow.


How the children did enjoy the humour of it! Old Clark
was divided between his devout respect for the liturgy
and the necessity for silencing the ravening and profane
beast; so that he sang through his teeth clenched in
resolution :
“As pants the hart for cooling streams.
“When I can read my title clear
To mansions in the skies,”
and marked time for himself with the circling of the stick.
The dog was the one touch of humour to the children;
and in that stifling gallery close to the white stone of the
walls which doubled the temperature to the eye, the touch
of humour was required to save the weaker of them from
fainting. Some of the children even troubled to bring
meat for the dog on the Wednesdays, leaving it near his
unexplored lair in the blackberry-brake ; and as man’s
respectability protected the animal from violence during
the services, and as no one but the children he trusted ever
saw him after the service, he lived to a ripe old age. The
children also liked the dog because the minister had mis-
apprehensively mentioned the animal and his owner from
the pulpit, and the parson’s apology that followed to Mrs.
Barden had not wiped out the public complaint; for all
the children disliked Mrs. Barden, and did not scruple to
let her know it.
So soon as the minister gave out the hymn, and the air
began to be alive with the organ breath, and old Clark
doddered down the gallery stairs to the dog performance,
Billy slipped after him, went softly out of the church by
the little door in the bell-tower, which could not be seen by
any of the congregation, and ran off at his top speed to
the tryst at the “ Dunbar.”
The “Dunbar” was the trysting-place in those days,
and is still. It is an immense granite monument in
memory of the scores of people drowned in the wreck of
the Dunbar off South Head in ’57. Little had the man


who paid for it, or the gravers and the builders of it,
thought of its uses twenty years after its building—to be
warmed by the proximity of beauty and youth for ever ;
this great rock, in whose shade lovers kissed and quarrelled
and kissed again.
The little brown girl had waited anxiously for Billy; and
the sudden change in her face when he ran up glowing,
breathless, and bulky with the freight of the romance,
would have made an old heart young. That change to
light was adoration and humility and self-abandonment;
and left her unarmed, except that she had the shield of
Billy’s innocence.
"Hallo, Laur.”
" What yer late for, Billy ? ”
" Couldn’t get away from old Clark till dog-time, Laur.”
She laughed. " Isn’t he a good old dog ? ”
" My word, you do look pretty when you laugh, Laur,”
he said —and kissed her.
She returned his kiss fourfold, and he endured them,
and thought them rather tiresome.
"We’ll go to our grave, and I’ll read you the new
chapter, Laur.”
She went unquestioningly, although the manuscript read-
ing had always been a sufferance with her, and she listened
to oblige him. She thought that listening would make
him care more for her ; but, as a matter of fact, he didn’t
care much for anybody excepting Arthur and his mother,
although he admired his father to worshipping point; and
for the rest, he wanted only an audience.
They reached their roomy grave. It holds seven, and
its last tragedy had happened thirty years before, when,
according to the headstone, the father of the family had
breathed his last moment of mourning and joined his
dead. Next to it is the grave that Billy had at one time
pirated for geebungs. Now he held it in succession to the
boy who had regularly fought him for it—sturdy George
Green, who died under the hoofs of a runaway horse a


fortnight ago, and now had a grave really his own a
hundred paces off.
Laura sat on the kerb of their grave and collected five-
corners, while Billy climbed into their tree and filled his
hat with the last loquats. That done, they sat side by
side and fed each other; and the meal being finished, he
straightened out the manuscript and read. Laura had
not ears to hear, but she appeared to listen attentively,
which was enough for him ; although all the time her
eyes were turned adoringly on the boy, whose enthusiasm
flushed his fair skin to the hue of the lower edge of a rose-
leaf. So withdrawn was her eye from everything but
Billy, and so withdrawn was his every sense from every-
thing but his romance, that neither saw nor heard the
approach of Pagan the father. Billy continued reading :
“ ‘ Swear your oath/ said Red Matthew (Clooney.)
“ And Sneaker,’ (Musby) repeated it to the gang.
“ ‘We swear never to be without gun, sword, and pistol,
and if we do, may we be cursed in all our undertakings.
May we never again see the Blood-brothers, may we be
killed as cowards in battle with the police, and may we
die alone in a strange country if we ever betray the Blood-
brothers by sleeping unarmed.’
“At that moment our hero advanced from his hiding-
place.”
And at that moment Mr. Pagan advanced from his
hiding-place.
“ Get up, sir ! ” he said sternly.
Billy rose ; the enthusiasm had fled from his cheeks and
the blood also.
“ Who is this little girl ? "
Laura spoke for herself, but falteringly
“ My father is Mister Bell.”
“ I don’t know him, but I soon will. Give me that
rubbish, you."
Billy winced; it hurt him to have the manuscript referred
to as “ rubbish/’ but he gave it up.


U- father stowed the romance of the Blood-brothers in
. pocket, took Laura b, the band and Billy by
u Moulder, and marched them back to church.
‘Uora wai seat up .0 the gallery and Billy .0 llte Pagan
where he found the entire Pagan fam.ly, all of them
PC ous—-Elizabeth and Arthur looking as if in dreadful
f ation at the pulpit, but really trying to make their
Seaappear normal and to keep th.i, eye. off the
sc .. n 1 Theorgan thundered out the last hymn, and
Billy 11 who was passionately fond of music, forgot in the
sound the temporal wrath to come.


CHAPTER IV
“ Did it hurt much, Billy ? ”
“ Hurt! Oh ! Gripes ! ”
“ What’d he say ? ”
“ Only he was licking me for the deceit, and he said he
could understand a boy wanting to get out of the hot
gallery. ”
“ Didn’t he say anything about Laura? ”
“Not much—said a nice little girl like that would do
me more good than harm—but it was a sneak and a lie to
wag it from church, and I deserved a licking for making
the girl deceive her father. ”
“ Quince switch, was it? ”
“It wasn’t —it was my cane,” and Billy pointed to the
bullock sheath.
“ O-o-o-o-h! ” said Arthur. Even the sight of the
bullock sheath made him tingle.
“ With your clothes on ? ” he inquired by-and-by.
“No—bare,” and Billy groaned at the memory of the
shame. “ But it’s the last time.”
“ The last time —why, what are you going to do ? ”
“I’m going to run away.”
“And leave them all? You mustn’t do it, Billy—and
he’a a good father.”
“ 1 know he is—but he gave me too much this time, and
hs said the romance was rubbish, and he laughed at my


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 2 S
writings —he’s burned the manuscript.” So at last the
tears came from the eyes that were already hard.
“Burned the manuscript?” echoed Arthur, almost
breathless at the outrage.
“Yes, he burned it —and I’m beaten sick, and I’ll run
away to-night.” His mouth clicked as it closed.
“ And where’ll you go ? ”
“ Oh ! along the track,” replied Billy airily ; and then,
partly revengeful and all earnest:
“ And I’ll write that story again.”
Arthur began to cry.
“ Don’t be wet, you silly.”
“ You’re going to leave me, Billy.”
“ Look here, don’t tell anybody, and I’ll take you with
me.”
“ Oh, Billy, I couldn’t leave them all.”
“Well, I'm going to, anyway. If you don’t come, I’ll
go by myself.”
As usual, Billy won, and Arthur consented to abscond,
and asked when they were to go.
“We’re going to-night.”
“To-night! but ”
“ But—never mind but —I’ll make a swag, and we’ll
put bluey up and away.”
“ But we haven’t got a bluey.”
“There’s the blankets off my bed, silly—they’re white;
but they’ll soon get dirty on the track, and we can say
they’re blue.”
Arthur was silenced, and Billy started the building of
the swag. He spread the blankets on the floor—as any
old hand would have done —but the contents of the swag
had neither the simplicity nor the lightness of an old
hand’s, and the grievous weight of that swag was dis-
covered almost as soon as they had started on their
discoveries. Billy put in his old school clothes and
Arthur’s, and all the shirts and socks that Arthur could
take from the laundry without attracting attention ; then


followed their little gods— Robinson Crusoe, Grimm's Fairy
Tales, Abbott’s Life of Napoleon, Carlyle’s French Revolu-
tion, Charles Reade’s Foul Play, Jack Harkaway's School-
days, _ Hayward’s Rodney Ray, The Adventures of George
Barrington,' Pme Needles and Old Yarns, Geoffrey Hamlyn,
Little Dornt, Llarpur's Poems— practically the only book of
Australian verse then extant, the Bible, The Kangaroo
Hunters, by Bowman, and a Shakespeare for children,
with nearly all the wit, and absolutely all “ Falstaff,” left
out.
On top of the books they placed the bullock sheath of
bitter memory, a faded photograph representing their
mother with Arthur as a podgy infant on her lap and
Billy pictured only as a scowl and boots, the outline and
substance of his clothes having utterly disappeared.
Arthur’s nickel watch went in next, Billy explaining
that men on the track always carried their watches and
money in their swags, where, of course, they would be of
the most use. Next they packed the magnifying-glass
and their shanghais, which, as Billy said, “ would be useful
to kill birds if they ran short of tucker.”
Arthur appropriated the great billy-can and two of the
pannikins the family used when picnicking at the “ Under-
c iff and “Sans Souci.” He filled the billy-can with a
packet of tea and sugar ready mixed in about two propor-
tions of sugar to one of tea, with half a leg of mutton
(they had to break the bone with a boot, masking the
meat in a towel for the double purpose of keeping the
meat clean and muffling the noise of the bone-break), and
nearly a whole loaf of bread, which had to be pressed to a
ball before they could force the lid on the billy-can.
Then Arthur got two saddle-straps from the stable ;
half a bar of yellow soap (the very smell of it was cleanli-
ness) topped their belongings. Billy turned the edges of
the blanket, rolled the swag, strapped it, and tied their
towels to the straps to serve as a shoulder hold to carry
the swag by. J


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 27
Then he said all was ready, but added melodramatically
that they “ must wait for the night.”
Meantime they hid the swag under the bed and watched
the summer Sunday die in the garden, that gave back to
sun and sky greeting for greeting of colour and
challenge for challenge of flame.
As the short twilight began, their mother came upstairs ;
and Arthur being sent away, she took the unrepentant
boy in her arms and wept over him. That is to say, she
wept over his deceit, and she was more sorry for the
necessity of his thrashing than for his actual stripes. She
made mother-love to him until his stubborn heart became
water to her; and she knelt with him and prayed silently
for them both.
Then she kissed him and went downstairs, leaving a
great apple-tart, which she had brought him as a roborant
to his stomach, fondly hoping that her prayers had
been a roborant to his soul.
Billy’s heart was very soft just then; but he parcelled
the tart, and tied the parcel to the billy handle, and sat
down in the half-dusk to wait for the household’s bed-
time.
The big moon sailed on through its unruffled sea and
went ashore on the horizon ; and as the star-darkness
succeeded, the garden emptied the Pagan children into the
house, and they clattered up Billy’s especial flight of small
stairs to say “ good-night,” and clattered down again
and to bed. Then the father came up so quickly that
Arthur had scarcely time to hide, and Billy was hard
pressed for time to jump into bed —fully dressed as he was
—and pull the sheet and the glaring vermillion and white
Alhambra quilt up to his chin.
But Pagan senior was not in an observant mood a
regret as thorough as his rage at the deception and as
blind as his justice was his —and his bowels yearned for
the boy. He came to the bed and put his hand on his
son’s hot forehead and said, “ I am sorry I had to do it,


lad, and went away quickly, so that his sorrow might not
become visible.
The lights in the windows of the wing where the grown-
ups slept disappeared; the place become very quiet—the
only sounds the short howl of a wandering dog and
the sneezing of Clooney’s goats in their dis-fenced
domain.
Billy got out of the window and into the bougainvillea
growth, careless of the terrible thorns, sharp as shark’s
teeth and shaped like them; sprang at the pear tree
branch, touched it with the extremities of his fingers and
fell among the cabbages. The soft ground preserved
him, and he was up in a moment, telling Arthur to
throw the swag. Arthur did so with such good aim
that the awful package struck Billy on the chest and
temporarily flattened him again. Arthur lowered the
billy by a string, and then swung himself down
cautiously, wincing audibly as clothes and flesh gave
way to bougainvillea thorn.
The pannikins they fastened to their braces, as they
had no waist-belts ; Arthur took the billy, and the elder
boy with great trouble hoisted the swag on his back. It
distressed him a little by reason of its weight; but Billy
had an idea that anything he could lift he could carry,
and he started down the gravel walk with his burden.
Out in the highway they stopped a moment to say the
curse over Clooney and his goats, and then they made
the Stanmore Road and walked east—going to Ashfield
and the dawn.
At Summer Hill the residence of Mrs. Barden was in
their track, and Billy lowered his unconscionable swag
to the gravelled path and said, “ Have you been in
their kitchen, Arty ? ”
“Yes.”
“ What part of the house is it? ”
“ It’s in the middle—you go through the laundry to it.”
“Where’s the pantry ? ”


“ Next the kitchen-first the laundry, then the kitchen,
then the pantry.”
“ Put the billy down, then—we’ll go in.”
(< Oh no no! don’t do that that’s wrong it’s
stealing.”
I know, I know ! but she got me that beating, didn’t
she ? Didn’t she get me licked ? ”
“ Yes —but ——”
“ She got me licked, and we’re going to spoil the
enemy’s kitchen.
“Any dogs?”
Arthur laughed. He was quite satisfied by now of the
justice of the raid on Mrs. Barden.
“No dogs—not since the one that lives in the grave-
yard.”
“ Come on then.”
They opened the gate, walking on the grass of the lawn
to avoid the noise strong boots make on round gravel;
and when they reached the asphalt they took off their
boots and went on stockinged. They passed a window,
through which they saw the sickly gleam of a night-light.
“ Who’s in there, Art? ” inquired Billy.
“Uncle Barden! the old um-cha has her room next
door.”
“Don’t they sleep together? ” said Billy, giggling.
“ Not when he’s been boosing—she takes another room
then.”
K Poor old chap,” giggled Billy, whose sense of humour
was touched at the going astray of Barden, a self-
righteous ironmonger, with every fault of the teetotaler and
without the teetotaler’s distinctive virtue of abstinence,
“ What’s he done now ? ”
“ He had a bottle of beer all to himself last Friday
when she was out, and when she came back he was jolly,
and he tried to kiss her while the minister was there.”
Billy laughed aloud, but checked himself, and became
the business man again.


“ This is her window then ! Go quiet—she can see in
the dark and smell when she’s got a cold.”
They reached the laundry. Mrs. Barden’s faith in human
nature prompted her to bring the laundered articles in at
night, although her carelessness left the window open.
The boys climbed in, Billy sniffed ; the eye dimly made out
ghosts riding on pale clothes-horses—the air was full of
the Barden’s Friday washing.
“ Have you any matches, Art ? ”
“No, but I think they keep them on a shelf near the
copper. ”
Billy looked as directed, and found. He struck a match
—looked round at the clothes-horses and selected a pillow-
case.
“To put the spoil in,” he explained.
They lit matches to steer them past the chairs in the
kitchen ; they reached the pantry, and so quiet had they
been through all that each heard the other’s heart-beats.
There was a goodly store in the pantry—for was it not
Sunday night ?—and Billy put into the pillow-slip a roast
of beef—scarcely touched, but a little dry. Mrs. Barden
never allowed under-done meat on her table, as she thought
it might provoke her two sneaky boys to revolt; and the
Sunday meat was always cooked on Saturdays. But the
Sunday plum pudding which Billy now put into the pillow-
case was made and cooked on Sunday; as according to
Mrs. Barden—God rather likes Sabbath boiling, but draws
the line at a roast. A blanc-mange followed the pudding.
The boys knew it would squash and spoil some of the
meat, but they took it—for sheer wantonness, and to annoy
Mrs. Barden. Then they emptied the pickle jars into a
mustard tin, and put a packet of cocoa into the pillow-
case and left with the booty—while the Bardens slumbered
on.
Arthur had now the pillow-case as well as the billy-can
to carry, and as the excitement of the absconding and of
the burglary died the soreness of his beating returned to


Billy and the load seemed to be weightier than all the
mountains of Monaro. But they struggled gamely on till
Arthur’s nickel watch showed the midnight to be past and
Monday come. Then they lightened the load in the pillow-
slip by eating as much as they could, an olla-podrida of a
meal, pieces of beef, wedges of pudding, flakes of blanc-
mange, and pungent pickles that filled their eyes with
tears. At two o’clock they started again, by four they had
left Haslam’s Creek and its dead behind —and they were
weary as the dying by reason of walking the irregular
distances of the railway sleepers. But they held bravely
to it and as they approached Parramatta, the dawn-breeze
blew and the day-star beckoned. They camped on the out-
skirts of the old convict-time town, and Billy threw down his
cramping load. But the weariness had not drowned his
imagination; for as Arthur dropped, dog-tired, by the
swag, Billy, looking at the southern sky, acted a little of
the Napoleon he worshipped and fixed upon the lowest
pointer of the Cross.
“ My star,” he said.


CHAPTER V
It is a very honest weariness that sleeps long in the sun;
and the boys were early awake. Billy awoke to the sore-
ness of the beating and the joint weariness of the swag;
and as he re-rolled it he determined to leave most of the
books in somebody’s charge before they took to the road
again.
Having given up housekeeping, which they did by
re-making the swag and picking the grass seed off their
clothes—they went to the river, bathed, and re-dressed,
feeling the good clean youths they were, with neither care,
memory, nor regret for yesterday.
But as they breakfasted on the contents of the pillow-
case Arthur stopped, blushed, said “Oh, I forgot,” and
putting his hands to his face, said his prayer and his grace;
and Billy said “ Amen ” as if he were half ashamed of it.
Then much refreshed by this devotion to duty, they climbed
the fence of a great orangery and stole oranges ; and
when they had eaten their fill Billy hoisted his leaden swag
and they set off for the town.
In the town there was no work for them, so they sought
maritime adventure below the wharves. The paddle
steamer Warrigal lay tied up to a big gum, and her
captain, Thomas Tangey, loafed over the rail smoking.
Tangey was good-humour in whiskers —his face was so
hairy that only his eyes and a little strip of forehead were
left uncovered ; but what could be seen of him was so
mirthful that people said a clean shave wouldn’t disguise
him—anybody would know his eyes.
He removed his pipe as the boys approached him, Billy


having dropped the swag and grunted relief as the weight
left his shoulder.
“Good morning, Captain,” said Billy very gravely, and
Arthur echoed him.
“ Mornin’.”
“ Can we ship with you? ” inquired Billy, adopting the
formula of Rodney Ray and Jack Harkaway.
“ Ship with me ? What as ? ” and Tangey grinned,
“ Before the mast,” said Billy sheepishly. The formula
did not seem to work.
“ Before the mast? —ho-ho-ho-ho-ho ! ” Tangey laughed
thunderously. “ Before the mast! ” —and then, suddenly
serious as he saw that his joy had a cutting edge—“ Me
boy, this boat’s ports are King Street and Parramatta
wharf —fourteen-mile voyages, me lad. An’ then you
come here and want to ship before the mast on a little
side-wheeler with a tricky boiler.” He laughed thunder-
ously again.
“ It’s air right,” said Billy with great dignity. “If you
can’t ship us, that’s enough.”
“ Run away, aint yer ? ”
“ Yes,” replied Arthur. “ How d’ya know? ”
“ Sunday clothes on Monday, and that big cargo of
yourn.” He pointed to the swag.
“ It is very heavy,” assented Arthur.
“Can I drop it at Ryde, or anywhere down the river
for yer ? Which way ye’re goin’ ? ”
“ We don’t know —we’re looking for work.”
Tangey grinned again.
“Ye’ve got work, aint yer?” pointing again at the
swag.
Billy, who had been drawing puzzles in the dust with
his boot, answered the earlier question.
“ If we give you a lot of the books in the swag, would
you take ’em to Sydney and give ’em to a carrier to deliver
at Mr. Pagan’s ? ”
“ I would that,” replied Tangey, with great earnestness.


34 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
“Bring the lot aboard, an’ I’ll get you a billy o’ tea
while yer makin’ up the swag again.”
They accepted his offer gladly, and by the time they
had re-made the swag and re-packed the books Tangey
had the tea ready, and they drank. More —they ate ; ate
potato cake that was like the potato cake of home, so
that weariness and memory moved Arthur to tears.
“ Here—here—-take a pull at yourself,” said Tangey,
“there’s nothing to cry about. ’Minded ya of home, did
they ? Gord love me ! —so they do me. An’ plenty other
things ’mind me of home too.”
He had become suddenly grave. “D’ye know Hobar’
town ? ”
“Yes,” said Arthur promptly, stopping his tear-flow
and answering as if he were in the geography class.
“ Hobart, the capital of Tasmania, is situated on the
southern bank of the Derwent River. It ”
“Never min’ that. Do yer know the Huon jest out-
side Hobar’ town ? ”
“No.”
“ Well now, that’s a place.”
The humour of his eyes had changed to tenderness;
his little bit of bare cheek flushed like the Huon orchards
at the apple-riping.
“ Huon,” he repeated; “ Gord love me! that’s a place.
My old woman’s down at the Huon—that’s how ye got
pitater cake —she learned me to make ’em.”
“She must be very old,” said Billy, noting Tangey’s
great grizzled hairiness.
“ No, not so old, either. I’m forty, and she’s just about
sixty. An’ I left her twenty years ago.”
“ And haven’t you been back yet ? ”
»«No—y’see, it was this way. Me old man died, and the
old woman she went out washin’ —an’ me—l couldn’t get
anythin’ to do. I was a big lump of a cove at nineteen,
I promise yer. An’ so I leaves her a letter one day, an
says I’ll send her money as soon as I got work, but I


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 35
wouldn’t come home till I was me own man—without no
boss.”
“ And where did you go ? ” asked Arthur. The night
tramp had made him wondrous kind to runaways.
“ I went t’ Sydney. First work I got was fourteen
days in Darlin’hurst for stowin’ away.”
“In gaol?” Billy spoke this time, and his calm had
left him.
. “Yes, in gaol—where nearly all runagates gets some
time or other. ”
The boys felt an horrific trickling of ice-water on the
spine.
“Then I got deck-hand on a ’arbor ferry, an’ I sent
nearly all me gaunce to the ol’ woman. Well, you know
what mothers is. Money wasn’t any good to her. She
keeps on writing—' come home,’ an’ I keeps on sending
me stuff an’ stayin’ away. An’ I aint goin’ ’ome till I cops
me own boat—master an’ owner, ’an then I’ll take a trip
and bring her acrost.”
“ But supposing she dies before then?” suggested Billy.
“ Die ! Not much. An’ nobody dies till his work’s done. ”
They ate potato cake, and he went on smoking—the
word “ work ” had brought him to the consideration of
their case again. His pipe went out during his mental
struggle, and the boys had been gazing at him, spellbound
by his marvellous hairiness, for some minutes before he
returned to earth.
“I know where you can get a job.”
They sprang at him. But he waved them off with his
P*P«-
“No— not here, but at ’Omebush—at the sale-yards.
Weekly cattle an’ sheep market. Moreover, ye’re bound
to get a job ’elpin’ drive to the abbaters—it’s on’y for a
day, but yer might get somethin’ else.”
The boys were half wild with delight. Not only was
work promised, but romance also the chasing and
hurrying of scores of thousands of cattle. They did not


patch of scrub they came to, kicked the dog that tried to
follow him back to his position with the sheep, and went
away to start the bullocks.
With the help of the dogs, and after a dozen false
tries they got the flock started. Around them was a
great pandemonium which the boys scarcely noticed, so
busy were they in preventing the sheep making back to
the water; where in one watering paddock thousands of
cattle drank their last drink in anything like freedom,
and where the drovers, anxious to start on the road to the
abattoirs, hurried them away from the farewell stoup —
this stirrup cup of death.


CHAPTER VI
_ , hovs h ad a clear road for a mile, until two hundred
TB of maddened bullocks charged through them , and
S ° k was only saved from an irretrievable dismission
gregariousness of the sheep. Arthur was on
5 tft wTng of the flock when the bullocks made their
fee left wing si „ ht of the long dashing horns
of the beasts (descendants of the
f d f i h ncks of New South Wales, the progeny of Indian
Cape bulls, and with all the lunacy of the cross
taThemt fell on the nearest sheep, a tough, strong old
thtr and hung on while the wether went mad on his
an/carried the boy into the right wing of
passed, and the boys found a new
distraction —riding on one sheep until it knocked up tem-
then changing the steed. They were checked
This performance by Mat, who, lolling at ease in the
took his everlasting cigarette from his mouth and
stated that “the boss ’ud shift yous bloke’s ears if he
yer ridin’ ’em.” At that they took to their feet
* ain , and toiled along in the wake of the flock
rest of that day was a phantasmagoria to the
brothers Heat and dust and animal stench, and th
checking of the numberless little rushes of some more
than idiotic section of their charge, wearied the.r bod.es
and souls; but they kept going mechanically, at the
Xer pace and distance from the mob ahead so that no
theirs might boggle the system that brought
these moving miles of meat to the shambles.


At dusk they were three miles from the abattoirs, and
the column increased its pace. Encouraged by the hock-
biting of dogs, the shouts and whistles of the men and
the hair-raising strokes of the stock-whips, the bullocks
broke into something between a lope and a gallop, and
the sheep into a brisk trot. With intervals of this gait
and short walks, and the excitements that the changes
of pace produced, men and beasts forgot fatigue ; and
as the big moon arose at nine o’clock over the abat-
toirs and the bay where the shark herds come to eat the
offal, the last sheep of Billy’s and Arthur’s mob was
yarded. Spreading their blanket under the cart, the boys
slept brokenly. Mat had taken the horse out of the
shafts and led him to the stable ; but the leg-tied sheep
stayed in the cart all night, and detachments of the meat
column arrived until the dawn.
The Pagans’ drover arrived with his cattle shortly after
daybreak, having travelled slowly, and came to the cart,
He damned the eyes of the cigarette boy, lifted the bound
sheep to the ground, and cut their bonds. But the sheep
were too far gone to rise, and so were killed first of the
flock; because, as the drover said, “they might die on
their own.”
The boys and the drover had breakfast. The drover’s
morning meal consisted of two cups of equal parts each
of tea and rum, the heel of a cottage loaf, and several
wedges of shin of beef boiled to a brawn, or, as the
drover called it, “pottedded.”
To them came a monstrously fat man —the drover’s em-
ployer —very good humoured, very clever, book-ignorant,
and very rich. His hundred thousand pounds or so had
been secured by fattening and slaughtering stock, with an
occasional speculation in station property. Before he
became too fat to ride a horse, and when he was a
seventy-thousand-pound man, he had been his own
head drover from Homebush to the abattoirs. His
life had been a wild turmoil of meat and rum ; and his


• u A not left him with his poverty. He joined
l m tv?and the drover, and ate of the drover’s breakfast,
and drank J he dr °^ r been powerless to
Hi \ hUn h bit Half an hour before the dawn-or
alter h ‘ S b , eak ‘as the cattlemen call it-always found him
Spar r;w ke and impatient of his luxurious bed. Five
broad f pawning and he left the couch that was so soft
minutes y kener , and was dressed and away to
Mto
* e in the down. And so he usually break-
stirred dr °" S J d from his drover’s billy and quart pot,
Thome his wife and daughter had six-course meals
Tilt edged receptions-their principal trouble being
an d decoration . Whe n old Givens
“IL make money, his wife changed her habits as
began to make y was added to the pi le,
"nothin S.
man r . , this hospital and a hundred to that, so tong
?™bl£hUsnLr and have hint rushed by
“ l J ey h ut his wife objected to the anonymity of
■ for the balance of her days, for in thrs
lit of money giving he had his own way-wh.eh was
h TSfgW.t„;hT.g°» 'these hospitals,” she had
a -**A him “They don’t do you any good m sassmty.
Queen’s Statue Fund, an’ they’ll
: y dSy".LTmeo a „jd


be bought; and so many worms had been knighted lately,
that a knighthood would disgrace him.”
Tom Givens ate and drank as for two men, and then in-
quired what the boys were doing. The drover told him,
and Givens stated further that his docket clerks had left,
and the boys began to realise that they were actually
appointed at a pound a week each.
Givens brought them to his foreman and left them to
be initiated —the ceremony of initiation being crude and
forceful, and mostly consisting of a blow on the head with
a sheep’s paunch filled with abominations. But the hardi-
hood they had found indispensable for the maintenance of
a position in the front rank at school, where everybody
has to be either hammer or anvil—beater or beaten —
brought them even-tempered, and with a pretence of
smiling, through the brutal ordeal. And henceforth they
were enabled to treat new-comers in the same way—a
privilege not allowed to rust.


CHAPTER VII
The boys were favourites in an hour, and were happy
enough, as their adaptability rapidly made them callous to
the cruelty around them. Even the Kosher butcher—a
very unspeakable Jew— who slew his bullocks to the
accompaniment of long protracted agonies, liked Billy,
and allowed him often to use the rubber stamp and brand
the Kosher beef with Hebrew signs.
Over in the mutton-house ’Lijah was a never-ending
fascination to the brothers. His clay-coloured, livid face,
blotched In places by a mighty love of rum, lighted like an
exhalation' of gas as he carried the sheep and laid them
on their backs by the blood-drain. His ears lifted and
pointed like a dog’s as he sharpened his knife on the steel
that swivelled from his belt strap, sounding the tocsin
of death ; and his toothless mouth leaked joyously as he
lifted each doomed sheep in turn, drove the point of the
knife behind the ear and cut downward, making mutton
of the quaking animal in an instant. Tom Givens knew
’ Lijah’s love of blood-letting and never checked it, for the
blood-lust strengthened ’Lijah to do the work of two men.
’Lijah most enjoyed Fridays —the Bartholomew’s day of
swine. Every hour on Friday he stepped into the pig pen,
stunned a dozen pigs, and proceeded to throw cold water
over the swooned pork to prevent the blood sticking to
the hair and the skin, with the result that some unfortu-
nate pigs awoke before their throats were cut, and made
a squealing exit from the world.
Arthur tallied the sheep by their skins and their mutton,
and filled his time in handing gambrels to ’Lijah and his


44 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
satellites of battle, murder, and sudden death. Billy took
the weights of the quarters of beef, and regarded with a
jealous eye the heads and hoofs which were the perquisites
of himself and the foreman.
The constant succession of events —although his life at
the abattoirs was less than a month long —accentuated in
him the wonderful adaptability of his own land.
The long spells of hard work —when to fill a big order
for a freezer ship, the slaughtermen speared and pithed
and poleaxed throughout a bushranger’s watch in sum-
mer (a bushranger’s watch in summer is twenty-four
hours a day)—and Billy learned to stay awake indefinitely,
and to sleep like a log for twelve hours when the stress
had been combated and beaten—accentuated the great
Australian quality of resilience—the bending double of
the human bow, the flight at breaking strain and the
quick return to the normal. As the country is, so are the
men of it—capable of endurance to the verge of collapse,
and then recuperating almost immediately without effort.
Able, like children, to be well on Monday, dangerously ill
on Tuesday, and well again on Wednesday.
A five years’ drought sweeps through the Continent at
ten or eleven year intervals ; for scores of thousands of
square miles the country becomes a vast dust heap,
whose poverty evicts even the crows and the “ goannas ” ;
and just as it seems that the land has been condemned,
and that the death warrant is on the road, up comes the
brave south wind with his lungs full and his skin dripping
water, and down from the north sweeps the monsoon.
An inch of rain consolidates the dust; half an inch more
makes it mud, and although the drought-smitten cattle
and horses have dug up the grass roots, and all seeds
have apparently perished, yet, from God only knows
where, a sickly greenness springs. A few months after the
break-up of the drought, the dust heap is a meadow—a
garden —a great and gracious park ; and the store cattle,
which have been hurriedly trucked back from some infre-


ipn t natch untouched by drought, wallow in luxury and
the yellow fat spreads over their ribs and condemns them
of their duties, the sudden necessity for
• „ endurance and the succeeding death-hke sleep, made
fhpse adaptable brothers more adaptable ; made their re-
munerative ability more elastic ; gave them that resource-
fulness that the son of the rich man never has, and the
University man rarely. He who would be strong must
fiodit three rounds a day with first principles.
They had been nearly a month at the abattoirs when
Dead Finish first came to them, and in this way. Five
bullocks— no finer beef beasts were ever flayed—were in the
lane that led to the killing rooms, and three were driven
in and slaughtered without trouble. Then the last two
were goaded into the pen. A big roan, the finest of the
five came first. His beauty rippled under a coat of satin;
his ’ health was so perfect that no man could stir his
nerves • and as he was swift enough to be first of any mob,
dogs’ teeth had never rat-trapped on his hocks, whip had
never turned a hair upon his hide. His beef ended at the
neck at the knees, and at the thick flanks ; from which
last ’comes the dish that housewives know as “ silver
side ” There was no meat on his proud head, and from
knee to hoof, and from flank to heel, he was beauty and
swiftness. His horns and hoofs were lustrous—he was so
perfect that the drovers were sorry that his sex had been
taken from him by a blunderer. _ .
He entered the killing pen contentedly; his great pink
tongue licked his nostrils ; and then the horror of the
blood upon the floor seized him —the inexpressible fear
of the ruminant suddenly discovering that there is such
a thing as meat, and that the world is hungered.
On the staging above, the thin silent spearman nick-
named by the abattoirs the “Living Skeleton,” so thin
was he—circled round the pen, poising his spear for the
opportunity. The second bullock was uneasy, but not so


frightened as his perfect companion ; and the Nemesis
above gave his spear a short stabbing drive, and the
second bullock fell huddled upon himself—his spinal cord
severed—incapable of motion, but alive to some of the
pain that was to come. A great lucent tear rolled down
from the dark intclhg'cut eye.
Then the big roan became quite mad. He circled
swi t y roun the pen, so that the thin spearman cursed
im for not standing still to take the thrust. He broke
his horns against the bars behind which Billy watched the
struggle, gnawn by a great sorrow for the bullock. The
Living Skeleton” whispered a curse and stabbed—but
the spear just pricked the spine and furrowed the hair,
e ectnfymg the big roan. He lowered his head, and put
all the magnificence of his strength into a bundle; then he
threw himself on the door leading to the race—the door
that was really weak and only existed by the ignorance of
the bullocks—burst it from hasp and hinge, and stormed
into the race. The “ Living and the flayers
streamed after him, running along the planks on the fence-
footed theinalK * W “ h inSpirati “ br “ »«■
The bullock stopped at the gate at the end of the race,
glared, and flung the foam of terror from him; and
challenged the whole world. Both his horns were rooted
out-the horrible blood and his pet fear were in his
g !° SSy whlte of hss bell y had the dark brown
ot clotted blood on it.
f lll £, slid from the fence and opened the gate
that led to liberty. The big roan stopped, challenging;
bellowed his mingled misery and hope, and charged
through the gate, almost colliding with his preserver
as he ran. r
A howl of surprise and anger came from the men on the
fence ; some of them ran for horses to head the beast;
the others came at Billy threateningly, and the “Living
Skeleton menaced him with the spear. Their re-
proaches rained on the boy.


ii Silly cow —to let that beast out.”
<■ Won’t old Tom make you cop out for this ! ”
“ What yer do it for ? Are you off yer pannikin ? ”
“ Little fool! ”
“I’ll pith yer.”
“ This is Dead Finish for you ! ”
The foreman said nothing, but he struck shrewdly ; and
taking Billy by the hair led him into the slaughter-house,
paid him off, and kicked him into the gutter. Billy arose
blinded by pain and fear, and a man took his hand. The
man was Billy’s father.
The father led the son outside the abattoir gates and
returned to a fist argument with the foreman. When he
rejoined Billy his eye was beginning to blacken ; but the
foreman had to take a holiday—the holiday of a drover’s
dog.


CHAPTER VIII
Mr. Pagan hired a wagonette at Brickfield Hill, and the
father and the sons drove along the dusty Parramatta
Road, and the father sat with one arm around Arthur and
the other around Billy, and questioned them :
“ Barden’s house was broken into for food,” he said.
“ Did you do that? ”
“ Yes, father.”
Pagan smiled over their heads,
“ Why didn’t you provision from home ?
“ We did, father ; but we wanted to get even with Mrs.
Barden.”
Pagan smiled, but more gravely—he had been getting
even with the world all his life, and sometimes the getting
even had hurt him.
“The man who struck you,” he said to Billy, “said
something about a bullock having escaped.”
“ I saw the poor thing nearly mad, and I opened the
gate of the race and let it out. ”
The father’s heart leaped.
“ How did you find us out? ” asked Billy.
“We got the books from the carrier a fortnight ago,
but we didn’t find Tangey till yesterday, and he told us to
try Homebush first and then the abattoirs. ”
“ And how’s mother and all, dad ? ”
They were very quiet as their father told them of the
four weeks she had passed in black despair while they
were being intoxicated with newness—despair all the
blacker because for the first time her mother-love and


j, e r conventionalism had both been wounded by the one
arrow.
But they began to talk of their adventures—talking
together, chasing each other’s words home to all the
meaning ; interrupting and supplementing—babbling, but
coherently.
They talked on of things they thought they had for-
gotten ; incidents of the long night walk and of the droving
to the abattoirs, and also of the cruelty of the Kosher
butcher; and generally they wove such a gossamer of
romance about their golden month of independence, that
the father, who was as hungry a romance-seeker and as
simple a boy as either of them when his judicial mood
was off duty, felt that he should have been the third of
the party, although he felt the foolishness of the wish at
the same moment.
Terrible surprises awaited Billy. The road channel was
no longer a roaring river but a trickling gutter ; the
street-corner post which he had used to leap was no more
the great ship’s mast it had appeared aforetime ; the boy’s
eye, which had found itself and its sense of proportion
during the great month, now saw that that post was
but four feet high. And although the garden blazed as
of old, everything looked smaller; and Billy wondered how
he could have hurt himself by jumping from the window
on the night of the absconding.
Arthur did not see any difference, because he was yet too
young to think, and lived by instinct.
The mother received them in silence —kissed them, cried
over them, and felt jealous that they were not dirtier, and
did not seem much the worse for being out of mother-
care for a season ; for their rough shirts were clean, and
Arthur’s clothes stains, the record of his fall in the blood-
drain, were palpably the result of an accident. Elizabeth
and the other brothers and sisters heard the story of the
month a dozen times—the comedy of the Barden pantry,
the drama of the swag, and the epic of the abattoirs.


5 o TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
In two days Arthur was a child again ; bur y i “' l !? as
old his pen-knives and his Mexican spur, which he had
given to Swags at the time of absconding an w_nc e
had demanded from Swags on his return ; and sW g
many tears when all the digging he was capable of failed
Z disclose the caches. But Billy was a boy no longer-
the sweetness of earned bread had spoiled his stomach
for any other kind of victual; and so he begged that
he should not be sent to school again ; and the father
and mother agreed as they had a new and great ixspect
for him. Then his father found a billet for him with Pape
and Slowgrove, the solicitors. He was to be a superior
kind of office boy, licking the stamps, posti. the lett ,
filling the ink-bottles, acting as comptroller of t he P«*ty
cash and studying to matriculate. He was to be paid five
shillings a week, and after he had matriculated, Pape
and Slowgrove were to article him.
Billy entered on his new duties with the zest he broug
to everything, walking his six miles to the
morning and his six again home at night He was taken
in hand by the conveyancing clerk, Stephens,
man, whose drawn face had registered and whoSe p J
eyes had looked on his own pain from birth, and told you
he was crippled before you saw his weak legs or * etOU S
crutches that stumped him through his little world. B y
mastered his duties of stamp licking and ink supp y
quickly that Stephens promoted him to copying an inden-
ture, addressed to whomever it might concern, made
between Alfred Tremayne of the one part and the
Commercial Banking Company of Sydney of the other
part, and witnessing that the said Alfred Tremayne and
his heirs, and executors, administrators and assig
hereby conveyed all that piece or parcel of land mentioned
in the^schedule hereto, and all its messuages, tenements
hereditaments, and appurtenances. Billy copied thl "
all the energy and thoroughness born of his pride of the
trust; but he lost all his interest when the same stock


• denture was handed to him for copying over and over
* ea in and when he found that the whole clientele of Pape
and Slowgrove did not depend on him.
Then he discovered the Government Free Library, and
almost lived in it, or in its books ; eating voraciously and
indiscriminately travel, romance, fiction, and history, which
last is mostly plain lies. Many books he brought to the
office and read between the copying and the licking of
Stamps ; but there were heavenly books not in the lending
branch of the library, and these he used in the reading-
room, while waiting for the stamp office to impress stamps
on some deed or other. He ate his lunch while he read,
rarely knew what he was eating, and left the mystery to
be solved by his stomach.
His sex-innocence was rudely strained when one morn-
ing Mr. Slowgrove came to the office unusually late.
This lateness was more conspicuous from the fact that
the day was Saturday—a short day. His face glowed
like the setting sun that goes before a windy dawn; his
hands were nervous and in constant indecisive motion.
He wrote a telegram, gave it to the boy, and with it the
money, and five shillings extra for himself.
Billy took the wire and read it, as he always did :
“ Florence safely delivered of a son.”
Mystery of mysteries 1 Great Chinese puzzle ! Laby-
rinth of words ! Maze of senselessness !
“ Florence safely delivered of a son.”
“ Deliver—to give forth, discharge, liberate, pronounce,
utter,” that is what Billy’s memory said the dictionary
says.
“ Florence safely delivered of a son.”
He stood on the post office steps and racked his
memory; deaf to the roar of the city traffic around him.
Why, the Litany said somewhere (he could almost hear
old Clark droning the responses as he thought of the
Litany) “all women labouring of child.” But that had


nothing to do with delivery. It only meant poor widows
working for their children.
“ Florence safely delivered of a son.”
The unknown phrase tormented his curious mind. He
went through the rest of the day with the words beating
him, and on the long walk home they set themselves to
the measure of his steps. It left his mind uncertain of
everything —the only surety was the shillings, and Billy
hoped that Florence would be delivered of a son every
week on the same terms.
On reaching home he gave the five shillings to his
mother, as he gave all his earnings, for he liked to feel he
was a bread-winner —a protector of the house ; and his
mother accepted his money, because she knew that money
spoils youth and makes it old before its time.
Aunt Barden had tea with them. Her converse was
refrigerating. She spoke of the sewing meeting, of the
plantigrade parson, of the enormities committed by that
spasmodic man of Belial—Barden. Mrs. Pagan, in reply,
wondered audibly, with all the unreasoning hatred of
alcohol of the abstainer who never knew grog and its joys
and sorrows, how anybody “could touch the vile stuff.
Pagan the father laughed, left the table, and strolled out
to the garden.
Then Billy, bursting with the mysterious telegram,
said:
“ Mrs. Slowgrove has been safely delivered of a son.
What’s ‘ safely delivered of a son ’ mean, mother? ”
His mother stammered in her cruel embarrassment.
Mrs. Barden replied that Billy would come to a bad end,
which Billy thought was no reply at all.
By this time Mrs. Pagan had recovered sufficiently to
say that to deliver meant to liberate, and that Mrs. Slow-
grove’s son had been liberated from an illness. Seven
pairs of young ears gathered around the table listened
with every fibre to this halting explanation ; but they all
accepted it because they had never known their mother to


tl lie Billy accepted it absolutely, but he henceforth
v. Ida very poor opinion of Mr. Slowgrove’s literary
h lities • for the telegram should have said “ Florence’s
* has * been delivered from his illness,” or even “our
*on has recovered.” Why did a man telegraph hyper-
bolical sentences at great expense ?
Elizabeth came to him as he walked under the trees.
« How old is Mrs. Slowgrove’s little boy ? ” she Inquired.
«I don’t know,” answered Billy. “ I never knew they
had a little boy until I saw this telegram.
Elizabeth puckered her forehead and looked very wise.
“Then it’s a new baby,” she said ; “ a new baby.
“The doctor finds babies under tabbage leafs,” said
Steve, nodding his head sagely. Steve was five years
old and his utterances were exceedingly cocksure.
“ I was found in a pumpkin flower,” asserted Swags, a
very stentorous boy of seven.
a Qooney must a jumped out of a wattle bean. This
from Arthur.,
The chorus swelled.
“ And ole mother Barden out of the bougainvillea,
because she’s full of prickles. ” Thus Billy.
“And Musby out of a castor-oil tree.” That from
Elizabeth.
Billy took a book from his pocket. He had exhausted
the possibilities of that conversation, and a minute later
he was galloping with Porthos and D’Artagnan.
He was startled back to the nineteenth century by a
little shriek of joy from Elizabeth, and turned to see her
rushing to the gate to admit Laura Bell, who had become
a Pagan visitor during Billy’s month of freedom,
He said “ Hullo, Laura ” with some of his old breeziness
and also a new indifference, and held a few minutes
conversation with her, giving her monosyllabic answers
to her breathless questions as to his experiences ; but he
had no romance to read now, and therefore required no
audience.


So in a little while he moved away from her, leaving
her to talk with Elizabeth. Then Laura closed the only
chapter of romance her life had ever known, or was to
know, and Billy went back to D’Artagnan.
Under the spell of his voluntary study he began to live
almost entirely for books, so that he read in the streets,
and once posted a dozen letters unstamped. He forgot
to enter postages in his petty cash account, so that his
wages were often brought down to vanishing point in
providing for the deficit. Old Stephens preached a lecture
to him, taking the beauties of punctuality and the busi-
ness virtues as a text; but although Billy always promised
an amendment, a book seduced him ten minutes after the
promise had been given.
Pape and Slowgrove recognised this unfitness for routine,
and decided that next time the office boy tripped he should
fall. The office where impressed stamps were affixed to
deeds closed at three o’clock, and shortly after lunch one
day Stephens handed the boy two deeds, and told him that
he must return them stamped by half-past three.
Billy took the deeds to the stamp office, and the stamp-
ing officer told him to return at ten minutes to three.
He had half an hour to spare, and decided to spend it
in the library. The attendant gave him the book he
asked for, a bulky tome entitled The Romance of Explor-
ation, and Billy ate that book word by word. He did not
touch earth again until the attendant cleared the library
at closing time; and Billy then discovered, to his great
horror, that six o’clock had come, when by all the rules of
time-measurement the clock should have registered a
quarter to three.
The office was closed, of course, when he reached it;
but he tramped out to old Stephen’s house at Waverley,
and was received so warmly by the conveyancing clerk
that he decided not to visit Pape and Slowgrove’s
again.
By the time he reached home he had walked twenty


iles for the day, and weariness subjugated his anxiety
m n ext day. But there was no need for anxiety.
Luck is a force (the Ephesians raised an altar to Luck,
callin 0 ’ it “ the Unknown God ”), and by noon next day
he was at work at a man’s wage as entering clerk in a
wholesale soft goods house. He was not fifteen, but
looked nineteen, and said he was so.
When, a week later, he casually broke the news of his
change of occupation, they were all surprised, but said
nothing. His mother thought now it was not possible to
make him walk in any way but his own.
Out of his working hours he read as much as ever
with a book in hand in a crowded street blundering into
the pedestrians, and finding the pavements a moving
Birramwood of lamp posts. .....
Ail his reading made him weary of life in limits ; and
the inevitable happened one day in September, when
the peculiarly soft and short-lived spring raged in his
veins, and hrs blood was full of trumpet calls.
He asked for a day’s holiday, and went to Manly
Beath and the flower show, and returned on a steamer so
loaded with native roses that it became a great bouquet
afloat; and he felt a new loathing for the entering room,
and the invoices, and the Himalayas of drapery, and
determined to leave all the sordidness of fixed hours and
seek the new in that “ bush ” which his father’s old mates
used to speak of so caressingly.
His luck cleared the track for him again. The Govern-
ment offered by advertisement free railway passes to
rabbit trappers, and Billy applied, and was granted a pass.
He drew his salary from the soft goods people for the last
time; and sent almost all of it in a letter to his mother,
aying that he must go away or die; and next dusk the
south-west express snatched him out of Redfern station,
past the winking suburbs and over the mountains to the
big salt bush plains.


CHAPTER IX
Meanwhile Mrs. Pagan had received the
evening delivery, and endured something like hear -break
but not quite that, for she knew that nearly all Billy s
available capital was represented by the money ° r ’
and her blood ran quicker, and her tears became swee as
she recognised his absence of meanness, his ignorance of
fear of the world that made him burn his boats, and his
resourceful daring. , ,
But her husband was strangely grave as he read the
letter. “It is no good bringing him back, he su ,
“he’d only go away again, and we want him
kindly of us always. He has no money, but his phenom-
enal luck is better than money.”
During all that day the south-western express, vith
Billy wedged in one of its second-class compartmeits,
trotted along its twenty miles an hour, throug t e ear y
morning, the fiery mid-day, and the dull molten afternoon,
over changeless plains that, look when you would, show
one tree to the north and east and an unbroken sea c
salt bush to the south and west. Billy looked out of the
window for an hour, and the tree went with the tram; and
then he slept for an hour, and although the tram travelled
while he slept, when he awoke again there was the samt
salt-bush plain and, apparently, the same solitary tree.
He had found a friend in the carriage a young woman,
who looked old, so worn was she by child-bearing anc
child-illness. Her baby nuzzled her flaccid breast with a
small pathetic mouth, set in a lined, blue-veined face
stamped with suffering. As she talked, and told Billy all


. herself and her miseries, the child sucked tor a
ment dropped the nipple for a moment to wail, and
Sen for'a moment fastened on the dug again.
Rillv listened intently, and purred sympathy occasionally.
' ofwas the only good listener the woman had ever known ;
and she forgot his sex and his youth, and became more
C °T^ C train drew up at Warandera late in the afternoon,
a the trouble-worn mother and her sick baby gasped
f” air as they lost the faint breeze the travelling of the
tSin had brought to them from the molten day.
Billy helped her with her parcels to the swaying coach
• the station yard, and held her baby while she climbed into
vehicle. She shook hands with him, and then, made
water-weak by his sympathy, she kissed him ere he could
prevent her, and “ God blessed ” him ; and Billy, feeling
water-weak himself, watched the great six-horsed Cobb
swing out of the station yard into the pepper-tree planta-
tions of the kind which grow in every town of the Rivenna.
Then he boarded the train again ; and sundown set him
down at Darlimurla, with five shillings in his pocket for
capital and a swag for furniture.
He left his swag at the “Drovers Rest while he
went into the town to buy tucker. Then he secured the
swag again, boiled his billy by the Murrimbidgee and ate
his beef and bread as the stars came out to look at their
reflections in the river; smoked a pipe, spread his blankets,
and slept.
Early next morning saw him bound for an out-station a
hundred miles off, where a friendly police-trooper had told
him there were big prices for scalps, and a man could
easily make a pound a day. “ Plenty of rabbits round
here,” said the policeman ; “ you can get on at Mungadal
or Eli Elwah or Barrabogie or Illillawa —but it’s too near
the town, and all the Speewaas go there—so they don’t
pay much for scalps. You can make wages here, but out
Kilfera way you can make a cheque.


And as Billy wanted to make a “cheque,” and as he also
wanted to go further than any man had ever been before,
he left Burrabogie to the Speewaas and took the track
towards Kilfera. In three days he reached the rabbiters’
main camp, and next day made his beginning at the futile
work of extermination. The station gave him a camp and
debited him with the cost, and he found a mate in an old
rabbiter. In a week there were a goodly number of scalps
to credit, and Billy thought he knew as much as an old hand.
Billy and his old mate did well, and the cheque grew,
although they never reached the financial heights of the
great trappers who made their fifteen hundred pounds to
two thousand pounds a year out of scalping ; who, after
two months of trapping, drove their four-horsed buggies
into one of the river towns, and owned those towns, from
the pepper trees in the streets to the frowsy barmaid in
the saloon.
The trappers were not trapping to exterminate, but to
make money. Many killed on one part of the run and bred
the rabbits in the other. Where the border stations killed
off the rabbits up to the great rabbit-proof fence of wire-
netting that runs along the border of New South Wales and
Queensland, the trappers threw live rabbits in from the
infested side of the fence to keep the game going.
Billy had attacked the vermin with all his accustomed
energy, for which his mate took occasion to lecture him.
“ Never kill a doe,” said the mate. “ You’re gettin’ one
scalp an’ losin’ fifty.” Later he told of a job he had put
up on a new chum squatter just from England, who having
paid him for three hundred scalps, told him to take the
stinking things away and bury them.
“ And did you bury them ? ” asked Billy.
“Did I bury ’em? Not much! I rung in them three
hundred scalps on ’im four times before he tumbled to me
graft.”
“ What did he do to you ? ”
“ Give me me choice of a month in the logs at


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 59
Wilcannia, or five rounds with his sooper. I took the
cooper on, an’ he belted ’ell outer me.”
Billy, being at this time very impressionable and very
soft-hearted, liked everything and everybody, and was
much attached to his mate by the mere force of habit; but
be would not discriminate in his catches as the old man
had ordered him to do, and one day there was great
trouble in their camp. The old man found among the
dead rabbits a dozen does, and grumbled.
“Didn’t I tell yer that a doe in the burrer is twenty
rabbys to come? ”
“ Yes, you did.”
“ Well, why don’t yer take notis ? ”
“ I’m here to wipe out rabbits, not to breed ’em,” said
Billy sulkily.
“S’truth,” gasped the old man, “are ye learnin’ me?
11l give you a clip under the ear,” and he shook the stick
he used to kill the rabbits caught in the traps,
“ You’re not the bit of stuff,” replied Billy in the ver-
nacular of the camp, shaking his stick also.
There is a streak of madness in all men who live long
the lonely life of the bush, and the streak dominated the
old trapper just then. He struck, and the youth dodged,
taking the blow on his loins—then Billy struck him know-
ledgably on the shins, and the old man sat down
hurriedly, yelling his agony in insults of the assaulter.
Billy ran for the station homestead, the old man screaming
after him; “You mailman to a nigger. Oh! oh 1 you
combo! You dorg’s bootmaker 1 Your sister’s a gin—
you ”
The distance and the rapid run shut off the curses as it
the old man had been dumbed suddenly. At the station
Billy drew his cheque, gave the cook ten shillings to bring
his swag from the camp, and by sundown was clear of the
station horse paddocks. He walked most of the night,
for that monkey look of rage on the old rabbiter s face
had given him a lasting fright, and Billy wished to put
distance between them.


CHAPTER X
He found on facing the world—which in his present out-
look consisted of dusty plain with the sand blown round
the hummocky salt bush; and the clay-coloured river, that
his capital amounted to thirty-four pounds, and that he
owed no man a penny.
He met a dozen men that day, but only one went his
road and spake at length to him. The others muttered
sullenly, “ Day ”or Hornin’,” and passed on, each man a
little ship on this great lonely ocean of salt bush ; a little
ship that carried no lights, that had no port of registry,
and no papers, and that spoke none during the voyage.
The man who went his way was singularly communica-
tive. He told Billy his name was George Cripps ;he had
been a hut-keeper and shepherd on God’s End for thirteen
years. God’s End, he explained, was the back station of
Restdown. He had drawn a big cheque and sent most of it
to his sister. Hadn’t seen her for twenty-five years —she
must be an old woman by now, though when he saw her
last she was the prettiest bit of skin in Bathurst. He had
kept fifteen pounds to tear up, and when that was gone he
wasn’t going to work—he’d have a holiday.
“ How? ” said Billy.
Cripps looked at him with a fine scorn in his eye.
“ How? W’y by goin’ round the stations, just enough
walkin’ to keep a man ’elthy —’bout twelve mile a day—
makin’ a station every night an’ livin’ like a toff.”
Billy regarded Cripps more closely. He was a tall
thin man with a nose like the beak of a cockatoo;
clay-coloured, sunken cheeks, an eye that spoke of some-


. e akin to insanity, and long yellow hands, dirt-
and callous as horse-hoofs.
ba H e en t oW many tales as they pushed on through the salt
h ver gum-fringed creek beds—-almost dry, but for the
"ot exudations of salt in the courses , and Billy let him
£lk and thought how fine this life was, and what a
’ nns butterfly of a world. There was uniformity of
g kv g and air and plain to satiate; there was salt-bush
• millions each a twin brother to each ; there was silence
m nressive to an old heart filled with memories, but
to the young heart that belongs to romance.
Tnd over all there was a charm too subtle for Billy to
define, but understandable enough for him to feel
There was granite sand that their boots disturbed to
o sound like the walking of a woman m silk ; quart-
zite and iron slugs that rang metallically to the assault
of their heel-plates, and dust so fine that it kicked up in
their tracks and before them, and made a ladder to the sun.
A long series of rises, so far away that they looked m this
flat and pulseless plain like mountains, took their blue up
to the golden vapour of the sky-rim. The great ex-
panse of burned and sun-bitten herbage around them,
so seemingly incapable to the new chum of feeding a sheep
to the acre, held vast quantities of life. Great
numbers of kangaroo started up from resting-places as
Billy and his new mate came to their feeding grounds ;
turkeys fat and heavy, and pencilled with delicate feathers
of silver, ran through the tussocks to get a flying way on;
Billy’s old friend the rabbit was as plentiful as salt bush;
and once a flock of emus burst from a mulga belt and ran
off at locomotive speed towards the heart of the sun.
Billy gazed on all these things, and found a heart-leap and
a pulse-spur where few men suspected them; and old
Cripps talked, and talked, and talked.
By-and-by they came to a common phenomena of the
salt-bush country. Millions on millions of great black,
green, and yellow caterpillars swarmed around the salt-


bush hillocks, eating the country bare ; millions more
wriggled in enormous lines, attached head to tail, all
of them, and moving like one caterpillar. They had been
there gorging for two days ; they lay in all attitudes of
pulpy bloat ; the feet of the travellers squashed them in
thousands. Billy regarded them first with a pleased curi-
osity, then with annoyance that vermin should destroy
good feed ; but they looked very beautiful, framed by the
sap-green salt bush with the chocolate earth for back-
ground, and the wondrous sun lighting the banquet for
them ; these ephemera, to whom an hour is more than
the procession of the equinoxes is to man.
He spoke to Cripps. “ They’ll eat the country bare.”
The clay-faced man negatively wagged his rudimentary
beard and pointed dead ahead where a new wind was
doing its dervish dance on the plain.
“ A willy-willy,” said Cripps, “ over In the nor’-west —I
was pearlin’ there wunst —they calls ’em cock-eyed bobs.”
“ Well, what of it? ” inquired Billy.
“ ’Course, you don’t know. Them there willy-willys,
they get bigger an’ bigger until they starts to blow from
all around the compass, and then they’ll just tear all this
soft tripe into fluff in two two’s. Day after t’morrer there
won’t be a caterpillar for fifty miles.”
They made the seventeen-mile creek by two o’clock, and
after dinner started for their eleven-mile stage to the dam
at the twenty-eight mile. That dam is called by most
travellers the Zuyder Zee, because a Dutchman took the
contract for sinking it at an impossible price, and covered
up his loss by drowning himself in the dam. In the after-
noon stage the clay-faced man talked little except to
grumble at Billy’s speed, which was commensurate with
his desire to see something new, and to see as much of the
something new by daylight as would give sufficient
material for the night thoughts.
But, thanks to the speed, they made the tank and the
tank-watcher’s hut, before dusk, and found there the


who pro™* » »" old friend of the clay.
man welcomed them quietly, fed then with
.lasting lamb chop from the eternal frying-pan,
e them a great bucket of post-and-rail tea, and pressed
fhem to stay a night or two
But the clay-faced man refused.
“ Are yougom’ to the Galah.
Vp S • I got business there, said Cnpps.
ThV tank-watcher smiled. The only business a man
had at the Galah shanty was a royal spree-the
tearing up of the cheque-the palliation of the dreary
0 f the dyspeptic plain.
f 0“ i- m horse shootln- t’morrer night,” he said per-
• “ an > it’s good sport if you amt used to it.
Sa ?franT' I’ve got bis’ness at the Galah,” repeated
C ri pp S doggedly, noting that Billy looked at him eagerly,
and seemed inclined to stay.
« An’ my ration man was out yestidy,” the tank-watcher
went on in the monotone of the plains, as if he were
repeating a lesson, “an’ I’ve got two bottler square-
fa *Then did the great man Cripps make up his mind as
determinedly the other way. , _ .
“The young feller’s footsore, I think; he ought to be
by the bat we come; an’ a day’s rest won’t do him no
’“After supper Billy had one nobbier of the gin, whose
smell he felt to be ungodly, and turned into his bunk;
while the tank-watcher of the wistful eyes and the clay-
faced man talked old times, and drank the raw spirit by
pannikin ia ced waxe d shrill; his insane eyes
flashed as he told of somebody named Bill doing some-
thing great in the way of sprees. The clay-faced man
had a great respect for Bill as a lordly waster of money,
and he told in a high voice of Bill’s awful extravagance


one night after the Menindie Races in Marblep’s year, the
said Bill having written out a cheque for twenty thou-
sand pounds, and then calmly lighted his pipe with the
wealth.
At this Billy laughed, and the clay-faced man turned to
the bunk, outraged by the ribaldry.
“ What cher snickerin’ at? ”
“Why,” said Billy, still laughing, “he didn’t light his
pipe with twenty thousand pounds—only with a bit of
paper.”
The clay-faced man gasped—“S’truth, yer pup—w’y
don cher call me a liar? I tell yer I seen him.”
Billy did not reply, and the old man quenched his
disgust in supplementary gins.
The two began to talk of the track ; of all the old hands
of the Riverina.
The tank-watcher was rapidly becoming drunk —his long
Ups sagged and leaked—he dropped his pipe, attempted
to recover it again, and fell on the floor. Then he lost all
interest in his pipe, and began to sing snatches of the
sundowners’ song with Billy and the dogs as audience and
old Cripps for chorus.
They yammered and maundered, and drank the quart of
square-face ; and then Cripps suddenly became suspicious
of the tank-watcher, swearing that he had lent the tank-
watcher a swag-strap at Corona in 1879, and demanding
the instant return of that swag-strap and no other. There
was a verbal quarrel that looked like growing into a fight,
but old Cripps was too drunk to stand, and the tank-
watcher led him to the bunk, and he slept.
He apologised next morning for having been drunken
on such slight provocation as half a bottle of square-face,
excusing himself with the plea that he hadn’t had a drop
for twelve months, and his head had consequently become
disused to the feel of it.
By noon next day they were on the way to the Galah ;
and the tank-watcher at parting gave Cripps two nips—for


true eyes and the whirlwind 65
their stay of twenty-four hours had been an oasis in the
they sighted a great pillar of dust, a " dth^ ir
stretched to the sound of a hundred bullock bells.
Thtn they made out many bullocks feeding and men un-
Th . • other teams. In the centre of the dust disturb-
y°reng two dogs fought, encouraged by the shouts of the
r asters who sprawled on the clay floor under the
“shanty” verandah. A small, fat, perspiring man, try-
• p- to support his trousers with one frail suspender, that
h • e- the only buffer between him and indecency, came
utand looked suspiciously at Billy and Cripps, and then
Evidently satisfied with the inspection, gave them the loud-
voiced welcome which spells insincerity-and led the way
to his unlicensed bar.
A man rode up on a horse, whose continually cocking
ear told of a sore back, dismounted, and joined them. He
W as something shorter than a tall man, and was in what
Criops called half-condition. Your eyes told you he was
soft, and your grip of his leg and arm-muscles told you he
was’as hard as a creditor.
The man of the frail suspender put cloudy glasses before
them and half-filled them with a liquor called rum by
courtesy. It had been carefully doctored, and had almost
solved the two plugs of black tobacco which were nailed to
the inside head of the cask ; so that it was full of surprises
and spurs—a drink to make a corpse amorous. Further-
more, it was excellent battle rum, so much so, that the
man of the frail suspender said to Billy and Cripps and
the soft, hard man ;
“The man who has three drinks o’ my rum and then
doesn’t fight the first man he sees is a damned coward.
Billy had two drinks, and was dead to the world in half
an hour. Luckily, he had taken the precaution at the
Zuyder Zee to sew the notes into his under-shirt, between
the shoulder-blades, a place where no man who tried to
go through him would think of, and to hide two half-


66 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
sovereigns in his boot. By this he made himself very
unpopular with two gentlemen adventurers, whose lives
were divided between a heaven of free alcohol and a hell
of unsatisfied longing for the lurid stimulant dispensed by
the one-suspender man ; and who, having searched Billy,
got for their trouble half a fig of tobacco, ninepence in
coppers, and a fragment of a shrieking poem addressed
to the drought.
The clay-faced man had four drinks, and became the
king of the wide earth. The last shadow of prudence left
him ; he threw his three five-pound notes on the counter,
and invited the universe to drink at his expense.
Then did the shanty keeper run to the verandah —one
hand holding up his trousers for greater security—and
notify to all whom It might concern that Cripps was
setting up an “all hands burst.”
The men came in: the tanned, tough, hard-cases who
drove the bullock teams ; the few station carpenters, who
had watched with great pleasure the dogs worrying each
other; a hut-keeper who had just got through his spree
and half recovered. A week ago he was king, and every-
body laughed at his feeble jokes ; to-day he was mother-
less —making a bad recovery, and haunted by thousands
of white transparent faces. None now so poor as to
listen to him, even the shanty man insulted him, picking
a quarrel over an alleged spilling of a thimbleful of rum,
which the shanty man said the hut-keeper had spilled with
the direct intention of spoiling the bar counter. As
nothing short of a dynamite cartridge could injure the red
gum flitches the shanty man called “furniture,” it is
evident that the sole reason of all these charges was the
cowardly desire to humiliate this drink-racked man, who,
having no money and being ill, was fair game. Woe
to the conquered! Who has—is ! He had been in the
dead-house for two days, sleeping like a log, and waking
to a weakness like to the awful weakness of a woman
dying in child-bed.


had been the necessary palliation of the
His excess naa H is drunken ness was
horrific sameness - .
the adulterator was the
not vicious, oui^
criminal. called that there was “a bloke
Wh “ . H lo“ ouTfor all hands," and the dog-fight
7fof«a»t of an audience and tapered off into faendl,-
failed for w ng and flank-movements, Billy was
neS MI round. Being young, he awoke with a
r f- P1 H y headacle only for physical trouble ; and alter
d had an Indian bath, which consists of two
he had had t h e head, he felt well
bUCket .f . . Jar off so far as the Galah was concerned,
enough toswear » ’ interest in life until next morning;
B 1 althoughthe drinking and the howling waxed
an d althoug and even next day, he refused
shrill during and sat on the long crazy form
aU “Vitetion t - hese poQr wassailers go ing from
m the ba , ? & sobriety through the first joys of
thC r g ness the wild exhilaration and the boundless
d L U rTstrength of it, the baresark madness of the acute,
P d S the collapse and recovery, or death in the dead-house,
and the P b( . the Pouter, was king. He had
Cnpps, ° > the shanty man called him
SC"t and-by t would be “holdup, old man;” later
Ml « on keep your tongue between yer teeth-I’ve had
enough of your graft”; and again later, “get out o this,
Tn 7 Lughed very heartily at
Cripps’s accepted wit, applauding even when he sa ,
“ pass the snake-juice.”
tttow“. C fTeSw mei I’m a full board, I am,
. v. t o-ets me cheque I tears it up. Some on em when
theverets lonely they turns religers-but they always sooer-
tb®y g ’ there’s others w’d ud rather say a prayer than kiss
(Poo° boaattu, wretch, when had that kite's


mouth last rested on the soft lips of the world’s apology
to man for making him ?) “ Yes, rather ’an kiss a woman
or take a nip ; but what I say is—don’t give me a drop for
two year, till I’ve made a cheque, an’ then say to me,
‘ George! here’s a snifter, ’an I’ll take the skin off my nose
in two two’s.”
“ Oh, yer can’t tell me,” said the shanty man, putting a
fat perspiring elbow into his own glass; “it’s lonely out
back, I promise yer, ’nuft to send a man dotty.”
He himself had never been a hundred yards from the
Galah since his arrival there; and the one good quality of
this fear of the bush was his continuously growing bulk;
so that another two years without exercise, and with the
daily abuse of the fairly good liquor he kept for his own
drinking, promised to do the world the favour of killing
him.
Cripps went on.
“ But I’m never lonely. Give me an’ all ’ands burst
every two years or so, an’ I’m right. Fill ’em up again,
fat guts.”
The shanty man bore the jibe patiently. His time
would come later; meanwhile, custom had given Cripps
the right to insult whomever he pleased at this time.
He made use of his right—he addressed the “hard-soft
man” as “stinker,” and was immediately requested by
that gentleman to put up his hands. The shanty man
prevented the fight by asking all hands to have a drink;
loudly excepting the hut-keeper, whose cheeks flushed at
the insult, while his brain lifted and seethed and cracked
in fear of the white transparent faces that surrounded
him.
Billy regarded the unfortunate narrowly, and his bowels
yearned for him. Prudence struggled with inclination for
a minute; and then, flushing pink and white, the young
fellow crossed to the hut-keeper and put half a sovereign
in his hand. The hut-keeper was distraught by his
terrible experiences ; he had been wondering how he


tuue eyes and THE WHIRLWIND 6,
. . 4 i-'.
!h „„.d km -
had Started to gi er iidered .’ n dumb horror how his devils
hearing men; h thev had him alone. Then
w ould torture him w . q h said) .. Take this,
suddenly a yoUn f ' r °‘ ed and ‘the white transparent devils
a l d h a« a face burning with the flame of
left him, and h that was a symphony,
youth, and a s i - ;o . n and bega n to cry, and Billy
He took f e p h n f back to his place. Cripps asked all to
left him and went k ef joined the drinkers at the
drink again, an „ A . all me two years in a job 1
bar , and Cnpp- talked. An at
ain’t ioneiy. N , V night , an’ 1 wish an’ I wish ;
Cord’s End, I just that ran away
an’ I wish to see me wrfe the Flash .
with her, an'me k.d ,a" Super u
„•«» I w.sh t-s white transparent faces came
a Tto him as he heard of Cripps’s ghostly rev.ews at
back to mm, , dropp ed his glass.
God’s End, an i aghast for a moment, then he
The shanty man hustled the hut-keeper
flashed from behm objected, in words broken
tmts he Managed to say. - I can
by great ne „ . d o ff e red the com.
*>“ “ d suspido "
Shot through his beady eyes. ~
“ Ye’ve nicked it from me till, he sai- • ke
Then the hotel-keeper went mad, altho g P
th^S?n.lli n y e ou W men ad “o this shanty and
rg.z
all right, tnat sia , commer round,
but he didn’t give me a rum w cou ld at the shanty
j:ih-rs Action of Bush


wiih^nd giVC 016 a b ° ttle t 0 *° 0n the
got ’em.” afraid g ° w,thout a bottle-because I’ve
facef cLtd t d on°hTm to & 33 WWte
didnt“ d Th° W he S3yS 1 St ° le this half-sovereign ; and I
sttnl when l° Ung f f° W hCre Ve kto me He’s too
got ’em, too.’ SayS St ° le it ~ h6 ’ S to ° s trong-and I’ve
suL h enlv h and fa< ? 0n a^ain s he creamed
shrewdlv’ that I, k the Shanty man with his fist, so
form. th 1 tHe Skm between th e brows split in cruci-
H f Tke rn Sbanty , ma ” took the blow and went to the ground
botdeTomth aZed PU% ’ 3nd liftin S a b-vy potter
bottle from the counter, he struck the hut-keeper on the
tinned confus -n~the drunken men con!
Criops &ti n ng ° r H oargUe 88 th6y had done before - Old
worid to H • t k u d t u- n ° one m P arbcular . and asked the
Te dead h ’ Ws 6yC WaS and Ws time-ere
tn USe Claimed bint—was short.
the wall - hut (t, 6 l allC f man t 0 3 Sitt ' ng ’ P° sture against
and in kn t! *s**“ was surgically a bad subject,
coroner h dled ’ There Came P olice > and a
sham ' I ° em P anelled 3 half-drunken jury, and the
vrr„ P r con,mil “ d for “ d ™
minded mS.’ sh “ ken all these events, left the bioody-
place > where Cnppa still raved of his shadow men-
and by catnpny littfe and wal]d muo "en.
line agmn. SCrUb & Week he rail™?
r a s e ? railway Sidingf he met a man towing a
blobber-lipped horse-a morose animal with no future
Jounm an ha ’ 3 V f fr ° m assoda t io «, the same unforgiving
3 thaTSok h ° rSe; hiS long UppCr Hp was of
kind that looks even more prehensile than it is ; fluffy


r —, Viic thin Hisrli-boncd. checks, and
whiskers grew ro > indecisive chin.
towing 5 and the horse sat back, anu
m onths he had call teach , b „, which many
E ^ 6 '
“°Th. U ta« y fire with a strange directness that
Billy found later on was not native to him.
« Want a job ?” he said.
And Billy replied, “What at.
“Pickin’ up an’ burnin on.
“ TeiTshimn’ a week an’ board V lodgin’.” Jf
Billy did not consider before replying ; ® "
he had been more cautious he never would have
much. “All right; HI take Aon„ Screw
Then he b ® gan ,f° cheque at rabbiting ; but this
-w experiences are what I’m
looking for.”
“ What’s yer name?
Billy told him.
M^F-inney 1 on his tow rope again, and
the horse sighed, and era’wled in Tvfgot a
ofi condition, an' V. always siow.
but ’e’s a very staunch ’orse.


To be staunch is to be constant, and Billy thought the
second-best horse the most constant sleeper he had ever
seen.
“ Ye’ll ’ave a very comfortable place,” resumed Finney.
“ We start after brekfus an’ then we ’ave ’alferour fur
dinner, an’ knock off at dark. Ye’ll be very ’appy with
uz. ”
Billy said he hoped so. A few minutes’ walk at right
angles to Billy’s old track brought them to a chock and
log fence, and after they had run this up for two hundred
yards or so, the light scrub and gum-belts broke and
showed them the back view of one of those awful houses
which disfigure rural New South Wales. Four walls are
built of weatherboard, and then holes are cut here and
there, and are called doors and windows, according to
size. The alleged home is roofed with galvanised iron;
a material which in hot climates is the finest brain-wearer
and insanity producer known; and lo ! the House Beau-
tiful !
Finney’s house was generally like all the others of its
type, but was immeasurably worse in detail. There was
no drainage, and all the kitchen slops and refuse were
thrown outside the door, so that a kind of muddy grease,
in which half a dozen moulting fowls scratched and
pecked pettishly, had replaced the soil.
A lanky, freckled, muddy-skinned girl of eighteen or
so, bootless and stockingless, without stays, and clad
apparently in a thin, wispy skirt only, had hoisted one leg
—a leg that was the leg of a gin for colour, shape, and
thinness—on to a cracking water-butt outside the door.
She was carefully examining a wound on her foot,
evidently caused by a jagged splinter, and as her face
was turned to the wall, she heard Finney’s visitor before
she saw him.
Even then she continued examining the wound, thinking
that one of the infrequent neighbours was her father’s
companion; but when she heard Billy’s voice she turned


. . the rud flushed under the muddy skin,
Se Ito, 'd'rty move<i to a bound and a ga “ op ’ “
jtney!” ■ " she ’ s “ fr '‘ Bht '
ened as a coot. j ff h ; s second-best horse, and
Finney (he kitchell , alld tendl another
followed by y ’ ase on the rammed-clay floor. A
compost of mud a yery old> bent over a
tin hanging from the pot-hook in the Wl de-
chimney t good-day, nor to
JSZ Billy i he only granted an inguiry as .0 when
-.piled ~: ; „rofra
evidently “motioned Billy to a
S' and reflectively picked his teeth w.th a
fork ‘ 'c ■ k inpr hand into the kerosene tin, grabbed at
,he finger '
>— in ,ha to-
“y^"“fn-it's sreddin'-a good thing 1 burned nteself
-it might a’ done t’ ra g s -” enamel on 5t
, Sa aid “* HeU
looking hke amp . With a crazy wire
Cate and attends at
™.'s’t". meat and the heavy globes of flour and water,
"Shi and after cutting
hunk of the livid cow-beef, she put ,t and a
to eat in a growling manner, so that f> y


constrained to ask him to take the meat and eat it on the
mat. But there was no mat!
While the middle-aged old wife bobbed for other dump-
lings for Billy, there entered the cocky’s son—a scrawny
youth, as lean as a busy bull, half larrikin and half
bushman—the type that only the despairing agricultural
settlement on bad land near an equally despairing town
can produce.
His collarless shirt was banded by a narrow Vermillion
necktie, meeting in a bone ring at the neck band, the ends
then separating, one going east and one west, and stop-
ping at the braces. His neck was thin and pouchy, like
the neck of a vulture; his skin was ih a constant con-
dition of peeling, although he had lived all his life under
the dry, roasting sun of the Bad Lands.
Looking through the window-hole, for it was unglazed,
Billy saw the meagre, half-starved horse that had carried
the cocky’s son. With the callousness of the Australian
youth for the horse that bears him, the cocky’s son had
tied his weary steed to the cracked water-barrel. In
three or four hours the cocky’s son would gallop that
horse over fallen timber for sheer wantonness, and at
dusk he would take the bridle off and turn the animal out
to find the sustenance possible on burnt grass growing in
sour, burned clay—grass infrequent as charity, and as
sapless as dead hair.
Finney looked up from his grumbling meal and said
“ Hello! ” and the new-comer said “ Hello !”asif he were
answering a question, and glanced inquiringly at Billy.
“Me noo ’and,” Finney replied to the pantomime,
pointing at Billy with a very dirty fork, on which was
impaled a grey lump of indigestible dumpling, “gawnter
’elp me burnin’ orf an’ pickin’ up. ”
His son replied, “No use,” and seated himself. By
this time the wife had captured enough dumplings for
Billy and her son; and when their plates were placed the
son fell-to with all the greedy concentrativeness bis father


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 75
had shown. As Billy still sat with his knife and fork Me,
Finney stopped in amazement and asked him “wot he
was waitin’ for ? ” „
To which Billy replied, “ The lady hasn’t sat down yet
The son laughed as at a good joke. “Wot! the old
woman ? ” .
WUUtau 4 t .
The father did not even stop eating to reply.
“ She can sit down after we’ve done,” said he, with his
mouth full. . . _... ~ ..
The meal proceeded quietly, although Billy felt hw
gorge rising at the thought of this patient, worn-out wife,
waiting on these brutal relatives. A great billy of tea
and a pot of jam were put on the table for the second
course, and then Billy noticed that there had been no
vegetables to the meal. #
“No vegetables,” said Finney, observing the glance;
“ we ain’t got time to grow ’em.” „ ,
The son sniffed. “ ’N’ no pudden, neither, he said.
“Carn’t have puddens without aigs,” his mother
6 This brought the despairing Finney into the conversa-
tion. “No-no aigs. Y’see, we’ve got whips o fowls,
but we don’t get no aigs, because,” he concluded help-
lessly, “ the dam things lays away.”
The tea and the jam provoked converse, and Billy then
found that the very casual son was a drover s hand, and
that, being within five miles of his parents, he had, m the
most casual manner, called to see them after | a “
of three months. To-morrow he would saddle
horse, and say, “So long,” and the mother would wipe
her cooking hand to pump-handle her son fr eckled fist,
and the father would say, “ Over the river, which is the
Bad Land’s translation of “ nw” and the fon would
ride off casually for another three months of tailing cattle,
or watching them in the midnight camp.
“ D’ya get much of er cheque? ” said the father.
“ Fifteen quid,” replied the son.


76 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
The father congratulated him.
“ But I blewed seven an’ a ’arf at two up! ”
The father cursed.
“An’ then I got inter ’nother school an’ I couldn’t go
wrong, easy’s failin’ off er log—l won ’leven quid.”
The father admired audibly.
“So I paid what I owed’t the store w’en I went away,
an I bought four pair er sox, green an’ red ; they’re a bit
of orlright, an I’ve got two quid for the ol’ woman, an’
arf a ned fur Janey.”
The father glared at him.
“ What the ’ell do yer wanter buy sox for. Why I
want a noo set uv ’arness f’r me secon’ best ’orse, an’
there s a pairer ’antes wantin’ f’r the plough ’orse.”
The -son grinned : he knew that little ploughing was
done at Finney’s.
A pairer ’antes f’r me plough ’orse,” repeated the
father savagely—he had seen the grin, “an’ you go
wastin’ money on foolishness.”
“ Sox isn’t foolish.”
“ W’y, yer cub, will yer contradic’ me ? ”
He was n contradickin’ yer, father—was you now ? ”
This from the drudge and peacemaker.
I tell ya he was—but I don’ care. He ain’t bin’ a son
ter me.”
“ Yes he has ; he’s bin a very good son,” said the
woman bravely.
“I’ve earnt all I et since I was so ’igh,” supplemented
Abel, holding his hand exactly three inches above the
table.
“ Never min’ me ! never min’ me ! I’m nothin’, I s’pose.
I’m dead, ain’t I ? ”
And then, as he saw that his wife was attempting to
answer these unanswerable queries, his mood suddenly
changed, turning his tone to something like kindliness.
“ ’Ave yer dinner, mother, an’ bring Janey.”
The woman called Janey, and seated herself on the form


bv her husband’s side. Then Janey came, still very shy,
but with a longer dress on-one that actually touched the
ground, and (almost half-concealed the thick boots that
cbod her As Billy found later in the day, though shod,
le was not stockinged. She walked to the form with
difficulty ; so shy, that she knocked herself against every
obstruction on her side of the kitchen.
She was not so shy that she did not welcome her
brother-the only living thing that was usually kind to
her although he had his little ways of torture.
<’ Hello, Abel,” she said, “ ’ow are yer ? ”
«Orlright till the doctor sees me. ’Ow are you,
B °The girl’s shyness was gone. Her rage made her
quiver.
“ ’Ow dare you call me that? ” ..
Finney interposed. “ Sit down you—and don t you call
her that no more 1 ” . . ... .
Then he made matters worse by explaining to Billy .
“You see, ’twas this way. We ’ad six boys an
coulden’ get a girl. So ol’ Pruden, he says to me go
t > bed with y’r boots on, an’ the nex one ull be a gi 1.
The luckless Janey sat there, and ate ashes, and was only
afraid that they might not choke her ; and Billy felt even
sorrier for her than he had for her mother. This girl who
would never be young-this thin, angular, freckled woman
of nineteen in her pitiful nakedness, doomed to the awful
poverty of the bush, and cursed with the possession of
a thriftless father and six brothers, who had heard from
the neighbours the legend of her, and who called her
“Boots” only when strangers were present, so that the
ta And while thinking of her, Billy thought of himself,
and wondered how long he would be “happy m this
paradise, as Finney had prophesied.
Abel returned to the charge in another way.
“ See, Janey’s got a bloke ! ”


Poor Janey ! Oh, sister Boots ! thy cup of sorrow is
very full this day.
“ Ga’rn,” said his father. “ Who’s e’ ? ”
“ Sam Pedder—l sor ’im with ’er when I got off at the
slip-rails.” Truly the vials of wrath were loosened. The
father’s heavy hand smote Janey’s freckled face, and she
ran from the kitchen.
“ Ye’re a cow to ’it a woman,” said the son.
“Wot! Wot! Wot! You call me a cow —put ye’re
’ands up.”
“ I’ll put ’em up, quick an’ lively,” but the son re-
treated as he said it; and the mother, getting between
them, pushed Finney back, and he returned to his chair in
the way of the man who is glad to escape a fight, but
wonders how the spectators will construe the retirement.
Abel disappeared, and found Janey, with whom he made
peace with the half-sovereign and crude apologies, to the
effect that he “didn’t mean no ’arm” ; and the girl who
was never to know youth forgave him easily, being built
on the self-abnegatory lines of her mother.


CHAPTER XI
good to me. 'En.ry 'e takes
;th er eirl er Jimmy Scotchman’s an’ marries er—
l* P O Tr Jhe others goes an’ lives with ’im-says it’s comf’b’ler
T Cme An’ now Boots goes an’ talks to that cow-
Pedder ” Then with% sudden ferocity- “ Don’t
ST’ave nothen t’ do with them Pedders while yer ’ere,
L’ no truck with Scotchman or Jim Finney s either. _
» Are the other Finney’s round here, then?” inquired
B .. Course they are-why there’s not many people round
this oart that ain’t called Finney or Pedder or Scotchman.
$£ P see, no noo people never comes to the distnck, an
vot’s here marries each other.”
“ Have you known the Pedders long.
In answer, Finney’s fingers crooked like talons, and his
mouth opened and shut in a terribly hungry fashion.
««Known’ em long? Me father knew’em. Me wife was
a Pedder— blast’em.”
.. What did they do—were they bad neighbours.
.‘Bad nabers! My Cord l-W’y they borreyed a trace
Chain from me father, an’ they stuck to it, an said they
guv it back.”
“ Was that long ago ? ”
“Me father died nineteen year ago, an it wus two years
b tthi S td that separated families, thatlasted bitterly
for twenty-one years, that gave the Pedder s and the


Finney’s blood-lust on occasions, was born of a silly
dispute over a trace chain.
“ By Gord, if I catch Janey talkin’ to that Tom Pedder,
I’ll—l’ll chop ’er legs orf.”
He uttered his butcher-threat with great satisfaction,
and then rising from the form, told Billy that he “ needn’t
begin the job till t’morrer, ’e could ’ave a look round the
farm now.”
So Billy went outside to look round the farm. The farm! i
The farm! Away to the right there was a paddock of 1
scraggy wheat, dirty yellow when it should have been sap |
green, and in the paddock the eternal rabbit ate what little *
value was in the crop. A dog lay in what Finney called the I
bottom paddock—which was as guiltless of vegetable |
growth as a circus ring—and worried a dry bearskin. The |
dog was the only sign of life except the rabbits, but a :
moment later Janey came into sight on the steep bank
of the creek a quarter of a mile off. She carried a bucket
of water in either hand ; she had evidently had to wade
through mud to the water-holes in the creek, for her dress
was tucked up to the knees, and she carried her boots
tied by the laces round her neck. When she saw Billy
she stopped, put down her buckets, unpinned her skirt, and
put her boots on. Then Billy knew that Finney’s opinions
of the foolishness of “sox” had been forcibly extended
to Janey—she was never stockinged.
On the other side of the creek was the only green land
in sight; and, as usual, Finney had tried his worst land
first, and had tried it for fifteen unspeakable years. Grey
gums, nearly all young and green, covered this alluvial
flat, and Finney’s slow brain had now decided to clear the
timber and put in a crop.
Billy saw all this, and then his gaze returned to Janey,
who had resumed her march with the buckets. Billy’s
idea of women was the home idea, the worship of them as
divinities, alternating with the fleshly use of them—the ideal
and the material treatment of women stratified. For the


fi,ct time he had seen men eat and women waitmg-hke
f, ! eins , who humbly and gratefully accepted the bone
thrown backward over the warriors’ shoulders ; e a
feen the father strike the daughter as men strike men;
ond now he saw her toiling over the baked clay paddock
hent like a Chinaman to the water-yoke, and his heart
almost ruptured itself with the swelling of its pity.
He ran to meet her ; took one bucket and tried to take
the other, but she hung on to it protestmgly, so that at
last they started off—he carrying a bucket and a half and
she carrying half a bucket and wishing that the distance
to 6 the crazy water-butt ran into miles, for their hands
touched, and he talked kindly.
At last Billy said suddenly, “ I’m sorry he hit you. _
She blushed under her muddy skin, and said, apologis-
ing for Finney, “ He did’n mean ter, but he don t like
the Pedders, an’ ’e’s ’ad a big knock larst week.
« And is Redder really your sweetheart.
She mistook his sympathy for smittenness, and replied
with attempted coyness : „
<< oh no —not much —just walkin’ together. y •
“Nothing,” said Billy, “ except that your father might
have beaten you without cause.”
Janey’s hopes of a conquest died, and to cover her dis-
a knockout last week. ’E wus goin’ into
Tintinbong an’ he sor a man ’angin’ to a tree—sooercided,
the man ’ad. An’ father he got frightened an woulden
touch ’im, an’ after ’e wus gone Alick Pedder come along,
an’ ’e took the man down an’ went through im, an then
•e told the p’leece, an’ Tom Pedder came round ere last
week an’ ’e said Alick got twelve pound off the man. An
father’s that sick ter think ’e missed it an’ the Pedders got
They came to the crazy water-butt, and poured the
water in, whence most of it escaped. That was charac-
teristic of old Finney. He had a stripper and no shed


82 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
for it, and the machine perished in the strong- suns and
searching rains ; during one year of unprecedented pros-
perity he had bought a buggy, but it was left to the
weather also, and what sun and rain did not do was
accomplished by the roosting fowls, who made the vehicle
their house. A little caulking would have made the butt
watertight, but Finney had neither time nor energy for
the job, and, therefore, Janey wore her soul out in carry,
ing from the creek water which leaked from the butt
almost as fast as it was poured in.
Abel Finney was fitting slippers of green hide to his
unshod horse, whose hoofs were worn almost to the quick
from galloping after cattle in stony rises.
By-and-by Abel, having finished the job, drew from
his pocket a bastard meerschaum pipe, weighing about
half a pound, with an immense mouth-piece, which Abel
said was “ real amber,” but which was really Kauri gum.
The weight of the actual smoking surface was nothing;
but the maker had ballasted the pipe with the figures of
three very naked women running away from themselves
along the stem.
Abel filled and lit his pipe, and Billy smoked with him
for company, while Janey looked at Billy admiringly
and dreamed dreams, with Billy and herself for central
figures. Poor Janey ! miserable Boots ! fated to lose this
Prince Charming, who spoke kindly; whose voice rang
whenever he talked of injustice; who carried buckets
when such cattle as women were about to do the
drudgery of the world. The fluffy dust Abel called
tobacco burned down to a nose-suggestion of all the
rags of the earth on fire. He put the pipe, with the
naked women chasing themselves down its stem, into
his pocket carefully; then for pure flashness he kicked
his horse and told him to “ straighten up.” He mounted,
gave his spurs—for mere side—to the thin and salty
flanks, and as his beast pig-jumped, to the rider’s great
delight, the rider said, “ So long.”


“ Good-bye,” from Billy. „ from
..S'long,” I* *"“died bccn».«. no.
Finney, whose resentmen tbe miserable horse
strong enough to ive. -| a'lhrh the animal did
had carried Abel over the ,hp-ra, w ,„„il,
after four baulks and five • * his horse
along the dusty ?im,.y discovered his
wh Ue there was an audience old y
losses again. ~ ey on the wine an’ two
pairer ’ames.” confession of poverty, thought
■"tig to the creek, he followed
her, and said briefly ;
“More water? ”
“ No-pumpkins.” setting-sun haze to the
Je^Thlrßiu/understood why Finne/s farm pro-
duced pumpkins. They were self-sown, sell gr
Finney had no trouble with whh a Uni f e so old
Janey attacked two gr . Billy’s blood ; but at
that it grated like a saw an cu the heavier
last the pumpkins were cu ,an slowly to the home-
and Janey the lighter, ey virtuous glow that
Stead °Vth e e the man who is not
comes of the doing OI A s , T . v clasping her
too virtuous to have s ° me va ™, ;f the bu iky vegetable
pumpkin as tightly “ fow and Jr evfr.
were really Prince Ch S “ Have you hurt
Billy noticed that she limped, and said, na y
your foot?” , j t u e ru d came
y ..yes-mister. Her eyes glowed and the ru
into the mud again as she looked at him.


“ Splinter? ” said Billy, remembering the exhibition of
the morning.
“ No—’orse trod on me foot.”
“And did it break all the skin like that?” pursued
Billy, entirely giving away the fact that he had seen her
in her half-nakedness of the morning, and that he re-
membered it.
Janey blushed again, not from shame, for there was
none, but from shyness, and replied :
“It wus this way. The secon’ best trod on me foot an’ I
coulden’ push ’im orf, so I pulled me foot out an’ busted
it all.” And then as an afterthought, and examining her
heavy boots with great pride, “ An’ I diden’ have no boots
on then, either ! ”
For supper, more livid cow-beef and pumpkin, that in the
process of its boiling in the uncleaned kerosene tin had
lost its rich orange tint and become yellow-dirty.
Billy rose next morning determined on his course of
action, and was strengthened therein by the discovery
that picking up and burning off occasionally included
felling. Finney had told him that he would start work
after breakfast, and have “ halferour ” for dinner, and
knock off at dark, and all this proved true. But Finney
also stated that Billy would find his place “ comf’t’ble ”
and in that Finney either lied or was mistaken.
They started work after breakfast, but breakfast, con-
sisting of cold salt horse, cold pumpkin, and damper, was
served by the light of the stars ; and from about an hour
after midnight Finney had murdered sleep by wandering
through the resounding house, as uneasy as a lost soul in
Tophet, falling over every obstacle in the rooms and
swearing blastiferously at each. Even after he had
finished his falls in the interior, he went outside, quite
four hours before daybreak, tumbled over the water-butt,
stepped on a stray cask-hoop and brought the opposite
segment against his shin, so that he cried oaths, in great
agony ; and finally disturbed the slumbers of the blobber-


true eyes asd the whirlwind 8s
jipped horse hy Uckfat «». to*"'*** “““
head. Fmnev’s struggles with the kitchen
Billy, awakened o y e d at the disturbance. Then
(urnitore, wa firM an y wh „ lhe yells to Id hnn
»” "• ys “ w
hand laughed bis blun^““ sleep was out of
Finding, at tour o d ° ck directed to “ sluish ”
the question, Bi ? but instead, he ran to the least
himself at the and bathed, and returned to find
stagnant poo cannikins of suspicious tea. Finney
Finney drinking many panmk offered some
nodded at Pumpkin and . and having
opinions on the advant was just the promise
eaten, the two e Qn his ncw man—said cross
of dawn as Finney laid h & yery ancient rop e.
consisting of an axe, P > second . best horse, whose
Finney of rope and green-hide and
harness was a- g old dothes.
string, and the sea p breakfast, at four o’clock,
What ’’lr dinner, and then work till
to noon, then R :u v found did not mean until
dark. Now “till dark Bdly and although they
“sunset,” for the “.j ine o>clock, 0 > c lock, Finney made a
did not stop work un u knoc king off early, as the
favour of it—said they rg t< „ An d all that day
moon wouldn’t set for Rillv dragged branches
—the longest he had ever now burned Q ff, until his
and fired them, ; and . picke breathed whit e ash;
world was bounded by cl^ d and languid i y lifted an
while Finney advised secon’ best ’orse.”
occasional bough an cu „ j get up so airly I’m
As he explained to
knocked up before brea kfast.
—he got up so early that nigh t, but his wean-
Billy had decided to dear 11 g Finney of
ness seduced him to stay till next nay.


his determination to leave, but that he regarded his day’s
work as not calling for any pay; and Finney was divided
between disgust at losing the services of a good hand, and
bewildered joy at discovering that the big day’s burning
off and picking had been done without money and with-
out price.
Finney woke the household, as usual, two hours after
midnight; and at four o’clock Billy bathed in the creek,
and after making up his swag and eating a little meat and
some of the everlasting pumpkin, he said good-bye to the
Finneys, for he was old enough bushman to know the
importance of an early start.
But, outside the slip-rails where the road lay along an
old river course and was flanked by high clay cliffs made
by flood-erosion, he heard the scared voice of Janey, call-
ing with a subtle intonation of tenderness in the affright:
“ Hey—mister ”
Billy stopped, and she ran suddenly to him out of the
morning darkness.
“Thought you’d like a pitater cake for the track, so I
baked ’em last night—mister.”
Billy took the parcel of potato cakes from her. The
alleged cakes were rolled in the pink cover of the Javelin.
The paper had done duty before, and through the rents
Billy saw that no man might eat those cakes and live.
But he took them as gratefully as if they were moa’s eggs,
and thanked her for the gift—for he knew that she had
stolen the potatoes from somewhere, and that her very soul
yearned for vegetables, which made the gift greater.
“It’s very good of you to think of me at all—er—
Janey.”
“It’s good to have somebody to think of—it’s very lone-
some ’ere—never see nobody.”
Poor little soul! Billy’s pity made him shy of her, and so
he did not adopt the only and very obvious way of giving
her comfort.
“I hope you will have a better time,” said he, very


true eyes and the whirlwind 87
conscious that he was talking copybook, but unable to
think of an^n^ put her arms roun d his neck and
, F °d moistly, turbulently; and he,
t lSS nered by the swag and the packet of potato cakes,
3 not follow up the advantage her kisses gave him,
6 blew” 'smiting his blood cold again and
Thed , „ through the clay cliffs and mounted the
™ «-« *• «« •“
down the wind :
"ro^'byOaiie t y,”' shouted Billy, looking back. She
° f th ' T” ?;
. u er eV es Billy was framed by the coming light.
b s staved in the gloom and her “ mister” went on
,0 the day and the world ot men, and in twenty minutes
had forgotten her existence in some new bush-rapture.


CHAPTER XII
By noon he had made Tintinbong, and by night was
dressed in town clothes and had eaten so well that
memories of Finney’s soul-destroying table had vanished.
And that afternoon an American, who had a store where
they sold drays and cheese and gloves, and where there
were rabbit traps on one side of the building and dress-
makers on the other, gave him a billet as clerk; and then
the firsts of September and the training he had had at
Rice’s made the work babies’ play. He found a few good
mates —one a fruiterer, breezy as a man-o’-war’s man on
shore-leave in a Polynesian port, who regarded the new
arrival with a bulldog’s doubting eye until he found that
the young man was not stalking his motherless daughters.
Then there came a time when the reporter of the local
paper was intoxicated twice in the one day; and Billy
began professional journalism on the Tintinbong Graeier.
As usual, he was liked and successful and always in trouble
from the beginning. Local scandals raged around the little
office —it was as if the little local sky had fallen when the
local bishop—who received his paper free —ordered that
the paper should not be sent again, because Billy had
published a paragraph reflecting on the bishop, who had
ordered a plumber to leave the bishop’s palace because
that free and independent artisan had refused to call the
bishop “ my lord.”
Billy tasted the joys of seeing his opinions—right and
wrong —in print, and the satisfaction of receiving money,
therefore, for more than a year. His life was simple, his
wants were food, tobacco, and books; and he had all these


, „v And all the time he tasted the pleasure
ofpowe" . because the editor proprietor was an ill man-
and almost invalid. power was m i SUS ed in the
The time came w tradesmen, and the Justices
ey es of the local who lead the back-block
of the hen a deputation waited on the invalid
community , and w rter of the Tmtmbong
Cditor - an L?lTought Tinbnbong into contempt in the
Cramer had br g ite true , as the world
eyes of of Tintinbong’s existence; but the
TmaUer a'p’eople the greater the exaggeration of them
importance to the idea (for he had saved
S ° BUly ; otnifbougMa portmanteau, and packed
over s Y en J P_ b t Q his three friends, and left Tmtm-
and said good of the tender Rivenna spring,
perched" il the observation seat of the van with h.s friend,
the guard of the east-bound express.


CHAPTER XIII
■‘Her sandals ravished his eves • h, r i-
through his neck,” yes , and the fauchion passed
Midnight saw him out of the train and supping in the
Australian hotel at Wairuna-a town which Bill; saw in
rive rom the station was much larger than Tintin-
bong and argued well for the possibilities of the ex-
reporter of the Grazier. But by dusk next evening he
contenrtoT * e . nGWS P a P ers of Wairuna were
tent to carry on business without him, and all the
evidence pointed to the swag and the track. However
his way was not to look for difficulties with a lantern, and
be gave himself up to the new pleasures the moment
produced; asked “if there was anything on” with the
Zt ZTe SS 3 man ° f the WOHd ’ and founJ
that there was something on, went to see it. He found it
m a very small audience at the naked hall the boastful
proprietor had named the Theatre Royal ; where, on this
evening, a very cheap dramatic company payed
-aTd whs” 1 " Wlth real Sn ° W -° f dsSUe P a P er tom sm,all
and which, owing to some accident with the lighting
apparatus, caught fire when it was falling thickest.
of the hit St ex P orience of even an imitation
of the theatre and everything was a joy to him. The
scorbutic youth, who comprised the orchestra, banging
something by Suppe on the piano ; the virtuous hero,lhf
sang two songs when his fortunes were at their lowest
Ttrn ftte aft eath T eate ” d h ™ i the villain, who stole
a w.l (that afterwards turned out to be unsigned) and
it under a stone on a public road ; the back scene


cloth which had evidently been rolled up before it was
uite'dry, so that the mountains had run into the river,
and a mass of unattached foliage grew on a white cloud ;
the insanitary wreck, who was the mystery of the play,
and who suddenly shed his old clothes and appeared in a
frock-coat and fine linen, saying quite irrelevantly that
his mother’s name was now cleared, and he could safely
take his proper position in society ; all struck him with
the charm of the unknown and the new, and he applauded
and laughed and worshipped.
The principal lady of the play charmed him most. She
had yellow hair and pink cheeks—and a yellow-haired,
pink-cheeked woman is to a boy the highest expression of
youthfulness. In the first act she wore a crimson velvet
gown and a high collar—she was the squire’s happy
daughter then ; and in the second act also, where she
starved in cruel London, she wore the crimson velvet.
The third act she returned to her childhood’s home with her
hair down, and wailing that she had been betrayed ; but
she still wore the crimson velvet; and Billy’s heart ached
for her miseries, as it had done for the more substantial
woes of Janey of the Boots. The tawdry sentiment, the
sham enthusiasms, the burlesque snow which was plainly
paper, and nothing else but paper, in the untoned lights,
and the ridiculous contradictions of the alleged drama,
would have made him snigger in contempt had he read
them in print; but they were all glamoured by this
magnetic woman of the yellow hair, the peach-like bloom
of cheek, and the brilliant belladonnaed eyes.
He would have waited after the performance to see her,
but she seemed so far above him ! Where was the lion he
might slay for her sake, as Samson slew his lion on the
Timnath Road?
He wandered about the streets till after midnight,
smoking; and blessing the luck that sent him from Tintin-
bong to Wairuna.
He thought of her until he slept, and she was in his


thoughts when he awoke. And yet, if he had only thought
rauTthL ?V °l "T: M ,h ' attraction because it las
had not S TcoL " herself ' F “ Bi “/» time
th^m^ntn^'throughh-^nd 6^^ “h andsmoked
u s * y and nt noon ho fu & k«
“t Ch thf tS° ,h d e ™" » h ° - 5
wreck, who had made an incoherent return to his nm rJ
hC aSkCd that bHlliant R ° Scius todriJ?
w> ? a /r kd fa “' ac “- M
humoured desire b,h 1.“ “ pr ' ! “ * <?°°d-
of a suspiciously great thirst Th*"? Tt 0 ” ly evldcnce
which Billy l a T.„d ■' had * hr “ drink >- f “
“r;;.: t: bvf^ !Zl
2 allowed this bar-room
from a certain tragedy he said he had written • and ThT
h t easked greasy man to
was on a holiday and would like
to the greasy actor, a man on a holiday meant a man
on lh"Tay d by torro “'“'f five shillings
the company ■ I Safer T*,7“* “ °' her m “ ° f
Srssftisysss


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 93
show with his lightning change programme—the said
lightning changes being made with stage waits of not
more than five minutes each ; to little Montayne, the
advance agent, a very small, very young, deadly-in-
earnest man, with a little thin anxious face peering out of
his imitation furred coat ; and to old Everett, one of the
merriest hearts that ever pulsed.
Billy invited them all to drink, and they drank en-
thusiastically and borrowed money with a great affectation
of secrecy, as if the publication of their borrowing were
certain to give their souls to the branding iron ; and next
day they introduced him to the ladies of the company.
One was a motherly dame, who played the old women.
She called Billy “my dear” on sight; told him he was
like one of her sons. She had six, my dear, none of them
in this awful business —thank God !
Between starting new courses of her interminable knit-
ting she offered the information that this was the worst
crowd she had ever been with ; all outsiders, except Miss
Denman, my dear ; and what could they expect, my dear,
but bad houses with such a show? The ghost hadn’t
walked for three weeks. She thanked God she had her
return ticket to Sydney—she would go away to-morrow
—she would have departed to-day only they asked her
to play this night, and she didn’t want to leave anybody in
the lurch ;it was against her principles, my dear. She
further warned Billy against the borrowing overtures of
the men of the company—all hamfatters, my dear, not one
actor in the lot.
During this interview a rehearsal had been proceeding
in patches, interrupted as it was now and then by the
greasy man insisting that he should “take the small
stage at almost every line, although such actions huddled
all the rest of the company into the wings. All his
speeches the greasy man bellowed to the empty hall;
redoubling his vocal exertions when he found that the
building was the father of an extraordinary echo.


By-and-by the rehearsal stopped, because Miss Rane-
ham, the lady of the crimson velvet, had not arrived, and
the greasy man, Gillott, began again to act.
“ I’ll fine everybody late for rehearsal,” he roared
“or I’ll resign the stage management. Why isn’t
everybody here ? Last night’s call was plain enough.
And I don’t care who it is, Miss Raneham, or not —they'll
be fined.”
The consciousness that he had three shillings left of the
five he had borrowed from Billy on the previous day had
given him a new dignity, and his wrath was indeed
terrible.
And suddenly his voice lost all its bull-roar, and Billy
saw that Miss Raneham had arrived, and that the greasy
man was affrighted into whispers. She came down to the
footlights, languorous, impudent, her blue eyes glancing
lazily, her yellow hair yellower than it appeared at night
muscular, but more than spare—thin and wiry ; the
German Madonna type that is your true man-eater; not
a daughter of Eve, but of Lilith, who the chronicles say
was delivered of devils.
She was a low organism—only redeemed from being
as vulgar as cheap satin by the charm of her Pagan
frankness.
“You’ve a loud voice for a stage manager who never
pays,” she said.
“But there was a call, Miss Raneham,” stammered
Gillott.
“ The call I want to hear is a call to treasury,” retorted
Miss Raneham ; and some of the better sort of the shabby
company, who had been silent during the storming of
Gillott, murmured applause.
The rehearsal proceeded. It was a shrieky drama—the
Peep o' Day, disguised by Salier under the title of the
Ould Sod, and intended to be played during the week
that held St. Patrick’s Day and the Hibernian Sports—
a drama full of thou’s and thee’s, and high moralities and


murder Glllott was to play the villain, and now that
. Raneham was present he roared not so ungently.
RuUn her most sweetly-lnsolent manner Miss Raneham,
X knew an actor although she could not act herselt,
to Gillott’s ranting, saying .
O You ought to be fiendishly quiet in that speech. Pur-
cell is an early kind of Silver-King-Spider just then, and
vou yell like afish-oh.”
y Then Gillott did yell, and take the stage again.
« Miss Raneham, 1 have been an actor for fifteen years.
»Yes, a cup-and-saucer actor;” and the company
lamrhed' while Gillott squirmed.
does she mean? ” asked Billy of the leading old
W TSh my dear-you know, surely. No !Wl. a bad
actor never" knows what to do with his hands If he has
a cup and saucer to hold he is all right. Another kind of
can’t act unless he has a mantelpiece to lean on
The old man over there is a broadsword actor—he s lost
in a part that hasn’t a broadsword combat in it, my dear
vou know-one, two, three, four, cross-thrust, parry-
'T two three, four, cross-like that.” She released
one’ knitting-needle from the wool, and stabbed and
to the stage, through the empty audi-
he said. _ - W. P». up
East Lynne to-morrow. It’s the only thing to ge us
o l ocfhohreu 0 c f ho h r e us o rap P roval arose-they all knew the tearful
drama, which has saved more companies from stranding
Raneham, Isabel; Miss Denman, Barbara/’
“ I can’t. I’m going home to-morrow, objected the
girl who hungered to play Lady Macbeth.
“Geor-e Dailey and his wife’s coming by to-night s
train "“eot o„ Saher imperturbably. "Mrs. Dailey plays


g 6 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
Barbara; George Dailey, Carlyle; Mrs. Everett, Corney;
Mawson (to the old broad-sword actor), you play Levison.”
Gillott snorted, “ / always play Levison.”
“Do you? This trip you don’t! You play Dill, and
for God’s sake, don’t yell—quiet, snuffy old man with a
comedy touch—that’s your style. One o’ the girls ’ull
have to double Afy. Everett, you take on old Hallijohn,
and double the detective, Dick Hare—who’s Dick Hare ?
Somebody ’ull have to take him.”
They began the rehearsal almost without any reference
to the book —they knew the play so well. Later on
Mawson told Billy how East Lynne had brought them
triumphantly out of Bourke in flood time.
“My wife played Lady Isabel. She paralysed them in
all those pathetic parts. My wife, sir, is simply wonder-
ful ! —you should hear her choke in that scene where
Willy dies.” He went on rapturously in his description
of the lady’s throaty agonies, and concluded sadly with
the statement that she did not travel now, she was slowly
dying of consumption in Sydney.” Then he borrowed half-
a-crown, and made a mournful exit to the hotel next door.
Miss Raneham had been in a company stranded at
Newcastle, and when the outlook was as black as the
coal of that city, East Lynne had brought a full pit and
gallery that wept itself damp, and put the company in
funds again. And almost all on that stage had been
saved by the crude production one time or another.
The rehearsal went on to the scene where Dick Hare is
first required, and then Miss Raneham, who had made up
her course of action half an hour before, allowed her eye
to rest with feigned carelessness on Billy’s pink cheeks
and yellow hair, which she admired because they had
that naturalness which was foreign to her own.
“There you are—that young fellow will do to read Dick
Hare.”
Her glance caught Billy’s eye, and fixed it; and he
walked over to her, half staggering in his shyness.


“You’ll read it, won’t you?” and Billy nodded, for his
heart was in his throat, and he couldn’t speak—not even
when Gillott made their names known to each other.
She shared the book with him and spoke the lines, for
his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth, and he trembled
like a leaf in a breeze. And while reading she bent lower
until her hair mingled with his, and made him not only
unintelligible but inarticulate, so that only croakings
came from his lips when he tried to speak.
The scent of her hair and the perfume in the make-up
on her face flooded him, submerged him—he could scarcely
breathe. If the crude kisses of Janey Finney had thrilled
him, how much more did the smell and alternating dis-
tance, nearness, and approach of this educated courtesan
shake all the rare energy of him ?
A neap-tide of desire flowed from this purple-cheeked
creature —she made up even in daylight—and dragged
him under, and he fought against it as a man fights
against strangulation.
But her sex attraction was continually fought by his
idealism —even the rouge upon her cheeks were to him the
banners of innocent health. Later on the necessity to
appear to live, even in a low degree, up to Billy’s ideals
wearied her very much —to continuously simulate a high
psychological rapture when only a physical exaltation was
necessary was pain to her-; for she was very frank and
very desirous to please, very animal, and her morals were
the morals of a discriminating coffee palace.
After the rehearsal she asked him to walk home with
her, and talked of himself, asking what he did, betrayed
great eagerness when he told her he was a pressman ;
and showed a corresponding change in her manner when
he unwillingly supplemented it with the information that
he was not just then on any paper—unwillingly, because
he was loth to lose the glamour his connection with one
of the little rags of the bush might give him in her eyes.
Then he told her he was doing nothing, and she asked
him if he would like to be an actor.


To which Billy replied, “Yes, if I can act with you
always, and if ”
“ If what ? ”
“ If there’s no chance of me becoming like that stage
manager.”
She laughed and applauded. “ You like Gillott? Im-
possible, my boy. Why, he was born with grease on his
collar and a pot of beer in his hand. And you —why there
was a company busking around heaven, and when they
left they kidnapped one of the angels.”
She pinched his cheek, and laughed to see as the result
of the flattery and the pinching, the roses chase the lilies
under the lucent skin.
“ They kidnapped two,” said Billy, looking straight at
her mouth —he was afraid of her eyes.
“ Oh, the young rake, listen to his compliments.” She
pinched the cheek again ; and then, seeing that they were
alone in the patch of pepper trees and citron gums, which
Wairuna calls its botanical gardens, she kissed Billy on
the lips.
“ Peaches and cream, my dear—sugar and spice and all
that’s nice—that’s what you’re made of. ”
The neap-tide submerged Billy again, but her tone—
gay enough, but businesslike, brought him back to facts.
“You could go on with the company an’ you liked it,
good milord ! ”
“Could I really?”
“Yes, you could—and Billy’s an ugly name. I’ll call
you Wilfred —and it will look better in the bills.”
“ But the manager won’t engage me. I can’t act —I
wouldn’t be worth a shilling a week.”
“That’s about all you’ll get, Wilfred, unless the public
is ass enough to come to the show. We haven’t had
salary for weeks—just board and lodging. The manager
will take you if you will go. And I’ll teach you.”
‘ ‘ Then I’ll go—l’ll go. ” All his youth and enthusiasm and
adventurousness shone in his eyes—this small Hannibal


of the paltry conquest thought of bending his head that
he might not ruffle the firmament.
The lady who played the old woman, and the girl who
hungered to play Lady Macbeth, left for Sydney next day,
and in their stead arrived George Dailey and his wife ; who
played one night, snorted at the company, the house, and
the management, thanked God that they had their return
tickets, and returned to Sydney after sarcastically pre-
senting the manager with the salary for the evening.
Then did Miss Raneham introduce Billy as a man of
sufficient ability to walk through one of the minor parts ;
and Salier, with a ludicrous affectation of dignity in his
overflowing face and fat figure, said he would consider the
matter and let Mr. Pagan know of his decision in due
course.
“Due course” was reached in exactly five minutes.
Gillott had prompted Salier with the belief that Billy had
money, and Salier, approaching Billy as a king might
approach a slave, asked him to have a drink. Then he
carelessly introduced the subject of partnership ; any man
putting money into Salier’s Dramatic Company would be
certain of an immense profit.
Billy felt chilly; but he thought of the lean electric
man-eater, and of her brilliant belladonnaed eyes, and in
ten minutes Salier had fifty of his seventy pounds. Half an
hour later ten pounds were on their way to Billy’s mother,
and the balance stayed with Billy to be treasured for the
time when it might help the fascinating Raneham.
So little Montayne, who had been an advance agent in
the rear because the company had not enough money to
send him far ahead, left that night by the southern train
with ten pounds in his pocket, the perennial hope of the
theatrical man on his small eager face, and with him went
a thousand new day-bills with the name of Wilfred Pallon,
(Billy’s nom de theatre) displayed in medium type, next
Gillott’s whose name and attainments were double
starred in two colours; that being his reward for assisting
in the introduction of foreign capital.


CHAPTER XIV
Billy’s connection with the company had run into months
—he would never have an actor’s talent, for which he
thanked God secretly ; although he had no intention of
leaving the company, for his star was there.
As the audiences became smaller, the company dwindled,
until only eight of them were left. Yet they gave the
same bills as they had done with a company three
times the strength ; by hacking the text and the action
of the plays, and by doubling, trebling, and quadrupling
characters.
As the company became absolutely a commonwealth,
Salier’s authority vanished, and the company did what
was right in its members’ own eyes. Gillott insisted on
playing the villains; and old Mawson who was false as to
hair and teeth, and ancient all over, as strongly defended
his right to play the juvenile leads and the lovers,
although he had the rich fruity voice of a man who has
been living exclusively on fat for half a century; Salier
doubled the heavy fathers and the low comedy characters;
the scorbutic pianist was promoted to playing detectives ;
and Billy played the family lawyers and the decent old
gentlemen who befriend the heroine in the second act of
every domestic drama ever written.
When East Lynne took them out of starvation in the
very flourishing town of Tumbleup, Miss Raneham had
pressed for Billy to be promoted to playing Archibald or
Levison; for this idealistic love that could treat her as
a star was new to her. She could not understand Billy


sighing in bad verse when a decisive action on his part
would have given him the extremity of conquest of her
and the spoils thereof; he piqued her curiosity, and
baffled curiosity was with her a half-militant desire.
So boy as he was, utterly unfitted for either character
by reason of his youth and his ignorance, she wished him
to play either Carlyle, the slow ox-like possessor of
Isabel, or Levison, the ravisher by cunning ; she wanted
to have even stage love made to her by him, to guess at
his feelings when his shyness was off its guard, and when
he should, as one character or the other, hold her in his
arms.
To this answered Gillott, “ My line is villains, and if 1
don’t play Levison, how am I to wear my riding-boots? ”
Miss Raneham, I grieve to record, said, “Oh! damn your
boots,” and went to Mawson, asking that Billy should be
allowed to play Carlyle.
“ What! that boy ! Why he is too young.”
“And you’re too old. It’s ridiculous you playing
juveniles.”
“ Ridiculous —why, upon my word ! What age do you
think I am?”
“ Sixty, if you’re a day.”
“ Not forty-two yet, madam. And I have the experi-
ence requisite. Why, long as I have been in the business
—nearly forty years now—l never knew how to play
juveniles until six months ago. Keep that boy to old
men’s parts and walking gentlemen for another twenty
years, and he may become an actor.”
Billy played Dill, and doubled himself four times with
other characters, while Mrs. Everett played Barbara Hare
and Corney Carlyle at the same time. One night they
put up a garbled version of the Merchant of Venice ,
which Gillott had arranged for in opposition to Mawson,
who wanted Macbeth, so that he might have a broadsword
combat in every scene.
Everett had been cast for the Doge, but he had a merry


heart and a gullet that attracted beer from vast distances ;
and at the last moment Billy had to do the Doge and his
own part also.
Then Sailer robed Billy in a table-cloth, and sat him on
a great case draped by another table-cloth ; and as he
didn’t know the text, the book was placed on the case so
that he might read the parts from it.
A dozen times a page he lost the place, and as nobody
was on nodding terms with the play, no cues were given,
and the curtain fell on four incoherent acts, which left the
audience of that town in a state of great disquiet until
the day of their collective death as to the meaning of the
play.
But old Everett returned to duty apologetically, although
his own buoyant soul had made his peace before he came ;
for he was so good-humoured that even very selfish men
liked him. The two rarest forces in the world are a heart
of energy and a soul of joy, and old Everett had the last
still, as he had had the first when young.
The outlook changed from sepia to Indian ink. Billy’s
fifty pounds had long since run through Salier’s sieving
fingers ; and now that Billy was suspected of being as
moneyless as the others the cheerful deference of old had
fallen into disuse, and the men of the company called him
“ Cully ” and “ Rocks.” None knew of the ten pounds he
carried in a detachable pocket buttoned to his shirt
between the shoulder-blades ; and when his clothes and
the two pounds of cigarette tobacco with which he started
his stage life had been distributed, he was left to himself
—that is to say, to Miss Raneham.
The reduction of his raiment by the borrowings of the
company had been rapid. A shirt to this one and a tie to that
—here a little and there a little. As the wardrobe became
bare, Gillott “borrowed” one of Billy’s portmanteaus to
hold his “borrowings,” and although the whole of the
impudent fraud was apparent to Billy, and Miss Raneham
rated him for his complaisance, he felt the shame of youth


at asking for its own ; and Gillott dressed better as Billy
t0 «« S ” were so easily started. Firstly,
The -A he wanted a ruffled shirt for his part m a
G^°l and he s hoW ed that, by opening the pleats
-»«.»««• »» h d
and her apparentu.approach-
>bf' m o M k pose should have saved him
EVBn a • a- borrowed Billy’s best black trousers ; and
from cadging, . from below the knee and
having rolled them up ■»« > '“ to. “ ««» he
Claud. Me,no... in the
■tr.ES-
greatly relieved, Bill, »en,
J£k to his pipe, a return which was very good
■“Et." S’u—•
farce, tragedy, romantic dram “' “ d f °‘ s "
stage-art had been t L people of
line the company was most com } dagger the
Gilargambone thought Gillott s address to tne gg
funniest thing they had ever to
who played the Bleeding ± the
physician, and some other parts, as quire g
*Z:: in the whole business beyond
flJSto? the public continuously stayed away 1 and the


public showed no intention of reversing its habit, even
when that conceited wreck, Mawson, played Dick
Swiveller, in the light and airy style of a musth elephant.
Miss Raneham was little Nell, Mrs. Jarley, and Mrs.
Quilp, all in the one evening ; Billy did Sampson Brass
and Grandfather Trent, being given these pares by
reason of his ridiculous youthfulness ; and Gillott snarled
and bellowed and enjoyed himself as Quilp.
Then old Everett insisted on being heard. Some of
their repertoire had been too ancient, he said, and some
too modern—he proposed to strike the happy medium
with the Soldier of France. Mawson agreed when he
found that his part had several broadsword combats in it ;
and Miss Raneham, after a prolonged and heated argu-
ment with Mrs. Everett, gave way to that lady, who said
in a robust tone that she had played leading lady in this
very play, the Soldier of France , twenty years ago, ind
she would like to know who would dare to play ker
characters in a commonwealth company.
They played the Soldier of France at the Mechanics’ In-
stitute, Oanwait, for the first time. The Mechanics’ Insti-
tute was also used as the local court of petty sessions,
and the stage was built on trestles, the back of the stage
masking a fireplace.
Before this the company hung the one scene that re-
mained to it—representing a castle on a hill and with
trees growing out of the clouds. Billy had set the scene,
and placed the three chairs that no country company acts
without, a few inches from the back cloth.
When Mrs. Everett’s cue came she entered unsteadily
to Gillott, having anticipated the reward of her artistic
triumph. With the usual foolishness of the human she
moved the chair so that one of its legs carried the scene
back and hung over the fireplace. Then with great
dignity she seated herself, the chair fell through the scene
cloth, the lady was overthrown, and for two minutes—for


the accursed curtain would not fall—the audience saw
that Mrs. Everett wore white stockings and that she had
been walking in deep liquid mud.
Each of the company flew to his pet horror as soon as
the curtain had lowered. Gillott bellowed that it was a
most unladylike thing to spoil his scene. In front, the
shrieking audience almost suffocated with its laughter ;
behind the curtain the company wrangled and recrimi-
nated.
Gillott: “ Mrs. Everett, I have never been so insulted in
the whole course of my professional career.”
The rich fruity voice of Mawson : “How, I ask any
sane person, is this company to earn its salt if a lady
insults an audience as Mrs. Everett has done ? ”
Salier : “It’s no good going on —the back seats are
yelling for their money back —we’ll return it now, and play
again to-morrow.”
The company groaned —it was the first fair audience
they had had for months, and many of them burst into
further abuse of Mrs. Everett’s stockings.
Everett —optimistic to the end—stopped them, speaking
joyfully, and rubbing his hands in self-congratulation.
“ Why, this is the best thing that could have happened,
unfortunate as this accident to my wife may seem.
Everybody will talk about this —the —er —accident. It’s
the best advertisement we could have had—and we’ll have
a thumping house to-morrow night.”
But for once his optimism failed to cheer his hearers,
and they talked loudly in condemnation of Mrs. Everett,
and Miss Raneham remarked incisively :
“ It wasn’t an accident—it was too much gin.”
Mrs. Everett fumblingly replaced the wig which had
been knocked awry by her fall, and in a murderous tone
she replied :
“Drink or no drink I've been a virtuous woman
always. I've never allowed men to lower me in my own
estimation or anybody else’s.”


To which Miss Raneham :
“ Don’t you say that to me —you old cat.”
“ Old cat! You —you —wanton —you strumpet.
Everett took his wife away just in time, and Salier
argued Miss Raneham into a chilly quiet.
Billy had run off the stage and out of the hall when he
heard these words applied to his goddess. He was
absorbed by the little crowd of the audience that still
laughed, but with the added zest of the knowledge that
all the money had been returned, and that the farce had
been performed to a free house.
He broke away from the crowd as soon as he could, and
walked into a belt of gums. There he found a prone
trunk, and sat on it, and thought, and chewed the insult
to Miss Raneham until his thoughts made him almost
physically sick.
Mrs. Everett had called his star “strumpet” and
“wanton,” and the angel that guards virtue (in dramatic
performances, at any rate) had sent no thunderbolt to
crush the slanderer. His mind did not doubt —it was
simply impossible for Miss Raneham to be anything but
that his idealistic eye regarded her. Had a man insulted
her so, Billy would have given him his choice of weapons,
and prepared himself for death ; but chivalry to the sex of
the offender had to be recognised, and so he resolved to
ask Miss Raneham to marry him, the vehicle of his
thoughts being the resolve to “show her stainless to the
world.”
The decision to “ show her stainless before the world ”
involved the necessity of making himself appear as a new
kind of ass to the universal eye ; but he did not regard
that contingency, and returned to the hall feeling like
a chapter of the heroic romances of early in the last
century.
He found Miss Raneham packing up. She had decided
to leave the company if Mrs. Everett stayed in it. At the


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 107
other end of the dressing-room Mrs. Everett was packing,
but more unsteadily, and addressed to a very faded yellow
velvet bonnet the statement that she would leave the
company unless Miss Raneham was immediately dis-
charged with all due dishonours.


CHAPTER XV
As Billy entered the atmosphere had that leaden hush
which precedes great storms in the tropics another
recriminatory sentence would have brought the two
cyclonic ladies into collision.
“ Will you come out for a walk, Miss Raneham ? ”
“Not just now, Wilfred.”
“Do ! I have something important to say.”
Her eyes began to laugh. “ Why, you’re as impressive
as Gillott at a rehearsal. What’s the joke ? ”
“It isn’t a joke—l want you to come out now.”
She immediately closed down the half-packed box, cast
one last look of scorn at Mrs. Everett, and walked out
with him.
They passed into the gum belt, where Billy had wrestled
with his soul, and at his asking, she sat on the fallen tree.
Billy stood beside her and spoke, his face burning in its
shame as he reviewed the awful accusation of Mrs. Everett.
“ What Mrs. Everett said ! Was it true ? ”
Surely few women are called upon to choose between
two such ways in the space of a breath. If she would
tell him what his own observation should have told him
long before, that that golden head and those Madonna
eyes were the couriers of a courtesan, his idealism might
vanish, and a healthy animalism take its place. Here
was her opportunity to win this boy, as she had longed,
and yet she did not take it.
For this idealism of her, now that there seemed a
possibility of it being destroyed, became very dear. She
was a woman only from the sex point of view; but hidden


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 109
below the mass of exaggerated animalism was the desire
of being loved for the virtues she did not possess—that
which, in a lower order of courtesan intelligence, is re-
presented by the hunger to be considered quite respectable
and regular.
In a flash her arguments had presented themselves, and
she had decided. She assumed her most electric look and
said, almost with real tears.
“ Oh, Wilfred ! can you believe it? ”
And “Wilfred,” full of horror of himself—wondering
how such a man as he was allowed to live—said he did not
believe it; and with more of a mother-desire to protect
this virtue than a man-desire to spoil it, he took her in his
arms, where she had been scheming to be for three
months, and called her his queen —which she truly was
except for the difference of an “A” in the spelling—and
asked her to marry him that he might “show her stainless
to the world.”
Her pity for his general ignorance perverted her inclina-
tion to laugh, and she almost wept in compromise. And
then she said, “ I can’t—l can’t.”
“You don’t love me then,” said Billy, shaking as he
thought, because he loved her, but really for the reason
that his ideals and his self-unrecognised conceit were
striking attitudes inside him.
“It isn’t that,” she replied. “I do love you.”
There was an interlude, and Miss Raneham felt almost
young again.
“ Then, why not? ”
“ Oh, I’m too old.”
“You’re not why I’m eighteen!” His shoulders
squared and his chin rose an inch higher as he spoke.
“ But I’m twenty-two.” Her age was really thirty-six.
“That’s nothing,” said he, regarding her dyed hair and
pink cheeks affectionately; “you don’t look more than
sixteen.”
“ But I can’t—l can’t.”


“Yes you can marry me and give me the right to
protect you.” And his ideals struck another attitude.
She shook her head slowly—half inclined to take the
plunge. She saw all the consequences—she knew that if
he once accepted the responsibilities involved in giving her
his name, he would never fail in the responsibilities, even
if he grew to hate her—as he would, as she recognised he
would ; although her grasshopper nature prompted her to
take him in his summer and care nothing for the north
wind that might blister the earth to-morrow.
And then she felt some maternal pity for him, and
wondered if her own son, who was about Billy’s age had
ever been tempted in this wise by some old harridan (a
month or so older than herself). He was indeed desirable,
but there was only one way to come by him ; and bigamy
is a nasty word.
“ I am married already.”
“ Married! ” echoed Billy, striking another mental
attitude.
The truth left her and she acted.
“Yes. I was very young—we were never suited—he is
in Sydney now; I live with him when lam there, but he
does not understand me.”
She began to cry, half from the force of her own
histronic ability and half in self-pity ; and Billy raved at
large—at her hard fate, and the unloving husband, and all
the other ontoward circumstances which had combined to
deplume this angel.
They acted all the way back to the hotel, did these two
self deceivers ; and at the door of her room he left her,
after kissing her as if the limelight were really on him.
That night the question as to whether Mrs. Everett or
Miss Raneham should leave the company was settled in
favour of the former. Old Everett’s optimism was for the
first time shaken—a slight paralysis had called to warn
him of the time that comes to all men when a merry soul
must sew its shroud, and Mrs. Everett had decided to
take him home.


CHAPTER XVI
The youth who had idealised Miss Raneham was worried
over the fact of his ideal’s concealed marriage, and showed
the worry so much that the pianist who liked him greatly
said, “ Look here, sonny, don’t you give that dyed old gal
a minute. She can’t remember when she was straight.
It was ten years before she ever saw a stage, I’ll swear.”
He was asked for proofs, and gave them.
Then seeing the sudden change in Billy’s face, he added,
“ I’m sorry I didn’t know. I never thought you could
take it like this. Why, she’s old enough to be your
mother. ”
“ She isn’t —she's only twenty-three.”
“Oh, don’t tell me that! She’s close up forty. An'
she’s not worth while.”
“ I know she isn’t," said Billy, with an air half despair-
ing and half man of the world. “ None of ’em's worth
that."
“That’s where you're wrong, Cully. Plenty of 'em’s
worth that—but they’re not this sort. And, look here!
I’ll give you a point. You’ve been writin’ poetry to her,
haven’t you ? ”
“Yes," replied Billy, unable to wholly disguise the
shame.
“ Well, take my tip an’ get ’em all back again. Time
will come when you’ll want to kick yourself for writing it.
And take another tip—never do any writing to a woman
unless you can trust her ; and not then, except when you’re
playin’ her for keeps.”
He left Billy soon after this philosophic utterance ; and


the young man stayed there with all the miseries of the
earth on his shoulders.
At about ten o’clock she passed the bar and heard him
talk loudly, and was much shocked at his evident excess ;
for his cleanliness of life had been so near to her as to
make her own indiscriminate ways appear more regular.
No man is more shocked than the bishop when he dis-
covers the curate practising the bishop's vices ; the height
of outraged feeling is reached by the embezzling accountant
who finds the office boy stealing the petty cash.
She passed and repassed the door a dozen times, and
then she stopped and called, “ Wilfred.”
“My name’s not Wilfred —it’s Billy.” This with the
triumphant air of the worm who has turned.
“Wilfred.”
“ What do you want ? ”
“ Come here. ”
He muttered grumblingly, but he came to the door,
“ I have only one favour to ask of you, Miss Raneham,
and that is that you will return all my letters and—er—
verses.”
He began to know himself a little, and, therefore, to
see that he was ridiculous, and the knowledge made him
the more annoyed with her.
Then she played the card that had given her the trick
before, whenever he had sulked.
“You shall have them,” she said, acting indignation.
She returned with the letters and his many attempts at
verse, and he tore the bulky package across and gave it to
the fire in the commercial room.
Firmness having been routed, she brought up a storm-
ing party of tears, and Billy began to be affected.
“ I don’t want to say anything unkind to you,” he said,
“ but —I know all about you and your deceit, and I don’t
want you to speak to me again. ”
She left him as if enraged, but really ashamed for the
first time in her life ; and Billy sobered himself and wrote


some verses on his condition, with frequent allusions to the
cold world and the dead condition of his heart.
Verses and melancholy occupied him in the daytime, and
at night he had plenty to do as he had been promoted
to playing the lovers. In their first scene together Miss
Raneham lay in his arms, thinking that now he must
soften to her. But he held her with a draper’s clasp,
and dodged even the stage direction to kiss her, so that
the frosty peck he called a kiss was given to the back of
his own hand.
When travelling they never spoke to each other, and
both were miserable —she because now that he seemed
doubly unattainable he was trebly dear ; and he because
the habit of his dalliance had been broken so suddenly—
as a confirmed drunkard dies if his liquor is stopped too
quickly.
At night, a week after the fight with the pianist, she
stopped Billy as he was leaving the hall, saying, almost
choked by emotion, “ I am not so bad as you think.
Let me explain ! Ah ! Wilfred, you are too harsh.”
Pity for her swept him or seemed to. He could not be
sure which. In that atmosphere they rarely had an honest
emotion • and acted well always except when on the
stage.
“ Well, if you can explain—then.”
“ Wilfred ! give me the chance ! Will you come up on
the balcony to-night? Not till after twelve. I have a
headache.”
“ I will —of course—if you can explain.”
“ I can—l can—you will come ? ”
“Yes,” said Billy, quite disarmed, “ Pll be there.”
By midnight he was on the balcony, and after placing
two deck-chairs in the shadow, he went to her door and
knocked gently.
She opened it, and the light from the room smote the
darkness of the balcony as a mailed and brilliant hand.
She was in a heliotrope dressing-gown —her Ups took


the hue of the dress, and were exaggerated to blueness by
desire. . . , ,
She put forth her hand and drew him in, closed the
door, threw her arms around his neck and wept.
“ Poor woman,” he thought, “ had she been so much to
blame ! And she was to explain.”
So he kissed her, and as he did her tears dried as if
by magic. She returned the caress with kisses full of
blood and fire.
She would explain directly, and meantime life was a
good thing.
Next day it rained, and he had forgotten all about the
explanations she had promised.


CHAPTER XVII
For the month that the company lasted after the conquest
of Billy that progressive youth lived in a very gross
materialism thinking he had for ever lost his ideals,
whereas he had merely lost his ideal of Miss Raneham.
Winter had come, and with it even smaller audiences.
Then one njorning Salier came to them and said: “It’s
every man for himself now. I thought we’d get a house
to-night with that new thing ” (new because it had not
been played for thirty years). “ And I tried it last night on
the dog —but that idiot Mawson introduced a gag about
Wesleyans, and they’re all Wesleyan’s here—so now
we’re hauled to two blocks.”
Salier had been a sailor, he said —his enemies said a
steward.
“ And what’s to be done? ” asked Miss Raneham, her
hand clasping Billy.
“ Everybody get home the best way he can.”
Their hands clasped tighter, and Billy’s dream vanished,
and he became a man again.
“Would you stay here with me?” he asked, when
Salier had left them. “ I could get work.”
His ideal of her had vanished utterly, but for the sake
of the ideal she alleged she held of him, he felt it merely
honourable to be faithful to his folly.
“Oh 1 not here ! Oh ! Wilfred, I couldn’t live in a
place like this.”
The opium dream was ended then. Had he, after all,
been her plaything only, as the pianist had hinted ?
“ You would like to go home? ”


U y es —but how can we get away ? ”
“We can’t,” said Billy, “ but you can;” and he told
her of the money he had carried so long in readiness for
the emergency.
u oh —but I couldn’t leave you ; but sne said it m a
tone which stated plainly enough that she could
“ You o-et ready, and I’ll find what the fare to Melbourne
and on to°Sydney is.” And he went, glad that he was
breathing more freely, now that the fumes of the sex-
drugging were disappearing under the pressure of the time.
He found that the through fare was five pounds, and
added to that two pounds for her expenses ; for himse f
he was certain of work somewhere, and he was pleased to
be naked again.
When he returned she had finished packing, and was
seated on her baggage and trying to weep-but with in-
different success. He gave her the money, and she hung
round his neck and wept; and he felt sorry for her, and
glad for himself. ,
Seated in the train she gave him her home address, and
he learned for the first time the name of her husband—
and she wept again, and knew this time her own falsity;
for the safety of the train had given her a new joy—the
ioy of being delivered from the wrath to come.
The bell rang, and she kissed him as he stood at the
window, holding his head close until he felt suffocated,
and wished the train would take her away quick y; and
then, as her tears fell (real tears this time), all those
evidences of age, which his careless, unobservant eye,
making its vision from the haste of first impressions, had
missed until now, became in a flash a horror to him.
The train steamed out, and Billy felt glad to be free and
clean again; and his thoughts took a new , t " m ashl ->
name was called from the tail of the tram, and the fat face
of Salier looked out from the guard-van. Billy waved
his hand to Salier, who withdrew his head just too late
to escape the observation of Gillott, Mawson, and the
pianist, who yelled in execration of the departing manager.


They gathered round Billy, and Gillott and Mawson
further execrated Salier in blank verse. The pianist
laughed as if it were all a good joke, and Billy began to
love his merry soul.
He asked the three to drink, and they accepted the
invitation so thoroughly that Billy and the pianist finally
left Mawson weeping, and Gillott pacing the bar, and
saying at Intervals, “ Abandoned’’—striking his forehead
as he spoke. . , ,
Billy found temporary employment in a store, and the
oianist taught music. For a month they did this to earn
money enough to take Mawson and Gillott to Melbourne,
and to pay the by-drinkings of those tragedians while
awaiting their manumission. Great relief came to them
as they parted with the broadsword actor and the ranter,
both of whom acted until the end.
Two weeks more work gave Billy enough to see him
through to Sydney. The pianist decided to stay and
S 3? the township the -Maiden’s Prayer’’ and “Nelly
Bly ” and with regrets on both sides they parted.
• The train took the youth to Melbourne, and he spent a
wondrous day there—so wondrous that he had to travel
steerage to Sydney, the Comida making that port on an
evening in early September, and casting him out on the
wharf with five shillings in his pocket, ready to make new
overtures to Fortune.


CHAPTER XVIII
His first act next day on rising from his bed in one of
those hideous and insanitary barracks known as Cotfee
Palaces —which have the palatial qualities of a tenth-rate
public-house, and whose coffee is beneath contempt was
to find the card bearing the Sydney address of Miss
Raneham. He read it for the thousandth time, as he
walked indecisively to the Pyrmont Bridge. While cross-
ing that crazy structure, he suddenly came to a decision.
He tore the card into little pieces, and with it tore the
memory of her, and threw the card into the stream and
the memory out of his life.
He went to breakfast light-heartedly, and having eaten
courage into himself, started out to face the world. By
noon he had exhausted the chances of the newspaper
offices ; being refused by the heads of the reporting staffs
in every case principally because he had had no city
newspaper experience, but also because he was not a
shorthand man.
Then he applied for the clerkly positions advertised, and
failed in them ; and decided that only hard manual labour
was open to him, and that it must be tried next dawn.
There were advertisements for strikers at a Pyrmont
engineering works, and, with a very hazy idea of a striker s
duties, he decided to be a striker.
An hour later he was engaged and handed over to a
smith, who was grumblingly blowing the bellows at one
of the scores of small forges in the great musical pande-
monium they called the smith’s shop.
Clink —clank—clink—clank—chime—chime—clank ! A
hundred hammers fell and thudded softly on white-hot


forgings, and rang on the anvils ; fifty fires glowed and
roared ; fifty smiths and fifty strikers beat the metals to
substance, and welded them into form ; fifty showers of
sparks glowed momentarily on a hundred basil aprons ;
the stale smell of hot metal suddenly plunged in water
was in the air ; the men breathed an atmosphere mixed
with baked dust and charcoal fumes.
While his smith readied the small forging that was to
be their first job, Billy looked round in some trepidation
and tried to educate his head and arm to the hammer-
beats, which the other strikers seemed to make by instinct.
“Get the seven-pound ’ammer,” said the smith, and
Billy, trying to weigh them, handled hammer after
hammer until he struck one that seemed the right weight,
and was so by accident.
“Now, then,” said the smith, lifting the light forging
from the fire with his pincers and taking his light hammer.
Billy lifted his seven-pounder, and taking the time from
the musical banging of the smith’s hammer on the anvil—
the conductor tapping his desk for the larger hammer to
find its time—he struck, half missed the heavy, rounded
forging, and dealt the anvil a blow which jarred his arms
almost out of the sockets.
The smith, a man with a querulous expression that
gave his mouth the appearance of being clothed in a
perpetual sneer, lifted his eyebrows and his upper lip;
and Billy —his desperation making him sure —caught the
time and the place, and struck the forging until the smith
again embarrassed him by ringing on the anvil a signal
to stop striking; and that being disregarded, removed
the forging to the fire again. Then Billy struck the anvil
again, and almost shook his own head off as the seven-
pounder bounced from the elastic steel.
“Ye’re a bit too strong,” said the smith in a mean
surly voice. “ D’ye want to make that anvil inter em’ry
powder?”
He motioned Billy to blow the bellows, and just as the


new striker was becoming used to that he ordered him
away from it and called for the seven-pounder again.
“ Chime —chime—chime—clink—chime—clink—chime
—clink—chime.” The seven-pounder rose and fell, and
wrought the white-hot metal until the striker’s eyes pro-
truded and his spine began to sweat. He thought he had
been striking for many years—when a dozen steam
whistles blew piercing blasts, and every man dropped
instantly whatever he had in hand and ran for his break-
fast.
“What time is it?” he asked the smith; and that
gentleman, who had already settled down to eat great
masses of cold pork with some of the spark-dust and steel
filings from his unwashed hands, growled, “eight o’clock
—three-quarters uv a hour for brekfus.”
Only two hours’ work ! All that hell of endeavour had
given him but one and eightpence.
He left the works to seek breakfast, and found it in
a house of one of those shocking terraces that overbuild
Sydney. He ate even a larger breakfast than usual, and
returned to four hours of agony; the hammer bringing
into highly-tensioned play back and chest muscles he had
never used before.
During that day the smith, who knew at once that
Billy had never before lifted a hammer, evidenced the
possession of a humour which was worse than his surli-
ness. In recognition of Billy’s awkwardness he nick-
named Billy “crookedy”—and the nickname “stuck,’’and
was flung at Billy a hundred times a day by the hundred
men and boys in the smith’s shop.
Now, any nickname that hurts is something to laugh at
for the first day, to scornfully ignore on the next, to be
irritated at on the third, and to go mad with rage at the
mere mention of after a week or so of endurance.
And in the second week of his servitude, during a
dinner hour, he made a new stick for his own beating.
Slowe, the smith, had been lecturing a number of the


smiths on some disputed point of forging, and in explana-
tion used some word which his audience objected to.
“What’s that mean?” said Risby, a hairy smith of
colossal build.
“ It’s a teachanical term,” replied Slowe —little ripples
of pride coursing over him as he mouthed his mispro-
nunciatlon.
“You mean technical,” said Billy, and Slowe reddened
with rage until his face looked like a furnace in blast.
Irritating laughter broke around him, and one voice
sa i(l “ Got yer match now, Slowe. Mind he ain’t goin’
to be a rival canderdate.”
For Slowe was branch-president of his union, and was
almost certain to get the Labour nomination for the Pyrmont
seat in the Assembly when the labour organisations became
politically strong enough ; and at this sally his eyes were
filled with murder.
“ I mean teachanical,” he roared. “That’s wot I mean!
W’y, yer cub, will yer try to learn me! Yer can’t lift a
’ammer proper yet. ”
“And you can’t lift words properly either,” said Billy,
his doggedness expressing itself by his boot-toe drawing
arabesques in the baked, black, casting sand.
The laughter of the strikers applauded; but the smiths,
jealous of their privileges as any noble of the vested
interests his father stole, encouraged Slowe with remarks
to the effect that “ they wouldn’t allow any striker belong-
ing to them to give backslack like that. ”
Slowe’s blood retreated from his face and the sneer
came back.
“ No more o’ yer lip,” said he, and the audience gasped
•in astonishment at this light punishment, but the sting was
in the tail of the sentence. “No more o’ yer lip—Mister
Teachanical ’’and he repeated that obscenity which
had given teeth to the first nickname.
A howl of laughter went round the shop—the delight of
devils when they see another devil hurt —and Billy, stung
almost to madness by the cunning of the indecency, lifted a


hammer, took a step towards Slowe, retreated, dropped
the hammer, and went out.
The last action should have been the first, and the first,
which only proved him guilty of indecision, should have
remained unacted. When the whistles shrieked and work
restarted, neither Slowe nor his striker spoke ; the smith
giving the striker instructions in the manual language of
the anvil chime.
At last this language became inadequate; and as Slowe,
evidently trying to embarrass the blows of the seven-
pounder, suddenly moved the curved forging on to the
peak of the anvil, Billy dealt a mighty blow to where
the forging should have been. The impact jarred him
almost to paralysis, and the bouncing hammer - head
snapped its handle at the eye.
The smith cursed and told him to get another hammer.
Billy did so, poised it, and again the smith half laid a trap
for him, so that the hammer fell in the wrong place again,
and Slowe smiled like a thin-lipped devil. A gusty rage
came over the striker. He lifted the hammer, and another
half second would have seen it crashing through Slowe’s
mean skull. Just in time his reason returned, and as it
was too late to stop the hammer falling, he gave it a side-
long twist, so that it crashed through the hood over the
forge, streaming away the thin sheet-iron as if it had been
paper. Slowe was white to the ears now, his eyes almost
green with fear ; but Billy looked at him only once and then
went to the office, intimated that he would not work again,
and asked that his time should be made up.
“Are you too frightened of him to stay?” asked the
clerk, as he made up the tenpence an hour.
“I’m not frightened of him at all,” replied Billy, “but
I’m frightened of myself. If I stayed here longer, I’d
have to kill him ! ”
The clerk became suddenly silent and thought of send-
ing for the police; but contented himself with deducting
more than the value of the forge-hood which the whirling
hammer had destroyed.


CHAPTER XIX
There were two ships waiting for the dock, and one, a
big steel side-wheeler, was taken first. Then Billy, with a
hundred other men, waited six hours of their own time
for the dock to be pumped out. There were all sorts
of men in the waiting crowd—the big fresh-faced boys,
as yet unharmed by red and white lead, physically
ignorant of the effects of raw sienna, their hands not
yet closed to sweating by much handling of ochres.
There were old hands —of the careless kind—who had
eaten their meals with a certain amount of paint from
their hands ; men whose breath smelt of pyrites ; whose
eye-whites had the half-white, brilliantly-cold appearance
of lead when it is being broken up with oil, and whose
cheeks had lost their blood, so that beneath the skin
there seemed to be a new and foreign pigment, in colour
like the colour of driers.
“ I s’pose you’ll be in the fust batch?” said one of these
men to Billy.
“Yes —won’t you? ”
“ No; I’ll wait for the clean ship.” (He meant a ship
with her contour unbroken by wheels.) “ I can’t go on
a side-wheeler. Some’ow I always get put on the floats,
and them levers and spokes of them wheels they puzzle
me, and I go on thinkin’ about ’em till I’m like to fall.
I did fall out o’ the wheel o’ the City o’ Brisbane one
night, an’ come clap down on the dock floor, an’ smashed
me ’ip. So I don’t go on them side-wheelers now, even
if I have ter wait two shifts for a screw boat.”
The floor of the dock showed black under the water


eddying to the intake of the great pumps, and the
foremen mustered them to the paint-shop, and armed
them with scrapers and paint and brushes. The nonde-
script legion swarmed over the ship, lowered stages and
attacked the plates at the Plimsoll mark; descended to
the floor of the dock and pecked with the triangular
scrapers at the keel; entered the doors in the sponsons,
and clustered on the floats and struts of the great wheels.
Billy noticed that the old men were put on the dock
floors, the middle-aged painters on the lower stagings,
and the younger men on the higher stages and in the
perplexities of the wheels—and as he stood in uncertainty
the foreman called :
“ You—hey—what’s yer name?
“Pagan.”
“Well, Pagan, you go in the starboard wheel.
Peberdy! you show him how.”
Billy turned, and saw that Dan Peberdy, an acquaintance
of his early boyhood, who years ago had led small pirates
to Sydney to steal box-lids from the warehouses. He
had grown very tall—but although he was over twenty he
had the ridiculously thin neck of a child, and an infantile
down on his cheeks was his nearest approach to the
dignity of a beard.
Dan Peberdy greeted him pleasantly, but with all the un-
effusiveness of the average Australian, who is as ashamed
as a Red Indian when he betrays emotion.
They seated themselves in the perplexities of the wheel
and talked, and cracked and stripped the sea-eaten paint
from the perishing steel.
“Chip—chip—chip—chip,” said the hull, responding to
the hundred human woodpeckers tapping at her plates ;
and far below, from the floor of the dock, came the sound
of the paint chips falling, almost as softly as feathers.
Between the light blows of the scrapers, Billy and Dan
Peberdy talked.
“ Your old woman was down the road last Satardee.”


Billy did not like to hear his mother spoken of as
« your old woman ” ; but he knew it was merely portion
of the language, and so he lei it pass.
“ Is she looking well? ” he asked, with something of a
heart tremor.
“Oh, yes! Seen yer brother Jack, too. He’s a’ell of a
toff —tall ’at and long dogger on, an’ shiny boots. ’E
got married ’bout five weeks ago. I seen it in the paper.”
“ And how is my father? ”
“Oh! ’e looks orlright—but ’e’s got quieter. Th’ other
day a bloke cheeked ’im, an’ yer father didn’t hit ’im ——
’Ow long since yer seen ’em ? ”
“ Over a year,” said Billy, for the first time feeling like
a criminal.
“ But ye’ve wrote to ’em ? ”
“ No, not for six months. I couldn’t write when I had
no money to send, but I’ll write when I get my first week
here.”
“ Won’t yer go ’ome then ? ”
“No —not while I’m stiff. When I went away I said
I wouldn’t go home again until I was successful; and I
won’t.”
Penerby looked at him in admiring surprise. “ Gor’
bloo me! ye’ve got plenty o’ spunk. Now me—’soon’s I
go a stoomer, I get away to th’ ol’ woman—no dirty side
about me.”
The scrapers chipped away —the flakes of old paint
made feathery descents to the dock floors—the work went
on for an eternity. The scrapers were laid aside, and the
vermilion paint offended the eye in great tracts of the hull,
and flamed at the ends of long brushes.
The sun flamed on this hell of paint and steel, and
frizzled the brains of the workmen through their paint-
stricken eyes. In the sponsons, Billy understood why
men dodged side-wheel ships in summer. Below him,
under the water-line and the circle of the floats, men had
finished with the scrapers and were already painting. The


heat on the steel hull brought the nausea of it up to him - T
and from above, the heat of a furnace descended on him—
not diffused, but in one awful ray -aiming always at a
space on his skull, just above the left ear, and the size of
a pin point; aiming there with such a devilish persistency
that it became tangible.
And just as Billy had decided that he simply could not
breathe another moment in that sickening atmosphere, and
that five minutes more would send his scraper rolling off
the float, and himself after it, to the dock floor, a heavenly
bell sounded “ hope ” and “ intermission ” ; and trembling
from the tension, he staggered through the door in the
sponson and into the open day again.
Dan Peberdy tumbled out of the little red-hot iron door
after Billy, and they found a lunching place under the cool
green coppered sides of a trading brig from the Islands,
which was hauled up on the slip.
Peberdy carefully washed his hands in the sea water,
and then again in some hot water from their billy-can,
which the tea-boys of the yard had prepared.
Then he made the tea —very strong and very sweet —in
equal portions of ingredients.
Billy washed also, and Peberdy, regarding him approv-
ingly, said, “ That’s right! Might’s well cut yer throat as
eat with dirty ’an’s.”
They ate and talked, and Billy arranged to leave his
boarding-house and go to live with Dan. He had no
great affection for Peberdy, but Peberdy told many stories
of the “push,” and curiosity and the hunger for new
sensations decided the recruit.


CHAPTER XX
Every Saturday Billy drew his pay—varying from two
pounds to forty-eight shillings—and having sent fifteen
shillings of it home with a letter—for he knew that his
money-affection was not the kind that would content his
family —he enjoyed his mood as his mood listed him ; with
books, of which he was still a glutton, and in the human
education to be got when the two-up school was in
session, or the nightly push club assembled—the “kerb
association” as some of them called it, for the assembly
rooms were the street.
In the push club sessions ordinary traffic was suspended.
Two men were allowed to pass without comment; the
solitary pedestrian was shouted at, but if he chose not to
reply, might proceed in peace; the Chinamen, and there
were many in the quarter, were assailed with half-pidgin,
half-Chinese insults that drove them frantic. If their rage
got the better of them to such a foolish extent as to
suggest reply, the “push” beat them with the hardest
objects handy. Experience had made both sides as
cunning as an adultress, and when the “ push ” assembled
as the lamps were lit, all the Chinese population came to
its front doors and sat there ready to repel the assault.
Billy did not join in their insults of passers-by, nor their
harrying of the yellow alien ; but he was liked generally,
although the others thought his habit of constant work
a proof of weakness, and regarded his habit of constant
reading as an eccentricity which entitled him to pity.
One evening in early October Billy joined the “push”
session in the Argyle Cut. Brummy Jones, a lanky


larrikin of twenty-three, presided that night, and around
him were collected a dozen members of the “push.” All of
them very splendid in their after-work wear; with velvet-
collared coats, wide-flapping trousers, and dizzy-heeled
boots, laced from the ankle to the toe —with narrow
crimson neck-ties on their scrawny throats, very heavy
silver watch-chains, and very large meerschaum pipes,
like Abel Finney’s. There were also a dozen donahs,
their ages varying from fifteen to twenty, for at twenty
the donah is old, and generally married.
The donahs were pert, short-frocked girls, wearing
their hair, short and stubbly because it was continually
annoyed by rough and red-hot curling tongs, in a pig-
tail. Their “fringes” hung over their eyes, their faces
were freckled, and they were mostly red-haired. They
wore exaggerated dress improvers, which they had to put
aside before they could sit down. Many of them, pallid
by reason of their factory work, had given themselves an
irregular fixed blush by rubbing crushed geranium petals
on their cheeks.
Brummy Jones was speaking, emphasising his state-
ments with periodical expectorations through his teeth.
He had a heavier silver watch-chain than any other ; his
hard felt hat was flatter and wider in the brim ; the little
finger of his right hand bore an enormous ring; the eye-
lets in his boots were a bright blue ; and his boots were
tied with crimson laces. He was altogether lovely.
The gas lamps shone in feeble challenge to the moon
that was not strong enough to light all the space of this
great tunnel—hewn by convicts through a sandstone
mountain; occasionally a passing vehicle flung a sickly
beam at the kerb association in session, but mostly the
association spoke in a half-darkness.
Brummy Jones spat through his teeth, and uttered the
law: “None o’ yous is goin’ to Athol no more. There
wus a lot a toffs there larst time. Nex’ week is the
butchers’ picnic to Cremorne, and we’ll all go there,”


The donahs began to chatter. “Steve’s gawnter tike
me,” said Connie Thompson, a sickly girl who worked in
a pickle factory, and who carried the stain of the wonder-
fully prepared condiment on her fingers.
Brummy spat. “ Thort he wus doin’ a three’er.”
“ So he wus, but ’e’s cornin’ out t’morrer, an’ larst time
I seen ’im, I told ’im I’d saved up for the picnic, an’ he
says he’d tike me.”
Some old jealousy burned in Aggie Alston, a very pale,
very clear-skinned girl, with magnificent hair—ruddy, but
not mere red, because it had a wonderful light somewhere
in it.
She said : “ I wouldn’t ’ave a bloke I ’ad t’ pay for—
anyway.”
“ You! You can’t get a bloke even by payin’ for
They were at each other’s throats in an instant, but
Brummy separated them, evidently not from nice notions
of the fighting of women, but because, as he said, there was
“no good wastin’ a good scrap.” They’d have to bottle
their wrath until next week, when they might fight, and
show to the butchers’ picnic the power and the glory of
the Flying Angels.
“She’s a skite,” yelled Aggie. “ I could get plenty o’
blokes if I wanted ’em but her voice betrayed the fact
that she didn’t believe herself.
Dan Peberdy joined the group, and having been informed
of the arrangements for the butchers’ picnic, he asked the
association if any of it was “cornin’ down the town,” and
Connie Thompson having answered “ yes,” Dan made his
obeisance —which was an expectoration through his teeth,
a sideways twist of the head, and the farewell of “So
long ” to the leader, and departed with his retinue.
Then Brummy spat as if it were a solemn religious
observance, twisted his head sideways, and remarking
“So long, chaps,” walked off delicately on his dizzy-
heeled boots towards the ‘ ‘ Rocks. ”
The session broke up—pebs and donahs wandered off


in couples bidding shrill “good-nights” as they departed,
and Billy and Aggie Alston were left alone.
Billy looked with a joy, half fleshy, half the joy of an
artist, at the singular brilliancy of her pallid face as
delicately white as if she were an aristocratic eater of
arsenic instead of a girl who labelled tins in a jam factory.
He broke the awkward silence with “ And won’t you go
to the picnic? ”
“I g’pose I’ll have to,” replied Aggie, all the vicious-
ness of a biting mare coming into her lips as she thought
of Connie Thompson. “Brummy says I’ll have to fight
her. I’ll fight her—quick and lively ! ”
“ But wouldn’t you go if you hadn’t to fight her ? ”
“ n 0 I haven’t got a bloke.”
“ Why haven’t you ? ”
“Oh! I could get plenty —of sorts. But I’m a bit
more particuler than the other girls is.”
“Look here,” said Billy impulsively, as usual. “If
you’ll promise not to fight I’ll take you.
Here was the triumph of Aggie! Billy the eccentric
the unapproachable —the scholar who spent nearly all
his money on books —had offered to take her to the
picnic. Cleopatra never knew such conquest.
“ I won’t hit her till she hits me—will that do? ”
Billy was fain to be content with that, and he walked with
her to the squalid boarding-house her mother kept in Essex
Street, and left her, building in her mind the golden cloth-
ing she would wear for the picnic. The hat which was a
masterpiece of pink straw, green tulle, and black feathers,
crowned by a very brassy buckle inlaid with precious
stones of glass —the light-brown dress piped with helio-
trope velvet—the dress improver she had seen flapping in
the breeze outside a draper’s shop in George Street—
which dress improver was almost as large as a crinoline,
and would look very imposing and billowy when she put
it aside to sit down.


CHAPTER XXI
The following Tuesday saw the Flying Angels started
for the butchers’ picnic at Cremorne. In startling contrast
to the raucous youths and the shrill ’girls who crowded
the steamers, the day was perfect—clean, pure, and with
a suggestion of a reserve of beauty and perfection not im-
mediately patent.
There were family groups—decent, clean-living people
with their children, and enormous baskets promising a
victual as generous as that day was, but this decency
was discounted by the velvet-collared men and the
flamboyant girls—who were merely noisy now, but
noisy enough to give some promise of the happenings
on the return voyage, by which time the beer and
the dancing would have done their work. Billy and
Aggie (her clothes carried out the promise she had made
herself on the night he had invited her to the picnic)
travelled on the Mystery— a steamer whose name fitted
jjgj. £qj- man knew how she kept afloat, and the
general prophecy of her end was that she would be
wrecked by collision with a jelly fish.
Of the ancient steamers conveying the picnickers of the
day, the Mystery was berthed last, and when Billy and
Aggie reached the “pavilion,” which was an open shed,
iron-roofed, and framed of round unbarked timbers, they
saw Dan Peberdy and his girl “ Chuffy ” Maloney, and
Brummy Jones and his girl, and Connie Thompson and
her “man,” whose small, close-cropped, round head told
the tale of his retirement, dancing on the uneven floor.


There was no pretence of enjoying the dance on that floor,
which sea air and weather had buckled in sharp edges and
sudden hollows. Billy and his charge looked on for some
minutes at this most solemn function —at the idiotic
seriousness of these men and their sweethearts revolving
on their toe-tips in a space that might have been de-
scribed by the oval of any of the men’s hat-brims ; and
then Aggie, putting out her arms in the regulation manner,
so that she looked as stiff as a Dutch doll, said ;
“ Have a darnce? ”
“No—no—no—l don’t dance,” said Billy, refuting the
proposal with energetic horror.
Her face clouded, but she humoured him.
“ All right—what’ll we do then ? ”
“Let’s go for a walk,” Billy proposed nervously. He
was full of shame at having placed his intelligence in the
position of being insulted. “And it’s time to get some-
thing to eat.”
“ It’s five-to-twelve,” said Aggie, consulting a little
silver watch, of which she was ostentatiously proud.
“Well, where do we eat at?”
“I brought the tucker,” replied Aggie; “it’s in a
basket—an’ a friend o’ mine—a married lady —brought
it for me. I didn’t like carrying it on the boat—it looks
so low.”
Billy wondered whether the “married lady” considered
basket carrying low, but he said nothing; and they pro-
ceeded to find the married lady. This done, Billy took the
basket, and after buying a bottle of beer for himself, and
a bottle of some preparation of copperas, known as ginger-
ale, for Aggie, they left the yellow beach and walked into
the bush.
The air, as they lost sight of the sea, became bluer and
darker as it borrowed hues from the rustling gum trees
that sometimes huddled together in belts, and sometimes
broke into parks, as if planted by man.
From the cleavages of the sandstones grew native roses,


true eyes and THE WHIRLWIND 133
and waratahs, and flannel flowers, and nondescript blooms
in blue, and flame-red, and orange, and ivory ; and at
sight of them all, Billy’s soul leaped into his eyes. Aggie
looked at him, and taking the admiration for herself,
thought he was “ coming round.”
« j sn ’t it fine ? ” asked Billy at last.
“ Oh ! it’s all right,” replied Aggie, rather disappointed;
“but you get used to ’em.”
She was used to them—on the jam labels her fingers
pasted on tins from January to December and back again.
Billy drew in another deep breath, and looking around,
decided that there could be no finer setting for the feast.
He placed the basket and the bottles in the centre of a
great flower bed, and threw himself down on the same
couch of bloom.
They ate the meat pies, which tasted of tallow—and
the fruit, which was passable—and the sandwiches, which
were not—and the cake, which to anybody with a recog-
nised liver would mean congestion of that organ—and
drank the beer and the copperas solution ; and then Billy
lay back in the flowery bed and smoked, while Aggie
threw the remnants of the tarts at him.
The pipe was smoked out, and Billy came from his day
dream and studied Aggie’s half-averted face. She had no
more lunch-remains to throw at him, and sat looking at
the gum clump and the suggestion of the sea beyond.
The filtered sun-rays struggled with the light in her hair,
and tinged the pallor of her face to the sheen of aluminium.
“ My word, Aggie, you look so pretty.”
“Garn ! ” said Aggie, almost breaking the spell by her
speech. “ I wish yer meant it.”
Billy rolled over to where she sat, asseverating on his
way that he really did mean it. When he reached her
side, he sat up and kissed her. Then Aggie immediately
collapsed on his arm and returned his kisses slowly; her
eyes were closed, and she moaned her satisfaction. Billy
tore himself from the temptation, rose from her side, and


walked to the basket. That he filled with flowers—glad ot
any occupation —and when he looked round, Aggie had
risen and walked a dozen paces off.
He called to her, and as she turned, he saw that her
hands were filled with bloom.
He hastened after her, and as he reached her side, she
desperately relieved herself of the embarrassment by
throwing the flowers in his face. Then she laughed
hysterically, seized his hat, and ran off with it into the
thicker scrub that now replaced the eucalypti park.
Billy dropped the basket, followed her, and caught her
with suspicious suddenness.
Her upturned face sought his, and Billy kissed her again,
and this time there was no prudence in him.
Then Aggie collapsed absolutely.
“ I’m sorry,” said Billy haltingly ; “ I’ve been wrong.”
She turned on him a merry face full of colour—the
pallor had miraculously disappeared.
“ Not much. Why?”
“Your good name,” said Billy—not so sure of his
ground this time.
“Don’t you fret, Bill—Oh, you dear old chap.” She
kissed him blusterously.
“ But your mother ? ”
“Oh ! mother ! She’s all right—she don’t know—and
if she did—what would she care ? ”
“ And the others ? ”
“ The others ! the push ! ” She laughed again. “ W’y
they’ll be jealous. That Connie! —she said I couldent
get a bloke.”
Her teeth snapped, and the viciousness came to her
lips again.
“ I’ll show her —I’ll show ’em all.”
The touch of his hand on her neck made her merr


They reached the basket and sat on the flowered
aga ‘? , __ an d crowned each other with garlands.
C ° At last Aggie said it was time to go, and they walked
1! blades of the gum park—swinging hands by
Sttle fingers, as every proper bloke and donah have
dO Air C sur?aS e certain proof of one of these irregular
Elements, they had exchanged hats. She looked very
en £ F the black felt, but Billy was fully conscious of the
ild tL. Aggie called a ha., aad
he consented to wear it only as a penance for his sin.


CHAPTER XXII
The Connie-Aggie feud died of inanition.
Aggie had refused to leave the jam factory—the wages
kept her independent, and she “wouldn’t take money
from no man, not even if she was married to him.” She
remained with her mother, and so earned the right to say,
as she did say quite proudly, that she was “ half-square]
anyway.”
Yet she was very exacting, and Billy had to fabricate
excuses that he might keep up his beloved reading. It
was only in his devotion to books that she slightly
despised him ; otherwise, she regarded him with the full
eye of pride, mixed with seme wantonness.
And one day a letter from his mother found him, saying
that his father was dangerously ill, and asking him to
return before death made return useless.
The full extent of the results of that selfishness, which
he had considered to be independence, came home to him
as he read it. He wrote a note to the foreman of the
docks saying that family illness might keep him from
work for a few days ; then he walked over to Aggie’s
house and told her the same story. This she did not
half believe, asserting that “that old woman” (meaning
Miss Raneham) was in his thoughts; but he hurried away
to the train, and before ten o’clock reached the rambling
house and the flamboyant garden of his youth.
He noticed the leaden hush in the very atmosphere—and
felt that he was too late. His mother opened the door
and greeted him without surprise, saying only, as she


true eyes and THE WHIRLWIND 1 37
kissed him, “ I knew you would come as soon as you
Jieard of our trouble, dear/’
He found her strangely softened —all her Puritanical
repression of emotion had vanished ; for she had touched
the world more intimately since his departure, and found
it not so ill.
They had been expectant of him for so long that now they
were not surprised at seeing him, and they met him as if
he had been away from home but for a day.
There was a certain constraint on Billy’s part. They
had had the home idea with them always, and he was part
0 f it ; but to Billy all things of home were foreign. To
them he was a much older, taller, and more manly brother
before ; to him, on the first shock of meeting, they
were merely acquaintances whom he had not seen recently.
And the first knowledge he had that this was his mental
attitude towards them was when he noticed that Elizabeth
had become a beautiful, gracious-eyed girl with an expres-
sion that spoke only of peace and of home. And seeing
that the average brother has no appreciation of the beau-
ties of his sister, this fact emphasised the strangeness of
thfm that had grown in him during his voluntary exile.
He was reminded of the flight of time by discovering
that “Swags” was no longer “Swags,” having lost his
stoutness with the approach of late youth ; and that Baby
Steve no longer lisped; and that Arthur, now sixteen, had
become a pale studious youth, who wore spectacles, and
appeared very much ashamed of the light-brown fringe
upon his upper lip.
The elder brothers and sisters had reached the man and
woman age while Billy was yet at home —but he noticed
changes even in them, half foreigners as they had always
been. This night all the clan of Pagan attended, and there
were strange brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law to be
introduced, and new babies and wondering eyed toddlers
to be brought under the notice of “ Uncle Billy.” All these
formalities over, his mother led him upstairs, taking his


hand when they were clear of the dining-room, and kissing
him tearfully in the dark corners of the stairs.
“He can’t last very long, dear. But I’m so glad you’ve
come home that I can’t be sorry for anything.”
“ I was a beast to stay away,” said he chokingly, but
she stopped him.
“No, you’re not. Home was too small for you, and
you’ve never forgotten us. When the money came
regularly every week I was glad to have it, although we
didn’t want it, and have never used it —but I was glad
because I knew then you were doing honest work, and
that your heart was always for mother and dad.”
Then she kissed him again ; opened the door of his
father’s room, and ushered him in.


CHAPTER XXIII
The father’s great figure was outlined on the very long
bed from head-board to foot-rail.
His long hair, silvered over since Billy had seen it last,
sprayed on the snowy pillow-case—like moon-light on
newly slaked lime. The stern firm mouth had relaxed
a little —the ears had lost the blood of this strong man’s
once-magnificent circulation.
Billy, appalled by this change, ran to the bed, and took
the hand that had been half advanced for him.
The man in the bed spoke soothingly :
“There there —dear lad, don’t fret! You’ve done
nothing. ”
“Yes I have, dad—l might have had these two years
with you.”
“ I would have been the gainer, dear lad, by that —and
you would have missed the experience. Don’t fret —I did
the same myself—but I never saw my people again.”
Then to his wife, “ Leave me, dear girl. I want to talk
to Billy.”
Mrs. Pagan went out hesitatingly ; and Billy, much
relieved at finding that his father had also been a new-
sensation- seeking vagabond, lifted his head, and his
father took possession of it with one still strong arm, and
carried the head to his own breast, and there kissed his
son many times.
Then he began to talk :
“Yes —I ran away when I was sixteen, and I didn tgo
home again for twenty years. I had the same idea as you
have —not to go home unsuccessful. And when I did go


i4o TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
back with plenty of money it was useless to me—they
were all dead I mean my father and mother were.
Brothers and sisters don’t care for each other once they
marry and have a new community of interest. . . . Yes
—my mother dead—that was the worst. I wanted to
tell her as a man how sorry I was for what I had done
as a boy, and she was gone. . . . Light my pipe, dear
lad.”
Billy took the pipe, and filled it, and lighted it, and
when it was drawing well he put it in between his father’s
teeth—the teeth that were as strong and as white as the
teeth of a young Myall.
“Yes —gone! ... So I racketed most of my money
about for four or five years, and then I met your mother—
God bless her!—she deserved a better man.”
“ You daren’t say that in her presence.”
His father laughed, and a little flush of gratified vanity
came into his face.
“No—l daren’t, and that’s a fact. But I’m not one
of the best men in the world, and she’s one of the best
women, so that it doesn’t seem fair.”
“You have been very happy,” said Billy; “that’s
everything. ”
“ Yes, we have, dear lad—although I got her by a lie.”
Billy stared.
“ Yes, a lie—l was forty-one, and she was twenty. And
one day she said a married couple should be of almost
the same age. So then I said I was twenty-eight, and I
didn’t look more, and I acted like a boy of twenty.”
Billy could quite understand that; he had known his
father, even recently, to play with his children—a child
himself. And a man’s age, despite his experiences, is only
the age of his heart.
“ I told her afterwards, and she forgave. Of course
any woman forgives the lie that is told to get possession
of her—supposing, of course, she loves the liar.”
“ Then, dad, you’re over seventy ! ”


satisfaction. “ It could drive my craft another hundred
years, bar accidents. . . . But my head is going to kill
me.
“ How can that be, dad ? ”
“I’ve had two strokes already, my boy — all in a
fortnight. A blood clot on the brain, or something like
that—and do you know where I think I got it, Billy? ”
“ Where, dad? ” This in a whisper full of awe.
“ In a fight with a man at Monte Video forty years
a g G _I got knocked out and fell on the back of my head,
and every now and then I’ve had a fixed pain that warned
me for all my strength. And it was over a woman, too —
a fly-by-night— that’s the worst of it. . . . Fill your pipe,
“ I’m seventy-five, my boy —seventy-five. . . . And my
heart’s as good as ever. Feel it.”
Billy put his hand under the bed-clothes and felt the
throbbing through his own body.
“True beat it is,” said the father, with a little smile of
dear lad. I don’t mind you smoking now. Strange, isn’t it ?
We want our children to follow a certain line of conduct,
and yet we give them the opposite example.”
A spasm of dizzy pain contracted his brows.
“Too much talking —take a pull, old chap,” he said
aloud to himself; and they smoked for a few minutes in
silence.
“Yes, I’ve had a wondrous constitution —so have you,
dear lad, the best of all the bunch. I ought to have lived
to over the century-mark. . . . The dirty luck of it . . .
a clout on the head forty years ago . . . well—well—and
a light of love she was, too.” He half turned and gripped
in his own the hand that lay on the coverlet.
“That’s what did it. I had one life-time before I met
your mother, and I’ve had another life since I married her.
The first life was a nightmare of poverty, and sudden
wealth, and excess —and the second life was a good
dream. And dreams are more real than nightmares,
Billy.”


142 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
Billy pressed the hand in sympathy, and his father
returned the pressure lovingly.
“Your hand’s hard with work, dear lad. I’m very
glad. There’s not a lazy bone in you. And the eating
of unearned bread is the worst crime. What have you
been vrorking at?”
Billy told him of the foundry and the docks, and the
old man applauded with smiles.
“That’s right. It’s all experience—and you’ll write
it all one day, my son, as I would have painted it. But
this country is too young yet to stand artists or anybody
but money grubbers. . . . And do you drink, my lad ? ”
“ A little, dad.”
“ H’m . . . been drunk yet ? ”
“ Yes, dad, about five times,”
“All right—but don’t do it too often. Hold yourself in
—don’t let your strength make you think nothing can
hurt you. If I hadn’t been so reckless forty years ago
I d feel as young as you now with twenty-five years ahead
of me. Strength is its own snare sometimes. . . . Any
women ? ” 3
Billy blushed, and said, “Two, dad.”
“Tell me about them.”
Billy told him.
“Oh ! well—you couldn’t hurt those two. But protect
the good women even from yourself whenever you meet
them, or you’ll be the worse off. The man who injures
good women is punished by losing his faith in all women.”
“ Yes, dad.”
“And you can never be a true artist if you don’t have
the old-fashioned respect for the virtuous woman, and the
old-fashioned faith in some God or other—not in a re-
ligion, but in a God, even if it’s only an enthusiasm for
something. . . . Those things are beyond logic.”
“ Yes, dad.”
But none of these women will count when you meet
the right one. And when you do—marry her quick—


marry young. Youth’s not complete without it. My
dear lad! my dear lad” (his father-love forced tears
from him), “if I could only live to see you at the age
when fixed habit would make you safe. . . . That eye
of yours will lead you into many dangers and many
troubles ... my lad ... I fear for you.”
“I’ll think of you, dad, and I’ll hold myself in,” said
Billy, his eyes streaming.
The father pressed his hands again. “ I believe you
will, my son. And now go, my boy—l want rest.”
Billy kissed him, and turned to leave.
“And I’m so glad you came to have this talk. I might
never have the chance again. And that money you sent
; t > s a il banked in your name. We didn’t want it, but
when I go you’ll have to provide a little. I know you’ll
never see your mother or the family starve.”
And Billy said half under his breath, ‘‘ By God, no 1” ;
and the father was satisfied, and turned over to a sleep
so leaden that it seemed like the last.
Only one more chance did the father and son have to
talk; for two days later the third visitation was made,
and Pagan the father, turning his last look of love on
the mother, straightened his big, powerful body, and
was as dead for a dozen hours before he died. It was
with feelings of bitter rebellion that Billy saw his father’s
coffin disappearing on the flat slings held by the under-
taker’s men—who insulted the real grief by their orthodox
expression of commercial woe.
That night he talked of ways and means with his
mother and Arthur, and finding that the house and about
a hundred and fifty a year remained to the family, Billy
“Well, I’ll be good for a pound a week until I can
make more than I’m doing now.”
“ And you’ll stay at home, dear ? ”
“No, mother,” said Billy very firmly—he was only
softened, not besotted by grief; “dad told me the day


he died ” (she began to weep as he spoke of her volanic
lover and husband) “that I must leave the dock and
go into newspaper work. I can’t do that here—they
won’t have me—so I must go away.”
“Oh! Will! I’ve just had one loss —don’t you go
too.”
“I’ll come back again, mother, never fear! I’d stay
at the dock for years, although I hate it; but dad said
that the first duty of a man is to realise himself, and
I’m only losing myself doing a labourer’s work on ships.”
“Then you must go, dear—your future is more than
my comfort; ” and so it was settled.
A welcome surprise awaited Billy next day. A brand
new brother-in-law, who rather admired his errant relative,
brought a copy of the Javelin, and pointed to a sketchy
story signed “ William Grey Pagan.”
Then Billy lost all the nonchalance the last two years
had educated his audacity into, and ran to the house
telling them all the glad news, and finally read his first
contribution of note —“ A Day at the Docks ” —to an
audience of his mother and sisters, of the brother-in-law,
and Aunt Barden.
When he had finished the reading, came sweet ap-
plause from the audience—or from all of them except
Aunt Barden.
Aunt Barden sniffed, and asked him, in an iceberg-cold
voice, “ when he intended to get some honest work, and
why he didn’t go into Government service while he had a
chance. ”
To which Billy, still flushed with the joy of just seeing
his name in brevier capitals, and knowing that the kelp-
clogged harbour of Government service will never suit
a ship that aches to put to sea : “I won’t touch Govern-
ment ; I’m going to write for the Javelin."
Aunt Barden sniffed again, and said he would come to
a bad end ; but on this occasion she had no seconder, and
Billy’s mother, in an unusually hard and determined tone,


true eyes AND THE WHIRLWIND i 4S
asked Mrs. Barden to devote herself to the training of her
own sons.
Mrs. Barden sniffed, subsided, wept, became reconciled,
and left for home as acidulated as ever.
Billy said good-bye to them all next day, and walked to
Sydney for the pleasure of seeing the old familiar way,
and he called at th & Javelin office and received the payment
for his story. The editor, as a special mark of favour,
took him to lunch, and told Billy that he had great hopes
of a literary success for him, and that he would be glad
of more “ sketchy copy” on the lines of the dock story,
and then he shook hands with him in a warm, hurried
way and dismissed him. Billy was very proud of this
special mark of favour until he discovered that these
special marks of favour were general marks of editorial
routine.
He went to the docks and drew his pay, and said good-
bye to all his one-time mates, and then he nerved himself
for the last wrench—the parting from Aggie.
His father’s advice appealed to him so strongly, because
he knew that it was tolerant of the irregularities it pur-
posed to correct; and half his reason for leaving Sydney
was the necessity for breaking with Aggie.
It was Saturday afternoon, and he found her sitting at
a sewing machine against an open window that looked
out on a crowded alley.
She was trying —with fingers awkward through long
labelling—to sew tucks in some under-garment, and sing-
ing, with her mouth half-full of pins, in the half-smothered
voice that is peculiar to the people of the pushes :
“ Oh, go an’ leave me, if you—wish it.
She is welfy, I am—pore ;
You stole me ’art an’ then you lef mee.
Then Billy felt himself to be the greatest criminal crime
had ever known. This poor girl —who loved him, and who
sang her heart-break, although she sung it badly enough
to destroy pity !


146 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
His heart melted to her, and he clasped her in his arms.
She started, slightly turned her head to look at him,
received his kiss, and then said, with an injured air and
rubbing the kiss away, “ Oh ! it’s you—blokey.”
“Yes, Aggie—poor old Aggie—have you been lonely?”
“Oh, I can live without you, mister. Don’t you go
worryin’.”
He lifted her from the chair, seated himself in it, and
pulled her to his knee.
“ Well, have yer bin with the old donah with the dyed
’air?”
“ I haven’t seen her, Aggie. I went to see my father,
Aggie, and he’s dead—died three days ago.”
“Well, he’ll never be any more deader ’n ’e is now,”
she replied flippantly, biting short lengths of cotton off
the reel, chewing them to pulp, and spitting them through
the window.
“You mustn’t talk like that, Aggie.” His tone
showed irritation, and under it Aggie began to recognise
the master, and felt afraid of going any further.
“ So you forgot all about me, Aggie ? ”
“ I didn’t say that, Billy.”
“ Well, d’ye think you could do without me altogether ? ”
“ I s’pose I could If I tried,” and she looked at him
very calmly.
Then Billy recognised that there was no possibility of
her heart-break, and for a moment he wanted her a little
because she appeared indifferent. But he steadied his
outraged vanity and continued :
“This is our last meeting, Aggie.”
“ Is it?—go hon !
“Yes, it is.”
“ Oh, carry me out an’ bury me ! Why, where are yer
goin’?”
“ I’m going back to the bush.”
She looked at him appreciatively.
“You’re straight anyway, Bill. Another bloke ’ud ’ave


come to a girl and borreyed all her wages an’ sneaked off
without tellin’ her. But you was alwys differen’ from
them sort.”
“Was I?”
“Course you was. D’ye know I wus fonder o’ you ’n
I could ever be of any other bloke—there wus never
nothing low about you. An’ mind—there was never any
one but you. I wus never worse than ’arf square.”
“And what will you do now, Aggie? ”
“ Well, I wus goin’t’ tell yer. Simms, the watchman o’
all them big buildin’s down Lower George—l’m goin’t’
marry ’im.”
“No —no —you shan’t.”
“Won’t I just! —Why I b’leeve yer jealous. You’re a
dearol’chap. Hug me like yer uster .... Yer see I could
never ’ave married you. You’re a toff now, an’ yer goin’
t’ be a bigger toff yet—an’ by-and-by ye’d hate me, an’
then I’d take t’ drink—like mother.”
Her eyes swam in sudden tears, but she dashed them
away.
“So I’m goin’ t’ marry Simms—he’s an’ ole bloke
he is—thirty-three or four—but ole blokes is kinder’ ’n
young ’uns, I think—except you, Billy—you’re a dear ole
chap.”
“ But does he know? ”
“’Bout you and me? Of course—better before than
after, he says.”
“ Well then, I hope you’ll be very happy with him,” said
Billy, crushing down his disappointment that this girl
would not die heart-broken on his account, nor permit
any act of his own to ruin her life. “ And now I’ll go.”
“ No—not yet ” Her arms were round him—his face
was hidden in her wonderful hair.
“This is our larst evenin’, Billy —an’ you’ll take me to
the theayter fust —Bland ’olt’s play or Dampier, somethin’
with murders in it—an’ then we’ll have some supper an’
then—we’ll say good-bye.”


As they parted finally she said, “ W’enever you’re in
town come an’ see me like an’ ole friend.”
“ But your husband —that is to be ? ”
“He won’t mind an’ ole pal o’ mine. An’ he knows I’m
straight once I give me word. Promise ! ”
He promised.
Next night as the dusk was settling down on the plain,
in rivalry with the dust, the train with Billy aboard slowed
into Bourke station.


CHAPTER XXIV.
His last impression that evening—obtained from his bed-
room window—was of a bellying cloud of blackness,
threatening the opaline night; and of a sleep-seeking
crowd in the street below, trying to find in the molten air
sustenance for their abused lungs, and betting on the
chances of the black cloud breaking.
His first impression next morning was of breathing an
air with an unwonted suggestion of softness in it for the
cloud, strange as it may appear, had really broken, and
the people in the street and in the bars earnestly discussed
the probability of an early breaking of the three-years’
drought. . .
But long before noon the fifty points of ram had dis-
appeared as if they had never been ; the squdgy soil was
dry again, and the cloud-burst was memorable only for
the sudden birth of myriads of insects, from the orna-
mental midge, whose legions for a week after hurled
themselves on every lamp and light and extinguished them
temporarily, to the blood-thirsty mosquitoes—little ener-
getic black devils, armed with the sword of fever and the
pertinacity of a bull-ant.
Billy was almost immediately engaged on the Post , a
journal which was always in trouble with some or other of
the “great-little” men, who hold the municipal and
magisterial positions of every back country town in
Australia. The three months that Billy served as sub-
editor, reporter, proof-reader, collector, and book-keeper,
over-flowed with rich experiences ; but he had wearied of


it, and was contemplating a new move when the proprie-
tor of the Post made up Billy’s mind for him by becoming
insolvent.
After that he loafed for two days, and looked for work
for four days, and then, finding that his funds were drop-
ping to the familiar zero, he left the hotel and made a
camp by the river.
The “hatter’s” camp lasted a week, his only visitors
being some half-christianised blacks, who had adopted the
custom of some mean whites of living on their gins.
Their other commodities were amateur boomerangs,
made for sale to unknowing strangers, and which were
utterly incapable of boomerang-flight. These ‘ ‘ civilised ”
niggers had really never thrown a boomerang for purposes
of warfare or hunting, but they knew visitors would buy
anything in the shape of native weapons, and so the gum-
fringes by the river were a great manufactory, where the
“warriors” carved boomerangs and nullahs with a knife
from Sheffield, and the gins gave the new fabrications the
colour of age with a can of red-brown paint (mixed in
America), laid on with a sixteen-ounce paint brush that
had been made in Germany.
They came to his camp and tried to make a friend of
him, but Billy talked little to them. Bad rum and easy-
got food had degenerated them into an aristocracy ; the
only primitive strength that had not disappeared was in
their teeth—full molared and incisored—not one missing
of cheek teeth, eye teeth, and lip teeth, and all white,
hard, and brilliant; teeth that a bullock would shudder at.
For the rest, their good-humour—the good-humour of
happy babies—amused, until their filth and their retinue
of mangy dogs disgusted. Their insanitariness was
added to by the maternal affection of one of the ladies of
the tribe, who carried in a dilly bag the remains of her
lately deceased piccaninny, much in the same way as a
white widow expresses her bereavement by wearing the
most expensive mourning clothes she can afford. Billilla


h d gashed her arms and legs with flints and yabbie
laws, and also wore the clay cap of widowhood.
° Billy regarded her with some curiosity —there was not
dozen square inches of her skin which had not been
under the knife —and on her shoulders, and between her
breasts, her family name was raised on the flesh in
hieroglyphs*
“What’s them cuts on ’er—er—chest ? ” queried a
voice from behind him.
“That’s her name,” said Billy, half turning as he
spoke, and then, as he turned full round and looked into
the merry eyes of a very hairy man, his voice took on a
note of wonderment.
“Why, it’s Tangey!”
“ What— what—Gord luv me 1 ” replied the surprised
Tangey. “Why, it was the two blokes with the big
swag. How are yer—by cripes, you ’ave grown! I seen
yer old man, yer know, after you’d gorn on ter ’Omebush,
and he treated me like a toff—helped me to get a boat er
me own. An’how is he?”
“ He’s dead,” said Billy very gravely.
“Is ’e now?— well, go on! By cripes! He’s dead. An’
the day I got me own boat, an’ yer father put me right for
j t i sends fur me ol’ woman down t’ th’ Huon, an’ she
packs up t’ come t’ me, an’ she dies at the w’arf. ’Art
disease, they said ’twas, an excitement, y know.
He stopped to sigh, and continued : “ Yes, art disease
—me poor ol’ woman. ... An’ I wanted ’er to see me
missis.”
“ What, married ? ” inquired Billy surprisedly.
“Yes,” replied Tangey, blushing furiously under his
hairiness. “Y’ see, a ship’s like a ’ouse—spesh’ly a
tradin’ boat —it’s sheer waste t’ do without a woman to
look after ’em, so ’bout a month after I got th’ ship, ’an
before I ’ears o’ th’ ol’ woman bein’ dead, I picks up a nice
lirrle girl ’ere —dressmaker she wus in one o th stores -
an’ we gets married.”


1 ‘ And are you glad ? ”
“ I am that. W’y we been nine trips now —’ead o’ th’
liver an’ back ; an’ four trips on a failin’ river with swag
poles out—one in a flood an’ one on fire ; an’ never ’ad a
cross word’—ceptin’ love-rows, y’ know—fall out to make
up agin.”
“And you’re doing well ? ”
“ Never looked back since I walked aboard the Platy-
pus* at Echookey two years ago—an’ twelve months after
I gets the ship I pays back yer father the larst copper.
Well—my oath ! . . . . an’ what er you doin’? ”
“ Nothing ! Paper I was on here went broke, and I’ve
just got enough tucker for a week—that’s why I’m camp-
ing here.”
“That’ll do come on.” Tangey picked up Billy’s
quart pot and billy-can, rolled the swag loosely together,
and walked off with the camp towards the river.
“Wait a bit,” said Billy, walking quickly after him.
“ Where away ? ”
“T’ the ship,” replied Tangey, still walking very fast.
“You can clerk, can’t yer ? ”
“ Yes—why ? ”
“Sooper-cargo,” replied Tangey shortly. “Want a
man t keep stock an’ make up th’ bills—two pound
a week an’ all found.”
“Look here,” said Billy, “if you really want a man,
and you re not loading yourself with me out of kindness
of heart altogether, I’ll take the job.”
Don t you worry about that; ” and Tangey walked
on as he spoke. “ I’ve got no room f’r anybody but
grafters aboard the Platypus .”
“Then it’s a deal, and I’m very grateful to you.”
“ Not a word,” said Tangey, with an attempt at gruff-
ness. “You do your jooty, and I’ll do mine.”
They had reached the river bank, where two Chinese
gardeners were straining at a windlass, drawing water
from the river in oil drums that ran along a wire railway


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND i S3
from the garden to the water. Some seventy feet beneath
them—for the Darling was very low—was a big side-
wheel steamer, to which Tangey pointed very proudly as
the Platypus ; and tied near her, and down stream, was
her attendant giant, the barge Republic.
The barge was topped with wool, and undumped bales
filled the hold of the Platypus for the steamer’s great
flat-bottomed width, and for a height of a few inches
above deck, so that the hatches could not go on, and
tarpaulins did the duty.
“ I thought you were a trader,” said Billy, pointing to
the wool freight.
“ So we are —that’s cornin’ up the river—we sell out
ship-full and barge-full, an’ take wool for back loadin’.”
The Platypus was not a pretty craft —she was too
hard worked for that. Whatever paint had once done
to beautify her, the blistering suns and the stinging rains
of her river tramps had long since removed.
By her scarred sponsons hung two great gum limbs—
her snag-poles —which felt the way for her wheels, and
walked her out of hidden danger ; almost inside the star-
board wheel itself the cook prepared the meals of the
ship; from the top of the starboard paddle-box protruded
the stove chimney, cowled and capped, and smoking in
painful emulation of the engine stack.
They descended the river cliff and walked aboard. The
cook was dishing up the dinner; four river gentlemen of
leisure—loafers whom Tangey was always carrying up or
down from point to point of his two thousand five hundred
miles of voyage —were languidly lifting a bag of potatoes,
with a loafer at each corner of the bag. Tangey looked
at them for a minute with growing irritation ; then he
put them aside, lifted the potatoes to his own back and
carried it ashore; and returning, said to them, “That’s
the way to do it—not four of yer in each other’s way,”
in the patient tone a mother uses to gently rebuke an
erring child.


Then he told the loafers to “ go forrard an’ get a bit ’er
dinner,” and the loafers obeyed gladly, for they were
going to the only work they understood.
Tangey led Billy to the port sponson, and from there to
the upper deck. This was given up to the sewing room
Billy could see through the open door the dress-
makers at work, and hear the three sewing-machines
buzzing like a giant March-fly in trouble ; to the dress-
makers’ cabins on the port side ; and on the starboard
side to the cabin with four berths and a comfortable space
almost as large as a decent-sized room ashore, and fur-
nished with a table and lockers and a swinging book-
case.
Tangey threw Billy’s swag and belongings on the table,
and pointing to the berths, said : “ Bob Lachlan’s got the
midships upper ; Gam Major, in the midships lower; you
take this cross-ship berth-plenty er fresh air, y’ know,
nigh the winder—an’ ye’ve bin used t’ fresh air lately.”
They both laughed—Tangey at his own wit, and Billy
in sympathy. Then Billy thanked him, and they left the
cabin.
The sewing room ran across the deck, flanking both
port and starboard cabins; and ahead of the sewing room
was a structure which was a combined chart room and
bridge in fine weather, when the windows and doors were
shut, and a combined chart room and wheel house in bad
weather, when the windows and doors were closed, and
the steerer was shut in to his work as warm and as com-
fortable as in the sitting-room of an hotel.
Billy knew the reason of the great size of the chart
room when Tangey showed him over the ship. The
charts were rolled in ten-mile distances, and were on a
scale that admitted of the marking of every snag, shoal,
bar, island, reach, and bend, and so made them almost as
long as the river itself.
Springing from the wheel house, which ran the width of
the ship, were the two lighthouses where burned the ship’s


• great lamps with reflectors the size of cycle wheels,
Cy rl so brilliant, that at night their broad white beams
shouted at the darkness and picked up every snag and
cut short Billy’s lightning admiration of all
* new things by mentioning for the third time that
dinner was ready ; and the two descended to the mam-
d ck again, past the cook, who had progressed to the
dishing B of the pudding, and who was surrounded by the
dmiring gentlemen of leisure. Tangey led the way
!Lg the deck to the stern, passing three cabins, and they
descended a companion into the hold, and found there a
floating store-a big counter, fixtures full of dress stuffs
ready-made clothing, boots, and fancy goods ; and behind
L counter, Tangey’s little rosy, clean, fair wife-all
blushes and curves, a very merry dumpling of a woman
Tangey introduced Billy, and Mrs. Tangey blushed
a£ rain and said she knew of him because Tom was always
talking of him; and then she and Tangey blushed
Jointly and severally and looked at Billy and laughed, and
Billv blushed also.
.< Dinn er-time, ain’t it, Em’ly?” asked Tangey.
“Yes, Tom—l’ll get cook to ring.”
She patted some of the clothing in farewell, and climbed
the steep little companion. The men followed her more
slowly, and the furious clanging of a discordant bell smote
their ears as they reached the deck.


CHAPTER XXV
The cabin where the family meals were served
although Tangey called it the “saloon” and Mrs!
Tangey, who could not lose the speech of the shore'
spoke of it as the “ parlour,” was so small that the table
and a form on either side of the table quite filled it.
Iherefore Tangey and his wife waited on the deck until
the dressmakers—a merry gang of four—and the mate
and engineer had entered and taken their seats.
Then he motioned Billy to the nearest seat on his left
placed his wife at his right hand, unfolded a camp-chair’
and seated himself at the head of the table—half in the
cabin and half in the doorway ; and then the cabin, saloon
or parlour, was full and almost hermetically sealed. ’
Tangey introduced Billy to the company in a breath
and there was little conversation for ten minutes, for the
people of the rivers have robust appetites, and are not
ashamed of them.
But when the pudding had gone the round of the table
and some real Bendigo apples—which probably felt verv
strange at the head of the river system—were brought by
the cook ; the pertest of the dressmakers cried out for
room, saying that Miss Maclure was “ scrooging ” her.
Then did Gam Major, the mate, make his one hoary
j oke. If you can t find no room there ye’d better sit on
me knee, he said.
Gam had uttered his joke every day for two years, but
the joke was still fresh, and everybody laughed. If a man
lau^ht° 0d m eSn t Want Wh t 0 P rov °ke him to
laughter. Good hot blood is merry of its own volition.


The men made their exit from the little cabin, and
Tangey taking Billy to the store below, gave him the
books, and left him to unravel the wonderful book-keeping
which' identified its debtors in many cases as “Joe at the
four-mile gums, Bunyip,” and “Tom the Fish, care
Wilcannia punt.” But he went far towards making order
of the chaos before the very unmarine engine throbbed at
the pace its engineer called “full speed” (because that
speed was faster than the pace of a worm after rain in
spring), and when the continuous passing of the steering
chain to port told him that the Platypus was swinging.
When he reached the wheel house he found her bow
post, which was scarred and gnawn in witness of its many
fights with snags and islands and rocky bars, turned down
stream. Tangey was at the wheel, full of pride of driving
his own craft; and the mate, Gam Major, stood beside
him unrolling one end of the chart which bore the river
yet to come, and rolling up the end that had passed.
“ It must be a hard job steering after a flood when the
channel’s altered,” said Billy suddenly.
“Not so ’ard,” replied Tangey, spinning the wheel to
starboard and crossing the river; “you miss the snags
that’s gone, but you seem t’ know where t’other new
one is.”
“It’s instink,” supplemented Gam. “Instink, Mr,
Pegrum— nothink else.”
He called Billy “Mr. Pegrum ” to the last hour of their
acquaintance, by the way.
“An’ then,” continued Tangey, “ the boat knows ’erself
—she ain’t bin bashed on bars an’ torn with snags for
nothin’ she ain’t. She sees a snag o’ night-time some-
times before we do, an’ she shies —s’elp me Gord, she
shies.”
They were running in a channel with a sudden dip in it
on the port side, but on the starboard it went away into a
gradual shoal. The Platypus with her helm amidships
seemed to experience a sudden fear of that patch of sand,


thinly disguised by the light-green leaf-tinted water ; and
shied to port as a horse shies from a sheet of wind-blown
paper, and Tangey jammed the helm to port.
“ Why didn’t you keep it amidships then?” asked Billy.
( “ Wot—w’y didn’t yer see ’er shy off the shoal?—an’ if
I’d le t ’er go she’d a bin inter that steep bank—so I ’ad t’
steer port to keep ’er straight.”
“Why if that’s really so,” said Billy, “the boat’s alive.”
“ A course she is—’er engines makes ’er alive. Now
look at that barge be’ind us ! ”
Billy looked astern where the Republic , with her crew
of one steersman, was stowed solidly. The barge had all
the unintelligent movements of a log on a flood.
“That barge,” continued Tangey, “’as got no ’ead—
nor any other barge for that matter.”
The Platypus steamed out of the channel and through a
wide reach, followed by her unwieldy consort, and Gam
rolled up another foot or so of the chart.
Tangey edged the ship in and out of the shallows and
the snags; and as he knew he had an appreciative
audience in Billy, he tried the cunning of the Platypus to
its limit.
A big snag was struck by the bow, thrown aside and
sunk, and rose almost under the port wheel, but the snag
poles caught it, and pushed it out of danger; and the
Platypus steadied after the blow and travelled more know-
ingly, as if she really felt that the snag had been sent her
for a warning. But turning suddenly from a channel like
a corkscrew into a wide deep reach, the ship ran ashore.
He expected excitement, but there was none. The
beach was of soft mud and the Platypus was uninjured ;
Lachlan reversed his nondescript engines ; all hands and
the cook and the gentlemen of the river ran to the bows
to pole her off, with varying degrees of energy; and the
helmsman of the barge, seeing the accident, steered his
Republic to the other side of the river, where her great
weight and her way dragged the Platypus into deep water.


Billy was lost in admiration of the manoeuvre,
« Does a bargeman always do that? ” he inquired.
<« If ’e doesn’t ’e gets the boot, Mr. Pegrum,” replied
“ Enyway, it’s only the barge givin’ back to the steamer
some o’ the power she takes from the steamer. Yer see
a weight like that In such times is as good as another
engine. ”
The Platypus steamed ahead again, but Gam took the
wheel, and Tangey talked.
“Now, y’ know none o’ them blue-water men ’ud do
’ere. Why, they'd be lost! S’posin’ they wants t’ go
fr’m Sydney to Noo Zeeland. Well! they lays ’er course
an’ sets ’er so, an’ bimeby they comes to Noo Zeeland—
clear road, no snags, scarcely a rock, no bars, an’ no
drought! An’ we? Well, our rivers change every year’r
so, an’ arf the time we’re drivin’ ’er over a four-foot-six
bar an’ she drors four-foot-seven. A course this boat ’ud
be no good at sea—she’d get puzzled because there’d be
no snags.”
The Platypus panted down the river, and the barge
followed with an aldermanic dignity until past teatime;
and at eight o’clock, which was about the time of moon-
rise Tangey called to the helmsman of the Republic to
tie up to the bank, and steered the steamer into an embay-
ing of the river, near a belt of thick scrub.
The mate carried a line to a great river-swept gum,
whose branches carried flood wreckage fifty feet above
what was now dry land.
The engineer stood at the gang plank with a dozen
axes, and served them out to the captain and the gentle-
men who were “working their passage ’ (Riverina term
for loafing), and to the cook, the firemen, the mate, and
the supercargo ; for “ wooding up ” is a job for all hands,
and not anything in the shape of a man travelling on a
trader —not even an archbishop —may be relieved of the
duties of fuel getting. For that is river law, and the


statutes of the Medes and Persians, compared to river
law, were elastic immoralities.
The steel blades glistened in the moonlight, the axe
strokes filled sky and river with echoes as the company
half-cut through a dozen trees in line, and then felled a
arger tree, so that in its fall it carried the nearest trees to
earth, and the nearest trees carried the further with them
There was a great fluttering of dispossessed birds ; and
bears and ’possums, who had been looking down with
curiosity and contempt at the hewers of wood, broke into
wails and terrified noises as the trees left the perpen-
dicular, and they ran off, shrieking their fear, when their
homes reached the ground.
By ten o’clock the Platypus, which was a great glutton
had sufficient wood to drive her for twenty-four hours, but
she stayed at the anchoring gums until next dawn
This was Billy’s average day. With the first suspicion
of the dawn, Gam pulled the whistle string and awoke the
life of the river before the sun had touched it, starting
the mallards on their foolish flight for hours before the
steamer, too frightened as they were to think of escaping
by a cross-river course.
As the steamer moved from its anchorage the nude
thC su P ercar ff° appeared on the starboard
paddle-box—he drew a bucket of the foaming wheel wash
and drenched himself with it, repeating it to a dozen
buckets.
After his Indian bath Billy read for an hour or two for
he soon got a good scratch library together, and filled the
swinging bookcase-and then breakfast. Between that
and the next meal he wrote up his stock-book; and when
the Platypus stopped at a station he served the customers
with goods they wanted, and forced the sale of articles of
old unsaleable stock which the purchasers did not want
and which they regretted buying a moment after agreeing
to the purchase. & 5
In the night there was the wooding up, and the dress-


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 161
makers sang on the wheel decks. This average day was
broken occasionally by the receipt of wool and back load-
ing on the downstream journey, by the return every two
months to Echuca to buy fresh stocks of boots, saddles,
fencing wire, onions, tobacco, clothing, bar-iron, dyna-
mite and whisky. For this last they had a licence to
sell in two gallon lots, but daily the law was broken by
sales of a gallon, which sales were always charged and
invoiced as “one tin of tea,” or “one gallon of tobacco,
2 4 s The police-sergeant at Ruffanuff always received
his debit notes made out in that way.
Billy filled in his time with reading, and steering, and
writing unactable tragedies, which were his latest literary
craze ; and when by accident he did none of these things,
he lay prone on the sponson, and watched the river, and
the tortoises sputtering in an insanity of fear of the
steamer; and the flocks of flying cockatoos, which were
merely yellow crested ghosts, animated by a shriek; and
the mallards, which represent the collective foolishness of
all birds. When none of these were in sight, he lay and
gloated over the silence and the liquid gold of the sun
rays on the shaded water, which was so full of gum-leaf
shadows that it seemed to overflow.
So a happy year went by, and he read every day in
printed books and the more expressive books of men,
and was much loved by Tangey and his wife.
But life on the river was not always quiet—often the
conditions of drought and flood made it epic.
There were times when the river became little more
than a chain of pools, and the Platypus and her barge
had to be lightened, and poled off shoals inch by inch ;
when Tangey cursed every Sydney-side politician living
or dead or to be born, because they had talked for many
years of locking the rivers and so making them per-
manently navigable, and had never got beyond talking.
And there were other times when the flood waters came
down in irresistible faces and solid-strong walls, and the


Platypus and her barge sped downstream with the speed
of locomotives ; the craft racing by trees and wreckage,
covered with bears, ’possums and snakes, lizards, centi-
and other crawling horrors, all huddled together
shiveringly— their venom sapped by fear.
There were times when she struggled upstream against
the roaring clay-coloured freshets, panting heart brokenly
in the stress ; her naked boiler-plates pulsating under the
steam ; her crazy stack red-hot and vomiting fire like an
iron-smelter in blast ; her helm-gear squealing to the
blustering steering of Tangey, and her tow-rope vibra-
ting to the sag like a violin string.
And at the end of that memorable year came, not only
flood, but fire. J


CHAPTER XXVI
There had been great rains at the head of the river. The
Warrego discharged a wide shallow Niagara into the
main stream; but below Tilpa there was neither rain
nor river. Out on the plains bordering the stream the
sheep died in thousands, and the willy-willys gathered
the dust from the bare red earth and covered bleached
bone and rotting fleece. A broken bottle, or a quartz
crystal, lying on dry leaves acted as a burning glass, and
fired the mulga ; and on the river-course the Platypus
company poled their ship wearily from shallow to shallow.
On the fatal night they moored in a deeper channel
than usual, and wooded up from fallen trees. The night
had been so hot that deep sleep came only with the morn-
ing breeze. Before the dawn the youngest dressmaker
Stepped from her cabin to take her bath, and saw the river
bordered by banks of fire. A burning log had fallen on
to the lower deck, and the stack of fuel near the stokehold
had burst into flame.
The ship’s company was awake in an instant. While
Lachlan, at the risk of his skin, raked the banked fires,
started the engine, and before dashing out of the smoke,
crammed the furnace with wood, and the gentlemen of
the river, energetic for the first time in the memory of
man, threw the burning wood heap into the river ; Tangey
took the wheel, and called on the helmsman of the barge
to loose his rope and drift.
Gam cut the steamer’s mooring rope, and the Platypus ,
which had been straining under her engine, jumped like a
startled horse.


The fear that there would not be enough stream to take
her to safety was lost when they felt the strength of the
current; the Warrego water had come down during the
night; the ordinary channel of the river had disappeared ;
the Platypus floated on an angry sea.
Tangey steered, afraid to look back, and the other
men attempted to extinguish the fire.
The fire gained with the speed, and Tangey ordered
the engines astern-so that the Platypus held its own with
the flood. The barge passed them in a flash, and dis-
appeared in the next bend, safe in the hands of her steers-
man, who, Gam said, would beach her safely.
The men worked at the buckets, but “ Dead Finish ” had
come for the Platypus; and Tangey, setting his teeth hard
like a man, and feeling inclined to weep like a woman,
steered the moving flame toward a flat beach, put her
engines full ahead, and drove her high on the sand.
Then they saw that the ship would never move again.
The smoke had reached the stoke-hole, so that the
engine could not be stopped; flame burst from the store
at the stern two minutes after Billy had rescued the
books.
The women filed ashore —the men rescued the personal
property of all. Tangey left the steamer first of the men
—he knew the case was hopeless.
There was no living thing left there, and the fire took
complete possession. Her timbers burned to weakness,
till at last her back broke, and the engine broke away and
slipped into deep water. And then the fire, having ad-
mitted the water, was itself extinguished. The forward
half of the steamer was not even warmed.
“Thank God! the barge is safe!” exclaimed Mrs. Tan-
gey, in an attempt to comfort her husband.
“ Yes, thank the luck for that,” said Gam, and the girls
echoed him.
“ An’ dom the luck for burnin’ ma engines,” said Lach-
lan in an unforgiving tone, and Billy echoed it. There


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 165
seemed more justice in cursing the fate that burned the
steamer than in blessing that fate for sparing the barge.
Tangey said nothing, but his grief worked convulsively
in his throat and in the muscles around the eyes.
Then he looked at the broken ship, tried to speak, and
uttered sobs that shook him.


CHAPTER XXVII
The coach, Wonnaminta bound, suspended the swaying
of its body and the creaking of its leather springs as it
approached the change. The horses stopped dead as
they felt the brake—for the last five miles they had waited
anxiously for the moment ; they were tucked up and mis-
erable, and the salt sweat had caked on their flanks and
withers.
The groom ran out and placed a slab under the heavy
pole; the driver threw the reins at him, and the groom
led away the horses and harnessed in the new team.
“Letter for you, Billy,” said the driver to the groom,
and that adaptable youth, William Grey Pagan, opened
the dirty envelope, read the contents, and said very cheer-
fully :
“I’ve got the sack 1 ”
“Thort you ’ad—the noo cove’s come up with me this
trip. ”
“That’s on account of the row I had with that chap
you brought up the trip before last.”
“ What are yer goin’t’ do, then? ”
“ Oh ! put bluey up, I s’pose.”
“Th’ boss said I could give you a lift on the coach
wherever y’ liked to go.”
“Not much,” replied Billy firmly. “ I wouldn’t ride a
yard in his coach.”
The driver turned away to the ramshackle eating-house.
Half an hour later he climbed to the box-seat, placed the
reins to the proper fingers, spat in farewell to Billy, and


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 167
said as he swung his terrible whip and the polers went
up to the collar: „
< 1 Ye’ll get yer cheque at the orfis at Wonnammta.
Billy thanked him with a hand-wave, and the coach
departed at a hand-gallop, which the driver quttWy
slowed to a brisk trot, with a cloud of golden dust about
it The deposed groom returned to his camp against
the open shed called the “stables.” He rolled his swag,
carried it into the bark-covered barn known as the
half-way house” (so-called because it was three-quarters
of the road from Meumdre and one-quarter from Won-
naminta), and returned to his camp to give a good-bye,
with small pieces of meat in it as earnest, to the goanna
he had made a friend of, because no other friends were
After that he sat in the “half-way house” and drank
bad rum with the Cornish shanty keeper, not because be
liked bad rum, but because it was the only thmg to do
until moonrise. His devil of energy made him do the
wrong thing rather than nothing. ~ . .
Byline o’clock he had left the shanty, only half hearing
the keeper’s injunction that he was to keep the nght-hand
track into Wonnaminta, and not to go left at the fork.
At the beginning of this noctivagance the swag and
the rum-fumes prompted him to sleep; but the plain-wmd
blew freshly in his face, and he put the laziness far from
him and walked swiftly on. , ,
The track lay over the same kind of country he had
trodden with Cripps-salt-bush and salt pulsions in th
red soil between the growths-quartzite and slugs
schistose splinters and mica scales glittering in the moon
rays. The moon filled all the earth, but not all the sky
oouring rays from one point of diffusion as if a doot had
bLn opened in the deep-violet vault and the light floo
had tumbled out with such force as to reach the earth n
a volume, spreading only as it collided with the trees. In
the unlit places of the firmament were many stars burning


168 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
expr r ion ° f a chnd ’ s e^e
him that message of br ° U S h
that region seared hv T’ [ ° h the dwellers “
next dawn as madmem 6 ' *** W ° Uld faCe th<
And as he walked, the seeing- eve and • •
”' nd were saturated with the Lb,;
became se „ ht he did „ ol know* that
sobbing over SeTofenthip
Taegey and the little wife who M, V a P "‘ WS with
than the loss of the belov'ed steamer
the salt-bush, where Md he d Came . to a vac ancy in
•He surface and |°
fi^r%Xhl th .h?h S - iD Pa "”“- a»Ta
with aif.hVhtdntZSZSZ S “ *
around it and on. lm ‘ ast be wa lhed
which gave 8 hkn the plains ~ a circumstance
shanty had told him noth’* 7 tr ° ub,e ’ for the man a t the
suspected "***■ He
mght he had passed the fork • h Th^ 1 StUdy ° f the
on, and he cared n J ul ’ but he had a track to walk
knowledge that his . J* rhlther . Fate ,ed him. Even the
office did" not
turer wants is the V , * 311 th e true adven-
was an adventurer to the “r ° * foSSf
the G Sk o"“t drarf ”“^-.
ceeded, and more theat 7 mP 1 eatre ’ more hills sue-
Then, behig Concentnc , Hdts •» infinity,
and Slept. ’ the m °° n sett,n S> Billy camped
froi h rr.Tots„ h :t.r.re^ n o^
and by nightfall he had reached tolZSVSSSZ


irhere there is not a stick of straight timber, and the
neanest houses are built of rubble masonry.
But there are no houses except in the township, and the
only township is Wonnaminta ; a hopeless settlement,
which has the local civil servants to make up quite one-
third of its population. There were a clerk of petty
sessions ; a stipendiary magistrate; a postmaster; a
telegraph operator ; two school teachers ; an inspector of
stock, where there was no stock ; a mining registrar,
where there were no mines to register ; and the local con-
stabulary, where there was nothing to arrest. The school
roll was filled largely by the children of the civil servants.
This delectable city lay in the great hand of the pfainc ;
scarred by livid claypans ; ribbed by infrequent outcrops
of crystalline quartz, very wearing to the eye.
Billy went to the coach office and drew his pay, and
commenced a week which would have been luxurious any-
where else, but was at Wonnaminta merely seven days
without work in it. At his hotel he had as fellow-
boarders all the civil servants, including the two school
teachers ; and a merry Irishman, a prospector by occupa-
tion and Xavier Quinn by name.
Billy and Quinn plunged into a mutual affection, without
effort or preliminary ; and this well-read youngster of the
Book of Humans found food for his eye in the study
of the anaemic, thin-flanked school teacher, and of her
querulous husband.
But a new door opened for the wanderer, and Wonna-
minta was soon left behind. Xavier Quinn and his mate
Lawler and Billy had formed a prospecting party. The
three struck south-westerly through the iron and quartzite
outcrops. A packhorse carried the swags, the rations,
and three picks, a shovel, and a dish ; the horse also bore
as a necklace his own hobbles, and the bell, now muffled,
that would yet trace him in his frequent attempts to break
away to the sweet water at Netalie, where a Western Dis-
trict mare foaled him, and the lucerne grows perennially.


CHAPTER XXVIII
The love Billy had for that mixture of wild energy book
crr s ’xtro knowledge ’ and
own as Xavier Qumn never wavered, once their first
and only dispute had been disposed of. Xavier was a
round man with a red face and a redder beard • he had
and H hiS CVerlaSting ' srln flash « d white.
2nce was h P ’ f O,) indsive ton & ue > and his
glance was humorous and full of cunning. Dick Lawler
•s mate, was a man of Quinn’s build. He regarded the
3 thing J °^f~ the ™ ost arduou s work was to him
arcical thing. He laughed at anything as he toiled •
at his pick, or his singlet, or his perspiration. His merrv
man' S S:'t i him '° “‘V L of the
an He had one passion—a passion for a good horse •
year HeT^d S ° nt him ° nce aol for a
I. , ' He could no more keep his hands off a fine horse
thieflLf I pad C °tS ld R he / rSt aUthenticall y horse
thief, Rolf Pad-the-Hoof. He was sincere always-con-
heaH he Was °” of ,he *">“««
o these three left Wonnaminta very seriously, although
they were all good-humoured and in high spirits • for the
prospector has always his death’s head at the feast of his
jocular farewell. For this is the way of prospectors ; many
to go, and fewer to come back again.
From dawn, for there was not a slug a-bed in the three
nigLfXo e t ed a “ r ° Und thC C ° mpass ’ makin S back al
nightfall to temporary camps, where the precious water
was-m soaks and clay-pans. For weeks they wanlered


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 17
so, not blindly ; knapping the out-crops with pick and
hammer, until the summer brought them to a land which
is a squatter’s paradise in good seasons, and'which
sprang into bloom as they approached ; into the white
and pink buds of the broom, and the sweet-smelling
downy yellow of the acacias.
Then they struck Blazing Glory, and later, Sandy
Blight; and tried those two elusive silver fields with little
return except a healthy perspiration and some valuable
experience.
Everywhere on those fields they found all the forms
of lead and copper, but in unpayable quantities. Billy,
caught by the beauty of glossy nodular hematite, of irides-
cent iron, its base metal glowing like a peacock’s preen,
of the glistening crystals of gypsum, and of the pearl-
shell gleam of iodide of silver, was the only one of the
three made happy, by reason of his appreciation of the
beauty; Quinn and Lawler were more practical, and
appreciated the barrenness of the labour.
They cursed the country generally, and talked glow-
ingly of far-off fields, with that appearance of commer-
cialism the prospector uses to excuse the fact that he is
tired of the old field and lusts for a new one. The
cursing of the country kept them amused at night when
the three sprawled before their tent, and Quinn drew lines
in the dust with his forefinger to show how their lode
should have dipped, and how their shaft should have
struck it at fifty feet. To this Lawler replied that the
shaft would strike the Suez Canal before it got into ore
in that country. The statement provoked Quinn to much
blasphemy, and Billy at that point used to restore his
mates to good humour by laughing at both.
One night they were visited by two tank-sinkers, who
had just finished a contract at a neighbouring station, and
were on the road to Thackaringa where Paddy Green was
then working his rich claim the “Six over Six.” After
the visitors had eaten, the five men sat among the


stare PlCd Salt ' bush under a thick viol et sky filled with
hldled pZcist tt ;7f t V^oi
Quinn cursed this particular section of the country
f? am ’ . and sneered bitterly at the tale of the Iron
with n ireat° n KmChega ’ which the tank-sinkers asserted
with great earnestness was a very big mountain, although
they were not strong-hearted as to its value. g
Then Xavier sneered again, and the ' tank - sinkers
inTsham y f H nded M ° Untain J further bating,
m a shamefaced way, that they held a seventh interest
etween them. That spurred Xavier to even more bitter
sneers, which showed that he was becoming interested-
k 6r ° f t IS matCS W6re sur P rised when he told the
tank-smkers that if they would guide him to the Iron
f m.“n K f g 0, ‘ aS WS pr6Sent show was not
mme, but a grave-a mere gratuitous hole in the
The tank-sinkers agreed almost eagerly—they wanted
outside opinion on their principality of manganese iron •
hor,e r?° n nCXt . f y the Cam P^ ear was packed on the
horse that yearned for Netalie, and the five men advanced
over the salt-bush and blue-bush plains which led them to
the cones..™ a,,. Billy had crossed in his noc.ivaganl
Early on the next day’s stage they found an old shaft—
its diy-rotted timbers blown into dust by every breeze.
wenty-five years before a party of miners from Bendigo
had prospected this country for gold, where no gold
existed They had broken the caps of the richest shyer
odes of modern times, and had passed on never knowing
the nature or value of the rejected metal; departed hot
foot on the track of phantom gold. Then the water
tailed not a drop even in their futile shaft. So they died
there. Some distance from the shaft Quinn’s party found


their bones—bleached and cleaned by the blown sand of
the dry plains.
By noon they sighted the Iron Mountain, and saw
that it was a range running north and south as truly
as the compass knows, and over a mile long. Three
hours later they reached the base of the mountain; then
followed an hour of struggling through the dense mulga
that covered it, up the steep iron outcrop that told
them of the deceptiveness of its height. They reached the
highest pinnacle, stirring in their progress thousands of
wallaby. Below, they saw the mulga tops like a grass
sea, and fading, without any apparent line of demarca-
tion, into the salt-bush plains. There was no life but
their own in sight; only far on the western horizon a
pencilled line of red dust and some small indefinite objects
like the motes that float before the eyes of a liver-diseased
man, told them of a camel train making a slow inevitable
progress from South Australia into Queensland.
Dark clouds had gathered—clouds that would mean
rain on the coastal fringe, but here heralded only a useless
phenomenon. The sky pressed down on the blackness of
the manganic iron hill, enveloping the men in half-
darkness, so that they seemed to hold the firmament in
their hands. In a few minutes the blackness rolled itself
up again, and went away on a new-born east wind.
On the highest iron blow two men were sinking a shaft
—the comparison of proportions moved Billy to a mirthful
admiration of these miners. It was like two ants trying
to tunnel a cannonball.
Quinn and Lawler refused the offer of the tank-
sinkers to go below. The shaft was only thirty feet deep,
and they said they could see the bottom of it. By this
time the tank-sinkers were apologising for the iron, and
the manganese, and the size of the range; and when
Xavier examined the dump and contemptuously spanged
specimens down the mountain, saying, “Blasted carbonate
o’lead,” the tank-sinkers became almost tearful. But


?elt e duffer k * ° Pini ° n the ir ° n ran^e was *
“ What d’yer think ye’ll be gettin’ in dolomite country ? »
he asked triumphantly; and the tank-sinkers, very weary
of the short, hard criticism, did not reply.
The two miners ended for the day their labours of
HcrcuJes and climbed to the surface; and the small crowd
roundT l° r the minefS ’ Cam P- Bi % turned him
round to see the great panorama of the country, to the
south, where the Pinnacles burst impudently through the
alluvium °f the plain like a virgin’s breasts—to the north
where R ob e sat royally in sunset-and eastward
over a measure-sea of mulga.
He was to stand there three years later and see the
mulga re-placed by a city of thirty thousand people ; to
see I( >ng lines of suffering bullock-flesh, sagging in the
yokes and dragging waggons, lime and coke ifden; to
and ftme m fd r H an< l, b 0 ; ler belchin £ eternal smoke
and fume, and deadly lead-dust. He was to follow the
hrysahd stages of the men who now, by luck or judg-
ment, owned this Iron Range; to witness one of thefe
rnmiona ’ t 0 Ws share ’ become a cheery
Ihonaire, whom money could not spoil; to see two
week b ° Undary rider > ten shillings a
week, the other a stage carpenter-become millionaires
And all these things happened because, to lift certain
obscurities into a light that blinded them, a bLk bot
noticing how the white fools went mad over cheesy green
s7o r “ MinC knOW * that fella/and
SSISSS* th,s Iron Range was sim > ly


CHAPTER XXIX
Had Billy known these things he would have dragged
Quinn and Lawler with frantic energy to the boundaries
of the existing leases on the Iron Range, and used the
balance of that day in the cutting and placing of pegs,
and the digging of “L” trenches to mark new claims,
Whose holders should be Quinn, Lawler, and Pagan. But
not being a prophet, and trusting implicity in Xavier’s
contemptuous judgment, and thinking more of the pano-
ramic beauty and of the romance of being in the midst of
the primitiveness than of the quick fortuitous ways of
money and mine making, he followed the elder men to the
camp silently.
After supper with the miners they talked in a hushed
way; for the silence of the Barrier night was very im-
pressive, and there was a forbidding reticence in the great
brilliant black masses of iron, and a chilling quietude in
the mulga, unruffled by any breeze. Occasionally this
silence was broken by the thud of the leaping wallaby;
the unnatural sound of gristle heels striking metallic rock,
and then the impacts fainter down the range as the
wallaby sought the plain and the pad through the salt-
bush that led to the water that knew them only in the
darkness; the darkness that hid them from man, the
murderer, and the an-hungered.
From far down the range a sound like a hen-curlew’s
cry came to them. When it was repeated they knew it
for a “ coo-ee,” and the younger of the tank-sinkers arose
and coo-eed in return. For half an hour the questioning
“coo-ee” came to the camp, and the directing “coo-ee”


Of'the TRUE EYES AND THE WHJ RLWIND
horses broTe C " lCkted 38
and two men rode into the glare 0 f the camffi ”
The new-comers off-saddled a f P fire '
ohaff for their horses and the’ ° accepted a feed of
themselves. ’ courtesy of the camp f or
man— a drover hlVas—tW th 6 mine ’” said the slighter
wish not to be ridden bare-back'bTh^ 0 made 3 horse
covered a mean mouth ; but his beard” 1 ' H ' S Wack beard
his e yes were mea ner still ™ ao f w i
addressed the tank-sinkers as «jw? a ? the
began to eat. The other man J? &nd J™.” and
heavy; with, not a h T ° St ta “ and
the fact of his strengthfand with th” of
used to ordering while other me t 3 ’ r of a ma n who is
station manager, evicted from his°last H . C . Was an ex '
most undeniable bailiff th p ! ‘ positlon by that
hundred and fifty he had a
being the wreck of his nasi r ° Wn ’ tbe ot her half
Steep had failed ,he m> ofT°7' S “ Pi “-
having come to the bleached „ P of the silver country
Stead > the station manage, ZVeZ the hom-
cover a new world Xe nrnfii deSpatched to dis-
Columbus. profits were , like a new
The tank-sinker called “ Dave ”e, vi , .
search, for, addressing the slation ” % k ° ew ° f this
Bntt,” he asked : manager as “Mr.
Seen anythin’ to soot yer yet? ”
“ Seen
,f k o e u s" d ? " ant ' EZxm


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND I? 7
“We’ve got a big show ’ere "-he waved his hand
around the darkness explanatorily.
“The Iron Range.”
Xavier Quinn snorted. “Yes, it’s big, an’ so’s Cape
Horn, but there s nothing in it.”
Jim’s advocacy of the Iron Range collapsed.
The drover fixed Jim with his mean eyes. “ I potter
good bullock team, Jim—twenty of ’em—all good workers
an’ I’m gom’t’ Queensland for a mob o’ fats for Adeled’’
an’ I’ll let ’em go reasonable.” *
He did not say that the manager of the station they
were on, and where he had had the bullocks running free
had threatened to impound them if they were not removed*
but that was the fact. *
J‘“’ s eye achieved a gleam of feeble interest.
We d like another team—but we’ve got no money.”
There was a silence at the fire for as many minutes as
Jim took to think at a tangent.
“Ten you what,” he said suddenly, “you gimme the
bullocks, an 111 transfer me fourteenth in these claims.”
The drover hesitated; the payment seemed to be in a
valueless medium ; but a sale was compulsory, and he
agreed. The sale was bound there and then, although
the tank-sinker’s mate, with his blind faith in the millions
of tons of weathered iron around them, tried to persuade
Jim to “sleep on it;” and then the station manager, whose
forehead had been corrugated with the estimation of
chances while the sale was being arranged, said to the
drover:
“ What’s the value of the bullocks ? ”
“Say ’bout ninety pound,” replied the drover, hoping
against hope that he had found a buyer for his interest in
this bleak and barren range.
“ I’ll give you ten pounds on your bargain.”
“ Say fifteen.”
“ No, ten.”
“ Say fourteen.”


.7* TRUE eyes and the whirlwind
“No, ten.”
“Well, meet me.”
“ Eleven pounds then.”
“ It's a deal— a hundred and one pound »
V” He
rough agreement of sale & °° ’ wntten on «t a
“ Fair question, Mr. Britt?”
“Yes ; what is it?”
without "seein’ this p"”^ 6 UP yer mmd sudde nly to buy
„Second-
was
their gear on "th el^ loaded
started north-west, leaving the t Net . alle memories, and
of conquering the rane-e a i W °u miners t 0 their work
of Alvaro. a WOrk that cal 'ed for the will


CHAPTER XXX
Thb three years that followed their departure into the
unknown country gave Billy experiences that the majority
of men never find in a life of sixty years. He was a boy
no more. The open air whose smallest breeze had a
thousand miles of plain and mountain to travel and
of its sea-salt before it reached his lungs, and the strong
Central Australian suns had puckered his eye-lids
giving him the knowledgable look of a man of twenty-
five, whereas he was but twenty-one. The blistering
summers came and went, and a two years’ drought taught
them that only the resourceless man can be killed by
nature in her stingy moods; and when drought was suc-
ceeded by the strong south winds, driving up their
argosies of rain, it brought them enough water to treat
the alluvial they had expected so much of, and so robbed
them of even the pleasures of hope.
But the sanguine three never sighed. Their hope made
the years nothing to them, not even to Lawler, who was
very near the forty-year mark. They were all boys, and
when their sanguineness was really foolish, it only proved
that they were very young and healthy and strong.
They found a creek-bed running between hills of de-
composed granite, and followed it up for about a mil*
to find it absolutely barred by another granite hill that
rbse across its course like a wall, the creek continuing in
a subterranean flow—that is, when it had a flow, which
was rarely. In the bed of the creek Quinn found rubies;
he showed his mates the water-worn, dull-red crystals,
and said for the hundredth time :


lB ° TRUE EYES and the whirlwind
do’bTm'L'"”' b< ’ ! ’ S, mark ” e WeU ’ Bi "j” fortin’s
th J h ® y dug ‘ tbe rub y wash from dawn to dark • and in
it k "°™ “
wh : .»S Q„in„'7 h t !’ , h b, ■” , jOOIS here •» -k. a road
second button of
“ stage -
7 t lt‘ “'.Th f the red Plai " S ; ‘ h *
and rarely
in ttriSf bSf"'"’ “ d T* “*• ’°' ,he «»t time
had almost forgot
at the store first and tret that U i' er Wls hed to call
P»is. They are nT S
3kss t‘ Sr r mp s a "«-*
chemical irritants T ’r I ” P ° unded mos % of blinding
to the sSs "tte h ” h “ ds ’ “ d
scorbutic disease whW, ’ the . SOres of Bar “o Rot, a
the uninitiated sufferer to f °- brin^in .B'
sins. consideration of his


But Xavier said “the pub first,” and to the public-
house they went like good bushmen—for that is the
religious observance of the back country.
But it was only an observance ; for after three first-
mate nips, an inch above the “ pretty ” of the glass, they
took their horses to the hotel stable, and Quinn and
Lawler went to the store to break into the fifteen pounds
left to them, while Billy guarded the precious rubies.
Early afternoon found the three in clean moles and
shirts, the ideal “back blockers” on a holiday; and the
beards of Lawler and Billy fell to the local shears. Xavier
retained his. “ I’d rather lose me life than me beard,”
he said, caressing it in affectionate admiration. “ Tis
this that have taken many a gurrl away from her home.”
They took the parcel of gems, and walked to the office
of the local ore buyer, who was also the local assayer.
He did not keep them long in doubt.
“ Hm’,—pretty—and N. G. They’ll cut all right; and
dull in two days.”
He flicked a particularly fine ruby from his table into
the street; and Lawler began to feel goose-flesh under his
sores.
“But they’re rubies, ain’t they?” asked Quinn, while
Billy indignantly regarded this stranger, who uncere-
moniously threw out their jewels.
“Rubies be damned,” replied the assayer. “They’re
a poor kind of zircon, man !—give me a few navvies and
I’ll get you a hundred tons of ’em, Where’d you eet
’em?”
“Nor’-west,” answered Martin shortly, and looked
blankly at his mates.
The assayer laughed. “ It’s a long way to carry pretty
road metal. D’ye know the Barrier ? ”
Billy answered, “Yes, we were all there three years
ago.”
“ Well, those creeks on Poolamacca way ’re simply
lousy with these things, ” He paused, and spanked some


“ Whydidy «“ *«
SZZZ&l’Zr** L "'“- " ilh
** £5?Zi£ Why ’ *' ,r ” Ra^ •■ - «n-
-,Th^. f °^ 0t their disa PPointment of the rubies and
pelted him with questions. ’ and
. * ron Range! All iron and manganese l That
d.m wUd ea,, Why. „e cooldVe go, ,J it ££
“ mZ? y °“ '“ k y ° U didnV ’ rtp,M the «ss.yer.
hat Iron Range is rotten with chloride. There’s twentv
iTeTvaK,?"'’ S “* b “” <»■
» wl f he ranges 1S over ten millions.”
Why, then—that tank-sinker’s a millionaire ! ”
And so’s Britt.”
“And the carpenter.”
fortchun ’ y Xa PU >- ° ther tank - sinker Jim out of a
£»£ LawlCT aad -*
wa?Ta D st In d Vited ? C aSS . ayCr t 0 drink with th em, and
ZSTJSISSZSg? burs “° ? wi,h his w-
“We’ll go back to the Iron Range. If it’s ffo od then
just V lik g e°it th i e ro b n gge d St “ the W ° rld ' 1 kn ™ a’place
*. lr °" . and manganese, and dolomite country—
only bigger. Drink up, boys, and let’s have another !
God ! our fortm’s made ! ”
th 'a h “" dred “ d first fortune had
been made, accord,„g to the cheery gospel of Quim,.


CHAPTER XXXI
At twenty miles from the Iron Range they saw its
wondrous metamorphoses. The eastern horizon was
hazy with the volumes of smoke that poured from many
smelter stacks, standing black and thin against the sky,
like pencils set on end. They crossed dozens of con-
verging tracks, where waggon wheels had milled deep
into the red dust; away to the south a few hundred ant-
like men were laying a railway.
Then they made into a main track, and struck an inter-
minable line of cobb coaches, packhorses, waggons and
swagmen ; all hot foot for the great iron outcrop.
And Quinn, noticing all these contradictions of his old
contempt, groaned.
Night fell as they covered the last stoney rises and
ploughed through the last red dust plain, passing scores of
graves on the track and off the track, for the disease that
follows large communities of careless men had been busy.
Little heaps of ore from small veins cut by the grave-
diggers lay by the shapeless mounds ; below, the un-
beautiful dead lay in a metallic beauty; one particularly
hard case was buried in a chamber of Kaolin, veined by
azurite celestially blue.
The smoke the stacks had vomited became lurid with
the nightfall, as if many points in mid-air had burst into
flame. The wind changed and blew the smoke towards
them in such palls that they seemed to hear it rumbling
overhead.
They were in the town now. On that salt-bush plain,
and in the mulga fringe where the drover and Britt had


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
coo-eed ” in perplexity one nie-ht
returned three found a huge duSLao fil/T" the
ctr**" for
vom ' t of the smdLrs!,’ k "'s r ho “ h “ d ih ° f then,i thc lurid
had been replaced by mine builrT 601 that the mul ga
Winding engines rattled alonp- -f nd P°PP et -heads.
below, three thousand In t P? 6 len^th of "on ;
to pierce deeper the vital, of theVaZ hamn "’ r “ d d "il
Ihe mam street a . . 7 ° e ’
by an army of thetne "a*’ Crowded
motes on the beams of the keroL t CP duSt hun £ w
crowded and stirred by thousands J '‘f Ways were
and were stilled again over the”/ Voices came .
drunken, youthful voices quarreir . mu . rmurs > shrill,
young blood and PnnC ’P ally because
^ d
In Lcndon town there lived a maid * ’
He^blno^K 116 SOt the rum
reek of jaded mail-ckttle ■ nHn ° f over - fres h horses;
and an overpowering sense of the° h SWaat and dust y flesh ;
lessness of money. cheapness and utter use-
this main str^et^mptifrfhefrsk oll mi " e paral,el to
glare of the molten metal olunm S ' pots ’ and th e sudden
these haggling, eageTt ce s 2I *T dump * all
mg them the exprefsion o brit r!dtColour~^v-
tng lusts, nck-red demons, lit by gl ow -


Here, at least, most men were what they seemed to be.
In this Homeric struggle for money men threw away the
veneer of civilised habit, and became devils disguised in
men’s flesh, or colourless hermaphrodites, or the peers of
gods.
Billy and Quinn and Lawler stopped at the centre of
the crowd-dazed and paralysed by the movement and
roar of this city after the clean quiet of the plains ;
and when they had become used to the pandemonium
they entered the bar of the Denver City and had the
Alcohol Sorrowful—for it was not in man to appreciate
these outer evidences of a great prize missed, and yet feel
no regrets.
These regrets were even deeper next day when they
explored the mines of the Iron Range and found a sub-
terranean city in the great lode; and then Quinn was
impatient for the track again, and talked of the lode that
could hide the Iron Range and never feel the inclusion.
But three days later Quinn groaned again; for they
reached the lode he had spoken of, and found a red-
bearded, choleric little man cursing his smelter-construct-
ing gang, and he irritably replied to Quinn’s queries that
this mine was owned by the Terrible Dick Silver Mining
Company, and that Terrible Dick himself had pegged the
claim two years ago.
The three mates, still too sanguine to admit a lasting
defeat, then made a forced march to Mootoroo, where
Xavier’s second lode lived, and which, as the Terrible
Dick’s property was now unavailable, was worth, accord-
ing to Xavier, the Terrible Dick and the Iron Range put
together.
They were not too late to peg the great hill of iron that
Quinn had discovered, which was their hundred and
second fortune, and were at work immediately.
“Ye don’t want any exemption f’m labour whin ye
have a bigger mine ’n the Iron Range,” said Xavier.
It was big enough to lead a man on, and poor enough


iB6 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
to ruin him. When they had stripped the weathered face,
the great outcrop showed itself as peacock-iron with a
little lead. It was a pretty mine, and that was all.
Then did Quinn lose heart; but Lawler, almost as
cheerful as if he had just stolen a horse, proposed that
they should fight with the weapons of their time.
“It’s a pity to let a boom like this go to waste,” he
said. “ Let’s see if we can sell her.”
“We must sell something or steal something,” re-
marked Billy. “We’re on our last quid.”
But Quinn had caught the idea ; and neglecting en-
tirely the fact of their impending pennilessness, talked
magnificently of the price they would float at.
“ I tink we’d be gettin’ five hunderd pound.”
“Five hundred hells,” said Lawler scornfully. “Ask
ten thousand and we’ll get eight—ask five hundred and
they’d know it’s a duffer. ”
So the three donned their best moleskins, and went to
the town at the Iron Range to seek a buyer.
The incidents of the raving multitude in the dust-heap
known as Silver Street were not lost on Martin or
Lawler, who, after five minutes’ study of local conditions,
decided to raise the price of the Mootoroo from ten to
fifteen thousand. Before they reached the Exchange
their price had advanced to twenty thousand; and after
seeing the wild changing of money-values in the vestibule,
the Mootoroo was not saleable under twenty-five thousand.
They were deluged with offers of syndicate flotation ;
but Lawler was the brains of the party, and he said
firmly:
“No! twenty-five thousand’s our price—no control till
you pay either.”
Then the offerers fled from them as snow leaves the
foot-hills in summer. They stayed there without money
for two days, and were almost reduced to “travelling on
the slug” (meaning the getting of credit by showing
specimens, and spinning tall stories about their claim);


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 187
and as they were giving up the first hopes, and meditat-
ing a return to the highest offerer of the brokers, they
were introduced to a wonderful youth, who represented
British Capital, and had a fine taste in the turning up of
exactly three inches of trouser-leg.
The three mates regarded him with a great respect,
which, however, did not last long, and had been more for
the represented than the representing.
The English youth visited the great blow of iron, and
they thought they had made a straight-out sale; but next
day the buyer offered 10 per cent, deposit on a twenty-
thousand pounds’ basis for the right to work the mine
for six months.
Lawler wished to hold out for more, but Quinn became
almost tearful as he rehearsed their many necessities for
ready money ; so the bargain was sealed, and each of the
three left the Australian Bank with cheque-books, and six
hundred and sixty-six pounds, thirteen shillings, and four-
pence, to his credit.
Then the partnership agreed to do nothing—not even
prospecting—until the option had determined. Lawler
went out to the Packsaddle to buy a horse or two; had
“heard there was some good mokes there, he said
blushingly, trying to discount his failing.
Xavier, despite his agreement, had another claim The
Rising Sun Extended Something—in twenty-four hours.
Billy, having studied this new romance for a week, other-
wise idle, interviewed the Editor of the Silverfields
Standard, and was engaged as a reporter forthwith.


CHAPTER XXXII
“ Behold a god stronger than I, who cometh to lord it over me.”
admil,ed hi ” * i,s
work I .?^' 0 ' lib ' ral W™* f ~”> 0» Paper, his
and bad anTs'"? rep °" er P ut h ™ »lo all mines, good
mo d ;i r oraVs?„~' y ““ **«* b ' “P
aor-d of!? had ”°* suffici “' ball “ 1 to earry a heavy
is to find out T man’ s and thing pros P erit y d °es
reckless nature Pred.sposmons. To his naturally
lessness ”s„h at TST'’' “““ * repU,a,i °" f “
bled fie^_, o ’k,"| 1' ”T e f S be P“-
ssssps
pSe" ofßmnnT Th ™‘ ks * waa alto'f" the pur!
unscathed. mattered Time would escape
mothe h r° U tf h hC fe ™ itted re S ularl y and largely to his
mother, the prosperity and its clogging dulnL and the
188


general sense of security were making him mean and
selfish, almost to the killing of his real nature.
One day there was shown to him in the street the first
of the martyrs of the Iron Range—one of the millionous
many who have given their health as well as their sweat
to the earning of a living. Billy saw this man a wreck
from lead poison. His gums and his palate were of a
livid blue ; the blood had left him and the poison had
taken its place. Billy looked at all this misery without a
tremor', and carelessly wondered at himself. Next day
was the day for his mother’s remittance, and he caught
himself regretting the necessity of sending the money.
Then with a real audible oath the old Billy Pagan
seized his hat, ran to the bank, and telegraphed a double
allowance home. That done he sought the man who had
been leaded, and made him happy—for a time. And no
man can do more than that. All the gods the world
knows or has imagined are unable to make a man happy
all the time.
He had yet many months to travel before he could say
his age was twenty-two ; and just as the three years of life
in the back country had toughened his body and hardened
his eyes, his experience of the mining city had seared his
soul also.
Xavier Quinn came to see him on a day in March ; the
month the forefathers of some of us say was the month the
world started business, and was almost shocked at the
change.
“Come here,” he said at last, opening the door with
one hand and with the other taking Billy by the collar.
“ You’re goin’ to see something to liven you up. Why,
man! ye do be gettin’ old. Come out an’ drink an’ be
merry. ”
Resistance was useless in the case of Quinn, so Billy
submitted to the clutch and asked where they were
going.
“ We’re goin’ to a sing-song, me boy. An’ when ye’ve


heard this gyurl, close your ears so’s ye’ll never ’ear any-
thin’ again! ” J
Thats that Concert Company,” said Billy. “All
right—let me walk quietly. I have to give ’em a para-
graph anyway.”
They entered the theatre and heard two yawnable
numbers so that Billy desired to leave ; but Martin held
him, whispering in the subdued tones of a muffled fog-horn •
“Whist! whist! I tell ye! ’Tis herself-an’ she ’ave a
troath stuffed with birds.”
Then Billy looked in the direction of the stage, and saw
a girl there, and gasped. She was a vision of militant
beauty-of glossy dark hair, and those brown eyes with
the shades of tawny honey and blue-black silk in them.
Her hair was like a dark horizon, a midnight to the
placid sea of her white forehead.
Her beauty was not the insipid pink and flaxen pretti-
ness of those women of spring morning, who are all lamb-
kin and daisy; it was more the beauty of a yet-young moon-
less night, jewelled with two great deep-eye stars ; of a
night old enough to have the night’s mysteriousness and
young enough to have some of the colour of the day left
m it—like the rose dusk that follows a red sunset.
She sang, and he tingled and thrilled to her voice ; and
when she had finished she looked his way, and their eyes,
unconsciously to her, met for an instant, and for that
instant Billy’s heart stopped beating.
At the end of the concert Xavier prattled him into the
bar, and prattled him out again, and Billy answered “ No ”
when a “ Yes ” was required of him.
All the memories of his old dalliances were as if they
had never been—to this new goddess his soul approached
virgmly in great fear of his own faults and in high worship


CHAPTER XXXIII
Not mine be it to possess the hand of Pelops ! Not mine to own
golden talents, or to outstrip the winds, but I will sit under this
rock, holding thee in mine arms, looking upon my sheep feeding
together, and toward the Sicilian Sea.”
Billy bribed the alcoholic accompanist with dinners to
secure for himself an introduction to the girl. Her name
he thought as perfect as her voice and her face— Mary
Herries. Then followed introductions to her father, the
manager of the company, who regarded him suspiciously ;
and to her brother, who sang songs supposed to be gently
humorous, and who looked on Billy amusedly, as does
any brother who sees the fact of his sister’s attractions as
an unaccountable thing.
When he was presented to her Billy, in dire confusion,
wildly pressed the tips of her fingers, looked over her
head at the wall beyond, muttered his pleasure, and fled at
the first opportunity.
All his earlier experiences went for nothing. He was
as much perplexed as to the right manner of approaching
this girl as lif he were still a boy. Every day he met her
and talked of the weather, and was silent for twenty
minutes, and then he said “good-bye” and ran away.
Meantime, without his own help or thought, he made
money. Having a little, he had the reputation of baiting
more; and the fact of a man having money is sufficient
reason for the world putting more in his way. For as
soon as a man has enough, and his possession of it is
known, everybody unconsciously conspire to give him more;


192 TRUE EYES and the whirlwind
every man he knows begins to work fr>r v,-
wages. ° work for him without
mp “s their
Billy had/as one oThis t rQUmnandhism ates.
many deals Fred Pn«k - partne rs, in one of his
show on £ sUver
was a small, pink-and-white youth with aLh t ®
pression, and as Billy regarded I- biab >' lsh ex ‘
to be suspicious of and n • lm , as to ° mnocent
left all such arrangements 6 partner ’
Baskins aught of hfs doings. They h a n d° o ooTH q r tioned
nearly all the stock in this small f P ’ by Word ’
b xSLfa t nd P L PriC . eS Pany ’ 3nd
w™;c.o La ™ r tl v he to ™ ■**>. «•**-
wondrous metal field which was^S/S'be 0 ” ““
»■%, Irui, ready io ”, lh f **
word that would send them n they waited f °r—the
tracks-when he ZuztZlt ** **** ° n to “w
Merries ; and becomifo- • h S apparent fai lure with Miss
*• •« <*. i e r s T!; a ;T b rea£ ££ ° f
phere she breathed. * the the same atmos-
stubSa.^dsd^iStto e^S Per Untiri^,y ’
opening offered; although he T^. whenever an
on scrip, ignorant of the g s , um th^ S ° far pi ;nff up scrip
as a boom must follow a slum D “ Ust follow a boom,
more, nor did he drive hlc f Ju B * he wassailed no
•oils of four a. the
penences was that the best the ° f all his ex ‘
clean love-and eood wnrt a W ° dd g ! ves is tru e love-
end of all wisdom. 30 Slmple llvin B‘. which is the


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND r 93
Mary Herries met him often in the big, dusty main
street, which was covered with life, like an ant-hill, where
men hustled and stopped for an instant and ran on again
—after talking more by touch than words, like foraging
ants. She greeted him so serenely always that his cheeks
flamed, in contrast to her own ivory face with scarcely a
touch of colour in it; and he answered disjointedly and
spoke of nothing in particular in an unintelligible way and
fled—having brought himself no nearer home than before.
To this his friend, the accompanist, who had a genuine
friendship for him by this time, said soothingly:
“ That’s how she looks at everybody. Makes me freeze
I tell you. She’s as cold as Lurline.” ’
At which Billy endeavoured to eat the accompanist while
acknowledging to himself that the musician was right
And while suffering after one of these chance meeting he
met Xavier and Lawler, and they sang in chorus the joys
of a new track, and of finding thereon the hundred and
third fortune. They begged him to regard the fact that
they had six exceeding fine camels—the first on the Barrier
and bought at Port Augusta—and much gear; and that the
Iron Range boom would burst, and ten thousand of the
twenty-five thousand people would be left without money
to carry them out of wrath; stranded in a red-hot town
without water.


CHAPTER XXXIV
explorer Cain, there sounded the t, T° f
metallic wind to the sand burning undeffhe beSbl
and Billy listened and remembered how tone “J
had blown and sung there without the coming of Tib
to damp it into stillness In *(,«» e i “ n ® ot rain
strength he had seen the fever « o ve'r *■ 7°“* *" d
drun a, Acaeia_ mM Lt^ate Zm Z S”« "** ?'
and grew rich thereby. Men andtlJl T X ™ Us >
the creeks to-day and 7 joyfuhy sCkTweTT !’f * “
morrow the fickle drift had changed and the JT* ’’ by to ’
S^^n^dSSS'
194


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND l#s
ment; and men who had seen their mates fa}] of t u_
typhoid and who feared the same end, wearily
tiie carcases in great heaps of hundreds in number and
burned the corruption from off the face of the earth. ’
Bob the Finisher bought another dray.
And through all these horrors men worked all the
harder, because the record of every day told them onlv
too simply that the days of a man are, on a new rush
fewer than usual. Claims floated into companies by the
dozen; the liquor bars and shanties were full of roysterere •
while in a humpy ten feet away men died of the fever
The adventurers hastening to the silver fields from the
places of the four winds made wages with Death that thev
could distance him—the stakes being wealth and life •
but the fact of having won was no guarantee of the
wealth being' paid over.
Yesterday one man sold a salted claim ; tonight he
died, and his swindle has gone for nothing. Four days
ago two men, their faces full of blood—their eyes
hate fought to a pulpy finish in the yard of the Chloride •
to-morrow Bob the Finisher will place their shells in the’
same dray, and bury them jostling one another
Billy came out of his half-withdrawn consideration of
these things to hear Quinn demanding why he didn’t
listen, and when he had apologised for his inattention
Quinn continued :
“ So see here-this place is N. B. G., Billy, me man.
Let sdo what I say—sell everythin’ an’ clear.”
“ Just what / think,” said Lawler. “ An’ the firstthing
I’d do ’ud be to sell all those shares ye’re in with Paskins
over,”
Billy replied rather loftily that there was plenty of time
—this boom would run another year yet.
Xavier gestured his impatience. “ Don’t I tell yer—
she’s done. Why! luk here! ”—he led Billy to the door as
a big drum and an asthmatic cornet burst into play, and
pointed to three Salvationists—“ what's them ? ”


xg6 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
“ Salvation Army,” replied Billy.
“ Right ye are—an’ whereiver they go poverty goes wit’
’em—they’ll desthroy this place. The free-hearted men
who’d booze an’ fight but ’ud never do ye a dirthy thrick,
they’ll go, every wan o’ them ; an’ the taytotallers, an’
the liars, an’ mean shneak thaves, they will take their place,
me man. * Whin you see a Salvation Arrmy cornin’ on to a
rush, ’tis time that you do be gettin’ out. ”
Billy heard the last words of his speech as at a dis-
tance, for Mary Herries had passed him, bowing serenely
in acknowledgment of his clumsy recognition.
So much did this affect him that on their return to
Lawler he said :
“ I’ve half a mind to go with you. I’m sick of living-
here.” s
That s the talk,” said Lawler approvingly,
“You’re me own man, an’ me good mate,” supple-
mented Xavier, squeezing Billy’s shoulder in gratitude
for the half-promise.
And then occurred something which made the half-
promise absolute.
An alert young man, well groomed, his moustache
frizzed and brushed heavenward, entered the bar and
looked around with the sharp apprehensive glance of an
hungry bird; his eye brightening into certainty as he saw
the mates.
He was the broker of the triad. Quinn called on him
to drink.
“ Nice thing we’ve struck,” said the broker, nibbling at
the lemon-shaving that had flavoured the cocktail.
“ What is it ? ”
“Well, Paskins is it.”
Whatd I tell yer,” asked Lawler triumphantly; but
his mates did not heed and the broker went on :
“ You know the shares we’ve been buying in, the shows
we’re in with Paskins ? ”
“Yes.”


«« Well, we’ve got ’em all, and they can’t deliver—well
squeeze the bears.
“ Not much, you won’t,” replied the broker, smiling
pityingly. “ Paskins has broken the pool. All the shares
we’ve bought are his, and his broker delivered to me this
morning.” .
Considering everything they recovered quickly from the
shock, contenting themselves with cursing their treacher-
ous partner ; and Billy said :
“This fixes it! I’ll go with you, Xave. As soon as
you like. There’s only two people in the world to trust,
and that’s you and Lawler.”
“ You’ll go! When ? ”
‘ ‘ When you like—now. Let’s get some place where the.
air’s clean—out of all this robbery.”
Then did Quinn and Lawler bless the loss that brought
nis gain to matedom, and appoint to meet him that night,
and make the break for the new land.


CHAPTER XXXV
“ In that moment to see beatitude in all its length and breadth.”
t 0 get aU ready ’ and Bi,l y. having ordered
ibe beauttfnlly moustached broker to sell all his stock
walked to ,be suta-b called New Paris „„
S^ ,c ho„Ti° owcote " d Wi,h villas md
He found Miss Herries on the verandah vainly attemot
,n H bT 4 n he In thC distraction «f a novel P
noSLeioThi h- ol,^ to Sa / “ g ° od - bye >” and wanted
with khU if hIS ,nde P endence c ame back to him, and
with it nis self-possession.
rries '" he “ d •» fen
wor,d “ hesa "«—* d
“ Going away. Mr. Pagan ? And for long ? ”
I dont know,” he replied even more bitterly. “I’ll
baCk he ™’ ' *»■* Wha/doas "
h ShC bCgan t 0 pity him - Sorr °w and he seemed to
be very uncongenial acquaintances.
“ y ° u come out for a walk? ”he continued, lookine
S ere b “ at her ’ a ” d “■“« *■
She assented suddenly, and brought her hat and tb«.
two walked down the rise on its outlfltown afd to
a great pinnacle of gossan, whose overhanging capes
gave grateful shade. “ngmg capes
There she seated herself on a boulder out of the sun-


glare, and Billy picked up iron-stone slugs and threw
them into the deep gorge below.
“ Well, Mr. Pagan—you are going away ? ”
He looked at her and marvelled at her composure;
then looking away again, he replied :
“Yes, I’ve been deceived. A friend of ours broke the
pool, and we’ve thrown away a lot of money buyiag his
shares without knowing it.”
“ And is this the reason you are leaving? ”
“ Yes—l’m sick of everything—everybody’s a fraud.
I want to get away with my two mates, anywhere where
we won’t meet any other men.” He sat on a boulder next
her, and felt deliciously miserable.
“And because one man has treated you badly you
won’t believe in any other man ? ”
“No, I won’t!”
“Nor any woman either?” she persisted, with a touch
of coquetry that was quite new to him.
It was a dangerous question. They were so diametric-
ally opposed in natures that they had been from the first
intended for one another; and now, to accentuate the
danger, there had been a frightened anxiety in her voice,
as there was a suggestion of coquetry in her words.
“ Yes, in one,” said Billy slowly, almost breathlessly.
“ In one,” she repeated interrogatively, with a flutter of
the eyelids.
“Yes, in one,” said Billy again, coming nearer to her.
Then he grew bold suddenly, as a coward in the presence
of a supreme danger finds courage, and his arm flashed
round her neck, and he kissed her. She made, for the
briefest moment, no attempt to escape.
“ My darling,” said Billy in great rapture.
Miss Herries became her composed self again, and put
him aside and rose.
“ My darling,” said Billy again, playing his old part of
the human whirlwind, and she warded him off with
difficulty.


*vr eyes and ™
Mn Pagan, you ”
hurried *> -
and with not a thou fll / tat,ous m ‘ght vanish,
preparing for the * matCS who were
But I don’t know you > ”
sSzrr - -«•"
smile emWdmed h ßill^to°Sthe ay h ’ fiShß ” s ’' a " d ,h »
her hand ind stopped him his but she lifted
for a Jeekf""’ a ” yWay ' ““ Mr ' ***>'< HI think over it
“Cod bless you I" sa id B ill y .. ...
s.r k “ p me ■" for. L^sv 0 ” good
They returned slowly • BJIIv tiori
now, and was beginning to J t Captured her h and by
At the gate he fooked this aTd th Pr ° prietar y airs,
no witness, and kissed her agait/ d Way ’ and saw
favours, begged another! US y ° Uth ’ haV ' ng Stolen these
‘‘Well, what is it?’’
ear girl make that week a day ? ”
with this volcank!lover!' half ' fr,§fhtened > and very pleased


CHAPTER XXXVI
The sudden uplifting had been too great a height for
him to come back to earth immediately, and without
damage. He walked back to that sublime gossan hill
and further out, and awoke to find he had walked from
daylight into moonlight, and to remember that Quinn and
Lawler had arranged to meet him at nine o’clock at the
Government tank.
He returned to the town, even then utterly unable to
think of his mates, or appraise their disgust of his defec-
tion. He had no thought of paltering with them; that
blessed afternoon had made the law; henceforth he knew
no peace but near her.
He found Quinn and Lawler in the midst of a cursing,
impatient crowd that struggled for precedence at the
Government tank that softened the miseries of a great
water famine; the famine which the Government discounted
by trucking water from springs and dams a hundred miles
away.
Their string of five camels had been watered before
Billy’s arrival, and were water-swollen, so that they
looked like five great footballs set up on sticks. One by
one Quinn and Lawler “hooshta’ed” them to the ground
and replaced the loading, while Quinn talked volubly of
his arrangements, and of the glories of the new field they
were to find, and of their hundred and fourth fortune.
“ I told that broker felly wit’ the pretty moustache to
sell every bit of schrip we have, and pay the money into
the Australian—he’s safe enough—he’s a white man.”
The loading was finished, and then Quinn said sharply:
“Where’s your shwag, Billy, me boy ? ”


TEUE E «s and THE WHIELWIND
-
even “ “? m, “ ,,ed Q"'"" “ a stonily cold and
H“^df^he'» V^re?'~ I ’ V ' Se “
Devil fly away wit’ the night I tuk ve tn h* u
sin?! Devil damn her.” 6 ye to hear her
Dont say that, Xavier! don’t sav that i v >
e “W al d b T Ut If y ° U Say that we ’ H <3«arrel. ” * ° U r<s my
I u sa y an yt’ing to hurt ye? Would I Rill o
«.“ J ,he 0— ° f if ylTcoL S
“I can’t, Xave—it’s fixed.”
Quinn flamed again.
’bS of .r r ■*? ? D »”’*
Wit’gold we’re goin’to.” ’ 7 ' Tls a place lousy
he “,! «V- „| ka , myself if , cm , ( ge(
“Ye blazin’ fool! Wimmen is only me dsin T
Come away and live a man’s life. ” 7 ’ 1 6,1 ye>
than if I were dladT” 1 °° m ° re Walk away from her
r ,ess ’
r m to ««-"s
hberately Quinn mounted his camel—Semi* 38 de ‘
refusing Billy’s hand fc.vt au- Gently and sullenly
wentaLyat y a I b XTforou < iti,'*** * ifa feet ’
eantels, fiened P f.s“ltrS 1 , t b ;Z“”> ht; paCk '
a?, a r
•tonblins Jnt hTs tdd°r Sh °“ ld “-' ”*


“Tell him I’m sorry I can't go,” said Billy, twa|qg to
Lawler, who looked at him with a quizzical sympathy.
“ I will that,” said Lawler, preparing to mount, and
shaking Billy’s hand vigorously.
“ I must stay where she is—l can’t help it.”
“ I know—l know,” replied Lawler. “ I’ve been that
way meself.”
Billy was roused to a lover’s sympathy for a lover.
“ What—were you in love with a girl ? ”
“ Hundreds on ’em,” said Lawler, grinning at his
memories.
“ But this one you couldn’t leave ? ”
“That wasn’t no girl! It wus a ’orse—prettiest geldin’
I ever see. ...” Then he concluded hastily: “.Well,
good-bye, Bill! an’ a good time to yer with yer girl. . . .”
They shook hands again.
“. . . Sure yer can’t come with us? This ull be a king
of a trip.”
“ No hope, old man—no hope.”
“ H’m . . . well, damn sorry, I am . . . well, good-
bye. . . . Get up, yer bitch, I’ll pull the nose out o’ yer.”
The cow-camel grunted her agony and broke into a
trot. In a moment the cushiony footfalls on the dusty
pad became inaudible, and camel and rider vanished in
the moon-haze.
Billy was sorrowful for quite five minutes, and then the
memory of the afternoon glamoured him again; and he
instantly forgot his two mates, who rode along silently,
trying to accustom themselves to the fact that the trinity
had lost a third of itself.
He went to his work of padding cables, and writing
indignant sub-leaders against the Government, and did his
work in a dream, with the result that next day’s paper
was a very humorous production. And next day, and the
day after, and the day after that, he haunted her; and
made himself exceedingly miserable by Ins inability to
understand her new coldness, which was her only armour—


204 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
cheapened'herself 111 fiftJi T Unwittin^
persistence signed the e 7 her pit ? and his
marry him ; ““
was given whether she had been right r ! n l P '°. m . lSe
,fc For as yet she could not sav she in Z u- g “ glVmg:
Wa T S he hen ß S S re K of that hC Sta^tled hrpleasur’bS
realities ; alfd ** ° f back to
that now, when the possessionof thhf /® ally . dy . and
money desirable monevW.L- i-, s be l° ve d girl made
imminent, he obtained a weekvTtam ‘till “'“'l “ emed
newspaper and rode om- tr, ti, • absence from the
pink-a.d-white S.o,pLl ’ Td’ ? ’ hM V , “"» the
see if that mine had *
his leave he rode back tn tt,» r „ 1 da y s over
himself that the “mine ’’was J° n Raag:e ’ admittin ff to
And at Iron Ramre ! f f”° a mine > bu t a grave,
almost in a whicb bad risen
And there **
■he <d.r.ha. *«-«■ on 2 taclt to
many of the people tbO* tbousands to Paskins,
tongue had inhirfd hIS im P uden t, incisive
g to ISS rrieS and her fath -.
adventures; whereat she^elf- 6 °h-*! SS Untrue ’ of Bi %’s
which she thought was a rip-h tJ* Z ter . aess for her lover
was really a very human jealousy' m gnatl ° n ’ but which
and long^ married l
Billy’s alleged wife and J?* ness was f ° und who knew
cruelly deserted the ’lady. re ed how Bill y h ad
In her ignorance of her lover she half Kni- . • ,
the insult of his offer tn mo u ° f beheved it—felt
other feelings with an h f r ’ then re P laced al l
frankly avowed to hleff S J ° VC f ° r him ’* a love
y owed to herself, regarding him as unattainable.


“Good-morning, sweetheart,” said Billy, running up to
the verandah.
She turned on him a face that had lost the pallor of
ivory and the soft steadfastness of night, and had now the
cold purity of marble.
“ My God I—dear girl, you’re ill.”
“ No, I’m well —but you!—you’re married already.”
Bill laughed loudly and felt on very good terms with
himself. Then he answered the charge in the best possible
manner ; he crushed her in his arms and laughed again.
“ Then —you’re not —it isn’t true? ”
“Isn’t true, dear girl—isn’t true? Didn’t you know I
love you too much to lie to you in that way ? ”
“ Oh, I’m so sorry for believing it a moment. I’ll never
listen to anything against you any more.”
“ Sweetheart —not a word.”


CHAPTER XXXVII
“Pale as a pearl she is—paleness that gives
A woman grace—yet not too pale a hue :
in her is seen what nature yet can do.”
They walked over the gossan hill, and on to the wmdv
plain, where a few late desert pea-blooms flamed against
the sage green of the seeding salt-bush ,
occasional airs of
aay.ns, Billy discovering the harness otriT^rt ridtf
a"St^c„tLr^ nd dr r ed
TS?d' hat ,f e for ttem m o„ir n, ' l) ’
thi flct thlt ? at fol,owed he wa « successful in forgetting
Is i,td“l‘lTS h h! d dl Sr a ™a d “
work in future Rut va - U e P on his own
3117 life
Kf-s=* SSSsS
thett b ? Billy losing
he “ hioh ™» Brown’ and ““
- - |£LK ' l—
“M i'S2?a , S& Whirlwind,-,
dearest chap that ever breathed." 1 m the


“ Dear, then.”
“ I’ve wondered what is like your eyes, Mary! and at
test I’ve found it. Look! ”
He displayed a specimen of the most beautiful mineral
earth has ever hidden and man has ever found; its tawny,
honey-and-brown lustre seemed to move momentarily as
the sun fell on its naturally polished cleavage.
“My eyes are not like that. That is beautiful. What
is it?”
“ First-class in irresponsible geology,” said Billy with
an affectation of professional pompousness. “This is
crocydolite —and it is very rare; and I gave a man ten
quid yesterday for this little bit. But she’s worth it—is
my girl with the crocydolite eyes.”
She laughed at his little speech; and then, with a
sudden accession of courage, leaned towards him and
kissed him of her own will for the first time.
So went their afternoons ; and Billy cursed the night-
fall that took him to the sub-editor’s chair; and every
mor pin g he blessed Adam for being turned out of
Paradise, so giving him this chance.
Mary had told him that he must come to her mother’s
house in Melbourne, and take her thence as his wife, and
he, knowing that nothing could alter her decision in
this, forbore attempts to persuade her to an immediate
marriage—that is, he forbore further attempts when he
found the early ones unsuccessful. She showed very plainly
that in such a serious matter as marriage she did not regard
the presence of her father and brother as of any value;
and that in this proposed revolution of her life she instinc-
tively longed for her mother, that the revolution might
have her mother’s countenance. So he faced the day feat
brought the train to take her south and east, and said
“good bye” with a voice as steady as her own, although
his eyes spoke plainly that old cry of poor failing clay—
“ Forget-me-not.” But when the rattling, narrow-gauge
train drew out and before it got way on she enjoyed the
luxury of tears ; and to him Dead Finish came yet again.


CHAPTER XXXVIII
SLk : reduClng > here b y gradual planes and
there by sudden wrenches, the boom-time appetites, which
mere wages could not satisfy. Many of the companions
of h,s prosperity vanished from the field; many more
rz played the Levi “- by
‘ he °* h “ f' d « ■“ d Bi “y. “eeing this, achieved to
pride, which is of all unaccountable prides the most un-
othersfTtwi Pnde -° f P ° Verty - S ° he P assed the
other still friendly acquaintances of his prosperous days,
and knew only his office mates. y
Every night a mail outwards took a letter to True Eves
thl?wvT m^ rning thC bward train br °ught a letter to
MelhT hlrlWlnd 7 nOW 4 S ° reformed that he blew constantly
“sruSrSd^ was 10 ,he s “ adf — -
But months passed and tried him, and he saw no chance
ot change, and so became reckless of himself and undulv
appreciative of the injustice of asking Mary to wait
longer. He wrote a stilted letter, offering her release
bUt '““ntially and decisively
.;'” dd T ”° re Panned of living without hope,
eyo,,d a " d hopeless
But his slat was bringing to him an end to this life that
sickened him most when he was most reckless. The
company that owned the Silverfields Standard had long
been in travail and was beginning to acknowledge that a
capital of less than the amount of the company’s bad debts


was questionable finance. Now the concern tottered to
its fall. All the mushroom brokers and the pyplMed
Napoleons of Finance who had caused the ruin had long
before been scattered to the winds.
The night came for Billy to “pad the cables” for the
last time, and to write the sub-leader which said, “ Every
intelligence in the community thinks,” when it meant that
the immature writer thought he thought. He left the
town poorer than he had entered it after the incident of
the bastard rubies; but at Adelaide he heard that the
main street of the Iron Range city had burned itself and
its boom memories on the night of his departure, and an
enterprising newspaper accepted his offer to write a
column of description of the fire by the usual reliable
eye-witness. That led to other work which brought
money; and late in October, when Melbourne begins to
shout aloud its joy at being alive, he entered that city full
of the pride of life, knowing that he had ten pounds in his
pocket, and feeling that he owned the wide earth.
He had neither thought nor intention of visiting Miss
Herries —indeed, when he considered his dismissal he made
himself stiffnecked. But the weakest instinct is as strong
as or stronger than the strongest will, and an hour after
his arrival found him in the quiet street to which he
tracked her address—a street full of white houses and
blue shadows—the side walks of grey-blue paves very
cooling to the eye.
There was a strip of garden before the house—a garden
of moss and lush grass, with the rank weakness of early
spring still in it, and a border full of blue and white
violets. The grass and the moss ran to the bole of a
great pittosporum tree blooming in a cere ivoriness as
if it had a human knowledge and enjoyment of itself,
scenting the air as thoroughly as an acre of Sevillian
orangery could. It did not surprise Billy to know, as he
did later, that the invading sprays that had to be pushed
aside when it was necessary to close the upper windows


threw their scented flowers into Mary’s room. He thought
it only natural that all things beautiful should seek her to
learn from her a beauty none but herself could ever know.
In that hundred yards of street his love, which that
morning had seemed only a pleasant memory with tears
and a death in it, had suffered a tropical redintegration,
from the mere fact of his approach to the house that held
her. The half-careless thought of her had become a
fanatic religion. As he opened the gate and waited at the
door for an answer to his ring, he shivered as a fasting
man shivers in the southerly winds of late winter.
And in a moment it was all over. The door opened,
the housemaid showed him into a sitting-room, and there
he saw Mary’s music and her books, and touched them
somewhat femininely—and ere he had time to return to
his chair Mary Herries herself entered. She was calm as
ever and as pale, but Billy saw that she looked tired also
and he flattered himself the weariness was for him, and
took heart.
She touched his hand, and they sat and talked.
.‘‘ It ll^ as afined ay, Mr. Pagan ; ” and Mr. Pagan agreed
with Miss Herries that it was so. And then, in this
divinely rare air, he shivered, and asked her in a choked
voice to forgive him.
That ended the conventionalities, for her love was
stronger than her pride, and in a moment her head was
on his shoulder, and the tips of her fingers caressed his
hair.
By-and-by she introduced him to her mother. He had met
Mr. Herries many times before, but all Mr. Herries’ friendli-
ness, as shown in the early stages of their acquaintance,
had vanished when the young man had to be regarded as
a prospective son-in-law. And now he found both father
and mother difficult. They had secretly thanked him for
the breaking of the engagement, which meant that they
could keep their only daughter—for a time, in any circum-
stances. They plainly showed their disapproval of the
presence of this cause of Mary’s recovered happiness.


Even Billy’s self-possession left him in the refrigerating
atmosphere, and in response to his half-whispered aside
Mary brought her hat and left the house with Ktm
They strolled through the Maple Walk in the Fltzroy
Gardens, and in the Avenue of Planetrees—past the alert
Discobolus, and the fountain where a Michael Angelo
colossus crouches under the burden of the great fountain
basin, and so back into the Big Garden ; and Billy was
divided between his plans and the delight in this new and
thrilling Paradise. He talked of “our plans,” and that
morning he had had no scheme for the future 1 Now the
possession of the girl amounted to an obsession of himself.
There were interludes with so much music and light in
them that no room was left for words ; and they talked of
the most trivial details of conduct in a way that was epic.
She told him, in a tone that was too gentle for reproof
and was more of a caress, that he must be really serious
and steady now, and that she would be proud if he worked
for her, even as a labourer; and Billy swore with his old
blusterous energy that neither kings nor principalities, nor
time, nor place, nor height, nor depth, should turn him by
the breadth of half a hair from the path she wished him
to follow.
And immediately after bidding her “good-night” the
well-meaning young man returned to his hotel, and
believing in his innocence that the atmosphere of a coffee-
palace would better suit the health of his new resolutions,
paid his bill, and did remove to a coffee-palace, where the
suspicious Rechabite in charge asked for, and received, an
advance payment of his room for a week. But in the
elevator he met some friends of his most reckless days at
the Iron Range, and the party went to the room of one of
them for a small game of hazard ; and daylight found Billy
breakfasting on whiskey and Frankfort sausage. That
did not hurt him, for he saw the hazard-party for the last
time before eight o’clock that morning; but he had lost
nearly all his capital, having left, after his losses and his
payments, of his ten pounds only ten shillings.


He tried to kick himself on his way to the bath, and
told the shower many times that he, William Pagan,
wasn’t good enough to look at her.
But he went downstairs whistling, and when the sun-
light had reached his blood all the pride of life and self-
satisfaction returned to him, and he walked Collins Street
full of resolve.
Firstly, he had to breakfast somewhere, and his low
funds prompted him to economy, as his fastidiousness
caused him to shudder at the fourpenny restaurant he
entered, only to ask a foolish question and run away
without a reply. Finally, he spent one of his half-crowns
on a royal breakfast, and having lit his pipe, went forth to
seek his fortune.


CHAPTER XXXIX
“Do or undo, or pretend ; but at one of these never be ending,
For these are the ways of the world—doing—undoing—pretending.”
The Maxims of Billy Pagan ,
He began a round of the newspaper offices, and at the
second time of asking was engaged as reporter on .the
Message —an evening journal, conducted by a glorified
compositor, who remained in a continued condition of
impending explosion from the pride of editorial power
which swells every editor who has begun his career in the
mechanical department.
The “ Editor ” never wrote, and rarely passed a line for
the paper. He had the daily thrill of seeing on his office
door the name of “ Editor ” in appropriate brass ; and for
the rest he gave advice to the half-dead hacks he called
leader writers; wept his joy over such advertisement
canvassers as were successful; and cursed, with a fine
choice of curses, the down-trodden publisher who was,
as often as not, too late for the country trains.
Billy’s work did not take him to the presence of the
editor, and he plunged into his duties with a zeal which
caused the other reporters to look askance at him. All
day he worked with scarcely a moment of intermission,
and at night he walked to Paradise and saw Mary Herries.
On the second night of his engagement on the Message
he went to bed feeling very empty; and on the following
morning he awoke to the fact that he had no money, and
had fasted twenty-four hours. However, he knew that
in four days his first week’s salary would be due; at the


moment he regarded the five days’ fast as an interesting
experience.
The abstinence brought no pain ; only a curious feeling
°f lightness in the body and of irresponsibility in the
bfain. On the third day he felt that his stomach—of the
possession of which he had remained in ignorance until
then-had become a collapsed bag ; he felt also the
necessity of preventing his feet being lifted too high as
he walked, for fear they should fly away and utterly dis-
appear. J
And on the fourth and fifth nights, when he held Mary
in arms that were almost water-weak, and his unfed brain
wandered a little, she imagined a return to excess, and she
wept. And Billy did not tell her the truth, partly because
he knew she would insist on helping him, and his proud
stomach could not accept gifts from a woman, even though
it was the woman he loved; and partly because he was
physically insane for the time, and so hugged the petty
martyrdom of being misunderstood by the beloved.
On that Friday afternoon he had reported a meeting of
a suburban Municipal Council, and the newly-elected
Mayor, a wealthy, good-humoured, illiterate man, invited
his Council to a lunch, with champagne and chicken in it.
Of course the press-men were invited—for a newspaper
man is the breath of a public man’s nostrils; and the
Mayor wanted complimentary paragraphs. But Billy
ug'g'mg the sweet sorrow of abnegation, refused, and
went away—not hungry, for hunger had passed—but
empty ; and flying very light in the head.
Next day the Message cashier paid him four pounds
He had struck up an acquaintance with an old man whos-
speech spoke of education, one of the emergency me.
who was paid by the column—and he confided to Billv
sorrowfully, the fact that the week had been a poor one to
him.
“Only fifteen shillings in this week,” he said, not
complaimngly nor beggingly, but sadly ; and Billy, big


with his eighty shillings, asked him to drink, and then to
lunch.
“ There’s an excellent eating-house in Swanston
Street,” said the emergency man with an eagerness he
strove to suppress, “ really good. Half a duck or a
whole teal, potato salad, and button tomatoes for eighteen-
pence —or two shillings with a bottle of lager! ”
“Then two shillings it shall be,” said Billy with a
spark of his old decisiveness. “ Let’s go! ”
The emergency man introduced himself. “I am John
Banworth. Of course, you don’t know my name; but
twenty years ago they prophesied great things for me in
literature. But the country’s too young yet.” He said
it all without bitterness, and concluded with a boy’s en-
thusiasm, thumping along with his stick at a tangent.
“ I’ve lived —I’ve had my dreams ! And no man has
lived who hasn’t had dreams.”
They arrived at the place of the half-ducks and the
potato salad and the button tomatoes and the garlic
crusts, and the old journalist made energetic fork-play.
But there was no hunger in Billy. His will gave him
an artificial appetite in an hour or so, and he fed on
oyster stews, and other soft things, and by nightfall
began to be his old self again—so that he astonished
Mary with a return of the whirlwind wooing which
had won her.
And when she reverted to the subject of his supposed
excesses of the previous three days all his abnegation
had disappeared; and he told her of his starvation, and
accepted her tears and kisses and half-incoherent cries
of love and pity with the knowledge that he had earned
them, even though it had been with foolishness, and was
determined to save every fraction of his wage.


CHAPTER XL
“On the first day of Christmas my true love gave to me
Three French hens, two sugar-loaves, and kisses three
A prayer for health ! a prayer for love ! and a piece of’a juniper
He knew enough of women to know that the wedding
Mary would like would be the one with the conventional
ceremonial, and with the conventional details observed;
so for the next seven weeks he lived on as little money
as possible. By Christmas Eve he had amassed a capital
of £2O, and when the two were on their usual walk that
evening he told her hesitatingly that he had a little money,
and asked would she marry him soon.
“Will three months do?” she asked, hesitating now
that the time had come for definitiveness.
“Three years, say! Why three months is an
True Eyes.” &
“Then two months.”
“ No ; three weeks.”
“ Well, six weeks.”
“On St. Valentine’s day, for luck, then, sweetheart.”
On St. Valentine’s day, dear, then.”
“ Mind, I’ve only my salary to live on.”
“Dear boy—if you had not even that I’d marry you.”
“God bless you, dear.”
“I’d marry you all the quicker, Will, if you hadn’t
anything.”
“ Then it’s a pity I’ve got any work or wages.”
“And if you couldn’t earn any money, Will—l could
sing.”


“That will do,” said Billy almost sternly. “The only
audience you’ll ever have again will be your husband.”
“ But I’d like to help.”
“And you shall—in the right way. Why, True Eyes,
if the time ever came that I was unable to earn enough to
keep both of us, and knew that I could never do it again,
and you had to work, I’d leave you and never see you
again.”
“Oh, Will! Why?”
“ My darling—it’s my pride and my privilege to know
that lam to earn the bread that will feed you—and if I
didn’t earn it, I couldn’t look Love in the face.”
The big, red Christmas moon glared on the pavements
the Christmas crowds surged and bustled in the still,
heated, atmosphere. Melbourne was purchasing its Christ-
mas presents.
Billy drew the dearest hand in the world through his
arm and into bis own palm, and said apologetically :
“I’ve forgotten your Christmas present, sweetheart.
What would you like ? ”
“Nothing, dear—l’ve got the world. You’re giving
me yourself.”
“ A fair deal,” cried Billy, adding wickedly—" and next
Christmas, dear, you can make me a present.”
“What sort of a present?” she had intended to say,
but she looked at his eyes before she said the words, and
read his meaning, stammering that if he talked in that
way she would go home at once.
And Billy talked not at all—but pressed again the
dearest hand in the whole world, and walked home with
her very happily, for he had seen the child that was to
be in her half-frightened eyes.
* * * * *
The Saturday before St. Valentine’s day had come, and
Billy fumed impatiently in the reporters’ room of the


aiß TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
Message , waiting the word that his work was done, for he
had promised to take True Eyes to Brighton Beach.
The sub-editor entered, and ordered him to report a
cricket match; and Billy, looking at the sunlight, and
thinking of the beach and of the girl, and of the bitter
disappointment the breaking of the holiday would be, first
temporised with the instructions, and then refused to obey
them. In five minutes he left the Message office knowing
that he could never return there ; but he put aside the
anxiety of worklessness, and hurried to the meeting-place;
and the rest of the afternoon was worth a year of heaven
to him.
Then came the day of which no like shall come again—
and they were married to the susurrent accompaniment of
the tears of the mother of True Eyes. Billy’s hands were
red from nervousness, but he was scarcely conscious of
any reality in all the ceremony.
Almost all his little marriage capital had been expended;
he had been specially generous in the way of hansom
cabs. Returning to the house, he willingly made peace
with Mary’s unwilling father, who still regarded him with
the bull-dog’s doubting eye Billy had learned to evade in
the man-of-war’s man of Tintinbong.
And old Fourdroyer, the author of many unactable
tragedies and with a fine Irish talent for flattery, proposed
the health of the bride in a honeyed speech, in which he
managed to quote a hundred irrelevant lines from the
most unactable of his own plays ; and Mary’s mother and
her aunt, who were both of the dark-haired ivory beauty
of Mary herself, criticised Billy’s Norse fairness favour-
ably, and decided that it might have been worse.
“ And these twain were one flesh.”


CHAPTER XLI
“ As light is wedded to its co-mate —heat.
So am I wed to thee for age and youths
As form is blent and into substance beat,
As goodness welded into highest truth. 1
Billy had engaged residence in a surburban boarding-
house-one of that type which seem to have been all feast
from the one mould. It had a bedroom and sitting-room
separated by folding doors; in front there was a little
strip of garden; the window was half-shielded from the
road view by a great yellow banksia that had crept under
the verandah like a stealthy thief until it was sure of
its own courage. Then it had made one stride to the
window, and had thrown through it a spray that bloomed
sickly out of the sun, and was leaved yellow by the con-
finement of the room. This self-imprisoned spray had
decided Billy on the hiring—it gave their home the little
touch of romance the other boarding-houses did not
possess. Billy said it was Arcadia—for the fortnight they
lived there the two called it their “bower” ; their happi-
ness making them so light that they might have perched
upon the spray with no great probability of breaking it.
And now a most sublime cabman —for everything seemed
on an heroic scale this golden night-drove his sublime
horse, that had nearly forgotten its string-halt, over the
sublime wood pavement, and Billy and his bride looked
into each other’s faces and laughed.
Mary explained that she laughed at the memory of
Fourdroyer’s speech, and Billy said that he laughed at the


conventional weeping of her mother and her friends as if
marriage W as death. Mary was very silent at that and
ftiurmured, poor mother,” then she turned on him her
se rene eyes glowing with a great happiness, and said :
It is a sort of death, dear. I have left my old life
and I can never go back to it. ” * ’
“ And u if you want to you shan’t, True Eyes,” said
to crusTher blUSter ° US that al ways threatened
She lay in his arms very contentedly, saying, “ I’ll never
want to leave you again, dear. ... Oh ! don’t crush me
I believe when you go to heaven you’ll own it, dear—vou
take everything by storm. ” y
. “ G ° to he , aven ! ” said Billy. “ Why, I’ve {jot heaven
“At four shillings an hour?”
% Geor & e ! ” said Billy, suddenly brought face to face
fte added to cover that anxious inflection of his voice for
a oound" hC \ bUt thirty ‘ five shillin £ s in the world, and
on tWs nTeht if ° to Cabman ‘ He could be mean
Cristo W3S 3 nigHt f ° r a miser to P la y Monte
The knowledge that fifteen shillings was the onlv
paT\ b u rh e e e k P ° Ver ? r thiS by wt
lasting one than'mo^,
hirbSweapom hIS Self ' C ° nfidence ’ and self-confidence
“ You’re all mine,” said Billy.
‘‘ AH youns .’ sweetheart.” She looked at him in the
tenderivnf hght Wi ?° Ut 3 Wush or tre mor, frank and
and ll Ge ,°n ge ' ” Said Billy ’ “ you se e what a man I’ll be
and how 111 get on in the world. One of these davs I’ll
be great enough to deserve you, True Eyes.”


“S-sh ! I don’t deserve you, dear.”
Billy contradicted, and they belittled themselves until
humility became happier than pride.
tt D’ye know what,” said Billy suddenly, “I can’t
believe we’re married. Let’s yell it out, will you ? ”
“Oh! no, no, dear.”
“Look here, True Eyes, if you let me yell out ‘My
wife ’ about a dozen times, I’ll die happy.”
“Oh! don’t, don’t don’t say death, dear. Now
you’re mad again, and don’t call out so loudly.”
3 “Well, let me introduce you to the cabman, so that I
have a chance to say, ‘My wife ! The cabman! The cab-
man ! My wife! ”
“Oh, you silly boy.” She was blushing now, and her
eyes were overflowing with love of him.
“Well, then, you say it.”
“ Say what?”
“ Say ‘I am your wife ’! ”
“ I’m your wife.”
“ And I’m your tyrant and your slave, sweetheart.”
They were merry for a moment. Then Billy grew
grave. _ ,
“This is a confession of faith,” he said; and they
kissed with a kiss that was a new book of revelation to
both of them.
The sublime cab stopped in the imperial gutter and Mr.
and Mrs. William Grey Pagan alighted, _ _ ,
Billy gave the cabman the sovereign, threatening him in
a fierce whisper with “death” if he dared audibly wish
them a long life, and so take the boarding-house into con-
fidence. Then he opened the gate.
Mary turned with a wild, fleeting idea of running home
to her mother, but her fingers were on his arm, and she
did not really want to go, and Billy shortened his grasp,
and took her hand in his own, and they advanced.
They found an open door, a deserted house blazing with
light, and as they entered the sitting-room True Eyes


became Shame Eyes, turned on Billy a reproachful rose-
red face, and said :
“ Oh ! they know we’re just married—they left the place
open and went away for us—why didn’t you tell them ? ”
“So I did. I said we had been married three weeks.”
“And did you explain why you had left a three-weeks
bride ? ”
He stared at her, seeing his mistake; then having no
words of excuse, he kissed her again.
The humour of it struck them and they laughed, but
nervously.
So True Eyes was married to the Whirlwind.


CHAPTER XLII
The accursed breakfast bell of the boarding-house called
Billy to bread-winning. With an adorable shyness they
went out to breakfast, fondly believing that they were
acting long-married people to the life. But Billy saw
nothing incongruous to the role when he glared fiercely at
a grey-beard popinjay who sat next True Eyes, and was
guilty of the heinous crime of smiling as he passed the
marmalade.
The man who can love well is more unreasonably
jealous than was the Mosaic God on Sinai; but the
necessity for work to make the fifteen shillings into the
necessary three pounds by the time the first weeks board
became due was strong on him, and when they left the
table and took his hat and prepared to say “ Good-bye ”
to her.
It occupied them half an hour under the verandah, and
fifteen minutes at the garden gate.
At last Billy was gone, with the vague excuse of busi-
ness to attend to; and she, not yet knowing of their
pressing want of money, told herself that he loved tbe
world of men more than home, and so on. It is a charac-
teristic of real love in its early stages that it belittles
itself and seeks for reasons, and so is not quite certain of
its object; the fatuous belief that some men and women
have that old love will live no matter what they have done
to kill it is like unto only one other thing, and that is the
cheerful sexual content that belongs to capons.
The effect of love is the effect of cathedrals —to any man
with a sense of proportion, the gulf that separates the


comparisons makes him smaller than ever he knew how to
be before. Love makes a man humble while clearing his
eyes so that he sees truly ; in which last characteristic
love differs from the lesser, the church religion, in that
it has no superstitions.
It is almost impossible for the love-cleared eye to see
wrongly. It becomes as intuitive as the palm that
readies itself for rustling before the sea-airs reach it; it
can rarely be deceived in its object. But so much humility
is in love that love doubts its power to keep, consults
its mirror, and finds the lines of age in the wrinkles of
merriment.
Billy walked through the streets with the importance
of a politician in a bush constituency—impelled by the
necessity for money-making as a motor, with the shock of
leaving True Eyes acting as a brake. And as he went
through the Fitzroy Gardens, in that big flower-walk whose
beauty stays in the memory when more important memories
have been attenuated by time, he leaned towards the
scarlet geraniums which no artist in colour can thoroughly
reproduce, and said, “You are like True Eyes’lips,” which
they were not, being too brilliant, and True Eyes’ colour
being a suggestion and a mystery, and not an exaggera-
tion ; and to the brown pansies, “ You are like her eyes ”
and blushed at himself like the foolish baby he was.
A Salvation Army soldier met him in the plane walk. He
was an anaemic sort of soldier, but some substitute for
human affection swayed him, and his face was alight and
his eyes eager. When he saw Billy’s face all alight and
radiant he said, “ God bless you, brother,” and went on,
telling himself that another soul had found happiness;
which it had, although of a more complete sort than the'
soldier knew.
Billy went on unheeding, and singing an epithalamium.
He checked the inaudible melody at the door of the
JVorth City Chronicle , a suburban paper; and his necessity
giving him another courage, he entered.


At a rough desk sat a man of weedy physique ; his —irnn
face half hidden by a scanty black beard which was of
the kind one sees on Japanese jars—as if each hair had
been threaded into the skin, and fastened with a clove
hitch separately.
He was adding columns of figures, and in the agonies of
arithmetic he ground his teeth, and sang hymns through
them, in a vindictive way that greatly discounted the words.
His hymn habit was so strong on him that he hummed
at intervals while Billy explained his call; and when the
young man had reeled off his list of qualifications
Spofforth, the hummer of hymns, stopped, shot back a
sliding board in the partition, and called for Mr. Squaven.
Mr. Squaven answered the call and appeared. He had a
round fat face, illustrated by something that looked like
good-humour at first sight, but was only a cheerful
stupidity ; for he was one of those soft men whose fat
is not force, but incubus, and a man like that is the
greatest example of selfishness known.
Like his partner he was a Wesleyan. He drank light
beer with the moderate drinking Wesleyans, and with the
outside and ungodly printing public. Spofforth, Koing.
teetotal, had to do with the more numerous Wesleyan
teetotalers, and so the office secured the printing orders
of both sides.
The antithetical partners talked to Billy, and turned him
round mentally, and observed him; and finally engaged
him as editor, reporter, and proof-reader, at thirty
shillings a week. There were to be four columns of
municipal council a week, and two columns of police
news, and four columns of teetotal and religious matter,
for which last the editor would have to go far afield to
outside hamlets to report the utterances of a dreary ass
with blue and yellow harness on his neck and letters like
P.W.X.C.T. after his name; but the partners told him hq
could fill up his spare time canvassing for advertisements.
The fat partner handed Billy a sheaf of paper, and


directed him to the police court; and Billy left—glad of
the chance of work, and glad also to be out of the won-
derful presence of Spofforth and Squaven.
On his way to the police court he saw another news-
paper office ; a great sign-board informed him that there
really was a paper known as the Suburban Advertiser.
Here his buccaneer’s eye saw the possibility of finding
the balance of the necessary three pounds a week; and
his luck attending him, he left that office in ten minutes,
again on his way to the police court, and engaged to do
precisely the same work as for the other paper. He had
discreetly suppressed the fact of his prior engagement
by Spofforth and Squaven, and so came to supply the
same news done in different styles to both of the alleged
journals.
Thus he had to write five columns that day before he
returned to Mary, and his explanation of his haste to
leave her in the morning not only removed her fears that
his love was waning, but made her find new reasons for
worship, a result which Mr, William Pagan had secretly
calculated upon.
Then followed six weeks of skating on thin ice—of
serving two masters—of carrying between the skin and
the fruit a sharp knife which momentarily threatened to
slip and cut the holder. The little kindly Mayor of the
suburb lost himself in admiration of Billy’s wondrous learn-
ing ; and one day he blushingly confided to the young man
that he intended to run for Parliament, and that Billy might
earn twenty-five pounds by writing six speeches for him.
Billy’s politics at that time were mostly of the first French
Revolution ; but he was honest enough to read some par-
ticularly stodgy Hansards before writing the speeches,
which were thus filled with catch phrases as “ the incidence
of taxation,” —“the robbery of levying all taxation on the
poor of the community,” and so on. The speeches also
called on the working man, at intervals, to “arise and


come forth to political freedom,” but did not advise him
what to do when he had arrived at that delectable position.
However, the little Mayor accepted the speeches, and
learned them even to the last apostrophe ; but he never suc-
ceeded in delivering one oration to the end, because the
free and easy interruptions of the electors flustered him
and he lost the continuity of the speech, and so had to
begin at the beginning again. It is as well to say that
in the campaign in which the ammunition was Billy’s
literary work the little Mayor occupied a very honourable
and profitless position at the bottom of the poll. When
the next election time came he trusted to his own won-
drous eloquence, and was elected by an enormous majority.
But it is better that a hundred mayors should stay out-
side Parliament for ever than that two lovers should be
denied a honeymoon journey by reason of poverty; and
Billy, as he clutched the Mayor’s cheque, saw in the
incident the finger of Fate. There was but one thing
wanting, and that was leave of absence from his sub-
urban editorships—and when he reached Spofforth’s
office he found that Fate had provided for that also.
The proprietors of the rival journals had compared notes,
and discovered their editor’s reprehensible versatility. So
Spofforth signed Billy’s last cheque, groaning at Billy’s
wickedness and the necessity of paying him; drying one
line before he wrote the next, and singing hymns through
his teeth. The other employer made some remarks about
“dishonourable proceedings,” to which Billy said:
“ I couldn’t live on the beggarly screw either of you
gave me, and I did my work well for both of you; and if
you talk any more about dishonourable proceedings I’ll
kick you.”
His employer said he thought he ought to send for the
police—only in the public interest, of course—and then he
paid his late editor, and said it was all highly irregular;
and Billy laughed and walked out.
He ran along the streets, and galloped through the


228 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
gardens, and into the boarding-house, and catching Mary
in a way that made her lose her breath for a moment, he
said:
“ Put on your hat, True Eyes—we’re off on our honey-
moon trip. It’s late, but we only succeeded to our estates
to-day.”
“ Dear boy—have you got a lot of money? ”
“ Twenty-eight quid, sweetheart! and I’ve also got the
sack— never mind that—get ready. There’s a boat for
Tasmania in four hours.”
“ Oh, we couldn’t be ready in that time ! ”
‘ ‘ Couldn’t we ? We’ll try. ”
“But we can’t afford to, Will.” She looked straight
at his eyes now, and had done so these last few days, for
habit had given her confidence. Before then she had
closed her eyes when he kissed her—being misled by the
very human belief that if she closed her eyes nobody
could see her.
“We can’t afford not to. We’ve got youth and happi-
ness, and it’s sheer waste of money not to spend money in
making them finer than they are.”
“ Will you’re a What did you say that wise old
gentleman who sits next me is—a sophist ? ”
“ Call me anything you like, but get ready.”
So they had three weeks of such happiness as comes to
few people in the world—happiness so great that the
ambitious young man said:
“ When I am Dictator of Australia, sweetheart, I’ll
provide on my estimates every year enough money to give
a honeymoon to all true lovers.”
“And if they were like you, dear, they wouldn’t take
the money without earning it.”
“I didn’t earn this,” said he merrily, “a little man
gave it to me for writing speeches.”
It was their last evening. They were so happy that
there was a pang hidden somewhere in the pleasure, and
even the mercurial Billy was silent. The summer haze


came in over the Straits with the dusk, and turned the
opaline waters of Emu Bay into shadows, sassafras scent
rushed from the scrub which ran to the sea-edge, and
Table Cape hung out its flaming lantern—and the holiday
was over. For all things must have an end even
heaven!


CHAPTER XLIII
“Do well, or do ill, or do something', rather than rest or rot,
Sickness comes not to the busy, nor flies to the boiling pot.”
The Maxims of Pagan.
Strengthened by the fact that the child who should make
their trinity in unity was on its mysterious road from the
Land of the Unborn, Billy’s pertinacity was made so ener-
getic that, at the sixth time of asking, the great daily
paper, the Era , found room for him as an emergency man,
who is principally a reporter without salary —a watch-dog
who gets no bone.
He was to be paid thirty shillings a column, but when
one of the sensations he reported was important enough
to be set in a big type, they paid him not thirty shillings
a column, but three-halfpence a line, and so saved six
shillings. A week or so later another sensation, import-
ant enough to be published without calling for the eco-
nomical blue-pencil of the sub-editor, was printed in a
very small type because space was at a premium, and the
millionaire proprietor paid by the column, and so saved
another six shillings.
Billy brought to his work an enthusiasm for which
money could not state an adequate price, and his rage at
these miserable little frauds on his labour were loudspoken
and vivid; so that the other reporters who considered that
the millionaire proprietor had made them, and not they
themselves, regarded him with the horror the Inquisition
might have regarded the heretic who blasphemed in its
presence.


His work was mere sensation-mongering—the mag-
nifying of a fairly considerable flood to the dimensions of
Noah’s deluge—the glorification of a squalid murder into
the romance of a vendetta that filled two columns.
Public opinion! Public opinion, as Billy saw it, was
often the opinion of a junior reporter prompted by the
millionaire proprietor to say certain things “in the public
interest,” which is a euphemism for the interest of the
proprietor of the newspaper using the phrase.
It was the successful paper because there was no better.
The Chronicle, an honest, well-meaning, literary, but politi-
cally-stupid sheet, was so stupid that its stupidity was worse
than crime. It had brought Northern instincts with its
first imported printing machine to the Southern seas,
where there are no Northern conditions. In a land where
the existence of a vast public landed estate and the absence
of a leisured class made the Government almost socialistic,
the Chronicle was more Tory than an English Tory of
early in the nineteenth century. Once the paper published
a leader regretting the success of Oliver Cromwell 1
And while Billy was rapidly becoming a master in the
deceptions of daily journalism, in the glorifying of a
stupid politician because he happened to be on the same
side, and the damning by inuendo and the suppression of
his speeches of a clever politician on the other side, he
made many friends among the luckless literary free lances,
of whom Banworth and Jardine were ancient specimens.
And in the Christmas week of which he had spoken to his
wife when she was only his promise, True Eyes’s little girl
was born. That is an event which humbles more than
death can humble any man but the utter fool.
And Billy, fool as he was in many things, was not a fool
in this. For him there had been ordained a miracle! The
woman he loved had voluntarily descended into Tophet
while she was yet alive, to bring to him a Forget-me-not—
a seal of love experienced, and an earnest of love to be.
She lay there, very pale and still, with the new empire


232 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
won, and blessed her husband; and he wondered and felt
like a criminal whose crime is known but mercifully not
spoken of. In a few days he was conscious of being
outside the pale ; and True Eyes, seeing it, and knowing
him well, drew his head down to her breast, and said that
she had two babies. At that Mistress Macpherson, the
dour old nurse, who regarded children from the maternal
standpoint of the stud book, said they were not husband
and wife and child, but three children.
Mary’s mother, by this time half reconciled to Billy,
called every day, and even unbent to her son-in-law
sufficiently to express admiration of her grand-daughter.
“ It’s the cunningest little thing,” she said enthusiastic-
ally; “it just lies there and breathes and breathes and
breathes. ”
To which Billy replied that such a proceeding was very
usual, and so again earned the momentary disapproval
of his mother-in-law.


CHAPTER XLIV
The Christmas number of the Javelin contained Billy’s
first printed verses—and happily Apropos, they were
addressed to True Eyes. He felt like a new Alexander
when he ran with the paper to his wife, and she read them
as a fanatic might read an authentic message from his
particular god, and told the baby what a great genius its
father was; and Billy blushed at the praise and depre-
cated it, while little ripples of pleasure at the sweet
sincere flattery coursed down his spine.
Then came the day when she arose to take up the
threads of life again. She told Billy that it was a new
world now—the baby had changed for her everything—
she could not clearly remember a time when he was not
her husband and she not a nursing mother.
But she also said that he must be her lover always ; and
Billy replied that he would never be content to regard her
only as the mother of his children ; they must always love
each other as much as if he had never possessed her—
which is an ambitious standard to maintain.
Mary had insisted that the money for his work in the
Javelin should be disbursed in new clothing for his glorifi-
cation ; and after some argument Billy, who had become
quite habituated to his clean shabbiness, consented. The
wondrous vesture came home a few days later, and when
he was dressed True Eyes turned him round worshippingiy
and asked the unconscious baby to look at her pretty daddy.
By-and-by Billy, having kissed his wife and child, went
out, feeling all the confidence that comes of wearing new


clothes ; a confidence that made his eyes sparkle like the
sun on salt water, and exaggerated his youthfulness.
Mistress Macpherson, the dour nurse, had watched
these proceedings with dissatisfaction ; partly the result
of her natural sourness and partly because, having just
drunk some of the invalid’s brandy from a cup that con-
cealed the proportion of spirit, she felt the virtuousness
that comes from a sense of personal safety. Her criticis-
ing attitude was so evident that when Billy had departed
Mary turned to the nurse inquiringly :
“ Ye should na let him gang oot wi’ his fine claes on like
a bridegroom—seekin’ ither lassies while ye are sick here,”
said Mrs. Macpherson.
True Eyes tried to defend him, but she was too weak
for anything but tears, and her mother entering and find-
ing the cause of the trouble energetically discharged Mrs.
Macpherson, and when that lady refused to go, forced
the retreat.
When Billy returned in an hour or so and heard of the
brilliant campaign, he said to his mother-in-law :
“You’re a jewel—l love you for that.” Then his
mother-in-law became his friend for always.
“Will,” she said, “you may kiss me. That indecent
old wretch with her nasty virtue —it’s more like vice to my
thinking.”
Then, not being a lady to do things by halves, she told
him to kiss her again.
The struggle for a living continued on the Era for
nearly three years ; and within a few months of the end
of his servitude their second child had begun to toddle and
fall on its head with great exactitude, in the way of baby-
hood. The gold of Billy’s youth was already blackened
by a poverty that was doubly hateful because it involved
the people he loved. Not only was the habit of sending
money to his mother now more honoured in the breach
than the observance ; but money for necessities had to be
often refused to Mary simply because that money did not


exist. In the summer when their wants were least he
earned enough to keep them comfortably; but in winter
when the monetary demands were greatest the great space
given to Parliamentary reports cut down the space given
to the sensation-monger, and life became a running fight
with privation. And that privation brought out the best
in them. When butter was dear both Billy and True
Eyes discovered they did not like butter, and they each
would be more content to have the other eat. In distress
her latent qualities of fortitude and sacrifice—which being
made for him she loved was not sacrifice at all—were
developed so that Billy told her a dozen times a day that
he was not good enough to breathe the same air with her;
and the words paid her with usury.
But out of her presence he chafed at the restrictions of
poverty as a proud horse chafes at the cruel bearing-rein.
He wanted books and he couldn’t get them; he wanted new
music for that perfect voice that was the dearest sound in
all the world to him ; he wanted rest and intermission for
her at the seaside out of the suburban street that flamed
like a furnace in summer ; he wanted for her those dresses
in the great shops in Collins Street—the dresses which
were marked “Nine Guineas ” in the most careless way,
as if nine guineas were ninepence. He stood by the
carriages that brought rich and leisured women to these
shops, and cursed these women because they had the
wealth which True Eyes would have so gilded and im-
proved. And then he half forgave these women in their
carriages for their unconscious usurpation because they
were nearly all painfully ugly. The knowledge that no
amount of wealth could gild these wealthy people was some
consolation. He began to understand the hatred Anar-
chists have for settled conditions. Often on leaving the
Era office he shook his fist impotently at the building that
held the man who filched a few shillings from his earnings
in this way, and a few shillings in that manner.
But the Javelin treated him with more than a business


kindness—often it advanced him money for contributions
it might not print for years, and Billy and his wife now
regarded the paper as a middle-aged fairy who sent a
cheque just when skies were blackest.
Many times he had noticed that after leaving his report
of an important thing in crime at the office only a paraphrase
of his version appeared next day; and he was told that he
would not be paid for it as it was the work of one of the
men on the salaried staff. And although very suspicious
of the Era and its ways, he swallowed the fact that his
work of midnight writing, of carrying the reports to the
office in the hot summer evenings or the sleets of winter,
and the return walk home in the early morning—had gone
for nothing.
And one night he discovered how small an apparently
great thing can be —how much meaner than the meanness
of a dwarf is the meanness of a giant.
His friendliness with the police—said friendliness being
the result of a readiness to give the arresting constable a
headline to himself, such as “Clever Capture by Constable
Jones,” brought him early information. On this night
that ended his service with the Era they brought him the
news of a particularly horrible murder with sex-phases in
it which would have won the study of Krafft Ebbing.
Billy wrote it with great joy—it made two columns and a
half; that report meant a total of five pounds for the week
for him. So that no salaried man on the Era staff should
forestall him, he did not deliver the report to the sub-editor
until half an hour before midnight. Then he went away
to smoke, and when he returned at midnight he found two
of the salaried staff engaged in paraphrasing his work.
They published the two and a half columns next day;
and Billy, desiring to know his fate, at once applied for
payment, and was offered fifteen shillings—the payment
for half a column. He pressed them, and the cashier
was ordered to pay him for a column. Billy took the
money, and having stated in a loud voice his belief in


the utter knavery of the millionaire proprietor and his
jackals, he left the Era office for good.
He was not sorry for his action when he came to face
the consequence of having nothing to do—nor did Mary
regret the cause of the new anxiety.
“ Only a thief would stay to be robbed,” she said,
summing up Billy’s justification in her unconsciously
epigrammatic way.
They comforted themselves with the fact that the
Javelin cheque would soon arrive ; and Billy, who had
made up the account till he knew every item by heart,
told her joyously that the amount would be nearly thir-
teen pounds. He had forgotten that the Javelin had
advanced ten pounds against two stories which it had
not yet accepted ; and when the cheque did arrive, and
with it the letter, Billy fumed like a big sea in a narrow
strait. The cheque was for three pounds only—a kindly
note from the editor explained that the Javelin would
never again publish a story of more than four columns,
even if written by Shakespeare and Homer in collabora-
tion ; and that, therefore, they returned his two stories
and had deducted the amount of the advance.
The disappointment was very bitter. Mary thought
of the finery intended for the children and shed silent
tears; and Billy raged up and down the little sitting-
room, saying that the Javelin's excuse was a well-meant
lie ; he knew he could not write ; he was a failure; he’d
go to hard work—anything. Then he stopped in his
walk, opened the returned manuscripts, tore them up,
twenty pages at a time, and threw the fragments in
the fire.
Mary sprang up, still weeping, and poured water
on the fire, rescuing the manuscript, very damp and
very charred at the edges, but still legible. She had
slightly scalded her hand in the operation, and pretended
the injury was more serious than it was, to draw Billy
from the contemplation of his troubles.


In that she succeeded; and next day she dried the
manuscript and patched it into readableness—but Billy
never saw it again.
And then, realising that there was really nothing ade-
quate for him in the city, and that the anxiety of work-
lessness had worn his hope as thin as a new moon, he
answered an advertisement of a country editorship; and
returned home appointed editor of the Ootanyobbing
Times , and wondering how he should break the fact of
their separation to Mary.
But it was done at last, and she sat opposite him
stony and dumb with the misery of this break in life
this unhappy change of happy habit and smiled
weakly when he protested he would send for her in a
fortnight; he would return himself in a week, and so on.
So the wife and the two children were kissed for the last
time, and the husband and father walked away carrying his
kit-bag; and the tear-filled glances of his family followed
him till the distance swallowed him.


CHAPTER XLV
The slow train to Ootanyobbing covered the hundred
miles in five hours ; the chronic condition of moisture
so different to anything Billy had ever known before-
exaggerated the depression natural to the parting, until
it seemed for him that the sun would never shine again.
The deep volcanic soil produces enormous forests of
amygdalina, messmate, and mountain ash, and from tree
to tree hang supple jacks, their white star blooms melt-
ing in the endless dew. At the feet of the greater trees
grow innumerable tree ferns, dwarf ferns, musk shrubs,
dogwoods and lycopods, so thickly that they appear to
be interlaced with the amygdalina and mountain ash;
and the forest becomes a wall. In irregular methods
of attack the settlers of this new town of Ootanyobbing
had hacked homing-spaces out of the stubborn vegeta-
tion, which retreated sullenly inch by inch, and closed
up again on the settler if for a season he left his axe
idle.
As the train slowed into Ootanyobbing station-yard,
the largest open space Billy had seen for the last twenty
miles, it gave the rain-fog that had clung to the sur-
face of the unbroken sea of forest a chance to precipitate
itself in rain. The train, in a great hurry, stopped at a
crossing, amid the curses of the driver and the porter,
to allow the passage of a timber jinker, drawn by twenty-
four bullocks. On the great blue-gum log, that bobbed
ludicrously in the jinker chains sat the jinker man—a
big, loose-jointed Gippslander; his feet and hands so large
that they seemed uncontrollable ; his face all happiness


and freckles; his hair of such a living', flaming red that
the colour was Oriental. In these stubborn forests drenched
by endless rains the flaming red was a new incongruity.
There was no such possibility as waiting for a fine day
to jinker those trees out of the bush. Rain is almost
eternal at Ootanyobbing, and the dewings and the rain
speedily rot the messmate and the mountain ash once they
are felled. A traveller in the scrub seeking to escape the
embraces of a supple-jack jumps for the clear foot-hold of a
prone log twenty feet in circumference; and a second after
the jump has been taken the traveller finds himself up to
the neck in a moist rottenness, inhabited by woodlice, and
the creeping things that sing a hymn when luck sends
them to live in a puddle under a flat stone, or in the vitals
of a wet rotting tree. So the logs are brought out as
they are cut.
As the team left the firmness of the railway crossing
Billy saw the bullocks plunge shoulder-deep in mud.
The jinker followed them and the log almost dis-
appeared, although the line of disturbance in the dirty
water showed that it progressed below the surface.
Then the jinker heeled over and the high wheels went
almost out of sight. The crimson-haired jinker man threw
himself cheerfully into the quag, and as cheerfully beat
the bellies of the bullocks, swearing at them dispassion-
ately and using soul-destroying curses in a very urbane
manner. The leading bullocks went on their knees on the
firm ground at the distant side of the slough ; the jinker
righted and the log appeared again, and came to the safety
of the corduroy road. Billy smelled the abattoir smell
of long ago—the stench of bullock-fear. The jinker man
struggled out of the mud also, and laughed as his brave
feet touched the corduroy. The mud was in his hair—he
wiped away the Adamic sweat and the Adamic mire, and
laughed again—and Billy loved him.


CHAPTER XLVI
“ Man does not live by bread alone—but by catchwords.”
There were two mails a day to Melbourne, and Billy sent
a letter by each mail, and tried to think that a hundred
miles was nothing and that he was quite near her; and
failed miserably to make himself so believe. To both of
them the hundred miles was not greater than a hundred
yards nor less than a million leagues ; for them the fact
was enough that they saw not each other—that for each of
them there was no longer the beloved smile converting
earthly food to most substantial asphodel. Not only was
the separation the rupture of a habit most angelical; it
was an outrage on the nature that had conceived them
and bred them for each other—his Norse fairness to her
immaculate ivory—blue eye to hazel and brown—black
tress and crisp hair of yellow—man-strength to woman
steadfastness—errant tide to anchored star—reckless deed
to prudent beauty.
To escape the consideration of their misery Billy worked
double shifts, doing unnecessary work, until the Very
Sloth, who was Billy’s employer, and who hibernated nearly
all the year, told the town that Billy was bound to get on
because he showed such interest in the business of bis
employer—the Sloth aforesaid. Billy had never looked for
such a result; he had taken to the unnecessary work in
self-defence, so that he should have no time for the cowardly
pleasure of meditating on his troubles ; but when he found
it had a result and a reward, he took both. He found that
a duly-accredited editor travelled half-fare on the railways,
R 241


and that the Sloth was agreeable to editorial trips to
Melbourne; and one day the train hurried with Billy out
of the raining mountains, and into the sunlight of the
plains about the city.
True Eyes’s welcome was a revelation to him who
thought he knew her. She said among other things that
she thought she would never see him again ; and her
belief was not altered nor her manner made quite merry
again when he reminded her that their separation had
endured for quite three weeks. But the separation to
her had been longer.
“. . . The man may forget on the sea,
But oh ! for the fireside woman ! ”
Back went Billy to work in the dew of the blue gums,
and returned often to Melbourne, and so again to work.
The people of Ootanyobbing had been interesting enough
until he had worn them threadbare with study. The
newspaper proprietor —the Human Sloth —ceased to pay
his editor the full salary after three months or so. His
admiration had increased to a marvellous extent; but when
he offered Billy half-salary and much praise the young
man, remembering Mary’s hintings of winter clothing
being required for the children, turned on his employer so
menacingly that the Human Sloth found sufficient energy
to tremble, and was then styled by the small knicker-
bockered compositors—for they set the paper with boy
labour—“Shivery Grass.”
The local government of Ootanyobbing was the apothe-
osis of alcohol—the aristocracy of beer. The man who
sells liquor is the speaker of the Bush Parliament and
the Premier; and there is no Opposition. No matter
how brutal, how ignorant he may be —he is a power.
Hero-worship is a necessity—man cannot live if he
worships not somebody—in these primitive communities,
the sodden ed boards behind the bar are the footways of
a throne. This worship of Bung by-and-by carries the


publican to the Municipal Council, then to Parliament,
and a cheap title if circumstances makes him Mayor of a
city for three terms consecutively, or, at any rate, to the
chance to eat dinners audibly at Government houses.
Possibly this ignorant beer-vendor, who led public opinion
at Ootanyobbing, had something of the sort already in
his vision. As head of the Progress Committee, which
kept its progression all in one way—-the way of the
Ootanyobbing Hotel—he discovered reasons, about every
ten days, why a deputation consisting of the Committee
and himself should go to Melbourne to interview the
Minister for Railways on the subject of a new railway
crossing—although there was no traffic on one of the
existing crossings, and the grass grew high on the metals
of the shunting sidings ; to interview the Minister of
Works on the subject of a grant for a road that would
never be used; to worry the Postmaster-General into
sending a postman to Ootanyobbing, where a postman
was not required, as the populace liked to call for its own
letters at night, and smoke, and discuss the weather, and
spit all over the office in such a condescending style that
the Postmaster’s chronic rage shook him into a palsy, and
he secured as a consequence the reputation of having
been such a shocking drunkard in his youth that his
nerves had smashed.
For these and many other purposes deputations from
Ootanyobbing, headed by the publican, were frequent
occurrences at the Government offices in the metropolis,
and badgered Ministers sent messengers to He as to their
whereabouts. But there would come a time when the
Government wanted the vote of the members for the
district—and then the Ootanyobbing deputation had its
way—and the unnecessary public works that were
never intended to benefit anybody but the pubUcan,
who acquired nearly all the wages of the men so
employed, were authorised. There was a road going
nowhere to show for the expenditure of loan monies,


and by-and-by the merciful scrub invaded and covered
it up.
At the birth of the Progress Committee it was a public
affair. The lanky blue-eyed splitters and the jinkermen,
of whom the freckled red-haired man is the type, gathered
around the eloquence of the publican and the barber; and
believed with the faith man always will have in the cere-
monial of a meeting with a Chairman, and statements such
as, “ I move and I second,” and “ I hope this meeting will
in its wisdom, etc.,” “ and I rise to a point of order,” that
now surely the Millennium of the timber-man was at hand.
For this reason the public cheerfully responded for some
months to the levy for the deputation’s expenses; and
then, finding that the cursing of one bullock produced
more results than the labiations of ten deputations, they
stopped supplies, and contented themselves with labelling
the publican “ Shypoo ” and the barber “Wind.” As
most of the deputationists were poor —with the country
poverty the poor man of the city never knows the depth
of—the financing of the deputations fell on the publican,
who paid willingly in return for the position of General.
This once led to trouble for the deputationists. A
Minister for Lands being threatened with the curse of the
Ootanyobbing Progress Committee’s friendship persuaded
a city friend of his—a merry man of leisure —to imperson-
ate the Honourable the Speaker. Only the publican was
introduced to him, and the Speaker was so gracious and
discovered such an interest in the publican that that hunter
of fame forgot the deputation, and left it on the Treasury
steps. The merryman clung to the publican all day,
so that that day to the publican is represented by a blank
in the calendar. He did not return to Ootanyobbing for
three days; and for a week after he required stimulants
and shuddered at the name of a politician.
The deputation awaited his return till late in the after-
noon; and as it had very little else beside its railway
ticket, it had to return by the very slow night train. And


when it arrived at Ootanyobbing at an hour after mid-
night, the deputation was very thirsty, and the hotel was
closed. When the publican returned he found the work
of placating his followers hard and expensive, but he
succeeded in retaining his Cmsarship.
All these deputations left the village as if it were
a procession of heroes ; each of them returned dishevelled
—drunk, if the deputation’s business had failed, and very
drunk if it had succeeded.
The freckled jinker man loathed deputations, and cursed
the inebriety of deputies with bitter curses.
“Most of these ’ere deppytaters is wasters,” he said,
“ dirty wasters—but sometimes they git a few good men,
an’ the drink kills ’em. There was Dave Rogers Pm
Stockyard Crik, good man, ’n a great grafter. They
sends ’im down on a deppytation ’bout cuttin’ that big
grip ’at Fish Crik, an’ he gets ter like deppytations, and
schemed ter be on all of ’em. ’Course ’e had a two-days’
bust every deppytation, and ’e died larst Foundation Day
—deppytations killed ’im.”
“ Might as well die of deputations as of Stella Malone,”
Billy said cruelly—excusing the cruelty with the fact that
the jinker man was beloved of him, and he knew that the
jinker man was drinking heavily.
To that said the jinker man dully, not sullenly:
“ Beg’n your pard’n, no. Any lousy cur can die thro’
lovin’ drink; but any white man ’ud be glad of the
to die of Stella Malone. ”
The jinker man’s tragedy was short. Mrs. Malone had
come into money suddenly ; her unbeloved husband, who
returned home occasionally to become the father of a new
child, had dollied four hundred ounces out of an abandoned
mine, and had come home for good. Now Stella, who
loved every freckle of the jinker man, was driven to the
new piano daily; was ordered to forget that “low felly
Baker, wit’ the red mud on his ginger hair,” and prepare


herself to marry a real gentleman—the station master, for
instance.
She rarely managed to see Baker. In the morning, in
the evening, and in the dark night she thumped unwill-
ingly the tortured piano, whose tone the pluvious climate
had already affected; and the jinker man, hearing these
unnecessary scales and the fingering out of the superfluous
“Nelly Ely,” swore a little more than his average, and
prodded the bullocks on the thin flank and in the nostrils
without even the usual shadowy reasons for the cruelty.
Stayed from marriage because no priest would marry
her without her mother’s consent; stayed from becoming
Baker’s wife —in fact if not in name—by her religion,
Stella did a brave thing.
She told her mother she must marry Baker, or be
disgraced; and the old woman, imagining a grandchild
without a father thereto, consented, and married Stella to
Baker in a great hurry. Then did Stella confess the
deception to the priest; and being ordered to confess also
to her mother, was forgiven by that philosophical old lady,
who, as a token of peace, offered the new Mrs. Baker the
piano for further practice. But Baker refused.
“Thank yer all the same,” he said, “ but me an’ Stella
want t’ be ’appy—so thank yer, no, if it’s all the same to
yer.”
Meantime these digressions into other people’s business
did not give Billy his full salary, and a week or so after
Baker’s marriage he decisively interviewed his employer,
the Very Sloth, and demanded all arrears of pay under
certain stated penalties.


CHAPTER XLVII
“They hollered loud on paper, but in strife they hollered low
And they perished fighting bravely where the ruby liquors flow.”
The Very Sloth paltered. “He could not pay,” he said;
but he had prepared to establish a paper at Ballanar a
very promising place fifty miles off, where there were no
newspapers, and a community that hungered and thirsted
for journalistic representation. The impetuous Billy ac-
cepted. He believed in his abilities to make a paper a
property of value, providing there were any backbone to
the place of publication. Further, he wanted a free hand,
and his openly expressed scorn for the deputationists had
made him very unpopular at Ootanyobbing; and finally,
if he succeeded in making the Ballanar Star a payable pro-
perty, this separation from True Eyes would be no more.
Everything was ready at Ballanar—the Very Sloth in-
formed him; Billy could take a few cases of type, and
some furnishings, and a compositor, and set the matter
there and bring it back by Wednesday’s train to be
machined at Ootanyobbing. In this way the Very Sloth
got an editor for nothing, as after he had printed the Star
he changed the heading to that of his own paper, and
printed from the same type.
So Billy wrote to Mary a letter full of hope much too
large for his chances. It was the sort of letter Napoleon
might have written when he became First Consul. True
Eyes wrote him such a letter in reply that for days after
he walked the mud of Ootanyobbing like a conqueror.
But when he landed at Ballanar with his compositor he


felt his courage oozing like the night sweats of a con-
sumptive. Ballanar was patently one of those promising
places which never fulfil themselves.
A small rat-eyed man introduced himself to Billy, and
in a voice punctuated by the loud laugh of insincerity
invited the editor to drink. He breathlessly introduced
Billy to a dozen depressed looking men as “the pro-
perrayter of the noo paper,” and Billy, seeing that the
welcome was to his celebrity, and not to himself, dis-
liked the rat-eyed man, whose real mission was to secure
for his own hotel this new lion of a pitiful arena ; and
so cause the opposition hotel-keeper to gnaw the files of
disappointment.
But the opposition hotel-keeper—one Edward Agrols—
was honest enough to show that he wanted the paper,
and not the man. He stopped the column headed by the
rat-eyed man, introduced himself—while the rat-eyed
man stood by trying to dissemble his sudden hate—and
said:
“ 1 want a favour from you, Mr. Pagan—the first copy
of the Star. ” l J
“ You shall have it,” said Billy, delighted that the paper
was not forgotten.
The compositor opened the bale of newspapers, and
Billy distributed them to the crowd. He did not re-
member till That night that no man paid him. But they
all said the Star was a fine paper, and Billy went with
Agrols to Agrols’s hotel—the rat-eyed man and his clique
following in pursuance of Agrols’s invitation to everybody
to drink with him. The rat-eyed man murmured, with a
poor attempt at good-humour, that “he liked to be
sociable—he could be friendly with other men in the same
line as himself,” and so on.
But after the drinks had circulated, and the rat-eyed
man (Bowner), and his men had sulkily withdrawn, Agrols’s
boundless vanity killed Billy’s liking for him whilst it was
yet suckling.


« You see that feller Bowner —well, he’s jealous of me,
he and his friends. Won’t let me into the shire council
here, did his best to keep me from being a J.P., and all
that. But bless you, I could be in Parliament for a dozen
districts if I wanted to. What! ME? Why, / was one of
the fust of the Reform Club down South. One of these
days /’ll read you my speech on the Goldfields Truck Act.
/was one of the fust, / was, you might say the fust, of the
Hew Liberals. I ... I ... I ... I,” and Billy heard
all this and wondered why the type-box that holds the ‘ /’
types is smaller than the ‘e ’ box. He also resolved that
if ever the melancholy task of reporting Agrols’s speeches
came to him, Agrols should be reported in the third
person.
He was recalled to his host’s talk by missing the
personal pronouns, and then he found that Agrols was not
talking of himself.
“Between you and me,” said Agrols, thrown off his
guard by his vanity, “ this place ’ull never come to much.
The railway should have been on Government land, but
Blinman who owns all the land round here, he squared it
with the railway department, and the Government land is
five miles away. So Blinman he’s landlord all round;
and people buy land on the time payment system, and if
they’re slow paying early in the game he gives them time;
but if they don’t pay to the day when they’re in their last
instalments—out they go, and in comes a new lot. That’s
what’s keeping this town back—we have a new popula-
tion every year or so.”
As Billy listened, all his courage oozed away; and
Agrols’s latter statement did not bring it back again.
“ Now if you and me pull together we can make Blinman
treat the town better. You with the Star, and me to start
a branch of the Reform Club, /’ll give a few lectures
on Agrarian Troubles, and you’ll write a few leaders red
hot, and full of spikes—and we’ll make him behave
Billy left him and went out to look at Ballanar. His


depression was exaggerated by a light powdery rain that
fell, and had already obscured the dead trees in the main
street, and the tops of the living bush from which
Ballanar, like Ootanyobbing, had been hacked. There was
a loud whistling in the air, and a wind that had been to
the Antarctic for ice began to blow.
. street a hundred feet away disappeared in the
silent, almost impalpable, rain. Something like despair
that rain brought Billy, who saw nothing ahead but star-
vation in Ballanar ; and then his pity for the clammed and
despairing horses, who hung by their bridles to the pegs
outside Bowner’s hotel while their masters drank inside,
came to help him from a consideration of his own troubles!
It was almost the daily life of these unfortunate friends
of man. Never stabled—they were hide-bound from cold
and weak feeding. On the day of Billy’s arrival there
had been a marvellous dispensation of Providence on
Billy s account, and the sun had been shown to him for
an hour. But, as he soon found, the usual condition of
Ballanar was rain in sheets, waves, douches, and showers,
powders and emulsions, and an Antarctic wind that blew
from Cape Horn, and for six months of the year knew no
cessation. In such weather these miserable horses were
kicked through a dozen miles of girth-deep mud to
Bowner’s public-house, and there hung up by bridle
reins mercifully shortened, so that when the clammed
animal tried to fall down the reins held him up, even if
the tension lengthened his neck.
While their horses were thus engaged their masters
drank potent rum in Bowner’s bar, and talked raptur-
ously of the way Ballanar would go ahead when some-
thing unspecified happened. The unspecified happening
was never to be by any chance the work of the present
settlers. They had a hazy idea that a powerful stranger
was to come along, and clear the scrub, and run
marvellous numbers of dairy cows, and bring Ballanar
to popularity and profit. Meantime their holdings re-


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 251
mained uncleared, except in a few cases; the present
settlers left most of their crop lands fallow; and they
allowed a good portion of their dairy lands to be invaded
by new scrub, and rode their despairing sobbing horses to
Ballanar once or twice a week, and talked, over the rum, of
“ how this place ’ud go ahead pretty soon.” Then, filled
with black spirit, and the hope of getting something with-
out working for it, they mounted the tearful steeds again,
and splashed out of Ballanar and over the reeking hills
and drowned valleys to their selections.


CHAPTER XLVIII
When Billy entered Bowner’s hotel he found all the
men of the hills and of Ballanar in the stage of blatant
assumption of the district being the finest on earth;
that stage which follows the first stage of half-deprecat-
mg hope, and is only attainable with the third rum.
“’Ere’s the properryetor er the Star," said Bowner,
his loud, insincere laugh proclaiming his belief that a
joke was hidden somewhere in the word.
Billy was introduced to the company, and Bowner said
with the air of a man who defies criticism :
Me and Mr. Twisker ’ere was sayin’ you’d have a
splendid chance ’ere. You can grow up with the dis-
trict”
. BlU y> with the memory of Agrols’s accidental truths
in him, asked “if there was quite a certainty of the
district ever growing ? ”
, A sh °wer of reassurements replied, Mr. Twisker asking
indignantly to be shown “ a place that ’ud grow twenty
tons of onions to the acre.
“And that’s what was grown right in front of us
where the station-yard is now, and before the railway
was here,” he concluded.
“Twisker! luk at me!” Billy’s blood moved at the first
sounds of that voice. Not a boastful turn in it; full of
strength that did not know of itself; a voice that Billy
swore, in his usual fervid way, could not utter a lie.
Twisker ! luk at me ! ” And Twisker, recognising
his master, looked, and was silent.
“Now, Twisker, and all of you min! Wasn’t there


jnly twenty tons to the acre in wan season? Answer
me t hat. And wasn’t it only in a very dhry season when
we didn’t have more than four fut of rain—’stead of the
twelve fut that is our due? Answer me that, An’ if
that’s so—an’ it is ; there’s not a denial in all of ye—
why do you thry to mislead this young man wit’ tales
of plinty? Answer me that. He’s a young man—and
a clever young man, I’ll go bail—and it isn’t fair, when
he is misfortint enough to be among us, that he should
be led to his room”
Billy smiled at that —having nothing, he could not be
ruined except by losing time. And at last he had found
a man in Ballanar.
Under cover of an order for drinks all round he left his
place, and attached himself to Hannell, the strong-voiced
man, who had asked Mr. Twisker to “luk at me.”
“ My name is Pagan,” said Billy,
“An’ mine’s Hannell.”
They shook hands.
“ Mister Pagan, I liked ye when I fust looked at ye.”
“And I you when I heard your voice.”
“Then ’tis friends we are —and ’tis a friend each wan
of us will be wantin’ here. ”
“Accident?” queried Billy, touching very gently Han-
nell’s left sleeve.
The strong old man’s brow clouded—pain came into the
blue eyes which were so clear and young.
“Yes,” he said, half sighing. “I was a miner—an’
better than a miner—prospectin’ on my own. Ah! man,
a great life—free as the burrds. Ye shud see the burrds
in Ireland—they have more freedom than anywhere else—
or they seem t’ have, because there’s nothing else free
there.” He sighed again, and resumed very suddenly:
“ Ye’re a Home Ruler, I think ? ”
“ I am,” replied Billy.
“Good man! —I was sure of ye —ye’ll have to meet
Dr, Shannahan from Burrum.”


*54 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
“ But about your arm ? ”
“Oh, yes—the arrum. Rowan is always tellin’ me
that. ‘Stick to your subject,’ says he. An’ Father
Horan, he says to me sometimes, when he gets in great
exashperation to know something, ‘John,’ says he, ‘whin
your faith and your works have carried you to hiven
you’ll get yourself trown out because you’ll tell St. Peter
yarns instid of ansherin’ questions.’ Well, about the
arrum. There was a shot wan day didn’t go off, an’ I
wint down the shaf’ to see about the miss-fire, an’ jist as
I put me hand near the hole it fired, an’ smashed me
arrum to jelly. An’ thin I was no good for a real man’s
life again.”
(( I m sorry,” said Billy, pressing the maimed stump.
I know ye are—l know ye are. So I had to turn
to for the old wife, and I got a selection, an’ I built me
house an’ cleared me land, an’ we get groceries an’
butchers meat an’ whisky an’ the holy money for the
Presbytery out of a crop or two.”
They talked to the exclusion of the others for half an
hour, and then Hannell, noting the sour jealousy of
Bowner, asked Billy to help him with the horse as he
had to be going.
“Which tie-up is your horse at?” asked Billy as they
stood in the rain. 7
“At no wan of thim,” replied Hannell indignantly.
D ye think I’m a brute beast to threat me good horse so !
No, sor, he have his stable and sweet chaff—tidy and
warm. ” J
He led the fat, big-framed horse into the rain, speaking
affectionately to the animal, and then disregarding Billy’s
offer to help him into the saddle, because, as he said “it
would get him into soft habits,” he took the reins in his
teeth and mounted,
“Good-bye, then, Misther Pagan—we’ll see plinty of
wan another.”
“Shall I walk a bit with you ? ”


“That you won’t! You’ll be wet troo without cause—
an’ whispher, me lad ! You’ll get that felly Bowner aginst
you if you don’t make up to him—an’ don’t tell him you’re
a Home Ruler.”
“ He can go and play with spiders so far as I am con-
cerned,” said Billy hotly, “and I’ll tell him I’m a Home
Ruler if I want to. I’d rather starve than be hired
flatterer to an ignorant pimp like Bowner.”
“Well, then, you’re a good man,” said Hannell, his
face shining with rain and enthusiasm. “ You’re too good
for here. Whist, man! I don’t want to make you down-
hearted. ”
“You needn’t bother about that,” interrupted Billy;
“ I’m not a coward —I know how to face things.”
“Good man agin! Well, thin! the place can’t support
a paper; nobody pays anybody wit’ money—it’s barter!
barter 1 barter! The merchants in the city suffer, I
shuppose.”
“ But I tell you,” said Billy, “ the man who owns the
Ootanyobbing paper arranged all this, and he’s given me
advertisement contracts and orders for papers from every-
body in the district. And they’ve all signed the contracts.”
“Signed!” repeated Hannell contemptuously, “of
course they’ve signed. They’ll order everything, but
they’ll niver pay —so I say to ye, get out if ye can, an’
if ye can’t make the best of it.”
“ I’ll do that,” said Billy, shaking hands with him
again. “And I’ve got you." That latter statement
comforted the speaker and charmed the hearer.
“ ’Tis a thrue word —ye have me. Now go in out of the
rain—ye have no top coat! An’ God bless ye and give ye
good thoughts.”
His heel-touch on the barrel of the fat horse started the
animal into a canter through the squdgy street; the great
splay hoofs casting showers of water from the pools over
the rider. Billy entered the hotel, and dodging success-
fully the insincere friendship of Bowner, escaped to bed,
and forgot anxiety in the deep sleep of a tired child.


CHAPTER XLIX
Next day he found the office and in „ e
for the equipment of the Star ™ ° f type
!S|SSsS3ssa
the end of the week he returned 2 So at
S . to Ootanyobbing,
X&zszz r»Fv
became “ Shivering- Grass ”w M the Very Sloth
the Star and its few cases ofZl 7 transferred
further agreeing to prLt the 2«r a t U rT Vedly t 0 Billy ’
editor should se g cure P a^ ant ! UntH his
So Billy returned to Ballanar sole proprietor of the cy
ss H h r
bath, and the frogs are as big as the fowb”■"* jTd
ssssriisr fow,s - and thereforethe "
th.?fc"Lf“ fo P r r a t fi d ‘ he f f ° r 8 "«*». and
&-^SsraSs~
r.h g e~
atdrt.'“i“eef 7* * " joiS
cverai guarantee for the payment of the bills.


Only Hannell refused to sign.
“ Look here,” said he in explanation, “ I’m as poor as a
church-mouse, an’ I couldn’t pay me whack of this if it
wint aginst me, an’ nayther can these fellys that’s atjprd,
an’ they don’t intind to pay—they’d sign a paper givin’
me the trone of Oireland if I asked thim.”
Billy loved him the more for this honest refusal. Indeed,
no healthy minded enemy even of Hannell could refrain
from thinking of him kindly. The sturdy nature of this
maimed man had strengthened him to build a house
unaided, giving the nails a start with the handle of the
hammer and then lengthening his grip and driving them
home; working a cross-cut saw single-handed, and clear-
ing his selection alone ; felling great trees with the axe
swung in the one hand that had now the strength of
three.
Said he : “ If I’d sat down and cried over me misfortun-
ate luk, me arrum would have grown too weak to hold me
hankychief. ”
However, the guarantee was signed and the plant ™»mA
to hand. A machine, and an imposing surface, and galleys,
and chases, and types to make any printer’s heart glad.
With the plant came the account —everything charged at
more than double prices ; for Billy’s necessity had
to the printers’ furnishers to be their opportunity, whereas
it was only menace to them.
But the fact of the plant’s existence was not in itself a
relief from anxiety. Rather was the machine something
to be afraid of—a something that fed on paper and ink, that
had to be paid for in cash—a something that called for set
type, for which wages had to be found. When the anxiety
had got into his bones and the money neqessity had
smashed his nerves, Billy became conscious of a personal
hatred of the machine as if it were humanly inimical to
him.
For the first few weeks a little ready money came, be-
cause the people of the district treated the novelty as a toy.


There was one man who paid twenty-four shillings for
four advertisements for a cow he alleged he had lost; said
cow being branded XO in a diamond. Some weeks later
Billy discovered that the advertiser had never lost a cow—
he had advertised for the pride and pleasure of seeing his
name in print.
But the novelty wore off—none paid in advance; few
when their printing orders had been completed. They still
showed an intense interest in the proceedings of the
Star by standing out in the everlasting rain on publishing
nights listening to the wheeze and clank of the wondrous
guaranteed machine ; and occasionally the one admirer of
literature in the district put some of his mouth into the
office, and insulted the editor by inquiring :
“ That there leadin’ artykul this week —did yer git it
outer yer own ’ead ? ”
But neither the curiosity nor the admiration were
currency; and at last Billy’s staff dwindled to one com-
positor and two apprentices. The editor, and accountant,
and reporter, and proprietor, taught himself to impose, and
machine the paper after turning out for some issues a pie-
bald sheet no man could read; and then he re-learned type-
setting, and set up his leader and the local news without
writing it from his thoughts direct to the composing
stick.
The quality of the leaders deteriorated at this stage.
At the beginning they had been fiercely democratic and
had called for a land tax—to the delight of Agiols and
the disgust of Blinman, who owned the town. As the
editor’s anxieties increased, and the rights of capital were
taught him bitterly by the failure of his customers to pay
their accounts, he felt very sorry for himself, and thought
of the distressed masses little, if at all.
So the leaders talked of local wants nearly always, and
the new columns were set in a big type to minimise the
cost of composition.
Occasionally there came a very angel of hope in the


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND a S9
shape of Government advertisements. Two G f
these produced more profit than all the rest of the pnpcr ;
and behind these orders was always the glorious certainty
of payment.
“ Electoral Revision Court,” said Billy in a deep and
holy joy, looking at one of these Government orders;
“ four insertions twenty-five inches tabular matter at five
and three—twenty-six pounds five O— o—o oh, you
beauty! There’s four weeks’ screw for the comp, and
four weeks’ screw for me, and four weeks’ board for the
girl, and three pounds over. God bless the Government-
may the Electoral Revision Court live for ever ! ”
And little, round Page, who struggled with his paper in
the next town ten miles off, arriving just then to say that
a similar order had been sent for his paper, these two men,
to whom adversity had given a child’s keen capacity for
the enjoyment of their infrequent pleasures, bade good
simple John Bluett, the compositor, to wash out die billy-
can and send young Rooney to Agrols for two shillings
worth of beer.
Young Rooney was one of Billy’s two apprentices. The
other, Henderson, had been chosen because his father—a
mysterious man who felled trees in a large way on the
mountain tops and rolled them down the mountain side to
the creek, there to await the winter freshets that carried
them nearer to the railway station— had mysteriously
hinted at a premium.
“ Won’t say what that there premium might be,” he
said to Billy at the opening of the negotiation, and often
afterwards. “It might be twenty pound, and it might be
thirty pound, an’ it might be a—a—a— ’undred—an’ on
t’other hand, it mightn’t be none o’ them figgers. But just
you take my boy, Mr. Pagum, an’ make a clever man on
’im, and we won’t quar’l about the figger.”
Billy had lightly accepted the task of making a “ clever
man ” of Sim Henderson, but a week proved to him that
Sim Henderson could not be made a clever man under an


260 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
expenditure of several millions. And Bluett, the com-
positor, said a dozen times a day :
“Make a clever man of you ! ’Struth ! The only way
to do that is t’have you born again ”; or, “Mr. Pagan,
this damn wooden fool’ll never learn the cases. He’s dis-
tributed that stuff all wrong. Here’s ‘ p’s and fractions
and astonisher marks in the ‘ e ’ box. ”
And then Billy would say—clinging to Sim partly for the
much talked of premium, and partly because his stubborn
nature once it had taken up a thing clung to it against
much reasonable evidence—
“ Send the idiot out to shoot bears. It’s all he is fit for.”
The town had been hacked out of the forest, and the
houses held a running fight with the scrub. A giant gum
rung many years before, and now dead and white—shook
its enormous skeleton arms over the office, and shrieked
warnings from its leafless limbs. On stormy nights, and
after the stress of money-anxieties, Billy grew almost
afraid of this tree, and retreated into his bed by the office
fire. All night and nearly all day for many months the
tree shrieked its horror of the winter ; the wind struck its
two great forks diagonally, and the shrieks became almost
human in their affright like the sudden cries of a woman
in her pangs, or the screams of a burning horse.
And when in a great storm, that broke the white man’s
record of storms in that country, that Tree of Bale fell,
shearing away the verandah of the post office on the
other side of the street, Billy put his foot on the prone
giant with as much satisfaction as if it had been the corpse
of a bitter enemy.
Sim Henderson’s shooting was in the living bush
where the stupid, kindly koalas carry their baby-bears up
the trunks of the smoothest and straightest gums. Sim
Henderson’s game had to be extraordinarily stupid ; these
bears hanging on the gum trunks, chewing eucalyptus
leaves, and gazing calmly on the preparations for their
death watching the powder and the shot passing into


Sim’s crazy muzzle-loader —were just the right sent of
game for the sleepy, stupid youth. He usually riddled a
bear with shot before killing it; cold-bloodedly reloading
while the stricken beast cried like a teething infant.
Then he skinned the animal in the office, covering the
floor with grease and blood stains, and as he stretched the
pelts on the floor to dry, the unwary visitor caught his
feet in the nails, and there was much crude profanity in
consequence.
And one day, fancying himself immune from punishment
because no man had yet killed him, he skinned a bear on
Billy’s table, and so dirtied one of the sacred Home letters.
Billy was almost lunatic when he saw the sacrilege, and
he threw the surprised Sim out of the office, and sent the
skins after him. At the same time he also threw away
the remote possibility of the mysterious premium.
The other apprentice, young Rooney, was a very short,
very smart, boy, who became a good compositor while yet
in knicker suits. But his mother objected loudly to the
carrying of beer to celebrate Page’s frequent visits.
“ Mr. Pagan,” she said, leaning over the fence to inter-
cept him as he passed to the post office, “ I gave you me
son to make a writer man of him, an’ all he do be doin’
do be runnin’ up the street wit’ beer.”
“Mrs. Rooney,” replied Billy with a touch of his old
jollity, “the first duty of a newspaper man is to carry
beer—the second, to drink it. And, seriously, the boy is
getting on very well—he likes work, and he loves his
mother; and when a boy does that he is nearly perfect.”
“Oh! it’s the good boy he is, Mr. Pagan,” said Mrs.
Rooney, wiping away the tears that came to her naturally,
because there seemed to be nothing whatever to weep
for, “an’ I want all the goodness. That blade thief,
Blinman —Pve paid him up nearly all for me place, an’
now he’s goin’ to turn me out, if I can’t pay the whole in
six weeks. An’ what am I to do —where am I to get
twenty pounds in six weeks ? ”


“I wish I could help you, Mrs. Rooney.”
“Of course you do—you have the good heart. But
it’s help you want yourself, I’m thinkin’. How can a
newspaper gentleman live here—people don’t pay for what
they eat! ”
He left her feeling sadder than usual; the whole hopeless
place told of the labours of Hercules rewarded with the
sores of Lazarus. But he had not walked far when she
recalled him—a strange hilarity in her voice.
( . Come back, Mr. Pagin ... I want you to see it—
’tis Ballanar can grow pumpkins—the beauty. ”
She led him to the garden—withdrew the protection of
many great rasping leaves and exposed a preposterously
large pumpkin. It was so large it gave Billy the im-
pression of its interior valuelessness—it looked hydro-
cephalous.
Mrs. Rooney beamed over the colossal vegetable, and
her pride was so great that Billy put away from himself
the consideration that pumpkins were less than valueless
at Ballanar they carried a liability. There was never a
Ballanar farmer who got a profit from pumpkins. One
man sent away a ton to Melbourne, and the returns showed
that he owed fifteen shillings for freight after the pumpkins
were sold.
So he said “ It’s very large, isn’t it? ”
“ ’Tis that. Oh !ye have the eyes in your head. Tis
the beauty. Tis me ewe lamb—the apple of me eye. ”
Billy conquered the temptation to laugh at the vegetable
ewe-lamb, and the gigantic apple of Mrs. Rooney’s eye;
and she went on :
“Tis that black thief, Blinman—he wants it. That’s
why he’ll trow me out in six weeks if I don’t pay twenty-
two pound.”
“ I don’t think Blinman would throw you out for the
sake of a pumpkin, Mrs. Rooney. They are not worth
anything—at least, ordinary pumpkins are not—and the
ordinary ones grow wild.”


« oh ! don’t speak your ignorance—haven’t I seen Mm
look over me fence at it? ’Tis that he wants ” (her
voice dropped to a whisper), “ an’ he shan’t have a shmell
0 f it I’ll kill it wit’ me axe before we’re turned out.”
Billy left her talking to the pumpkin and putting the
« C urse of Crummle ” on the few caterpillars that already
prospected the vegetable.


CHAPTER L
His distractions to this life of anxiety were few. An
occasHina, talk with little Page, who appeared to be
, P I yOU d,SCOvered he was too lazy not to be
good-humoured; a bi-weekly ride to John Hannell’s
ferVent home - ruler , Dr. Shannahan, of
the n k !f ° f h,S C ° Untry tiU his e y es > and the eyes of
the one-armed man, filled with tears, and they gripped
pSfam ■ ■' -Ith
prise at the beginning, that their love of Ireland was even
more deep-seated than their religion. And at nights when
the long wind from Cape Horn smote the township and the
forest unceasingly, and the gale-blown rain lashed bush
the editor sa, by lh ,™
™d o r C “ Sa ™ bC '“ S fed b -' r the spoil- of frequent
r ( , i.? ernment Wood hea P in the P° s t office yard
two hundred feet away ; and Jack Bluett the ever faithful-
the man whose eyes shone with the fidelity of a dog’s when-
edftor’s telk 6St ? T Billy - listened open-mouthed to his
tor s talk, which was always wisdom to Bluett
R °“ aSIO " a ride on one of the wretched horses of
fleo H t 0^ U f tZ CrCek) Where Pa^e Rented or re-
or alallonfn P UbHc °P inion > not which;
gallop to a rare inquest, where coroner and Jury and
a toot, all the people concerned, got drank with aTiittle
delay aa possible, in order ,o keep „p ,h. excitement
e inquests were the most uproarious of functions: the
witness especially achieved such popularity that thw
id not sober up for a week after the verdict i there was
always a horse race arranged after the jury had done its


duty —a drunken horse race, which occasionally provided
a corpse for another inquest.
But the first quarter had gone, and no debtor had paid
for advertisement or subscription, and in six weeks the
first bill would be due to the printers’ furnishers. Even
the business people of Ballanar did not pay. The two
butchers said without apology, and rather as if they were
defending a right, that payment in cash was not usual.
“ Business in all towns was conducted on contra-account;
Mr. Pagan ought to take it out like everybody else.”
To which Billy: “ D’ye think I want five miles of
sausages, or a ton of tripe? I want money.” But they
merely shook their heads (or what looked like heads in
the slaughter yard) and said “it wasn’t usual,” and Billy
went away, raging. He found the experience repeated
everywhere. The hotels wanted him to take out his
account in liquor, and he complained to Page.
“That’s nothing,” said the philosopher of Quartz
Creek ; “ d’ye think I’d have stayed here if I hadn’t been
forced to stay? And what’s kept me, d’ye Blink?
Why, never getting ready money. Last week I went to
collect at that hotel at Twoneck Point, and I had to take
it out. Man! I was drunk there for five days, and I
missed publishing that week altogether. One time I used
to kick and refuse the liquor, but I might as well have
something, and it’s no good kicking against settled things.
Man! If one of those fellows offered cash to the other,
both of them ’ud die of heart disease.”
“ But damn it, Page, this is living among cave men
again. How can there be any white man’s manliness in
men who live on barter ? Why, a man can’t feel like his
own man unless he has something to jingle in his pocket.”
“ Right you are,” replied Page soothingly; “but they
haven’t a white man’s manliness neither have 1. I
never pay cash on anything, I settle most of my men’s
wages with orders on stores. I never see money. Why,
there was a chap went down frpm Barradeen to Mel-


boiirnc—hatJ a few shillings when he got there, but forgot
all about it. Walks into a bar, ordered a rum, dran/it
and was going out. ‘ Here,' says the barman, ‘ pay up.’
£L sp S V T ugly ; I t :°- ‘ ° h ’ CUt k out -’ *ays the chap
from Barradeen. 111 cut you out with a clip over the
nose, says the barman, waltzing over the counter, and
before the Barradeen chap could explain and pay, the
gutter » Chmbed 311 ° Ver hlm aDd thCn thrCW him into the
((^ n d h °w did men come to live like this? ”
“ The land has broken their hearts—that’s why. It ’ud
break your heart if you came on to land like this without
much 3 ‘ J° U m Hke the rest of them-take up too
much land and not be able to clear it, and by V by the
undergrowth ’ud get you down and choke You
ought to see these men as I saw many of them when they
first came here; loud laughs and big voices, and by Vby
the damp got into their chests, and the bush was alwavs
growing and frightening them, and while their'rops were
J. " Ved °" W6ak food “ d
\\ j[ hen m y paper can’t hope to live, Page ? ”
<( Government ads. ’ull keep you going, that’s all.”
,No money from the advertisers ever ? ”
“About once a year. Look here! Have you got a
h “Bote'” tCr ° r 3 blacksmith advertising with you ?"
to n I k 35 • Ur - C aS death that the P ain ter will want
to pay you by painting the office blue and yellow, and the
blacksmith will think he’s done his duty when he promises
to mend the machine if it breaks down ”
jec^Sh. 6 ““ here th “ ***'’ ***** —* P-
drink G ” 0d L ° rd! ” Said Billy disgfustedI y- “ Let’s have a
t , I 1 ’ 8 tbe onl y sensible remark that has been spoken in
this town for a week,” commented Page, leading the way
to a very depressed bar, known as the Jubilee Hrtel *


CHAPTER LI
The church at Ballanar was very fastidious as to its
printing, and its indebtedness increased accordingly. And
Bluett was suspicious.
‘ ‘ They wouldn’t order Perfection card if they meant to
pay for it. And that parson never asks the price. We
won’t get a bean for all this.”
His employer replied by hitting him affectionately.
“ You talk like a Jonah, Jack ; and all the time you’re
my Mascotte.”
“ That’s all right, boss—you’re too trusting. Mark me,
you won’t get paid. That parson’s got no common
honesty. Look here, that church is wood, isn’t it ? Built
on wooden piles to hold it out of the wet, isn’t it ? ”
“ Yes, Jack.”
“Consequently there’s no foundation stone, is there?
Only a bit of pine planking let into the wall-plates with
‘ This building is dedicated to the glory,’ and all the rest
of it. Well, they advertise ‘ Laying of the Foundation
Stone,’ and there is none, is there?”
“No, Jack.”
“That’s what I say, boss—no honesty—calls a board a
foundation stone.”
The week for the celebration of the “foundation stone”
arrived, and a bishop and some deacons came from some-
where, and Bowner secured them as boarders, to his own
loud exultation and Agrols’ chagrin. And though the time
was mid-winter, the gale from Cape Horn went into recess
for the “ Foundation Day,” and the sun shone for a few
hours.


At Bowner’s the air was filled with feathers and the dying
scream of turkeys ; the cache of vegetables, which had
been buried in straw a foot under the grass roots a month
before, was dug up ; there was merry popping of corks.
And after three days the bishops and the deacons shook
hands with Bowner, and the parson of Ballanar, and de-
parted by the train; and then Bowner took his large
account to the parson, and the parson said the amount
would have to be collected from the parishioners, although
he thought that Mr. Bowner should remit half of it as a
donation to a very struggling church. Bowner groaned,
knowing he would never see a penny from the parish-
ioners, and he told all the visitors at the bar, and was un-
able to laugh insincerely for a week.
Then Agrols heard of it, and his chagrin was changed
to a wild joy at Bowner’s discomfiture, and his own great
perspicuity in refusing to entertain the guests who had
never applied to him.
Billy heard of it, and laughed exactly half a minute.
Then a sudden gravity came to him, and he made out
the church’s long account and sought the minister.
The minister said : “ This is very high, Mr. Pagan, one
might almost say-exorbitant. Of course, we regard half
of it as your donation. ”
Bißy groaned more bitterly than Bowner, and said:
“And for the other half.”
“ Well ~we—a—can’t pay it until we are in funds.
We must make an appeal to the parish—the profit on
the tea meeting goes to the harmonium fund.”
Then Billy tore the account into small pieces and threw
them abroad.
“You asked for the best work, and I paid cash for the
materials. I haven’t a penny of ready money—you have
robbed my wife and children. Damn you ! ”
He almost ran from the parson, being frightened of
himself. There could not now be the usual monthly visit


of a day or two to Melbourne; he had not even money for
Bluett’s arrears of wages.
And his bitterness making him petty-minded, he made
up the pages of the paper during service on Sundays,, so
that the congregation next door was distracted in its
devotions by the crashing of mallet and planer. In all
this he was joyfully assisted by Bluett. After the first
Sunday the parson retorted from the pulpit with a sermon
on the demoralising effect of a love of money.
But Mrs. Rooney stopped Billy’s crude system of an-
noyance.
“Ye must forgive him, Mr. Pagan. He can’t help it—
he haven’t the thrue religion.”
“Blinman’s going to turn you out on Saturday?” his
bitterness made him say.
“Yes, he is that.” Her tear-filled eyes passed over
every beloved plant and blade of grass in the garden.
“ And have you forgiven him ? ”
“Yes, I have that,” she replied bravely. “Father
Horan says, ‘No bitter thoughts of anny wan, ses he.
‘But I’ve scratched like an ould chooken all over the garr-
den, an’ med the clay bloom,’ ses I, ‘an’ it’s harrd, father.
‘I know—l know,’ ses he; ‘we have our cross, every
wan—forgive him,’ ses he. So I forgive him—the black
thief, and may God send him sorrer and repintance.”
“And the pumpkin, Mrs. Rooney?”
The light of battle shone in her eyes. “On Friday I’ll
kill it into little bits wit’ me axe.”
He laughed at her forgiveness of Blinman; but after
that conversation he forgot his injury, and there was no
more Sunday work in the Star office.
The notice arrived from the printers’ brokers informing
Mr. Pagan of what he knew already—that his bill bad
been dishonoured, and that he must immediately arrange
for payment. Billy swore. But the next letter brought a
Government advertisement worth five pounds, and Billy
laughed. He and Bluett set up the advertisement, and


printed the paper a day before its time, and before that
week’s Star was dry from the machine the editor left for
Melbourne with the account in his pocket.
And there he told some of the least of his troubles to
True Eyes.
“ But if they don’t pay, dear, how have we been
living ? ”
“We lived for a month on a notice of the Electoral
Revision Court, dear; and for a week on two insertions
of mail contracts; and for three days on tenders for the
construction of cattle yards at Barradeen railway siding.
And that’s how, my darling —hand to mouth living, and
separation, too. I’m dead tired of it all, sweetheart.”
“You have nothing to hope for, then absolutely
nothing? ”
“ Absolutely nothing, dear.”
“Then stay here with me, Will—don’t go back —we’ll
be together even if we’re poorer than we’ve ever been.
And here’s the baby scarcely knows its father. Don’t go
back, dear.”
“ I must —I must. You don’t know what it is, Mary.
A man can’t leave a sinking ship until it’s sunk. And
there’s dear old faithful Bluett there —I can’t leave him.”
“Then you shan’t leave him, Will. You shall do as
you think you should. And I won’t worry you—kiss me,
Will.”
Then she dressed the children, and the four of them
walked into Studley Park, and took a childish joy in the
minahs and the first burst of wattle bloom, and forgot
Ballanar for half a day.
But when, two days later, he interviewed the printers’
furnishers, he found the problem partly solved for him.
“ Seeing you were unlikely ever to meet these bills,”
said the principal, “we have cancelled the agreement,
and sold the plant to a Mr. —what’s his name?—a Mr.—
oh! Howard—yes, Howard.”
“ And has he taken it over? ”


“ Yes —the plant was removed from your office
morning to Mr. Howard’s office at Ballanar.”
“ He’s staying in Ballanar, then?”
“ Yes —of course—he’ll continue to run the Star."
“ Will he? The copyright and the paper are mine.”
‘ ‘ But, my dear sir, do be reasonable. What’s the good
of a paper to you without a plant ? ”
He felt happy now that he had a fight on hand; and
next day he returned to Ballanar and arranged with Page
to print the Star at Quartz Creek. Howard absorbed, the
apprentice, and at last Billy persuaded Bluett to go over
to the enemy and take the enemy’s ready money. For
three weeks the Star appeared with only a change in one
paragraph to keep the copyright alive, and then Howard,
who did not like fighting, and who was worn down by the
refusal of the vanquished to be beaten, paid Billy fifty
pounds. Then Billy said “ good-byes ” with regret in
them to Dr. Shannahan and Hannell and Page and Bluett,
and went his way to home and beauty.
Agrols nodded to him carelessly as the train left the
station, but Bowner had forgotten his existence, and was
absorbed in worship of the new “ properryeter.”


CHAPTER LII
Six months of varying fortune followed, and Billy’s
Thursdays were barometers. Some Thursdays he re-
turned saying: “Two columns in this,” holding up for
Mary’s inspection a copy of one of the two weeklies for
which he “free-lanced,” “and a column in this one,
dear,”
And to that Mary replied, “ Oh, isn’t that good,
sweetheart? ”
On Black Thursdays he returned half-crushed; and
Mary replied bravely to the fact there was no necessity for
him to state, “Never mind, dear boy; we can manage.”
Which is to say that she could manage, and manage she
did, in a way that amounted to genius.
In these days Mary’s father, unable to withstand her
championing love of her husband, had become quite
friendly to Billy, and every day his stick resounded on
the little strip of asphalt at the side of the house, and the
children ran to give him a welcome, repaid by stories and
barley sugar. For at that time Billy was too young to be
a companion to children—too full of hopes and dreams and
ambitions ; he was, very unbecomingly, slightly jealous of
even the children who stood between his girl and himself;
there were times when Mary had to conciliate two babies—
the small baby at her breast, and the great baby who
showed his little world outside a brave brow, and an un-
quailing eye, and returned home crushed for a moment,
when older men who held editorial chairs and objected to
his youth, of which they were really envious, had been
more than usually spiteful.


Meanwhile the little and frequent storms of ill-luck had
broken up the fifty pounds which had seemed to be such a
substantial rock; and the day came when the large splay
feet of Crump, the landlord, bringing Crump along the
strip of sonorous asphalt to ask for rent overdue to Crump
—brought not fear to them, but the weariness of long
struggling.
Crump was the worst of landlords, for he had been a
labourer; the most Tory of Conservatives, for he had been
for nearly all his life the most ignorant of unskilled work-
men. Now he hated the Labour party with the bitter
hatred of one theologian for another.
On a Friday night he called; he said for the last time.
“I ain’t a-goin’ to call no more,” he said stubbornly,
and with his eyes fixed on his newly-greased and squeak-
ful boots.
“Now that’s good of you,” retorted “I never
wanted you to call at all. I don’t want to know you.”
Crump gasped, and Mary squeezed her husband’s arm
and whispered, “Don’t annoy him, Will,” but he dis-
regarded her.
“You’ve been impudent to Mrs. Pagan,” Billy went
on. ‘‘ If you want to say anything, say it to me. And
while I’m here it’s my house, and I won’t have you
in it.”
Crump gasped again, but not In anger, for he was a
very slow man.
“ If I don’t get me rent t’morrer, me noble,” said he,
“ I’ll put the bailiffs in.”
At the suggestion of desecration of the temple Billy’s
voice choked with passion. “Your rent will be paid to-
morrow, and we’ll leave on Monday. But don’t you dare
to come here ; it will be sent to you.”
When Crump had departed Billy walked up and down
the little strip of asphalt wondering how that rash promise
could be fulfilled, and finding no solution.


By-and-by he entered the sitting-room, his rage quite
gone, and Mary asked him where he thought of getting
the money.
“ I don’t know, dear girl. I don’t know—but by my
soul, I’ll get it.”
He was prepared for any desperate expedient at the
moment. It is such moments that father crime.
Next morning after breakfast he dreamed in the garden,
and at last Mary came to tell him that he must really go.
“ Saturday is a short business day, dear, and it’s after
nine now.”
Billy looked at the little garden again, very glorious as
it was in its new spring clothes, and groaned.
“Isn’t it a shame, True Eyes? Look at that rose
spray from next door coming over the fence, and the ivory
pear bloom just beginning to fall, and I’ve got to leave it
and go into that cruel city, and beg or borrow or—steal.”
“ Not steal, dear.”
“ Well, no; although last night I would. Fifteen shillings
is all I have for paragraphs this week, and the rent is two
pounds. . . . O Lord! why should we who are young
be bothered like this ? ready to work for money, and able
to enjoy it; and people who are old and diseased and
can’t spend the money they have, have it to spend.”
“ It’s the price they pay for losing youth and love,
Will! ”
He kissed her, quite satisfied with life again, and then
he kissed the children and prepared to go. But Mary put
her arms around his neck and said: “ The love shall
bring the luck yet, dear”; and as he said “good-bye”
finally, she became practical and gave him the only coin
they had in the world.
“ Don’t walk to town, Will, go on the tram ; you’ll have
more time for money hunting.”
Billy walked briskly to the tram-line, but had to wait for
a few’minutes outside the news agency where he owed so


much for papers that at last news and literature had been
cut off from him.
His eye wandered idly over the window, and the news-
paper contents bills at the shop entrance. And suddenly
his idleness changed to interest, to incredulity, to drunken
joy. For he read :
fltljrntncle.
THIS day’s ISSUE CONTAINS THE
FIRST INSTALMENT OF
A STORY OF GREAT INTEREST
A NEW WRITER
WILLIAM GREY PAGAN.
IT WILL BE CONTINUED WEEKLY
UNTIL COMPLETED,
For a minute he read and re-read the bill in a condition
approaching stupefaction, then hd entered the shop and
bought a paper, knowing that the expenditure would not
leave him the tram fare. He read the flattering para-
graph that introduced him to the Chronicle's columns;
then he read the story, and it seemed finer in print than
ever it had been in manuscript. The explanation of the
mystery burst on him ; he had never sent a manuscript to
the Chronicle; the story that had come to save him was
the one the Jwvelin had returned more than a year ago—
the one Mary had rescued from the fire. She had re-
written it, and sent it to the Chronicle without his know-
ledge ; and her own expectancy of its success had long
since died; yet had she said no word. The brave and
tender heart! The robust and beautiful soul 1
He started running back towards home, talking wildly
to himself. “Oh! my girl! The love has brought the
luck. ”
And midway he checked himself. He would not return


empty-handed ; it should be a return from the wars, loaded
with much spoil; safe by reason of that buckler of love
she sent before him always.
He changed his way, and entered the gardens that
flanked the tram-track, and raced the tram two miles into
town, arriving at the Chronicle office breathless.
There he saw the editor, and the editor congratulated
him and hoped he would write “more of such quality,”
and arranged terms that were really liberal, and seemed
wondrous. And Billy lingered. At last with his heart
in his throat, and all the shame youth feels in asking for
its own, he blurted out that he “would like to see the
cashier.”
So to the cashier they went, and the editor said :
“ Mr. Pagan will probably want to draw some money.”
“ Probably,” said Billy, turning very pale, and instantly
flushing crimson again.
“ Yes, sir,” said the cashier.
“About how much will you wish now, Mr. Pagan?”
said the editor.
“ About twenty or twenty-five,” stammered Billy, feel-
ing like a criminal.
“ Twenty or twenty-five ? ”
“Twenty-five, I think,” said Billy, again feeling little
currents of hope and uncertainty and fear chasing each
other along his spine.
They gave him the money, and for a moment he was
sorry he had not asked for more—the payment seemed
all so easy and effortless; and he shook hands with the
editor, and walked like a somnambulist to the door, and
when he was in the sunlight again he wondered whether he
could refrain from shrieking. But his uproarious happi-
ness did not last long, for if Love had brought the luck
—Envy brought the hate.
Standing a dozen yards from the office were a dozen
pressmen whom Billy knew —reporters mostly, two of
them reporters of a literary turn. In his joy Billy wanted


to love the whole world. Each of these men he
had been friendly enough with in the days of his servitude
on the Era suddenly appeared to be all Davids and
Jonathans ; so he stepped to them, trying to appear only
cheery and not overwhelmingly glad : “ Well, boys, come
and have a drink.”
Some of them turned their backs, some walked off,
others refused sourly and in mean tones ; and Billy, all
the joy of achievement gone out of him, went away
ashamed, wishing, for a moment, that the thing had not
happened. And then he thought of that noble girl who
loved him, and was really the cause of his success, which
had come when apparently another Dead Finish had arrived.
So he hurried to her, stopping for a minute at the pot-
house, to drink with all the old lovable failures, and
touch human hands that responded to his hnpp<ru»a c •
racing to the flower market to buy early tube-roses at a
great price; and not discovering, in his pre-occupied hurry,
that he had walked home until he had opened his own gate,
and stood in the strip of sounding asphalt, and saw in
the little garden beyond his father-in-law playing with the
children under the pear tree ; and the sudden events of the
past two hours seemed wonderfully unreal. To re-assure
himself, he took the notes and gold from his pocket and
held them in his hand.
The children shrieked at seeing him, and his father-in-
law said, “ Hullo, Will! ” and Billy replied, “How are
you, Jack ? ” for they had become mates ; and there was
no hampering respect or father-and-son manner to place
boundaries to their liking.
Billy protected the tube-roses from even a suspicion of
their identity by closing the mouth of the paper bag that
held them, and said to Mary’s father :
“ What do you think that girl of ours has done, Jack? ”
‘ ‘ Don’t know, old man. What is it ? ”
“She rescued a story I had tried to burn in disgust,
and she copied it, and sent it without my knowledge to


the Chronicle , and they printed the first of it this morn-
ing, and paid me twenty-five pounds just when things
were blackest.”
The old man’s strong features softened their lines.
“She’s a good woman, my lad.”
“ Good ! Good ! She’s a better man than I am. And
fools call hers the yielding sex.”
He went into the house as he spoke, and found Mary
in the sitting-room.
“ Back again, Will—and so early. What luck, dear ? ”
In answer he tore the paper covering from the tube-roses,
and she took them.
“Oh ! the beauties ! I’ll kiss you for them, dear. But
they must cost a great deal. You must have a lot of
money.”
“Darling!” said Billy, as ardently as in the days before
the cares of a family had irritated him into being by
moments unjust and ill-tempered to her; “Love has
brought the luck. Look at this! ” He held the paper to
her as he spoke, and she read, and read it again, and
finally she lifted his arms and put them around herself,
and laughed for joy until he expected hysteria.
“Steady, now,” said Bill. “Don’t let that change to
crying, sweetheart; the time for that sort of thing expired
yesterday.”
“ Don’t talk, dear—don’t talk. I’m only glad. . , .
And it was hard not to tell you all these months, and
at last I gave up all hope.”
“God bless you, True Eyes. . . . And now we’ll de-
spatch old Crump; and after that we’ll get a hansom—you
and I—and we’ll go house-hunting.”


CHAPTER LIII
The stories continued, and most of Billy’s new produc-
tions were read in the manuscript to True Eyes and True
Eyes’s father and the children; and when there was no
other audience Billy went into the garden of their new
house, and read aloud to himself and a humorous small
dog from next door.
The editor of the Chronicle had proposed that Billy
should go to Sydney to syndicate his contributions with
another paper, so giving the Chronicle the matter cheaper
and securing an increased rate for the writer.
He sought his wife shamefacedly, seeking sound reasons
for another separation. He found her sitting under the
verandah trying to discount the heated dusk that had
followed a molten day. The small two-year old child lay
sleeplessly on her lap; and Mary cajoled and threatened
and joked, and finally sang, in her attempts to make the
baby’s consciousness go where it should.
“‘Come where my love lies dreaming,’” sang the clear,
true contralto, that always kept, long after the singer’s
first youth had gone, the sweetness and the purity and the
hope that belongs to the voice of first-youth only.
But the baby was wakeful, and had a neck of pride.
“ I ’on’t, mamma—l ’on’t. I ’termined I ’on’t,” he said
sleepily.
Billy laughed. “What an obstinate little beggar he
is.”
“ He’s as self-willed as you are, Will. I’ve got to wear
him down by petting him, and that makes him more
obstinate afterwards, although he’s soft for the moment


280 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
. . . Don’t talk, he’s going off. . . . ‘Where my love lies
dreaming . . . Dreaming . . . the . . . happy hours
away.’ ”
“ I ’on’t . . . I ’
“Sh—sh— ‘ Come where my love ’ . . . he’s gone. Carry
the lamp, dear. . . . Bless him . . . he’s gone till
morning light.”
The baby was laid in his cot, with many liftings of
Mary’s forefinger and bushings and whispers to Billy to
be very quiet; and they returned to the verandah, and he
told her he had to go to Sydney L and all the gladness
went out of her.
And next day he went to Sydney, leaving True Eyes
wondering dully if she should ever see him again; her love
creating new and wondrous dangers for this journey of a
new Ulysses, whose greatest danger was his own impulses,
and whose Penelope reduced her friendly sorcery to half
intelligible prayers for his safety, breathed to the scorch-
ing north winds, to the babies in the nursery, to all the
sacred little household tasks.
Meanwhile Billy, having surmounted the first searing
pangs of parting, journeyed northward, his mind hungry
for new impressions, and his heart yearning for the girl
who made the house the home; for that is the way of a
man the really contradictory gender being the masculine.
But for all the yearning, his eye glowed with enthusiasm,
as befitted one who went out for the conquest of a new
world. He found that the new world objected to be con-
quered, and that the people he had come especially to take
by storm told him coldly to “ call again next week.”
So he went to see his mother, and found the family
unchanged; and for old sake’s sake sought his boyhood’s
haunts, and found himself uninterested.
And then he decided : “No more of old tracks for me.
I m changed, and changed for the better—changed by my
dear girl—and the old tracks will never fit my feet again.’
And then he turned a corner, and into the old tracks
again, for he met Laura Bell face to face.


CHAPTER LIV
She did not recognise him until he spoke, but he knew
her immediately, for she had not greatly altered, al-
though she had grown taller. Her face was thin and
wistful as of old, and her eyes were still the brown eyes that
followed his every movement when he read his romances
in the days of their youth.
She recognised him a little when he said “Laura” and
blushed faintly; and then, as he spoke his the
recognition was complete.
They walked along Pitt Street together, and she told
him she was married and unhappy; she had never cared
for her husband; he was so brutal to her that she scarcely
cared for the children because they were his.
Billy listened to it all with a very ready pity, and had
almost asked her if she were in poverty, but a glance at
her dress told him the reverse. She had at one been
his sole audience—now he was the only audience she
knew; and half an hour of his sympathy made her mis-
take it for a revival of that boy-liking for her, and she
became eager and militant.
“ Meet me to-night,” she said at last, her cheeks burn-
ing in narrow ovals of red. “ I have so much to say.”
“ I can’t! I really can’t,” replied Billy, aghast
“ I must see you. I am insulted daily at home. I
have not one friend.”
“Poor old Laur,” said Billy, softening.
“You’ll meet me, Billy, won’t you?—for old sake’s
sake.”
“ All right, I will.”


“At the Manly Ferry at eight. I live at Manly. Good-
bye till then.”
_ She was gone, and Billy, walking away very much
disgusted with himself, said, “Meet her! I’m damned
if I will.”
But as the day progressed he found himself arguing
that there was no treason in merely meeting Laura ; and
to that argument his love brought evidence in rebuttal, so
that when he turned into Adolphe’s, the little French
restaurant, where many of his friends dined, he was still
a ganglion of doubt. He saw Rosser, one of the new
acquaintances, dining alone, and his recognition of the
sturdy honesty of the man moved him to ask Rosser’s
advice.
“ You I°ve your wife? ” asked Rosser.
‘More than I care to say to anybody but herself,”
replied Billy, blushing, as he did whenever his wife was
mentioned.
“ Then I say, ‘ don’t meet the other.’ ”
But I ve promised, and I’ll look like a cad to her.”
“ Never mind that—break the promise—look like a cad
—he a cad—but don’t be a liar and a fool.”
“ But is there any lie in only meeting her ? ”
Rosser laughed cynically. “ Only meeting her. Would
it end there ? Here is a woman who is unhappy in her
home—never loved her husband—now hates him. What
is worse —she says she scarcely loves her children
because they’re his. Now babies make a good woman
almost too good for earth—babies are the salvation of
many a woman who would otherwise be at least as weak
as water, and probably actively bad. This woman has
some boy and girl romance with you in it. You meet
her—she won’t let you go again. ”
“I’m strong enough to resist.”
You are a fool if you believe that. Are you as strong
as she is ? Her misery gives her new weapons. For a
week of what she would call happiness she’d wreck herself*
and you too. ”


“ Laura wouldn’t do that.”
“ Laura would—for Laura’s sake. She is a gambler
who has nothing to lose. .. . See here, old man ! My
wife is dead now, and all I have to pride myself on is
all the days of my married life I was true to her, not
because I believe that man’s morality and woman’s
morality are the same, but because I loved her too well to
ever bring to her the suspicion of inconstancy on my part.
I simply wouldn’t take the risk. And you mustn’t. Why
can’t you go home to-morrow ? ”
“ I havte to see the Messenger people—then I’m finished.”
‘‘See them in the afternoon, and go by the afternoon
steamer.”
“But it’s like running away—as if I couldn’t trust
myself.”
“ And you can’t trust yourself. Do you know that
once I had arranged to meet a woman—same as you
a dangerous one—she wasn’t trivial enough for a light o’
love. Wife was away with her people. Understand ? ”
Billy nodded.
“ I resolved to myself for two days that I wouldn’t keep
the appointment, but on the afternoon of the day I felt
I’d have to keep it. I felt my manhood would be insulted
by me if I didn’t. My manhood ! Well, what do you
think I did? ”
“ No idea.”
“ Well, I dined well, and drank a lot of wine with three
or four other fellows, and they wanted to leave me, and
almost terrified at being alone, I begged them not to go.”
“And then?”
“ We all went to the Pirate’s, and I made my manhfwt
very drunk there, and listened to the Pirate’s stupendous
romances, and then I went home merry and safe, and
woke up next morning and worked better than I had ever
done before.”
They smoked in silence for some minutes. Then the
coffee was brought, and Billy spoke :
“ Rosser, old man, I won’t go to the Manly boat.”


284 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
They shook hands over the table.
MessengerJ Sector of the
for another triumph and dm ° f fai,ure m plans
«J * ‘ - bye,™ and 3^hence V to to th* IS , mother s house to
brothers and sisters his affe t h ° USeS of married
cooled by long disuse’of the Wh ° m he found
then he wentfo offi habit -‘ «™*
for home, and reached the wharf"'as’ h* s““**
taking m the fenders tbe deck hands were
»ST l °“ Ched hi " “*• ™. and he turned and
" not «id reproachfully through
was going?"*’ LaUra busy. How did y„„ Imp* ,
Javelin y i r “\,'' I 'j‘^“‘; 0 - and “ I called at the
whof?i StlTed"? ““ ” 5 ' raOVe ”“"“ •» anybody
■■XTiTf?o t ?o n^ZX w ° uM ° , * b ' shak
?. e ci?rr - ■--iisssf
“1 S * ay here f “ * fe » days. ”
—shake hands— don’t lm P ortant —g-ood-bye
you reach home. I Y“ U be p aU^ ht b y the time
spoken jerkily, moving tothe T/ ~ ” He had
she clung to his hand, and “ -? C K P ° ke ’* but
hand of granite. f on lt; but 2t was a
awayandflSu/Xtgau™? 1 ”?^ 0 '” H ° ‘° re his hand
a mi„„ te KX‘4? d o^’X , ?.r l00 ”'
moved. " cast °" and the steamer
A«d two days late, he had reached his haven again.


CHAPTER LV
At home there were new troubles. That brother of Mary’s
whose beauty had been his own snare, had returned to the
mother-roof to die. Phthisis gripped him ; his youth and
bloom had disappeared in premature old age—but when
he died and was shaven and streeked, the cause of his un-
doing came back, and Eros lived again in that wondrous
unnatural beauty which immediately precedes corruption.
This blow had scarcely time to stun—for although his
wilfulness and unbridled self-gratification had not made
him lovable, the excess of strength which caused his
unlovableness had compelled admiration when True
Eyes suffered the beginning of a greater shock. The
Chronicle had returned the last-written stories. There
is but a transient vogue for anything in a small community
where nearly everybody is building new ways, and there
is little time for leisure or for cults or fads, and the vogue
of Billy’s pen was over.
“ Never mind, dear, we can manage to live,” said Mary,
brave always. J
That isn t enough, sweetheart. We can never chance
the possibility of a Crump again—nor any of the old humili-
ations of poverty. I’ve got to strike out for something
new. ”
“ How, dear? ”
“ ni g -0 t 0 this new gold rush and see if I have luck
with me.”
She sighed, and said, “ You’ll never be content again
with the old ways.”


“ I never will, my girl. . . . I’ve been able to give
you a glimpse of comfort these last few months, and I
can t let you go back to the times when you stayed at
home because you had not a decent dress, and when the
want of a few shillings prevented us going to a theatre.
There’s no return, dear, to that.”
“I suppose not—but it will be like death not to see
you for months—and my baby will be born, and I may
never see you again.” She shed no tear although they
were in her eyes, and sobs were in her voice,
“ But I will return, dear—nothing can kill me till I have
seen you again—and nothing can kill you until we meet.
I must go, sweetheart. The children are growing, and
by-and-by they will want educating. Don’t fret, sweet,
... A man must go out and do, so that the way may be
easier for the people who follow him.”
“ Yes, dear ! and when must you go ? ”
“In a week, True Eyes. And the sooner the better,
because I shall return the sooner, and a week later may
mean the missing of chances. And we have only thirty
pounds. I can leave twenty with you, and that will last
you for six weeks, and by then I will have made some
money to send you.”
“ But ten pounds will only pay your passage, and you’ll
be hard up when you land ? ”
Don t you fear for me,” said Billy darkly, making his
manner suggest some hidden resource, which really didn’t
exist, “I’m all right.”
# was settled, and Billy in the hurry of preparation
did not feel the agony of separation, which was present to
the wife every waking minute and came as an ugly dream
to invade her sleep. It is one of Nature’s ironies that the
creature most exquisitely strung—the sex that can feel
most—is nearly always denied the nepenthe of action in
which the man forgets his griefs. To Mary, to whose
high, deep, enduring nature were added a star-like stead-
fastness and the mental breadth of a man, it was a titanic


struggle to consider this separation with outward calm
—to look without betraying her terror in a future so vora-
ginous.
All these years they had been so happy that he could
see, now that an Antarctic of loneliness was imminent,
that there had been no winter in their lives before.
For the next two days this man and this woman were as
under sentence of death, feeling the leaden hopelessness of
the condemned. And at last the day came and the hour;
and the train, which they thought impatiently would
never start, did start, and the two kissed and broke from
one another. True Eyes, half-believing that she had
looked her last on him, went back to wait by the hearth
that was now not halved; while the Whirlwind set his face
westward to do and dare and win, or to do, and not dare
enough, and fail—as men and women have done since love
and adventure bore the types of Penelope and Ulysses.


CHAPTER LVI
“ For this a man taketh his sword, and goeth his way to sail upon
the sea and on rivers, and looketh upon a lion, and goeth into dark-
ness ; and, when he hath stolen, spoiled, and robbed, he bringeth it unto
his love."
A man walked as if tormented on a steep white beach at
the head of a great gut of the sea. From the shanty in
the sand-hills came the yells of drunken loneliness of men
who had called in the assistance of whisky to prove they
were quite happy ; somewhere behind the shanty a crazy
cow-camel roared its discontent. The man on the shore
was Billy Pagan—a thousand miles from home—trying to
extract some comfort to his worried soul from the cold
white moonlit beach.
He and Lawler—one of the trinity that had missed the
fortune of the Iron Range—had sailed on the same ship to
these lonely sand-dunes, and now he awaited Lawler’s
pleasure to depart on the trackless salt lakes to the gold
country in the North.
But Lawler had shown no real desire to leave the
glamour of the shanty. All that day he had been doing
what he called “ making a start,” which consisted in tow-
ing his protesting camel from the shanty on the shore to
the shanty on the lake, a mile away, and back to the
shanty on the shore for a final drink. And Billy having no
camel or horse or ox or ass, had accepted Lawler’s offer
to carry his swag on the camel, and now he waited for his
mate.
Billy had no immediate fear of his domestic arrange-
ments, for a heaven-sent twenty pounds had been earned


fcl Adelaide by writing something for somebody, and fifteen
of that had been immediately telegraphed home, so tint
for the present there was no possibility of the wolves of
penury gnawing at the unprotected lintel. But there was
the ghastly loneliness for this most gregarious of men to
fafA in this new phase of the most ancient fight known to
m nn—the fight for the family, as in the olden times.
The night waned to the accompaniment of the plaint of
e sailor who had missed his ship through drunkenness. He
cursed without stint or intermission the Scotchman who
had contributed to his undoing by paying for the drink.
“Shanghaied by a blanky Scotchbyterian amenner” was
the burden of his speech, till the sun rose in all the
hurry of the sub-tropics, and the sailor went to sleep in the
sand.
An hour after daylight Lawler came leading his camel,
and saying that at last he was ready and they would leave
at once. Billy’s preparations were few; he wrote yet
another letter to his wife, and posted to her half a dozen
of the bulky communications which he invariably described
in the beginning of them as “ a few lines; ” and then he sent
a telegram to her, not that he had anything to say, but
because he was leaving the telegraph line and might not
see another telegram for many months. By noon they were
well started, the camel bearing their swags and carrying
also the men in turns.
Lawler, as he was suffering a recovery, had the first
ride, and swayed to the uncouth movements of the cheap
baggage camel, in whom there was not grace, nor comfort,
nor swiftness ; and Billy trudged slowly through the knee-
deep sand that was not yet of sufficient difficulty to take foe
spring out of his step, although his heart was lead-heavy.
At two miles from the shore they reached the ever-
changing summits of the rolling sand-hills, and Lawler,
turning the camel, said :
“ Better take your last look at the sea, Bill.”
“ I wonder how long before we see it again,” said Billy,


letting his eye run on the smooth waters of the endless
bight, the stealthy rollers creeping soundlessly to shore,
and the great bald islands of shelving sandstone.
“ Dunno—three months or a year—or never.”
“ Don’t say ‘never,’ old man.”
‘ ‘ Y’never know! might come back here with fifty
thousan’ quid, or peg out on the fields and get yerself
scoffed be crows an’ dingoes. ”
“I won’t do the second, I’ll swear,” said Billy vehemently.
“ I won’t die. I’m going back home again, gilded.”
“ Don’t know yer luck, Bill.”
“ My luck will bring me back again, Dick.”
“What’s it matter anyway?” asked Lawler, and
answered the question himself: “Don’t matter anything.
An’ somebody’s got to draw the blanks. ... To hell
with the sea! Let’s get on, Bill.”
They left the sand-hills and struck into the squdginess
of a salt-lake bed. Salt and magnesia stamped the tracks
of horses and camels and men that had gone before —and
the tracks of light waggon wheels were delineated by
incrustations of brine.
“ Buggy been through here lately? ” said Billy, pointing
to the tracks.
“ Might,” replied Lawler “ an’ mightn’t! Them tracks
might be five years old. There’s likely been no rain about
here for that time, altho’ it’s close to the coast. This stuff
here’s sticky, an’ full of gypsum—it might hold our tracks
ten years if no rain or traffic comes.”
By four o’clock they were clear of the lake and passed a
strip of depressing mulga country ; then came a mile of
stunted salmon gum, then a clay-pan, and on the further
side of that they saw a dwarfed forest, the trees growing
so close together as to make the passing of the camel
seem impossible.
“Tommyhawk,” said Lawler, halting on the edge of the
dwarted belt.
He swung the tomahawk and three trees fell down,


dragging others with them. They fell without aMUod,
and covered the men with a dust which was occasionally
greasy, and had an insectivorous smell that was
animal.
Billy was startled, but Lawler said laconically, “ white
ants,” and urged the camel on. For half-an-hour they
travelled through all this still death of trees—the perished
growths falling around them silently and covering them
with dust.
On the outer side of the belt the salt country dis-
appeared for a little, and there was a belt of normal
salmon gums. Then they came to a cane-grass swamp of
sweet water, and there they camped.
Lawler unloaded and hobbled the camel and tied him to
a quandong tree, and the animal closed its eyes in lazy
enjoyment as it chewed.
The other man made a fire, and when the billy boiled and
the tea sent up its incense the mates sprawled at ease—«a*h
man with his elbows on his swag, and his pound-weight of
the good canned beef the men on the track in ungrateful
derision call “ tinned dog,” and one onion, and shared the
town bread; for they were too early on the track to need
damper.
Their converse, monosyllabic while they were hungry,
grew into sentences from Lawler, who began to question
Billy.
“ Ain’t eatin’ much, Billy—off yer feed? I got a dozen
boxes o’ pills in me swag.”
“I’m all right, old man. I’m thinking of home.”
“What’s the good, Bill? It’s cruel, thinking of ’ome
while yer on the track—tho’ I dunno, I never 'ad no
’ome t’ think on. ”
“ Poor old Dick.”
“ Y’must be very fond o’ yer wife an’ kids.”
“I am.”
“That time y’ left us on the Iron Range, Xavier Quinn
was fair mad. And when I spoke about yer he’d get ratty


292 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
for weeks after that. ’N’ by-’n-by, he says, ‘ Billy was
always a good mate. ’N’ a girl gets round a man, an’
he can’t get a chestful of air unless she’s breathin’ it too,’
says Zave.”
“ Good old Zave! He was a good mate, too.”
“ Ain’t heard of him for five years nearly. Of course
that country we went to on the Peak was a shicer. Just’s
well you didn’t come—we near did a perisher there. ’N’
after we got back to Added I goes to t’ Zeehan, V Xavier
he goes Queensland way.” He continued suddenly : “If
yer so fond of ’em, why don’t y’ stay with ’em ? ”
“ Because I love them so much I must make money for
them. ”
“ I s’pose so .... all marri’ges ain’t like that. My
cousin, he’s very well off, plenty o’ schoolin’ too. His
father bought a lot o’ land in Sydney in the early days.
An’ mine followed rushes—just’s we’re doin’. Well, my
cousin got married to a girl, very well off too she was,
an’ they started wrong—’avin’ different beds, y’ know; and
she goes ’er way, an’ ’e goes his. Come to no good neither
of ’em, and when they go for a divorce, he says she was
vulgar, an’ she says he was a fish an’ no man. An’ the
judge wouldn’t give a divorce to neither of ’em. Still they
wasn’t never really married. ”
“ How was that, Dick ? ”
“Well, they never ’ad no kids—nobody’s married till
they’ve had childern.”
“ And don’t you know of one happy couple, Dick? ”
“ Only two er three. An’ one of ’em was an old couple
that had their golden weddin’ th’ Week before I left Added.
They’re very toffy, but they knoo me as a kid an’ they
arst me t’ come. An’ at the supper one o’ his friends pro-
poses their ’ealths, an’ the old chap—the ’usband—re-
sponds. An’ he says : ‘Me an’ my wife never had a cross
word pass in all our lives,’ an’ I remember when I was a
kid seein’ ’em bangin’ and fightin’ one another like
billyoh.”


“ They must have loved one another to have forgotten
all their little quarrels.”
«< S’pose they must .... pass the tea, Billy.
Venus and the Cross flamed at one another 5 the aky
became filled with stars. The mates smoked silently for
an hour and then turned in, and so went through all the
journeyings of sleep and arrived safely at the mom.
They were afoot early next morning, and travelled over
samphire, salmon gum, gimlet and salt-bush country, suc-
ceeded by miry lakes ; and at noon they saw a condenser,
and trod the cracking fields of salt that spread around the
boilers. Stalactites of salt and magnesia, white as new
wool, hung from the condensing surfaces.
A long-necked thin man was in charge of the condenser,
and told them that a camel drink would cost ten shillings;
and though Lawler grumbled, he ordered the wateringthe
camel, but stated in an undertone to Billy that he would be
flaming careful to see the cow got her fill; and as he moved
towards the tanks he further remarked that the condenser
man was worth watching, as no grown man with a neck of
that size had ever been known to act like a white man.
Consequently he was pleased to discover that the con-
denser man had attempted to swindle the men who paid,
and the animals who carried, by running a light film of
kerosene over the horse troughs, so that the thirsty beasts
refused to drink. And on this discovery Lawler immedi-
ately assaulted the condenser man, and afterwards de-
manded an explanation. This not being forthcoming,
Lawler re-assaulted the condenser man, filled the camel
and all their water-bags to bursting with sweet water, and
departed without paying, the condenser man being too
badly beaten to protest. The track from the condenser
went due west, but the mates struck towards the north; ami
so for many days thereafter they saw no other men. Their
lives were bounded by these illimitable expanses of salt-
bush and spinifex, by infrequent belts of ant-eaten trees,
by shadowy configurations of lake shores, by great day-


294 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
»rC^' rafr “ a " day “ d <*' of haze and
TnThis^a and 80 they
to them that no white man harf h f f nner Jt a Pl>eared
dust hummocks of the salt bush /Ti dlsturbed the
the bones of horses and call ’ f** then came *o
these melancholy traces of thl ' CardeSS
™= r LSe”.ir s ,T„raw ,"tr a ” d '; is -**° f
the Orient in that Australian 'u ,OUrS and tbe bel,s of
so ancient that the Orient is but*?***’ '® itSelf
The alien in his ample white breeches
jacket and blue turban sitting n “ d lght scarlet
packed on the saddle of n ° H man y- c °l°ured rugs,
swaying
again, lived in Lawler’s and R:n - ° ff ' hlnd and back
string had disappeared and thl Cy f long after the
white saucer-shaped lake whn/ ™ 6re a one 11 in the
the aky that was P sohS’ald dir. SCemed t 0 hold U P
came near to them. g dd P 3nd never on an y day
that spokeTf llnfm e^^ r d Se ’ h P . lain enou g h if trackless,
and camels that hadTallen bv lh abandonmen t of horses
The half-burned remit 0 /rh had been
caUed aloud to ear andl! J 686 , mart y rs to progress
depressions on the ground th ’ bUt here the dead were in
corruption out of them and tIT- q . uickly bur ned the
of the great saucers of the lakes hfd inds ’ bl °wing out
of biting dust. k ’ had & Iven them a shroud
A week after leaving the coast tho *
f ramte country wiUzandztone rid * ' "S* *°! int °
to a great outcrop of quartz asfcJdlJ d 811 ly ’ P omt *ng
Lawler chipped it and d 7 . k ! lf they should try it.
“ Buck,” hilid w“fh fr 7- Cd . a milk ' w Wte cleavage,
afraid that h,S - tone - He had beea
digger he wanted to push 3nd like a true
ch ““ - p-i„ ■■—*


That night they camped at a gnamma hole in the great
flat outcrop of granite, and the gnamma hole was filled
with sweet water. The country before them seemed to
be changing.
Lawler made a fire at the foot of a small bell of stunted
trees a score of yards from the base of the rock, and
Billy cut down a quandong and stripped its brandies for
camel food, as Lawler had said that this sort of country
was new to him; it might be poison country, and they
could not take the risk of their camel dying.
So the camel was “ hooshtahed ” down and strapped
after she had ground the dust under her chest-pad into the
shape of comfort, and so left to the enjoyment of the
quandong.
The men prepared their food and ate silently; scarcely
seeing each other through the thick haze that came with the
sudden sunset, and was scarcely dissipated when the stars
rushed out. The mates had exhausted their possibilities
of superficial converse on the fifth day, and the loneliness
and the quietness had made their secret thoughts sacred
and doubly dear.
Lawler ate in a meditative way which discounted his
daylight habit of a jollity that apparently knew no set-
back or reaction ; and Billy took his meal sparingly and
slowly, and was tortured by his imagination, which built
for his beloved dangers that did not exist.
Seen through the haze of the fire and of the velvet night,
these men were so self-withdrawn as to appear strangers,
even to each other.
By-and-by their unfamiliar voices bade each other good
night, and they withdrew to their blankets to smoke and
dream. The fire had burned low, but had ignited the
roots of the belt of dwarfed gimlet wood, the roots that
many winds had exposed and left to harden tortuously in
the sun. From these roots the merest breath of air threw
a spark shower.
And as the men dozed, something in mid-air began to


296 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
sing. Billy and Lawler started, looking for they knew
not what, although they knew that the presence of any
other humans within the horizon was almost an impossi-
bility.
The singing in the air changed to the louder harmony
of a reed organ, and the mates looked at one another full
of wonderment mixed with a little fear.
The volume of sound became tremendous, as if some
great, rarely-used stop had taken charge of the instrument
and the player; and then one of the burning gimlet woods
tell, and the great sonorous flow was reduced for a
moment until another piped tree was heated through and
began to sing from bole to summit, Lawler wiped his
forehead.
“ White ants,” he said jerkily. « All them gimlets are
piped.”
For an hour they listened to the advancing and receding
and recurring waves of harmony, and then fell asleep
happily, with all their gloom banished by the harmony of
these gigantic pipes of Pan,


CHAPTER LVII
“ By trying, the Greeks came to Troy”
They found next day that Lawler’s prospect of a change
of country had been correct. Two hours’ travelling
brought them to a stony rise ; and that crossed, they saw
below and before them, rippling away in waves of crimson
to the horizon, a great garden filled with everlasting
flowers, and native lilac, and the scented pink broom.
All day they travelled through this, and at night they
camped in the centre of another great garden, and by a
clav-pan which was full of new rain-water, and showed
them how local and unreliable were the rains of this
They hobbled the camel, as there were no trees to serve
as manger or stable, and the camel had to be fed somehow.
In the absence of timber, they managed to get sufficient
fierce, short-lived fuel to boil their billy from the dead
branches of the scented broom.
Next morning the camel was not in sight, but they soon
picked up the broad tracks and followed them until ten
o’clock. And then they found the camel, blown up like a
balloon, and at his last gasp.
Lawler looked around, and his eye at last rested on a
little shrub with a peach-like bloom.
“ Poison plant,” he said, with an oath. I might ve
stayed, made speechless by this calamity, the
camel made the position definite by dying; and as there


was no fuel to burn the carcase, the mates returned to the
camp.
Better stay here till ’t’morrer, ” said Lawler. ‘ ‘ There’s
water ’ere. An’ somehow I don’t think there’s much
further on.”
“ Why don’t you think that? ”
I don t know, but I feel it’s that way. Now we ain’t
got no condenser, ’cause I thought the camel ’ud carry us
safe through to Kalaleerie with the water we had in the
bags. And we can’t carry the camel bags,”
Well, let’s get our fill at this clay-pan, and take as
much as we can carry in the small bags.”
“ Good again, but it’ll still be hard going. Tucker ’an
ail, it 11 be near seventy-pound swags, and then the water
bags. ”
“If it’s going to be bad,” said Billy, “let’s get through
with it, and start now.”
“ Good again! The longer you look, the higher the
jump is.”
They re-made the swags, taking only absolute neces-
saries, and abandoned the rest with the camel gear. Each
man carried his water-bag; so that with the swag, Lawler’s
estimate of seventy pounds was exceeded.
At two o’clock in the afternoon they left the brilliant
oasis of the clay-pan and struck north, through the
flowered desert.
An hour before dusk the flowers ended and were
succeeded by a stony rise and a volcanic gorge. They
walked hock-deep in an impalpable powder that flew into
the air from their footfalls and almost choked them ; as
if they had been breathing unslaked lime.
They struggled on; but long disuse from the habit of
swag-carrying and an erect habit of gait had put out of
action the carrying muscles of Billy’s breast and back,
and the bearing of the inordinately heavy swag was an
agony.
Billy, temporarily pigeon-breasted in the effort to keep


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 999
toe swag from sagging to his loins, thought he would
never walk upright again. It was an Old Man of the Sea
to him, and then he remembered Sinbad, and laughed.
“ Whatcher openin’ your face about?” asked Lawler,
whose good-humour had disappeared for the moment In
his appreciation of the difficulties that lay beyond.
< ‘ Did you ever read Sinbad the Sailor , Dick ?
“Never read him—saw him in a pantermine over
Sydney way.”
“Well, the book’s nothing like that. . . . Anyhow 1
Anyhow I
W as thinking of Sinbad. He says in one place :‘As I
walked along I saw'that the valley was strewn with
diamonds, and the sight pleased me so much that I almost
forgot my troubles.’ ”
“Well, there’s no di’mon’s here,” said Lawler-
“Nothing but limestone.”
“ I know. But I was thinking these swags wouldn’t
weigh a pound to us if there was a big patch of alluvial
in this gorge.” . .
“ Wouldn’t it, be cripes ? When you d got it you dhe
kidded to stay, and then the water in the clay-pan would
dry up, and you’d start back with the gold an’ maybe do
aperisher.”
“ Doesn’t seem to be much certainty in anything, even
after you’ve got the certainty,” said Billy, with a half-sigh,
for home seemed a dozen worlds away just then.
The impalpable pungent dust changed to ascending
ledges of rock, and they climbed wearily to the top of
another ridge and saw below them a forest of salmon
gum, dwarfed by height until it looked like a plain of un-
broken grass. Beyond it was an immensity of mystery,
half-water and half-haze. It looked like a grass plain
stretching to a calm sea. f
“Lake Disappointment,” said Lawler; “accordin to
the Goviment maps, Mount Misery ought to be the other
side.”
“ But the country isn’t known, Dick.”


3~ TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
rf loratio ” <’"* here "»«Y
«C„ , ey turned back from that lake ”
•hey slipped andstobw do'sTtte stony hIH I*"’ B '’*'"’
gums, and, reaching- the timber rh 7 t 0 the salmon
rose with a new heat as Tf ;t 7 .““I* 4 The sua
Lawler said, with as much anxietyTs * and
joy of living- allowed him that bS usua m°ming-
for water th« WOUM in ,ro “ b ‘«
they must sleep all day and f . mm,miSe , the consumption,
while the lake bed held the tract-fit at &ny rate ’
no fear of passing- auriferm ° n tbe ake there was
luck held to tIZ Z feZ COUnt 7 in the dark - Their
granite rock midway through thTfi § t ft f ° 0t ° f 3
said it looked likely and tried it • Lawler
baJing and straining after thev’cf tf h ° UrS ° f P atien t
below the surface refilled the h fUCk the Water ’ two fe et
full skin. ’ ,Cd the ba^s > and each man a
camped till moM^s^O^This ‘"t afternoon . and
million wonders Thp rP h baSm Bi % found a
collapsed tote fooltXhTa TT* that
traced on the lake floor hi th ° arabesques of briny sand
the lake mud. Uw£ w ? Unous life which inhabited
knap a rock «; tht * “ a mile off to
showed Billy the water that t SUn and salt g lar e
deceitfulness of fnd t* ; and tb * blue
the mirage of water and far-off ptes ZtZ* t
denly appeared to be a e-ip-anf.V P ’ but Lawler sud-
fifty feet high. Then a w!nd bletand 3 ° f
stature came down to human limb.’ t f
seas that were not there were efasedf shimmer ing
pencil-marks from a slate d * spon 8 e erases
Uwl„ rMnr „ d , saying (here was


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND JB I
and as they yet had an hour of daylight, they ooiatsd
along the shore.
Billy pointed to a small channel to the lake, a channel
that kept its regularity of width and configuration for a
hundred feet.
« That gutter is as straight as if it had been surveyed,
Dick.”
Lawler went down on his knees and felt in the indurated
shore, and then Billy saw that another little channel ran
parallel to the first one, and about four feet from it.
“ D’ye know what that is? That’s the wheel-tracks of
the Guv’ment explorers.”
“ And the tracks are thirty years old.”
“ Good again, Bill. What d’ye make of it? ”
“ That there’s practically no rainfall, and that a stroke
of bad luck will bring us to a perish.”
“ Good again! If there’s no water in the next eighty
miles, and no big trees, our name is Mud. We’ll find
Dead Finish all right.”
They returned silently to their camp, full of the appre-
ciation of the probability before them, but with never a
thought of turning back to safety. Besides, as Lawler
said, the little soak they had baled dry that day might be
permanently dry, and under any circumstances the track
was north, and north they would go in defiance of aH Ills.
So when the moon rose at ten o’clock it found two men
well on the way and walking sturdily, bearing their bur-
dens across the firm surface of the lake, whose great
width, flat as a billiard table, lay before them. The
moon’s rays looked on two moving black patches, walk-
ing in a white world, plodding noiselessly in the solid and
salt encrusted sludge—the ghosts of men on the ghost of
a once great sea!
A long night walk is always a journey of mystery.
Billy had had all such experiences as his country offered.
He had walked all night through rows of ghostly-white,
dead and ring-barked trees, over paddocks that shall


one day bear a hundred miles of wheat. r, .
interminable mallee; on the ninelyA *
waters of the Tasman cnn 3 . oeacn, with the
thundering on the stones—b be Sa " d . and
noctivagances no immensity such as these ' “ al . these
salt lake lying under the searchlg e ec tt of
from every other life, and knowing to . Cut ° ff
tion, these two mates walked like gh a?“'i IS ° la ;
departed great waters, and were Ghosts 1 plaCe of
outlook. gfnosts in their mental
their brains
weariness of sinew • the half hanically and felt no
*•— f r
power of sensation. aversed, dulling then
reach'. Sprang Up on the lake and
and finding it covered with , shore
tomahawked many soinifex rh,m P “i 5 y cam P ed and
they half dozed f Whi,e
fire the air was filled with scem ofThe
burning with the odour of Ribbon nf R f h spmifex »
memories, called to thf surface t thT* '* ***
£££ Zi: o £ZT th T sea T °/ nd . the "f un!
and walked quickly up and
less mercurial Lawler had had hi* Itne1 tne lake bed. The
had put them away from him when he re^filledt- 0 ’ hC
So the dawn found them • Rjlh, „ ■ ”i ed hls P‘Pe-
down; Lawler smoking and lookinetThfi^ 113, UP a “ d
scent of a score of ner f„ mf , . n the fire; and the
with the strengthening of the sun. dyinff d ° Wn


CHAPTER LVIII
‘ He whom love rules, where’er hts path may be,
walks safe and sacred."
In four hours they covered the remaining- width of the
lake and reached a shore of loose drift that made walking
doubly hard.
Suddenly they crossed a track coming in from the
south-west, and the tracks of two booted and of one un-
shod man ; the boot-tracks covering the naked footmarks
in places, as if the booted had pursued the unshod and
found it a stern chase. Billy and his mate looked at one
another in a new fear. Another mile brought them to an
ominous heaping together of dust. The tablet at the
head of the mound was a meat-can, fired till it had lost
its solder, and spread out—and the inscription, made by
collections of nail holes, read:
“ In memory
of Henry
Peterson born 18
49 died of thi
rst 23rd Novetn
ber 1892 ”
The men who buried him had, with Australian adapt-
ability, borrowed the habit of the aboriginal, and on the
grave they had deposited the dead man’s belongings—his
pannikin, his billy and water-bag, a prospector’s dish, and
his pouch-belt, with its compass and pipe sheath.
The mates left the grave quickly—it reminded them too


jnuch of their own chances; and the habit of silence
which had come to them a week ago when they had told
all their experiences and talked themselves to a standstill
helped their thoughts to gloom. But they went on
steadily, and still with the spring in the heel and the light
in the eye; and neither light was quenched nor spring
deadened by the little agonies of walking through the
lances of heavy spmifex, which cut through their clothes
and skin, nor by the irritation of the presence of swift
cunning, and disgustingly-bloated March flies. ’
They came to a salt-bush plain of red dust; still follow-
ing the tracks of the two booted men. The unshod man
RM? t-i r e T n ~ the man b the S rave - And suddenly
Billy kicked a heavy stone, and the impact numbed his
toes, for his boots were worn. He looked at the stone
and saw that it glistened, and cried to Lawler.
■ to ° k k Up ’ and in a voice that tried to be calm
said, A twenty-ounce slug, mate. ”
Each threw down swag and water-bag, and on his
knees searched the scrub-covered dust. Little cries of
pleasure broke from them as they found other slugs. A
work of four hours exhausted this small and adventitious
patch, so far as the surface was concerned. Lawler
hand-weighed it and said:
“ Three ’underd ounces—if it’s a penny-weight ”
Twelve hundred pounds 1 They recommenced the search
funously-forgot hunger and the heat and the March
flies. At dusk Lawler reminded Billy that they had
only two days’ water, and advised a move. But when
they Jooked for the tracks of the two shod men they could
not find them—they had passed the tracks in this delirious
search. Billy was for working on and continuing the
operation of specking ”; but Lawler cursed loudly at
the foolish greed that would sacrifice them, and dragged
him on the quest for the tracks.
i J* Can t find the tracks ’ for th e love of Gawd
let s find timber, an’ we’ll get water in the tree roots,”


At last, in the darkness, they camped—«t»H »■
scrub, susurrent to the night wind. The nest day’s
march brought them to another auriferous flat, running
from an iron-slugged hill into an iron gorge of Infag
rock; and on that flat Billy was mad again with the
lust of acquisition, and with little cries of delight he
“specked” a four-ounce slug of the red gold—the true red
of the noble metal in its water-worn surfaces. But on
the short rations of water their swags were doubly heavy;
and excitement is a poor substitute for fluid. At last
Lawler cursed him and dragged him on; and the mates
strode over the iron rises together and snarled at each
other as they walked.
In the early afternoon they saw a belt of salmon gum,
and on its border they picked up the tracks again.
Erratic tracks they were now, and indefinite of direction.
Lawler, with anxiety in his face and voice, croaked from
his bone-dry tongue:
“Them blokes’s done a perish! An’ so will we if we’ve
got no luck.”
They came to a swag abandoned—to clothing—to a red
bandanna handkerchief filled with little nuggets.
Lawler quickened his pace; and Billy, looking at his
mate out of the corners of his eyes, secured the bandanna
as he walked, and went on with the thrill of acquisition
even in that moment of impending horror.
They suddenly came on the stricken men. One, almost
naked, was on his knees in the position of digging for
the water-bearing roots of the salmon gum. A great
crow flapped away from the man as Lawler and Billy
came up. The other man, more fully clothed) and of a
greater vitality than the water-digger, lay under the
scanty shade of a sandalwood.
Lawler examined the digger and found that be Was
dead—his jaws forced open by the swelling of his black-
ened tongue. Another half an hour of life would have
given him the water of the tree roots.


The man under the sandalwood was at his last gasp.
He moaned slightly as Lawler held the water-bag to
his lips, but he was unable to drink ; and feeling this,
smiled to them as if satisfied, closed his eyes, and was
gone.
In the presence of this tragedy all Billy’s acquisitiveness
vanished ; and Lawler lost his anxious snarl and became
very gentle.
With the tomahawk from Lawler’s swag they scraped a
wide and shallow grave in the alluvium. Then they
searched the bodies and laid them in the cutting, and the
pity of it all smote these two Argonauts, and as they did a
man’s work they shed a woman’s tears.
In the pockets of the water-digger they found many
papers, a sketch of two great mountains barring a sand
plain, and a sectional plan showing evidently the mine
workings of a prospector; a letter—a woman’s letter with-
out date or address, asking “Dear Ted to come home—
never mind if he hadn’t a penny, but to come home,” and
a photograph of a very young, very fat, and very naked
baby.
On the body of the other man there was an undated
account for a pair of boots bought somewhere, of some
shop unknown, the transaction having been for cash ; and
half a dozen photographs of women in tights, from cigar-
ette packets.
To the travelling men all these trivialities were new
tragedies-they spoke of the grip on life these men had
had and lost.
Lawler retraced his steps to bring back the castaway
swags, while his mate completed the work of the dead
man, reached the tree roots, cut them into lengths with the
tomahawk, and up-ended them in the pannikins to drip out
their life-fluid.
And as he worked, he thought of the photograph of the
naked baby and of the letter asking “ Dear Ted ” to come


home anyhow, and he saw himself in the man's
place, and the baby that was yet to come to him ; but Ac
sight made him more tender than afraid. For from hard
places fear flies.
Lawler returned with the property of the dead, and they
removed their camp from the grave. There was little
desire for food in them, but they drank the acrid water of
the tree-roots and nibbled a little stringy beef.
And suddenly they felt how far they had been drifting
from each other, and the desire of the touch of human flesh
rolled over them, and each extended hand to each.
“I’ve been a greedy Jew, Dick.”
“ Not you, Bill! It’s me, an’ me dirty snarling ways.”
So these two great children sat there with hands clasp-
ing ; soft as babies for a moment, and silent as lovers for
an hour.


CHAPTER LIX
At daybreak they unrolled the dead men’s swags, spread-
ing the blankets over the bodies and pinning them down
with sticks.
“ No dingoes here, Dick ? ”
“Bet your life there is—where there’s crows there’s
dog’s.
“And where there’s dogs there’s water, Dick.”
“’Course—but you might do a perish looking for it—
maybe it’s only a gnamma hole in a little granite rock.
Xnere s no points in trustin* to ding*o wells. ”
Another hope scotched brought silence to them again,
and they filled in the grave, S
Then Lawler sorted the legacies.
“ The plan might put us on ter somethin’—l dunno—if
WG this ~ an ’ the le «er, an’ the kid’s photo
might find his people. ’N’ the gold ’n’ the meat we’ll take
n ° g ° od *’ them - Two o’ milk—why didn’t they
gristbin ;t C ,? ndenSed Stuff ’ S prett y thick > but an’t got no
They loaded themselves with mule loads, and as they
were starting again Lawler said rather ashamedly :
“ I’ll collar that ’ere bottle o’ patent yeast—l’m a srood
hand at makin’ bread.” s
Once they had got into their stride their pluck came
back, and Lawler talked.
“ T’make a damper rise light ye want t’ put four raisins
in one of the raisins in every quarter of the damper. ’F
ye !, don *’ the dam Per ’ull stick in yer chest like sludge.”
Billy, rather amused at the superstition, asked for the


chemical explanation of the effect on bread of four nfWiiß
and no more. But when he saw that Lawler’s weak point
was his bread-making he calmed his mate’s resentment by
saying that there were many things true which could not
be explained. So they went through that terrible day erf
heat and anxiety without one cross word.
That dusk their luck led them to a native well—a mare
hole in the rock half filled with putrid water, emu bones,
dead insects, and other abominations. But they strained
the water and boiled it and skimmed it and boiled it again;
and by design ate their fill and drank to satiety because
they knew that great strength was wanted for this running
fight with the ugliest of deaths.
They approached the ordeal calmly, for they had mastered
the consideration of the chances, and they had the gold ;
and the possession of the red metal fathered a new hope,
making them look not to to-morrow, but to a week hence,
a month hence, when all this battling should be overpast.
Then followed three days of struggling against heat and
thirst, and overburdens and despair—times when Lawler
wanted to abandon everything except the tucker, and Billy
agreed to abandon everything but the food and the gold.
The metal weighed nearly forty pounds, and in the last
stages of their fight every pound seemed a ton.
On the third afternoon Lawler, who had his share of the
gold, his water-bag, some canned meat, the condensed
milk and the ridiculous patent yeast, suddenly stopped,
cursed the weight of the gold, and threw it into the dumps
of porcupine grass.
Billy hesitated a moment; then stooped and recovered
the parcel and walked on with it, loaded like a mule; and
Lawler’s eyes flashed crazy hate.
They reached a belt of mulga and extracted water from
the root? and then essayed to eat; but were too weary, and
fell asleep sitting up, with the meat between their teeth
and in their hands.
At about midnight and moonrise Billy awoke from the


3-0 TRUE EVES AND THE WHIRLWIND
ai:S^r aUSt “ n “ d f ° U " d a'™ half-
“ Don’t sav thaf ° 4 4 morrer . Bill.”
there’s " *« ‘ h ™Rl>-.h e „’s water where
Water or no water, Bill I’m d
don’t want to move or feel an Jh d ° n .' Im full ~ 1
He dozed again - and Bin T * again -”
ness in his mental
-ulga, from UP / nd d ° Wn in the
again, and wrestled with his Wl beltand back
the dawn replaced biB love until
All that day they remained ? ~P hs and tbe cold moon,
shade of the belt, and Billy dug mLy ro't *****
them, and Lawler dozed as i fhf. ° tS and draine d
sciousness again. would never come to con-
At night Lawler was still In ci-
on the night before and laceratedT’ walked as
thoughts of home, telling himself that h° T* ° ld
take the track to-morrow Thl d i he ’ &t east » must
a chance of safety. ' h deay seeme d like losing
At moonrise the first wind they had fc nn ,
began to blow over the seas ofnl i“ k for a week
refreshed. Suddenly the wind h Law,er awoke
they thought they aTeth^cT- 0 and
Billy stopped to listen and Lawlertt \ i Umping ’ 80 that
The wind veered south again Up ° nkis elb ow.
but m a moment it came to them* r.l • th y ~ ost the sound,
westerly than before. ’ P “ ner Wlth the stronger
‘‘Thump! thump! thump-thump! ”
V °The


two, I’d say it was a battery. But it’s neither five
nor ten head. ”
“Thump! thump! thump-thump!”
“It’s a battery—it’s a little three head mill! That’s
it.”
Lawler sat up. “I b’lieve yr right. . . , Gord luve
me—it is a three ’ead—an’ we didn’t ’ear it before because
first, there was no wind our way, an’ they’ll have on’y
enough water to work half a shift a day.”
They stood up together, very excitedly, and listened for
the beats, praying that the westerly wind might not stop
blowing.
All night they heard it; and at dawn they looked for
signs of it—but there was naught around them but an
unbroken sea of scrub.
Then Billy climbed the highest mulga he could find and
saw to the west a bald hill.
“That’ll be it,” said Lawler. “ Wind from the west
hill in the west —the battery’s behind the hill.”
It looked so near that they felt like running to it, but
the distance was deceptive and their burdens delayed them •
and for four hours they staggered on, bathed in the cold
perspiration of weakness, before the limit of the mulga
was reached. Another two hours of titanic endeavour
brought them tremblingly to the hill top, and then they
almost forgot the deadly weariness in the sight that lay
before them. The western slope of this iron hill was
dotted with the tents of a hundred men— there were a
score of windlasses and dumps marking prospecting shafts;
a condenser on the shore of a little salt lake at the foot of
the hill; and near the condenser the three head battery,
whose noise had saved them, clanking on its ««« and
thumping on its dies, and driven by a coughing oil engine.
On the flat that spread westward from the Ink* there
appeared a dazzling whiteness as of a new deep fall of
snow, but it was only the desert sand covered with finely
powdered quartz.


“ Where Ve been cornin’ from ? ” he asked
e ° wn a X a ' n —said, “South
“ ’M—where yer eoin’ ? ”
“ Kalaleerie.”
eighty miles west! ” P • Kalaleen s nigh
“ Xavier Quinn ? ”
ba “ ory °” t “ , “ e - h ' Mill.”
“Xave! Dick!”
“Is he here?”
is 1-H». XavZlL e r; h '''‘ r*’ Th« ■.=
y • ve these two chaps want yer ”
JtT *° ,I,e "' Bi “>' ”“ M a day . s
“ Why—be the holy—it’s Lawler! ”
1 fiSt ’ mate - An ’ here’s Billy.”
Come with yoiTtomltenl^ ’ An ’ * he have grown-
ssst'sztsr- *
„ v J 1 , eVer th ° u f ht I>d see you again.”
** miles
meet until we die.” ShtlCk t(> the^ame we’ll
Didn’t think we’d cpa ft,.
Lawler; “we near done a ”° m ° re ’” Said
theiHuck^ut ° rSe?. tZ rf >1” W


I took this thrack from Kunesland. An’ how’ve ye done ?
Are ye shtiff? ”
“ No, Xavier,” replied Billy for both of them. “ We’ve
got about four hundred ounces between us,”
“Have yer that? Good min! An’ did yer get all of
it?”
“ No, there’s more there—but we were near to a perish,
and it’s only the noise of your mill that brought us
through.”
“Well, well,” said Quinn reflectively. He addressed
the crazy battery, “So y’are good for something, are
ye? . . . ’Tis no good crushin’ with that. The ingine
do be always breakin’ down an’ the water givin’ out, or
the salt makes a schale on me plates—’tis some wan thing
or other all the time.”
“ Is it your own, Xave? ”
“ No—’tis for a company in the east—an’ th’ manager
comes t’morrer an’ I’m goin’ out back again.”
“With us?”
“ Glad to have ye,” he shook hands with them again,
and added chaffingly: “ Shure there do be no woman to
prevent you goin’ this thrip, Billy?”
“No. Last time I stayed for the woman’s sake— and
now for the woman’s sake I go.”
“Well then! well then! . . . Now climb ye into me
bunk, Dick—ye look a shtiff ’un, an’ for you, Billy, take
the other rug an’ lay you down on the floor. . . . An’ put
your gould here—ye needn’t take it to bed with you—
there’s no fear.”
He brought them each a drink, and the softening of
their gullets and the weariness that asserted itself with the
knowledge of safety and the renewal of hope, sent them
to sleep for nigh on twenty hours.
When they came back to earth again there was tea
ready and potatoes boiling in a bucket; and onions and
bread and opened tins of curried mutton, and they ate
with the appetites of children in winter.


3i4 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
fourth bSSr !? thC » ‘hat twenty-
tent with two troopers and a • • and *
card pinned on the canvas to outside a smali
branch of the Arafura Bank was oneSfrTh Rush that a
To the bank wenf + pen Por business.
and Billy bought a draft Z°SboJne **
the value of the gnld and wnt i 6 for tw °-thirds of
r s ' d -- L «’Cx h :;:“::r t Tcs
* ldut ?' b. returned
with the next dawn. ength cai »e back to him


CHAPTER LX
But Lawler’s cheeriness did not return to him with the
accession of physical strength resulting on the four days’
rest. He shunned his mates and brooded—this philoso-
phical horse-stealer, who had discovered a mild joke even
in the things that hurt him now found a pain in the
absence of privation. But this fit of depression lasted only
for a day or so, and was succeeded by an uproarious
cheerfulness that made Quinn and Billy wonder while they
laughed.
They won on an average two ounces a man a day, and
when the manager from the east came and released Quinn
of his charge, Quinn left the sound of the crazy three
head mill and joined Lawler and Billy in the alluvials.
But Quinn’s old restlessness was on him; he tnHwt
again of regions yet unknown, which would be found to
hold their “ fortin’ ” ; and he sulked when Billy remarked
that even half-ounce diggings were better than the rhanre*
of doing a perish.
For a week he sulked, and then Circumstance r-ama to
help him. The alluvial of Quinn’s Rush was almost
worked out. The population had increased to six hundred
—almost every man of the number a prospector. They
had sieved and dry-blown and “ specked ” the little tongue
of auriferous soil—they had dollied every quartz leader.
Time and place thus accordant for a new rush,, the
Final Circumstance came in the person of a little red*faced
man, who rode up to Quinn’s Rush one burning' noon,


3,6 TEUE EVES Asn the whirlwind
Qutaao™" A dLiVaT ,o ‘ d - ra,h " *°° «lUi»*ly,
Quinn’s R „f h ,. * « ■>“ Cied
immediate decision to leave for ft, P levery1 every man ~ a n
United of the swan g e r fo r l e f " Mi A fe »
the find. dla, “ ce and the direction of
“ ’Bout forty mile nor’-nor’-east an', >
lake—then seventy mile a wee bit L T C ° me t 0 a pink
miles east, an’ th’ alluvial s ° a °d twenty
-»«-««« ?■* WS ‘ ake
quartz an’ iron. ” llls flankln & ’em-hills o’
n.ome'nt'ltt” “? wanted a
resource there was the a" thiSSelf '
because a common objective meant SC,plmed arm y-
In two hours the armv nf ? C ° mmon action -
Men on camels, horses"
buggies men wheeling their all in T °" drays and
Pamd no ,o whed over hundred. “ d pre-
country; men who were frankly “ ° f trackfess
ward and visible sirrn Z swampers ”_the out-
*-«• freight of h '
to have Srs. look in at the £r” ahead
per as a consumer of water ho . S ‘ And a swam-
a camel after a w«k”dro,u ' W ° is
timber • *» » a
poverty—men who had not the mn h terr ° rs of
carriage of their swags and h a rf t 7 ° pay for the
burdens because they could not afF a Carry the heaviest
things superfluous. ff ° rd t 0 throw awa y even
*5 “XZSS £ -*-« the bank,
Thirty Mile Rush ’’ until countermand^ 6 1‘ Hundred an d
to True Eyes, giving her the a ” d then he wrot e
g g hCr the address of Quinn’s Rush.


and enclosing- a draft for almost all the balance of his
money ; for at Quinn’s Rush money takes its proper place,
which is many grades below the value of a man’s sinew.
That done, Quinn and Lawler and Billy mounted their
new riding camels, and rode off in the wake of the army.
Almost all the strong men of the expedition were well
ahead —in this ruck the three mates rode abreast of the
weaklings, of the burdened footmen, and of the old men
prospectors who were tramping patiently to possibly their
hundredth rush ; and still with hearts buoyant and heads
high facing odds greater than any military genius or
mere soldier has ever known.
There was very little water in the Pink Lake, and the
succeeding ninety miles of sludge and sand greatly re-
duced the numbers of the gold seekers. Many fell, worn
out, by the track and died where they fell— but most of
the men, on whom the heat and the burden fell heaviest,
dragged through the interminable days, hanging on to a
friendly stirrup iron, clutching some saving strap of r-nwiol
gear.
At the second great lake there was a condenser, well
equipped for a roaring trade, and at that Quinn’s face
darkened, and he muttered his doubts to Billy.
The men with plenty of money paid the shilling a gallon
demanded—the poor men waited patiently for midnight,
and stole the water they could not buy. Bitty and Quinn
aided and abetted a score of water thefts that night.
Quinn became more open in his suspicions as the two
days of a necessary spell passed, and the condenser owner
reiterated his black opinions of the track ahead.
“Billy, me man,” said he, “ ’tis odds agin there
bein’ any rush. The chap that came in with the gould—
he’s not here—he didn’t come back; an’ that condenser
felly, he don’t want us to go on, an’ he’s makin’ a ’undred
pound a day sellin’ water. ”
“ It might be straight for all that, Xavier,”


31 “Mi I? UE EYES AN ° ™
kern in wit’ the gold * tWnk that fell Y that
an’ I don’t a onT d ° be
"‘Tf Z? 30 knC J ° f 3 c o nd etr be t? d °" 3 thrack
never see there ’ S many of these men will
g-et troo here!” y ° U ~ an there ’ s P len ty behind us ’ll never
‘‘f/ve 3£ te ? the ° rOWd ’ then? ”
ereens. An’ y’rT COndenser felly into smith-
the thracks dhry ahead, an’’leV V tell ’ em all
wather he can carry and IIJ . h man take all the
o’ God.” ry ’ and then them f the Mother
“ Not leave them y
“ Vis-but we have doubts X , a \ e ~ we go too.”
careful to win troo.” b ’ the doubts ’ull make us
muci of >*** “0 , s „
-sS SSi? h “ ndered
and when the time came to Z t 6 loaded ° amels *
was thirty miles. P that ni Z ht the day’s
b«»et to' h J re «"°T ,b ' y PaSSed ‘ "«row defile
sand that changed its configuratio 3 ? de plain of
Some three hours after t ?™ g “ ratlons with the wind
of the two mountains, and fcfj? most eas terly
this place that seemed so strangeW -I™ Billy studied
memory of boyhood seems fw Y ami l ,ar —as a revived
a man in his prime. lffn and yet intimate to


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 3 «,
prised affirmative. They spoke to Quinn, who w» In-
credulous, but cautious, and refused to considTthe
possibility until they were alone.
By design they built their fire at some distance from
the many other camps; and after a hurried meal the
plan found on the man who had perished with his mate
was spread upon the ground. As Lawler opened it a
letter and a photograph fell from its folds. The oitiful
fit’ K S K ng i<^ e .f Ted ” t 0 Come back ~the portrait
of the baby Ted ” should never see.
The sight of it sobered Billy, and eased Lawler's eager-
ness-the tender touch of the unknown woman who
wa,«d tor ‘.Ted” drew them aside to, a mom J from
the burning track that promised fortune.
The three men studied the plan, and were agreed that
in these hills was the mine of the dead man ; and Xavier
deciphering some half-illegible pencilled notes, laid his
finger on the western contour of the eastern hills and
said:
“You’re all right, me boys. He’s got water marked
here, an if it’s on the mountain it isn’t a usual thing,
an yell get plenty if ye get any.”
“ We’ll go to-night.”
“Shteady now—an’ have every wan of these fellys after
ye? No, me boys ! ’tis not the way. An’ there may be
somethin’ good in the hundred and thirty mile rush,
afther all. . . . I’ll t’ink now. . . . You, Billy and Dick,
hshten. . . . T’morry I’ll go on wit’ the crowd at pickaninny
daylight, an’ don’t ye shtir a peg till near midday. Thin
ye make back for the mountain, an’ every day at twelve
one of ye come to where we crossed the pass, an’ see if
I m cornin’. An’ if ye find a good thing, an’ ye haven’t
got it purtected whin I come back, don’t shtir a finger
to me unless I come alone. ”
“ And we’ll see you in how long, Xavier? ”
“If I get on good gould— not till I’m ready; an’ if
there s nothing there—in two or three weeks. ”


J h :L r T ade Qulnn ’ S SWag ±at ni Z ht ’ gave him two
full water-bags, two dozen tins of meat and a great
damper and some flour and his blankets; for in this
uncertamty it was doubly necessary that he should fly
light, carrying little else beside food and water and the
scanty clothes he wore.


CHAPTER LXI
By pickaninny daylight, the mounted men were in motion,
and Quinn and his camel went with them. The stragglers
and the weaklings—putting off as long as possible the
beginning of another hell of endeavour—hugged the camp-
ing ground until ten o’clock. Lawler and Billy watched
them till the last man had disappeared, and then mounted
their camels and urged them along the back track.
In two hours they breasted the pass again, entered It,
found at a mile in, a sudden depression in the rocks of
about a dozen acres in extent; and in the centre, shaded
by a great eroded cave in the granite, a deep, wide pool
of sweet water.
They filled the bags, and pursued their way with diffi-
culty—the camels flinching as their hoof-pads struck the
sharp splinters of rock with which the living rock beyond
the pool was strewn. Two miles of this travelling
brought them to a gradual ascent into a change of coun-
try. The camels grunted in new-found ease as their feet
trod the drift-sand that covered a narrow passage that
extended for a thousand yards; and then the adventurers
suddenly found themselves in the wide valley of rolling
sand they had seen from the track to the Hundred and
Thirty Mile Rush; although this passage to it and the tarn
of sweet water were not visible from the plain.
They sank knee-deep in the yielding sand—it noised
about their boots, not with the sound granite sand has,
as of a woman walking in silk, but more with the quick
hissing of a snake. And Lawler, whose time was due for
y 321


3 “ true eyes and the whirlwind
b “ a " e ”'° re g ' oom >- “ ***
B ‘ Uy W “ to ask him his
sprin g i7t d ? n \“ e n “ h^,*°d Sl h 7 here ““ “ '” g ™ d
“Why, Dick? ”
“That there sand ’ud cover ver t,«f
Feel it man u r cover yer before mornm’. . . .
, ls ““ “■>
cam. up an’ covered it i„ a ', ike ,his
solid fr o„„d where the fences id A ™
year the wind font u „ . en - An the nex’
fences, as good’s new fill'd 1 ” therG stri PP ed the
fifty yards tank instid.’’ * n °° three ’ underd an ’
obstacle and hugged
hard surface an d at t Camds resented the
track of half impalpableness. t 0 retUm t 0 the
“ MthV h 6n thC drift Chan - e - Dick ?>’
s;est* -•—«o
a whTrlwlld spring V into h totf S ° f Sand the y
mountain side, a n< fon to the «’a * danCed down the
sprang to meet it and tt. nd ' sea , and the surface
regular wind P illars * it to the
“A willy-willy, Dick! ”
, . a . n , a un cock-eyed bobs they call ’em ”
The whirlwind was reolared L, 0 • .7- , -
some knowledg-e of direrf Wlnd w h lc h blew with
pass became Sve atS Tr ' f 1 fire “■*« »f the
of perhaps a year' ago sc e i' c ould see the hummocks
Mows filled L ruS“3 d „r ““ ‘ t »
the "ii^g y i B ‘“ y d” *"! ° f ,h ' s «d where
halted before a small P 'ot<! a° “’ a ° tl<! ’


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 3 * 3
“ What yer stoppin’ for ? ” snarled Lawler. His trouble
was with him that day.
“ Here’s a tree stump—it’s been cut down, I think.”
Lawler found some interest and returned to examine.
“That’s no stump. There’s no tree growin’ on this
slope like it.”
He knelt and tore away the sand from the base of the
stump, made energetic by curiosity.
“ Regulation size—six inches in circumf’rence—but not
the right height. . . . Why, ’course—the sands covered it
up a few feet an’ there’s only a foot or so sticking out."
He tore the perished bark from the stump and dug
furiously. In twenty minutes he had cleared the sand and
reached the shelving rock three feet below. He scratched
again and uncovered a pile of stones laid as an “ L ”
with the peg at the junction of the lines. *
“ What is it, Dick ? ”
“ It’s one o’ the dead men’s pegs, by God! ”


CHAPTER LXII
The direction of the “ L ” trench they followed up, and
found the other peg- of the eastern boundary of the dead
men’s claim. And by that time night was on them, and
they camped on a comparatively level part of the iron hill,
having found a broad belt of mulga for camel food.
Before noon of the next day they had discovered the
other pegs ; and returning diagonally across the area to
their camp, Billy barely escaped falling into a shallow hole
masked by new scrub. In that hole they found the
capping of a strong wide reef of iron netted with quartz
leaders, and every stone they broke was hinged with gold.
They traced the lode by the old costeens, losing it when
it dipped and was covered by alluvial, and suddenly they
came to a shaft—its dump so conspicuous against the
black iron slugs of the mountain side that their first
wonder was that they had not seen it before.
The shaft was small and the reef filled it. On this
dump every stone they broke showed gold. They de-
scended the shaft and found every inch of its forty feet
equally rich, and they made a new camp that night and
were soberly elated. Even Billy’s joy at the contempla-
tion of things achieved could not make him uproarious as
of old; behind the luck, like a shadow, was still the fact
of exile, and the dangers of the way to be trodden before
exile could cease. And he thought a little also of the two
dead men whose property they had succeeded to—of
“ Dear Ted,” whose big body dried and shrivelled under
the mulgas.
Lawler was quite ungratulatory. Since Quinn had


left them he spoke of head pains, but was nthwwtsn
silent.
But this silence was favourable to work, and they did
work—deepening the shaft, extending a drive, and dolly-
ing a rich vein—quite one-fifth gold—that had made in
the lode their first foot of sinking.
‘ ‘ Poor beggars ! ” said Billy, half to himself.
“Who?”
“The two chaps that had this claim and did the
perish.”
Lawler became suddenly communicative— his face work-
ing as he spoke, as if thought were to him a physical pain.
“They wasn’t the first either. Yesterd’y I found two
rotten pegs an’ an old shaft ’bout ten feet deep. Lousy
with gold it all was, too. An’ them pegs was twenty
years old, if they was a day.”
So there had been other perishes and other heartbreaks.
In comparison Billy’s woes were nothing, and he resumed
work almost cheerfully.
At the end of a fortnight, as they had arranged, they
crossed that hell of sand that drifted to every wind and
never knew absolute peace, and went through the gorge
and past the pool to the plain. But Quinn did not come,
and after three days’ waiting, they marked a tree near the
track with the word “DIG” and an arrow, and im-
mediately below the tree they buried instructions enclosed
in a meat-can, taking the risk of it falling into strange
hands.
Having done all they could, they returned to the claim,
whose riches and permanence they were beginning to
appreciate at the right value; and there they brutalised
themselves with incessant toil—there being nothing else
to do.
As the weeks went by the irritation of each other’s pre-
sence became a growing pain. They had drifted so much
apart that they might each be said to eat alone, and all
bushmen know that when that stage is at band madness


rise" 17 3 lhtle d ° Wn thC traCk 3nd ascendin & the last
And the winter, which was only a little less hot than the
summer, was almost past; and the hurrying spring made
the plains beyond the iron hills a wilderness of everlasting
flowers-a hundred leagues of stellar lawn; filled it with a
dominating scent of ruddy broom, and brought also some
aC °T d lefI e f. table Production that sickened the men as
they breathed it and combined with the sameness of their
diet of meat and damper to produce in them that vileness
ot blood and skin known as Barcoo Rot.
A ” old ™ then one red, loud-smelling onion-seemed
the finest thing in earth or heaven.
th 2" y Said '°? Ce > “voluntarily breaking the silence of
tneir unrelished meal:
Dick A ” blt ° f garHC rubbed on the crust would be all right,
Lawler turned on him eyes yellow and aflame with
kidney trouble and rage.
“ Who’re yer talkin’ to? Mind yer own guts an’
leave me alone.” 5
For days after that they rarely spoke to one another.
H/r/r ion Was WOrSe for mi y than for Lawler, for
he had the mental trouble of exile to face; but he had a
young hver to help him. The anxiety for the people at
home rarely ceased. Sometimes for a day concentration on
his work stopped thought, and the weariness of overwork
brought the leaden sleep of exhaustion at night, so that
next morning he was tempted to think that new habit had
come t° save him all this agony of midnight imaginings ;
that love, after all, is only a matter of use, and
emoved, or modified, like all other uses fallen into desue-
tude ; that much suffering had deadened him to further
pain; and that he could calmly accept any happening now.
nhnt m u T° ment S ° me Chance thin &~ a glance at her
photograph, the sudden discovery of the date— destroyed
all this unnatural calm, and his soul began to cry within


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 327
him for a vision of her—as his arms formed themselves to
her shape to clasp the midnight air.
When the month of birth came there was no rest for
him—sleeping or waking. When he came to his meals
physical hunger conquered physical nausea of the sameness
of the diet for a moment; and then the memory of her
came back to him, and he put the meat from him in disgust
and was no more ahungered.
The longing for human companionship made him talk
aloud to the rocks and the mulga —to even the morose
camels, grown more morose as they were left unworked—
to the brilliantly ugly lizards, and the particularly ugly
cat-faced “mountain devil” he had, in the hunger for a
living friend, trained as a pet.
And at their night-meal always, after half an hour’s
waking dreams of ‘ ‘ old odours and old memories and airs
of long ago,” he suddenly awoke to a consciousness of
Lawler’s murderous gaze. At first he was afraid, but as
the memories obsessed him more and more, he became
reckless of any danger, so that on the tenth night or so of
this new phase of Lawler’s crankiness he said sharply t
“ You’ll know me again, mister.”
“Ay,” said Lawler very slowly and malevolently as he
chewed his meat, “I’ll know yer again—an’ I’ll mark yer
again.”
Then they began to hate each other even for the noises
that they made while eating.
They put a cross-cut into the lode and found it to he of
great width and generally of the same value but the fact
that they were the owners of one of the finest prospects on
earth was never spoken of—they felt there was no reason
for gladness even if they had found Sinbad’s Valley of
Diamonds.
Billy knew he was in danger and yet he did not care. It
was so easy for Lawler to throw a drill down the shaft as
Billy was descending —to kill him in one of a dozen ways.


But there was always the anticipation of horror which casta
out fear more effectively than true love ever can.
. “The hahy will be born to-night and True Eyes will
die,” said he, as he worked with the energy born of i
mental riot. And he laughed, because he knew that her
death would be his end.
“ The baby was born last night and they are both dead,”
said he, suggesting horror already come ; and at that he
laughed louder than before and worked harder; so that at
night by the time he climbed the shaft all desire, all
capacity to feel or think, had gone out of him, and he lay
on the dust near the camp and looked dully at the sun
setting behind the great hill of iron, and hoped dully that
it would never rise again.
A few days after Lawler had said that he would know
Billy again his crankiness took a new turn; his desires
being toward that bottle of patent yeast he had taken from
the swag of the dead men.
His great trouble was that the yeast would not work;
seeing the variations of temperature it had been subjected
to, the fact was not surprising.
Lawler was so disappointed that he broke the silence
and asked for advice, and Billy civilly enough stated the
variation-of-temperature theory. But when Lawler, acting
on this knowledge, attempted to vary temperatures by
leaving the bottle in the sun, then dashing water over it,
and afterwards suspending it in the shaft at various
depths, Billy laughed aloud; and all Lawler’s malevolent
crankiness came back to him. And worst of all—it was a
silent malevolence—or almost silent.
Many times in the night Lawler rose and walked to the
shaft, and changed the depth of suspension of his precious
yeast. On the second night of the procedure a new
thought struck him, and he went through the perform-
ance so noisily that Billy was awakened every hour.
_ Towards the dawn a deeper sleep took possession of
him, so that to awaken him it was necessary for Lawler


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 3*9
to fall against the bunk. At which Billy, half-asleep, but
with a sense of earlier and unpunished aggressions at the
back of his brain, arose and struck Lawler on the face,
and received blows also, and so struggled out of the
unwalled shelter over the bunks.
Their blood was cooled by flowing; and after mutual
menace in the light of the waning moon they returned
growling to their sleeping-places, and lay there till dawn
watching each other narrowly. And that was the end
of the yeast craze.


CHAPTER lxiii
g-erous than a^arli^pha” ° ne more dan '
food and
They werenowreducedtot Oye shortness of supplies,
and they had so much of thp«* at ’ oatmeal > and jam,
® , little starvation would have b a ° CUrSed P rovi sions that
be ng a creature of habit often latsT T^ 01116 - But maa
the belonging-s of the , hen he does not wish to.
*«» that
of the miner to old nomenclature , S . avish Terence
and Billy, with the sense of ex so ? ,tthC “ Eureka >”
grasp of prophecy, and with as rt+i ” klm ’ called !t with a
the “ Homeward Sund SL “ as ’
how or why, one leaf of the Kb? T’ n ° I man knoweth
man addressed as “Dear Ted” h aV S unhkel y that the
by design; it is more unlikely tb* * With him
whose literature was represents I °* er dead man,
of photographs, had owned the b C,garette Packet
fragment; it is improbable that anmh Pr ° dUCed the
given them the pious leaf for th ther P ros pector had
to his compass aLwate4a° th; T^ 01 - trusts ™re
or Pagan, or undefined g “ l ° any God ~Christian,
a -nt'- *
“A £
and now Lawler found it, and was posted by' ilt


His habit of silence gave way at times to an
loquacity. He preached, recited, deduced, ranted, and
explained—he abandoned work, and Billy worked alone.
And after stating that he and Billy were great sinners, and
that Billy was the worst of the two and must be born again,
he relapsed into silence, and watched his mate with burn-
ing eyes.
Billy, being busy working like two men, and fretting
like a bride with her brand new husband on the sea
noticed Lawler and his crankiness not at all—seeking dis-
traction by petting the ugly lizard, talking to it softly, and
feeding it with scraps of meat.
Every night he debated with himself the right and
wrong of leaving the claim and giving way to his hunger
to return home ; to go lame and naked, if need be, but to
go; to run to her; to spur horse, break the hearts of
camels, and drive a steamer’s engines to bursting, that he
might be with her quickly and quell the fierce longing
that made his heart beat in his head like a steam hammer.
To combat that came the thought of that good mate
Xavier, now God knows where on the trackless sea of salt
and iron, who might come to his own the day they left ;
and when Billy also considered that before he could reach
her she would have gone through her hell—for life or death
would have won or lost the fight, he decided to allow the
honour to his absent mate to keep him there in daily
Tophet.
And having decided this, he would be seized with the
same promptings to desertion next day, and be forced to
fight anew the battle that ended always in the same way.
On a hot and windy afternoon, when the sand drifts in
the saucer-shaped valley were advancing, and whirling,
and retreating on each other, the raucous voice of Lander
perched on a great rock and publishing his religious'
mania to the mulga belt—was heard fitfully by Billy as he
ascended the shaft and almost fell back again at sight of a
naked, thin, and very miserable aboriginal nosing about


the camp. Billy called to him, and at that the black
started up m great fear and limped into the scrub.
Billy called him again, and his hunger and thirst stifling
his fear, the black man returned within a few yards of the
white man, but kept one foot behind the other ready to
turn and run. J
The white man opened a tin of meat, and the little
black eyes of the aboriginal, half-seen through his long
and matted hair, became wolfish. Billy placed the meat,
some bread, and a water-bag on the ground, and retreated;
and the black man ran to the food, carried it twenty feet
nearer the scrub, drank a quart of water, and devoured
the food to the last scrap. That being done, and the tin
having been cleaned out with his tongue and his fist,
the black was full and happy, and not then caring whether
he was to be killed or not, he suffered the white man to
approach.
In ten minutes they had made a friendship of signs
and trusted one another, and Billy, who had not heard
himself speak lately, talked much to the black, although
he knew the black did not understand. Seeing the ab-
original’s eye rest yearningly on a shirt, Billy gave it
him, and the black man donned it quite correctly. Then
seeing a few mulga branches near a tomahawk, he showed
hat he understood the combination, and cut a branch into
firewood lengths occasionally looking up for applause.
Billy smiled, and said “All right,” and left the new
labourer to his work.
He suddenly missed the voice of Lawler, and walked
a ong the mountain for some distance, but could not see
his crazy mate.
n! i an hour he returned, and found that the insatiate
nigger had abandoned wood-chopping, and was eating
something he had roasted in the ashes. Billy, experienc-
ing the fear of the losing of that hideous pet which had
been so much to him, whistled for the lizard. Then the


black fellow understood, grinned, and held the fragments
of the mountain devil to his patron.
The white man, motored by a sudden fury, stepped
towards the tomahawk, remembered, turned and fled.
Up the mountain he went to its backbone, and from
there looked at the salt lake to the west of them, choking
back this little trouble which was more than a great
sorrow. The sun had set, and the darkness closed
quickly, but the man stood there a lonely figure, the
shell of a man—almost as unreal as the shadowy lake
below him—the ghost of a once great tidal sea.
*******
In a room of a cottage two thousand miles away the
nurse placed the new baby on True Eyes’s arm, saying;
“ It’s a beautiful boy, my dear. ... So go you to
sleep and forget.”
“ But you’ll telegraph to his father, nurse? ”
“ To-morrow.”
“ No—to-night.”
“ The telegraph offices will be closed.”
“To-night—to-night! —let him know, and he’ll come
home.”
“ It’s like a man to stay away, my dear. Selfish brutes
—that’s what they are.”
“ He isn’t—oh ! —he isn’t.”
“ Then he isn’t —I won’t worry you—and I’ll telegraph
to-night.”
“ God bless you ! ”
“There! there! don’t cry. You ought to thank God
it’s a beautiful baby. Now go you to rest, and I’ll send
the telegram.”
“And God bless Will, and baby, and me, and mother,
and all.”
* * *


334 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
Upon the backbone of that iron hill their love and
ngmg annihilated space, and her presence there seemed
very
1 the u Ckim T and mone y and Power,” cried Billy to
the thick night. It isn’t worth it. I’ll come back to
y , True Eyes 111 take the track to-morrow. ”


CHAPTER LXIV
Lawler returned to the camp quite convinced of the
necessity of Billy being born again. His religious exalt-
ation had been replaced by the calmness of the exe-
cutioner, and every executioner knowing that his
occupation has legal sanction—does not inquire into
the morality of killing a man for gain, and is surprised
at the injustice of the unpopularity of his business.
However, Lawler was perfectly satisfied of the justice
and kindliness of killing Billy, and he strengthened his
resolve with a madman’s cunning.
When he returned the camp was in darkness. The
camp fire had died down, and the aboriginal, having
eaten all he could find in the camp, had lighted a fire
of green sticks between his own legs, and crouched over
it—full, happy, and asleep.
Lawler silently secured the tomahawk, keeping as he
did so his eyes upon the crouching figure of the man who
wore Billy’s shirt.
One stroke of the hatchet clove the skull, and the black
man died, full and happy, and without a pang. Then
Lawler wrapped the body in a blanket and carried it down
the mountain side, and buried it on the edge of the drift,
one hundred feet below. He had not once looked upon
the face of his kill, he had simply carried out a business
arrangement which promised well for Billy, and as hehad
no thought of the presence of another man in the camp
his crazed reasoning accepted this slaying as the slaying
of his mate.
As he climbed the hill again he saw little flames spring-


336 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
we g nt P o a n! that ** T fri^d .
thought he td sraLVhisTotrs l 6 ** 7 ““ he
the shelter, and said very kin d ,y-for lT* “ der
‘ion of going home had softened 7 him • aPPy antlcl P a *
hO 7 *—■
Billy halloed a ff»r I,- ’ ran d °wn the mountain,
this new phase of mania— m ” Ch perple * ed “
to he Jm we« » r W " L ? Wler
homeward way, ' ream °f the
*^z*!ZiTr not - troubi *
to clear out as soon as he is fidf 7 f mgger is
until he is empty But he was nf .T ? retUrn a^ain
for repeating to himself “To-dayT to day f’^lad'f 6 '
htnt sotehearte. to tbe „as yma l Sots^S
black patch upon the sand. He turned to ,7- 3
Eawler’s fear at seeing the dead alive. aying ’ a ° d
All day the winds covered the „ .
again; but Billy did not stay to see He ”" 00^ U
to do, as fairly he might have done to r H prom P ted
and strike oui for home and hTI T! murde ™
He searched every rock and e ,7! yCt he didn,t-
last he found Lawler bleeding SCrUb ’ and at
and only half-consdous g 3 *° Und in the throat »
of i S ZT* V lnt£ °Z bhMta *
him there, and Jowing hfs
he
For all the curses, and finding that Lawler was too


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND m
weak to move, he took the wounded man on his
and carried him to camp, and on the way Lawler revived
a little and tried to bite his Samaritan.
Billy recognised despairingly that there was no hope of
an immediate return home; and he tended Lawler with
all the more gentleness because he often desired to curse
the stricken man—to strike him—to abandon him.
The winds blew strongly and variably, and on the second
day after Lawler’s attempted suicide there appeared a
trough in the gorge where there had been yesterday a
mound, and in the trough they saw a black object—half-
shapeless in the distance. Lawler pointed a bloodless
hand at this, and croaked out:
“Cover it up—cover it up!” and Billy took a shovel
and heaped the sand again over the man Lawler slew.
The wind changed in the night, and next morning they
saw the body again, black, but inoffensive, because it was
rapidly drying. Lawler became hysterical at the reappear-
ance, and at that Billy, with infinite labour for the
available timber was a mile or so away—prepared some
long stakes, and drove them into the firm sand around the
corpse, and covered it with sand again, so that the winds,
wherever their direction, would serve to build the barrow
higher.
So for a fortnight he tended Lawler, who was conciliatory
and full of mad hatred by turns; and one morning he awoke
when the sun was beginning to flood the changing gorge
and the impassive mountain with light, and there were
voices on the hillside—and the new men were Xavier
Quinn and another.


CHAPTER LXV
Billy, me man—l’m back with you.”
“ Xavier! at last! Old Xave ! Shake, old man! and
shake again. Where’ve you been? We thought you’d
done a perish. ”
‘ ‘ Plenty time for that, mate. The young felly here is a
shychst with a tellygram for ye—an’ he have left his boike
out on the plain.”
Billy clutched the telegram, tore it open, and read :
“A son born last night—when do you return?” He
got his breath again, turned away without a word and
walked to the hill top.
Below him lay the great dry lake, softened by its daily
mirage, and around it the red and blue of the limitless
gardens of wild flowers challenged sun and sky.
“Luck has come to live with me,” he said exultantly.
True Eyes well, and Xavier here, -and the mine a
certainty, and I can go home to-morrow.”
And then came another doubt to him. The telegram
was nearly three weeks old—she might be dead. He
lacerated himself with speculation, and when he returned
to the camp nearly all the exultation had left him, and he
was in the clay again.
“ Ye aven’t paid the man for yure wire,” said Quinn.
I beg your pardon,” said Billy—not yet used to the
sound of his own voice in conversation. “ How much ? ”
“ Hundred ’n fifty mile from the telegraph line,” said
the cyclist; “it ’ull be a tenner.”
“ And a tenner to take a reply back.”


The cyclist flushed. “ You’re a good sort, Mr. Pagan,"
he said.
“ Did you know the message ? ”
The cyclist nodded. “ May you have a dozen.”
“Man! you brought new life to me. ...”
“’N’ I have some that’s worth tin telegrams,” said
Quinn, “an’ it’s good whiskey, too.”
Into Lawler’s face came a look of interest. “ Gimme a
second mate’s, Xave, before I peg out.”
“ You peg out! —I’ll give you three snifters to keep on
livin’! ”
“ Gimme one now.”
Quinn poured the whiskey into a pannikin, saying:
“ ’Tis a big dose ye’ll have, Dick, me man—no drink like
the wimmen do be sippin’ out of scint bottles, but a big
shecond mate’s nip, an’ well above the pritty—tho’ there
do be no pritty mark on a pannikin.”
Lawler drank the great nobbier, and lay down again,
and the colour marched to his face, and the religious look
went out of his eyes, and a human expression came in.
The cyclist agreed to wait until next day, so that all
might make for the township at Lake Coonowra together,
and Quinn beckoned Billy away to the shaft, and they sat
on the dump and talked.
“We kin take the thrack t’morrer wit’ our fortin’s
made.”
Billy smiled —it seemed as if Quinn had been con-
tinually saying that for many years.
“ Don’t shmile, ye scut! ’Tis made this time. A big
hard lode, an’ soft country, an’ all of it worth free
ounces —there’s fifty t’ousand a man for the free of us.
An’ ye’ve dollied over five hundred ounces, an’ we have that
to keep a shtiff upper lip on till we sell.”
“ We’ve got no lease.”
“ We’ll have wan. We’ll put in new pegs this day, an’
we’re keepin’ the shyclist man here till to-morrer, whin we
go, an’ no man can get ahead of us.”


340 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
“ Where did you meet the cyclist ? ”
“ Camped twinty miles away on the wrong thrack. An’
he told me of the tellygram, an’ I brought him back and
we found yure plant, an’ we left his boike and hobbled my
baste out there on the plain.”
“ And you had no luck on your trip ? ”
“ Man ! there was no rush—’twas the thrick of the con-
denser man to bring us poor divils along to buy the
wather. ”
“The dog! ”
“ Tis a dog he was—an’ minny a man has died this
rush, an’ will see his girl’s breasht no more. . . . There
was four I berrid wit’ me own hand.”
“ A pity you didn’t bury the condenser man.”
“ He was the furst thing we looked for whin we found
the thrick. Tin min was elected to hang him, an’ we had
the rope an’ a foine choice of threes ; but gone he was—
shkipped clean an’ not a thrack to find him.”
“ And you went on ? ”
“I found a little wather in a cane-grass swamp, an’ I
prospicted for tin miles round, an’ all the time I got tin
pinnyweights. ”
“We’ve enough for all, Xave.”
“Thrue, we have—be reason of me good mate Billy.”
“ And Dick.”
Tis little Dick have done; he was beginnin’ to be
crazy whin I left.”
“ D’ye think he’ll come round all right? ”
“ He will be as good a man as we are—whin he have a
good dhrink. He did that perish wit’ you, an’ he was tuk
right off his dhrink, and thin he got into these mountains
wit’ that gorge there. ”
“You’ve had a talk with him, have you? ”
“ I have—while you was actin’ the goat wit’ your tele-
gram on the top o the mountain,” He glanced slyly at
Billy, and that detected young man blushed. “ An’ don’t
you be ashamed of ut. ’Tis a good an’ lovin’ woman she


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 341
must be . . . an’ I’m glad you married that time, tho’ I
wanted you wit’ us at the Peak.”
“ Well! what did Dick say ? ”
“Well he said a lot —ravin’ in a quiet black shnake
shtyle. He doesn’t hate you, but he finks you’d be
betther if you wint t’hiven for a shpell, an if he had a
chance now he’d thry to send you there . . . wifout any
animosity to you, of course.”
“I’m not going to chance being killed by a lunatic,
Xave. . . . I’ll get away from him. . . . Poor old Dick 1
He was a good mate once.”
“Of course he was, whin he was human, an’ will be
agin whin he gets human agin. . . . ’Tis the mountain
and no dhrink that have brought him his religion.”
“Do you really think his religious mania would go if
we left here and went to a town and got good tucker?”
“ Sure as you’re settin’ there, ’tis so. He love God
more than God love him, an’ that’s bad—thim one-sided
affairs always is.”
Billy laughed. “ You’ve a funny theology, Xave.”
“ Never mind me feology. ’Tis thruth what I say. . . .
The love of heaven taken to excess is a dam sight worse
than beer ... an’ ’tis nearly as bad as bein’ jealous of a
woman . . . lovin’ her, an’ not been sure of her.”
“Ifyou brought back only ten pennyweights of gold
you’ve brought back tons of philosophy, Xave.”
“ Maybe—maybe. ... An’ now to put in new pegs,
me boy, an’ shtart to-morry at pickaninny daylight”


CHAPTER LXVI
Next morning long before sunrise the four men moved
slowly down the dun-grey mountain side, and the camels
that carried them protested loudly against this break of
their two months’ rest.
R caching the plain, they found the bicycle and Quinn’s
camel, and Billy gave his telegram to the cyclist and,
h ™ ng f°, mon 7’. handed him ounces of the dollied
gold, which paid him doubly.
mudl ’ ,ay ’” Said thC ° yCliSt ’ ° bjeCting weakJ y. “ this is too
“ No ' a f WOrd >” Billy. “Give him a whiskey
before he starts, Xave.” 3
“Thert-s «, nobbier, left. One for the shyclist, and
one for yon an- me Billy, if we wa „, it , a „/ , hre ’ e fot
Uick ... an he s shure to want it. ”
The sick man’s eye brightened as he took the whiskey,
Tk k d ‘ He dinked the Pannikin against
the bottle and wished “ Here’s luck ! ” to Billy.
Then the cyclist bade them good-bye and mounted his
battered machine. His frayed tyre-covers crackled for a
minute in the salt-bush, and he decreased quickly to a
moving mote; going where there was no road, finding
dlreC f tl .° n ' n an instant; a brave quick man
pedalhng swiftly from one set of horizons to another.
ti Jl hC mat f s P ushed on in his wake, but compara-
tively slowly; although the speed astonished the long-
ested camels out of their superciliousness, and Lawler
improved rapidly now that they had left the lunacy of the
mountains and had come to the reasonable plain. In


three days they were at the township. At Coonowra they
found a boom like unto the boom days of the Iron Range.
A boom is a period when people buy at above the value
of the thing bought; and this boom would not have been
had there not been a telegraph line to Coonowra. For
man is a hurried animal who believes in a telegram the
news he would disbelieve in a letter.
“ ’Tis the wire ’ut does it,” said Quinn. “ Bounce
’em, an’ let ’em think there’s no hereafter to buy in, an’ be
the curse o’ Crummle, they’ll give you diments for camel
dung.”
They applied for their lease, and Coonowra was full of
their new find ; and there being many English buyers, the
mates had offers. And Quinn, become by a miracle
violently business-like, said that his price was “a
hundred and eighty t’ousan’—fifty t’ousan’ a man, an’ in
cash. An’ the other bit will give a few t’ousand for the
people of the man who did the perish. An’ no long options
—tin days to inspect. An’ tin per cent deposit.”
So Quinn went back to the claim with a buyer, and
Billy, having received a wire that no ill had come to True
Eyes, telegraphed every day while he waited for Quinn’s
return.
And Dick Lawler was violently drunken for more than
a week, and grew stronger as he drank, and then
suffered a kindly recovery for four days ; so that at the
end of a fortnight from their arrival in Coonowra, when
the deal was on the way to completion and a fat deposit
on the purchase money lay in a bank at the capital, Dick
Lawler was well again—cheery and strong, and in his
right mind.
The three mates had a very solemn, joyous half-hour
together before the coach left to take Billy to the coast,
and at the last moment Lawler took Billy aside and said:
“ I won’t say I’m sorry, Bill —but I was dotty, an I
didn’t know me good mate. An’ me drunk put me right


Eym- d y.r’- a "'-^"’ re * man sackin’ fme
He uf S ‘ lllr,^ flt ’ D,ck - you’re my mate; put it there!”
He held out his hand and Lawler gripped it
“ You’re a white man, Bill. An’ I ’eard ’bout the
“ kid°’’ C * ain>t thC laSt ’ BaL An ’ ’ ere ’ S the
of m , y S hand ° ne of the specimens
of golden quartz man has ever beheld, the body and neck
qulrtz ° g reSting ° n a baSC ° f Very cr y sta Uine
DiCk ’ wo ” d ' rf “>' And there’s twenty
“No, nineteen, Bill.”
“ Where did you get it ? ”
m. < , l n? Un . nO ~T omeW i iere “ the Ran ? e when I was loafing
round— time I was dotty.” ®
“ The youngster ’ull keep this for Uncle Dick’s sake.”
Lawler flushed again with pleasure.
“Unde Dick! Eh—not bad neither .. . there’s a
good show somewheres there. Think I’ll go out again
after it. . An* I’ll take whiskey with me lis trip. fT
WeU, good-bye, Bill I was a dotty cow-forgei
*I 6 for &°t ten it, Dick. Good-bye, Xave—for a spell.
Good-bye, Dick I’ll write to both of you. ”
Ihe six horses, conspicuously well fed among- the
wretched animals around them, and who suffered almost as
much as the men-their masters, took the coach through
the salmon gums as if they had a feather at their tails


CHAPTER LXVII
“ And now we hear the East a-callin’—
Callin’ on the Iron Range,
Callin’ on the rattling train,
Callin’ on the clay-pan—
Never leave your love again.
As in a dream to Billy the coach won through its three
days of salt-bush, livid lake, and slugged rise to where the
railway had pushed its limit of civilising road, and the loco-
motive took him through thirty-six hours of sunlight and
starlight to the sea ; and when he saw the sea again he
thought of Lawler’s half-prophecy at their last sight of it,
and thanked the love and luck again that had brought him
to salt-water with the certainty of a fortune at his back,
instead of the loam of the wilderness pressing heavily, but
unfelt, upon his face.
He had to wait three days for a steamer, but the ship
came at last and brought him to Melbourne in a dawn; so
that he saw True Eyes before she was well awake, and
kissed her madly, and told her that his anxieties were over
and that he need never leave her again.
And Mary listened and returned his caresses, and
thanked her conventional appreciation of God as Billy had
thanked the god he called Luck, and was very happy and
believed that surely this could never have an end.


CHAPTER LXVIII
To pi ove that I do love thee, order me to do something impossible ’*
There can be love without money, and there can be love
not so unselfish, but more cloudless, with it. Those days
when True Eyes had said of the scarce butter that she
didn t like butter; and Billy, equally illogical, had said that
he hated butter, but that he would like to see True Eyes
eat it because he loved her, had taught them for each
other’s sake not to despise money.
True Eyes, flushed with the joy of possession, of buying
the house she had regarded yearningly for a year, of
knowing that enough money to be the father of an income,
had been settled on her, cried :
“Oh ! isn’t it splendid not to have to count the pennies?”
And Billy replied that it was the world’s shame and his that
she should ever have felt the necessity.
In the ideal world—and the world is rapidly fulfilling the,
ideals of the past, only to have itself set the task of fulfill-
ing the ideals of the present—only the people who cannot
love shall feel poverty. On second thoughts it is well to'
say that they are the only people who feel poverty now.
To the lover there is glory in the necessity of the beloved,
and the loving beloved is glad to have the necessities in.
such company.
Love there can be that has never been tried as there can
be strong steel which has never been tested to its break-
ing strain ; but happier those who know the tested steel.
To each of these was known the best of strength each
had gone alone into darkness and sailed upon rivers and


looked upon a lion, and having stolen and spoiled and
robbed, had brought the prize to the beloved. The
Whirlwind, returning with the quick-won gold, which
is the gift of the wind and often goes like it, and True
Eyes with the baby won of the pangs of hell the guer-
don of long and quiet endurance and much steadfastness.
And that the testing had been forced on them and that they
were unable to escape it did not alter their appreciation
of each other’s achievements.
They planned anew for their new house, and altered it
and gilded it in thought above its merits ; so that if every
stone of it was not happy the absolute insensibility of in-
animate solids is thereby proved. And there were pigeons
which picked the mortar from the brick houses adjoining
and so brought curses on themselves from the owners
of the houses ; while their iris wings, flashed in sun rays,
brought pleasure to True Eyes. And there were pepper
trees and magnolias and pittosporums and lawns, and the
children joyed among these so much that True Eyes dis-
covered that the new surroundings were prolonging the
children’s lives; although they had been rude of health
and strident of lung from their birth.
They altered, they bettered, they made worse, any place
that was capable of alteration. In the new-found energy
of owning something, they were ready to remove the dull
earth; to take an unhappy tree from one spot where it did
ill and plant it joyously in another place where it died.
And True Eyes’s father came every day and gravely took
the place in hand, warning his daughter and Billy away as
being frivolous people who had failed to understand the
true significance of property. He bought a wheelbarrow
to remove things, and then the children clamoured for real
barrows, which are not purchasable in shops; and True
Eyes’s father built three toy barrows in a week, and there
was a procession of barrows doing unnecessary removals
for half a day.
The money for the mine in the Sandy Gorge was paid


over, and Billy found the woman who had written to “ Dear
Ted ” asking him to come home, and paid her her share,
and then he settled down to staying at home, and in two
weeks he found he was counting the hours.
True Eyes came to him as he sat under a big mulberry,
now fully fruited. Momentarily a black and bloated berry
fell from the tree, staining the grass first burgundy and
then black.
“You’re dull, dear.”
“ Thinking—old girl.”
“ Thinking what? ”
“Thinking this isn’t a man’s work.”
“ What isn’t—waiting? ”
“Yes, waiting.”
“Why don’t you write? ”
“ That’s negative. I was a man of action for nearly
seven years—l want to do. ”
A fat mulberry fell on her shoulder and stained the
dress.
“Those things stain like paint,” she said.
“ Come closer, dear, and I’ll take the stains.”
She moved to him, and a berry fell on his hat.
“ Prophet! ” said Billy humorlessly.
“ What do you want to do, dear ? ”
“Something decisive. . . . I don’t know, True Eyes.
Something. A man’s work. ”
“ What are you thinking of doing? ”
“Well . . . there’s a new rush at Klondyke.”
She moved from him. “ Where’s Klondyke? ”
“ North America.”
She rose to her feet quickly. “You want to leave
me. . . . Yes, you do. Well, you shan’t. ... A man’s life!
What about us? ... I’m not going to cry. . . . No,
don’t kiss me. You shan’t go.”
Billy looked after for a moment. Then he went to the
wood-house for an axe. Then he returned to her.
“ I won’t think of it, dear girl, if you object.”


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 349
“Object! I was all those months alone. . . . Haven’t
I earned you, dear ? ”
“ But I must do something.”
“ Find something to do here.”
“ I’m going to,” he said half-jocularly and half-ashamed;
“ I’m going to fell that tree.”
He then attacked with a vigour that amounted to male-
volence a quite inoffensive gum.


CHAPTER LXIX
“ Who rides from one who loves him best;
And he rides slowly home again
Whose restless heart must rove for rest ”
TREE-felling soon lost its charm, and Billy’s love of action
forced him to the city, where, in the first afternoon, he
lost a few hundred pounds as the result of dabbling in a
stock he did not know. That quieted him for exactly two
days, and then he returned to the city and opposed a bear
movement in a stock on information of the kind which is
given to millionaires on race-courses by knowing persons,
who, as a result of their knowingness, cannot afford to
shave or wear whole boots.
But all this was not action. Even winning in such
circumstances would have been tame, and he was restive
and ill at ease all that afternoon, and wandered about the
garden and aimlessly destroyed some palings with his
knife, so that Mary saw his restiveness and in great haste
proposed they should go to the theatre, although it was
not their usual night.
He looked admiringly at her as they prepared to leave
the house, but in the cab he became quite dull again—
obsessed by his hunger for new places and new actions }
and True Eyes, not knowing what to say, held fast to his
sleeves as if that could keep him with her.
Luck sent them to an opera full of action and martial


movement, and the nervous strength of the adventurer
pulsed to the drum-beats and started to the trumpets, and
did desire most mightily to go forth again and dare the
new for the pleasure of the daring.
What a strange ability man has to forget the ill and
remember only the good! The adventurer’s desire, taking
a bird’s-eye view of the past struggle for fortune, saw
only the rose and chrome of the track ; the making camp
as the velvet stars came out, the striking camp in the
roral dawn; the gallop through knee-deep grass, “where
the horse has all the pleasure of the rider on its back ”;
the making of a solitary audience for the gorgeous playing
of the bower-bird ; the endless procession of the stars,
rising seemingly for the one wanderer; the illimitable
spaces made only for him who moved in them; the joy
of chasing something to be killed when caught, and of
finding something to take a risk in; ignoring the camel
stench, and the waterless track, and the burned-out con-
denser, and the food-hunger, and the water-hunger, and
that home-hunger, which is the worst of all.
Surely of all unreasonables—the most unreasonable is
man. Compared to him woman is a very fixed star of
steadfastness.
A strong man is only a man of one idea when he
has not the capacity for two ideas at the one time. The
very nature of great nervous energy is to be diffuse,
prodigal, extravagant. It is the nature that fears most
the probability of poverty, that descends deepest to the
meannesses of thrift. So Billy, whose energy was re-
newed every day, planned a dozen schemes at once; to
go forth and do and dare and win (and always for
the last time, of course), and then to return to True
Eyes (who would wait patiently at home for him, and
be, like himself, for ever young) and live happily ever
after!
And when he thought of her anxiety and her


loneliness in his absence he explained it away, as a
murderer can prove beyond cavil that he was always
actuated by proper motives ; and when he thought of
the discomforts and dangers of the new tracks he closed
his eyes and did not see them.


CHAPTER LXX
‘ For a terrible thing is habit,
It soaks to your bones and your soul.”
The Star of Clontarf Bill,
The new nature was not to be denied. He made
many journeys, days distant, and returned conscious
that departures and returns had no sense in them. In
the succeeding weeks Mary tried to avoid the inevitable
by proposing various hobbies, and at last she prompted
her father to advocate politics. She seconded him, but
with little enthusiasm, for she saw that Billy’s thoughts
were far away, winning something from a fight with
first principles.
“You’re not listening to father,” she said a few minutes
later. “ What are you thinking of, dear? ”
“ I was thinking of the North where the New Rush is.
I’d like to see that country.”
She dropped his hand and rose—all her patience gone.
“ You don’t care for us. We’re too quiet for you. You
want hurry and bustle and loud things. ... Oh t you
—you —selfish, selfish man. We do all we can to please
you, and you don’t care. ... No ! Don’t come near me,
you think I’ll be always yielding. ... Go away . • .
go to a war and be killed, and then you’ll be satisfied.”
“ Dear girl! Ido care. I ”
She eluded him and ran into the house.
“ Now, what’s all that about? ” asked Billy.
“ I can’t tell,” said the old man, who could have told
very correctly.
2 a 353


“ I don’t want to go to a war. There’s nothing in-
dividual in it.”
“It’s all the same to her, my lad—you want to go
away.”
“The best of women are unreasonable,” quoth Billy
oracularly, not that he knew or believed in what he was
saying, but because it comforted him.
“There are men like that, too,” replied Mary’s father.
“ I think I’d better follow her.”
“ I think so, too,” said the old man coldly.
Billy went into the house, divided between being
aggrieved and the consideration of himself as an egoistic
brute.
But though he made his peace then by promising to
stay, both of them knew that the promise could not be
kept.
Every morning brought further news of the Rush in
the North, and Billy became more restive and True Eyes
more impassive as these outside influences prepared them
for the inevitable.
Then at last he said, with the boldness of shame con-
fessing an unnatural appetite, that he must go in a week,
and his impassive wife said no word.
Four days after that there was a paragraph in the daily
papers giving some wild particulars of a fabulously rich
discovery of gold, and at that Billy started up and said he
would go at once.
True Eyes offered no opposition beyond saying :
‘‘ I think it’s only right to tell you that baby is ill. Do
you think you ought to go ? ”
For a moment he hesitated, and then she saw she had
lost the last chance. His selfishness had won, as selfish-
ness usually does, when pitted against sacrifice.
‘ ‘ Let’s see the little chap. ”
She brought the baby, and Billy felt the small hands and
the fair head with a hurried professional air.
“ He’s all right, dear—just a little feverish.”


“ But he’s pale, Will, and he hasn’t eaten his food **«■«
morning.”
“ It’s only a passing trouble. Send for the doctor.”
“You won’t stay then? ”
“ I would if I could do any good by it, but the little
chap’s all right. Send for the doctor. I’ll see him on my
way to town and ask him to call. And I’ll have to clear
out, dear. I’ve a lot to do. I’ll send a cab for the
baggage. Good-bye. ”
She tolerated his kiss and did not return it; but his
selfishness blinded him, and he only kissed her again and
went away puzzled.


CHAPTER LXXI
True to the contradictoriness of him, before the ship had
turned her nose due north from Keppel Bay, he felt a
strange new consciousness crying to him to return.
“ She’s right,” said he, breathing even this divine air of
the tropic night sadly; “I’m unsatisfiable. When I’m
with them I want to beat to open sea, and when I’m away
from them I m hungry for the little heaven she makes of
home. . . . Never mind ! this will be the last—l’ll leave
her never again. ”
He landed a few days later and struggled up to the new
rush and found it much overrated, which is the fashion of
all rushes; and then he had such work as his soul loved-
long tracks, new tracks, hard tracks—tracks two hundred
miles from a post office. He met the rainy season, and for
days rode in damp discomfort, wet from the skin outwardly
by the sweats provoked by the tropical air although no sun
shone for days together; and wet from the outside in-
wardly by the tropical rains that defied weather gauges
and registered themselves in feet. By this procedure and
its consequences he learned to ride naked to the belt, and
so save a dry shirt for the night camp ; and from the ex-
perience of sitting all night, foodless, in driving rain, hold-
ing the bridle of a hungry horse and waiting for the
daylight under the impression that he was on the brink of
a dangerously deep flood, and finding when that daylight
came that the river was wide and but two feet deep, and
that a comfortable camp was pitched on the other side, he
learned not to believe that stillness necessarily means
depth.


But these discoveries did not compensate for the loss of
home; and morning, noon, and night his memories spurred
him to return.
The stubborn pride that in his youth had made him an
exile so long from his father’s roof, prompted him now to
do new deeds that he might win thereby.
“ I won’t go back empty-handed,” he said finally ; and
then he wrote to True Eyes and swore the eternal love and
devotion that would have been so much more valuable and
so much easier of belief had he raced South at once to
say these things with a material tongue.
And as if to prove his belief that it is only necessary to
determine and then to proceed to do a thing in order to be
able to do it, news was brought in of a wonderful discovery
and Billy rode forty miles over rotten, spewy country and
twenty miles over stony rises, and saw the mine and bought
an option over it; and then his hands being full, he made
back coastwards as fast as quivering horseflesh could carry
him.
There was a telegraph office fifty miles from the port,
and there he halted to send a few messages to his business
connections and to True Eyes.
The clerk handed him a telegram. “Been here five
days,” he said, “and it’s bad news.”
Trebly bad news that came so tardily. The message
from True Eyes stated simply “ Baby is dying.”
And the message was five days old. In a moment his
hideous selfishness, his lust to leave his monotonous duty
of love and quietude, became patent and exaggerated.
He sent a frantic telegram in reply and raced to the coast,
cursing himself for the folly he had never seen in himself
before.
And she had said, “ The child is ill. Do you think you
ought to go? ” and he had half joked on the subject and had
promised to send the doctor. And now she was tired of it
all, weary of his insatiable appetite for new excitement;


her love might indeed be dead as the reward of these
erratic and unnecessary absences.
He waited a day for a steamer and it seemed a year, and
there was no answer to his telegram. They were being
repeated after him with less than the usual delay of hotel
keepers in such matters, but he was travelling too fast for
repeat telegrams, and therefore nothing of his punishment
was spared him.


CHAPTER LXXII
The children sat under the big mulberry, and were very
quiet. They kissed him without that delightful gabble of
question and experience they had always met him with;
and fearing greatly, he left them and entered the house.
And there he saw True Eyes become Sad Eyes—and all
the light had gone from her face as if the light of life itself
had been suddenly withdrawn.
She turned to him quietly —without passion of any sort,
without reproach, and without welcome. So that the
lead his heart had been these seven days now lost its
weight and became glacial.
“Well!” . -
“My darling—the telegram was five days late. ... I
hurried home. ...” ~
“ I told you the day you left that the child was ill.
“ I know, dear girl—l know—and how is he now? ”
“Do you think my arms would be empty if he were
alive ? The child is dead.”
“My God! ” ,
“ Your God! Your god is yourself. You walked your
own wild way, and if we all died behind you, you would
be bound up in new things and would not know.
“ Dear—dear— l’ve loved you all the same for all this
56 “You’ve loved us in a way —your way. But your love
is too weak to know without being told. If you were ill
or in trouble a thousand miles away I would know. . . .


Don’t come near me I cannot bear it To
touch you would be to touch poison . . . j„st now.”
Oh, my darling. ”
the‘S dS ’ ,f?. rds! •• • you went away I knew
the child would die ... my l ove told me so.” She was
voiceless but not tearful-all the tears of twenty years she
had shed before the baby died. y
“ ™ ay l S6 0 e him •• • d ear ?” he asked timidly.
Th S vw h li“ Jr' ■ Man ! man ! don,t torture me. . .
The chdd died four days ago, and we buried him yester-
There were no words for him to say. Vocabularies
express trivial passions and hint at great loves, but in the
CSatt * rCat *
slow d m arms ~ the strength went out of him
slowly in a few weeks And just before you left he
was learning to walk, and he could drag the heaviest
chairs about—you remember.”
He nodded, not trusting himself to speak—his heart was
m his throat choking him. Was
“Marasmus, they said it was. ... And then the
skeleton, and there was nothing left
igf brave heart and his big 1 blue eyes. . . ”
“My poor girl.”
alone D and ““ V ' y ° U left me to bear his death
alone, and put away his poor little body alone . vou
dld ■ • yoU u d ’ d you had been with me m this
black time, the love I had for you before would have been
nothing to the love I’d give you now. ... For the first
S.- y °“ ‘° d ° a thi “« -d you
uot s l tay“ med ‘ litUe dc "' “ d ,hat is I did
“I know ... you men .. . you men . . . yo u’re


selfish even when you’re brave. Your courage has got to
be sudden, so that you can’t think over it, or you run
away.”
“ Men haven’t the slow endurance of women.”
“ Are you excusing yourself? ”
“I? No! I excuse nothing. I’m sorry.”
“Sorry! Will that bring him back? Will it take
away from me the sight of his dear, puzzled, agonised
eyes, that spoke to me when he was so weak that he
could wail no more . . . when his voice was gone? . . .
My baby ! My baby ! . . . His dear eyes said to me all
the days and all the nights of his agony, ‘ mother, help
me ! . . . Why don't you help me ?’. . . And all I could
do was to carry his bones on a pillow in my arms ...”
“ What can I say, dear? ”
“Nothing .. . nothing .. . nothing. He is dead,
the little baby who was so strong. . . . His big heart, it
only kept him alive for longer torture. ... If he had
been weaker he would have suffered less. . . . And he
pleaded with his eyes to me to help him, and all I could
do . . . all the world could do . . . was to see him die.
. Who began these lies about a God that loves little
children ? . . . If there is a God, and He has power over
all, He is a cruel God who tortures babies. He makes
men’s hearts hard so that they run away from the people
who love them to seek the new sensations of an hour.’*
“My darling, I have done you a great wrong. Let
me help you now.”
“ Don’t come near me. You have done nothing to me
that I could not forgive. But the child! Do you know
that the day before he got so weak that he could not even
cry, he called ‘ daddy, daddy ’ for an hour, and all the next
day his eyes were on the door, and I know he looked for
you ; and even when he had a few minutes’ rest from the
brain trouble his eyes were on the door —and you . . .
you never came.”
“ My poor little lad.”


“He is not yours—not
now, not even the memory of
him. You gave up all that when you went awav. I was
father and mother to him.”
“ I can never ask you to forgive, dear, and I can never
hope you will forget. . . .
I’m the worst man alive.”
“Then go away. ... No. I am not harsh. I cannot
bear you near me. . . . Later, perhaps, when this is
softened. ”
“ I will wait till you send, sweetheart. I will never ask
you to come to me unwillingly. ”
“Good-bye, then. . . . Don’t kiss me. . . . Oh, mv
little baby! ” ’ y
Even then her justice was, as usual, as his exaggeration.
You re not that . . . but you’re the only man to me,
and the only man has failed me in my trouble. ... Oh
little baby ! little baby !! ” ’
She still paced the room with her arms before her in the
stiff, strained, untiring attitude in which she had carried
the dying child on a pillow through all those days and
nights of Hell.
“ What do you want me to do, dear? ”
“ I want you to go away—to leave me till I feel kinder
to you.”
“If we are not to be as we have always been, True
Eyes, I cannot bear to see you—l can’t live in the same
house. ”
So Billy did not even touch her hand, but left her in
this quiet madness of tearless sorrow, and quitted the
house.
In the garden the children came to him—they were
still subdued, although the little death was four days over-
past, but the elder girl, a bright-eyed thing of nine, kissed
him and asked him not to cry, and told him all the gossip
of their opening minds and of the wonderful things the
garden, that was their world, had discovered to them.
Master John, a youth of five, with a marvellous
imagination that earned him the reputation of a small liar


among people who did not understand children, told his
newest tale of himself.
1 ( There was a lickle boy named J acky, and his farver
did tell him not to go into the steet, and he did go into the
steet, and a big horsey was there, and he did bitted my
head yight off, and then he yunned away and I goed home.”
And fair and radiant Lucy, the baby of three, who did
not know her letters even, but pretended to be able to read,
opened an old directory and read, hinting, as she always
did for anything she wanted, in this way :
“There was a yickle dirl an’ zere name was Lucy, and
yare muvver did give her a new thilk dyess wif tucks an*
fyounces.”
Feeling this passing comedy the more by contrast with
his most enduring tragedy, Billy kissed them all in a hurry,
bade them good-bye hysterically, and went away choking.


CHAPTER LXXIII
Judas repented most when he found that the silver was bad.
“ d h ' “ - ----
Then he went to the house again to say “good-bye >•
stonJ™ fto reCClVed him u earUy; f ° r She Was now too
mly sad to even reproach him and felt that all her
emotions were for ever dead.
1 u e . mad f 3 sorrowful journey of it back to the mine and
looked with a cold eye on all the beauty of the NoS^S
had aforetime thrilled him as if it were Love or wine
fh a f IS IT® an ansesthesia to him until he rode into
at great belt of lime, where the moonlight played its
wondrous tricks and showed its silvern fantaSeJ and
there a night gallop for half a dozen miles on a hard and
6 ButTh ° hanged h 'f ana3St hesia to a wild intoxication.
But there was m him little of the old and marvellous
appreciatmn of life, even to its meanest function-for now
forth ° f h ° me and u b6aUty Was taken from him - Hence-
forth, there were to be no contrasts.
Ke reached the new Manoa, whose purchase had taken
nearly aU his money, and sank a shaft to cut the great
rich reef below the level of the tunnel, and when
cross-cut double the distance from the shaft he had ex-
pected necessary, he found no reef there.
And feeling like a new Judas, who had betrayed his love
or silver that now appeared certain to prove counterfeit,
364


TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND 365
he drove the cross-cut further and tumbled his workings
into an old drive, where the reef plainly cut itself out.
That old drive had evidently made itself in the earth
eighty feet below the sunlight, for there was no sign of
other working. But they found a filled-up cross-cut and
then a filled-up shaft, and rose to the surface, and then
discovered that after the shaft had been filled in, probably
half a dozen years before Billy’s purchase, grasses and
scrub and young gums had been planted on it so that it
appeared virgin ground.
The shock quieted him even more—that was all. He
idled for two days by a great rock hole in the granite half a
mile away from his Eldorado, and caught many little white
fish with five square port-hole marks on their sides—the
fish the Northerners call “ten gun brigs”—and gazed
with an unadmiring eye on the painted finches in the
acacias.
The knowledge of the swindle that had robbed him did
not affect him to even passing anger; a new sampling of
that shallow tunnel showed that the gold contents were in
grains—not ounces ; there was rarely a colour in any of
the many dishes he washed, and the fact did not affect him
either.
‘ ‘ Those two thieves who sold me are out of the con-
tinent now,” he said to the indignant miners, who begged
him to set the law in motion. ‘ ‘ Let them go. ... I
don’t care for anything. ”
He cared enough for something to ask a teamster not
to beat four bullocks which had run away for twenty
miles from camp on the scent of milk bush.
“Don’t welt ’em, man,” he said, “the poor things
wanted the new feed badly, and a craving’s a mighty easy
thing to excuse.”
A few weeks after the discovery of the worthlessness of
his “mine,” he rode off aimlessly, not caring whither he
went.
“Thank my luck I provided for home,” he said in a


366 TRUE EYES AND THE WHIRLWIND
miserable attempt at being glad of something. “ They’ve
enough to live on, and now my life’s my own.”
Through all the beauty of that country, of flooded and
uncertain rivers rushing through banks of bloom and rising
so high that they dirtied the flowering trees with wrack ;
through the five-mile square of all the known varieties of
scented gum that gives the belt the name of Perfume
Plain ; (past a league of ivory and azure water-lilies ;
through a scrub of musk thridded by fireflies, and past
gardens saturated with the mystery and the scent of
frangipanni, he made his way through the great jungle
that goes half-way down the mountains and stops within
hailing distance of the sea, and there without plan or
method, he boarded a casual steamer and casually sailed
south.


CHAPTER LXXIV
It is not easy to show the way to a blind man.
In Sydney he halted in September, and true to the aim*
lessness of the last few months, he wandered down to
Manly and saw the flower show that seemed to be a
mere caricature of the great exhibition he had attended
on that day many years agone when he had sprawled
on North Head, and gloated over the Pacific, and dreamed
his dreams. The sense of change was only a variant
of the wail of the old men who complain that “things
were different when they were young.” And yet the
only thing that is different is the old blood, the only
thing that suffered change is the old man’s eyes. The
world is continually finding betterment; disproving the
ancient’s wail. We take our old men too seriously.
There is in Sydney, in the heart of the wholesale
drapers’ quarter, a public-house that all day pulses with
life; admits men by a dozen queer doors, and vomits
them. After dark it is deserted, and by nine o’clock
it is closed; for its drinkers are at home, or at drinking-
houses more convenient.
Billy discovered it, and visited it twice, as aimlessly
as he did everything else now; but he came there on
the third occasion by design, and so it became a habit.
For a fortnight he sought Nepenthe there, and found
it sometimes —which is as often as a man may justly
expect to find anything. Any condition without change
in a system whose life-breath is difference, modification,


variant, and substitution, is impossible- as an Eternal
i Etemal S ° ng is 33 impossible as an
verlastmg Tophet with an Everlasting Wail. The waters
t Lethe must be tonic sometimes.
ta ,S\ nthe tr me t 0 u him ° nly during the da y> when he
talked himself into the new world of the drapers, who
spoke of a good purchase of lace or hosiery as if it
were an Austerlite or the declaration of the Australian
Republic; who talked of the “Warehouse” (each ware-
house was “The” warehouse) as if blankets were epics.
f " lght) wh ® n he was alone—for he shunned his
WetfH T T aV ° ided WS fiends—there was no
halt If l°A m C ° ntained in alcohol. His earlier
habit of hfe had put steel into his constitution, so that
these excesses, begun in self-defence, did not end in
physical prostration. And after a few weeks he found
for hi e r\ m C ,° mPany ° f ° therS there was no rest
k r haUnted b >' the httle child who
ded, the baby who was at the beginning of the end
a 1 eyes and heart; the son who had called on him in
his extremity and he had not replied.
He decided new plans, and immediately wrecked them
hone rh T to find n6W traCkS and new wa y s . the
hope that newness might mean peace. And over a
made 0 T ° f draperS ’ drinki ng-house
; ade *” es and rejected them, and made others
and rejected those also.
Two men entered, and took up the only unoccupied
position at the bar. One was a mammoth of a man—
fosl hCa ! y ’ grOSS to indecency, muscular, good-natured,
oul-mouthed, m a Rabelaisian way, and honest; his
companion was fleshy, small, silver-grey of beard, bald
f head, and strangely blue of eye—a blue so light that
it was more than porcelain blue, or soldier-crab blue;
it was almost blmd-blue-the colour of sightlessness.
The mammoth man talked with something of a brogue,
but not a Roman Catholic one. 5


“ Did ye hearr that poor old Hayes, of Porson, Nephew
and Walker, is dead this day ? ”
The man of the light-blue eyes suspended the pouring
of the square-face gin into his glass, and regarded the
mammoth agitatedly.
“Hayes! You don’t mean it? Why I had a drink with
him here five days ago.”
Had he said that he and the deceased had drank a
dozen nobblers of spirits on the last morning of their
meeting the actual truth would be better served. People
from old-world communities, where all the pioneering
work is done and the conditions of life are more vege-
table than animal, talk of the immorality of drunkenness
in new lands. There is no question of conventional
morality involved. Where there is much arduous driving
of new ways—much building for the people who come after
—a high nervous energy must be maintained, and that
calls for a distraction and finds the distraction.
Excess is necessary to a new community, as a church is
to an uneducated one.
The mammoth man replied: “For all that, me friends,
Hayes is dead. He handed in his chips the day before
yesterday.”
Three other men, attracted by the mention of Hayes’
name, joined the two first speakers. One of them a
cheery, mercurial man, dying at fifty of a very juvenile
consumption; the other a clean-shaven man, who looked
healthy because of the network of pink veins in his
face that at a little distance looked like the bloom of
health, but was only the bloom of corruption. The ‘third
man was a typical teetotaler—dark, weak, and exotic.
As they talked Billy finished his whisky, and called for
another.
“What did he die of, Boyle?” asked the consumptive
of the mammoth.
“Same old thing,” replied Boyle. “That shocking
stuff—stone-gin.”


He never showed a tnsrk of liquor on him anyway,”
said the blue-eyed man, for he drank gin, and wanted to
excuse it.
The man with the bloom of corruption on his face took
a biscuit of the size of a shilling and crushed it in his
teeth, so that an impalpable powder, white as lime, came
in puffs from the corners of his mouth.
“ Whisky don’t hurt a man as long as he can eat,” he
said triumphantly ; and added to the barman, “ White seal
for me, George. ”
Said Boyle, “ I b’leeve you’re right. I always take a
dozen oysters and a pot of stout, after that I can drink
whisky all day—it does me good. What are you fellers
going t’ have ? ”
The consumptive 'ordered brandy. He explained that
brandy had never done harm yet to any man who used it
sensibly.
“ Ri §f ht you are,” said the barman. “ There was never
a man died yet of plain drinkin’—it’s the fancy part that
kills a man—not sleepin’, an’ eatin’ too much. ”
There was not a man there who admitted that his own
particular form of alcohol had anything of maleficence; even
the teetotaler, drinking bitters and soda—the said bitters
being fifty per cent, alcohol—remarked that he “didn’t
believejn anything but total abstinence—it was the only
safe way.” He pointed his statement by helping himself
to the bitters with a hand that shook already, and he
drank the insidious mixture while the man with the blind-
blue eyes explained that Hayes had died of stone-gin,
whereas good Square Face, being an excellent tonic, was
likely to prolong the life of its drinker to a century.
They all stated their self-deceptions, each of which was
cruelly opposed to the deception of the other—but they
had not nerve enough to quarrel, and always agreed
hurriedly with what they did not believe.
At last they left the bar, and the barman talked.
“See them fellers? All goin’ like Hayes. Th’ big


feller that eats oysters an’ whiskey, he’ll tumble off ooeof
these fine mornin’s ; an’ so ’ull the blue-eyed chap. Hb»
he can drink that Square Face all day beats me. Meet
ungordly drink it is—/think. ’Course, that chap with
the brandy voice, he's booked—only half a lung left; an
the pink-faced chap, he’ll go too. Y’ see he takes one o’
them sawdust biscuits with his drink, and then he thinks
the whisky turns to water.”
“ And the teetotaler? ” asked Billy.
“ He’s done too —‘ Bitters,’ says he, an’ all the time it’s
stronger than brandy.”
The barman stopped and drank a wine-glass full of
greasy liqueur.
“ What do you drink? ” said Billy.
“Anything. I b’leeve in mixin’’em. I take everything
in the bar. . . . Mind yer, it don’t hurt me a bit. I eat
two lemons every morning. When you do that, drink
can’t touch you. Feel me arm.” He rolled up his shirt,
closed his hand, and brought what muscle he had to the
surface. Billy felt the half flabbiness and pretended to be
impressed. But he saw already the little pouches of
kidney disease under the barman’s eyes.
He started for the door. “ Good-bye,” he said, but the
barman cried:
“ Hey 1 You ’aven’tfinished yer whisky.”
“ Never mind,” replied Billy, “ I don’t want it now,”
He passed into the street, cured for ever of his desire
for such oblivion. He could not accept Nepenthe at
the price of sinking to the place of the Deceivers —the
trouble must be faced.
He faced exile without food and drink for eight-and-forty
hours ; and then his temperature sprang to the region of
that blood-heat where a man’s body burns like spinifex.
Typhoid racked him with all its loathsomeness \ but after
six weeks he found himself out of hospital again and in
his mother’s house.
He could not rest there long—he had determined to go


back to True Eyes and say good-bye to her and to the
children, and then go away somewhere where work and
distraction were to be found.
He wrote his wife to that effect, and went to Melbourne
by sea, so that his mother’s letter to True Eyes beat him
by a day and a half.


CHAPTER LXXV
Love is the price at which love is bought—it is the one commodity
independent of the market
There was moonlight in the city, and summer heat in the
air; and Billy in the weakness that followed bis fever
sweated over his packing in his room on the fifth floor of
the great ant-hill they called the Commonwealth Hotel
He had decided to visit his family to-morrow, and to leave
immediately afterwards for some new rush in the North
West.
There came a knocking, and he strode across his opened
luggage and opened the door. And there in the darkness
of the corridor, but framed by the moonlight that poured
in floods from the window above her, stood True Eyes,
and her hands were held toward him.
“ My darling,” said Billy very weakly, and staggered.
Her arms were around him at once, and she said, “ My
poor boy, come home.”
“ I can’t, dear girl. It was like your goodness to come
here, but I can’t go back now. I’ve lost everything—
I’m ill.”
“We want you all the more for that,”
“ But it means poverty! ”
“ We’ve been used to it before.”
“ Dear girl, I’ve still some respect left for my own
decisions. I’ll come to you when I am my own self
again.”
She smiled, as smiled Dante’s Beatrice in the Seventh
Star.


“ D .° y° u think we’ll let you go? .. . Oh! No! No!
The children ask foT'you . . . just as he did.”
lose ISn t fair ’ dCar " TakC mC WhCn 1 win ~ not when 1
“ That is not my way, Will.”
S mine! • • • I’m beaten for the moment—but
«t s only for the moment. When my head’s up again, as
it will be to-morrow, I’ll fight again, and beat them all.”
“ And then?”
“ When I win I’ll come-back, and you shall heal the
bruises. ”
“ I won’t wait. You must come home . . . don’t you
know, dear, you’re doubly dear when you’re beaten ? All
your prosperity friends gone—there is nobody to come
between us now.”
“ It’s pity then.”
No, not pity. It’s selfishness ; you’re all mine now.”
He moved about the room indecisively— for one of his
rare moments of indecision. He kicked a kit bag, and
laughed without mirth.
“ I was just packing up for the Territory.”
t ( r ° u did ll l mean to go away without seeing us first ? ”
“t? I’d easier forget to be sorry for all these wasted
months away from you.”
“ Dear Will, come home.”
“This is a sacrifice of pride. I’ve never returned to
you beaten before.”
You re not beaten. I am. I take back all I said to
you. I’ll say that I forget baby’s death, if you like. ”
“ I don’t like, dear ; and if I did, you’d be saying a lie.”
I know, I know ! But come to me.”
r armS WCre around his neck and their lips met, and
Billy s resolution was gone, and he did all the praying
“My darling my good mate. . . . We’ll go home,
/vnci i ii never have an ambition ag*ain,”
She laughed as experience laughs at empty oaths.
“You will have ambitions by to-morrow. And I


wouldn’t love you if you hadn’t / But IV be MlSt
the ambitions, won’t I ? No more loro ? ”
“ No, sweetheart. . . . We’ll send the man for the
dunnage to-morrow.
“ We'll send?”
“ We'll send.”
“ It used to be ‘/will,’ not we will.”
“ It may be so to-morrow again, True Eyes.”
“ We’ll take the chances.”
“ We will, sweetheart.”
They left the hotel, and walked down the shining rv>m n(T
Street and up the moonlit Eastern Hill together.
THE END
PLVMODTH : WILLIAM BRKNDON AND SOM
PRINTERS
