

TRUST DEED
A CHURCH
®Jii gisrfsf 0f
KIM TED B Y
ALEXANDER GORDON, ESQ.
SgtinEjj;
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.




TRUST DEED
A CHURCH
Hi ||i«W£ flf
EDITED BI
ALEXANDER GORDON, ESQ.
Sgfcnejj:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OP NEW SOUTH WALES.
1874.




It has long been felt as a want among Churchmen in this Diocese
that on the occasion of building a new church, and conveying a site
for that purpose, there has not existed any recognized and well
considered form of Deed of which use can be made for the purposes,
of the intended conveyance. Various forms have therefore been
adopted as accident or circumstances have at the time suggested, and
the consequence is an undesirable diversity of practice with reference
to a common object. Sometimes the land has been conveyed upon the
trusts of the Church Temporalities Act, thus introducing provisions or
trusts unsuitable to existing circumstances and leading to breaches of
trust which, to say nothing of the irregularity, may be attended with
consequences of a serious character. Sometimes the land has been con-
veyed upon the trusts of the same Act with certain specified exceptions
a plan which risks the confusion of inconsistent provisions, and cannot
be otherwise than imperfect and unsatisfactory. Under these circum-
stances and without prejudice, or rather as auxiliary, to the cautious
action of those who have deemed it desirable that application shall
sooner or later be made to the Legislature to alter the Church Temporal-
ities Act itself, and to bring existing trusts under such altered Act, the
Synod gave encouragement to the preparation of a form of a Trust Deed
for a Church by, on the 19th July, 1872, passing a resolution adopting
that portion of a Report made by the Standing Committee, dated the
6th July, 1872, which affirmed that it was desirable that Ordinances
or Trust Deeds should be framed with as little delay as possible under’
which Church property might thereafter be placed. In pursuance of
this Resolution, I deemed it my duty, at the request of the Standing
Committee, to prepare the form of a Deed suitable for a Trust Deed
for a Church. The Draft when prepared was laid before the Standing
Committee, and by the Standing Committee submitted to the Synod
3


at its Session in 1873. The Draft thus submitted was, on my own pro-
posal, referred by the Synod to the Provisional Standing Committee
for consideration and report. The Provisional Standing Committee
delegated the examination of the Draft Deed to a Sub-Committee con-
sisting of Mr. E. Jones, Mr. W. J. Foster, and Mr. T. J. Jaques. By
these gentlemen the Draft was very carefully considered and various
alterations made in it; and the Draft so altered was reported upon by
them to the Provisional Standing Committee, and by the Committee
laid before the Synod at its last Session. I may here state that the
Sub-Committee was kind enough to consult me with regard to the
alterations made in the Draft, and they all met with my full approba-
tion as being improvements. Every member of the Synod had a
printed copy of the Draft forwarded to him some days before the meet-
ing, accompanied with an intimation that it was to be brought forward
for consideration. It was under such circumstances that it fell to me
to introduce the subject to the notice of the Synod on the first day of
the Session, by inviting the Synod to go into Committee upon the Draft.
On this occasion various objections of a general character were started,
and after much discussion the debate was adjourned to the following
day, When the Synod by a majority of seventy-seven to twenty-one
negatived the objections, and entered upon the consideration of the
Deed clause by clause. The greater part of five days was devoted to the
work thus undertaken. Considerable opposition was offered to some
of the clauses, and the result was that the Draft came out of Committee
in the form now presented, that form having in every particular been
sanctioned by, generally speaking, very large majorities. Those who
had charge of the matter spared no pains notwithstanding the
difficulties occasioned by the opposition offered, to make the
Draft as accurate in all respects as possible; and every altera-
tion by whomever suggested, if deemed to be an improvement,
was adopted. At the end of the Session the Synod in Committee pre-
sented the result of its labours to the Synod as the Synod, and the
natural consequence would have been for the Synod to adopt its own


work, and a majority of the members, namely, twenty-nine to sixteen,
was in favour of so doing. Those, however, who had been opposed
to the measure throughout availed themselves, as they were held to
be entitled to do, of a form of voting which, by showing that out of
the diminished numbers then in attendance there were only seven
clergymen in favour of adopting the Draft while there were eleven
against it, prevented the passing of the formal Resolution, although of
the laity present only four sided with the majority of the clergy,
while twenty-six voted on the other side. Under such circumstances,
however, I feel that the practical utility of what has been so carefully
done cannot, and ought not to be in any way affected. I therefore
commend with the utmost confidence the accompanying Form of Deed
to the use of the members of the Church in this Diocese, feeling per-
suaded that the Synod itself will, without hesitation, and if asked so
to do, attach its sanction to a work which is none other than one which
it has itself initiated and completed. In the meantime the Form will
be available for the use of those who feel that it suitably meets existing
wants, and I trust it will be followed up by similarly framed Deeds
for Parsonages, Burial Grounds, and other Church property, so that a
time may come when, guided by experience, the Church in this Colony
may as a united body go to the Legislature, and ask that property now
under the Church Temporalities Act may be transferred, according to
its character, to be held upon the trusts of Deeds framed upon a plan
similar to that of the one now presented.
ALEXANDER GORDON,
Chancellor of the Diocese of Sydney.
Sydney, 28th February, 1874.




®tm btjtmct iu trust for a ftljmxtr.
THIS INDENTURE being the Trust Deed of
the Church of and made the
day of in the year of our Lord 18
Between A.B. of of the first parties.
part C.D., &c. of hereinafter
called Trustees of the second part and X.
of the third part:
Whereas the said C. D., &c. have Recital of pur-
contracted with the said A. B. chase of Land.
for the purchase of the piece of land hereinafter
described at the price or sum of £
And Whereas the said piece of land has been —as site for a
purchased as and for a site for the erection of a Churclj-
building for the celebration of Divine Worship
according to the usages of the Church of England
And Whereas the said Trustees have requested —of request to
the said A. B. to convey the said land in the convey '
manner and upon the Trusts hereinafter expressed
and contained NOW THIS INDENTURE Witnesseth.
WITNESSETH that in pursuance of the said
contract and request and in consideration of the consideration,
said sum of £ paid by the said Trustees to
the said A. B. the receipt whereof is hereby acknow-
ledged He the said A. B. doth grant bargain sell grant.


and release unto the said X. and his heirs all that
parcels.
general words. Together with all rights privileges easements com-
modities and appurtenances whatsoever to the
said land and premises or any part thereof belong-
ing or appertaining and all the estate and interest
of the said A. B. in the said premises and every
Habendum, part thereof To HOLD the said land and premises
unto the said X and his heirs To the use of the
to Trustees in said Trustees their heirs and assigns Upon the
Trusts nevertheless and with under and subject
to the powers provisions and declarations herein-
after contained expressed or declared of and con-
Upon trust for cerning the same that is to say Upon trust to per-
the erection of an( t su ff er a Church or building to be erected
a Church. the said land to be called [name of Church]
such Church or building to be set apart for the
celebration of Divine Worship according to the
usages of the Church of England and to be
subject to the regulations contained in the Schedule
Declaration as to this Indenture annexed And it is hereby
to trusts being DECLARED an( j agreed that the Trustees or Trustee
Schedule. 1 ln for the time being of these Presents shall stand
seized and possessed of the said land church and
premises upon trust to permit the same to be used
occupied and enjoyed by the persons and in the
manner and subject to the conditions and regula-
tions set forth in the said Schedule. And the
said A. B. doth hereby for himself his heirs
Covenants f or executors and administrators covenant with the
title and fur- ga {cl Trustees their heirs and assigns that notwith-
therassurance. standin g ail y act deed or thing by the said A. B,


or any of his ancestors made or done or knowingly
permitted or suffered he the said A. B. now has
power to grant and release the said land and
premises unto the use of the said Trustees free
from incumbrance And that the said A. B. and
his heirs and all other persons lawfully or equitably
claiming through or in trust for him or any of his
ancestors will at all times at the cost of the said
Trustees their heirs or assigns do and execute all
such acts and assurances for further or better
assuring the said land and premises to the use of
the said Trustees their heirs and assigns as by
them or other the Trustees or Trustee for the time
being of these presents shall bo reasonably re-
quired And IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that if any Declaration as
Trustee or Trustees of these presents shall after
the consecration or licensing of the said Church
for the celebration of Divine Worship die or be
desirous to be discharged or refuse to act or shall
become insolvent or lunatic or be absent for more
than two years from the Colony or shall otherwise
become incapable to act then and so often the
occupiers of seats in the Church under the regu-
tions contained in the said Schedule hereto may
at the Annual Yestry Meeting in the said Schedule
mentioned next after the occurring of such event
elect any person or persons to be a Trustee or
Trustees in the stead of the Trustee or Trustees
so dying or desiring to be discharged or refusing
to act or becoming insolvent or lunatic or being
absent or incapable to act as aforesaid every such


person being a male of the age of twenty-one years
and a Communicant of the Church of England Pro-
vided always that if the said Church shall not have
been consecrated or licensed when any such event as
aforesaid shall occur or if a new Trustee or
new Trustees shall not be elected at the said
Annual Vestry Meeting then the surviving or
continuing Trustee or Trustees or the Executors
or Administrators of the last surviving Trustee
may by writing appoint any person or persons
being qualified as hereinbefore mentioned to be
such new Trustee or Trustees as hereinbefore
mentioned And upon every election or appoint-
ment of a new Trustee or new Trustees the trust
premises shall be so conveyed transferred or other-
wise dealt with that the same may become vested
in the new Trustee or Trustees jointly with the
surviving or continuing Trustee or Trustees or
solely as the case may require And every new
Trustee shall both before and after the said trust
premises shall have become so vested have the same
power authority and discretion as if he had been
—power of hereby originally appointed a Trustee And it is
yoke and°alter HEREBY DECLARED that it shall be lawful for the
Trusts. Synod of the Diocese at any time and from time
to time by Ordinance to revoke or alter the con-
ditions and regulations hereinbefore referred to
and by the same or any other Ordinance or Ordi-
nances to declare such other conditions and regu-
lations of and concerning the premises as the said
—declaration Synod shall think fit. And it is hereby further


declared that every Clergyman or Churchwarden to be signed by
of the Church so held under the trusts of these cler o^ man « &c *
Presents as aforesaid shall before acting as sueh
Clergyman or Churchwarden and every Lay officer
of the said Church shall if required so to do
by any such Clergyman or Churchwarden as
aforesaid before acting sign the following
Declaration; —“ I, A. B. promise that I will duly
“observe and keep the conditions and regula-
“ tions set forth in the Trust Deed of the Church
“of so far as they affect
“ me in my position of as mentioned
“described or referred to in the said conditions
“ and regulations.”
In W itness, &c.
11


SCHEDULE ABOVE REFERRED TO.
Trustees to procure Building to he consecrated or licensed as
a Church.
1. The Trustees shall so soon as may be after the erec-
tion of the Building and upon its being provided with all
things requisite for the celebration of Divine Service pro-
cure the same to be consecrated or licensed by the Bishop
as a church for the celebration of Divine Worship accord-
ing to the usages of the Church of England.
Churchwardens to he elected ad interim and disposal of Seats
determined.
2. The Trustees shall previously to or so soon as con-
veniently may be after the building has been so consecrated
or licensed as a Church as aforesaid call a meeting of the sub-
scribers to the Church and at such meeting the subscribers
shall elect two of their number being male adults and com-
municants of the Church of England to be ad interim
Churchwardens of the Church until the First Annual
Vestry Meeting of the Church to be held as hereinafter
mentioned and shall also determine whether the seats in the
Church after reserving a sufficient number of the seats to
be always appropriated to the gratuitous use of the clergy-
man licensed to officiate in the Church shall be free or
partly free and partly rented and if any part of the seats
are to be rented shall also determine the rent thereof And
the determinations of such meeting shall be binding on all
Trustees and Churchwardens of the Church and all persons
using the Church until such determinations shall be varied
or altered as hereinafter mentioned. Provided that if at
the time of the said meeting a clergyman shall have been


licensed to officiate in the church or so soon thereafter as a
clergyman shall be so licensed such clergyman shall be at
liberty to appoint a Churchwarden qualified as hereinbefore
mentioned to act with the two Churchwardens so elected
by the subscribers as aforesaid until the First Annual
Vestry Meeting.
Powers of ad interim Churchwardens and Vacancies how to
he filed up.
3. The Churchwardens so selected or appointed as herein-
before mentioned shall have the same powers as Church-
wardens elected and appointed at the Annual Vestry Meet-
ing of the Church as hereinafter mentioned. Provided
always that in case there be no subscribers or if from any
cause a meeting of subscribers cannot be held or from any
cause a meeting of the subscribers to the Church when
called as hereinbefore mentioned shall not be held or the
meeting when held shall not elect Churchwardens or deter-
mine with reference to the seats as hereinbefore also men-
tioned the Trustees may appoint two of the subscribers or
if there be no subscribers then two other persons qualified
as hereinbefore mentioned to be Churchwardens and may
at their own discretion determine with reference to the
seats as hereinbefore also mentioned Provided also that
in case of any vacancy occurring in the Churchwardens so
elected by the meeting or appointed by the Trustees as
hereinbefore mentioned before the said Annual Vestry
Meeting and so often as any such vacancy shall occur the
Trustees may fill up the said vacancy by appointing one of
the subscribers or if there be no subscribers then some other
person qualified as hereinbefore mentioned to act as a
Churchwarden until the said Annual Vestry Meeting
And the clergyman may in like manner fill up any vacancy
occurring in the case of the Churchwarden appointed by
him as hereinbefore mentioned.


Annual Vestry Meeting.
4. The Clergyman and Churchwardens shall by notice
given in such way as they may deem best and stating the
place and time of meeting summon the Trustees and
Occupiers of seats in the Church whether rented or free
and being members of the Church of England and of the age
of twenty-one years to meet in the Vestry of the Church
or in some other convenient place on Easter Tuesday in
every year or within a week of such day for the purpose of
receiving the accounts of the Churchwardens for the past
year electing Churchwardens for the ensuing year and for
other business connected with the Church. And such
meeting shall be called and known as “ The Annual Vestry
Meeting ” of the Church And any person renting a seat
or usually attending the celebration of Divine Service in
the Church shall be deemed an Occupier of a seat in the
Church And every person may and if required by any
person who has himself signed the Declaration next herein-
after mentioned shall before taking part or voting at such
meeting or at any other meeting of Occupiers of seats in
the Church subscribe the following Declaration : —“ I the
undersigned do declare that I am a member
of the Church of England and an Occupier of a seat in
the church of And every person being
an Occupier of a seat in the Church and not being indebted
to the Churchwardens in respect of seat rent or otherwise
on account of the Church shall be entitled to one vote at
the Annual Vestry Meeting and at all meetings of Occu-
piers of seats in the Church.
Meeting when Constituted.
5. As soon as the said Clergyman and five other persons
being qualified as aforesaid shall be present the meeting
shall be held to be duly constituted and may proceed to


business but if the meeting shall not be so constituted as
aforesaid witbin half an hour after the time appointed for
the meeting then the meeting shall stand adjourned for
seven days the place and hour for the adjourned meeting
being the same as those for which the first meeting was
summoned. And so soon as at such adjourned meeting
five persons duly qualified as hereinbefore mentioned shall
be present the meeting shall be held to be duly constituted
and may proceed to business but if it shall not be so cons-
tituted within half an hour after the time appointed the
meeting shall be treated as a lapsed meeting Provided
that any meeting once duly constituted may from time to
time be adjourned to such time and place as the meeting
may determine And such adjourned meeting shall be
treated as a duly constituted meeting and as a continuation
of the original meeting.
Chairman.
6. At such meeting and at all other meetings of Occu-
piers of seats in the Church the Clergyman licensed to
officiate in the Church or the Clergyman authorised to
officiate in his place shall when present act as Chairman of
the meeting and in the case of his absence the meeting
shall before proceeding to business elect its own Chairman.
Business of Meeting.
7. At such Meeting or adjourned Meeting as the case
may be the Clergyman licensed to officiate in the Church
shall appoint or signify in writing the appointment of one
person being a male of the age of twenty-one years and being
the Occupier of a seat in the Church and a Communicant of
the Church of England and not being a Trustee of the
Church to act as a Churchwarden until the Annual Vestry
Meeting next ensuing. And the Trustees shall appoint
or signify in writing the appointment of one person


qualified as aforesaid to act as a Churchwarden for the
same period. And the Occupiers of seats shall elect one
of their number whether present or absent being qualified
as aforesaid to act as a Churchwarden for the same period.
Provided that if the Trustees shall have failed to appoint
or signify in writing the appointment of their Church-
warden the Occupiers of Seats shall elect two of their
number qualified as aforesaid to act as such Churchwardens
as aforesaid. And the three persons so appointed and
elected as aforesaid shall execute the office of Church-
warden and any act done by them or the majority of them
as Churchwardens shall be taken and deemed to be the act
of the Churchwardens of the Church.
Lapsed Meeting, consequences of.
8. If in consequence of the Meeting becoming a lapsed
Meeting or from any other cause any failure shall occur to
appoint or elect the three persons or any of them herein-
before mentioned as Churchwardens then the Church-
wardens who summoned the meeting shall forthwith
communicate such failure to the Bishop, And the Bishop
or his Commissary duly authorised shall appoint such
person or persons as he may deem best and the circum-
stances of the case may require to act as Churchwardens
or Churchwarden until the Annual Vestry Meeting next
ensuing. And if any dispute shall at any time arise re-
garding the appointment or election of any Churchwarden
the same shall be referred to the Bishop or his said Com-
missary who shall after enquiry conducted in such manner
as he may prescribe make such order touching the same as
to him shall appear expedient. Provided always that the
person into whose place a failure to appoint a successor
shall have occurred as aforesaid shall continue to hold office
until an appointment of a successor shall have been made
as hereinbefore provided.


Vacancies of Clergyman's or Trustees' Churchwarden how to
he filled up.
9. Whenever any person appointed as a Churchwarden
shall die resign or become by insolvency lunacy or other-
wise disqualified or incapable to act during the period for
which he was so appointed then and in every such case
the person or persons having the right to appoint as here-
inbefore mentioned shall as soon as may be practicable
after the occurring of the vacancy so created appoint a
person duly qualified in each cash respectively to be a
Churchwarden until the Annual Vestry Meeting next
ensuing in the place of the person so dying resigning or
becoming disqualified or incapable to act as hereinbefore
mentioned. And the appointment may be made in writing
without summoning a meeting of the occupiers of seats in
the Church.
Vacancy of elected Churchwardens how to he filled up.
10. Whenever any person elected as a Churchwarden
shall die resign or become disqualified or incapable to act
as hereinbefore mentioned during the period for which he
was so elected as aforesaid the other Churchwardens shall
within thirty days after the occurring of such vacancy by
notice stating the place and time of meeting summon a
meeting of the occupiers of seats in the Church for the
purpose of electing a Churchwarden and such meeting shall
be conducted so far as circumstances will admit in a man-
ner similar to the Annual Vestry Meeting of the Church.
And at such meeting or at any adjournment thereof which
may take place the occupiers of seats in the Church shall
elect one of their number qualified as hereinbefore men-
tioned to be a Churchwarden until the Annual Vestry
Meeting next ensuing in the place of the Churchwarden
who has so died resigned or become disqualified or incapable
as aforesaid.


Bishop to Jill up Vacancies in certain cases.
11. If from any cause whatever a vacancy occurring in
the number of Churchwardens appointed or elected as here-
inbefore mentioned shall not be filled up as hereinbefore
provided it shall be lawful for the Bishop or his Commis-
sary duly authorised if he shall so think fit to appoint a
Churchwarden to act until the Annual Vestry Meeting
next ensuing in the place of the Churchwarden whose
death resignation disqualification or other incapacity has
occasioned the said vacancy.
Powers oj Churchwardens.
12. The Churchwardens so appointed and elected as
aforesaid shall have the general charge of and control over
all property and monies belonging to the church of which
the charge or control is not otherwise vested or provided
for and shall have also the general control and superin-
tendence of all matters connected with the arrangement of
seats in the church and in the case of any of the seats being
let shall make agreements with persons for the letting to
them of such seats for such term within the year of office
of the Churchwardens as they may deem proper. And the
Churchwardens shall collect all seat rents and other
monies payable on account of the Church.
Application of Monies received.
13. The Churchwardens shall apply all monies received
on account of the Church but subject as to the Offertory
monies or any portion thereof to such special application
as may have been consented to by the clergyman licensed
to officiate in the Church or the Clergyman authorised to
officiate in his place or the Bishop as the case may be for
the following purposes and in such order and in such pro-
portion as they may deem fit that is to say in providing all


things necessary for the clue celebration of Divine service
and the administration of the Sacraments according to
the usages of the Church of England including the payment
of so much of the stipend of the Clergyman officiating in
the Church as may not have been otherwise provided for
and the salaries of all lay persons holding any office in or
about the Church in providing relief for the poor of the
Parish or District in keeping the Church and premises
attached thereto in repair in liquidating any portion of
debt on the Church and in reimbursing the Trustees any
costs incurred by them in execution of their Trust. And
if there shall then remain any surplus of the said monies
the Churchwardens shall apply and expend the same in
such manner as may be determined by any Annual Vestry
Meeting of the Church.
Churchwardens to produce Accounts.
14. At every Annual Vestry Meeting of the Church the
retiring Churchwardens or one of them shall exhibit a book
containing fair and correct accounts of all monies received
and expended by them as Churchwardens and the accounts
shall be certified by the Churchwardens subscribing their
names thereto and the said account book and all vouchers
for payments together with such balance as shall appear by
the accounts to be remaining in the hands of the retiring
Churchwardens shall be by them or one of them delivered
to the new Churchwardens or one of them Provided
always that at every such Meeting two or more persons may
if the Meeting shall so determine be appointed to audit
the accounts of the retiring Churchwardens. And the new
Churchwardens shall cause the accounts of the retired
Churchwardens either as presented to the said Meeting or
when audited as the case may be to be priuted for distri-
bution among the occupiers of seats in the Church,


Power to vary arrangement as to seats, amount of rent, Sfc.
15. The Churchwardens and Trustees of the Church or
a majority of them may at any time and from time to time
with the sanction of the Annual Vestry Meeting of the
Church vary any arrangement existing with regard to the
seats in the Church being rented or free. Provided that
of the seats of the Church at least one-sixth thereof shall
always be free. And the Churchwardens and Trustees of
the Church or a majority of them may also with the like
sanction increase or reduce the rent which shall have been
previously fixed for seats in the Church. Provided that
such increase or reduction as the same may be shall not
commence until the expiration of the time for which any
seats to which it applies shall have been previously let.
Church not to be used except for the celebration of Divine
Worship unless with express sanction of Bishop.
16. The Church after it has been consecrated shall not
without the express sanction of the Bishop be used for any
other purpose than the celebration of Divine Worship the
administration of the Sacraments or the performance of
the rites and ordinances of the Church of England and no
person except the Bishop shall be allowed to perform any
clerical office in the Church whether consecrated or licensed
except with the consent of the Clergyman licensed to offi-
ciate in the said Church and of the Bishop. Provided
always that in case there shall not be a Clergyman so
licensed as aforesaid the consent of the Bishop only shall
be necessary.
Bights of Licensed Clergyman.
17. The Clergyman licensed to officiate in the church
shall have free access and admission into the church at all
such times as he shall think fit and may celebrate Divine


Service administer the Sacraments and perform all other
rites and ordinances of the Church of England therein
without any hindrance from the Trustees Churchwardens
or any other person whomsoever and shall for such pur-
poses have keys of the church. Provided always that
in case the license of such Clergyman shall be withdrawn
in accordance with the 19th Constitution he shall thereupon
ipso facto forfeit and be absolutely deprived of all and
singular his rights in or respecting the church as aforesaid
and shall thenceforth if attempting to exercise any such
rights be deemed a trespasser therein.
Appointment and "Removal of paid Lay Officers.
18. All the paid Lay officers of the Church except the
Clerk and Organist shall from time to time be appointed
and removed from office by the Churchwardens and the
Clerk and Organist if any shallfrom time to time be appointed
and removed from office by the Clergyman licensed to
officiate in the Church. And the Salaries of all paid Lay
Officers shall be fixed or sanctioned at an Annual Yestry
Meeting of the Church.
Monuments in Church, Sfc.
19. It shall be lawful for the Churchwardens with the
consent of the Clergyman licensed to officiate in the Church
and with the sanction of the Bishop to permit any monu-
ment to be placed in any part of the Church upon payment
to the Churchwardens of such charges and subject to such
regulations with reference to obtaining the consent of the
Bishop by a faculty or otherwise as the Bishop shall sanc-
tion and prescribe. And it shall be lawful for the person
so placing such monument as aforesaid and his heirs execu-
tors and administrators to maintain and keep up the same
to and for his and their sole and separate use.


Alterations in Church.
20. It shall not be lawful to make any alteration in the
fabric or internal arrangement of the Church when conse-
crated or licensed without the sanction of the Bishop and
upon such terms and conditions as the Bishop may from
time to time in that behalf prescribe.
Printed at the "Churchman” Office, 570, George-street, Sydney.




