

TRUTH v. ERROR,
S
w
P ILLUSTRATED IN A
0
CORRESPONDENCE
|
?n
\V BETWEEN
| Alcabef of tfjc (Lllnu'cj) of Cuglani)
(h
fl
«
rftj
I A LAYMAN.
'■&
s
:<S
I
II
|<s
<«
n
LEE LOSS, EXCELSIOR STEAM PRINTING WORKS, $
231 and 233 CASTLEREACH STREET, V'
(near market street', f?
* *jr




TRUTH v. ERROR,
ILLUSTRATED IN A
CORRESPONDENCE
BETWEEN
|>eakt of % dljntrcfj of ©nglanb
A LAYMAN.
LEE &, ROSS, EXCELSIOR STEAM PRINTING WORKS,
231 AND 233 CASTLEREAGH STREET,
(near market street),


PREFACE.
Christian Brothers and Fellowmen, —The following correspon-
dence, which was unintentionally brought about through the
publication of the article headed “ Introduction,” is. now laid
before you, with all its responsibilities and imperfections, as an
appeal to your common sense and intelligence, as a stand
against bigotry and ignorance. All names of persons and places
have been omitted in connection with this correspondence with a
view to strip from the subject all personality. It represents two
phases in the history of theology —Layman’s letters, that of the
Apostles and Disciples of our Lord, for the first. 300 years of the
Christian era, and Mr. that which crept into the Church of
Christ about the same period, and has been most vigorously and
pertinaciously maintained and upheld by the Homan Catholic and
Protestant Churches to the present day. Its immense importance
will be seen when, if Layman and those who think as he does,
are correct in their theology, it must sap the very foundation of
the leading doctrine of Romish Catholicism, as to a future state of
Purgatory and Eternal Punishment, and deprives Protestant clergy-
menof that system of terrorism which aims at frightening men from
sin by the severities of God, rather than winning them by an appeal
to his boundless love, mercy and justice. It disarms Infidelity of its
chief weapon against Christianity, and leaves a sinning world
without excuse in rejecting the offers of Divine mercy,
through the intercession of our blessed Mediator and Saviour
the future Judge of the living and the dead. The
doctrine of eternal torment in hell is the apple of discord thrown
into the Church of God, by the devil, to destroy, the harmony of
the Scriptures as to the Divine character, which , can only, be
restored by a return to first principles as believed in by Christ’s
Disciples, and as taught by their Divine Master, namely, immor-
tality as the reward of holiness, and extinction as the reward of
dime. 11 Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life
freely.”—Rev. xxii. 17.
God’s mercv in Jesus exempts thee from hell;
Its glories then sing, and its wonders go tell;
’Twas Jesus, thy friend, when He hung on the tree,
Who opened the channel of mercy for thee.


TRUTH v. ERROR.
INTRODUCTION.
COMMUNICATED BY LAYMAN.
<; The discussion which took place yesterday” (October 4th, 18/6)
at the Church of England Congress, says an English paper,
shewed that there was far more to be hoped than feared Irom
discussion especially on the causes of unbelief in England, and was
an ample vindication of the excellent practical use which such a
gathering is calculated to serve. “As iron sharpeneth iron, so it
is good for Church workers to meet together occasionally, to gain
the advantage of each others experience, to compare notes as it were,
and to learn that a question may have other sides besides that which
may happen to have engaged their individual attention Apply this to
those most interesting and important matters which are now before
the world ; matters in which every man woman and child now in
existence are concerned. Almost all men of thought, who hold the
Bible as a divinely inspired production, and have devoted them-
selves to its study, are agreed upon one point, namely, that we are
on the eve of changes, involving all that is dear to man, politically,
socially, and religiously. “ Many shall run to and. fro, and
knowledge shall be increased,” is a prediction, now fulfilling. The
sacred page, hitherto obscured, as many believe by a false theology,
is being unveiled. It is averred, that numberless passages, to
which have been given spiritual renderings, are the prophetic
records of real events, now in rapid progress towards fulfilment.
Some are teachably studying the sacred page, with an anxious
desire to arrive at a knowledge of the truth, while others, wrapped
up in traditionary creeds, are obstinately shutting their eyes to all
new light, as a fatal innovation on truth. Why not “ try all things,
and hold fast that which is good 1 ” The doctrine of annihilation, of
the finally impenitent. The discovery of the Lost Ten Tribes, in the


Anglo Saxon People are matters which, instead of meeting with
the rebuff of Christians, as dangerous or useless investigations,
should be calmly, dispassionately, and openly discussed. " Truth
never can be injured by investigation. Let free discussion, under
the. restraints only required by good breeding and order, be
instituted, and good must result. Let it be sought and not be
shunned and truth must triumph. If a man sincerely believes in
the old theology, which teaches the eternal duration of torment, in
hell,, as the lot of the ungodly, let him do so, but in all
charity towards him who does not, and, on the other
hand, let him who holds the doctrine of annihilation,
while he rejoices in what he esteems the more glorious and
merciful attributes of God, do so, without reproach to his brother
Christian. Both being equally honest, both must be equally
desirous to be assured, in their own minds, that what they believe
is really in accordance with the revealed will, and attributes
of God. Both cannot be right, one or other must be in the wrono-.
How is this difference to be cleared up? Certainly not by
vituperative and uncharitable conversation, or writing. If, how-
ever, both parties would agree to free discussion, upon the basis of
alternate lectures, or written essays; each one to be replied to, before
another was brought forward, and no other authority whatever
consulted than the Bible, truth would then, there is good reason to
believe, be arrived at. What is wanted is, free, open, honest
discussion, conducted in a spirit which can leave no doubt but, that
truth and truth only , is the object sought, and desired. All love of
the mere display of superior talent and learning, should be banished,
or subdued, .as beneath men entering upon such momentous and
interesting investigations. Let the bishops and clergy of all
denominations shew by their zeal to promote the truth, and nothing
but the truth, the love of souls and the honour of God is that and
that alone which animates them in entering upon, and promoting,
free and loving discussion upon points of difference, such as those
alluded to, and they will then, and not till then, convince the
world, that they are the true and faithful exponents of God’s holy
word. If they cannot , and will not do this, thanks be to God, the
Master is soon coming, and will, when He does, set his house in order,
and cleanse it from the pollution of unbelief, error, and all the
abominations of uncharitableness and bigotry.
Let the feelings of all Christians, whose theological views differ
from those who look on the sacred page as one misunderstood, or
misrepresented, be respected. The Bible, no doubt, has been, and
still is, a sealed book to thousands. That which refers to real events
has been presumed to refer to spiritual matters ; a state of things
which may be traced, in the case of those students of its sacred lore
who have not the knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek languages'
to the usual writers and preachers, and to the publication 5 oflhe


Bible with headings to chapters and pages, a practice which the
sooner discontinued the better, and the sacred volume issued
without either note or comment, retaining only, marginal readings
of Hebrew or Greek words. Let those who believe in the more
generally received doctrine of eternal torment, and those who differ
on this point, respect each others feelings, but, while doing so,
study the subject, not only from their own standpoint, but from
that of those with whom they differ. Let the greatest respect be
shewn on all sides, to honest differences of opinion, and honest
investigation after truth, and the result must be beneficial to all,
because truth must, and will, triumph over error, no matter from
whom, or from what source, it may primarily have originated. Let
the glory of God, and the good of men, stimulate all, and the reward
will more than recompense for all the time and trouble bestowed in
the pursuit of so grand and important a subject.
December 15th, 1876.
(To the Editor.)
Sir, —In the supplement to your paper of the 20th January
there is a paragraph with this heading “Communicated by
Layman.” In this paragraph the writer draws attention to the
fulfilment of prophecy in the presfnt day, and also to certain new
doctrines which he calls interesting and important matters, in
which every man, woman, and child are concerned. He says the
sacred page has hitherto been obscured by a false theology, and
he invites the bishops and clergy of all denominations to shew
their zeal to promote the truth by encouraging calm discussion
upon these interesting and momentous subjects ; the new doctrines
he alludes to are, the annihilation of the finally impenitent, and
the discovery of the Lost Ten Tribes in the Anglo Saxon people.
How, Mr. Editor, with regard to the annihilation of the finally
impenitent, I do not see anything to discuss ; God’s Word on this
Subject is as plain as language can be. We must not only look upon
God, as a God of all love, and all mercy, but also as a God of
infinite truth, and infinite justice. He shewed unutterable love
in sending his dear Son to die for us poor sinners, and there is free
salvation for all who will accept it in the way He has appointed,
and if any are not saved at the last great-day, it is because they
will not come to Him. As a God of infinite truth He has
declared the final state of all those who refuse the offer of free
salvation by the mouth of Jesus Christ, the second person of
the ever blessed Trinity. I would ask any one who has a doubt to
read carefully St. Matthew xxv. 31, to the end of the chapter,
and let him remember that these are the words of God Himself.
I will quote the last verse of that chapter,—“ And these (that is
the wicked) shall go away into everlasting punishment but the
righteous into life eternal.” What is it to me, so far as lam


personally concerned, whether the wicked go into everlasting
punishment or whether they should be annihilated (if such a thing
was possible) but when I consider how many there are among us
who are living careless lives, away from God, and if this doctrine
should encourage only one to go on in his evil course, and that
poor soul should be lost in consequence, then it is of the utmost
importance. With regard to the Lost Ten Tribes, the subject
with me is hardly worth a thought, at all events it is harmless.
St. Paul says—lf ye be Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed, and
heirs according to the promise. I dare say this letter will be
answered, but I have no wish to go any further with it, but 1
have thought it a duty to express my opinion on the subject.
I am sir, yours truly,
January 2)tli, 1877.
LAYMAN’S REPLY TO MR. LETTER OF JAN. 2 4
(To the Editor.)
Sir, — Mr. was quite right in anticipating a reply to his
letter of January 24th, published in your issue of the 27th, a task,
•which I now undertake. I shall dismiss from my answer, every part
of his letter, not immediately relevant to the subject, and proceed at
once to discuss the very important doctrine of annihilation, in which
Mr. “ does not see anything to discuss ; God’s words on
this subject being as plain as language can be,” especially as
expressed in the last verse of the 25th chapter of St. Matthew.
“ And these (that is the wicked) shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.” The structure
of this sentence is peculiar ; the word everlasting being made use
of to describe the punishment of the wicked, while that of eternal
is selected to express the happy condition of the righteous. "Why
this distinction, if our Lord intended, in both cases, to convey the
same idea of perpetuity ? Why not have used the word eternal in
both instances. A cause must have existed, because, it is evident,
that by the selection of two words of different force, He did not
intend to convey the same idea. What then did He intend to
imply ? This will be explained, on reference to the sth of John
and 29 th verse, where our Lord, alluding to the same event, terms
it “ The resurrection of condemnation,” as opposed to that of life,
and St. Paul, in his epistle to the Romans, crlls it “ The outpour-
ing of indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish.” I take
our Lord’s meaning to have been, an unalterable, irrevocable
punishment, and, therefore, everlasting as to its results, but not so
in its endurance. It was as if our Lord had said “ The wicked
shall go away into unalterable, irrevocable punishment.” This is
consistent with other parts of Scripture where this punishment is
called the second death or final extinction ; now, it is self-evident


that, where a second death takes place there must have been a
previous one, or there is no meaning in words. The one having
taken place in this world and the other to take place in the next.
The wicked are therefore to be extinguished or annihilated, first,
in accordance with natural law, on earth, and, secondly, as a
punishment in the world to come. The punishment of death,
by man, upon his fellow man, is, in fact, eternal extinction from
amongst his species, and as a denison of the earth. In this light,
I can understand our Lord using the same word, both in reference
to the righteous and wicked, when speaking of their final condition,
the one rewarded with eternal existence, and the other punished
by eternal death or extinction of the second life by the second death,
God thus manifests his justice, truth and mercy before the as-
sembled hosts of heaven and all the nations of the world. The
parable of the tares supports this view of the case, they are
gathered in bundles and consumed with fire, perfectly annihilated,
as tares. That tares typified sinful wicked men is perfectly clear
from our Lord’s declaration, “ that so it should be in the end of
the world.” "When God says I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, it is tantamount to saying, He has no pleasure in their
extinction. St. Paul, when he says, “ The end of these things
(i.e. sins) is death,” and “ the wages of sin is death,” says, in
fact, it is extinction, and as in exact opposition to such a condition,
he exclaims, the gift of God to the righteous is eternal life; thus,
as plain as words can convey anything, he shows the two extremes
of the case, the one being, vital, sensible duration, and the other
annihilation. What does he mean by the sting of death being
sin 1 Does he not mean that the consciousness of the condemned
feel that this fearful result, annihilation, is traceable to the sinners
own headstrong, wilful course of action 1 To urge more on this
first branch of the subject, would, I think, be uselessly occupying
time. Every intelligent person keeping in mind that death
means extinction, and applying this interpretation, wherever the
word death is made use of, will find an astonishing number of
texts in the Hew Testament, which supports the views I have
advanced. The woi'd “ death,” is used so frequently, without
reflecting upon its true meaning, that truth is misunderstood and
error propagated and confirmed. I now purpose to review this
subject in its bearing on the Divine character; God represents
Himself as a just God, as equal in his decisions, as a merciful
God, as hating injustice, as a God of love, as being love per-
sonified. Love is said to be of God, and his love is described as
passing knowledge. The Divine Being appeals to man’s judgment
and intelligence as capable of understanding and appreciating his
character and acts, consequently to our sense of his justice, it is
therefore no act of presumption in us to study the subject, but
rather one of duty. Are not my ways equal lis a question put


by God Himself to the house of Israel, and He thus submits the
judgment of his actions to human reason. I ask then, is it in
accordance with man’s conceptions of justice and mercy to punish
with eternal torture, an intelligent being, for the sins of a short
life? Is it not far more so to execute sentence of death, or
annihilation upon him, after judgment and condemnation. This
punishment, is designated, in the New Testament, as the second
death, and is always described as following, and being the result
of, trial at the bar of Divine justice, and in accordance with the
sentence of condemnation and judgment, first passed upon the
criminal in open court before assembled angels and men. This
second death, is, in fact, the extermination, destruction, annihila-
tion of God’s enemies, and not one of prolonged and exquisite
torture, but simply such as must naturally and unavoidably be
the result upon the mind and feelings, as described by the terms,
weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth. lam of opinion, that
all will not be subjected to this extreme sentence, but, that there
will be different degrees of punishment, according to circumstances,
and having in view the reclamation and ultimate reception of the
transgressor into Divine favour. I found this upon God s character
of mercy and justice, and upon the words of our Saviour Himself,
who, when speaking of the sin against the Holy Ghost, clearly
indicates, that there are sins to which the Divine forgiveness may
be extended in the “world to come.” Rest perfectly assured
God will cause no punishment to be inflicted which is not perfectly
consistent with infinite wisdom, justice, love, mercy and power,
but that eternal torture will form no part of his administration,
unless, under circumstances which demand its infliction, but never
as ]\l r . believes with one indiscriminate disregard to the
appeals of justice, love and mercy. To suppose such recklessness
and cruelty to form any part of the Divine administration, is an
insult to the majesty of God and human reason. In the 18th
chapter of Ezekiel and verses 26, 27, and 28, God appeals to the
house of Israel and says, “ When a righteous man turneth away
from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and dieth in them;
for his iniquity that he doeth he shall die. Again, when the
wicked turneth away from his wickedness that he hath com-
mitted, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall save his
soul alive. Because he considereth, and turneth away from all his
transgressions that he hath committed, he shall suiely live, he
shall not die.” Two conditions are here spoken of, one relating to
time, and another to eternity; if the righteous turns from a
virtuous holy life and dies a sinner, for his offemes committed
during life he is to die a second time, or in other words, if he
became extinct in this world, while practising his wickedness, for
the iniquities thus committed his soul would be destroyed, anni-
hilated in the next world, while, on the other hand, a wicked man


forsaking his sins and acting righteously dies, in this reformed
state he shall save his soul alive, or, instead of being annihilated,
he shall possess eternal life. Thus God vindicates the equity and
justice of his actions. Not the remotest allusion is made to
torment, torture, or eternal burning. It is evident to my mind
that a judicial decision and sentence is alluded to, and that it is
the soul that is meant, and not merely the bodily life. He shall
save his soul alive, or preserve it from annihilation, for God is
able to destroy both body and soul in hell fire. God, I admit, is
“not merely a God of love,” but that He is also one of justice,
wisdom, and mercy; but I deny, as an insult to his sacred and
glorious nature, that He is one of cruelty and injustice, and I pity
the man who is so indifferent to the sufferings of his fellowmen, so
deaf to all feelings of humanity as to exclaim “ What is it to me,
so far as I am personally concerned, whether the wicked go into
everlasting punishment, or whether they should be annihilated.”
It is, in fact, as good as to say, “ all the world may be damned, so
that lam saved.” It is the sentiment of a heart of stone. How
different are the feelings animating the intelligent circles in Old
England ! How different to that Divine person who, when con-
templating the calamities about to fall upon Jerusalem, as He
drew near and beheld the city, wept over it, yes, He who will be
the judge of all, and pronounce the sentence “depart, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire,” wept over Jerusalem, and at the tomb of
Lazarus. Could He torture ] No! Were the woes of others a matter
of indifference to Him ? No ! “ What is it to me V has sounded
from has been echoed through the district, and
re-echoed back to from whence, it is to be hoped, it may never
more be heard, “There are multitudes” says the Rev. J. B.
Brown, B. A.,* who say, “We do not believe in this eternally
vengeful God.” I think that I may say, that the Church of our
day, in the person of all its most intelligent members and teachers,
has renounced this idea of eternal torture as too horrible. There
is an almost universal consent to abandon this tradition of
Calvinism amongst our wisest and most influential ministers.”
Nothing but an overwhelming sense of the reality and the misery
of sin, reaching to the roots of the being, and mingled with all its
experience, could make it for a moment credible to man, that the
sin of a little span of fleeting life which is born with the taint
of corruption, could draw on itself the sentence of unutterable
torment through never-ending ages, under the judgment of a God
who blends infinite tenderness with absolute righteousness in every
degree.” The trust of Christendom in theterrrors of hell through
all these ages has been faithless and degrading, and has had a chief
share in producing that dreary indifference to the claims of Christ
* The doctrine of annihilation in the light of the Gospel of love, by
James Baldwin Brown, 8.A., 1875.


and his Gospel, that blindness to the realities of the higher world,
which after eighteen centuries of Christian teaching and
influence, the Church has bitterly to deplore.” One more remark
and I have done. When I take a review of the amount of intense
suffering there is endured in this world, I am disposed to think
an all merciful and just God may not be indisposed to permit it to
have its influence on his decisions on the great day of judgment.
I, like Mr. look upon the Supreme Being “as a God of
infinite truth and infinite justice,” but I look upon eternal torment,
not in the light he does, as consistent with these glorious
attributes, but as inconsistent with, and opposed to them, and,
when received in connection with God’s other attributes of love
and mercy, as antagonistic to his grand and holy nature. With
your permission, Mr. Editor, I purpose to reply to Mr. ’s
observations in connection with the identification of the Lost Ten
Tribes of Israel in another letter.
I remain, sir, yours, &c.,
LAYMAN.
Note. — The doctrine of annihilation as I view it and under-
stand it, has removed a cloud from my view which that of eternal
torment previously cast over the Divine Being, enabling me
to view Him, in all the refulgence of his grand and glorious nature,
which fills my soul with feelings of rapturous delight when I reflect
upon Him in the light of a God of love, mercy, and justice. I
therefore recommend it to the acceptance of my fellow Christians,
with humble confidence, as worthy of their most serious and
prayerful consideration.
(To the Editor.)
Sir, — I was under the impression that when a person wrote a
letter in a newspaper over his own signature, and any other person
thought proper to answer it, that answer would not be published
by the Editor unless signed by the writer. I was not a little
disappointed, therefore, when yesterday evening I saw your last
issue at a friend’s house, and in that paper an answer to mine
which was published a fortnight ago, which was written with a
view to correct some ideas, written by Layman, with regard to
eternal punishment, and the discovery of the Lost Ten Tribes
in the Anglo Saxon people. When I wrote that letter it was my
intention to have no further communication on the subject
mentioned above, nor should I write on the present occasion, but
thinking that this letter may catch the eye of some who are too
curious to dive into the deep seci’et things of God, and are neglect-
ing the “ one thing needful.” I can give your correspondent no
higher information on the subject of eternal punishment than


what I have done as contained in St. Matthew xxv., being
the words of God Himself.—A pure, a holy God—a God who
cannot lie. When He hath said it, then surely there is nothing to
discuss. “ Hath He said it, and shall He not do it ? ” “ Who art
thou, O man, that thourepliest against God?”—Blessed for ever be
his holy name there is salvation for all those who will accept it
in the way He has appointed, and if any are lost it is because
they “ will not come to Him that they may have life.” I heard a
faithful minister say in his sermon “ that he believed God was so
holy, so just, that all who may be lost would be compelled to say
“ Amen to their own damnation.” May neither you, Mr. Editor,
nor I, nor your correspondent, know from experience what eternal
punishment is. That there is such a thing I believe, for God hath
said it; but I think it very likely that in this dispensation we are
not capable of lenowing tuhat it is, it is expressed by so many terms
in Scripture, “ but as eye hath not seen, nor heart conceived, the
glory that God hath prepared for those who love Him,” so also we
cannot conceive what that eternal punishment will be, in a place
prepared for the devil and his angels.
I wish your correspondent to understand that the Bible was not
written to satisfy our curiosity but to teach us the way to heaven.
It is quite possible to be able to argue well upon different difficult
parts of Scripture, and yet miss the narrow path to everlasting life.
I am sir, yours truly,
February 13th, 1877.
(To the Editor,)
Sir, — Mr. evidently considers his opinion entitled to con-
siderable weight, or he would not have felt constrained, under a
sense of duty, to have given it publicity, but, unsupported, as it is,
by any argument, and put forth with so much pure egotism, I feel a
difficulty in replying without animadverting upon the style of his
letter in this respect. It, to my mind, also, manifests such
indifference to biblical study, and a right understanding of God’s
utterances and their bearing upon the highest interests of humanity,
as to display a very restricted knowledge of their meaning and
importance. Self-security, being, with him, the grand ultimatum ;
of which, being apparently well assured in his own mind, he
appears to be perfectly indifferent to the interests or fate of others,
and thus manifests a want of that kindliness of nature so essentially
•requisite to the adornment of a Christian, as disqualifies and
disentitles him to that influence for good, his opinion would other-
wise possess. ‘ ‘ What is it to me,” what God has done with the
Ten Tribes'? the subject with me is hardly worth a thought.”
Not worth a thought;! No ! Why! Are they not God’s peculiar


people whose history, in connection with God, occupies the greater
portion of the Bible, and forms the grand theme of prophetic
verse ! a people in whose destiny that of all the other nations of
the world is involved 1 So long as Mr. believes himself an
adopted child, or a sprig of the wild olive engrafted into the
genuine stock, he cares not what becomes of the rest; the lineal
descendents of Abraham, or whether they are in existence or not,
fbis is nothing to him. He is safe, what is it to him what God
has said about, or done with them ! Being of a very different
opinion I shall briefly attempt to show the vast importance of the
subject as connected with the human family at large. “In thy
seed (Abraham’s) shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.”
On these people, at this very moment, hangs the validity of the
Bible and the truth of this glorious prediction. If they are not
in existence, then the Bible is false, our faith is vain, and scepticism
triumphant. Is the subject then one “ hardly worth the thought”
of intelligent men ! Is it not one of thrilling, vital, interest !
What can be made of prophecy if the Ten Tribes are not in
existence! If the clear word of prophecy is baseless, what
becomes of the Bible, as the revealed word of God ! What
regard can be had to the declaration “ Thus saith the Lord !” . Is
this “not worth a thought!” The ablest professors of biblical
learning and history have fully recognised the immense importance
of a right understanding of prophecy, and are at this time deeply
engaged in its investigation. Is it nothing to be the most favoured
nation of God under heaven, to be lc the head and not the tail 1 ’
If we, English, are the descendents of Joseph, then our people will
be blessed of God above all other peoples under the canopy of
heaven. Listen to the words of Moses, who, speaking of Joseph,
says, “ Blessed of the Lord be his land, for the precious things of
heaven, for the dew, for the deep that watereth beneath, and for
the precious things brought forth by the sun, and for the precious
things put foi’th by the moon, and for the chief things of the
ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting
hills, and for the precious things of the earth and the fulness
thereof, and the good will of him that dwelt in the bush. His
glory is like the firstlings of his bullocks, and his horns, the horns
of unicorns ; with them he shall 'push the people together to the ends
of the earth." They are the ten thousands of Ephraim and they
are the thousands of Manasseh.—Dent. xxxv. 14-17. Ephraim
never realized the fulfilment of this blessing during any period or
past history, neither has Manasseh, nor any other tribe of Israel,
it is therefore either now fulfilling, or to be fulfilled. Neither can it
take place unless Ephraim and Manasseh are now in existence,
consequently, if they are not, the whole prediction is a fabulous
imposition. The whole of the Ten Tribes were to be lost to
history, to lose their old name, and to be known by another, yet


they were to be found, to repossess the land of their forefathers,
and to be the special favourites of God. Where then are they 1
Ephraim was also to “ become a multitude of nations —Gen.
xlviii. 19. In no nation of the world are these glorious
predictions perfectly accomplished, but it may be confidently
affirmed they are at this moment partly fulfilled, and wholly
fulfilling in the English nation and Anglo-Saxon race and in none
other. Is this a “ matter hardly worth a thought V Is it no
matter of interest, of no importance, to be connected with, or to
form one of a nation holding so grand, so important, and so
marvellous a position as this; namely, the first and greatest
nation in the world, the favourite of heaven 1 For the prevailing
ignorance and indifference to this important subject our clergy
are responsible. Her Majesty the Queen is not so, having
encouraged Mr. E. Hine, in his investigations, by reading his
publications, and according to him her public patronage. (See
Note.) To say our bishops and clergy were not in fault, would
be inconsistent with truth. Instead of seizing with avidity, and
anxiously investigating this surpassingly interesting subject in
connection with biblical truth and their own national past and
future history, their apathy and ignorance is deplorable. Their
language is, in subtance, that of Mr. . Can anything be more
culpable 1 Is it not their duty to investigate, and if they believe
Mr. Hine and his followers’ views are in accordance with Scripture,
to enforce and support them by every legitimate means at their
disposal, and if erroneous to expose their fallacy, and denounce
them 1 There are some honourable exceptions such as the Rev.
Hulton King, in Sydney, and the Rev. W. C. Hawkins,
on the Manning River ; but as a body they display an
apathy and indifference, or an ignorance of biblical knowledge
highly censurable and disgraceful, and are, to use prophetic
language, of old, “as watch dogs” idlers, that will not bark,
or “ dumb dogs” that connot bark, in either case they are
men holding positions for which they are eminently disqualified.
That there are earnest godly men amongst the clergy who are
acting with vigour and earnestness in their holy calling, who are
feeling their way cautiously and honestly, there is no reasonable
doubt, and who, it is devoutly to be hoped, will be up and doing
either in support of truth or the refutation of error. May God
bless, guide and prosper all such.
I remain, sir, your obedient servant,
LAYMAN.
Note. — Mr. Edward Hine’s works may be had at Mr. C. E.
Fuller’s Bible Depot, 387, George-street, Sydney. They are
strongly recommended to the earnest perusal of all anxious
enquirers after truth. A small pamphlet entitled “ Ephraim or


the Lost Ten Tribes of Israel,” may also be procured at the same
place, and will be found to support Mr. Hine’s views, and to have
received his commendation.
(To the Editor.)
Sir, —When Layman in your issue of 20th January last, wrote
a paragraph on the doctrine of annihilation and the discovery of
the Lost Ten Tribes in the Anglo-Saxon people, he invited a
discussion between those who believe in this doctrine, and those
who do not, he says, “ both cannot be right—how is this differ-
ence to be cleared up I —certainly not by vituperation and
uncharitable conversation or writing .” How was I, then, surprised to
read in your paper of 17th February, his answer to mine of 24th
January, which was not written to discuss the doctrine, but to
express my own views, which I believe to be scriptural. In that
letter lam accused of having a heart of stone—of having no love
for the souls of my fellowman—and not caring who went to hell
so that I may be saved myself. This is certainly putting a mean-
ing upon my words I never intended, it is something like the
manner he explains away the words everlasting punishment and
life eternal.
I know you lawyers can with ease,
Turn words to meanings as you please.
I wish from my heart that the whole subject was dropped. I
believe it has tended to make careless people more careless still.
What we want among us is home religion, a closer walk with God.
If the time and talent that has been devoted to search out
mysteries had been used to bring wanderers home, with God’s
blessing there might have been good fruit, at all events it would
have been labouring in the right direction.
And now, Mr. Editor, I shall have done with the question. I
shall write no more to you on this subject. I dare say Layman
will lay his hand heavily upon me, but it is not my wish te
retaliate.
Yours, &c.,
(To the Editor.)
Sir, —In reply to Mr. ’s letter of February 25th, I adopt the
language of Pope as my motto, more especially the last two lines :
Teach me to feel another’s woe,
To hide the faults I see ;
That mercy I to others show,
That mercy show to me.
Mr. says, “ I dare say Layman will lay his hand heavily
upon me, but it is not my wish to retaliate.” In this language is
embodied a latent threat; he may, or he may not retaliate, but it


is not his wish. While I have no desire to rouse this dormant fire
of wrathful ire, it is my determination to speak out plainly and
honestly, what I deem his language justly demands at my hand,
assui’ing him, at the same time, I am not influenced by personal
feelings. All I have to deal with in my remarks are the observa-
tions he has placed before the public, which, coming from him as a
lay reader, or preacher, in connection with the Church of England,
may seem to carry more weight than they would if emanating
from a person who makes no profession as a teacher of others. If I
have put a meaning on his words, “ he never intended,” the blame
rests with himself, in his misapplication, or selection of those he
has used to convey his thoughts. I maintain I have given their
legitimate import, not overdrawn, but such as any intelligent
person would naturally give to them. Neither have I laid myself
open to be taxed with quibbling, by an attempt to “ turn words
to meanings as I please.” I have, I hope, given to the words of
Scripture their true and legitimate interpretation according to the
rules of common sense, although it may not be in conformity with
the theology of the schools of divinity, and that my deductions are
logically correct. At all events I deem I have a right to do so till the
contrary is proved, a task which Mr. has not yet attempted.
“ What is it to me, so far as I am personally concerned, whether
the wicked go into everlasting punishment, or whether they should
be annihilated 1 ” Surely this is plain unmistakeable language.
“ With regal’d to the Lost Ten Tribes, the subject with me is
hardly worth a thought. ” Is not this equally so 1 If they
“ convey a contrary meaning to that intended ” why does not Mr.
give the public the correct one 1 ? I cannot see how I could have
dealt with these expressions less severely than I have done, neither
do I think more so than they deserved. I believe eternal torment
to be clearly inconsistent with the character of God, whose mercy
endureth for ever; “ who delighteth not in the death of the sinner ”
and whose “tender mercies are over all his works.” “ Who keep-
eth not his anger for ever.” Could such a being consign an
intelligent, highly sensitive, loving, noble-minded, living being, for
the sins committed during a period of twenty years, many of which,
perhaps, originated from educational errors, from natural impulse,
from example, or severe temptation, to eternal torture, of either
mind or body 1 The thing is incredible. It is too inconsistent with
the attributes of the ever glorious and eternal God. Would it be
in accordance with justice and mercy 1 Reader! answer this
question. A being “ born in sin and shapen in iniquity,” and thus,
naturally wicked, and never regenerated by the Holy Spirit, never
brought under the sound of the Gospel of peace, and thus inca-
pable of appreciating the love of a holy and just God, must be
offensive to Him ; could never be admitted into his sacred presence
and that such a being must necessarily be shut out as an offensive


and repulsive object, is quite clear, but would it accord with justice
and mercy to retain such a poor creature in exquisite torment for
ever and ever 1 ? No ! Would not its annihilation be the natural
impulse of an all-powerful, merciful and just God 1 Yes! Such
is human reason, and it is in accordance with human action. A
merciful man will stamp to death with his foot and annihilate the
vermin which infest his cultivated ground and destroy its produce.
Would he torture them ? No ! Can man be more compassionate
than God 1 that God who has said “ Can a woman forget her
•sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of
her womb 1 Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee.”—
Isaiah lix. 15. What? that God who is of more tender heart
towards his people than a mother to her sucking child, torture, or
sanction its infliction, through eternal ages 1 Impossible ! Did He
permit Abraham, when He tested his faith, to plunge his knife into
his beloved son Isaac 1 No ! His compassionate nature forbad it. If
He sanctioned taking an eye for an eye, or a tooth for a tooth, it was
as an act of retributive justice, and not one emanating from a cruel or
vindictive nature. This r etaliatory law was subsequently abrogated
by Him who is the appointed judge of all men, and that too for this
important reason, that his disciples might be the children of God,
who causes the sun to shine and the rain to descend upon the evil
as well as on the good. The same glorious Being, when agonizing
upon the cross, asked forgiveness of his heavenly Father for his
malignant and cruel murderers, on the plea that they acted in
ignorance. Is it then at all probable or consistent, that such a
Being, in whom, as God, there is no variation nor shadow of
turning, will submit the wicked to the pains of eternal torment 1
“ Who can believe it, let him believe it, but the end of such belief
is the abyss of atheistic despair. How could man ever believe it 1
How could such a creed ever plant itself in the Christian world and
grow 1 ” It has been planted, has grown and thrived under priestly
and clerical culture, since these teachers have departed from the
simple and primitive teaching of the Apostles and early followers
of Christ. “ Torment is the priest’s scourge.” “We hear some-
thing of the souls whom the terror has driven to the priest,
nothing of the multitudes, whom it has brutalised and destroyed.”
“ All cruel punishments brutalize the heart ” said Swift. The doc-
trine of eternal torment is a part of the grand masterpiece of
“ a lie ” invented by the devil to lead mankind astray from truth.
It has given a position to the preachers of the Gospel they were
never intended to hold by their Divine Master, from which has
originated purgatory, masses and prayers for the dead, and indul-
gences. It has, by these agencies, filled the coffers of the church
by working upon the credulity and ignorance of mankind, a state
of things which, thanks to God, is now rapidly giving place to
learning and intelligence, thus laying the axe to the roots of the


trees of imposition, bigotry and ignorance. On the other hand, Mr.
believes the doctrine of annihilation “ has tended to make
careless people, more careless still.” I ask that gentleman, and all
who hold the same opinion, which makes the most impression upon
our better nature, mercy, love, kindness, and forbearance, or severity,
hatred, vindictiveness and cruelty ! Justice tempered with the for-
mer or the latter 1 Mr. says “he wishes from his heart the
whole subject was dropped.” Why drop contending for “ the truth
once delivered to the saints,” and hold fast error ! What! “ don’t
disturb men’s prejudices ” when they are opposed to the character
of God, contrary to common sense, to truth, and our own and others
eternal happiness ! The idea is monstrous, hi ot solve the problems
on which, in the minds of millions, hangs the validity of the Bible
as the revealed will and word of God ! Allow scientific scepticism
and ignorance to triumph ! I say be up and doing, search and
investigate, with all diligence, till the public mind is satisfied, if
that be possible. At all events let the servants of God be found at
their posts, watching and vigilantly discharging their important
duties. Drop the subject! No ! not for an instant. What are
the bishops and clergy about! Their trumpets utter uncertain
sounds, while the enemy is at work. Too many are living at ease
in Zion while the foundation of her bulwarks are being undermined.
Is the old theology of the universities and colleges true or false 1 is
a question agitating the public mind, and is one which must be an-
swered ; it must be either affirmed, or abolished, as one worthy or
unworthy of belief. Do the clergy understand the Bible! To the
majority there can be little doubt it is a sealed book, they are
behind the times in which they live, and are being outstripped by the
laity in biblical knowledge, and, as a body, losing all hold upon the
public mind as interpreters of the revealed will of God. It was truly
said by the Archbishop of Canterbury the other day that “many of
theclergy were unable to meet the questions put to them by intelligent,
mechanics, who were not to be answered with superstitious notions.”
“Is the* pulpit losing its power ?” inquires Mr. Scott, at the
Wesleyan Association at Adelaide, the other day. “Many believe it
has, was his reply.” “ The pulpit is behind the times and no longer
considered the only authority on religious and moral matters. He
thought this result inevitable, because the press was not trammelled
by past traditions, and the conservations which hampered the pulpit,
but was subject to a sifting and wholesome criticism to which preach-
ing was not amenable. He sympathised with advanced thought,
and believed in the gradual unfolding of truth, and had no spmpathy
with the vulgar denunciation of advanced men, and of their works
as trash.” When the Master comes will He find faith on the earth ?
Yes, but not what it ought to be ! and who will be to blame! The
sleepy watchmen, and idle watchdogs, of the clerical profession.
Their Master will shortly be here, let them therefore take warning,


and be up and doing, ere it be too late. When He does come He
will take the reins into his own hands, establish a new order of
things, and then clerical duties will be brought to a close. Such
at least is the opinion, as we understand, of many learned and
intelligent men at the present moment, and is one which accords
with the views of the writer. Will nothing arouse these men to a
proper sense of the duty they owe to God and man ? Do they not
hold the most important and responsible trust in this world i If
those who hold the doctrine of annihilation are in the right, then
the followers of Calvin are in the wrong. Annihilationists being
in the right, believe the truth; and Calvinists being in the wrong,
believe a lie, and dishonour God, and vice versa. Is this of no
moment! I put this question with all respect and earnestness to Mr.
’s bishop, and all the other prelates and pastors of God’s
flock, both within and without the pale of the Church of England.
I say to them, if you wilfully neglect this manifest duty, it will be
to imperil your own souls. You being stewards of the oracles of
God, it is your duty more than that of any other order of men to
expose error and maintain truth, even at the risk of the loss of
worldly goods, and if need be, of life itself. It is no uncommon
thing to hear it said “ the Bible is a sealed book to most of the
clergy,” a remark which, if annihilation is the truth, and the “ Ten
Lost Tribes of Israel” are found in the English nation and Anglo-
Saxon races, is undoubtedly true, since few, or comparatively few,
believe in either the one or the other. Don’t let the matter drop.
Agitate! Agitate! fellow Christian. Tell us what truth is
known and propagated; be found doing, for the Master is
knocking at the door. The doctrine of eternal torment in hell is
the main stay of the Church of Rome, and by her masterly use of
it her coffers are constantly replenished. Establish that of
annihilation as the clear truthful exposition of the revealed will
of God, and Rome’s enormous fabric of error will crumble rapidly
to pieces. If on the other hand eternal torment is a reality, and
the teaching of Scripture, Rome is established on a firm basis. I
view eternal torment as a doctrinal leaching to be a verification of
the declaration of the Apostle Paul (2 Thes. ii. 11, 12) that
for the want of the love of truth, or a determined longing after it,
God has sent a strong delusion, as the Apostle declared he would,
that a lie should be believed by way of punishment upon those
who, from choice, reject the truth. Why ? Because they prefer
the false rendering of God’s Word as being more congenial with a
corrupt nature, and not because it is not within the reach of
human comprehension. We hear of clergymen being inhibited by
their bishops from preaching what they conscientiously believe to
be the Word of God, and which even bishops dare not deny, though
they dare not preach it, but hinder those who would. They put
shackles upon divine truth at the peril of their own souls.


Would it not be the more wise and safe course to encourage
discussion and investigation, so that, if the doctrine be true, it may
be as wisely and speedily propagated as possible, and if false,
exposed, and at once abandoned 1 Attempts to suppress truth
when unpalatable to old and erroneous doctrines, while it savours
of persecution and illiberality, generally defeats the object aimed
at. With these remarks I now close my correspondence in
reply to Mr. ’s remarks.
I remain, sir, yours kc.,
February 29th, 1877. LAYMAN.
(To the Editor.)
Sir, — I send yon the following remarks for publication, in the
humble hope that they may throw some light upon the subject of
eternal punishment now attracting so much attention. In the
Gospel of St. John v. 28, 29, our Lord Jesus Christ says,
the hour is coming in the “ which all that are in the graves shall
hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done
good, unto the resurrection of life ; and they that have done evil,
unto the resurrection of damnation .” Jesus Christ is here
speaking of the dead as a whole, and in so doing, distinctly
describes two kinds of resurrection, and two distinct classes of
persons who will be raised at his call; first “ they that have done
good,” and secondly “ they that have done evil,” to the first is
allotted the gift of life , and to the second the sentence of
damnation. This is no isolated declaration, but is, in substance,
that announced by our Lord on all occasions, when alluding to
the same tremendously important, and interesting subject. No
one doubts what is meant by “ eternal life,” but vast numbers
have great misgivings as to the meaning of damnation, the
majority of people believing it to mean eternal torment, and no
doubt, such has been taught by theologians, during many centuries,
nevertheless it is self-evident, there can, by no 'possibility, be
torment, where there is no vitality, yet, when the state of damna-
tion is alluded to, it is termed “ the second death,” and our Lord,
the greatest authority on the subject, informs us in the 24th verse
of the same chapter, that “ everlasting life, is not coming into
condemnation” but, “as passed from death unto life,” from which,
the conclusion is, that to pass into condemnation, is, into death,
or in other words, into extermination or annihilation. Being
“ cast into the lake of fire” is emphatically said to be the second
death, the words being “ This is the second death.” To this alb
will be subjected whose names are not found written in the book
of life (Revelations xx. 14, 15.) The church at Smyrna is
exhorted to be “ faithful unto death,” for they are promised to have
bestowed upon them a crown of life, and shall not be hurt of the


second death (Revelations ii. 10, 11) —mark the conditions,
faithfulness to the period of the first death, is to ensure immunity
from “ the second death," or, in other words, those who are faithful
till their extinction or annihilation as to this world takes place,
will be exempted from extinction or annihilation in the next.
In Rev. ii. 23, vi. 8, a remarkable form of expression is made use
of, namely, “to kill with death.” This makes death an instrument,
or converts that which is a cause into an effect, language which is
inconsistent with reason, if understood as translated; a more
consistent translation must therefore be looked for. Ordinary
death is not final extinction, it does not reach beyond time ; it is
extermination only so far as the subject of it is connected with
this world. A different result must, therefore, be looked for. In
the cases alluded to, if either the word extinction or annihilation
be substituted, the passages convey a meaning recognised by
reason. “I will kill her children with annihilation,” I will give
power to him whose name is death, or exterminator, “ to kill with
the sword, and with hunger, and with annihilation, and with the
beasts of the earth,” from whence the natural inference is, that
those so slain, will never know the resurrection, but be at once
and for ever exterminated with relation both to time and eternity.
According to this view of the subject, if a correct one, a large
portion of the human family living at the period when the fourth
seal is opened, will not know the resurrection, having been pre-
viously annihilated. Again, “ being cast into the lake of fire ” con-
stituting “ the second death , eternal torment must be an impossibility,
since death is extinction. That the second death will be accompanied
with fearful mental torture, as well as bodily pain, appears certain,
and being final, it is eternal, since all really final acts or events
are eternal and unrepealable. In this respect the final punish-
ment of the wicked is eternal, and the suffering consequent upon
it, however short, is also eternal, being final, complete and ended.
The result is eternal to the condemned, being irrevocable and
final. We may rest perfectly assured that nothing will take
place on this solemn occasion, which is inconsistent with God’s
character as a just, holy, merciful and loving God—nothing more
than the necessity of the case demands, and the justice of which
will be self-evident, and will be universally admitted, or which
will cast a shade of regret over the brilliant joys of heaven. A
criminal condemned to death by an earthly judge, suffers more in
the contemplation of his fate, than from the act which deprives
him of life. He feels, no doubt, every desire of his heart, every
hope, every enjoyment cut off for ever; remorse, sorrow, revenge
and despair may, one and all fill the mind ; he knows he is about
to be exterminated, all is lost, and, so far as this world is con-
cerned, eternally. His only hope, if penitent, is in the pardoning
mercy of God, obtainable through faith in the redemption


puichased for himself by Jesus Christ, who has “destroyed the
power of death,” over those who believe in Him, “ and brought life
and immortality to light.” The earthly criminal may, therefore,
under this influence, die in peace, under “ the full and certain
hope _ of a second life, of purity and peace, and of eternal
duration. Look now at the case of the impenitent sinner con-
emned at the bar of God. The records have been searched.
There are books kept, one of which records the names of all those
wlO have obtained the forgiveness of sins, or the divine favour
during life, and all whose names are not found in this book
which is designated “ The book of life,” are condemned to
undergo “ the second death,” which is the execution of the penal
sentence of eternal destruction or extinction. The torment of
mind which must be the natural result of the perception and
magnitude of the loss sustained, and, from the utter hopelessness
of the case, the rush of despair, self-reproach and anguish of mind,
may well, be supposed to produce “ weeping, wailing, and gnashing
of teeth. Could any words depict greater misery or agony, or
any punishment be more perfect, more just, or more fearful in its
iesult'l inflicted, not by the benevolent Creator Himself, but what
may be termed self-inflicted, since it will be the natural result of
the powers of mind possessed by an intellgent creature like
man, whose intellect grasps at once the hideous mistake of a mis-
spent earthly career, its stupendous result, and irretrievable
natuie. .As the seed has been sown so the reaping will be
mercy will give place to justice. The records are mdelible and
unalterable, and the punishment eternal, final, and unalter-
able, yet strictly natural as cause and effect. The means
employed to extinguish the second brief period of life allotted to
the wicked, and effect their second death are indestructible, beino-
unquenchable and everlasting fire, prepared, not for man, but for
the devil and his angels. Hone of these conditions necessitate
lingering torture, neither, if employed to effect a second death,
could they be productive of torment beyond the time required to
produce the extinction of life in the condemned, may destroy life
instantaneously, and thus prove a death dictated by the infinite
mercy of Him “ who is able to ” and will “ destroy both soul and
body in hell.” Mark the word, for it is one made use of by the
appointed judge Himself, to “destroy,” not torment, body and soul
m hell.. The object of the Divine Being, we feel justified in
saying, is evidently the annihilation, not the torment of his sinful
and rebellious subjects. We read of soul and bodv being destroyed •
of the one Great Lawgiver—able to destroy—of the body of sin
being destroyed of the presumptuous and self-willed being like
natuial brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, who shall
utterly perish in their own corruption—of the destruction of them
that believe not of the way which leadeth to destruction—of


vessels of wrath fitted to destruction—of those whose end is
destruction —of being punished with everlasting destruction, and
of lusts which drown men in destruction, all of which passages
imply extinction or annihilation. Against this array of texts,
there is but one which expressly states that torment, in any form,
to be inflicted hereafter, will be perpetual, and this applies to the
devil, who is to be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where
the beast and false prophet are, and shall be tormented day and
night (Rev. xx. 10). The devil is here represented as to be cast
into the lake of fire, a place especially prepared for him, but made
use of for the destruction of the wicked. The devil being a spirit,
the nature of the torment to be thus inflicted upon him can only be
conjectured • it may be largely mental, it cannot be corporeal, and
must be of a peculiar character to reach him as a spirit, for while it
is destructive to man, it is evidently not so to him. The case of the
devil and man is widely different, the one being the victim, and the
other the victimiser, and manifests the justice of God who thus
mitigates the punishment He causes to be inflicted upon the devil’s
deluded followers, while upon the arch-fiend himself, who deceived
them, He inflicts a perpetual state of misery, it is presumable com-
mensurate with the eternal life of happiness, of which he has
purposely and maliciously been instrumental in depriving them, as
well as the inconceivable amount of suffering he has caused during
man’s mortal career, his inveterate hatred of God as the ringleader
of rebel angels, and the enemy of peace, happiness, and order,
both in heaven and on earth. In making this distinction the
justice and mercy of God is prominently displayed, a vast distinc-
tion being made by Him, in the punishment to be dealt out to the
authors of rebellion, sin and evil, and their sinful, but deluded
followers, the victims of his cunning and revenge. There is a
remarkable statement made by St. Paul in 2 Cor. ii. 15,16, which
demands consideration, he says “ For we are unto God a sweet
savour of Christ unto them that are saved, and in them that perish :
to the one, we are the savour of death unto death ; and to the other,
the savour of life unto life.” Two classes of persons are here re-
ferred to—those that are saved and those that perish. To the one,
through the Gospel he preached, he was the means of conveying a
taste or perception through one phase of death to another death, to
those who would perish, which is as much as to say, when those
came to die, who would be ultimately destroyed, they would have a
consciousness of their hopeless and lost condition; on the other
hand, those who were saved, through the instrumentality of the
preached Gospel, while still living, would enjoy a foretaste of that
future state of blessed life which is reserved for them. From this
it is shewn, that the unregenerate will experience natural death in
this world, resurrection, and then extinction from the world to
come, by the second death. The believer, during this life, though


having to pass through natural death, enjoys through faith, pardon-
ing mercy, helping grace, and a full assurance of a joyful
resurrection to eternal life. St. Paul leaves no doubt about the fate
of the unbeliever j—he will perish, or in other words be extermin-
ated, root and branch for ever, but not the remotest intimation does
he give of a prolonged life in misery or torment, extending through
eternal ages; we have to thank our uninspired teachers for that
doctrine—if doctrine we may call it. But on the other hand St.
Paul gives the most positive assurance of an endless life to all who
receive and are obedient to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Chiist.
If our clerical' brethren will persist in preaching what the Scriptures
do not teach, and what they cannot prove, why they must not be
surprised if the intelligent laity refuse to hear them, for it is the
duty of the laity to “ try the spirits and see whether they be of
God,” and not to be afraid of the terrors of men.
Here I shall stay ; having read the report of the “ London
Conference on Conditional Immortality sent to you foi
publication, and seeing that this important and surpassingly
interesting subject is in the hands of distinguished scholars,
who are so vigorously applying the axe to the root of
this enormous and shameful heresy, found only in . the
traditions and writings of uninspired men, 1 joyfully leave it in
their hands. To know its origin, and how it took root and grew,
would be to me most interesting. How it ever attained its magni-
tude and such firm hold of the minds of intelligent men is most
surprising. Surely we have had false teachers and have been led
to believe a lie, because we did not sufficiently love the truth and
seek where alone it can be found. I thank God that I have lived
to see the day when the delusion is vanishing, and men are emerg-
ing from the dismal shade. The God of love will now appear to
the wise in the brighter refulgence of his glorious attribute,
unobscured by the mist of ignorance, bigotry, superstition or unbe-
lief. Content to see the subject in the hands of those able and
accomplished scholars and divines, who have so ably, eloquently
and openly expressed their views at the London Conference, and
have determined their light shall shine far and wide, and who will
not be thrust aside by narrow-minded bigotry, ignorance, prejudice
or superstition, 1 leave it there. It would be presumption on my
part to enter further into it, so I lay down my pen until duty re-
quires me to resume it again in vindication of our Father’s character,
or in self-defence. I do this, Mr. Editor, with many thanks to you
for the generous manner in which you have placed your columns at
my disposal, and permitted me openly to avow my thoughts upon
this solemn subject.
I remain, sir, your obedient servant.
LAYMAN


Extract from a letter of the Rev. Mr. 0.
Some time ago some letters appeared in your journal signed
Layman. I know it has been reported far and wide that I was
the author of those letters; this I deny, and testify that such report
was utterly false. I suppose it is believed that I only believe in
conditional immortality. Well I maintain that there is not a Chris-
tian anywhere who does not believe in it. Your readers may be
astonished at this statement, but lam here to prove it. And
should they succeed in removing me out of their way, the truth will
still remain as long as there is a Bible left in the district, and
Layman lives to read it. jy[ r q
e Pi* e . V ‘ r ‘ not Layman, neither is he the author
ot letters signed Layman, which appeared in our columns some time
ago.]
(To the Editor.)
Dear Sir, Will you permit me to make a few remarks upon a
letter in your issue of the 27th ult., from Mr. . He says
e\ eiy thing is so plain about the doom of the finally impenitent that
there is nothing to discuss. Then why is there so many differing
opinions about it ? They may all be wrong, but it is certain they
are not all right, and I want to know which is right and which
wiong, or as they say in court, I want the truth, the whole truth
and nothing but the truth. If a man is fined, or imprisoned, or
whipped or banished from his country, it is punishment, and if he
is hanged, it is capital punishment, the severest that can be inflicted
on I JIl i in - And I think if the fear of death would not keep one from
a bad life, nothing else would. How could it be infinite mercy or
justice either to keep a poor wretch alive just to torment him, when
le could so easily be put out of the way, and an end put to his mis-
chief ; 1 think it would be infinite cruelty to keep him alive, and
besides it tells us in Revelation that there is to be no more pain.
How can that be if there is to be so many burning for ever and
never dying, I don’t believe it.
• tlien about the Lost Tribes. Mr. says the subject
is hardly worth a thought. This would just apply to a great deal
more that is in the Bible, if it applies to this question. I do not
know much about it, but it says in the Acts that the twelve tribes
hope to come to the promise, and I can find a great many things in
my Biole about the gathering of these tribes into their own land,
and think it is just as much deserving of my thoughts as anything
else in the Bible, and I would like to hear more about it. What
is the good of their preaching if they never explain these things to
us.. They pretend to know all about it, and when we want to know,
it is all a mystery.
Yours, &c.,
A. S.




