

PRICE THREEPENCE.
rto^f


TYRRELL’S nnU MIXED
“ The Baoklover'stm Bargain Shop”
CASTLEREAGHST.UW SYDNEY, N.S.W-


CSZECOZCTID EDITION - .]
TRUTH TRIUMPHANT;
BIGOTRY BAFFLED,
BEING
ll of (|alumnh^i.
BENJAMIN HOARE.
Religion, blushing, veils her sacred fires,
And, unawares, Morality expires.
Nor public flame, nor private dares to shine ;
No human spark is left, nor glimpse divine !
Lo! thy dread empire, Chaos, is restor’d;
Light dies before thy uncreating word._
Thy hand, base Pervert , lets the curtain fall.
And universal darkness buries all.
— Pope's Dunciad.
SECOUD THOTJSANTI.
HENRY FRANKS, MALOP STREET.
1879.
PRICE THREEPENCE.


PREFATORY NOTE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
It is but four days since the first edition of one thousand copies of this
pamphlet was published, and the supply is already almost exhausted.
This gratifying success has induced me to issue a second edition. This
will be published in both Adelaide and Sydney, and will thus, it is
hoped, within the limited range of the subjects its deals with, do some-
thing in both those places to counteract the falsehoods promulgated by
ignoiance and incendiarism.
With reference to the aspersions on the Catholic doctrine of prayers
for the dead, the charges of Catholic idolatry, and the alleged prohibition
of the authorised Scriptures, I say, to lay and clerical slanderers alike, in
the words of Balmez —“ I shall insist upon one thing, which you cannot
refuse me. Produce me a text of Scripture, a monument of the traditions
acknowledged as articles of faith in the Catholic Church, a decision of
the Councils or of the Pontiffs, showing your interpretations to be well
founded. Until you have done this, I have the right to tell you, that,
possessed with the desire of rendering Catholicity odious, you impute to
it doctrines which it does not profess, you attribute to it dogmas which
it does not acknowledge; that you are adversaries without candour
or honesty, and employ weapons disallowed by the laws of combat.”
In the following pages Mr W. J. Reid and the Rev. Mr Frazer are
fixed by their own statements in a logical dilemma, from which there is no
honorable escape save by retraction and apology.
B.H.


TRUTH TRIUMPHANT;
BIGOTRY BAFFLED.
Woe to the world because of scandal. For it must needs he that scan-
dals come ; nevertheless woe to that man hy whom the scandal cometh.
Matthew, Chap. 18, V. 7.
Polemical controversy is not a genial nor usually a congenial oc-
cupation. Even to those who love it, it is “ love’s labor lost;” for how
seldom are men converted from error by mere argument ! It is not
expected, then, in these pages, to open the eyes of the obstinately blind ;
it is enough to be able to show to the candid and ingenuous mind, the
form of falsehood in all its native ugliness.
A few days ago there was no idea of inditing these lines. It was
hoped that the Canadian Calumniator had left this fair town for
ever; and that the strife he had caused might be left to time and charity
to heal. But it is not so. Last week I had put into my hands a
pamphlet purporting to be a report of the farewell meeting in Geelong to
the ex-priest Chiniquy. From that pamphlet it appeared for the first time
that this farewell service was taken advantage of to
put forward some sort of serious reply to the serious
allegations publicly made against the veracity of the
Canadian apostate. I read the record of the proceedings
carefully and seriously. It was a duty to do so. I had
openly, publicly, and deliberately made most damaging accusations
against a fellow-being, charging him with offences, and giving the
proofs, which rendered him unfit for the companionship of mnorable
men. It was therefore due to him to give full heed to the best an-
swer he had to make.
The pamphlet mentioned contains, it may be presumed, that answer.
It is entitled—“ Farewell meeting with Pastor Chiniquy. Addresses de-
livered bv the Rev. C. Chiniquy and other ministers, at a meeting held in
the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Fenwick-street, Geelong, on Friday
evening, the 14th March, 1879.” On finishing the pe-
rusal, the idea that promptly occurred was—How true,
even yet, are the words of Solomon —“ There is noth-
ing new under the sun.” All the aspersions and calum-
nies collected together in that pamphlet have been repeated and refuted
more than a thousand times, and yet they were renewed before the
simple Fenwick-street audience with the unblushing effrontery that cha-
racterises some kinds of falsehood. The old Manichean motto was
“Lie ! Lie boldly ! Lie always !” Even this proves Solomon’s wise
truism ; for it is still the rule of the false teacher.


The notice taken of myself is gratifying and complimentary. For a
little while there was doubt as to whether the strictures contained in this
valedictory pamphlet called for any reply.
At first, I felt that they did not, and resolved to let an unhappy
episode fallout of sight, conscious that there was no further duty to perform
in the matter, while only such a puny attempt had been made to remove
a portion of the stigma fixed upon this apostate priest and his cause.
Hardly, however, was this resolution arrived at, when it transpired
that “ Pastor Chiniquy ” was about to return amongst us, and that he was
announced to lecture on “ Mariolatry,” a term which at once conveys a
slander and a reproach. Clearly then the contest was to be revived, not
by honestly and fairly and squarely meeting an opponent in contro-
versy ; not by an attempt to rebut the accusations made against
him ; but by the promulgation of a new set of calumnies. This fact
changed some very pacific purposes, and evoked a resolve to thrust a
lance into one or two other of the weak joints of my opponents’ deplor-
ably weak armour.
In order to be explicit, let us in a few words summarise what is
past. Fiarly in March last, the ex-priest Chiniquy came to Geelong.
Having heard him, I wrote of him as follows ;
He tells us, then, that he has been for 25 years walking in the darkness and death
of Roman Catholic superstition, idolising relics, worshipping images, practising and
witnessing priestly extortions, and otherwise playing the bigot or the villain for a
quarter of a century. By the grace of the great G-od, however, he has been snatched
from his evil, and is now a shining light of sanctification. He is, he says, the instru-
ment chosen by God, for the liberation of his countrymen from the bonds of error.
This is the modest introduction which “ Pastor Chiniquy ” gives of himself to a Gee-
long audience. He has burst suddenly into light after 25 years of the densest error and
superstition. He does not pretend to bring any new light or revelations to mankind,
but only that the light is new to him. But if he cannot shed any new light upon re-
formed communions, he can denounce with tenfold emphasis and authority, the super-
stitions he has abjured. This, as I gather from his preaching and his lectures, is his
principal mission. If he can make a little money for some Canadian friends and ‘‘ star
the provinces” at the same time, why there is no harm done. Have I described him
aright ? I think so. Let us, then, see how he performs his work. I find his last
lecture in Melbourne reported in Saturday’s Age, and one of the passages runs as fol-
lows :
“ For twenty-five years he had been a servant of the Church of Rome, and knew all
her secrets, which Protestants could not know, and would hardly believe if told. The
Church of Rome was a grand and perpetual conspiracy against all the rights of man
and the laws of God. People might say that it was not charitable to speak in that way
of that Church. But he assured them that he had no animosity against the Catholics.
In fact, he loved them dearly, for he had many times shed his blood whilst trying to
open their eyes and save them. The British people were busy in making money and in
improving their social position, and did not suspect the enemy which in the meantime
is destroying their liberty. If no change take place before long, England and her co-
lonies would fall into the hands of Rom?, and her people adopt the schemes of the Pope.
There was a powerful party in the Anglican church, composed of men of rank, wealth,
and intelligence, who were sworn to restore England to the Pope. Not long ago he
received a pamphlet setting forth those facts at great length, in which it stated upon
authority that 1,200 dukes, lords, Ministers of State, and other great and influential
persons belong to that organisation. In Victoria the same organisation existed, on a
smaller scale, but for the same purpose.”
Such was “ Pastor Chiniquy’s ” last deliverance in Melbourne. His first in Geelong
on Sunday last, judging by the printed reports of it, shows the Roman Catholics
equally well that he “loves them dearly.” He denounced their “superstition,” in good
pointed Saxon, as a fabric of lies and villainy : metaphorically tsampled upon their con-


fessional as a festering obscenity; and branded their priests as imposters and extor-
tioners who heartlessly rob the widow and the orphan of their toil-won means, under
pretence of buying, with the proceeds, the souls of their relatives from immortal tor-
ment. In order that I may not be suspected of misrepresenting this new apostle, let me
quote from a printed report of his address :
“ In order to be saved, the Church of Rome taught them that they must go through
thousands of things, and a shameful ceremony. Catholics had to kneel at the feet of a
man and tell him their secret thoughts, bad desires, and sins ; they had to disgrace
their self-respect by speaking to that man upon matters about which a man and woman
having any sGf-respect should never open their lips : they had to allow that man to
put most damning questions, and after that disgusting part was over, before their sins
could be forgiven, they had to fall on their knees in the dust, and to pray to images
from morning to night, and even then there was no happiness. When Roman Catho-
lics were dying, the priest told them that they would have to go through burning fires,
and must be burnt for thousands of years. If a man’s wife died, he had to give to the
priest every cent he possessed to get the priest to pray that his wife’s soul be taken out
of purgatory. They had to pay to get their wives and their children out of the fire
after leaving this earth.”
Last night he lectured. I was present. His discourse was a narrative of how and
why he left the Catholic Church. lam not about to assume to myself the champion-
ship of the Roman Catholic religion. Magna cst veritas et prcevalebit. The church is
in no need of defenders against such a foe. If she were, a thousand able light-inspired
pens would be to the fore, directed by truth, erudition, and ability. I write not, then,
for her defence ; but from the honest indignation that arises in every manly soul at the
sight of falsehood—gross, glaring, unmistakeable falsehood—flaunted in the face of
day and in the open impudent guise of shameless mendacityt
You think my language is strong. So it is. But not so strong as that which has
provoked it, nor so pointed as my facts. These I will pit, one by one, against this
“ Pastor’s ” statements.
1. Chiniquy's Fact. —The “ Pastor ” says he has been 25years in the Catholic Church
and knows all her secrets. — My Fact. —Though not born in the Catholic Church, I have
been 23 years in her holy communion, and I know all her secrets. I know her cathe-
chism, her dogmas, her tenets. These are her “ secrets.” They are summed up in the
love of souls and the desire for their salvation through Jesus Christ. Let the Pastor
specify any other secrets.
2. Chiniqtiy’s Fact.—“ The Church of Rome was a grand and perpetual conspiracy
against all the rights of man and laws of God.” —My Fact —As to the rights of man, 1
have never yet in one single instance had my rights as a man even slightly infringed on
by my church. Were the “ Pastor’s” statement true, mine could not be so. It may
be quite true that some obscure Canadian priest, of the same kidney perhaps as him-
self. in some distant and obscure parish, has played the tyrant and the extortioner with
his flock, and trampled upon man’s free rights. But such individual acts are as alien to
the principles of the tender loving Mother Church, as are the outrages of the Kellys
to the laws of our common society. As to her conspiracy against the laws of God, 1
shall content myself with saying that I know her teaching to me, from her altars and
her text books, has been the unadulterated charity of Christ.
3. — Chiniquy’s Fact —“ If no change take place, before long, England and her colonies
would fall into the hands of Rome, and her people adopt the sch<mes of the Pope.
There was a powerful party in the Anglican Church, composed of men of rank, wealth,
and intelligence, who were sworn to restore England to the Pope.”— My Fact. —This is
so evidently the assertion of a monomaniac, or a wild enthusiast, and so unsupported
by fact or argument, that it needs no serious answer save this : —lf “ Pastor Chiniquy”
knows this, he is a traitor to his Queen for not betraying the rebels and conspirators
against his Queen and country to justice- If he does not know it, he is a slanderer for
asserting it. Let him choose which horn of the dilemma he pleases.
4— Chiniquy's Fact —“ Roman Catholics, before their sins could be forgiven, had to
fall on their knees in the dust, and to pray to images and idols from morning to-night.”
— My Fact —This statement is evidently intended to have a general or universal appli-
cation. It must mean all Catholics, or the language is misleading. And further, it
must mean that the Church teaches the practice. Solemnly, such a thing has never once
in my whole life been inculcated upon me, nor as far as I know, upon any Catholics I
have ever known. The assertion, to my knowledge, is an unmixed falsehood, and com-
ing from a formerly educated Catholic, must have [been known to be so by the
utterer.


s.— Chiniquy’s Fact.—“ If a man’s wif 3 died, he had to give to the priest every cent
he possessed to get the priest to pray that his wife’s soul be taken out of purgatory.”—
My Fact. Pastor Chiniquj,” having been 25 years a priest, could not have made this
statement in ignorance. It is either true, or it is wilfully false. There can be no
middle term. I know it to be utterly false, for though numbers of deaths of my Catho-
lic acquaintances have been known to me, in not one have I known such a thing to
occur, though I have often heard it asserted by persons outside the communion who
knew no I challenge this ‘‘Pastor,” to quote a single passage, from the
Church’s authoritative teaching, that will lend any colour to, or support, his
calumny.
— Chiniquy’s Fact. —“ Roman Catholics are forbidden to read the Holy Scriptures
wherever the Church’s authority was in force, and were only permitted to do so here
because the law of the land protected the people against the Church’s tyranny,” —My
Fact—-' The following letter of His Holiness Pius YI. to the most Rev. Anthony Martini,
now Archpishop of Florence, on his translations of the Holy Bible into Italian, shows
the benefit which the faithful may reap from their having the Holy Scriptures in the
vulgar tongue : —“ Beloved Son—Health and Apostolical benediction !At a time that a
vast number of bad books which most grossly attack the Catholic religion are circu-
lated, even among the unlearned, to the great destruction of souls, you judge exceed-
ingly well that the faithful should be excited to the reading of the Holy Scriptures, for
these are the most abundant sources, which ought to he left open to everyone , to draw
from them purity of morals and of doctrine, to eradicate the errors which are widely
disseminated in these corrupt times. This you have seasonably effected, as you declare,
by publishing the sacred writings, in the language of your country, suitable to every-
one s capacity, especially when you show and set forth that you have added explana-
tory notes, which being extracted from the Holy Fathers, preclude every possible dan-
ger of abuse. ****** Given at Rome on the calends of April, 1878, the
fourth year of our Pontificate. Philip Buonamici, Latin Secretary.”
I have contented myself with the simple half-dozen point blank refutations of bald
falsehoods uttered against the Roman Catholic Church by this itinerant traducer,
whose shadow, lam truly sorrow, has ever darkened our town. When, I say, I am
sorry, it is not from the slightest apprehension for the eternal verities; but because of
the strife and bitterness and lasting animosity of a sectarian character which such a
firebrand must leave behind him. Nothing is easier than to fan into a blaze religious
discord. Nothing is more difficult than to allay it. In Geelong, there has been for
many years, peace and harmony and mutual good will between Catholics and Protes-
tants. Will this be the case in a week’s time, when “ Pastor Chiniquy ” has finished
his series of coarse vituperative attacks upon all that the Catholics hold holiest and
most sacred ? I fear not.
I deeply regret that so many estimable citizens, amongst whom I rank many per-
sonal friends, should have conceived it to be their duty to assist in heaping these pub-
lic vilifications and insults upon the cherished belief of not only a large proportion of
their fellow citizens, but at the same time upon that of millions of earth’s most pious,
gifted, and greatest children. I have, however, the consolation of knowing that a very
large section of the more liberal Protestant mind, utterly dissents from, and is nau-
seated at, the work of this mad or wicked mischief-maker.
. I would be the last to miscall, deride, or hold up to public ridicule, the religious opi-
nions of any man or set of men. Suiely “ Pastor Chiniquy ” has done no good work
in insulting and belying mine.
Instead of setting himself to answer these serious allegations, the
Pastor launched forth into a number of still more furiousdiatribesand blas-
phemous utterances about “ wafer gods,” “ dough christs,” and other
horrible ribaldries, and he was then more specifically arraigned in print
as follows:
“ 1 have publicly impugned “ Pastor Chiniquy’s” veracity. I have done so delibe-
rately. It is no light thing to do, and I well know the responsibility of the act. It is
not a thing I would have done before I had fully convinced myself beyond the possi-
bility of doubt of the absolute certainty of what I was stating. I specified the in-
stances in which to my knowledge this “ pastor” had been guilty of deliberate untruth.
These stand on record. They involve either one of two positions—either
“ Pastor Chiniquy ” is a public calumniator, or I am a deliberate slanderer and a bearer


of false witness against my neighbor. There is no escape for one of us. We both
know what we have stated, and what we are stating. The “ pastor ” has stated that
as a Catholic lam obliged to worship images, I say the statement is a wicked false-
hood. The “ pastor ” has stated that as a Catholic my Bible would not be free to me,
were it not for the protecting flag of Great Britain. I have quoted a Pope’s sign ma-
nual 101 years old to prove that his words were a wicked falsehood. The “pastor,”
according to printed reports, has stated that there exists in England and the colonies
a deep-laid conspiracy for the Pope against the throne and sovereignty of our Gracious
Queen. I reply that the statement, if he knows it to be true, proves him to be a traitor
for not betraying the criminals; if he does not know it, he is a slanderer for asserting
it. All these things, and more, I have solemnly set forth against him. If I have ma-
ligned him, there are the bar of justice and the bar of public opinion for my punish-
ment.
I then proceeded to quote from a pamphlet published by one of his
own congregatii n in Montreal, to show that he was as much discredited
there as here, and that his story of having converted 25,000 French
Canadian Catholics to Protestanism, resolved itself on examination into
300 or 350 who were “ nominal Protestants.” The pamphlet in ques-
tion is entitled “ The Story of my connection with the Chiniquy move-
ment in Montreal in 1874-7.” It was written by aMr William B,
Court, ex-superintendent of St. John’s French Presbyterian Sabbath
School. Mr Court, at the time of writing his pamphlet was a genuine
Presbyterian, of the same church as this “pastor.” He is therefore a
fair witness to call concerning this alleged wholesale conversion, espe-
cially as he professes to take his figures from the books of the Society
where the proceedings were duly registered. This is what he says :
“ About 554 names of heads of families (this must |be
clearly understood, not names of persons) were registered in
these books. Many of these individuals had children, and some
of them gave to M. Chiuiquy two, three, or four names of child-
ren as the case may have been. These children’s names were
published by M. Chiniquy, with the names of the parents ; and
thus the 2,000 names mentioned in the report of the Board are
correct. But notice. Many names were of Protestants of long
date—perhaps thirty heads of families. And many parents
gave the names of their sons, in some cases three or four, as
heads of families, and thus received aid from M.
Chiniquy, and from the society in the names of their children.
The parents in many cases, did not give their own names, and
thus they themselves remained Roman Catholics, and received
aid from both Protestant and Catholic institutions.
“ In the Witness of 3rd April, 1876, M. Le-Metayer Masselia
stated that 250 had been erased from the books of the society,
so that 300 names remain, making about 1,200 converts (giving
four children to each family.) But the names of old Protest-
ants should have been deducted in the report of the Board, from
the records I have spoken of, in addition to the 250. And be-
sides the 250 expelled for prostitution, concubinage, false ad-
dresses, false names, etc., etc., the Society’s Committee was on
the point (when as already mentioned the Board stepped in and
assumed the management of a non-sectarian association) of ex-
pelling about 100 more names of heads of families.”


“ The very great majority of the French Canadians have
returned to Romanism while nearly all the French Europeans
nominally attached to Protestanism remain where they were
spiritually all along, viz., indifference ; I say spiritually—for I
am glad to recognise that many are morally correct in their
lives.
“ It is well known in Montreal that the effect of the adminis-
tration of the Board upon the French Europeans, who were at
least intellectually converted to Protestanism, and relapsed, and
upon those who remained nominally in Romanism, was to in-
duce them to lose faith in Protestanism. 1 have come across
personally many families who were nominally converts of M.
Chiniquy, but who really had no more reverence for their new
than they had for their old faith, but who made use of both for
worldly purposes. And nearly pH this want of confidence in
Protestanism, and what is far sadder, in the Gospel as a divine
system of faith and morals, has resulted to a very great extent,
as can be very easily proved, from the unfortunate policy of the
Board.”
“ Hundreds of names of persons, well known to the police
and priests as persons of the worst character, and who are still
so, have been advertised in the Daily Witness and Aurore as
converts to Protestanism. The effect of this unfortunate course
has been to make the Presbyterian Mission a laughing-stock
with all honest and serious men. Further I have evidence fur-
nished by two persons well known for their credibility and
knowledge of what they testify to, to prove that of the 400
converts of M. Chiniquy, published in the Witness of March
last all are more or less doubtful. Indeed, of the 6,000 or 7,000
names of those who have been represented in the public prints
as converts to the Gospel, perhaps one twentieth—and this I
would consider a high estimate—may be looked upon as even
nominal Protestants.”
Why, this story reads like Falstaff’s men in buckram, who grew in
the course of the fat old knight’s narration of his conflict with them,
from two to twelve, causing Prince Hal to exclaim—
“ These lies are like the father that begets them ; gross as a mountain, open,
palpable.”
To these accusations there was no reply, save an occasional allusion in
the man’s lectures to t; contemptible scribblers,” and a “ slavish press.”
But his excitement seemed to grow by what it fed on, and on his third
or fourth appearance he spoke to the people in terms of murderous in-
citement as follows :
Once, when he was in Canada, he was going to be murdered by the Catholics, but the
Orangemen threatened that if it occurredthey would kill every one of them ; and then
the Roman Catholic Bishop w rote, ‘ ‘Don’t'touch Chiniquy any more. If you kill him these
Orangemen will kills us.” (Laughter.) If the Catholics killed him here, very few
priests would have time to make their last wills. On Wednesday a policeman came to
their chairman (Mr W. J. Reid) saying, “You must not have Mr Chiniquy lecture
here to-morrow ; if you do, there may be bloodshed. The Roman Catholics are coming
to take his life and slaughter him.” If they had done so. did the audience think »ny
priest would have been in his bed that night ?


This was becoming serious and criminal from a legal point of view,
which caused the appearance of the following :
Let me say that I have good and consoling reason to know that all the better and
more liberal Protestants, utterly repudiate and condemn the wicked appeals to their
passions which, this Chiniquy has made. The others I can afford to leave in the
narrowness of their bigotry. Of the Catholics I know this, that they have been so
stung by this man’s coarse malignant ribaldry and detestable and accumulated false-
hoods —some of which I have nailed and clinched upon him—that it has required all the
restraining influence of their clergy to prevent an open rupture.
What does this language mean ? It means that an indiscriminate act of wholesale
murder would be perpetrated between midnight and morn by the Protestant community
of Geelong, should any individual ruffian offer violence to Chiniquy. The atrocity of
this cold-blooded murderous suggestion seems to have been very agreeable to a portion
of the audience, judging from the laughter it called forth. Mr W. J. Reid sat
in the chair and heard it, and made no protest. He therefore is responsible for it
also.
I think in the interests of common morality (for it is an imputation on the whole
Protestant community) he should be made to publicly clear himself of the horrible
complicity in a murderous incitement. Till he does so, I regard him as a particeps
criminus ,
One matter more, and I have done. I have caused to be made a diligent enquiry
amongst the police, and neither Captain Burton nor any member-of the force knows
anything of the alleged advice said by the man Chiniquy to have been given thus to Mr
W. J. Reid—“ You must not have Chiniquy lecture here to-morrow if you do there
may be bloodshed The Roman Catholics are coming to take his life and slaughter
him.” I learned from the Inspector that no member of the force would have dared un-
authorised to deliver such a message. Armed with this information, lat once
privately put it to Mr Reid to state whether it was true or false that a policeman ever
delivered such a message. He admits that it is false; but thinks the pastor made a mis-
take, I now ask Mr Reid, Sir, through the Geelong Times publicly, what I then asked
him privately concerning this “ mistake.” It is this—“ Seeing that that statement,
even though made in error, contained a grave slander upon the Roman Catholics of
the town, why did he not feel compelled in the interests of Truth, to correct the gross,
damaging, insulting ‘ mistake ’ of his friend ?”
I have waited for Mr Reid’s reparation to the Roman Catholics. The lie or “ mis-
take” has got five days’start. Mr Reid’s tardy truth seems in no hurry to overtake
it. Mr Reid would scorn to tell a lie himself. How is that he has permitted this
Chiniquy to promulgate a damaging slander in his name, and not felt called upon to
make any reparation to the injured, because they are Roman Catholics. Let him an-
swer that. Honest men who have enjoyed his acquaintance are anxious to know.
After this, Chiniquy departed with £214 18s 2d, the result of his
“ mission,” and no more was heard of the controversy for nearly a fort-
night. His friends had gathered in the gold for him and sent him away
rejoicing. They were very liberal, just as the Scripture says—
“In whose hands are iniquities ; their right hand is filled with gifts.”
Mr W. J. Reid then published a letter in reply to mine, in which he
upbraided me for the use of strong language, quoted to me Mr Gladstone
on the Vatican, adjudged the Geelong priests as guilty because they had
maintained silence during all M. Chiniquy’s abuse, complained bitterly
of some stones thrown at his carriage, and in conclusion exhorted me to
let Chiniquy alone, lest I might be opposing myself to the work of God.
To this thoughtful advice, the following reply was published :


Instead of an answer to my charges of Chiniquy’s deliberate lying, Mr Eeid gathers
a posy of my indignant remonstrances, and presents them all in a bunch, as a proof
that I have disgraced your columns by their use. Such kindness should not go unre-
quited. Let me in return present to Mr W. J. Eeid, a savoury nosegay, culled, all but
one item, from the Geelong Times report of Chiniquy’s speeches. Here are the flowery
phrases :—“ Rome’s diabolical trick,” “ the intolerable Church of Rome,” “ the God of
Rome eaten by rats,” “ their false Christs,” “ worshipping images,” “ their wafer Gods,”
“ the bloody sword of the Pope,” “ contemptible scribblers,” “ deceived by the Press,”
“ Rome wants to cut your throat,” “if they kill him here very few priests would have
time to make their wills,” “ he knew they would try to kill him,” “ there was danger in
allowing Catholics to have power,” “ the charity of the Church of Rome was that of a
bloody tiger,” “ the most diabolical form of idolatry,” “ it changed men into brutes,” “ he
preferred the Kellys to all the priests of Rome. They were brave and would not take
money.”
o 0 e o o o
Mr W. J. Reid won’t evade the points of my charges by merely saying—“ Pastor
Chiniquy can only be proved to he an impostor by the priests and bishops of his late
communion ; by their silence the public have only to conclude that they take judg-
ment by default.” This is an exhibition of the quality of Mr Reid’s charity, which in-
terprets silence as guilt. He reads his Bible. Does he know chap. XIY of St. Mark,
60th and 61st verses, detailing our Lord’s trial—
“ And the high priest stood up in the midst and asked Jesus, saying—Answerest
thou nothing to the things which are laid to thy charge by these men ?
, “ But he held his peace and answered nothing.”
According to Mr Reid’s code of morals and system of logic, our blessed Lord—horrible
to think—was guilty.
Mr Eeid is horrified to think that any one could have been so wicked as to throw
stones at his carriage. If the thing was not done by Chiniquy’s own hirelings, lam
sorry too ; but lam also amazed to admiration at the self-restraint of my co-religion-
ists, since this was the only hostile demonstration against a wretch who in his filthy
prurient pamphlets, sent insultingly to many Catholic households, declared that nearly
every Catholic lady above nine years of age was a wanton. Let Protestant husbans
and fathers think for themselves what such a ruffian provoked.
And now in conclusion, I have one little secret to tell that will thoroughly illustrate
Mr Reid’s burning desire for Truth to be known. He will thank me for reminding him
of it. In the conversation I had with him, I specially charged his friend with falsehood
for making the following statement; —
“ If a man’s wife died he had to give to the priest every cent he possessed to get the
priest to pray that his wife’s soul be taken out of purgatory,”
Mr Reid took it upon himself to defend the general allegation that Catholics were
taught to believe that they could buy the souls of their relatives or friends out of pur-
gatory. In support of this position, he quoted to me the fact that he once had a servant
girl who used to employ her wages in that way. In order to bring him to close quar-
ters, I offered to pay £5 to the Hospital if he would bring one single authoritative state-
ment from the Church’s annals to justify his assertion. He at once accepted my offer,
and took down in writing a statement he promised to prove. No doubt he relied upon
his friend Chiniquy. Since that time 16 days have passed away, and W. J. Reid has
produced his answer to mv letter, but it contains no allusion to this episode. As he
is so purely desirous of eliciting the truth, he will be delighted that I remind him of the
circumstance. But I will do more. He is a rich man, a pious man, a good man, and he
loves the poor Catholics. Money is no object to him—where truth is concerned. I
challenge him to stake £5O for the benefit of some public charity against £5O of mine
for a similar object, to be forfeited by whichever of us shall be adjudged by an impar-
tial tribunal to be at fault on this controverted subject between us.
Time flew past, and this, it was thought, ended the matter;
but it has now transpired that the little select knot of gentlemen vyho
bade farewell to the ex-priest on the 14th of March in the Fenwick-
street Reformed Church, gave me what they appeared to consider a
tremendous flagellating. The meeting, not being advertised, and con-


sequently not reported, was considered too good to be lost, and lias found
the light, as said, in a pamphlet. Let us see what this joint
production of their sapient reverences can say.
The first part consists of a congratulatory report, which appears
to be singularly appropriate, seeing that the whole business was a money-
making concern, and that the handsome sum of £214 had been netted.
Then follows the address of the honoured guest of the evening, in which
the mild evangelising missionary modestly deprecates praise, speaks
slightingly of the money given him, but goes into rapturous delight at
the recollecton of the stones thrown at his patron’s carriage and the
calumnies he had endured from the press, particularly those set forth in
the foregoing resume. But here, as elsewhere, he wanders naturally into
mendacity. Like the miser who has
“ Gazed on gold so long, and gazed on hard,
His eyes are jaundiced and impart its hue
To all they look on,”
so Chiniquy in his lectures and his pamphlets has lied so long and lied
so hard, his tongue is forked with lying and cannot speak without a
falsehood. He told his auditors that I had called them “ the very scum
of society.” Now, if he did not utter this mendacious sentence to injure
me in the good opinion of many reputable men, or else from the sheer
habit of lying, it is impossible to say what prompted him : for it is cer-
tain that I have never used language that would give even a colour to
the assertion. If I have done so, let him or his truth-loving friends
point it out. This is another challenge. From this, the veracious
speaker went on to refer to the quotations from the Montreal pamphlet
published by a young man in his Canadian Church. His sole reply to
these was that the young man who published it was crazy; that he was
not the real author; but that it was the work of a number of wicked
Jesuits ! After making some further extracts from the Geelong press,
condemning the said press as wicked and irreligious, and exhorting his
hearers to entirely withdraw their support from such a press, and to
start another on the Chiniquy principles, he resumed his seat.
Let us pass over without particular notice a beautifully charitable
speech by the rev. pastor of the Church—a speech in which that gentle-
man scornfully condemned the scriptural exhortation of “ Blessed are the
peacemakers,” as inapplicable to dealings with Roman Catholics, towards
whom he advocated the use of not “ peace, but a sword,” because he
was quite certain that the Romish apostacy' was the Antichrist of pro-
phecy. Yes, we will pass over the tolerant kindness of this Chrisitan
soul, and pause before the literary great gun of the evening, the Rev. T.
M‘Kenzie Fraser, who came prepared with his books and papers to de-
molish and make mince-meat of me. How I must have trembled had I
known of the tremendous preparations that had been going for my over-
throw !
But to be unconscious is to be happy. And now that all is over—
now that the match has been applied, that the literary mine has been ex-


ploded, that the shock has come and passed, and that I can take a survey
Q f what was to have been the ruin of my shattered cause, I can only sup-
pose the shot must have misfired, for I can discern nothing remaining
but the thick mist of a deal of ignorance or misrepresentation. But
let the gentleman speak for himself :
The Rev. T. M-Keuzie Fraser said, I have risen to speak chiefly to one point.
Pastor Chiniquy has been publicly branded as a liar for asserting that the Church of
Rome prohibited the free circulation and private reading of the scriptures among the
people Mi Beniamin Hoare declares that he has been a papist for twenty-three years,
that he has possessed a bible and read it, and that no one has ever attempted to prohi-
bit him for doing so. Mr Hoare may thank God that he is an inhabitant of a Protestant
country and under the protection of British laws ; otherwise he would soon have seen,
aye, and felt too to the very marrow of his bones whether his free use of the Bible
would have been permitted or prohibited. In order to see how the Bible is
treated by the Church of Rome, we must not go to Protestant, but to Roman Catholic
countries, where Papacy is in the ascendant, and has therefore free scope for the work-
ing out of her principles. Take Italy for example. Several years ago, the Rev. Ho-
bart Seymour, a well-known minister of the Church of England, visited Rome with the
express view of enquiring into the real doctrines and practical working of Popery.
Let me quote a few sentences from his work entitled— Mornings among the Jesuits at
Rome.”
And here Mr Fraser proceeded to quote copiously. The
narrative relates that a Romish Professor of Canon Law and a
Professor of Dogmatic Theology had a conversation with the Rev.
Hobart Seymour on the free use of the Bible iu the Roman Catholic
Church. The latter of these gentlemen is said to have declared that it
was a calumny against the Catholic Church to say that she was opposed
to the full and unrestricted use and circulation of the Holy Scriptures.
But Mr Sevmour pointed out to him that the only Bible he could ch-
ain in Rome was Martini’s edition at a cost of £4 sterling, and offered,
if there was really no prohibition against the sacred volume, to obtain
any number of Bibles from the British and Foreign Bible Society that
might be distributed freely and gratuitously to the inhabitants of Rome.
After some evasion, the Professor, being pressed closely by the keen
Englishman, said the Church held the doctrine of the infallibility
of the Pope, to whom therefore it belonged to give the only infallible
interpretation of the Scriptures. Mr Fraser continued —
This extract is taken from the sth edition of Mr Seymour a work published in. 1862.
If since then, Bible shops have been opened and circulated in Rome, no thanks to the
Pop e _ a ll thanks to Victor Emmanuel. Thus you see we have not only Mr Benjamin
Hoare but learned Doctors and Professors solemnly denying that the Church of Rome
prohibits the free circulation of the Scriptures amongst her people. Mr Hoare makes
a great deal of the rescript of Pope Pius VI., in 1778, which commends the reading of
the Scriptures ; but he surely cannot be aware that this rescript was addressed to this
very Martini, Archbishop of Florence, whose work was a commentary in 24 quarto vo-
lumes, and therefore inaccessible to the poor, and that his Holiness commen ed
chiefly for this reason —because he had enriched it by expositions drawn from tradition,
accurately and religiously observing the rules prescribed by the Sacred Congregation
of the Index.” It is very much the same as if Protestants were to forbid the bible
without note or comment, but were graciously pleased to recommend the useof Henry s
or Scott’s commentary. But I go further than this : I fearlessly assert that the
Church of Rome has in solemn council prohibited the free circulation and reading of
the Word of God. The decrees of the Council of Trent are absolutely binding upon all
Roman Catholics, and I shall now quote to you an extract from the proceedings of that


Council, as given in Rule 4 of the Congregation of the Index, and sanctioned by a bull
of Pius IV., in 1564, and by many of his successors down to the present age. I have
the Latin version of the rule before me, but I shall quote the translation : “ Seeing it
is manifest by experience, that if the Holy Bible be permitted to be read everywhere,
without difference in the vulgar tongue, more harm than good results thence, thro’ the
rashness of men, let it therefore be at the pleasure of the bishop or inquisitor with the
advice of the parish clerk or confessor, to grant the reading of the bible, translated by
Catholic authors, to those who, in their opinion, will thereby receive an increase of
faith and piety. This licence let them have in writing; and whosoever shall presume,
without permission, to read or possess such bibles, may not receive the absolution of
his sins, till he has returned them to the ordinary.” The following is the latter part of
the rule:—“ But all the booksellers who may sell, or in any other manner supply,
bibles, written in the vulgar dialect, to any person not possessed of the aforesaid li-
cence, shall forfeit the price of the books, to be applied to sacred purposes by the bishop
according to the nature and decree of their fault ; but let no one buy or read these
bibles, without the permission of their pastors !” In more modern times and in protes-
tant countries indeed, papists have found it impossible to enforce this law ; but there it
stands, it has never been repealed : on the contrary it has been confirmed by several suc-
cessive popes, particularly by Clement XI., in the famous Bull Unigenitus, published in
1713, and again by Leo XII., in his Encyclical letter in 1824. Now, then, has Mr Hoare
got such a written permission from his priest to read the bible ? If not, then he stands
convicted by his own admission of being a bad catholic, and a violator of the laws of
his church. And what now becomes of his charge against Pastor Chiniquy, that he is
a liar in asserting that the Church of Rome forbids the free use of the Scriptures to
her children ? Ido not call Mr Hoare a liar; I believe that he honestly speaks what
he believes to be the truth, because he personally has never been interfered with ; but
before he comes forward as the champion of popery, I would advise him not display
such deplorable ignorance of the laws and practice of his own Church.
Mr Frazer’s arguments on this subject are given in full, in order
that he may have the entire benefit of whatever they contain. They
are given for another reason also—that he may be responsible,
as I intend to make him, for all that he has said. Let us see what this
is:—
1. Mr Frazer says that the freedom here enjoyed in the
use of the Bible is owing to our living in a Protestant country ; and that
in a Catholic country we would have been fearfully punished for daring
to exercise such a right. 2. That the free use of the Bible was expressly
forbidden by the Church in the Council of Trent, as proved by a por-
tion of a rule cited, 3. That Clement XI., in the bull “ Unigenitus,”
also confirmed this prohibition. These three statements are given as
three arguments in support of the one proposition that the free reading
of the Holy Scriptures is forbidden to Roman Catholics. This was one
of the propositions of the ex-priest Chiniquy, on account of which
I quoted evidence to show that—as he could not plead ignorance—he
lied. I will not say the same of Mr Frazer. He may plead what
Chiniquy could not—want of knowledge. But it shall be made clear
that there is no escape for Mr Frazer from one of these two positions
—that he has made three gross misstatements, either knowingly or
through ignorance. I shall notice the three points in the order
given.
1. The charge that Catholics are forbidden to read the Bible, and
that any liberty they may enjoy is owing to the glorious liberty of Pro-
testanism. The answer to this is that the first book ever printed, by
Faust and Schaeffer, in the year 1450—that is 67 years before Luther


broached the Protestant heresy, and 79 years before the name was
known—was a copy of the Bible. Within the following twenty years,
from 1450 to 1470, thousands of copies, in all the languages of Europe,
were printed at the Vatican press in Borne, and disseminated through
the various nations. This proves that before such a thing as “ Pro-
testant liberty ” was known, the Catholic Church was zealous in the
wide dissemination of the Holy Scriptures. Unless this fact be success-
fully controverted, which is simply impossible, it is a palpable misstate-
ment to say that the free distribution of the Bible depended upon Pro-
testanism.
2. As to the alleged prohibition of the Council of Trent. It
was during the period above quoted that abuses began to creep
in, and corrupt and unauthorised editions began to gain circula-
tion. Indeed the Bible was afterwards corrupted by the sec-
tarians, garbled, and falsified to such a degree that, as
Isaac D’lsraeli admits, in his Curiosities of Literature, “no books
ever yet swarmed with such innumerable errata.” So true was this
that the errors having been found to amount to more than 6,000 in the
English editions, all the previous translations were suppressed by royal
proclamation in the reign of James the 1., and the one which is now the
“ the Book of God, and the standard of truth,” recognised as the au-
thorised version, was published by “ His Majesty’s ” special command in
the year 1611. In this version are still found more than a thou-
sand corruptions and falsifications of the original text.
Now, it is against this false standard of faith that the
Catholic Church ever has protested, and ever will protest. It
was against this system of unauthorised publishing, or dangerous read-
ing of false editions, that the precautionary prohibition of the Council of
Trent was passed and published. When the Eev. Hobart Seymour
sought at Borne for the Bible, he looked for the corrupt edition, pub-
lished by King James’s authority ; and of course he sought in vain.
When he asked that the people might be supplied with the Scriptures,
he wanted to be allowed to disseminate the mutilated Protestant version
amongst them. And this impudent request was most properly refused.
Every .pope and every pastor of the Church ever did, and ever must,
forbid the promiscuous reading of unverified Scriptures, as, in the words
of the Sacred book itself, “ the unlearned and unwary may wrest them
to their own destruction.” That the faithful are not forbidden, but
encouraged, to read the true and duly authorised version—authorised
by those who alone have the right and the light to teach and to
interpret, the pastors of the Church—l myself know, and so does the
whole wox’ld as well, even without the plain documentary evidence I
have quoted from Pope Pius VI., written in 1778, that the Holy
Scriptures “ ought to he left open to every one.” So much for Mr Frazer’s
deplorable ignorance of the true action taken by the Council of Trent.
3. That Clement XL, in the bull “ Unigenitus,” also confirmed the
prohibition of the Scriptures. On this point Mr Fraser has climaxed
his unhappiness. He has actually—ignorantly I am willing to believe—


distorted the very meaning and the object of that now famous bull.
The bull “ Unigenitus ” was published by Clement XL, on the Bth
September, 1713, against the Jansenists and their champion Quesnel.
Quesnel wrote a book called The New Testament in French, with Moral
Reactions. It was not against the Bible or the Scriptures, but against
this hook, its falsifications, and Quesnel’s false teaching, that the bull
“ Unigenitus ” was issued. The text of the bull itself it will be better
to give here, because one is bound to presume that Mr Fraser himself
never saw it, or he could not have so falsified its meaning. Here is a
careful translation of it:—
“ We condemn the work of Quesnel as containing one hun-
dred and one propositions, respectively false, captious, offensive
to pious ears, tainted with heresy, erroneous ; in a word,
heretical, and renewing various errors, especially those contained
in the celebrated propositions of Jansenius. Moreover, by the
express and particular condemnation of the hundred and one
propositions, we would by no means be understood to approve
what is contained in the rest of the book. In the course of the
examination made of it, we have noticed several other propo-
sitions bearing a close relation and affinity to those just con-
demned, and tilled with the same errors. We have also remarked
many others calculated to breed disobedience and rebellion
against authority, civil and ecclesiastical. In fine, what is still
more intolerable, we have found the text of the New Testament
altered in a most censurable manner . and agreeing in many places
with the French translation of Mons, long since condemned.
Bad faith has been daring enough to wrest the text from its true
sense, to give it a false and dangerous meaning. For these
reasons , in virtue of the Apostolic authority in us vested, we
forbid and condemn the hook of “ Moral Reflections," under
whatever title and in whatever language it has been, or may
hereafter be printed ; in whatever edition or whatever version
it has appeared, or may yet appear, as eminently calculated to
mislead the faithful by the false appearance of instruction full
of piety. We likewise condemn all other books and pamphlets,
in manuscript or in print, or—which God forbid—that may be
hereafter printed, in defence of this work. We forbid every one
of the faithful to read, to copy, to keep, or to use them, on pain
of excommunication incurred by the very act.”
Such is the text of the bull “ Unigenitus ” which Mr Fraser told his
Fenwick-street audience confirmed the Church’s previous prohibitions
against the free use of the Bible. That statement was either criminally
wilful, or culpably reckless. Let us trust and believe it was the latter.
One cannot bring himself to believe that Mr Fraser would wilfully misre-
present a plain fact for the sake of gaining a small temporary triumph.
But allowing that he is not guilty of the worst—that he only sinned
through a culpable ignorance, that fact alone should teach him a long
lesson of humility when he feels tempted in future to dogmatise con-
cerning other men’s creeds and communions. He has kept company with
Chiniquy, a man whose word is a synonym for unveracity ■ he will not


have much reason to complain should some people be less charitable in
their interpretation of his error than I have been. He has accused me
of ignorance of the laws of my own Church. I have convicted him of
an ignorance, or something worse , that involved slander.
It would have been pleasant here to have dropped the pen; but
there is yet another word to say. We are asked—Does Catholicity
really teach the doctrines alleged with regard to Protestants 1 Are the
doctrines of St. Thomas, as set forth by Chiniquy, really those taught
by the Church 1 To thes& questions there is a brief reply—The teach-
ings of St. Thomas respecting heresy are founded upon those of St.
Paul—
As wo said before, so I say now again : If any one preach to you a gospel besides
that which you have received, let him be anathema. — G-al. Chap. 1, v. 9.
A man that is a heretic, after the first and second admonition, avoid.—Titus, Chap.
111, v, 10.
In his treatise on Faith, Chap. 3, Section 2nd, St. Thomas in answer
to the question —“ Ought heretics to be tolerated in a Christian
country 1 ?” writes thus —“ A prince or judge would not be accused of
injustice for inflicting capital punishment on one guilty of forgery
or highway robbery. Still, money and property regard only the
temporary affairs of human life. He that corrupts the essential Articles
of Faith, and sows the poisonous seeds of heresy in the hearts of others,
is not less culpable than the former ; for the soul is more precious than
the body, heaven than earth, and the Church of the faithful than those
in darkness and the shadow of death. Hence, heretics, by their dan-
gerous doctrines, merit to be excluded from the true Church by excommu-
nication, and to be delivered to the secular power for corporal punish-
ment. Such have been, at all times and in all countries, the general
principles and practice of the Catholic Church _ with regard to the
dangerous conduct and doctrines of heretics. She inflicts only spiritual
punishment on them. But the secular authority, according to the laws
of the country, has power and right to inflict corporal and even capital
punishment on them.” There is not a word about burning, muidering,
killing, or quartering, as alleged.
The doctrine of St. Thomas on the civil law confirms this position.
In his work De Regimine Principum, discussing the question as to
whether infidels can have dominion over the faithful, he says—“ Divine
law, which emanates from grace, does not take away human law, which
is founded on the law of natural reason. Therefoie the distinction
between the faithful and infidels, considered in itself, does not take away
the dominion or supremacy of infidels over the faithful.”^
And again, in his 6th article with respect to the obligation of the faith-
ful to obey the secular powershesays : —“ The faith of Jesus Christ does
not take away the law of justice, but rather confirms it. This law wills
that inferiors should obey their superiors; for without that human society
could not be preserved. And thus the faith of Christ does not exempt-


the faithful from the obligation of obeying the secular powers.” This is
the theologian whom the Canadian apostate is asking the Protestant
world to believe is a demon of religious intolerance.
But I will go further and say, what perhaps will astonish some people,
that the penalty of death for heresy, has never been enacted or inflicted
by purely ecclesiastical authority in a single instance. It is even
generously admitted by all honest impartial writers that during the
whole period of the Inquisition no capital punishment was inflicted at
Home.
There can be no doubt that in various nations, at various periods,
ecclesiastics, as individuals, have been concerned in persecutions. But
the Church is not answerable for the offences of her children. She is
answerable for her own acts, her own teaching, her dogmas, and her
doctrines. In that deeply philosophical work of Balmez on European
Civilization, one of the most profound and analytical books of the pre-
sent century, in chap, xxxvi., page 189, the writer says—
It is a remarkable thing that the Roman Inquisition was never known to pronounce
the execution of capital punishment, although the Apostolic See was occupied during
that time by Popes of extreme rigor and severity in all that relates to the civil admmis >
tration. We find in all parts of Europe scaffolds prepared to punish'crimes against re-
ligion. Scenes which sadden the soul were everywhere witnessed. Rome is an excep-
tion to the rule; Rome, which it has been attempted to represent as a monster of
intolerance and cruelty. It is true that the Popes haye not preached, like Protestants,
universal toleration; but facts show the difference between the Popes and Protestants.
The Popes, armed with a tribunal of intolerance, hare not spilled a drop of blood ;
Protestants and philosophers have shed torrents. What advantage is it to the victim
to hear his executioners proclaim toleration ? It is adding the bitterness of sarcasm to
his punishment. The conduct of Rome, in the use which she made of the Inquisition, is
the best apology of Catholicity against those who attempt to stigmatise her as bar-
barous and sanguinary In truth, what is there in common between Catholicity and
the excessive severity employed in this place or that, in the extraordinary situation in
which many rival races were placed, in the presence of danger which menaced one of
thejn, or in the interest which kings had in maintaining the tranquility of their States,
and securing their conquests from all danger ?
It is doubtless quite true that the Spanish Inquisition, under Ferdi-
nand and Isabella, Charles Y, and Phillip 11., was at times very severe,
but if secular princes, for personal or political purposes, worked on one
side and the other (and it is equally true for both) to promote power
or to gratify revenge by bloodshed and massacre—surely that ought
not to be charged against the teaching of the Church,
It is a singular and significant fact that the first enactment
for “ burning ” heretics was passed in “ Merrie England,” in the
year 1401; which Hallam, in the 9th Chap., part 2nd, of his “Middle
Ages,” characterises as “ the sanguinary law of Henry IY.” Green, in
his “ History of the English People,” Book 4, Chap 5, thus writes on
the subject:—“ In the first Convocation of his reign, Henry declared
himself the protector of the Church, and ordered the prelates to take
measures for the suppression of heresy, and of the wandering preachers.
His declaration was but a prelude to the Statute of Heresy which was
passed at the opening of 1401. By the provisions of this in-
famous Act, the hindrances which till now had neu-


tralised the efforts of the bishops to enforce the common law, were ut-
terly taken away. Not only were they permitted to arrest all preach-
ers of heresy, all schoolmasters infected with heretical teaching, all
owners and writers of heretical books, and to imprison them, even if
they recanted, at the King’s pleasure ; but a refusal to abjure, or a re-
lapse after abjuration, enabled them to hand over the heretic to the civil
officers, and by these—as ran the first legal enactment of religious blood-
shed which defiled our statute book—he was to be burned on a high
place before the people.”
It is of course an easy matter to paint the Church as cruelly into-
lerant by crowding into a few pages the dark blots of the reigns of kings
and princes that are spread over four or five centuries of a barbarous or
semi-barbarous time, and laying all these sad crimes at her door. It is
easy to depict the severities of Ferdinand and Isabella and Philip 11. of
Spain, of Mary of England, and Louis XIY. of France against heresies,
and to say nothing of the cruelties of Henry VIII., those of Elizabeth,
the pains and penalties of James L, Anne, and William 111., not
forgetting dear “ Old Noll,” and his “ crowning mercies.”
This has been done a hundred times, and men have formed their
judgment on such evidence. But what is it worth 1 Such pictures do
not prove that Protestantism is tolerant, against all history to the con-
trary. There never was a more intolerant man than Luther himself.
According to Seckendorf, one of his apologists, he declared of the Jews
that—“ Their synagogues ought to be destroyed, their houses pulled
down, their prayer books, the Talmud, and even the Books of the Old
Testament, to be taken from them; their rabbis ought to be forbidden
to teach, and be compelled to gain their livelihood by hard labor.”
Erasmus complained of his savageness, that “ in his old age he was com-
pelled to contend against a savage beast, a furious wild boar.”
lu his many disputes with the Zuinglians, Luther did not belie his character ; he called
them damned, fools, blasphemers. As he lavished such epithets on his dissenting com-
rades, we cannot be astonished that he called the doctors of Louvain beasts, pigs, Pa-
gans, Epicureans, atheists ; and that he makes use of other expressions which decency
will not allow us to cite ; and that launching forth against the Pope, he says, “ He
is a mad wolf against whom everyone ought to take arms, without waiting even for
the order of the magistrates ; in this matter there can be no room left for repentance,
except for not having been able to bury the sword in his breast.” Such was the spirit
of tolerance that animated Luther.— Note 2, European Civilisation.
Nor have his modern imitators improved upon the original. In what
is Chiniquy, who would refuse to allow a Homan Catholic any position
of trust in the State, more tolerant 1 And the Fenwick-street pastor who
spurned the Scriptural inj unction, ‘‘Blessed are the peace-makers,” as applied
to Roman Catholics ; and who declared “ not peace, but the sword,” was
the weapon with which to deal with them—what is his Protestant
tolerance worth 1 And that other man, also, who at the same valedic-
tory service advocated “ a barred door to Popery, and no peace with
Rome ” —how does lie reconcile such a doctrine with “ universal
tolerance f’ These men who laugh at the idea of the “ Infallibility


dogma/’ claim to be infallibly right themselves in their intolerant
condemnation of Romanism. Let us hear no more boasting about this
“ Protestant tolerance,” or else let us see it practised in real earnest.
Let it be shown in respect for other men’s creeds and convictions;
in the discountenancing of rabid abuse and violent insult offered to
Catholic worship,
Till this is done, it is idle to talk of tolerance. It is quite true that
there has been a large charitable feeling shown here during the recent
social disturbance. It is quite true that all the Episcopalians and very
many of the dissenting sects have refused any encouragement to this
Canadian sower of strife. It is quite true that these truly tolerant
people comprise the great numerical majority, the most cultivated
minds, and most of the best talent in the community. But these are
not the people who are always declaring against Catholic intolerance
in the middle ages and showing their own in this. They are the people
who do good rather than talk about it; who have not only tongues to
speak, but hearts to feel, and hands to give. They are the people who
understand charitv—practical charity ; who, remembering that the poor
we have always with us, will succour them, like the good Samaritan, of
whatever creed they be, because they are God’s poor. And they are the
kind .of people who in this new country will perform the greatest share
in building up a social fabric, free from the blighting bitterness of other
lands, and who will hasten the time when the lion will lie down with
the lamb, and the sword be turned into the pruning-hook.
HENRY FRANKS, PRINTER, GEELONG,


'JAt'f
/tt£L to
f (04-5!
N C€joy




