

2? U S
Boy IB
*
N
— ~,.2^^lll
1 TRUTH AND FREEDOM, f
SERMON
CDTHBEBT FETHERSIONHAU6H,
I *
'Q
v 9




TEETH AND FREEDOM.
SERMON
CDTHBERT FETHERSIONHAUGH,
UNSECTARIAN MINISTER OF URANA.
(PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.)
“ The Truth shall make you Free”
ffieorge Hofccrtson
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
MDCCCLXXVI




PREFACE.
This sermon, published at the desire of some whose
opinion I value, was first preached in Wagga
in July, 1875 ; when my friends in that town, where I
had been ordained only two years before, thought it
advisable that I should publicly give an explanation of
my reasons for separating from the Church of England,
which 1 have now for the most part embodied in this
preface. At the same time, the sermon was expressly
written as one of the farewell sermons for my people
at Jerilderie, from whom I had to part, to my <>reat
regret; not on account of having separated from the
Church of England, but because I had found it neces-
sary to “ let go ” not a few of the commonly received
doctrines of the Christian Churches—by some still
believed to be “ necessary to salvation.”
Such are the dogmas of The Fall and Original Sin,
of the Atonement, of Election, of Eternal Torment, of
the Infallibility of the Bible, and of the Trinity, in-
cluding necessarily the Godhead of Jesus Christ.' ’
I fail to find these dogmas, as taught by the
churches, in either the words of Jesus or in the spirit
of His teaching. At the same time, even had Jesus
taught that the greater portion of mankind was
appointed to eternal punishment, I would reject the
teaching; for the doctrines I hold are not mere pro-
positions to which I assent, but matters of faith winch
1 unfeignedy believe and which I do not accept merely
because Jesus taught them, but because I find them
underlying all the great religions of the world, and
because they represent the “universal consciousness


of the soul in all places and ages,” and irresistibly
commend themselves to my reason and conscience, and
to that inward verifying spirit of truth, “that light
which lighteth every man,” which all possess but
which unfortunately so few use.
I believe that Jesus was a teacher sent from God.
But why do I believe this ? Clearly because of what
He taught. He never wrought miracles to prove a
doctrine, but appealed to men’s reason, to men’s
natural sense of truth, to their experience, and above
all, to their faith, in proof of the truth of His teaching.
We never find Jesus dogmatically calling upon His
hearers to yield blind or unquestioning assent to His
teaching. We find Him saying, “If any man will do
His will he shall know of the teaching whether it is of
God or whether I speak of myself” (John vii. 17),
And again, “Yea, and why even of yourselves judge
ye not what is right?” (Luke xii. 57). Surely such
passages mean that men should “ prove all things,”
and that Jesus called us to liberty, and that lam
correct in characterizing His teaching as the gospel of
Truth and Freedom. Then perhaps it would be as
well for me to explain that by “ dogma” I understand
any proposition of religious doctrine which we are
called upon to accept because of the authority which
proclaims it, altogether independently of whether it
commends itself to us as truth or not. A dogma may
contradict our reason and outrage our conscience,
nevertheless, because the Bible or the Church or the
Pope declares it is true, we arc bound to accept it or
take our place outside the pale of “the Church.”
By a “ faith,” on the contrary I understand that
which, when presented to us, is at once accepted as
true, not because of the teacher who presents it or the
authority on which it rests, but because “ we have the
witness within ourselves,” that it is true, and because
the divine apprehending and verifying spirit of truth
within us at once seizes and in faith grasps that which


though we were not able to work out for ourselves,
yet we now confidently accept when once placed
before us. The teaching of Jesus is above all things
undogmatical, above all things a faith —a faith to be
lived out.
Whether the disciples of Jesus misunderstood Him,
or whether He Himself really believed and taught
that He would return to judge the world at an early
date, we cannot now know. We do know that the
New Testament writers, with one exception, fully
believed it, and that the early Christians were firmly
imbued with the idea that the second coming of Jesus
would occur in their day. Indeed to this belief may
be attributed in no small degree the great hold the
new religion of Christianity took of the popular mind.
As Jesus did not return to judge the world, and as
the records emphatically state (Mark xiii. 30 ; Mat.
xvi. 28, xxiii. 36) that this coming was to take place
before that generation had passed away, 1 can only
put the whole matter to one side, while concluding
myself that here, as in other cases, Jesus was “ a great
way above the heads of his reporters,” and that they
have misunderstood Him. Spiritually, Jesus does
judge the world every day —for to the true Christian,
the life, words, and spirit of Jesus, ever form the
criterion by which he judges himself, and though he
well knows he cannot attain to that exalted ideal.
I cannot, then, find any of the dogmas imposed upon
us by the Churches, and in which, according to them,
the essence of Christianity exists, in the words of
Christ in any of the four records of His life which
“ God has caused to be written for our learning,” nor
yet even in that book called the “ Acts of the
Apostles,” and which we may well accept as a faith-
ful exposition of the teaching of the immediate fol-
lowers of Jesus, can we find any traces of those
doctrines I have already enumerated and stigmatized
as dogmas. Can we not then rest content with the


words of Jesus and the spirit of His teaching ? What
a mercy it would be if we could. For then we could
quietly put to one side these dogmas which are the
plain cause of our sectarian divisions and which are,
in my opinion, the outcome of men’s attempts intel-
lectually to express matters which are, for the pre-
sent, at least, entirely beyond the power of the
intellect to grasp ; matters upon which every one is at
liberty to think for himself; matters concerning the
nature of God, of ideas, of things, of man ; matters in
fact of opinion , and therefore open to argument and
discussion, and which having no direct bearing upon
our moral character or spiritual life, should by no
means be imposed upon us as “ necessary to be
believed.” As Hooker said of the doctrine of the
Trinity, and he was, I need scarcely remark, a very
Gamaliel in the Church of England, and orthodox to a
degree, so I say of these doctrines, they “ are nowhere
to be found by express literal mention, only deduced
are they from Holy Scripture.”
There are mysteries which the mind of man cannot
penetrate, for instance the mystery of the being or
nature of God. Intellectually we here see “through
a glass darkly,” and surely our proper attitude is one
of modest yet trustful reverence and awe. We cannot
solve the mystery of His being. God cannot be
known in Himself by the intellect.
“ We have but faith, we cannot know,
For knowledge comes of things we see ; ”
and yet men have not only attempted to define God,
but have insisted that unless we assent to “their stereo-
typed creeds, almost devoid of reverence and utterly
devoid of all spirit, of all life,” we shall perish ever-
lastingly. The dogma of the Trinity as set forth in
the creeds, is an insult to the understanding—it is
placed before us as an intellectual or metaphysical
conception, and thus judged it is unintelligible and
therefore incredible.


Again, there are difficulties in this strange mys-
terious life of ours, in which we all fall so lamentably
short of that ideal which we can imagine but not
attain to, difficulties which no man has solved, which
no man can solve. Instead of petrifying our attempts
at solving them into dogmas of Original Sin, Atone-
ment, Election, Eternal Torment, and Personal Devil,
&c., excluding from fellowship in worship and com-
munion all who cannot accept our speculations, is it
not much better calmly and trustfully to leave these
matters in the hands of that God and Father who has
given us so many proofs of His love and care; that
surely we can trust Him with what is still dark, and
never more doubt that beneath the most inexplicable
of His dealings a great loving purpose lies concealed,
and that, even though we cannot see them, “under-
neath us are the everlasting arms.”
Surely there are mysteries enough, peace-disturbing
problems enough in the ways of God, as we see them
in the world of nature and the world of man, to trouble
and distress us without adding to our perplexity by
means of articles and creeds and confessions of faith,
which if they confess any thing, confess that God is
not love, is not good, is not just, is not a Redeemer.
From such a God I shrink, and if I could be per-
suaded that such a God was our Ruler, my prayer day
and night would be that I might “perish everlastingly”
from His presence.
God has not given us the Bible, God has not given
us Christ, God, above all, has not given us His Holy
Spirit, to add to these mysteries which are so dark to
us in nature and in Providence —these great gifts are
revelations, unveilings of mysteries, of that which had
been hid from generations, who yet in faith trusted in
God and were saved.
I remember once in the far north of Queensland,
after a painful search, coming upon two unfortunates,
who, lost for days in the bush, were perishing for


wapt of water under the burning heat. Staggering
towards me with outstretched arms clawing the air,
in hollow tones they gasped “Water, water, give us
water! ” So many perishing for want of that living
water of which whosoever drinketh shall never more
thirst, are crying to the Churches for “ God, God, give
us God ;” and what answer do they receive? Listen!
“ The Father is made of none, neither created nor
begotten. The Son is of the Father alone, not made
nor created, but begotten. The Holy Ghost is of the
Father and of the Son, neither made nor created nor
begotten, but proceeding. So there is one Father, not
three Fathers; one Son, not three Sons; one Holy
Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts. And in this Trinity
none is afore or after another, none is greater or less
than another. But the whole three persons are co-
eternal together and co-equal, so that in all things, as
is aforesaid, the unity in Trinity and the Trinity in
unity is to be worshipped. He therefore that will be
saved must thus think of the 'Trinity. 1 '
Thus the Athanasian creed. Listen now to the
Westminster Confession of Faith : —■
“By the decree of God for the manifestation of His
glory some men and angels are predestinated unto
eternal life and others fore-ordained to everlasting
death . ’ ’ Again;—
“VII. The rest of mankind (the non-elect) God
was pleased . . . for the glory of His sovereign
power over His creatures to pass by and to ordain them
to dishonour and wrath to be for their sin inflicted, to
the praise of His glorious justice/’
Again it speaks of man: —“ Being utterly indisposed,
disabled, and made opposite to all good and inclined
to all evil” by the fall of Adam.
This is strong meat for men. In the Shorter Cate-
chism will be found “milk for babes,” such as the
following:—“ All mankind by the Fall lost communion


with God, are under His wrath and curse, and so made
liable to all miseries in this life to death itself and to
the pains of hell for ever ,” —all this remember for
another's sin. “If a son ask bread of one of you who
is a father will he give him a stone,” is a question
parents would do well to remember, who for no better
reason than that this catechism was “dinned” into
their minds (not hearts) when children, deem it in-
cumbent to din it into the minds of their children now.
“ He that soweth the wind shall reap the whirlwind.”
I have said in the following sermon that “ men are
seeking after God, if haply they may find Him, with
an earnestness unparalleled in the history of the
world.” In some cases God is sought, in the exclusive
spirit of the old dispensation, as a partial God, the God
of a special few, the God of this or that sect; others,
rushing into the other extreme in seeking for God,
seek Him so far off from ordinary mortals that the
God they find does not meet the affectionate, emotional
part of us at all ; others find a God for us from whom
we would fain find refuge in some benign and loving
Saviour, who will deliver us from a Being whom we
might fear, but never worship. Bewildered and repelled
by varying and terrible conceptions of God, not a few
say in their hearts, “ There is no God.”
At such a time 1 need make no apologies for
obtruding my private opinions on matters pertaining
to religion upon the public ; for I am of opinion that
in these days of difficulty and doubt, when not only
are the peculiar tenets of popular Christianity dis-
believed, but the being of God and immortality of man
openly questioned, the freely-expressed thoughts and
beliefs of any earnest man who has fearlessly and
faithfully sought for light and truth must be worth
something.
I know there are numbers of earnest men and women
who, with good and honest hearts, are seeking after a
right knowledge of God and His ways towards us. To


such the experiences of a fellow-seeker may prove a
real help ; to such I address myself. 1 have no wish
to unsettle those who have found peace and rest by
means of the old teaching, and in whom the old form
of faith has produced that love which alone unites man
to Him who is Love. And were the old faith meeting
the wants of our time and producing the Christ-like
and lovely lives which have made that faith the
admiration of the world, even though 1 had become
convinced of the errors of its dogmas, I would keep
silence ; for the end of all faith is love, and the end of
love is God, and no age ever has formulated a faith
absolutely true —each generation has been provided
by God with such a form of faith as has contained
sufficient truth for its necessities ; and so must it ever
be. And thus, when we speak of truth, we speak of so
much of the eternal realities as God has been pleased
to reveal or unveil up to our own time. “ That which
corresponds with eternal fact is truth,” says one who
had an apprehension of truth amounting to inspiration
(the late F, W. Robertson). To unenquiring, unscien-
tific, and creed-ridden minds, these dogmas may appear
to corrrespond with eternal fact; but a very little
consideration will show that they are not only a very
inadequate attempt to express mysteries, but that they
plainly contradict eternal facts ; and, as Lavater well
puts it, in the popular creed, “ Truth is ever at variance
with herself. Eternal order is degraded to a juggler,
whose purpose it is to deceive.”
Step by step I have been driven back from dogmas
and doctrines resting upon authority to those great
fundamental truths of religion which constitute the
catholic —or universal —faith of all nations, which Jesus
gave to the world under the name of the “ Gospel of
the kingdom of heaven.” 1 venture to hope the free
expression of that which has commended itself to my
mind as truth may help some who are seeking for a
faith that will not contradict their reason or outrage


their conscience. Like Banyan’s Christian, 1 began
the heavenly road weighted with a heavy burden—a
harden of unbelievable theology and soul-deadening
dogma. I have struggled on in an earnest and, I hope
I may add, fearless search after God and His truth,
and 1 have my reward ; for as Christian lost his burden
at the foot of the Cross, even so were the shackles
unloosed from my heart and soul, and I have found
rest and life in Him whom Christ and the Cross have
made known to me—God, who is not far from every
one of us, for in Him we live, and move, and have our
being ; that God who is light, and love, and truth —the
light of the knowledge of whose glory I have seen in
the face of the Man Jesus Christ. I have, indeed, in
my quest reached a quiet resting-place, and such peace
of mind and joy of heart that gladly would 1, like my
beloved Master, give my very life if it would secure
for all whom I know and love that peace which passeth
all understanding, and which God in His love and
tender mercy has given to me.
But it is open to all ; none need be in darkness —
none need be for very long in doubt. One passage of
Scripture above all others have I kept before me—
words reported to have been spoken by Jesus himself:
“ If any man will do His will, he shall know of the
doctrine.” And sure is it that if any perplexed soul
will but turn from dogmas and doctrines about God
and Christ, and will steadily endeavour to do the will
of God by reaching out to “ whatsoever things are
true, good, pure, lovely, and of good report,” such a
one cannot remain long in doubt: a willing heart is an
open door, through which divine truth must flow in on
the seeking mind—“ with the heart man believeth unto
salvation ; ” and if any man will do God’s will, he must
know of the teaching he is following if it is of God, or
a mere human invention. Yet let no man imagine that
“to think for himself” and definitely work out for
himself a faith that will enable him to give to every


man a better reason of the hope that is in him than
that some book, or some church, or some man says so,
is an easy matter, or is to be accomplished in a day.
It will require much painful effort, strong exercise of
the will, unflinching courage, earnest prayer, and,
above all things, utter faith in the living God himself,
as One who must hear the cry of His children, as One
who must satisfy the yearning soul that seeks to be
filled with His Spirit. I speak of my own experience:
it is one no man could go through twice in a lifetime.
At the risk of alienating loved friends and relations, of
drawing upon myself the suspicion and distrust of my
brother clergy, and—greatest trial of all—at the risk
of having to give up that which is dearer to me than
life itself—the work of a minister; without hesitation,
but with many a bitter pang and hard struggle, and
after many an earnest prayer to God to relieve me
of my difficulties by taldng me to Himself, 1 have
followed what 1 firmly and sincerely believe to have
been the guiding light of God’s truth, until I now
O # o O >
find myself “ without the camp.”
In a former pamphlet I said that “ There is little
rest for those who earnestly and faithfully embark
upon the troubled waters of the quest for truth.”
How true this is may be gathered from the words of
one who, like myself, having with pain and reluctance
torn himself from the cherished belief of his fathers —
has, I trust, found a stronger faith his own. W. R.
Greg, in the preface to his well-known work “ The
Creed of Christendom,” thus expresses himself—“ The
pursuit of truth is easy to a man who has no human
sympathies, whose vision is impaired by no fond par-
tialities, whose heart is torn by no divided allegiance.
To him the renunciation of error presents few diffi-
culties, for the moment it is recognized as error its
charm ceases. But the case is very different with the
searcher, whose affections are strong, whose associa-
tions are quick, whose hold upon the past is strong


and tenacious. He may love truth with an earnest
and paramount devotion, but he loves much else also.
He loves errors which were once the cherished con-
victions of his soul. He loves dogmas which were
once full of strength and beauty to his thoughts,
though now perceived to be baseless and fallacious.
He loves the Church where he worshipped in his
happy childhood, where his friends and his family
worship still, where his grey-haired parents await the
resurrection of the just, but where he can worship and
await no more. He loves the simple old creed which
was the creed of his earlier and brighter days, which
is the creed of his wife and children still, hut which
inquiry has compelled him to abandon. The past and
the familiar have chains and talismans which hold him
back in his career till every fresh step forward be-
comes an effort and an agony, every fresh error dis-
covered is a fresh bond snapped asunder, every new
glimpse of light is like a fresh flood of pain poured in
upon the soul. To such a man the pursuit of truth is
a daily martyrdom —how hard and bitter let the
martyr tell. Shame to those who make it doubly so;
honour to those who encounter it saddened, weeping,
trembling, but unflinching still.” How true are these
words, I know too well, as must every earnest soul
who, having learnt the old evangelical doctrines from
the lips of a beloved mother, has had to give up the
cherished belief in the light shed on his faith by a
fearless and enlightened criticism of the New Testa-
ment writings. To this martyrdom there is an end,
but no man need hope to attain to the great dignity
and happiness of being a teacher or helper of others
unless he is prepared to go through this ordeal. He
who aspires to influence others, to lead his fellow-
men to higher and clearer light, must go through a
“ baptism of fire,” and looking straight forward through
difficulties and doubts, perplexities and misunderstand-
ings, must “press forward towards the mark of the


prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus,” not
thinking of expediency, knowing nothing of fear.
I continued to officiate as a clergyman of the Church
of England for some time after I had parted with most
of the distinctive doctrines of that Church, because
with many of the liberal clergy, I considered it was my
duty to remain in her orders so long as 1 believed and
taught nothing contrary to the teaching of Jesus, and
because, with Dr. Farrar, “ I looked upon the orders I
had taken as the highest pledge of honesty and the
strongest incentive to the fearless search for truth.”
The time came, however, when I could no longer con-
scientiously continue to minister under her auspices.
In the following letter I resigned my charge:—
“ Jerilderie, Ctli May, 1875.
“To the Venerable Archdeacon Pownall, as Commissioner of the
Right Revd. the Lord Bishop of Goulburn.
“Dear Sir, —After mature consideration of my position, and an
impartial examination of what I believe to be die will of God as
conveyed to me in the Holy Scriptures, and not without much
distress of mind, I have come to the conclusion, in spite of all
arguments —and they are neither few nor weak—of the leading
minds among the liberal clergy of the Church of England, that I
cannot conscientiously continue my ministrations as a clergyman of
the Church of England. Further, as I cannot offer myself for
priest’s orders so long as the Athanasian Creed is embodied in, and
continues to he a part of, the Thirty-nine Articles, and as you
inform me that it is necessary that I shall offer myself for priest’s
orders if I wish to continue my connection with the Diocese of
Goulburn, T beg therefore to resign my position as minister of the
Church of England at Urana and Jerilderie.—l have, Ac., &c.,
“ C. FETHERSTONHAUGH.”
I resigned simply as a matter of conscience, and not
on account of the pressure which had been brought to
hear on me by my brother clergy, and by those in
authority —pressure which would, sooner or later, have
deprived me of my position as minister of the Church
of England at Urana and Jerilderie.
At the time I was ordained, my religious convictions
were broad and liberal, and I expressed myself so dis-


tinctly in my examination papers that a clerical friend
who looked over those papers objected to my having
gone out of my way to express my own peculiar views.
I entered the ministry under no false colours ; for
though my religious opinions were broad, yet I held
the orthodox doctrine of the tri-personality of the
Godhead, including of course the Deity of Jesus, the
doctrine of the atonement as received by the Mauricean
school, and the existence of a spirit of evil called the
Devil.
I also held then, as I hold now, to the doctrine of
justification by faith, that is the being made just or
righteous by faith ; faith not in doctrines about God
or Christ, but faith in the living God Himself. At
the same time I have always kept this principle clearly
in view, that it was my duty as a , to bring all
matters of belief —belief not faith, for our beliefs are
only the outward and visible expression of our inward
and spiritual faith —I say I have always kept this
principle clearly in view, that i was bound to bring all
matters of belief before the bar of reason and conscience,
adhering only to what commended itself to these faculties.
This principle is simply that of Paul, when he tells us
to prove all things, holding fast only to what is good ;
and when again he tells every man to be persuaded in
his own mind ; in fact it is the true protesting principle
of the right of private judgement.
Had 1 known that the appeal to reason and conscience
would result in my being led step by step to “let go,”
one after the other, those articles of belief I have
enumerated, I need scarcely say 1 would never have
submitted myself for ordination ; but I had been led
to believe by wiser, better, .and far more highly
educated men than myself, that an appeal to reason
and conscience would but serve to establish me more
firmly in the articles of the Christian Belief.
I imagine such must have intended not the individual
o
reason and conscience, but that of other persons, which


is simply a return to authority. At the same time,
when I subscribed the thirty-nine articles, I never
imagined I was depriving myself of my right of my
own opinion, or of the right of the free discussion of
the doctrines contained in these articles and set forth
or implied in the Prayer hook. In subscribing, I never
imagined that I bound myself to continue to think all
my life as I thought at the time of my ordination, or
that if, on continued study and reflection, my opinions
altered somewhat, I should be called upon to resign.
In subscribing I never pledged myself to absolute
inward belief in all that is supposed to be taught in
the articles and formularies, nor do I consider that I
pledged myself to teach all that is plainly set forth in
these matters. Before my ordination I plainly stated
my disbelief in the immoral and Pagan dogma of.
eternal torment, and moreover I distinctly stated that
I could never read the creed called Athanasian to a
congregation ; and, thank God, I never have stood up
before a congregation and read to them a creed which
states plainly that all who do not believe the incom-
prehensible dogmas, set forth there in scholastic
language, language which not one in a hundred can
understand, and called there, in bitter irony, the
Catholic Faith, shall perish everlastingly.
So long as I did not contravene the broad teaching
of the Church of England, gauging it by that of such
dignitaries as Dean Stanley and others, I considered I
was free to teach and to preach all that I found in the
New Testament, under the term “Of the gospel of
the Kingdom of Heaven,” as necessary to salvation.
The Sixth Article declares “that Holy Scripture
containeth all things necessary to salvation, so that
whatsoever is not contained therein, or may be proved
thereby, is not to be required of any man that it should
be believed as an article of faith;” and again, in
Article Twenty, that “it is not lawful for the Church
to ordain anything contrary to God’s word.” While


in the ordination service for priest’s orders the newly-
ordained priest vows “to preach only as necessary to
salvation, that which he shall be persuaded may be
concluded and proved by the Scriptures.” Now, all
this is very misleading to a young clergyman; he
finds the Church of England on one hand referring
him to the Bible as his rule of faith and disclaiming
all claim to infallibility, while on the other hand she
calls upon her clergy practically to admit her infalli-
bility, by subscribing to certain creeds, as to be
believed because they “can be proved by certain
warrant of Holy Scripture, and to accept certain
articles and formularies as the exponents of all that
Scripture saith is necessary to salvation.”
With the passage which I have quoted from the
ordination now before me, I was fully under the im-
pression for a long time that where I considered the
teaching of the articles or prayer-book differed from
that of the Scriptures, I could fall back upon, the
latter, and so 1 retained my position; but having been
requested some few months back by one of the com-
missaries of the Bishop of Goulburn to give expression
to my religious convictions, I was forced to a careful
review of my position. After examining some of the
latest ecclesiastical judgments in England, I became
convinced that I had no place in the Church of
England, and I resigned. For one of these judgments,
rules distinctly that clergymen of that Church are not
permitted to base their teaching upon the Bible merely,,
but are expected to accept the articles and prayer-
book as the exponents of the Christian Faith; thus
raising these to a position of supreme authority..
Simply, then, the Church of England, while distinctly
upholding Holy Scripture as her sole authority in
matters of faith, yet says to her clergy, “ Here are
certain articles and formularies, you must subscribe to
these, and you must not contravene the doctrines
taught in them, for they are a compendium of all that
2


is contained in Scripture as necessary to salvation.”
She says the Church cannot ordain anything contrary
to Holy Scripture. Disingenuously she disclaims any
claim to infallibility, while yet she calls upon her
clergy practically to declare that she has not ordained
anything contrary to Scripture, and ingeniously con-
trives they shall in subscribing testify to her infalli-
bility. In spite, then, of all my Broad Church friends
Inive said on the subject, I consider that a literal and
fair interpretation of the Voysey .Judgment commits
the clergy of the Church of England to a communism
of thought little short of ultramontanism. So soon as
I became convinced of this I resigned, for I believe
that every Christian minister should take his stand on
the sufficiency of the New Testament writings, taken
in their broad sense, not putting a narrow con-
struction on their meaning, but taking the spirit and
not the letter.
Ministers of the gospel, if they are appointed for
anything, are surely set apart by their fellow-men for
the express purpose of investigating and seeking out
spiritual and moral Truth. By a single-minded devo-
tion of their entire time and talents to the study of the
sacred Scriptures and God’s ways with us, it is intended
th.tt these men shall he enabled to open the treasuries
of divine knowledge and wisdom to those of their fellow-
creatures whose education or occupation precludes
them from much study. The clear and paramount
duty of the Christian minister is, the honest simple
avowal of what he believes to be the truth. No Chris-
tian minister has any right to keep the truth to him-
self and every man’s own convictions, convictions
ai rived at after careful and deliberate thought, after
earnest and faithful prayer, are to that man truth.
Ministers arc much blamed both by the press and the
laity, because they do not preach plainly what they
themselves believe, and because they express them-
selves ambiguously in the pulpit. We hear it con-


stantly said by laymen that the clergy, as a rule, are
fifty years behind the age, and that, instead of being
in the van and the leaders of the religious thought of
the people, they arc very much in the rear, in fact,
jogging along like steady old wheelers in a mail coach,
not only not helping on the vehicle, but retarding and
impeding those who are doing the work with their
shoulders well up to the collar.
Someone has said that the clergy may be divided
into three classes : a large majority who are ignorant;
a small number who know and arc silent, and a minute
minority who know and speak out.”
Now, it is all very well for men who are unshackled
by creeds or subscription, to speak out and discuss
religious difficulties in a free and liberal spirit. If a
clergyman does speak out, he is accused of being dis-
honest, a traitor to his church, and such a system of
organized intimidation is brought to bear upon him,
that he is glad to retract and hold his tongue, or do as
I have done —go out altogether, and thereby lose, not
only probably his means of living, but what is of more
importance to an earnest man, his means of ministering
to the spiritual wants of his fellow-men.
There will be no freedom of thought till clergymen
are freed from subscription to creeds and articles, and
until the laity are prepared to listen to the faithful
utterances of earnest and true men, without calling
them such ugly names as heretic—infidel—atheist.
The laity have it all in their own hands, and they
have no right to blame the clergy. If “ the prophets
prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule in their
name,” it is because “the people love to have it so,”*
and “the end thereof is” dogmatism, sectarianism,
and the inevitable rebound, infidelity and atheism.
People say they are fairly worn out with the tire-
some flow of weary doctrine and moral platitude they
have to listen to when they go to church, and that
* Jeremiah.


they wish clergymen would cease their drowsy dis-
putatious, and give them something that would come
home to their hearts, while it would not outrage their
reason and conscience. But so long as men arc
obliged to preach in accordance with cut and dry
doctrinal statements, so long will congregations have
to listen to cut and dry sermons, and moreover as lonir
v 7 O
as men have to subscribe to articles and formularies
which are contrary to plain sense and plain morality,
so long will our pulpits be filled for the most part by
unintelligent and ignorant men, however earnest and
pious they may he.
Distinctly 1 repeat, the laity are to blame. Is it not
a fact that when one of the most able and pious clergy-
men in Victoria expressed himself in a lecture with
more charity and hopefulness than the prevailing creeds
allow, with regard to the future of those we call
heathen ; is it not a fact that a number of boys were
removed from the school of which he was the head ?
Some of the pious laity could not bear to think that
their future hliss w'ould not be enhanced by the
knowledge that less favoured individuals were bein«r
eternally tormented.
Much would be gained by freeing clergymen from
all subscription. But much more can he done if the
laity, after having enquired and searched a little for
themselves in the records of the life of Jesus and Acts
of the Apostles, would then be satisfied to put those
dogmas which arc not to he found there to one side as
non-essential, and agree to make faiths, not dogmas,,
the basis of religious communion and public worship.
People have had enough and to spare of dogmatic
theology, and are crying out for a more simple re-
ligion, for simple truth ; something they can under-
stand ; something to keep them on in their daily life of
toil and struggle ; something they can make their daily
spiritual food, and that will not repel them by contra-
dicting their reason. The only religion that will win


the world is a religion that is easily understood ; that
will require neither proof nor argument, but will at
once commend itself as True because it is Truth.
Such a religion is the gospel of the Kingdom of
Heaven —it is a religion which u the common people ”
heard gladly —it is for the educated laity who support
that great organization, the Christian Church, to see
that their less educated brethren get spiritual food, or
they will rue it sooner or later. The “■masses” with-
out religion means anarchy and lawlessness and blood-
shed. Let the moneyed and educated classes see to
this ; it is not only the ignorant and depraved who
never enter the doors of our Churches; some of these
poor creatures would come if they were not ashamed.
It is the operative classes —the artisans, who keep aloof,
and pass by scornfully on the other side, simply be-
cause they don’t and cannot believe the sort of gospel
they hear preached in the Churches. The popular
gospel, the creed of the Churches, is too incomprehen-
sible —no one can pretend to understand it, it is a
mass of metaphysical doctrine, all open to argument
and discussion, and it is the worst news ever preached
to man, because it condemns all who cannot believe its
incredible dogmas to the torments of hell for ever.
Thoughtful minds, whether cultivated or not, revolt
from these ecclesiastically invented dogmas. Cod has
not given us the means whereby to solve all the
mysteries of life, neither does He require from us a
correct statement of belief concerning them, but “ He
hath declared to thee, 0 man, what is good.” “ And
what doth the Lord thy God require from thee; but
to do justice, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God.”* “ For God is no respecter of persons,
but in every nation he that feareth Him and worketh
righteousness is accepted of Him.”f
Makclii. t Acts'.
C. F.
Uhana, B th December , 1875.


SERMON.
In the eighth chapter of the Fourth Gospel, and 31st
verse, Jesus is recorded to have said, “ continue
in my words, then are ye my disciples indeed,” and u ye
shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you
free."
And Paul the Apostle of Religious Liberty, the
uncompromising advocate of a Free Christianity in
writing to the Galatians, exhorts them to remember
their freedom under the new dispensation, in the
following words : —“ Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty
wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled
again with the yoke of bondage."
And, I, as a Christian minister, would wish to impress
upon you the necessity of coining to Christ himself, if
you would find the way to God and that knowledge of
His ways with us, which is life eternal.
“ The glorious Gospel of the Blessed God was con-
tained in the words, and lived out in the life of Jesus
Christ. That Gospel is the revelation or unfolding of
Truth, the knowledge of which will make us Free."
Having then obtained our freedom, let us not be again
entangled in the yoke of bondage to a conventional
and dogmatic theology, but let us “ standfast in the
liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free."
The words which are before us sanction the state-
ment made lately by Mr. Gladstone, “ That the two
poles upon which the Christian dispensation rests are
Truth and Freedom.”*
* Vaticanism, p. 02.


It follows then, necessarily, that those who are
appointed to preach that gospel should he free to search
“ for the Truth as it is in Jesus,” and should be at
perfect liberty to teach and preach without any restric-
tion whatever, that which commends itself to them as
Truth in the records we have of the words and life of
Jesus of Nazareth who was as we read in Luke’s Gospel,
“ a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and
all the people' 1 (Luke xxiv. 19).
I claim, therefore, for ministers the right of free
individual thought iu all matters pertaining to religion,
and that they shall not be entangled in the yoke of
bondage to the traditions of the Fathers or the dogmas
of the Reformers, but that every Christian minister
shall be free to think for himself, search for himself,
compare, sift, and re-examine from time to time the
form in which he has cast his faith, and from time to
time, if necessary, recast that faith in a mould more
suitable to the demands of the age in which he lives,
and the capacities of those whom lie hopes to lead to a
Christ-like and godly life.
I claim for ministers the right to call upon their
hearers to think for themselves, and to impress upon
them that it is necessary to hold to what is true, not to
what is conventional, respectable, and orthodox.
I claim for ministers the right to endeavour to extri-
cate themselves and their hearers from all authority in
matters of belief, except that ol the individual con-
science, and to impress upon all that it is their duty to
investigate spiritual and moral truth, however difficult
and even painful that investigation may be ; for, as
Butler says, Man hath the rule of right within him ;
what he wants is that he honestly attend to it.”
“ Conscience does not only pffer itself to show us the
way we should walk in, but it also carries its own
authority with it as our natural guide” while Newman
“is very bold,” and says, “ I have alwiiys contended
that obedience even to an erring conscience was the


way to gain light, and that it mattered not wnere a
man began so that he began on what came to hand,
and in faith.”
I claim, then, as a Christian minister, that which I
claim for every man—the right to speak straight out
from my own heart and soul that which I believe to be
the truth ; appealing, as did Jesus, to the divine in
man, to the conscience ; to that faculty in man, call it
what you will, which naturally, and without reasoning
about the matter, perceives what is true, and good, and
right, instinctively turning to these things, as the plant
to the light.
Thus taking my stand, I claim to speak “with autho-
rity, and not as the scribes,” who appeal to traditions
and writings; I appeal not to any epistle written with
ink, but to that which is graven with the spirit of the
Living God himself ; not on tables of stone, but on
fleshy tables of the heart ; in your own souls ; in the
depth of your own affections and emotions.
This is an authority none can dispute. Ye have the
witness in yourselves —“Ask, and it shall be given
you ; seek, and ye shall find ; knock, and it shall be
opened unto you. For everyone that asketh receiveth,
and he that seeketh findeth, and to him that knocketh
it shall be opened.” “He that hath ears to hear, let
him hear.”
Who, or what, or how God is, we cannot know, but
nevertheless, “Be ye sure that God is,” and that it is
not only becoming, but necessary, that every one
should come to such knowledge of God in His relations
to us, and of ourselves in our relations to Him, as will
raise us to that state called in Scripture Eternal Life,
because it is a state of harmony or oneness with that
Eternal Life to whom we owe our being.
We are all of us, all who have power to think,
reflect, and reason, personally responsible for our
religious beliefs ; that is, for the use we make of that
spiritual faculty called faith, which is part of our


nature, and which, when expressed in words, becomes
our belief. I his is a responsibility we cannot put
upon another, most certainly we cannot put it upon a
church. “Before God, face to face, each soul must
stand and give account, not only for the deeds done in
the body, but for these religious beliefs which do in
no inconsiderable measure influence us, in that which
a late writer states, makes up three-fourths of life—
namely, our conduct.”
Fver, then, while I have endeavoured to get my
hearers to think for themselves, themselves to search
for the truth, have 1 been anxious to put before them
that which I have received as truth, as I believe, in
answer to careful study, earnest prayer, and an intense
desire to receive “ the light of the knowledge of the
.glory of God” as manifested in “the face of Jesus
Christ” (2 Cor, iv. (!) ; and with the strong hope,
too, that I, too, in my degree may be enabled to reveal
the Father unto men, and give light to some that sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death, and guide the
feet of some that are out of the way into the way of
peace, i bis was my hope in entering the ministry, as
i trust it will be my hope to my dying day, and “ I
thank God that He counted me faithful, putting me
into the ministry,” and earnestly pray “ 1 may walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith 1 have been called ”
—the noblest calling, as 1 believe, on this God’s earth—
the calling of a Christian minister.
“ The time is come,” says the late John Stuart Mill,
“in which it is the duty of all qualified persons to speak
their minds about popular religious beliefs.” “To
this end was 1 born, and for this cause came I into the
world,” Jesus says, “that I should bear witness to the
truth” (John xviii. 37). Yes, “the hour cometh, and
now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the
Father in spirit and in truth.”
For that truth to which Christ came to bear witness,
though held down for many centuries, is fast setting


free the religious faculties in man. And if there is
O
one characteristic of the present age more marked than
another, it is the intense interest witli which religious
subjects are freely discussed, not only “ under the
pulpit,” and out of the pulpit, but, thank God, in some
instances in the pulpit also, showing that Mill was
right, and that there being an earnest desire abroad
to arrive at the truth, it is indeed the duty of “ quali-
fied persons ” to speak out plainly, and not allow their
trumpet, as is too often the case, to give forth any
uncertain sound. We are evidently in a transition
period, our religious beliefs are changing their forms.
The simple and grand truths of the Religion of Christ
are being divested of the mould in which they were
first cast by His early followers, and of the many addi-
tions and accretions which have gathered around them
during eighteen centimes ; and the work of “ those
<D o ' #
who are disciples of Christ, indeed,” is to re-set those
truths in a less pretentious and more simple frame-
work, u free from profane and old wives’ fables and
genealogies which gender strife.” Free, in fine, from
Jewish ritual and pagan mythology, and once more to
present to the world the simple gospel, or good news
of the Ki ngdom of God, as it was borne witness to in
the words and life of Jesus of Nazareth.
Let preachers, learning from Jesus, once more pre-
sent the gospel on the only basis on which true
religion can be founded, on the basis of the Divine
Humanity; there did Jesus base His religion, and
yet not His religion, but that which had been from
the beginning; for Jesus spake not His own words,
but the words of Him that sent Him, and Jesus was,
as Lessing says, “ the first certain teacher,” because,
appealing to the Divine in man, He taught that the
only authority a free man should bow to in matters of
religious belief is that still small voice which, if we
stifle it not, speaks in the heart of each one of us, for
“ the Kingdom of Heaven is within us.”


Jesus gave to the world absolute religious principles,
“ the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.” Love to
God and love to man, the being good and the doing
good, not from fear ot punishment or from hope of
reward, nor yet because commanded, but in faith that
we all can live as children of that Father “ who
causeth His sun to rise upon the evil and upon the
good, and sendeth His rain upon the just and the un-
just.” Jesus came to bear witness to the truth, but to
get at that truth and to know it, as it was first
preached by Jesus, a great deal of the crust of human
error needs first to be removed.
.Just as from the word Christianity we should have
to drop a great number of letters before we would
have tlie simple word Christ, so from the religion
called Christianity we shall have to drop a great
number of doctrines before we shall come to the
simple religion of Christ, for the religion of Christ is
not a set of doctrines, but a life. The simple truths
of the Gospel have become so worked up into elabo-
rate systems of theology ami schemes of salvation,,
that in no land of Christendom does the Gospel pre-
sent to-day the features it wore when it began its
mission. Nowhere does the Gospel speak with the
voice it first spake with, when it won the world and
when thousands of simple-minded peasants hung with
anxious ears and full hearts on the gracious words
that fell from the lips of Him who spake as never man
spake before or since.
Our minds, crammed from early youth with cate-
chismal and dogmatic teaching, many of us never even
as much as approach the liberty wherewith Christ hath
made us free, but remain all our life long entangled in
the yoke of bondage ; in bondage to teachers and
Churches, to tradition and superstition, and, last of
all, in bondage to public opinion, to conventionality.
From these things the truth will set us free, if we
O t 7
will but come to Jesus Himself and not to doctrines


about Him; doctrines which it would puzzle any man
who had not previously been taught them, to deduce
from Jesus’ own words.
Strong in the power of the Spirit, which was His
without measure, the Son of Man called men from
vainly attempting to worship God through a system of
religion, u a creed of dogma, ceremonial formalism, and
tradition,” to the glorious liberty of spiritual freedom,
founded not upon lawlessness, which would be slavery
to self and sin, but upon obedience, as St. Bernard
says, to a better will than our own —the will of a
loving Father. Set free by the knowledge of this
truth into a new life, the true disciples of Christ, as
children of that perfect Father, who is ever giving
Himself in life, light, and love to the universe, shall in
their degree, too, be perfect, by freely giving them-
selves to His service in noble lives of self-sacrificing
love.
Not upon the words and teaching of Christ, but
upon one or two passages of Paul’s writings —passages
in all probability misunderstood —is based that system
of popular theology which has held the world so long,
not because of the dogmas which disfigure it, but
because underneath all was the truth ; for our popular
theology is based on “ the fall of man,” .and a rotten
foundation it is ; even if it were true it would form but
a very sorry foundation upon which to base a religious
faith.
The gospel of Jesus stands on a far more solid
foundation—on the divine in man, on the divine
humanity as revealed and proved in His own person.
Upon a few words of Paul’s, declaring that death
entered the world by sin—an hypothesis incontro-
vertibly disproved by science, —is built that popular
gospel which has commanded the love and reverence
of millions for so many centuries, because underneath
its irrational and God-dishonouring dogmas was ever
to be found the one true foundation; “ for other


foundation can no man lay than that which is laid,
which is Jesus Christ:” Jesus Christ, the proof in
His own person that man is not a fallen, corrupt,
totally-depraved creature, under a curse, and doomed
to the pains of hell for ever for the sins of Adam, but
a God-begotten, divine Son of ; ‘the high and lofty
One that inhabiteth eternitv.”
%/
Well has the history of Christianity proved the
truth of Paul’s words when he said, “ Now, if any man
build upon this foundation—gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, stubble—every man’s work shall be
made manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it
shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every
man’s work of what sort it is.”
The fire of the Spirit of Truth is trying these addi-
tions to the Gospel. “ The thirst unquenchable for
Truth” has more than ever possessed the human mind;
men are seeking after God, if haply they may feel
after and find Him, with an earnestness unparalleled in
the history of the world. And they arc cut off from
the way to Him by a mass of obstructions in the
shape of dogmas, an d creeds, and rituals. They cannot
come at the way for these things. Jesus has been all
this time with us and yet we have not known Him.
Just as the face of God was veiled from the Jews by
their conventional religion of sacrifices of blood and
minute observances, so the face of Jesus in which
was reflected the glory of God is hid from us by
the thousand and one fantastic theories of popular
Christianity.
But the living Spirit of Truth is bringing a burning
heat to bear upon these faulty superstructures which
no doctrine of mere human invention can abide; nought
but the Truth itself can withstand the scathing fire of
free inquiry, the intellectual, scientific, moral and
spiritual criticism that has been brought to bear upon
the Christian beliefs of our day. All that is contrary
to the spirit of Truth, the spirit of the Bible, the spirit


of Jesus, must perish; but Jill that is true and needful
for us will abide, like God and His Word, for ever.
As I have said, we are living in a transition period,
“ Christianity is on her trial for her very life.” You
cannot take up an ordinary newspaper or magazine
without seeing that the religious feelings of the public
are in a state of great unrest, and nothing but free
inquiry and free discussion will settle this disturbed
state.
For my part, I see no hope of peace, but in resolutely
bringing our reason and conscience to bear upon the
several articles of our Christian belief’ and while, with
unwavering faith and trustful prayer, we seek for that
wisdom which is from above, let us conscientiously,
fearlessly, and without hesitation, reject all that con-
tradicts the spirit of the New Testament as interpreted
by reason, conscience and that Spirit of Truth whom
Christ said would abide with us for ever.
What are usually termed heretical opinions arc
generally truths seeking the light. These opinions
may express these truths but feebly ; may be accom-
panied by error; but yet will they be found to contain
much which, when accepted, will set the human mind
free from great entanglement of bondage.
o O o _
The man who, with an honest heart, fearlessly seeks
the truth carefully and studiously, with earnest prayer
and submissive spirit, prepared to sacrifice the most
cherished belief, the dearest confession of faith, must
in time reach up to that truth, for God is faithful.
Christ made known a noble and liberating truth, when
he told men who doubted 11 is teaching that, if they
were willing to do God’s will, they would know of His
teaching whether it were of God, or whether He merely
spoke of Himself,
From my soul 1 believe I have not sought in vain ;
on the knees of my soul 1 have won my faith, and I
believe 1 have truly caught even more than a glimpse
of “ the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of


Jesus Christ;” and from that Saviour’s life and words,
and through that Saviour’s spirit, received some of
that truth which He Himself said would set us free.
And it has set me free—free to think for myself, free to
preach to all men what 1 believe to be, “ the glorious
gospel of the blessed God.”
The truth once received into the soul, it takes a
hold of the human mind that nothing; else can take.
A man is, as it were, possessed by it ; he dare not
keep it to himself, he cannot, he must speak. The
truth transforms : the timid become brave, the slow of
speech eloquent, the weak strong. The man, stirred
to his inmost depths, is driven right in on himself,
and out of himself again, till he rests on God, who
pours fresh truth into the awakened soul, trembling
with a new life ; and in the beautiful words of
one of the bravest and most single-minded of men— *
“ Timid flesh may resist, and Moses say, ‘ I am slow
of speech.’ What avails that? God says, ‘Go, I
will be with thy mouth to quicken thy tardy tongue.’
Shrinking Jeremiah, effeminate and timid, recoils be-
fore the fearful work. But the great Soul of all flows
into him and says, ‘ Say not I am a child, for I am
with thee. Gird up thy loins like a man, and speak
all that I command thee. Be not afraid of men’s
faces.’
“Elisha must leave his oxen in the furrow ; Amos
desert his summer fruit and his friend; and a thousand
others, stout-hearted and God-inspired, must go forth
of their errand into the faithless world to accept the
prophet’s mission, be stoned, hated, scourged, and slain.
Resistance is nothing to these men; over them steel
loses its power, and public opprobrium its shame.
These arc the men Avho move the world. They have
an eye to see its follies, a heart to weep and bleed for
its sin. Filled with a soul wide as yesterday, to-day,
and for ever, they pray great prayers for sinful men.
* Theodore Parker: “Discourse on matters pertaining - to religion.”


The wild wail of a brother’s heart runs through the
saddening music of their speech. The destiny of these
men is forecast in their birth. They are doomed to
fall on evil times, and evil tongues come when they
will come.”
Stirring words from the very heart and soul of one
of whom the world was not worthy —and from the
beginning it has been so.
The arm of the law and the passions of the crowd
have ever been employed by the fearful and intolerant
upholders of a conventional and sacerdotal religion to
root out and destroy God’s prophets, and the noble
truths for which they died the martyr’s death. Thus
Socrates, the most virtuous man of his age, was put
to death by his own countrymen, judicially convicted
of impiety and immorality. Thus John the Baptist,
fearless and free, scorching in his denunciation of sin
and hypocrisy, must leave bis head in a charger. And
Jesus, who brought us the glad tidings of truth and
freedom, Jesus is called a blasphemer and hath a
devil, and a priest-ridden rabble hung the world’s
Saviour to the hill of Calvary, with loud cries of
“Crucify Him! Crucify Him!”
The road to the truth does indeed lie through doubt,
difficulty, and trial ; yes, through agony and bloody
sweat ; through failure too, but through all to victory,
yes, thanks be to God, finally without doubt to victory.
None has ever achieved that victory but with loss of
blood. Few have ever tried that narrow and difficult
path, without intense effort and moments of despair so
deep, that the burden laid upon them seemed greater
than they could bear, and the frantic prayer has often
risen to the lips that God would, in mercy, send
death, and with death, peace; for parting with old and
cherished beliefs—beliefs received from the lips and at
the knees of a beloved mother, is like parting with
one’s very life’s-blood, with portion of oneself. But it
is fear that thus presses us down to the ground. Are


we honest ? Are we willing to do the will of God ?
Why, then fear? It is all unbelief —want of faith.
Well may we say with the disciples, “ Lord increase our
faith.” Is God true? Then in seeking Truth we are
seeking God, and have ranged ourselves on His side.
We must have Faith —it is indispensable.
The seeker after Truth who has not Faith, is like the
storm-tossed mariner who seeks an unknown haven
without a compass. Only by Faith can we reach
God and a knowledge of His truth, yet must our Faith
be intelligent and rational, else shall we faint in the
day of adversity. Faith in one good and eternal Will,
in whom we live, and move, and have our being, to
whom our wills are to be brought into obedience; whose
service is perfect freedom, and who is directing all
things
“ To one far off divine event,
To which the whole Creation moves.”
Who is working all things for good, the perfection of
all; who comprehends all and who will infallibly accom-
plish what He wills; who will, in time, raise all His
rational creatures up to Himself in perfect harmony,
the human entirely merged in the Divine; God in man,
man in God —a new creature.
We must have Faith in God as the one true and
absolutely self-existing Being, the ever-present source
of all that lives, and breathes, and is, the Supreme Good.
Faith in His absolute goodness, in His truth, His love.
Without this Faith the heart faints and is ready to
perish, but with “Faith, which is a confidence of
things hoped for, a conviction of things not seen,”
we can with the Master take our stand “ without
the camp,” regardless of the opposition and contra-
dictions of ignorance, the defections and reproaches
of friends, the sneers and calumnies of enemies.
“ Resolutions o’ershadow us with vigorous wing ; ”
the truth we seek clears to our eager vision, and
in faith the trustful soul goes out to meet its


God, and finds Him; finds Him, as He is most
surely to be found, in the face of Jesus. The mists
have risen. Quite amazed, we wonder at past obtuse-
ness : we cannot understand why others cannot with
us see the new world which has opened upon us—
“earth no more without form or void.” We have
struck the key-note of the harmony to which God will
in the end reduce all His works ; to us there is a new
heavens and a new earth, in which dwelleth righteous-
ness. We now know that evil was not made to last;
that goodness alone is immortal. The whole current
of our being sets to this new world, our vocation is
clearly defined, we aspire with all our soul after this
higher and better world, this blessed life to which we
have found the way ; like Jacob, we have wrestled,
and we have won. God has spoken, if He has not
told us His name ; yet have we heard the accents of
His voice: that voice lias soothed our troubled hearts
with a sense of infinite calm. We open our hearts to
God straightway ; the eyes of our understanding are
also opened. As certainly as the open eye drinks in
the light, so certainly does the awakened soul drink in
the light and love of that God and Father who is love,
who is light, and in whom is no darkness at all. The
voice of God in our hearts, calling us to seek His face,
His truth, is a voice that cannot be silenced. When
once that voice has made itself heard, like Abraham,
we must leave our fatherland and seek a country God
will make known to us. If, having heard, we have
asked and received help ; if, having knocked, the door
has been opened; if, having sought truth, we believe and
feel we have found it —let us not fear or be dismayed:
our plain duty is to declare what we have heard. Having
freely received, we must freely give. To conceal what
we firmly believe to be the truth, because we fear the
consequences, is mean and cowardly in the extreme.
We must obey the truth, and not the base law of
expediency. God will take care of the consequences.


Well did Dean Alford say
“ Speak thou the truth ; let others fence
And trim their words for pay;
In pleasant sunshine of pretence
Let others bask their day.
“ Woe, woe to him, on safety bent,
Who creeps to age from youth,
Failing to grasp his life’s intent
Because he fears the truth.”
And it is no light matter if, through his honest en-
deavour, the searcher after truth should he led, step by
step, till he finds himself, as in my own case, outside
the narrow creeds of the so-called orthodox churches.
Such an one will he looked upon with suspicion ;
he will he accused of seeking notoriety, of being a
visionary, an enthusiast ; he will he avoided as dan-
gerous; some who go with him in heart will think him
imprudent, and tell him he has impeded, not hastened,
the unfolding of the truth. Under these circumstances
nothing but a firm belief in the righteousness of our
cause, and that God is with us in all our efforts, will
enable us to keep on our course steadily, and with
that single-eye which is indispensable in the Truth-
seeker.*
Well has Martineau said, “ The grand secret of
human success is singleness of purpose ; before it,
perils, opposition, and difficulty, melt away.”
Who among us is always able, not only to respond
to the call of duty, but to sacrifice all, even life itself,
“to bear witness to the Truth.”
Only one has ever succeeded, and Him we crucified.
If we Avill come to that Crucified One and learn of
Him, the evil spirit of fear will be cast out of us, and,
in its place, will dwell in our hearts, “the spirit of
power, of love, and of a sound mind, enabling us to
come out of the crowd of timid Christians, earnest
* “Everyone wishes to have truth on his side; hut it is not every-
one that sincerely wishes to he on the side oi truth.”


and single-minded, able to do and to die for God and
His Truth, for our Master, and His and our fellow-
men.”
It seems to me that there are hut two courses open
to those (and their name is legion) who cannot find
peace in “ the jarrings and jargon ” of our popular and
sectarian Christianity. Either they’must return to the
arms of that ancient and venerable, hut unprogressive
mother church, from which we have all emerged, and
unhesitatingly submit reason and conscience to her
authority ; or, as growing and healthy shoots, still
rooted in the same nourishing soil which has produced
so much piety and devotion, they must strike up into
the clear, bracing atmosphere of that liberty where-
with Christ hath made us free. Then, freely drawing
in life and truth by the untrammelled use of our own
individual faculties and powers, direct from the source
of all life and truth, we shall steadily grow into
that knowledge of God and Him whom He hath
sent (to set us free), which is life eternal, and perfect
freedom.
Let me, then, earnestly beg of you to “ Stand fast in
the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and
be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage, for
God hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of power
and of love, and of a sound mind (1 Tim.); sanctify
therefore the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready
always to give to every man that asketh you a reason
of the hope that is in you (1 Peter); but refuse pro-
fane and old wives’ fables, and exercise yourselves
rather unto godliness (1 Tim. iv.); for the end of the
commandment is love, out of a pure heart and of a
good conscience and of faith unfeigned (1 Tim i.);
for God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ” (2 Cor. hi.).
Seen in the face of Jesus, “ God is light, in Him is


no darkness at all.” The darkness is past, the true
light now shineth. Jesus has cleared away the
mystery which veiled the Father from the children.
God, though hid for generations, was revealed in
Christ. In the Old Testament we have God; but
God veiled, not only partially hid, but a partial God.
The veil is done away in Christ, for Christ came to
reveal, to unveil, to bear witness to the truth, and that
truth shall make us free. Where the spirit of the
Lord is there is liberty, and we all with open face
beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord are
changed into the same image, from glory to glory, as
by the spirit of the Lord (2 Cor. iii. 17).
As a Christian minister, I base my teaching on the
words, life, and person of Jesus ; for in faith and hope
in God, as revealed in Christ, and in faith and hope
in man, as typified by Christ, I find all of doctrine, as
taught by Jesus Himself, as necessary to be ,
while in love to God and love to man Jesus sums up
all of Christian practice as necessary to be done in
order to inherit eternal life. But it seems to me that
the pure and spiritual religion of Jesus has with the
Churches degenerated into .a dead formalism. Instead
of worshipping the Father in spirit and in truth, and
serving Him by faithfully following in the footsteps of
Flim who said, “ Learn of Me! Follow Me! ” men
have come to follow, not Christ, but systems of
religion, and have come to believe not in Christ and
His teaching, but in doctrines about Him invented
after His death, and have called upon us to believe in
these traditions of men as revelations of God, under
pain of eternal damnation. The repetition of creeds
has taken the place of faith in God, while outward
observance and performance of rites has been sub-
stituted for that love to God and man which is the
natural outcome of all true religion. Thus heresy,
as it is termed, has been more condemned than an
immoral or selfish life,


Now, if —as I and others firmly believe —many of
the doctrines taught hy the churches are not only
contrary to reason, unsupported by evidence, opposed
to the moral conscience and to that natural sense of
truth through which we apprehend in faith that we
cannot comprehend ; but if, further, these doctrines
are not to be found in the tea chine: of Christ himself,
then I do maintain that every prudent and sensible
man is bound to reject such doctrines as soon as he
brings them out into the light and applies to their
consideration those rules upon which he constantly
acts in matters of every-day life, and which he invari-
ably recognizes as guides to truth in all other affairs.
Whenever any system is examined, whether it be a
system of religion or anything else, the one all-
important question is, not on what authority is it
based, but is it true or is it false ; and any system
which plainly contradicts reason, conscience, and the
natural sense of truth, cannot be accepted, even though
an angel from heaven were to proclaim its infallibility,
and preface the announcement with a “ Thus saith the
Lord.” But many who feel this are afraid to admit
it, afraid to act on it. The mass of people are con-
ventional ; they fear the consequences. To think for
themselves, to choose for themselves, involves effort,
and effort they will not make. They fear they may
estrange and distress friends and relations; they may
suffer in their business or profession, may forfeit
position.*
Thus expediency has taken the place of the abso-
lutely right. The question with most people is not,
* A friend lately said, in a letter to me — u F cannot blame
men for being* backward in inviting* that ostracism with which
the respectable religions portion of all communities visit the man
who thinks for himself. Several of my friends who have left
the ancient dogmas far behind have specially warned me, as a
business man, against provoking this feeling. They themselves
are successful and, indeed, wealthy men, yet they are not ashamed
to avow their dislike to making their views prominent.”


Is it true ? Is it right ? But, What will be the conse-
quences ? What will people say ? How will it affect
our position ? Now, Jesus ever appeals to us as indi-
viduals, and submitted llis own teaching to the judg-
ment of those who were willing to do the will of God,
and in His name I call upon all never to trifle with that
still small voice, the Conscience, through which God
makes Himself heard to all who will hear. In the name
of Jesus I call upon you never to violate the sacredness
of your own individual self-respect.
“ This above all things, to your own selves he true.”
Be true to your consciences, your own souls, so only
can you he true to God. Come to Jesus, to His words,
and life, and you will be freed from the yoke of bond-
age to external authority and preconceived opinions
and beliefs; from the bondage of traditional and eccle-
siastical authority, and finally from the bondage of
public opinion of what will be said, of what will be
the consequences of accepting the Truth and acting
on it.
Are we seeking to grow in knowledge of God in His
relations to us, then we should “ have but one desire,
to know the Truth; but one fear, to believe a lie.”*
And now, in conclusion, to those among you who are
seeking Truth, I can but say, “ Come to Jesus.” Hear
Him speak, He came to bear witness to the Truth. He
has the words of eternal life, and if we continue in those
words we shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall
make us free.
To those among you who desire a closer walk with
God, again I say, “ Come to Jesus,” see Him live; for
“ He has left us "an example that we should walk in His
footsteps.”
To those among you who feel estranged from God, and
yearn to be at one with Him, still again, I say, “ Come
to Jesus,” see Him in the darkest hour of His life, in the
* Tyndall.


gloomy garden of Gethsemane, and in the bitterest trial
your Heavenly Father allows to come upon you, with
Him say, “ Nevertheless, Father, not as I will, but as
Thou wilt.” Not my will but Thine be done.
And, finally, if there are any among us who are
afraid of God. afraid of that death which you believe
will bring you face to face with God, once again, I say,
“ Come to Jesus,” see Him die, and looking up at the
Cross with Him die to sin and to self; with Him cast
yourselves into the everlasting arms, with the trust-
ful words, “Father, into Thy hands I commit my
spirit.”
Then we who have been entangled in the yoke of
bondage to a conventional and formal religion; then
we who have been groping about in the dim twilight
of tradition and superstition, shall come out into the
clear sunlight of the loving truth of God. Freed from
all terror, from all fear by the “ light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus,” we too in
our degree shall be enabled to bear witness to the
truth, and shall shine as lights in the world. Our
lives shall indeed shine out, bright, clear, and true; we
shall be witnesses to that light that lighteth every
man ; that light will brighten and cheer our way.
And even if that way should lie through the long,
weary wilderness of sin and sorrow, yet shall we be
at peace and content; shall we not know that all is
under the good Providence of that loving and righteous
Father, who, through Jesus, has sent us the glad
tidings of religious liberty, the glorious Gospel of
truth and freedom.
Now, unto the King, eternal, immortal, invisible,
the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever and
ever. Amen.
Walker, May, and Co., Printers, Mackillop* street (o/f Bourkc-st. West), Melbourne.




