

F/^7




TRUTH:
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE EVILS CAUSED BY
TOBACCO, ALCOHOL, UNDER-SUEEACE
EVILS, CELIBACY, &c.,
SEttli Jib bice,
BXCEABD THOMAS SELBY,
PKOFESSOB OF
Jflebtcal jferbs,
Who Heals all Diseases with Herbal Preparations only.
RESIDENCE:
HILLSIDE TERRACE,
DEVONSHIRE STREET'
SURRY HILLS, SIDNEY.
“ The Diseases of Society can no more than Corporal
Maladies he prevented or cured without being spoken
about in plain language.
John Sttjaet Mill.”


• #
'■ ■ Mj ' H|H| _ j
'
.I . \
\
■ .
- If .. .
' •


Preface .. .. .. .. . • • • .. 5
The Four Great Evils.. .. .. .. .. 5
Statistics of Infants’ and Adults’ Deaths .. .. 6
Comments on Celibacy .. .. .. • • 7
Deaths by Accident, Suicide, Delirium Tremens,
Intemperance, through Intoxicating Drinks,
1881 7
Per Cantage of Lunatics through Intemperance .. 7
Reform Necessary .. .. .. .. .. 8
Surface Evils : Air, Skin, Stomach, .fee. .. .. 11
The Soul’s Residence .. .. .. .. ..11
Pure Air .. .. .. .. .. .. 12
The Stomach .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
The Skin .. .. .. .. .. ..15
The Curse of Curses: Alcohol .. .. .. 17
Average of Deaths per week caused through In-
temperance, 1881 .. .. .. .. .. t 8
The Doctor’s Last Resource .. i. .. • • 19
The Invalid’s Fallacy.. .. .. t .. .. 20
Report of Mr. George Ross, Surgeon, London, 1848
and 1849 .. .. .. .. .. .. 20
Concluding Remarks on Alcohol .. .. .. 20
Tobacco .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 21
Case of long continued Illness through the use of
Tobacco .. .. .. .. .. .. 21


Tobacco : It’s Injurious Effects upon Boys.. .. 21
Under-surface Evils .. .. .. •. .. 26
How to Mitigate the Evil .. .. .. .. 28
Percentage of Deaths from Infancy to the age of 40
years .. .. .. •• • • .. 29
Advice to those Suffering .. .. .. . - 30
The Scientific and Natural Method of curing
Chronic Disease .. .. .. .. .. 30
Comments upon the Scientific Herbal Remedies .. 32
List of Diseases that can be Cured .. .. .. 33
Facts to be Remembered .. .. .. .. 34
Medical Testimony .. .. .. .. .. 36
Testimonials .. .. .. .. .. 36
Celibacy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
"Woman .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 41
Contagious Diseases .. .. .. .. .. 43
Advice to those about to Marry .. .. .. 44
Concluding' Remarks .. .. .. .. .. 46


PREFACE.
This work is written with a view of showing
the four principal evils that are underm ning
the morals of Society, and helping to destroy
prematurely so many of our race, besides
causing so many to suffer for years from ill-
health, which destroys to them the pleasures of
life, causing suffering, want, misery, and
crime. Two of these great evils are to be found
upon the surface, open to all. But two other
evils, dreadful in their nature, are under the
surface of society, which makes them much
more dangerous, for the very reason that they
are of delicate nature, and therefore in the
present state of society cannot be so openly ex-
posed.
And this present state of society is caused
through ignorance of the two grand purposes
for which we were formed, and the two great
principal objects for which we live, for without
the stomach and reproductive powers all human
beings would cease to exist, for those are the
two organs upon which the foundation of all
life depends, and, when misunderstood, lead to
abuses that are ruinous and degrading.


The Wondrous Power that fashioned man
placed in his body a soul to prompt him to
obey the two great instincts of nature, for
which He gave him two great and important
organs, in order that he may be enabled to ful-
fil the grand laws of natural progress, and it is
for the want of understanding this great
mechanism of nature that causes so many to sin
and violate the laws of health.
If we refer to statistics, we will find that
nearly half the deaths are children, under the
age of five years, and this great infant mor-
tality is caused through setting at defiance the
laws of health and ignorance on the part of the
parents concerning the proper care of their
infants, which in many cases will be
found in bad nursing, insufficient clothing of
the arms and chest at too early an age, im-
proper food and continued medication upon
every imaginary ill, while much is caused
through a violation of nature’s laws on the
part of the parents for the want of Physiologi-
cal knowledge.
According to the statistics of adults, over
thirty per cent, of the deaths occur under the
age of 40 years, which in a great proportion
could he traced to abu'se of the stomach and
ignorance of the Reproductive Powers, for it is
these two most important parts of our system
which enable us to fulfil the laws of God, yet
do not appear to be understood by many of the
most intelligent of our race, or at least that is
the only conclusion we can come to when we
see so many daily swallowing large draughts of


alcohol, trying to convert it into flesh and
blood. There are few but what could live to
long past 60 years of age if. they from the
beginning followed a natural life.
A large proportion of the men who live from
the age of 15 years and upwards never marry,
which is proof* to my mind that there is some
under-surface cause for so many men to lead a
life of celibacy, for such a life is unnatural,
and a direct violation of the laws of nature,
for marriage is necessary in order to fulfil the
second great purpose for which we live.
During the year 1881, in New South "Wales,
by accident and suicide, eighty-six deaths were
•caused through being under the influence of
intoxicating drinks.
232 deaths were also registered during the
•same year from intemperance and delirium
tremens, making in all 318 people who lost
their lives in one year direct through the abuse
of intoxicating drinks, which shows the dread-
ful loss of human life that is still going on in
our midst through this horrible monster Intem-
perance.
According to the report of Dr. Manning, ten
per cent, of the lunatics of New South Wales
has been caused through the abuse of intoxica-*
ting drinks.
The use of alcohol and tobacco causes
annually, at the very least, ten per cent, of the
deaths.


What is required is a great reform in the
teaching of young people, for it is dreadful the
long continued injury that is done to many
through ignorance of the ills caused by these
under-surface vices. All young people, when
they arrive at a proper age, should receive the
necessary Physiological instruction. They can-
not then plead ignorance as the cause.
During my practice I was consulted by a
gentleman of birth and education, who could
speak several languages, yet he was 28 years
of age before he discovered the great injury
that he was doing to himself by violating a law
of nature, and then he learnt by a friend lend-
ing him a book by Dr. Fowler, an American
author, which at once showed him how igno-
rant he had been concerning one of the most
important organs of his body. We would think
it almost impossible for a gentleman so highly
educated to live so many years in ignorance of
this grand principal of nature. How much
better for this gentleman if, instead of studying
dumb languages, he had been taught to study
the mechanism of his own body, for up to the
age of 84 years his foreign languages had been
of little or no use to him.
Some of all classes and all grades of society,
both married and single, require a greater
knowledge of their physical system in order
that they may see how necessary it is for them
to lead a natural life, and to enable them to steer
clear of the paths of temptation and vice.
In the foregoing pages I have endeavoured


to illustrate, in as concise and simple a language
as possible, some of the worst vices of society—
tobacco, alcohol, unnatural vice and contagious
diseases, with other minor evils, which help
to destroy the health and happiness of the
people.
Persons suffering from any form of disease,
caused through a violation of nature’s laws, can
consult personally or by letter E. T. Selby,
M.H., who for the past 23 years has made
these diseases his special study, and how to
treat with simple Herbal Preparations. Eeme-
dies, although powerful in curing disease, yet
are perfectly harmless in their medicinal effect
upon the system, acting upon the various
diseased organs of the body by gradually
assisting them to recover their normal state.
These Scientific Herbal Preparations have been
proved by various medical practitioners to effect
more lasting cures than any other form of
medication.
The ordinary medical practitioner, whose
time is taken up by bedside practice and the
various forms of acute diseases of women and
children, has not the time to devote to the
study and practice of this special class of chronic
diseases. For, in order to be able to treat
chronic diseases successfully, a medical practi-
tioner must devote the whole of his time to its
particular study and treatment.
Invalids who desire to seek the advice of
E. T. Selby, M.H., can place every reliance
upon his integrity and honour.


There are many who do not require the
teaching that this work is intended to give ;
but there are many who do require its advice,
and it is to them I beg to carefully peruse its
pages, hoping that it will be the means of im-
parting to them nature’s truths, and that the
illustrations will enable them to see clearly the
three grand purposes for which we were formed,
and be the means of causing them to lead a
natural life is the hope and ernest desire of
Your obedient servant,
BICHABD THOMAS SELBY.


TRUTH.
SURFACE EVILS, WITH COMMENTS
UPON AIR, STOMACH, SKIN, &c.
Nearly all our diseases may be traced to a
violation of nature’s laws through abuse of the
stomach and ignorance of the Powers of Repro-
duction. These are the two most important
parts of our body—the stomach for the pur-
pose of transforming matter into blood, in order
to supply the waste of the body; and when
we through ignorance or otherwise violate these
two most important parts of our system, we
help to destroy both body and soul, for our
body is the residence of tbe soul; it is the
house where the soul resides ; and if we abuse
nature’s laws by poisoning our blood with to-
bacco, intoxicating drinks, improper food,
and impure air, and pollute our bodies with
loathsome diseases and various other vices, we
destroy our body, and compel our soul to leave
its habitation years before its natural time.
It should be the object of every person to live
as long as they possibly can upon this plain of
existence, so as to allow their soul to have time
to become properly developed and more fitted
for tbe spiritual life beyond.


And this can only be accomplished by a
thorough knowledge of ourselves and a proper
understanding of the use of the most important
organs of our body. When we consider the
vast numbers who die premature deaths, many
of them with a strong physical body, who, with
a better comprehension of their own systems,
may have lived to 70 or 100 years. We know
that there must be some dreadful cause for so
many to pass away in the very prime of exis-
tence, and how can it possibly be otherwise
when we see men of intelligence, men of educa-
tion, continually abusing nature’s laws.
Many of the causes can be traced to errors
committed in early life and to various forms of
sensual vices; others to hereditary causes;
while vast numbers send themselves to an early
grave through following the fashionable vices
of this age in many cases through not under-
standing the laws necessary to preserve health.
The most essential thing necessary to enable
us to live to an advanced age and enjoy health
is to be born of healthy parents, and so be en-
dowed with a healthy body. The next great
essential is to be trained from childhood with
a knowledge of the use of all the most impor-
tant organs of our body.
PUEE AIE.
Next to the above comes air and food, for it
is a combination of these two great principals
that the waste of the system is continually re-
paired. We breathe air for the purpose of


obtaining the gases which purify the blood,
changing the blood from a dark *j venomous
blood to a bright arterial blood, which change
makes the blood fitted to replace the continual
waste of the system.
Pure Air is as requisite as food,, and perfect
health cannot be obtained without it. I would
recommend all to study well this great essential
of life : If your dwellings are situated in low
lying places, subject to bad smells through
insufficient sewerage and other causes,, re-
move, if possible, to more elevated situations,
where there is better drainage and a greater
supply of pure air ; see also that all decaying
vegetable matter is removed, and beware of
stagnant water, as these generate gases that
poison the air, causing typhoid and other
fevers.
Invalids will find the above one of the best
remedies to assist in their recovery. Pure air
is also one of the best remedies to assist in
purifying the blood by taking walking exer-
cise, which quickens the circulation and in-
creases the respiration, thereby enabling you
to obtain a greater supply of this greatest
essential to life —pure air.
THE STOMACH.
The Stomach is the most important organ in
our body, for it is the stomach, by the aid of
the gastic juice, that has to transform our food
into chyle for the purpose of being converted
into blood, in order to supply the continuing


waste of the body. Yet vast numbers of
people abuse this organ daily by cramming
into their stomach excessive quantities of
unsuitable food, not properly masticated, under
the impression that the more they eat the better
it will be for their body, and that it will make
them stronger, vhich is a very erroneous im-
pression, as it is not the quantity of food we
eat, but it is what our stomach is able to digest
that sustains our body. If we cram into our
stomach more food than our stomach is able to
digest, we injure our stomach by weakening
the pyloric orifice, which allows our food to pass
into the duodenum before it is digested,
passing out of the system undigested, in almost
the same state as when received into the
stomach, from which the body receives no
nourishment, but a great injury is done to the
digestive power of the stomach, causing many
to suffer from dyspepsia, headache, severe
attacks of diarrhoea, and various other forms of
disease. All who value their health should
guard particularly against eating too much,
more especially if you suffer from feeble diges-
tion, or your occupation is sedentary. Re-
member that digestion should commence in
your mouth by thoroughly masticating your
food.
The abuse of the stomach also leads to various
other abuses. In this warm climate people
eat too much meat and not sufficient vegetable
food, which has a tendency in the young to
greatly stimulate their animal natures.
Tobacco is another dreadful evil, which in-
jures the stomach, and through the stomach
acts as a powerful stimulant to the nervous


system, which will be found more fully des-
cribed on page . .
The stomach is also greatly abused by. the
use of intoxicating drinks, more especially
ardent spirits. For farther illustrations of the
injuries caused by intoxicating drinks I must
refer my readers to pages .
I recommend the following drinks, . which
will be found all sufficient to allay thirst .
Water, milk; milk and water, with sugar ;
tea, cocoa, or lemon juice, with water.
THE SKIN.
The Shin is a very important part of our sys-
tem, as through the pores of the skin is con-
tinually passing an insensible perspiration,
which the eye cannot see, hut which is never-
theless continually passing through the pores
of the skin, carrying off the impurities of the
body j and when the pores of the skin fail in
their work through uncleanliness, chills, and
various other causes, the perspiration becomes
obstructed, and disease in the form of colds,
fevers, and inflammations is the result, for
through the obstruction of the perspiration the
impurities that should be passing from the
system are taken into the circulation of the
blood, and the blood becomes loaded with
noxious matter, causing the vitality of the whole
system to become depressed; and if the ob-
struction to the pores of the skin continue for
several days, serious diseases are sure to
follow. Thus we see the great importance of


bathing, which is necessary to remove the
impurities from the surface of the skin in order
to allow free exit for the waste of the system
that is continually passing through its pores,
for much more of the impurities of the body
pass through the skin in the form of insensible
perspiration than pass through the bowels,
kidneys, and lungs combined. By that we see
that it is of the most vital importance that we
should wash the surface of the body daily,
yet cleanliness is greatly neglected; many
people wash their face twice a day, but their
body only once in from seven to thirty days.
To all who wish to preserve their health, I
would advise them to take a bath immediately
on rising in the morning; wash all over with
soap and sponge ; then sponge down with cold
water, and wipe dry. A sponge bath can be
obtained by all persons, as a towel, soap, sponge,
and a tub of clean water is all that is required.
To the invalid whose system has become
greatly reduced by disease I would recommend
a warm bath to be taken at night on going to
bed, two or three times a week, soap and
sponge to be used freely at the same time.
Warm Foot Baths, to be taken at night on
going to bed for about ten minutes, will be
found of great service in preserving health
and producing sleep.


THE CUESE OF CUESES: ALCOHOL.
Alcohol is to be found more or less in all
intoxicating drinks; it is this subtle fluid
that works the barm tbat causes so many
people to become ruined in health, body, and
mind, and hurrys numbers to their graves
before they have spent half their allotted
time on this earth, and is one of the principal
causes of crime and vice in its very worst forms,
and helps to fill our prisons to a greater extent
than all other influences put together. Num-
bers of human beings who are badly organised
in their sober senses are perfectly harmless,
yet under the influence of this horrible curse
iose all self-control. Even in men and women
whose organism is good, by the continual use
of this spirit, create in themselves an appetite,
which grows stronger and stronger, until it
becomes quite uncontrolable, and grows into
a disease; and children begotten of such
parents are born diseased, with the germs ot
alcohol in their system, and so become trans-
mitted from one generation to another, and
those thus born, who inherit this curse, are in
much greater danger of being led into
drinking habits than a person who has been
born free from this disease, for those with the
germs of disease in their system have . neither
the physical or moral courage to withstand
temptations; neither have they the same con-
trol over their appetites, for the very reason
that they are conceived in disease ; and if the
mother is addicted to this fatal habit as well as
the father, they will be fed upon it from the


very first year of their life, which is often the
cause of mere lads having a craving desire for
drink, which later on in life culminates into a
positive greed—a greed that takes such a hold
upon the poor victim that he is dead to every
other feeling, and will stoop to any meanness,
no matter how low, to obtain this poison ;
and the result of this is that the stomach and
liver are brought into such undue action that it
continually thirsts for more; the kidneys be-
come effected to such an extent that they either
act too much or not at all; then the generative
system becomes involved, which is the most
serious part of all, as it acts as an excessive
stimulant to those organs, which affects the
whole system, from the brain to the feet,
causing the victim to suffer from depression,
nervous debility, loss of memory, fear, irritable
and dissatisfied even with himself, selfish and
intolerant towards others, even against their
own will. The disease, having become their
master in spite of the efforts often made by
many to abandon this dreadful curse, they
cannot refrain, although they know it will cost
them their life in the end, for the very reason
that they are born with the alcoholic disease in
their bodies.
The man or woman who indulges in this un-
natural appetite is running af earful risk in many
ways. They are not only ruining themselves
both physically and morally, but they often set
at defiance all civil and religious laws; whilst
under its influence they are continually courting
death in the form of accident. In the year
1881, in N.S.W., 318 persons lost their iives
by accident, delirium tremens, and intemper -


ance, caused through the abuse of intoxicating
drinks over six deaths per week.
Young men, while under the influence of
this dreadful enemy, become easy victims to
fallen women, for intoxication is one of the
greatest promoters of contagious diseases in
both sexes.
Married men, while intoxicated, also often
fall victims to the same class of females, which
often causes a pure and virtuous wife years of
suffering. Yet these men, in their sober
senses, would blush with shame to be seen in
the company of this class of females.
Abuse of intoxicating' drinks also leads to
the very worst forms of poverty, for it has
often caused numbers of once respectable
people to die in the most abject misery, or seek
the refuge of pauper asylums ; whereas, had
they led a life of sobriety, they could, with
ease, realise an independence for their old age,
and so end their life with pleasure and comfort.
Within the past few years many of our most
prominent men have died from diseases caused
through alcoholic drink—men who society could
not veil spare ; yet they were carried off while
they were in the prime of life years before
their natural time, and as time rolls on this
monster alcohol will add still more victims to
the list.
Many argue that intoxicating drinks must
he beneficial, because their doctor orders them
to use it as a medicine. But why do doctors
recommend the use of alcoholic stimulants ? It
is because they have never studied the Herbal
Kingdom, but have lost all faith in their own
physic, and, as a last resource, fall back upon


the brewers’ and distillers’ compounds. And
what is the consequence of this folly ?It is
that alcohol kills more than it cures, and what
it doesn’t kill it makes incurable.
Many invalids use intoxicating drinks under
the impression that it will give them strength.
But they never laboured under a greater fallacy
than this, for it has been proved beyond a
doubt, by some of our greatest scientists, that
there is no strength to be derived from these
liquors, but what is thought to be strength is
only stimulation, which is always followed by
depression, requiring still greater supplies of
this delusive enemy.
If alcohol gives strength, why do men who
train for athletic victory abandon the use of
tobacco and alcohol entirely while under a
course of training.
According to a report of Mr. George Boss,
Surgeon of one of the London Hospitals during
the time of the great epidemic of cholera in
the years 1848 and 1849, seven experiments
were tried. The most fatal were those patients
treated with brandy alone ; the mortality was
from 57 to 00 per cent. The most successful
treatment were those patients treated by salts
of potash and soda, with cold water in abun-
dance ; the mortality was from 8 to 14 per
cent., thus showing that even in cholera, as a
medicine, brandy killed more than it cured.
The continual use of alcohol beclouds the
mind and weakens the intellect, causing many
to stand on the verge of insanity.
As my work is written for free distribution,
I have to confine myself to space, so cannot
illustrate all the evils caused by this dreadful


alcoholic curse. I myself view alcohol as a
monstrous fraud let loose upon humanity,
sapping the morals of society to its very foun-
dation, and believe there is but one cure for
this evil, and that is its entire banishment
from the face of the earth ; and although the
time is far distant, I believe there will yet
come a day when the people will become so
enlightened that alcoholic drinks and tobacco
will become things of the past, and their entire
use abolished for ever.
TOBACCO.
Tobacco is another curse to society. Num-
bers of men and boys, in ignorance of the laws
of health, are daily spitting away one of the
most important fluids of their bodies through
the use of this vile weed. This fluid is called
saliva, and belongs solely to the mouth and
stomach. If, therefore, we wantonly waste
this precious fluid, it is impossible for the
stomach to carry on the process of digestion
properly, for +he saliva is for the purpose of
moistening the food while we are chewing it,
and, further, to digest it when it reaches the
stomach. Therefore, in order that the food
should be digested properly, it is absolutely
necessary that the saliva should be kept free
from impurities, which is impossible to those
who smoke and chew tobacco, for both methods
of using tobacco poison and destroy the healthy
purpose of this fluid, which makes its quite un-
fit for digestion. Besides, the quantity is


.greatly diminished, so that between the two
,’evils it is not surprising that the stomach be-
comes diseased, dyspepsia and a train of evils
following, which oftentimes culminate in diseases
which become incurable, for the very reason
that tobacco acts as an excessive stimulant to
the glands of the mouth and mucous membrane
of the stomach and intestines, and through
.the stomach acts as an excessive stimulant to
-the liver and kidneys ; and I am positive in a
vast number of cases lead to organic diseases,
both acute and chronic, which has cost num-
bers their lives; while many, through con-
tinuing its use for a number of years, it has
„ caused such an excessive stimulation of the
nervous system that they have become imbe-
.cile in their prime of life, for many such cases
have come under my own observation.
The use of tobacco is positive death to the
man of feeble digestive powers ; for any man,
-whose stomach is barely able to sustain his
.body, if he takes to the use of tobacco about
The age of 18 years, and smokes six ounces per
week, the probability is that he will die long
before the age of 40 years; yet with care he
may have lived to long past 60 years.
Tobacco, on many temperaments, acts as an
.excessive stimulant on the nervous system and
brain, causing drearps which exhaust the
.system, and often lead to serious results.
The fumes of tobacco are also taken into the
.circulation of the blood, with the breath pois-
oning the blood with its deadly nicotine, and
many, when their system has become broken
down by disease, become so enslaved that they
; are unable to abstain from this demoralizing


vioe, still believing that, it cannot be tobacco
that has destroyed their health, for, when
error has become established, it is difficult to
remove it by Truth— no matter how palpable
the truth may be.
As au illustration, I will quote the following
case, which came under my own observation
A gentleman and his wife called to see me,
having come over from New Zealand for t e
benefit of his health. He stated that for about
four years his health had been failing, anc
for the last two years he had been suffering
from symptoms that it would be out of place to
mention here, which had caused him great
mental trouble. He had formerly been a strong
vigorous man. His age was 37 years, and
when in health his weight was about 13 stone.
But his weight then was only 9 stone 101. be.
I found, on examination, that he was suffering
from impaired nutrition. His stomach, liver,
and kidneys were in a very morbid state.
Bowels had been at one time continually re-
laxed, but for a long time past had been dread-
fully constipated; secretive power of. the kid-
neys was very unhealthy, with offensive smell.
He was also much annoyed with flatuency, and
was dreadfully irritable, with very little desire
for food. Tongue much coated, with palpita-
tion of his heart at times, which caused a ner-
vous frightened feeling. On trying to discover
the cause of his ill-health, he stated that he
began to use tobacco at the age of 16 years,
and of late years had become a complete slave
to it, smoking about one pound of tobacco per
week, and occasionally cigars, when I came, to
the conclusion that his health had become lm-


paired through the excessive use of tobacco,
and told him if he wished to regain his health
he would have to discontinue the use of
tobaccco for ever. The idea of discontinuing
the use of tobacco seemed to almost paralyse
him, and he came to the conclusion that I must
be wrong, for he said he had consulted medi-
cal men in New Zealand, Melbourne, and
Sydney, and not one ever told him that before.
His father was also a great smoker, who lived
to the age of 72 years, so that it could not be
tobacco that killed his father. I told him that
I was convinced tobacco was the cause of his
trouble, and as a proof not one of the medical
men had been able to give him much relief
for the very reason that the cause of his
disease had never been removed. Therefore, it
was impossible to cure so long as the cause
remained, and until he discontinued the use of
tobacco entirely it would be useless to give him
medicine. He accordingly left me, very
dissatisfied with my advice, for he said he would
rather go without his food than his tobacco.
His wife, however, was of a different opinion,
for she was sure the horrid stuff was doing
him harm. 5
About four months after he called again,
and stated that he had given up the use of
tobacco for about two months. He had also
followed my advice hygienicly, and found his
health greatly improved, which had convinced
him that my opinion was right, and he desired
to try my Herbal Treatment. I accordingly
treated him with Concentrated Herbal Medi-
cines for several weeks, when I succeeded in
restoring him to a moderate state of good


health, and he became a confirmed anti-to-
bacco smoker.
Several similar cases to the above have come
under my observation during my practice.
How shocking is the sight of mere boys,
parading the streets of Sydney, smoking cigars
and tobacco, assuming all the airs of men of
30 years, setting at defiance the laws of
health. No wonder that our youths, as they
advance in years, become stunted in growth,
and never attain the form, figure, or vigour of
manhood, but in many instances look pale and
emaciated, for the very reason that they are
destroying what is required to build up their
body by excessive stimulation and waste.
And no wonder that our youths become
addicted to these fatal vices when their parents
set the example before their children for years
and cannot themselves see the injury, their
minds and intellects having become obscured
through the fumes of tobacco, which makes
them blind to the perils and dangers which
threaten their children, which they are often
only too glad to avert when it is too late.
By the above we see that those who use
tobacco are in as much danger of hurrying
themselves into their grave before their natural
time as those who use alcohol.
How inconsistent tlien it seems for people to
deliberately spend their money to be poisoned,
for that they are being poisoned slowly but
surely there is not a doubt; for all scientific
men who have given these two subj ects (alcohol
and tobacco) theirinvestigation, have denounced
the use of both entirely.
And I believe if all who have died from


diseases caused through the use of tobacco
could rise from their graves, the vast numbers
would so alarm the present generation that one
and all would vote for the entire destruction of
tobacco.
UNDER THE SURFACE EVILS.
There is a right and proper use for every
organ of the body. But vast numbers fail to
understand the right and proper use of their
organism, and through their misunderstanding
under-surface evils exist to a great ex-
tent, causing the races to suffer from ill-
health, premature decline, and degenerate to
perhaps a greater extent than all the sur-
face evils put together.
Man was fashioned with powers for the pur-
pose of enabling him to fulfil the second great
purpose for which we live, and when these
powers are used naturally, when the body is
fully developed, it gives health and vigour,
and assists to develope people to higher stages
of existence, both physically and mentally, and
enables them with greater certainty to live to a
more advanced age, and so become more useful
members of society. But a misunderstanding
of these important parts cause many to violate
nature’s laws, and so continue to destroy their
health, until they arrive oftentimes to a very
advanced age, and this fact can only be dis-
covered by those who dive beneath the surface
of society. We would naturally think that,
as men advanced in years, instinct would
prompt them, and give them a knowledge that


they were doing wrong by so violating nature’s-
laws; and such is the case in numbers of in-
stances. Many young men, who have at an
early age sinned, as they develop to manhood
abandon their evil ways. But, unfortunately
for many, they do not perceive their errors,
and continue on their sinful course, exhausting
the very foundation of their life until they in
many cases are far advanced in years, and s<)
destroying their health as to make many of
them for ever unfit for wedlock ; for this is one
of the great stumbling blocks to marriage.
Nature, when violated until an advanced age,
so disorganizes and destroys the constitution as
to make many hopelessly incurable, for there is
not a part of the body but what suffers more or
less from this continued injury to their system.
It debilitates the mind, weakens the action of
the heart, destroys the digestive and assimila-
tive powers of the stomach, causes unhealthy
action of the liver, constipation and relaxation
of the bowels, destroys the healthy secretive
power of the kidneys ; the lungs and chest be-
come weak, causing shortness of breath, asthma,
bronchitis, and oftentimes consumption. .It
debilitates the whole nervous system, causing
nervous trembling, fear, loss of confidence,
sleeplessness, and epilepsey, bad dreams, and
general debility of the whole system. In fact,
it destroys both body and soul.
The ill-effects of this vice differs greatly in
various individuals. Some become completely
ruined in health. They look pale, bloodless,
emaciated, and unfit for business, and life
seems to them a horrible burden, while others
are stout and look the picture of health, yet


cannot fulfil the purpose for which they were
intended, for Nature in them has become com-
pletely changed.
When such men have to appear before the
Angel of Justice, and answer the question,
“What hast thou done that thou appears be-
fore me so much unlike a man ?” Their excuse
will have to be that it was the dark age in
which they lived—an age which failed to teach
Physiological knowledge, and by so doing
tried to keep them in ignorance concerning
their most important organs.
WHAT SHALL WE DO TO kiITIGATE
THE EVIL?
There are two instincts in the human being
—one the animal instinct and the other the
moral instinct; but in nearly all persons the
animal instinct predominates, but by know-
ledge the moral instinct becomes the ruler, and
it is mostly through ignorance that the animal
nature becomes the master.
In order that man should become the master
of his evil passions, it is necessary that
he should be taught the injury that will
occur to himself through a violation of
Nature’s laws, for there are few persons
who will continue to sin against nature when
they know the evil consequences that will
occur by so doing. No lad should be allowed
to pass the age of 16 without this most im-
portant information concerning himself, for
depend upon it if you keep them in ignorance


they will in a number of cases fall into vices
that may he to them an everlasting injury.
The parents are the most proper persons to
give instruction on these physiological matters.
I would advise them to purchase some care-
fully-selected work upon these subjects for
their sons and daughters to read, in order that
they may learn the dangers that lie in their
paths through violating Nature’s laws. Out of
one thousand patients 819 had sinned before
the age of 17 years, in ignorance of the dread-
ful results that would follow, which shows
clearly to my mind that it is in early life when
this most valuable instruction upon Physiology
is required.
It is these under-surface vices that are
causing the races to degenerate and so many to
die premature deaths; for if we take the death
rate from infancy to the age of 40 years we
will find that nearly eighty per cent, of the
deaths occur under the age of 40 yeais, for the
very reason that so many violate Nature’s laws
for years and then marry with their constitu-
tion weakened and diseased, and the resul is
that their progeny is born weakly through then
parents’ folly. The first great principle neces-
sary, which is to be born of healthy parents is
denied their children, who, through the ignor-
ance of their parents have to drag out a miser-
able existence, not able to reach the physical
development of their parents, nor live to the
allotted time allowed to healthy human beings,
which is ripe old age.
But already a brighter light is commencing
to surround us whic h is beginning to show
people that it is time to throw off this horrid


mockery of sham and come out into the broad
light and speak the truth to their children, so
that they may be able to profit by their
parents’ experience and knowledge, and the
good which will result from this teaching will
be seen in the coming generations who will be
born of healthy parents, and be blest with
healthy bodies, and so be able to develop into
fine healthy races of people who will live in
health, and die only of ripe old age.
In order to alleviate and cure tbe various
symptoms of disease caused by a violation of
Nature’s laws, the invalid must at once
abandon the evils that have caused his ill
health, and when that is fairly resolved upon
he may then hope, with perseverance, to have his
health restored to its normal state. In extreme
cases, where the various organs of the body have
become very much weakened, time and great
perseverance is often required before the
patient can recover his health sufficient to enter
with confidence the bonds of matrimony, which
is the best course this class of persons can
adopt when their health is fully restored. Re-
member it is honourable to love if you love
with honour. You are commanded to obey the
natural law.
THE SCIENTIFIC & NATURAL METHOD
OF CURING- CHRONIC DISEASES.
Men look back and try to discover tbe mys-
terjr of the beginning of Nature. They may
as well look and try to fathom the


endless depths of space that reach beyond the
stars, which is an impossibility. The Won-
drous Power behind Nature is so great and
mighty that our feeble minds can scarcely con-
ceive understandingly an atom of His great-
ness—a Power who could fashion human
beings with such wondrous organisms, each
gifted with distinct opposite for the purpose
of blending together, in order that the great
natural order of things may he continued to
the end, must be a Power something wondrous
indeed; and although we cannot trace the
beginning of Nature. We know that all human
beings who have descended from the first pair
owe their existence to the blood, for it is
through the blood that conception takes place.
It is by it that the child is nourished: it is the
blood that enables us to continue to live, and
when any part or organ of the body becomes
diseased, it is only through the blood that it
can be restored to a healthy condition. And
here we see again the love and goodness of the
wondrous Grod of Nature, who has caused to
grow upon the face of the earth such a bountiful
supply of herbs which, in themselves contain
all the medicinal properties requisite for heal-
ing the diseased parts of the body.
The medical practitioner who has made the
virtue of medicinal herbs his special study, on
discovering the part or organ diseased, is then
able to select the necessary herbs suited to the
particular disease the patient may be suffering
from, which, when scientifically prepared, will
produce a positive effect upon the diseased
parts by being taken into the stomach so as to
be conveyed into the circulation of the blood,


and by that means carried through the affected
organs, and so produce their positive effect by
assisting the diseased parts to recover their
normal state.
Twenty-two years’ special study of medicinal
herbs and their concentrated preparations has
enabled Professor R. T. Selby to discover the
most positive Herbal Remedies, which are sure,
reliable, and prompt in effecting their specific
influence upon the system —remedies that with
perseverance will cure all curable diseases.
Consultation fee, personally or by letter, £l.
Invalids, when writing for advice, must de-
scribe minutely all the symptoms of their
disease, so as to enable R. T. Selby to form a
correct diagnosis of their case.
Prof. R. T. Selby’s Scientific Herbal Reme-
dies can be taken by the most delicate invalid
without the least danger. These Remedies are
almost tasteless, so that the most fastidious
cannot d object to them. Their use in no way
interferes with the ordinary diet, occupation,
or habits of the person using them. Their
action is so simple and gentle that they eradi-
cate the diseases almost imperceptibly, and the
gradual but certain improvement that takes
place is the only indication to the patient that
he is taking the Concentrated Herbal Reme-
dies^
The following is a list of the diseases that
can he cured with the Concentrated Herbal
Me Heines :


Impaired Digestion
Liver Diseases
Biliousness
Palpitation of the Heart
Kidney Diseases
Chronic Cough
Headache
Lowness of Spirits and
Melancholy
Nervous Prostration
Loss of Energy
Pimples
Shortness of Breath
Incapacity for Study
Trembling of the Hands
Mental and Physical De-
pression
Nervous Debility in all its
stages
Diseases arising from Bad
Habits
Desire for Solitude
Sudden Pallor
Timidity
Disinclination for Business
Unpleasant Dreams
Dislike to enter Society
Acid state of the Stomach
Local Weakness
Functional Disorders
Nervous Exhaustion
Mind Irritable and Des-
ponding
Dimness of Sight
Pains Back Loins, and
Kidneys*
Want of Vital Energy
Asthma or Bronchitis
Consumption
Noises in the Ears
Loss of Appetite
Lassitude
General Debility
Impaired Sight Sc Memory
Loss of Power
Premature Decline
Epilepsy
Want of Energy
Want of Confidence
Excitability of Temper
Tremor from slight cause
Loss of Memory
Pain in the Sides
Wasting of the Muscles
Impure Blood
Skin Eruptions
Costiveness
Night Sweats
Blushing without cause
Wasting Diseases
Restless Sleep disturbed
with bad dreams
Sterility
Pains back of the Head or
Spine
Irregularity of the Bowels
Fear of Insanity
Poorness of Blood
Impaired Nutrition
Incontinence of Urine
Dizziness, &c., resulting
from exhaustion of Nerve
Power and all disorders
proceeding from Seden-
tary Pursuits
Piles or Fistula
Extreme Restlessness
Urinary Troubles
Stricture
Female Complaints
Venereal Diseases
Jaundice
Diseases causing impedi-
ments to Marriage, See.,


PACTS TO BE REMEMBERED.
No agents employed. All communications
must be personally or by letter.
Those who desire to consult R. T. Selby,
M.H., by letter, must enclose the usual fee of
£l, and describe minutely all the symptoms of
their disease, cause, age, occupation, general
bodily health, &c., &c., when I will carefully
consider their case and forward my opinion by
return of mail, or as early as possible.
Invalids are reminded that Mr. Selby’s spe-
ciality is chronic disease : by chronic we mean
long-standing disease, difficult'to cure, uncer-
tain, durable, decrease of vitality, constant
wasting,’ &c., but more especially diseases of
the nervous system.
Most of the cases alluded to can be treated
with every success by correspondence, as my
vast experience enables me to judge correctly
from a written description. If a personal
interview is necessary we say so in reply to
their letter.
Remittances should be forwarded by notes
or Post office money order, payable to R. T.
Selby, General Post Office, Sydney.
All Remedies are forwarded by return, or as
soon as steamer or mail coach will allow. All
my Remedies are packed in strong wooden
boxes. Some of my Remedies are sent by post.
All orders for my Concentrated Herbal Reme-
dies must be accompanied with a remittance ;
stamps must also be enclosed for a reply. All
orders should be addressed to R. T. Selby,
M.H., Hillside Terrace, Devonshire-st., Surry
Hills, Sydney.


MEDICAL TESTIMONY
IN FAVOR OF
THE CONCENTRATED HERBAL MEDICINES.
John Skelton, Senr.,
Licentiate in Medicine and Surgery, London, Edinburgh
and Glasgow, writes as follows of Concentrated Herbal
Preparations :
“Little or nothing was known of them until within
the last quarter of a century; they are now among the
greatest improvements in modern Pharmacy, and em-
brace the peculiar features for which our preparations
have become celebrated. They combine the essential
qualities of definiteness, uniformity, and reliability,
making them so highly useful in chronic disease when it
becomes necessary to completely change the character
of the blood. In all such cases the process must neces-
sarily be slow in order to gradually change its condition.
In certain cases the transition from disease to health
takes place all but imperceptibly.”
And their general acceptance and use more or le9S
among all Medical Professors to whom they are known
is the best evidence we can give of their utility.
B. Keith, M.D., Dr. Grover Coe, and numerous
other medical writers, all speak highly in favour of the
new remedies, the active principles of Herbs.


TESTIMONIALS.
Copy of a Letter received.
March nth, 1883.
Mr. Selby.
Dear Sir, —I write to inform you that I have taken all
the medicine, and am happy to say I feel quite well. I
have a good appetite; digestion good, bowels regular,
and all right in every other respect. Trusting you are
well, I wish you a long and happy life.
From yours, very truly,
J. D. L.
Copy of a Letter received.
Pine Vale, June 20th, 1883.
Mr. Selby.
Dear Sir,—l have the pleasure to inform you that the
medicine you forwarded to me for my friend twelve
months ago has done him a great deal of good. He feels
quite recovered, and begs me to return his heartfelt
gratitude co you.
Yours truly,
a. r.
Copy of a Letter received.
Narrandera, June nth, 1880.
Dear Sir, —I herewith enclose cash, for which please
send me your Botanic Medicine for mental and physical
debility and general prostration. This medicine is for a
friend of mine, to whom I was telling the great benefit I
leceived two years ago from your Botanic treatment.
I am, dear Sir, yours truly,
N. M. C.


Copy of a Letter received.
Townsville.
Mr. Selby, M.H.
Dear Sir, —I must inform you that your remedies have
done me much good, and being anxious to effect a com-
plete cure, I forward P. O. order for another supply. I
must inform you that I feel five times a better man now
th in I did before taking your remedies.
Your obedient servant,
G. K.
The following two cases also successfully treated :
Dear Mr. Selby,—
For over ten years I have been a miserable sufferer
from that dreadful complaint—nervous debility. I had
lost all hope; my constitution was fearfully shattered,
and my spirits failed me, until a friend of mine lent me
your work, “Social Science.” I read it, and was
amazed at its contents. That moment was my salva-
tion. My eyes were opened to my dreadful condition. I
at once saw the true cause of my long continued suffering
which four medical men could not understand. All this
was caused through my ignorance. It is needless to state
that, after taking your advice and Herbal Medicines, I
soon became a changed man, and now having a.onedfor
the past I am happy in mind and healthy in body, and
have a bright future.
Yours, ever grateful,
T. W. B
To R. T. '.Selby, M.H.
Dear Sir,—When first I wrote to you for advice 1 told
you that I had lost faith in everything, having tried s >
many medical men for years, spending my money and
deriving no benefit, but getting worse. My mind was
confused, with dizziness in my head. I was incapable of
any continued exertion, and suffered dreadfully from pal-
pitation, and my mind was tortured by the thought that


all this was caused by my own ignorance. Your reme-
dies acted like a charm. I am now perfectly well; the
pains in my back and head are gone, memory restored,
eyes clear and free from specks, nervousness dispelled,
and the vigor and strength of manhood completely
regained. No one can tell how thankful I am, and how
entire is my confidence in the efficacy of your valuable
treatment.
Yours, for ever thankful,
W. J.
Redfern, October 18, 1882.
Henry Rayment, suffering from chronic diarrhoea; so
weak that he had to be assisted out of the cab; under
treatment three weeks; quite recovered, and became
much stouter than he was previous to his illness.
Mr. Henry Anderson, Redfern, suffering for a long
time from a very severe cough, cured with one bottle of
Mr. Selby’s Herbal Medicine.
Mr. Latcham, suffering from debility, with severe
constipation of the bowels, the result of typhoid fever.
By using the Concentrated Herbal Medicines his bowels
became regular, and general bodily health good.
Mr. Williams, suffering for over two years from stran-
guary pain in evacuating, at times so severe that, on two
or three occasions, it had caused him to faint. One
bottle of Mr. Selby’s Herbal Medicine gave great relief,
and with perseverance a cure was effected.


CELIBACY.
Man was fashioned for two purposes. For
the purpose of obeying two great commands
his stomach compels him to obey the first great
law of Nature, and his love Nature enables
him to fulfil the second great law of Grod; and
by fulfilling these two great commands develop
his soul, in order that his soul may be niore
fitted for the more spiritual life beyond. Yet,
if we refer to statistics, we will find that nearly
one half the marriageable men are leading a
life of celibacy, and a large proportion of those
men will never marry nor fulfil the great pur-
pose for which Nature intended them. _ Many
of these men may have erred in early life, but
as they obtained a better understanding of
themselves their moral nature has become their
master, causing them to lead a life of celibacy.
Here again they erred for want of greater
knowledge; for forced celibacy, when the body
is fully developed means, in many cases,
ruined health and premature death. There is
a time in the life of every man when the soul-
inspiring influence within him prompts him to
obey the natural law, and if he disobeys
the promptings of nature for a number of years
serious results will follow; very important
organs will often become weakened and
diseased, whilst their hearts become withered
and their very nature stunted in its develop-
ment, and as they advance in years they
become miserable and unhappy within,. for
there is still a craving desire for something,
they know there is something wanting, but


they cannot tell what. That something is the
love of woman. They want some one to love,
some one to live for. They have not obeyed
Nature’s commands, and for being disobedient
Nature has punished them.
True, there are some men so constituted as
to he able to lead a life of celibacy without
injury to themselves, hut those men are few in
comparison to the opposite.
My advice to all men who find their natural
instinct continually prompting them, or who
have passed the age of 25 years, is to seek the
society of females—religious females, virtuous
females—and they will instil you with their
influence, and make you wiser and happier
men. Then with care choose a partner suit-
able to your temperament; and when you
marry, remember, if you wish to enjoy health
and happiness, ycm must be temperate in all
things, for excessive love, like excess of any
other passion, will prove injurious, and destroy
your happiness and health.
How to choose a partner for life so as to live
happy and produce healthy children is ex-
plained in Social Science, which will be sent by
post only to any address, on receipt of 6d.
stamps.
the LAST EDITION OF
-SOCIALSGIENCE-
/S OU TOF PRINT
"A Revised’edit ion"
v \NILL SHORTLY BE READY >


WOMAN.
By nature woman was formed to be the help-
mate of man, to be his companion through life,
and by her help be enabled to fulfil the great
purposes for which they were both intended to
aid in assisting each other to obey the two
great commands of Nature. But statistics
prove that a large proportion of the females
are compelled to lead a life of celibacy, and
never have the opportunity of fulfilling the
laws for which they were intended, which is
quite contrary to the natural purpose, and a
violation of these natural laws cause numbers
of females to suffer ill health, and in many
cases retards their full development. For if we
compare mothers who have passed the age of
40 years and maids who have passed the age
of 40 we will see a very marked difference.
Health, kindness, happiness, and sympathy
will be found to a much greater extent on the
mother’s side.
In this country, where the females are in the
minority, all ought to be able to procure a hus-
band and so fulfil God’s laws, which could be
easily done if men would obey the great com-
mands instead of 'continuing to destroy their
health by following the various vices that exist
in our midst. ' - ’
There are over sixty thousand marriageable
women in New South. Wales all anxiously
waiting for their turn to.come, and a large per
centage of these will have to wait in vain,
which need not be if bachelors would spend
their money in making comfortable homes in-


stead of squandering it in ways that are ruin-
ing their health which in time will destroy to
them the pleasures of life.
It should he the object of every one who has
the welfare of society at heart to bring the
sexes together as much as possible, and by so
doing help to destroy those diseases which are
undermining the constitutions of so many; for
there are none so hopelessly lost to marriage
as the men who shun the society of females.
In all diseases peculiar to females that are
amendable to medicine the Scientific Herbal
Preparations used by E. T. Selby will be found
to be the most positive and reliable remedies;
for experience has proved them to ba superior
to all other preparations.
Charges for advice and medicine moderate in
diseases of females.
Testimonial.
Miss White, suffering from a severe cough for several
weeks, cured with one bottle of Mr. Selby’s Herbal
Medicine.
Copy of a Letter received.
Auckland, January 9th, 1882.
To Mr. R. T. Selby.
Dear Sir, —I am pleased to inform you that your
Herbal Remedies have done my daughter much good.
Headache has gone, a better appetite, she is gaining in
flesh; cheerful and hopeful, quite a different woman in
every way. lam thankful that we tried your remedies.
We remain yours gratefully,
JAMES SIMPSON.


CONTAGIOUS DISEASES.
The contagious diseases to which I refer are
those under the surface of society, which are
'contracted by contact with some person suffer-
ing. In the year 1881 seventy-six deaths were
registered from this disease ; forty-five of these
were infants, and we may he sure that some
passed away, the true nature of their disease
not made known. I mention this as many are
under the impression that these diseases are of
a trifling nature, which is really, not the case,
as the most serious results are occasioned by
this class of diseases, complications oftentimes
occurring that cost many young men their
lives; while the most serious injury is often
done to the constitution through the long-con-
tinued medication this class of patients are
often subjected to. It has also prevented
numbers of men from marrying, and when the
blood once becomes contaminated with the
virus, it occasions, in many cases, long con-
tinued suffering, often ending in consumption
and Bright’s disease of the kidneys.
Young men should remember that their
future health and progeny demand that their
lives should be chaste. I advise them to study
well their stomach by avoiding all stimulants,
more especially alcohol and tobacco, for both
these act as excessive stimulants to the nervous
system, and cause many young men to lose
control over their passional natures.
This class of diseases will be found more
fully described in Social Science, pp. 21 to 26,
a copy of which will be sent by post only to any


address, on receipt of 6d. stamps to defray
postage.
ADVICE TO THOSE ABOUT TO MARRY.
If we look around among married people and
compare the children with their parents we
will find a large proportion of the children de-
generating in physical stature, and not at all
equal, when they have done growing, to their
father or mother in bone, muscle, or weight,
and a large percentage of these will be found
wanting in nerve and mental powers when
compared with their parents. Now if we
examine this subject closely we will find that a
large percentage is caused by unsuitable
matches, one or both parents deficient in health,
love all on one side, which causes infidelity in
the marriage relation, destroying the harmony
that should exist between the husband and
wife. Mental organism completely opposite,
making it impossible to be agreeable one with
the other, which greatly destroys the happiness
of the home ; while in a number of cases they
will be found so much alike in colour and
bodily form.
The most important consideration before
marriage is health. Both parties should be
positive that they are free from organic
disease.
Love is also necessary in order to make life
a pleasure. Always be sure that you love
each other. Love is attraction —sympathy one
for the other. When two people meet who
love each other they become bold and confident


for the very reason that the magnetic forces
are suitable and attractive to the sympathies of
both. Perfect love is very essential for health
and happiness, and for the production of
healthy offspring.
Mental organism is another very important
matter, and one which requires great study and
thought; for if people are too opposite in their
likes and dislikes it will be impossible for both
to be happy, and has a very injurious influ-
ence upon the pregnant mother, greatly to the
injury of her family, as it destroys that kind
magnetic sympathy so much required at par-
ticular periods.
The next and equally important matter in
order to produce strong healthy children is to
be opposite in colour or bodily form—the
woman a blonde and the man a brunette are
well suited for kissing each other. There are,
however, many shades between. I advise the
colour of the hair and eyes to be as opposite as
possible.
Bodily form is another consideration neces-
sary, for if two people marry, both deficieut in
muscle, it is impossible for them to produce a
muscular child. I advise, if the man is spare
in body he should choose a stout woman for a
wife ; if the woman is slender, choose, if pos-
sible, a stout man.
Perfect health, equal love, alike in taste, and
opposite in bodily form or colour, are the four
great essentials necessary for the production of
healthy offspring, and to make married life
happy.
In conclusion, I would remind my readers
that if they wish to enjoy health and live to


ripe old age, they must study Nature and obey
Nature’s laws, not forgetting that every part of
your body is depending upon your stomach;
therefore, above all, study well how not to
abuse your stomach, for it is this organ that
enables you to fulfil the first great law of
Nature.
The subjects that I have alluded to in this
work, more especially those under-surface evils,
are the most neglected subjects of all, yet are
the most important; for without these parts we
could not fulfil the purpose for which we were
fashioned, and for the want of knowledge
thousands become imbecile, because they,
through ignorance violate Nature’s laws.


Truth is the title of my work, and I have
made no statement in this work, only what I
have proved by practical experience or believe
myself to be positive truth.
Hours of Consultation, daily (except Wed-
nesdays and Sundays), from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.;
evening, 6 to 8.
R. T. SELBY,
Professor, of Medicinal Herbs,
Who treats all Diseases with Herbal Prepara-
tions only.
Residence : Hillside Terrace, Devonshire-street,
Surry Hills, Sydney.
My residence is about three minutes’ walk from
the Redfern Railway Station.


It i A bo
flSttl


1508
00246111


