

TRUTH NOT LIBEL:
. BEING THE
STATEMENT OF A FEW FACTS
IN REGARD TO THE
LATE ACTION FOR LIBEL, BROUGHT AGAINST WILLIAM CLARSON,
By JOHN BLAIR, Surgeon, L.C.S., Edin.,
Vice-President of the Medical Society , and Hon. Surgeon to the Alfred Hospital.
WHEREIN THE PLAINTIFF, AFTER AVAILING HIMSELF TO THE FULL OF “THE
LAW’S DELAY,” PRACTICALLY ADMITTED THE TRUTH OF THE DEFENDANT'S
SERIOUS CHARGES AGAINST HIS CHARACTER, BY WITHDRAWING THE SUIT
AND PAYING THE COSTS.
BY
WILLIAM CLARSON.
Melbourne:
CLARSON, MASSINA, AND CO., GENERAL PRINTERS,
72 LITTLE COLLINS STREET EAST.
1871.




INTRODUCTORY.
I promised some time ago that if the Plaintiff in this case
put any obstacle in the way of full justice being done to him-
self or me, the public should be made acquainted with some at
least of the facts we have charged against him. I fulfil that
promise. Had the Plaintiff* been other than a medical man, I
might not perhaps have so persistently resolved on this ex-
posure, but when I reflect on this fact, his offence appears of
such ail aggravated nature that it would be rank cowardice in
me to shrink from the duty.
There are few, if any, greater crimes against society than
those laid to the charge of this man, yet the law affords no
means of punishment. Nay, so far from this, he is enabled by
its means to harass and annoy others, whilst safe himself under
the protection of its forms, and under the cloak of a profession
the true qualifications for which the public would be justified
in supposing to be high-mindedness and purity.




THE LATE ACTION FOR LIBEL,
BROUGHT AGAINST
WM. CLARSON BY JOHN BLAIR.
A. PLAIN STATEMEN T, ETC.
When, some eleven months ago, Mr. John Blair
that he had been libelled by a series of charges being made
public against him in his professional character, he sent to me
two friends, Mr. James Service and another gentleman, with a
request that I would offer an apology, or in some way repair
the damage he had sustained. These gentlemen informed me
that Mr. Blair, with a magnanimity much to be admired, was
not desirous of injuring me, but that he felt bound to insist on
an early and ample apology, or I must take the alternative of
an action at law. I am bound to say Mr. Blair’s friends ex-
ecuted their mission faithfully; they displayed a proper amount
of earnestness, and rose to the gravity and importance of the
occasion. The whole thing had a ring of genuine concern for
Mr. Blair’s character that was refreshing to hear, and which
would have been very effective, no doubt, with any stranger ;
but it failed to impress me with a suitable sense of sorrow for
their injured friend. I failed altogether to appreciate the con-
sideration felt on my account, and declined either to apologise
or take a step in that direction ; on the contrary, I informed
them I would afford Mr. Blair the fullest opportunity of vindi


eating his character, at law, or in any other way he deemed
advisable ; and to simplify matters for him, though I had no
hand in or knowledge of the issue of the circular complained
of, I would adopt the document as my own, and cheerfully
accept the full responsibility.
In the course of next day, I received a letter from Blair’s
solicitor, demanding an apology, and threatening all sorts of
pains and penalties. To this document my solicitors replied,
and then followed a writ for damages assessed at <£looo.
Within a few days, the newspapers announced that
Blair’s solicitor had been successful in retaining Mr. Higin-
botham, Mr. Ireland, Mr. Fellows, and Mr. Aspinall, for the
prosecution ; and everything was done to give an air of reality
to the affair. Paragraphs appeared, calling public attention to
this cause celebre, and containing most ridiculous misrepre-
sentations—misrepresentations which I sought in vain to have
corrected. As I was disposed to offer no obstacles to the course
Plaintiff had thought proper to adopt, my solicitors were
instructed to afford every facility for the case coming to trial
at the next sittings of the October term ; and they faithfully
carried out my instructions. To my surprise, however, they
informed me that the Plaintiff had not set it down for hearing,
and so had lost the term, and involved a delay of four months.
In order that there might be no misunderstanding as to the
cause of delay, I caused copies of the following circular to be
sent to every newspaper in the colony —sending the first copy
to the Plaintiff himself. I had a special reason for thus
keeping the public informed of the progress of the case, for I
found the action was seriously affecting me in a business point
of view. Our bank manager had intimated that, pending the
threatened action, the bank must decline our firm’s discounts :
it became necessary, then, that no delay should take place.
Imagine any firm in Melbourne, largely engaged in business,
suddenly being informed by their bankers of such a decision.
I must say this took me by surprise, for I had never expected


the Plaintiff would have found so powerful an ally. It was in
vain I argued that I could not withdraw from the performance
of a duty I owed in the interests of public morality. The
bank had nothing to do with public morality, or private
either, for the matter of that; and we must get along as best
we could. My circular was as follows :
DE. BLAIE VERSUS CLAESON. '
This case having practically lapsed, or its hearing been shelved for four
months, by reason of the Plaintiff not having entered it for hearing at this
sittings of the Supreme Court, I deem it right to make public the following
statement. In doing so, lam not foolish enough to suppose that the
public takes any particular interest in me or my concerns; but a certain
amount of publicity having been given to the case, it becomes my duty to
make known the cause of delay. In all cases of this nature, it is proper
that the public should refrain from forming any hasty opinion, and that it
should calmly wait the issue of any trial wherein the character of a profes-
sional man is concerned. With the whole facts before them, people are
enabled, irrespective of the mere legal decision, to draw their own conclu-
sions. While, therefore, it is the duty of the public to withhold its verdict
pending the inquiry, it becomes an imperative obligation upon the parties to
the action that no unnecessary delay shall take place. Should the Plaintiff
delay proceedings, he does so to his own injury, as he thus permits the libel
to remain intact; and, further, inflicts a grievous wrong on the Defendant,
by jeopardising his credit with an impending action ; but should the delay
be caused by the Defendant, he becomes doubly culpable, in prolonging the
injury he is supposed to have inflicted by the libel complained of. Holding
these views, I have endeavoured to afford Dr. Blair every facility in bringing
on his action at this present sittings, so that not a moment may be lost to
him in publicly defending himself from the grave charges made against
him; and in proof that I have done so, the following copies of letters fiom
my Solicitor will be sufficient :
[Copy.] — Db. Blaib v. Clabson. —Memo.: At each stage of this action,
the Defendant has striven to drive on the Plaintiff to trial at the ensuing
sittings. The Plaintiff has avoided the consents given voluntarily to accept
notice of trial, and on Monday last, the 24th inst., he was served with a
notice that the De f endant would accept any notice of trial for the ensuing
sittings, although the Plaintiff had no right to ask from the Defendant the
acceptance of such notice. — Jas. Wisewould,
25th October, 1870.
fCoPT 1 To T. J. Wybuen, Esq., Plaintiff’s Attoeney. — Clabson et
Uxoe ATS Blaib.— Take notice, that the Defendant will accept short notice
of trial in this cause for the ensuing sittings of the Supreme Court, to be
holden on the 29bh day of October, 1870.—Dated this 19th day of October,
1870. Yours, &c., James Wisewould, 16 Collins-street West, Defendants
Attorney.


[Copy.]—ln the Supreme Court. No. 4304. —81 air against Clarson
et Uxor. —Take notice, that the Defendant will accept any notice of trial
the Plaintiff can give for the trial of this cause at the ensuing sittings of
this honourable Court, commencing on the 29th day of October instant. —
DaUd this 24th day of October, a.d. 1870.—Yours truly, Jas. Wisewould,
16 Collins-street West, Melbourne, Defendant’s Attorney.
To. T. J. Wyburn, Esq., Plaintiff’s Attorney.
Now, while any delay must prove highly damaging to Dr. Blair—as tend-
ing to confirm the general conclusion that, if guilty, he will not allow the
case to come to trial—unfortunately, the delay is likewise attended with very
serious consequences to myself. The public, of course, only know that an
action is pending against me, which, if successful, may go far towards ruin-
ing me commercially. With that spirit of fairness characteristic of the
British public, it is assumed that the Plaintiff has a chance of a verdict;
and, on the face of it, it would appear to be nothing short of madness for
him to go to law unless he felt sure of the result. As a consequence, I find
my whole business relations disturbed—credit injured—and those commercial
facilities which persons in business can claim as a right, denied. It will
readily be understood what consequences are likely to flow from such a state
of things.
In Blair’s case, he may accept the delay as the lesser of two evils; but in
mine, it simply means commercial ruin. And I now state, fearlessly, that
he has everything to gain by delay; for, whatever damage may attach to him
by the alleged libel being allowed to remain unchecked, it is nothing com-
pared to the injury he would inevitably sustain in the investigation we are
so anxious to push forward.
A thousand things may transpire to his advantage in four months—
and that is the shortest time which, now, must elapse before the trial can
take place. Witnesses may be lost sight of; death may lend the Plaintiff a
helping hand in this or that direction; commercial ruin of the Defendant
may aid him further; in fact, Mr. Blair has everything to gain by delay.
But we have not the least assurance that he will even come to trial at the
next sittings of the Supreme Court. He may deem it sufficient that the
public know the action is pending, and thus secure to himself the benefit of
a doubt; but that is not sufficient for me. If I do not, within a very brief
period, get from him some guarantee that the case shall be brought to trial,
I will take such steps as will place the whole details of our charges in the
possession of the public. Eorbearing as I have been throughout the matter,
it has only been in the knowledge that, sooner or later, the public should
have the fullest materials for forming its judgment. I have patiently
waited, in order that whatever blow I might strike should be struck with effect.
I have carefully abstained from any act likely to jeopardise the attainment
of more complete redress; and this in the fullest belief that, whenever the
law was set in motion, it would prove equal to the requirements of the case.
I have been quite content to be sneered at as a coward, for that I have not
taken personal vengeance for offences which literally bear no name. But the
matter has now assumed such proportions that, in the interests of public


morality, it cannot longer be delayed. Either Mr. Blair is utterly unfit for
his profession, or he has been grossly libelled. He is accused of crimes
which, in a layman, would render him unfit for decent society; but which
in a medical man, should, if proved, drive him from any country with the
most damning disgrace. And I would not have it supposed that I have
accepted the responsibilities of this action without fully counting the cost.
It really matters nothing to me what the consequences may be to myself —I
cheerfully accept them; and in urging on this trial, I am conscious that in
the end every man and woman whose opinion is worth having will heartily
approve my conduct.
I can imagine no state of society so hopeless, as would be that where the
general impression prevailed that there are offences which the law is im-
potent to deal with—that there are wrongs which it is powerless to rectify.
Once let this impression become established in the public mind, and we shall
find our Supples increase in number with alarming rapidity; but let the
opposite belief prevail, and society has some security for the maintenance
of, and respect for, the law.
It is not a light matter to blast the character of any woman; but when
this is done by a man with the object of shielding himself, or preparing the
public mind for any exposure by damaging his accuser, it stamps him as in-
sufferably base, cowardly, and contemptible.
With an ingenuity of the most subtle character, this has been done for'
years; and only now are we made aware of the extent of the success attend-
ing the plans of this plotting schemer. Within the last month, it has come
to our knowledge that the Plaintiff, with no other view than to damage my
wife in the public mind, has shown letters, purporting to be under her own
hand, containing not merely indiscreet matter, but actual and unmistakable
criminal solicitations to himself; solicitations which he claims credit for having
resisted. Now, what must the public think of this ? What can be thought
of the medical man who could receive such letters from a lady patient, and
that lady with her husband at the time his warm and devoted friends ?
Either he was a party to the intrigue, and accepted his friend’s hospitality
under the guise of a filthy hypocrite, or he was guilty of the worst form of
indiscretion, in not promptly checking a liaison which th reatened to become,
at least, awkward for himself. But we defy him to produce such a letter;
further, we declare that if any such letter is in existence, it has been none of
Mrs. Clarson’s writing. We defy him—not only to produce the particular
letter described by his friend Mr. Service as a “distinct and emphatic invita-
tion to crime,” but we defy him to produce a single syllable under Mrs.
Clarson’s hand which can be interpreted as an overture of a criminal
character, or which can show her to be aught but the pure-minded, conscien-
tous woman I, as her husband, know her to be. Such devices may deceive
those who have no knowledge of my wife’s character, and may be used with
a view to induce me to let the subject rest, but they will prove utterly futile
except to force on the matter to a conclusion, which the public and ourselves
can alone accept as final.
WM. CLAKSON.


This letter failed to elicit any reply, but some weeks after-
wards an article on the case appeared in the Weekly Times,
under the heading, “ Laid up in Lavender.” In this article
the subject of the “law’s vexatious delays,” and the injustice
and wrong involved in such, were ably descanted on, but the
writer fell into the error of supposing that it was possible for
me to take action against Mr. Blair, and so compel him to
meet the charges he was apparently avoiding. We could do
no more than we had done, and a little knowledge of the law
would have shown the writer this.
Still desiring to keep the public au courant with the facts of
the case, and the causes of delay, I replied to the article in a
letter of date the 23rd January, and simultaneously with its
issue the Telegraph reprinted the article from the Weekly
Times.
BLAIR VERSUS CLARSON.
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sib, —As the leading article in The Weekly Times of Saturday last is calcu-
lated to bring this case into great prominence, I may, perhaps, be pardoned
for offering one or two observations pertinent to the matter I regret exceed-
ingly a certain flippancy of style, which I take the liberty to think is
characteristic of the article referred to, and especially so as I deem the
subject one of momentous interest, not merely to the public, but to the pro-
fession of which the Plaintiff is a member. lam credibly informed that the
failure of justice consequent on the delay is, in some measure, owing to the
advice of the members of the Medical Society, of which the Plaintiff is an
office-bearer. It appears that a fear is entertained lest the “ status of the
profession” should suffer through the exposure of one of its members; and
so everything possible is to be done to prevent the case coming to trial.
Now, if this be true, let me assure the members that they have reckoned
without their host. We have quite made up our minds as to the right course,
and if the Plaintiff still hesitates as to his duty, he will speedily learn, if he
does not already know, what we deem to be ours; and the Medical Society
will learn that it is utterly powerless either to shield crime or to arrest the
course of justice. This latter lesson may be useful to a body which, with a
pretty full knowledge of the facts of this case, has not the moral courage to
insist on its members freeing themselves from charges of so serious a nature
as those preferred against their vice-president. Finally, the public may rest
assured that from the first we have had no other idea than that the earliest
opportunity should be taken to lay bare the simple truth, and any delay
which has occurred has been owing to the culpable inaction of the Plaintiff.


We have, from the first, offered Mr. Blair the fullest opportunity to press on
the investigation; that he has not embraced it we deem an injury to our-
selves, but the public may deem it otherwise.
I am, etc.,
Eichmond Park, 23rd January. WM.. CLA.ESON.
[We reprint the article to which Mr. Clarson alludes, as the most satis-
factory way of meeting Mr. Clarson’s charge of “flippancy” against The
Weekly Times. — Ed. D. T.]
It will be seen, from the above, that the Plaintiff has had the
fullest evidence of my earnestness and determination to meet
him face to face, on the ground selected by himself, and to cut
off every avenue of retreat. Having himself set the law in
motion, I was content to abide by its decision, quite undeterred
by the brilliant array of forensic talent he had secured.
Sittings after sittings came on, yet no sign was made, except
on our side, for we actually applied for the case to be heard
“by proviso,” but the plaintiff resisted, the Judge ruling that he
had yet another session open for him. On the expiration of
this further term, we were able to serve him with a notice
compelling him to come to trial, and immediately on recerpt of
this notice he took out a rule withdrawing the action on pay-
ment of costs. These costs, as taxed, were but a tithe of my
costs out of pocket; so I am mulcted in a heavy loss, with
many months wearying anxiety, and the Plaintiff escapes with
a small cost; in fact, the mere price of the pleasure it has
afforded him in disturbing my credit, and upsettrng all my
affairs. It is tr ue I may now commence an action for damages ;
but, as Defendant, the law would afford him even more facilities
for delay than as Plaintiff. I confess to be weary enough of
the law ; but when I reflect that the Plaintiff, since the com-
mencement of this action, has passed through the Insolvent
Court, my chance of recouping my loss is not very encourag-
ing. I only refer to this here as answering, once and for all, the
question repeatedly asked, why I do not take action myself;
and not in any way reflecting on what may have been the
pecuniary difficulties or misfortunes of the Plaintiff.


The foregoing is a simple narrative of the action to the
present date. I shall now put the public in possession of some
of the reasons operating with me to press this matter to a
proper settlement. They will see that the charges are of such
a nature that no man having a due regard to the interests
of society could allow to be hushed up or hidden. I have
waited some weeks, in order that the Plaintiff might be afforded
the opportunity of offering some public reparation for the
wrongs flowing from his conduct, and for the damage he has
assiduously attempted to do to my wife’s character. So far,
however, from such being offered, he has manifested an air of
swagger and bravado, aggravating, if possible, the offences
complained of. I have determined now to fulfil the promise
made, and I do so with perfect indifference as to the result.
Notwithstanding the opinion of many as to the utter heed-
lessness of the public regarding the moral character of pro-
fessional men, I cannot help thinking that this case will he of
great use to many women, a warning to medical men without
principle, and not be altogether thrown away on a class of men
who seem to regard all women as fair marks for intrigue and
lust. It will serve a high purpose if it teach women that their
true security lies in the most perfect and implicit reliance in
their natural protector ; and that all thought of pardon to the
offender, whether in the interest of peace or care for the world’s
rebuke, is a profound mistake, and one which will be a per-
petual source of misrepresentation and wrong to them.
I desire to state in the most public manner that the course
now adopted by Mr. Blair, in endeavouring to “ hush up ” the
matter by abandoning the action, is entirely opposed to our
wishes, and that the law affords us no means of preventing the
step he has taken. I feel certain that the public will regard this
proceeding on his part as exceedingly unsatisfactory to all
parties —to himself, as the accused ;to me, as his accuser, and
to the public against which the offence has been committed.
The charges laid at the door of Dr. Blair are of so flagrant a


character, and so vitally affect his professional reputation and
standing, that it behoves him not to lose a moment in meeting
them. Either he is a much maligned and unfortunate man, or
he is a disgrace to society and a scandal on the profession of
which he is a member. It is impossible he can escape from one
of these alternatives, and I challenge him to at once meet the
matter in the only way the law affords for establishing his
innocence. I have offered him every facility to bring his
action, by consenting voluntarily to waive all rights of objec-
tion, and by keeping forcibly before him the damage he was
suffering from delay.
I regret exceedingly that I have the task imposed upon me
of thus publicly justifying my conduct and course of action
throughout the matter, but I do so in full view of the respon-
sibilities I incur, and the very serious consequences to Mr.
Blair likely to flow from the disclosures I may have to
I believe there are times when a man is required to denounce
crime with no bated breath—times when the interests and
well-being of society demand a full-toned, and no uncertain
voice. I shall be faithful to the conviction !
IN the year 1859 I built a cottage at Northcote, and went
to reside there with my wife, and son. The medical
man of the district was Mr. Blair; and in process of time,
he visited our home, ultimately becoming an intimate and
mutual friend of my own and of my wife. This friend-
ship, in the course of years, grew into a close attachment; so
close, indeed, that acts of mutual kindness became quite the
ru l e we, on our part, recommending him patients from our
immediate circle, and often sending him presents of game, or
of fruits, flowers, etc., the produce of our garden. He, on his
part, would not unfrequently offer to take my wife for a drive,
or to accompany her when taking equestrian exercise, my own
opportunities being so few for such a purpose.


This close intimacy continued without interruption for some
years, and until after our removal from Northcote —he having
removed from that district, and gone to reside in Melbourne,
some time previous—each enjoying the privileges and liberty
which true friendship confers. He would speak unreservedly
to ns of his aims and prospects, while we did our best to
recommend him in the direction of an advanced practice.
During this period, he would occasionally accompany me on
shooting excursions, and would seldom pass our house without
calling in to see us, in a friendly way, or to take refreshment,
if he needed it Indeed, lam quite justified in saying, that
we had come to regard him as a firm friend ; and that my wife
entertained for him a sisterly regard. He spoke freely to her
of his contemplated marriage or engagements ; and in many
ways showed that his friendship was not of a light nature.
During all this period, his professional services had frequently
been required, though perhaps not more than four or five times
in as many years for any serious ailment; and his manner
had at all times been that of a delicate-minded and moral
man.
Of the manner in which my eyes were opened to his true
character, we dwelt at full length in a narrative we submitted
to counsel, written by Mrs. Clarson, but which would be too
long to give here in full. I endeavoured to curtail much
of the most offensive matter, and said little of his insidious
and systematic efforts to debase my wife’s standard of virtue
and chastity, by relating' the details of the many confidences
reposed in him by his patients, male as well as female. In
spite of her serious upbraidings at such revelations, he
would appear to have eagerly seized upon every opportu-
nity for telling her things concerning the many families he
visited —ridiculing their domestic troubles, and betraying in
the most wanton and cruel manner, matters which had been
entrusted to him in the sacred relation of medical adviser and
friend. Indeed, so flagrantly has he outraged these confidences,


that his actions are only explicable on the ground that an
insane desire had taken hold of him to break down every
obstacle interposed by a pure mind ; and that these insidious
influences would aid him in the accomplishment of his designs,
by contaminating her mind and leading her to the belief that
virtue and chastity were mere crotchets —ridiculous in the eyes
of modern “ good society,” and but found as eccentricities
with “ slow ” people.
I prefaced the narrative referred to with the following
letter to my solicitor :
June 25th, 1867.
My Dear Mb. Friend,
In the accompanying parcel you will receive,
Ist. A few remarks, introductory, of mine;
2nd. Mrs. Clarson’s epitomised statement as to Blair’s attempted
aggressions;
3rd. A copy of my letter to Blair.
I imagine the account is given with sufficient clearness to enable you to
decide upon the points necessary to be brought out in submitting any case
to Mr. Michie. I have re-written my wife’s statement-preserving the
matter intact, only desiring to save you the trouble of deciphering a rather
illegible handwriting. On re-reading, I see much that requires re-wntmg,
but have no patience or inclination to do that in the mere interest of “ goo
English.”
Of course, I wish to know if there be any legal mode of overtaking this
villain. lam quite aware that a painful publicity must necessarily be given
to details, but for this we are perfectly prepared. Ido not think my wife’s
character can suffer more from an exposS than it is likely to suffer from the
whispered scandal passed from ear to ear. _
1 am in no way desirous of "making myself a martyr” to the public good,
but I cannot have it upon my conscience that I knew so much of evil of this
scoundrel yet concealed his real character. Indeed, I see in this timidity a
criminal culpability; and feel that were I guilty of such conduct I should
deserve the censure of every right-minded man and woman in this com-
munity.
The question, then, is—What is best to be done ? If I consulted my own
feelings merely, I should give the wretch a sound thrashing, and so mark
him that he might bear about him his disgrace palpable to every eye. But,
then, the question arises. Will not such a course bar the way to any more
complete redress ? And it is just here that I feel the need of help from you
—the counsel and advice of one versed in a knowledge of the world, and
of the law—yet whose actions are controlled and regulated by a higher


knowledge. It is, perhaps, egotism to say it, but it is quite true, that I
never felt the need of advice as to any course of action before; but in this
matter my mind is in one continued whirl. At one time lam clear as to my
duty—in another moment an opposite course is equally clear; —till the very
brain gets weary of thought.
I desire, then, my dear Mr. Friend, that you will look over the accom-
panying ; and I shall be prepared to accept your decision. Should you see
it necessary to take counsel’s opinion, you will not forget the matter of the
rumour circulated by Blair as to insanity, which can now clearly be traced
to him.
Since seeing you I have been shocked at the disgraceful breaches of the
many confidences reposed in him by patients—matters which he appears to
have had an insane delight in repeating to Mrs. Clarson, and which, had ho
entertained the slightest suspicion of her mental powers, he could not have
mentioned. All proving how utterly unworthy he is to hold the position of
a medical man.
Whether he hoped by such insidious means to debase her mind, or to
neutralise her rigid conception of female chastity, I know not; but on no
other grounds can I reconcile his cruelty, and wanton disregard for the
sacred confidences placed in his keeping by his numerous patients and
friends; and the very exposure of which to the public would have the effect
of driving him with the most damning disgrace from any English com-
munity.
And here it may be necessary to draw your attention to the circumstance
that very great and extraordinary difficulties stood in the way of my wife
revealing, this man to me. He had been for many years our medical
adviser and friend. Between each of his lustful aggressions a more or less
lengthened period of time and proper behaviour elapsed—sufficient to en-
courage the belief in my wife that no further evil would be attempted. On
three separate occasions she openly declined to be upon any terms of friend-
ship with him [see enclosed letter of Blair’s*]; and only renewed the ac-
quaintance on his manifesting a changed disposition by letter, or on a visit
when I was at home.
It was only after a time—and when it became apparent that he desired to
shirk the responsibility of the dreadful state he had wrought on her mind.
* [Copy of the Letter Refereed to.]
101 Collins-street East, Dec. 28th, 1865.
Dear Mrs. Claeson,
Notwithstanding our quarrel about the Northcote gossip, and the many
promises you tell me I have made, and carelessly neglected, I remember of
1 sic] one now, to tell you when I was about to get married. lam thinking of
such a step. Further details you will hear after; but, for once and all let
our disputes be settled.
I am very sorry to be the cause of pain to you, knowing the delicate state
of your nervous system. For the past, pray accept my apology; and I
earnestly trust, for the future, our friendship may continue uninterrupted.
I am, very sincerely, yours,
JOHN BLAIR.


by shaking off the acquaintance, that his true character and baseness showed
itself. He hoped quietly to slip out of the evil; or. failing that, by a
subtle manoeuvre prepare the minds of his friends for the worst.
We shall probably be blamed for not bringing this matter before the world
prior to his marriage; but we had not the remotest idea that he had marriage
in his mind at this time ; indeed, he distinctly denied it to both of us when
we called; and it was generally rumoured that his recent engagement was
at an end.
Believe me, my dear Mr. Friend,
Very faithfully yours,
WM. CLARSON.
[Copy of Me. Friend’s Reply.]
June 28th, 1867.
My Dear Mr. Clarson,
I have gone through your sad communication with the most scrupulous
and, 1 may conscientiously say, prayerful care. During the whole of my
professional career, nothing ever caused me keener anguish. Knowing you
both so well, I have felt that I would not act on my own opinion merely,
and I have, therefore, submitted the whole matter to a gentleman in whose
view I have the most absolute reliance. He agrees with the opinion I
formed when you were here, from the statements then made, and in every
particular confirms me that you have “no case!” The law affords you no
relief, and it would be madness to thrust yourself into an action which, so
far as expense is concerned, would be ruinous. Men of this class —and I
regret to say I am not without experience of such—have a good knowledge
of woman’s character, and take no step without making quite safe some
means of retreat. Their profession, too, gives them immense vantage ground.
Mrs. Clarson’s mistaken kindness and forgiveness, in the hope that you
might be spared the pain and the tragic scene she had evidently painted as
likely to result from her exposure of Blair to you, have secured him ; for
the law could only interpret these as a condonation of the offence. I can
fully understand and appreciate the motive in your wife’s mind, but then I
have a full knowledge of her character ; the public would only be too ready
to put the worst construction on her conduct. She has done herself a
grievous wrong, and there is no remedy for her but heartfelt gratitude to
God that she has been spared from actual evil, and that she has in you one
who can enter into her every thought throughout the trying term of years
under which she suffered from this fiend in human form. It is a great
mercy her health has not broken down under the trial.
I shall be in Melbourne in a few days, and will call, when I trust to be
able to have a long conversation with you.
With full sympathy for yourself and Mrs. Clarson, believe me,
Yours very truly,
CHRISTOPHER S. FRIEND.


It is impossible, within the compass of a small pamphlet, to
give more than the merest outline of the charges we could
have so fully entered upon, had the case been settled in a
proper way. I pledge my honour as a man, that I state
nothing but what I have the fullest authority for stating ; and
I deem it proper to say that the charges made are but a tithe
of those we are prepared to make. I shall ask no excuse
for what may be deemed by some a persecution of this man,
nor shall I urge any justification further. I believe there are
many men—and certainly many women—who will appreciate
the work as a good done for society. If there are none, I can-
not help it, but, supported by a sense of rigid rectitude, I shall
not regret the step. I regret having to introduce the names of
any persons in this account; but, in the case of Mr. Service, I
feel that gentleman has some explanation to offer to the public.
With the full knowledge of some of the most damning facts
here narrated, he assisted in every way in helping to the
position of honorary surgeon to the Alfred Hospital his friend
Mr. Blair.
I charge Blair with having—while acting as our medical
adviser, and during the existence of a mutual friendship ot the
warmest character—attempted the corruption of my wife’s
mind, and with having actually attempted liberties of a crimi-
nal character with her. Repulsed in these, and having im-
plored forgiveness for the insult, in the face of impending ruin,
he manifested, for some time, a proper behaviour—sufficient to
induce my wife to believe there could be no repetition of the
insult, and to justify her in not having revealed his offences to
me. I charge him with again attempting to abuse this con-
fidence, and with having in the most wanton and scandalous
manner endeavoured, by force, to obtain what he could not by
consent.
Failing in all his efforts, and apparently strengthened in his
position that his first offence in the interests of peace had been
forgiven, I charge him with having endeavoured by intimida


tion to prevent my wife informing me as to his real character ;
and subsequently, with having circulated rumours as to her
being “an amiable little lady, but quite deranged at times,
for no other purpose than to prepare for a probable exposure
by damaging in this subtle way the testimony against him.
I charge him with having subsequently, systematically,
and in the most brutally cowardly manner, insulted my wife
by bowing with mock courtesy in the street and in other
ways, which he must have known to be most offensive to her
and which drew from me the following letter :
r copy.]
Mat 11th, 1868.
To Mr. John Blair.
I AM in receipt of an envelope containing an unopened letter, addressed
to Mrs. Blair in Mrs. Clarson’s handwriting. I have handed it to Mrs.
Clarson, and at her request have read the contents.
While I regret exceedingly that she should trouble herself to hasten on
the punishment which or later must overtake you, and still more that
she should desire to relieve me of the labour, by undertaking it herself, I
must sympathise with her when I learn the cause of this fresh irritation to
her.
It appears, then, that notwithstanding the grievous wrong you have done
us, and the utter loathing you know we must both have towards you, you
have lately added to your offence by bowing with mock courtesy on occasions
when you have met Mrs. Clarson alone, in such a way, too, as you well knew
would be most offensive and aggravating to her.
This mode of torture is highly creditable to your discernment, for with her
knowledge of your character, nothing could be so utterly humiliating as the
slightest sign of recognition on your part.
I am not sure whether there is any legal way of stopping such offences,
neither is it my present intention to inquire; my purpose now is to warn
you, that if there is any repetition of that herein named, I will, on being
informed of it, “post” you throughout Melbourne and suburbs as the cha-
racter I know you, and take such other steps as shall prevent the possibility
of a recurrence of the offence.
To further insult the woman to whose weakness, imprudent forbearance,
and great regard for you at the time, you owe the fact that you are not now
serving a sentence upon the roads of the colony, with lesser offenders, cer-
tainly appears malignant and satanic; but it is quite consistent with your
character, as revealed to us. It is certainly consistent with your scandalous
betrayal of the sacred confidences reposed in you by your patients, male and
femal6, WM. CLARSON.


I charge him with having in every way endeavoured to
injure irreparably her character as a truthful, pure-minded, and
conscientious woman, and this in the immediate circles of old
and valued friends. And, finally, we state that if Mr.
Service’s statement be correct that Blair has shewn to him a
letter, purporting to be my wife’s, which is nothing more or
less than a distinct and unmistakable invitation to crime, then
we charge him with the forgery of such letter.
I charge him with having sent to me a hideously mutilated
portrait of Mrs. Clarson, which he had had photographed from
one given to a lady and mutual friend, by Mrs. Clarson ; and
with having sent a letter, suggesting that the said indecent
photograph should serve as a design for a transparency at the
Free Banquet. This with no other view apparently than to
induce me to attempt summary vengeance, and so close the
matter in a vulgar police court brawl.
I charge him that whilst acting in his professional capacity,
he seduced to her ruin a young lady patient, whose name I
have, and who was quite prepared to give evidence—and the
nature of whose evidence Mr. Blair was made aware of in our
pleas—had he proceeded to “ clear his character.” This young
person occupied the position of nursery governess at South
Yarra, was well connected at home and in the colony. That
some time afterwards, on discovering herself to be enceinte , and
on imploring him to aid her in hiding her disgrace from her
friends, he sent her to Ballarat, having failed in his efforts to
induce the girl to stay in town, and to swear her ruin was due
to one of the clergy of the Catholic church here. This latter,
under the specious pretence that if she did so, her friends
would aid her in hushing the matter up—adding to the pro-
posal the damnably libellous suggestion, that “they always
managed matters so ” in the church named.
I charge him that, shortly after the birth of the child, and at
a time when he knew absence from the mother meant certain
death to it, he induced the mother to part with it to a woman


living some six miles from Melbourne, to whom he paid the
sum of five shillings weekly for its “ maintenance ” until its
death, a month or two afterwards. That he attended the child
in its illness, gave the required certificate of death, and had the
child buried under a fictitious name (vide Addendum, p. 24).
I charge him with having endeavoured, when informed of the
fact of our being in possession of this evidence, to induce the
mother to get out of our reach, with a view to deprive us of
her aid in his exposure.
I conscientiously assert that the case here referred to —for
heartless, deliberate cruelty and consummate villainy—has
never been equalled by any I have ever perused. I have a
good knowledge of the unfortunate person, and have so high
an opinion of her truthfulness, that I believe her incapable of
exaggeration or of untruth. By the last April mail, the dis-
tressing intelligence arrived that the news of his daughter’s
ruin and disgrace had caused the death of her father.
I also have serious questions for Mr. Blair to answer regard-
ing the late M. B’Aloustel, Margaret Compton, the late Mrs.
Carr (of Wellington-street, Collingwood), and concerning
matters affecting his conduct even recently, in his professional
capacity.
This is perhaps no place to state the fearful wear and tear
this matter has been to me. With this the public have nothing
to do; it concerns them little to know that many years of a
man’s life are struck off by such cares and troubles as are im-
posed by such matters. The ruined health and constitution of
a woman suffering under the accumulated wrongs inflicted by
this fellow, are only matters of concern to me, and are of no
interest beyond the immediate circle of my friends. I have
cause of intense gratitude that life has been spared and reason
not impaired; only a firm faith in Providence, and a con-
scientious belief in His over-ruling wisdom, could have sup-
ported my wife through the trial.


I trust the experience will not be without its uses, and that
this recital may serve some public end. It has already served
one very useful purpose —it has cut away insincere friendships.
There have been many old friends who could no longer be
such while there was this “ difficulty” in the way ; and it
has shown us those whose sterling worth no gold can value.
These things, I repeat, are of little moment to the public, the
profession, or the press. But in view of the facts herein set
forth, every member of the community has a right to demand
that one who has outraged all the ties that bind society
together shall no longer be permitted to hold his “ pride of
place,” as the acting head of the Medical Society of the colony,
or as a leading officer of the Alfred Hospital, with the prestige
that these distinctions bring towards private practice. Is there
a husband or father who may peruse these pages that can stand
by with indifference, and not join in some manifestation of in-
dignation at the betrayer of friendship and professional con-
fidence, the violator of innocence, the defier of public decency,.
the cunning assassin of female reputation, and the wanton
destroyer of the peace of his own and other families ? Or, is
there a member of the profession which this man so foully
disgraces that will continue to meet him on terms of equality
and fraternisation ? If the old Greek apothegm, so well known
to the faculty, be of any weight in these days, “He who winks
at wrong, shares the crime,” then the gentlemen of the pro-
fession are bound to make some effort to purge their society of
this foul ulcer. And the press, too, if its professions of zeal
for public morality be anything more than mere verbiage,
should insist upon these disclosures leading to some public
action in the matter. Had I been actuated by the desire to
merely vindicate my own personal honour, or that of a maligned
and virtuous woman, a much shorter method would have
sufficed—one that for years past I have been withheld from
taking by those whom I knew to be sincere friends. My faith,
however, in the purity of colonial opinion is not yet dead; and


I leave this statement to the fathers of families., medical
profession, and to the public press, with the most perfect confi-
dence, and with the satisfaction that, though long delayed, the
time has come when they have the materials for forming a cor-
rect judgment.
It would be a simple task to swell this account to a goodly-
sized volume ; indeed the difficulty has been to reduce it
within readable compass. Every one of the letters written
has a history of its own, and one which it would be requisite
for the reader to learn for the perfect understanding of the
case. lam satisfied that however much the mere superficial
observer may blame my wife, those who have looked deeper
or who have taken the trouble to study the matter in the light
of the close relationship established between a lady and her
medical adviser—and especially when that medical adviser is
on terms of the closest friendship and esteem —will be very
chary of blame, and will truly sympathise with a woman
passing through so trying an ordeal.
It has been my duty to stand between my wife and her
slanderer, and the simple fulfilment of the duty has been
pleasurable to me; still more so is it now, when lam made
fully aware of the evil machinations of this fellow to damage
her good name in society. Whatever colour of truth this
“ gentleman of the period,” by his subtle suggestions, has been
able to give to the slanders he has circulated, the public will
be able to judge now as to the value of the evidence.
A woman may be killed with a boot-heel, but a man kills a
woman just as effectually by circulating reports as to her un-
chastity, in all probability because he has the most sufficient
reason for knowing her to be pure in mind and character.
WM. CLARSON.


ADDENDUM.
OvnoiAl Coer of the Bkgiste >t‘ the Deat i and Burial of an illegitimate
Child, of which Mr. John Isi uk was the put ; ither, referred to at
extracted fro rar-General for the
- Colony of Victoria, October 3, IBfo: — - V .
“No of Certificate, 11,191 —1867. riot of Northeote, in
the Colony of Victoria, registered by Robert EovrU
“ Desoriptfeh: No. 737. —When and where Died : -l«f December, 1867;
Society Paddock, South Preston —Name an cl Surname, ank or Profession:
John, Campbell. —Sex and Age; -mordhs.
“ Cause of Death: Tot- .v- -u ter .. Di atlon jf -.illness: 14 days. —
Medical Attendant by whom cer&fied Dr, J hen he last saw de-
ceased ■ 10th December. 1867.
Nanp .ud Sure • fFa hor Vf< ther, if known, with Rank or Pro-
fession — Jllegitimuie.*
“Signature, description, and residence oi Informant: William J. Foster,
neighbor oj deceased. Society Pu t oc!:, tdh Preston
“Signature of Deputy R gistrar Date, and wiser, registered; Robert
Bowie, 22nd December, 1867. Norther,'.
“ When and who. le fvhom < • ■led: 23rd December,
1867, Melbourne General Or- mery. 11 toseph Foster.
•‘Name a;ut Religio;; ses of Burial. —Not
any. J. Pvnris.
“ Where Porn, and how long in the Australian Colonies,.stating which:
Flemington. Victoria.
“I, Will JAM Hsnbt Archer. Registry -General of the Colony of Victo-
ria, do hereby certify that the above is a. true copy of an entry in a
Register of Deaths kept In this Office.
‘ W. H. Archer.
“ Extracted this third day of October, 1870. —T, F., J. S.” .
Olatkoo. Vmu». .v ( , ,i- OiliJn. Street Eut, Melbourne.
* Although Mr. Blair, as a marred man, night so far evade the legal
requirements as to suppress the record of his adulterous intercourse, by the
concealment of the paternity, it. certainly not from remorse that he also
withheld the name of his unfortuned : vietiin. lam not aware in what light
this will be re ’yarded ;s to me that the
ohence of knowingly giving a fictitious name to a deceased person is one of
very great magnitude, as it falsifies >ur public records. It is a serious defect
in the existing machinery if it be possible for a man to present a false return
without being amenable to any law* —W C.
