

rpRUTH STRANGER THAN
JL FICTION.
THE ARTESIAN WELL OF CHICAGO.
Br the Rev. J. Page Hopps.
At various times the wonderful story of the discovery
of the great water supply for Chicago has appeared in
English journals. Five years ago, I sent one of these
accounts to a friend of mine in Chicago, a leading mini-
ster of that town, requesting him to verify the story or
-contradict it. In a short time I received from him a
letter stating that he had laid the matter be‘ore a
gentleman of his acquaintance, an attorney-at-law
and his reply he enclosed. Unfortunately, the particular
account I forwarded was not returned, but it was prac-
tically identical with the following, which was written
by Dr. S. Eadon: —
“Chicago, as is well known, is one of the most go-
ahead cities in the world. Like Jonah’s gourd, it ap-
peared to spring up in a night. Its population rapidly
inci eased; and water soon became a sine qua non , both
as regards use and luxury. Science was at fault; for
geologists had pronounced that there could be no water
beneath such a stratum. Top water was all that could
be looked for, and presently a water company was
formed to supply this impure kind of liquid.
“There happened to live at this time in Chicago
a person named Abraham James, a simple-minded
man of Quaker descent, uneducated, and in
fact v quite an ignorant person. It was
discovered by a Mrs. Caroline Jordan that James was a
natural clairvoyant, in fact, a medium, and that he had
declared, when put into the trance condition, that both
water and petroleum, in large quantities, would be
found in a certain tract of land, in the neighborhood sf
the city. ’ For a long time no attention was paid to his
statements. At length two gentlemen from Maine,
called Whitehead and Scott, coming to Chicago on
business, and hearing what had been said by Abraham
James, took him to the land where he said water could
be had in immense quantities by boring for it. Being en-
tranced, James at once pointed out the very spot. He told
them that he not only saw the water, but could trace its
source from the Rocky Mountains, 2000 miles awav, to
the spot on which they stood, and could sketch out on
maps the strata and caverns through wh ch it. ran.
Negotiations were at once entered into for the purchase
of the land, and the Work of boring was commenced,
this was in February, 1864, and the process went on
daily till November, when, having reached a depth of
711 feet, water was struck, and flowed at once at the
rate of 600,000 gallons every twenty-four hours.
44 The boring showed the following kinds of
strata passed through by the drill, and this was
spiritually seen and described by the clairvoyant
as practical proofs to the senses ot other people!
First the drill passed through alluvium soil, 100 feet!
limestone, saturated with oil, 35 feet, which would
bum as well as any coal; Joliet marble, 100 feet; con-
glomerate strata of sand and fiint mixed with iron
pyrite and traces of copper, 125 feet; rock (shale)
saturated with petroleum, the sediment coming up like
putty, thick and greasy, 156 feet; galena limestone
was next reached at a depth of 539 feet; a bed of
limestone, containing flint and sulphuret of iron, was
next bored through, the depth being 639 feet, and
being very hard, the work went on slowly.
At this point there appeared a constant commo-
tion, arising from the escape of gas, the water
suddenly falling from 80 to 60 feet, and then
as suddenly rising to the surface, carrying with it
-chippings from the drill, and other matters. The work
■still went on, when at a depth of 711 feet the arch of
the rock was penetrated, and the water suddenly burst
forth from a bore 4* inches at the bottom, of a tem-
perature of 58 degrees F., clear as crystal, pure as
diamond, and perfectly free from every kind of animal
and vegetable matter; and which, for drinking pur-
poses and health, is found to be much better adapted
’than any water yet known, and will turn out to be the
poor man’s friend for all time to come.
“Here then is a huge fact for the faithless; a fact
brought to light by dynamic or invisible agency, and
which no power of negation can gainsay. Natural
science said no water could be found; but psychology
said, 4 False! for I will point out the spot where it will
flow in splendid streams as long as the earth spins on
its axis !’ Since 1864 the Artesian well of Chicago has
poured fourth water at the rate of a million and a half
gallons daily; and what is economic, to say nothing of
Yankee shrewdness, it is flowed into ponds or reser-
voirs, which, in winter, freeze, producing 40,000 tons of
ice for sale, and which might be quadrupled at any time.
44 What will science say to this cui bono matter of
factf What, those super-wise people who, with finger
on lip, moon about, and whimper, and cry out, • What’s
the good of the dynamic and the invisible V’ Is there no
good in finding, by spirit agency, a living fountain of
pure water for the use of millions of human beings for
ever? Is it not a mighty boon for the humanity of that
part ot the earth ? Verily it is; and the source ef know
ledge was a communication from disembodied spirits in
spirit life.
‘•Let us now turn more particularly to the man
—Abraham James—by whom, and through whose
mediuraship, this discovery was brought about.
He was of Quaker origin; without schooling;
ignorant of any language but his own—Eng-
lish ; simple-minded, upright, truthful, honest,
ignorant as a clodpole. Of drawing he knew nothing;
and as to science, he could not tell a triangle from a
parallelogram ; and as to their properties and relations,
he was in profound ignorance. Yet this same man,
Abraham James, when in the trance state, can lecture
on geology, chemistry, medicine, astronomy, the philo-
sophy of life, and on any branch of physical and natural
science, and that, too, with suck knowledge and elo-
quence as few savants can equal.
“ Although English is the only tongue he knows, yet,
in the trance state, he speaks French, Italian, Spanish,
German, and an Indian language, of each of which he
knows nothing in his natural or normal condition.
“ Abraham James never received a lesson on draw-
ing in his life, yet, is his trance condition, his drawings
of the formation and stratification of the earth’s crust
are marvellous productions. He drew a series of
diagrams, which traced the Artesian well at Chicago
from its source to its outlet or fountain head. This
picture, when put together, is composed of six sheets of
drawing paper 26 inches by 4O inches each, and was
done in sixty hours—a piece of work which would have
taken any ordinary artist sixty weeks, in his ordinary
condition.
“ It matters not to Abraham James, when at work,
whether it is light or dark. He generally uses from one
to six different kinds of pencils, sometimes using one
hand, and sometimes both hands at the same time, the
fingers often moving with a rapidity which often
troubles the eye of the beholder to follow.
Whether In light or in dark ; with eyes
bandaged or not; with a piece of paper held
between his face and the picture, it matters not, the
work goes on. What he sees with his spiritual eye in
the interior of the earth, he can delineate on paper with
perfect accuracy. Speaking of the drawings of
Abraham James, a writer who has seen them, says :
4 The floors of some of these caverns were composed
of great masses of some of the most beautiful shells,
which, in their shadings and perfections, are evidently
the work of a master hand. The elaborate character of
the shell work which runs through all these geological
pictures, the millions of accurate pencil strokes
necessary to complete them, and the very short time In
which they were executed, are matters of great as-
tonishment and wonder to all who have seen them.’
“In the trance state, Abraham James drew a full-
length portrait of the martyred President Lincoln, on
sheets of paper 7.1 feet long by 4feet wide. The Pre-
s.dent is represented life-size, standing upon a rock,
the broken chain of African slavery beneath his teet,
and in his left hand the scr«ll of American Liberty.
This picture was completed in the medium state in
twenty-four hours, and is a remarkable production even
amongst the other marvellous effects of this trance artist.
Whence comes this skill ? The human spirit acts with-
out the ordinary instruments of the senses; 4 Sans
teeth, sans eyes, sans mouth, sans everything;’ and
yet the work goes on in light or in dark with almost
lightning speed till the picture is completed.”
The reply to my question, above referred to, was as
follows:
“I have carefully read the article 01 the Chicago
Artesian well, taken from the Stroud News, handed me
by you a day or two ago. lam perfectly familiar with
the facts stated, and can say to you that they are true.
I was personally present when the medium James
located the well. 1 saw the drill started at that point,
and watched the work daily during the whole period.
The matter of the drawings is also true. I have seen
him working with six pencils, three in each hand, and
each pencil doing a separate part of the work, and all
the pencils in operation at the instant. When the ma-
ture of Lincoln was made, there being even no outline
of the figure and no measurement (indeed, he never had
any instrument but a pencil;, he first made an eye and
then a foot, and so worked the picture down from the
one point and up from the other. When finished, these
two points were found in proper positions in the figure.
44 This Artesian well is, after a lapse of sixteen years,
still fl Aving, although the quantity of water discharged
iwWf so great as formerly, owing to numerous other
wells, which were subsequently bored all over the
city, penetrating the same stream of water,”—“The
Truthseeker.”
J. Wxvj, Printer, 33 Wcllington-St., Collingwood.


