

Wk
1 / A y ■ B jf I \ I flf p y i
\ ’iflff. | I /Hi »db I \ I *
\ t ml* \ Z \
I M IMmLtn: t \ k 9m-
ik Wip|■ H Hk % I
u V I gWBm
\ «■ IMa
\ iBp J \k y I j H
.mil
BSs? mBmH
't\l» J?
%\\ a \\ "; ,-^pi
V, '> V'BsSbk **££'■ X 1^4. i
. ' 'I, : .. 1
UCKONIE!
ABS3 -a
i6Gl3tu
►


2ZHTTT


“TUCKONIE’S WARRIOR
FRIEND”
The Meeting with Gulunna
CHAPTER I.
ONE summer-evening in the far North-
west, where the white man seldom
penetrated, a dusty, travel-stained
caravan came over a rise, and stopped in
the shelter of some trees. The travellers,
who were three in number got out and
started to prepare their evening meal. They
were a strange looking trio as they went
about their various duties, gathering sticks
and filling pots and kettles, but they seemed
to agree very well.
“I will see to the fire, Dan,” said Tuckonie,
a little aboriginal boy of about eleven years
of age, “you needn’t bother about that.”
“All right, youngster,” replied the old
sundowner, whose name was Happy Dan,
“and while you’re doing that, I’ll see about
making our quarters comfortable for the
night—or do you want me to help you get the
meal ready, Peggy?”
“Oh no, Dan,” said the little golden headed
white girl, whom Dan addressed as Peggy.
“If you’ll open the tin, I can do all the rest.”
So it was arranged, and, in ten minutes,
the three members of the party were sitting
down and enjoying a hearty meal. After they
had finished, they sat around the camp fire
talking of the different adventures they
had been through, and wondering what the
next one would be. Eventually, they grew
drowsy, and decided to go to bed, but at this
moment, a faint chanting was heard in the
distance.
“Listen,” said Peggy, “what’s that funny
noise?”
Tuckonie was all attention. “It sounds like
a chant of evil,” he said, “and it is coming
from the west there where the trees are
very thick.”
“Goodness, I wonder who the people are,”
said Peggy.
“Well, I think it’s worth investigating any-
way,” said Dan.
So they all moved off cautiously in the
direction from which the sound came. At
last Tuckonie held up his finger, “Do not go
any further,” he said, “they are just on the
other side of these bushes. We will be able
to hear what they say from here.” Just then,
the chanting stopped, and a strange, cracked
voice was heard.
“It is done, my friends,” said the voice,
“and it is good. We have nut the spell of ill
fortune upon the young chieftain, Gulunna.
For the good of the tribe, we must see that
Chief Mullyan’s son never rules it.”
“Yes, that is so,” said another voice. “If
he should ever rule it, he would bring us to
ruin.”
“Wisely spoken,” said the first voice. “He
would ruin us, for he favours the ways of
the white people instead of the ways of the
dark people. Moreover, he hates us medicine
men, and, if he could, he would take our
power away from us,”
“This must never be,” said a third voice.
“Chief Mullyan believes in us, and so our
power over him is complete, but if this
Peggy ami Tuckonie off to light a fire.


young warrior chieftan, Gulunna, ever comes
to rule the tribe, our rights and privileges
will be gone. It would be a good thing if we
could drive him away from the tribe.”
“Perhaps we will in the end,” said the first
voice. “But come, we have been here long
enough, let us return to the camp.”
“Hmm,” said Dan, after the three medi-
cine men had gone, “I don’t feel very friendly
towards those three gentlemen.”
“No,” said Tuckonie, “neither do I.”
“Anyhow,” said Dan, “their quarrel is
with this Gulunna; they won’t be troubling
Ui, so we have no need to concern ourselves
with them. The wisest thing we can do is
to get back to our own camp and go to bed
and forget all about them.”
The following day, as they were continu-
ing on their journey, Tuckonie discovered
the tracks of a large tribe, and so the party
agreed to follow along those tracks, thinking
that some of the tribesmen could tell them
where they could find good hunting grounds,
as they were growing rather tired of tinned
food. Suddenly, up strode a tall handsome
warrior with a wild duck slung over his
shoulder.
“Who are you?” asked Dan, as the stran-
ger greeted them.
“My name is Gulunna,” said the warrior.
“I am the son of Chief Mullyan of the Warra-
munga tribe. I have been hunting!”
“Gulunna!” cried Peggy and Tuckonie.
“Yes,” said Gulunna, “you seem surprised.
Have you heard of me ”
Gulunna shoots a wild duck with a how
and arrow.
“In a way we have,” said Peggy.
“Then it is very likely that you haven’t
heard much good, for I have not many
friends,” said Gulunna.
“Why is that, Gulunna ?” said Dan.
It is because I want to change the ways
of my tribe,” said Gulunna. “I want them
to practice greater skill—l want them to
throw off the rule of the medicine men who
are ruining them, but they will not. They
do not understand that the medicine men are
keeping them back—these medicine men do
not want the people of our tribe to learn too
much because then they would lose their
power. They frighten them and threaten
them, and make the warriors give them
great gifts for their magic which is trickery.
I want my tribe to become great and strong,
but they can never do this while the medicine
men hold power.”
Tuckonie looked interested. “Isn’t your
tribe great and strong now ?”
“Not strong enough,” replied Gulunna.
“There are many powerful tribes around
here and one of these tribes is the sworn
enemy of my tribe. Their leader, Tomingley,
learned much from the white men when he
was a boy, and now he has come back to his
tribe and knowing so much more, they will
be able to conquer us. Oh, if only we were
free from the influence of the medicine
men.”
“Well,” said Tuckonie, “as you are the
son of the chief, you must be the chief of the
tribe some day, and then you can free them
from the rule of the medicine men.”
“Perhaps,” said Gulunna, “that is, if I
ever become chief. But my cousin, Balala,
wants the chieftainship, and he is a great
friend of the medicine men. I think they
will make my father give the rulership to
him.”
“But,” said Tuckonie, “if you are the son
of the chief, it is only right that you should
be head of the tribe.”
“The medicine men hate me,” said Gul-
unna, “and they will turn my tribe against
me, and if they do that, then the tribe will
elect Baiala in my place. He is a cruel man
and a coward as well, and he will let the
medicine men do what they like. If he ever
comes to rule my tribe, then they will
perish.”


“Do the warriors of your tribe like Ba-
lala?” said Peggy. „
“The bravest of them do not like him,
answerel Gulunna,, “but he is skilful with
his words and so clever in his manner that
he has been able to hide his cowardice and
his cruelty from a lot of them, and they do
not really know what his nature is like. But
I know and I would rather kill him with my
own hands than see him lead my tribe to
ruin.”
At this moment, another young warrior
came up. He was not as handsome, nor as
well-built at Gulunna, nor did he have such
a pleasant and honest expression, but he
carried himself with the pride of a prince.
“Hail, Gulunna,” he said scornfully
“what do you here with these white men?”
“I speak with them,” said Gulunna
proudly. “What is it to you, Balala?
“I think,” replied Balala, “that your
father, Chief Mullyan, would be interested
to know that you are so friendly with the
white men. The medicine men would be
interested also. We all know that you are
trying to destroy the ancient religion and
laws of our tribe so that you may make us
like the white people. You do this to suit
your own evil purposes.”
“That is not true,” said Gulunna, as he
moved towards Balala threateningly. “Take
it back.”
“Don’t you lay a hand upon me,” said
Balala, shrinking back, “fighting between
chieftains is forbidden.”
“Oh,” said Gulunna, “so you think you
can insult me and then protect yourself by
our laws, do you? Listen to me, you coward,
you puppet of the medicine men —I have
been waiting for this opportunity for a long
time! Now I am going to give you the
thrashing you deserve.”
“You would not dare,” said Balala. “I
will call the medicine men, I will ”
But he did not have time to finish, for,
crying out, ‘Protect yourself!’ Gulunna
sprang at him and dealt him a blow which
sent him to the ground with a shriek.
“Now,” said Gulunna, his voice trembling
with anger, “why should I not kill you!
Speak, you coward, why should I not kill
you! You do not deserve to live—there is
no place for cowards amongst the ranks of
the warriors.”
So saying, Gulunna raised his spear, but
at this moment, Dan thought he should
interfere. “Hold on a minute, Gulunna,”
he said. “You can’t do this sort of thing.”
Gulunna looked at Dan very seriously.
“You do not realise how evil this man is,
white man.”
“Well, perhaps I don’t,” said Dan, “but
just the same, you can’t kill him in cold
blood. Let him go.”
“Yes, perhaps it is better so,” said Gul-
nnna, with a sigh. “Perhaps I should not
soil my hands by shedding his cowardly
blood. Go, you rat, go back to the medicine
men who will protect you!”
“I will go,” said Balala, with a look of
hatred on his face, “but you will be sorry
for this some day, Gulunna. I, Balala, will
have my revenge.”
Gulunna strode up to him. “I wouldn’t say
too much if I were you, my brave cousin,”
Jig said, “otherwise I might change my mind
and kill you yet. Go!”
Balala, apparently thinking that Gulunna
meant what he said, slunk away through the
bushes.
Tuckonie and Peggy had been following
all this with great interest, for, although
they did not approve of such fights, they
could not help liking Gulunna so very much
better than Balala. Dan, too, favoured Gul-
unna, but, having witnessed his hasty
temper, he thought he would try to reason
with him. “Listen, Gulunna,” he said, “I
think you ought to learn to control your
temper. It isn’t the thing to want to kill
a man just because you dislike him.”
Gulunna gave him another earnest look.
“White man,” he said, “I do not kill a man
just because I dislike him. I have some
enemies whom I respect very much. But
when I think that this Balala is plotting
against the good of my tribe, and that he
might some day come to rule it, I feel that
it would be better for them if he were dead.”
“Just the same,” said Dan, “there must
be other ways of straightening things out.”
“Yes,” said Tuckonie, “you must not kill
him, Gulunna. But, all the same, I do not
like Balala.”
“Neither do I,” said Peggy. “I believe
what you have told us about him, that he
is a wicked man, and a coward.”


“He is,” said Gulunna, “and one of these
days I am afraid he will feel the weight of
my club upon his head.”
While this conversation had been going on,
Balala had been running as fast as he could
towards the mia-mias or bark houses of the
medicine men. When he arrived there, he
sought out Noongah, the chief medicine man,
and told him what had happened. Noongah,
Kinie, and the other medicine men, decided
that they should go to Chief Mullyan and
complain of the way Balala had been treated
at the hands of Gulunna. When Mullyan
heard that Gulunna had set upon Balala—
for the medicine men did not say that Balala
had provoked the fight—he was very angry,
and sent for Gulunna immediately.
„By this time, Gulunna, Dan, and the kid-
t.ies had become very friendly, and so when
Gulunna went to meet his father, he took his
made triends with him and they were
able to bear out his story, that Balala had
insulted him and therefore caused the fight.
Then Gulunna turned to the medicine men
and denounced them, saying that they were
cheats and frauds and that they had no
power but the power given them by the
people. Now, when Chief Mullyan heard
this denunciation, he was very upset, for
he regarded the medicine men as priests of
the spirits of the tribe, and he was very
much afraid that, by making fun of them,
Gulunna would anger the spirits and bring
down their vengeance upon the tribe.
Gulunna, he said, “I know that you
mean well, but you are a wild youth and
must be punished for this outburst against
the medicine men. Therefore, I must decree
that you shall take no maiden of this tribe
ss your wife until the medicine men give
their permission.”
“Very well then, my father,” said Gul-
unna proudly, “I will accept the punishment.
Put let the medicine men bear this in
mind. I Gulunna, will have my revenge.”
CHAPTER 11.
Kmie’s Treachery.
THAT night, Dan and the kiddies were
awakened by the voices of the medicine
_ men raised in anger and fear, and,
looking out of the caravan, they saw a red
haze rising amongst the bushes.
“My goodness,” said Peggy, “that fire is
coming from the place where the medicine
men’s mia-mias are.”
At this moment, the five medicine men
came running through the bush, with Gul-
unna close upon their heels, brandishing
a spear.
“Great Scott,” said Dan, “Gulunna has
apparently had his revenge upon the medi-
cine men. He has set fire to their mia-mias.”
“Well,” said Peggy, “You can’t really
blame him for being angry, but I don’t think
should have set fire to their mia-mias.”
, < , <The . y . Wlll certainly never forgive him for
A, said Tnckonie. “See how angry old
Noongah looks.”
And Noongah certainly did look very
frightening, as he called out abuse to Gul-
unna. “Evil will come upon you for this,
you son of evil V' he said. “You have burned
the holy mia-mias of the medicine men! We
will bring down all the curses we know
upon you for this;”
“Silence!” shouced Gulunna. “Silence,
you dogs, or I will kill you! One word more
and you die! Run like the rats you are!
Go forth from the tribe and never come
back.” And with these words, he made
another leap forward towards the old men,
who, seeing that he was in earnest, left off
their shouting, and ran away as fast as
they could through the bushes.
‘‘Well, that’s over,” said Dan.
“I think you are mistaken there,” replied
Tuckonie. “Those medicine men will not
let the matter rest at that.” And Tuckonie
was right, for not many minutes afterwards,
they heard the voice of Noongah rousing
the tribe.
“Warriors! Warriors, awake! Come


what it was all about, and when he learned
not thought.”
what had been done, he was very angry
“Well,” said Dan, ‘Svould you like to come
with Gulunna.
with us for a while? You’ll be very lonely
Dan could see that no matter how brave
if you stay by yourself, and I don’t suppose
Gulunna was, he could not fight all the war-
any of your tribesmen will speak to you now
riors who were arrayed against him, so he
that you’ve been outlawed.”
strode in amongst them and told them to
“That is so,” said Gulunna, “and I would
put up their spears.
like to come with you if you will have me. I
“By what right do you interfere, white
am a good hunter, and in this way I shall be
man ” said one of the warriors. It is the
no burden upon you, for I shall help to find
law that one w’ho has done as Gulunna has
food for us all.”
done, should die.”
“That’s all right, Gulunna,” said Dan.
“It might be your law,” said Dan, “but
Then Tuckonie noticed a few warriors
it isn’t the law of the white men, and at
present the white men have control of this
creeping towards them through the bushes.
“Look, Gulunna,” said the boy, “warriors—
country.”
This brought forth angry murmurs from
amongst the warriors, but the w T ords had
no effect on Dan. “Understand this,” he
said, “I do not want to interfere, but I
won’t stand by and witness murder, and
be on your guard.”
Gulunna w’as on the alert in an instant,
but soon he dropped his spear to his side
again. “It is all right, Tuckonie,” said,
“these are my ow r n special friends.”
that’s what it w'ould be if so many of you
The young warriors, when they reached
attacked one man. Why, you warriors
the group, told Gulunna that though he was
should be ashamed of yourselves acting in
outlawed, they w’ould still remain his
such a w r ay.”
Then Chief Mullyan spoke up. “There is
some wisdom in w T hat you say, oh white
friends, and promised him that if ever there
came a time when they thought it might do
some good to plead with Chief Mullyan
TUCKONIE’S warrior friead
quickly and help us! I, Noongah the medi-
cine man and all my witch doctors are
being driven from the tribe by this whelp,
Gulunna!” . . , ,
“Oh,” said Dan, “that’s bound to start
something. I wonder whose part the war-
riors will take?”
Tuckonie looked thoughtful. “I am sure
they will be against Gulunna,” he said, tor,
although Gulunna is a very brave young
warrior and would have many friends, these
same friends would think it wrong to drive
the medicine men from the tribe, for medi-
cine men are always much respected.
“And much feared,” said Dan, shrewdly.
“Besides this,” said Tuckonie, ‘ t is a
very serious offence to insult medi le men
or to lay Hands upon them. Soir. of our
people say that whatever you do to the
medicine men, you do to the departed spints
of the tribe and they do not easily forgive.
Then the voices of many warriors were
heard and soon there was a great gathering
there in the bush. The warriors spread out
into a circle and stopped the departure of
either Gulunna or the medicine men. Then
Chief Mullyan stepped forward to find out
what it was all about, and when he learned
what had been done, he was very angry
man. It is not good for so many to fight
against one.”
“Then shall he not be punished I said
Noongah, the medicine man. _
“Have no fear, Noongah, said Cniet
Mullyan. “My son shall be punished, for
this time he has gone too far. Though i
crieves me to part with him, I must place
Spon him the greatest punishment except-
ing death. My son Galunna, you are out-
lawed!”
“'What? said Gulunna, “you will send me
away from my tribe.”
“I must,” said Chief Mullyan, “for you
no longer deserve to belong to it. Go! From
this moment you are an outlaw, and all
men’s hands are turned against you. Ne\ ei
more do you belong to us—we are no longer
your brothers and friends. Go!”
So Gulunna, feeling that it was useless to
resist any longer, turned and proudly strode
away into the dark and lonely bush. How-
ever, he had not gone very far before Dan
and the kiddies caught up with him.
“Tell me, Gulunna,” said Dan, “what are
you going to do now ?”
“I do not know,” replied Gulunna, “I have


r re^urn °f Gulunna, they would do
so. They meant this, too, for they did not
want Balala as their chief.
When the goodbyes were said, the young
warriors returned to the tribe and Gulunna
vent to the caravan with Dan and the
kiddies He threw himself on the earth
beside it, and was soon asleep.
Early next morning, the four friends had
breakfast, and then Gulunna was invited
into the caravan, and they continued on
their journey By mid-day they had placed
many miles between themselves and the
camping ground of the tribe.
-J 8 ? 1 ln that time, the medicine men had
net been idle. They were satisfied that they
Dw °^ tlawed Gulunna, but they were afraid
that Serena, the mother of Gulunna, might
alT her busband > Chief Mullyan,
and that he might recall Gulunna on her
account, for he loved her very dearly
Accordingly, they tried to think of a way
of Serena might bring about the death
;;Ha s anyone a plan?” said Noongah.
Tes, replied Kinie, the crafty one, “I
a P ] an / „ We will 2° to Mullyan the
& and n tell blm - that we bebeve that
lsh^ s to P° lson bi ™ so that after
Wdtt a e tribl” can bring baA Gulunna t0
“But,” said Noongah, ‘‘Mullyan will never
believe that.”
“k sal ,? I Klnie WJ th a meaning look,
but he will demand that Serena shall be
put through the test of truth.”
said Noongah, ‘‘the drinking of
the enchanted water.”
• said Kinie > “we will get the drink-
ing bowl and fill it with water, and then
in the presence of everyone, ask her to
deny that she desired her husband’s death.
You know what the test is, she must drink
; n a i 6r mak ™s the denial, and
, e tel ! be . r that if she has spoken the truth
she will die.’” lf She has spoken false ‘y.
Yes, said another one of the medicine
men we know all this. But how shall she
t sbe . speaking the truth? She will
not be lightened to death as others have
Tbere: f? re the water will have no
effect on her.”
0> sa * d Kinie, ‘but we will make a
new ceremony whereby we must wave our
hands oyer the bowl before she drinks We
can easily let a small drop of poison fall into
it and in this way she will die.”
Noongah thought for a moment before
softly*^ 6 * ben a t length he answered


CHAPTER 111.
Gulunna Slays
THE next day, Noongah and the other
medicine men went to Chief Mullyan
and told him that his wife was plotting
his death, so that she could bring Gulunna
back and make him ruler of the tribe. Chief
Mullyan refused to believe that his wife
would do any such thing, but the cud medi-
cine men kept on insisting that she would,
and asked Chief Mullyan if he was willing
to put his wife through the test. Chiet
Mullyan agreed to this, still believing that
his wife was innocent.
And so, that evening as the sun was sett-
ing, the warriors formed a large circle into
which the medicine men took Serena. Then
Chief Mullyan told her what the medicine
man had told him, and asked her if she
could deny it. Serena did deny it, and
turned fiercely upon the medicine men, but
they were ready with the testing bowl, and
asked her if she was willing to drink of it
to prove that she was innocent.
“Yes,” said Serena, bravely, “I am willing
to drink of it.”
“Good,” said Noongah, “Give the woman
the bowl, Kinie.”
After Noongah had spoken, Serena lifted
the cup to her lips and drank, but in a
moment she turned pale, and a look of great
pain crossed her face.
“Serena, my wife, what is the matter
with you?” cried Chief Mullyan, rushing
towards her, for in spite of what had been
said, he loved his wife.
“Oh, I am ill,” said Serena, for the poison
that Kinie had dropped into the water was
beginning to take effect.
But Noongah looked round at the war-
riors and shouted, “She is guilty! Look at
her, she grows pale and trembles! She has
failed to pass the magic test.”
Then Serena could no longer stand, and
would have fallen to the ground but that
the Wild Boar.
Thief Mullyan caught her in his arms.
“Serena ” he said earnestly, ‘ yOI J
weren’t trying to kill me-yet you did not
Pa “My h husband,” said Serena weakly, ‘‘there
has been some trick. I swear I did not try
vou ” But by this time, all the
warriors were crowding round, calling out
to her angrily, for they believed that the
test had been an honest one, and that
had really died because she had told the lie.
“Stand away,” said Chief Mullyan, Le
he Tht SerenTlooked into his face as if
to say something more but before she
could speak another word, she died
A look of satisfaction overspread the
faces of the wicked medicine men. So do
the spirits strike all those who do evil,
said Noongah. ,
And Gulunna, many miles away from t
camping grounds of his people saw a smoke
signal for his friends among the warriors,
thought it right that Gulunna should know
that his mother had died by means of a
mao-ic test But Gulunna knew that h*s
true and faithful and that she
would never have attempted to _km he
husband. So, he swore to the spmts that
some day he would return and take his
revenge upon the wicked medicine men w
caused Serena to die in this way.
Some days later, Dan, Gulunna and the
two kiddies fell m with another tribe
which was ruled by Chief Bulla. Ch
Bulla seemed glad to see them, and said
they were welcome to stay with as
long as they wished. Gulunna was
to see all the warriors of Chief Bulla s
tribe building a huge mia-mia. Now a mia-
mia is a rough, bark dwelling place, and
Gulunna had often slept beneath the shelter
of a small one, but he had never seen such
a large and strong mia-mia before.


‘‘What is the meaning of this ?” he asked
Chief Bulla. “Why do you build such a big,
strong house?”
“Well may you ask,” replied Bulla, “have
you not heard of Kerda, the wild boar?”
“No,” said Gulunna, “I have not heard
of him.”
Ah,” said Bulla, “He is a terrible beast
indeed—he is twice the size of an ordinary
wild boar, and his anger is terrific. He has
killed many of our warriors.”
“Well,” said Dan, “I never heard of a
warrior being frightened of a wild boar.
Why don’t you call your warriors together
and go out and hunt him and kill him for
food ?”
“You do not know what you say, white
man, replied Bulla. “This creature has a
brain like a man. He seems to know when
ve go forth to hunt him—he seems to
know all of our plans, even before they
are made.”
“That is very strange,” said Tuckonie.
“Strange indeed,” answered Bulla. “We
have set traps for him, but never has he
fallen into them—w r e have encircled him
around with our warriors—their spears
drawn—but he has fooled us—he has dashed
in one direction, and quickly turned to
another and, after killing one man or may-
be more, has broken through the circle.”
Well, ’ said Gulunna, “I have never heard
of a boar who acted like this.”
No, said Bulla, “I have discussed it
with my medicine men, and they say that
they think the soul of a wdcked departed
warrior has entered into the body of this
boar, and that is why he outwits us all
the time, I assure you, strangers, he is
i ordinary boar—he is enchanted.”
At this moment, there arose a great outcry
among the aboriginals and, the next moment,
U ? gman * ame rushin S up to the Chief.
Chief Bulla! ’ he cried, “another one of
our warriors has been killed by Kerda the
wild boar.”
What! said Bulla, “yet another! Oh,
why are we so afflicted! Still, the mia-mia
is completed, so we can at least be sure of
future protection against this enchanted
pig.”
I am sure, said Bulla, “that we will
not be able to venture out singly as before,
but we will have to hunt only in large
parties.”
At this instant another warrior came
bounding up to where the group stood talk-
mg. “Fly, fly for your lives!” he cried.
Kerda, the wild boar, is upon us! He
snorts with wicked anger.”
At these words, all the members of the
tribe came rushing towards the mia-mia—
lubras, warriors and children, almost falling
over each other in their haste to get through
the doorway.
“Come on, Peggy, come along, Tuckonie,”
said Dan. “We had better go in wdth them,
we haven’t any weapons with us at the mo-
ment. You come too, Gulunna.”
And soon it appeared that everyone was
safejnside the house. At this moment, the
snorting of the boar was heard and a few
seconds after he made his appearance in
the clearing.
“Just listen to that,” said Tuckonie. But
as they listened, they heard another sound
—it was the sound of a child crying out in
fright. And then the beating of little hands
was heard on the door. “Let me in,” said
the child, “here comes the boar!”
Quickly, said Dan, “there’s a child out
there. Open the door and let her in.”
But one or two of the warriors refused
to do this. “Cowards!” said Gulunna, “will
you leave the child to perish?” And with
these words he flung open the door and
rushed out into the clearing.
“My goodness,” said Peggy, “it is a big
boar.” -
‘You will die, foolhardy warrior,” said
one of the other warriors. “No man can
1-ght against the enchanted animal.” And
with these words, he slammed the door shut.
But Gulunna took no notice of the war-
rior—he picked the little girl up, and slung
her over his shoulder. Then, with his shield
held steadily and his spear poised, he rushed
on the boar, which in its turn, charged at
him with a cry of ferocious anger. How-
ever, just as Gulunna was preparing to
meet the charge, the boar turned quickly to
the left to attack Gulunna from the side.
But Gulunna was as quick in his movements
as the boar—he sprang aside and, before a
moment had elapsed, he drove his spear
through the side of the monster. He was
only just in time, for, in another couple of


'
JH SPr. Jp
M I WMOt. . #
a w / u *
/-$ " .. _ j. j« aBllg|S«3
wM * ; -?-' jB.B?hl-- ~ ~ ~^~^-~- ~~ * : g v^^-jpffliy : *'* , • ~~ ...jmMB~-~~\ V •ggFiiHg^F*
Hk Ba. '" 7 ■ .BB y 1 .- >^c
Jb i|» "4^8
wBr
_>.- '
4$&r^ r t bb ■ Jr^BBSBb
Page 9
Poison is dropped into the han’t.


.
■ '■ ■ . g
• -•
_


seconds, the boar would have had him down
upon the earth. Now the position was
reversed, and Gulunna stood victorious while
the vicious boar breathed his last at his
feet. Then Gulunna strode up to the mia-
mia and shouted aloud to those within to
open the door. “You need have no fear,
he said, “the enchanted boar is dead.
Those inside could scarcely believe their
but Dan knew that Gulunna was an
honest warrior, and would not trick them,
so he insisted that the door should be
opened. When all the members of the tribe
saw that the boar was indeed dead, they
were overjoyed and formed a circle round
Gulunna. They broke into a corroboree'
of thanksgiving. “He is the greatest warrior
of all times,” they said.
“Yes,” said Chief Bulla, “he is indeed.
Long may you remain with us, Gulunna, and
I and my tribe will show you much honour.
Let a feast be made ready to do honour to
this brave man who has rid us of our
enemy!”
CHAPTER IV.
Gulunna Goes to Seek Olahtnha.
AFTER the feast Gulunna, Peggy, Tuck-
onie and Dan decided to go on their
way, and the eve of the next day saw r
the caravan some miles from the camp. Days
passed in peaceful travel and then the little
party arrived at the camping grounds of
another tribe.
“Well,” said Dan, “I wonder who well
meet this time.” And with these words he
stopped the caravan to make enquiries.
An old warrior with many markings on
his body strode up to the caravan. Greet-
ings, strange ones,” he said, “I am Chief
Logga.”
“Glad to meet you, Chief Logga,” said
Happy Dan, “my name’s Happy Dan and
this is my little friend, Peggy Harvey.”
“Welcome to my tribe,” said Logga, “but
I see you have two of my own people amongst
you.”
“Yes,” said Tuckonie, “I am Tuckonie,
son of Chief Narkunda of the Arunta tribe. ’
“And,” said Gulunna, “I am Gulunna,
son of Chief Mullyan of the Warramunga
tribe.”
When the introductions had been per-
formed, Chief Logga asked them several
questions about their journey, and having
satisfied himself that they were worthy to
be his friends, he asked them to a feast
which they were giving that evening to
celebrate the betrothal of his daughter Nim-
eela to the w r arrior, Piebole. Dan accepted
the invitation on behalf of the whole party.
The feast proved to be a very elaborate
one, every man, woman and child of the
tribe being present. Nimeela, the daughter
of Chief Loggia, proved to be a very sweet
and pretty young lubra, but the warrior
Piebole was a giant of a man, with a hideous
face and a very cruel expression.
“I do not like him,” whispered Tuckonie
to Gulunna.
“Neither do I,” said Gulunna. “I think
the girl is much too nice for him, but if
she loves him it is no concern of ours.”
Then some of the lubras came round with
food and soon everyone was eating and drink-
ing to his heart’s content. But little Tuck-
onie, who always liked to know what was
going on, went around the circle, talking to
the warriors and the lubras and soon found
out that Nimeela hated Piebole, the warrior,
but that her father had promised her to
him in marriage if he would stay and lead
his battles, for Chief Logga himself was
getting old and unable to lead his warriors.
Gulunna felt very sorry for poor Nim-
eela when he heard this story, but his
opinion of Piebole was a little higher than
it had been, for he thought that if Chief
Logga wanted Piebole to lead his warriors
in battles against other tribes, then Piebole
must indeed be a very brave warrior.
However, it was not long before he had
cause to change this good opinion, for Pie-
bole began to boast of his bravery, and the


many fights he had won—and he made scorn'
ful remarks about all the other warriors,
including Gulunna. Now Gulunna, though
not conceited, was a proud young warrior,
and he would not tolerate insults from any-
one, so he challenged Piebole to fight him.
This caused a lot of excitement at the ban-
quet, because no other warrior had ever
been known to speak up against Piebole.
They said Gulunna was very foolish and
would probably lose his life and they begged
him to apologise to Piebole and call the
fight off, but this Gulunna refused to do.
Then they told him that Piebole fought with
a magic spear so that it was impossible for
him to lose a fight, but still Gulunna in-
sisted on meeting him in battle. So the
fight was arranged for the next day.
Late that night, Babbilla, one of the medi-
cine men of the tribe heard a soft voice
calling to him from the door of his mia-mia,
and when he went out, he discovered that
it _ was Nimeela. “Quickly, Babbilla,” she
said, “let me come inside, I want to talk
with you.”
“Come in, Nimeela,” said the old man
kindly, “but what is the matter with you?
Why have you come so silently, and what
is that you have brought?”
“It is Piebole’s magic spear,” replied Nim-
eela, “I went to his mia-mia and took it,
and I want you to hide it for me.”
Babbilla looked troubled. “This is a grave
thing, Nimeela, why have you done this?”
“Because,” said Nimeela, “tomorrow he
fights with the -warrior Gulunna and I do not
Nimeela bides Piebole’s spear.
want Gulunna to be killed. Oh Babbilla,
I do not want to marry Piebole—you know
that I love a young warrior of another
tribe. If Gulunna wins the fight, perhaps
he could save me from Piebole.
“Oh well, child,” said Babbilla at last with
a sigh, “perhaps I take my life in my hands.
Yet I will do this thing for you.”
So Nimeela left the spear with Babbilla
and crept silently back to her own mia-mia.
The next day, just before the fight was
due to commence, Piebole came rushing up
to the warriors in a great rage and said
that _ someone had stolen his spear. The
warriors all denied having any knowledge
of it, and said that he was at liberty to
search all their mia-mias. The search was
carried out, but no trace of the spear could
be found. Piebole was frantic with anger
over this, for he prized his spear very much
—however, he was still confident that he
would have no trouble in killing Gulunna,
even with an ordinary spear.
So the two enemies stepped into the circle
formed by the warriors and faced each
other, waiting for the signal to commence.
As the warriors looked at them standing
there—tall, heavily built, muscular Piebole,
and the lean, young Gulunna, they all felt
sure that Piebole would be the victor.
Then the signal was given, and the two
warriors rushed at each other. Piebole
lunged heavily, but Gulunna sprang aside
as lightly as a wild cat, and brought his
shield forward in defence, while he waited
for a favourable opportunity to strike at
Piebole. Piebole attacked again—and again
Gulunna sprang out of reach of the spear.
Piebole, having lunged so heavily, could
not pull himself up very quickly, and he
looked so funny lunging with his spear at
nothing at all, that the ring of warriors
laughed. This enraged Piebole, who could
not bear to be laughed at, and he struck
wildly at Gulunna, using up all his strength
in mighty blows, which Gulunna always suc-
ceeded in dodging. Now it began to appear
to the warriors that the fight was not such
an unequal one after all, and they grew
very excited and shouted at Piebole to show
his valour as a warrior. This succeeded in
making Piebole more reckless than before,
which was just what Gulunna wanted. At
last, after a particularly heavy plunge on
Piebole’s part, Gulunna turned and sprang


at him as swiftly as an arrow flies from a
bow, and deftly drove his spear into the
breast of the warrior. Piebole fell to the
ground, vanquished.
“The strange young warrior has defeated
our mighty Piebole!” cried the warriors in
wonder.
“Yes,” said Piebole, as he lay dying, “he
has defeated me, but only because he stole
my spear. The spear which I ha\ e used
in this fight was too light for me—l am a
big man, and I need a heavy spear.
At these words, a low growl went up
among the warriors, for they knew that
it was hard to fight with spears which were
not of the same weight as the spears you
had always used. Piebole saw that his woras
were turning the warriors against Gulunna.
So he thought to be revenged on him, even
if he had to die himself. “He has killed me
by trickery,” he said to the warriors, “And
now you have no one to lead you against
your enemies. Perhaps he belongs to an
enemy tribe —perhaps he has come here de-
liberately to slay me. Therefore, warriors,
beware of this man.” And after his speech,
which had been a great effort to him, Piebole
fell back upon the ground and died.
When they saw that Piebole was dead,
they rushed forward in a body towards
Gulunna, shouting, “Kill the strange war-
rior! Kill him! Kill him!”
But Dan stepped out amongst them and
said, “I will shoot the first man who Jays a
hand upon him. It was a fair fight.”
Then Chief Logga held up his hand and
stopped them. “Do you forget that you are
warriors?” he said. “There is no doubt that
this man stole the spear of the dead Piebole,
and therefore deserves to die, but he shall
be tried by a council of the elders which is
our law, and not murdered without a trial.”
Now when Nimeela heard that Gulunna
was to die, she made up her mind to save
him, for he had saved her from Piebole.
Accordingly, she crept out into the bush
without having been seen, and gathered
some little orange berries. She carefully
ground these to a pulp between two stones,
and then, stowing it away in her possum
skin pouch, she went back to the tribe. She
found out who the guards were who were
looking after Gulunna, and then went to
tisive a talk to their lubras while they weie
preparing food for the warriors. As soon
as she was unobserved, she dropped a little
powder into the food. Then she went a>vay
and hid amongst some bushes which grew
not far from the mia-mia where Gulunna
was imprisoned.
At sundown, the lubras came up and
brought the guards their food, which they
ate hungrily. When Nimeela saw that they
had eaten all the food, she felt contented,
for she knew that now she would be able to
carry out her plans. Soon, she began to
creep nearer to the prison. As she was
creeping forward, she was surprised to see
a slight movement in the bushes not far
from her, and ior a moment her heart stood
still. She watched carefully, and the next
moment a small, dark form appeared. It
was Tuckonie. Almost instantly, Tuckonie
recognised her. “If you give the alarm,
Nimeela,” he said, “I will kill you, for
Gulunna is my friend and I mean to rescue
him. It is not fair that he should be con-
demned to death, for he did not steal Pie-
bole’s spear.”
“Have no fear, Tuckonie,” said Nimeela,
“I will not give the alarm, for it was I who
stole the spear, so that Gulunna should not
be killed, and I am here for the same
purpose as you—to rescue him.” Then
she told Tuckonie that she had drugged the
guards, and in another few moments they
would be sound asleep.
When Tuckonie heard these words, his
little brown eyes danced with joy. “Dan and
I were wondering how twj of us could over-
power six of them,” he said, “Dan is creep-
ing through the bushes on the other side
of the mia-mia.”
When Gulunna had been rescued he asked
Nimeela if there was anything he could do
for her in return for what she had done for
him.
“Yes,” said Nimeela. “I love a warrior
of another tribe —his name is Olahmba, and
he belongs to the Tanawarla tribe. I want
you to go to this tribe and seek out Olahmba,
and tell him to come and claim me as his
bride. Tell him to lose no time, for it may
be discovered that I have helped you to
escape, and if it is, I do not know what
will happen.”


“I will find the warrior, and give him your
message,” replied Gulunna.
Then Nimeela held out an opal to Gulunna.
“Take this stone which has many coloured
fires burning within it—it was given to me
by Olahmba. When he sees this, he will
know that you have indeed come from me.
Tell him when he comes to bring some of
his warriors with him if he can, in case
there should be trouble. Now you had better
go—it is dangerous to remain here too long.”
“Yes, Gulunna,” said Dan, “Nimeela is
right. You had better come back with me,
and we’ll get into the caravan and leave
immediately.
“No,” said Nimeela, “that will not do.”
“Why not?” said Dan, in surprise.
“Because,” said Nimeela, “the warriors
of my tribe are interested in your house on
wheels, and they would not let you go
without gathering around to bid you fare-
well. They might discover that you had
Gulunna with you, and in that case they
would not let you go.”
“But we could hide him,” said Tuckonie.
“It would be dangerous,” replied Nimeela.
“Moreover, the ground is uneven around
here and the trees grow close together—l
noticed when you came that you did not
come quickly.”
“That’s true,” said Dan, “for about a mile
either way of this camp the ground is so
rough that you have to go almost as slowly
as if you were walking.”
“Yes,” said Nimeela, “even if you succeed-
ed in hiding Gulunna, they might discover
that he was missing after you had gone, and
in that case they would go on after you and
could easily overtake you.”
“Well then,” said Tuckonie, “what are
we to do?”
Nimeela had thought everything out care-
fully. “Let me take Gulunna to where our
war canoes are hidden,” she said. “There is
a river not far from here, he could take one
of the canoes and go by water to the tribal
grounds of Olahmba this will be much
quicker. You can stay with us for a little
while longer—and in that way no suspicion
will fall upon you. Then afterwards, if
you wish, you can join Gulunna.”
When the party heard Nimeela’s plan,
they all agreed that it was the best one.
So Gulunna went off with Nimeela towards
the river, while Dan and Tuckonie went back
to the caravan where they told little Peggy
all that had happened.
“My goodness,” said Peggy. “I wonder
what they will do when they find out that
Gulunna has got away.”
Several hours afterwards, a cry went up
amongst the warriors, for when six men
had gone up to the mia-mia to relieve the
guard, they had found them still lying in a
drugged sleep, and no one inside the mia-
mia.
Soon, a lot of the warriors came running
up to the caravan to ask the party there if
they had seen Gulunna. They said they did
not know where he was—which was quite
true, as they did not know where he was by
then—but the warriors insisted on search-
ing the caravan. Then they searched the
bush all round about, but found no sign of
Gulunna. However, they did discover that
Nimeela was missing too. “She has helped
this warrior escape,” said one of the other
warriors, “because he killed Piebole and
therefore saved her from marrying him.”
“If she has done this,” said her father,
Chief Logga, “she will be punished. Go,
my warriors, and look for tracks. When
you find Gulunna, I give you leave to kill
him instantly, but Nimeela must be brought
back to me. Her punishment will be in my
hands.”
Hours after this some of the warriors
returned, dragging Nimeela with them. “We
have found her, Chief Logga,” they cried,
and she is indeed guilty. We discovered
her coming back from the river. The rest
Gulunna goes to seek Olahmba


tuckonies warrior friend
of the warriors have gone down to the river
tollowing the tracks made by Gulunna and
of the other warriors shouted to
Chief Logga. “What shall be done with this
woman who has betrayed her father and
hpr tribe?”
“She deserves to die!” cried another.
“No,” said Chief Logga, “she will not
die By her wicked plotting she has robbe
me of a brave, strong warrior to lead my
tribe to war— therefore she will provide
me with another.
“What do you mean?” said Nimeela feai-
fll “Listen to me,” said Logga. “Chief Bad-
lam of the Babonga tribe desires a wife. I
will give you to him in return for the help
of his tribe if we should need it against our
6R “oh S no, my father, no!” cried Nimeela,
“You cannot do this! Chief Badlam is
known among the tribes as a
man. He is dreaded as one of the most
cruel chiefs who has ever ruled a tribe. You
could not marry me to this monster
that would be even worse than the marriage
with Piebole.” „ . •,
“It is no worse than you deserve, said
Logga, “You have betrayed your tribe and
\ou will suffer for it. Now go back to the
Women and I will send some of my warriors
to the tribe of Chief Badlam to make my
bargain with tiim. _ i
So it was decided and poor Nimeela found
herself in worse trouble than before. W hen
Dan heard this he decided he’d better not
go off after Gulunna, who was now fairlj
safe, but to stay by Nimeela in case she
should need help.
Meanwhile, Gulunna was speeding up tne
river in his canoe and shortly before dawn
he came to the spot which Nimeela had des-
cribed to him. He dragged his canoe from
the water and hid it amongst the bushes.
Then he crept off like a shadow through
the bush. He knew that once he reached
Olahmba’s tribe and had made friends with
the warriors there, he need no longer fear
any of Chief Logga’s tribe wno might be
pursuing him. _ ~ . ,
Chief Logga’s warriors knew this also and
when they too reached the spot without hav-
ing overtaken Gulunna, they knew that it
was hopeless, for they were not in full force
and could not give battle successfully to the
warriors of Olahmba’s tribe, therefore, t
turned and went back down the river.
I
Mr


CHAPTER V.
G ulunna Dances.
BY about eight o’clock in the morning,
Gulunna had reached the camping
grounds of the Turrawarla tribe,
where Chief Uloola and his son soon made
him welcome, for they had heard about his
adventures and knew that he was a brave
warrior.
When all the introductions were over,
Gulunna went quietly up to Olahmba and
told him all that had happened, and showed
him the opal which Nimeela had given him.
“She sends you this stone as a token,” he
said.
“Well, she still loves me,” said Olahmba.
“That is good to hear, I will do as she asks—
I will take some of my warriors and go
back to the tribe and claim her.”
It may not be so easy,” said Gulunna.
“It may mean war. Would your father lead
his tribe to war against the tribe of Chief
Logga ?”
“No,” said Olahmba sadly, “he would not
make war with Chief Logga’s tribe for this
reason. It would not be fair to ask the
other warriors to go to war over a matter
that concerns only myself.
“True,” said Gulunna, “but have you no
warriors who would follow you as friends?”
“Yes,” said Olahmba, “I have some good
friends. I think that they would go with
me. But the trouble is that if I go and
Logga will not give me the maid, Nimeela,
then I must steal her, and that would be
another cause for war,”
“What will you do then?” said Gulunna.
“I cannot desert Nimeela,” said Olahmba,
“for we do not know what punishment her
father may have in store for her. Still, I
must tell my father what I am going to do,
so that he may be prepared for war if it
comes.”
So Olahmba went to see his father and
told him all that he had learned. Chief
Uloola was very distressed when he heard
his son’s story, but he knew that Olahmba
dearly loved Nimeela and so he gave him
ermission to go.
“I would like to send all the warriors of
the tribe with you, my son,” he said, “but
we cannot ask them to go to war on this
account.”
“No,” said Olahmba, “I understand this,
but it may mean war just the same, so you
will be prepared, my father?”
“Yes, son,” said Uloola, “I will be pre-
pared.”
Then Olahmba went amongst the tribe
talking with his friends and finding out
which of them would go with him. By mid-
day, the party was complete, and after hav-
ing taken farewell of the tribe, they set off
in their canoes for the camping grounds of
Chief Logga,
They arrived at nightfall, and crept first
to the caravan to find out from Dan and
Peggy and Tuckonie what had happened
during their absence. Tuckonie was not
there, but Dan soon told them the story.
When they learned that Nimeela was to
marry Chief Badlam, they were very indig-
nant for they all knew Chief Badlam to be
a very bad man.
“This marriage must never take place,”
they said.
Just then, little Tuckonie came back and
when he saw his friend Gulunna, he was
overjoyed. Without waiting for introduc-
tions to the other warriors, he told them his
news. “I have been amongst the tribe,” he
said. “Just about half an hour ago, I saw
shadows creeping through the bushes, and
I found out that it was Chief Badlam’s
tribe. Chief Badlam went to the mia-mia of
Chief Logga, w r hile the warriors, weary from
their journey, lay down to rest. I crept up
to the mia-mia and listened and found out
that the wedding feast takes place tomor-
row.”
“Tomorrow!” said Olahmba “then we have
not much time.”
“Listen, though,” said Tuckonie, “I have
found out much more than this. Four war-
riors of your tribe, Gulunna, have been taken
prisoner by Chief Badlam.”


“Four warriors of my tribe?” said Gul-
unna in surprise. “What were they doing in
this land?” „
“I do not know,” said Tuckonie, “but Chief
Logga was telling Chief Badlam what had
happened, and when he mentioned your
name, Chief Badlam told him that his tribe
had come across these four warriors during
their wandering and had taken them pri-
soner.”
“Then,” said Gulunna, “we have four more
v.arriors to fight on our side. I must find
some way of speaking with them. ’
“You will have to be quick then,” said
Tuckonie,” for Chief Badlam intends to kill
them.”
“Well,” said Gulunna, “we must try and
rescue Nimeela and my four warriors and
if it comes to a fight, we must fight. I will
go to the feast in disguise.”
“Yes,” said Olahmba, “that’s the idea,
we’ll go to the feast as strangers—we will
go as old medicine men. Being medicine
men, they will not refuse us their hos-
pitality, for they will fear that we might
bring down evil spells upon them. They
will ask us to remain at the feast, and while
we are there, we will be able to listen to all
their plans.”
Dan laughed. “Well, Olahmba,” he said,
“it may be all right, but if I were chief and
six old medicine men came marching in to
one of my feasts, I’d feel very suspicious.”
“Yes,” said Olahmba, thoughtfully,” I sup-
pose it would look suspicious.”
“Perhaps I’d better go alone,” said Gul-
unna. “You and your four warriors hide
in the bushes nearby and I will take careful
notice of everything that passes and find
out some plans, and then I will come and
inform you of it and I will find some way of
letting Nimeela know that we are here to
rescue her.”
“Good,” said Olahmba, “so let it be.”
However, the feast started much earlier
than our little party expected, and by the
time Gulunna got there, poor Nimeela had
already been married to Chief Badlam. The
marriage ceremony was a simple one and
at its conclusion, Chief Logga called out for
more food and drink to be brought round.
The guests had been eating and drinking for
some time when Gulunna entered the circle
disguised as an old medicine man. In a
strange, cracked voice, he greeted them.
For a moment the warriors were silent, as
they did not know who this strange old
medicine man could be. Then Chief Logga
addressed him. “Greetings, oh strange old
medicine man. What do you here?”
“Oh Chief,” said Gulunna, “some short
time ago I made magic in a fire and by
my magic I saw that there was a great
feast to be held here in honour of a wedding,
and, as I was hungry, I thought I would
come and give my blessing in exchange for
seme food.”
“Well,” said Chief Logga, “the blessing of
a medicine man is always a good thing. Take
your share of our food and welcome.
“Yes,” said Chief Badlam, “and I will be
thankful to have your blessing too, old man.
Now come, let us have the dances.”
“Yes,” said Logga, “Lib will do his kan-
garoo dance for us. Come, Lib.”
When his name was called, a warrior
sprang out from the others. He looked an
awful sight because he was painted all over
with the most grotesque designs and wore
a hideous mask. He paused for a moment
and then commenced to leap round imitating
a kangaroo. The warriors were very pleased
with this and all except Gulunna agreed
that he was very clever indeed. „
“I could do a better dance than that,
said Gulunna.
The warriors were very surprised when
they heard this, for Gulunna in his disguise
The Kangaroo Dance.


seemed to them so old and frail. After a
while, Chief Logga laughed and said to
Gulunna. “If you can do a better dance,
old man, we would dearly love to see it.”
Chief Badlam was laughing also. “It should
be worth watching,” he said. “Go and do'
your dance, old man, and I will make a
bargain with you—if you truly dance better
than Lib, I will give you whatever you ask.”
“Very well then,” said Gulunna. “Stop the
chanting and let it begin again, and I will
show you what I can do.”
So the chanting was stopped, and after
Gulunna had taken up his place in the middle
of the circle, it started again, and Gulunna
leapt and bounded like a kangaroo, but his
leaps were ever so much higher than Lib’s.
The warriors were astounded, and, at the
conclusion of the dance, they shouted their
approval. Both the chiefs agreed that he
had indeed danced better than Lib, and
Chief Badlam was very pleased about this,
as he thought it was a good omen for his'
future. “You have pleased me very much
indeed, old medicine man,” he said to Gul-
unna, “and I will make good my promise.
Come, what do you ask of me?”
This was Gulunna’s opportunity, and he
lost no time in grasping it. “Chief Badlam,”
he said, “I ask you to give me as a present
the four warriors you took prisoner on your
way here.”
Chief Badlam looked at him curiously,
thinking this was a strange request for an
old medicine man to make, but still, it was
his wedding day and he was feeling very
pleased, and after all, what would it matter
to him what became of the four warriors.
He thought perhaps this old medicine man
wanted them to try out some spell upon
them. So he laughed and said, “Very well,
the warriors shall be yours—tomorrow you
shall have them.”
Then the feast went on, and when it was
at its height, Gulunna crept away un-
observed. However, Lib, the dancer, who
was jealous of Gulunna, had seen the
strange glances and signs that passed be-
tween Gulunna and Nimeela, and he won-;
dered how he could use them to take some 1
vengeance on the old medicine man. Late
that night, he went to Chief Badlam and
told him that there was some plot against
him.
“What is this ?” said Chief Badlam, turn-
ing his cruel eyes upon Lib. “What do you
mean ?”
“I speak the truth, Chief Badlam,” said
Lib. “At the corroboree of the feast, I
watched carefully everything that w r ent on.
Yo-ur bride, Nimeela, kept her eyes fixed on
the old medicine man, and he, in his turn,
kept his eyes fixed upon her, and then I
saw a sign pass between them. He held up a
polished flashing stone to her gaze, and she
looked at it, and then nodded her head to
him. There is some secret between them,
and I suspect treachery. I would urge you
to take care, Chief Badlam.”
“Treachery, eh?” said Badlam, viciously.
“Well, this medicine man shall learn that
it is not wise to be treacherous with me.
Today I take my bride away, and I have
promised that the four warriors I took pri-
soner shall be his. I must give them to
him, for it brings evil fortune to break a
promise to a medicine man, but I will see
that the four warriors will be useless to
him. I will take them with me into the bush
and I will leave a message with this strange
old medicine man where he may find them.
But when he finds them, they will be dead
with a spear through the heart. As for
Nimeela, I shall find ways to punish her.”
Now Lib did not care about Nimeela, it
was Gulunna he wanted to punish, so he
spoke again. “Can you not think of some
way of punishing the old medicine man,
great chief?” he said.
Badlam looked thoughtful for a moment,
but like all vicious men, he was superstitious,
and it was said amongst his people that to
do harm to a medicine man would bring
some grave calamity to the one who did it,
so he answered Lib, and said, “It will be
enough to deprive him of the four warriors
I promised him. Now go.”
So Lib had to “be satisfied with that, and
went back to nis tribe. He did not know
that little Tuckonie had hidden amongst the
bushes, listening to everything that passed.


CHAPTER VI.
The Re-union of Ntmeelu and Oleihmhn,
AS soon as it was safe, Tuckonie ran
back to the caravan where Gulunna
and Olahmba and the other warriors
were talking with Dan. He quickly told
them all that had been said. When Olahmba
heard that Badlam had said that he would
find a way to punish Nimeela, he was furious
and wanted to go out on the instant, and
fight Chief Badlam, but Gulunna knew that
the whole two tribes would take sides against
them, so he discouraged Olahmba from doing
this and Happy Dan agreed with him.
“It’d be hard enough to fight one tribe,”
said Dan, “let alone two.”
“Yes,” said Gulunna, “I think it would
be better if we could find out the way that
Chief Badlam intends to go and hide our-
selves amongst the bushes. Then we would
only have to fight one tribe and we could
take them by surprise, which would give us
a better chance. We could rescue Nimeela
and my four warriors as well.”
“If only we could rescue the warriors'
first,” said Dan, “they would be able to fight
on our side.”
“Those four warriors are very well
guarded,” said little Tuckonie.
Gulunna looked thoughtful. “Well, he
said, “Chief Badlam will not attempt to
kill those four warriors while he is in the
hunting grounds of Chief Logga’s tribe, for
it would be bad for him to do this. He will
most likely attempt to kill them as soon as
he passes over the border. That is where
we shall wait.”
“Yes,” said Olahmba, “and what then?”
“Well,” said Gulunna, “at a given sign
we will spring out and attack Badlam’s
tribe —you get Nimeela first and take her
to some place of safety, and leave Chief
Badlam to me. The rest of our warriors must
make for the four captive warriors, whom
I will point out to them, cut their bonds and
give them spears to fight with. Then we
must do the best we can with the rest of the
tribe.”
“That’s all very well,” said Dan, “but
how are you going to get the time to cut
their bonds ? The tribe will start to fight
as soon as you spring out from the bushes.”
“Yes,” said Gulunna, “I have thought of
that, but I thought we might disguise our-
selves in some way that would frighten the,
tribesmen —at least for a moment —and that
short space of time might enable us to cutl
my tribesmen’s bonds.”
“I’ve got it!” said Dan, “I’ve got some
luminous paint in the caravan. We gener-
ally take a can of that along with us in case
we’re ever called upon to perform some'
magic. I could paint your faces with that
and with some pieces of white canvas or 1
something wrapped around your bodies you
should give them a pretty bad shock.”
So it was agreed upon, and the next day
Dan took the warriors into the caravan
where he painted their faces with luminous
paint and gave them any pieces of white
canvas or white material which he could
find. It was decided that Dan should stay
here for the present, to prevent Chief
Logga’s tribe following the party, for if
Chief Badlam happened to send out a smoke
signal, Logga’s warriors would certainly,
go to their aid.
But Dan said that after he’d stayed long
enough to make sure that all was safe, he
would leave and join them a mile past the
border. So the warriors said goodbye and,
concealing themselves as best they could,
they crept off through the bush to wait for
Chief Badlam and his tribe, just over the
border line.
Some time later, Chief Badlam’s tribe took
of Chief Logga and set out on their
journey. By nightfall, they had reached
the place where the little band of warriors
were waiting to take them by surprise. All
along the way, the cruel Chief Badlam had
been threatening Nimeela that he would beat
her when they arrived back at the camping
grounds of their own tribe.


Nimeela was desperate, for she could not
see how Gulunna and Olahmba could help
her now. Several times she tried to lag
behind thinking that she might be able to
run away into the bush, but each time Chief
Eadlam dragged her forward.
It was after one of these unsuccessful
attempts on Nimeela’s part, that Chief Bad-
lam gave the cry to halt. The warriors
stopped and then Chief Badlam told them
to bring out the four warriors of Gulunna’s
tribe whom he had taken prisoner and to
form a circle around them. While this was
being done, Gulunna, Olahmba, and their
warrior friends crept nearer and nearer to
the circle and just as Chief Badlam was
about to give the command to his warriors
t ' plunge their spears into the hearts of the
four captive warriors, Gulunna and his
friends sprang out of their hiding places,
yelling and shrieking like the spirits of the
winds.
They looked such a dreadful sight in their
white robes with their faces shining with
green light, that Chief Badlam’s warriors
took fright and gave way. The attacking
party did not lose a minute—they rushed to
where the four warriors were bound, and
quickly cut the bonds.
Olahmba, meanwhile, had rushed towards
Nimeela, who shrank from him in fear, but
he spoke to her in his own voice and then
she recognised him and no longer tried to
evade him. When this took place, Chief
Badlam was furious and gave the orders to
his warriors to charge the intruders with
drawn spears, but it was some time before
his warriors had recovered sufficiently from
their fright to be able to do as he said.
The attacking party, fortified by the four
warriors freed from their bonds, made good
use of the time at their disposal, and soon
they had put about twenty of Badlam’s
warriors out of action. The rest ran shriek-
ing from the scene of battle, even though
Chief Badlam told them that the attacking
party was composed of human beings like
themselves. The warriors refused to believe
him, claiming that no ordinary man could do
so much damage in so short a time.
Then Gulunna went rushing up to Chief
Badlam, shouting to him to put up his spear
and fight him. Badlam raised his spear,
but he was no match for Gulunna, who
struck him to earth instantly. When they
saw that their chief had been vanquished,
tne few remaining warriors fled into the
bush in terror, leaving the little party vic-
torious.
Nimeela was overjoyed to find herself in
tfie arms of her brave Olahmba. “Oh
Olahmba/’ she said, “I kept hoping until the
very last that you would appear, but then
when we had come so far and I had seen no
sign of you, I thought it was hopeless.”
“I would never have deserted you, Nim-
eela,” said Olahmba, “but indeed it might
have been hopeless but for our brave Gul-
unna here. He has been the most wonderful
friend to me.”
“And to me also,” said Nimeela, and they
both took Gulunna’s hand and thanked him
and Olahmba promised him that if ever Gul-
unna should be in need of aid he would give
it to him.
“The day may come,” said Gulunna,
“when I will claim that aid.”
“You will be welcome, Gulunna,” said
Olahmba.
Then Gulunna turned eagerly to the four
warriors of his own tribe and questioned
them as to what had been happening during
his absence. They had a sad story to tell
him, for Chief Mullyan, his father, had died,
and the wicked Balala ruled the tribe in his
place.
“So he got the chieftainship, just as he
planned,” said Gulunna thoughtfully. “Tell
me, my friends, how does he rule the tribe?”
“Very badly,” said one of the warriors.
“So badly that we could no longer bear to
remain with the tribe. I tell you, Gulunna,
he will lead it to destruction.”
“Just as I thought,” said Gulunna, “but
come, my friends, we must not remain here.
We have agreed to meet Happy Dan, my
white friend, a little further on, and then
we will all travel together to Olahmba’s
country where, I hope, he and Nimeela will
be married.”
So the little party set off and did not stop
until they had reached the place where they
had agreed to meet Dan, Tuckonie and
Peggy. These three were there before them,
as they had gone by caravan and on that
account had been able to travel much more
quickly. They were delighted when they
heard how the fight had gone, and agreed to
go on to Olahmba’s country.
“Well,” said Gulunna, “we are going by


canoe, for that is the quickest way and we
have the canoes all hidden in readiness. How
will you go?”
“Well,” said Dan, “I’ll stick to the cara-
van, Gulunna.”
“Very well then,” said Gulunna, “but it
is a much longer way and you will not arrive
there until some time after us.”
“But never fear,” said Oiahmba, “we will
have a great welcome prepared for you.”
Meanwhile, Tuckonie had been looking
admiringly at Gulunna and his friends and
was thinking in his little heart that by going
by caravan he was missing all the fun.
“Please, Dan,” he said, “would you mind if
I made this trip in the war canoes with
Gulunna and his friends?”
Dan looked at Tuckonie and saw how anx-
ious he was to go with the warriors, so he
gave his consent, much to Tuckonie’s delight.
Then the goodbyes were said and Gulunna
and Tuckonie and the rest of their party
went through the bush to find the place
where the war canoes were hidden, while
Dan and Peggy got back into the caravan
and continued their way along the bush
track.
CHAPTER VII.
The Marriage of Gulunna
SOON Gulunna’s party had arrived at the
tribal grounds of Chief Uloola, Olahm-
ba’s father. Now although this chief dis-
approved of the battle which had been
fought because he knew it would mean war,
he was still very proud of the brave deeds
which Gulunna and Oiahmba had done, and
so he made them welcome and gave his
consent to a marriage between Nimcela and
Oiahmba, while at the same time he told
his warriors to be ready to snatch up then-
spears and shields and prepare for war at
any moment.
Now Oiahmba, because he loved Nimeela
and was so shortly going to marry her,
wished that he could find the same happiness
for Gulunna and so he took him to meet his
sister, Araluen, who was one of the most
beautiful young girls in the whole country.
To Olahmba’s delight, Gulunna and Ara-
luen loved each other at first sight. How-
ever, things were not as simple as they
seemed, for Araluen had promised to marry
the warrior, Gop, who was absent. She had
given him a small polished boomerang made
from the wood of the bumble tree, which
was Araluen’s totem, and with this gift
she was pledged.
After this things went very peacefully
until one day Oiahmba came to Giulunna
and told him that the warrior Gop had re-
joined the tribe and that he had refused to
give the token back to Araluen, but that he
would willingly meet any warrior in fair
fight.
“I will fight him,” said Gulunna simply.
“Good,” said Oiahmba, “and you need
have no fear of foul play, Gulunna, for this
Cop is a brave and honest warrior. Now
come with me, I think you had better meet
him.”
So the matter was arranged and within
the hour the two warriors met on a patch
of ground all ready to do battle. Araluen
was very distressed, for although she loved
Gulunna, she liked Gop, and in her heart
she hoped that neither of them would come
Tuckonie asks Gulunna permission to
go by canoe.


to any harm. Chief Uloola raised his hand,
and the fight commenced.
And what a fight it was—each warrior
doing his utmost to win.
“Oh,” said Tuckonie, excitedly, “Look how
they charge each other.”
“My word,” said Dan, “they’re a couple
of magnificent fighters.”
“Look,” said Olahmba, “Gop rushes at
Gulunna with his spear poised—Gulunna is
waiting for it—no, he has jumped to the
side.
“Yes,” said Tuckonie, “and Gop has gone
round to strike from there. Now Gulunna
has spun round and is charging him,”
“They meet in a wrestle!” cried Olahmba.
Then the spears and shields were thrown
away and they fought with their hands.
The onlookers were breathless with excite-
ment. Suddenly Gop took a dive at Gulunna
and succeeded in getting him up over his
shoulder, but as he went to throw him to
the ground, Gulunna, by a dextrous move-
ment, tripped Gop and together they fell to
earth.
Gulunna was the first to rise—quickly he
leaped upon Gop, and snatching up his spear
pointed it at his heart, while he held him
down. “See,” said one of the warriors, “the
fight is Gulunna’s if he strikes now.” But
Gulunna did not strike for he admired the
brave way in which his enemy had fought.
“Will you give way, Gop?” he said, “or
must I strike?”
And Gop answered him: “Kill me if you
wish, brave warrior, but the fight is yours
Gulunna challenges Gop.
and I acknowledge you as the winner. See,
here is the boomerang token—cut it from
my wrist.”
So Gulunna severed the band of leather
which attached Araluen’s token from Gop’s
wrist. “Now rise, conquered warrior,” he
said to Gop, “and if you will take my hand
as a friend, you shall have my lifelong
gratitude.”
“With all my heart,” said Gop, as he rose
and took Gulunna’s hand, and as the two
warriors stood there, their hands clasped in
friendship, a mighty roar cf joy went up
from all the warriors who were watching.
“Bravo!” they said, “these two warriors
are friends, and neither has done the other
harm!”
Some days after this, Gulunna and Ara-
luen were married, according to aboriginal
custom and, for a time, they were very
happy indeed. At last it seemed that Gul-
unna’s troubles were over, and that here
in the tribe which had adopted him, he
would find peace and happiness. But after
a month had passed, news began to reach
the tribe which was very upsetting. First
came word that Chief Bulla had risen, and
intended to make himself ovenord of all
the North-western tribes. He had already
conquered two tribes and made their chiefs
acknowledge him as their superior.
Day after day, messages kept coming in,
and at last came the news that Balala had
sold Gulunna’s tribe to Chief Bulla, but
that Bulla, knowing Balala to be a coward,
would prefer to set up some other young
warrior of the tribe as chief under him.
Gulunna was furious when he learned how
Balala had betrayed the tribe, and deter-
mined to return to it and try and win back
the chieftainship for himself.
Shortly after he had learned this, a mes-
senger from Chief Bulla came to seek out
Gulunna. The messenger said that Chief
Bulla would take the chieftainship away
from Balala and would give it to Gulunna if
Gulunna promised to acknowledge him as
overlord in the same way as Balala had.
Gulunna sent back a message of refusal.
Meanwhile, he was making good friends
amongst the tribe, and he thought that in
due time he would ask them if they would
return with him to his own tribe and help
fight Chief Bulla, The next news that


Bulla's messenger.
reached him was that his tribe had rebelled
against Chief Bulla, and that Balala was
being merciless in trying to suppress the
rebellion, Gulunna learned of how Balala
had killed many of his best friends of
former days, and when he heard of this, he
knew he could stay away no longer. “The
time has come when I must return to my
own tribe,” he told Chief Uloola. “May I
take some of your warriors with me to
fight on my side if they are willing?”
“We will do more than this for you,” said
Chief Uloola, “and not only for your sake,
but for our own also, for if Chief Bulla
intends to conquer all tribes, he will some
day come here and make war upon us. It
is better that we should go with you and
make war upon him now before he becomes
too powerful.”
When Gulunna heard these words, he was
very pleased indeed, as he knew that the
support of Chief Uloola and his brave band
of warriors would be a great help to him.
“And perhaps,” he said, “if some of the
conquered tribes see that we are ready to
rise and fight for freedom, they also will
rise and join us against Bulla. This man
must be cast down, or, in time, he will suc-
ceed in his ambition and conquer all.”
When they told Happy Dan what had hap-
pened, he was very perturbed. “I didn’t
think it would ever come to this,” he said.
“These risings and wars are not good.”
“But Dan,” said Olahmba, “I cannot see
how we can do anything else but fight him.”
“No,” said Dan, thoughtfully. “It certainly
seems the wisest thing to do as far as you
are concerned, Olahmba. As for Gulunna,
it is only natural that he should want to
rescue his tribe from a strange Chief.”
“What are we going to do, Dan?” said
Peggy.
“Well, Peggy,” said Dan, “I will be very
interested to know what happens. I think
we’ll return to Gulunna’s tribal grounds
too.”
“That is good,” said Tuckonie. “I would
dearly love to join in this battle.”
Dan laughed. “Tuckonie, I’m afraid you’re
getting quite a thirst for battles, young-
ster.”
“Well,” said Tuckonie, “it is only natural
that the son of a warrior should wush to go
to battle and prove himself a brave man.”
“Yes, I suppose so,” said Dan. “However,
we don’t know what will happen along the
way, so I’d prefer you to go back with me
and Peggy in the caravan. When we even-
tually get there, you’ll be allowed to play
your part in some way in the battle, but I
wouldn’t like to see any harm come to you
by treachery on the way, and one never
knows, Bulla may have spies or small war
parties hidden along the way.”
“I will do what you want, Dan,” replied
Tuckonie. “My father placed me in your
care, and it is only right that I should obey
you.”
Gulunna and old chief Uloola.


“Good for you,” said Dan. “When do you which of the warriors should remain behind
and the warriors intend to start, Gulunna?” to look after the lubras and the children.
, ~, , . ~ , ~ |, , Eventually, this was done, and then Gulunna
Gulunna told him that they would prob- w to Araluen to tell her all his plans. But
ably start on their journey in the morning . , , ,
—they would go by canoe as far as the Aialuen had a in store for him
tribal grounds of Chief Logga and from t0 behind wddl
there on by foot. and chlldren > and insisted on going with him.
“All right then,” said Dan—We’ll meet “But why, Araluen?” said Gulunna. “You
you at your own tribal grounds.” So it was know how dearly I love to have you with
agreed. me always, but you will be an added res-
The next thing that had to be decided was 'P° ns i dd ity.
y “No,” said Araluen, “I have a feeling that
/ /f while lam with you, all will go well. My
/ vfv dreams have told me this. Please take me
/•/ y\ \ with you—l know my father will give his
,/V \ J \ consent.”
\\ I A-l I 'X I Gulunna was troubled at these words, but
\\IV V \ I he went to Chief Uloola. and asked him wdiat
, \l| \1 / he thought of the matter.
/j| v “Well,” said the chief, “it is a strange
I 111 request for a woman to make, but after all,
1( ’ s^e a chief’s daughter, and has the blood
1 of warriors running in her veins—and per-
with you—l know my father will give his
consent.”
Gulunna was troubled at these words, but
he went to Chief Uloola, and asked him w T hat
he thought of the matter.
“Well,” said the chief, “it is a strange
request for a woman to make, but after all,
she is a chief’s daughter, and has the blood
of w r arriors running in her veins—and per-
haps there may be something in what she
says—that while she is with us, we will be
prosperous. If you will agree to it, then I
will agree.” So it was decided that Araluen
should accompany them on the way.
When Nimeela heard that Araluen wished
to go with Gulunna, she also wished to go
with Olahmba. “Well, Ido not know,” said
Chief Uloola, when he heard of this. “We
can’t take all the lubras and their children
with us.” But none of the other lubras
wished to go. So it was agreed upon that
Araluen and Nimeela would be the only
ones.


I 'Jm'
CHAPTER VIII.
The Warriors Gather Together.
THE following morning, after saying
goodbye to Dan, Peggy, and Tuckonie,
they all set off in the canoes, and in
due course reached the tribal grounds of
Chief Logga. They then crept cautiously
away through the bush, taking care not to
make themselves known to any of Chief
Logga’s warriors, for they did not know
just then whether or not he was on Chief
Bulla’s side, but certainly thought that he
would not do anything to help them, as they
had at one time taken Nimeela away from
him. On and on they went, day after day,
night after night, until at last Gulunna saw
in the distance the hills of his own land.
They decided to wait until nightfall before
they went into the tribal grounds, so that
Gulunna could seek out those who would be
faithful to him, and find out what had been
going on.
Under cover of darkness, Gulunna dis-
appeared amongst the bush, and came at
last to where the warriors were sleeping in
their mia-mias. Careful to make not the
slightest sound, he passed from one mia-mia
to another, until at last he recognised an
old warrior named Nooma, who had been
friendly towards him. He awakened him
with a gentle touch on the shoulder, but
when Nooma saw Gulunna, it was all that
he could do to suppress a shout of joy. How-
ever, Gulunna warned him to be silent and
then asked him to tell him all that had been
taking place.
Nooma had a great deal to tell him. He
informed him that the warriors had risen
against Balala and slain him, and that then
they had refused to acknowledge Bulla as
their over-lord. Bulla and his warriors had
come to the tribe and had taken some of the
leading warriors and speared them as an
example to the rest of the tribe. Bulla
had then set up the wicked medicine men,
Noongah and Kinie, in place of Balala, and
these two medicine men had treated the
tribe with most shocking cruelty in order
to subdue it. Quite a number of Gulunna's
friends had been slain by them.
“Well Nooma,” said Gulunna, “I have a
debt of vengeance to pay, not only for the
death of my friends, but for the death of
my mother, who was treacherously killed
by these two wicked medicine men. Now the
time has come for me to discharge that debt.
Point me out the mia-mias where Noongah
and Kinie lie sleeping.”
Nooma pointed them out to him.
“Good,” said Gulunna. “Now Olahmba
and I will go and challenge them. They will
have a chance to fight for their lives. If we
are victorious and these men are slain, I
will claim the chieftainship of the tribe,
which rightfully belongs to me.”
“Oh Gulunna,” said Nooma, “how the
tribe will rejoice at the sight of you. How
happy they will be to acknowledge one of
their own blood as chief—one to whom the
chieftainship should rightfully belong.”
So they went back to where the mia-mias
were, and then each one posted himself
outside the mia-mia of one of the medicine
men. Then all the sleeping warriors were
awakened by a loud cry from Gulunna.
“Come out, Noongah, you evil doer! It is I,
One of Bulla’s tribe.


Gulunna the warrior, returned! I challenge
you to fight for your life!”
At the same time, Olahmba challenged
Kinie. In fear and trembling, the two old
medicine men came out. “You cannot fight
with us,” they said. “You are tried warriors,
and we are medicine men. We do not fight.”
“Fight,” said Gulunna, “or I will kill you
where you stand!”
“Do you not fear to lay hands on a medi-
cine man?” said Noongah.
“I do not fear,” said Gulunna, “nor does
Olahmba fear. We have heard of the dread-
ful deeds of cruelty whtch you have com-
mitted, and now your time has come to
suffer for them. Such men as you do not
deserve a chance to fight for your life, but
because we would not do the things which
you have done, and kill people in cold blood,
we call upon you to defend yourselves.
Come! Let the fight begin!”
By this time, all the warriors were
aroused, and word had gone around the camp
that Gulunna, the son of Chief Mullyan, had
returned to them to lead the tribe to free-
dom. Eagerly they watched Gulunna and
Olahmba rush upon the two old medicine
men. The fight did not last long, and when
Noongah and Kilie were vanquished, the
warriors gathered round Gulunna, shouting
“Gulunna, the son of Chief Mullyan, has re-
turned to us! Hail Gulunna, chief of our
tribe!”
Now there were amongst the tribe, one or
two warriors who had received many
favours at the hands of Chief Bulla, and
when they saw what had happened, they
lost no time in hastening off through the
bushes in the direction of Chief Bulla’s
tribal grounds.
In two days time, they had reached their
destination, and they then sought out Chief
Bulla, and told him what had happened.
“Well,” said Chief Bulla, after he had
heard the news, “I am not so sorry for it.
Gulunna is a brave warrior, and the chief-
tainship rightfully belongs to him, as he
is the son of Chief Mullyan. So return to
Gulunna, and tell him that he may rule this
tribe in peace, providing that he, like the
other chieftains, acknowledges me as over-
lord of all the tribes.”
“Great Bulla,” said one of the warriors,
“this Gulunna is different from Balala, he
is a very proud warrior and I do not think
he will acknowledge any other man as head
of his tribe. What shall we say to him if he
refuses to do as you have commanded?”
Bulla looked stern. “Say to him that if
he does not acknowledge me, I will descend
upon him in battle with twelve great tribes
under my command,”
The two warriors departed and hastened
back to Gulunna, to whom they gave the
message. Then Gulunna called all his war-
riors about him so that they would be able
to bear witness to his answer. “Go back to
Chief Bulla,” he said, “and tell him that
Gulunna refuses to acknowledge him as
over-lord.”
“Oh Gulunna,” said Araluen when they
had gone, “have you done wisely? What
hope have we against so many—we who are
so few?”
“Would you have me play the coward!”
said Gulunna.
“No,” said Araluen, “but it seems so hope-
less.”
“It may be hopeless,” said Gulunna, “but
I would rather my whole tribe perished
bravely in battle than acknowledge Chief
Bulla as over-lord.”
“Well,” said Olahmba, “it is certain now
that we will have to do battle, therefore I
think we should prepare for it. Will you
not gather the warriors together, Gulunna,
and drill them ? This gave us the victory in
one battle, and it may do so again.”
“Yes,” said Gulunna, “I will drill them.
But first let scouts be sent out to all of the
tribes who have their grounds in this part
of the country. Let them go softly and
cautiously and find the names of all those
warriors in any tribe who would rebel
against Chief Bulla, then let these warriors
leave their tribes and come here to me, and
with me take up arms against Bulla.”
“It is a good thought, Gulunna,” said
Oiahmba. “In this way, we may add many
warriors to our band of fighting men.”
“I hope for all our sakes they may be
many,” said Araluen.
Gulunna looked determined. “Many or
few, we will fight. I have some skill in
waging warfare which I learned from the


white people—this will help me. Now tell
me, warriors, are you ready to go with me to
battle against so many?”
At these w T ords, a brave cry w r ent up from
the warriors. “Yes, yes, Gulunna,” they
cried, “we will be with you to the end!”
“Very well then, it is done,” said Gulunna.
“Let the scouts depart.”
One afternoon two strange warriors crept
out from the bushes, and said that they
washed to be presented to Gulunna. The
young chief received them kindly, and asked
them what their business w T as. They told
him that they were discontented with the
rule of Chief Bulla and had come to join
wdth his tribe in the fight against that
chief.
These two were soon followed by more
warriors—they came sometimes in groups
of twos and threes, and sometimes in much
larger numbers. All of them were stalwart
warriors, and looked as if they w 7 ould be a
great help in a fight. After Gulunna had
interviewed them, he ordered food and drink
to be placed before them, and then allowed
them to rest for a while, after which he
made them join his w 7 arriors in the drill.
By the end of another day, the numbers
of the tribe had swollen enormously—in
fact, the young chief had now under his
command as many warriors as would make
four large tribes. His own warriors were
delighted that so many friends had come
to help them. As for little Tuckonie, he
felt quite sure now that nothing could take
the victory away from them. Peggy and
Warriors join Gulunna.
Happy Dan were just as pleased about it as
he was. “Oh Tuckonie,” said Peggy, “isn’t
it wonderful that so many brave warriors
have come to join Gulunna? I must say I
was a little bit frightened at first when I
thought that poor Gulunna would have to
go out and fight all those warriors that Chief
Bulla’s got, when he only had a few.”
“Yes, Peggy,” said Dan, “It’s good to
think that help has come. But at the same
time, they’ll be hard put to it to defend
themselves against Bulla’s w 7 arriors. Don’t
forget that he has twelve tribes under his
command—Gulunna’s men will still be fight-
ing about three to one.”
“Yes,” said Tuckonie, “but Gulunna has
drilled them so well and taught them so
much that they are now much better war-
riors than any Chief Bulla would have.”
Then one day Tuckonie rushed in breath-
lessly from the high hill on which he had
been watching as a scout. “I have seen the
first of the smoke signals, Gulunna,” he said.
“Chief Bulla’s tribes are on their way.”
“Which way do they come?” said Gulunna.
“From the East,” said Tuckonie. “I read
carefully all the messages sent to us by our
scouts at the furthest outposts. They told
us that Chief Bulla’s men are marching
quickly. If they keep on marching as speed-
ily as they are now, they should reach us
within three days.”
“Three days,” said Gulunna, “then we
have only two more days left in which to
prepare for the battle, for I have decided
that it would be best for us to meet them a
day’s journey from here where some of our
warriors may take shelter amongst the
cliffs.”
“When will you leave here then?” said
Olahmba, “In two days’ time.”
“No,” said Gulunna, “we will leave today.”
“Well,’' said Tuckonie, “that means that
we will have two days to spare in the place
where we are to meet Bulla’s men and give
battle to them.”
“Yes,” said Gulunna, “it is a good thing
for our warriors to become well acquainted
with the ground on which they must fight.
Come, Olahmba, we will gather the warriors
together, and lead them to the battle
grounds.”


CHAPTER IX.
Chief Bulla Shorn His Cunning.
ONE hour later, the long line of
Gulunna’s warriors could be seen
marching along through the bush to-
wards the East.
After a day’s march, they reached the
locality where Gulunna had decided the
battle was to take place. “Rest well tonight,
warriors,” said Gulunna, “for each man will
need to feel his best for the next few days.”
Now Tuckonie, after he had eaten and had
a little rest, went away from the tribe, and
looked about until he found one tree which
was taller than all the others. He climbed
to the topmost branch and there sat waiting
to do his duty as a sentry. Soon he was
rewarded by the sight of a smoke signal.
Quickly he hurried down the tree and went
back to Gulunna. “Gulunna,” he said, T
have surprising news for you. Chief Bulla’s
men are dividing.”
“Dividing,” said Gulunna.
“Yes,” said Tuckonie. “Fully half of them
have turned back.”
“That is strange,” said Gulunna.
“Very strange,” said Olahmba. “What
can be the meaning of it? I thought that
when they attacked, they would attack in
full force.”
“I thought so too,” said Gulunna, “but
remember this —Chief Bulla believes that
we are only one tribe, whereas with the
many warriors which have been added to us.
we are really four. Chief Bulla perhaps
scorns to send his full force against such a
small number of warriors, and thinks he
could conquer us quite easily with only half
his men.”
“Yes,” said Tuckonie, “maybe that is it.
Maybe the other half are going somewhere
else to conquer some other tribe.”
“Well,” said Gulunna, “if it is so, it will
be all the better for us, but we must not
lose sight of the fact that this Chief Bulla
is a crafty man and may be playing some
trick. Let every warrior be on the alert.”
Now after this, the warriors all retired to
rest, and upon the following morning, Gul-
unna made them march all over the intended
battle ground, so that they would become
familiar with every upcrop of rock and every
tree and bush.
‘This knowledge may save many of our
lives,” said Gulunna. “And remember, when
I give the signal, you are to rush upon
Chief Bulla’s men in force. Wait till he
and his men coming from the East pass
between our ranks, and then let us close
in on him. There will be yet another signal
for the archers.”
“We understand, Gulunna,” said the war-
riors.
The next day, which was the third, they
heard towards midday the distant sound of
chanting'. It was a war song which the
oncoming warriors of Chief Bulla were sing-
ing.
“Now,” said Gulunna, “to your places,
everyone. Araluen, go to the place which
I pointed out to you amongst the boulders
and take Nimeela with you. Be careful
that you give no sign that you are there.”
“We will give no sign, Gulunna,” said
Araluen. “Goodbye for the present, my
husband, and may the good spirits fight on
your side. But oh Gulunna, now that the
time has come, I feel so anxious for you.”
“Do not feel anxious on my account, Ara-
luen,” said Gulunna, “I will return to you.”
Then Nimeela said goodbye to Olahmba,
and the two women walked off towards the
hiding place which the warriors had found
for them. The warriors had by this time
taken up their posts, and Gulunna went off
to his own post, followed by little Tuckonie
who seemed to think that in some way he
could protect him. Suddenly, the child
paused. “Listen, Gulunna,” he said.
“I am listening,” said Gulunna, “the
chanting—it comes nearer.”
“Yes,” said Tuckonie, “but do you not
notice something strange about that chant-
ing?”


“Strange,” said Gulunna. “Why yes, it
has a different sound, and yet I do not know
what causes it. Your ears are more sharp
than mine, my little friend—what do you
think it means ?”
“I think it is this,” said Tuckonie, “that
the chanting is not coming from only one
direction —it comes from all directions
from in front and behind, and from every
side.”
“Yes,” said Gulunna. “Yes, you are right.”
“Well then, Gulunna,” said Tuckonie,
“what does that mean?”
“It means,” said Gulunna, “that we are
surrounded. That was why Bulla’s men
divided! Olahmba! Olahmba, come here to
me quickly.”
When Olahmba heard the excited tone of
Culunna’s voice, he rushed to him as quickly
as ever he could. “What is the matter,
Gulunna?” he said. “Has something gone
wrong ?”
“Yes,” said Gulunna, “we are surrounded.
Do you hear that chanting, it is coming from
all around us. Chief Bulla’s men are doing
to us what we had hoped to do to them.”
“This is very bad,” said Olahmba. “I did
not think that Chief Bulla’s men fought in
such a way.”
“Neither did I,” said Gulunna, “but he has
proved to be more crafty than we thought.
If Bulla’s men close in on us from every
side, we will have no hope. A battle from the
front, we could sustain—and if we were
enabled to surround his forces, our chances
would be better still—but I do not think we
can defend ourselves from an attack from
every quarter.” s
“Then what are we to do ?” said Olahmba
sadly. “Surely we cannot surrender—that
would be cowardly indeed.”
‘ No,” said Gulunna, “we will not surren-
der.”
Then,” said Olahmba, “does that mean
that we must stay and fight a battle which
we know will be hopeless ? Must we stay
here, knowing that we stay to meet our
death ?”
“There is only one thing tc do,” said Gul-
unna, “we must gather our forces together
and go from this place. Our only hope is to
avoid meeting Chief Bulla’s men while they
are in circular formation. If we can avoid
them for a couple of days, perhaps Chief
Bulla will call them together again and then
we may attack.”
At this moment, a terrific clap of thunder
was heard and the next minute down came
the rain. The sky grew black and gloomy.
“It is a bad omen,” saia one of the warriors.
“And listen—Chief Bulla’s warriors are com-
ing nearer and nearer. At any time now
they will close in upon us.”
“We must go from here at once,” said
Gulunna. “The storm is not a bad omen, it is
good, for it will in some measure hide our
movements from the enemy.”
“I wish I felt as confident as you do,
Gulunna,” said the warrior, ‘but when you
say that we must go away from here, you
seem to forget that we are surrounded.
Whichever way we go, we must meet Bulla’s
men—and while we fight with those who
face us, we will be attacked from the rear.”
“Do you not think I brought you here for
a special purpose?” said Gulunna. “I have
taken everything into consideration—there
is a way out.”
“What!” said Olahmba.
“Do you not know the passage through
the rocks?” said Gulunna.
“Oh yes,” said Tuckonie, “I know it. You
and I passed by there early this morning,
Gulunna. There is a large cave, and at the
end of this cave there is a smaller one which
becomes a passage—that passage leads right
through the hill out into the country
beyond.”
“But,” said the warriors with horror,
“that is the sacred cave of the spirits. We
dare not go there, it would be sacrilege.”
“Well, I would have you pass through
that cave,” said Gulunna.
Now at this, a wailing went up among
the warriors, for, although they were brave
men and did not fear other warriors, they


y /y jw I m y y
did fear those things which were strange
and unknown to them. “We cannot go into
the cave,” they wailed, “we would die.”
“It will mean death if you do not go,” said
Gulunna. “Come, you have not much time
left in which to make up your minds. Igo
to find my wife, Araluen. She and I will
be the first to enter the cave. Do you
warriors fear to do what a woman will do ?”
Now when the warriors saw that the two
women had gone bravely with their warrior
liusbands, they were ashamed that they had
been afraid to go, and so, gathering up their
courage, they followed Gulunna into the
dark and dismal cave. They were only just
in time, for, shortly after the last of them
had disappeared into the cave, Chief Bulla’s
warriors closed in upon the scene.
“They are not here!” cried Chief Bulla in
a terrible voice. “Where is the scout that
told me this was the place where they
were camped?”
“They were here indeed. Chief Bulla,” he
said, “they must have gone away.”
“How could they have gone away?” said
Chief Bulla, “when we surrounded them on
every side?”
“Perhaps they have gone through the
sacred cave of spirits,” said one of the
warriors.
“Then we must follow them,” said Chief
Bulla.
But this the warriors would not do. “We
do not fear to fight men of flesh and blood,
0 Bulla,” they said, “but we will not go into
the cave of spirits. Kill us if you like, but
do not send us in there.”
Chief Bulla sneered, “Gulunna the warrior
was right,” he said. He wished to save his
tribe from the influence of the medicine
men. You are a lot of superstitious cowards.
Nevertheless, if you fear this cave so
greatly, I will not take you into it, for your
fear would rob you of your strength, and
you w*ould not be able to fight. Let us
march around to the other side of the hill
where Gulunna’s warriors will come out
from the passage of caves.”
“They will be gone before we get there, O
Bulla!” said the warriors.
“Yes, they will be gone,” said Bulla, “but
we will follow them. Wherever they go
we will pursue them, for no man can defy
Chief Bulla and not feel his vengeance.
Gulunna must acknowledge me as overlord,
or else he and his tribe will perish! Go! 0
Warriors, 0!”


CHAPTER X.
Gulunna’s Army Victorious.
ME AX WHILE, Gulunna’s warriors were
running through the caves as fast
as ever they could in the darkness.
Frequently, one of the warriors screamed
out in fright as he thought a cold hand
touched him. Even Gulunna and Tuckonie
were a little nervous, for, although they tried
not to be superstitious, they could not forget
all the strange stories that they had heard
from the medicine men ever since they
were very young.
“I only wish Happy Dan was here,” said
Tuckonie, “he always makes it seem so silly
to believe in spirits—he does not believe in
them at all.”
“I do not know where Happy Dan will be
by now,” said Gulunna. “I had made an
agreement with him that he was to come to
the battle ground late in the day on which
I thought the battle would take place. And
when he arrived, if he thought the battle
was going against us, he was to fire shots
from the caravan—not to kill anyone, for
this is against the principles of the white
people—but to try and frighten our enemies
away from the attack.”
“Well,” said Tuckonie, “when he finds that
we have gone from there, he will try and
find out which way we have taken, and
then he will follow us.”
“But the storm will have washed away
our tracks,” said Olahmba.
“He will find us just the same,” said
Tuckonie, “the spirits of my tribe will help
him.”
Soon after this, they reached the opening,
and they all filed out once more into the
daylight. The storm was still raging, for
which Gulunna was very thankful, for Chief
Bulla’s men would not be able to track
them.
“Where do we go now, Gulunna?” said
Olahmba.
“We go towards the lake of birds which
has the island in the middle of it,” said
Gulunna.
“What!” said Olahmba. “Are we making
for this island? You do not forget, do you,
Gulunna, that once on this island, we would
not oe able to escape quickly. It would be
easy for Chief Bulla’s men to surround us
there.”
“I have not forgotten, Olahmba,” said
Gulunna. “I have a plan in mind. But
hurry, let us reach the lake as quickly as
we can, for, unless we have some hours of
spare time when we reach the island, my
plans will be of no use.”
So the warriors, tired as they were, ran
through the bushes, keeping pace with Gul-
unna and Olahmba, who were running very
quickly in spite of the fact that they were
helping Araluen and Nimeela along.
“Oh Araluen,” said Gulunna, “I should
never have brought you on such a perilous
journey.”
Warriors look at island.


“Yes,” said Araluen, “I want to be with
you always, Gulunna.”
On and on they raced, until at last through
the bushes they saw the shimmering water
of the lake. “How are we to get across?”
asked the warriors, “for this is not good
water in which one may swim! There are
quick sands!”
“We must build a bridge,” said Gulunna,
“and we must have crossed over that bridge
by the time Chief Bulla’s men arrive. Let
us hope that it will take them sometime to
find out where we have gone.”
“Yes, and it might too,” said little Tuck-
onie, “for if the rain makes it hard for Dan
to find where we have gone, it will make it
hard for Bulla, too.”
“Yes,” said Gulunna, “but we must not
forget that Bulla will probably have scouts
posted all over the country. Sooner or later,
he will learn from them where we have gone.
Now come, warriors, to work, build a bridge,
but build it in such a way that its two ends
will come just short of the banks of the
and just short of the island.”
“Then is it to be a floating bridge?” said
Olahmba.
“Well,” said Gulunna, “it would float with
only a few warriors upon it, but not with
many.”
“Then,” said Tuckonie, “that will mean
that we will have to cross over in small num-
bers, and if Bulla’s men arrive before the
last of us have crossed, those who remain
will be at his mercy.”
“No,” said Gulunna, “we will make sup-
ports for the bridge—these supports will be
the trunks of trees. But before we sink
these trunks of trees into the slime at the
bottom of the lake, we will attach a very
thick green twine rope to them.. We will
keep hold of one end of the rope while we
sink the supports. Ropes will be attached
to the supports very low down.”
“What is all this for?” said Olahmba.
“Well,” said Gulunna, “if two or three of
us pull hard at the green twine ropes
attached to each support, the bottoms of the
support will shift in the slippery mire on
the bed of the lake, and the supports will
give way and slip sidelong into the water.
The bridge will then sink—that is if it is
heavily weighted with warriors. Now do
you see my plan?”
“I think I do,” said Olahmba. “We will
cross over, leaving a few warriors hidden on
this side to pull the ropes on these supports
at a given signal. When we reach the other
side, more warriors will take charge of the
supports holding up the other end of the
bridge. We will wait until Bulla’s men are
crowded on to the bridge, and then pull at
the green twine ropes.”
“Yes, that is it,” said Gulunna. “If this
bridge falls, hundreds of his warriors will
be thrown into the lake, and they will be
too hard put to it to fight for their lives to
attack us. We will have the advantage.
This seems a cruel trick to play, but we must
bear in mind that Bulla has said that he
will show us no mercy. Therefore, we must
show none to him, he must be conquered
forever. Only then can the tribes of this
country live in peace.”
“It is good, ’ said Olahmba, “we will do
it.”
Meanwhile, the warriors had been working
hard hewing down trees and stripping them
of their branches, and at last, after several
hours’ hard work, the bridge was completed
and placed upon the supports. This done,
Gulunna and his warriors passed over. Once
on the other side, they felt secure.
Soon they saw something appearing among
the bushes on the far bank. To his delight,
Tuckonie recognised the caravan. He rushed
back over the bridge. “Quickly! Quickly,
Dan!” he said. “Come over the bridge at
once, for very shortly now it will be des-
troyed.”
“Right you are, youngster,” said Dan. So
he passed over the bridge.
Once on the other side, he and Peggy
were greeted eagerly by all the warriors,
who thought that their appearance among
the tribe was a sign of good fortune. When
Dan heard Gulunna’s plans, he was very
sorry for Chief Bulla’s warriors, but he
agreed with Gulunna that it was the only
thing to do. “I’d rather frighten them off


with fire-arms if I could,” he said, “but I
realise that if they were merely frightened
away this time, they would attack again
and again.”
Just then they heard the chanting of
Chief Bulla’s men. It was rather a frighten-
ing sound, mingled as it was with the loud
claps of thunder. Soon the warriors ap-
peared, and when they saw the bridge they
were delighted. They thought that Gulunna’s
warriors had not had time to destroy the
bridge after crossing, and so they fell easily
into the trap.
“Come, warriors, come!” said Bulla, rush-
ing forward at the head of his warriors. And
in a few moments they were all rushing
the bridge. In less time than it takes to
tell, the bridge was crowded. “Now, Gul-
unna!” shouted Bulla, “you will pay dearly
for your impudence. I, the great chief
Bulla, will rule your tribe and all the other
tribes in the country!”
“You are wrong, Chief Bulla!” shouted
Gulunna back to him. “My time has not
come, but yours has! Warriors! The
supports!”
A moment afterwards, a loud cry of fear
and rage went up from Bulla’s warriors, as
they felt the bridge tip to one side and slip
into the water. Soon it was apparent that
Bulla’s forces had no hope against Gulunna.
When the bridge collapsed, Chief Bulla
had been flung into the water, together with
his warriors. Suddenly, one of the warriors
near him who belonged to a different tribe,
turned upon Bulla, with a look of hatred on
his face. Even though he was finding it
hard to swim in that thick, muddy water,
he struck out at Bulla with his spear.
“Ruthless and ambitious Chief!” he said,
you have brought all this misery and evil
upon us! But for you, we would have been
all living peaceably in our own camping
grounds, with our own tribes. Die, madman,
die!” The blow of his spear was sure and
true—without a cry Bulla died and sank
beneath the waters.
And now Gulunna, seeing that the leader
of his enemies was dead, felt his heart
moved with pity for all those who were
wounded and all those who struggled in the
water. “Listen to me, warriors!” he cried.
“I do not want to make myself an over-lord,
I want only to rule my tribe in peace, and be
friends with all other tribes. If you sur-
render to me now, my warriors will do what
they can to rescue you, and to dress your
wounds and help you, and you will be free
to return to your own tribes in peace. If you
will not surrender, then we must go on with
cur dreadful work. Speak, what will you
do?”
The conquered warriors answered as
though with one voice. “We surrender, oh
Gulunna!”
Immediately, Gulunna and his warriors
sprang to the help of their previous enemies.
Peddling logs through the water, they suc-
ceeded in rescuing all those who remained
alive, and once on the land, they tended their
wounds and did everything for them which
they could do. The warriors of the various
other tribes, told Gulunna that they were
glad that the war was over, for they had
never wanted Chief Bulla as an over-lord,
but there had been nothing else to do, but
to submit to him. “But now,” they said,
“we can go our different ways in peace.”
“Well, Gulunna,” said Dan, “it seems that
your troubles are over now.”
“Not only my troubles, I hope,” replied
Gulunna, “but the troubles of all those tribes
who have been so cruelly oppressed.”
“Yes,” said Dan, “they have paid a heavy
price for peace, but when you see them
Dan’s arrival.


S!
/
together like this, well, perhaps the price
was not too high.”
“And you, Dan,” said Gulunna, “what will
you do now?”
“We are wanderers,” said Dan, “and we
have reached the parting of the ways. Peggy
and Tuckonie and I will go on, leaving you
to rule your tribe in wisdom.”
“But perhaps,” said Tuckonie, “we will
meet again someday.”
never do, I will always remember you as one
of the best and bravest friends a warrior
could have.”
Then Dan, Peggy and Tuckonie mingled
with the people, saying goodbye to them, and
when the sky was aflame with the setting
of the sun, they drove off into the west.
Some miles further on, when they reached
high ground again, Tuckonie looked back.
On a distant rise, he saw the upright figure
of a stalwart warrior, outlined against the
red gold sky—his spear held high! It was


}' • '
• .
»
, • •
\ ’ <
* .1 ■ . . \ . • , •
V 1 * ~ . .
i ' • / • *
. * . i ■ \ - V . i V.
«
v
, * . ■ . ' ir I . , .
<
' ■ , ' • . . -
• ' * / .. i /
' ' . #* " *.
■ • , . ; , ' ' I ’ •
\ , •
. \ • * .
*
' '
V , . ' * / « . - , t
' 1 * ■ * . ' ' t • .
I .
. * I
■ - ' ‘ , ' »■
• 1 ’ - •
I ‘ / •
\
# / * '
%
; #
i . > ■“ , ■' / ‘
i
' - ■ <»
* - ' / . • •
- - ' ✓ ' ’ ' ‘ ■ -
> V * * -
* •
■■■"■ . ’
* . < / • -
* • ' ; , - . ■ . ■ . - . I ; - v -
*
' / * ♦
* 1 . ' • ■ ' • . A ■ , . •
*
• ' !■.-■■ 1 % 4 '
' ' ' '
. '
• • l 1 \ v * ’ 4 *
. •
• 1
, • ’ " • \ - ~ ■ . ‘ ,
/ ... • ■ • * - t
- •
■
' ' ; ‘ : . v b* . . ; \
» « • .
’
• / *
■ ■ • , • ■


•?
AgdMjjr w r'. *i jiff ' ■ '5;' '
SsssSr ,v^^>- : '" >v^;‘
SSl* ' J&'■ - *,\ A iitiP^^%:^£&. :
Jf s**Bw|k jr , ‘ -”*■ ■
j - /
|H»«B « W| . v -* __ at.c?--^
' Mr . ■
CAN YOU GIVE
THIS ILLUSTRATION
A NAME?
(Ho. Z)
£25 in Prizes
First Prize £lO Third Prize £3
Second Prize £5 Fourth Prize £^
5 Consolation Prizes at £1 each
There is No Age Limit!
Neatness of entry will be taken into considera-
tion when awarding prizes. The Managing
Director of Hoadley’s Chocolates Limited and
their Advertising Consultant will he sole judges
of this Competition and their decision will he
final in all respects. This is an express condi-
tion of entry. No correspondence will he entered
into in connection with this competition.
The competition will close on 30th June, 1945
Address your entries marked
" HOADLEY'S " to Box 2928,
G.P.0., Sydney, Australia
