





TUCKER’S TEACUP
READER
ILLUSTRATED
TUCKER'S PUBLICATIONS
38 Pin STREET
SYDNEY
Tu c


THE ART OF TEACUP
READING
The prcsent'day is witnessing an enormous interest in
matters Psychic, not only in Australia, but all over the world.
Among the many forms of Psychic phenomena, tea-cup read-
ing is probably the most popular. While it cannot be classed
as a science, to those who study symbolism tea-cup reading is
of absorbing interest, and as a form of harmless entertain-
ment it serves a useful social service.
Hidden signs and symbols have fascinated humanity all
down the ages, and in spite of the advance of cold and exact
sciences, increasing interest is being displayed in all excursions
into the mysterious and symbolical.
With the aid of this little book any hostess can make a wel-
come contribution to the entertainment of her guests. At the
same time a “flair” for psychology, an intimate knowledge of
her guests, and a sense of what the Scottish people speak of
as “Second Sight,” are contributing factors to successful tea-
cup interpretation.
A little practice, however, will soon develop the necessary
qualities and ensure the success of any social party.
The consultant will drink or pour off any tea that may be
in the cup, and shake the grounds well so that the leaves, etc.,
may cover the surface of the cup. Reverse the cup into the
saucer, that the tea may be drained off.
The reader of the cup should study carefully the person
who is waiting to hear the reading. Do not expect the figures
always to have a strong resemblance to the emblems; it is
quite sufficient that the leaves suggest these things. Some-
times they are very distinct.
The one who takes pleasure in this entertaining pastime
must make himself the judge more or less of time and place.
Human forms are often very distinctly seen, and in these cases
it is not difficult to determine the sexes. However, in doubt-
ful cases the dark leaves are taken for the male sex, and the
light for the female. The same with dark or fair people.


i n o
It is impossible to lay clown any definite rule a2t6 l 8
tation; although every symbol has some general significance,
it must have a particular significance in regard to each person.
In reading the tea-cup the Seer must not be in a hurry;
the general appearance must be studied. Those symbols that
stand out prominently are of more importance than those that
are less clearly indicated.
The various shapes and the meanings to be attached to
them will at first be puzzling to beginners. Practice is neces-
sary before the symbols can be accurately interpreted at a
glance. That, however, will come later, and in time it will
be as easy as reading a book.
It is an excellent plan to make a rough copy of the leaves
as they present themselves to you in each cup, making notes
of the various meanings.
Do not feel dismayed if, when you begin looking at the
teadeaves, you are unable to discover in them anything
definitely symbolic. It is certain that nothing will be found
if the Consultant is feeling nervous ! Keep a calm, open
mind, and do not be in a hurry, for it is under such conditions
only that a clear reading of the leaves will be possible. In
some cases the symbols are more easily read than in others.
Much depends upon the consultant.
The gift of imagination (by no means to be confused with
invention) is of the greatest possible importance in discerning
the symbols. Figures of human beings and animals will fre'
quently be seen, as will squares, triangles, circles, and also
the line of fate.
These signs may be large or small, and the importance of
them must be judged by their relative size and position Sup-
pose, for instance, that a small cross should be at the bottom
of the cup, the only one to be seen, the consultant would
predict that a trifling vexation or a tiresome little delay must
be expected; but not for the present, as it is at the bottom
of the cup. An alphabetical list of symbols is given later on,
so it is not necessary to define them here. The various points
of a more general character, however, must be studied before
it is possible to give an accurate reading.
It will constantly be found that the stems, isolated leaves,
or small groups of leaves, form a letter of the alphabet, some-


times a number. These letters and numbers have meanings
which must be looked for in connection with other noticeable
signs. If an initial l 'M” appears, and near to it a small square
or oblong leaf, both being near the rim of the cup, it would
indicate a letter coming speedily from someone whose name
begins with an “M." If the initial appears near the bottom
of the cup, it shows that the letter will not be coming for
some time.
If there be a clear space at the bottom of the cup devoid
of tea-leaves, it shows water, and that, in all probability, the
letter is coming from abroad. If the symbol of the letter
comes very near to a bird flying, it shows a telegram. If
the bird is flying towards the consultant (the handle), the
telegram has been received. The news in it is to be judged
by other signs in the cup. If flying away from the handle,
the telegram is sent by the consultant. A single bird flying
always- indicates speedy news.
In a cup with various ominous signs, such as a serpent, an
owl, or many crosses, the news coming is not likely to be
pleasant. In a cup without bad signs, it can safely be said
that the news is good.
As a general rule large letters indicate places, whilst smaller
ones give the names of persons. Thus a large letter “S”
would stand for Sydney, and a smaller “s” would stand for
Smith, for instance. To all rules there comes the occasional
exception, and this principle holds good with regard to the
letters in the tea-cup. It is said that these smaller letters
always point to the first letter of the surname. Usually it is
so; but sometimes it is the first letter of the Christian name,
or even a pet name, to which the letter refers. It is well to
keep this possibility in mind, otherwise the reader may give
misleading information.
Sometimes numbers mean the date for an event to be ex-
pected, a“5,” for instance, very near the brim of the cup, or
the handle, means in five days; or five weeks if it come on the
side, possibly as far off as five months if the figure be at
the bottom of the cup.
As dots around a symbol always indicate money in some
form or another, according to the character of the symbol,
a figure beside the dots would signify the amount of money


to be expected. If the symbol were that of a legacy with
the figure ”90” near, it would show that a little legacy of
ninety pounds might be anticipated.
Clearly defined symbols that stand out separately arc of
more importance than such as are difficult to discern. Clusters
of shapeless leaves represent clouds marring the effect of an
otherwise fortunate cup.
Journeys are shown by lines or dots formed by the dust
and smaller leaves of the tea. The length and direction of
the journey may be known by the extent of the line and,
roughly speaking, the point of the compass to which it leads,
the handle in this case representing south. If the line of dots
ascends sharply to the brim of the cup, a journey to a hilly
country will be taken.
Supposing the consultant to be at home, and the dots form
a line from the handle all round the cup and back to the
handle, it signifies a journey for a visit and the return. If
the line were to stop before reaching the handle again, with
an appearance of a house where the line ends, a change of
residence might safely be predicted. A wavy line shows an
indecision as to arrangements. Crosses upon the line indicate
that there will be vexation or delay in connection with the
journey. Large flat leaves some distance apart along the line
stand for important stations to be passed through.
It is of course a great mistake to be always looking in the
tea-leaves, as some foolish people do twice a day. It is sure
to lead to contradictions, though there is no harm in the habit
of looking in the cup each morning for finding the events
likely to happen in the course of the day. This is as per-
missible as the reading of the cards each morning for the day’s
events by those who consider it a safeguard, remembering
that to be forewarned is to be forearmed.
Some people use the tea-cup simply for the purpose of ask-
ing a definite question. When this is the case, the consultant
should be told before turning the cup in the hand to concen-
trate the thoughts on this one point, as in the case of wishing
while shuffling the cards for a definite wish. Then the reader
must look only for the signs that will give the answer to the
question, ignoring all other points. This is necessary for the
giving of a satisfactory answer to the question asked.


SYMBOLS AND THEIR
MEANINGS
ANIMALS.
The forms of animals are sometimes very distinct. The
symbolism of the different animals will be found of interest,
and accurate. A few dots may take the form of a dog’s head
This will be sufficient to foretell a true friend. Should a
letter of the alphabet be near, there will be news from a Friend
whose name the letter indicates.
Ape • —This animal points to the fact that you have a secret
enemy; it denotes malicious and dangerous persons whose
tongues arc to be feared; it is also a sign of despondency,
care, anxiety, and fraud.
Ass.-—lf at the top of the cup, a very good augury of sue-
cess and happiness. In the middle, contentment. At the
bottom, patience and perseverance will overcome all present
difficulties. *
Baby.—The face or figure of a baby near the handle por-
tends a birth or an addition to the family. At the bottom
of the cup, trouble through senseless talk. In the clear, new
successful interest leading to honours.
Bat, or Flying Fox.—An ill omen showing sickness and
trouble in the home; with other signs a prediction of death.
Bear.—lndicates that there is a danger of running into
danger through stupidity, and most probably meeting with
obstacles that will call for the use of brute force. 111-con-
ceived projects may land you into trouble.
Bees.—Bees and ants would have much the same meaning.
Both indicate sagacity. If a bee is seen on the handle of the
cup, look for some excitement at the house, probably an as-
sembly of people, social intercourse. At the bottom of the
cup, domestic upset, heaps of work, and muddle. At the
top, a visit to a place of amusement or large gathering, either
for intellectual or social relaxation. A rise in life through
industry.
Bishop.—A sign of benevolence, authority, and progress;
in cope and mitre, preferment and honour.
Bride.—This sign indicates a wedding, coming joy, or a
rival in your affections, according to other symbols around it.


Buffalo. —A most unexpected and unusual happening, pos'
sibly causing agitation and uncertainty as to the best way to
proceed.
Ball.—An ill omen of misfortune, attacks of pain, or of
slander by some enemy; if it gallops with tail up, personal
danger or illness of someone dear to you.
Butterfly. —The butterfly indicates frivolity and innocent
pleasure. In the middle of the cup, beware of rushing into
too much gaiety. At the top of the cup, the butterfly indfi
cates pleasure, and the consultant can by being sincere and
natural become an acquisition to society. Surrounded by dots,
indiscreet extravagance.
Cat. —The cat usually shows treachery or deception; but
if near the handle and at the top of the cup a cat is distim
guished in a resting position, it shows domestic comfort.
Child. —A child seen in the clear denotes innocent inter'
course. At the bottom of the cup, expense.
Cockroach. —This signifies unrest, domestic tribulation, or
disagreements; several cockroaches, that there is a risk of
slander and abuse by those whom you regard as friends.
Camel. —A responsibility satisfactorily carried out; some'
times frustrated plans and endless delays; a camel laden
means wealth from an unexpected source abroad.
Chinaman. —There is someone who appears eager to serve
you hut in reality is far from being trustworthy.
Clergyman. —Reconciliation in a longstanding feud.
Cow. —This is always a sign of prosperity—more or less
according to the position of the cup. If the head of the cow
is turned away from the handle, your success lies in wider
fields.
Crab. —Strife, family disagreements, an enemy.
Dancer. —A pleasant omen of coming pleasure and gratifi-
cation, good news, happiness in love and friendship; it also
means that you will receive an unexpected invitation; several
figures dancing in happy abandonment foretell that your hopes
and desires will be fulfilled, and that many changes will occur,
all tending to your success and future happiness.
Devil.—This symbol gives warning that reformation is
needed, or you may find yourself so tightly in the grip of


bad influence that it will be well nigh impossible to extricate
yourself.
Dingo.—For a maid, or a bachelor, this symbol predicts a
single life, but one of freedom, health and success; for the
married, it implies regret that they did not remain unmarried.
Diver. —A great and unexpected piece of news which will
lead to a fortunate discovery; to the lover it reveals deception.
Dog .—The dog is always an emblem of fidelity and shows
true friends. However, the position even of this faithful crea*
ture has a twofold meaning. If his image is surrounded with
dashes and clouds, it shows that your friends are estranged
from you through the envy of some one unworthy of your
confidence. If at the bottom of the cup, a friend is in trouble.
A dog appearing to be running or capering indicates joyful
news and a meeting of dear friends.
Dog’s Head —Fidelity
Dashes —Estrangement through Envy
Elephant.—A sign of power, travel, promotion, happiness
and stability in love and friendship.
Fox.—This denotes that you may have an unsuspected
enemy, possibly disloyal dependents; sometimes it means theft
and trickery.


Frog. —A change of residence; with other signs, new work
or profession; with bad symbols around, unpleasant sights
and stories.
Giraffe.—You are apt to cause mischief through blundering
and the making of incorrect statements.
Goat. —Clear and straight lines near indicate a victory over
enemies.
Grasshoppers.—These insects give warning of a poor har*
vest season; for an old person the risk of chill leading to
severe illness.
Griffin.—This legendary animal, with the body and legs of
a lion and the beak and wings of an eagle, is ominous of
great danger. Narrow escapes if about to take a journey. If
seen at the top of the cup, do not be too confiding, and be'
ware of putting money into any new concern. If at the
bottom of the cup, great danger is imminent. Forewarned is
forearmed.
Hare. —If a hare is seen in the cup near the house, some
calamity may happen. In the clear of the cup, that the party
must have courage, or her timidity will be her downfall. At
the bottom of the cup is a warning that an absent friend is
harassed and needs assistance.
Horse -—A horse’s head, a lover. Should a horse appear
to be in full gallop it foretells good news from one who loves
you dearly. If the horse is surrounded with dots it indicates
a rich suitor. If by dashes and clouds, the lover is true, hut
unfortunate circumstances are keeping him back. Should
there be a rider on the horse it would indicate good pros'
pects abroad. If wavy lines are round or in the way of the
image of the horse, it indicates a lover is kept back by his
unsettled finances or position.
Jockey. —If in the thick, warns you that some one is about
to take undue advantage of you in business. If a letter is
close by, take it for an initial of the party. If in the clear,
successful speculation, or the winner of a lottery. If at the
bottom of the cup and cloudy, trouble through betting.
Judge in Robes. —Legal affairs, personal or otherwise accord'
ing to other indications in the cup; this sign is often seen
during a famous trial or when such is about to take place.


Kangaroo.—You will receive an unlooked-for and interest-
ing piece of news; sometimes it indicates that you have a rival.
Lamb. —A lamb in the clear, fortunate changes coming
about. If straight lines are near they indicate a straight course
to advancement while young. If at the bottom of the cup or
in the thick, danger of letting youth slip away in pleasures
and forgetting that it is not so easy to make headway when
youth has passed.
Leopard.—This animal foreshows triumph over adverse
circumstances or an evil report; two leopards, fortune and
misfortune following each other in quick succession.
Lion. —The king of the beasts suggests powerful friends,
and, at the top of the cup, quite clear, the lion indicates a
good position through influential friends. There is danger
of losing a good position if there are wavy lines and thick
clouds about. In the clear, a lucrative office under-Govern-
ment.
Lion- —-Power, Influence
Curved Lines—Danger of Reversal
Man.—A visitor arriving. There may be a letter near
which will convey the visitor's name.
Mermaid. —A mermaid in the clear denotes that it will re-
quire a strong will to resist the allurement of a flirt. In the


thick, temptation to do the wrong thing. At the bottom of
the cup, a false friend.
Mice.—These indicate danger of poverty through fraud
or theft.
Monk.—Religious controversy and disturbances.
Mouse. —The mouse indicates poverty through neglected
opportunities. At the bottom of the cup or with dashes
around, danger of a burglary, and loss of money by swindling.
Nun.—To see the figure of a nun indicates some form of
restraint. Danger of a broken engagement. In the thick,
sorrow, repentance.
Nurse. —The services of a nurse will be essential.
Ox. —An ox in his stall implies hospitality, domestic peace
and abundance.
Oyster.—Shows courtship to the young, but entails a long
en t4 a g emen t. In the clear, acquired riches and possessions
through perseverance and hard work. At the top of the cup,
dearly defined, a rise to honours. At the bottom of the cup,
in the clear, denotes that the latter part of life will be fred
from worry and as full of comfort as could be desired.
Pigs.—The pig indicates a mixture of good and bad luck.
It generally denotes good luck together with the danger of
excess and selfundulgence.
Policeman.—This tells you to beware of theft and under
hand practices; with other signs, it would indicate trouble
probably caused by those with whom you are most closely
associated.
Postman.—lmportant and profitable news.
Prawns.—These bring pleasures, presents and satisfactory
arrangements.
Queen.—A queen upon her throne indicates security, peace,
and honour; sometimes the attainment to a high position
through powerful friends.
Rabbit.-—An indication of illness for a child; a dead rabbit
means domestic duties which will bore you, sometimes Imam
cial worry; several rabbits suggest that you must depend upon
your own efforts for your amusements and must be content


with simple ones; a rabbit on its hind legs predicts that a new
plan or idea will bring you great success.
Rat. —Treachery and other impending troubles, arc fore'
shown by this unpleasant symbol.
Rider. —A rider denotes news of good import, lucky deah
ings, good prospects, and luck abroad.
Seal.— An indication that a considerable amount of patience
will be necessary before your hopes are realised, but eventually
you will gain success and wealth.
Shark.— An ominous sign of death.
Sheep. —To landowners or those engaged in any agricul-
tural pursuits sheep are an omen of success and prosperous
dealing; to others this sign implies that they will receive
assistance from unexpected quarters.
Snail. — This is a sign of infidelity; several snails, "that mis-
chief is going on around you of which you are unaware.
Snake. —This indicates implacable enemies. On the top or
middle of the cup, if clear, it promises triumph over an, enemy,
but not easily obtained if the snake is in the thick, or cloudy.
If a letter appears near the emblem, it will be easy to discover
the name of the enemy. If near the handle it shows there is
someone in the house who is unworthy of trust.
Soldier. —This signifies that you may count upon the loyalty
and affection of your friends; sometimes it indicates that you
may expect speedy news of a soldier.
Spider. —You may expect to receive an inheritance; with
other signs, that you will be triumphant in a disputed will or
money settlement; several spiders foretell profitable trans-
actions, sometimes a heritage of much wealth.
A spider seen in the clear, by diplomacy and
caution riches may be attained. At the bottom of the cup
shows that the person is too secretive and would be wise to
seek counsel from a trusted quarter, and not to listen to the
promises of the subtle flatterer. On the handle, there is some
one secretly trying to undermine the honour of the house. At
the top of the cup, guard against the artifices of those who
lay snares to catch the unwary and thoughtless. A spider in
the morning cup of tea is not so lucky as finding the represen-
tation of one in an evening cup of tea.


Tiger. —You will be placed in a perilous position possibly
through the bad behaviour or folly of those who should pro'
tect you.
Tortoise. —To those in trouble, riches and comfort in the
future. Should it be in the thick, it shows difficulties in bush
ness, and just hard work and perseverance is the only thing
that will save the situation. At the bottom of the cup it
indicates wealth after many years of toil and hardship. To
the rich it indicates difficulties. At the top of the cup, triumph
after trouble.
Toad. —If a toad is seen in the middle of the cup it means
there is a flatterer amongst your circle of friends whom it
would be wise to avoid having further communication with.
At the bottom of the cup it denotes a state of lavish depen'
dence.
Twins.—This is a symbol of sympathy and the perfection
of happiness; with other signs, news of the birth of twins.
Whale. —A prediction of personal danger which may be
averted if you are cautious.
Wolf.—The wolf denotes intrigues and greed. Envious
people in business. Danger of robbery.
Woman. —This emblem varies very much according to the
nosition in the cup. To a male consultant, at the bottom of
the cup, it indicates that he is courting a widow. At the top,
a maiden. Surrounded by dots, wealth or children. In the
clear, pleasure and happiness. Several women indicate scandal.
Woman Carrying a Burden. —An unhappy marriage or mv
fortunate love affair.
Woman Carrying a Child.—This shows distress, sometimes
illness of someone dear to you, or sadness through separation
Woman Holding a Mirror. —Clairvoyance and predicition
of the future are signified by this symbol.
Women.—With bad signs, several mean scandal; otherwise
society.


FLOWERS.
Flowers are given as a token of appreciation, praise, or love.
Also in loving memory to the dead. Hence we take them as
the symbolism of love, honour, esteem, and favours. At the
bottom of the cup the more sinister interpretations attach to
these beautiful gifts of nature, and would appear to indicate
at least a serious illness. In the clear, good fortune should
be near at hand, happiness in love and marriage.
Anemone.—These flowers often indicate an event to be
expected in the early autumn; the nature of it must be judged
by other signs in the cup.
Arum Lily,—This flower stands for dignity, expectancy, and
calm; its fuller meanings must be judged by other symbols
around it.
Bouqu-et.— A large bouquet of flowers seen in the clear
would be such a fortunate symbol that the smaller symbols
of evil would lose their sinister significance. If' near the
handle, the opening of a new sphere of life. If at the top,
honours. Accompanied by a ring, an offer of marriage. By
a horseshoe, success in business and bold enterprises, general
prosperity. With a sword or dagger, a sinister enemy. Be-
ware of confiding in others too freely. With a key, realization
an attainment, hopes and wishes fulfilled. Denotes success in
all contests and trials of skill and ability.
Bouquet—Success
Star —Elevation
Dots—Money


Branch. — A large branch is a sign of much independence
and of success in carrying out an undertaking; the larger it
is the greater your success; a broken branch signifies an at'
tempt to organise a project or new scheme which will end in
failure.
Bush. —Invitations and social enjoyments.
Carnation. —These sweet'seented flowers bring happiness,
faithfulness, love and good friends.
Chrysanthemums. —These beautiful flowers assure you of a
long desired hope in connection with someone dear to you
which will be realised in the autumn.
Clover or Shamrock. —The leaf of clover is always con'
sidered as a lucky sign, more especially the four-leaved clover.
At the top, immediate good fortune. In the middle that a
fortune is not far distant. At the bottom of the cup, many
disagreeable circumstances attended the good fortune in store.
In the clear, serene and undisturbed happiness is assured to
the inquirer.
Daffodil.—At the top, a cup overflowing with happiness
and the joys incident to youth. In the clear, your own abili'
ties and personality will bring the success you are so much
desiring. If the cup of the daffodil should be down towards
the bottom of the cup, then it is most probable that the joys
of life have been taken too freely, and an unpleasant change
will be brought about through your own folly and heartless-
ness. Lying at the bottom of the cup, hopes frustrated
through carelessness. Enterprises will fail. True love has
been thrown away.
Dahlias. —A sign of some important event which you may
expect to take place in the autumn; it also denotes thrift and
increase of fortune.
Daisy. —This emblem of simplicity suggests happiness in
the spring, or, if it should take the form of the more stately
Marguerite, the debutante will have a joyous and successful
season, with many admirers.
Ferns. —lt is said that a man should never give his sweet-
heart ferns. Perhaps that is why the interpretation here is
that there is restlessness in the air, a change of desires and
places.


Flower Border.—That for which you have long hoped and
waited is about to come to pass.
Forget-me-not.—This flower speaks of the attainment of a
cherished hope, also that you will probably find your truest
happiness in love and marriage.
Geranium.—This flower shows a strong will and determined
character, contentment, and happiness; it also denotes two
opposite natures who have a great bond of affection between
them.
Gladioli.'—These flowers indicate courage in the face of
difficulty; hope and tenderness.
Flollyhock.—You will have a friend, or lover, who will
never disappoint you.
Iris.—Originally the personification of the rainbow. A
messenger. Iris is represented in works of art dressed in a
long tunic and drapery with wings attached to her shoulders,
in her left hand carrying a staff, sometimes holding a pitcher.
If seen as above, then expect a message from high quarters
bringing advancement.
Ivy.—A sign of loyal friends. Should you decipher this at
the bottom of the cup, then prepare for sad news of a well-
loved friend. In the clear or at the top of the cup, there
will be a gathering of true friends, or an invitation to a large
house-party. One ivy leaf in the clear, a devoted and faith-
ful lover.
Lily.—At the top of the cup, you will have many friends
of refinement and influence. In the middle of the cup, a long,
virtuous and useful life. If clouds are round, your husband
will never distinguish himself by any real deeds, and though
a good man will leave matters very much to you. At the
bottom of the cup, do not listen to flattery, for there is danger
that your virtue will be assailed.
Mistletoe.—This signifies that a cherished hope is unlikely
to be fulfilled, or at any rate it will only be after many months
have passed, and when you have become weary of waiting.
Orchids.—These give a pleasing assurance of coming good
fortune and a life of ease and wealth.
Oakleaf.—The oakleaf promises luck, good health, profitable
business. A happy marriage, loyal friends, success in every-
thing.


Palm Tree.—This is a symbol of honour, fame, and victory;
increase of wealth, love and marriage.
Pansy. —This flower is a symbol of understanding, modesty
and contentment; it is also a pleasant indication of faithful
friends and happy days.
Pine Trees. —Happiness followed by an aftermath of regret
Poppy.—This flower is significant of a pleasant occurrence
in the early summer.
Rosemary.—Memories of the past will mar your future
Roses. —Nothing can have a better augury than the i;ose.
It is a certain emblem of happiness, long life, prosperity, joy
for the lover, to the maid, love and marriage. Success to any
new venture. Honours to the student. Fame to the artist
Notice, however, must be taken as to the position of this
flower. If at the bottom of the cup, success is coming, but
there will be delays and probably strenuous work to attain
fame. If a letter is near the rose, that will surely be the initial
of one,who is sending a gift, or an offer of marriage.
Snowdrops.—These are a symbol of youth and innocence;
this sign may point to some event affecting you and yours
which will probably -take place about February; if seen in. a
cross it would foreshadow the death of an infant or young
child.
Stocks. —These sweet-scented flowers foreshow an unexpec-
ted happiness with someone whom you have not seen for a
long while.
Sunflower. —This flower proclaims learning and a satisfac-
tory conclusion in matters which are most interesting to you;
it also implies that you may reasonably expect a scheme to
work out greatly to your advantage.
Tulips. —A symbol of radiance, health, and constancy in
love and friendship.


Trees. -Good health and a pleasing assurance of coming
prosperity and happiness; if surrounded bv dots an inheritance
of property in the country is foreshown!
Tree—Lasting Health and Position
Triangle—Beneficial Alliance
Violets.—A bunch of violets in the clear, love and pleasure.
At the top of the cup, an invitation to a ball. Violets scpar-
ately in the clear, a delightful visit to the country. At the
bottom of the cup, these sweet flowers convey sadness, per-
haps tears, even sickness or death, but other symbols near
must be taken into consideration. Balance the good and bad,
the lucky and unlucky symbols, and so modify your interpret
tations.
Wallflower.—This sign indicates the serious consideration
of a new plan.
Water Lily.—This flower proclaims a declaration of love.
Wattle Tree.—This speaks of affection and peace; a declara'
tion of love, and a happy marriage.
Wreath.—This is a symbol of marriage and of much happh
ness being in store for you.


BIRDS
Birds in general are good, but the interpretations vary with
the species; also the dots and dashes must be taken into con-
sideration. Remember dots are good, dashes are obstacles.
Also the positions must be studied. A flock of birds,*change
in circumstances or change of country. If two or more birds
are seen as if flying towards the handle, expect good news.
If they are at rest, a stroke of luck is near. Birds of
passage indicate the gift of divination in a remarkable degree.
Notice on which side of the cup you may see the likeness of
the bird or birds; if to the right, coming or going, it is always
a good sign—prosperous business, etc. If going from the
handle on the left side, then look to your investments and
your business. If coming on the left side, you must beware
of new propositions.
The relative importance must be judged according to the
size of the symbols whether the representation be a bird or
any other symbol. For instance, if a small bird should be
seen resting and a small horseshoe is by, good luck or good
news, but not anything very great. If the birds seen flying
are very small they would portend good news, but not quite
unexpected, nor anything very great.
Albatross. —If seen with the sign of a ship or water it por-
tends distress for those at sea; to sailors or to those associated
with them it is an omen of sadness, meaning sorrow and
sometimes death.
Canary. — A lover —close at hand if at the top of the cup.
in the near future if in the clear, and despondent at the bottom
of the cup.
Chicken. —This shows new interests and pleasures; if roost'
ing, domestic tribulation; if flying, troublesome matters.
Cock. —A sign of forthcoming good news, of conquest and
triumph.
Cockatoo. —This bird indicates disturbance in the home and
some vexation with friends.
Cormorant— This bird is a symbol of agility, swift decisions,
and the attainment of your ambition through the power of
rapid thought and work.
Dove. —Peace, harmony. A messenger of love.


Duck.—lncrease of wealth. Trading by water.
Eagle.—Attainment and emminence in things of the intellect
and spirit. Elevation through money. Fame due to mastery.
Should this be at the bottom of the cup, the inquirer may
reach the height of his ambitions but have few friends.
Emu. Lack of caution will not be one of your failings.
Hawk.—This is an unfortunate symbol, as it denotes dr'
cumstances in which people and things seem'to be working
against you, placing you in awkward and embarrassing pre'
dicaments.
Humming Bird.—ls a presage of an imperative call from
a friend, or sudden emmigration.
Magpie.—- 1, One for sorrow, two for mirth, three for a wed'
ding, four for a birth”; this ancient saying well explains the
meaning of seeing magpies in the teadeaves.
Ostrich.—This symbol points to achievement in creative
work; if running, you may look for startling news and
rumours of public upheavals.
Owl.—A bad omen of illness, misfortune, and poverty; if
flying, you will receive tidings of grief; to lovers this bird is
a symbol of bad news or unpleasant rumours; to those who
are contemplating new work or enterprise the owl should be ■
regarded as a warning to proceed with caution.
Parrot.—Scandal. MischieEmaking.
Peacock. —Luxury, vanity, and splendour. With his tail
spread in the clear denotes the acquisition of estate. A life
of luxury if surrounded by dots. At the bottom of the cup,
with clouds or heavy leaves around, vanity and placing too
much importance on the look of things will bring trouble and
tribulation. At the top of the cup, happiness, feasting, and
success.
Pelican. —This bird is a symbol of loneliness, separation,
and yearning for the unattainable; if it is flying, you will
receive news from those who are far away in isolated parts
of the world.
Penguin.—This strange bird indicates interesting news of
expeditions and discoveries in the northern regions.
Pheasant. —Good fortune; new friends; if flying, speedy and
propitious news.


GENERAL.
Ace of Clubs. —This signifies good news through the post.
Ace of Diamonds.—You will be gratified by a good present
or sum of money.
Ace of Hearts.—Shows affection and happiness in the home
Ace of Spades.—A large town or building.
Acorns. —An acorn at the top of the cup foretells riches
easily gained. In the middle, and in the clear, good health
and enjoyment. At the bottom of the cup, shows a certain
recovery from a severe illness; or if the consultant has financial
difficulties to contend with, assistance is at hand and a way
shown to speedily surmount all troubles.
Aircraft. —Should the leaves form the picture of an aero'
plane in full flight in the clear, this would portend elevation,
a rise in position. Near the handle, new projects. At the
bottom of the cup, unsuccessful project. If the aeroplane
should appear to be broken, disaster is foretold. In the thick,
encompassed by clouds, danger of losing a position, and many
obstacles. If a favourable symbol is near—i.e., an anchor or
a horseshoe —obstacles overcome by tenacity and perseverance.
Altar.—lf with a figure near, sorrow and distress are fore-
shown.
Anchor. —At the bottom of the cup, success by water. At
the top, constant love. In the middle, surrounded by dots,
a voyage bringing success, good business and commerce,
money by water. Erect, with the link uppermost, well-de'
serve'd rest, with plenty. Surrounded with thick clouds, in'
constancy. Dashes round about, dangerous enterprises, ultb
mate success.
Anvil.—Your strength and energy will bring you much
success in new plans or enterprises.
Arch.—Things which you desire are developing in the
wished'for direction; the arch is a sign of hope; your ambition
may be gratified in a most unexpected manner.
Ark.—This symbol assures you of security and of finding
refuge in times of distress and turmoil.
Arm. —If curved, it signifies love, protection, care and
strength; stretched out, that a new influence will come into
your life which will prove to be an endless source of joy
and love.


Arrow.—This indicates a disagreeable letter; from whence
it comes must be judged from the direction of the arrow. If
dots are around the trouble will be financial.
Axe.—This shows mastery and power to overcome difficul-
ties; sometimes separation.
Balloon.—A symbol which indicates that much is attempted
but little achieved; there is a passing enthusiasm for various
experiments and new ideas, but the interest goon flags, and
finally vanishes as the balloon in the clouds.
Bananas.—These promise gratification and the occurrence
of those things which are most pleasing to you; also a predic-
tion of much happiness and success in love affairs.
Banner.—This is a symbol of a prosperous life for a man
and of a wealthy marriage for a woman.
Basin.—This symbol stands for small ailments and minor
worries; a broken basin, domestic annoyance.
Basket.—A basket seen in the clear near the handle shows
an addition to the family. If at the top of the cup, either
a gift or an increase of wealth and friends. A basket of
flowers is an augury of good things, festive gatherings, social
pleasures. If a ring should be near, a marriage. If the basket
should not be complete, news of a broken engagement or post-
poned wedding. A complete basket of flowers even at the
bottom of the cup would have no sinister meaning. In case
of sickness it would show the recovery of the patient. A
basket with dots around indicates money by legacy.
Bath.—This indicates grief or dismay.
Bayonet.—A sign to be feared; it shows danger of opera-
tion, wounds, and pain.
Beans.—These show quarrels and disputes with relations.
Bed.—A visit, illness, or death, according to other symbols.
Beef.—A round of beef foretells coming financial worries
Beehive.—This is a symbol of eloquence, mental capacity,
and much energy in forming new schemes and carrying them
through; also of attainment to power and honour.
Beetroot. —This symbol indicates that someone will try to
do you a bad turn, but it will fail in its object and rather turn
out as a benefit.
Bell.—A bell seen in the clear or at the top of the cup is
a happy omen. To a person holding a situation under Govern-


ment it promises an appointment to a higher one. Services
recognised with a rise. To the young it foretells a happy
marriage. Two bells, happiness and riches through marriage.
If at the bottom of the cup and thick teadeaves around, it
portends sad news.
Biscuits.—These seen in various shapes and sizes foretell
the occurrence of pleasant events.
Boat. —To see a boat in the clear, a discovery will be made
which will be a material benefit. At the top of the cup,
pleasure and pleasant secrets revealed. At the bottom of the
cup, and in clouds, an unpleasant discovery that will entail
personal danger.
Bones. —These are an indication of misfortune surmounted
with courage.
Bonnet. —This implies that youth will be past before you
have the best happiness of your life.
Book.—An open book denotes a revelation of importance
and benefit. A closed book implies unexpected research,
which will entail trouble and expense.
Boot. —If the toe of the boot is pointing away from the
handle, a speedy removal, the kick out. At the top of the
cup, a desire to travel. In the middle it advises caution, as
to the next movements. A circle near it indicates a satisfac'
tbry completion.
Bottle.—A sign of happy days; several bottles indicate
extravagant tastes; small bottles, illness.
Bow and Arrow. —This denotes that there is unpleasant talk
of your personal affairs which may do you harm.
Bower. —Happiness in love is proclaimed by this symbol.
Box. —An open box foreshows a troubled love affair; a
closed box, that you will find something which you had lost.
Bracelet. —A discovery made too late.
Bread.—A loaf of bread is a sign of the commonplace and
of monotony; several loaves give warning against waste and
extravagance, for a shortage of corn is threatened; loaves of
bread with crossed swords above them predict mutiny and
disaffection among those whom the world trusted.
Bridge.—An advantageous opportunity; a fortunate Jour-
ney.


Bridle. —This points to the fact that you greatly object to
interference or authority, and that you will always be “top
dog” with your friends.
Brooch. —This indicates that you are likely to make a dis'
covery greatly to your advantage, and may in time turn it
to good account in the development of a patent; a brooch
with dots around it predicts a present.
Broom.— This signifies that there is for you to be
careful in the choice of your friends, and to avoid rushing
into an intimacy which you might later have cause to regret.
Buckles.—These foretell that some important arrangement
of much personal advantage will fall through in an unforeseen
manner, causing disappointment and dismay.
Bugle.— This shows a desire for admiration and notice
from all whom you meet; it also implies that it is high time
to arouse yourself and become more energetic and industrious.
Building. —A sign of removal.
Buoy. —This is a symbol of hope; you have a good friend
in all weathers.
Butter. —This signifies good fortune and success, the com'
forts of life, and a desire for the best of everything.
Buttonhook. —An exchange between, friends, successfully
organised plans, and a propitious meeting.
Buttons. —lf of various sise and shape they mean that there
will be many suggestions as to arrangements and new plans
without anything definite being settled.
Cabbage. —Notice particularly what indications are around
the cabbage. If dots are seen, jealousy relating to commerce.
At the bottom of the cup, spite through jealousy. If squares
are near, jealousy may bring the enquirer into difficulties.
Cage. —If the cage is complete and in the clear, to a maiden
it indicates an offer of marriage. In the middle, foretells a
marriage of convenience. At the bottom, disappointed love.
If dots are near, a business proposal or settlement.
Cakes.—New friends, social success, invitations, and hosph
tality. See also Wedding Cake.
Camera. —This proclaims the fact that you are too fond of
gathering new or clever ideas from others, with a view to
passing them off as your own original thoughts whenever the
opportunity arises.


Candle.— This is significant of trials, worries, or illness.
Candle Extinguisher. —An uncomfortable incident or epi
sode which will put you out considerably.
Candlestick.— You have need to look at things from a wider
point of view; to make the best of yourself you must cultivate
perception.
Cannon.— This denotes military and naval display and good
fortune; with pleasant symbols around or near, such as a
crown or star, promotion for someone dear to you in the
service.
Canoe.— This implies that a new friendship will eventually
lead to a happy love affair.
Cap. —This warns you to be cautious in your dealings with
those of the opposite sex; it also points to the fact that those
things which you desire to hide will become known.
Caravan.— This signifies an independent nature, desiring to
live a roaming life free of restrictions; sb ould a h°rse be
harnessed to the caravan your ambitions will be tultilled.
Cart. A symbol of fluctuation in fortune and of a tedious
waiting for any settled improvement in financial affairs.
Cathedral.— Prosperity, contentment, and happiness with
those whom you love is the meaning of this symbol.
Cauliflower.— This signifies that even your best friends
cannot describe you as constant or reliable.
Celery.— A vigorous body and active mind which will pre'
serve the energies of youth to a good old age.
Chain.— An engagement or wedding; an entangled chain
means a dilemma which will tax your ingenuity to the mmost
a long, thick chain indicates ties that vou wish to undo, a
broken one, trouble in store.
Chair.— A small chair shows an arrival; a large one,
liberation over a new plan.
Cheese. A large cheese denotes that you will benefit by
the generosity of prosperous friends.
Cherries. —A love affair, happiness, and health, are the
meanings of this symbol.
Chimney. —Unless you are cautious you
step; a chimney with smoke to be seen means that you


content, and find pleasure in daily routine and a somewhat
commonplace life.
Chinese Lantern. False security, the evidence of which will
soon be brought to your notice.
Chisel.— A symbol of losses, dismay and trouble.
Church.— Courage, honour, and tranquility; a legacy.
Cigar. A wealthy friend or lover who will absorb all your
thoughts; a broken cigar signifies a disagreeable incident or a
quarrel.
Circle.— Money, presents, an engagement, faithful friends.
Clock. If the clock should be at the top of the cup and
quite clear, a speedy recovery from severe sickness. At the
bottom of the cup, there may be news of a death.
Clouds.— Clouds correspond to the.mental condition of the
inquirer. They indicate unsolved problems and points at is-
sue. If light and only defined by a faint outline, they may
be regarded as sunlit and fortunate; but if compact and heavy
they show trouble and misfortune.
Cloves. —This symbol proclaims the desire for appreciation
and the wish to appear at your best on all occasions.
Coach.— lf with horses, you may look forward to a time oi
ease and luxury; if without horses, it warns you against an
act of folly or a harmful indiscretion.
Coal. —Prosperity and good fellowship.
Coal-Scoop. —This signifies domestic difficulties or vexation
at th<? urn things have taken.
Coac.—Sadness caused through a parting; if the coat is
ragged, distressing news; without sleeves, failure in a new
undertaking.
Coconut. — Travel or interesting discoveries.
Coffee Pot. —Dependence on creature comforts; slight in-
disposition.
Coffin.—The semblance of a coffin does not always foretell
a death. Usually it means a tedious illness, and shows that
great care should be taken. It also denotes probable failure
in business.
Collar.— Perseverance in the face of obstacles will bring
you a great reward.


Collar-Stud.— A reminder of some tiresome or disagreeable
little duty which you would fain forget.
Comb. You will find out that your confidence in someone
was misplaced and this discovery will cause you much distress.
Comet. This shows an unexpected visitor or unexpected
news from a distant country. Frequently a family upset, and
a more violent than wise expression of feeling. Great and
unusual happenings, according to the sphere of life to which
you belong. At the bottom of the cup, sudden and unex'
pected loss of property.
Compasses. This sign implies that you may expect to
travel and to spend your life in interesting activities.
Concertina.— This symbol proclaims dilatory habits and
feeble wit.
Corks. —This sign shows the power of adapting yourself to
your company, and of proving yourself useful in awkward
situations.
Corkscrew. —This denotes that you will be vexed by inquisi
tive people who trouble you with questions.
Corn,— This is a pleasant omen of wealth and success.
Cradle. — A cradle at the top of the cup indicates the arrival
of a stranger. In the clear, a birth. At the bottom and thick,
sickness to children.
Crane. —Heavy burdens and anxiety are indicated by this
symbol.
Cross, — You must expect to meet with hindrances and ob'
stacles in the way of your desires; sorrow and misfortune are
also indicated by this symbol.
Crossed Keys. —A sign of authority, power and honour, and
an assurance of comfort and help in times of difficulty or
doubt.
Crown. —If straight lines are close to it, the crown signifies
a straight course to honours. If wavy lines arc around, there
will be delays and obstacles in the way of deserved honours.
Cucumber. — A new plan successfully carried out.


Cup.—A large cup tells of a splendid opportunity coming
your way which will insure your future success; a small cup
means that a little anxiety is before you.
Cupboard.—Disappointment in money affairs.
Curtain. —This symbol proclaims that someone is hiding
a matter from you which it would be to your advantage to
learn; with other signs in the cup which are good you may
conclude that the matter will be revealed to you shortly.
Dagger, —Beware of being too hasty in any undertaking on
hand.
Desk.—You will receive a letter which will upset you, or
you will lose the friendship of someone with whom you have
corresponded regularly for many years.
Dish. —Anxiety in household matters; a broken dish is a
foretaste of a greater loss.
Doll.—A festivity at which you will endeavour to conceal
your feelings of boredom under somewhat foolish hilarity.
Drum.—A drum signifies riots and disturbances. If a sob
dier or sailor, a call to arms. At the handle of the cup, domes-
tic quarrels and turmoils. At the bottom, unfortunate pub-
licity. i
Ear. —A large ear shows that you will be shocked by hear-
ing of some scandal or abuse; a normal ear means that you
will receive some interesting and pleasant piece of news or
valuable information.
Ear-rings.— To a man this symbol proclaims the displeasure
of one of the opposite sex; to a woman, the humiliation ot
unrequited affection.
Egg.—An egg anywhere in the cup is most favourable
the more the merrier. It denotes_ dignity of estate, prosperous
business, good children, success in present undertakings.
Egg-Cup. —A sign of an escape from a threatened disaster.
Easel.—An easel in the clear promises chance of rising in
the artistic world through the help of a rich patron. It also
denotes success in works of art. At the bottom of the cup,
early disappointments, but eventual success.
Engine.—An engine in the clear on the right of the handle
denotes a journey. On the left of the handle, complications


will arise on a journey. At the bottom of the cup or in the
thick, plots and complications.
Eye.—To see an eye in the cup advises to be careful in bush
ness dealings. To inspect carefully any proposition put for-
ward.
Eyeglasses.—You will make a beneficial discovery through
surprising means.
Faces.—To see a face at the top of the cup denotes a dis'
covery. At the bottom of the cup, disappointment will follow.
More than one face in the clear, friendships and merry'
making.
Fairy.—Fairies are inhabitants of legendary world of im*
mortal youth—a world of stormless skies, strange adventure;
where love is free and time unmarked; a land of pure romance
and enchantment. Seeing this figure in the cup foretells a
season of romance and love. Take particular notice of the
position. Should a fairy be seen at the bottom of the cup,
the joy and enchantment will be ephemeral. Seen in the clear,
a life of happiness enjoyed with loved ones. At the top,
Cupid is close at hand. A marriage, happy children, and a
long and useful life.
Fan.—A fan in the clear at the top of the cup denotes
innocent flirtations. Near the handle, an invitation to a place
of amusement. With wavy lines, indiscretion, coquetry. In
the thick, vexation, pique.
Feathers.—Large feathers signify achievement and pros'
perity; to authors, literary success; small feathers denote
something of which you are afraid, but which you will meet
with courage.
Feet.—You will be called upon to take a decisive step in
some matter which may lead up to an eventful change in
your life.
Fence.—This means that there is but a step between you
and success.
Ferry-Boat.—This symbol implies that difficulties will be
smoothed away for you by the aid of good and useful friends.
Fiddle.—ln the clear an invitation to a wedding or a dance.
At the bottom of the cup, quitei clear, and if a ring is near,
an offer of marriage. If flowers are near, festivities.


Figs. —These indicate joy and abundance of the good things
of this world; to those in business it is an omen of success
and prosperity.
Fireplace. —Your chief interests in life will probably lie in
your home; small duties, simple pleasures, and a circle of
friends.
Flag. —Danger, rebellion, and war are the meanings of this
symbol.
Flock. —The smaller leaves, dust, and stems sometimes ap'
pear like a flock. Whether resembling sheep, bird, or any
other thing, it indicates a gathering or sudden happenings. It
may be a gathering of a public nature, a convening of meet'
ings and demonstrations in which the consultant is interested
or concerned.
Football. —Love of outdoor games, or a keen interest in the
welfare of those who take part in them, is shown by this
symbol.
Forge. —This implies a need for refinement and of recoil'
structing your ideas on many subjects.
Fork. —This warns you against those who constantly flatter
you; it would be well for you to be on your guard or you
may one day awake to the fact that all this flattery was used
as a tool to harm you.
Fountain. —A most favourable omen foretelling happiness,
success in love and marriage, prosperity in business, and good
fortune in all you undertake; this symbol also points to an
unexpected legacy.
Fruit.— Fruits are fortunate if they arc in season, but grapes
denote ambitions in love gratified in all seasons.
Garden Roller.— An indication that things around you are
liable to become somewhat unmanageable, and that you will
need tact and strength to avoid being crushed by circum-
stances.
Garland.— A sign, of happiness, love and honour.
Garters. — A contempt for feminine weakness is the mean'
ing of this sign.
Gate. —An excellent opportunity awaits you, perhaps the
chance of a lifetime; massive high gates denote restriction,
misery, or imprisonment.


Gimlet.— You will be unpleasantly reminded of a disagree'
able fact.
Glasses. —These show that you will entertain your friends
on a lavish scale, and delight in hospitality, but will occa-*
sionally be confronted by difficulties in your arrangements.
Golf Clubs. —These indicate a life so full of work that
there is but little leisure for recreation.
Gondola.— A visit to Italy, or a romance are the meanings
of this sign.
Gramophone. —This usually portends vexation at being
drawn into a somewhat disorderly and noisy pleasure.
Grapes. —These signify pleasure, abundance, fulfilment,
and a life free from care.
Grave. —This symbol must be read in accordance with its
position, also with reference to other signs in the cup; as a
general rule, with gloomy signs it would bring a message of
coming sorrow or with cheerful symbols, that a death would
benefit the consultant.
Gun. — If a heart should be near, a rival in love. In the
thick, trouble. Near the top, discord. At the bottom, slander
which will bring ill effects in the future. If a soldier or sailor
is consulting, it would suggest a call to arms.
Hand. —A sign of good fellowship, loyalty, and affection;
it may also indicate a parting, a meeting, or a bargain con'
eluded; other signs around it must be noticed in order to
read its special meaning.
Handbell.— You would much like to startle the world by
a wonderful discovery or amazing theory by which your
name would be known for all time; but you will need every
possible good symbol to appear in the cup to give you any
assurance of your ambition being gratified.
Handcuffs. —Disgrace, imprisonment, misfortune, and diV
honesty; this sign must be read in connection with others
around it.
Handglass. —An illusion quickly dispelled is the meaning
of this symbol.
Handscreen.— Even small demands sometimes necessitate
great effort on the part of those to whom the demand is made.


Harp. —In the clear, it denotes a romantic attachment that
will end in a happy union. Should there be thick leaves or
lines near, it shows there has been a quarrel, but the parties
wiir soon be reconciled. If at the bottom of the cup, it shows
delays in love affairs.
Harrow. —This shows that much of your time will be given
endeavouring to make the lives of those around you smooth
and happy, whilst you cheerfully spend your days in a some-
what monotonous manner.
Harvest.—A shock of corn is a somewhat sa*d emblem
showing that you have sown that of which the reaping will
be tears; it is also a warning of illness, especially to the aged
Hat. —At the bottom of the cup, a rival. In the clear,
honours.
Hayrick.—This indicates a desire for mastery and pre-
eminence; it also shows that a doubt will arise as to how best
to proceed, but you will find the right way out and will come
to a wise decision.
Head.—A large head gives warning of family trouble or
of serious illness; a very small head, waning ability or power;
several heads, mental distress or derangement.
Heart —Love
Ring—Proposal


Heart. If a crown should be near a heart, it denotes
honours. If dots are near, financial gain and true love. A
fruit near, pleasures. Two hearts together, certain marriage
If a letter can be seen near, it signifies the initial of the per'
son’s name.
Hoe. This means that you will often have more to do
than you can well accomplish; each day things will occur
needing your attention and increasing your work, but in spite
of it you will have good health and cheerfulness.
Honeycomb.—Prosperous undertakings, honour and re'
nown, and much which is delightful are foreshown by this
symbol.
Hoop.—You will find immense satisfaction in doing things
that require energy even if they are of little importance.
Horn.—lf a horn is seen at the top of the cup it denotes
an abundance of this world s goods, or an inheritance close
at hand. In the middle of the cup and clear, a rise in position.
If dots are round, money with marriage.
Horns. \ou have a powerful enemy, or at least someone
who has feelings of animosity towards you, which may prove
to be unpleasant in their result.
Horseshoe.—An unexpected piece of good fortune, the
achievement of your wish, and good luck in all you undertake;
a double horseshoe hastens the arrival of your desires; a horse'
shoe reversed means an upset of plans causing much disap'
pointment and vexation; a broken one denotes a dilemma,
trials, or discomforts.
Hot Water Bottle.—You will always find compensation in
all trials and discomforts.
Hour Glass.—lf this symbol is seen anywhere in the cup
it behoves you to be watchful over those dear to you. To
be circumspect in your business and in your domestic life. In
the thick, imminent danger and peril. At the bottom, danger
in the future through present neglect of duty.
House. —At the top of the cup, success in business. A
good change of abode. If the present state of affairs is not
favourable, this indicates a speedy change for the better.
Great success in any new enterprises. Good for engaging
new employees. At the bottom of the cup, shows there is
need to be cautious and vigilant. If surrounded by dashes


or dark clouds, expect troubles, disputes, and sickness in the
home. At the side in the clear, a change to the seaside.
Inkpot.—Expectancy.
I ron —Small vexations or troubles which will quickly pass,
is the meaning of this symbol.
Jewellery.—You may expect an increase of wealth, possibly
good presents also.
Jug.—lf you see a jug at the top of the cup, beware of
excess. In the clear, a severe rebuke. At the bottom, loss of
money and position in the future through present extravagant
follies.
Jumping Figure. —Change which will be greatly to your
advantage.
Kettle. —This symbol is of significance to the home. If
placed near the handle of the cup, and in the clear, it shows
domestic efficiency and comfort with consequent happiness.
In the thick or at the bottom of the cup, it shows complica'
tions, quarrels, and domestic upsets.
Key. —A single key at the bottom of the cup, guard against
robbery. A key or a bunch of keys at the top, clearer unden
standing and good business. If you use your opportunities
with intelligence they will unlock for you the doors of happb
ness and prosperity.
Kite. —Your ambitions, if followed and wisely directed, will
lead to success, but any enterprise that is allowed to go free
and take its own chance, will end in disaster. Beware of
projects that are hazardous and fanciful.
Knapsack.—A favour will be asked of you which you will
be compelled to grant. If in the thick, there is danger of re'
striction of the necessities of life.
Kneeling Figure.—A new enterprise or project; care should
be taken to think it over well; do nothing rashly and seek
reliable advice.
Knife. —Notice must be taken as to the position of a knife
seen in the cup. If the knife has the blade down towards
the bottom of the cup, and there are fine dots around, other'
wise clear, a wedding is approaching; if a ring or a heart is
near, the lady whose fortune is bein'* told is about to become
a bride. If the tip of the blade is pointnig to the handle, it


indicates false friends, separations, and strife; deceit in love.
Should a broken ring be near, the party will be associated
with a divorce. At the bottom of the cup, a brawl; unfor-
tunate law-suit. A broken knife, the end of a quarrel. A
single knife in the clear portends the end of warfare, pro-
vided the blade is not upwards. At the very tip of the cup,
be careful of scandal. Crossed knives, disturbances and dis-
agreeable news.
Ladder.— lt is generally good to find the semblance of a
ladder in the tea-cup, as it promises advancement through in-
dustry, and though gradual will be permanent. In the clear,
shows advancement. If dots are close to it, ambitions realised
through money. If the ladder is not very distinct, others will
interfere and delay your projects.
Lamp. At the top of the cup, in the clear, it indicates an
occasion of feasting and joy. At the side, hidden things re-
vealed, lost property recovered. At the bottom of the cup,
a festival postponed. Two lamps, twice married. On the
handle, the discovery that an estate has fallen to you and your
heirs.
Leek. —This implies that you are anxious to come to the
root of some matter of which at present you have only an
inkling; with good signs around, you may expect to come to
a satisfactory understanding.
Leg. —This foretells a successful race with fortune.
Leg of Mutton. —Depression and pecuniary worries is the
meaning of this sign.
Letters. —lf you see a letter in the clear, it denotes a speedy
remittance of money. Should the letter be hemmed in by
clouds, expect bad news, a loss, or an accident. If a heart
should be near, and there are no clouds or dashes surrounding
it, a love letter can be expected which will bring good tidings
and possibly a desire for a speedy union. Should the heart
be in the thick, then expect a refusal. A square of four dots
shows a letter. Letters of the alphabet must be interpreted
literally. They are often seen very distinctly in the cup, and
probably denote the first letter or even initials of the person
from whom news or an offer of marriage or business proposal
may be expected.


Lighthouse.—A good sign of security and of light on your
path whenever it is most needed; if crooked or broken,
disaster*at sea.
Lines of Dots. —These indicate journeys and their probable
length and direction; to be read in connection with other
signs of movement; wavy lines mean tiresome journeys or
difficulties likely to be encountered; if the lines ascend sharply
to the brim of the cup, a journey to a hilly country will be
taken.
Lock. —To see a lock is not very favourable; it denotes that
there are obstacles to encounter. If there are straight, thin
lines near, forethought and determination will remove the
barrier; if wavy lines, troubles and losses. In the thick, it
denotes that though there is wealth the person is mean.
Looking-Glass.—This implies a desire to know the truth,
even if it be unpleasant to you.
Lute. —This a sign of a secret sadness of which those
around you know nothing; to musicians, a good omen of
success.
Magnet. —You will be drawn by an irresistible attraction
towards someone for whom you will eventually feel more
dislike than affection.
Magnifying Glass.—You are given to such exaggeration
that it amounts to untruthfulness.
Mars.—This sign will often be seen, and indicates a count-
geous, energetic nature, fond of exploits and freedom, and
shows a capacity for strenuous work; a fortunate symbol for
a soldier.
Mask. —This is an indication of insincerity. Be careful in
whom you put your trust. However, it is not always a bad
symbol; if a bird or flowers should be close to it, an invitation
to a theatre or a dance is impending.
Mast. —This symbol must be read in connection with the
surrounding signs.
Maypole.—This shows that you find but little satisfaction
in your amusements and gaiety; for whilst you appear to enter
into them in a light-hearted manner, you are craving for
further excitement.
Meat. —A sign of financial worry.


Medal.—You will be rewarded for past industry by future
prosperity.
Medicine Bottle.—An unpleasant sign of illness.
Melon.—This means gratification and good news, and the
deriving of much pleasure from the appreciation of those
who good opinion is of value to you.
Mercury.—This planet is constantly seen in the teadeaves
and is a symbol of ceaseless activity of striving to attain
great things; it also indicates good business capacity.
Mermaid.—To those associated with the sea, this is a warn'
ing of shipwreck or other peril.
Milk-Cans.—These show an agricultural enterprise that will
be to your advantage.
Milk-Churn.—A good emblem of future comfort and iiv
creased happiness.
Milking-Stool.—A new venture about which you will feel
somewhat dubious but which with care will be carried out
successfully.
Mirror.—Prophetic dreams; a love of truth.
Mitre.—This symbol in the clear indicates honours from a
high quarter due to a brave deed. Near the handle, a valuable
article of adornment will be presented to you.
Monograms.—These will often be found in the tealeaves
and will indicate someone of much importance in your life,
whose initials are shown by the monogram.
Monument.—Someone in whose career you are much in'
terested will rise to fame.
Moon. —Surrounded by clouds it denotes depression and
tears. A full moon in the clear suggests a romantic attach'
ment, probably an elopement. If straight lines are near, all
will end happily; but if wavy lines or a cross or a comet sun
rounds it, trouble will arise, and regret will follow. The first
quarter of the moon indicates new ideas, the opening of new
projects. The last quarter warns you to refrain from taking
up any new undertaking, and to be wary of travelling by
water. i
Motor Car. —Short journeys by road or rail, visits from
friends; with other signs, some increase of fortune may be
expected.


Mountain. —If the mountain is defined by fine specks and
has a clear outline, it denotes good friends and fortunate
journeys. If thick and rugged, hindrances to your prospects
through enemies. If away from home, the return will be de'
layed longer than you wish.
Mug.—This symbol predicts a merry meeting.
Mushroom. —In the clear, this foretells a change to a
country home. Remember that the handle of the cup repre'
sents the north, so the direction of the home can be traced
according to the position of the emblem. At the top of the
cup it indicates sudden exaltation to honours and position. If
the right way up, at the bottom of the cup, it indicates
rapidity of growth. Reversed, expected reversals, frustrated
hopes, and unsettled business, even loss of position. Should
the head of the mushroom be towards the handle, there is
every possibility of saving the situation by great energy and
foresight. Look well into your business.
Nail.—lf at the top, a sudden and sharp affliction. Fre'
quently an injury or great injustice will be inflicted on the
unwary.
Names. —To see the name of a person or place, signifies
events occurring in connection with such person or place; if
good symbols appear, pleasant happenings mav be expected;
if gloomy signs, then trouble will arise associated with the
name seen.
Needles.—These denote mischief and deceit; sometimes
disappointment in love.
Necklace. —If complete, a great conquest and many ad-
mirers. If broken, danger of losing the love of one you are
devoted to.
Neptune. —This planetary symbol indicates a condition of
chaos.
Net.—Toil or anxiety followed by amazing achievement
and good fortune.
Nose. —A large nose denotes dissipation; a crooked one
shows a wayward and untrustworthy character; a long, thin
nose implies that you change your ideas on various subjects
and alter your mode of life in accordance with your new
ideas.


Notice-Board.—Your attention will be called to some fact
which it will be to your advantage to learn.
Numbers. —These are frequently found in the teadeaves,
and must be read in conjunction with surrounding symbols
If the consultant has a lucky number, and this appears with
good signs, it promises much success. An unlucky number
with gloomy signs predicts misfortune. A journey with a
five near obviously points out that it will be taken, in five
days, or weeks, and so on. Ten dots, close together, means
ten pounds or shillings, according to the sffie and number of
the dots. Numbers with the symbol of a legacy show the
amount to be expected.
Nut-Crackers, —This portends that you will strive to solve
a difficult problem, the result of which is of much import'
ance to you.
Nuts.— Gratified ambition and wealth are indicated by nuts.
Onions. —You may expect that something which you sup'
posed was a secret will be discovered, possibly through
treacherous friends.
Opera-Glasses. —You are in danger of losing the confidence
of your friends because of your inquisitive questions.
Organ. —This must be read in connection with other signs
around it; sometimes it means a wedding, death, or realised
ambition; to a musician, it is a good omen of achievement.
Padlock. —An open padlock means a surprise; a closed one,
a need for precaution.
Pail.— You will be called upon to undertake a variety of
things which you dislike.
Palace.— This portends good fortune and favours.
Parallel Lines. —These predict welhthought'out and smooth'
ly running plans.
Parasol. —Quite distinct and in the clear, a new lover, and
hasty marriage. Surrounded by dots, a wealthy lover. In
the thick, the estrangement of a former lover.
Parcel.— A parcel is defined from an oblong, thick teadeaf.
The contents are judged by the symbols surrounding it. If
at the top of the cup, it is close at hand. If at the bottom,
delayed. In the middle, soon.
Parsley. —Small events will bring you satisfaction.


Pears.—lmproved social condition and other advantages;
this fruit brings success to a business man and to a woman
a rich husband; one pear signifies a birth or new plans.
Pepper-pot.—This means vexation and unreasonable irrita'
tion which you will endeavour to conceal.
Perambulator.—News of a birth.
Pestle.—A sign of decisive measures; a remedy for a griev-
ance or an ill.
Piano.—This is a sign that you will make the most of your
opportunities and will gain that for which you have aimed;
to musicians, a sign of advancement.
Pickaxe.—This sign proclaims labour troubles and strikes.
Pincers.—A painful experience; an injury; toothache.
Pincushion.—Thrift, order, and a well-regulated household.
Pineapple.—A pleasing indication of wealth, rich friends,
and good presents.
Pipe. —A visit from a dear friend; several pipes foreshow
news from a man who is much in your thoughts.
Pistol.—Disaster; warning of approaching danger.
Plate.—For the present, you will merely jog along in an
ordinary way.
Plough.—You must expect to go through toil and frustra-
tion before you finally conquer your difficulties and achieve
triumph.
Plum Pudding.—This denotes festivity and cheerfulness.
Post.—This signifies a formidable obstacle; if broken, that
you will encounter a storm of opposition to your plan.
Potato.- —You will have need of patience in your daily life,
and will sometimes be troubled by pecuniary difficulties.
Pulpit.—A love of talking and a dislike to listening is the
meaning of this symbol.
Pump. —Your own efforts will bring about a fortunate
result.
Purse. —In the clear, gain; with dots around, a windfall of
money. At the top and straight lines near, a legacy. At the
bottom of the cup, an unexpected and large loss.


Racquet.- —Invitations to sports and games. If the handle
is down and the racquet is quite clear, it shows that the con'
sultant will win a prize either in a tournament or a lottery.
Two racquets together, a flirtation.
Railway Signal. —This symbol may be seen at “danger” or
“all clear.” Its meaning must be read in accordance with
other signs.
Rake. —This implement denotes a persevering nature which
should bring you a liberal measure of success in whatever you
undertake; it alsq indicates luck in speculation.
Razor. —Quarrels, also a warning against interference in
other people’s affairs; to lovers this sign foretells disagreement
and separation.
Ring. —The ring is a sign of marriage, if quite clear and
near the top. When the ring is in the middle of the cup,
and is not quite smooth all round, it denotes an offer of man
riage. A letter near in either case will denote the initials of
the party concerned. Two rings, a hasty marriage and com'
pletion of projects. If a ring is surrounded by clouds, it will
be wise to be cautious. At the bottom of the cup, denotes
a long engagement; but should a cross be quite near, a broken
engagement.
River. —A sign of trouble and perplexity, sometimes illness
and bereavement.
Rocket. —This foretells joy and gladness at some event
about to happen.
Rocking Chair. —This indicates contemplation of a new idea
or scheme about which you are somewhat doubtful.
Rolling Pin. —This is an indication that you will be capable
of smoothing out your difficulties and will usually find an easy
path in which to tread.
Sack. —This predicts an unlooked'for event which will turn
out to be most fortunate.
Saddle. —The successful solving of a troublesome matter is
the meaning of this sign.
Saucepan. —This is an indication that many troubles will
befall you, and your courage will be tested in meeting them.
Saw. — Interference which will bring a good deal of trouble
upon you, is signified by a saw.


Scales.—lf the scales are evenly balanced, the augury must
be good; but should either side be weighed down, it would
show wrong judgment, even an unbalanced mind—certainly
failure and want of foresight. If the scales are at the bottom
of the cup, a lawsuit, and the case will surely go against
you. If in the clear, and you have a lawsuit on hand, success.
It would also denote completion and a very satisfactory reply
to any proposition you may have advanced. If a sword should
be near the scales, then a speedy judgment will be meted out.
Sceptre.—The sceptre, an emblem of powpr and authority,
seen in the clear, denotes that the consultant will receive an
honour from royalty. Near the house—i.e., the handle—signh
Ties that the consultant will be offered a position of authority.
At the bottom of the cup, honours and work appreciated later
in life.
Scissors.—At the top of the cup, separation. In the clear,
the end of a quarrel. At the bottom of the cup and in the
thick, quarrels and disturbances. At the handle, unrest in
the home.
Scythe.—lf a scythe is in the cup, it denotes danger to the
consultant. It would bo wise to guard your health. At the
bottom of the cup, danger of death or very serious accident
in the near future. At the top of the cup, quite clear, re'
covery from a present danger or sickness.
Shaving-Brush.—This sign suggests that you are apt to
turn molehills into mountains.
Signpost.—This symbol must be read in conjunction with
surrounding symbols; it usually emphasises the importance of
other signs; a broken signpost indicates that you take a wrong
turning in your life and afterwards have much cause to regret
it.
Ship.— -A ship being the emblem of intercourse, voyaging,
and traffic, shows that news from far-off lands will come to
hand. In full sail, trade will increase or a voyage may be
taken. It should be noticed which way the ship is heading,
in order to interpret the meaning. Coming towards the handle,
it would mean the arrival of expected or unexpected friends.
The fulfilment of your desires if in full sail. Going from the
handle, it would denote the falling away of business or good
things. At the bottom of the cup, your expectations will not


be fulfilled, obstacles in your enterprises, and partings with
friends. At the very top of the cup, it would indicate a speedy
journey. Taking the handle for the north, you will notice
whether the ship is sailing north, south, east, or west, and
the destination can then, be arrived at. If the sails are droop-
ing or falling away, then it denotes a decrease of trade, health,
or even intellect. The expected news will not come. If a
letter be deciphered on the sails, this should be a further
source of enlightenment. Any symbol that may be on the
sails must be taken into consideration. A number might give
the date of sailing or the arrival of the ship. A fleet of small
ships show's much business, success in commercial enterprises,
new projects, and extension of interests. In domestic life
it shows a social gathering.
Shoes.—These indicate speedy new arrangements which are
likely to turn out extremely well.
Skeleton.—This implies a feeling of disgust at some infor-
mation which is told to you and w’hich you are asked not to
reveal.
Slug.—Petty annoyances; bad weather.
Spoon.- —If in the middle of the cup, the consultant will be
invited to stand sponsor at a christening. Two spoons in the
clear, good luck, flirtation.
Spade. It shows that by steady work you will acquire
riches. At the bottom of the cup, news of wealth abroad.
Spur.—This symbol foretells that as the result of endurance
and honest labour you will attain to honour.
Square. —This formed of dotted lines indicates perplexity
and dismay, and endeavour to extricate yourself from an em-
barrassing situation.
Star. —A lucky sign; if surrounded by dots, wealth and
honour are foretold. At the top, love and honour. If dots
are about it, it foretells great fortune, wealth, high respectabil-
ity, honours. Several stars denote good and happy children.
A star surrounded by dashes and in the thick, a warning that
good fortune is weakening. Look well to your home affairs
and business. Clouded, shows long life, though many troubles.


Steeple.—This denotes misfortune, bad luck; if it is crooked
or bending it foreshows a coming disaster or crushing blow
to your hope.
Steps.—Unaccustomed work which will fall to your lot as
a result of the illness of someone with whom you work or
associate.
Stockings.—A present received or given is the meaning of
this symbol.
Stones.—Little worries and vexations.
Stool,—A large stool is a symbol of honour; a small one
signifies that your success in life will be meagre.
Strawberries. —Pleasure and the gratification of your wishes
are shown by this fruit.
Street Lamp. —This is a sign of a foolish desire to draw
attention to yourself.
Submarine. —Swiftly arriving news or events; sometimes the
disclosure of a secret which will be of much personal value
to you.
Sun.—-In the middle of the cup, fortune, happiness, and
comfort. At the top of the cup it denotes that the consultant
will be a pioneer and receive honours. Surrounded by dashes,
sudden changes. A circle near, complete happiness, restora'
tion to health.
Swimming.—A brave endeavour to overcome your fear of
an undertaking which must be faced.
Swing-Boat.—By an act of folly, you forfeit the good
opinion of someone with whom you most desire to be on
terms of friendship.
Sword.—This is a sign of danger, sudden illness, or even
death; it also betokens slander and dangerous gossip; to lovers
it is a bad omen of quarrels; a sword in its sheath shows
honour and glory for someone dear to you; a broken sword
predicts the triumph of an enemy.
Table.—This means suggestions and consultation; note the
subject from the surrounding signs.
Tea Cosy.—To the unmarried, this is a sign that they will
probably remain single; to the married affection and comfoit
in the small things of life.


Tea-cup and Saucer.—You may expect to hear something
of much interest and pleasure in your “fortune.”
Teeth.—These call attention to the fact that probably a
visit to the dentist is required.
Telegraph Post. —Hasty news by telephone or telegram.
Telegraph Wires.—You will transact important business by
telephone or telegram.
Telephone.—You will be put to considerable inconvenience
through forgetfulness.
Telescope. —Discernment; adventure.
Tennis Net.—This shows pleasures and social entertain'
meats.
Tent.—A symbol of travel.
The Cross. —The cross is always suggestive of suffering. In
the clear it is indicative of troubles that can be overcome by
perseverance and faith. At the top of the cup, delayed desires.
At the bottom, great trials. Two crosses, severe affliction.
Thimble.—For a girl, this symbol implies that she will
probably never marry; to the married, it predicts changes in
the household.
Thumb.—A large and powerful thumb foretells an oppor'
tunity in which you prove yourself superior to those who
hitherto somewhat despised you.
Timber.—Logs of timber are a sign of well-being and pros-
perity in your affairs.
Tomatoes Growing.—An increase of worldly goods is fore-
shown by this sign.
Tombstone.—This sign must be judged in accordance with
other symbols around it.
Tongs.—A pair of firetongs indicates anxiety and disturb-
ance in the home.
Tongue. —This signifies that unless you amend you will
make mischief by your indiscreet and unkind words.
Tooth.—One large tooth is a symbol of bereavement
Torch (Flaming).—This is a hopeful symbol that some
unexpected piece of good fortune will come to you; it also
indicates the discovery of an undeveloped talent.


Tower. —This predicts an advantageous opportunity through
which you may rise to a good position in life.
Toys. —Pleasure with children.
Train. —Arrivals, removals, a journey.
Tram. —A roadway journey on business or pleasure
Tram Line. —This is indicated by two thin, straight lines
which run near together up the side of the cup.
Triangle. —Indicates good or bad luck according to the posh
tion. With the apex uppermost—i.e., nearest the rim of cup
it is a sign of good fortunte and success, of new and success'
ful enterprises, ambitions achieved, hopes realised. With the
base uppermost, its indication is sinister loss and failure in all
immediate enterprises and projects. It warns you of dangers
arising from giving a too free rein to your passions and desires,
and cautions you to observe moderation in all things. In the
strife between brain and heart, reason and impulse, you wil
fail if you do not follow the dictates of reason. If the apex
of the triangle is uppermost and pointing due north—-i.e., the
handle of the cup—you will have material gain. If south,
honours and preferment. If west, a beneficial alliance or
partnership, and if the inquirer is a maiden, marriage. 'While
if the apex is towards the east, new avenues will be opened
up before you, with fresh projects and enterprises which will
prove highly successful.
Trident.— lf this sign has the fork upright, it portends
cess and gain in mercantile affairs, speedy acquisition of
wealth. If at the top of the cup, money is coming from across
the seas. To those in the navy, this indicates appreciation
and honours from high quarters. If the fork is down, then
troublesome times are ahead, and great caution should be taken
with regard to enterprises, especially connected with the sea
Notice should be taken to which side the fork points, as from
that direction will come success or failure.
Trousers. — A pair of trousers foretells news of misfortune
or sorrow for a man.
True Lover’s Knot. —This is a happy omen of faithfulness
in love, and of enduring friendship.
Trunk. —Arrivals and departures.
Tub. —You have evil to feTir, is the meaning of this sign.


Tunnel,—This suggests that you are likely to make a wrong
decision in an important matter.
Turnip. —The discovery of secrets and domestic quarrels
are indicated by this sign.
Umbrella.- —If open, there will be cause to find shelter with
friends, who will be willing to receive you under any cif'
cumstances. If closed, disappointments, favours denied.
Vanity Bag. —A large circle of admiring friends, and much
pleasure with them.
Vase.—Denotes that steadfast service will bring its measure
of reward. At the house, happiness, comfort. If clouds are
round, a sacrifice for the benefit of some one dear to you.
Vegetable Marrow.—This means sad news or monetary
losses through bad crops, either at home or abroad.
Vegetables.—These indicate toil, followed by a time of
leisure and affluent circumstances.
Venus,—This planet which is sometimes seen in the tea-
leaves, brings a message of peace or placidity.
Vice, —A carpenter’s vice signifies that you will need power'
ful assistance to extricate you from the mess in which you
will find yourself through your folly.
Violin.—A symbol of coming success to a musician, and of
pleasure and entertainment to others.
Waggon.—This implies a fortunate outlook and changes for
the better.
Walking Stick . —The arrival of a male visitor.
Wall.—A thick high wall denotes many difficulties in your
life, and that much courage will be needed to overcome them.
Water.—This is usually recognised by a clear space entirely
free from teadeaves at the bottom of the cup.
Wedding Cake.—This proclaims a speedy and prosperous
marriage.
Wheel.—A wheel at the top of the cup indicates that an
inheritance is about to fall to the consultant. If engaged in
mechanical work it shows progress by the use of your faculty.
To all others it denotes a stern necessity, a life subject to time
and circumstance.


SOME COMBINATIONS AND
THEIR MEANING
Ace of Diamonds, A Circle—An engagement.
Ace of Diamonds, A Bush.—A pleasant invitation.
Ace of Clubs, An Obelisk.—The offer of a good promotion.
Ace of Hearts, A Train, A Query— lndecision about a
removal.
Ace of Hearts, An Urn, A Bed.—lllness in the home.
Ace of Spades, Bricks.—An advantageous offer from a
large town.
Arm, A Wattle Tree, Bird on a Perch.—New plans which
bring about a meeting with someone who will become all the
world to you.
Arum Lily, Bells, A Church.—A Wedding
Arum Lily, A Bat, A Bed, A Widow’s Bonnet. —Death of
a widow.
Banana, A Peacock, Ace of Hearts, Trees. —A happy mar-
riage to someone of wealth and property in the country.
Bed, Motor Car, Gum Tree—A happy visit to the country
in the spring.
Besom, Ugly Faces.—You will make many enemies by mis'
chieLmaking,
Bonnet, A Bouquet. —Marriage late in life.
Bride, A Crescent Moon, A Swallow.—A journey which
leads to a romantic love affair.
Bride, Penknife, An Owl.—Jealousy terminates an unhappy
engagement.
Cab, A Square, A Cap.—A gloomy outlook brought about
by one of the opposite sex.
Camel (Laden), A Small “T,” A Coffin.—An unexpected
fortune through the death of someone abroad whose name
begins with “T.”
Chain (Entangled), Onion.—You will be placed in an em*
barrassing position by the discovery of a secret.
Chinese Lantern, A Pair of Stilts.—Pride brings about a
fall.


Clover, Plums, A Bridge.—A new and excellent opportunity
will come your way necessitating a journey.
Daffodils, The Sun. —A joyful occurrence in the spring.
Doves, A Book, A Beehive.- —You will advance rapidly and
become a well-known writer.
Duck, A Vegetable Marrow. —Rash investments.
Eagle (Flying), A Steamer, A Tent, A Large “E”.—A
position of honour abroad.
Ear, A Beehive, A Trumpet.—Fame as a public speaker
Fate Line, A Sword in Its Sheath, The Sign of Mars, A
Chain.—A happy fate awaits you and marriage to a soldier
who will rise to the top of the tree in his profession.
Goat, A Running Figure, A Lamb.—There need be no
doubt as to the successful outcome of your venture.
Boot—Forced Removal
Roadway—A Journey
Circle—A Fortunate Ending
Letter F—lnitial of Person
Ring—Proposal
Gum Tree, An Open Padlock, A Wallflower, A Pineapple.
—A new plan of life is made necessary as the result of an
unexpected inheritance of much wealth,


Grasshoppers, A Wreath of Asters. —Death of an elderly
friend or relative in the winter.
Key, A Flaming Torch Some discovery or the develop'
ment of a patent leads to your becoming famous.
King on Hi's Throne. —Security and peace; it may also mean
that you gain a high position through influential friends.
King on His Throne, An Eagle in a Cage, A Mace. An
important public ceremony in which you take a part.
Kookaburra, Tree, A Rose, A Man —A prospective visit
to the country in the summer, when you will meet with some
one who will become very dear to you.
Ladder, Ring, A Man and a Woman.-— Marriage will be
the means of advancement and good fortune.
Ladder, A Palette. —Attainment to a position of honour as
an artist.
Ladder, The Symbol of Mars.—A most fortunate career
as a soldier.
Lion, A Lute - Rising to the top of the tree as a musician
is assured by these symbols.
Lion, A Man Speaking from a Platform.- —Great success in
a public career, and the attaining to an influential position.
Lion, A Man Beside a Pestle and Mortar. —Excellent pros'
pccts and fame as a doctor.
Li card, A Peaked Cap. —An expected visitor is not to be
trusted.
Mace, A Mallet. —Through wisdom and clear judgment you
will rise to a position of authority.
Man Carrying a Burden, A Pair of Scissors, A Mushroom.
—Quarrels in an unhappy love affair, ending in a broken eiv
gagement.
Magnet, A Meat Cover—An unpleasant discovery leads to
the abrupt ending of an infatuation.
Nail, A pair of Pincers. —A visit to the dentist and the
removal of a tooth.
Notice Board, A Leak, An Open Padlock.—ln a surprising
manner you will get the information for which you are seek'
ing.
Onions, An Otter. —Those in whom you trusted have be-
trayed your confidence and divulged a secret.


Owl, A Pail. —Loss of income will necessitate your under'
taking distasteful work.
Pagoda, A Palm Tree, Water.—A voyage to a warm climate
under very happy conditions.
Pestle and Mortar, A Walking Stick. —Illness and the at'
rival of the doctor.
Pulpit, Opera Glasses.—Those who weary others by undue
curiosity will always remain in ignorance.
Query, A Letter, Initial “B,” A Grave Stone.—You will be
consulted as to the erecting of a headstone on the grave of
a relative or friend.
Quill Pen, Lilies of the Valley, An Organ.—Great happh
ness through marriage.
Rabbit, An Arrow, A Large Letter “L,” A Dagger.—News
of severe illness and a probable operation for a child.
Rhinoceros, An Overcoat, A Steamer, A Large Letter “I.”
—The undertaking of a somewhat hazardous enterprise neces'
sitates a voyage; through this much will happen which will
eventually lead to your becoming famous.
Rocket, A Pear, A Violet.—News of a birth of which you
may expect to hear in February.
Rocking Chair, A Pedestrian, A Mushroom. —Deliberation
over important matters brings you to the conclusion that a
great venture, which may mean enormous gain, is worth a
small risk, and success will await you.
Sailor, A Flying Swallow, A Trident, A Ring.—Happy
news of good promotion for a sailor and a proposal of mar'
riage.
Scaffold, Leg of Mutton.—Gambling or speculation will
bring you to poverty unless you pay heed to this warning.
Shark, A Pistol, A Flying Seagull.—News from abroad of
a tragic death.
.Snake, A Ram, A Woman, A Widow’s Bonnet.—Over'
whelming evidence against some widow who is a dangerous
enemy.
Sofa, A Sleigh.—A cold in the head or a chill.
Sword, A Ring, A Man, A Woman, A Toad.—Separation
of lovers brought about by slander and malicious talk.


Table, A Quill Pen, A Cat, A Ring, with Dots Around.—
Legal business over money matters which leads to family
quarrels.
Throne, An Ostrich Running, A Flying Seagull, A Flag.—
Serious news from abroad of disturbances and rebellion.
Tram Lines, A Building with Dots around it, A Purse. —
You will take a roadway journey to a bank, and arc warned
to beware of pickpockets.
Urn, Hospital Nurse, A Man, A Large Heart—Serious
illness affecting the heart is predicted for a man.
Vegetable Marrow, A Steamer, Black Fellow, A Broken
Pillar. —Distressing news of misfortune for someone dear to
you in a foreign country.
Violet, A Water Lily, A Wren, A Crescent Moon, A Ring.
—A romantic love affair which ends in a happy marriage
taking place in the early spring.
Wading Boot, The Sign of Neptune. Several Penguins, A
Mast. —News of a disaster at sea.
Widow’s Bonnet, A Pig, A Dotted Circle, The Figures
“100.” —A small legacy of a hundred pounds may be expected
from a widow.


COMMONWEALTH
NATIONAL LIBRARY
By returning this book on or before the latest dale
stamped below you make it available to other readers.
22558 9.40 St 8548


A Matter of Grave Importance
is no subject of such vital importance as the birth rate.
Every country is to-day facing the fact of a decreasing
birth rate.
Birth control, economics, religion and sex appeal are in-
extricably mixed up In this most urgent of modern problems.
To where is civilization heading ?
Is it to extinction by the slow process of natural decay, or
shall civilization go up in one wholesale orgy of blood letting
between nations ?
To be able to think clearly on this question and to enable
humanity to find its way out of the jungle of difficulties, a
knowledge of the subject of Birth Control, for and against, is
essential to every thinking man and woman.
What do you know about the matter, really ?
Of what value is your knowledge of sex and procreation ?
THE STORY OF LIFE, by F. C. Tucker, will tell you all
the essential facts and clear your mind of a lot of misconceived
ideas.
So do not remain in ignorance any longer, but ask your
bookseller to let you have a copy. If he is too shy or too
reactionary to stock THE STORY OF LIFE, you can get it
direct from the publishers. Send 2/6 to
Publisher,
TUCKER'S PUBLICATIONS
38 PITT STREET. SYDNEY
and a copy of this invaluable book will be sent you in plain
envelope per return of post.
THE STORY OF LIFE is priced at 2/6, but its real worth
is incalculable.
Printed by STAR PRINTERY LJMITEP. 433 Sent St., Sydney. 'Phone MA 7228
