



Itf h-V i-t"


Tully River District
NORTH
QUEENSLAND
As the introductory lines on the cover of this booklet
imply, these pages are written in the hope that they will
serve in a measure to draw attention from that class whose
indomitable pluck and energy transform the wild-woods
to fields of waving grain, with sleek herds browsing in
well-shaded pastures, with a result appreciative of the land
described herein.
Much of the beauty of the North has been written in
a way calculated to impress the tourist, and no feature of
the wonderful country embraced in what is termed North
Queensland has been overwritten —and yet much remains
to be said and to he written. Even between the fine capital
of Central Queensland (Rockhampton) and that great sea-
port Cairns, there is a stretch of country of which little has
been written and of which comparatively little is known,
though the most authentic evidence obtainable shows it to
be a district (comprised of districts) whose fertility, rain-
fall, natural running water, timber wealth, &c., give it a
place quite equal to any agricultural and pastoral land in
Queensland, and some features do give it an advantage
over some well-known and well appreciated North Queens-
land land, and this without in any way depreciating the
latter. If a farmer can be put in possession of land that


will grow cane, maize, root crops, lucerne, paspalum, and
the host of other artificial grasses (with an average rainfall
of too inches, and 15 1 inches maximum, minimum 41.30
in 1902), and citrus and stone fruits, such as oranges,
lemons, mandarins, apricots, peaches, plums, nectarines,
with bananas, pineapples, papaws, mangoes, cotton,
tobacco, rubber, coffee, cocoa, &c., he will count himself
as having an opportunity to “ sit under his own vine
and under his own fig tree ” and sing as in the days of
his youth. Apart from other products, tobacco cultivation
is a most inviting industry. Australians consume a little
under 13,000,000 lb. of tobacco annually, and only grow
about 3,000,000 lb., leaving about 10,000,000 lb. to be
imported annually. This is a very profitable crop. These
opportunities are growing fewer and fewer in the Southern
States of the Commonwealth, and no place in the 3,000,000
square miles of Australian territory offers a better
prospect than do these North Queensland areas.
In the administration of its laws, the Department of
Lands is liberal to a degree, and the settler, who is in good
faith striving to make a living off his land, need have no
fear of being hampered or harassed by the Department.
From the Minister for Lands, his Under Secretary, and
the whole of the Department’s staff, every assistance and
encouragement, every attention and information, is given
with a spirit that is daily being appreciated and accepted
by the settler from the other States and from across the
sea.
The particulars here set out deal more with that area
known as the Tully River district, embracing the land
between Cardwell and Maria Creek, and watered by


o
s
H
3
>
3
H
p
H
Q
3
a
o
a
o
H
3
a


Kennedy Creek, Wreck Creek, Dallachy Creek, Murray
River, and Tully River. Though there are irregular
patches of good land on the creeks named and on the
Murray River, it is not until one crosses the Murray that
the great extent of good country is met with. The land
on both these rivers is suitable for agriculture or dairy-
ing, though that on the north bank of the Tully has the
preference.
Until 1872 Cardwell was the most northerly settle-
ment in Queensland. Thirty odd years ago it was antici-
pated that Cardwell would be the port for the extensive
mineral field at Etheridge and neighbourhood, but the Sea
View Range presented insurmountable difficulties, and the
traffic was diverted elsewhere. The town lies at the south-
west corner of Rockingham Bay, a large shallow indent on
the coast, wherein many an ill-fated ship lies piecemeal at
the bottom. The backwoods have their history burnt into
the memory of those of the early pioneers who remain,
and of their elder children who had to share the anxieties,
responsibilities, and risks of pioneer life. But the isola-
tion and self-denial have had their day, and are yearly
giving way. The ring of the woodman’s axe has been
heard; the roar of the smithy’s forge and the ring of the
anvil, the whirr of belting and the circular saw, all now
speak of the wonderful change wrought in this wonderful
district in a few short years. The old-time commotion
is beginning to be again apparent in Cardwell, with an
increasing growth which proclaims the steady influx of the
stranger from afar, who has heard of the wonderful land,
and has come to see it.


h
Pi
o
Ah
A
to
H
W
to
Pfl
H
A
O'
B
H
PS
o
to
H
co
w
A
A
O
ca
s
EH
ef
B
Pi
>*
A
A
P
EH
3
W
to
a
-
w
A
PS
◄
o


Like the Atherton district, the Tully has its falls, its
gorges, and its precipices. The following description of
the Tully River Falls, from the pen of Mr. R. C. Ringrose,
barrister-at-law, located at Herberton, will give a good
idea of their extent and beauty:—
The Tully Falls are situated in a scrub in all respects similar
to the Atherton scrub; the main fall is 885 feet high, with a series
of descending rapids beyond that. Crossing the falls there is a hill,
which I estimate at 50 feet above the level of the top falls, and
with a precipice or vertical face of rock estimated at 1,000 feet
sheer drop. The gorge is similar to but grander than the Barron.
The volume of the water is unknown, but is apparently greater
than the Barron.
The country is magnificently watered by rivers, creeks,
lagoons, and swamps; and those products which are to be
seen growing on the farms of the beautiful Clarence River
in New South Wales may be seen growing here with rare
luxuriance. Over thirty years ago there was a sugar
plantation and mill between the Murray and the Tully,
but scarcity of capital and a series of those incidents and
adverse circumstances, with which pioneers have so fre-
quently to contend, put an end to the industry. Whether
the seal and motto of the Cardwell Shire is the phoenix
and " Resurgam ” the writer does not know, but it is
certain that Cardwell will rise fresher and stronger from
the ashes of its past. The land is there, the rainfall is
there, and settlement is going there.
The islands of Rockingham Bay cannot escape per-
petual admiration. Counting the Brook Group—twenty
miles out from Cardwell —Goold and Garden Islands, the
Family Group, and Dunk Island with all its satellites, the


steamer passes eighteen in as many miles, the largest and
fairest being Dunk Island, whereon is a solitary but
ideally located homestead. This lies two and a-half miles
off Tam o’ Shanter Point, where Kennedy, the explorer,
landed on his fateful expedition in 1848. These islands
vary in form, and are for the most part covered with scrub
and dense tropical jungle to the water’s edge. One feature
common to all, and to others further north, is a sandspit,
more or less pronounced, shooting out to the north-west,
aiding in the formation of a well-sheltered bay or cove.
With the exception of Goold and two islets close by, the
islands of Rockingham Bay have been proclaimed a per-
petual reserve or sanctuary for birds. Visitors to them
must subdue the instinct for killing something. Under any
circumstances it would seem almost sacrilege to disturb
the peace which presides over these charming scenes.
Much of what has been said of the Atherton Scrub
and its timber wealth may also be said of the Tully River
district. Up the higher reaches of the river may be seen
the cedar giants, stately trees which have weathered many
a furious storm, falling one by one at the will of the sturdy
settler, Butterbox pine, maple or silkwood, satin wood,
silky oak, black bean, yellow-wood, pencil cedar, Leich-
hardt, and others, grow in profusion along the water-
courses, and follow the streams at a depth varying from
a quarter of a mile to one mile, behind which the country
is sparsely timbered plain, clothed with natural grasses,
such as wild lucerne, wild oats, trefoil, Bokhara clover,
kangaroo grass, ivy couch, &c., which carry in their natural
state one beast to the acre and a-half all the year round.
On the plain country, which is slightly undulating, the soil


is dark sandy loam, and in the scrubs a light chocolate. In
the plain country cane, maize, lucerne, and other crops
grow luxuriantly, while scrub soil will always speak for
itself. On the Tully River, about six miles from its mouth,
stands the village of Rockingham, a settlement of about
100 persons. Here the Adelaide Steam Navigation
Company have a wharf and sheds for the convenience of
local shippers.
Among the industries of the Upper Tully may be
mentioned banana cultivation, Para rubber, cane, maize,
and cattle raising—the banana cultivation being chiefly in
the hands of Chinamen. (Reference to this will be seen
in another part of this booklet.)
One peculiar feature of the land is the wonderful
fertility of the dark soil plain country. Unlike the forest
country in other places, the Tully River district forests,
when cleared, grow excellent cane, maize, and the usual
crops of a first-class agricultural farm.
Appended are extracts from letters written by South-
ern farmers and others, who have inspected these lands
The comments have the ring of honest conviction about
them, though in some cases the writers had gone with
prejudiced minds, believing that the reports were too good
to be true, and that Tully district lands, like other lands,
were vastly over-rated. However, they have seen, and
now believe. What is there for them to see is there also
for others to see. The land there is waiting for the settler,
and soon the plains will be parcelled out into farms with
the dairy cow in full evidence, and the boundary fences
running north, south, east, and west, surrounding the


03
B
P
2
>*
P
3
P
EH
H
a
2
◄
5
fc
◄
«
>■<
p
M
H
w
a
=
H


comfortable dairy farmers’ homes. Land of this quality
never remains long unoccupied, and the occupation means
the ultimate wealth of the occupant.
REPORT ON “THE TULLY RIVER SCRUB”
Mr. G. L. Bondfield.
The country here is magnificently watered, the soil
good, and the climate ditto. Along the watercourses there
is a fringe of scrub well timbered, varying from one
quarter to one mile in depth, with chocolate soil. As soon
as one emerges from the scrub a great area of undulating
plain country bursts upon the view, and is a very pleasant
sight after walking through the scrub. Across those
undulations I found trefoil, Russel River grass, blue,
kangaroo grass, wild lucerne, wild oats, and Bokhara
clover, growing indigenous to the soil, and it occurred to
me that if a farmer got in here, and sent the butter, fresh
pork, eggs, and vegetables to the cities, before the Atherton
or Evelyn men can get their timber down, what a fortune
there is to be made. On this land one could strike a
furrow for 40 acres and not meet a root or stump. On
inquiry, a gentleman here, who has been a resident for
about thirty years, told me I would be quite within bounds
in saying it would carry a beast to the acre and a-half
all the year round. And it looks like it. Magnificent
chocolate soil in the scrub, and black soil in the open.
Bananas, pineapples, citrus fruits, stone fruits, mangoes,
papaws, lucerne, Guinea grass, maize, Rhodes grass, &c.,
do well. A very interesting object-lesson is being taught
here by Mr. Bryce Henry. This gentleman has leased a
considerable extent of land with water frontage for


banana cultivation. Among the banana plants eight acres
of the Para rubber plants have been set. This small area
carries fifteen hundred plants. Now, it is estimated that
five years is as long as the banana will thrive in the one
place, so the rubber plants are set in between the bananas.
By the time the latter are worked out, the rubber will
mature, and as the yield of each rubber tree is valued at
ios. the first year, 15s. the second year, and £1 yearly
thereafter, and only parts of the Queensland coast are
suitable for rubber cultivation, it is evident the Tully River
land is a good investment. Boats of light draught go up
the river collecting the produce, and carry it to sea to meet
the deep-sea vessels trading along the coast. The upper
reaches of the district are sparsely settled, but towards
its mouth settlement is greater. Pioneers here will have
no greater difficulties than usual in pioneering, rather to
the contrary. So little clearing is necessary that returns
from dairying or agriculture would be early.
PARA RUBBER TAPPING, Etc.
The process by which the marketable product is
obtained, in the case of rubber, involves a system of
cutting or scoring the bark in some manner so that the
resulting exudation (the rubber latex) is caught and
subsequently solidified. This is technically known as
“ tapping,” which name, however, does not happily describe
the operation. The period at which the trees may be
tapped for rubber is a matter of size rather than age, the
recognised minimum being a circumference of some 15 to
18 inches 3 feet from the ground, and which size may be


attained in four years under specially favourable con-
ditions, five years with attention, cultivation, and care,
or six years under normal circumstances and no especial
cultivation, in North Queensland.
By the time the trees are this size the lacticiferous
system, which consists of ducts or cells throughout the
bark of the whole tree, is approaching maturity. These
cells consist of a series of sacs or irregularly-shaped tubes,
generally long and hairlike, running with the grain— i.e.,
longitudinally or vertically. These would seem, however,
to have no regular continuity, and the area drained by
one tapping is but slight. Hence the flow of latex is not
long continued, and many tappings are necessary to obtain
any appreciable quantity of rubber. Since the lacticiferous
is vertical, or practically so, the cuts necessary to enable
the ducts to be emptied, or as nearly emptied as possible,
must consequently be horizontal. Not entirely horizontal
either, for then the latex would run over the bark and
largely be lost, or at least most difficult to collect, but on
a slope, to enable the latex to be caught and collected in
a cup or receptacle at one end.
As the method of tapping became more systematised
the cuts were made lighter, but still a fresh cut was made
for each tapping. During this period these generally
consisted of one sloping cut 6 to 12 inches in length, or of
two at about the same angle, meeting at a point like the
letter V, so that the latex from both could be collected in
one receptacle. The more modern method of tapping, and
what is called progressive tapping, consists of re-opening
the first cut by taking off a thin shaving of bark from the
lower side of it. This, of course, means an immense


Xfl
Q
◄
H
*
O
O
PS
M
3
w
a
g
3
fH
H
p
EH
ri
Eh


saving of bark or tapping area. The next step is to save
collecting tins or receptacles, or rather reduce the number
necessary, and so, instead of the two cuts constituting the
“ V ” method, a number of cuts are connected, giving rise
to what is now known as the half and full “ herring-bone ”
methods. The spiral method consists, as the name implies,
of cuts winding round the tree trunk to the ground, which
tap a maximum area without actually ringing the tree.
Where a tree is substantial enough several such cuts are
made, giving rise to the multiple spiral method; and when
the distance the latex has to flow is found to be excessive,
and discloses a tendency to coagulate before reaching the
receptacle, cups are placed at more reasonable intervals,
and the method is called the half spiral.
Of these methods, for general purposes, the full
herring-bone is the best and most useful, and next to it
perhaps the ordinary V. The disadvantages of the V’s,
however, are in the necessity of fixing the receptacles
somehow on the tree, which is apt to injure the bark and
render the surface uneven for subsequent tapping, whereas
in the herring-bone systems the main vertical channel may
be taken to the ground, where the cup may be easily and
quickly placed and rest safely. The spiral methods, owing
to the amount of walking round necessary, have been
found to take somewhat longer to cut or pare, though
otherwise satisfactory.
As the processes of tapping evolved from a crude
gashing to a delicate shaving of the bark tissues, new and
appropriate implements were devised. The simplest knife


or chisel has become the most popular, and the last-
mentioned, or Michie-Golledge tapping knife, will be
found the one most in use and likely to be used.
On an old and large tree, I foot in length for such
cuts will be found as long as can be conveniently made.
On small trees it is a good rule never to include more
than half the circumference. Thus, on a tree of, say, five
years of age, 6 inches in diameter, the side cuts should be
4 inches to 5 inches in length only if on both sides of the
vertical channel, or twice this if only on one side (half
herring-bone). Generally, too, it will be found that, unless
the trees are exceptionally even in growth, the cuts nearer
the ground will be longer than those higher up the trunk.
With large trees it is better to have a number of “ herring-
bone ” or “ V ” systems than to have unwieldy side cuts,
and, with the spiral system, to make half or multiple
spirals of them. To ensure these side cuts, which should
be alternate rather than opposite, being parallel, a good
method is to have a piece of thin tin or zinc cut to the
desired shape—viz., a four-sided figure, with the parallel
sides at an angle of about 45 degrees with the top and
bottom. In width both vertical channel and first or open-
ing slanting cuts should be to inch, which will be
found quite sufficient for subsequent working. The open-
ing up of trees will be found to take a little time, and the
number that can be done in a day not great, at any rate,
at first; but it is better to do it carefully and well than
risk damage to a tree that can never be again undone.
Subsequent tapping consists of paring off the least
possible thickness of bark sufficient to open up the cells


and start the latex flowing again. The bark will be found
granular rather than fibrous in texture, so that with a
sharp tool the necessary thin shavings may be pared off
quickly and neatly with but little practice. In tapping
rubber a blunt knife wastes bark surface by tearing instead
of clearly cutting; renders the scrap difficult to take off,
and, owing to extra power required, is far more apt to
slip, and to make ugly wounds in the cambium when it
does slip, than is a sharp knife.
The best time of day to tap is early in the morning
or late in the afternoon, as the flow of latex has been
found to decrease somewhat in the heat of the day, and
also has then a tendency to coagulate too rapidly and on
the face of the cuts, which adds to the proportion of scrap
rubber, is more difficult to collect as well as less valuable,
and hinders the natural flow.
Tapping ordinarily in this country should not be
continued after about 10 or n a.m. or started again before
5 p.m., but in cloudy weather or in well laid out planta-
tions, where the situation is naturally a protected one and
the trees shade each others’ stems, the time might be
lengthened. It is a good plan to start tapping early with
the outside or exposed trees first, continuing till n a.m.,
and then collecting the latex, taking it into the shed and
coagulating it at once, subsequently collecting the scrap
in the afternoon.
There is no especially recognised season for tapping,
which, under favourable conditions, may be continued all
the year round. In very heavy monsoonal weather, how-
ever, it becomes difficult, if not impossible, owing to the
rain-water running down the tree trunk and either
mingling with and washing the latex (and a considerable


TAPPING RUBBER TREES, KAMERUNOA STATE NURSERY,


amount of dirt) over the bark indiscriminately or swamp-
ing the collecting tins; also, if a good crop of fertile seed
is desired, it has been found inadvisable to continue tap-
ping through the blossoming period. During dry periods
of the day in the rainy season tapping can be satisfactorily
carried out, and the flow of latex will be found rather
more free; but, as it is not so thick as in drier weather, it
is an open question whether much more is obtained. In
very dry weather the flow, on the other hand, will be
found to be materially less, though thicker in consistency.
Tapping should be done regularly and as nearly as
possible at similar intervals of time to obtain the best
results. The frequency with which any one cut may with
safety and advantage be re-opened depends upon a curious
natural action in the growth of bark or new covering of
the severed latex cells, by which an extra supply of latex
is supplied to the newly healing parts. Every other day,
therefore, is the most frequent period at which tapping
may be best done.
In opening trees for the first time the amount of latex
obtained is often little, but as the operations continue the
flow will be found for the above reason to materially
increase. Sometimes but little wound response is notice-
able for the first week or more, and the operator is
inclined to cut away more bark dr to cut deeper; this
inclination must be combated, however, for nothing is to
be gained by the removal of more bark, and the wound
response is not in the least hastened thereby.
When this swelling to almost bursting point of the
latex cells takes place, it can be understood that but the


thinnest of shavings or parings is necessary to open the
cells and obtain a steady flow of the valuable “ milk.”
After tapping, the flow of latex seldom continues for
more than about two hours, and often ceases within a few
minutes; then the contents of the cups are collected and
taken to the store or house for subsequent treatment.
The amount of bark removed in a season or a year
varies very much with the nature of the tree. If the
transverse cuts are apart, and alternate as suggested, and
the tapping is carefully done, the lower cut will not be
reached for a twelve month or so with regular cutting
three times a week (every other day). Renewed hark
should not be tapped for eighteen months or so, and, if
possible, left for two years. The growth can be tested
from time to time by the point of a penknife.
Theoretically the latex should be collected and
brought into the store or rubber-room for treatment
directly it has stopped flowing from the tree into the
collecting cup; but as the length of time for which each
tree will continue flowing is variable, and the fact that
trees cannot all be tapped at the same moment, this is not
practicable. Generally, therefore, the tapper continues his
tapping until his task or tale of trees is finished; but as
soon as this is done the latex from each cup, commencing
from the tree first tapped, should be collected by being
poured into a larger utensil. For a small plantation a
large “ billycan ” will do, but as any rust or dirt will
discolour and contaminate the latex the utensils should
be enamelled, and, needless to add, kept clean.


When brought in, the latex must be strained to get
rid of small particles of bark, dirt, or any extraneous
matter. This is done through fine wire, or by preference
hair sieves, or even cheese or butter cloth. In doing this,
if the latex is thick and does not flow through the sieve
readily it must not be rubbed or assisted with the fingers,
as the friction involved will be sufficient to cause some of it
to coagulate on the sieve and render the sieve useless by
"blocking the interstices to some extent. In this case the
latex must be diluted with more water. If drip-tins have
not been used water has often to be added at this stage,
sometimes to the amount of four or five times the volume
of pure latex.
Coagulation is the solidification of the rubber from
the milky solution. The rubber at this stage is in minute
globules suspended in the water. If left exposed to the
air coagulation will take place naturally in from twenty-
four hours to three or four days; but it may be induced
artificially and in much less time by the addition of
chemicals, by heating, or by agitation (churning). Rubber
latices are naturally either slightly acid or alkaline, and
whichever they are found to be by testing with litmus
paper, a neutral or slightly opposite condition must be
induced. Para rubber latices are nearly always found to
be slightly alkaline, and therefore acids form the best
coagulants, and for this purpose acetic, formic, tannic,
and other mild acids are the most used. For acid latices
alum, salt, or corrosive sublimate may be used to induce
coagulation, while formalin and ammonia will in either
case hinder the formation of that condition in which the
rubber globules will readily agglutinate. Hence a few


p
>
3
>*
a
-3
P
H
Pm
O
«
9
H
£
M
o
◄
a
-*i
o
o
a
<
a
►*
fl
a
a
a
H


drops of ammonia are sometimes added to the water in
the drip-tins to insure coagulation not taking place incon-
veniently rapidly when some delay in the prompt collection
of the latex is seen to be unavoidable. When such
restraining chemicals have been used a little more acid will
generally be found necessary to obtain proper coagulation.
Of the coagulants used acetic acid is the most common
and safest. Care must be taken not to use too much, as
an excess of coagulant, especially an acid, hinders the
coagulating of the rubber. To find the correct amount the
litmus paper should be used; and a few drops at a time be
added to a portion of the latex with a pipette and stirred
in till blue litmus paper is turned faintly pink. The
quantity should not exceed i drachm to a gallon of pure
latex, and generally three to five drops will be found
sufficient for a dish or pan. The quantity of acid is in
proportion to the pure latex, and not the water and latex,
hence if the I drachm be required to coagulate a gallon,
this amount would not need to be increased even were the
latex mixed with 10 gallons of water.
Fresh latex from newly opened trees is sometimes
found to be naturally slightly acid. This will, however,
often pass off. and may be readily coagulated by the
addition of acetic acid in the usual way if its addition is
deferred for a few hours after setting in the pan. Occa-
sionally, however, from unknown reasons, despite the care
taken in testing and measuring, the latex will not coagu-
late, but this will very seldom be met with.
Once the acid or coagulant has been added the latex
may be churned or set in pans. The heating process is


cumbersome and unsatisfactory. If churned, any small
butter churn will answer the purpose. The proper
mechanical coagulators, such as the Michie-Golledge, have
the centre clear and the paddles so fixed as to impart a
centripetal movement to the latex, whereby the coagulated
rubber is thrown into the central vortex and is readily
removed in a plastic lump. With any sort of butter
churn the rubber generally solidifies on the paddle, and is
more or less troublesome to remove, besides taking longer
to coagulate. By this means (churning) the rubber can
he obtained in a few minutes, but for small plantations is
hardly as satisfactory as the coagulating pan system. On
large estates where hundreds of gallons of latex have to
be dealt with, and a coagulator run by machinery can take
20 or 30 gallons or more at a time, it is certainly rapid,
clean, and satisfactory.
The coagulating pans are enamelled iron saucer-like
pans 10 or 12 inches in diameter and i l / 2 inches deep, with-
out any lip. The 10-inch pans hold about 50 oz. or
pints of liquid, which, when the acid has been dropped in
and stirred, are set to coagulate on a table or shelf. At
this stage care must be taken to so place the pans that
dust and insects cannot get at or into them, for, as the
rubber coagulates, it becomes very sticky, and dust not
only adheres, but any adventurous fly or other insect,
taking it for something palatable and alighting on it, ends
its hours there and is difficult subsequently to get rid of.
The rubber-room or place where this work is carried out
and the pans set to coagulate should not be too shut in.
Plenty of air is advisable, but while the sunshine, and of
course the rain, should be kept out, it is not necessary to


make the special arrangements for coolness that a dairy
requires. If i foot wide shelves are arranged round the
walls, 6 or 8 inches above each other, to carry the pans
of setting latex, a gauze screen or curtain could be
arranged to keep off flies and insects. It is always advis-
able, if at all possible, to have water laid on and a sink
or similar arrangement in the rubber-room, not merely
for the water required for admixture with, or dilution of,
the latex, and subsequently washing the biscuits, but to
facilitate the washing of collecting cups and cans, pans,
dishes, and utensils generally. Cleanliness in the rubber-
room, to obtain the best results, is as necessary as in the
dairy.
REVIEW OF THE RUBBER MARKET FOR THE
YEAR 1910
(From the Report of Messrs. Gow, Wilson, and Stanton,
Limited.)
Market Conditions. — It can be no exaggeration to
say that the past year has been the most remarkable in
the history of the rubber industry since the discovery of
vulcanisation.
Though the Brazilian crop last season was larger
than ever before, the current demand for raw rubber was
such that prices were raised to an unparalleled level,
which was maintained for several months.
Consumption, however, gradually became hampered
by the strain of high prices, and this, coupled with the




inevitable speculation induced by the condition of busi-
ness, brought about a reaction in May, since when the
tone of the market has been largely dominated by the
stocks and the general trade outlook in America.
The highest prices ever recorded for crude rubber
were made in April, when the quotation for hard fine Para
reached 12s. 6d. per lb., while at the auction on the 19th
■of that month plantation smoked sheet realised up to
12s. iod. per lb., and the average price of all kinds of
plantation rubber sold that day was no less than ns
per lb (or, say, one-third of the value of silver).
After the prolonged period of high quotations and
generally exceptional trade conditions, the reaction has
reduced prices to a basis on which manufacturers are
better able to safeguard and cater for the requirements of
the industry, and it is satisfactory to record that the
condition of the trade generally is now far more healthy
than has been the case for some considerable time past.
High prices have seriously interfered with the enor-
mously increased powers of consumption which have been
manifest during the past two years, and have had the
effect of bringing into use a much larger quantity of waste
rubber and other compounds. This is strikingly shown by
the imports into the United States; the quantity of old
■scrap for re-manufacture imported during the first nine
months of 1910 amounted to 13,327 tons, as compared
with 2,714 tons for the same period two years before.
This example gives some idea of the extent to which
increasing supplies of raw rubber could be handled at
moderate prices by displacing these very large quantities


of inferior substances, to the ultimate advantage of the
industry from the consumers’ (as well as producers’)
point of view.
Plantation Rubber. —London Auctions: The
amount of plantation rubber offered at the London
auctions during the year aggregated 95,394 packages (or
5> 1 93/ / z tons), which figures compare with 50,602
packages (or 2,684 tons) for 1909.
For the period under review the average price realised
at auction was the highest on record, viz., 7s. per lb.,
being no less than is. per lb. over the previous record
established in 1909.
The following table shows the expansion of the in-
dustry during the past five years:—
Total Quantity and Average Price of Plantation Rubber
Offered at Auction in London during the past Five
Years.
Ist Jan.to 31st
Packages
Offered.
15,380
24,047
50,002
95,394


1st Jan. to 31st I)ec.
Number of
Packages Sold.
Average Price
Paid.
s. d.
1900
4,130
5 6i
1997...
7,388
4 9g
1908... ...
10,018
4 1|
1909
40,877
0 7s
1910
85,438
7 Ti
*
During the past year nearly double the quantity of
these grades of rubber has been received as compared with
that brought to the London market during 1909. This,
coupled with the fact that the average realised was higher
than during the previous year, causes the result, so far as
Though there are differences of opinion as to the
quality of plantation rubber, the increasing quantities
continue to be freely taken in all markets, and we are again
able to refer to a satisfactory feature which has been much
in evidence, viz., the disposition amongst manufacturers to
contract for the crops of plantations in advance, strong
inquiry having been observable even when “ spot” markets
were quiet.
Preparation. —For the past 18 months the result of
experience with the rubber has induced many manufac-
turers to give a decided preference to that cured with
smoke, it being noticeable that a premium is generally
given for this preparation when properly carried out.
Thorough smoking has a preserving effect, with the
result that the rubber is better able to stand the handling
necessitated in manufacture and subsequent use.


p 3
5*
t>
EH
aT
◄
55
◄
«
O
55
11
gj
E
CO


The process is, therefore, strongly to be recommended,
but if the premium at present offered is to be maintained,
it is, of course, essential that the quality must be kept up.
A very important fact which cannot be too strongly
brought before the notice of planters is, that on the estate,
the less handling rubber undergoes the better; all that is
required is to wash out the impurities, and reduce the
coagulated rubber into the most suitable form for econo-
mical drying. There has lately been a marked tendency to
roll out crepe very thin to hasten drying, but it is desirable
that crepe in the finished form should be thick and even in
texture, say Y%- inch thick. Smoking carefully applied
during drying is beneficial, either to sheet or any other
kinds prepared.
Generally speaking, the preparation of plantation
rubber now arriving shows improvement in various direc-
tions, more attention being given to factories and
machinery than formerly, and the sending out of chemists
to Ceylon and the Malay States to study the question on
the spot has been a valuable move in the right direction,
which should have beneficial results.
Standard Quality. —In view of the proportions
which the plantation industry is now assuming, the need of
establishing and maintaining an efficient standard of
quality cannot be exaggerated.
Especially in the case of what is known as “ First
Latex Crepe,” there have been complaints on account of
the streaky and discoloured nature of many arrivals.
These, if continued, might affect the prospects of planta-


tion rubber successfully competing with other grades, and
estate managers must take every possible precaution to
ensure that their first-quality rubber is in fact first quality
and free from any such defects as those referred to.
Para. —As with plantation so with Para, the last com-
plete crop has been the largest, excepting that of 1909, by
nearly 1,000 tons, the sole cause being no doubt the satis-
factory prices ruling.— Q.A. Journal.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS re TULLY
RIVER LAND
Q. Nature of soil?
A. In the scrub, light chocolate soil, something similar to
Atherton; in the plain country, black soil, ex-
tremely fertile.
Q. Average rainfall?
A. 100 inches; number of years recorded, 35. Number
of wet days, 103. Greatest rainfall recorded, 15 1
inches, in 1894. Smallest rainfall recorded, 41.30
inches, in 1902.
Q. Class of timber?
A. Maple or silkwood, silky oak, sassafras, black bean.
hoop-pine, pencil cedar, satinwood.
Q. Nearest port?
A. Deepsea boats “ heave to” opposite mouth of Tully.
River boat conveys produce to them and cargo back
to the settlement.


Is Tally River navigable?
Q
A
Yes; for small craft, about the size of your river
passenger boats.
Q
A.
Cost of passage from Brisbane, and route?
About £2O. Go by boat to Cardwell, ride 20 miles
from there; good road. Or go to mouth of Tully
and take launch up Tully River. Or go to Towns-
ville, and ride or drive from there.
Q
A.
Q
Has residence to be done by selector or otherwise ?
Yes, either by selector or his representative.
Can an investor with, say, £5OO get more than the
section 640 acres, either by selection or purchase
from Crown or private owners?
A.
Q.
A.
640 acres is the maximum the Crown will grant.
Maximum heat in shade?
Cannot say—no way of finding out. The writer was
there in the end of November, 1907, and found it
cooler there than at Grafton or Lismore at that
time of the year. As the crow flies it is only about
13 miles from the sea.
The Torres Straits Mail Service, which will bring
North Queensland in quick touch with the growing
markets of the East, must ensure a good time for the
agriculturist in the North, as the distance from those ports
will be only about one-third of the route that has been used
hitherto.


fa
fa
>
OS
fa
fa
H
fa
O
CO
M
fc
-ti
n
H
B
fc
O
fa
fa
fa
co
H
fa
O
H
co
■<J
◄
◄
fa


FERTILITY OF THE TULLY RIVER DISTRICT
“Pugh’s Almanac, 1911,” says: —
Land is being taken up rapidly on the Murray and
Tully Rivers, which possess soil unsurpassed in the State
for richness and depth. Sugarcane and all tropical and
semi-tropical fruits grow luxuriantly. Tobacco-growing
has now been started at Murray River.. The cigar leaf
brings as high as is. landed at Cardwell wharf ready for
shipment to Melbourne. Rubber is grown on Tully River
and Salt Water Creek, Cardwell, about 2,000 trees.
The Crown Lands Commissioner at Cairns says: —
On the Murray and Tully Rivers, and towards the
several Banyan Creeks, there are thousands of acres of
magnificent farming lands only waiting the advent of the
farmer. A tramline from Cardwell to these rivers would
open up some of the finest lands in North Queensland.
Valuable timbers, such as silky oak, maple, and pine,
are in large quantities in the scrubs and towards the
ranges. A fair quantity of bananas is shipped weekly
from these rivers.
OPINIONS OF NEW SOUTH WELSHMEN
Cairns, 16th November, 1908.
Just a few lines in reference to the Tully River land.
We put in a fortnight looking over the country in the Tully
River district, and we are surprised that such beautiful
land should be open for selection yet. We are of the
opinion the land is equal to the Richmond and Clarence
Rivers in New South Wales. Along the river banks are


strips of fine scrub lands extending back to about half-a-
mile, and then a strip of open plain country requiring very
little clearing to be ready for the plough. In fact, some
fair areas only require to have the grass burnt off. Behind
the plain country are strips of ti-tree swamps, which only
require draining and the trees ringing to make them into
first-class dairying land, if sown with artificial grasses; or
farming, if the seed were sown to miss the wet season.
Behind the swamps again are belts of open forest country.
In our opinion the timber on the scrub land is worth the
money paid for the land. The only drawback to the
district is the distance at present to the market, as there
are very few roads and a lot of creeks to cross, which
are at present in a very bad state. The local Shire Council
are at present trying to borrow money from the Govern-
ment with a view of building a tramline from Cardwell to
the Tully River, or one from the mouth of the river along
its banks. In our opinion, if the tramway is built and
good roads made, the Tully River district will be one of
the best producing districts on the North Coast. The land
is suitable for fruit-growing and dairying; in fact, for any
kind of farming at all. Corn and tobacco will mature
nearly all the year round. Anyone in search of coast lands
cannot do better than inspect the land on the Tully River
before selecting elsewhere. The worst thing about these
lands is that the grass grows so fast the stock cannot keep
it eaten down, and it gets too high and rank, but when
burnt the young grass is sweet enough for any kind of
stock.
Intending selectors would do well to call on Mr.
Savage, on Banyan Creek, and he will give them all the


information he can; also, Mr. Henry would also give any
assistance to intending selectors. It would be a good thing
if the Government were to make a road up to the Crown
land, so that intending selectors could get to the land with
a little ease. If you think this account is worth showing to
intending selectors you are at liberty to do so.
S. J. Edwards, Rye Park, Burrow, N.S.W.
R. E. Watt, Gulgong, N.S.W.
South Gate, Grafton, N.S.W.,
18th February, 1908.
I proceeded to Tully River, which is 25 miles distant
in a northern direction from Cardwell. The road from
Cardwell is good throughout, almost the entire length
being formed and drained.
The Cardwell residents favour the construction of a
tramline to Tully, and have already petitioned the Govern-
ment to carry out the work.
These properties are equal to the Clarence River
maize flats, being rich scrub lands and first-class open
country.
There are numerous small streams, and permanent
lagoons all over the open country, which is first-class land
suitable for cultivation, especially cane-growing. The
scrub land is rich, sandy loam. The marvellous growth of
vegetation, native fruits, soft timbers, and grasses are
indescribable.


Ctf
g
si
&H
P
H
P
H
S 3
H
Sh
Ph
P
fc
o
5
o
◄
p
w
S
si
H
B


This property is 14 miles from the mouth of the River,
which is navigable for eight months in the year. At
present there is a small steamer trading on the Tully and
adjoining rivers from Townsville. She calls at all the
ports and inlets between Cardwell and Cairns. She is
trading principally in the interests of banana growers, but
only runs up the Tully 6 miles from the mouth. No doubt
she would run further up if inducement offered.
There seems to be a very large area of timbered
country and an inexhaustible supply of saleable timbers,
such as silky oak, maple, pine, &c., and buyers are
plentiful.
There is no doubt as to the capabilities of the soil, and
the rainfall is very heavy. All the land is first-class dairy
country, suitable for fruit-growing, bananas, maize, and
cane.
The latter would probably pay best, and if the
Queensland Government could be induced to erect a sugar-
mill in a central position the land would be worth, at least,
£2O per acre.
The Tully is in a central position, having Cardwell 25
miles to the south, Maria Inlet 12 miles to the north,
Herberton at the head of the river, and the sea to the east,
with Innisfail lying 30 miles to the north-west.
I was informed that all the available country north,
north-west, and west of Tully is being taken up.
Maria Inlet, 12 miles off, is becoming an important
shipping centre, and there is a tramline from the jetty to




the banana plantations lying higher up the stream. I saw
some excellent cane on the Tully, the stalks weighing over
20 lb. each.
A. E. Warrington.
Dr. M. L. Cameron, of Gladstone road, South Bris-
bane, and late of the Manning River, N.S.W., writes: —
I left Brisbane on the 10th instant, and reached
Cardwell on the 14th instant.
Immediately on reaching the Tully we started to
inspect the property. Unfortunately it began to rain, and
in five days inches fell. It made it rather unpleasant,
but we got over the place pretty thoroughly. Although
there had been inches of rain, none lay on the surface
six hours after the rain had ceased. The subsoil is a
mixture of coarse gravel and clay, very porous. The scrub
land and the plain appear to be Ai, and good enough for
anything.
There are about 2,000 acres of what is here called
swampy land. That does not mean it is useless, but is
pretty heavily timbered with ti-tree, not like our ti-tree
in New South Wales, inasmuch as the soil where it grows
is a rich black loam. The greater part of this swampy
land is well grassed, but lower and wetter than the open
plain. You can form some idea of the amount of timber
on the scrub portion in this way. Mr. has been
cutting on the adjoining reserve, where the maple had
previously been all removed except a few rough trees, and
he has cut 100,000 ft. off from between 40 and 50 acres.


He reckons that there is about as much maple as silky oak
on the scrub that has not been touched, so that there will be
about 200,000 ft. of maple and oak on each 50 acres, and
it can all be got at through either the river, Jarra Creek,
or Banyan Creek. We started to cross in a catamaran, but
turned back, as our horses could not get a landing on the
opposite steep bank, so we never crossed the Jarra at all.
This I very much regretted, as I am told there are
thousands of acres of excellent country for 30 miles
higher up the Tully River, right up to where the cedar is.
The question of a tramline from Oyster Point, ij/2
miles south of Cardwell, to a point on the north side of
the Tully River, on the timber reserve just below Banyan
Creek, is the all-absorbing topic there. A majority of the
Shire Council is in favour of getting a Government loan
to construct the line, providing the Government builds the
jetty, which will require to be 1,400 ft. long to insure
10 ft. of water at low tide. For the 6 miles from
Corduroy Creek to the Tully the country is all good, and
it is universally conceded that the chief source of revenue
will be from the north side of the Tully, where there are
3 acres of good land for every one on the south side.
There would require to be a bridge across the Murray
and one across the Tully. Another scheme I suggested
was to connect the Tully with a line to the Maria Creek
tramline. There is practically no range to cross, and it
would run through good country all the way.
All citrus fruits flourish there. I never saw better
mandarins and oranges with so little cultivation; mangoes
are growing wild; papaws could not grow better any-


where; paspalum does as well as anywhere. lam bringing
with me some roots of grass well thought of here, said to
be better than paspalum; it is called ivy couch. I never
saw or heard of it before. Bullocks which have been
working seven days in the week are fat, but they have
been washed periodically with tick dip.
Mr. Isaac Henry is prepared to put in 1,000 acres of
cane in one year if a mill will start. There are a few
stalks of cane at his place, and also where Mr. King is
living, which proves that cane will grow well even among
ti-tree.”
Besides the road from Townsville to Cardwell, there
is steam traffic up the river, and an agitation is progress-
ing to connect the north bank of the Tully with Oyster
Point, a locality about 2 miles south of Cardwell, where
at small expense a jetty can be constructed at which the
large ocean-going boats going north and south can call.
This will be a great advantage to the Tully district, as it
will mean the facility for shipping products to Northern
or Southern ports.
In addition to this the progressive railway policy of
the Government, which has included in its proposals the
linking up of the great cities of Townsville and Cairns,
and other connections south of Townsville, will give
railway connection to this famous Tully River district
with Brisbane, thus making accessible markets for the
settler, wcih, as a rule, are denied to the pioneer.




A most satisfactory feature of this land is its timber
wealth and a sawmill already established there, and its
absolute freedom from rabbits and prickly pear.
SUMMARY OF LAND LAWS
Agricultural Selections.
Agricultural Farms.
The largest area that may be acquired by any one
person as an Agricultural Farm is 2,560 acres, but so
large an area is not likely to be allowed except in remote
districts. The notification opening the land specifies in each
case how much any one person may select. The purchas-
ing price may range from 10s. an acre upwards, as may
be notified. The term is twenty years. The annual rent
is one fortieth of the purchasing price, and the payments
are credited as part of the price.
In cases where the condition of personal residence
applies, the selector must reside on the selection person-
ally for the first five years of the term, and thereafter his
registered bailiff may perform the condition of occupation.
In other cases the land must be continuously occupied by
the selector residing on it personally or by registered
bailiff. Within five years from the issue of the license to
occupy, or such extended time as the Court may allow,
the selector must enclose the land with a good and
substantial fence or make substantial improvements on
it of a value equal to the cost of such a fence. On the
completion of the improvements the selector becomes


entitled to a lease of the farm, and may thereafter mort-
gage it; or, with the permission of the Minister, may
subdivide or transfer or sublet it.
An Agricultural Farm, subject to the condition of
personal residence during the first five years of the lease,
cannot during such period be mortgaged, except to the
Agricultural Bank, or be transferred.
After five years of the term have elapsed, the pre-
scribed conditions of personal residence or occupation and
improvement having been duly performed, a deed of grant
may be obtained on payment of the balance of the pur-
chasing price and deed fees. A small discount is allowed
on accelerated purchase.
ADVANTAGES OF DAIRYING IN QUEENSLAND
The following is the Departmental summary of Land
Laws relating to Agricultural Farms:—
One advantage which Queensland possesses for the
dairy farmer—and, perhaps, the most has not been made
of it in attracting settlement —is that, while the winter
months in the other States cause the output to contract
until the export trade practically ceases, dairying can be
carried on in Queensland during the whole year. This
advantage is best illustrated by figures from the latest
report of Weddel and Co., London, from which the


June
... ! 1,029
July
101
August
82
September
... i 655
figures relating to the export
cold months have been taken,
of
as
butter during the four
follow:
Victoria.
X.S.W.
Queensland.
11,005
Total 1,867 I 12,429 20,302
The warm months do not place Queensland in an
unfavourable position, as at the present time the amount
of butter in Brisbane is taxing the cold storage accommo-
dation.—Brisbane Courier.
In 1902 Queensland produced 4,851,362 lb. butter,
in 1906, 22,746,593 lb., and in 1910, 3 1 ,258,333 lb., as
showing the remarkable advantages which Queensland
offers to the dairyman, though in 1882 it was necessary
to import for consumption within the State 781,422 lb. of
butter.


possible.
Stations.
FARES
Single.
Return.
Between Brisbane and—
£ s.
d.
£ s. d.
Mackay
6 6
3
10 15 9
Bowen
6 11
6
11 11 6
Townsville
7 2
0
12 2 0
Charters Towers
7 11
6
12 18 6
Ravens wood ...
7 11
0
12 17 6
Hughenden
8 14
0
14 19 6
Richmond
8 19
6
15 9 0
Cion curry
9 10
6
16 9 0
Winton
9 3
6
15 16 6
Cairns
8 3
0
13 18 9
Kuranda
8 5
6
14 3 3
Mareeba
8 8
6
14 8 3
Atherton
8 11
0
14 12 9
Quick Service by Rail & Steamer
Brisbane and North Queensland
Passengers may book direct between Brisbane and Northern Ports, and
vice versa , via Gladstone.
Passengers leaving Brisbane by rail at 10.30 p.m. on Fridays
arrive at Gladstone at 12.40 p.m. on the following day, and at once
embark on board the mail steamer, reaching Townsville at S-°
a.m. on the following Monday, thence to Cairns by connecting
steamer; and similarly, passengers leaving Townsville by the mail
steamer at 10.30 p.m. on Mondays arrive at Gladstone on the
following Wednesdays, and are at once taken forward by rail to
Brisbane, arriving there at 6.5 a.m. on Thursdays, connecting
with the Sydney Mail Train.
When the Northern mail steamer arrives at Gladstone before
9.30 a.m. on Wednesdays, a Special Train will leave Gladstone for
Brisbane at 9.40 a.m. Should the steamer arrive later, a Special
Train will leave Gladstone for Brisbane as soon after arrival as
Children 3 years of age and under 12 years of age, Half
Fares; Children 12 years of age and over, Full Fare.
The Fares cover First Class Accommodation and Sleeping
Berths on the Railway, and First Saloon on board the Steamer.
Single Tickets and the forward portions of Return Tickets
are available for One Calendar Month.
Return Tickets are available for Six Calendar Months.
Tickets may be obtained from the A.U.S.N. Company’s
Offices at Brisbane, Mackay, Bowen, Townsville, Cairns, and
Charters Towers, and at the Railway Stations at Brisbane,
Charters Towers, Ravenswood, Hughenden, Richmond, Clon-
curry, Winton, Kuranda, Mareeba, and Atherton.
A Second Class Sleeping Car is running on the Rockhampton
Mail Train. The charge is 2s. 6d. per berth, but no bedding or
attendant is supplied.


BY AUTHORITY :
A. J GUMMING, GOVERNMENT PRINTER,
BRISBANE.




