

TUMBARUMBA BEAUTIFUL
"The (Jem of the Highlands”


T umbarumba.
Flanked in the rear by forest clad hills that tower sentinel-like above the town, and approached by a winding
road that opens out into a valley of streams and undulating country, Tumbarumba has been appropriately described
as the gem of the highlands.
Graceful willows, their leafy branches caressing the gently flowing streams, poplars reaching high to the heavens,
and flowers and shrubs abound in this delightful town 22 75 feet above sea level, the natural beauty of which pos-
sesses a definite and alluring charm.
Almost English in its setting, Tumbarumba is blessed with a climate second to none in New South Wales. The
seasons are clearly defined—warm, salubrious summer days always followed by delightfully cool nights, and bracing
winter cold—all of which tend towards variety without being too extreme.
Tumbarumba is a town that should be better known; a town that offers unlimited scope and pleasure for
tourists and ptersons desiring rest and peace amid picturesque surroundings.
One feature is the bathing pool, situated in natural s urroundings in the showground, the latter being a veritable
Garden of Eden, and recognised a s perhaps the most attractive country showground in the State. Here is to be
found the playground of the residents, who seek their leisure and pleasure beneath the shade of the trees calmly
swaying to the command of the gentle zephyrs. (Violent storms are almost unknown.)


The golf links, which have been described by visiting golfers as the Gleneagle s of New South Wales, are
situated on a hillside behind the town, and are ideal, both in setting and formation. Like a lawn in a wilderness of
trees, the racecourse is another asset to the town. The newly completed reservoir, which is to supply the town
needs, can be reached afte r a delightful walk over the golf links through an ever changing vista of scenery. The
return journey, by way of change, can be made by good road.
Ten miles from the town the Paddy’s River Falls offer an alluring picture of nature in all its wild, untameable
beauty, while for the sportsmen trout Ashing abounds in the numerous streams in the district. The shooting season
provides enthusiasts with ample sport.
This cameo but inadequately describes the natual attractions and resources of Tumbarumba, but it gives an
idea of what the visitor may expect. An idea is not sufficient, however, and therefore to satisfy themselves people
have only to make the journey to Tumbarumba. It will hade the effect of causing visitors to retain memories that
can only be satisAed by a repetition.


A striking- view of the
town of Tumbarumba,
showing Mount Tum-
barumba in the back-
ground
TUMBARUMBA


The Tumbarumba Coun-
cil Chambers, on the
corner of Winton and
Bridge Streets, were
built in 1935, at a cost
of £2200, a remarkably
low figure for a building
of this kind. It is hand-
some in external and
interior appearance, and
has the most modern
appointments for the
staff’s working, and a
commodious and well
furnished council room
SHIRE COUNCIL CHAMBERS


Although heavy snow-
falls are not of frequent
occurrence in the actual
township area, the hills
immediately behind the
town are often clothed
in a beautiful mantle of
white, while snow revels
are always obtainable
in the winter months at
no great distance from
Tumbarumba
TUMBARUMBA UNDER SNOW


The Tumbarumba dis-
trict abounds in trout
fishing streams of this
nature. This is a scene
on faddy’s River. The
enthusiastic angler need
have no dearth of sport
in Tumbarumba, and
he has not to go far
from the town to in-
dulge in his pleasure
TROUT FISHING


This picture shows por-
tion of the main street
of Tumbarumba, look-
ing south to its junction
with Bridge Street. Its
splendid avenue consists
of rare species, some of
which, in the flowering
period, present a mag-
nificent sight
PARADE STREET


A result of utility and
scenic beauty, the
swimming pool is situ-
ated on the Tumbar-
umba Showground. It
was constructed by
deepening and widen-
ing the creek bed, so
that the water i s con-
stantly flowing through
it. Its construction in
1935 was part of the
scheme for equipping
the showground as a
tourists’ camping
ground. This scheme
involved the expendi-
ture of more than £3OO
SWIMMING POOL


The Tumbarumba Dis-
trict Hospital, ideally
situated on a hill over-
looking the town, is a
nine bed institution,
employing a staff of six,
and with skilled medi-
cal attention, is
equipped to treat many
cases that formerly had
to travel to the larger
centres. The daily aver-
are of patients in 1935
was 3.91
DISTRICT HOSPITAL


One of the many charm-
ing creek scenes to be
seen in and around
Tumbarumba, blessed
many times over with
abundant supplies of
never failing streams
such as is depicted here
anjd affording the
nature lover beauty to
feast on, and ample
sport in the way of
trout fishing
CREEK SCENE


The only steam season-
ing works in the New
South Wales timber in-
dustry, the Alpine Ash
Ltd.’s yards at Tumbar-
umba have a tremen-
dous output, which is
ever increasing, pro-
viding employment for
a large number of men.
The work of this com-
pany is doing much to
popularise the beauti-
ful mountain ash, which
can be put to a number
of uses
TIMBER SEASONING WORKS


PADDY’S RIVER FALLS
Ten miles from the town of Tumbarumba the majestic
beauty of these fails provides a great point of interest in
the district. They have been classed by visitors as being-
superior to many of the falls that have earned fame in
other parts of the State. The stream is constantly running-
and many tons of water are falling from a height of 30 to
40 feet every minute of the year


A picturesque scene in
the bush near Tumbar-
umba. Thi s is one of
the several outposts in
the timber industry des-
tined to play no small
part in the great future
that lies ahead of the
Tumbarumba district
A BUSH TIMBER MILL


This is a scene on the
road, from Tumbarumba
to Batlow, which runs
through miles of beau-
tiful forest country
such as this. At times,
too, the road is high up,
looking down on forest s
of trees, affording views
of enthralling beauty
and majesty
FOREST BEAUTY


Freely admitted to oc-
cupy a place of pre-
eminence among the
prettiest showgrounds
of the State, the Tum-
barumba ground is situ-
ated in a most conve-
nient and easily acces-
sible part of the town.
On it are camping faci-
lities for tourists, so
complete and well cared
for that it has been
classed by the N.R.M.A.
ag No. 1 of the New
South Wales camping
grounds
PORTION OF TUMBAKUMBA SHOWGROUND


Kopsen’s Boat Oar Fac-
tory at Laurel Hill is
the only one of its kind
in the Southern Hemis-
phere. Here large num-
bers of men are em-
ployed the year round
converting the forest
giants into such things
as oars and handles for
the many and varied
agricultural implements
IliSSill
BOAT OAR FACTORY


Quite close to the town
of Tumbarumba the
lover of beauty in
nature can feast his
senses on such scenes
as this, where, too, if
he is very discreet, he
will hear the enchanting
call of the lyre bird
A FERN GULLY


The rugged grandeur
of the mountains is well
portrayed in this scene
near Tumbarumba,
which abounds in such
awe inspiring examples
of nature’s handiwork.
Mount Kosciusko is seen
in the distance
TOOMA VALLEY


Industrial Tumbarumba.
Beauty always appeals—i s always sought after—but no town can live on beauty alone. This is where Tum-
barumba excels. It has the beauty; a riot of nature in all its glory, but it has, too, an amazing number of important
industries, the results of which find undoubted favor on the chief markets of New South Wales.
In additdon to being a thriving business town, where the townspeople combine in civic pride for the betterment
of their fellows and the progress of the district, Tumbarumba is a noted sheep and cattle raising area. Potato
growing is carried out extensively, while the excellent soil conditions make the district one of the finest oat growing
centreg in the State.
The timber industry, perhaps, holds pride of place in the district, and for more reasons than one. In the first
place, Tumbarumba possesses the only boat oar making mill in the Southern Hemisphere; it possesses also the only
steam seasoning plant in New South Wales, and the whole of the timber is grown in the district. That in itself
indicates how richly endowed ig this town among the hills.
From the time Tumbarumba was founded, in 1857, it was found to b)e gold-bearing. Practically the whole of
the area on which the shopping centre now stands was worked by the miners of those early days, while interest
attaches to the fact that the present showground was at one time the Mecca of men seeking the precious metal.
Gold mining is still carried on to a small extent in the district, but it has no pretensions to being a mining town.
Another interesting industry is that of the distillation of eucalyptus. Here again nature plays a prominent part


in the progress of the district, and this industry, a vitally important one, is flourishing, and promises to be a big
factor in the future of Tumbarumba.
With the introduction and adoption of pasture improvement, the sheep breeders of the district are beginning to
make their presence felt on the fat lamb market, their product rivalling the best from any other part of the State.
The cattle, too, are definitely of a high standard, and the quality of the meat is excellent.
The numerous orchards, worked on the latest scientific lines, are producing some of the finest apples and pears
in the State, and the success of the growers is indicated by the keen demand for their fruit. The famous apple
orchards of Batlow are adjacent to Tumbarumba.
Briefly this traverses the position in Tumbarumba from a more or less agricultural and commercial viewpoint,
but its contrast with the natural beauties of the district would lead to the contention that nature and man have com-
bined to place Tumbarumba definitely and irrevocably in the forefront of the progressive towns of New South Wales,
Wholly Set Up and Printed at the ‘ ‘ Tumbarumba Times’ ’ Office, Tumbaru mba


/ V /
IUM
TUMBARUMBA BEAUTIFUL
"The gem of the Highlands”
