







ERRATA.
Page 15, line 2, from bottom, for adventures read adventurers.
„ 16, „ 8, „ top, for 250 B.C. read 200 B.C.
„ 53, „ 5, „ top, for wratliful the rend the wrathful.
„ 58, „ 5, „ bottom, for perhaps somewhat read perhaps
owing - somewhat.
„ 68, „ 6, „ top, for disloge read dislodge.
~ 73, „ 17, ~ top, for gentlemen read gentleman.
„ 74, „ 15, ~ top, for son read son’s.
~ 80, „ 9, ~ bottom, for as highly read was highly.
„ 89, „ 1, „ top, for trouble read trouble.
„ 89, „ 14, ~ top, for Li-tu read Ti-tu.
„ 90, „ 11, „ top, for form Christianity read form
of Christianity.
„ 90. „ 12, „ top, for protectorary read protectoral.
„ 91, ~ 4, „ bottom, for Tiu read Tui.
„ 91, ~ 18, „ top, after able bodied insert men.
„ 93, „ 4, „ top, for practical by read practically.
„ 95, „ 14, „ bottom,/#?' lead read led.
~ 112, „ 9, „ top, for cxpidition rend expedition.
„ 114, „ 2, ~ top, for metrailleuse read mitrailleuse.
115, „ 2, „ bottom, dele that.




UNG-KIKG-,
WILLIAM MESYY,
Major-General in the Imperial Chinese Army.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED,
HONGKONG:
PRINTED BY NORONHA & Co..
Nos. 5, 7 & 9, Zetland Street.
1884.




INTRODUCTION.
My motive in publishing this slight historical sketch,
is to meet a much needed want, by supplying the
public generally and the Eastern World in particular,
with reliable information about Tungking.
O O
The chief source of information has been the Yiieh-
nan-chi-lio, a native work published in Kwang-Si. I
am indebted, to the Prefect of Wu-chow for a copy of
that important work, and especially to His Excellency
Yiian or Ngu-yen the Annanese Ambassador in 1880
to the Court of Pekin, for his courtesy in affording
me much useful information about An-nan.
The account of the Black Flags is based upon know-
ledge acquired from two of my military pupils who
were sent upon an Imperial Mission to the Head
Quarters of the band at Lao Kai. As they were not
only natives of Kwang-Si, but had been formerly
trusted chiefs of the T‘ai-pings they were for a month
the welcome and honoimed guests of the daring Black
Flag leader Liu Ymlg-fu.
O O


1 have also to acknowledge the assistance I have
derived from Acheson’s Index to Williams’ Diction-
ary and to Mayer’s excellent Chinese Reader's Manual.
It was my intention to incorporate this little hook,
with the chapters on Yun-nan and Kwang-Si of a book
The Chinese Empire , now in course of preparation which
will contain an account of my travels, experiences, and
observations, in the Chinese Empire, and although that
course may still be followed the ignorance of the public
about Tungking made it advisable to publish these
notes at an early date and in a convenient form.
Wm. MESNY.
Hongkong, January , 1884.


CHAPTER I.
Tuugking —Boundaries, Meaning of the name—Chief city—lts
antiquity. Chinese legendary period —Historical name. Chi-
nese Official name—French Official names of Provinces and
Districts —Chinese nomenclature adopted by the Annanese —
Origin of the name Lo-yiieh-ti—King Lo—The Lo nation and
its ruler —Shu Wang —The Hsiung Nation —Period of the Lo
and Hsiung —Period of T £ ad and T £ ang —Hsi-shu the Chinese
Envoy—The court of Nan Chiao —Exiled Chinese Minister of
State— £ Huan Chou —The Modern Province of I-An.
Tungking, is the term by which that portion of the
kingdom of An-nah, forming the delta of the Song-koi
or Red River, is generally known.
The Chinese kingdom forms the boundary of Tung-
king on ttvo sides. The Northern boundary is formed
by the provinces of Yun-nan and Kwang-Si, and the
Eastern by the provinces of Kwang-Si and Kwang-
Tung. On the South and West, Tungking is limited
by the Black River and the Gulf of Tungking.
The word Tungking, like all names in the kingdom
of An-nan, is Chinese, and means Eastern Capital.
This name was originally given to the chief city,
now known as Ha-noi, or £ Ho-nei, when that place was
the seat of royalty, but it has gradually acquired a
wider significance until the present day when the name
embraces the whole of the surrounding country. The
name would seem to be of comparatively recent date


having been used for the first time at the close of the
last century when the city of Ha-noi was rebuilt and
fortified on Yauban’s system.
The Country has been known to the Chinese, under
various names, from a very early date, as mention is
made of it in the legendary period of Chuan Hii or
about two thousand five hundred years ( 2500 B.C. )
before the commencement of the Christian Era. At
that time it was known as Chiao-chih by which name
it is still called in the ordinary parlance of daily life.
We next find mention of the Country under the
style of Yiieh-nan-kuo which is at the present time
the official title applied to the whole of An-nan.
Subsequently it was known by the various names
of Lo-yiieh-ti, Nan-chiao, Lu-liang, Chiao-chou,
Wu- pfing-chiin, Chiu-chiin, Sung-pfing-chiin, An-nan,
or An-nam, Ching-‘hai-chun, Ling-nan-hsi-tao, Ta-
yiieh, and finally in 1175 A.D., the name An-nan,
became, by order of the then reigning Emperor Hsiao-
tsung of the Southern Sung dynasty, the name of the
country. This name is now generally incorrectly
written as An-nam, a fashion set by the French. Not-
withstanding this dictum of the Son of Heaven, we
may consider the true historical name to be Yiieh-nan.
We first find mention of the country by this name in
B.C. 2500, and the fact of that name being handed
down from the dim vistas of the legendary period, and
surviving to the present day as the official name is
undoubted evidence of its widespread use and popula-
rity.


The French, however, may and doubtless have good
reasons for preferring An-nam as the collective name
of the territory they appear determined to acquire, and
I am not disposed to dispute their choice of names
whether Dai-bing or Song-koi, Tungking or Ha-noi
as* these names will, when necessary, be used by me as
those most generally known and in common use
amongst Europeans,
The country has in the past often been divided and
sub-divided by various sovereigns, and in a map 1 have
by me, the country is divided in the Chinese manner
into twenty-eight Sheng or provinces, each Sheng
beins; sub-divided into several Hsiens or districts.
o
The entire official nomenclature for the various offi-
cial posts and officers is identically the same as that in
use throughout the Chinese Empire.
The provinces and districts of An-nan are necessa-
rily much smaller than they are in the Middle King-
dom, but this fact although it makes the official duties
lighter and the emoluments considerably less than in
China does not materially affect the official duties re-
quired of Government officers which are virtually the
same in China and An-nan.
We have thus far seen that the legendary records of
the Chinese mention An-nan, as early as 2500 8.C.,
under the name of Yueh-nan before which time tra-
dition says it was known as Chiao-chih and subse-
quently as Lo-yueh-ti. This last was probably the
name of the ruler at that time for it is recorded that
Lo Wang or Kino - Lo claimed to be the direct descen-
O O


dant of Shen Neng also known as Lo Hsiung Shih
the Divine Agriculturist of the Chinese. Tradition
has it that this Divine farmer lived 2750 B.C. Near
the Chiang Slmi a river which flows from the Li eh
Shan in the modern province of Shen-Si, I was taken
to a place which was pointed out to me as the farm
where he taught the people how to construct the
wooden plough and gave them practical instruction
in farming. This patriarchal ancestor of the millions
of modern Chinese agriculturists, most likely, used fire
to clear the land and to reduce his stubborn timber
into useful if rough and ready farm implements, as he
is called Yen Ti or the Fire Ruler. But it is recorded
that even at that early period the kingdom of Lo was
firmly established and well governed. The state was
called Lo Kuo, the ruler Lo Wang or King Lo, the
ministers of State Marquises, Lo £ Hou. or nobles, its
warriors were Lo Chiang and the people were known
as Lo Min.
After eighteen generations had thus passed, a dark
cloud charged with disaster, lowered over the Lo
nation. War broke out, the Lo people were conquered,
their ancient laws abolished, the form of government
entirely changed and all their national institutions
were overthrown and suppressed by the usurper Shu
Wang.
Having ousted the Lo dynasty and exterminated
the last of their princes, Shu Wang assumed the style
and title of An-yang Wang and after firmly establish-
ing himself as King, he proved himself a vigourous,
energetic, and powerful monarch. Under this new


regime tlie people became known as the Hsiung nation,
a name doubtlessly derived from the warlike disposition
of the new ruler who was the founder of the Hsiung
dynasty. The period during which these two dynasties
were dominant is known as the Lo Hsuing Shih.
That era was succeeded by the' era historically
known as the Tao-t‘ang Shih. We iind it recorded
that during this period the Emperor Yang Ti-yao,
whose accession to the Imperial title, took place about
B.C. 2356, sent an Imperial envoy named Hsi-shu to
reside at the court of Nan-chiao, the country which is
now split into An-nan and the two Kwang provinces.
During the Yu-yu-shih era in the reign of Yii Ti-
shun, about B.C. 2255, one of his ministers of State hav-
ing misbehaved himself, was banished for his misdeeds
O '
to Chhmg-Shan in An-nan. Under the Yang dynasty
diking-Shan was called ‘Huan Chou in commemora-
tion of its being the residence of ‘Huan Ton during
his exile, it is now the modern Annanese province ot
Jen Sheng. Subsequent to this, troublous times broke
the friendly bond hitherto existing between these two
nations, and there appears to have been an entire cessa-
tion of intercourse between China and An-nan, as for a
period of more than a thousand years we have not a
single syllable of authentic or traditional record. The
two countries were for this long period apparently in a
state of isolation as complete as if each was in no way
cognisant of the existence of the other. The result is
an immense gap in the historic continuity to this
narrative.


CHAPTER 11.
Chou Cheng Wang—First Annamese Envoy—Chung San-I —
Annamese Tribute —Chou Kung’s advice—Chung Sau-I’s
reply—Chou Kung flattered into compliance—The Envoy
returns loaded with presents after having successfully achieved
his mission.
In the absence of any authentic historical records,
or of even the most hazy and indefinite legends or
traditions, we shall boldly step over the intervening
gap of more than a thousand years in order to place the
reader on the firm basis of historic fact. Intercourse
between An-nan and China was revived under the
Chou dynasty, at which time, we first find mention of
the Court of An-nan sending; tribute to the Court of
O
China. In the sixth year of the reign of Chou Cheng
Wang, who, in 1115 B. C., succeeded to the throne of
Wu Wang the Government of An-nan, took the initia-
tive towards the renewal of friendly intercourse with
China by despatching an envoy to the Court of the
Chou Rulers. This envoy named Chung San-I,
pi : B§6iited liiiiiself at tlie Imperial Court as the ambas-
sador of the friendly Court of Chiao-chih. He repre-
sented that the King of Chiao-chih a lineal representa-
tive of the old Yileh-shang-shih dynasty, had sent
him with Tribute to the Chou Rulers which he pre-
sented with the usual ceremonious formalities. This
tribute consisted of some white birds, most probably
cockatoos, some other birds which were very likely
peacocks and a large quantity of Ivory.


Chou Kung, the famous sage, who was uncle of the
King Cheng whose counsels and wise utterances are
highly respected in the present day, strongly advised
the Court of Chou not to accept the offered Tribute,
giving as his reason, that the Government of China
had done nothing to merit such a mark of respect
from so distant a court. Owing to his great personal
influence, his counsel was listened to, and what more
rarely happens, seems to have been for a time acted
upon. As to whether the revered sage of that remote
period was influenced in this decision merely by the
wish to display Chinese politeness towards strangers
or whether he foresaw that in the dim future China
might be embroiled in international disputes and
difficulties on account of her Tributary States, history
is silent.
It might have been better for China had Chou
Kung remained steadfast in his resolution not to
accept Tribute, for, by her acceptance, China assumed
the position of Suzerain with its appertaining duties
and thus made it obligatory on herself to be respon-
sible for, and if necessary to undertake the defence of
her Tributary State. It was these very responsibi-
lities that the Venerable Duke Chou appeared so
desirous of avoiding when he plead as his excuse,
“I, as an upright statesman dare not accept your prefer-
red tribute. You, as an honest official owe me none.
I have done naught to deserve it
You, nothing to owe it.”
A Wonderfully sagacious argument that —which
it will be well for the rulers of China to remember if


they would avoid the responsibilities which are incur-
red by a Suzerain State to its tributaries. But in the
instance under consideration the subtle flattery of the
Annanese envoy, unfortunately prevailed and caused
the safe Chou Rung to reverse his decision. The
O O
historic reply of envoy Chung San-1 was in subs-
tance as follows :
“My own poor country has, during the last three
years, enjoyed perfect peace and tranquillity. We have
not been disturbed by violent commotions, such as
earthquakes, neither have we suffered from the noisome
pestilence nor gaunt famine. The very elements have
been propitious, for no great storms or fierce tempests
have destroyed our shipping or harassed our coast,
whilst the turbulent waters have ceased to overflow
their banks so that our crops flourish. These positive
blessings, as well as their freedom from all calamities,
o >
the Annanese nation attribute to the benign influences
of the wise and puissant ruler who controls the des-
tinies of the great Chinese people, Avherefore, the \ lieh-
shang-shih nation seeing your people so greatly fa-
voured have sent me, thy servant, to offer you this
slight mark of respectful homage.”
These words of eloquently artful adulation proved
to be an argument whose convincing logic was irresis-
tible. We can picture the sage complacently, stroking
his beard—if he had one —while he swallowed the bait
so cunningly laid to entrap his wisdom by tickling
his vanity. China accepted the Tribute of An-nan
and sent the Annanese Ambassador back to his own
land loaded with presents. Among these presents,


five South Pointing Chariots are mentioned. These
were in all probability Chariots fitted with the ancient
Chinese Compass which points to the South instead of
to the North as do our modern European Compasses.
Thus high success crowned the friendly advances of
An-nan and the Annanese Ambassador secured the
famous Chou Wen Wang as overlord of his king and
country.


CHAPTER 111.
Historic Times—Shih ‘Huang Ti—Cliineso Expedition to Nan-
yiieh—Conquest of Lu-liang —Origin of the name Lu-liaug—
Ancient Simplicity of Dross —Love of Nature—Dawn of the
Han Dynasty—Chao T‘o—Nan-‘Hai-yii—Tungking Invaded
—Repulse of the Invaders —Prince An-yang—A Divine Me-
chanic —An Ancient Engine of War —Chao T'o’s Superior
discretion—An-yang’s False Security—An-yang neglects his
Deliverer.
We have now come to the historic period and have
at our disposal data with some real pretensions to re-
liability which will assist us in unravelling the tangled
threads of the Tungking question which conceived in
olden time and fostered till the present day seems not
unlikely to be violently dissolved in the not far distant
future.
In 218, 8.C., the third year of the reign of the Great
Shih ‘Huang Ti or the First Chinese Emperor,* who,
not only strove to consolidate the country by sup-
pressing feudalism but built the stupendous work,
known as the Great Wall, to protect it from the attack
of outside foes, an expedition was directed against the
State of Xan-yilch. After encountering many hard-
ships, the expedition was successful and took possession
of Lu-liang, our modern Tungking, and dividing it
into prefectures and districts, established a thorough
system of military and civil organization upon the
Chinese model.
* This is the same Emperor who ordered the destruction of the books of
the learned including the works of Confucius.


The name Lu-liang probably originated from the
bardy inhabitants living in the rocky fastnesses of
their wooded and mountainous country, where their
naturally warlike disposition was greatly fostered till
they presented a striking contrast to their kinsfolk who
occupied the lowlands and valleys.
These hardy people were not much troubled by the
changes of fashion, for in summer, they were clothed
only in their own skin, and in the winter time they
covered their bodies with the skins of wild beasts.
The people were pleased with nature’s handiwork and
made no attempt to improve it. The women were
not ashamed of the smallness of their breasts, the
largeness of their waists, nor the natural appearance
and size of their feet. They allowed the natural
beauties of the human form to develope in perfect
freedom. Everything was as it ought to be. The
men were proud of their women and the women were
obedient and faithful to their husbands. Although all
kinds of animal and vegetable food were freely eaten
temperance was the order of the day, and they esteem-
ed water as the best of all liquors.
The power of the Great Chin now began to wane,
and after the death of this mighty monarch his suc-
cessors proved weak, vacillating, and utterly unworthy
of their high descent. In the midst of this decline the
Han dynasty began to loom big in the political horizon
in the person of Liu Pang who was destined before
long to dispute for the possession of Imperial Power
Avith Pa Wang. Among the number of adventures
who during this unsettled period sought to gather


power to themselves the figure of Chao T‘o stands out
in hold relief. This man a native of Chcn-ting-Fu in
Chili proved himself possessed of no mean military
genius in addition to great powers of energy and de-
termination. This warrior overran and conquered the
country now included in the provinces of Kwang-Si
and Kwang-Tung and had himself proclaimed Prince
of Nan-ylieh. About 250 B.C. this potentate established
his court at Nan-'hai-yii, the present city of Canton,
Avhere the remains of his palace together with historic
records of his residence and power are to be seen at
the present day. Having obtained a secure foothold
at Nan-diai-yii, he cast covetous glances towards
Tungking and it was not long before he found a
O O *—'
suitable opportunity of invasion. The country, con-
vulsed with those internal disorders which disgraced
the closing years of the Chfin dynasty, and torn by
the struggles of various factions for power, seemed an
easy prey to the ambitious warrior prince. He accord-
ingly invaded Tungldng in the hope of annexing that
wealthy region to his self acquired dominions and
marching his forces against An-yang Wang, he soon
discovered the flimsiness of his dreams of a speedy and
easy conquest. He met with experiences and difficulties
similar to those encountered in our day by the French
and learned like they have, that he had to cope with
no mean foe. His forces met with stubborn resistance,
were checked, repulsed, and were finally obliged to
retire upon Wu-ning the Bac-ninh of to-day without
having obtained any material advantage from this
costly campaign. After a lapse of two thousand years


we find in the early part of 1883, history repeating
itself in the similar fortunes of the French invaders.
Prince An-yang owed the preservation of his throne
and country to the miraculous interposition of a
stranger who suddenly appeared in his realm. This
stranger is spoken of as the Divine Mechanic and
would appear to have been well versed in the art of
Avar. He is said to have constructed engines of Avar
Avhich Avere used with terrific effect against the inva-
ders, a single discharge disabling thousands of the
enemy.
Chao T ; o finding himself unable to successfully con-
tend against the combined influences of mechanical
skill and supernatural power, withdrew with his baffled
troops, to his capital and stronghold Nan-'hai-yii. He
did not however abandon his design of acquiring
Tungking but postponed action until a more favour-
able time. He did not allow his mortification at his
Avant of success, to blind him to the necessity of still
farther strengthening himself by fortifying his ad-
vanced position at Bac-ninh, and cultivating the friend-
ship and patronage of Han Wu Ti, who had by this
time succeeded in firmly establishing himself on the
throne of China. Chao T £ o recognized the founder of
the Han dynasty as his suzerain, and, having thus
secured his principality from the imuasion of the success-
ful Chinese army, he concentrated all his talents and
energies on his scheme for the acquisition of Tungking.
This course of action was in marked contrast to
the conduct of the successful prince An-yang. This
latter potentate unduly exalted by his success became


vainglorious and lethargic. Forgetful of the vital
assistance rendered to him in his time of tribulation
by the Divine Mechanic he slighted and neglected his
benefactor. Prince An-yang did precisely ■what the
present Ta-tsing dynasty has lately done to many of
those Europeans who afforded them such material
help in suppressing the Tai-phng and other rebellions.
The saviour of An-yang and Tungking was allowed
to depart with few thanks and scant courtesy, as soon as
the immediate need for his valuable services and co-
operation was no longer visible. The Engine of War
which had wrought such havoc in the ranks of the
invaders was allowed to fall into a state of disrepair
and decay although An-yang had been expressly warned
that, upon its careful preservation and safe keeping-
depended his dominion and power. An-yang dwelling-
in fancied security and unheedful of the affairs of state
thought of nothing but ministering to his own volup-
tuous pleasures. He lived up to the Turkish adage
of never doing to-day what he could put off till to-
morrow. Peace had been restored to the State, there
was no rumour or even thought of war, but an un-
healthy—foul—stagnant peace hung like a pall over
the land.
“Is it peace or war ? Better ivar, loud war by land and sea,
War with a thousand battles, and shaking a hundred thrones.'’


CHAPTER IV.
Chao T''o sends an envoy to the court of An-yang—An-yang
flattered by his foe —The Beautiful Pearl—Chao Shill obtains
possession of the famous engine—He returns to Chao T £ o—
The secret expedition—An-yang subdued —Farther conquests
of Chao T‘o—His death.
In the meantime dire disaster drew near. Chao T'o,
long brooding in secret how to retrieve the defeat
which had overwhelmed his previous attempt, saw,
with secret satisfaction the criminal carelessness of
his former enemy to all state cares. He saw those
officers to whom the preservation of the state was due,
neglected and allowed to leave Tungking unrewarded,
o o o
unhonoured, and laughed in derision at his unwary
neighbour. Chao T‘o having learnt by bitter experience
the foolishness of underating his foe resolved not to
blunder a second time. He carefully ‘matured his
plans and determined to send his son and heir Chao
Shih upon a special mission to the court of Yueh-nan.
The young envoy was carefully instructed in his royal
father’s plans and fired with youthful ambition left for
the court of An-yang with the resolve to do all in his
power to make his important mission a brilliant success.
The envoy had much in his favour, he was young and
clever, the polished scion of an important royal house,
and heir to the large dominions over which his warrior
father ruled with a firm hand. His father was a re-
nowned warrior, the popular ally and vassal of the
Imperial house of Liu, a man feared and respected by his


nciglibour.s, in short one whose friendship was worth
securing and whose enmity it was rash to provoke. It
is no source of wonder then that the young envoy on
arrival at the court of his father’s old enemy, was, after
having duly presented his credentials, entertained with
every mark of consideration and honour. As was
intended An-yang felt highly flattered at this mark of
attention from his most powerful and dreaded neighbour,
and readily fell into the wiles of his deeply designing foe.
It became the fashion to court the favour of the royal
envoy and would have been considered the greatest
folly to have provoked his displeasure. His wit and
sprightliness carried all before it and he grew in favour
with man and woman, so that no one could withold any-
thing from him. Chao Shih was however as wise as
a serpent for he did nothing that could in any way
lessen his power, and in no way abused his high privi-
leges, but ever kept steadily in view the successful
accomplishment of his mission. The Court of Yiieh-
nan was a gay and brilliant one and festivities of all
kinds formed one unceasing round of pleasures.
But amid all the beauteous women of the court
there was one young maiden so fair and peerless that
she was called Mei-chu which being interpreted is
The Beautiful Pearl. This fairest of the daughters of
men was the favourite child of An-yang, and she as
all beautiful and accomplished maidens should do, fell
in love with a brave young man, in her case the youth-
ful and accomplished envoy. The young prince reci-
procated the affection of the princess, and to the intense
gratification of both the lovers Mei-chu’s royal parents


did everything in their power to encourage and hasten
on the marriage which they hoped would, in the person
of Chao Shih, bind the Hawk of Nan-hai to their
interests. The whole court were delighted at this
felicitious end of the mission but this great success
and happiness only caused the young prince the more
to remember the more important object of his mission,
and the duty he owed his father, as a filial son, a loyal
subject, and a special ambassador.
Chao Shih availing himself of the influence of his
spouse Mei-chu, sought, and notwithstanding the
solemn warning of the divine mechanic, he obtained
O 7
possession of the talismanic Engine which like the Ark
of the Israelites of old gave certain victory to the side
possessing it. As he could not remove it without
exciting suspicions he carefully studied its construc-
tion and mechanism, until he had thoroughly mastered
every detail of the engine when he deliberately des-
troyed it by sawing it to pieces. As in the time of
prosperity no one had taken any interest in the ma-
chine and it had been no one’s duty to look after it,
Chao Shih had by this act of judicious vandalism effec-
tually destroyed the talisman, for with the exception
of the divine mechanic who had left the kingdom, no
one but himself possessed the knowledge necessary to
repair it or to construct a similar engine. Having thus
brought his mission to a triumphantly successful issue,
he returned with honour to his father’s court before
any one suspected the mischief he had done. He was
welcomed at Xan-Tiai-yii with great rejoicings.
Preparations were energetically pushed forward for a


secret expedition against tlie unsuspecting and un-
prepared state of Yiieh-nan. This expedition skill-
fully conceived and carefully worked out was a com-
plete success, for the kingdom of Yiieh-nan was sub-
jugated and passed away from the royal house of An-
vanff to that of his wiser and wilier neighbour. After
v o o
this conquest and successful annexation, king Chao
T‘o assumed the style and title of Wu Wang or the
Warrior king. Thus it happened that if not the whole
of An-nan at least that part known as Tungking
became an integral portion of the kingdom of Yan-
yiieh, the king of which, had sworn fealty and allegiance
to Emperor Han Kao Ti the founder of the Han dynas-
ty of China.
But Chao T'o was not satisfied. He was bent on
farther conquest and availing himself of the disorders
which prevailed in China Upon the death of Han
Kao Ti and the Regency of the Empress Lii, he
shook off this allegiance, defied the power of the
Han and annexed the province of ‘Hu-nan to his
self acquired dominions. After this act of annexa-
tion lie thought it politic to renew his allegiance
to the Imperial house and accordingly in the reign of
the Emperor Han Wen Ti he did homage for his
kingdom. This stiff old warrior prince lived for many
years a quiet life, attending assiduously to the affairs
of state, and when the fulness of his time was come he
died being more than one hundred years old.


CHAPTER Y.
Subjugation of the kingdom of Nan-yiieb—Teng Yung governs
Cliiao-cliih —Lady Clm heads an insurrection —General Ma
Yiiau—The insurrection suppressed —Lady Clm captured and
executed—Ma Yiiau raises a bronze pillar on the confines of
the Empire—Ma Liu-jcn, guardians of the pillar —Memorial
temples to Ma Yuan.
After tlie lapse of a number of years the state of
Xaii-yueb began to decline till in 116 B. C. it was
subjugated and became in the twenty-fourth year of
the reign of Hau Wu-ti an integral portion of China.
The former dominions of the renowned Chao T'o were
after annexation divided into nine prefectures and
governed by a regular staff of Civil and Military offi-
cials like the rest of the Great Empire. Everything
went on peacefully until the commencement of the
Christian era when the numberless internal disorders
resulting from the jealousies of those rival statesmen
who were at the helm of affairs during a succession of
Emperors who were minors, were fannied into insur-
rectionary heat until Wang Mang bursting into open
rebellion, usurped the throne and so broke the empire
into several fragments.
O
In 25 A.l). the accession of Kuang Wu Ti partly res-
tored the shattered fortunes and Empire of the Imperial
House of Liu and laid the foundation of the Eastern Han
Dynasty. He gradually acquired power, and in the
fifth year of his reign he received a mission consisting
of Teng Yung Governor of Chiao-chih and Hsi Kuang


a prefect of the same state. These two envoys were
not only the bearers of tribute but came to tender
their submission and swear allegiance to the Imperial
Court. As was customary Teng Yung was ennobled
as Lieh ‘How and sent back to his own land accom-
panied by an Imperial Officer named Jen Yen, whose
duty it was to instruct the Officialdom of Chiao-chih
in the Chinese System of Education, Rites and Cere-
monies, and general Administration. This latter officer
did not perform his duties in a wise manner, but gave
so much offence in carrying out the instructions of
his Imperial master that the people rose in armed
insurrection. The patriotic rebels were headed by
the wife of Shih-tsu the son of a famous Lo commander
named Chu. The courageous lady Chu soon made
herself a power in the land. At her beck thousands
took to arms and rallied round her standard willing-
to do her bidding. This chivalrous and patriotic
heroine put herself at the head of her troops which,
like our modern Joan of Arc the maid of Orleans, she
lead on from victory to victory until she had beseiged
and taken sixty-five cities and driven the Chinese
from the greater portion of Chiflo-ohih. Having res-
cued this tract of country from the Imperial grasp
she assumed royal power and title by having herself
proclaimed Sovereign of Chiao-chih. With the assist-
ance of her sister she ruled the kingdom with great
ability and prudence and for some years the people
were peaceful and happy under her sway while she
herself enjoyed undisturbed power.
Ihe Imperial Court could not however calmly


brook such a powerful rival, and fearing tiiat if she
were left alone her power would increase until she
could master the whole Empire it was decided in the
eighteenth year of Kwang ¥u Ti 42 A,D. to despatch
a powerful expedition to effect the subjugation of
distant but formidable Chiao-chih. This expedition
was entrusted to the veteran general Ma T nan, then
seventy years old, who had already greatly distin-
guished himself by repelling and hurling back the
daring Thibetan forces that had invaded the western
Chinese frontier.
When this expedition reached Chiao-chih the Sover-
eign lady Chu was in the height of her glory and her
kingdom enjoying a prosperous, healthy peace. At
her call the people flocked once more around their
honoured and beloved ruler, but although her troops
fought with great gallantry they were unable to
withstand the better armed and more numerous sol-
diers of Ma Yiian. In several engagements she was
defeated, her forces scattered, and finally, the two noble
sisters were taken prisoners. When these two heroic
women were brought into the presence of Ma Yiian
their courage did not fail them. They had fought
for their country and bore their adversity without
shrinking. Ma Yiian did not allow himself to be
fascinated by the beauty, martial prowess or volup-
tuous charms of his captives, but feeling somewhat
scandalized at their nakedness, he cut off the very
capacious sleeves of his state dress and handed one to
each of the fair sisters, with instructions to pass them
over their heads down to their waists, and there fasten


them. The sleeves formed convenient skirts to cover
their naked limbs, and by this act Ma Yilan unconsci-
ously instituted that fashion of female dress which
has lasted through long centuries, prevailing as it does
to the present day, for that one simple act of kindly
charity won the gratitude of the entire nation it was
liis business to subdue. Attired in this simple yet
yoryeous costume the two ladies Cherny T’se, or Chu,
O O O' '
and Cheng Erh, were lead forth to public execution.
They thus paid with their life’s blood for the bold
patriotic attempt they had made to keep their native
country free and independent. Yet the Tungkingese
would seem to have been dead to all feelings of grati-
tude or they would have paid some marks of honour
to those brave women who were martyrs for their
country and people, instead of lavishing them upon
their conqueror Ma Yilan. The Imperialist Comman-
der being desirous of perpetuating the fame of his
military achievements in Tungking, had a pillar of
bronze erected on the confines of that state. This
pillar was to mark the boundary of the tributary
kingdom and the inscriptions on it not only stated
this fact, but there was a notice to all armed bands of
Annanese not to pass this rubicon or make raids in
China. There was also inscribed a solemn warning,
addressed to the Tungkingese people, stating that on
the dajr when this pillar was removed or injured the
destruction of the State of Chiao-chih would be certain.
In order to secure the safety of this monument, Ma
Yilan ordered a score of veterans to remain behind as
a guard. These men and their descendants were in


after years generally known as Ma Liu-jen, or the men
detained by Ma.
Honours and rewards were showered upon the suc-
cessful warrior on his return, and he was created
Fu-po Chiang Chun. Nor was this all, for temples
were erected in his honour in many parts of Kwang
Si, where tradition still keeps alive the memory and
fame of his martial deeds and exploits. One temple
situated near the great rapids of the West River is
especially noticeable for its perfect preservation. It is
kept in repair by the boatmen of the river who regard
Ma Yuan as in some special manner entitled to their
gratitude and honour. A reputation which has endined
for eighteen centuries, and which is still quick and
lively is unquestionable testimony to the military
genius of Ma and the great ascendancy he had acquired
over the inhabitants of the turbulent borderland.


CHAPTER YI.
Chili Hsieh—Chiao-cliih sends tribute to Wu Ta Ti—Chiao-chou
Chieh-tu-shili—Sung-pien ’Hon—The prefect of Chiao-chou
rebels—The end of the rebellion—Chiao-chih renamed by
Wn-p’ing Chun—The name altered by succeeding dynasties. ”
In 190 A.]), in the reign of the Emperor ’Han
Hsieii ’ tlie prefect of Jih-nan in Chiao-chih returned
from that country to his native place. This man
originally a native scholar ot the Chinese state of Lu,
the modern Shan-tung, being seized with a spirit of
unrest and adventure had gone to Chiao-chih where
he had distinguished himself so greatly that he, a
foreigner, had been raised to the dignity of prefect.
On his return, his fame as a traveller was noised
abroad until it penetrated the precincts of the royal
palace and reached the ears of the reigning potentate.
Chili Hsieh was presently summoned to court and on
his arrival this ancient explorer was received in audi-
ence by his sovereign who raised him to the ranks of
the aristocracy as a Lung-thug ’Hou. After a short
Stay Witli his kinsmen Chili Hsieh the newly created
Marquis Lung-thug went back to Jih-nan and quietly
resumed his official duties. After the final collapse
of the Han dynasty the state of Chiao-chih on receipt
of the news resolved to send a special envoy to the
com t ot the new Emperor, and the Marquis of Lung-
thng was selected as the suitable man. The advent
of the Marquis of Lung-thng at the court of Wu Ta
Ti bringing tribute from so distant a state was hailed


as an event auguring well for the newly established
royal house of Sun. The Emperor was highly grati-
fied by this mark of attention and in commemoration
of the occasion changed the name of Chiao-chih to
Chiao-chou, whilst the ambassador was created a
Lung-pien ’How and had bestowed on him the im-
portant and responsible post of Chiao-chou Chieh-tu-
shih, or Commandcr-in-Chief of the imperial forces in
the state of Chiao-chou.
The object of the Emperor in making these changes
was evidently to impress the Aunanese with a sense
of his great power and authority. It was a clear indi-
cation of his desire to govern An-nan directly as a
Colony, rather than as a semi-independent state. It
was the thin end of the political wedge intended to
deprive An-nan of its autonomy, for when the Annan-
ese government had made Chih Hsieh Prefect of
Jih-nan, they did so as a signal mark of their appre-
ciation of his abilities and services. But when the
Suzerain stepped in and placed this fortunate and
enterprising immigrant above all his former Annanese
colleagues and superiors, then was struck the death
blow of the right of An-nan to promote or demote an
official without reference to the Imperial Court. On
the death of the new Viceroy his son Tlui did not
succeed him but was merely appointed Prefect of
Chiao-chou. Time soon proved Tlui’s allegiance to
the reigning house of Sun to be of the slenderest kind
for that official headed a revolt, presumably with the
intention of possessing himself of the power his father
had enjoyed. But this was not to be. The Emperor


Wu Ta Ti greatly incensed at the treachery of ’Hui
despatched Wu Tai with an expeditionary force to
crush the rebellion, punish the leaders and restore
order in the distant Colony. Complete success at-
tended the expedition. Wu Tai, who previous to start-
ing had been created Chiao Chou Tzu Shih, landed
without opposition and summoned the rebellious ’Hui
to his presence. The order was obeyed for ’Hui
together with his five brothers presented themselves
at the Imperial Head quarters where they humbly
acknowledged their guilt and craving pardon for their
treasonable oftences, offered guarantees for future good
behaviour. However, the Imperial Commander re-
mained obdurate, and, being exceeding indignant with
the treason and abject cowardice of the six brothers
who piteously begged for mercy, he, after treating
them with contempt and contumely ordered his young
men to fall on the traitors and hack them to pieces.
I his act ot severity caused the stern Commander to
be held in great awe by all classes so that the imperial
authority was quickly and firmly re-established. The
reigning Emperor in order to commemorate t]ie sup-
pression of the revolt changed the name Chiao-chou
to Wu- p‘ing Chun and governed it by martial law a
practice maintained by succeeding dynasties.
Ihe Chin dynasty called it Chiu Te Chim whilst
under the Sung; Clri; Niang; Ch‘en and Sui dynas-
ties it was known by the name of Sung-p £ ing Chiin
after which time the ancient name of Chiao-chih was
again revived.
For some two or three centuries the Sovereign


State was too busily occupied in protecting its own
people and defending its northern frontiers from inva-
sion by the Nomadic Tartar hordes to be able to
attend to its distant Colony. Although all questions
relating to Chiao-chih were shelved during several
centuries very little harm seems to have befallen the
Colony from the inability of the mother country to
actively interfere in its governance. It must however
be admitted that the people of Chiao-chih have
scarcely ever displayed such an aptitude lor adminis-
tering 1 their own affairs as would entitle them to claim
autonomy or independence. A hen left to themselves
they have broken into mutual recriminations and
quarrels, until the Suzerain has been obliged to
interfere. They were no more capable of governing
themselves than is Ireland at the present time, occa-
sionally capable men appeared and by their vigourous
rule reduced anarchy to order having by their superior
abilities induced the clannish and jealous chieftains
to submit to their Headship. But this capacity for
government and administration was not hereditary,
nor did a succession of such great men arise, for, in
the course of one or two generations everything was
avaiii in a state of anarchical confusion. Claimants
O
for, and Pretenders to, royal power rose on every side.
The rival disputants with their armed bands of partizans
and retainers rent the country with internecine strife
in which each and all displayed a total indifference to,
and disregard of the rights of property, the welfare of
their unfortunate country or the sanctity of human
life, whilst miseries untold fell on the unhappy land,
but the end was not yet.


CHAPTER YII.
The T'ang dynasty and Chiao-cliih —An-nan Tu-'hu Fu—New
Territorial divisions —Revolt of Chan Clrieng—General Ma
Tsung—'l'he Colonists attempt to assert their independence—
Suppression of the insurgents by Tu-‘liu Fu Kao P'ien.
With the rapid flight of time in China, dynasty
succeeds dynasty without any material improvement
in the condition of An-nan being effected. For century
after century An-nan like an unsolved problem or an
enigma defying solution remained as a bone of contention
for the governing powers and its own inhabitants, who,
like the Irish of to-day, unwilling to accept quietly the
wholesome discipline of subjection to a strong bene-
ficent power were in a constant state of ferment,
although hard experience had proved them incapable
of successfully asserting or maintaining the independ-
ence they claimed. In the nineteenth century the
Annanese are apparently no nearer the peaceful solu-
tion of this difficulty than they were at the commence-
ment of the present eta.
In China Li Shih-min having successfully over-
turned the rule of the licentious Sui Yang Ti and
firmly seated his father Yang Li Yuan on the Imperial
throne lost no time in seeking to extend his dominions.
Being a man of considerable parts and lofty ambition
he resolved not to rest satisfied until he had subjected
to his father’s rule, the whole of the country formerly
embraced in the bounds of the Empire in the days of
the Han Dynasty. With this end in view he pursued


a career of conquest and at a very early period he
reduced the former Colony of Chiao-chou which during
the lapse of some centuries of relaxed rule had acquired
semi-independence to subjection and naming it An-nan
Tu‘hu Fu divided it into Fen Chiin and Chou depart-
ments. The Fen Chiin were probably military Pre-
fectures and the Chou smaller divisions or Magistracies.
There were three Fen Chiin and ten Chou as follows.
(1.) The Chiao-chou Fen Chiin subdivided into
(1.) Wu-O-Chou.
(2.) Yueh Chou.
(3.) Chih Chou.
(2.) The Ai Chou Fen Chiin subdivided into
(1.) Fu-lu Chou.
(2.) Chang Chou.
(3.) The ’Huan Chou Fen Chiin subdivided into
(1.) Fen Chou.
(2.) Lu Chou.
(3.) Yang Chou.
(4.) YiiChou.
(5.) Ai Chou.
These three Fen Chiin comprising the ten Chou
formed a Military Command called Ching ‘Hai Chiin,
Chieh Tu Shih or the Colony named Lingnan-hsi
Tao subject to a Lieutenant Governor or Tao T‘ai.
After this we hear no more of An-nan until the reign
of the Emperor Yang Hsien-Tsung who ascended
the throne in A.D. 806. In the third year of the
term Yiian-‘Ho A.D. 809, Chan Ch‘eng raised the
standard of rebellion but the Chieh Tu Shih, Ma Tsung


marched against the rebel forces, gave them battle
and so thoroughly routed them that they fled for safety
in all directions. By this military promptitude quiet-
ness and order was restored and for rather more than
half a century we hear nothing more of An-nan.
However, in A.D. 862 during the reign of the Emperor
I-Tsung the Colony attracted the attention of the
Sovereign State. The people had been gradually
freeing themselves from the imperial yoke and General
Kao P‘ien received an imperial decree instructing him
to subdue the Colonists to allegiance and enforce the
Imperial laws in Chiao-chou. The disaffection was
speedily crushed out for the insurgents were defeated
with great slaughter by the Imperial troops.
The Annanese do not appear to have greatly im-
proved their condition by becoming the willing feud-
atories of China. When after centuries of independence
they sought the protection of China it was probably
because they thought it more advantageous to be the
voluntary tributaries of a Great Nation than the com-
pulsory slaves of a smaller state. But having put
their head into the halter they soon found that the
authority of the Suzerain was more irksome than they
imagined and the frequent struggles to recover their
lost independence only resulted in the yoke being made
the heavier and their vassalage the more certain.


CHAPTER VIII.
An-nan invaded by Ma Flsi-fan—Submission of Cb'ii Cli'eng-mei
to Emperor Niang Chen-ming—Li Chih seizes Tungking for
Liu Limg-shan—Yang Yen-shih the liberator of An-nan —His
death—His son succeeds to power but is slain by \Yu Ch'ang-chi
who assumes royal authority—Ting Kung-cho and his son —
Autonomy of Chiao-chih or An-nan.
At an early period of the tenth century the Yang
dynasty became extinct and the five succeeding dy-
nasties strove not merely for supremacy within the
bounds of the Empire but to extend its borders in all
possible directions. Thus in A.D. 915 the Emperor
Niang Chen-ming despatched an adventurous Warrior
Ma Hsi-fan with a large army to effect the conquest
of An-nan. He subjugated a considerable portion of
the country and imitating the example of the illustrious
Ma Yman he erected a bronze pillar on the most distant
frontier so that future generations should know of his
conquest. Shortly after this the horizon began to
lighten with hope for harassed Tungking for there
arose a native leader who rallied the people to him and
boldy wrenched the government of his fatherland from
the Imperial grasp. This adventurous patriot named
Ch‘ii ClTeng-mei after organizing An-nan secured his
position by a wise and politic step for he did homage
to the House of Niang. His submission was accepted
and so great was the Imperial favour that he was
honoured and formally appointed Chieh-tu Shih of
An-nan.


Not for long did he retain Ms power. Liu Lung-
shan (?) who pretended that he was of Imperial
lineage and descent, assumed the title of Nan ‘Han
Wang and founded the Southern ‘Han dynasty. A
partizan of this monarch named Li Chih-shun endea-
voured to extend the Empire. He invaded An-nan,
defeated the opposing forces, seized Ch‘ii of Ch‘eng-
mei, and subdued the country, which again became a
Colonjr of China but not for long. The Tungkingese
having once tasted of the sweets of freedom were ripe
for rebellion and soon a leader appeared in the person
of Yang Yen-shih. This patriot stirred up a successful
rebellion, freed his country from absolute dependence
on China and ruled An-nan with a firm and powerful
hand. Although he rendered nominal allegiance to
the Imperial House of‘Han he vigourously maintained
an actual independence which they were quite unable to
gainsay. The then Emperor glad to keep the nominal
Suzerainty over An-nan at Yang Yen-shih’s own
request conferred on him the title of Chiao-chih Chieh-
tu-shih. After a short spell of power the liberator
died and was succeeded by his son Shao-‘hung. This
man did not po§§§§§ hi§ father’s power of governing,
so disaffection soon shewed itself. The permanent
unrest and discontent of the people encouraged a
powerful Annanese military chieftain named Wu
Ch‘ang-chi to conspire against Shao-‘hung whom he
slew. After this murder Wu Ch‘ang-chi usurped
legal power and state and founded the house of Wu.
In A.D. 963 during the reign of the Emperor Sung
T‘ai-tsu, Wu Ch‘ang-wen, who had succeeded his


elder brother as king of Tungking, died beaqueatbing
the kingdom to Wu Ch‘u-p‘ing a near kinsman. This
man divided the kingdom into twelve independent states
or principalities over each of which he placed a Shih
Chii. For a time everything went on prosperously
but a great change was at hand. A man named Ting
Kung-cho a sub-prefect or IVii Shih of a district
obtained great influence over the people by his coura-
geous daring, and uprightness. His son also was very
popular and a great favourite with the people who by
this time had begun to realize the power of combined
action and the benefit of uniting to exercise a voice in
the administration of their own affairs. The earliest
result of this newly acquired knowledge was their
unanimous election of their youthful favourite to the
post of Yuan Shuai or Commander-in-Chief of the
Annanese forces. The young commander was no
laggard conservative but a zealous reformer bent on
consolidating the kingdom by fusing the twelve Shih
Chiin into one homogeneous state. Having carried
his idea into execution he placed his father on the
throne with the title of Ta Sheng Wang or Great
Conqueror. The prince gave his heroic son the ap-
pointment of Lien Chieh-tu-shih the highest military
command in the newly united kingdom of An-nan.
Just after the completion of this important revolution
Prince Ta Sheng received news of the total extinction
of the Nan ‘Han dynasty and the assumption of Im-
perial power by the victorious house of Sung and
fearing lest his newly founded dynasty should incur
a like fate he determined to secure himself if possible


by tendering allegiance to the greater power. His
overtures were successful and he was rewarded for his
prompt voluntary submission by the Emperor invest-
ing him with the title of Chiao-chih Chun Wang and
in addition the power he had conferred on his son was
confirmed by an Imperial edict creating him Chieh-tu
Shih. Ihe Imperial House of Sung thus recognized
and confirmed the newly recovered autonomy of
An-nan and it is henceforth spoken of as an outside or
barbarous frontier-state under the title of Fan I Kuo.


CHAPTER IX.
Prince Ta Slieng—llls decease and successors Princes Lion and
Chin—Li ‘Huan deposes his sovereign and usurps the throne
Prince Chin solicits aid from China —An expedetion of redress
is sent under command of Generals Liu Ch‘eng, Chiu Li, and
Wang Chiian —Li ‘Huan defeated at Pai-t‘eng-chiang —Jen
Pao’s ambition—-He falls into an ambuscade, is slain, and his
army totally destroyed —Liu Cli‘eng dies of chagrin —Hsii
chung-hsiian reports the disaster at Court.
This dawn of autonomy was destined to be of short
duration, and in the sudden eclipse of independence all
the old horror of assassinations, conspiracies, sedition,
rebellion, usurpation, battles lost and battles won by
trickery or craft, is again to darken the page of the
History of Tungking.
In one short sentence we record the death of Prince
Ta Shcnif and his elder son Prince Lien who succeeded
him. This latter Prince was succeeded by his younger
brother Prince Chin. Had this Prince possessed a
tithe of his father’s fertility of resource, courageous
daring or power of wise administration, he might have
lived quietly and happily in fulfilling the task of
restoring prosperity to the united, independent, but
wearied Tungking. which he inherited. But his feeble
o O'
and spiritless government annoyed his subjects so
greatly that one of his Ministers of State, the ambitious
Li ‘Huan was enabled quietly to depose Prince Chin
and assume the kingship. The dethroned sovereign
having no party in the state who were willing and


able to help him recover his lost power and dignity,
did, by appealing to China for forces and aid where-
with to oust the usurper, subjugate the people, and
reinstate himself in his lost kingdom, basely surrender
that freedom and right of self-government which his
warrior father had so nobly and hardly earned. China
ever willing to assume protectory rights listened to
his cry and in A.D. 981 the Emperor Sung T £ ai-
Tsung issued an imperial decree demanding the ins-
tant submission of Li £ Huan and ordering three Im-
perial Commanders Liu Ch £ eng, Chiu Li, and Wang
Chlian to put themselves' at the head of a vast expe-
ditionary force, invade Tungking, punish the traitor-
ous Li £ Huan and other rebels, and reinstate the
deposed monarch. The Imperial army soon reached
the scene of its operations and in a pitched battle the
army of Li £ Huan was utterly routed at Pai-teng-
chiang. This unexpected success fired the ambition
of a Commissary Officer, or Chiian Yun-shih named
Jen Pao, who all athirst for military fame asked, and
obtained permission to command a large body of troops
who were detached to pursue the fugitive
soldiery. But his ardour overcoming his discretion he
thought only of pursuit and neglecting all precautions
necessary to keep his rear open and thus maintain his
communications with the main army which could act
as a support or base of operations in case of a reverse,
he allowed his rash and foolhardy zeal to lead him far
into the heart of an unknown and hostile country. Li
£ Huan was quick to perceive this grave defect and to
prepare a plan to checkmate his antagonists.


Messengers arrived in Jen Pao’s camp with offers of
the rebels submission to China, the result of which was
open neglect and carelessness on the part of the Im-
perial troops, whose commander was deluded into the
belief that the one battle had ended the outbreak.
Meanwhile Li ‘Huan was not idle but making active
though secret preparations to crush the foe. Taking
advantage of their false security he suddenly fell on
their camp and entirely annihilated Jen Pao, his staff,
and the forces under his care. Communication with
the main army had been so effectually cut off that a
considerable period of time elapsed before news reach-
ed Head Quarters of the terrible disaster which had
befixllen the imperial arms and so black was the pro-
spect that Liu Ch‘eng, the Imperial Commander-in-
Chief, on receiving the fatal news shut himself up until
he died of bitter disappointment thus anticipating the
fate which his angry sovereign would have meted out
to him. After the death of their leader, Hsii-chung-
hsiian, the former assistant of the unfortunate Jen Pao,
memoralized the throne on the subject of the awful
catastrophe in Tungking laying all the blame on the
shoulders of a dead man, the late Commander-in-Chief,
and advising the recall of the remnant of the Chiao-
chih expedition as it was impossible to avenge the
disaster or in any way restore the prestige of the Im-
perial arms.
On receipt of this memorial the Emperor issued an
imperial decree recalling the troops from Chiao-chih,
ordering condign punishment on all the superior of-
ficers, the decapitation of the two surviving commanders-


Chiu Li and Wang Chiian and conferring posthumous
honours on the deceased Jen Pao who was created
Kung Pu Shih-lang or President of the Board of
Works for his loyal courageousness in advancing into
the heart of the enemy’s country. A more fitting
reward would have been a granite pillar with the
inscription: “ Died Jen Pao as fool dieth.”
Li ‘Pluan, successful in his usurpation and in his
defiance of the Imperial Power made firm his authority
in Chiao-chih and then went through the farce of sub-
mitting to and craving punishment from his beaten
foe. But of this in the next chapter.


CHAPTER X.
Li ‘Huan sends Tribute to China in A.D. 984—Death of Li 'lluau
in A.D. 1004—His son Lung-yiieh succeeds him—Lung-t‘ing
usurps the throne —Ming- £ hu appeals to China for aid but is
refused —-The usurper submits to China in 1007 —Revolt of Li
Rung-wen who also sends tribute to China and is rewarded by
title of Nan-p‘ingo Wang—Succession and death of his son Tc-
cheng who is in his turn succeeded by Jih-tsun —Revolt in
1059 Order restored by General Yu Ching —In 1070 Jih-tsun
complains of his tributary —Capture of Prince Chan Ch‘eng—
Jih-tsun dies and is succeeded by his son Ch‘ien-te —Revolt
of Magistrate Chu-chou —General Kuo K‘uei defeats the rebels
The Emperor of An-nan pays tribute to China and recovers his
lost territory—Yang-'huan —Then Tsu—ln A.D. 1175 An-nan
is again restored to independence —An-nan Kuo Wang.
In 984 the second year of the terra Yung-hsi of the
Emperor Sung T‘ai-tsung, Li ‘Huan thought it ad-
visable to secure the countenance of discomfitted China,
and accordingly, he sent an ambassador to the Sung
Court with valuable tribute and in return received
imperial recognition and favour. He was called An-
nan Chieh-tu-shih and after two years the higher royal
title of Chiao-chih Chilli Wang was bestowed on him.
Some twenty years later, in 1004, this founder of aroyal
house died, leaving the throne to his heirs, descendants
of whom survive to this day and are of political
importance as the rightful claimants of the throne.
Lung-yiieh succeeded his father but was promptly
ousted from royal power by his brother Lung-t‘ing.
This caused another brother called Ming-dm to go to


Lien Chow in China to seek imperial aid and troops
wherewith to crush the usurper and reinstate the
rightful monarch. The court of China although very-
tenacious of its rights and generally quite ready to
assert its power was on this occasion deaf to all the
entreaties and arguments of the envoy, who returned
to An-nan baffled and mortified. For some years
public affairs in An-nan were in an extremely rinsatis-
factory condition the usurper barely managing to keep
his position, but in 1007 we find him so firmly esta-
blished as ruler of An-nan that he sent a mission to
China with the usual tribute. His overtures were
accepted and with the confirmation of his kingship
he was awarded the royal title of Ta Chung Wang.
Shortly after this, in 1008, Li Kung-wen a military
officer in the Annanese service, put himself at the
head of an insurrection and drove Ta Chung Wang
from the land. He claimed royal power and state as
being a lineal descendant of a former king, and wishing
to secure the recognition of the Suzerain State he
sent an embassy bearing tribute to China. His tribute
was accepted and he was formally invested with power
and authority as Nan-p‘ing Wang or King of the
Peaceful South, a somewhat sarcastic title when the
history of An-nan is remembered. He made good his
grip of the country and despite all the opposition he
encountered lived and died kino- of An-nan. Fie was
O
succeeded by his son Son Te-cheng who after a short and
uneventful reign was in turn succeeded by his son Jih-
tsun. This latter monarch had not long ascended the
throne when two provinces were rent from his dominions.


During the reign of Emperor Sung Jen-tsung in
the year 1059 great disaffection prevailed in several
departments of An-nan until finally the smouldering
embers burst into flame. Chin Chou and Yung
Chou two of the more important provinces rose in
armed rebellion and seceded from the rest of An-nan,
but the Imperial government took prompt action,
poured troops into the disaffected districts and com-
manded General Yii Clung to suppress the rebellion,
This was soon done and order was once more restored
at least for a time. At this time An-nan was some-
what of a semi-independent principality over which
China as the Suzerain State exercised unmistakeable
rights, interfering- with the internal administration,
O / O
sending troops to restore order, making kings, confer-
ring titles, or crushing rebellions against any ruler
whom China was pleased to recognize and support.
Jih-tsun thus had just cause for fearing that, as such
rapid success had attended the Imperial arms, he
might be deemed incapable of governing and removed
from his kingdom. lie accordingly hastened to pre-
sent a memorial to the Emperor in which he acknow-
ledged his negligence in the maintenance of order
o o o
within his realm, and prayed for punishment mete for
his delinquencies. The memorial was thus a sort of
sop in the pan, a public confession of faults and short
comings, a sign of repentance, a prayer for merciful
punishment, and a petition for reinstatement in royal
favour. The Emperor allowed him to retain his king-
dom but somewhat sternly admonished him to be care-
ful in his administration of the government and to


practise assiduously those virtues which are consistent
with the duties of a king.
In the next reign, that of the Emperor Sung Shen-
tsung, in the year 1070, Jih-tsun made complaint of
the shortcomings of Chan-ch'eng a tributary state
which had neglected to forward its regular, customary
tribute, and sought the imperial permission to exact
the usual payment by force of arms. As soon he
had despatched this complaint he mobilised his troops
and declared war against the defaulting state without
waiting for the permission he had sought. The
Annanese arms were completely successful. The
backsliders were completely defeated and cowed, the
offending prince was captured and carried to the
Court of his suzerain to be dealt with according to the
enormity of his offence. The king of An-nan having
thus asserted his authority by avenging the insult
offered to his dignity became unduly elated by his
success in the field and proclaimed himself Emperor, as-
suming the title of Ta-yiieh ‘Huang ii. But his cup
of glory was full. He died soon afterwards leaving
his throne to his son Chhen-te.
Now it came to pass in the eight year of the term
Hsi-ning or 1076 of the present era, that a high
officer of Chu Chou threw off his allegiance and
quickly made himself master of several districts. Im-
perial Troops were despatched against him under a
warrior named Kuo-k‘uei who made short work ol the
rebellion. The arch-conspirator was slain, his family
put to the sword, his residence razed to the ground,
whilst his adherents and followers having lost their


leader and being several times discomfitted dispersed
in all directions quietly resuming their neglected oc-
cupations. This fiasco scared Ch'ien-tc the Emperor
of An-uan so effectually that he, dreading the Imperial
arms, despatched an envoy with tribute and offers of
allegiance to the Chinese Court. This act of timely
homage proved acceptable, the Imperial Suzerain was
appeased, graciously restored the lost provinces, and
among many other signal favours, ordered the army
of occupation to withdraw from the dominions of
Emperor Ta-yiieh thus leaving him free to rule as he
pleased. After a fairly peaceful reign the Emperor
Ch‘ien-te was gathered to his forefathers and Yang-
‘huan his son reigned in his stead. Now Yang-'huan
died and left the throne to his son Tfien-tsu who
obtained the recognition of his birthright and imperial
title from the Sung Emperor Hsiao Tsung. This
prince by his skilful diplomacy acquired in the year
1175 a Charter of Independence from the Emperor of
China. Although for some years the rulers of An-nan
had styled themselves Emperors they had never been
recognized as such since the first dawn of autonomy,
in 963, had suffered total eclipse. The rulers of An-nan
for nearly two centuries had been merely tributary
princes of a distant Colony, but by this Charter the
prince of An-nan, Tden-tsu, was by imperial edict in-
vested as An-nan Kwo Wang or King of An-nan and
thus actually declared a free and independent monarch.
This fact, capable of historic proof, has often been
doubted by many, but, although the French govern-
ment have endeavoured to shew that An-nan has


always possessed independence and the right to make
treaties with outside powers without reference to
China, this is not the case. For twenty-four centuries
after An-nan had voluntarily asked for the Suzerainty
of China the latter power had systematically treated
its tributary either as a province, a distant colony, or
at most as a semi-independent but strictly subject
state.
The year 1175 is historically remarkable as the
first year in which China by an Imperial Charter of
Independence voluntarily restored full autonomy to
turbulent Tungking.


CHAPTER XL
T'ien-tsu’s rule as au independent monarch —Succession of Lung-
lian—-‘Hao-sban succeeds to the throne—Princess Chao-sheng
abdicates in favour of her consort—Jih-'hsiian’s memorial to
the Emperor of China—lts result.
The first act of the new monarch was to proclaim
An-nan an Empire but he did not make use of his
independent position to introduce any reforms in his
dominions, to strengthen the country, or to govern
wisely and well. About the days and events of his
reign, history utters not a word, so that it is probable
he quietly rested in monastic-like satisfaction with
himself and the world generally. He was succeeded
by Ids son Lung-han who after a short and uninterest-
ing reign was in his turn succeeded by his son Tlao-
shan who died without leaving any male issue to
ascend the throne. Thus it happened that his daugh-
ter the Princess Chao-sheng succeeded to royal power
and state. After a time, however, we find that wearied
out with regal care and state affairs she took unto
herself a husband, Prince Chen Jih-'hsilan in whose
favour she abdicated.
In 12G2, being the third year of the term Ching-ting,
the new Emperor of An-nan reported to the Emperor
of China the facts connected with his accession to
the throne and besought the imperial recognition of
his claims and confirmation in his kingship. The


Emperor grunted all that was asked of him and in
addition decreed the male issue of Chen Ta Wang the
legitimate heirs to the throne of Tungking. This was
the last act of interference by the Emperors of the
Southern Sung dynasty in the affairs of An-nan.


CHAPTER XII.
The Mongols found the Yiian dynasty—Death of Jih-'hsiian—
Wei- £ huang sends tribute to China —He abdicates in favour of
his son Jih-'hsiiau who is summoned to Peking—His uncle pro-
claimed An-nan Kuo Wang —Flight of the new king—lnvasion
of An-nan in 1285 by the Mongol army —Accession of Jih-
tsuu—The second invasion—Defeat of the Annanese fleet —The
invaders compelled to retreat —Jih-'hsiian submits and in 1291
dies—Jih-tsun sends mourners to the Imperial Court—lnvasion
of China —Jih-fou sends tribute to China in 1332.
Under the Sung dynasty the military power of
China steadily waned, everything was corrupt for to
court favourites were given all the high military ap-
pointments and the greatest claim a favourite could
have for a post was to know nothing whatever about
it. The hereditary foes of China, the Mongol Tartars,
were not slow to perceive her helplessness and soon
the Great Wall proved a very inefficient protection
from these wild nomads who made armed incursions
into the rich provinces within that marvellous but
useless fortification. All these things hastened the
downfall of the Sung dynasty and its collapse was
completed by the terrible Khublai Khan overrunning
the country with his Mongol hordes and defeating
the Chinese everywhere until all opposition being
crushed, he finally completed his conquest by found-
ing, in 1260, the Yiian upon the ruins of the Sung
dynasty. In the second year of his reign it was made
known to the Great Khan that Jih- £ hsilan the Great,


had died and had been succeeded by bis son Wei-‘huang
according to the Imperial edict of the late dynasty.
This news was brought by a mission which the
new kina: of An-nan bad sent to China with a view
of propitiating the Great Khan and securing by means
of tribute bis friendly support. This mighty poten-
tate known in Chinese history as Yuan Shih-tsii
received the mission favourably and confirmed Wei-
‘huang by conferring on him the title of An-nan Kuo
Wang. But it came to pass that in 1278 Wei-‘buang
died leaving; the crown of An-nan to bis son Jih- £ bslian
who by assuming imperial power without first seek-
ing the permission of the Emperor Sbih-tsii gave
great offence to that sovereign who in bis anger sent
o o o
an imperial herald to the court of An-nan to summon
Jih-‘bsiian to the Court of China to answer for his dis-
respect. The herald arrived and delivered his sum-
mons hut without effect so a second summons was
sent by an officer of higher rank Avho only succeeded
in persuading the Annanese monarch to despatch his
uncle as envoy to the Imperial Court of China.
The wily uncle on arriving at court persuaded the
Emperor of the futility of expecting the present king
of An-nan to give way and gently insuinated that he,
the uncle, should he invested with the royal power as
An-nan Kuo Wang. This was done, and the uncle
returned to An-nan from which he had departed an
envoy, as the rightful king duly invested by his Su-
zerain. He was accompanied by a body of imperial
troops who were to dethrone the insubordinate king
and install and sustain the loyal envoy in the kingship.


On the arrival of the new monarch at the capital of
An-nan the officials and people declined to meet the
Imperial wishes. The would be king and his im-
perial guards were compelled to fly for their lives
from wrathful the monarch and an indignant people.
But this affront to the dignity of the Great Mongol only
roused his ire and according in Itßs he instructed
two of his most renowned and trusted warriors, T‘o
‘Huan surnamed the Prince Conqueror of the South
and A-li-‘hai surnamed Pdng-chang to lead an expe-
dition into An-nan to chastise the insolent people and
punish their rebellious king for his defiance of the Im-
perial Decrees. When Jih-flisiian heard the rumours
of this threatened invasion, he took energetic measures
to secure his realm from invasion. From the absolute
silence of Chinese historians as to the results of this
expedition we are left to infer its fate. This is no
difficult matter since the silence of the Chinese and
the fact that Jih-‘hsuan not only remained in posses-
sion but assumed the Imperial title of Ta-yiieh
‘Huang Ti or Emperor of the Great Ylieh nation, we
may rationally suppose that the Mongol Chiefs and
their hitherto victorious veterans were repulsed and
driven from Tungking by the hardy inhabitants.
Although we have no historic record of the achieve-
ments or fate of the expedition we have evidence that
the brother of the presumably victorious monarch
made his way to the Chinese Court, sware allegiance
to the House of Yuan, and was rewarded as his dis-
comfitted uncle had been by the empty title of An-nan
Kuo Wang. In 1288 we find it recorded that a


second expedition under the same famous commanders
was sent to subjugate An-nan, dethrone Jih-‘hsiian
and establish his loyal brother Yi-chi.
Great precautions were taken to ensure the success
of this second invasion. An army corps entered An-
nan from Yun-nan, and the main army of invasion en-
tered from Kwang-Si by means of the great West River,
whilst a large fleet under an experienced naval officer
was instructed to act in concert with the land forces.
The troops established their Headquarters at Ssu-ming
or Ming-chiang Tung. The fleet proceeded to a port
called An-pang ; Hai-K‘ou, at which place the Anna-
nese fleet soon made its appearance. This was the
signal for a long series of naval encounters between
the hostile fleets. No less than seventeen naval en-
gagements are recorded the culmination of which
was a great sea-fight in which the Annanese fleet was
severely crippled. This one defeat cost the conquered
four thousand men in killed and wounded besides
several of their ships which were either burnt or sunk.
Soon after this desperate fighting the Imperial fleet
sustained a reverse. A large fleet of grain ships was
being convoyed by a number of imperial war junks
when the Annanese fleet fell in with it, beat- off the
convoy removed the grain and burnt the ships. In
the despatch from the seat of war to the Court it was
stated that the Chinese threw the grain into the sea
to prevent it falling into the hands of the enemy!
T‘o ‘Huan was not to be delayed by the loss of his
stores but quickly advanced, crossed the Fu-liang
Chiang with his army and so completely defeated the


enemy in a hard-fought battle tbat Jih- £ bsiian and
bis son fled to a large island on the sea-coast, most
probably ‘Hai-nan. When the Imperialists reached
Tflen-chang Tdai-k‘ou and found no traces of the An-
nanese Royal family, they withdrew for the winter to
the City of Chiao-chih, probably modern Ha-noi. But
while the imperial commander was wasting his time
in comfortable winter quarters, the fugitive king busily
employed himself in raising an army. After he had
gathered together three hundred thousand warriors he
occupied the mountain passes in the rear of T £ o ‘Huan,
extended his line over a hundred li of mountains
and passes, compelled the imperialists to hurriedly
evacuate the city and seek safety in a precipitate
retreat. But this was no easy matter for all the
passes were in the hands of the Annanese and strongly
guarded. At last after considerable trouble a barely
practicable route was discovered via Yan-chi Hsien to
Ssii-ming Chou and along this route the remnant of
the Chinese army gradually found its way back to
China. After clearing his land of the invaders Jih-
‘hsiian sent an embassy to the Mongol Court to acknow-
ledge his fault and the enormity of the crime of driving
the Chinese invaders from Chiao-chih. Shortly after
this he died and in 1291 was succeeded by his son Jih-
tsun. The new monarch sent a mission to China, the
only result of which was a summons from that haughty
court to come to Peking. Jih-tsun remained quietly
at home and in due time another expedition for the in-
vasion of Tungking was started. It had not got far on
o o
its way when, the Emperor of China dying, its farther


advance was forbidden by his successor Cheng-tsung
in 1295. The opportunity tv as seized by Jih-tsun who
sent mourners to the Imperial Court and was rewarded
with the title of An-nan Wang. On his death he was
succeeded by his son Jih-chang who in 1311 sent an
embassy to, and then immediately invaded, China;
penetrating a considerable distance into Kwang-Si
before his Annanese troops were repulsed by a Mon-
gol force despatched from Tiu-nan to oppose them.
Shortly after this short-lived attempt to turn the
tables by invading China, Jih-chang died and was
succeeded by the Shih-tzii* Jih-kuang who in 1326
sent an embassy to the Emperor T‘ai-ting Ti. Six
years later in 1332 the Shi-tzii Jih-fou also sent a
mission with tribute to the court of the Emperor Wen
Ti. But the latter mission proved a failure, for the
Emperor entirely ignoring the ambassadors they had
the mortification of returning to An-nan without the
slightest notice having been taken of them or their
having achieved anything whatever.
* Shih-tzii is the equivalent of Crown Prince.


CHAPTER XIII.
The Ming dynasty founded—Prince Jih K‘uei sends tribute to
China—The gold and silver seal—-A Chinese resident appointed
to An-nan—Eevolt of Shu-ming 1374 —His abdication —An
Annanese regicide, 1388—Death of Shu-ming, 1396—Li Chi-li
makes his brother king and then slays him—Slaughter of inno-
cents —China sends ambassadors to An-nan to invest the kino-
O
Protest of the ministers.
For nearly a century Mongoldom dominated China.
But in 1368, the Yiian dynasty was crushed and by a
dark plot thousands of Mongols throughout the length
and breadth of China were slaughtered in one night,
O O '
as in England on St. Bride’s day, some centuries earlier,
and in France on St. Bartholomew’s day, two centuries
later, the Danes and the Hugenots, unsuspicious of
danger, were foully murdered during the watches of
the night. After the bloody close of the dynasty
founded by the Great Khan the chief conspirator, a
buddhistic priest of plebian origin named Chu Yiian-
chang founded the Ming dynasty.
The founder of the Ming dynasty had no mean
capacity for wise administration and by his energetic
rule he soon brought the neighbouring states under the
imperial aegis. In the first year of the term, ‘Hung-wu,
1368, an Imperial commissioner was despatched to the
semi-independent states on the South-western frontier
of China to demand their submission to the House
of Ming and payment of the customary tribute.
Accordingly in 1369 we find that Jih K‘uei, Prince of


An-nan, sent the usual present to the Imperial Court
and sought investiture from his Liege Lord the Em-
peror of China. His tribute was accepted and his
request granted for he obtained the title of An-nan
Kuo Wang, a special Commissioner being appointed
to proceed to An-nan with the Imperial Edict of In-
vestiture and the seal of office. This seal is known as
the Chin-yin Yin or Gold and Silver seal, and was to
be handed to the tributary monarch after his investi-
ture as the emblem and Insignia of Royal Power. As
the Imperial Commissioner was crossing the frontier he
was met by an Annanese envoy carrying despatches to
the Imperial Court announcing the death of Jih K‘uei,
the accession of Jih Chien and seeking Imperial sanction
and investiture for the new king. The Commissioner
did not proceed but awaited the result of the Annanese
envoy’s mission to the Imperial Court. The Emperor
was pleased to grant the request of the Annanese
Monarch and appointed a Political Resident and De-
puty Resident to the Court of An-nan. The Resident
was Wang Lien a £ Han-lin-yiian Pien-hsiu, who forth-
with proceeded to An-nan with his Deputy and the
previously appointed Commissioner and after solemnly
investing Jih Chien as An-nan Kuo Wang begged his
O o OO
acceptance of some costly presents from his Imperial
Suzerain. The Resident was allowed perfect liberty
of active interference and it is perhaps somewhat to
his action that in 1874 an uncle of the King named
Shu-ming violently usurped the throne of An-nan.
The usurper then despatched envoys to the Ming
Court but without success. Although greatly morti-
O O «/


fied at tins failure lie deemed Ms recognition by China
to be of such political importance that he sent a
second mission with costly presents and a memorial
in which he humbly acknowledged his faults and re-
quested punishment from China but this second mis-
sion was like the first a complete failure. The Chinese
Emperors would have no intercourse with the blood-
stained usurper who grovelled at their feet. Finding
all attempts at conciliation useless, he abdicated the
throne in favour of his brother Chuan, hoping that the
royal power would be secured to his branch of the
family by the Imperial recognition of his brother.
Chuan in 1375 sent a mission to China but with no
better success for the Chinese Court were apparently
determined not to recognize or countenance in any way
the kingship of Usurpers and Revolutionists. In 1378
Chuan died and was succeeded by his brother Wei
who although he renewed the attempt to ingratiate
himself in imperial favour fared no better than his
brothers. In 1388, Li Chi-li, a minister of state, assas-
sinated his master, king Wei and elevated a nephew
of the murdered king to the throne at the same time
making himself Regent. In 1396, Shu-ming died and
on a notification of this event being sent to the Imperial
Court, the Board of Rites was instructed to inform the
Government of An-nan that the Imperial Government
would hold no intercourse with rebels and usurpers.
Three years later in 1399 the regicide minister mur-
dered the puppet he had dubbed king and placed a
youthful son of his victim on the throne. This youth-
ful king named Yung found that the penalty of dis-


pleasing the king-maker was death for he was soon
murdered by Li Chi-li. It looks as if Li Chi-Ii had
sworn a vendetta against the House of Shu-ming and
took the method of first letting them taste the sweets
of Royal Power, and after making their life a burden
by his evil machinations slaying them unmercifully
in order that he might get rid of the whole of the
direct male representatives. After this he raised his
own younger brother to the throne, but in a fit of anger
he slew him also, and followed this up by the whole-
sale butchery of every member male and female of
the royal family of Chen. Having by this terrible
destruction of human life cleared his way to the throne
ho assumed the title of King of An-nan, changed his
family name from Li to £ Hii and had his family
proclaimed the rightful heirs to the bloody crown
of An-nan as the lineal descendants of the ancient and
virtuous Shiin. King Yi-yiian altered the name of the
country to Ta-yii, had his son proclaimed Emperor
of Ta-yii and himself assumed the title of T‘ai-shano-
‘Huang ii or King of Kings. During this period of
bloodshed the Emperor of China died and was suc-
ceeded by Ming Cheng Tsu, who, in 1103, consented to
receive a mission from An-nan. The Annanese envoys
brought rich tribute to the Imperial Court. They had
the satisfaction of being well received, their tribute
accepted and successfully accomplishing their mission.
Yi Y nan was formally invested by Imperial Commis-
sioners as King of An-nan.
M bile this had been going on an old Minister of State
of An-nan had found his way to the Imperial Court


and there protested against Yi Yuan’s investiture.
He declared that a member of an ancient Royal House
was living among the Lao tribes as the honoured
guest of the great chieftain Lao Kuo-ssu. The
claimant’s name was Chen T‘ien-p‘ing and on his
being brought to the Imperial Court he found favour
in the eyes of the Son of Heaven. This augured ill for
Yi Ylian An-nan Kuo Wane;.
O


CHAPTER XIY.
T'ien-p'ing receiving imperial encouragement and support invades
Tungking in 1405—His death —Troops from Yiin-nan—
Leonine cavalry—Capture of Hanoi—Capture of Chi-li and his
son —An-nan remade a colony—Revolt of Chien-ting in 1408
—Cheng Chi-kuang Emperor of An-nan —The Imperial troops
withdrawn—Fresh revolution in 1418—The Red Coat rebels—
China again interferes —Wang Tung’s command of the Imperial
troops —Their successes—His army is annihilated by the des-
pised Annanese.
When the next mission from An-nan came to the
imperial court, the Emperor received them in audience
and suddenly introduced the young pretender Chen
T‘ien-p‘ing to them. The envoys immediately recog-
nized him as a direct descendant of the Royal House
of Chen and acknowledged the legality and justness
of his claims to the Annanese throne. This confirmed
the Emperor, and in the springtide of 1405 he sum-
moned the king of An-nan to submit, commanding
him to send a mission of Ministers of State and other
high officials to the Imperial Court so that the right-
ful king might be safely and becomingly conducted
to An-nan and seated on the throne of his ancestors.
These decrees were very unpalatable to the usurper
for they threatened, not only his shaky throne, but his
life so he sent a petition to the emperor seeking im-
perial favour and clemency at the same time engaging
to do the Imperial bidding. As he did not shew any
signs of proving more amenable to argument, orders


were issued, in 1408, to the two commanders £ Han
Kuan and ‘Huang Chung to mobilise the Kwang-Si
army corps and see T‘ien-p‘ing properly installed in
his capital as King of An-nan. The threatened
monarch took every possible means to defeat the
enemy. An ambuscade was skilfully prepared into
which the Imperial troops were inveigled and merci-
lessly slaughtered by their despised foe. The would
be king was slain and but few of the invaders escaped
to tell the tale, whilst the Annanese who had sustained
but slight loss, returned to their homes laden with the
rich spoil of their over-confident foe and elated by
their decided success over the imperial forces. When
after some months news of the catastrophe reached the
Imperial Court, the Emperor, furious at being so baf-
fled by a little state, ordered the Duke of Ch‘eng Kuo
and the Marquis of Hsin Ch‘eng to raise an army to
avenge their fallen comrades, retrieve the honour of
the Imperial troops, and restore the lost prestige of
China.
An-nan was again invaded and the Chinese estab-
lished their headquarters at Lung-chou Ting but
here the Duke of Ch‘eng Kuo died, so that sole com-
mand devolved upon his colleague the Marquis of
Hsin-ch‘eng. This latter officer resolved upon ener-
getic action. By a series of rapid forced marches he
overtook the Annanese army, forced them to give him
battle, and routed them with great slaughter. This
battle caused the fickle Annanese to forsake their un-
fortunate king ‘Hii who had to fly for his life. Im-
mediately after the battle the veteran warrior Mu


Sheng, Marquis of Hsi-p‘ing, effected a junction with
the victorious troops and brought to their aid a vast
body of tried Yiin-nan warriors. The two armies
formed an imposing and aw T e inspiring sight. So great
was the number of troops that the lines of the encamp-
ment extended over nine hundred li or about three
hundred English miles. After some delay operations
were resumed. The troops moved out of their gigantic
camp and dividing into two bodies advanced into the
enemy’s country along divergent lines. Mu Sheng
with his Yiinnanese warriors going South West,
whilst the Kwang-Si contingent under Hsin-ch‘eng
proceeded to the South East. It was not long before
the resources of the great Kwang-Si commander were
sorely taxed. He was met in his advance by King
Tdii who had succeeded in gathering around him a
considerable army. He had pressed into bis service
a large body of trained elephants who bare on their
backs warriors and engines of destruction. At the
sight of this astonishing apparition the Kwang-Si
army was seized with consternation and a panic
set in amongst them. Their general, however, had
seen too many hard-fought battles and strange devices
to be easily daunted and he soon infused courage and
hope into his despairing troops. He caused the camp
artificers to make a number of artificial lions. He
lashed these monsters on horses, and on commencing
the battle, he first 'fired off his guns when close to the
enemy and then launched his lion-mounted horses at
them. Such was the impetuosity with which this
strange cavalry charged, that elephants and men,


scared by the thunder of the guns and horrified at the
fiends they imagined were fighting .for the foe turned
and bolted for dear life. The elephants in their mad
career of flight rushed right and left amongst the
Annanese ranks and wrought terrific havoc. The
Annanese were completely routed, their king only
escaping by the skin of his teeth, for in order to avoid
his pursuers he had to steer out to sea in a small boat
he found stranded on the beach.
The Imperial troops flushed with two victories
turned away to the Eastern Capital hung in the
modern city of Ha-noi and after taking it by storm
settled in quarters there. Soon after the Western
capital Hsi Tu which is the present capital of the
Ching-hua province fell into the hands of the \ fin-nan
army corps who strongly garrisoned it and took every
precaution against surprise. Scouts were sent out
who soon discovered the whereabouts of King ‘Hfi
and the wretched Chi-li the King of Kings, who were
kept under the strictest surveillance by means of spies.
These men soon brought the news that Chi-li had, with
the assistance of his son, raised a fleet of war junks
which lay at anchor at Yin Chiang. The watchful
commanders of the Imperialists conducted an attack
on this fleet by land and sea which resulted in its
dispersion. Chi-li and his son fled but were pursued
and finally captured at Chfi-lo ‘Hai K‘ou. I his im-
portant capture was soon complemented by the cap-
ture of the fugitive king. A native mountaineer named
Wu Ju-ch‘ing whilst crossing the Kao Wang Shan
near the Port of Yung Yang ‘Hai K‘ou fell in with


his unfortunate sovereign and Judas-like betrayed
him together with a band of trusty followers and
relatives into the hands of the enemy.
The whole of the prisoners were sent under strong
escort to the Imperial Court where they were sum-
marily executed with the exception of Ch‘eng a son,
and Jin a grandson of the tyrannical but unfortunate
King of Kings.
After this successful invasion, An-nan was rean-
nexed to China as a colony, and three officers were
appointed to govern it. These officers were entitled
Tu-Tung-Ssu-Ssu, Pu Cheng-Ssu-Ssu, and An Cha-
Ssu-Ssu and filled the offices now filled by Governor,
Treasurer and Judge. This triumvirate ruled the coun-
try and in order to govern it more easily they cut it up
into numerous divisions and subdivisions for the ad-
ministration of which a small army of Chinese officials
was imported and thus An-nan became an integral por-
tion of the Chinese Empire even as parts of Alsace and
Lorraine have formed since the war of 1870 an inte-
gral portion of the German Empire. But although
suppressed, embers of insurrection still smouldered and
towards the close of this eventful year a revolt headed
by Chien-ting broke out. Mu Sheng was commanded
to again take the field at the head of his Ylinnanese
warriors and being a man of action he was soon in
the heart of An-nan advancing without much opposi-
tion as far as the river Sheng Chiieh ‘Ho. At this
place his army sustained a defeat but managed to
keep their position. After this the veteran Comman-
der was reinforced by that experienced soldier Chang


Fu his former colleague who was sent to be his deputy.
These two men were given extraordinary powers and
were left their own masters subject to no conceited,
ignorant, and obstructive literati. Whilst waiting
for the support of the Kwang-Si army, Mu Sheng
was obliged to remain inactive and Chien T‘ing waxed
stronger, bolder, and haughtier, finally proclaiming a
protege of his, Emperor of An-nan.* In 1409, about
midsummer, the Kwang-Si commander engaged the
rebel host at Lien Chou and at Chib Chou, defeating
them with great slaughter. Two months after this
Chien-ting was captured by the victorious Chinese
troops. But in 1410 the revolt broke out again and
the cry was this time for independence for king and
country. This outbreak was headed by Chen Chi-
kwang the man whom Chien-ting had proclaimed
Emperor of An-nan. This insurrection took nearly
four years to subdue, and it was not until the insur-
gent chief Chen Chi-kwang was captured at Lao Kuo
in 1414 that it was suppressed. Although no great
battles were fought the campaign seems to have been
a tough one for both sides.
In 1415 rebellion again broke out but was quickly
crushed by Chang Fu; and yet again in 1418 insurrec-
tion rent the unhappy country. This latter rebellion
was caused by the tyranny and extortion of the higher
Chinese officials. The movement began in the pre-
fecture of Ching-'hua in the district of O-lo and was
headed by the district magistrate one Li Li who by
* lineal descendant of the House of Chen is at present living and fulfil-
ling the post of Provincial Treasurer for Shan-Si a little above Son-tay,


his skilful management gained a large following. He
then assumed the imposing title of P‘ing-ting Ta Wang.
The Imperial Commander-in-chief of the Chinese
forces in An-nan marched against the rebels, but with-
out much effect, for he found them strongly intrenched
and was unable to disloge them from their position,
hhe non-success of the Chinese troops encouraged
P £ an Lian the prefect of I-an, in 1419, to join in insur-
rection. He carefully disciplined his followers who
were known as the Red Coat Rebels from the colour
of their tunics. Towards the end of the year he was
defeated by the Imperial troops and compelled to fly
for his life, but the reverses of the patriots roused Fan
Yii, a buddhist priest, to energy. He left his monastic
life and called the people to arms. After giving the
Chinese much trouble this martial priest was defeated
and captured by his enemies.
For some half dozen years Tungking enjoyed a
breathing space of peace.
In 1426 one of the Chinese Emperors sent his favour-
ite eunuch to An-nan with the Imperial pardon of the
rebels and the offer of an appointment for Li Li. The
pardons were accepted but the offers of office declined
by the patriot chieftains who withdrew in voluntary
exile to the rocky fastness of the Lao Kuo country.
At the same time the officials who had been the main
cause of all this trouble were summoned to Court to
give an account of their stewardship. But this Em-
peror died and was succeeded by the Emperor ‘Hsuan
Tung whose early attention was called to Annanese
affairs. He appointed General Ma Sheng, the Duke


of Ch £ ien Commander-in-chief of the Yiin-nan forces
and gave him instructions to protect that wealthy
province from invasion by the Annanese, who had
again risen in arms with the cry of An-nan for the An-
nanese. The invasion of An-nan was decided upon.
Policy was first tried, offers of official position and emol-
ument being made to the rebel chieftains, but this
failed, and the Chinese trodps on taking the initiative
were sorely defeated by Li Li, who had issued from
exile to head the movement of his countrymen. The
Chinese commander was obliged to sign a treaty with
Li Li by which a large portion of the loyal districts
were ceded to Li Li and so lost to China.
When this reverse became known the veteran Mu
Shensi was ordered to invade An-nan and lead his
o
Yiin-nan warriors to the aid of his defeated country-
men, who, shut up in Chiao-chih city, were glad to
treat with victorious Li Li who for two years had
been steadily driving the Chinese from An-nan. But
the reinforcements turned the tide and battle after
battle was fought until the troops of Li Li were driven
to the famous mountain pass of Chen-I-Kuan. But
at this place the haughty Imperial Commander Liu
Sheng came to an untimely end. Whilst crossing a
bridge with a large party of cavalry the bridge gave
way, and he, with many of the soldiers with him, was
drowned in a raging mountain torrent in full sight of
his own camp. This incident cast a cloud of gloom
over the Chinese troops, and they withdrew from their
position. They were followed by the Annanese who
advanced to give them battle. The army of Li Li had


a squadron of elephants which spread dismay and con-
fusio’ in the Chinese ranks. The Imperial troops
were routed with great slaughter and the leading
officers with all the baggage fell into the hands of the
Annanese. The officers were executed and in the
pursuit which followed the battle the invading army
was annihilated by the foe it had despised.


CHAPTER XV.
Wan Tung’s trace with Li Li —Autonomy again granted to An-
nan —Ha-noi made the capital city—The house of Li—Usur-
pation of the Yuan family 1508—Restoration of the House of
Li—Revolutions —Peng Yung’s expedition 1522 —Conspiracy
against King ‘Hui —Murder of King Kuang—Tribute again
sent to China.
After the decisive defeat of the one army of relief
and the repulse of the other by the Tungkingese, Wan
Tung again made overtures to Li Li. They concluded
a truce during which the two opposing commanders
prepared a joint memorial to the Emperor, in which
they asked that a descendant of the Chen family, one
Chen Jih-kao, who was living in the Lao Kuo country,
might he installed as An-nan Kuo Wang, and that
autonomy might again be granted to An-nan. The
Emperor was pleased to grant the prayer of Li Li, and
all Chinese officials, civil, military, and naval, were
ordered to immediately leave An-nan and report them-
selves for duty in the several places from which they
had been drafted for foreign duty.
Soon after this, in 1429, King Chen Jih-kao died
and by the unanimous request of the people, Li Li was
elevated to the kingship. He immediately sent tribute
to China and among the many precious articles was
a large golden statue of himself which he sent as his
proxy. In 1431, the Emperor created Li Li Ch'uan Shu
An-nan Kuo Shih, or Viceroy of An-nan, giving him
authority to act in every way as Dictator of that state.


Li Li established his court at Ha-noi, or Ho-nei,
and called it Tung Tu or Tungking, which means the
Eastern Capital, and then for the easier administration
of his dominions he divided An-nan into thirteen T‘ao
or Provinces. During his reign was inaugurated in
An-nan the Chinese system of competitive examina-
tions for all official posts. Not content with the extent
of his dominions and desirous of a scientific frontier he
absorbed that part of the Chinese province of Yiin-nan
known as the department of Ning-yuan Chou. After
a short reign pregnant with well conceived and care-
fully executed schemes the old warrior, king without
a crown, died in 1433, leaving the country for which
he had fought so nobly and achieved so much to
the care of his son Li Lin. In 1436, the Emperor
conferred on the son the title and crown which had
been denied to the father. In 1442, Li Lin died and
was succeeded by his son Li Chlin who asked the
Emperor of China to invest him with a crown and
robe of state and grant him privileges similar to those
enjoyed by the tributary King of Chao-hsien or Corea.
The crown for which King Li-chtin asked, was usually
made of gold, highly wrought and decorated with
eighteen long strings of pearls, nine to hang over the
face and nine to cover the back of the head and neck.
The robe of state was of silk richly ornamented with
dragons embroidered in gold thread. But the King of
An-nan’s request was not granted. In 1459, Li Chun
was murdered by his half brother who usurped the
throne, but the people indignant at the cruel murder
of their monarch, rose in arms, drove the murderer


from the throne, and executed him. For some years
king peacefully succeeded king, until about 1507,
Kina - Li-chiin or I-chtin ascended the throne. The
o
Queen was a member of the imperious and ambitious
Yuan family and in a few years we find the king-
deposed, forced to commit suicide, and the tyrannical
house of Yuan reigning instead. But their power was
of short duration. The people again asserted them-
selves, rose in arms, and exterminated the hated
house of Yuan raising to the throne, Li Chou a mem-
ber of the Li or I‘ family.
In 1516, the Chief Director of Ceremonies in the
Royal Chapel formed a conspiracy against the king’s
life. After murdering the king, the chief conspirator
declared himself the legitimate descendant ol a former
king, and usurped the throne. But a Cantonese gen-
tlemen who sojourned in Tungking roused the people
and forced the usurper to flee to the northern portion
of his kingdom where he was content to rule over the
three provinces of Tai-yiian, Chiing-tu, and Chang-
chfing. This spirited Chinese immigrant raised a son
of the murdered king to the throne. For his loyalty
he was made an earl and given supreme command of
the Navy of An-nan. Two years later in 1518 we
find that this same man, whose name was Teng-yung,
crushed the rebellion of Cheng Sui and slew a
pretender to the throne. With the influence he gained
by his energy he virtually reigned over An-nan
especially after his marriage with the Queen of the
late King. In 1522, he determined to subdue the
three provinces over which Ch‘en Kao the usurper was


ruling. After completely routing him, lie forced him
to flee, and the miserable traitor died of starvation in
the land over which he had once reigned. Having
thus united An-nan under one rule, this ambitious
Chinaman endeavoured to effect the death of King
Huei, but the latter was warned in time by his mother
and fled for safety to Ching-‘hua. After the flight
of King ‘Huei a half brother of his named Kuang
ascended the throne. Not content with having made
his own puppet king he determined on reigning him-
self and accordingly had himself proclaimed Emperor
of An-nan. In 1530, he abdicated in favour of his
son Tang-ying, but although living in retirement he
carefully watched the course of events and guarded
his son interests most jealously. Early in this year
the royal exile Li ‘Huei died and was succeeded
in his pretensions to the throne by his son King.
This new claimant was soon defeated by Teng Yung
but his place was immediately taken by a younger
brother so that the house of Li still remained as a
thorn to the Cantonese Usurper. In 1536, the royal
exiles sent a mission to China with tribute. Their
envoys were to seek redress for King King and the
punishment of Teng Yung. The result was an imperial
edict ordering the Two Kuang provinces together
with Ylin-nan to mobilise their troops and invade
An-nan for the purpose of restoring order.


CHAPTER XVI.
Mo Teng-yung petitions the Emperor —Fu-‘hai succeeds to the
throne —Mo Teng-yung surrenders himself to the Imperial
Commander —Intermarriage of the houses of Mo and Yuan
Fall of an Aerolite in 1547 —The Mo brothers flee to China
Wei-t‘an overturns the House of Mo —Appeals to the people
and to China—The advent of the Ta-tsing dynasty in China-
Investiture of the King of An-nan—Family feuds and struggles
for supremacy —Capture of the Crown Jewels Ha-noi.
In 1538, the Ti T £ ai of the two Kuang provinces
began his preparations for the invasion of An-nan on
a gigantic scale. He raised an army of 300,000 men
and requisitioned for a monthly allowance of seven
hundred and thirty thousand taels of silver, an annual
supply of a million and half piculs of rice, (about
ninety thousand tons) and an immense quantity of
military stores of all kinds. Mo Tang-ying hearing
of these mighty preparations petitioned the Emperor
but before any answer could reach him he died. Mo
Teng-yung immediately placed his grandson Fu- hai
on the throne left vacant by his son’s death. The
Imperial commander appointed to take charge of the
expedition immediately on his arrival at Canton caused
proclamations to be circulated through An-nan, stating
the nature of the preparations made for invasion, the
futility of resisting his skill and the might of his bat-
talions, and calling on the people to submit to the
inevitable. After sailing along the West River as far
as Xan-ning-fu where he established his head-quarters


he was suddenly recalled to Peking. Mo Teng-yung
took the respite thus granted him and sent his nephew
to the Imperial Court with a despatch announcing his
surrender to the Imperial Commander-in-chief. After
this he caused his servants to bind him in token of
submission and in that guise proceeded to the Head
Quarters and gave himself up to the Chinese array.
On receiving his memorial the imperial court ordered
Mo Teng-yung to return the Gold and Silver Royal
Seal of An-nan to the Emperor. He obeyed promptly
and was rewarded by a full pardon and his appoint-
ment as Viceroy of An-nan. Mo Teng-yung died in
1542, and his grandson Mo Fu-‘hai who succeeded
him was confirmed in his position by the Imperial
Government. Some years before his death Mo Tenet-
yung had adopted a young lad of the Yuan family as
his son. This act simple in itself was destined to
produce great changes in An-nan. This adopted son
\ uan-ching was the paramour of Mo Teng-yung’s
widow through whom he exercised great influence
in the affairs of the country. He succeeded in marry-
ing his youngest daughter to a young grandson of
his adopted father and having thus strengthened
his power he let his ambition lead him withersoever
it would. In 1546, Mo Fu-‘hai died and was
succeeded by his infant son ‘Hung-yi under the
regency of Yuan-ching. The crafty regent gradually
deprived of power all those who could in any way
withstand his schemes and after vainly endeavouring
to capture the two brothers of Mo Teng-yung who
fled for safety to China, he imprisoned the boy king
and seated himself on the vacant throne. But the


stars in their courses fought against him. In 1547,
a lai'ge mass of meteoric stone fell in the province of
Kuang-tung and the shock of its striking the ground,
caused it to break in two. This phenomemon was
duly reported at court and at the request of His
Imperial Majesty the wise men consulted as to the
meaning of this portent. They arrived at the conclu-
sion that the breaking asunder of the aerolite portended
a sudden rupture of "some one of the tributary states
of China. Just at this juncture the Mo brothers with
their friends and retainers arrived at Clr'iu Chou.
They memoralized the Emperor and were kept by his
bounty whilst an expedition was raised to reinstate
them in An-nan. In the next year several Annanese
nobles came to China saying that they wished to con-
duct the brothers Mo back to their inheritance but
they were suspected of foul play and ordered to quit the
country. Immediately after this the country of An-nan
was invaded and the Annanese army was routed with
great slaughter. In the next year 1549, the youthful
king ‘Hung-1 made good his escape and appeared in the
field at the head of some loyal troops against the
rebellious Annanese, and defeated them so completely
that the power of the rebels was gone for ever. After
these successes the young king was for some years
allowed to reign in peace. In 1597, however, a descen-
dant of the Li family, Wei-t £ an by name, overthrew
the Mo family and usurped the throne. The Mo
family then appealed to the Imperial court, who lis-
tened favourably to them but in the meantime the
wily Wei-t £ an appealed to the Annanese people who


unanimously declared themselves in his favour. The
Chinese government thereupon recognized Wei-(ran
but stipulated that Mo ‘Hung-yi should be granted the
Province of Kao-p‘ing so that he might rule there un-
disturbed. In the year 1659, the successor of W r ci-t‘an
sent envoys to Ytin-nan to ascertain what changes
had taken place in the great Chinese Empire. They
brought back the news of the close of the Ming and
the foundation of the Ta-tsing or Manchu dynasty.
In 1666, the king of An-nan sent envoys to China
bearing the Great Seal which the Uing Emperors had
bestowed on the Annanese kings. In the following
year the Emperor Kang-hsi was graciously pleased
to invest Li Wei-hsi as king of An-nan. The first act
of the newly made king was to wage war against the
Mo family and force them to flee with about three
thousand retainers to Yfin-nan. The Emperor direct-
ed the king of An-nan to restore their little dominions
to them, but in 1674, the Mo family were effectually
crushed and Kao-pfing province reannexed to An-nan.
For the next hundred and twelve years the country
was torn and distracted by the struggles of the power-
ful Chen and Yfian families for supremacy but in
1787, the king Li forced a peace by giving his daugh-
ter in marriage to one of the sons of the House of
Yfian who had after a century of warfare proved them-
selves the slightly stronger party. After the death of
this monarch his son in law Yfian Tlui seized the
state jewels, looted the capital, and carried off his
booty by means of elephants to his stronghold in
Kuang-nan. On his way thither however, fifty of his


elephants were captured by some of the adherents of
the Li family. After this successful robbery the
Yuan family, again took the field and captured Ha-noi.
The king was invited to again assume royal power
but on his refusal the city was again looted by Y nan
Tlui who carried off a second time all the royal trea-
sures and in addition all the beauties of the royal
Harem whom he transported by ship leaving a power-
ful garrison in Ha-noi to guard his interests. The
o o
remnant of the royal family fled to China and were
allowed to settle in Nan-ning-fu whilst active prepara-
tions were made for an expedition to enter An-nan
and reinstate them in royal power.


CHAPTER XVII.
Invasion of Tungking—Success of the Imperial troops —Li Wel-
ch! invested with the kingship—Recall and defeat of the Im-
perial troops —Yiian-kuang-ping recognized as king of An-nan
reception at Peking in 1790—Disturbances after his
death—Yuan Fu-ying’s success —He is invested as Yiieh-naa
Kuo Wang —-Tribute to China—Kang-hsi’s Dictionary —In
1848, a Chinese resident appointed to An-nan —Revolts in
Tungking.
Upon receipt of the Imperial despat' in Kuang-
tung the Viceroy of the two Kuang sent despatches
to An-nan exhorting the people to be peaceable and
then sent to Nang-ning-fu for Li Wei-chi, a scion of
the royal house of Li, whom he proposed to establish
as King of An-nan. An-nan was invaded by the
Chinese and for some time the Emperor’s troops had
everything their own way. Success followed suc-
cess, and, although no important battle was fought
the Tungkingese were speedily driven back until the
Imperialist quietly occupied the city of Tungking
or modern Ha-noi. The Court of Peking as highly
gratified with the brilliant success of the expedition
and ordered the Board of Rites to take the necessary
steps to invest Li Wei-chi as king of An-nan. After
his investiture, the new monarch notified his Suzerain
of his desire to visit the Imperial Court, but was
wisely advised to remain in his own land and give
his best attention to the consolidation of his country
and the establishment of his power. At the same


time, lie was informed that when he had secured
order and tranquillity in his dominions so that every-
thing would work smoothly during his absence, he
might come to Peking and have an audience with the
Emperor.
Shortly after this the Emperor ordered the recall
of the Chinese troops but the officers in command
saw fit to disregard the Imperial Mandate. This
disobedience led to serious consequences. The Im-
perial troops flushed with their easy success became
careless and neglectful, discipline was relaxed, and
military strictness gave place to ease, luxury, and
debauchery. No one took notice or heed of the cloud
on the political horizon till it burst in all its fury.
The Tungkingese who had fled before the Chinese
troops, slowly gathered around their chief Yuan ‘Hu
who drilled them carefully, and, noting the carelessness
of his opponents made active preparations for meeting
them in the field. On the New Year, when the Chinese
were enjoying with childish glee the usual festivities
of such an occasion, Yiian ‘Hu, choosing a dark night
for his enterprise, suddenly attacked the unsuspicious
and careless foe in their camp, and utterly routed
them. The self-confident Chinese General fled in dis-
may and after crossing the river destroyed the bridge.
His unfortunate troops thus caught in a trap were
slaughtered unmercifully by their pursuers.
The victorious Yiian ‘Hu then looked about him for
an ally against China, and entered into a treaty with
the neighbouring State of Siam. After thus securing
himself to some extent, he changed his name to T nan-


kuang-ping and ascended tlie throne left vacant by
the fugitive Li Wei-cbi. He then despatched envoys
to the Imperial Court, at the same time acknowledging
his faults, and, by an offer of tribute, tendering his
submission to the Emperor. The Court of Peking
regarded the sudden reverse which had befallen the
Imperial arms as direct testimony of the desire of
Heaven that the Li dynasty should give place to the
Yuan, and accordingly recognized the new monarch.
In 1790, King Yiian-kuang-ping visited Peking,
where after doing homage to the Emperor, he was
feasted and entertained and on leaving was presented
with many marks of his Imperial Suzerain’s favour.
Two years after his return to An-nan he died and
was sircceeded in 1792, by his son Yuan Kuang-tsuan
a youth of fifteen years.
The accession of a minor was the signal for the out-
break of strife. Yiian-yo a relative of the young
king was put forward as a claimant for the throne on
the grounds of his loyal support of the late royal
family of Li. He is said to have been supported by
a band of barbarian pirates, probably the French and
Spaniards who assisted him to gain the throne. The
youthful king appealed to China for aid to maintain
his tottering throne and called the attention of the
Chinese officials to the ravages the pirate fleet com-
mitted. The only result was that the Emperor ordered
his officials to keep a sharper watch over these hostile
vessels and to defend the coast of China by a power-
ful fleet. Another claimant was Yilan Fu-ying who
was living at the Siamese court in great splendour as


the honoured guest and son-in-law of the Siamese
king, who had given him his favourite daughter in
marriage. Yuan Fu-ying proved successful and soon
occupied the present capital city of Fu Chum or Hue.
In 1799, the Emperor ordered the officials of the
two Kuang provinces to abstain from interfering in
An-nan as the Yuan family had proved themselves
totally unworthy of the protection of China by neg-
lecting their duty as rulers in harbouring pirates and
outlaws. At the same time it was notified that when
Yuan Fu-ying had proved himself a fit and capable
king the Emperor would be pleased to recognize him
as king of An-nan.
I strongly suspect that this cautiousness was partly
the result of the employment by the Tungkingese
king of several French Military Officers. These
foreign soldiers materially assisted king Yuan Fu-
ying in establishing his rule over the whole of An-nan,
and rendered him great service by fortifying the more
important towns.
In 1802, King Yiian Fu-ying having firmly estab-
lished his power sought to renew relations with China
and sent envoys bearing tribute to the Imperial Court.
He also asked that the kingdom of An-nan might be
called by its ancient name of Yiieh-nan. His over-
tures were well received and he was rewarded by being
invested as Yiieh-nan Kuo Wang so that An-nan
again became a tributary of China by the desire of the
country itself and without any compulsion from the
Ta-tsing dynasty, who indeed had shewn themselves


loath to undertake the duties of Suzerain towards such
a turbulent state.
Without China’s support An-nan feels much like a
child suddenly cut a drift from its parents. This
is but natural as the Annanese are in many essential
points Chinese. Their language, their superstitions,
their education, their government, their manners and
customs, their traditions, their prejudices and their
religon, are virtually those of China; and although
French Missionaries, those insiduous foes to peace
in' semi-civilized states, have been trying for several
centuries to destroy or counteract Chinese influence
under the cover of preaching Christianity they have
not succeeded. The deep schemes of Jesuits and
others for acquiring temporal power in An-nan having 1
utterly failed; it seems as if in these days it were
necessary to support priests and priestcraft, and the
Religion of Love which they profess to teach, by
means of modern artillery for if we may believe the
utterance of a cynical French Statesman this present
war against An-nan was undertaken by France in
the interests of the Christian Religion.
After a glorious reign of nearly a score of years
King Yuan Fu-ying died leaving a well organized
kingdom to his son Yuan Fu-nuan. The new king
commenced his reign by swearing fealty to China and
seeking the usual investiture from the Emperor. The
envoys brought back to their royal master copies of
Kang-hsi’s great dictionary which was adopted as the
standard of language in An-nan.


King Yuan Fu-nuan did not continue to support
the French Officers and missionaries. The former
were dismissed and persecution falling on the mission-
aries and their proselytes things in An-nan resumed
their old way; idolatry, superstition, and exclusive-
ness were again uppermost. After a reign of twenty-
five years the king died and was succeeded by his son
King Yiian Fu-mien who reigned for seven years and
a half. This latter king was succeeded in 1848, by
King Yiian Fu-shih who sent tribute to China and
not only asked for investiture but begged the Emperor
Tao Kuang to send him a Chinese Protector. This
was done and the Imperial Government fearing foreign
intrigue and disturbance advised the Government of
An-nan to make Fu Ch‘un the permanent capital.
The Protector of An-nan was His Excellency Lao
Ch'ung-kuang, who after leaving the Annanese Court
became Governor General of Yiin-nan and Kwei-chou.
He died in 1866, whilst holding the latter important
office.
In 1867, An-nan was invaded by bands of Chinese
rebels called T‘u-fei who came from Kuang-si. The
king appealed to China for aid to expel the marauders
and the Chinese government directed Feng Tzu-ts‘ai,
Ti-t‘ai of Kuang-si to proceed to Yiieh-nan and quell
the rebels. On the arrival of the Chinese troops the
rebels were allowed to tender their submission and
most of them did so, but one of their chieftains, Niang
Tden-hsi, treacherously slew a battalion of Imperial
troops whose guests he and his companions were. He


then joined another rebel chief named ‘Huang Ch‘ung-
ying who had his Head-Quarters at ‘Ho-yang. The
united band levied black mail and were for some time
the terror of all traders to or from Yiin-nan and
Kuang-si.


CHAPTER XYIII.
■Chinese rebels in Tungking —They become the Black Flags —•
Arrival of French Warships at Ha-noi —The king of An-nan
implores aid from China —The French in Tungking —The
Black Flag co-operate with the Annanese —Gamier is slain—
Black Flags subsidized by An-nan—‘Huang Ch‘ung-ying is
captured and beheaded —Settlement of the Black Hags at
Lao-kai.
In 1870, Li Yung-fu, chief of the Black Flags
occupied the town of Pao-sheng in Lao-kai. His
band of marauders with several others were originally
a band of outlaws from Kwang Si, but more will be
said about them in another place. This noted leader
tendered his submission to the Chinese Government
as did also another chief one Teng Chih-hsiung. For
some time negotiations went on smoothly but as
‘Huang Ch‘ung-ying chief of the Yellow Flags con-
tinued to openly defy the Imperial authority the
negotiations were abruptly broken off. The Chinese
troops withdrew and the various bands were left en-
tirely free from molestation. Having successfully
defied the Imperial as well as the Annanese authorities
they were soon reinforced by another body of Kwang-
Si outlaws.
In 1871, a determined attempt to subdue these
troublesome freebooters was made by the Chinese and
Annanese troops under the General Feng. Negotia-
tions were opened and the aid of the Magistrate of
Chfin Chou was asked to mediate. One of the chiefs Su


Kuo- £ han trusting fair promises of life and safety sur-
render himself. He was taken to Canton and there
decapitated by order of the Governor General of the
Two Kwang Provinces.
Shortly after this in 1872, an army corps of obser-
vation formed of Kwang Si troops was stationed on
the Chinese frontier of Tungking to meet a threatened
danger from outside. The strategic points of Tung-
king were however not occupied by the troops of
Suzerian State. If this had been done and Tungking
O o
thrown open to commerce as Corea has been the
Franco-Chinese difficulty would have been nipped in
the bud and the prosperity of Tungking and South
Western China greatly increased. France would not
have engaged in its rash filibustering expedition to
An-nan and would not have encountered the shame
and humiliation they have done by their policy of
shilly-shally in carrying on the war.
In 1873, An-nan appealed to the Suzerian State
for protection from the French Ships of War which
the Government of An-nan declared had been admitted
to the interior of An-nan by the Chinese General
Chen Te-kuei. This official was immediately recalled
and severely punished for his indiscretion in thus
allowing Dupuis to reach Ila-noi. This gentleman
was proceeding to Yun-nan with arms, ammunition,
drill instructors and artificers for the Chinese and
was therefore entitled to the protection of the Tribu-
tary State. An act of stupid jealousy on the part of
a high official gave France what it deemed sufficient
ground for interfering.


On the first appeareance of trouble one of the
earliest steps taken by the Chinese and Annanese
governments was to engage the services of Liu \ ung-
fu, the Black Flag leader, who was given official rank
in the Chinese Army. His followers attacked Ha-noi
but were repulsed and drew off. ihe F rench troops
gave chase but were cut down by men lying in
ambush in the Bamboo groves outside the city.
Gamier and many of his men were slain and after the
custom of the country their heads were cut from their
bodies and carried away as trophies. Ha-noi was
evacuated by the French.
For this success Liu Yung-fu was created San
Sheng Fu Li-tu or Deputy Commandant of three
Provinces, and was allotted the district of Lao-kai.
He was thus given territory and acknowledged by
the Court of An-uan as a loyal border chieftain and
duly authorised officer of their army. He was allowed
rations and pay for 1800 retainers during times of
peace and granted the privileges of a powerful and
friendly border chief.
On the other hand ‘Huang Clvung-ying who had
assisted the French was captured and executed for
his treachery. By these successes the magnificent
achievements of a handful of French adventurers and
officers were annihilated in a few hours and rung-
king, of which the French had possessed the fairest
provinces, passed again under the (by the French)
abhorred yoke of Hue.* With the death of Gamier
who had been the soul of the entire movement, the
* M. de Caillaud.


hope for the success of the plans of the French in
Tungking failed for he alone understood them and had
the tact, ability and energy to carry them out. M.
Philastre concluded the Treaty of Saigon on March
sth 1874, the court of An-nan being brought to agree
to the terms by an insurrection of the people in favour
of the Li family. This insurrection was undoubtedly
stirred up by the French missionaries who saw in the
restoration of the Li dynasty a chance of ensuring the
success of French plans for aggrandisement and the
triumph of their form Christianity. This treaty re-
cognized the protectorary rights of France and the
complete independence of Tungking although the
latter state bound itself to follow the foreign policy
of France, but it must be remembered that this treaty
was obtained from the embarrassment of the king of
Tungking and from the ignorance of the Annanese
ambassadors as to its significance. There is not the
shadow of a doubt in the light of History that from
remote times the dependence of An-nan on China is a
fact, claimed at Peking and admitted by the Annanese,
and therefore the Chinese Government have an un-
doubted right to be consulted in all questions affecting
the political status of Tungking. But France did not
consult China who has preserved for more than thirty
centuries with the most careful exactitude her rights
as Suzerain but kept the Treaty of Saigon secret from
the Chinese Government for over a year. This closed
the first act of the Tungking drama. The second act
is still in progress.


CHAPTER XIX.
Official position of the Black Flag leader—The Black Flags at
Lao Kai—Their Revenue derived from official subsidies, dues
levied on all merchandise, and gambling—Precautions against
poison—Penalty for fire—French interference in Tungking —
China and the Black Flags —Possibility of China effectually
resisting France.
We saw in the last chapter how the renowned
leader of the Black Flags became a loyal supporter of
An-nan recognized by the government of that country
and given an official position in the army with a sub-
sidy and rations for his retainers. The amount of the
subsidy was 1,200 cash and 30 catties of rice a month
for each man of the Black Flag force. For married
warriors the pay and rations were doubled.
Among the Black Flags the old men and boys
have to attend to the cultivation of the land at Lao
Kai, the young men hunt in the woods and forests,
and the Avomen keep house and do all the trading
Avhilst the able bodied are doing duty as soldiers.
The hunters bring in Musk, Deer horns in the velvet,
Deer sinews, Rhinoceros horns and hides, and
Elephants tusks. Most of these articles are sold to
the Cantonese Traders who frequent the region. The
warriors are divided into battalions and companies
called Yin and Tin who do duty in succession for a
certain number of days monthly.
These hardy mountaineer warriors ha\ r e fortified
their town of Pao-sheng and built a strong citadel


with massive concrete walls. This town stands at
the junction of the An-hsi and Red Rivers on the
Tungking side of the former stream. The An-hsi
river is the old boundary between Annanese territory
and the Chinese province of Yun-nan, and it is from
this circumstance that the district derives its name
of Lao Kai or the ancient boundary. Inside the
citadel is the residence of Lin Yung-fu. Here he lives
with his family and about two hundred picked warriors
who form his personal body guard.
In addition to this several wealthy Cantonese traders
are granted the privilege of living in the security of
the citadel. These favoured few probably enjoy the
monopoly of importing cotton, salt, tobacco, etc., and
of exporting opium, copper, tin, etc. In these articles
a considerable and lucrative trade is done from which
the Black Flag leader derives an annual income of
about 80,000 taels of silver. The gambling is the
direct monopoly of Liu Yung-fu. There are more
than a hundred tables daily set out on the banks of
the river where the fortunate hunter, successful trader
and reckless soldier can indulge the national craving
for gambling and excitement in some of their name-
rous games of chance.
Food of all kinds is cheap and abundant at Lao Kai,
hut the water supply is a matter which receives the
special attention of the Black Flags as they think that
on its purity depends their safety from their most
dreaded foe, poison. Their water supply is derived
from a fine spring which bursts forth on a hill side
some few hundred yards from the town and the water


is conducted into the town by mean of bamboo pipes.
The spring is hidden from the view by a thick fence
of bamboos. A dense grove of these trees is carefully
trained so as to make a practical by impassable barrier
through which no foe can stealthily penetrate and by
poisoning the water at its source send destruction
and death amongst them. A guard of twenty warriors
is always on duty in this grove as an additional pre-
caution.
The houses outside the citadel are built mainly of
wood and were often destroyed by fire so that Liu
Ying-fu has issued a decree that the people in the
house at the time when it catches fire, are to be
beheaded.
The animosity of the Annanese to the French is
not much to be wondered at considering the treatment
they have received, but the protracted struggle that has
been going on for long months is quite as much due
to the action of China as to the Tungkingese them-
selves. China has not only spurred An-nan on but
has, in addition to direct orders to the Tributary State
to fight, given substantial aid in money, supplies,
munitions of war, and men. The fight is in reality
being fought by China who deems it wise to confine
the war as far as posible to Tungking and treat it as
a purely local disturbance although it by no means
follows that the war will not be conducted with spirit.
China, and An-nan also, is well aware of the unblush-
ingly piratical nature of the French attempts in Tunis
and Madagascar and is determined not to have France
as a powerful and hostile state on the very borders of


lier wealthiest provinces. The Chinese believe that
the French desire Tungking as the possible means of
obtaining Yun-nan and perhaps other provinces and
fight accordingly not only for their Suzerain rights
but for the maintenance of their territorial integrity
which is menaced by France. As a direct and power-
ful means of warding off the danger to a large extent.
China has exercised her incontestable right and
entered into a compact with her formerly outlawed
subjects the Black Flags.
These Black Flags were not the Tai-piug Rebels
but bands of outlaws such as existed at one time in
Merrie England. They left Kwang-Si their native
home and went into the well wooded mountainous
districts of An-nan. With these her own outlawed
subjects China has entered into an agreement, has in
fact enrolled them as a portion of her territorial army
told off for the special and highly honourable duty of
assisting a dependent state and protecting the boun-
dary of their fatherland.
Liu Ying Fu whom the French pretend to regard as
a puerile foe and a rebel has been granted the Brevet
rank of Major General in the Imperial Chinese Army.
He and his men are well supplied by the Chinese with
modern artillery, good rifles, together with weapons
and war materiel of all kinds. In addition to this he
receives from the Imperial Treasury a subsidy of
twenty thousand silver taels monthly so that he may
keep a permanent army of four thousand men on a
war footing.


Thus he and his men are not outlaws or rebels but
the recognized subjects of China, and nothing but the
ridiculous irritability of the French at the prolonged
resistance they have met will account for their persis-
tent attempt to speak of their hardy opponents as
rebels, while nothing will excuse their criminal blun-
dering in announcing that they will give no quarter
and take no prisoners if victorious. The Turks
had more right to call the noble race of mighty
Montenegrin mountaineers rebels and traitors than
the French to speak in such a way of the Tungkingese.
The only foes that the French have so far met are
the Chinese Black Flags aided by a few Tungkingese.
There is not a single foreign Chinese Officer at the
seat of war notwithstanding French assertions to the
contrary. France is fighting against unaided China
and has still to count upon a yet more effective resis-
tance when the Chinese and Annanese shall be lead
and disciplined by the foreign officers in the Chinese
Military Service. How formidable China would then
be with well drilled troops following, and guided by,
trusted European Officers, Colonel Gordon who is
remarkable for the naked truthfulness of his state-
ments has already told the world through a telegram
to the New York Herald. France if successful will
only stir up a powerful and quietly inveterate enemy
who will spare no exertion till she has put herself in
a position to retaliate. Long years may roll by but
the hatred will not die out till China again holds all
the land formerly hers which the French have already
taken or may in the future annex. The French do


not forget the war of 1870 and hope more enthusiasti-
cally than ever to recover Alsace and Lorraine. The
thirteen years of uneasy restless peace which have
rolled by have been almost entirely devoted by the
French people to preparation for a long and deadly
struggle. Time has only acted as fuel to the Anti-
Prussian rage and the fire of hatred burns to-day
more fiercely than ever. As in France so will it be
in China.


CHAPTER XX.
Mineral Wealth of Tungking-Duties-Chinese mining industries
at stake—The Trade of Timgking—Produce of Tungking—
Resources of the Population—Prospects of Trade under the
h rench French dreams of prosperity not likely to be realized.
The Chinese have long known of the enormous
mineral wealth of lungking. That country is the
centre of vast deposits of coal in addition to which the
ordinary as well as the precious metals are there
abundant. I know of no less than seventeen districts
in which there are flourishing gold fields. Silver and
copper mining occupy a great deal of native and
Chinese labour. The Chinese are the proprietors of
most of the larger and more productive mines hut the
output of metal by mines surreptitiously worked in
order to avoid the payment of the usual royalties is
very considerable. In the T‘ai-yuan Province there
are four gold fields and five silver mines; in the
Liang-shan province two gold fields ;in the Pei-ning
or Bac-ninh province one gold field and two large
districts rich with all kinds of metalliferous deposits;
in the Using-‘hua province there are two well worked
auiiferous tiacts and two large copper mines whilst
in the Hsiian-kuang province there are no less than
four large gold fields, two important silver workings
and one copper mine.
As all these mines pay a substantial royalty, calcu-
lated on the output to the Annanese Government and


in addition to the heavy squeezes paid to the local
provincial officials yield good returns to the Chinese
capitalists who own and work them, they would ap-
pear to be in a flourishing condition. Nearly the
whole of these wellknown mineral deposits are worked
by purely Chinese companies most of the shareholders
being Cantonese many of whom realize handsome
fortunes from their mining speculation. In view of
these facts it can only be surmised what European
engineering skill and commercial enterprise would do
for the development of the mineral wealth of the
country. Most of the men employed in the mines are
Kwang Si miners who of course can only work in
their own primitive way which reminds one of a hen
scratching up the surface of the ground.
As in the mining industry so it is in trade. The
Chinese with their usual energy, enterprise, and well-
known tradal proclivities have succeeded in almost
entirely monopolizing the trade and commerce of
Tungking. Next to England and the port of Hong-
kong the enterprising Chinese who occupy the high
tradal position among the nations of the East which
the English do among those of the West hold and
as far as one can forsee will retain the greatest interest
in the trade of Tungking. The Chinese concerned
are principally the astute traders of Kuang Tung and
Fu Kien and nothing that the French can do even if
they succeed in their rash enterprise will alienate the
trade and cause it to run in French channels. French
success can only benefit the trade, industries and
manufactures of England and China, for Hongkong


will be in that case more than ever the pivot on which
the whole of the trade of Tungking will turn.
o o
The principal imports are cotton cloths, salt,
tobacco, dried fish, crockery, hardware, and manufac-
tured goods generally; whilst the chief exports are
opium, rice, copper, tin, the edible lily, dried fungi,
etc., etc. In addition to these there are the na-
tural productions of Tungking the most important of
which, from an export point of view, is the timber of
the gigantic teak which grows luxuriantly in the
virgin forests on the slopes of the mountain ranges
near the Ylin-nan border. Timber indeed is a very
important item of trade including as it does the
durable teak, first class pine which is largely used for
coffin wood by the Chinese, the various hard woods
used in making furniture, the purely ornamental woods
and several species of fragrant wood. Many valuable
drugs are exported, of which the most noteworthy is
the wood and bark of the cinnamon or cassia trees.
The Cinnamon which comes from Tungking the
Chinese consider the finest in the world. The tusks,
horns, bones, hides, and sinews of elephants, rhi-
noceroses and deer, are also in great demand for
medicinal purposes especially deer horns still covered
with their natural velvet which are very highly prized
by debilitated Chinese gentlemen. Honey is sent in
considerable quantities to the provinces of Kuang
Tung and Kuang Si, whilst a very large trade item is
included under the head of various reptiles principally
snakes which are credited with powerful medicinal
properties.


If the French are successful in their enterprise or
keep up the disturbance in An-nan the vast bulk of
trade from Yun-nan which finds an outlet by Man-
hao down the Red River will follow, as it did in the
past and recently has again commenced to do, the
course of the mighty West River through Kuang Si
and Kuang Tung to Canton or Pak-hoi. This would
also be the result if the French resorted to a protective
tariff in their desire to keep the trade in their own
hands. Chinese are the quickest people in the world
to find out a cheap route and immediately that is done
trade is deflected from its natural or usual channel.
So true is this that a slight difference in the blackmail
levied by the mandarins of a district has been known
to suddenly take all the trade from one route toother
hundreds of miles away. Supposing France to be
successful China eager to damage French trade
in all probability be found quite willing the
steamers of other nations to navigate the Klpig Tung
rivers as far as Peh Seh. Such action together with
the removal of all extortionate or vexatious dues on
merchandize would make the great river system of
Kuang Tung the great commercial highway of all trade
from or into Central and Eastern Yun-nan, Kwei-chou,
Tungking and Kuang Si. If therefore the French
dream that their ultimate success, which is very
problematical, will give them an immense and wealthy
colony which will greatly increase their commercial
prosperity, their undertaking is likely to be utterly
chimerical and Tungking will prove to be but an apple
of Sodom for if trade is not violently interfered with


it will if the French afford even moderate facilities for
its development remain in the hands of the Chinese and
English manufacturers and merchants who at present
control it. Nothing can wrench it from their firm
grasp and any attempt to introduce a protective tariff
would reduce what might be a self-paying colony to
complete dependence on France, if not to the verge of
bankruptcy, without doing much harm to England or
China. Trade would be completely diverted from the
Song- Koi to the Sikiang but would not change hands.
o o o
But the French have very many difficulties and
obstacles to overcome before they can see even re-
motel|L the glimpses of ultimate success in their
attempted annexation of Tungking. They are at pre-
sent fighting in Tungking nominally against the
Aunanese--who detest them for their false promises at
the time Sgpie Li insurrection, and believe in nothing
but Frenteh callousness, greed, and rapacity, but in
reality against An-nan aided by China. Very different
will affairs be when the Dragon Throne tired of, or
compelled to forego, the temporising policy and diplo-
matic tactics of her greatest statesman, shall openly
come to the aid of her distressed tributary, and prove
that China is, actively as well as passively, implacably
hostile to the pretensions of any power which by
ignoring the indisputable rights of the Suzerain State
in seeking self-aggrandisement at the expense of
China’s Tributary Tungking has deliberately insulted
those proud claims of the Dragon throne of which not
one jot or tittle was abated during the most terrific and
threatening period of the history of the middle kingdom
to wit the times of the Tai-ping rebellion.


The practical political or other advantage to be
gained by this or that course ot action will not line
China from the enterprise however dangerous and
nothing will cause her to swerve from the line of
action which iron precedent, obvious duty, political
pretensions, the maintenance of her majesty and power,
fidelity to the venerated past, territorial integrity
national fame, historical continuity, fixity of purpose,
which with the lofty traditional pride of the oldest
civilized government the sun shines on, and the sup-
plications of a distressed ally alike demand of her.
When France has decided on a definite course of action
and is supported in it by the French people then will
come the crucial time. France will find that she will
have to spend treasure and men freely in the vain
hope of founding a great Oriental Fmpire; a scheme
which will sooner or later prove to be not only un-
attainable but a costly impossibility. Interference by
the French in Tungking means not only implacable
hatred but sooner or later open hostilities with a
practically resistless enemy. For every man I ranee
can afford to lose China can lose a thousand whilst
her command of treasure is like her levies practically
inexhaustible. Very different is the case with I ranee.
She fighting native levies aided by Chinese has as yet
shown no capacity for overcoming even local difficul-
ties. Lacking decision, wanting promptitude and
exhibiting no power of resource it is by no means
certain that even with their much talked of reinforce-
ments the French will be able to successfully crush
and stamp out the resistance they are receiving from


tlie Tungkingese although so many advantages have
been and are in their favour. When China declares
her course of action and French troops have to advance
into a hostile country, and to face a Chinese army
their serious troubles will commence for the farther
they have to remove their base of operations from the
sea the more insuperable will their difficulties become.
Even in the event of complete success France must
remember that she will have for years to maintain a
large European army in an unhealthy climate as she
will want not only a large body of troops for any
emergency that may arise but will require strong
garrisons for every town she takes and desires to hold.
French power will cease where the French rifle bullet
ceases to harm or the French artillery be heard, iheir
government must perforce be the government of the
sword. Obtained and kept by unrighteous force the
revenues of the colony will be spent in military occu-
pation and the commercial prosperity of fungking
will perish under the necessity of maintaining an
immense military force.


CHAPTER XXL
Some account of the Black Flags—Conclusion.
1 he renowned Leader of the Black Flags was born
in 1836, at Shang-ssu Chou in the South West of
Kwang Si. He has a smooth beardless face which
makes him look much younger than he is. Liu Erh,
or Liu Yung-fu as he is officially called, is as we have
seen an Annanese official of high rank in addition to
being a Chinese military official in command on the
Y un-nan frontier. This man who by his defence of
Tungking has made the name of himself and his band
famous has but one wife the daughter of a famous and
powerful Chinese border chieftain named Wano- Pino - -
... O O
hsing. This chief owns a large estate rich in all kinds
of metallic ores; his territory is situated on the Yun-
nan side of the An-hsi river. By his wife who is
still living he has a son of eleven years and two
daughters. The son is his eldest child. In addition
to his own family Liu Erh has living with him several
relations who hold official rank among the Black
Flags, and he also has an adopted son who is in charge
of the garrison of Pao Sheng the Black Flags’ Head-
quarters. Liu Yung-fu is assisted by several Chinese
officials who act as his secretaries. The most impor-
tant are, Han Pei-ming an official of the sth Civil
Rank, and Li Pei-tao the Military Seci’etary who
without the knowledge or consent of his chief ordered
the execution of a foreigner some short time since.


Some time ago Liu Yung-fu returned to Ms native
place in Shang Ssu Chou in Kwang Si, and had
arranged to go back and live there but his plans were
upset by a brawl in which some of his band unfortu-
nately killed a native of the place. Liu Erh was thus
compelled by popular opinion to leave the town and
he went back to the Black Flags in Tungking greatly
to the joy of the Chinese. The Chinese believed, and
perhaps justly, that the Black Flags were feared by
the French who had not only demanded the condign
punishment of Liu Yung-fu and the suppression of his
band but had proclaimed them pirates who were to be
exterminated. China thought that she had ready to
her hand a band of determined warriors dreaded by
the French which would be of material importance in
resisting the foreign foe and in frustrating his projects
for founding a wealthy Colony, and inaugurating a
prosperous trade. To this end Liu Yung-fu was
formally invited to a conference with Imperial Officials
in Yun-nan. He went and found himself honoured
in every possible way. He was pardoned for his
offences, the ban of outlawry was annulled, and he
was created a Major-General of the Chinese Army.
At the same conference the details of the aid he was
to receive in arms, stores, and money was duly
arranged after which lie returned to Pao Sheng with
a considerable supply of war materiel as an earnest of
what was to follow. The Black Flags took the field,
volunteers gathered round their banners and soon the
French advance beyond Ha-noi was checked. In a
severe tight the French were again worsted and left


their Commander Henri Riviere with several of his
officers and men dead on the field.
Since that time France has been continually send-
ing reinforcements to An-nan to avenge Henri
Riviere’s death, but have not as yet effected anything
noteworthy. She has gone to great expense for but
little gain and has set about the war in a half-hearted
unworkmanlike manner. With difficulty the French
troops were able to score a success of some kind at
Sontay but so desperate was the fighting that the
French loss was over a thousand men being espe-
cially heavy in officers, whilst the loss of the enemy
was slight, the dead found in the town being chiefly
the non-combatant inhabitants. France will not rest
satisfied with that, indeed if she means to remain in
Tungking she cannot but will need to annex the
country as far or nearly as far as Manhao. Other
large towns must be taken, the spirit of the people
broken, the Black Flag subdued, and their moun-
tainous country penetrated. I estimate that for the
thorough success of the undertaking the French will
require an army of about 60,000 men even if that
is enough. The country, climate, in fact everything
except superior weapons and discipline is on the side
of An-nan and China. Superiority in military dis-
cipline and weapons means much, but France has to
wage war with a stubborn foe who if well trained
would make magnificent soldiery. That they can
fight and give a good account of themselves we have
seen. Even as I write comes news from Tungking
and Canton of another great Black Flag success.


Whether the news is true or not cannot be certainly
known for sometime as the French allow no corres-
pondents to accompany them to the scene of action.
Correspondents are absolutely dependent on theh rench
for news, they can see and hear nothing for themselves
but must be content with what the French are pleased
to tell them. Still the Chinese account of the Sontay
affair proved to be more accurate than the French
account. But whatever the course of events in
Tungking will be, I wish to impress on all who may
read this little book that An-nan has been for more than
thirty centuries and still is the Vassal and tributary ot
China ; that France has ruthlessly and without legiti-
mate excuse tried to violently oust China and seize
Tungking; that the Black Flags are recognized
Chinese and Annanese troops and not rebels ; that the
Annanese people hate the French with a bitter un-
quenchable hatred ; that France has already met no
mean foe and will inevitably stir up the bitter, patient,
unrelenting animosity of China it she continues her
present course of action; that French success will only
put off the day of retribution whereas a French reverse
will be the death blow to their dream of a colonial
Empire in the East and probably cause their present
Republican Government to collapse.
And farther that the only parties who will ulti-
mately derive benefit from the success of the aggres-
sive policy of France will be Great Britain com-
mercially, and China politically for Great Britain
will have the Trade whether Tungking is Chinese or
not and China will heed the lessons of this Eastern


Imbroglio and prepare herself to cope successfully
with future troubles. If France desires trade and
protection for missionaries those privileges and rights
can be secured by treaty. It was by treaty that Corea
for long centuries the hermit among nations was
opened to the world and not by the thunder of French
guns or victories won by foreign arms. Let France
acknowledge China’s position as Suzerain and while
thus frankly admitting the lawfulness of China’s an-
cient claims ask firmly that Tungking be thrown open
to the Commerce of the woxdd. By so doing she will
get the practical good she desires without the moral
stain and possible humiliation she will incur by her
policy of forcible annexation. France must consider
not only the present but the future and that outlook
even with brilliant and decided French victories now
is not at all a bright or prosperous one either for a
French Tungking or France herself.


APPENDIX.
Chinese reinforcements for Bac-ninh. —General Chiang
and other Officers.
In the Summer of 1882, when it became evident to
the Chinese Government that France was determined
on annexing Tungking, precautions were taken to
protect the frontier of Yun-nan, and Kuang Si, from
invasion. Accordingly two persons possessed of some
Military experience, acquired whilst acting against
various hands of rebels during the late civil war, in
Western China, were appointed Provincial Treasurers
in each of the above named provinces. Each of them
was granted a special permission to correspond direct
with the Government at Peking a privilege rarely
granted to officers of that rank. Those officers were
O
commanded not to cross the frontier of China although
they were not forbidden to allow volunteers to join
the ranks of the Annanese regular army or of its
auxiliary forces acting under Liu Yung-fu. It was
thus expected that the French would be discouraged
and abandon the idea of annexing Tungking if they
found a formidable resistance offered to their advance
into the interior.
The repulse of Riviere and his troops at the time
of his attempt to take Sontay, seemed to prove that
the French were not likely to continue the strife, they
had left 1G Officers and 60 odd French Soldiers in the
hands of the Pdack Flags, besides, many native soldiers
and camp followers, and a great quantity of war


materiel, the number of the wounded on that occasion
was never exactly known, but it appears that 6 or 8
more officers died of their wounds, and many more
it is reasonable to believe suffered a similar fate.
China was mistaken, her neglect to declare herself
determined to defend Tungking, encouraged the
0 0' o
French to try again, in order to show China that
they were at least equal to taking Sontay from the
Black Flags, and Bac-ninh from the Chinese. The
Chinese Government therefore considered it expedient
to promote the Yun-nan and Kuang Si Commanders
to the rank of Governors, in their respective Provinces
thus granting them greater authority, and increasing
their power to defend the frontier. Yang Chum, the
Commander-in-chief of the Yun-nan contingent, had
under him the following brigadiers, with their respect-
ive brigades:—“Liu Yung-fu, with the Black Flag
brigade, forming the van, 6 battalions of 500 men
each; Wu Yung-An with the An-yi brigade, forming
the right wing, 6 battalions of 500 men each; TVai
Piao, with the Kai-hua brigade, forming the left wino-,
o ' o 3'
6 battalions of 500 men each; Chou Wan-shun, with the
An-ting brigade, forming the centre, 6 battalions of 500
men to which 10 battalions were there added. These
troops formed a grand total of 17,000, and comprised
the A T un-nan contingent defending the approaches to
that province, by way of the Hung or Bed River. So
much for Yun-nan; now for the defences of Kuang Si,
the Commander-in-chief of the forces of this province,
acting in Tungking, is named Hsii Yen-shiu. He has
under him 22 battalions of about 350 men each. Six-


teen of those battalions are at Bac-ninh and in the
neighbourhood under the chief command of General
Huang, who is assisted by two brigadiers, each of
whom has five battalions under him. We may thus
consider the entire strength of the Kuang Si land force
to have been 22 battalions of 350 men each, or say
7,700 men. Twenty battalions were, however, added
to this force in October last, and they would bring
up the force to the respectable figure of 11,700. There
is also a strong flotilla of small gunboats, which must
be taken into account as an item of this force if the
French attempt to pass Bac-ninh. The guns mounted
in the flotilla ai’e old fashioned smooth bores, but the
men are useful for land services with their rifles.
Thus we see that the Chinese have really only about
30,000 men defending their frontiers, none of whom
are disciplined according to the European system, and
not a single distinguished Chinese general has yet
taken the field. Yet the small progress the French
have been able to make has cost them a great many
men and much money. The capture of Sontai cost
more than was calculated; the capture of Bac-ninh
will cost still more, and when it is taken, what
advantage will the French have gained? Sontai is
still a long way off from the frontier of Yun-nan, and
it is ordy the beginning of difficulties that will have
to be surmounted before Man-hao is reached. Lao-kai
cannot be passed without a struggle, nor can the
obstacles in the way be easily overthrown. On the
Kuang Si side the difficulties are just as great and the
goal just as far. Lung-chou must be reached before


the Chinese frontier can be said to have been attained.
If France cannot see her way to creating for herself a
prestige in the East without resorting to force, she
should make up her mind to send out a sufficiently
large body of men to secure her object. If she cannot
spare a land force of 60,000 men backed by a power-
ful fleet, she would do well to retire from the contest
whilst the dim glory of Sontai still hovers above her
expidition to Tungking.”
The Kuang Si Officials are now eagerly bestirring
themselves for the preservation of Bac-ninh. Troops
are being raised in various places for the defence of
that important frontier fortress. Bac-ninh or Pei-ninh
is the name of a City as well as that of the Province
of which it is the Capital.
The Fu-liang TIo River separates it from the
Province of 110-nei or Ha-noi, and the L‘ai-p‘ing River
or a branch of that stream again separates it from the
Province of Niang-shan, on the East.
The Chinese will no doubt make a great effort to
hold the position in the plain before retiring to the
Mountain Passes of the Niang-shan Range, in the
Province of that name. I know that reinforce-
ments have been going to the front for sometime, and
the fall of Sontai has induced, the Kuang Si Com-
mander-in-chief Hsll Yen-hsui to take further pre-
cautions for his advanced position in the plain.
Troops are being raised and drilled to the use of the
foreign arms with which they have been provided.


General Chiang La-yang has received orders to
proceed to the front. This Officer is a man of good
parts, about 6 feet high, and solidly built, he took his
military degrees at an early age, and is now about 40
years old. He is a native of Ping Chou in Kuang Si,
and has some relations established as traders in Ha-
noi, who have had much friendly intercourse with the
French there. Since the burning of Ha-noi however,
last spring, they have not been in favour of French
rule, as they were then deprived of their property by
tire and looting.
Chiang will doubtless avail himself of his expe-
riences in Tungking, at this time, and may give a good
account of himself. His men are all armed with
Sniders, excepting the Body-Guard of each battalion,
which is armed with Winchester Repeating Rifles.
Kiang La-jang has acquired a reputation for the
military discipline maintained in the Ranks of his
force and daily drill is insisted upon. The men are
all of the same class as the Black Flags and many of
them were formerly under the same banners. The
three Prefectures of Nan-ning. Hsiin-chou, and Wu-
chou, have been recruiting Troops for some time, and
the Commandants of those Garrisons have volun-
teered for Active Service in the Field. Lieutenant-Ge-
neral Lin, of Nan-ning is a Hu-nan man. Major-
General 'Lung of Hsiin Chou is a An-hui man, and
Major-General Te Shan at Wu-chou, is a Man-chou
Bannerman, so, with such men at hand, China has
a variety and choice of nationalities, as well as abili-
ties, yet untried. Lieutenant-General Lin, did good


*
service at Canton for years, and has a considerable
knowledge of foreigners. Metrailleuses and Nor den-
felts, Gattling and Gardners are familiar weapons to
him. Breech-loading arms of various kinds are also
to be found in bis command, and I have no doubt but a
few Batteries of Krupps will be found there when
required for use against the common enemy.
Naval matters are also being attended to in Kuang
Si, there are scores of gunboats, armed with guns of
various calibre from six pounders carrouades to
twenty-four pounder seige guns. All these guns
are smooth bores, on account of their lasting qualities
and the scarcity of skilled gunners. These gunboats
are intended for service in the many Rivers and
Creeks, which pour their contributions into the West
River. These small craft are well adapted for the
work they have to do, drawing very little water,
and being easily handled; under sail, or propelled by
numerous oars, they can work up into many bye-
creeks, where other craft could not venture to go.
If they were armed with rifled cannon, and ma-
chine guns they would truly prove formidable indeed.
Major Niang, a Cantonese of considerable experience
on the West River, has charge of a squadron of this
Mosquito Fleet. Two or three of his eight sons are
to serve under him, each in command of a gunboat.
This fleet can easily reach the Head-quarters of the
Kuang Si Troops at Lung-chou.
Fleets of Junks carrying military stores of various
kinds are continually passing up to the front. Ban-


ners and uniforms, tents and messtraps, specie and
ammunition, rockets for the army, and torpedoes
for the fleet, are amongst the things going forward,
as indispensable to a force on active service.
None of these officers and men were at Sontay, but
they will very likely be found at Bac-ninh, or near its
neighbourhood, if the French pereiafc in=attempting to
take that place. The undisciplined Black Flags
proved formidable enough at Sontay, and there is no
reason to think that the defenders of Bac-ninh will be
less valourous. They are drawn from the same source
armed with as good if not better weapons, and have
an abundant supply of military stores, together with
the advantage of a few experienced Chinese Gunners,
for the artillery. Artillery was not used for the
defence of Sontay.
A well directed shell, will sometimes do immense
damage. A gunboat or a magazine, may be blown up,
and thus do much towards changing the fortunes of
the day from success to failure. A repulse of the
French at Bac-ninh, would prove their ruin in Tung-
king. One single reverse at this moment, might be
sufficient to attract a hundred thousand men of the
Black Flag type to Tungking, which would so dis-
organize the French Government Officials as to prevent
their future attempts at colonization in that quarter,
and so ruin the country, that as to make it useless
and unprofitable for years to come.
V
eo ( t!




