

Twelve Months
for Sedition
Harry Holland’s Speech
from the Dock and the
Chief Justice’s Remarks
in Delivering Sentence


TWELVE MONTHS FOR SEDITION
HARRY HOLLAND’S SPEECH FROM THE DOCK
- AND THE CHIEF JUSTICE’S REMARKS
IN DELIVERING SENTENCE
THE APPEAL QUASHED.
The Court of Appeal’s decision in the
case of the King v. Harry Holland
was delivered on Tuesday, April 28.
H. Holland had been charged on
two counts with having uttered sedi-
tious words and had been found guilty.
The speech had been delivered during
the waterside workers’ strike on Oc-
tober 26 and November 2 la6t year. He
was not sentenced at the time owing
to the fact that his counsel, Mr. T. M.
Wilford (who appeared, supported by
Mr. P. J. O’Regan) moved to appeal
against the decision. In connection
with his speech on November 2, he was
also charged in the Magistrate’s
Court with inciting to resist the police.
On the charge of inciting, however,
ho was acquitted, but the sedition
charge had to be heard in the Supreme
Court.
Mr. Wilford’s appeal was based
upon the argument that no man could
be imperilled twice for the same act.
Having been acquitted in the lower
court on the charge of inciting. Mr.
Wilford contended that he could not
be convicted in the Supreme Court for
words in the same speech, under the
Crimes Act, which he had! been ac-
quitted of under the Police Offences
Act. With regard to the charge of se-
dition arising out of the second speech,
it was argued that Holland’s language
on that occasion did not constitute se-
dition within the meaning of the
Crimes Act.
THE TWO CHARGES.
The Crown alleged that Holland had
used the following “seditious words”
at a meeting at the Basin Reserve on
October 26: —
“The waterside agreement was
broken when the men were obliged to
take a day off; when Mr. Liverpool
—Lord Liverpool—the gilded popinjay,
the figure-head of capitalism in New
Zealand, landed here; and the same
thing occurred when Sir Joseph Ward’s
Dreadnought called. I remind them
(meaning the police) of words used by
me at Broken Hill, in Australia, the
occasion when. I was sentenced to two
years’ imprisonment on a charge of
sedition. I told the miners. “If they
hit you with a baton, hit them with
a pick-handle, and! have something at
the end of it. Here is your opportun-
ity, you John Hops (meaning the
police). They (the employers) want to
give you a miserable eight bob a day,
and the soul and clothes of a slave,
and want you to scab on Labour” —or
words to the like effect.
THE SECOND SPEECH.
The second charge was to the effect
that Holland had used seditious words
at the Newtown Park meeting on No-
vember 2. The words the Crown al-
leged were: —
“You have a Gatling gun on the
wharf to-day, and there is one on the
turret of the Post Office, they tell us.
When Massey’s Cossacks come down
upon us —I was going to say “men,”
but I don’t want to be guilty of libel.
The 2000 men offering in the Waikato
are heroes, because they will come fully
armed, provided Massey gives them
full protection. If free labourers are
put on, they will work with a revolrer


in their belts and a bludgeon beside
them. 1 urge the navals present
(meaning sailors from H.M.S. Psyche,
then lying in Wellington Harbour),
when, they are ordered to shoot, to re-
member where their class interests lie,
and point their guns accordingly. The
lailwavmen should not carry free
labourers. Let the trains rot and rust.
The strike was not made by the work-
ing classes, but by the master classes,
who are pouring their armed hundreds
into Wellington, not by daylight, but
like thieves in the night, coming utter-
ly ashamed of the work they are under-
taking. They sneak in in the midnight
hours, blit grey-headed women come
out on the balconies to jeer them as
they pass. The railway men have said
that they are prepared to stop the
trains. The drivers can stop the carts,
and the seamen the ships. The uni-
formed jrolice can deal a staggering
blow by tearing off their uniforms, and
standing by the watersiders. We are
going to win, and by God, we are
going to do it, no matter what means
we are going to use;” or words to that
effect.
THE DECISION.
'file Chief Justice (Sir Robert- Stout),
in delivering his judgment, said: The
first question to be determined is
whether the words uttered by the ac-
used on the 2nd of November, 1913,
were reasonably capable of being con-
strued by the jury as expressive of a
seditious intention, as defined by sec-
tion 118 of the Crimes Act, 1908. The
words set out in the first inidetment
were part of a speech made by the ac-
cused in the presence of a large crowd
of strikers and others. “The strike
was not made,” said the accused, “by
the working classes, but by the master
classes.” In his view, the .strike was
a contest between these two classes.
POLICE TO TEAR OFF UNIFORMS.
If violence was resorted to, H would
be the duty of the police to suppress
it, but the accused suggested that the
police should tear off their uniforms
and stand by the watersiders. If the
civil authorities were unable to sup-
press violence with the means at their
command, they would be justified in
seeking the assistance of the navals.
If the navals were ordered to shoot,
the accused advised them to remember
where their class interests lay and
point their guns accordingly. It was
open to the jury to conclude that the
accused recommended the strikers to
use violence for the purpose of gaining
their ends, and that he suggested also
that the police in that event should re-
fuse to do their duty, and should take
the side of the strikers, and that the
navals, if ordered to fire on strikers,
should refuse to obey their orders. The
jury certainly would be justified in re-
garding counsels of that kind as in-
tended to promote feelings of illwill
and hostility between, waterside work-
ers and employers, and in treating the
case as one within the terms of sub-
section 1, clause (d) of section 118 of
the Crimes Act.
A LEGAL POINT.
The next question to be determined
is in connection with the speech made
by the accused on the 26th of October,
1913. He had been tried and acquit-
ted by a Stipendiary Magistrate on a
charge of inciting certain persons to
resist the police. This charge was
founded on the speech of the 26th of
October, and the words of that speech
were proved on the hearing before the
Magistrate. These facts, it was claim-
ed, justified the plea of previous ac-
quittal. In order to support such a
plea at common law, it is necessary
for the accused to prove that he was
acquitted of the offence on which he
has been arraigned, or that on his
former trial he might have been con-
victed of such offence. The principle is
that no man shall be placed in peril
more than once on the same accusa-
tion., and the rule applies only where
there has been a former judicial de-
cision on the same accusation
in substance. A test. suggested


for determining whether the
previous acquittal is a bar or not is
whether the evidence necessary to sup-
port the second proceeding would have
been sufficient to procure a legal con-
viction on the first
NO CLEAR TEST.
But that test is neither very clear
nor accurate. It certainly is inapplica-
ble where the fact relied on in sup-
port of the charge is the making of a
speech. It may be necessary to prove
the whole speech on the hearing of the
first charge, although it contains mat-
ter that constitutes several separate
and distinct offences. According to
the test suggested a conviction, or ac-
quittal, in these circumstances, for one
of those offences would be a bar to
proceedings in respect of any of the
other offences. But that plainly is not
the law, and the common law rule on
the subject seems to be that now ex-
pressed in section 403 of the Crimes
Act, 1909. But whether or not the
common law rule was wider than that
embodied in, this section, it is clear,
we think, that the only cases in which
a plea of previous acquittal can be
established now are those provided for
in that section. The plea of a previous
acquittal, therefore, cannot he estab-
lished.
CONVICTIONS CONFIRMED.
It- was contended, however, on behalf
of the accused that, in, connection with
this defence, he was entitled to rely on
the provisions of section 6 of the
Crimes Act, 1908, and section 24 (g)
of the Acts Interpretation Act, 1908.
But these secti ms do not deal with the
defence of a previous acquittal, and
appear to have been enacted merely to
prevent any doubt as to the right to
proceed undler any section of an Act
which makes an act or omission, an
offence, although such act or omission
may be an offence also under some
other Act or under some other sec-
tion of the same Act. This right is
made clear, subject to the proviso that
an offender is not to he punished twice
for the same offence. These statutory
provisions, therefore, do not assist the
accused in his present contention, and
the convictions on both indictments
ought to stand. It is desirable to add
that an accusedi who desires to plead
a plea of previous acquittal or previous
conviction may lose his right to do so
by pleading not guiltv when arraigned
on the indictment.
The reading of this finding by the
Chief Justice was agreed with by the
other judges. This meant that the
convictions were to stand. Holland
was ordered to appear before the court
next day (AVednesday) -to receive sen-
tence.
THE SUPREME COURT
On Wednesday, April 29, when Harry
Holland, editor of “The Maoriland
Worker,” came up for sentence, the
town was full of excitement. There
were hundreds of workers outside the
court unable to obtain admission. In-
side, the body of the court was filled,
many legal lights being present,
amongst them being Hon. H. D. Bell,
Minister for Internal Affairs, and Sir
John Findlay, whilst there was a
whole crowd of reporters, mostly for
the great ‘sup-press,’ judging from the
meagre reports, appearing in. the
dailies. .
After certain legal preliminaries had
been gone through, the stereotyped
question, “Prisoner at the bar, have
you anything, to say why sentence
should not be passed upon you?” evok-
ed a reply unique in legal annals .
Our Harry, his intellectual face ap-
pearing over the edge of the dock, de-
livered in his usual clear tones and
deliberate manner
A BRILLIANT SPEECH.
Without either nervousness or bom-
bast he addressed the court:
Your Honor, in .he first place, X
have to tender my heartfelt thanks to
both my counsel, who have made the
best fight they could under the circum-
stances I am also desirous of thank-
ing your Honor for the very kindly


consideration you have shown to me
during my trial.
I am sure the Court will not misunder-
stand what I have to say for a plea foi
mercy. When a man’s own life is
clean and straight, when his own con-
science tells him he has done no wrong
thing, he does not require to plead for
mercy: It is his privilege to claim
Justice.
Before I enter upon the task of plac-
ing before your Honor the very sub-
stantial reasons that I see why no sen-
tence should be inflicted, I want to
urge that, if having heard me, your
Honor should still resolve otherwise,
the sentence shall be so imposed that it
shall be made possible for me to do
my work from within the jail, and
thus provide for my wife and family—■
who may otherwise be made to suffer
as the result of my incarceration. Your
Honor will not take this for a plea for
leniency because of my wife and chil-
dren. Indeed,
THEY WOULD DESPISE ME
if I offered one word in that direction.
But it has always appeared to me that
one of the greatest crimes committed
against humanity in the name of the
Law, is that which makes entirely in-
nocent women and children suffer
hardships and miseries when their
breadwinners are rightly or wrongly
flung into jail. I would also ask that
in that case I shall be permitted to
have my own scientific books sent in
for study.
Now, I want to urge that there should
be no sentence in this case because
both indictments are based on re-
ports of two daily papers that were un-
scrupulously unfair to the workers from
beginning to end of the strike. No-
thing was too base for these papers
to utter, no act of misrepresentation
too glaring for them to commit. Dur-
ing that titanic struggle, the only place
where you could rely upon finding the
truth in those two papers was in that
portion of their headlines where the
date was printed—and they occasion-
ally made mistakes there.
I want to direct your Honor’s at-
tention to the egregious jumbles re-
presented in the two indictments. Was
there ever such stupidity put into
print?—and yet all the reporters said
I was a clear speaker, easily followed.
The reports of those papers were not
backed by one citizen of Wellington.
They were only supported, 1 by detec-
tives, and one of those uttered a start-
ling falsehood on oath when he said
l was an, organiser of the Federation
of Labour. I was not even a member
of the Federation of Labour.
The indictment levelled against me
in connection with the Basin Reserve
speech reads as follows:
“The waterside agreement was
broken when the men were obliged to
take a day off when Mr. Liverpool—■
Lord Liverpool—the gilded popinjay,
the figurehead of capitalism in New
Zealand, landed here; and the same
thing occurred when Sir Joseph Ward’s
Dreadnought came. I remind them
(meaning the police) of words used by
me at Broken Hill in Australia —an oc-
casion when I was sentenced to two
years’ imprisonment on a charge of
sedition—l told the miners, ‘lf they hit
you with a baton, hit them with a
pick-handle, and have the pick at the
end of it.’ Here is your opportunity,
you John Hops. They, the employers,
want to give you a miserable eight bob
a day and the soul and clothes of a
slave, and want you to scab on labor,”
or words to the like effect.
Was there ever such a jumble as that
alleged report? Doesn’t the very con-
struction of it
BETRAY THE FACT
that a few sentences had been ama-
teurishly and jerkily chopped here and
there from the body of the speech?
Would any sane person having heard
me speak imagine that I could utter
anything so muddled? Another rea-
son why there should be no sentence
is: The Prosecution did not present
certain vital facts in connection with
the Basin Reserve speech. Why?
There were three reporters present at


the meeting, but the prosecution left
one of them (the “N.Z. Times” re-
presentative) out of the case. Why?
Was it because his evidence would have
been favorable to me. The detectives
knew, and the Crown must have
known, that my reference to the words
used by me at Broken Hill was
made as a result of something
said by Mr. Young, and they
must also have known quite well that
my remarks were fully qualified, as
shall show your Honor. Why did
they refrain from placing the facts in
my favor before the Court?
I submit that it is a dangerous hour
when the Crown in any prosecution —
political, such as this, or criminal —
ceases to be as anxious to establish
the innocence of the accused citizen as
TO FIX HIS GUILT.
Of course, I know that a fair reply
to this is: Why did I not place wit-
nesses in the box to prove what I now
say? The answer is apparent; I could
only have furnished evidence to clear
myself by perhaps jeopardising the
case of a comrade. My own sense of
manhood would not let me do that.
Your Honor would not do it were you
similarly placed. Anyhow, it was quite
reasonable to expect that every fact in
my favor would be stated by the
Crown.
In the Lower Court, Mr. Young’s
case was heard before mine; in the
Higher Court that order was reversed.
Again, in the Higher Court the words
alleged to be used by Mr. Young re-
specting the police, and regarding
which I had made my remarks con-
cerning Broken Hill, were withdrawn
by the Crown. Had our respective
cases been heard in the same order in
the Higher Court as in the Lower, I
should have been free to place all my
witnesses in the box without jeopar-
dising Mr. Young in any way. If
necessary I could have brought 500
people to swear to the actual facts—as
I could bring 500 people to-day to
swear to them.
As against the distortions printed in
the Wellington dailies and
ALLEGED TO BE REPORTS
of my speech, and the foolish jumble
that constitutes the indictment, and as
a further reason why there should be
no sentence, I want, with your Hon-
or’s permission, to place before you
this report of the Basin Reserve meet-
ing (specially taken by a qualified
shorthand writer for the “Maoriland
Worker”) and from which the “Work-
er’s” condensed report was printed,
and I want to ask your Honor to com-
pare it with the indictment:
“Mr. H. E. Holland, editor of me
‘Maoriland Worker,’ said they were
that day confronted with an interest-
ing spectacle. Some time ago his
friend Hickey had said:
‘TO HELL, WITH AGREEMENTS’;
and ever since the press and employ-
ers had been proclaiming that the Fed-
eration of Labor favored breaking and
tearing up their agreements. Now
they beheld the workers —who were
supposed to be in favor of violating
agreements—fighting like Hell to re-
tain an agreement, while the employ-
ers were fighting like Hell for the right
to tear' it up! (Applause.) As a mat-
ter of fact, more than half the regis-
tered employers of New Zealand had
been hauled before the Courts and
fined for putting into practice the “to
hell with agreements” precept. (Hear,
hear.) Now they wanted a Scab
Union formed; and in his opinion there
was nothing lower than a scab, unless
it was the Reform politician who was
back of the scab. (Cheers.) The em-
ployers rated the men for leaving work
for one hour and 20 minutes to discuss
a matter of vital concern to themsel-
ves; but when the Governor, Lord
Liverpool, the gilded figurehead of
Capitalism, arrived, employers stopped
work for a whole day without the
men’s consent! Also when Sir Joseph
Ward’s Dreadnought arrived, the same
thing happened, and the employers and
the daily papers took it as quite the
correct thing. Apparently, the stop-
work power was to be
A ONE-SIDED PRIVILEGE.
(Applause.) Addressing the police, he
argued that the present trouble gave


them an opportunity- to secure their
own demands. The police were born
of the working class, and every police-
man who came to the waterfront for
the purpose of breaking the strike
would be a blackleg. The idea of the
ruling class when they enrolled the
policeman was that he should be a scab
in perpetuity. (Applause.) Rather
than scab, they should down tools (or,
rather, bludgeons). On second
thoughts, he would advise them to
throw in the clothes hut hang on to
their hardwood batons. “When the
time comes that you can no longer
wear your uniforms with honor, that
will be the time to tear them off,” he
said. He referred to the Government’s
refusal to permit the uniformed police
to have a Union, and said: “The pre-
sent struggle furnishes you John Hops
with your opportunity- to enforce your
demands for the recognition of your
Union.” Proceeding, he referred to
the mis-statements and falsehoods put
forward by the daily- press, and de-
clared that reporters who would write
the lying accounts for the daily papers
WERE REALTY SCABBING
on their own class; and urged that
industrial unionism would constrain
the reporters to refuse to -write slan-
ders to order, and the time would come
when neither advertisements for black-
legs nor lying reports would be set
into type by unionists in the printing
trade. He urged that they- should re-
gard with disdain the journalist w-ho
prostituted his intellect on the streets
of professional journalism. (Ap-
plause.) He referred jocularly to the
risk that Tom Young ran for his refer-
ences to the police, and in this con-
nection warned them that it was not
unlikely that the acts of maladminis-
tration committed by- other Govern-
ments in other disputes would be
copied by the present Government,
whose guilt in connection with Waihi
was so well established. He referred
particularly to the Broken Hill trouble
of 1909, when that city- had been in-
vaded by armed police sent by the
Wade Government to break the strike
in the interests of the mine-owners.
The Wade Government had even arm-
ed these police with pick handles; and
he, speaking at Broken Hill, had told
the miners that pick handles were not
part of the accoutrements of the New
South Wales policemen, and had add-
ed, inter alia, "If a policeman illegally
hits you w-ith a pick handle, hit him
back with a pick handle, but have
A PICK AT THE END OF IT."
For saying that, he had been charged
with sedition, and had been dragged a
thousand miles away to Albury, to be
tried by farmers and squatters, where
a fair trial was an impossibility, and
he was then sentenced to two years’
hard labor, and would not therefore
think of advising the people of New
Zealand in that direction. The people
of N.S.W. resented the Go\-ernment’s
action on that occasion. Petitions and
demands with nearly- 100,000 signa-
tures were quickly forthcoming; and
after five months he had been uncon-
ditionally released. The Wade Gov-
ernment, for its guilt on that occasion
and for its further guilt in connection
with the Newcastle trouble of 1909-10,
was
DRIVEN FROM OFFICE
at the first ensuing election, and never
succeeded in getting back. (Applause.)
That was what they would have to do
with the Massey Government for its
crimes against the workers. The pre-
sent revolt had demonstrated the soli-
darity of the Waterside Workers in
Wellington, and they were beginning
to learn that, given economic solidar-
ity, they had greater, power and great-
er strength than all the forces of the
combined employers. (Applause.)”
I know, of course, that the Broken
Hill incident will be urged as a reason
for greater severity in this case, but
there is no word that I said at Broken
Hill that I would not say again if the
circumstances demanded it. A dozen
lines or so were there lifted out of my
speech, and, shorn of their context,
were given a meaning that did not pro-
perly belong to them. The speech it-
self was certainly made under stress
of great indignation. Twenty or thirty
working men and women had been ar-
rested —-among them some of my best
personal friends, including Mr. Tom
Mann —and arrested under circum-
stances that pointed to


A DELIBERATELY ARRANGED
PLAN
to break the Labor unions at Broken
Hill. Some of them were lying in jail
at the moment my speech was made.
That speech was an uncompromising
attack on the Wade Government. For
it, I was arrested on a charge of sedi-
tion.
Mr. Wade, the then Premier of
N.S.W., was also Attorney-General,
and exercised the power he held to
change the venue of trial, and we were
taken to Albury, 1000 miles away. Al-
bury is a rural centre, and the jury-
men are mostly squatters and farm-
ers, with naturally strong prejudices
against the Trades Unions. In addi-
tion, the N.S.W. juror required a pro-
perty qualification; and, further, the
Crown had the local police sergeant
placed alongside the Crown Prosecutor
to openly instruct him whom to stand
aside, while the accused men entered
the dock under the disadvantage of
knowing none of the jurors, and were
not permitted to receive any instruc-
tion as to the jurors. They were
REFUSED THE JURY LISTS
prior to the trial, and had no oppor-
tunity w T hatever to know whom they
should challenge. Further, the same
unfair system obtains there as is in
vogue here, viz., the prosecution had
the right to stand aside the whole jury
panel, a right that was freely exer-
cised in the direction of weeding out
(as the records of the trials show),
while the accused were limited to
eight challenges.
It is true that I was convicted; but
it is also true that the people general-
ly recognised the injustice of my im-
prisonment, with the results already
mentioned, and the guilty Government
was at the next election turned out of
office, and has never since succeeded
in getting back.
Another reason why there should be
no sentence is this: In the Lower
Court I was charged, on this same
Basin Reserve speech, with having in-
cited the people to do certain things.
Without any reference whatever to my
remarks concerning Broken Hill, a few
words were
AGAIN LIFTED FROM THEIR
CONTEXT,
and I was charged with having said
to the Basin Reserve audience: “If a
policeman hits you with a baton, hit
him back with a pick-handle,” etc.
(The word “baton” was substituted for
the word “pick-handle.”) Why?
On that remarkable charge I was
held in jail along with other men pro-
minently connected with the strike, for
one month, bail being refused. The
fact that bail was so refused seemed
to my layman’s mind to constitute evi-
dence that we were held for a political
purpose rather than for any other,
that is, as one method towards break-
ing dowm the unionists' resistance to
the Employers’ Federation’s aggres-
sion.
At the end of that month, when the
Crown presented its own restricted
side of the case, the magistrate was
convinced that I had been merely re-
counting a bygone happening, and,
without any evidence from the defence,
he dismissed the case.
With regard to the second indict-
ment, that relating to Newtown Park,
the same
HOPELESS JUMBLE OF WORDS
constituting a total misrepresentation
of my speech, is apparent. There is
neither continuity, sense, nor grammar
in the indictment, which reads:
“Wellington has seen what is unique
in Australasia. You have a Gatling
gun on the wharf to-day, and there Is
one on the turret of the Post Office,
they tell us. When Massey’s Cossacks
come down upon us —I was going to
say men, but I don’t want to be guilty
of libel. The two thousand men offer-
ing in the Waikato are heroes, because
they will come fully armed, provided
Massey gives them full protection. If
free laborers are put on they will work
with a revolver in their belts and a
bludgeon alongside them. I urge the
navals present (meaning sailors from
his Majesty's ship Psyche, then lying
in the port of Wellington) when they


are ordered to shoot, to remember
where their class interests lie, and
point their guns accordingly. The
railway men should not carry free
laborers. Let the trains rot and rust.
The strike was not made by the work-
ing-classes, but by the master-classes,
who are pouring their armed hundreds
into Wellington, not in the daylight,
but like thieves in the night, coming
utterly ashamed of the work they are
undertaking. They sneak in in the
midnight hours, but old grey-haired
women come out on the balconies to
jeer them as they pass. The railway
men have said they are prepared to
stop the trains. The drivers can stop
the carts and the seamen the ships.
The uniformed police can deal a stag-
gering blow by tearing off their uni-
forms and standing by the watersiders.
We are going to win, and, by G ,
we are going to do it no matter what
means we are going to use,” or words
to the like effect.
I want to ask your Honor, as a still
further reason why there should be no
sentence, to compare that
HOPELESS ATTEMPT AT REPORT-
ING
with the connected report taken by a
member of “The Worker” staff for that
paper. It reads:
Mr. Holland spoke briefly, as did all
the other speakers. He said in effect
that Wellington had seen what was
unique in Australasia. It had been
declared that a Gatling gun was in
readiness on the wharf, and it had
also been reported that the Govern-
ment had another gun on the turret of
the Post Office. Whether this was
true or not, in the daily papers Col.
Heard had made it clear that if the
soldiers were called out, and if the
civil authorities (meaning the Massey
Government) deemed it necessary that
the crowd should be fired upon, even
though there should be women and
children in the crowd, the soldiers
would not hesitate to fire, although
they would not like doing it. He (Hol-
land) said he feared that if one woman
or one child were shot down by the
Government’s orders, the fact would
light the
RED HELL OF REVOLUTION
in this country, and he deprecated the
threat in that direction. They read
day by day of farm-owners preparing
to come to Wellington fully armed.
They read of 2000—he was going to say
men, but did not want to be guilty of
libel —Waikato heroes who were pre-
pared to come fully armed provided
Mr. Massey would guarantee them pro-
tection. They were going to behold
the dangerous experiment of so-called
free laborers being set to work with
revolvers in their belts and bludgeons
alongside them, and anyone interfer-
ing with them could be legally shot by
them. The Government was no more
justified in arming the scabs than it
would be in arming the unionists. It
had been suggested that the naval men
would be required to operate against
the strikers, and if there were naval
men from the Psyche present he want-
ed to urge that if they should be order-
ed to fire upon any body of men, wo-
men and children of the working class,
they should remember where their
class interests lay, and point their
guns accordingly. They should refuse
to shoot down either the men, women
or children of the working class at the
behest of the useless exploiters.
THE RAILWAY MEN
should make common cause with their
fellows, and should do nothing to aid
the employers to defeat the workers.
They should let the trains rot and rust
at the stations first. This strike had
not been made by the working class;
it had been deliberately precipitated
by the employing class, whose agents,
the Reform Government, were now
pouring their armed hundreds into
Wellington —not in the daylight—but
they came, as the Bible said, like
thieves in the night. They came ap-
parently ashamed of the work they had
to do, else why should they sneak in
in the midnight hours, while old grey-
headed women execrated them from
the balconies as they passed? The
railwaymen had already declared that
they could stop the trains, the drivers
had power to stop the carts, and the
ships would not sail if the seamen
folded their arms. The uniformed
police could deal a staggering blow by
shedding their uniforms on the day
they were required to commit crimes
against the honest workers, and by
standing in with them. “We are going


to win, and by God we are going to
win, no matter what means they em-
ploy against us—and we know what
this Government is capable of,” he
concluded amid much applause and
cheering.
Now, at the time of the Newtown
Park meeting, we had information
from the permanent men in Mount
Cook barracks that
FORTY ROUNDS OF AMMUNITION
had been served out, and the men had
been told that if they were called out
and ordered to fire on the strikers,
they were to shoot straight, and not to
shoot high or low. Colonel Heard’s
statement, referred to in my speech,
had already appeared in the daily
papers; and from men on the Psyche
we had information that they had or-
ders that if they were called upon to
fire upon the unionists, they were to
shoot to kill. Since then we have learned
that the gunboats were brought into
the dispute in defiance of the Admir-
alty’s fixed polic; ; and the captain has
been recalled.
It seemed to me that the Govern-
ment in power had lost all control of
its own passions, and that in its
BITTER HATRED OF THE
WORKERS
it would even order the bluejackets
and soldiers to fire on the people. I
admit that fires of indignation leaped
In my veins because of the threat.
I am not physically in a condition
to endure the hardships of a prison,
but I would tell your Honor in all
earnestness —even if it meant spending
the remainder of my life in a gaol—
that on every occasion that working
men who happen to be soldiers are re-
quired to shoot down other working
men in dispute with their exploiters,
the blood of manhood that throbs in
these veins of mine, my own know-
ledge of what is fundamentally right
and wrong, and my own sense of duty
to my fellow-men, would not permit
me to do other than urge the soldiers
NOT TO SHOOT.
I feel that I should be recreant to my
own conscience were I to do other-
wise—and the question then arises as
to what extent a man must pay the
penalty to class rule for the crime of
possessing a conscience which impels
him in such matters to the observance
of what Thoreau calls the “duty of
civil disobedience.”
The Rev. Mr. Brainsby spoke at that
Newtown Park meeting. He compli-
mented the speakers on the modera-
tion of their addresses. Two days
later he found it necessary to public-
ly protest against the flagrant way his
own utterances had been misrepre-
sented by “The Dominion,” one of the
newspapers used in the prosecution.
If “The Dominion” could so misrepre-
sent a clergyman, how could I expect
that I —one of the subjects of its open,
bitter hatred —could hope to be fairly
reported.
I sat in the Appeal Court and heard
the full bench protest to Mr. Wilford
that they had suffered from press mis-
representation. I know how you and
other men active in the politics of
New Zealand two decades ago, suffer-
ed by reason of press misrepresenta-
tion in the Australian papers. In the
recent industrial struggle, neither 1
nor any other man on the workers’
side expected fair play or generosity
from the class-controlled newspapers.
We have had the evidence of at least
one reporter that he was sent to my
meetings with special instructions to
look out for sensational items. As a
journalist of twenty years’ experience,
I know how dangerous a thing it is to
rely on even an unprejudiced report
that is not a verbatim report In such
matters. Who would dream of
TRYING SIR JOSEPH WARD
on a speech reported by the “Domin-
ion”?
It has been attempted to show that
my advice to the bluejackets not to
fire on the strikers, meant that they
were to fire on someone else; but, as
a further reason why there should be
no sentence, I would point out that on
the day following the delivery of my
speech at Newtown, I published in the


columns of the “Maoriland Worker” an
article headed “Don’t Shoot,” which
completely answers the allegation of
the prosecution.
DON’T SHOOT!
Tliis is the appeal of the useful, hon-
est workers of the waterside to the
blue jackets.
We are locked out because we would
not see our workmates victimised.
Would you ? We have stood by them,
and consider it w 7 as the only fair and
manly thing to do. Don’t you? Your
fathers and brothers have stood by
their mates. Were they wrong?
You knew they were not. You
know that it is only a man’s duty to
stand by his mate. Then, if our em-
ployers call upon } 7 ou to fire on us,
DON’T SHOOT.
Men are brought here to work in our
place to drive us by starvation to turn
our backs upon our mates. Would you
be able to quietly stand by and -see
men take the bread from the mouths
of those who you hold dear ? You would
kick the Same as we do. They tell you
we want to destrov life and property.
THIS IS A LIE.
We want to protect the only pro-
perty we have —our lives. We want
such condition as may make them
worth living. Is that wrong?
They tell you we have “boo-ed” the
special constables and the scabs
Wouldn’t you?
The employers are trying to smash
our union; they don’t want us to stand
by one another. But we are going to.
"Wouldn't you?
They want you to help in their dirty
work or breaking us up. DON’T DO
IT, BOYS.
You have no quarrel with us, nor we
with you And have our bosses ever
done anything for you? NEVER-.
It is into workers’ homes that you
go when on leave. Tour friends are
our friends : your fathers and brothers
are our fathers and brothers; the same
lives they live we live. Tou belong
7 the working-class the same as we
do. And it is t-o us and our homes,
our friends and cur relatives, that you
come when you are free.
Then, mates, as mates we ask you
not to allow yourselves to be used as
bullies or iierhaps murderers against
us.
If they call on you to intimidate or
slaughter us, DON’T SHOOT.
Do you go to homes of tho rich when
you land? No.
Do the officers take you to their re-
latives and their friends? No.
Then think of your own mates and
relatives first, and remember we are-
they and the same as thev. Then,
DON’T SHOOT.
Don’t let it be said that when yon
got back home that you have shed the
blood of your mates. Could you face
3cur old friends who have had to
struggle the sane as us if y 7 ou fight
us down? No, y r ou would be ashamed.
You say :
“Yes, but I am a sailor or a sol-
dier, and' must obey orders.”
But when y 7 ou joined the service you
did not join to- kill unarmed men, wo
men and children of your own nation
and class. You did not mean to leave
your manhood behind 3 T ou, did you?
Don’t be a machine; be a man.
Don’t bo a scab or help scabs. Think
of your old workmates.
DON’T KILL US. Think of your
own fathers and brothers, and if the
men who want us to desert our mates
call on you to fire, DON’T SHOOT.
The Crown knew of the publication
of that article, and yet the Crown at-
tempted to place the other construc-
tion on my spoken words. Why don’t
they prosecute me on the written
words instead?
It may 7 be my simple lay mind that
is not capable of comprehending the
mysterious heights and depths of the
law, a.ndi I confess that the small sense
of humour I possess is somewhat stir-
red when I find myself imperilled by 77
the law on the one hand, because I
am alleged to have advised some one
to use violence towards someone else ;
and again imperilled by the law be-


cause I advised someone NOT to use
violence —not to kill some men, wo-
men and children.
One of the strongest reasons why
there should be no sentence is that
the very Bible on which those extra-
ordinary newspaper reporters and de-
tectives were sworn, says, “Thou shalt
not kill.” It really does not say:
“Thou shalt not kill —unless the
Massey Government orders you to do
otherwise. The Bible command is as
clear as is Russell Lowell, when in his
unmortal “Biglow Papers,” he says;
“If you take a sword and dror it,
And go run a feller thru,
Guvment ain’t to answer for it—
God’ll send the hill to you!”
I want to further urge as a reason
why no sentence should be passed that
my Newtown Park speech in its refer-
ence to the navals, rested on a purely
hypothetical basis. The Crown’s con-
vention is that I advised the soldiers
to disobey.
Had the order to shoot been given,
it is exceedingly doubtful that it would
have been a lawful order. It certainly
would have been contrary to the pol-
icy and wishes of the Admiralty. But
the fact remains that the navals had
received instructions that if the or-
der were given they were to “shoot to
kill.” I made clear reference to the fact
that they
OUGHT NOT TO KILL
the men, women and children of the
working class. Why was that refer-
ence to the men, women and children
left out of the indictment? It is urged
against me that I committed a crime
when I made that appeal to the
Psyche’s men. They are now asking
your Honor to send me to gaol for
that alleged crime. Their position is
that if the navals are ordered to shoot
down men, women and children, they
must do so. It is, indeed, a hard po-
sition to justify. To me the possibility
of such a tragedy was a fearful thing
to contemplate. As a member of the
working class, as a platform propa-
gandist and a publicist of the working
class, I feel the position as keenly as
any man could feel it. I positively
could not refrain from urging the
navals not to shoot the men —and es-
pecially not to shoot the women and
children. I urge that in doing so that
I performed a greater service than if
I had adopted any other attitude. My
whole being revolted at the Idea of one
set of workers cold-bloodedly shooting
down another set of workers with
whom they had no quarrel —and doing
it in the interests of a handful of wick-
ed exploiters by whom the whole un-
fortunate trouble was made.
I love my home life, my children,
my books, my studies; but if by re-
tracting my words to the navals I
could walk out of
THIS COURT A FREE MAN,
I would not do so. It the law says
that it is right for soldiers or blue-
jackets to shoot down men, women
and children in an industrial conflict,
then the law is immoral and wrong;
and in the interests of law itself, m
the interests of order, in the interests
of morality, the court should not im-
pose a sentence upon me for advising
that such a law should not be obeyed.
There is something so positively hor-
rifying and revolting in the threat to
pour rifle volleys into a packed crowd
of men, women and children—some-
thing so awfully tragical in the pos-
sibility of women and children being
so shot down that a law that sanc-
tioned it ought not to remain a day
longer on the Statute Book.
A further reason why no sentence
should be Inflicted is that my speeches
were made primarily in criticism and
condemnation of the conduct of the
Government during a great national
crisis. I feel that it is altogether a
wrong principle to assume in every


industrial conflict that the people are
in the wrong and the Government In
the right. There has scarcely ever
been a big industrial upheaval in the
Australasian colonies that did not re-
sult in exposing the wrong-doing of
some Government or other, and thus
bringing about its downfall. This is
especially true of the Maritime strike
—both in New Zealand and Austra-
lia. And history will undoubtedly re-
peat itself. I contended in my strike
speech that the Massey Government
was wrong in its conduct —and accord-
ingly I never hesitated to deal with it
drastically. I had seen its actions at
Waihi, where it countenanced house-
breaking and driving out; I had knorv-
ledge of its conniving with the em-
ployers to violate the law itself at
Huntly in the matter of the formation
of bogus unions; and when the Wel-
lington trouble commenced, I pointed
out over and over again what
A STRONG STATESMANLIKE
GOVERNMENT
ought have done to end the strug-
gle. As I saw it, the Wellington strike
was a forced matter. First the ship-
wrights were subjected to attack; then
the conflict was extended to the
watersiders, when the employers de-
termined to end existing agreements
because they claimed one breach had
been committed. Generally speaking,
it -would be held to be absurd for a
trade union to decide to terminate all
awards affecting its members because
a section of the employers committed
an alleged breach. Yet that was the
employers’ attitude in the Wellington
trouble. They refused to let men work
unless under new conditions laid down
by them. The industry of the country
was paralysed, and the Government,
instead of calling upon the Union Co.
and other shipping employers to re-
sume operations immediately under
existing conditions, at once assumed
that the employers were right and the
employees wrong—and all the armed
force of the State was placed behind
the employers. I certainly lost no op-
portunity of attacking the Govern-
ment, but I claim that it would be a
dangerous thing to gag those who do
not agree with the ruling Government
at such a time. Had the powers con-
ferred on the present Government been
wisely exercised, it is certain that the
trouble w'ould have been speedily end-
ed. An industrial conflict, however, is
a conflict that cannot be ended with a
hardwood baton. The employment of
force —even if it be “legal” force —ever
begets force.
Strikes are inevitable while present
economic conditions prevail—for this
reason: The last Year Book issued
shows that in 34 groups of industries,
including 4402 establishments with
56,234 “hands” —the term is not mine—
the total production is £31,729,002,
while the total wages paid is £5,572,-
270 —leaving a surplus of £26,156,732.
The production per worker is £564,
and the wages per worker £ 99 —
A DIFFERENCE OF £465.
It is right here where the cause of
strikes is found. The strike is the
workers’ protest against this inequal-
ity—this withholding of just wages.
No Arbitration Court, however well
Intentioned, can deal fundamentally
with this situation —it can only pro-
vide palliatives.
This difference, then, between pro-
duction and distribution provides the
main reason for the employment of the
law of sedition to-day. It is a law de-
vised or developed, in past centuries,
to hold the slave to his slavery, the
serf to his lord.
Another reason why there should be
no sentence is that sedition is really
judge-made law —one of those laws
made by judges hundreds of years ago
when the judges themselves were prac-
tically dominated by the reigning Sov-
ereign and the Star Chamber, and of-
ten coerced into giving their verdicts.
No one can say how or when the law
of sedition originated. It is older than
Christianity. It is the crystallised
growth of centuries of decisions, and
has never really been the expression of
the will of either the legislature or the


people. It is a law that ought not to
find a place on the Statute Book of any
civilised country.
I know it has been written into the
statutes of New Zealand, but I also
gathered from this trial that for its in-
terpretations and its definitions, it relies
on the common law. In its orthodox
interpretation, sedition embraces all
those practices, whether by word, deed,
or writing, which . . . “directly
tend to excite discontent or dissatis-
faction.” And the fact remains that
no great change is possible until the
people have become discontented. As
Lord Holt said, it provides that men
shall be called to account who “pos-
sess the people with an ill opinion of
the Government.”
Lord Ellenborough laid it down that
“to attempt to alienate the affections
of the people from the Government” is
sedition. The law of sedition, if ad-
ministered in its entirety, would land
in jail every politician who sought to
displace the existing Government. It
is a law that cannot be administered
in its entirety—and a law that never
can be administered in its entirety is
a law that
NEVER SHOULD BE ADMINIS-
TERED.
The law of sedition rests first on lha
presence of classes: secondly, on the
presumption that the people are almost
wholly ignorant and easily led. There-
fore, the law of sedition operates to re-
strict freedom of speech. With a wholly
educated people there would be no
need to narrow the limits of speech.
With a people economically freed,
there would be no danger from revolt.
Change, ever-recurring change, makes
up the sum of the world’s progress as
much in social evolution as in organic
evolution, and any law that makes to
block the changes that are inevitable
erects barriers on the roadway of
human progression. It was a recogni-
tion of this fact that led Sir William
Windeyer—one of Australia’s most
eminent judges, to say, inter alia, in
one of the greatest judgments ever de-
livered in the Southern Hemisphere—
in the case of Bear and others —in re-
ference to a kindred law:
“The difficulty of dealing with the
matter is not lessened by the fact that
the question involved comes for consi-
deration surrounded by all the preju-
dices with which centuries of ignor-
ance and thoughtlessness have invest-
ed it. . . The teachers who first
publicly proclaimed the brotherhood
of man, his equality in the next world,
his right to worship as he chose, were
persecuted as the enemies of Society.
. A certain number of prosecu-
tions under the law, a certain number
of victims
TO THE IGNORANCE OR
SUPERSTITION
of those who framed it, a certain num-
ber of refusals to convict under a
growing sense of its unwisdom, injus-
tice, and barbarity, seem to be in all
societies the stages passed through by
laws established for the purpose of
coercing the opinions of mankind be-
fore they become obsolete, if judge-
made laws or if statutes are repealed
as inconsistent with advancing know-
ledge.” ,
Might I add to that great utterance
that “ideas of right and wrong are
not absolute but relative; not fixed,
but fluid, changing with tne changes in
our modes of producing and distribut-
ing life’s essentials —food, clothing and
shelter.”
I have already referred to the
Crown's omissions. The method of
selecting a jury is not a fair method,
in so far as it affects an accused. I
had the right to challenge six jurors—
a right that was exercised to the full.
But the prosecution had the power to
stand aside every man until the
twelve men were secured who were ac-
ceptable to the prosecution. I make
no imputations whatever against the
jurors. But the fact that 25 men were
ordered to stand aside, twenty-two of
them being wage-workers, while the
majority of those allowed to pass were
business men, accountants, etc., left
me with the impression that the


CLASS LINE WAS BEING RIGIDLY
DRAWN.
Perhaps I was wrong. I believe the
jurors gave the verdict that appeared
to the majority of them the verdict
they ought to give. I am sure that
had the prosecution furnished the
jurors with verbatim reports of my
speeches, or had it been possible for
me to have done so, the verdict would
have been a different one.
My final reasons why no sentence
should be pronounced is that I teel
that I have been singled out, along
with one or two others, for
PERSECUTION RATHER THAN
PROSECUTION.
I may be wrong. But why were
charges for sedition levelled against
others and Wren withdrawn? Was the
pursuit of myself because I occupied
an editorial chair as well as figured on
a platform? Was it because of my
authorship of the “Story of Waihi”?
I urge that this Court should not
sentence me for the utterance of a few
words; because, in such a case, this
Court will turn all the working class
eyes of New Zealand towards Ulster,
and will set all the working class
minds of the world thinking that there
are two laws within the British Em-
pire—one for the rich agitator and one
for the poor. Sir Edward Carson and
his drilling regiments; Lord Roberts
urging the British workers to arm to
save themselves from an imminent
German invasion, and figuring at the
same time as president of the Ulster
Covenanters —■
AN AVOWEDLY SEDITIOUS
ORGANISATION;
the British officers tendering their re-
signations and declaring that when
they accepted their commissions they
never anticipated having to turn their
weapons against their fellow-subjects
—and the Imperial Government —the
Supreme Head of the Empire —ac-
quiescing in or tolerating every inci-
dent—all seem to me to furnish un-
answerable reasons why your Honor
should not pronounce sentence.
For the rest, I have said once be-
fore —I say again—through all the ages
of that blood red tragedy that men
call history, the milestones that have
marked the highway of human pro-
gression have been the jails and the
gibbets of the ruling class. If it
should be that I have not convinced
your Honor, and that you feel it your
duty to proceed to sentence, then once
again I repeat that I have no apology
to utter, no plea for mercy to make.
I bow to the inevitable, conscious of
the righteousness and the strength of
my own position; and
Out of the night that covers me,
Black as the pit from pole to pole,
1 thank whatever Gods there be
For my unconquerable soul.
I thank your Honor.
THE SENTENCE.
The Chief Justice (Sir Robert Stout)
in summing up said: You have been
found guilty.and have been convicted
by a jury, and the Court of Appeal
has upheld that the jury were fuiiy
warranted in so finding. You have,
as you will admit, received every con-
sideration in the position you have
been, placed, and it is now my bounden
duty to carry out the law. You seem
to think that this law in regard to
sedition is SOMETHING IMPOSED
BY THE JUDGES of the past; but the
law is a law made by the Parliament
of New Zealand and passed unanimous-
ly. I was present in the House when
it was enacted, and there was not a
single objection. The Legislature says,
and every right-thinking person will
say, that if we are to have progress
and peace in the community there
must be some law which prevents voi-
lence and prevents people encouraging
violence. You have FAILED TO AP-
PRECIATE PEACE AND ORDER.
You are a .n enemy to the people, and
you have ceased to have the brother-
hood of man before you. Because a
man is a capitalist is no reason why


lie should be attacked. Anyone knows
what happened during the strike: some
men, waterside workers or others,
chose to assault others, and these men
were not hitting them nor obstructing
them in any way. I saw a man myself
hurling stones at a man w'ho was
peaceably driving a lorry at the time
of the strike, though he did not ap-
pear to me to be a waterside worker,
hut looked more like a clerk. Fancy
-such a man, or any other man, being
prevented from working, when perhaps
he had a wife and family starving!
If this sort of thing were permitted
it would mean anarchy, lawlessness,
violence, murder, civil war. If you
assume the role of friend of the people
you would have DONE WHAT JOHN
BURNS DID —told the people to go
home and stay there, because there
were criminals abroad, and that these
criminals might cause disturbances.
That would have been the advice of-
a man- who would promote the brother-
hood of man. The brotherhool of man
does not mean a brotherhood of water-
side workers only, but a brotherhood
that includes all classes of the com-
munity, rich as well as poor. If you
think that brotherhood is to be
amongst one class only, you do -not
appreciate what brotherhood means.
Violence and disorder have come in
everv ca-se not from the rich classes,
but from the working classes. In the
recent strike, what right had any man
to stop any other man from working if
he so wished? A man has the- undis-
puted right to labour, not only the
right but the duty to labour —the
foundation of social life. Men were
struck and assaulted simply because
they were working, and that is not
the way to promote brotherhood. The
law allows me to -sentence you to four
years, hut I am going to deal with
you more leniently than that. I am
going to deal far more kindly than
when you were sentenced by a judge
in your own country, Australia. But
let me give a word of advice: No good
can come out of violence. As you
yourself said, “Violence breeds vio-
lence.” You are not to imagine that
this community is going to permit vio-
lence towards the established authori-
ties. That would promote civil war.
Your conduct would have been more
excisable if you had been an unedu-
cated working mail, but it is impos-
sible to suppose from your speech that
you did not know what you were about.
You are evidently a man of reading
and A MAN OF ABILITY, and I
would urge upon you that you are fol-
lowing' a mistaken course. If you
preach peace and order to your mates
you may in the end suceed in improvc-
ing their status. But neither you nor
anyone else will succeed by preaching
civil war. J sentence you to TWELVE
MONTHS’ IMPRISONMENT, to count
from February 2, and I make it with-
out hard labour. As to request
to be allowed becl-s, that is -a matter
for which you must apply to the gaol
authorities. I hope, however, the
books you get there will not be such
as you appear to have been studying
in the past, revolutionary books and
what not. I hope you will lead such
books as will show you ycu have done
wrong. I ant sorry to inflict hardship
upon jour family by sentencing you,
but unfortunately you did not -stop to
consider that point when y T ou commit-
ted the crime. People- never do con-
sider the suffering ■ they inflict upon
others when they do wrong. As to your
plea that no sentence should be im-
posed, j'ou must understand that if
the Court acquitted you it would go
forth to the world; that the community
permitted violence. If you would lead
your fellows you ought to try and show
them that there must be a kindly feel-
ing between all classes, the workers
and the employers alike, and the only
progress that can come is by jiromot-
ing that kindly feeling.
I NTKNSE INDIGNATION.
Hundreds of citizens expressed their
deep indignation when the sentence
was known. Many of the remarks


passed would lead to fresh police court
cases if they had! been heard by the
police. A very significant incident oc-
curred! shortly after Sir Robert Stout
had passed sentence. Down at the
Post Office Square, a:n open-air meet-
ing was being held in support of the
candidature of J. Glover, who auto-
matically takes Holland’s place as
S.D.P. candidate for the Mayoralty.
Just as E J. B. Allen was addressing
the crowd, the four-wheeler which w’as
conveying Holland away passed the
meeting.
HOLLAND CHEERED ON HIS WAY
TO PRISON.
Holland was seen, and immediately
cheers, loud and long, were raised for
him. He had a right royal reception.
Hundreds of citizens shouted their
good wishes to a man -whom a class-
made law had imprisoned. His impri-
sonment has added hundreds of sup-
porters to the S.D.P., and to the can-
didate who has had to step into his
place.
