

TWELVE YEARS
LIFE IN
AUSTRALIA.
1859 TO 1871.




TWELVE YEARS'
LIFE IN
AUSTRALIA.
From 1859 to 1871.




TWELVE YEARS’ LIFE IN AUSTRALIA;
FROM 1859 TO 1871.
wN 1859, on a roasting hot day in January, the good ship
HI “ North ” arrived at the semaphore. My brother and
sister came on board to meet me, I, then a girl of twenty-one,
■v 5 ’ having left my native land (Somersetshire), father and
mother. What for ? I used often to ask myself. I was the
youngest of five, and always considered delicate, and the one
who must be taken care of. I shall never forget my first
“beverage” in Australia; it was “ shandy-gaff,” they said,
and its very name was a puzzle to me. After being much
refreshed with this cooling “nectar,” my brother and I walked
(over our ankles in sand) to the “ Port.” (I had made up my
mind on leaving “ home ” to make the best of everything, so
now was the time to begin). On arriving at the Port, we went
by rail to the City of Adelaide; all that was to be seen en
route gave me great pleasure. From Adelaide we went to
Mitcham, where I had my first meal. The people I met at
once decided I should never suit the Colony. After tea, I
rode with my brother to “ Curri Mantel Valley,” which was
my sister’s home then ; my brother-in-law coming out to meet
us, gave the well-known “ coo’ey,” a sound quite new to
my ears. Having arrived at our destination, I need not tell
you how thankful I was for my bed, for when you think of it,
walking, railway journey, coaching, and lastly riding 20 miles,
was not so bad the day of arrival, after three months cooped
up on board ship. My waking thoughts w y ere varied, and the
scenery I beheld on rising was most charming; and after a very
hearty breakfast, two of my little nieces took me for a stroll,
during which I came to the conclusion that life in Australia
could be endured.
Two years and a half I spent very happily amongst
friends and relations in almost every inhabited part of South
Australia, at last settling in the South East with friends, from
\shose house I was married in the year 1861, and where w r e


spent the first eighteen months of our married life, and
buried our first little baby.
My husband not caring to remain any longer in these parts,
we started for Queensland equipped thus : a waggon and pair
of horses, bedding and provisions, our trap answering the
purpose of house by day and night, it being 'well fitted up
with canvas and green baize.
Our route was from South East to Swan Hill, where we
stayed a night; then from Swan Hill to Talbot’s Pont; from
there to Balrandeel, and from there to Scott’s Back Country,
where all our troubles began, having to travel ten miles through
“ Malee ” desert (no road) sand up to the horses’ knees, and
whore we were told the natives were in scores on the alert to
eat “ white man consequently our chance of coming out
alive seemed very poor. My husband wanted me to go in the
back of the waggon to be out of their sight should they attack
us, but feeling quite as safe by his side I preferred to keep my
place ; however, we arrived safely on the other side by sun-
down, having only seen two of those “ dark sons of Australia’s
soil,” who were comfortably shepherding a flock of sheep in
the desert, which desert, I must here tell you, my husband
had to walk through whilst I drove, he having to cut and pull
down trees and bushes to make a way to drive through, and
well was he rewarded, for what should meet our gaze when
through this labyrinth, but a most delightful lake of fresh
water, hundreds of wild duck and other birds, a shepherd’s hut
and a flock of sheep —most picturesque. We camped here for
a day or two; the shepherd looked on us as great curiosities,
having made our way through, and wanted to know where we
were bound for, He told my husband he had made a great
mistake in bringing his wife into such rough scenes and
country, that I was not at all suited for such a life as these
parts of the country offered. He told us it was about thirty
miles from here to the Eiver Darling, -which we thought we
could do in two days ; so we started, leaving the pleasant
scenes to find the country very sandy, but pretty and nicely
covered with timber, and here and there beautiful clear lakes
of fresh water, bordered with box trees and covered with game.
By one o’clock we reached the banks of the “Eiver Darling,”
and on its waters was a boat (the largest then on the river),
“ The Lady Daly.” It was a pretty sight after seven weeks’
travelling, though I was too ill to appreciate anything, suffering
from the impure water I drank the other side of the desert.


However, this harbour of rest and “ aqua pura ” I made sure
would make me well at once. This delightful spot proved to
be a station, owned by a Mr. Phillips, and called “ Tarcoola.”
The manager’s wife being in town and he leaving for one of the
out stations, he kindly offered us the accommodation of his
house during his absence, which we accepted, staying there a
week. The second morning I fancied I was better and (my
husband not being at all well) got up to get breakfast, and
went out for some wood to light the fire. On my return to the
kitchen I fell in a faint on the floor; the noise brought my
husband in, and he carried me to our room and put me to bed
again, where I remained a week, at the end of which time I
begged him to take me away or I should die; so he put in the
horses, made up my bed most comfortably in the waggon, and
carried me out to it. We started for the next station, ten
miles distant. After a mile or two I felt better, but yet unable
to go the whole way; so we camped about four miles from the
next station, and after a good night’s rest I felt much better in
the morning. After breakfast we made for the station
managed by a Mr. Frazer (a cattle station), whose wife we
found to be a very kind, nice little woman. I was very pleased
to be with her for a few days, she being the first woman I had
seen for eight weeks. I soon regained my strength. From
here we started for “ Tarlona ” station, where we had to stay
a fortnight on account of all the creeks being flooded and
quice impassable. At the end of this time we made a start
for a creek, “Tally Walker,” which we, with all our belongings,
crossed in a canoe ; then my husband had to go over for
the horses, which had to swim over, and then, in consequence
of the canoe having to be sent for the mail man, to float the
trap, which unfortunately sank ; so there it had to remain
all night, it being too dark when the canoe was at our disposal
again; this was my first experience of camping out with
nothing but the canopy of heaven over me. Next morning,
after getting the wreck ashore, and packing up our belongings,
we started for a creek called “ Charlie’s Stones Creek,” which
we were told was quite passable, but when we arrived there
we found about a quarter of a mile of flooded ground
(apparently quite firm), with a stream about 500 yards wide
running through the centre, the bottom of which seemed firm,
“ Poliguium ” growing in the middle. Thinking it the safest
plan, I got out of the trap, my husband taking out
our things and putting them on the horses. I, to pass
5


the time, tried to find the means of crossing a little further
down, and coming to a part that looked like terra firma
made the attempt; but alas ! “things truly are not what they
seem,” and down I was going; having lost one shoe I thought
it best to pull off the other, and waded through minus shoes
and stockings too, as I found on getting through this quagmire.
Not caring to let my husband see me in this “ sorry
plight,” I walked to where our luggage was landed (he still
bringing over the remainder); I put on my boots and stockings,
and looking up I saw him up to his knees in the middle of the
stream, one of the horses having stumbled. The horse was loaded
with two cases, one outweighing the other, and the current
being so strong, drew him over, and there he w y as, with his
head resting on a “ Polignium ” bush, eating away quite calmly,
his master having to carry over the cases ere he could
rise ; that being done, dinner was the next item, after which
meal it w T as found to be quite impossible to get the trap over
without assistance ; so my husband started for Minindie, a
distance of seven miles over very boggy country (leaving me to
my own devices), hoping to get some one to help him ; he
returned at dusk with a black boy (the only assistance he could
get) and a coil of rope. Now real work began, for it
was no small matter bringing over such a large article.
However, “ where there’s a will there’s a way,” so they tied
the rope on to the axles and brought it over to the horses on
dry land, harnessing them to it. It was indeed by a “ long
pull and a strong pull,” with several drawbacks, such as ropes
breaking, and many unlooked-for accidents. Suffice it to say,
it was at last brought over. We took six days going to
Minindie, my husband and the boy working like slaves, for
in several places it was too boggy, and they had to carry the
things every now and then to lighten the trap. When we did
get to Minindie, after crossing the Darling, we stayed there a
day, it being Sunday. On the following day we started for
Mount Murcheson, that being the only place where you could
go on to the banks of the river when flooded (as then) for
300 miles.
I not being strong enough to travel, we stayed here and
opened a store. After, sending to Adelaide for goods, my
husband then applied to the New y South Wales Government
for land to purchase ; in four months’ time we received an
answer that we could buy land, and that a surveyor had
instructions to survey it; in the meantime my husband put up
6


a house 28 by 18, divided into two rooms, in which we had to
pack our stores as well as ourselves, but as the surveyor never
made his appearance, of course we could not open a store.
My husband got discontented having nothing to do, and started
hawking to dispose of his goods, having gone first a distance
of 200 miles for his license, leaving me without even cat or dog
for company. He was away eight days, having had to swim
creeks and wade through water going and coming; and unfortu-
nately, when within two miles of home, his horse “gave in”
right in the middle of a stream, and turned hack, taking with
him his master’s hoots, which were strapped on to the saddle;
so the rest of his journey had to be footed bootless. A painful
meeting it was, the poor fellow looking so ill and wan;
his feet were full of “ burrs,” which took me several days to
pick out for him, giving him great pain. After he had rested
and recovered from his fatigue, we had to prepare for his
hawking expedition, and when all ready, he started for a
month’s journey, leaving me quite alone once more, for the
second time in my life. Two hours after he had gone, what
should appear but a company of blacks, twenty-four in number,
from the back country, camping close to the house. Only one
of the mob could speak English and understand it. I, of course,
then was perfectly ignorant of their “lingo,” and felt fearfully
afraid of them, dreaming nightly of their making an attack on
me in my loneliness. Fear, I may say, was quite uncalled for,
as it proved, for they were very friendly to me, and the old
King seemed to think it quite his right to protect me, making
me understand it was very wrong of “ big one white fellow no
good leave you along y’rself, black fellow no leave min lubra.”
He and his lubra used to go out in their canoe and catch wild
duck and bring me more eggs than I could possibly make use
of; but I was very thankful they were so peaceable. They only
stayed a fortnight, for which I felt pleased and yet sorry, for
the loneliness was dreadful to bear, yet I never felt quite sure
of them. The mail man was a week behind his time in con-
sequence of floods, and I never saw a soul. I must here tell
you the air night and day was black with mosquitos, preventing
me from reading or writing unless I smoked to keep them
away. After having tried to write some letters I went for a
stroll, leaving some fuel burning to try and kill these pests; the
wind arose and it blazed up and set fire to a fly catcher and
then the lining of the room. Having turned round to gaze on
my lonely cot I noticed smoke coming from all parts of it, and
7


ere E could get Ixonie it was in a blaze. Little could Ido to
extinguish the flames, but what could be done I did, running
down to the river and bringing up some buckets of water to throw
ontliem. Most providentially there were some sheep-washers on
tie other side, and hearing my cry for help, they eame across in a
canoe to my assistance, and with their manly aid the fire was
soon put out; they pulled down tie remainder of the lining,
and by so doing tie rest was saved—alas ! the debris. However,
it gave me occupation to put my little homestead in order
again ere my husband’s return, though I was very ill from the
fright the fire had given me. My husband returned at the end
of the month ; then I was very ill indeed for three weeks, having
a little son and losing him. During my convalescence I used to
go out with my husband while he shot wild duck and pigeons.
As soon as I was fairly recovered from my late illness he left
me again for another month, in which time I made up my
mind never to be left alone again. "Where he went there
would I go too, for I was getting so fearfully low spirited that
though 3 Longed, yet I dreaded to see the mail man coming with
the letters, feeling sure I could not speak to him. On my
husband’s return I told him of my decision, and as hawking
did not seem his forte, he decided to give it up and do the best
he could with the remaining stores, and continue his journey
to Queensland. While he was forming plans for the future, a
Pioneer from the ‘ ‘ Paroo ’ ’ (a distance of 100 miles) arrived,
and as he was looking lor stores, he bought all we had left. The
difficulty was, how l these stores were to be got to the “Paroo,”
for he had no means of taking or sending them there. My
husband agreed to deliver them; this would take two months
to accomplish, and as I w'as going too, he could not take all at
once, so he left the overplus at the nearest station four miles
off, and made two journeys.
Our waggon packed, off we started, and our trip was rather
an eventful one. The third day was very hot, and the roads being
heavy and sandy, the horses were soon knocked up. A traveller
who passed ns said we should reach water in less than four
miles off, As the horses were so done up, my husband
took them out and left the trap. Having a saddle horse that
was tied behind the waggon, off we started for water, taking
with us a kettle, a tin of sardines, coffee, and some biscuits,
for it had been far too hot all day to care to eat. We looked
forward to a pleasant tea on the banks of the river, but alas!
what was our chagrin to find the four miles nearly double that
8


distance, and it was quite dark when we at last found the water.
Oh ! leaders, perhaps you may never have been so famished,
so yon cannot imagine our feelings on untying the silk handker-
chief (in which our store had been put) to find all gone but the
sardines, which was not a very nourishing repast. I could
not eat them, but my husband did. It was too dark to return
that night to our waggon, so here we camped. Morpheus soon
overtook my better half, but I spent the night trying to keep
the mosquitoes off. At daybreak, after watering the horses,
we started back to our waggon, hoping to make a good break-
fast. We had left some water in a cask, but the fates seemed
against us, for our dog, which we had left in charge of the stores,
had by some means turned the cask over, and of course out all
the water ran. My husband insisted on my riding back to the
river, which I did, once again taking coffee, biscuits, and kettle.
I made a fire and had a most enjoyable meal. After my
repast, my first thought was how to take some water back to
my husband, so after washing out the kettle (as that served as
coffee pot too) I filled it with water. The next difficulty was to
keep it cool, as the thermometer was 120 in the shade and a fear-
fully hot wind was blowing. I wrapped the kettle up in a skirt;
that kept it from sun and wind. Now, how am I to mount
my steed with the said kettle. On looking round, I saw the
fates had favoured me this time, for there was a stump on
which I was able to put my precious burden, and when fairly
settled in my saddle, I took it in front of me, and off we wmit
to meet my husband, which was not till I had ridden six
miles; he was then quite “ knocked up ” for the want of some
water. I only let him have a very little, as it was really quite
cold to his parched lips, and a quantity would have done him
more harm than good. I then made a fire and gave him some
coffee, which quite refreshed him.
After a little resting we made another start to the Paroo,
the rest of the journey being uneventful. Having delivered our
goods, we retraced our steps to Mount Murcheson for the remain-
der. Whilst there for a week, prior to our departure for the Paroo
again, the river came down over its banks. We made a start,
never expecting the river would be so high, as it was then a
most unusual occurrence. En route, we fell in with a married
couple who were travelling on horseback, and as they were going
to the same station as we were, we travelled together. It was
quite an impossibility for them to go by the road and “ make
stations,” the floods coming down so quickly, and they being


on horseback, could nob carry provisions, nor could they go
from station to station as they intended, so we asked them to
share ours. On tire second day of our journey, instead of
being- on the banks of the river, we were twenty miles back
from it, and “rounding the water,” which was then rolling
in a body of about th ree feet deep and at the rate of six
miles an hour. Third day we headed the water, crossed a
very rotten flat, and camped on a sand, hill which we supposed
safe.. My husband turned the horses out, then went for a
survey bo see bow far the water was from us, but not being
able bo see a sign of ifc, that night we felt safe and made our
camp there. Next day another survey was made, and the
result was the water was 2J miles from where we would have to
cross another rotten hat half a mile from our camp ; so the
greatest haste was made, but still we found the w-ater had
won the race, for it bad crossed the rotten flat and was two
miles farther on, so there was no choice but to drive through
it or wait to be drowned where we were. Althouh the water had
so lately flowed over the ground, it was not so very soft or even
boggy.
I took the reins and drove, and with the man on one side
and my husband on the other on horseback, we urged the
animals through this desert of water, a special providence
watching over us, for I may here remark that it -was the only
time one of our horses ever went through water —he always
seemed to dread it, and would lie down at once. The woman
followed her husband on horseback too ; the wauer was up to
the flaps of the saddle. That being accomplished, we pushed
further on, having eighty miles to travel ere we reached a
station, onr provisions running terribly short, and we had to live
by the gun, wild fowl being most plentiful; but oh ! bow we
wished for some bread. Tea and sugar we had. After a fort-
night’s toil we arrived at the Paroo again. Took a rest, and
then resumed onr journey to Queensland, which I rather
enjoyed, the scenery being very pretty, and every here and
there in the first hundred miles we traversed, we came to a sur-
facespring of lovely freshwater, little mounds from one to fifteen
feet high, with water bubbling out of the top. After travelling
two hundred miles over the border into Queensland, we
retraced out steps (having found out that the government
would not then allow r stock bo cross over from any other colony)
to Mount Murcheson, where the first object that met our view
was a steamer, “ The Albury,” Captain Johnstone and crew


stared in astonishment at us, having heard we and all our
belongings had been drowned in the floods. My husband
had some business to settle up the river, and the captain
saying they would return in five days, he took this opportunity
of going, leaving me alone with waggon, horses, and a little
dog for a companion, and £750 for my pillow every night. My
nearest neighbour was four-and-a-half miles off, but I could
not visit him, as I was surrounded by water. The five days were
prolonged to three weeks, the steamer having to go much further
up the river than they expected. The gentleman who owned
the station four-and-a-half miles off was a Mr. Bonny, and he
very kindly row r ed across the flood and asked me to go to the
station till my husband’s return, and he would send a black
fellow to look after my trap and horses, but some how I pre-
ferred being where he left me, expecting him hourly after
the fifth day. As it turned out it was a most fortunate
thing I did stay, for in a few days the river rose to
such a height that it actually washed them out of house and
home, so they came to my quiet spot and pitched their tents
round about, so the rest of my waiting was not so lonely.
On my husband’s return w 7 e started for Adelaide via
Minindie and Barrier Eanges. We stopped a day or two
at the former place, and some people there said -we must be
mad to think of crossing the ranges; no one had ever gone
that way. The publican begged of me to go by boat if my
husband would persist in such a very dangerous route, for if
no other trouble assailed us, the blacks would soon make
“short work” of us. I told him whatever dangers one was
subject to the other should share, and for “ weal or woe,” go
I would, for then I should know the -worst, and share the same
fate as my husband.
So next day w T e started on our travels to explore the Eanges,
and after four days’ severe hardships, being two days and nights
without water, we arrived at a place called “ Mungarie,” about
eighty miles over the border in South Australia, and the
first sight which cheered our hearts was several tubs of clear
water. A woman -who was living here seemed very frightened.
Our horses-would drink the water, for they were nearly w-ild -when
they saw it. The woman told my husband he would have to
take them four miles further to the creek, but invited me to
stay with her, w-hich I need hardly say I did, although
she was not very hospitable, for although we told her the dis-
tance we had travelled, she did not offer me either a glass of water
11


or cup of tea, the kettle lolling on the fire at the time. I did
not ask ior any then, hut E feel sure were I placed in that
position now I would soon do so. On my husband's return
ho ashed me if E had had some tea,, and then she begged my
pardon, her excuse being that not haring seen a woman for so
Long she forgot hoi manners. Here E will pass over ten weeks of
our travels. Having been to Adelaide and South East, we are
now back to “Munaaiie, ” where we were not even met by
cl inhospitably,” as the place was quite forsaken, the people
haring gone eighty miles further up. So here we are with a
buggy, twenty-five head of horses, and a dray with eighteen
months’ provisions, two men, and the aforesaid eighty miles to
travel, and not a drop of water on the road. My husband not
knowing his whereabouts went on horseback to explore, leaving
me with men and horses to look after for two days, while he was
away. A man on horseback rode up to us en route to Mr. N.'s
station ; he stayed with us till my husband’s return, when he
offered to take the loose horses further on to the station, where
they could he watered. At first it was proposed E should ride
01 with him, but feeling far from well that morning, and not at
all equal to an. eighty mile ride, I stayed behind to drive the
buggy. After giving our horses water, we tilled a cask and
put it on the dray, and started off on the horse track. After
two days and a night we arrived at Mr. N.’s, where we heard
from the maa that he had lost half the horses at a creek five
mile s further back ; we supposed he had fallen asleep there
and let them get away-’-
After two days’ rest my husband took a, horse and went to look
for them. Alter ninety miles’ travelling he found one, the
youngest of the mob, at a well wliere they had been watered
a day or two before, hut as no one was living there they conld
nob get water from the ivell, so the others went further on,
leaving the weak one to do his best. \Ey husband stayed with
him, as he was a young and valuable creature, giving him
water out of his hat, and in a, day or two he was able to travel
and be brought back to Mr. ST.’s. Et was Christmas
morning, and just as the snn was rising, I saw my husband
coming over the sand hills leading one horse and driving the
other, all three decidedly “knocked up,” after having travelled
ninety miles with only one tin can of water, having done the
journey in twenty-four hours, We stopped here a week,
bought some sheep (1,400) ; after drafting and paying
for them, we started for our own country, which was


the other side of the ranges. After three days’ travelling we
got to the foot of the ranges, where there was a nice water
hole, and sixteen or seventeen natives. While my husband
and his man were gathering the sheep into camp, I thought
I would give these old blacks a pannikin of flour each.
One old man was the king of the tribe, and when I gave
him his share he wanted to keep the pannikin too, and shook
his “ nella nella ” (or wadie) in my face, but when he saw a
revolver he made off, and his lubra came for the flour. We
had great difficulty to make them understand that we meant
them no harm ; one of them was able to interpret our language,
so they camped there. Next morning, after watering the
sheep, the man and one black fellow started with them across
the ranges. Ourselves, horses, cow, and black fellow (a most
intelligent youth) started to find our way as best we could
through creeks, hills and rocks, till within three quarters of a
mile to the tops of the range, when the black fellow said, “ Bel
more pull away allabout ya.rra man tumble down,” meaning the
country was so rough we could go no further. However, with a
little difficulty we did get to the top and camped there for the
night. After a day and night’s travelling we came to water;
we intended making our home here, the blacks telling us the
water was permanent although in the sand. We arrived at
5 a.m. Meeting the sheep here, the next thing was how to
water them. My husband and his man set to work and sunk
seven feet of a well, made a trough out of a tarpaulin, watered
the sheep and twenty-five horses, all before 11 a.m. We got
the blacks to shepherd the sheep, whilst my husband and man
set about building a house on a very pretty spot, where we
intended making our home. This done, there was little else to
do but water the sheep every other day, and my husband
started to explore the country around. At the end of six weeks
we found there was not sufficient water for the sheep, as the
spring began to fail, so my husband told me he would have to
leave me here and take the sheep to the river, which would
take him three weeks, unless he found water nearer. So he
and a black fellow started with the sheep, having started our
man to Mr. N.’s station for the mail, which I was to send
after him, hut when he did return he was in no humour to
follow his master, there being no road. I thought it best to
go with him —a journey of twenty-five miles through scrub
and timber, without a track of any sort, except here and there
he sheep’s footmarks.


At sunrise we started on horseback, I taking on my saddle a
bucket, a leg of mutton, loaf of bread, a pair of boots (for the
black boy), an American shovel, and an axe, the man refusing
to carry any of these articles, declaring his horse would not
stand it, hence the reason of my having such a load. At 12
a.m. I arrived at “ Nartaubulla,” where my husband was wait-
ing. No doubt it is very pleasant to have a groom in attendance,
but mine proved anything but a help, and would not stir unless
I took the lead in these unknown parts. The day was very
hot, and we had nothing to drink on the road, but on arriving
at the depot the black boy gave me a pannikin of tea, a perfect
“ nectar.” I even now remember with what a relish I drank
it. My husband was very much surprised to see me, never
thinking I would attempt such a journey. Being too far to
return I stayed with him that night, but started for our new
home by myself, and unfortunately I dropped my whip, and of
course had to dismount, and in picking it up I had turned my
horse round, and when remounted he refused to go the way I
wanted him, but feeling sure he would either take me back to
my husband or to our home, I let him choose the road, it being
such a dull foggy day that it was quite impossible to see
any landmark. After going for a quarter of a mile the sky
cleared, and I saw he was taking me home direct, where I
arrived at 1 p.m. Picture my life for eight days after. (I forgot
to say that my brother let me have one of his sons, a boy of
ten years old to be a companion to me.) We watered eleven
horses every day, that being our amusement and duty.
The wild dogs howled at night incessantly, making the air
resound with their cries, which was not very cheerful for us.
At last my husband returned, having left man and boy with
the sheep at Creek, some fifty-five miles off, where I found
we were to go and make our abode till rain came, when we
could return. So we packed up once more all that we possibly
could (leaving the rest behind without the slightest fear of any
one coming to disturb it) and made for the Creek—my husband,
little Torn, and I. We camped the first night at the depot
“Nartaubulla;” before leaving we filled all our utensils with
water, as our journey would be through dry and very hilly
country, and if we found any water at all it would be brackish.
Imagine, then, my dismay, on uncovering one of the utensils, to
find water, which when put in was as clear as crystal, now
like ink, from a plant which I had put in to keep it cool and
steady. Thinking it would do no harm, I boiled some to make


tea with, and we drank to our cost, as it threw us into a high
fever, and we had no other means of quenching our extreme
thirst but by drinking it, till we got to our next camp eight
miles off, where the water was brackish. At any other time,
had we drank it to such an excess, it would have been most
injurious, but it now acted as an antidote.
Next day our journey brought us to the Creek and sheep,
and here my husband told me, while we were having our tea,
that he must leave in the morning, and ride to the river to
report having brought sheep over the border, being the first
that ever crossed it except by the river. So in the morning he
left me. The man was to put up a tent for me, and the black
boy to mind the sheep. The next morning at daybreak I heard a
noise in the tent, and on sitting up in bed, I saw to my horror
a black fellow just coming into the tent with a wadie in his
hand, thinking, I suppose, to find me asleep, but on seeing me
awake and a revolver at my side, he fled, and did not
make his re-appearance. At the time it made me feel very
frightened, though I never told my husband till years after.
Here we stayed six months. Generally it was only little Tom
and I, as my husband was of such a roving disposition and such
an explorer by nature, that he used to go aw ay for w’eeks at a
time, leaving me to superintend the sheep and horses.
The water here being dried up, there was nothing left for us
to do but go back to where we passed the brackish water
fifteen miles back, and open what was termed a “surface
spring.” After pitching our tent here, and being fairly settled,
my husband went off on a “voyage of discovery.” When he
returned, he got the sheep shorn with the help of a man
from the river. Unfortunately my husband cut his hand very
severely, and the man, too, had hurt himself before they had
quite finished shearing, leaving five sheep yet to be done, and
as the poor creatures had to be shut up till they were shorn,
I thought I would like to release them, and try my hand at
shearing, which I may here tell you was a great success, though
as to how long it took me need not here be said. My poor
husband suffered very much with his hand. The shearing
over, he started for Adelaide to arrange about getting up
a load of goods. I was left again in full charge of two men,
sheep, horses, and home, Tom being my companion. One
night a w T eek after, the man came home with only half the
sheep ; seeing this, I spoke to him about it, but he declared he
had all. However, I counted them, and found half were
15


gome, Now what was to be done? The sheep must be found.
"We eonld nob afford bo lose them, and leb bhe wild dogs tear
them bo pieces, and not being able to trust the man to look
for them, I mounted hit horse and went among the ranges to
look, and aibera few hours’ searching I found them and brought
them home, but only to find the careless man had lost four or
five hundred more; this decided me to part with him at once,
and I sent a black boy and little Tom to shepherd them instead.
My husband was ten weeks away. During that time the
heat was intense, andthe water so bad that it was perfect martyr-
dom hawing to drink it; each day it threatened rain, but still
weeks went on audit came not. 1 was getting so ill that I never-
expected to live to see my husband again. The little lambs,
too, were suffering from the heat and want of water. Tor a
week little Tom and I used bo eabch and drench two hundred
and fifty every day till they were able to drink themselves;
then the fix was, bow were they to do so, as they would not
drink ont of the creek, the flocks making it so muddy. I
shepherded bhe sheep while the man made a trough out of a
gum tree, and made a stone yard so that they could have a
drink of clean water, and by these means all onr little lambs
were saved, Though I had Tom and a black boy, yet most of
bhe shepherding fell to my shoulders (or rather my feet, for on
leaving Adelaide I brought up nine pairs of the very best kid
boots, all of which I wore out in nine months, and by the time
my husband came back I had not a pair to my feet, and had
bo make a pair from bullock hide we had with us for making
leather straps, little thinking when the hoots were bought to
what use they would be put, otherwise I should certainly have
invested in a stronger mate). However, the old proverb,
“ Where ignorance is bliss it’s a folly to be wise ” proved true.
Christmas, 1864, my husband still away, and no rain, our
provisions getting terribly short, we having lent some to Mr. N.,
which he assured us would he returned soon ; hut that day
never came. I had to make scones for each meal, as any left
from breakfast would he quite uneatable three hours later.
The same with the meat ; we could not keep it a day, though
we tried all sorts of means. For onr Christinas dinner we
had lamb and scones. I intended making a pudding of some
dried apples, and before going out to bhe sheep, put them on to
boil, and on my return, I found them and the pot burnt black;
so adieu to onr Christmas pudding. Five days after we had a
delightful thunderstorm and rain, which I may say saved onr


lives, for the extreme heat and privations were telling on us
and our animals. The rain filled all the water holes, but was not
sufficient to make the feed grow, though it freshened up the
dry hushes. On the 2nd of January, 1865, my husband
returned, leaving a team with stores under the care of my
brother at Bulkamatta, two hundred miles off, not being able
to bring them any further for the want of water. On the 16th
inst. it began to rain in earnest, and continued for three days
and nights. On the second day my husband, with man and
black boy, took the sheep out of the yard and put them across
the creek, where they were obliged to leave them all night in
consequence of the creek having risen. On the third day they
went to look after and put them together. It not only rained
but simply poured, as though the heavens had opened. The
sheep had to be left the other side of the creek as the only place
of safety, there being a hill there. The very creek that my hus-
band and party had crossed in the morning was, a few hours after,
twenty-five feet high, and of course, not crossable, so they had
to walk four miles further up to the head, where it opened out
on a plain, and here it was only about two feet deep and two
hundred yards wide, and running with such rapidity and force as
to tear a pair of new doeskins from foot to waist, and it was only
with the assistance of poles they safely reached the other side
and came home. Next morning the waters “had abated,”
and again they crossed over to gather up the sheep, or what
■was left of them, as two-thirds of them were dead either
from the cold or had been washed down with the current,
which not only took sheep, hut huge lime trees bodily. After
a “ storm truly came a calm,” which was very charming to
view from one of the hills ; you could well imagine it w 7 as the
sea before you, as the low-lands was one sheet of water.
What a contrast from a few days before, when all w 7 as brown
and dried up. After this the grass grew, and the whole country
was an “emerald.” I really thought it wrong to tread on the
beautiful grass as it came up, being so long accustomed to see the
parched-up ground. The next thing my husband had to do
was to go back to the team and take delivery of tw 7 o thousand
sheep he had bought on his way home last time. Delivery
had to be taken on the 25th inst. While he was away,
I, with the help of a man, scoured all the wool, to have
it in readiness when, the team came to take it away to
Minindie to be forwarded to the city. One day while I was
very busy scouring, a visitor appeared on the scenes; this


was quite “ a red letter day,” as I had not seen a, stranger for
eleven months. Our introduction was nob a very pleasant one,
as he was the manager for the gentleman who owned the
country we were hying upon. He had made two attempts to
reach us before the rain, and each time had failed, and the last
time nearly lost his two men, and did lose two horses. When
he found the “major domo ” was a\yay —and thinking, I
suppose, it was no use bo grumble at me —he kept his wrath,
and was rery friendly, asking me if he could hare a cup of tea
and stay the night. Next morning before he left he told me
we should hare to leave this place, as they were going to stock
the country'. After which he took the whole honour of being
the first to stock the back country between the barrier and the
river, which was a slight mistake, as we had occupied that
country twelve months prior to his appearance, and we were
the first to cross the border either with or without stock,
My husband returned, having left the team and sheep on the
road, We packed up and started back to within fifteen miles
of our first camp, which was a very beautiful spot, with lakes
and pastures green, and wild fowl in hundreds. Here we built a
bouse, and made our home, and as soon as settled my husband
started north to explore some country he had taken up in South
Australia, leaving me for three weeks, and knowing there
were twenty-five or so natives on the lake a few miles off.
I did not relish my loneliness, with only Tom as my companion,
though he was a great comfort to me. My husband seeing
my tears, seemed quite hurt, saying it was poor comfort to
bim while away to think of his wife being so sentimental.
About a quarter of an hour after he bad departed, seven blacks,
after watching him go, made for the house. Imagine my fear
at being accosted by these men, all armed with war imple-
ments, and clothed in nature. Seeing them coming I went
outside arid sat hy a fire, trying to put on an air of indifference,
which, believe me, I did not feel. They all stuck their spears
round the fire; one of the men was chosen by the others as
spokesman, he being the only one wbo could understand my
language. He having been with us for a short time quite under-
stood what our possessions were, and he asked for sheep,
clothes and tobacco, all of which I refused. He told me I
had plenty in the bouse. I said, “ Well, if black fellow think
so, go and see.” That made him think I had a revolver or
sword ; therefore he was afraid to go in. I told them my
husband would be home that night, and if they did not go


away he would come down and shoot them. Then they came
to an arrangement that if they would go away altogether white
man would not be cross to them. So I promised them it
should be so if they left, which they did, and I never saw 7 them
again for two years. Next day I and a lubra walked twenty
miles to be sure they had gone, for I felt too uncomfortably
till I knew they had left the district and gone amongst the
ranges. My husband returned and stayed at home six weeks,
when he left to take some eight hundred fat sheep to Adelaide,
where he got 255. per head for them, leaving me w r ith me
little nephew 7 , a Dutchman, and one thousand eight hundred
sheep to lamb. A few 7 days after he had gone the man began
to shirk his w'ork, and expected little Tom to shepherd while
he idled in his tent all day, only going out to meet him in
the evening, and if there were any young lambs he w 7 ould not
bring them home, but left them for the wild dogs to eat, telling
the child he was master now and would do as he liked. I
thought it best to dismiss him at once, and if the dogs did eat
the sheep, it wms no use paying him to let them do so.
With the help of Tom and an old lubra I looked after them,
sending him with them the first thing in the morning, and I
went out afterwards to gather up the lambs, for if any were
left out the dogs would eat them. Many a time have I sat on
the sand hills and had a good cry, and then thought how 7 very
wrong it was of me, as all w 7 eut on so w 7 ell —the sheep giving me
little or no trouble, for wherever I put them there they could
be found, and everything I did seemed to prosper, and my
health w 7 as good, for which I used to thank God as I drove my
flock home.
My husband returned after ten weeks’ absence. He branded
105 per cent, lambs. Six weeks out of the ten we never saw
a soul. We were a fortnight without meat, as neither of us three
had courage to kill a sheep. At last the old lubra got desperate
and killed one. I need not say how’ long it took her, but w r e
were thankful for it when it w r as cooked. Now 7 lour years have
elapsed, and we are now off to the Grey Eanges on the Bulka,
to some country my husband took out in South Australia,
arriving at our destination in 1868, New 7 Year’s Day. Got a
stone house put up. In February I had a little son, which we
buried the end of April. In July, finding the w 7 ater w 7 as drying
up and the distance too far for wool to go down or stores to
come up, we left this place for our first camp again, where we
built a new house, and where I lost another little son. Two


years after I left my tome for Minindie, where my little
daughter was bom. It was the first time I had seen civilization
in its entirety ior seven years.
Tbr seven years after I left tome for Minindie where my
Little daughter was horn, it was the first time I had seen
civilization. The inhabitants of Minindie stared at me in
wonderment. They were quite surprised to see the small
woman I was. Evidently they expected to see quite a giantess,
hearing of the rongh life I led out back. The hotel keeper
bold me afterwards, he never was so much astonished at any-
thing, as when my husband helped me down out of the buggy
and introduced me as his wife. He expected “ from what he
had heard,' ’ to see a big, rongh woman, while I was only a
middle-sized, delicate-looking woman.
'When my little baby was only three weeks old I took her
with me back to our camp. Her first night in the bush was
spent ia an eld hut on Topoa. In the morning my husband
said he had something wonderful to show me, and when I
went out he pointed out the ground covered with rat tracks.
The rats had passed in thousands during the night, all travelling
south. For about three weeks our rat visitors were a great
nuisance to ns; we could hardly keep any eatables out of
their reach. I may mention this rat invasion happened in
March, 1871.
When we arrived home my husband started men to well sink.
“The water in the lake was drying up very fast.” And he
thought that water was to he got at a shallow depth on the edge
of the-Lake. W r hen my husband gob the men fairly started at
the well he left for Adelaide.
I felt rather strange, as my husband bad discharged all the
men during my absence in Minindie, “ except one.” It was
his first attempt at housekeeping by himself, and he amused
himself sending off the old servants and getting new ones.
My husband is now started for Adelaide with some fat sheep,
leaving me and my little baby alone. He was to have been
away ten weeks ; bub ib’s quite bhree months before he arrives
hack. I should not have said I was left alone, for I had my
dear litfle baby, and you can imagine, dear reader, what a great
comfort my baby was to me after so many years of loneliness.
I often prayed fervently to the Lord to spare my darling to me.
The water in the lake was getting very low indeed, and we had
bo filter it through sand before we could use it. I had to
send the sheep away for to look for food and water where
20


they could get it. I now had been ten weeks by myself. The
well sinkers were down oyer 200 feet, and no sign of water; the
men think they will come on water soon, so I keep them on
until my husband comes home.
A traveller going past told me the men I sent out to take
care of the sheep were not doing their duty, so I took my baby
and drove out thirteen miles, camped out all night and dis-
charged one of the men in the morning. When I got home I
found the door locked, and the traveller, “ who was a police
constable,” had taken the key away in his pocket. He found
out what he had done when he travelled about twenty-five
miles, and he left the key of my house at Langewirra Station.
So thus I was locked out of my own house, and by a man
who was given permission by me to rest a day. How to get in
now was the question. I had no alternative but to get the
door forced open. And it was some weeks before I got the key
over from Langewirra.
When my husband came home he knocked the well-sinkers
off, and went hack to meet the waggons, which were bringing
stores and shearing supplies, and took the teams to Langewirra,
where he went to shear the sheep, leaving me to pack up and
meet him there. I shall never forget that packing up. The
wind was blowing a gale, and clouds of dust flying all day long.
I got a cold on that occasion, from which I have not got over
yet.
The shearing now being over, and the wool started for
Adelaide, we make a start for “ Bencannia,” a place fifty miles
from our first camp, where there was water in a lake. After
we had been there two months, the water began to dry up, and
no signs of rain coming, we had to take our sheep seventy
miles further up to Cobain Lake, which was supposed to be
permanent water. Now my husband has to go back to the
Burra to take delivery of five thousand sheep that he
bought six months ago. I being in delicate health and
my baby so young, did not feel equal to undertake the hard-
ships of travelling and removing the sheep. Telling my
husband this, he asked me if I was going to give in now, and
whether I had lost all heart and courage ; and if I would only
try for another six months, he expected to get water in the
wells, and that we would have a settled home; so I made up
my mind to try once more and do my best, and a fortnight
after my husband left for the Burra. The water being almost
dried up, I had to get the sheep gathered up and make a start


to travel the seventy miles between the last camp and Cobam.
The weather was dreadfully hot, and the dusty track was not
at all pleasant travelling along. My little baby was blind with
sandy blight, and we had to travel the sheep two days (hot
windy days) without being able to give the poor things a
drink. You can imagine with what delight we welcomed the
sight of a big hole full of water, in a creek eighteen miles from
Cobam Lake. We camped for the night there and refreshed
our thirsty stock.
Started next morning, and got to Cobam about 4 o’clock in
the afternoon. There we found plenty of water, and an empty
house of two rooms, which I took possession of. The owners
had given me permission to occupy the house, they having left
it some time previously. Feeling very tired, I partly un-
dressed and lay down to rest with my baby. I had not been
laying down very long when I heard footsteps in the apartment
outside, and on looking up, to my astonishment, in the doorway
stood a policeman in uniform, revolver in hand, pointed at me.
I do not know which was the most astonished—the policeman
or myself. He did not know the hut was occupied, and seeing
smoke issuing from the chimney, he came to the conclusion he
had found what he w 7 as looking for, namely, a bushranger of
the name of “Bums.” After we got over the first misun-
derstanding, and he had explained how matters were to me, I
found that the man he was looking for was camped about four
miles from us, on the creek, at a blacks’ camp, the blacks having
given me the information. Letting the policeman have one of
my black boys to go with him and his two men, they went and
arrested “ Burns,” and brought him hack in custody that very
night. Next morning they started for Wilcannia. So now,
here I am a fixture until rain comes, with about one hundred
blacks camped within a quarter of a mile of me. Not pleasant
neighbours, although they were extremely kind to me; they
brought me wild fowl, fire wood, and looked after the horses.
I spent here six weeks very miserably. The weather was
close, hot and thundery, threatening rain every day. The
water in Cobam Lake, although twenty feet deep, was so very
bad in the middle of the day that it was difficult to use it,
were one ever so thirsty. What with sand flies by day and
mosquitoes by night, the poor horses were almost be-
side themselves. I have seen the horses for hours in the middle
of the day standing in the lake with the water rolling over
their backs, and when once the sun went down they would
22


gallop about for hours together. The horses were quite fat
when I went to Cobam, and at the end of six weeks they were
dog poor. When I was there six weeks we had two days’
beautiful rain. I made up my mind to turn my face towards
home, and I only got half-way, as far as the Packsaddle, when
I found the rain bad fallen no farther. However, at the Pack-
saddle I found the creek running full of beautiful water.
Two days after I had arrived at the Packsaddle, my husbanp
came up to me, he having come back with the sheep he went
to the Burra for. We decided to remain at the Packsaddle
until the rain came farther down, or until we found water in
the well which was now being sunk.
Here we stayed for three months, when one of the men came
up with the joyful tidings that they had struck water in the
well. My husband once more left me, this time with one
white man, and we had eighteen thousand sheep to look
after. My other help was natives; he took all the other white
men with him to start putting up a house. At the end of one
month he came back after putting up a house. Need I say
with what pleasure I started on the journey that brought me
to what was to be my permanent home at last. I must not
forget to mention the little adventure between the blacks.
The Murray blacks went up to Cobam to steal wives. They
took a few from each camp as they went by, intending to
wind up with a few from the Packsaddle. The blacks in
the black country were too much afraid of the more civilized
ones to defend their lubras. But the Cobam blacks sent one
of their number ahead asking us to protect their wives
when they reached us. We were prepared for the Murray blacks
when they arrived, and not thinking we would interfere with
them, they allowed the lubras to come up and ask for provisions.
As they came we detained them until we had them all but
two. Those two the blacks refused to let come up to camp.
So we had to go over to the blacks' camp and take them.
After taking the lubras, the thing was how to protect
them. There were twenty-five black fellows camped within
a short distance of us, and only my husband and I there.
But as we were debating how best to manage, a gentleman
rode up, and he stayed all night and assisted us. The first
thing we did was to erect a tent for the lubras to stay in during
the night, and my husband and our visitor kept watch all
night, armed with a gun and sword.
These Murray blacks went away next morning, and when
23


they wished us good morning they assured us they would
come some other time and take them. Some time during the
day the husbands belonging to the rescued lubras arrived, when
we were well repaid for our trouble. The thanks the poor
fellows could not express they showed by dancing around us,
and the Corrobborees they got up for our entertainment for
some days after were very numerous and amusing.
In July, 1872, I arrived at what was to be my permanent
home. We had splendid rains, and a very good supply of good
stock water in the new well. After getting my home nicely
arranged, in about four months I started with my little daughter
for Adelaide, which is the first visit I had paid that city for
twelve years. I now have recorded the most stirring incidents
of my life in the bush, so I will say good-bye to my readers.
