

$
w
AND
TUTOR IN APOLOGETICS AND SYSTEMATIC THEOLOGY TO THE PRESBY-
TERIAN CHURCH OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
ns>;kh ■
AUTHOR OP “THE AUSTRALIAN EXPLORERS,” “THE SABBATH,” “THE
MEMORY AND HOW TO IMPROVE IT,” “ A CONCISE HISTORY OF




PREFACE.
Xhe following Lectures were, in the first instance, delivered as a
special Sabbath Evening Course in St. Paul’s Presbyterian Church*
Balmain West. The interest which they created, and the favour with
which they were received, led to their publication, by weekly instal-
ments, in the “Balmain Observer” in which they appeared to be
extensively read. They are now issued in a more permanent form at
the request of many who heard them delivered, or read them as
they came from the serial press. That the good Lord may make them,
with all their faults, of further service in the cause of religion is the
sincere prayer of
The Author
The Manse , Balmain West ,
November, 1892 .




/f335■5/F/d/^6
a.t- 77
CONTENTS-
I. The Testimony of History ------ 1
11. The Analogy of Nature ----- - 8
HI. The Argument from the Nature and Capacities of the Soul 14
IV. The Witness of Conscience - - - - - -ID
V. The Scripture Doctrine of Immortality —The Old Testa-
ment ---------- 25
VI. The Scripture Doctrine of Immortality—The New Testa
ment - - - .... - -31
VII. The Glorified Body - - - 3fi
VIII. Heaven as Foreshadowed in Earthly Figures and Foretastes 42
IX. The Redeemed in Glory - -46
X. Are there Degrees of Glory in Heaven ? - - - -52
XI. Shall we know one another in Heaven ? - - . -56
XII. The Beatific Vision, or Seeing God as He is - - -62
. Nauc7>
S 7/
vV / ' J—
-4




In the noble lan swage of the ancient
Homans the word immortalitas was some-
times used to signify exemption from death.
In this absolute sense the term can be pre-
dicated of no man. On the whole race has
been pronounced the decree of returning
to the dust. But this doom can apply only
to the material integument and does not
affect the soul, if that can be shown to
be somethin? 1 higher than a subtle organi-
zation of the forces of nature. Conscious-
ness seems to assure us that the body is
the instrument which the soul employs to
do its work ; and as they are not, on this
ghowing, different modifications of the
same material, instead of perishing with
the body a strong presumption is already
laid that the spirit of man will survive the
ordeal which men call death. If “ proba-
bility is the very guide of life,’’ enough
has already been said to put every sane
man upon the earnest and solemn inquiry
concerning the destiny of the soul, for the
question bears with equal force upon all
classes and conditions of the people. Such
an investigation, conducted in a calm and
honest frame of mind, is one of the great
needs of the present age when material
pursuits are threatening to swallow up
everything thao cannot be translated into
money. In these circumstances a patient
hearing is seldom accorded to any one who
deviates so far from the common rut as to
take for his subject the immortality of the
soul. This adverse pressure of nineteenth-
cer tury pursuits has been thus deplored by
Mr Alger in his great work on the future
life. •* The faith pales and dwindles from
the general neglect of the strenuous and
constant cultivation of it formally secured
by the stern doctrinal drill and by the
LECTURE i.
The Testimony of History.
supervision of daily thought and habit in
in the interests of religion. Never before
were men so absorbed as now in material
toil and care during the serious portion of
their existence; never before so beset as
now during the leisure portion by innumer-
able forms of amusement and dissipation.
The habit of lonely meditation and prayer
grows rarer. The exactions of the struggle
of ambition grow fiercer, the burdens of
society press more heavily, the vices and
temptations of society thicken ; and they
withdraw the attention of men from ideal
and sacred aims. More and more men seem
to live for labor and pleasure, for time and
sense; less and leas for truth and good, for
God and eternity. Absorbed in the mater-
ialistic game, or frittered and jaded in frivo-
lous diversions, all eternal aims go by
default. In what previous age was mad-
dening rivalry so universal, giggling
laughter so pestilent an epidemic, triviality
at such a premium, and sublimity at such
a discount ? But the things to which men
really devote themselves dilate to fill the
whole field of their vision. They soon
came to disbelieve that for which they take
no thought and make no sacrifice or invest-
ment. The average men of our time—as
well those of the educated classes as those
of the laboring classes—do not live for im-
mortality. Our fathers, to a degree not
common now, walked in mental companion-
ship with God, practised solitary devotion,
shaped their daily feelings and deeds with
reference to the effect on their future life.
Thus that hidden life became real to
them. Now the interests and provoca-
tions of the present world, concen
tratei and intensified as never before
—the strife of aspirants, the giddy enter-


prises of speculation and commerce and all tie various aspects in which it has suc-
engineering, the chaos of caucuses, and
newspapers and telegraphs— monopolise
our faculties and exhaU't our energies,
leaving us but faint inclination to attend
to the solemn themes of the s >ul and the
mystic lures of infinity. To those o?az j d
with greed, battling with rivals or stuik in
debauchery, God naturally beoomes a ver-
bal phantom and immortality a foo'ish
dream. There is nothing in mechanism and
mammon-worship nothing in selfish sloth
and laughter, nothing in cruel oppression
and drudgery, to inspire belief in the
deathless spirituality of man. Among a
people prevailingly given over to these
earthlinesses, faith in the tran seen dent
verities of religion perforce dies out. In
the long-run the supreme devotion of the
soul irresistibly moulds its faith. Christen-
dom does not live in conscious sacrifices
and aspirations for God and eternal life,
but it lives chiefly for selfish power and
knowledge, money, praise, and luxury.
Therefore in Christendom faith in immor-
tality is decaying. But we believe this
decay to be temporary, the necessary
transition to a richer and more harmonic
insight. The passing eclipse of faith in a
future life is destined by concentrating atten-
tion on the the present to deve’op its re-
sources, realise the divine possibilities of
this world, unveil all the elements of hell
and heaven really existing here, and fully
attune mankind to the conditions of virtue
and blessedness now. When this shall have
been done the tangential and fractional
character of our experience will be so obvi-
ous, the inadequacy of the earthly state for
the wants of our transcendent and prophetic
faculties will be so urgent, and the supple-
mentary adaptations of the entire unseen
but clearly divined future to the craving
parts in the present will be so manifest,
that a complete revelation of immortality
will break upon the prepared mind of the
race. Then history will take a new depar-
ture in breathing communion with the
whole creation.”
The future may bring all this and much
more, but our contention is with the stub-
born facts of the present. That a serious
obstacle lies across the path of him who
would press home th** question of the
eternal destinies of the soul is indisputable,
and, as it cannot be avoided, it is the part
of wisdom to consider how best it may be
overcome. It may be laid down as axiom
atic that the necessity for urging spiritual
interests is on the inverse ratio of the dis-
inclination that exists to entertain them.
In this view of the case it will be desirable
to present the doctrine of immorality in
cessively emerged in human thought and
hold it up to the ramd till it has won con-
viction as a fundamental truth This will
he the more easily done by showing that
the argument is in a marked sense a cumu-
lative one and is drawn from many sources.
To some men one consideration will ap-
pear to have more weight than another,
but no link of the chain will be found so
weak as to be unsafe.
By way of introduction it will be con-
venient to lead off with the argument
from history in order to ascertain whether
this doctrine be supported by the general
consent of mankind A beginning will be
made with the lowest savage tribes, and the
testimony will theu be traced through all
the advanced nations in order to show that
the immortality of the soul has been
sounded through all the gamut of civilisa-
tion. For the most degraded members of
the human family one naturally looks to
the dark Continent of Africa. But
even there it is amply witnessed that the
soul survives the article of death. Wilson,
a celebrated traveller, who spent twenty
years in that country, says that an African
would as soon doubt his present as his
future existence. No better evidence of
this belief could be desired than that which
is found in the prevailing conviction that
the spirits of the dead return to visit their
former haunts. In old Calabar it was
customary for the sou to leave his father’s
house to decay, but after two years he
might rebuild it, the ghost being thought
by that time to have departed. The Bush-
men are mentioned in particular as being
afraid of the return of deceased spirits to
haunt them. Indeed it was quite a com -
mon opinion among the Africans that the
souls of the dead dwelt in their midst and
ate with them at their meals. Bat there
was also a locality of some kind which was
the proper abode of departed spirits The
natives of Dahomey say that this world is
man’s plantation, and the next his home !
The Zulus toll of men who have gone
through holes in the earth to the under-
world where a man may find his kindred.
To this place, however, the spirit might not
immediately descend, for the Congo negroes
are said to abstain for a whole year after a
death from sweeping the house lest the
ghost might be disturbed. Speaking of the
Bechuanas, a very low type of African
tribes, Dr. Livingstone says : “ There is no
necessity for beginning to tell even the most
degraded of these people of the existence of
God, or of a future state, the facts being
universally admitted. When speaking of
the departed—though there is nothing in


the physical appearance of the dead to His soul, proud science never taught to stray
justify the expression —they say, ‘ He has
gone to the gods,’ the phrase being
identical with abiit ad plures.” Turning
now from Africa to Asia we find this Con-
tinent peopled by races which usually rise
higher in the scale of civilisation, and,
therefore, do not come in for consideration
in this connection. Of its less advanced
inhabitants the Kamtchadales may be
mentioned as remarkable for their
belief in the immortality of the
soul. They affirm that all their
dead go to a subterranean elysium
where they find their wives, clothes, tools
and huts ; and where they also engage in
fishing and hunting. The preceding ob
servation applies in the same manner to
Europe, and here, too, a single specimen
from the lowest tribes must suffice. The
Finns of the north are proved to have
been believers in a survival after death
from the known fact that they imagined
the ghosts ot the departed as unkind and
as dwelling with their bodies in the grave.
The New World, as America is very
properly called, is exceedingly interesting
from this point of view, owing to the com-
plete isolation of the country from the rest
of the world up to a recent period. In
both parts of this great Continent the
evidence that the innumerable tribes held
the doctrine of the immortality of the soul
is very abundant. The following are some
o! the more noticeable testimonies to be
observed in a brief review proceeding from
south to north. We find chat the ancient
Peruvians placed their raradise far away
in the blue dome of heaven, and taught
that the reprobates were sentenced to a hell
situated in the centre of the earth. The
Mexicans held the singular belief that
souls neither good nor bad, or whose
virtues and vices balanced each other,
entered a medium state of idleness and
empty content. Tne Nicaraguans declared
that men who died in their houses went
underground, but the slain in war went to
serve the Gods. The Oaribs are reported
as believing that the brave men of their
nation go after death to happy islands,
where all good fruits grow spontaneously,
there to spend their time in dancing and
feasting, while they have all their enemies
for slaves. Of the many tribes of North
America, Charlevoix, the traveller aid
historian says, ‘ The best established
opinion is the immortality of the soul.”
As characterising the red Indians the
following hues from Pope’s “ Essay on
Man ” are well-known.
Lo! the poor Indian, whose untutored mind,
Sees God in clouds and hears him in the wind.
Far as the solar walk or milky way ;
Yet simple nature to his faith hath given.
Behind the cloud-topp’d hill, an humbler
heaven,
S one safer world in deoths of wood embraced,
Or happier island in the watery waste,
I’o t>e, contents his natural desire ;
lie asas no angel's wing, no seraph’s fire,
Rut thinks, admitted to that equal sky,
His faithful dog shall bear him company.”
But particular instances, if desired, can
be produced at will. The Irequois used
to leave an opening in the grave for the
lingering soul to visit the body, and some
of them pierced h lies in the coffin for the
same purpose. The Algonquin Indiana
account for lethargy or trance on the sup-
position that their souls have travelled to
the banks of the River of Death, but have
been driven back and return to re-animate
their holies. The lndians accounted
for the existence of a distant tribe speaking
the same language as by de-
claring them to be the spirits of their
dead. The Aleutian Islanders fancied that
the souls of the departed walked unseen
among their kindred ; and accompanied
them by sea and laud in their journeys.
Even frozen Greenland adds its testimony
to the same truth. Before the advent of
Christianity the shivering inhabitants held
fast to the belief in a future and everlast-
ing state, which would give them a better
life than was enjoyed upon earth. Coming
now to our own side of the world, and
commencing with Australia, we meet with
a race of human beings who are usually
placed at the bottom of the scale. But a
careful investigation has shown that thev
were not destitute of some glimmerings of
of the truth of immortality. Among some
tribes it was a prevailing belief that
white men were their ancestors
raised from the dead. The late Rev. Wm.
Ridley, who had large experience as a
missionary among the aborigines, has
recorded that they often buried their dead
on the top of a bald hill, that on rising
again they might have a commanding
vie v of the land. The island of Borneo
also furnishes some testimonies which are
to the purpose. Among the Ravans slaves
are killed, in order that they may follow
their deceased master and wait upon him.
Before being killed they are charged to
take great care of their master when they
jion him, to be always near him, and to
obey all his behests. Prior to JRajah
Brooke’s time “head hunting” was ex-
ceedingly prevalent among the Dayaks
who believed that the owner of every human
head they could procure would serve them


in the next world, where, indeed, a man's mighty waters are, there make me immor-
rank would be according to his number of tal! Where there is happiness and delight
heads in this world. The New Zealanders
believe that the souls of the dead go to a
a place beneath the earth, called Reinga.
After a great battle they say they are
apprised of the event by the spirits of the
departed long before it could be known by
natural means. The priests also pretend
by their spells to be able to bring wander-
ing spirits within the enclosed graveyards.
Before the introduction of Christianity into
the Fiji Islands it was a main part of the
ceremonies of a great man’s funeral to
strangle his wives, friends and slaves for
the purpose of attending him into the
world of spirts, and in this horrid rite the
Fijians weie by no means a singular people.
Departed spirits were supposed to go to the
tribunal of Ndengei, who either received
them into bliss or sent them back as ghosts
to haunt the scenes of their former
existence. A Tongan took a stranger by
the hand and made the unexpected ob-
servation, “ This will die. but the life that
is within you will never die,”
We pass next to another group ot nations
who had emerged from barbarism, but
whose progress had fallen short of a com-
pletely developed civilisation. The Scan-
dinavians are entitled to a prominent posi-
tion in this class. They were a martial
people, and their highest ambition was to
be carried after death to the splendid
Valhalla the temple of Odin built in the
upper sky. This was the heaven of the
the slain in battle. No other consideration
was so potent to arouse the valour of the
hardy sons of the frozen north. The
Brahmans and Buddhists of India are very
emphatic in their testimony to the con-
tinued existence of the soul. The Rig-
Veda contains the earliest record of the
religions belief of a large section of the
Indo-Germanic race, portions of it going
back from 1200 to 2000 years before the
birth of Christ. Professor Max Muller
says, “ There is in the Veda no trace
of metempsychosis, or that transmission of
souls from human to animal bodies, which
is generally supposed to be a distinguishing
feature of Indian religion. Instead of this
we find what is really the sine qua non of
all real religion, a belief in immortality and
in personal immortality. Thus we read,
‘ He who give alms goes to the highest
place in heaven, he goes to the gods.’ Here
is a prayer addressed to Sorna ;—“ Where
there is eternal light, in the world where
the sun is placed, in that immortal, im-
perishable world place me, O Sorna.
Where King Viavasta reigns, where the
secret place of heaven is, where these
where joy and pleasure reside, where the
desires of our desire are attained, there
make me immortal!” The Chinese also
are firm believers in a future state of exist-
ence. They worship the spirits of their
ancestors who have been long deceased.
When a death is about to occur they open
a hole in the roof of the house to permit
the soul to escape. One Chinaman will
take a bill from another to be paid in the
next world. On the occasion of a recent
suicide in Victoria a document was found
in the handwriting of the deceased China-
man, regretting that he owed a sum of
money to a countryman, and promising,
seemingly in all sincerity, to pay it in the
land of spirits.
The next witnesses to be called are the
Egyptians, Greeks and Romans, the three
most influential nations of heathen antiquity.
Common to the whole group, in different
degrees, were the practices of magic, ne-
cromancy, witchcraft, and sacrifices, or
peculiar honors to heroes after death, all of
which rest on a basis of belief in the im-
mortality of souls. More particularly, the
earliest accounts of the Egyptians attest
the belief in the continued existence of
spirits, “ Dissolution according to them,”
says Sir Gardner Wilkinson, “is only the
cause of reproduction,—nothing perishes
which has once existed, and things which
appear to be destroyed only change their
natures and pass into another form.
Anubis held in Egypt an office similar to
that of Mercury among the Greeks, being
the usher of souls in their passage to the
future state. The writer thus quoted says
that “ The judgment of the soul was con-
ducted by Osiris, aided by forty-two asses-
sors, supposed to represent the forty-two
crimes from which a virtuous man was
expected to be free when judged in a future
state, or rather they were the accusing
spirits each of whom examined if the
deceased was guilty of the peculiar
crime which it was his province
to avenge.” The Greeks were the most
philosophical of the nations of antiquity
and it was at their hands that classic my-
thology received its exquisite development.
The whole system demands for its neces-
sary foundation faith in immortality. No
people would have raised their heroes to
the rank of gods after death and offered
them sacrifices if they had thought their
spirits perished with their bodies. The
same doctrine must also have been held
regarding the souls of ordinary men. To
the unseen world this people gave the
name of Hades, in which place there were


recognised two principal departments, pre- evils of humanity, and spends the rest of
pared respectively for the good and the
bad, —an Elysium of bliss and a Tartarus
of torments. With a dead body it was
usual to deposit a piece of money to pay
the ferryman’s toll at the river of the
under-world, and also a cake to appease
the dog that kept watch at its gate. Hades
was further described as containing an
august tribunal at which presided three
incorruptible judges who bore the names
of Aeacus, Minos, and Rhadamanthus.
In the religious system of the Romans,
also, an important place was given to the
shades or ghosts of the dead. A distinction
was observed between the departed spirits
of good and of bad men. The former
under the name of manes or lares were
regarded as domestic deities, and received
divine honors. But the lemures, or spirits
of the wicked dead, were supposed to
wander about at night as spectres to tor-
ment and frighten the living. In order to
propitiate these malignant ghosts, and to
purify the human habitations, certain
ceremonies were performed on three nights
in May every year. On these occasions
the head of the family was required to call
out nine times. “Be gone, ye spectres of
the house.” In addition to all this evidence
from classic antiquity there remain to be
cqnsidereii the express testimonies of the
representative men of both nations. Plato,
who is understood to speak for Socrates
and himself (the two furnishing together
the best outcome of the intellect of Greece),
has placed on record the following
valuable testimonies, “ In truth, each
of us,” says he, “ tiiat is to say, each
soul, is immortal and departs to the
Gods in another world to render an account,
as the laws of the State declare. This to
the good is a matter of confidence, but to
the wicked of terror.” “ The soul, the im -
material part, being of a nature so superior
to the body ,can it, as soon as it is separated
from the body, be dispersed into nothing
and perish ? Oh, far otherwise. Rather
will this be the result. If it take its de-
parture in a state of purity, not carrying
with it any clinging impurities, which
during life it never willingly shared in,
but always avoided, gathering itself to
itself, and making the separation from the
body its aim and study,—that is, devoting
itself to true philosophy, and studying bow
to die calmly ; for this is true philosophy is
it not? —Well, then, so prepared the soul
departs into that invisible region which is
of its own nature, the region of the divine,
the immortal, the wise, and then its lot is
to be happy in a state in which it is freed
from fears and wild desires, and the other
its existence with the Gods.” As showing
the practical tendency with which this en-
nobling doctrine was credited, one other
quotation may be made from this prince of
philosophers :—“ O, my friends, if the
soul is really immortal, what care should
be taken of it, not only in respect of the
present time, which is called life, but of
eternity. And the danger of it,
from this point of view, does appear to be
awful, If death had only been the end of
all, the wicked would have had a good bar-
gain in dying; for they would have been
happily quit not only of their body, but
also of their own evil, together with their
souls. But now, inasmuch as the soul is
manifestly immortal, there is no release or
salvation from evil, except the attainment
of the highest virtue and wisdom.” All
these opinions, be it well observed, were
those of a Gentile sage, who was in his
prime four centuries before the Lord Jesus
Christ was born into our world. How
eloquently and with what conviction Plato
spoke and wrote on this subject, may be
guessed from two extraordinary incidents
which have come down from antiquity,
Cleombrotue, a philosopher of Ambracia,
was so impressed by the reasoning of
Plato on immortality, that he threw himself
from a cliff into the sea, not that he had
any suffering to escape from, but that ho
might exchange this life for a better. An
ancient poet has thus described the
occurrence :
Cleombrotus, the Ambracian, having said,
“ Farewell
0 Sun,” leaped from a lofty wall into the
world
Of ghosts. No deadly thing had chanced to
him at all.
Bat he had read in Plato’s book upon the
soul.
The other remarkable incident con-
nects itself with the end of Cato the
Younger. Though a stoic and a philoso-
pher he took leave of this present life by
means of his own sword. He was, indeed,
hemmed in by troubles on every side; but
he looked for a better life after death, and
to this he was moved by Plato’s book on
immortality, which be read seven times
over during the last night of his earthly
existence. But the Roman writers them-
selves came to be equally express in their
testimony to the same truth. “I am very
much influenced,” said Seneca, by the
general consent to the opinion of future re-
wards and punishments, and this medita-
tion raises me to the contempt of this life
in the hopes of a better.” Again :“ We
maintain the immortality of the soul on


the consent of all nations ; it is only neces-
sary to discuss where it resides and what
is its nature.” Cicero, the best ornament
of Roman philosophy and oratory, is very
profuse in his testimonies to the immorta-
lity of the soul, and considers it a dictate of
natural religion. Some valuable passages
to this purpose are met with in his admir-
able treatise on “ Old Age.” Cato, one
of his characters, is introduced as saying
“ This is my firm persuasion, that since the
human soul exerts itself with so great ac-
tivity, since it has such a remembrance of
the past, such a concern for the future,
«ir ce it is enriched with so many arts,
sciences, and discoveries, it is impossible
but. that the being' which contains all these
niusr be immortal.” And again; “ My
ou , I k ow not how, has always raised
i r s U a d looked forward on futurity, in
vu w and expectation, that, when it
bail depart out of life, it shall then live for
e' it ; and if this were not true that the
mind is imrn »rtal, the souls of the most
worthy would not, above all others, have
the strongest impulses to glory. What
besides this is the cause that the wisest
men die with the greatest equanimity, the
ig ora t with the greatest concern? Does
t cdrin hat those minds which have
h ! m >st extensive views, foresee that they
are removing to a happier condition which
those of a narrower sight do not perceive ?
I, for my part, am transported with the
hope of seeing your ancestors whom I have
honored and loved ; and am earnestly de-
sirous of meeting not only those excellent
persons whom I have known, but those too
of whom I have heard and read, and of
whom I myself have written ; nor would I
be detained from so pleasing a journey,
0 happy day when I shall escape from this
crowd, this heap of all pollution, and be
admitted to that divine assembly of ex-
alted spirits ! When I shall go not only to
those great persons I have named, but to
my Cato, my son, than whom a better man
was never born, and whose funeral rites I
myself peformed, whereas he ought rather
to have attended mine. Yet has not his
soul deserted mo, but seeming to cast back
a look on me is gone before to those habi-
tanous to which it was to be expected I
should follow him. And though I might
appear to have borne my loss with courage,
1 was not unaffected with it, but I com-
forted myself in the assurance that it
would not be long before we should meet
again and be divorced no more.” Could a
Christian have spoken more clearly, more
truly, or more touchingly than this man
who was groping only in the light of
nature’s own kindling F How does it put
to shame the materialists of the nineteenth
century, who, in addition to all the know-
ledge of the ancient world, have the un-
speakable advantage of revelation which
has brought life and immortality to light.
One more testimony from pre-Christian
history must close this list. The elder
Cyrus, just before his death, is represented
by Xenophon as speaking after this man-
ner : “ Think not, my dearest children,
that when I depart from you I shall be no
more, but remember that my soul, even
when I lived among you, was invisable to
you ; yet by my actions you were sensible
that is existed in this body. Believe it
therefore existing still, though it be still
unseen. How quickly would the honors
of illustrious men perish after death if
their souls performed nothing to preserve
their fame. For my own part I could
never think that the soul, while in a mortal
body, lives, but when departed out of it
dies ; or that its consciousness is lost when
it is discharged out of aa unconscious
habitation. But when it is freed from all
corporeal alliance, then it truly exists.
Further, since the human frame is broken
by death, tell us what becomes of its
parts? It is observable whither the ma-
terials of other beings are translated,
namely, to the source whence they had
their birth. The soul alone, neither pre-
sent nor departed, is the object of our
eyes.” It is made a question indeed how
far the work from which this extract is
taken can be safely accepted as actual his-
tory. Many have regarded it as a phdos-
p deal romanc- 1 , and have understood
Xenophon as making Cyrus an ideal hero.
But whether it was Cyrus or Xenophon
himself that gave this testimony to the
immortality of th; soul, its value remains
the same, for the author also is a con-
spicuous representative of the ancient
world, and flourished four centuries before
the Christian era.
Sue i, then, is the great cloud of witnesses
that attest the soul’s immortality. The
testimony comes from savage tribes, sunk
to the very zero of the social scale, and
from nations who have accomplished the
greatest triumphs of civilisation. The
proof is latent in the primeval customs of
antiquity and finds a voice in the greatest
philosophers the world has ever seen. The
acknowledgment of the soul’s immortality
if not absolutely, is, at any rate, practically
universal. An exception is sometimes
significant as proving the rule, and in no
case can it set the rule aside. The asser-
tion that the love of life is natural to man
is not disproved by a case of suicide oc-
curring here and there. If it should ever


be clearly made out that a tribe of savages consent -of all nations which is acknow-
have been found so degraded, or a school ledged to be the voice of nature. Speaking
of philosophers so denaturalised, as to have of this very subject Cicero says : “ In every
lost or repudiated the notion of immorta- case the consent of all nations is to be
lity, this might only serve to show to what looked on as a law of nature.” And again :
depths a creature made in the image of “ Universal consent is the voice of nature. ’
God may ultimately fall. Notwithstanding Tins is the primal proof for a future life,
a stray exception, the witness of history and upon .this immovable foundation the
to the soul’s immortality is virtually the further arguments may be securely built.


Analogy is defined as a certain relation
or agreement between things, in some cir-
cumstances or effects when the things them-
selves are otherwise entirely different. The
resemblance on which the argument is based
may respect their origin, their properties,
or their results. There is, for example, an
observed analogy between plants and
animals, in so far as both grow and decay.
On the one side it is known also that
animal life is supported by nutriment of
such a kind as is suited to the wants of in-
dividual creatures. It would be reasoning
from analogy to advance one step further
and infer that plants also are nourished by
a certain aliment which is adapted to their
condition and circumstances; and there is
no doubt that this inference was safely
drawn before science had demonstrated how
this sustenance was derived from the soil
and the atmosphere. Analogy, indeed, has
often proved to be the clue to discovery in
all the realms of investigation. In matters
of experience it must always remain one of
the principal bases of reasoning. The evi-
dence deriyed from analogy does not stand
on the same leyel with that which depends
on mathematical proof; but it must be borne
in mind that the result thus obtained is not
opposed to certitude but to demonstration.
Reasoning from analogy, it is true,
warrants only probable conclusions; but
the probability may be very high, and it is
frequently acted upon in the most impor-
tant affairs of life, and even in the inflic-
tion of the penalty of death. Bishop Butler
did not state (he case too strongly when he
asserted that “ probability is the very
guide of life.” What lies to our hand for
the present is the analogy between the
natural and the spiritual worlds. If it can
LECTURE ii.
The Analogy of Nature.
be shown, as it certainly can, that in the
natural world there is real life in
seeming death ; that nothing absolutely
perishes or is destroyed, that there is per-
petual change, but never annihilation ; then
there is already created a presumption,
which may rise into a high probability,
that the same conditions prevail also in
the world of spirits, seeing that the
same God is the author of both, and that
the two realms are equally subject to His
care and guidance.
The broadest and most superficial of the
analogies between the natural and the
spiritual worlds is to be found in the re-
volution of the seasons, as compared with
the life and destiny of man. The re-
semblance is so obvious that we speak in
the most natural way possible of the spring,
summer, autumn and winter of man’s pro-
gress from the cradle to the grave. We
see but one cycle of the stages of human
life, and then the end comes when all seems
to be extinguished in death. So, too, if it
were permitted to observe only one revolu-
tion of the seasons, a person would naturally
infer that the rigour of Winter, with its
solemn pall of frost and snow, meant the
extinction of all the forms of vegetation, but
experience has taught a different lesson.
Under this teacher we have come to under-
stand that life has only been compressed
into an organic germ, so small, indeed, as
to be hidden from the microscope. Never-
theless the oak which is to withstand the
blasts of centuries, is potentiallv present in
the acorn ; and although the first change
appears to be a further process of decay,
the latent life will feel the breath of Spring
and come forth with nature’s awakening
call. This revival of life in material


things is so suggestive of a survival of the between the natural and the spiritual, may
spirit of man through the ordeal of death,
that it has found a prominent place in the
literature of all nations. Heathen myth-
ology is largely colored with this pleasing
analogy. The two classic nations of
antiquity had their Persephone or Proser-
pine who descended beneath the earth at
the 'approach of winter and returned alive
with the spring. This suggestive sym-
pathy of the region of winter with human
mortality has been touchingly glanced at
by Milton :
“ Her fresh benignant look
Nature changes at that lorn season when,
With tresses drooping o’er her sable-stole,
She yearly mourns the mortal doom of man,
Her noblest work ! ”
How much the meditative mind is in sym-
pathy with the phenomena of spring and
how vehemently the heart yearns after its
beloved dead at this quickening season,
has been well shown by the gifted Mrs.
Hemans, only she has allowed the
imagination also to speak and ask the
departed ones back to this present scene.
‘But what wakest thou in the heart, 0
Spring!
The human heart with all ifs dreams and
sighs ?
Thou that givest back so many a buried thing,
Restorer of forgotten harmonies !
Fresh song and scents break forth where’er
thou art—
What wakest thou in the heart 1
Too much, oh ! there too much I We know
not well
Wherefore it should be thus, yet roused by
thee
What fond strange yearnings, from the soul’s
deep cell,
Gush forth the faces we no more may see !
How are we haunted by the wind’s low tone,
By voices that are gone !
11l
Looks of familiar love that never more,
Never on earth, our aching eyes shall meet,
Past words of welcome to our household door,
And vanished smiles, and sounds of parted
feet
Spring ’midst the murraers of thy flowery
trees
Why revivest thou these 1
IV.
Vain longings for the dead ! why come they
back
With thy young birds, and* leaves, and
living blooms ?
Oh I is it not, that from thine earthly track
Hope to thy world may look beyond the
tombs ?
Yes 1 gentle Spring ! no sorrow dims thine
Breathed by our loved ones there."
In this aspect of the question, the analogy
be applied, on the highest possible author-
ity, to the restoration of the body as well
as to the survival of the soul. Like seed
cast into the ground, the body after death
is sown in corruption and raised in incor-
ruption. The fanciful mind may well be
excused for speaking of nature as dead
during the depths of Winter, All sem-
blance of life has then fled from the vege-
table kingdom, and many animals pass
into a torpid or dormant state. This con-
dition would be perpetual if the circum-
stances were to continue the same. But
the sun again mounts high in the heavens,
and “ nothing is hid from the heat thereof.”
The dormant creatures now respond to the
awakening call, and the face of nature is
renewed. So it will be with those that
sleep in their graves, the last trumpet will
call them forth to life. But the analogy
will bear to be pressed still closer. The
seed, which is to germinate into new forms
of life, must first be literally buried in the
earth; just as the bodies of dead men are
laid in the dust. “ Except a corn of wheat
fall into the earth and die, it abideth alone.”
There must first be corruption, and then
comes life. Decay is the precursor of a
revival. The husbandman takes his seed
and buries it in the earth with a view to
the harvest, “He that goeth forth and
weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubt-
less come again with rejoicing, bringing
his sheaves with him,” And, in like
manner, God buries the dead by His decree
of dust to dust, with a view to the resur-
rection at the last day. It was, therefore,
with good reason and with a clear precep-
tion of this analogy that our pious fore-
fathers called a burying ground “ God’s
acre.” The farmer has his field in which
he sows his seed in the expectation of a
harvest, and God has his plot of ground
which He sows with dead bodies, that are
to bring forth fruit at the resurrection.
The dead body is sown in corruption, it is
raised in inoorruption, it is sown in weak-
ness, it is raised in power. It is
sometimes objected that this is a vicious
analogy inasmuch as the the kernel of the
seed does not decay, but germinates in the
bosom of the earth, and thus sends forth a
new form of life. But, for aught we know
to the conti ary, the same may be true of
the human body. It is quite possible that
there may be an indestructible germ of
life, which only awaits the resurrection
Spring in order to develop into the incor-
ruptible body.
A specially instructive case from the
analogy of nature is furnished in the strange
metamorphosis of insects, in which the


same living creature passes through several
very different states and stages of exist-
ence. “ Even in a moral poinf of view.”
says Sir Humphrey Davy, “ I think the
analogies derived from the transformation
of insects admit of some beautiful applica-
tions, which have not been neglected by
pious entomologists. The three states of
the caterpillar, larva and butterfly have,
since the time of the Greek poets, been
applied to typify the human being —its ter-
restrial form, apparent death, and ultimate
celestial destination, and it seems more
extraordinary that a sordid and crawling
worm should become a beautiful and active
fly—thai an inhabitant of the dark and
fetid dunghill should in an instant entirely
change its form, rise into the blue air, and
enjoy the sunbeams, than that a being
whose pursuits here have been after an un-
dying name, and whose purest happiness
has been derived from the acquisition of
intellectual power and finite knowledge,
should rise hereafter into a state of being
where immortality is no longer a name,
and ascend to the source of unbounded
power and infinite wisdom.
Child of the sun ! pursue thy rapturous flight:
Mingling with her thou lov’st in fields of light,
And, where the flowers of Paradise unfold,
Quaff fragrant nectar from their cups of gold.
There shall thy wing*, rich as an evening sky,
Expand and shut with silent ecstasy !
Yet wert thou once a worm, a thing that crept
On the bare earth, then wrought a tomb and
slept.
And such is man ; soon from his cell of clay
To burst a seraph in the blaze of day ! ”
“ A large caterpillar.” says Dr. Living-
stone, “ feeds by night on the leaves of
these trees, and comes down by day to bury
itself at the root in the sand in order to
escape the piercing rays of the sun. The
people dig for it there, and are fond of it
when roasted, on account of its pleasant
vegetable taste. When about to pass into
the chrysalis state it buries itself in the
soil, and is sometimes sought for as food
even then. If left undisturbed, it comes
forth as a beautiful butterfly ; the trans-
mutation was sometimes employed by me
with good effect, when speaking with the
natives, as an illustration of our own great
change and resurrection.”
The longer this subject is considered, the
more surprising will these transformations
appear. From the butterfly’s egg, hatched
by the quickening influence of the genial
sunshine, there comes forth a caterpillar,
which is nothing else thm a creeping worm.
After running its allotted course in the
larva form, it does not then cease to exist,
in the proper sense of the term, but passes
into a second state of being. It is now
found in a dormant condition, wrapped up
under the shelter of a chrysalis shell, and
w>th such protection passes in safety
through the rigours of winter. But this
second stage is really a preparation for a
third. At the proper time the insect
emerges from its imprisonment, and with
the return of spring issues forth as the
brilliant butterfly to flit and sport in the
glorious sunshine all the summer long.
With such an analogy before our eyes, we
are surely warranted in affirming that there
is nothing unnatural, that is to say, noth-
ing out of the line of the ordinary course of
things, in expecting a series of specifically
different and successively higher stages of
existence for man. He existed in one state
before bis birth ; he entered upon another
when he is born ; and if he is destined for;
a third and more perfect state after suffer-
ing that mysterious change called death
all this would only be in conformity with
the order of nature with which he stands
connected, and of which he really forms a
part. These wonderful transformations,
which eventuate in the winged butterfly,
are so suggestive of the permanence of
spiritual existence, apart altogether from
Divine revelation, that the inhabi'ants of
ancient Greece noted it well and left a re-
miniscence of the fact in their daily speech.
Although theirs was the most copious and
expressive of all languages, the Greeks
used but one word—Psyche—forthe human
soul and the butterfly, to mark their belief
that for both there arose a higher life
through seeming death.
Perhaps some will endeavour to off-set
this argument by producing analogies of an
opposite kind. While it is admitted that
we see many instances of preservation, it
may he alleged that we observe far more of
destruction. But what if it be answered,
that we notice only seeming or apparent,
hut never any real or literal destruction.
In one of our noble hymns, which we sing
in praise of the Deity, there occurs this re-
markable line :
He can create and He destroy.
Everybody understands at once, that to
create is proper to God alone, but some
may think to destroy is within the power
of any ordinary man. Taken in a loose and
popular sense, this is no doubt true ; but,
in the strict and literal fact, to put even a
single speck of matter out of existence, is
no more within the power of man than is
the ability to create. And it must be ad-
mitted further, that there is not a shadow
of proof to ground the belief that a single
atom has ever been annihilated either by
human or Divine power. The eye, indeed.


is continually deceived by appearances •and
disappearances in the operations of nature
and art —ceaseless change of form, a per-
petual dissolution of component elements,
and a consequent distribution of parts ; but
never anything more. We lay a block of
wood upon the blazing fire, and it is con-
sumed forthwith. What then has hap-
pened ? The article has, indeed, disap-
peared and ceased to exist under the form
of a piece of wood ; but not one particle of
its essence has been driven out of being.
One portion has ascended in smoke, another
has radiated into the air as heat, something
has escaped unperceived in the form of gas,
and a very considerable residue may be
found in the ashes upon the hearth. Had
we the necessary appliances to gather to-
gether all these dissevered and dispersed
elements, and could we weigh them in a
balance, they would form an exact equi-
valent to the original block of wood.
This line of reasoning may be extended
witn equal justice to man’s mortal body.
At the beginning it was framed from
earthly materials— ‘ God formed man of
the dust of the ground.” It is supported
by aliment derived from the soil. And
after burial it dissolves and re-unites with
its kindred elements. Not one particle
passes out of existence. Herein lies the
possibility of a literal resurrection for the
body, as distinguished from a new creation.
Hence we ape led to the inevitable conclu-
sion, that annihilation, perishing, or pas-
sing out of existence, are so many imagi-
nary names for a fancied something which
never happens in the material world. This
is one side of the analogy. Are we not,
perforce, led on to the other and necessi-
tated to affirm, that no more is there anni-
hilation for the soul in the article of death ?
Nor is this all. By the recent triumphs
of science we are enabled to push this argu-
ment one step farther than was possible for
our fathers. What has just been affirmed
of the matter of the universe is equally
applicable to its subtle forces, which, for so
many ages, eluded the keenest glance of the
human mind. Force, like matter, while
continually changing its form, remains
always the same in amount. The modern
doctrine, universally received under the
name of the conservation of energy, or the
transmutation of forces, teaches the as-
tounding fact, that not even i.he power put
forth in an impulse is lost, or ceases to exist
after the action is over. Every workman
must have observed that the effect of beat-
ing upon a hard surface is a very per-
ceptible degree of heat in the body which
has received the impacts. This, then, is
tho result. The force which was exerted
in beating upon the bard surface has not
perished; but is transmuted into heat.
What, then, is heat ? According to the
scientific definition, it is simply a mode of
motion. The body, which has received the
blows of the hammer, is composed of atoms;
and these atoms, again, are made up, it is
supposed, of a countless number of still
smaller particles which are called mole-
cules. Science tells us, that the effect of
beating on the body has been to set in
motion the molecules which are contained
in every atom, and now manifest their
activity in the phenomenon which is called
heat. It will thus be seen that the ex-
ternal force, expended on the surface of the
body, is continued within itself where it is
not lost, but broken up into millions of
molecular movements. The sum of the
whole matter is just this, that neither in
the matter or the force of the universe is
there such a thing as ceasing to exist. Is
it not the extreme of boldness, therefore,
for any man to assert that the soul or
spirit of man forms an exception, and the
only one, in the whole realm of nature?
The burden of proof must rest on the ob-
jectors’ own shoulders. It will not do to
say that we do not know spirit so well as
matter, for, the fact is, we know it far
better. The most intimate and direct know-
ledge which man can have is that of him-
self. Of all the truths that we know the
existence of mind is the most certain.
“ Matter,’’says Alger, “is that which proves
itself to spirit by the effects it produces on
spirit. Spirit is that which is its own evi-
dence. The centre of all consciousness in
us is its own proof of its own being, and all
that occurs within it is its own proof, and
is insusceptible of any other demonstra-
tion. Better adopt Berkley’s system
of idealism than that of materialists.
That which appears in consciousness first,
which recurs oftenest, and which persists
longest, is the most valid object of belief.”
It is only putting the preceding argu-
ment in another light to call attention to the
principle of continuity that runs through
all nature ; but a fact of so great impor-
tance deserves to be considered in all its
aspects. We have seen that, in respect of
matter, there is no such thing as destruc-
tion ; but only change into another form,
and so also of force. But this new form
changes again into another, and in this way
the series runs on to infinity. We see link
after link in the chain, but never either of
its ends. This continuity in matter and
force must surely have its analogue in the
spiritual world. On all accounts we are
entitled to presume that the principle of
continuity will bo stronger in mind than in


matter. The idea of greater permanence is
already suggested in the contrast between
the soul and the body. The latter does not
continue the same in respect of its sub-
stance, even to the close of a man’s life.
The matter is in a continual flux, during
which there is a process of integration and
disintegration ever going on. It is calcu-
lated that the entire physical organization,
is renewed every term of seven years.
Hence, it must happen, that a person who
has reached the age of seventy years, will
have had no fewer than ten different bodies.
But has he also had ten souls ? On the
surest of all evidence, he knows he has had
only one. Consciousness tells him and
memory certifies, that he has continued to
be identically the same in childhood, youth,
manhood and age, while undergoing com-
plete changes in his physical structure.
Does not this continuity of the spirit lay a
firm foundation lor the belief, that the last
change, though it removes the whole body
at once, will not involve the destruction of
the soul ?
As showing how the spirit may exist and
act in partial independence of the body, a
few words may be said on the phenomena
of sleep and dreaming. Sleep has been
called the twin brother of death, and the
fancy has the support of outward appear-
ances. The bodily functions, except such
as are purely automatic, are then laid aside,
while the action of the will is also sus-
pended. Yet the soul remains intact and
unimpaired. As if to show that the body
is not a help, but a hindrance, to the highest
exercises of the spirit, its operations are
always more rapid, and sometimes more
productive, in dreams than in the waking
state. The speed of thought is then simply
incalculable, hours being compressed into
moments and years into hours. Mathe-
maticians, who have racked their invention
to no purpose over their problems during
the hours of the day, have sometimes been
surprised to find the mind leap to the solu-
tion during the slumbers of the night. So,
too, has it often been with the highest
flights of literature. Several of the best
minor poems in the English language have
been fashioned and finished in the land of
dreams. Eacts like these go far to sanction
the belief that the body, instead of being
the proper home of the soul, may really be
its prison, the dissolution of which will
bring liberation rather than extinction to
the spirit. *
There still remains one more leading
argument from analogy, which is usually
associated with Hartley, the famous author
of the “ Observations on Man.” As ex-
plained and expanded by Dr. Crombie, it
runs as follows:—“The farther we carry
our researches into the physical and the
moral world, the stronger becomes our con-
viction, that no pure evil exists. Amidst
the numerous pains and sorrows, which we
are doomed to bear, we have every reason
to believe that there is not one which has
not a tendency to improve our nature, and
to make us wiser and better. The bene-
ficial effects of adversity it would be easy
to illustrate by a variety of examples. The
great end of evil seems to be, under the
ordination of Providence, to produce good.
The means may be the occasion of incon-
venience, of pain, or of sorrow, but the
tendency is salutary, and the end generally
beneficial. Apparent exceptions, doubtless,
occur ; but the general constitution, if the
system in which we are placed, warrants
the affirmation, that few, if any, direct or
pure evils exist; and that every pain,
every sorrow, every discord, and every
irregularity, permitted under the Divine
government, tend to the production of
greater harmony, and higher good. It
would be repugnant, then, to the general
plan of the Divine administration, to sup-
pose that the scene of human life should
close with suffering. Such a conclusion is
utterly ivreconcileable with the established
economy of our system, as manifestly ex-
hibiting a subserviency of pain to pleasure
—of evil to good. The dissolution of the
body must be considered as an evil; it is
more or less accompanied with suffering,
corporeal or mental, and sometimes with
both. Now, if it be a general law of our
being, that we be subject to no evil but
what is calculated to produce good, is it
probable that death, which is the last evil
we must bear —an evil from which there is
no escape—a catastrophe bosh morally and
physically painful and afflictive, will issue
in no good, but prove to be a pure, gratui-
tious, and irremediable calamity Fls it
not more probable that, like ad our other
sufferings, it will conduce to our benefit,
and, by a temporary suspension of our ex-
istence, if it is to be suspended, tend ulti-
mately to improve it, and advance us to
higher happiness P This sunposition will
reconcile it with the general plan of the
Divine administration. But, that disorder
and pain should conclude the scene, and
that suffering should be inflicted without
the possibility of producing good, is wholly
irreconcileable with the manifest purpose*
of Deity in the infliction of evil.” This
argument is, no doubt, open to the objec-
tion that death is a penal infliction, origi-
nally pronounced as such, and regularly
occurring as the wages of sin. All this is
true, yet it is of God to bring good out of


evil. It has been so in a marked degree
with the twin curse of labor. Man was
condemned to eat his bread in the sweat of
his face. Yet who can doubt that this
penal sentence has been converted into a
veritable blessing ? It affords occupation
for body and mind; it gives healthful
exercise for all the physical organs; it
creates an appetite for food and provides
food for the appetite. So manifest and so
striking are these advantages that they led
the ancient writers, unblest by revelation,
to frame the adage: ‘ ‘ Labor itself is a
pleasure.” By parity of reason, we are
warranted to make a similar affirmation
regarding death, and we should find it in
our hearts to believe that, to the good, it
comes as a friend in disguise. The fore-
going argument from analogy may, there-
fore, be allowed to remain intact. It is
another line of evidence that goes to show
that death cannot end all.
Such is the argument from analogy with
some of its leading illustrations. It does
not belong to the highest class of evidence,
but it should count for something, and be
allowed a recognised place in a cumulative
proof. The principle on which it rests has
been well expressed by an apocryphal
writer, who said—“ All things are double
and against one another, and God has
made nothing defective.”


LECTURE 111
‘ THE ARGUMENT Pip THE N/TUf[E AND CAPACITIES OF THE SOUL.’
In the Scripture record of the creation of cause of truth that the martyr will brave
man there is a clear distinction made be-
tween the body and the soul, alike in re-
spect of their substance and their origin.
The matter of which the body was formed
is identified with the dust we tread under
foot; but the soul is described as being
the very breath of the living God. The
distinction thus early instituted seems
never to have been altogether lost, for
even the heathen have been accustomed to
regard the human soul as containing some-
thing Divine, and those that taught the
contempt of the body acted professedly in
the interest of the soul. This ethereal
spark, dwelling in a frail tabernacle of
flesh, has secured for itself the study and
admiration of the wise and good in every
age. How have philosophers vied with
each other in exhibiting its Godlike powers,
and how nobly have poets sung the praise
of its imperishable deeds? By this unseen
power have been achieved all those splendid
victories which have adorned humanity
with all that it contains of greatness and
nobility. It is that which links man to
angelic natures, and gives birth to so much
that is Godlike in his desires and his deeds.
Corrupt and depraved, as fallen humanity
certainly is, this Divine spark, shining in
the midst of the darkness, reveals how
great man is even in his ruins. In the
search for knowledge it leads him, as with
enchantment’s spell, “to scorn delights and
live laborious days,’’ being satisfied with
its labor for its reward. It kindles a glow-
ing ardour in the patriot’s breast which
the scaffold or the flames and laugh at the
torments of death. Shall we find it in our
hearts to believe that this spirit, so im-
measurably superior to the body it in-
habits, is equally brief in the span of its
existence, and doomed to perish in the dis-
solution of its integument ? If we do so,
we shall set ourselves in opposition to the
general belief of mankind, and take up an
attitude of defiance to nature’s most
powerful testimony.
For one thing, it is certain that sceptics
have never brought forward the shadow of
a proof, that the soul is mortal. But, on
the other hand, the supposition of its im-
mortality does not contradict any other
known principle; but accords perfectly
with all other notions which are most
natural. Disbelief in its future existence
has evidently sprung out of the observed
fact of the death of the body. But the
reasoning proceeds on a false analogy, for
the two substances are diametrically op-
posite. Even were both material in their
constitution, it would not necessarily follow
that the soul ceases to exist with the dis-
solution of the body, for not even matter
is capable of perishing. Materialism, as
applied to the soul, is a doctrine which is
discredited upon every rational considera-
tion. How little foundation it has in reason,
may be guessed from the diverse and con-
tradictory opinions men have held regard-
ing the sort of material of which the soul is
composed. One has declared it to be fire,
a second water, a third air, a fourth blood.
carries him into the field of battle, and a fifth a peculiar concourse of atoms, and a
suffers him not to feel the mortal wound sixth has believed it to be formed of an
till life is ebbing away with his precious unknown substance altogether different
blood. It binds the heart so firm to the from everything else. Materialism, in any


form, involves the absurdity of ascribing
o matter the power of thinking—a contra-
iiction which has been well described as
inthinkable to a rational mind. It makes
;he brain the very soul itself, instead of
regarding it as the organ of the soul in this
mundane state, which is as absurd as to
iffirm that the eye or a telescope is that
which sees in and of itself. If the inquiry
concerning the nature of the soul is con-
ducted on a rational method of induction, it
will be impossible to resist the conclusion
diatthe two essences are radically diverse,
[t is an acknowledged fact that we know
mbstances only by their qualities or pro-
aerties, and on these data conjecture what
s behind them. But nothing can be more
anlike than the properties of matter—ex-
>nsion, form, weight, color, inertia, and
.he like ; and those of mind, understanding,
'eflection, judgment, imagination, memory
ind feeling. What can be more prepos-
;erous than the assertion that these utterly
liverse properties have one and the same
substratum, and are only different mani-
'estations of matter? The only alternative
o this absurd conclusion is the imma-
eriality of the soul, in the sense of being
i pure spirit. Here, then, we are furnished
vith a solid foundation on which to erect
m indefeasible argument. Death, so far
is we know, is only dissolution. But
lothing can be dissolve!, unless it be com-
>ound in its nature, for disintegration is
mt the separation of the parts which make
ip the whole. The soul, then, being im-
uaterial is but one unit, simple, uucom-
lounded, and, therefore, indiscerptible, or
ncapable of dissolution, which would be to
he spirit what death is to the body. This
octrine of the immateriality, indiscerpti-
ility, and consequent immortality of the
oul is by no means a refinement of modern
hilosophy ; but was perceived and firmly
rasped, with all its issues, by the wisest
ien of the ancient world, Cicero says :
1 In our knowledge of the soul, unless we
re grossly ignorant of natural philosophy,
re cannot but be satisfied that it hasnoth-
ig but what is simple, unmixed, uncom-
ouuded and single; and if this is ad-
litted, then it cannot be separated, nor
ivided, nor dispersed, nor parted, and,
lerofore, it cannot perish ; for to perish
nplies a parting asunder, a division, a
isunion of those parts which, whilst it
ibsisted, were held together by some
ond, and it was because he was influenced
y these and similar reasons that Socrates
either looked out anybody to plead for
im when he was accused, nor begged any
,vour from his judges, but maintained a
tanly freedom, which was the effect not
of pride, but of the true greatness of his
soul ; and, on the last day of his life, he
held a long discourse on this subject; and
a few days before, when he might have
been easily freed from his confinement, he
refused to be so, and when he had almost
actually hold of the deadly cup, he spoke
with the air of a man not forced to die, but
ascending into heaven,”
Another argument to the same purpose
lies in the line of men’s hopes and fears re-
garding the future. A shrinking from anni-
hilation, a fear of death, a love of life, and
a desire of immortality are matters of every
day observation. There is a mixture of all
these experiences in the well-known soli-
loquy of Cato :
” Ii must be so—Plato thou reasonest well—
Else whence this pleasing hope, this fond
desire,
This longing after immortality ?
Or, whence this secret dread and inward
horror
Of falling into nought ? Why shrinks the soul
Back on herself, and startles at destruction ?
! Tis the divinity that stirs within us :
And intimates eternity to man.”
Annihilation being unknown in nature,
it is no wonder that it is contemplated with
horror by the conscious spirit. To have
the light of existence quenched in eternal
darkness, must be the consummation of all
losses. It is only when men have, by their
evil deeds, rendered life an intolerable
misery, and yet fear a direful punishment
after death, that they can reconcile them-
selves to the thought of an absolute cessa-
tion of being. But this unnatural inver-
sion of a once healthy mind, only shows
how natural is the hope of immortality to
man in his normal condition. To the same
purpose is the instinctive recoil from death,
to overcome which is usually the last con-
quest of the Christian’s faith. This un-
willingness to die is not to be accounted
for by “the dread of something after
death,” nor by the pains of death itself;
but rather by the inborn sentiment of im-
mortality which was concreated with man.
Another phase in which this instinct mani-
fests itself is the love of life, and, in ordin-
ary circumstances, a clinging to it at all
hazards. Tor once the father of lies gave
expression to a general truth (exceptions
apart) when he said : “ All that a man hath
will he give for his life.” Milton was going
only a little beyond the mark when he
wrote:
“ For who would lose,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being?”
This solemnizing reflection is the under-
tone ( that runs through the whole of
Gray’s elegy written in a country church-
yard. The poem is unique in the English


language, and its subdued melancholy
finds an echo in every heart. The whole
of the elegy on its first appearance was
read by General Wolfe to his officers on
the eve of the storming of Quebec; to
which he added the remark : “ 1 would
rather be the author of that poem than
take Quebec to-morrow.’' The general did
take that city on the morrow, but the price
he paid was his own life’s blood. In one
beautiful stanza the poet has touched,
with a tender hand, this love of life which
is so closely allied with the hope of immor-
tality :
“ For who, to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing, anxious being e’er resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing, lingering look
behind.”
It has often been said that the love of
life and the desire of immortality afford no
proof that the soul is imperishable, any
more than that the desire of wealth proves
that a man will be rich. But the two rest
on very different foundations. The love of
money is wholly fictitious, and takes its
place among a group of acquired desires
which are continually multiplying with
the refinements of civilisation. In contra-
distinction from all these, the longing for
immortality justifies itself as one of the
native instincts of the heart. It has its
root far down in the human constitution.
Young, in his “ Night Thoughts,” has ex-
pressed this truth with his usual vigour of
poetic style :
” Who reads his bosom, reads immortal life ,
Or, nature, there, imposirgon her sons,
Has written fables ; man was made a lie.”
Here, then, is a genuine instinct, in the
form of a craving after immortality, which
has been implanted in the human breast
by the All-wise Creator. This desire ab-
solutely refuses to be suppressed ; and if
one attempt to destroy it as a hope, there
is great probability of its springing up as a
fear. This aspiration is so universal in its
diffusion, and so constant in its operation,
as to entitle it to take rank among the
most inveterate propensities of human
nature. It is as much a part of our con-
stitution as the appetite for food or the
thirst for drink. In this connection it
comes in as a strong argument for man’s
immortality. For all our implanted de-
sires, there are found corresponding grati-
fications. The one meets the other and
satisfies it. In the cases of hunger and
thirst, we find food provided for the former,
and water for the latter. It would be a
reflection on the wisdom of the Creator, if
this provision were lacking; for the im-
planted desire would be worse than use-
less if there were no corresponding object
to meet and satisfy its craving. Yet to
this reflection upon our Maker, one would
be inevitably driven if, for the desire of
immortality, there were no corresponding
future existence.
On other considerations, also, there is
much in our present state of existence to
beget the conviction, that the present is
but a preparation for the future. We are
conscious of possessing faculties now wnich
are susceptible of unlimited improvement.
There is a capacity for progress which the
present life, with its brief term and strai-
tened opportunities, cannot fully satisfy.
Even in those who have made the greatest
advance, it is clearly seen how infinitely
higher attainments might be made, if time
were converted into eternity. As youth is
the season of training for manhood—the
period when habits of industry are formed,
and the faculties disciplined for the duties
and conflicts of after-life, in such a sense
that this preparatory training can be under-
stood only when viewed in the light of what
is to follow; so, likewise, do the facts of
man’s earthly life become intelligible only
when it is contemplated as a school for the
future world. If you remove from consi-
deration the presumption of eternal life, the
present existence becomes a riddle. These
observations hold good of intellectual as
well as of moral qualities. It would surely
be unaccountably strange if our Maker had
implanted a passion for knowledge in our
nature; and that, too, with an unlimited
capacity for improvement, only for the
purpose of extinguishing it in eternal night,
just at the moment when it had reached its
highest development. Had this been so,
God would have “ made all men in vain,”
in a very different sense from that intended
by the inspired Psalmist. It is instructive
in this aspect of the question to compare,
or rather to contrast, the case of the lower
animals. They were designed for this pre-
sent state, and for this alone. For this
reason they are provided with just such
faculties and capacities as are suited to
their actual condition. There is no de-
ficiency, neither is there any superfluity.
If you examine them one by one, you will
find no faculty or capacity that is, or can
be developed, beyond the limit of present
requirements. This fact will be seen to the
best advantage in such animals as are sub-
servient to the wants of man, and were
evidently designed to do him service.
These have been the most gifted in respect
of capacity, some of them seemingly
coming near to the exercise of reason.
But, even so, whatever they do possess is


taxed to the uttermost to answer the end
intended. No man ever yet found the
horse or the dog that possessed one more
faculty or instinct than was necessary for
the purpose for which the animal was de-
signed to serve. How different is it with
man ! Of the great mass of mankind, it is
not too much to affirm, that the thousandth
part of their intellectual power, taking life
as a whole, is not put into requisition. The
potential is always in immense excess of
the actual. In almost every departmeutof
work, do we not find that it is the body
organs which are mainly brought into
operation, and usually in a merely me-
chanical manner ; whilst the intellectual
powers remain in a semi-dormant state P
The present age has shown that the results
of manual industry can be produced always
in greater quantity, and often in better
quality, by unconscious machinery.
What, then, can be the meaning of that
immense residue of intellectual power
which remains in abeyance p We can
hardly err in seeing, in this reserved
power, a connection with a most signifi -
cant principle which Paley has so well
described under the name of prospective
contrivances. It could never be under-
stood why the gums of a sucking child are
filled with rudimentary teeth, on the sup-
position of its remaining always an infant
at its mother’s breast. But when the
child has advanced to maturer years and
requires to masticate the food by which its
life is supported, we then perceive why the
rudiments of teeth should have existed
before being required for actual use. The
two periods of life are now seen to be the
counterparts of each other, and both must
be taken into account before the facts of
either can be correctly understood. If for
these two terms of life we substitute time
and eternity, the same reasoning will hold
equally good. Man has been endowed
with faculties in excess of his present re-
quirements, but they may be useless only
in the same sense that the rudimentary
teeth are so to the sucking child. And
the analogy of nature justifies the conclu-
sion that there is in reserve for him a
higher state of existence in which every
one of them may be called into full exer-
cise and yield perfect enjoyment.
Another point, which has just been
touched,deserves to be considered at greater
length. it is that progressive improve-
ment of the faculties which reaches for-
ward towards perfection, but never attains
it on this side of the grave. Why is it
that man is possessed of ideals which he
never finds it possible to realise, which re-
cede as ho advances, like the horizon before
the traveller, and which, nevertheless,
allure him onward stage after stage ?
What means this laying hold of the
future, this building of hope on the good
time coming, which has given the poet so
good cause to say that:
“ Man never is, but always to be blest.”
If he goes on developing his faculties and
increasing his store of knowledge shall we
say that when they have reached the
highest discipline and made the nearest
approach to perfection, just then utter ex-
tinction shall supervene ? The poet
Thomson has put the case as applied to
Sir Isaac Newton in the following lines :
And you, ye hopeless, gloomy-minded tribe,
You, at who, unconscious of those nobler
flights
That reach impatient immortal life,
Against the piime endearing privilege
Of being dare contend, say, can a soul
Of such extensive, deep, tremendous
powers,
Enlarging still, be but a finer breath
Of spirits dancing through their tribes
awhile,
And then forever lost in vacant air.”
The argument of immortality which is
begotten of these facts has been vigorously
urged by Addison in one of his delightful
papers in the Spectator, —“ How can it
enter the thoughts of men,” says this
elegant writer, “ that the soul which is
capable of such immense perfections and
of receiving new improvements to all
eternity, shall fall away into nothing
almost as soon as it is created ? Are such
abilities made for no purpose P A brute
arrives at a point of perfection that it can
never pass ; in a few years it has all the
endowments it is capable of; and were it
to live ten thousand more, would be the
same as at present. Were a human soul
thus at a stand in her accomplishments,
were her faculties to be full blown and in-
capable of further enlargement, we might
imagine it could fall away insensibly,
and drop at once into a state of annihila-
tion. But can we believe a thinking be-
ing that is in a perpetual progress of im-
provements and travelling on from per-
fection to perfection, after having just
looked abroad into the works of its
Creator, and made a few discoveries of
His infinite goodness, wisdom, and power
must perish at her first setting out, and at
the very beginning of her inquiries ? ”
This argument derived from the unlimited
progress of the human faculties is most
frequently assailed by denying the fact.
It is urged that the faculties of the mind
wane as old age approaches, that the
senses lose their acuteness, that the memory


becomes enfeebled, and that the whole in-
tellect falls into decrepitude. To a large
extent this apparent decay must be ad-
mitted. A conspicuous case is that of
Newton who was unable, in advanced age,
to go through those very problems, to the
solution of which he had shown the way to
his contemporaries when in the vigour of
his manhood. But something must be
allowed for the intimate connection of the
mind with the body, and the degree of de-
pendence which the spirit bears to matter
in its embodied state. But whilst this
acknowledgement of decay is made regard-
ing the intellectual powers in connection
with their material framework, full justice
should be given to the fact that the moral
element in man is far more noble even
than the intellectual; and that the affec-
tion of the heart show no symptons of de-
cay even to the last hour of this present
life, for this reason, probably, that they
are less dependent upon the material
organisation. This latter phase of the
question has been earnestly pressed by Dr.
Crombie : —“Our mental energies,” says
he, “it is confessed, are very generally
impaired as the body decays ; but our
moral susceptibilities and powers suffer no
declension by age; but, on the contrary,
continue in full vigor, to the close of a
lengthened existence. Our devotional
feelings are improved by years. It is
when the fever of passion subsides, the
fascinations of pleasure are past, and the
vanities of life cease to interest, that
the soul, as if emancipated from the do-
minion of sense, fixes its desires and hopes
on suhlimer objects, and delights to com-
mune with the adorable Author of its
being. It is then that piety warms the
heart with a purer, if not more ardent,
flame. It is then man feels it to be his
highest happiness to contemplate the works
and ways of God, to review with gratitude
the numerous testimonies of His parental
care in the long period of years past, and
to repose with humble confidence in His
favour and protection, in what remains of
years to come. While engaged in the
pursuits of active life, the milder affections
of our nature are checked by the jealousies,
the rivalries, the contentions, and wrongs
to which the best of men are liable. Age
withdraws us from the agitations of the
world; the turbulent passions are less
frequently excited ; and our dispositions to
cherish the peaceable and benevolent affec-
lions of our nature is progressively
strengthened. Experience, also, has
taught us wherein true enjoyment consists.
It is thus we learn that true knowledge is
wisdom, that wisdom is viitue, and
virtue happiness. Age may blunt
our perception, impair our memory, subdue
the imagination, and weaken the under-
standing ; but it opposes no bar to our im-
provement in virtue. To the pious and
benevolent affections of our nature, which
are the brightest ornaments of human
character, and permanent sources of the
purest gratification, the decay of our cor-
poreal frame prescribes no limit. We find
the love of the husband, the affection of
the parent, the sympathy of the friend,
gratitude to benefactors, placability to
enemies, and charity towards all men, dis-
playing themselves in the extremity of age
as powerfully as in earlier years. Now, it
is not knowledge, but piety and virtue
which are the chief ends of man, and in
these we seem susceptible of indefinite im-
provement. And it is a fact worthy of our
attention, and bearing closely on the pre-
sent argument, that, while animal appetite
is paued by indulgence, and ceases entirely
when its end is answered the pious and
benevolent are never satiated ; the delights
accompanying them never cloy ; they seem
intended to be immortal. If these affec-
tions, then, suffer no decay with the cor-
poreal infirmities of years and the declen-
sion of our intellectual powers, but, ou the
contrary, seem capable of increasing re-
finement ; it would appear a probable con-
clusion, that they would not have been
rendered susceptible of attaining higher
perfection if this were to be the only theatre
for their exercise; “Love never faileth ;
but whether there be prophecies, they
shall fail; whether there be tongues, they
shall cease ; whether there be knowledge,
it shall vanish awaj'.”


Among the Apostles of our Lord Jesus
Christ there was one who has gained for all
time a most unenviable notoriety. He was
duly called to the Apostolic office and num-
bered with the twelve. For the space of
three years he had been favored with the
blessed fellowship of the Saviour of the
world, and had listened to the gracious
words that proceeded out of His mouth. A
special honour had been assigned him, for he
w 7 as entrusted with the common purse of the
Apostolic company. Yet all these privi-
leges and all this training ripened into
black ingratitude, and culminated in base
treachery From that very feast which the
Saviour instituted in commemoration of
His unchangeable love, Judas went forth
and sold his Master for the p ice of a slave.
To make sure that the right person would
be seized, he proffered to give a sign of re-
cognition, and that sign was a kiss.
Now let us suppose this conduct of Judas
Iscariot to be simply related in plain
language, for the first time, to any sane
man, and let him be required to say whe-
ther he could pronounce an opinion upon
the action as right or wrong. We venture
to assert, that there is not to be found even
a naked savage, who would not treat such
a question as an insult to his capacity of
discernment. Be who he may, he would to
a certainty employ the most reproachful
terms in his language to express his moral
indignation against so vile an act of trea-
chery.
There is, therefore, a faculty in man by
virtue of which the mind decides imme-
diately, intuitively, and instinctively on
the moral quality of an action. The soul
possesses within itself a criterion of right
and wrong by which it tries all actions, and
LECTURE iv.
“The Witness of Conscience.”
estimates their moral worth. This faculty
has received the name of the conscience, be-
cause it is conscious of a conjunct or simul-
taneous knowledge, both of a law within
and an action without the mind. It is not
to be confounded with the reason or the
understanding, although many wise men
have fallen into this mistake. The con-
science is one of the original principles of
our mental constitution, created in the first
man and ever since inborn in ah his des-
cendants. Of a certainty it is not the child
of custom; neither is it implanted by educa-
tion, for we s e how the youngest, before
they can judge of anything else, will cor-
rectly distinguish between right and wrong.
Being thus a natural principle, we shall
also expect ic to be universal in its opera-
tion, and so to prevail, with more ©r less
inciden'al variation, among all the nations
of the earth. Those who have been long
subject to the quickening influence of a
healthy moral discipline, may reasonably
be expected to exhibit its actings in a
higher degree of development ; but we do
not find it altogether wanting in the lowest
barbarians. Human language, one of the
most trustworthy of all witnesses, puts in
very valuable evidence here ; for in every
dialect we meet with such words as ‘ought,’
‘ duty,’ ‘ moral obligation,’ ‘ desert,’ ‘ guilt’
and ‘ remorse.’ But ideas always exist
before the words which are formed to
express them. Men are averse to frame
new terms except under the pressure of
necessity ; and then only for the purpose
of expressing the thoughts that are strug-
gling in the mind for birth. The use of
such words in all languages is, therefore,
conclusive evidence that the notions of
merit and element, as generated by the


conscience, are common to all mankind.
On this aspect of the question we cannot
do better than quote the words of Cicero,
the great Roman moralist. “ Right rea-
son,” says he, meaning the conscience, “ is
itself a law congenial to (he feelings of
nature, diffused among all men, uniform,
eternal, calling us imperiously to our duty,
and peremptorily prohibiting every viola-
tion of it. Nor does it speak one language
at Rome and another at Athens, varying
from place to place and time to time ; but
it addresses itself to all nations, and to all
ages, deriving its authority from the
common sove/eign of the universe, and
carrying home its sanctions to every breast
by the inevitable punishment which it
inflicts on transgressors.”
The only plausible objections which have
been offered against the universality of
conscience are found in the apparent diver-
sities of moral sentiments which have pre-
vailed in different nations. But these
variations have often been exaggerated.
At the worst, we do not observe a failure
to discern a moral principle, or a set pur-
pose to frustrate its obligation. It is
rather a temporary aberration caused by
another object of desire which has obtained
an undue ascendancy. If the Spartans
legalised theft on the part of their boys,
under certain conditions, it was owing to
the fact that this military state put so high
a value on youthful dexterity as to be
willing to submit to the loss of a portion
of its effects as the price of obtaining this
advantage. If Greek and Roman parents
exposed their weakly offspring to perish,
or to be devoured by wild beasts, it was
still from a principle of love rather than
cruelty, for it was believed that such chil-
dren would have to suffer a life-long misery
in the struggle for existence. If the Hin-
dus lay down their decrepit parents to die
on the banks of the Ganges, it is not done
from the absence of filial affection, but
with a view to deliver them from the in-
creasing infirmities of age, and so hasten
their entrance upon a state of future bles-
sedness. In all doubtful cases some allow-
ance should be made for changing times
and circumstances, and also for the neces-
sity for enlightening and training this
faculty; but after every legitimate con-
cession is made, the great facts of con-
science remain intact all the world over.
This principle which the Creator has
implanted in our nature, in a way never to
be completely eradicated, reveals itself in
our experience under various aspects and
offices. It is only by examining these in
detail that we can arrive at a competent
understanding of the nature and signiti
cance of the moral faculty. In one of iti
most common manifestations it is declarec
to be a law—“ For the Gentiles,” says *th<
Apostle Paul, “ which have not the law
do by nature the things contained in tht
law, these having not the law are a lawuntc
themselves, which show the works of th«
law written in their hearts.” Ttie meaning
evidently is that, whether they followed il
or not, the Gentiles, who were without a
written revelation, possessed within theii
own breasts guide sufficient to direct them
to chose the good and refuse the evil. This
na'ive law within is described as corres-
ponding substantially to the written law
without ; for they are said to show the
works of the law written in their hearts.
This law is nothing else than the will of
God engraven on the mind of man, so as to
enable him to judge spontaneously con-
cerning the moral quality of any action,
whether performed by himself or others.
It is antecedent to revelation, which as-
sumes its existence and appeals to its
sanction. Even when a command is given,
there is a reference always implied and
sometimes expressed, to this inward law of
right and wrong w ritten upon the heart.
The allusion is found where it might be
least expected, as when children are ad-
dressed in these words—“ Children, obey
your parents in the Lord, for this is right,”
In expostulations and complaints, also, an
appeal in the same direction is by no means
uncommon—“ O inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, be-
twixt me and my vineyard.” Hence it
will be seen how fully the sacred Scrip-
tures recognise this remarkable faculty of
the human mind. The conscience, more-
over, is also entitled to be regarded as a
sense, by which is meant that it possesses
the power of perceiving the distinction be-
tween right and wrong by direct intuition,
and for this reason it has received the name
of the “ moral sense.” Thus when we ex-
ercise the sense of taste, we perceive sweet
and bitter as qualities in bodies without
any formal process of reasoning ; so when
actions are submitted to the moral sense,
there is a direct and immediate perception
of their character as good or bad. Herein
consists its surpassing value, for it is not
only ever present in the human breast—
which is of itself a matter of immense im-
portance —but it is at the same time a
principle of easy and certain application.
It is for this reason that we often meet
with men who possess little argumentative
ability, but yet give evidence of a very
keen and correct estimate of the moral


worth of their own and other men’s con-
duct. The conscience, still further, is to
be regarded in the character of a judge .
It acts as the deputy of a higher authority,
and so condemns or acquits, according to
the powers with which it is invested
and as the necessity of the case
demands. Even in circumstances where
it cannot enforce its sentence,
it none the less goes on to pronounce
judgment. Hence St. Paul affirms
regarding the Gentiles of the old world,
that in all their conduct, their thoughts, or
judgments of conscience, either accused or
excused them. The conscience, once more,
acts the part of its own executioner. It
inflicts its own sentence with more or less
effect, as the circumstances may determine.
With one hand it holds forth a reward to
the virtuous ; but, in the other, it carries a
scourge wherewith to lash the transgressor.
On the performance of an action which is
morally good, the mind is filled with an
indescribable satisfaction, a kind of
heavenly tranquillity which forms the chief
ingredient in the happiness of a virtuous
man. But this same executioner of the
judgments of conscience pursues the evil-
doer to the most distant lands, haunting
his mind with such appalling terrors as
render life a burden too heavy to be borne.
It is by no means uncommon for an out-
raged conscience to deliver up the trans-
gressor to the hands of justice, after he
had escaped the vigilance of his fellow-
men and had gone far beyond their reach.
Even when there was an absolute certainty
of the dungeon or the scaffold, this right-
eous power within the breast has com-
pelled some of the most depraved of men to
deliver themselves up to the ministers of
vengeance. If any one should think this
power of conscience to he largely due to
the Christian influences with which modern
society is leavened in all civilised countries,
he would be undeceived by the perusal of
what heathen moralists have written of
their own times. The following words
from Seneca will illustrate this point;
“ Wickedness,” says he, “ may escape the
law, but not the conscience. For a private
conviction is the first and greatest pun-
ishment of offenders ; so that sin plagues
itself, and (he fear of vengeance pursues
even those that escape its stroke. It were
ill for good men that iniquity may so easily
evade the law, the judge, and the execu-
tioner, if nature had not set up torments
and gibbets in the consciences of trans-
gressors. He that is guilty lives in perpetual
terror, and v hile he expects to be punished
punishes himself ; and whosoever deserves
it expects it. What if he be not detected ?
He is still in apprehension that he may be
so. His sleep is painful and never secure ;
and he cannot speak of another man’s
wickedness without thinking of his own.”
Let us next inquire what relation the con-
science sustains to the other faculties of the
human constitution. Being, as already
noticed, both a law and a judge, its place,
if it has any, must be superior to all the
rest, for, were it otherwise, it would be a
means without an end. If we examine, in
succession, the other principles of our
nature, we shall find that each has some
peculiar object which it seeks to attain and
so fulfils its purpose. Thus hunger craves
after food ; the benevolent affections seek
the well-being of the persons beloved ; and
the desire of society impels us to the
fellowship of our kind. But the proper
object of the conscience is superintendence
and the government of the other faculties.
It claims, in the name of its Author, a right
to control all the powers of the under-
standing, all the affections of the heart, and
all the appetites of the body. Nothing
short of absolute supremacy will satisfy
the purpose for which it was implanted in
man. As for the other propensities, a
person may sometimes be under the sway
of one, and sometimes of another, as cir-
cumstances may rule, but it is just the
peculiarity of conscience, that a man must
always be under its influence in a supreme
degree. The very essence of conscience is
sovereignty. If this supremacy is cur-
tailed, partially or temporally, this faculty
is just so far frustrated in the purpose for
which it was appointed. The only right-
ful position it can hold in the human breast
is the place of command. This truth has
been forth by Dr. Chalmers with his
usual eloquence and perspicacity—“ By
the supremacy of conscience,” says he “we
affirm a truth which respects not the
nature of virtue, but the nature of man.
It is, that in every breast there is a faculty
—not it may be having the actual power,
but having the just and rightful preten-
sion to sit as judge and master over the
whole of human conduct. Other propen-
sities may have too much sway, but the
moral propensity, if I mav so term it,
never can, for to have the presiding sway
in all our concerns is just that which pro-
perly and legitimately belongs to it. A
man under anger may be too strongly
prompted to deeds of retaliation, or under
sensuality be too strongly prompted to in-
dulgence, or under avarice be too closely


addicted to the pursuit of wealth, or even
under friendship be too strongly inclined
to partiality, but he never can, under con-
science, be too strongly inclined to be as
he ought and to do as he ought. We may
say of a watch, that its mainspring is too
powerful, but we would never say that its
regulator is too powerful. We may com-
plain of each of its other parts that it has
too much power over the rest, but not that
the part whose office it is to regulate and
fix the rate of going has too much influence.
And just as a watch cannot move too re-
gularly, man cannot walk too conscien-
tiously, The one cannot too much obey its
regulator, nor the other too much obey his
conscience. In other words, conscience is
the rightful sovereign in man, and if any
other, in the character of a ruling passion,
be the actual sovereign, it is a usurper.
In the former case the mind is felt to be
in its proper and well-conditioned state; in
the latter case it is felt to be in a state of
anarchy. Yet even in that anarchy con-
science, though despoiled of its authority,
still lifts its remonstrating claims. Though
deprived of its rights it still continues to
assert them. Long after being stripped
of its dominion over man, it has its dwell-
ing-place In his bosom ; and even when in
practice most disregarded, then it makes
itself to be felt and heard.”
Such, then, is a brief account of the con-
science considered in its nature, its office,
and the relation it bears to the other prin-
ciples of our constitution. It is now time
to turn our attention to the direct infer-
ences which are clearly deducible from this
master faculty. Those who deny the exis-
tence of God find here a fatal stumbling-
block. That there should appear in the
human breast, with the dawn of conscious-
ness, a ruling power in the name of recti-
tude —a power which not even a long life of
profligacy is able w holly to destroy—can
assuredly be accounted for in no other way
than upon the assumption of an Almighty
Creator, who placed it there as a witness
for Himself. Strong as the argument is
from external nature, there can be little
doubt that the conscience first suggests to
the mind the being of God, which idea is
afterwards strengthened and extended by
thejobservation of design in creation. It is
this faculty that explains the fact, that a
belief in the existence of God is innate in
the human mind. Were it not so, there is
great reason to fear that all the natural
fight, of which the world is so full, would
iail to convince men of this truth, especially
ethical bearings; just because he
would then be without a moral basi« bn
which to raise the superstructure. The
special value, however, of the argument
from man’s moral nature is the testimony
it affords for the moral character of the
Deity. Strong as it undoubtedly is for
asserting His natural existence, as the
Author of man’s constitution, it is vastly
more powerful in establishing the fact that
He is a God of righteousness, goodness,
and truth. Had He been of a contrary
character, with reverence be it spoken, can
any sane man believe that He would have
placed this master faculty in the human
breast to impel men to the practice of
righteousness, and afflict them with the
stings and arrows of an evil con-
science, as often as they did wrong ? The
reverse of this supposition holds good even
in this lower world. Is it wicked and de-
praved men who labor to promote the cause
of religion and morality ? Do infidels send
Christian Missions to the heathen ? Is it
drunkards who travel over the country
lecturing on the duty of temperance, and
the sin of drunkenness P Is it murderers
who endow our hospitals and submit to
hardship for the relief of suffering
humanity? Assuredly no. As certainly
as a tree is known by its fruit, so is char-
acter revealed in conduct. If a traveller
were to enter a province of a great empire,
which is ruled by a viceroy, exercising a
strictly delegated authority, he would have
no difficulty in ascertaining the character
of the absent sovereign from a study of the
actions of the deputy, the spirit of the laws,
and the mode of government. These things
would show unmistakably whether the
supreme ruler was an autocrat or a con-
stitutional monarch—a cruel tyrant or the
father of bis people. It would be a simple
process of reasoning from the effect to the
cause, which of all kinds of argumentation
is the least exposed to fallacy. From the
acknowledged fact, that all the decisions
and acts of conscience are on the side of
righteousness, and in direct opposition to
whatever is wrong, we are compelled, even
by common sense, to ascribe the same
qualities to its Almighty Author. If it had
been otherwise He would have committed
the greatest act of folly the world has ever
seen. For an unrighteous being to have
appointed as his deputy such a power of
righteousness, as the conscience is acknowl-
edged to be, would have been to defeat
His purpose, and bring to pass that which
is its direct antagonist. If he who is a
friend to vice had put within the human
breast the best advocate that virtue ha&


ever known, for the purpose of being his
viceregent, he would have inscribed his
own condemnation on the very crown of all
his mundane works.
The consequences which follow obedience
or disobedience to the voice of conscience
are of the utmost importance in our present
conmection, as clearly involving a system of
rewards which cannot be confined to this
present world, or limited to the brief term
of human life. What we discern in this
present state is only their beginnings, and
these are very manifest. Obedience to this
voice of God within the breast, is clearly
followed by health and soundness of body,
unless there be some predisposing cause
working in a contrary direction ; whilst,
on the other hand, disregard to its warn-
ings—which just means a life of licentious-
ness —most surely leads to a broken con-
stitution and an untimely grave. Con-
science, being its own executioner, is able,
in large measure, to inflict its penalties on
the body as well as the spirit. Who are
those honored men who come to the grave
in a full age with a hoary head tor a crown
of glory ? Hardly any but those, that in
obedience to the divine voice within, have
walked in the path of virtue and shunned
evil ways. But vicious men, the drunk-
ards and the profligates of society, do not,
as a rule, live half their days. No
insurance office would guarantee the
life of -a vicious man for it
knows from the testimony of experience,
that the evil-doer has but a short course
to run. The foregoing facts point unmis-
takably to a moral government which God
exercises over man, and yet the system is
incomplete, and the purpose often
frustrated, if it is measured only by this
present state. Sometimes the wicked live
prosperously in this world and die with no
bands in their death. When life closes, as
Dr. Chalmers said, it leaves many “ un-
settled questions ” between God and the
soul.
We turn, then, to another operation of
conscience in which it bears unmistakeable
witness to a future state of retribution.
This state of mind is called remorse. The
most fearful forebodings then harass the
soul. This terrible agony of the soul is
often strongest in the hour of death; when
there is nothing to be feared from this
present world. The instances which occur
to the mind are innumerable. Belshazzar’s
terror is graphically described in the Book
of Daniel, where it is made manifest that
his alarm could not have proceeded from
the fear of man, for he was then surrounded
by his defenders, not from the writing on
the wall, for he was ignorant of its mean-
ing until the Hebrew prophet gave the
interpretation. His mental agony could
have arisen from nothing else than a fore-
boding of future retribution. The
Emperor Tiberius confessed that tbe
distress of mind, which he is well-known to
have endured, was the consequence of his
own wickedness. Antiochus Epiphanes
was haunted with spectres during his last
illness, and no wonder, for he was the
worst of all men. It is related that
Charles the Ninth of France, who ordered
the massacre of St. Bartholomew, and
assisted in that diabolical tragedy, that
ever afterwards he had a fierceness in his
looks and a color in his cheeks which he
never had before ; that he slept little and
never soundly, and waked frequently in
great agonies, requiring soft music to com-
pose him to rest; and at length died of a
lingering disorder after having undergone
the most exquisite torments both of body
and mind. Such pangs of conscience are
the most unbearable of all agonies which a
human being can suffer on this side of the
grave. An English poet, who could speak
from experience only too well, has said :
“ Trust me, no tortures which the poets feign,
Can match the fierce, the unutterable pain
He feels, who, night and day, devoid of rest,
Carries his own accuser in his breast.”
What, then, can be the meaning of all
this mental anguish on the part of evil-
doers in circumstances which place them
far beyond the fear of any punishment that
man can inflict upon them F It can be
nothing else than the dread of woe which
is coming on the soul after the death of the
body. This agony of mind is produced by
the voice of God within summoning the
soul to a future tribunal.
The argument from conscience is greatly
strengthened by this further consideration
that many evil deeds pass without punish-
ment here, but yet cannot be supposed
finally to escape the righteous judgment of
God. The moral government of this world
is so patent a fact that men, in their own
proverbs, have described virtue as its own
reward and vice its own punishment. But,
for all that, moral disorders are subjects of
daily observation, and can be accounted
for only on the supposition of a future
world as the counterpart of this present
state. “ Let us,” says Dr. Blair, “consider
the confused and promiscuous distribution
of good and evil in this life. The enjoy-
ments of the world, such as they are, are
far from being always bestowed on the
virtuous and the worthy. On the contrary,
the bitterest portion is often their lot. Li


the midst of infirmities, diseases, and sor-
rows, they are left to drag their life, while
ease and affluence are allowed to the un-
godly, I must ask if such an arrangement
of things, owing to the ordination, or at
least to the permission of Providence, be
consonant to any ideas we can form of the
wisdom and goodness of a Supreme Euler,
on the supposition of there being no future
state ? But, as soon as the immortality of
the soul and a state of future retribution
are established, all difficulties vanish ; the
mystery is unravelled ; supreme wisdom,
justice, and goodness are discovered to be
concealed only for a little while behind the
curtain. If that curtain were never to be
withdrawn, and immortality never to
appear, the ways of God would be utterly
inexplicable to man. We should be obliged
to conclude that either a God did not exist,
or though He existed, that He was not
possessed of such perfections as we now
ascribe to Him, if, when a worthy and
pious man had spent his whole life in
virtuous deeds, and perhaps had died a
martyr to the cause of religion and truth,
he should, after long and severe sufferings,
1 finally, unrewarded and forgotten;
no attention shown to him by the Almighty;
no building of God erected for him ; no
house eternal prepared in the Heavens ! ”
With the same purpose in view Dr.
Crombie, also, makes the following re-
marks : “ln the general economy of
God’s government, we find, that physical
good and evil are not dispensed with that
discrimination, which we perceive exhi-
bited in the constitution of our moral
nature. To almost every physical evil in-
cident to our condition, the good and the
bad are equally liable. The convulsions of
nature, the devastations of war, the horrors
of famine, the ravages of pestilence, are
calamities in which both are equally in-
volved. From disease and sorrow, and the
pangs of expiring nature, neither is
exempted. But not only are good and bad
men indiscriminately subjected to the same
common calamities, and doomed to share
the same common fate, in respect to phy-
sical evils, but we even find the natural
order of things reversed—the former de-
pressed, the latter exalted; the former
condemned to toil, hunger and disease;
the latter enjoying health, honour, ease,
and affluence. The successful villian rises
to eminence, lives in splendour, and
triumphs in his guilt, while honest poverty
pines in obscurity and dependence, the
oppressor’s victim and the proud man’s
scorn. If we behold numerous examples
of God’s retributive justice, we find many
instances in which the virtuous suffer ‘ for
righteousness sake.’ These are the facts.
From this state of things, then, what con-
clusion are we to draw ? Shall we say
that virtue and vice are, by the pleasures
and pains connected with them, sufficiently
recompensed ? This is not true. There
are cases of sore distress, which the good
man is sometimes doomed to bear, in
which the feeling of self-complacency is
overwhelmed and lost. There are cases
in which the soul, with every conviction of
its innocence, looks forward with terror to
the evils which it must endure. Where is
the natural reward of piety and virtue
when the martyr expires at the stake, or
the patriot falls in resistance to a tyrant’s
rod, and in defence of his country’s free-
dom ? The argument, then, is briefly this :
Either the Deity is not just, or there must
be a future retribution. But justice is a
virtue which belongs even to man ; and to
deny the attribute to Deity is to exalt the
creature above the Creator. God, there-
fore, is just; and if His justice be not fully
manifested here, where our existence may
be only temporary, we must conclude that
the time will come when it will be perfectly
displayed, and when ‘ every man shall re-
ceive according to his works.’” In the
same strain Thomson, the Poet of the
Seasons, concludes the poem on Winter
with the following reflections :
“ The great eternal scheme
Involving all, and in a perfect whole
Uniting, as the prospect wider spread#,
To reason’s eye refined clears up apace.
y e vainly wise 1 ye blind presumptuous ! now.
Confounded in the dust, adore chat Power
And Wisdom oft arraigned ; now see the cause
Why unassuming worth in secret lived,
And died neglected ; why the good man’s
■hare
In life was gall and bitterness of soul ;
Why the lone widow and her orphans pined
In starving solitude—while luxury,
In palaces, lay straining her low thought
To form unreal wants; why heaven born truth,
And moderation fair, wore the red marks
Of superstition’s scourge ; why licensed pain,
That cruel spoiler, that embosomed foe,
Embittered all our bliss. Ye good distressed 1
Ye noble few ! who here unbending stand
Beneath life’s pressure, yet bear up awhile ;
And what your bounded view, which only saw
A little part, deemed evil is no more ;
The storms of wintry time will quickly pass,
And one unbounded spring encircle all,”


LECTURE V
The Scripture Doctrine of Immortality—The
Old Testament.
The English Deists of the eighteenth
century denied that there is any evidence
of a future state in the Old Testament
Scriptures. Upon this presumed absence
of the doctrine of immortality, they
founded an argument against the religious
system given by Moses being from God ;
for it appeared to them unaccountable that,
while the other religions of the world
appealed for theii sanction to reward
and punishment in a future state, it was
precisely that one which claimed to be true
to the exclusion of all the rest, that knew
nothing whatever of this belief. This
attack of the Deists upon the religion of
the Old Testament was met in an extra-
ordinary way by an extraordinary man.
This was the celebrated Dr. Warburton,
Bishop of Gloucester, who came forward
for the defence of religion after a fashion
of his own choosing. He placed himself
unreservedly on the side of the Deists, so
far as concerned their peculiar views
touching the absence of immortality as an
element in the religion given by Moses.
It has never been a strange thing for a
a controversialist to agree, for the time
being, with his opponents, and to grant
their position for the sake of argument, in
order to overthrow their opinion, by show-
ing to what absurd consequences it must
necessarily lead. But the extraordinary
attitude which Warburton took up, was to
agree with the belief of his opponents in
denying the doctrine of a future state, as
revealed in the Mosaic economy ; and then
be proceeded to draw, —not the conclusion
of his opponents that this religion could
not be Diyine,—but that it must be from
God and administered by an extraordinary
Providence, seeing that Moses had been
able to dispense with the promise of re-
ward or the threat of punishment in
another world. No lawgiver within the
whole compass of ancient history had
attempted to go through with his task in
the absence of this adventitious assistance,
and if Moses found himself strong enough
to do so, it could only be through the
power of God, whose servant he was and
whose religion he was commissioned to
promulgate to the Jewish nation. The
great literary work, in which this startling
theory was advocated, bears all the marks
of consummate ability, and in some respects
is an epoch-making book. It bears the sig-
nificant title, “ The Divine Legation of
Moses, demonstrated on the principles of a
religious Deist, from the omission of the
doctrine of a future state of rewards and
punishments in the Jewish dispensation.”
In this curious defence of religion, it is
roundly affirmed, that throughout the
whole Old Testament, from Moses to the
captivity, the Israelites had not the
doctrine of a future state of rewards and
punishments, and that so much as an
intelligible hint of it is not found in the
Mosaic law.
This statement of the question, which is
so flatly negative, could not possibly be
acceptable to the Church. The reasons
which oppose it occur to the mind without
number, and their force is irresistible. We
have seen in a former lecture that a belief
in immortality of some sort, is practically
universal in the human race ; that it has
prevailed in every age ; and that scarcely a
tribe of naked savages could be found who
did not possess a glimmering idea of this
truth. Are we prepared to accept a theory
which tells us that the Jews were, of all
nations, the only one that was destitute of
this instinct. They possessed all the natural


light which was available for the heathen,
and no reason can be imagined for their
turning it to a less profitable account, as
they were in truth reckoned to be the most
religious of all nations. Above all, the
Jews were the divinely appointed cus-
todians of the true religion, for the pur-
pose of preserving it till the fulness of the
time which was eventuate in the calling of
the Gentiles. These things being so, it
seems nothing less than absurd to affirm
that a people so circumstanced and so
highly privileged, formed an exception to
all other races in being left in ignorance of
a future state of existence. There were
some reasons, indeed, in the fundamental
conception of the Mosaic economy which
go to show why this doctrine should not
occupy the same prominence in the Old
Testament that it does in the New ; or
might even be required to recede into the
background while it was still held im-
plicitly as an article of faith. That dis-
pensation was properly called a theocracy,
or a constitution of state in which God
Himself reigned as King, and, so far as the
political order was concerned, dealt
with crimes and criminals according to a
system of temporal rather that of future
rewards and punishments ; while behind
all this there stood God, as God, and His
creatures in all their natural relations to
Him. It is difficult to see how the affairs
of state could have been otherwise adminis-
tered in the case of a people who had just
escaped from slavery, bearing all the de-
grading marks of servitude; and yet in
this condition were separated from the
whole world in order to be the custodians
of the true religion. “God,” says Dean
Graves, “ exercised over the Jews an ex-
traordinary providence, rewarding obedi-
ence and punishing transgression, whether
national or personal, by immediate tem-
poral blessings and calamities ; and this
system was rendered necessary by the in-
tellectual character and peculiar situation
of the Jewish people, as the only mode of
counteracting their carnal dispositions and
idolatrous propensities, the only mode
adapted to their short-sighted views, their
inadequate ideas of the divine perfections,
and their unsteady faith in the divine pro-
mises.” Furthermore, it would necessarily
follow that the realistic manner in which
God was immanent among His chosen
people, dwelling within His temple in the
city of the Great King, would exercise a
repressive influence on their anticipations
of a future state, and moderate such yearn-
ings as were felt by St. Paul who had a
desire to depart and be with Christ which
he declared to be far better. For this
reason there is some force in the paradoxi-
cal remark of the late Dean Stanley :
“ Not for want of religion,” says he, “ but
(if we might use the expression) from ex-
cess of religion, was this void left in the
Jewish mind. The future life was not
denied or contradicted, but it was over-
looked, set aside, over-shadowed by the
consciousness of the living actual presence
of God Himself. That truth, at least in
the limited conceptions of the youthful
nation, was too vast to admit of any rival
truth, however precious. When David or
Hezekiah shrank from the gloomy vacancy
of the grave, it was because they feared
lest, when death closed their eyes in the
present world they should lose their hold
of the divine friend with whose being and
communion the present world had in their
minds been so closely interwoven.”
In opposition to Warburton and the
Deists, it may be safely affirmed, as capable
of easy proof, that the doctrine of immor-
tality and a future state of rewards and
punishments runs the whole length of the
Oil Testament history. It is always im-
plied and often expressed. Like some rivers
it flows sometimes over and sometimes
underneath the surface of its channel, but
in one way or the other, it pursues its
course steadily gathering volume as it
proceeds towards the ocean of complete
illumination, when life and immortality
were brought to light in the gospel of Jesus
Christ. In this gradual advance from the
less to the better known, it shows itself to
be in the line of all the other truths of re-
velation which is of a strictly progressive
character. Herein there lies, if men will
only see it, a marvellous proof of the Divine
origin of the Bible, which consists of sixty-
six different books, written by men of
diverse idiosyncracies, during a long suc-
cession of centuries, in various parts of the
world, and yet contains only one system of
doctrine. Where else can such organic
unity be found in circumstance in which it
was so little possible under any conjecture
of human authorship ?
It must be admitted that, as late as the
time of our Lord Jesus Christ, a mater-
ialistic sect, known as the Sadducees,
denied the doctrine of a future state and
the resurrection of the dead. But it was
never pretended that they had any parent-
age reaching back into the olden times. In
this connection our Lord brought against
them a charge of ignoring, misinterpreting
or perverting the Scriptures which, in this
case, meant tne writings of the Old Testa-
ment. “ Ye err,” said the Great Teacher,


“not knowing the Scriptures,” thereby
affirming that, if they had studied Moses
and the Prophets, even the Sadducees
could not have remained ignorant of the
immortality of the soul and the resurrec-
tion of the body. A distinguished leader
of the opposite sect of the Pharisees de-
clared at Felix’ tribunal how differently he
had been taught in the school of the Old
Testament Scriptures. “ This I confess
unto thee,” said St. Paul, “ that after the
way which they call heresy, so worship I
the God of my fathers, believing all things
which are written in the law and the pro-
phets ; and have hope towards God, which
they themselves also allow, that there shall
be a resurrection of the dead, both of the
just and unjust.”
Besides the numerous passages which,
more or less expressly, assert the doctrine
of immortality, there are also certain
general principles underlying the whole
system which make for the same purpose.
First in time comes the dual nature of man
as was prominently pointed out at his
creation. The narrative in the opening
section of Genesis pauses in its rapid march
to explain, not only the fact but the mode,
of the formation of the first human being.
The Creator formed his body of the dust of
the eartb, and then, as if to mark his dis-
tinction from the rest of the living crea-
tures, breathed into his nostrils the breath
of life, and so man became a living scul.
Evidently this last of God’s works was de-
signed for immortality. Even before death
appeared, it was shown to be no necessary
consequence of protracted life, but very
distinctly the wages of sin. The duality
of man, which was thus clearly intimated
in the notice of his origin, was never lost
sight of in subsequent Scriptures. Again
and again, it was clearly indicated that the
destruction of the one did not imply
the extinction of the other. The
act of dying was often described as
giving up the ghost or committing the
spirit into the hands of God. The expres-
sion originated with the saints of the Old
Testament Church, and from them passed
down into New Testament times, when it
is found to have been used both by our
Lord and the first martyr Stephen. It is
a phrase that could have no meaning at
any time or in any mouth apart from be-
lief in the immortality of the soul. Still
further, in connection with man’s origin it
is to be remembered how emphatically he
is said to have been created in the image
or likeness of God. This reflected resem-
blance is usually supposed to have con-
sisted of several lineaments ; but we can
scarcely err in reckoning immortality as
one of the principal. A person who was
made liable to death at any moment could
not surely be said to bear the image of the
everlasting God. This divine image is
never predicated, as a natural property of
man, after he fell and became subject to the
wages of sin, Eighteous Adam, resplen-
dent in his Maker’s likeness, is called the
Son of God, but fallen Adam expelled
from Paradise, is said to have begotten a
son after his own image.
The circumstances which characterised
the departure of the Old Testament worth-
ies out of this world were not less signi-
ficant of immortality than the way in
which the first man is described as coming
upon the scene. There was one receptacle
awaiting the body and another the soul.
The dust returned to the dust and a grave
was soon prepared. But the soul instead
of perishing in the article of death was
described as descending into sheol. To
confound these two things, the grave and
sheol, was possible only to the most super-
ficial interpretation of Scripture. A very
little penetration suffices to show that
while the body was buried the spirit went
elsewhere. It is to be regretted that this
distinction was not better marked in the
English translation of the Bible. Sheol is
either identified with the grava or the
place of punishment, whereas it does not
usually mean the one or the other ; but
rather the invisible state into which the
soul enters after death. A notable case is
found in that passage in the history of
Jacob where he was delusively informed
of the death of Joseph, The broken-
hearted patriarch on hearing the sad
tidings replied, “ I will go down into the
grave unto my son mourning.” So we
find it rendered, but the word sheol should
have been retained or translated the in-
visible state. That it could not mean the
grave is evident from the consideration
that Joseph was not supposed to be buried
at all. He had no grave, but his body was
believed to have been torn and eaten by
the wild beasts of the desert, Jacob’s de-
sire was not that his body should be laid
in the same grave with his son’s, but that
their souls should be again united and
their converse resumed in the world of
spirits. This incident points to the region
of bliss within the invisible world; its
place of woe, —also described as contained
under sheol—has been graphically pour-
trayed by the prophet Isaiah when nar-
rating the advent of the Xing of Babylon
to that dreary abode. “ Hell,” that is
sheol,” from beneath is moved for thee to


meet thee at thy coming ; it stirreth up
the dead for thee, even all the chief ones
of the earth ; it hath raised up from their
thrones all the kings of the nations.
All they shall speak and say unto thee,
Art thou also become weak as we ? Art
thou become like unto us P” Another
argument to the same effect occurs in the
expression “ gathered to his people,” or
“gathered to his fathers,” which is fre-
quently met with in connection with the
death of Old Testament saints. This is not
to be confounded with the act of burial, for
they are sometimes expressly distinguished
from each other, as in Jeremiah when the
prophet says of the wicked, that they shall
neither “be buried nor gathered.” The
same inference is still more evident from
an examination of particular cases. Several
of the patriarchs are said to have been
gathered to their fathers, who are known
for certain to have been burled elsewhere
than in the family sepulchres. Abraham
was gathered to his people; and yet his
body was buried at Machpelah, while the
bones of his father lay in Mesopotamia.
The same thing is affirmed of Aaron,
though he died on the top of Mount Hor,
where the dust doubtless returned to its
kindred dust. So, also, Moses was gathered
to his people, though he died by the word
of the Lord in the land of Moab ; “ and He
buried him in a valley in the land of Moab,
over against Beth-peor; but no man
knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day,”
It follows from these considerations that
when an Old Testament saint is said to
have been “ gathered to his people,” or
“gathered to his fathers,” these words are
to be understood, not of the body which is
laid in the grave, but of the spirit that
enters into fellowship with glorified ances-
tors, The proof of a belief in the immor-
tality of the soul which these expressions
implied, is too evident to require to be
mentioned.
One of the black arts interdicted by the
law of Moses was necromancy, or divina-
tion by holding intercourse with the spirits
of the dead. There was need of this pro-
hibition, for the ancient Hebrews were
certainly addicted to this bad practice. A
emarkable case occurred on the occasion
of the visit of Saul to the witch of Endor.
The first King of Israel, in the last hours
of his life, sought out a woman that had a
familiar spirit, and asked her to bring up
from the dead whomsoever he would name,
The proposal was made to call up the de-
ceased Samuel, and this was accordingly
done. It is to be carefully noticed, that no
doubt seems to have been entertained on
either side, cs to the possibility of departed
spirits re-appearing upon earth. But this
expectation would have been utterly absurd
had they been of the opinion that men’s
souls perished with their bodies.
The record of two translations from earth
to heaven could not have failed to impress
more deeply upon the Hebrew mind the
existence of a future state, as a reward for
the righteous. “ Enoch walked with God
and he was not, for God took him.” The
translation is thus brought into casual con-
nection with his piety ; his being taken to
be with God in Heaven, is presented as the
consequence of his walking with God here
upon earth. And so, too, with Elijah in
his ascension in a chariot of fire. He was
the most zealous and devoted of all the
servants of God, and a distinction was put
upon him, also, in respect of the manner in
which he was to leave this world. It was
not possible that the destination of these
two eminent servants of God could escape
the earnest attention of the people under
the old covenant, and the fact of a future
state must have been a self-evident con-
clusion.
It is time now to come to the consider-
ation of the more direct texts in which
the doctrine of immortality is either plainly
implied or expressly asserted. If we go
back to the beginning we are confronted
with the promise of a Saviour from sin and
death made even in Paradise. On this
announcement of salvation Dean Graves
comments as follows: “ Whether Adam
could or could not conceive the particular
mode in which it was to be effected, he
certainly cherished a sure hope of future
deliverance. How let me ask, what hope
could he have cherished if he conceived
of death as the final extinction of his
being ? If eternal annihilation was his
own fate, what consolation could he derive
from the promise of a future deliverer ?
What mixture of hope would have re-
mained to sustain the energy of virtue,
had he conceived of that death which in-
evitably awaited him and all his posterity
as a total extinction of being ? I contend,
therefore, that the very history of the
creation and fall of man not only suggested
the idea and gave an intelligible hint of a
future state, but was calculated to inspire
every serious and pious mind with a humble
but assured hope that they were in the
hands of a merciful Judge, who, though he
thought it necessary to remove them from
this world by a corporeal dissolution,
would yet preserve that breath of life, that
living soul which He had Himself inspired,
and which had been formed in the image
of God, from total annihilation and eternal
death,”


An inspired writer tells us that the
patriarchs and the rest of the Old Testa-
ment saints “ all died in faith, not having
received the promises,” says he, “ but
having seen them afar off, and were per-
suaded of them and embraced them, and
confessed that they were strangers and
pilgrims on the earth. For they that say
such things declare plainly that they seek
a country. And truly if they had been
mindful of that country from whence they
came out, they might have had opportunity
to have returned. But now they desire a
better country, that is an heavenly.” Is
this the conduct of men who disbelieve in
a future state of being ? Of Abraham, in
particular, it is witnessed that “ he looked
for a city that hath foundations whose
builder and maker is God.” Concerning
Moses, the record shows that “ he chose
rather to suffer affliction with the people
of God than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season; esteeming the reproach of
Christ greater riches than the treasures in
Egypt, for he had respect unto the recom-
pence of reward.” A very remarkable
case, in which not only the immortality of
the soul, but even the resurrection of the
body are contained implicitly, is the ad-
dress of God to Moses at the bush when
He said I am the God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and of Jacob. That it was so we
have the authority of our Lord Jesus
Christ, During His conflict with the
Sadducees He said : “ As touching the
dead that they rise, have ye not read in the
book of Moses how in the bush God spake
unto him saving, I am the God of Abraham,
and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob F He is not the God of the
dead, but the God of the living.”
That is to say, although the
patriarchs were then long dead and buried,
in respect of all they contained that was
mortal, yet God still spoke of being their
God, which would not have been true had
their souls perished with their bodies.
Hence it followed that their spirits were
then in glory. This reasoning has been
stigmatized by unbelievers as rabbinical
and farfetched. But the objection has been
well met by the late Professor Tayler Lewis
who has remarked as follows: “The
course taken by Christ is very remarkable,
and it is astonishing how little weight it
seems to have had with writers of the War-
burton school. He does not meet the
caviler with the texts we would have ex-
pected. He does not cite such passages as
Psalm xvii, 15, ‘ I shall be satisfied when
I awake in Thy likeness; or Psalm xvi,
10, ‘ Thou wilt not leave my soul in Sheol;
or Psalm Lxxiii, 24, ‘ Thou shalt guide me
with Thy counsel and afterwards receive me
to glory.’ The Sadducee would, probably,
have been prepared with some explanations
of these, such as are now offered by the
modern rationalist. Instead of these our
Saviour quotes one of the most common
passages of the Old Testament: “ lam the
God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob.”
The Sadducee had heard it read hundreds
of times in the Synagogue, but he saw
nothing in it about a future life. It may
have been to him in other respects a favo-
rite passage, Christ’s appendix was as
startling as it was conclusive. “He is not
the God of the dead but of the living.”
God’s covenant with man proves his im-
mortality. He does not thus deal with
beings of a day. He does not thus solemnly
declare Himself the God of things non-
existent. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are
still present realities ; not living in their
children, simply, but rather their children
living in them. The Divine care of a
chosen people, thus continued from gene-
ration to generation, implies a continued
being in the individuals that compose it
and without which the whole series would
have no more spiritual value than any,
linked succession in the animal or vege-
table world. They still live in Him,”
The several striking passages from the
Psalms which bear upon the doctrine of
immortality have been quoted in the pre-
ceding paragraph, and the sense is too plain
to need any comment. We may, therefore,
pass on at once to the remaining portions
of Scripture. The Book of Job, whether
earlier or later in its origin than the Psalms
as a whole, may be here taken into consi-
deration. Immortality is often glanced at
by Job and his counsellors, as in the pas-
sage where it is said of man : “Thou chang-
est his countenance and sendest him
away,” surely meaning to some other place
than the grave. Remarkably express is the
following testimony : “ For I know that my
Redeemer liveth, and that He shall stand
at the latter day upon the earth ; and
though after my skin worms destroy this
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God;
whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes
shall behold, and not another, though my
reins be consumed within me.”
The Book of Ecclesiastes is of great
value for the testimony it offers for the im-
mortality of the soul, as a belief held under
the Old Covenant. The doctrine of a future
retribution forms the great basis, and the
leading truth of the Book of Ecclesiastes.
“ The author’s design,” says Desvoeux, “is
to prove the immortality of the soul, or


rather the necessity of another state after
this life, from such arguments as may be
afforded by reason and experience; and
his whole discourse may be reduced to
three propositions, every one of which,
when properly reflected upon, yields a
strong proof of a future state of rewards
and punishments. First, no labor or trouble
of men in this world can ever be so profit-
able as to produce in tbem a lasting con-
tentment and thorough satisfaction of mind.
Secondly, earthly goods and whatever we
can acquire by our utmost trouble and
labor in this world, are so far from making
us lastingly happy, that they may be even
looked on as real obstacles to our ease,
quiet, and tranquillity. Thirdly, men know
not what is or is not truly advantageous to
them ; because they are either ignorant or
unmindful of that which must come to pass
after they are dead ; therefore, one may
conclude, that there must be a state of true
and solid happiness for men. Thus, from
all these propositions, but especially the
last, the preacher ini-is that we must seek
for happiness beyond the grave.” But it is
not only the general drift of this book that
makes strongly for immortality The testi-
mony of particular passages is also very
express. In chapter viii and 11th there is
given a plain intimation that impunity for
evil is only for the space of this present
life: “ Because sentence against an evil
work is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart of the sons of men is fully set in
them to do evil.” The future judgment is
brought forward as a corrective to a fast
life in chap, xi, 9 : “Rejoice, O young man,
in thy youth ; and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the
ways of thine heart, and in the sight of
thine eyes; but know thou, that for all
these things God will bring thee into judg-
ment.’’ In chap. xii. 7, the doctrine of im-
mortality is taught as plainly as language
can make it. “Ihen shall the dust return
to the earth as it was ; and the spirit shall
return unto God who gave it,’’ The spirit
passes out of a state of probation. The
returning to dust is not the same as return-
ing to God. The spirit is separable and
survives the stroke of death. The dust
returns to the earth as it was. But the
spirit returns to God to receive according
to what it has become.
Isaiah, who has sometimes been called
the Evangelical Prophet, or the fifth Evan-
gelist, is very copious in his intimations of
immortality. The following may be quoted
simply as specimens of the series. In
chapter xxv there occurs the noble utter-
ance, which the Poet Byron said he could
never read without emotion: “He shall
swallow up death in victory.” But, if
there be no immortality, death gains the
victory and retains it, for it ends all upon
this supposition. The next chapter con-
tains another clear proof of the same doc-
trine : “ Thy dead men shall live, together
with my dead body shall they arise !” The
place of woe is mentioned in the xxxiii
chapter, where the question is asked:
“Who among us shall dwell with ever-
lasting burnings F”
One of the most remarkable visions
which the prophet Ezekiel saw was the
valley of dry bones, contained in chapter
xxxvii. It was designed to show the cer-
tainty of the return of Israel from cap-
tivity ; and it was done under the imagery
of a resurrection from the dead. The pas-
sage is valuable in our present connection
as proving that the ancient Hebrews be-
lieved in the resurrection of the body, as
well as in the immortality of the soul. For
as the church-father Jerome remarked;
“A similitude drawn from the resurrection
to foreshadow the restoration of the people
of Israel would never have been employed,
unless the resurrection itself were believed
to be a fact of future occurrence ; for no
on»* thinks of confirming what is uncertain
by what has no existence.” —This series of
proofs must close with one more instance,
and it shall be the following from the Book
of Daniel: “ And many of them that sleep
in the dust of the earth shall awake, some
to everlasting life, and some to shame and
everlasting contempt.” Such is the great
cloud of witnesses by whom we are certi-
fied that the doctrine of immortality, in all
its essentials, was known and cherished
under the Old Covenant. Men of modern
times could have failed to perceive this
fact only through the blindness of unbelief,
or the perverting influence of a pet theory
which had to be carried through at all con-
sequences.


LECTURE VI
•♦♦♦♦V♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦
The Scripture Doctrine of Immortality—New
Testament.
The natural arguments for the immor-
tality of the soul have been stated in the
earlier lectures of the series. It has been
shown that there is an observed analogy in
nature which should count for something ;
that this belief is supported by the general
consent of mankind, it being a fact that
scarcely a savage tribe has been found
destitute of some notion of immortality,
while the Gentile sages of antiquity
brought forward a powerful array of proofs
in favor of the doctrine ; and, further, we
have seen that it was taken for granted
and made the foundation of the Old Testa-
ment revelation. After all this argumen-
tation and demonstrative reasoning, it
might appear superfluous to ask for more
evidence, or savour of scepticism to char-
acterize all this knowledge as insufficient,
And yet when this whole subject is viewed
in the light of its supreme importance, it
may well appear that something might be
added to the ground of certainty on which
it rests. After all the seeming confidence
of the ancient sages, we do find, upon oc-
casions, an uncomfortable wavering when
the real issues of the question come to be
touched. Socrates, who had formerly
reasoned so well, betrayed an unexpected
misgiving in the last moments of his life.
His noble defence before his judges closes
with this faltering remark : “ It is time for
us to depart ; for me to die, for you to live.
Which of the two is the better, the im-
mortal Gods only know; but I suppose no
man on earth can certainly tell.” Even
Cicero, in spite of all his engaging argu-
ments, was not altogether proof against
such moments of hesitation. “I know not
how it happens,” says he, “ that when I
read, I assent, but when I have laid down
the book, all that assent vanishes.” But
in all questions which are burdened with
the possibilities of the future, it is proper
to distinguish between men’s hopes and
their fears. The evidence may be sufficient
so long as it is present to the mind, and
yet fear may recover its empire when the
attention is turned to something different.
It may thus happen, that while the reason
is satisfied, a stronger confirmation will be
required to fortify the mind against the
invasion of its fears. So, too, in regard to
the admittedly defective statement of im-
mortality in the Old Testament, it cannot
be denied that something more was wanted
now that the platform of revelation had
been reached. It could come only from one
source, the Lord Jesus Christ, who ap-
peared in the fulness of time as a preacher
from the heaven of heavens. What He did
in reference to the destiny of the redeemed
soul, is briefly summed up in these words :
“ He abolished death and brought life and
immortality to light,”
The manifestation of the Gospel added
at once to the certainty of this truth and
enlarged its boundaries to a degree for-
merly unsuspected. It brought this con-
cern home to men’s “business and bosoms”
in so overt a manner, that they could cease
to think of it only by forcibly expelling the
subject from their minds. Immortality
now became worthy of the name and stood
forth in sharp contrast to the form it wore
in ancient times. The late Archbishop
Whately has remarked that the abodes of
the departed, Elysium and Tartarus, were
supposed to be of the most dreamy and
unsubstantial nature. “The poet Homer,”


says he. “ from whom so many were con-
tent to derive their creed, represents
Achilles among the shades as declaring
that the life of the meanest drudge on earth
is preferable to the very highest of the un-
substantial glories of Elysium. It is re-
markable, too, that the same poet seems
plainly to regard the body and not the soul
as being properly the man after death has
separated them. We should be apt to say
that such a one’s body is here, and the ‘he,’
properly the person himself, is departed to
the other world. But Homer uses the
very opposite language in speaking of the
heroes slain before Troy; viz,, that their
souls were despatched to the shades, and
that they themselves were left a prey to the
dogs and birds.” The same learned writer
also expresses the opinion that a belief in
such an unsubstantial region could have
had no real influence, either in deterring
men from vice, or encouraging them in
virtue.
The dark side of the future state has
been graphically portrayed both by the
ancients and in the New Testament ; but
how radically different are the two pic-
tures ! The Tartarus of the old -world re-
ligions is fantastically capricious, grossly
literal, and ineptly puerile in all its details.
The imagination often ran riot and per-
mitted its silly inventions to exceed all
bounds of sober reason or decent probabi-
lity, Some evil-doers were condemned to
the perpetual task of carrying water in
buckets with holes pierced through their
bottoms, on which absurdity Bias, one of
their wise men, remarked that it would
have been a greater punishment if they
had been doomed to carry water in vessels
with no holes bored in them.
In strong contrast to all these figments
of a depraved imagination is the New
Testament doctrine concerning the abode
of the lost. If not less tolerable it is cer-
tainly far more rational. Strong language
is, indeed, used, but undeniably in a
figurative sense. The manifestation of the
realities of the bottomless pit is ample
enough to make every one flee from the
wrath to come. Our Lord Jesus Christ
forbore to keep silence on this awful sub-
ject. His personal teaching on this head
exceeds in bulk all that is elsewhere con-
tained within the New Testament. Five
times he uttered solemn warnings against
the Gehenna of fire, while the same voice
in undertone is very frequently heard
throughout His public discourses ; yet,
happily, it is the bright side of the future
that predominates.
The express declarations of the Saviour
regarding the blessed future that awaits
His faithful followers are very many and
unmistakably clear. Take these as speci-
mens of a class far too numerous to be
quoted in detail : “ I give unto them
eternal life and they shall never perish,
neither shall any man pluck them out of
my hand.” “Igo to prepare a place for
you ; and if I go and prepare a place for
you. I will come again and receive you
unto myself, that where I am there ye may
be also.” “ The water that I shall give
him shall be in him a well of water spring-
ing up into everlasting life.” “ Great is
your reward in heaven.” “ This is the
bread that cometh down from heaven, that
a man may eat thereof and not die.
Whoso eateth my fles i and drinketh my
blood hath eternal life, and I will raise him
up at the last day.” “If any man eat of
this bread he shall live for ever.”
“ Father, I will, that they also whom Thou
bast given me be with me where 1 am that
they may behold my glory, the glory which
I had with Thee before the world was.”
Most remarkable, also, was Christ’s answer
to the penitent thief upon the cross : “ To-
day sbalt thou be with me in Paradise.’’
It will be observed how, in these and
kindred passages, the veil of reserve, so
noticeable in this connection throughout
the Old Testament, is completely thrown
aside, the whole truth being manifestly
declared so far as man can receive it in his
present state of imperfection.
Besides the sayings of our Lord there
are also numerous incidents of His life
upon earth from which light shines upon
the doctrine of immortality. The trans-
figuration is one of these. As soon as the
badges of His humiliation had given way
to the divine glory, there appeared upon
the scene two celestial visitants who en-
tered into converse with the trans-
figured Saviour, The inspired narrative
vouches for these two persons being Moses
and Elias. One of these is particularly
declared in the Old Testament to have died
and been buried. But if death ends all,
if the soul perishes with the body, it was
impossible for Moses to have been present
on the Mount of Transfiguration either in
soul or body. Among the more remark-
able of Christ’s works there were three
cases of persons being raised from the
dead. The first of these was the daughter
of Jairus, ruler of a synagogue. Jesus
stood beside the dead body and said,
“ Maid, arise ! And her spirit came again,
and she arose straightway.” If the doc-
trine of immortality were not a fact there
could be no resurrection of the identical


person that had died. Almighty power
might, indeed, create another soul; but, in
that case, the person raised would be dif-
ferent from the one that had died. The
point of the miracle just quoted lies in the
fact that the spirit of the maid is .said to
have returned to her body, and must, there-
fore, have been existing somewhere else.
A second instance of resurrection
is that of the widow’s son at the gate of
Nain. Here Christ stopped the funeral
procession, and laying His hand on the
bier said : “ Young man, I say unto thee,
arise. And he that was dead sat up, and
began to speak. And he delivered him
unto his mother.” This second miracle not
only affirms all that was pointed out in
connection with the first, but also supports
the hope of renewed fellowship in Heaven,
from the sympathizing act of the Saviour
in giving back the son to the weeping
mother. The third instance is the raising
of Lazarus, who had been dead four days.
That the soul was all the while existing
somewhere was implied in the significant
words of Christ when He said that His
friend was not dead but asleep. The spirit
was alive and the body, being still in God’s
keeping, was peacefully wrapped in slum-
bers. Hence it was that when the com-
mand was given Lazarus came forth and
once more resumed his place among living
men. Significant of immortality as these
three resurrections undoubtedly are, the
coming of Christ Himself from the dead,
is immeasurably more so. The others re-
turned from the dead with their own per-
sons only, but Christ appeared as the
Captain of Salvation leading many sons to
glory. What the first ripe sheaf, gathered
and offered in the Jewish Temple, was to
the whole harvest which was then blessed
and virtually secured, such was Christ’s
rising to the whole resurrection from the
dead. “ Christ the first fruits ; afterwards
of the body, men have been wholly in-
debted to revelation, for there are no well
authenticated instances of any people
having attained to this supernatural belief.
The ancient Egyptians and Persians have,
indeed, been adduced inferentially as hold-
ing this opinion ; but. if the surmise could
be substantiated, it would prove them only
to be solitary exceptions to a general rule.
If the Gospel of Christ had revealed noth-
ing more than the resurrection of the body,
its Divine Author might well be described
as having brought life and immortality to
light. Another of the works peculiar to
Christ is that of judgment. “The Father
judgeth no man, but hath committed all
judgment to the son.” The date of the
final assize is given as the last day, and the
ordeal is to take effect on the quick and the
dead. The quick, or the living, must then
form an infinitesimally small proportion of
the whole, which is declared to be the
entire human race in all its generations
from Adam to the last born of human kind.
But this judgment is a pledge of immor-
tality, for if death ends all. there is noth-
ing left on which it can take effect. Fur-
thermore, the act of j udgment proceeds
upon the supposition of the separate exis-
tence of the soul. Once and again it is
asserted, that men are to be judged accor-
ding to the deeds done in the body. The
spirit then exists in two states, one in the
body and the other out of the body. The
first was during this natural life ; the
second between death and the resurrection ;
and when both are again united, the judg-
ment will revert to the first condition.
Once more : the consequences of the final
judgment proclaim the doctrine of immor-
tality, as with the voice of a trumpet
whether it be for weal or woe. The destiny
of both parties at the judgment-seat is
promulgated in equally decisive terms—
“ These shall go away into everlasting
they that are Christ’s at His coming. Then punishment, but the righteous into life
cometh the end.” The Apostle's meaning eternal. ’ Now, at last, nothing has been
does not appear to be the end of the world, be added to the evidence of a future
. ‘ . • « . • <ll% afoto ~ ~V. J il J it- 1
but rather the end or completion of the
harvest, the whole of the resurrection of
believers. It is begun with the rising of
Christ as the first fruits ; it is completed
when all that are in their graves shall hear
the voice of the Archangel and come forth.
Let it now be particularly observed what a
flood of light is shed upon immortality,
and the future state by the revelation of
this restored union of the body and the
soul. While we have seen that a belief
in the immortality of the soul is practi-
state of existence, and the deathlessness
of the spirit. After life and immortality
have been brought to light with the clear-
ness of the noon day sun, unbelief must be
wilful and therefore criminal. Want of
faith here must certainly bring condemna-
tion to the unbelieving soul.
Of the Twelve Apostles St. John came
into the closest contact and enjoyed the
most familiar intimacy with the Master.
An instance of this endearing fellowship is
given in the narrative of the last supper,
cally universal, it is not less remarkable where the beloved disciple is described as
that for the knowledge of the resurrection ly> n g Jesus’ bosom. In addition to this


singular privilege, the same apostle was
fitted both by nature and grace to receive
and reflect the spirit of the Saviour in a far
higher degree than the rest of the company.
From these privileges and qualifications it
is reasonable to expect that this apostle,
whose heavenward flights have been sym-
bolised by the eagle, would give marked
prominence in his writings to immortality
and the future state of glory. This antici-
pation is not disappointed by a study of his
Gospel, Epistles, and Revelation, In the
first there is no mistaking his preference
for those discourses of our Lord which,
more particularly, look beyond the grave
and treat of the blessedness of heaven.
This feature is specially noticeable in the
sublime words spoken to the disciples
immediately before the crucifixion. So,
too with the Epistles which we have under
the name of the Apostle of love. The
promise of eternal life which we have
through God’s Son, and the needful pre-
paration for its equipment, may be taken
as the twin subjects which run through the
whole ot those precious spiritual letters.
As might have been expected, this same
doctrine is found still more fully developed
in the Revelation which closes the canon of
Scripture and gives the fullest description
we possess of the Last Things. Intima-
tions of a glorious future for the righteous
sparkle over all its pages like stars in the
firmament. At one time it is a promise to
him that overcomith, that he shall “eat of
the tree of life which is in the midst of the
paradise of God.” At another, it is a
glimpse of the redeemed in glory described
as a multitude which no man could number.
One while, we hear the voice of the martyrs
from beneath the altar crying “ How long,
0 Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge
and avenge our blood on them that dwell on
the earth and, next, a word comes from
the excellent glory, “ Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord from henceforth,”
from the hour of their death, “ yea, saith
the Spirit, for they rest from their labours
and their works do follow them.” The
Book of Revelation finally closes in the
full blaze of eternal glory. The heavenly
state appears in all its surprising details of
the most superb imagery, compared with
which the most enchanting fairylands which
have sprung from the fancy of the most
fanciful men, must pale their ineffectual
fires.
The greatest of the Apostles, though the
last in time, and in his own estimation the
least of ail, was undoubtedly St. Paul. His
mind was dialectic rather than intuitive ;
and herein he differed to a marked degree
from his fellow-disciple whose writings
have just been considered. To him nat-
urally the truths of Scripture fell into a
divine system which eventuated in eternal
life for all the faithful in Christ Jesus.
Perhaps as a compensation for “ being as
one born out of due season,” he had a
special revelation made to him, not on
earth, but in heaven itself. This surprising
event is commonly known as the rapture
of St, Paul. An account of it is given by
himself in II Corinthians xii, 2-4. “ I
knew a man in Christ,” meaning himself,
although his humility did not permit him
to say so expressly . . . “ above four-
teen years ago ( whether in the body, I
cannot tell; or whether out out of the body,
I cannot tell ; God kno veth) ; such a one
caught up to the third heaven. And I
knew such a man ( whether in the body, or
out of the body. I cannot tell; God knoweth).
How that he was caught up into naradise,
and heard unspeakable words, which it is
not lawful for a man to utter.” This pas-
sage is exceedingly rich in its instructions
regarding the separate existence of the soul
and the future state. So clear a distinction
is made between the body and the soul that
the former is dealt with as a house which
can be left and even re-occupied by the
same tenant How well the spirit may
exist by itself, is witnessed by this incident
in which the writer expresses himself un-
certain, as to whether the rapture of the
soul took place with the body or without
it. This account, also, is instructive in its
bearing upon the question of another home
for the spirit besides this present world,
for the Apostle was taken to some place in
the universe which is called the third
heaven and the paradise of God, whither,
also, Christ promised to take the penitent)
thief on the very day of the crucifixion.
The doctrine of immortality is found
everywhere in the Pauline Epistles ; always
as an underlying truth and often very
pointedly expressed. A whole cluster of
texts, all of which clearly set forth the
fact of immortality and a future state of
existence for the soul, are found in the
fifth chapter of Second Corinthians. The
opening verse is enough of itself to settle
the whole question : “ For we know that
if the earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an
house not made with hands eternal in the
heavens.” Here the body is taken for
nothing more than a house to live in, and,
as if that were saying too much, it is next
characterized as a tent, in which a traveller
lodges only for a night. It is subject to
many accidents and may rent in pieces
or laid in ruins by the tempest. But the
destruction of the tent does not mean the


death of its inhabitant. So the Apostle
explains that the dissolution of the
earthly house will have no other effect on
the saintly soul than to occasion its migra-
tion to another and a better house, inas-
much as it is not made with hands, but
eternal in the heavens. So far from being
a loss, the change will be an infinite gain.
“ For we that are in this tabernacle do
groan being burdened; not for that we
would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that
mortality might be swallowed up of life.’
Nor is this hope of immortality a vain
conceit, or something dependent on the
accuracy of a process of fallible reasoning,
for this confidence in the soul is produced
by a divine influence. “ Now He that
hath wrought us for the self-same thing is
God, who hath given unto us the earnest
of the Spirit, Therefore, we are always
confident, knowing that, whilst we are at
home in the body we are absent from the
Lord ; we are confident, I say, and willing
rather to be absent from the body and to be
present with the Lord.” No stronger
affirmations of immortality than these
could be made by human language. This
Apostle never comes in contact with death
and eternity, but his spirit kindles up with
the glow of immortality. No sooner does
he come lace to face with the great reality
than he feels strait betwixt two,
having a desire to depart and to be with
Christ which is far better On this account
he reckoned death to be gain. And when
at last he was brought into the presence of
death his resolution, formed in less trying
circumstances, nobly stood the test.
we find such calmness of
spirit, fortitude of mind, and such
readiness of' 'will to meet the last enemy,
at his worst, unless it be in the case of the
Great Master on the eve of his crucifixion.
The Roman Emperor Nero, probably the
most c«fcplete incarnation of cruelty the
world had fired the city and laid
the blame at the door of the Christians in
order to find a pretext for their destruction.
In full view of all that was awaiting him
as a marked leader of the Christians, this
noblest of men serenely penned these last
words : “ I am now ready to be offered and
the time of my departure is at hand, I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith; henceforth
there is laid up for me a crown of righteous-
ness, which the Lord, the righteous judge-
shall give me at that day , and not to me
only, but unto all them also that love His
appearing,”


In proceeding now to a particular con-
sideration of the life everlasting with its
ineffable glories as pertaining both to the
body and the soul, it must be borne in
mind from first to last, that, for'all our'in-
formation on this engaging subject, we
are thrown entirely upon the sacred
Scriptures. If the knowledge to be ob-
tained is not all we could wish, let us not
fail to notice how easily it might have
been otherwise had revelation been an im-
posture and endeavoured to gain assent by
tickling curiosity and exciting the fancy.
In the manifestation of the invisible state,
in which there was no possibility of con-
tradiction, the Bible, had it been anything
else than the very truth of God, could have
very easily gratified the most extravagant
demands in its description of the world to
come. On this phase of the question the
late Ur. Whately has made the following
judicious remarks. “This portion of
Scripture affords an argument for the
truth of our religion, that is perfectly
within the reach of plain, unlearned
Christians, of such persons as, some pre-
tend, cannot be expected to give a reason
for the hope that is in them, but must be
content to believe just as they are told.
Now, let such a one, if he chance to meet
with an unbeliever who treats Christianity
as a series of * cunningly devised fables,’
merely put before him this portion of
Scripture, and ask him how it happens that
neither St. Paul, nor any other of the
sacred writers, has given us a full, detailed
and captivating description of everything
that is to take place at the end of the
world,— of all the interesting particulars of
the glorified bodies with which the faithful
will iise, and the heavenly joys to which
they will be admitted ? Nothing, certainly
ouid have been more likely to gratify the
LECTURE VII
The Glorified Body
curiosity of believers, and even to attract
fresh converts, than a lively and magnifi-
cent description of heavenly glories. Had
St. Paul been an impostor, it would not
have been at all difficult for him to invent
such a description; and, had he been an
enthusiast he could not have avoided it.
One, whose imagination had got the better
of his judgment, and whose wild fancies
were regarded by himself as revelations,
could never have treated of such a subject
as this without being tempted, by its
mysterious and deep interest, to invent,
and actually to believe, a vast number of
particulars respecting the other world.
Why, then, you may ask, do we find
nothing of this nature in the writings of
the Apostles (the Koran is full of it) ?
The plain answer is, they were not either
impostors or enthusiasts, but plain, simple,
honest men, who taught only what had
been revealed to them, and what they had
been commissioned to reveal to others.
You may safely defy an unbeliever to give
any other answer to the question if he can.
For eighteen hundred years has this proof
remained uncontradicted ; and, in all that
time, no one has given, or even attempted
to give, any explanation of the brief,
unadorned, unpretending accounts which
the New Testament writers give of matters
so interesting to man’s curiosity, except by
considering them as upright, sober-
minded men, setting forth what they knew
to be true, just as they had received it.”
The glorious resurrection of the bodies
of believers is a doctrine which is kept too
much in the back-ground of Christian
thought. In Scripture it occupies a fore-
most place. The body as well as the soul
has been redeemed from the curse of sin ;
and upon this fact some of the primary
duties of our religion are founded. “Ye


are bought with a price; therefore, glorify
God in your body, and in your spirit which
are God’s.” The resurrection of the dead
is, indeed, a mystery, and no end of diffi-
culties may be conjured up by a captious
mind, but it can be regarded as impossible
only if it exceed the power of omnipotence.
This was the ground Christ took against
the Sadducees. “Ye err,” said He,
“not knowing the Scriptures nor the power
of God .” “If the Bible affirmed,” says
Henry Melvill, “ that there shall be a
resurrection of all men, and then ascribed
to a finite agent the effecting of this resur-
rection, we think that reason might fairly
have argued that the disproportion between
the thing done and the doer furnishes good
ground for rejecting the whole statement
as untrue. It will, indeed, be an amazing
act, not to be overtaken by all the strides
of thought, that which summons back into
being the countless myriads of our lineage,
and re-animates the dust which had ever
been human—that there should be an ob-
servant eye on every particle that has ap-
pertained to man—that the individual
particles should be kept distinct, in order
that they may go hereafter to the constitu-
tion of that very person that they consti-
tuted here —and that, at last, each man
shall stand forth on the earth with his own
bone, and his own sinew, and hia own
flesh. We confess, that there is a wonder-
fulness in all this which is com-
pletely overwhelming, and that the re-
quired knowledge and the required power
can be looked for in none other than the
omniscient and the omnipotent. But will
anyone declare of the general resurrection
that it exceeds the capability of Him who
is to achieve it? Take what view you will
of the difficulties of the resurrection—and
can you declare of them that they are pal-
pably greater than God Himself is able to
overcome? The whole gist of the question
lies in this : the difficulties are to be con-
sidered relatively to the agent, and it is
only so far as the applied power can be
proved inadequate to the work, that the
magnitude can be admitted as an argu-
ment against the performance. Certainly,
with every admission of the stupendousness
of the resurrection, and allowing unre-
servedly, that if referred to any finite
ability it might be held impossible, we
cannot see how a work should be accounted
too great for God, unless we are prepared
to say the same of other works confessedly
His. We cannot understand why a man,
who admits that God created everything
out of nothing, should hesitate as to ad-
mitting, that God can perform all that is
included under the resurrection. There
seems to us no nearer approach to the in-
credible in the supposition that the dead
will be raised by God than in the
supposition that the worlds have
been made by God. To form man at
first, and endow him with life, or to bring
him forth from the dust, remoulded
and re-animated, is there evidently
so much more of difficulty in the
one achievement, as compared with the
other, that the Being, confessedly mighty
enough to effect the former is not ne-
cessarily mighty enough to effect
the latter ? For our own part,
without presuming to decide between
the difficulties of either of ihe works, each
of which immensely distances all finite
power, we think, that when once creation
has been referred to God as the Author,
there can be nothing to make us pause in
allowing that God may be the Author of
the resurrection. A man has no choice in
respect to creation ; the work is before him,
and the possibility stands proved by the
existence. The case is quite different in re-
gard to the resurrection, and the possibility
must be proved by showing an agency
commensurate with the work; bat unless
you can demonstrate of the resurrection,
that it requires a power out-doing that
required by the creation, beyond all doubt,
the proving that there is an agency ade-
quate to creation, is the proving that there
is an agency which, if thus employed,
would be adequate to the resurrection ; and,
thus, marvellously great as I hold the
achievement of summoning forth the dead,
and re uniting each human soul to that
identical frame-work of matter which en-
cased it during the days of its probation,
yet the moment I refer its achievement to
the Creator, I loose all hesitation as to ad-
mitting its possibility. I look upon the
wonder-working of creative wisdom and
creative might, and I gather from the
magnificent spectacle, witness in abund-
ance that a resurrection is possible. It is
possible, for that august Being who cannot
be perplexed by the multiplicity of con-
cerns, may, yea, if He be omniscient, must,
take cognisance of each atom of dust, as
well as of every planet and every star. And
why should he be unable to distinguish
what has belonged to man, and to appro-
priate to each individual his own ?It is
possible. The fields of space, who peopled
them P The lamps of the firmament who
kindled them ? The tribes of living things,
who animated them ? Oh, let me take a
survey, so far as it may be gathered with-
in with my narrow intelligence, of what
the Almighty has wrought, let me pour my
contemplations on worlds rising up at His


bidding, on creatures starting at His
call into existence in the likeness of
Himself, and sharers of His immortality; let
me call to mind ; that there was a time
when the Eternal One alone occupied im-
mensity, and let me contrast the bound-
less solitude with the now teeming uni-
verse ; and can I doubt that He unto
whom must be referred all this profusion
of architecture and all this exuberance of
animation, might again quicken dust from
which He had withdrawn the principle of
life ? And shall I hesitate to tell the ob-
jector, who would dwell on the dissolution
of humanity, and speak of the difficulties
of re-collecting the elements which have
been scattered by the winds or strewn on
the waters, and would thus strive by en-
larging on the wonderfulness, to throw a
doubt on the fact of the resurrection —shall
I hesitate to tell him, that every star
which walks in the heavens is my witness,
and that every insect which floats on the
breeze is my witness —that the graves of
this planet may yet pour out their popula-
tion, and that reason concurs with revela-
tion to decide it is not incredible that
God should raise the dead”
Although the resurrection could never
have been discovered by human reason, it
appears by no means repugnant to it when
shown in the light of revelation. On the
contrary it really falls in line with certain
analogies of nature such as the phenomena
of spring. In two passages of the New
Testament this resemblance has been ex-
pressly pointed out. As bearing on the
correct interpretation of these we must
find room for one more extract from a
distinguished writer, Dr. John Brown :
‘ ‘ That which thou sowest is not quickened
except it die,’ or rather. ‘ have died.’ or
‘ be dead.’ It has been common, indeed
all but universal, to suppose that here, as
well as in the oracle of our Lord, which is
in some respects parallel, in which the
necessity of his death, in order to the
multiplication of His followers is indicated
under the figure of the necessity of a corn
of wheat falling into the ground in a dead
state, in order to its being productive—
‘Unless a corn of wheat falling into the
earth be dead, it abideth alone ; but if it
be dead, it bringeth forth much fruit,’
it has been common to suppose,
that the death referred to in both
these passages is the change which takes
place in the seed after it is nut into the
the earth —the dissolution of the outer
coats of the seed, which takes place in order
to the germ taking root and springing up.
There are many strong objections to this
mode of interpretation. First, this change
in the seed does not correspond to the
death, but to the decomposition of the
body ; secondly, there is an inversion of
the order of nature, which is death and
burial, not burial and death, men are
buried because they are dead—they are
not buried that they may die; thirdly, in
the case of our Lord there was no such
decomposition ot the body, for He saw no
corruption —which, according to the ordin-
ary interpretation, is symbolised by what
is called the death of the seed in the
ground ; and, finally, there is no meeting
the difficulty here mooted, which is not,
How can the decomposed body be recom-
posed P But how can the dead be raised
to life P The fact in natural history to
which both our Lord and the Apostle
refer is this that, when there is progress
from a lower to a higher degree or species
of life, often—probably usually—a corres-
ponding species of death intervenes. It is
not the blossom nor the seed, when full of
vegetable succulence and life, that, when
sown, proceeds onward to a higher kind of
life, as a separate plant, bearing blossoms
and fruits. Cast such a blossom,
or seed into the earth, and you will see no
more of it—it will utterly perish. But let
the seed fully ripen —let it become dead-
ripe, so as to lose its connection with the
living plant, and, to all appearance, be
destitute of vegetable life—let it even
remain in this state in the granary for
many years—yet take this dead seed and
cast it into the earth, and it will receive
life, and show itself alive, and become
something of more importance in the vege-
table world than it ever could have become
if it had not thus died. Instead of its
having died being an obstacle to its atta n-
ing a higher life, it is the necessary condi-
tion of such a change. ‘ That which thou
sowest is not quickened—could not be
quickened— to its higher life, except it had
been dead.’ ”
“With what body do they come?”
Will it he the same in which they died ?
So much is clearly intimated in Scripture.
“ This mortal must put on immortality.”
“ Our vile body shall be changed.” “ To
every man his own body though this
may mean only that he is not to receive
the body which belonged to another man.
But in any case there must be a practical
identity between the body that is buried
and that which is raised from the grave;
otherwise it would not be resurrection but
creation. Against this identity many ob-
jections are persistently raised all of which
culminate in the instance of cannibalism.
Ancient history speaks of a race of men
called Anthropophagi because they ate


human flesh; and man-eaters are fre-
quently found at the present day among
savage tribes. This being so it seems that
the same bodies must belong in part, at
least, to different men. But the difficulty
has been unnecessarily magnified. It is
certain that there never have been men
who have lived wholly on human flesh ;and
even of that which has been eaten, perhaps,
not a thousandth part has been absorbed in-
to the structure of the body. And who can
deny that a superintending providence may
have prevented even so much as that
through a prevision of the resurrection.
As showing how little solid matter as com-
pared with liquids, is absorbed into an
organised body, a good illustrative
case has been recorded by Dr. Isaac Barrow
in his sermon on the resurrection. He
says, “ A small tree of five pounds weight
was set in two hundred pounds of dried
earth, and having been watered constantly
for five years, was then taken up, when it
weighed above an hundred and sixty
pounds; but the earth in which it grew
had not lost full cwo ounces of its weight.”
But the settlement of the whole question
depends on what sense we are to take this
identity. If it is held to be necessary that
the resurrection must contain all the
particles which have been incorporated in-
to the body in this life, then our bodies
are not the same even here, Heraclitus,
an ancient philosopher, said; You can no
more see and touch the same man twice
than you can descend twice into the same
river. There is a continual change going
on so that the whole frame is believed to
be renovated during every period of seven
years. It will thus happen that a man who
has reached the age of eighty-four years will
have had no fewer than twelve bodies in the
course of his life-time. And to all practi-
cal purposes it is reckoned the same body
all through. It will surely suffice if the
resurrection body is identical in the same
sense in which the present one is man’s
own body throughout the different ages of
life. The fifteenth chapter of First
Corinthians dwells much more on the dif-
ference than on the similarity of the two
bodies. Attention is pointedly called to
the endless varieties observable in other
bodies, as also to the power and the wisdom
of God in adapting individual cases to exist-
ing circumstances. A body that suits one
creature would be most unfit for certain
others. For this reason they are the most
various both in matter and adaptation. “All
flesh is not the same flesh ; but there is one
kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts,
another of fishes, and another of birds.”
Whether the creature is to walk the earth,
or fly in the air, or swim in the sea, God
has given it such a body as would best
serve its purpose in the element in which
it is to live. And the same principle pre-
vails even among inanimate things.
“ There are also bodies celestial,” the sun,
moon, and stars, “ and there are bodies
terrestial,” mountains, rocks, and accumu-
lations of water. In all this lower realm
the plastic hand of the Creator is seen in
fashioning bodies according to the particular
wants of His creatures. He has been able
to provide man with a body adapted to his
requirements in this world, and shall we
say it is beyond His power to prepare a
body that shall be a fit vehicle for the
spirit in the world to come? The Apostle
shows that He can, yet, just because it is
designed not for the present but for the
future state, it must differ in many respects
from the one we now possess. This differ-
ence is presented in several strong con-
trasts —“ It is sown in corruption; it is
raised in incorruption.” Our present body
is subject to fatigue, to disease, to decay,
and to death, and finally it is laid in the
grave as the seed is buried under the clod.
When it shall rise again it will be subject
to none of these things, but shall bloom in
incorruptible integrity.— “It is sown in
dishonour, it is raised in glory.” Now it
bears the marks of the curse, degradation
is apparent in all its capabilities. At first,
indeed, it was fearfully and wonderfully
made, reflecting the image of God and has
been well described as the “ human form
divine.” But the monarch has been dis-
crowned and laid in the dust. Yet the glory
that awaits the bodies of the righteous at
the resurrection excels that which shone in
unfallen humanity. The glory of the risen
body will not be the of the earthly,
but that ©f the Lord from heaven.—“ It is
sown in weakness, it is raised in power.”
At the best the body in the present
state is weak compared with the strength
of many of the creatures that are subject
to man’s sway, and when disease has done
its worst it is sown in absolute weakness.
But the same body is raised in power. It
reaps the eternal reward without fainting.
In the temple above the glorified saints
serve God night and day.—■“ It is sown a
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.”
The word “ natural ” in this verse is better
rendered “animal.” It means that the
body here is suited to present wanfs. Being
under the necessity of nourishment, it is
provided with the requisite organs for re-
ceiving and digesting tood, and all others
for like pm poses. But they are to continue
only in this present state. “ Meats for the
belly and the belly for meats, but God


shall destroy both it and them,'’
these respects the resurrection body will
be very different. “It is raised a spiritual
body,” fitted for the spiritual state, just as
the former was suited to its environment as
an animal body, “ There is an animal
body, and there is a spiritual body.” In
some respects the animal body while har-
monising with its circumstances in this
present world, is a clog to the spirit. “The
flesh lusteth against the spirit and the spirit
against the flesh, so that we cannot do the
things we would.” It is sometimes a
severe act of self-denial to keep the body
under. All these disadvantages will dis-
appear in the heavenly state, for then the
body, purified from every stain of sin, will
be so completely subject to the spirit and
dominated by it as to be fitly termed
a “ spiritual body.”
There is still another line of thought
which helps us to a better comprehension
of the glorified body. The Scripture gives
us the model or pattern according to which
it is to be fashioned. This is Christ's own
body as risen and glorified. In the Epistle
to the Philippians we meet with these
words, “ The Lord Jesus Christ who shall
change our vile body that it may be
fashioned like unto His glorious body,” or,
as it is better rendered in the revised
version, “ who shall fashion anew the body
of our humiliation, that it may be con-
formed to the body of His glory,” And,
again, it is said that we are predestinated
to be Conformed to the image of God’s Son
that He might be the first-born amongst
many brethren.” It is, therefore, of the
utmost consequence fora clear understand-
ing of our subject, to bring our minds to
the contemplation of such glimpses of the
glorified body of Christ as have been re-
vealed in Scripture. It is not very evident
at what precise time Christ took to Himself
the glorified body. To those who have not
thought much on the subject it is
natural to conclude that He assumed it at
the resurrection. But there is good reason
to support the opinion of others who think
that the Saviour rose in the body of flesh and
retained it for the succeeding forty days in
order to furnish the more evident proof of
His resurrection. If this is so, the fact
will explain why the appearances of Christ
between the resurrection and the ascension
seem to have produced less astonishment
than two or three which happened on later
occasions. It is only on this supposition
that we can understand why two dis-
ciples could have travelled with Him
from Jerusalem to Emmaus without re-
cognising in this stranger a superhuman
being. True, it is said their eyes were
holden that they should not see Him.
In all But this hindrance is not to he understood
of any restraining influence emanating
from Him ; it was rather the consequence
of their own sorrowful frame of mind
which kept brooding on the dark side of
the picture and prevented a ray of light
from penetrating the thick darkness. If
we understand that Christ assumed the
glorified body on the occasion of His
ascension into heaven, all the rest becomes
plain. There was one remarkable exhibi-
tion of His glorified human body, which
was made in the midst of His humiliation
and invites our first consideration. This
was the scene of His transfiguration. The
evangelists wrestle with the language of
earth to make it express the splendour of
the glory that appeared upon the mount.
Matthew says His face did shine as the
sun; Mark declares His raiment became
shining, exceeding white as snow, so as no
fuller on earth can whiten them; while
Luke, trying another expression, affirms,
that His raiment became white and glister-
ing. It will be noticed how strongly it is
affirmed, that the glory of Christ’s body
was so great that not even His garments
could hide it. We can understand it only
as the forecast glory of His heavenly con-
dition. Another mark of its surpassing
splendour is given in its overwhelming
effect on the three disciples, Peter, John
and James. Moses and Elias could bear
it, for they were already glorified ; but
the favoured Apostles could not endure
one glimpse of this glory, and yet they
would submit to anything sooner than
quit the scene. Let us think, then, of this
precious promise, that Christ shall change
the body of our humiliation that it may be
fashioned anew and conformed to the body
of His glory. This is the first glimpse of
the great sight. Another was vouchsafed
to Saul of Tarsus while on the way to
Damascus to persecute the Christians.
The Lord appeared to him and the bright-
ness of the glory exceeded the splendour of
the noon-day sun. The effect on the be-
holder was such as to smite him with
blindness so that his companions had to
lead him by the hand into the City of
Damascus. A third revelation of Christ in
His glory is given in the first chapter of
the Book of Eevelation. The seer of
Patmos says, “He saw one like unto the
Son of Man, clothed with a garment down
to the foot, and girt about the paps with a
golden girdle. His head and His hair;
were white like wool, as white as snow
and His eyes were as a flame of fire ; and
His feet like unto fine brass, as if they
burned in a furnace, and His voice as the
sound of many waters; and His counten-
ance was as the sun shineth in his


strength.” The Apostle to whom this
vision was shown had enjoyed the most
familiar intercourse of all the twelve, for he
had lain in the very bosom of that body of
humiliation. But how different was the
effect that proceeded from the body of
Christ’s glory P The Apostle says the
sight of the glorified Lord so overwhelmed
him that he fell at His feet as dead. To
such glory is it that the bodies of the saints
are to be conformed.
It would be a mistake to suppose that
this subject is invested with a merely
speculative interest. There are practical
consequences depending upon it of a most
important character. It is not only the
soul, but the body as well, that is to live
through eternity. However changed, it
will, to all intents and purposes, be the
same body that is to be united to the soul
at the resurrection. Sanctification is.
therefore, a work which should be extended
to the body also. St. Paul calls upon
Christians to know how to possess their
vessel, that is, the body in sanctification
and honour. All lustful passions must be
carefully suppressed. The same Apostle
furnished an example to his own precept,
“ I keep my body under,” says he, “ and
bring it into subjection ; lest that by any
means, when I have preached to others, I
myself should be a cast-away.” This would
still be a duty, even though the soul wer«
at death to perish forever ; but how awfully
more urgent does it become when it ii
known that the body must be an eternal
possession of the soul ?


LECTURE VIII
Heaven as Foreshadowed in Earthly Figures
and Foretastes.
According to Scripture usage the word
heaven occurs in three different meanings
or with three several references. In the
first application, it is restricted to the
atmosphere or the region of clouds and
vapours where the birds of heaven have
their habitation ; in the second, it embraces
the sky or firmament, the field of astronomy
with its world of wonders containing un-
told myriads of “ bodies celestial and in
the third reference, it designates the hea-
ven of heavens which is described as the
presence-chamber of the Eternal God,
where He manifests Himself in glory un-
speakable amidst an innumerable company
of angels and the multitudes of the spirits
of just men made perfect. It is this last
only that forms the subject of the
present lecture. That the future state
should forecast some indications of its glory
on the present, is an expectation which is
justified by the general analogy of the
course of things where there is no express
purpose of concealment. Columbus was
convinced that he was approaching the new
world of America, before sighting it, by
the appearance of land birds and the occur-
rence of floating weeds which did not be-
long to the ocean- So, too, the discoverer
of the Amazon was certified of the neigh-
bourhood of a mighty river by meeting
with a strong fresh-water current far out
at sea. The same truth holds good re-
garding the world of glory. In our present
state, indeed, “eye hath not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart
of man, the things which God hath prepared
for them that love Him,” and for this rea-
son, probably, that in our present condition
we are utterly unfit to bear such an unre-
served revelation. Nevertheless we have
some precious glimpses which bear the
same relation to the world of glory as
the dawn to the day. Let us now turn
our attention to some of these and see what
can be learned from them. The Children
of Israel when yet in the wilderness were
taught something of the goodliness of Can-
aan by the bunch of grapes which the spies
brought from Eshcol, and, in like manner,
but to a higher degree, may eyery Chris-
tian have his understanding enlightened
and his heart cheered by a meditation on
the earthly types by which the heavenly
state is foreshadowed to our present view.
We may conveniently consider these pre-
intimations under the three classifications
of figures, types, and foretastes.
One of the most striking of these simili-
tudes is that of a kingdom, “Fear not
little flock, it is your Father’s good plea-
sure to give you the kingdom.” “ I
appoint unto you a kingdom even as my
Father hath appointed unto me a kingdom.”
What on earth is more coveted than a
kingdom, or what will a man not give to be
a king ? There is a love of power inborn
in our very constitution, and it finds its
climax in being the head of a kingdom.
Ambitious men have shod oceans of blood
to reach this dignity. The kingdom of
heaven has, indeed, been obtained by
blood ; but it is the blood of atonement!
and is now freely bestowed on every one
that overcomes by the blood of the
Lamb. Nor is this kingdom without its
throne. It belongs of right to the king of
kings. But he finds room for assessors.
“ To him that overcometh will I also grant
to sit with me on my throne, even as I have
overcome and am set down with my Father
on his throne.” A king upon his throne is
incomplete without.crown. This, too,
is already provided. And that also of the
true amaranth, tor it never fades away.
Many so-called crowns in the ancient
world were of the most perishable, and even
evanescent materials, and those which
consisted of the most durable substance
which the earth couls furnish have all dis-


appeared under the corroding action of
time. Where can there be found at the
present day a single one that belongs to
primitive times ? The crown of glory is
not for time but eternity, and will never
fade away.
A second figure used to foreshadow
heaven is that of a country. It was said
of the ancient patriarchs that they de-
clared plainly they sought a better country,
that is an heavenly. They were without a
country then, and, in a far worse sense,
their descendants are without a country
now. To those more happily situated,
how much of gladness and delight is asso-
ciated with a fatherland. Around this
idea are grouped all those beautiful senti-
ments which pass under the name of
patriotism and have given rise to the ex-
pression, that it is sweet and glorious to
die for one’s country. The love of country
is most felt by the exile who regards it as
the happiest moment of his life when he
is enabled to revisit his long-absent home.
The Christian is not denied this source of
joy. He has in reversion a better land,
which, with no straining of words, may be
called the place of his nativity, in a higher
sense than any spot in this earth can be
so regarded. All true Christians are born
from above. The new birth is superna-
tural. Heaven only can be the home of
believers, and in keeping with this idea
they are always addressed as strangers in
the earth or pilgrims towards the better
land. There is no figure that commends
itself more to the human heart than this
representation of life as a journey with
heaven at the close with an eternal rest.
One other particular belonging to this
similitude is given under the id ia of an
inheritance. Here it will be noticed that
ample justice is done to the terms on
which heaven is bestowed as a free gift.
The heir does not provide his inheritance.
Its procurement in no way depends upon
his labour or wealth. If it did so,
what he obtained would not be
an inheritance, but the value of his own
purchase. This figure, if duly dwelt upon
by the mind, is fitted to call forth the most
joyous feelings. The heir of an earthly
estate who is meanwhile under tutors and
governors appointed by the father, as all
Christians are said to be in a spiritual
Sense, marks with pleasure the rapid flight
of days and years, rejoicing all the more
as the time of his majority approaches.
Should not Christians, in like manner, be
inspired by similar feelings ? Why should
they not hold up their heads and rejoice as
they see that redemption draweth nigh?
Notice, again, what happens when the day
arrives in which the heir enters upon his
majority. What rejoicings, what festivi-
ties, what congratulations are then wit-
nessed on the paternal estates ! Can it be
denied that this day of gladness corres-
ponds to the Christians death ? Why, then,
should there be such a difference between
the two ? It can be explained only as
arising from want of faith and hope. We
see only the sorrowful side of a death-bed ;
but it has also another which is seen with
gladness by higher spirits. To us it is the
settine-; to them it is the rising sun.
A still stronger kind of foreshadows of
heaven are contained in a series of types.
The first of these stands at the very be-
ginning of Scripture, and is found in the
Garden of Eden, or the earthly Paradise.
The very name signifies delight, and the
place in every sense corresponded to its de-
signation. Adam in Paradise had all
delight, joy, and pleasure his heart could
desire, he wanted nothing to make his life
pleasant and sweet to him ; so the saints in
Heaven have the fullest joy, pleasure and
satisfaction imaginable ; there is nothing
wanting they can desire to please and
delight them. “ Thou wilt show me the
path of life; in Tny presence is fulness of
joy, at Thy right hand are pleasures
for evermore.” “ They shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatness of Thy house;
and Thou shalt make them drink of the
river of Thy pleasures.” Adam in Para-
dise knew no sorrow, he had joy without
sadness, strength without weakness, health
without sickness, and life without death,
for death had nothing to do with him before
he fell. So in Heaven the godly are de-
livered from every mixture of evil, “ God
shall wipe away ail tears from their eyes,
and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be
any more pain, for the former things are
passed away.” Adam in Paradise enjoyed
the sweet and blessed presence of God,
holding glorious acquaintance and com-
munion with Him. God and man then
lived in perfect peace and friendship ; there
was no breach, because no sin, and so
God’s face was not hid from him. So in
Heaven the saints shall be free from sin,
for they shall be without fault before the
throne of God and the Lamb. All the
glorified shall enjoy the sweet and de-
lightful presence of God and of Jesus
Christ. “Wherel am,” says Christ, “there
shall my servant be.” “ And if Igo and
prepare a place for you, I will come again,
and receive you to myself that where I am
there ye may be also.” Adam in Paradise


had the tree of life and, while innocent,
had liberty to partake of its life-giving
fruit. So, in this Paradise of God, we read
of the tree of life with which stands con-
nected the promise “To him that over-
cometh will I give to eat of the tree of life
which is in the midst of the Paradise of
God.” Adam in Paradise had great know-
ledge, both of God, and the nature of all
creatures. God brought all the creatures
to Adam “ to see what he would call them,
and whatsoever Adam called each living
soul, that was the name thereof.” His
wisdom was manifested in naming the
creatures presently and perfectly, accord-
ing to their natures, as is plainly shown by
their Scripture names. So the safnts in
Heaven shall be perfect in knowledge, for
they shall know even as they are known.
Another very significant type of heaven
is found in the promised land of Canaan
with its prospect of rest to the people after
their wilderness journey. The correspon-
dence of the earthly to the heavenly is
well brought out in the fourth chapter of
the Hebrews, where the argument is carried
to a considerable length. “ For we which
have believed do enter into rest,” as he
said, “ As I have sworn in my wrath, if they
shall enter into my rest, although the
works were finished from the foundation
of the world. For he spake in a certain
place of the seventh day in this wise, And
God did rest the seventh day from all His
works. And in this place again, If they
shall enter into my rest. Seeing there-
fore it remaineth that some must enter
therein, and they to whom it was first
preached entered not in because of unbe-
lief, Again, he limiteth a certain day,
saying in David, To-day, after so long a
time ; as it is said, “ To-day if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts.”
For if Joshua had given them rest, then
would he not afterwards have spoken of
another day. There remaineth, therefore,
a rest to the people of God. For he that
is entered into his rest, he also hath
ceased from his own works, as God did
from His. Let us labour, therefore, to
enter into that rest, lest any man fail after
the same example of unbelief.” It will be
observed that the word rest is here ob-
viously used in three different shades of
meaning all of which, however, finally
blend into one. In verse fourth we have
the first of these in the order of time.
“ Por he spake in a certain place of the
seventh day in this wise, And God did
rest the seventh day from all His works.”
the heavens and the earth and ail the host
of them. It was not His purpose to oc-
cupy this hallowed rest in sublime soli-
tude, but rather to admit into it and so
into holy fellowship with Himself all His
sanctified people. With this statement
we have next to compare the eleventh
verse of chapter third : “ So I sware in my
wrath, they shall not enter into my rest. ’
Here the term “ rest” must be taken in a
specifically different acceptation. The
threatening appears to have been delivered
at Kadesh when, the ten spies having
given their evil report, the people rose in
rebellion and demanded to be led back
into Egypt. Then God said in His wrath,
“ They shall not enter into my rest.”
Undoubtedly the rest applied primarily to
Canaan which had been long promised to
the fathers and would then have been pos-
sessed by their children had they not been
utterly destitute of faith in God. But the
earthly inheritance was, at best, only the
shadow or figure of the heavenly ; and it
was the privilege of every true-hearted
Israelite to see therein the emblem of the
unseen rest eternal in the heavens. It is
evident, therefore, that the rest promised
to Israel did not apply to Canaan ex-
clusively, but reached forth for its fulness
of meaning to the heavenly rest which God
has provided for his chosen people. It
is with a view to enforce this appli-
cation that the sacred writer pursues
his argument in the seventh and following
verses of the fourth chapter. Joshua having
led the succeeding generation into the
promised land and allocated its several por-
tions among the twelve tribes, brought
about the fulfilment of all that could be
included in an earthly promise of rest. This
remained thereafter an accomplished fact
and could be referred to as an event in the
past history of the nation, and could no
longer be held forth as a promise which
was yet to be attained. In point of fact,
however, this is shown to have been
actually done. For the Holy Ghost, speak-
ing by the mouth of His servant David,
mentioned the rest as still existing, and
exhorted that late generation to strive to
be worthy of entering upon its enjoyment;
saying, “To-day, after so long a time.”
After four hundred years had intervened
between Joshua aud David, the Holy
Ghoet still odd “To-d:v if ys will hear
His voice harden not your heart. Now,”
continues the Apostle in the next verse, “if
Joshua had given them rest David would
not afterwards have spoken of another
Here the term is applied to the rest upon day.” If Joshua, in dividing the land
which God entered after having finished among the twelve tribes, had fulfilled all


that was contained in the promise, we
would have heard nothing more of this rest
as a thing of the future ; and from the
simple fact that we do so hear of it again,
the Apostle draws the necessary conclu-
sion—“ there remaineth, therefore, a rest
to the people of God.” It remained to
that generation in the days of David four
hundred years after the people had entered
on the possession of Canaan. It remained
in the days of the Apostles for those He-
brew Christians whom he so tenderly
exhorted. It remains for the people of God
now on whom the ends of the world have
come. From the whole argument there
emerges the interesting fact that Canaan was
meant to be a type of heayen. The type
and the antitype contain many suggestive
points of similarity. Canaan was called
the Lord’s land. So the heaven of
heavens is said in a very peculiar sense to
be God’s. It was the holy land'; and to
such a degree is this characteristic of
heaven that everything unclean is excluded
and it is affirmed that without holiness no
man shall see the Lord. The earthly
possession was God’s special gift to His
chosen people who were strictly cautioned
not to think of it as merited by their own
righteousness. So it is with heayen. “The
gift of God is eternal life.”
Closely connected with this latter type
and to some extent interlaced with it, is
another one which finds its form in the
Sabbath rest. The conclusion of the pre-
ceding argument is more literally expressed
in these words, “There remaineth there-
fore a Sabbath-keeping for the people of
God.” Where can we find the heavenly
state more fittingly pre-figured than in
the holy Sabbath day ? To the saint it is,
so long as it lasts, a kind of heaven upon
earth. The din of the world is now
hushed and gives place to a calm and
blessed serenity. It is a day also which is
devoted to heavenly things, to the praise
of God, and to meditation upon eternal
verities, Here is a glass, let it be observed,
in which men see not only heaven but
themselves also. Tbe Sabbath for this
reason becomes an excellent touchstone of
character by which every man can try
himself. If you find it a weariness and
wish it to be gone, you would not be in a
better, but in a worse case in heaven, for
you would find no end to that.
In addition to the typos of the heavenly
state there are also certain foretastes to be
enjoyed on this side of eternity. Among
these shall we hesitate to place the glad-
some feeling which accompanies the appro-
bation of a good conscience F There is no
reason why we should, for it is from God
and has something of heaven in its heart-
felt satisfaction. The converse also is true
for hell is never so much realised on
earth as it is in an evil conscience when it
proceeds to the horrors of remorse. This
will continue in the world of the lost, and
Justify itself as the worm that never dieth.
On the other hand, an approving conscience
is the divine support which has carried
good and true men through ail the suffer-
ings that malignity could invent. It is,
indeed, a foretaste of heaven itself.
The sanctuary and its services afford an-
other foretaste. The temple of old and its
ritual are described in Scripture as being
the patterns of things in heaven. Much
more fully may this reference be understood
of the Christian Church. In it God dwells
more graciously, if less manifestly, than
He did in the ancient sanctuary. The
solemn worship of God in public assembly
is the nearest approach -we make to heaven
in the spirit, while tabernacling in this
mortal flesh. Here at last is one thing that
is common to heaven and earth, the divine
service of praise. We worship God in the
place where He has chosen to put His
name ; and the spirits of just men made
perfect, serve Him day and night in His
temple above. Grace here is glory begun,
and the worship of God upon earth is a
foretaste of the heavenly state.
Those blessed foretastes which so much
ravish the heart of the Christian now,
reach their highest fruition in that which
is described as the earnest of the Spirit,
and the first-fruits of the Spirit. If we
would understand precisely what this fore-
taste is we should observe how an earnest
differs from a pledge. The latter may
signify the ratification of an agreement by
any sort of value no matter what its nature
may be. Contract for service may be
concluded by a money deposit which latter
will then be a pledge of fulfilment. But
an earnest must always be in kind. If
the agreement be for labor, an instalment
in service and nothing else would be an
earnest. So it is with this foretaste of
heaven. The graces wrought in the soul by
the spirit of God, such as love, Joy, and
peace are to be accepted as instalments of
the perfect love, the fulness of Joy, and
the peace passing all understanding which
are laid up for believers in heaven, or they
are the first fruits in the order of time as
they precede the whole harvest; and in
respect of quantity they are but a handful
in comparison with the complete
ing which awaits the saints in heaven.


In one of the articles of the Westminster
Creed to which every sincere member of
the Presbyterian Church assents, we have
the following clear and succint statement
of what happens after the death of
believers : “ The communion in glory with
Christ, which the members of the invisible
church enjoy immediately after death, is,
in that their souls are then made perfect in
holiness, and received into the highest
heavens, where they behold the face of
God in light and glory, waiting for the full
redemption of their bodies, which, even in
death, continue united to Christ, and rest
in their graves as in their beds, till at the
last day they be again united to their
souls.” The immediate entrance of de-
parted spirits upon the glory of heaven has
been opposed by two classes of adversaries
and on very different grounds. The first are
the Eomanists in the interest of their
doctrine of Purgatory. It is maintained
by them that the soul, instantly on its re-
lease from the body, enters into a middle
state, which is neither heaven nor hell,
where it must be purified from the stains
of sin, and be detained in confinement for a
longer or shorter period according as the
previous character may have been. Not a
shadow of proof can be alleged for this be-
lief from Scripture without doing violence
to the ordinary principles of interpretation.
There is only one text which gives even the
colour of plausibility to this doctrine and
after all it is in appearance, not in reality.
This is the oft -quoted passage in the first
epistle of St. Peter : “ By which also Ho
went and preached unto the spirits in
prison ; which sometime were disobedient,
when once the long-suffering of God
waited in the days of Noah, while the ark
was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight
souls were saved by water.” On no fair
interpretation can it be made out that this
prison is Purgatory. This statement
evidently means that the Saviour preached
LECTURE IX.
The Redeemed in Glory.
by His Spirit to the old world, in the
ministry of Noah, while he was preparing
the ark ; but they being disobedient, were
not only destroyed by the flood, but shut
up in the prison of hell ; in which respect
it is said He preached to those that are now
in prison.
The other class of opponents who deny
the immediate entrance of the saints upon
a state of glory are those who maintain
that the soul falls into a sleep at death, and
so continues till awakened by the sound of
the trumpet at the resurrection. It is quite
true that the Bible speaks of departing
believers as falling asleep in Jesus, but the
expression is used of the body, not of the
soul. The rest which the physical frame
then has from the labours, pains, and de-
cays of its mortal pilgrimage is so analo-
gous to its repose on its nightly couck that
men are naturally led to speak of the grave
as a bed. Thus Gray in his “ Elegy written
in a county Churchyard” falls upon the
same expression quite as a matter of course
“ The breezy call of incense-breathing morn,
The swallow twittering from the straw-built
shed,
The cock’s shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly
bed”
The term is also quite Scriptural and is used
in the same sense by the prophet Isaiah
who says, “ They shall rest in their beds,
each one walking in his uprightness.” The
former clause obviously refers to the body
as lying inert in the grave, while the soul
is at the same time indicated as being in
full activity and walking in its uprightness.
It would not be difficult to quote a large
number of texts in disproof both of the
middle state called Purgatory and the
fancied sleep of the soul whose very essence
is thinking, and the same time substantiat-
ing the fact of the immediate entrance of
the saints into glory. The following may
be accepted as some of the more remarkab \


passages, “ It came to pass that the beggar
died and was carried by angels into Abra-
ham’s bosom.” “lam in a strait betwixt
two, having a desire to depart and be with
Christ, which is far better.” “We are con-
fident, I say, and willing rather to be absent
from the body, and to be present with the
Lord.” “ To-day,” said Christ to the peni-
tent thief upon the cross, “shale thou be
with me in Paradise.”
To enter into any minute description of
the glory that awaits the spirits of just
men made perfect would be something
worse than presumptuous, for it would run
in the very teeth of Scripture warrant
which says ; “Eye hath not seen nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, the things which God hath
prepared for them that love Him.” “Such
knowledge is too wonderful for us; it is
high we cannot attain unto it.” Even the
revelation of this glory lies wholly out of
the line of our present experience, and is
so incommensurate with our limited
faculties as to make us despair of fully
comprehending it on this side the grave.
Our inquiry, therefore, must be confined to
mere outlines and to the broadest features
of the future state of blessedness. Thus
much we are safe in affirming on the very
threshold of the subject that it is in a most
peculiar sense God’s heaven, where He
manifests Himself in the perfection of glory.
“ The heaven, even the heavens, are the
Lord’s ; but the earth He hath given to
the children of men.” We know what this
earth is as the workmanship of God, and it
is an easy process to reason from the less to
the greater. If He has created this world
so good as to make a virtuous life here
below a continuous pleasure, if this earth is
full of the goodness of the Lord, what may
we not expect in heaven, which is de-
clared to be specially provided for the
everlasting enjoyment of His redeemed
people ? Thus much we are told that it is
eminently worthy of the Father of glory ;
and that God is not ashamed to be called
their God for He hath prepared for them a
city. Then, again, we know that the
saints’ enjoyment will not terminate in any
created thing, however glorious, but in the
infinite God Himself. Even on earth He
is the believer’s portion above and beyond
all that this world can furnish. Abraham
was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in
gold. But some better thing was in store
for him than wealth, as God showed Him
when He said : “ Fear not Abraham ; I am
thy shield and thy exceeding great reward."
If this portion was so valued as to make
the godly part with all they had to obtain
it, and disposed them even to take joyfully
the spoiling of their goods, knowing in
themselves that they had in heaven a
better and an enduring substance, how much
more precious must the realisation be in
heaven itself !
One of the most common figures under
which the heavenly state is set forth is that
of rest. Under this emblem it is especially
precious to the Christian pilgrim who has
to plod his wav through the wilderness of
this world. Who, indeed, has not been
captivated with the beauty of the words
which were heard from heaven, “ Write,
Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord,
yea, saith the spirit from henceforth, for
they rest from their labours and their works
do follow them.” Of all the uninspired
works on this subject perhaps the dearest
to the Christian heart is Baxter’s “ Saints’
Everlasting Best.” But that work, so full
of heavenly consolation, is founded on the
words, “ There remaineth a rest to the peo-
ple of God,” The rest here spoken of is
that of the Sabbath, and the text is pro-
perly rendered. “ there remaineth a keeping
of the Sabbath for the people of God,” that
is to say, that heaven will be like an ever-
lasting Sabbath. This deeper sense shows
that the rest in the world of glory, so far
from being mere idleness, will consist in a
large measure ox religious activity, for in
this way only is the Sabbath properly ob-
served upon the earth. The Jews were
wont to say there was no Sabbath in
holy things, meaning that this was the
busiest day in the temple according to the
sacrificial worship of the Old Testament.
We should, therefore, discard from our
minds the unscriptural notion that there
will be nothing to do in heaven The late
Dean Alford has some excellent remarks
on this aspect of our subject. “Of man-
kind in glory, thus perfected,” he says,
“ what shall be the employ P For I need
hardly press it on you that it is impossible
to conceive of man in a high and bappy
estate, without an employment worthy of
that estate, and in fact constituting its
dignity and happiness. Now some light is
thrown on this inquiry by Holy Scripture,
but it must be confessed it is very scanty.
It is true that all our meditations on, and
descriptions of, heaven want balance, and
are, so to speak, pictures ill-composed.
We first build up our glorified human
nature by such hints as are furnished us in
Scripture ; we place it in an abode worthy
of it; and then after all we give it an un-
ending existence with nothing to do. It
was not ill said by a great preacher that
most people’s idea of heaven was that it is


to sit on a cloud and sing psalms. And
others again strive to fill this out with the
bliss of recognising and holding inter-
course with those from whom we have
been severed on earth. And beyond all
doubt such recognition and intercourse
shall be, and shall constitute one of the
most blessed accessories of the heavenly
employment, but it can no more be that
employment itself than similar inter-
course on earth was the employment of life
itself here. To read some descriptions
of heaven one would imagine that
it were only an endless prolonga-
tion of some social meeting, walk-
ing and talking in some blessed country
with those whom we love. It is clear that
we have not thus provided the renewed
energies and enlarged powers of perfected
man with food for eternity. Nor if we
look in another direction, that of the
absence of sickness and care and sorrow,
shall we find any more satisfactory answer
to our question. Nay, rather shall we
find it made more difficult and beset with
more complications. For let us think how
much of employment for our present
energies is occasioned by, and finds its
very field of action in, the anxieties and
vicissitudes of life. They are, so to speak,
the winds which fill the sail and carry us
onward. By their action, hope and en-
thusiasm are excited. But suppose a state
where they are not, and life would become
a dead calm, the sail would flap idly, and
the spirit would cease to look onward at
all. So that unless we can supply some •
thing oyer and above the mere absence of
anxiety and pain, we have not attained to,
nay, we are farther than ever from a suffi-
cient employment for the life eternal. Now
before we seek for it in another direction,
let us think for a moment in this way.
Are we likely to know much of it ? St.
Paul likens ourselves to children, and that
blessed state to our full development as
men. Now ask yourselves, what does the
child at play know of the employments of
the man ? Such portions of them as are
merely external and material he may take in
and represent in his sport; but the work
and anxiety of the student at his book, or
the man of business at his desk, these are
of necessity entirely hidden from the child.
And so it is onward through the advancing
stages of life. Of each of them it may be
said ‘ We know not with what we must
serve the Lord, until we come hither.’ So
that we need not be utterly disappointed, if
our picture of heaven be at present ill-
composed ; if it seem to be little else than
a gorgeous mist after all. We cannot fill
in the members of the landscape at present.
If we could we should be in heaven.”
In our present state a very large measure
of happiness arises from activity and
especially from the activity of intellect.
Some philosophers have gone so far as to
affirm that a person is happy to the suae
degree as he consciously energises. One
who was well entitled to speak on this
subject has given it as his opinion that
more enjoyment is to be derived from
work than from holidays. Undoubtedly
there will be full activity of mind in the
heavenly state. Of the living creatures
who surround the throne it is said that they
rest not day and night; and the same
thing is affirmed in another connection
concerning the glorified saints. This
activity we need not hesitate to believe will
find exercise in the pursuit of knowledge.
It is said, indeed, in Scripture, that if there
be knowledge it shall vanish away; but
the statement is certainly to be understood
of this limited and imperfect knowledge
which shall disappear in the flood of
celestial light just as the moon and stars
fade from human vision at the rising of
the sun. How much intellectual work can
minister to a man’s happiness and make
him independent of adverse circumstances,
has been witnessed by every devoted seeker
after truth. The philosopher Hegel
finished his great work on the Phenomen-
ology of the Mind in Jena on the
very day that the great battle was
fought at that place, but the sage was
unconscious of anything unusual having
happened. All the world has heard of
Immanuel Kant, the father of the modern
philosophy of the mind ; but so well con-
tent was he with his mental pursuits, and
so much absorbed in the study of philosophy
that Kant lived and died in his native city
of Koenigsberg without once passing be-
yond its suburbs. Can it be conceived that
noble minds like these shall be condemned
to utter stagnation in’ the everlasting
blessedness ? Apart altogether from the
actual attainment of truth there is a vast
amount of pleasure to be derived from a
mere pursuit of the object. The dog will
hunt the hare while breath lasts, but cares
nothing for it after being captured. The
like eagerness is witnessed in many in-
genuous souls in the pursuit of science.
“If the Eternal Father,” says Lessing,
“ held truth in His right hand and the
search for it in His left, and I were re-
quired to choose, 1 would clasp His knee
and say ; Father, the left ! ”
When that which is perfect is come we
may confidently look for a change both in
our mode of knowing and of the object as
known, At present we gain our know-


ledge by inference, by analogy, and by years’ travel over land and sea, do some
demonstration; in heaven we may hope it
will be by intuition or the direct glance of
the mind ; and that the result will not be a
knowledge of the object merely in its
properties and circumstances, which is all
we have now, but rather a direct insight
into its very nature. “The cessation of
our present mode of knowing,” says
Richard Baxter, “ is but the cessation of
our ignorance and imperfection; as our
awakening endeth a dreaming knowledge,
and our maturity endeth the trifling know-
ledge of a child. If a physician be to de-
scribe the parts of a man, and the latent
diseases of his patient, he is fain to search
hard, and bestow many thoughts on it, be-
sides his long reading and converse, to
make himself capable of knowing; and
when all is done he goeth much upon con-
jectures, and his knowledge is mixed with
many uncertainties, yea, and mistakes ; but
when he openeth the corpse, he *seeth all,
and his knowledge is more full, more true,
and more certain ; besides that it is easily
and quickly attained, even by a present
look. A countryman knoweth the town,
the fields, and the rivers where he dwelleth,
yea, and the plants and the animals, with
ease and certain clearness; when he that
must know the same things by the study of
geographical writings and tables, must
know them with a general, an unsatisfac-
tory, and often a much mistaking kind of
knowledge. Alas ! when our present know-
ledge hath cost a man the study of forty, or
fifty, or sixty years, how lean and poor,
how doubtful and unsatisfactory is it after
all ! But when God will show us Himself,
and all things, and when heaven is known
as the sun is known by itsown light, this will
be the clear, sure, and satisfactory know-
edge : ‘ Blessed are the pure in heart for
they shall see God.’ This sight will be
worthy of the name of wisdom, while our
present glimpse is but philosophy, a love
and desire of wisdom. So far should we be
from fearing death, through the fear of
losing our knowledge, or any of the means
of knowledge, that it should rather make
us long for the world of glorious light, that
we might get out of this darkness, and
know all that with an easy look, to our joy
and satisfaction, which here we know with
troublesome doublings or not at all.” To
the same effect this eminent divine speaks
in another place. “It is very pleasant
here to increase in holy knowledge, though
it usually brings an increase of malignant
opposition, and so of sorrow to the flesh.
The pleasure that the mi.id ha'h in
common knowledge, brings man through a
great deal of labor to attain it. How many
men take, to see and know more of this
lower world ; though it is little they bring
home, but more acquaintance with sin, and
vanity, and vexation. How many mere
years do thousands spend in reading
multitudes of tedious volumes, that they
may know what others knew before them.
Printers and booksellers live by our desire
of knowledge. What soul, then, on earth
can possibly conceive howgreatapleasure it
will be for a glorified soul to see the Lord 1
Though I cannot now conceive what that
intuition of God Himself will be, it satis-
fieth me that it will be as perfect a know-
ledge as it is fit for me to desire.”
Thus far we have considered chiefly the
mode of knowledge or way of knowing in
the future state. It is now time to inquire
more particularly into the object of know-
ledge. The soul being thus supposed to
pursue the active search after truth
through eternity, it follows of necessity
that the object to be known must be
infinite, for otherwise it would be incom-
mensurate with the means of gaining
knowledge. But as this primary object is
the Eternal and Infinite God, the require-
ment is satisfied at once. To know God is
itself declared to be eternal life. This is
called in human language “Theology”
which, in former days, was termed the
queen of the sciences, both in respect of its
nobility and its unfathomable depths. The
counsels of God which are to us in the
present slate so inscrutable a mystery, will
form the theme of saintly study through-
out eternal ages. The scheme of redemp-
tion is a subject of contemplation to the
angels, although they have neither part
nor lot in that work. It is the Apostle
Peter who tells us that into these things
the angels desire to look. The mystery of
Providence will also be the subject of
intense inquiry by the glorified spirits in
heaven. The best of men have gone to
their graves deeply exercised, and some-
times profoundly depressed by the per-
plexities of the Divine Government which
are witnessed here below, and they have
had to take refuge in the assurance that,
“ what we know not now we shall know
hereafter.” God’s works, also, will be the
theme of study as well as Himself and His
ways. What shall we say of heaven itself
made to be God’s glorious dwelling place
and the home of His saints in whom is all
His delight ? Here surely is another inex-
hau-ititde field of knowledge. Dr. Talmage
observes : “ Many good people suppose
that we shaT see heaven the first day we
get there. No! yr u cannot see L-ndon in
two weeks. You cannot see Venice in a


rrmnth. You curt rot see the great city of
New York in a day. No ;it will take
all eternity to see heaven, to count the
towers, to examine the trophies, to gaze
upon the thrones, to see the hierarchies.
Ages on ages roll, and yet heaven is new.
The streets new ! The temple new ! the joy
new ! The song new ! I stayed a week at
Niagara Falls, hoping thoroughly to
understand and appreciate them. But, on
the last day, they seemed newer and more
incomprehensible than on the first day.
Gazing on the infinite rush of celestial
splendours, where the oceans of delight
meet, and pour themselves into the great
heart of God—how soon will be exhausted
the song ? Never ! Never ! ”
It is certain that the activity of the
gloried spirits will very largely be em-
ployed in praise and adoration. Scripture
authority is very express on this subject.
“ All the angels stood round about the
throne, and about the elders and the four
living creatures, and fell before the throne
on their faces and worshipped God, saying,
Amen ; Blessing and glorv, and wisdom,
and thanksgiving, and honour, and power
and might, be unto our God forever and
ever.” In other passages the redeemed
souls are more expressly associated with
the angelis in the adoration of the Most
High. But this continual praise must not
be understood as a perpetual repetition of
the same impulse. It arises from never-
ending discoveries of the glory of God.
The more the glorified spirits get to know
of God, of His ways, and His works, the
more reason do they find to ascribe glory
unto Him. And as there is no limit to the
one, neither shall there be to the other.
If it could be said of the servants in the
temple below, how much more of heaven
itself : “ Blessed are they that dwell in thy
house ; they will be still praising thee.”


LECTURE X.
Are there Degrees of Glory in Heaven ?
The question whether there be different
degrees of glory in heaven is one that has
long been prominent both in the Roman
Catholic and the Protestant communions.
The Roman'sts have been compelled to
give an affirmative answer a« the necessary
result of their doctrine of merit which goes
so far as to produce works of supereroga-
tion or doing more than duty requires. On
this reckoning it follows as a matter of
course, that, as there are different degrees
of merit in this world, so there wd] also be
corresponding grades of reward in the
world to come, seeing that both alike are
under the adnvnistration of the same God
w ho is peffec'ly just and righteous in all
His doings. Protestant theologians, while
generally admitting the fact under discus-
sion, have opposed the grounds on which
their opponents rely for its support. The
divine rewards of the future state are fully
acknowledged ; but only as a matter of
grace, never of obligation. They have
pointed out that the Scripture nowhere says
that the sain's are recompensed for their
works, as if they were meritorious, but
always according to their works, as being
the index of a holy character. But let it
here be noticed at the outset that both the
great sections of Christendom are prac-
tically unanimous in holding that there are
various degrees of glory in heaven ; and
differ only in the manner in which the fact
is to be explained.
In proceeding to unfold the evidence on
which this doctrine rests, we may begin
with certain presumptions which lie to
hand in matters of every-day experience
and observation. Nowhere in nature do
we find a dead uniformity. The earth
und r our feet is carpeted with a never-
ending varie’y of plants and animated crea-
overhead we see among the “ bodies celes-
tial ” thit one star diff reth from another
star i't glory. Men differ without end from
one another, in natural faculties, in in-
telle tuff attainmen's, in outward circum-
stances, and also in inward graces. It is
known also that there is a variation of
degrees, certainly immeasurably greater,
among the angels in heaven. They are de-
scribed as being arranged in an ascending
series of orders, as thrones and dominions,
principalities and powers, and also as dis-
charging higher and lower functions, some
being ministering spirits to the saints and
others standing in the presence of the
Eternal G>d. Orders of some kind also
exist among the fallen spirits, o'he, wise
we would not read of the prince of the
devils.
“ There must be an intimate connec ion,”
it has been well said, “ between our
present and future state, for otherwise
there would be such chasms and abrupt
transitions in the progressive order of the
Divine Government, as are quite opposed to
all that has appeared in any of the works of
Heaven. Circumstances will, no doubt, be
changed, new sources of enjoyment will be
opened, and the relations connected with
this imperfect world will give place to
others of a nobler kind, but the essential
elements of happiness shall remain for
ever. If, then, the essential principles and
felicity of the redeemed must he the same
in heaven as on earth, the difference con-
sisting only in the degrees of their per-
fection ; it follows, that the exercise of
Christian principles here is a preparation
for the exorcise of them in more perfect re-
lations in the heavenly country. The dis-
pensation of time, therefore, and that of
eternity, are connected as correspondent
ute» ; and if we raise our eyes to the skies and continuous links in the great plan of


the Almighty \ and the relv itiona and
things of tbe form®? ane- s®>tegai ated as to
be preparatory to tL l ® latter.
It is a legitimate process of reavoning to
confirm a less evident jkoposition. by one
that is more evident, eVfcn on th®' lo wer
level of analogy. Proceeding on this* pi in-
ciple w 3 may find an arg'Bfflnent fei a
diversity of degrees of glory from the
parallel and more clearly revealed! fact o\ 5 a
diversity of degrees of punishment in he 11
Our Saviour taught that it would be
more tolerable for Tyre and Sidoa, ft *r
Sodom and Gomorrah, than for Chorazm i
and Bethsaidain the day of judgment; and
in another connection He declared, to th®
same effect, that the servant who knew note
his Lord’s will and did it not would, be
beaten with few stripes, whereas ht? who
knew that will and yet did it not will be
beaten with many stripes. The punishment
of the wicked and the reward of the
righteous are strictly parallel, for they are
the harvests reaped in consequence of the
sowing in this present life ; and as there are
degrees of punishment in the one, it is safe
to infer, that there are degrees of glory in
the other.
The actual degree of glory which shall be
obtained by any one saint has usually been
considered as being principally conditioned
by his capacity of receiving ; so that while
it is true there shall be no felt want and that
every vessel will be full, it does not follow
that the quantity contained in each will be
the same. A quaint old author thus puts
the case: “ Like as sundry vessels,
whereof some are bigger and some less,
if they be all cast into the sea, some will
receive more water and some less and yet
all shall be full and no want in any. So
likewise among the saints of God in heaven
some shall have more glory, some less, and
yet all, without exception, full of glory.’*
In answer to the question, will not this
disparity of glory give rise to envy and
jealousy ? Augustine said very truly, that
such feelings would be entirely suppressed
by the unity of love which would reign in
all. .
The glory of the heavenly state will con-
sist to a large extent in the approbation
with which the servant, at the end of his
course, will be received by his Divine
Master; but it is not to be supposed that
all enter alike into the joy of their Lord
and receive an equal crown of glory. The
infant who has just come into this world to
and another ot His saints upon the earth.
Various excellencies have been rewarded
here with special marks of approbation.
Abraham, the father of the faithful, was
ennobled by the title of the friend of God.
The holy David, the sweet singer of Israel,
was called the man after Q-od’s own heart.
Moses, who was faithful in all his house,
was designated, by way of eminence, the
servant of God. Even in the Apostolic
company there was an election within the
election. Three of their number, Peter,
James, and John were taken to be wit-
nesses both of the Master s highest glory
and deepest sufferings. Nor did the special
favour of the L >rd end here, for out of
these three one was selected to be known
for all time as “ the disciple whom Jesus
loved.” We have only to conceive of the
same marks of special approbation to be in
similar operation in the world to come
to find diversities of degrees of glory
in heaven. That the same discriminating
approval will be exercised there, is put be-
yond doubt by such texts as the following,
“ Whosoever shall confess me before men,
him will I confess also before my Father
which is in heaven.” ‘‘Wherefore we labour
that whether present or absent we may be
accepted of him.”
The same truth touching degrees of
glory in the bright world above is further
confirmed by the position which is declared
to have been assigned to the patriarchs,
prophets, apostles, and other eminent
saints. They are represented in various
passages as occupying a foremost place
among the company of the redeemed in
glory. The beggar Lazarus was carried
by angels to Abraham’s bosom. It was
the declaration of our Lord that many
would come from the East and the West
and sit down with Abraham, and Isaac
and Jacob in the kingdom of heav< n.” At
the tran*figuration Moses and Elias were
honored above all the glorified saints in
being chost n to meet with the Saviour in
the hour of His glory. Christ made a
special promise to His apostles which gave
them a premier place in the world to come.
“Verily I say unto you, that ye which have
followed me, in the regeneration, when the
Son of Man shall sit on the throne of His
glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel.” And
to the same effect, also in another passage:
“ Ye are they that have continued with
me in my temptations. And I appoint
go out of it, and a saved malefactor, like unto yon a kingdom, as my Father hath
the thief upon the cross, cannot surely be appointed unto me ; that ye may eat and
received with the same approbation, as a drink at my table io my kingdom, and sit
Paul op a John. This would be contrary on thrones judging the twelve tribes of
to the analogy of God's dealings with one, Israel,” There is a different degree of


honor attached to the places at the right
hand and the left of a King upon the
throne, and the same distinction is made in
the kingdom of heaven. This statement is
sufficiently established by the words of
Christen a memorable occasion. “Then
came to Him the mother of Zebedee’s
children with her sons, worshipping Him,
and desiring a certain thing of Him. And
He said unto her, What wilt thou ? She
saith unto Him, Grant that these my two
sons may sit, the one on thy right hand,
and the other on the left, in thy kingdom.
But Jesus answered and said. “Ye know not
what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the
cup that I shall drink of, and to be bap-
tized with the baptism that I am baptized
with ? They say unto Him, We are able.
And He saith unto them. Ye shall drink
indeed of my cup, and be baptized with
the baptism that I am baptized with ;
but to sit on my right hand,
and on my left, is not mine to give;
but it shall be given to them for whom it is
prepared of my Father.” It should be re-
membered, also, in this connection that the
Scriptures speak both of the greatest and
the least in the kingdom of heaven: “Who-
soever shall break one of these least com-
mandments, and shall teach men so, he
shall be called the least ia the kingdom of
heaven ; but whosoever shall do and teach
them, the same shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven.”
Coming now to the parables we meet
wi h two —the pounds and the talents—
which apply very directly to the subject in
band. They both refer to our Lord's de-
parture from this world and His returning
at the end of time to reckon with His
servants according as they had been faith
ful or unfaithful. In both cases the
servant is promoted over Bye or ten cities,
according to the profitable use he had
made of that which had been entrusted to
his care. “ In the parable of the pounds,”
says an interesting writer, “ the reward
of the servants is represented as appor-
tioned to the measure of the profits they
had gained. The sum given to both was
the same, but their improvement if it was
different. The one, accordingly, whose
pound had gained ten pounds had the
government of ten cities given him ; while
he who had gained five pounds received
the government of five cities. In so far as
the future reward consists in approbation,
bestowed, while each is faithful to what he
receives, then, in so far as the reward con-
sists in approbation, all are on a level. But
while the Divine commendation is a part,
and a very delightful part of the reward, it
is not the who’e of it, so that in other res-
pects the difference of talents will be
connected with different degrees of
positive bliss. This distinction it is of im-
portance particularly to remember. It is
clear from these parables that future
blessedness will not be the result of one
cause only, but of several. One Christian,
then, may have an equal share with an-
other of what flows from some cf these,
though not an equal measure of what pro-
ceeds from others of them. In the moral
as well as in the natural world, God does
nothing without some ulterior end. When,
therefore, He enables a Christain to attain a
high measure of that excellence which is
the object of His greatest complacency in
heaven as well as on earth, He must design
by this means to bring him to that state of
future glory for which his character has
tilted him.”
Let us, in the next place, take a review
of those striking similitudes under which
this subject is revealed in Scripture. The
first to be noticed is that of the starry sky.
“ They that be wise,” we read in the pro-
phecies of Daniel, “ shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and they that
turn many to righteousness as the stars for
ever and ever,” The persons spoken of
in this passage are those that are wise in
the wisdom that cometh from above. Their
wisdom is turned to the best account, tor
they use it for the purpose of turning many
unto righteousness. And the sequel of the
whole is the reward which God is graciously
pleased to bestow upon them in heaven.
But as all will not take with them the same
record from the earth, some haying less
and some more, in like manner they will
not appear finally in the same degree of
glory, but will differ from one another as
the stars of heavt n differ in brilliancy.
The most ignorant person by turning his
eye upward any cloudless night cannot fail
to notice a marked variation in the bright-
ness of these orbs of the sky. But the
telescope magnifies this difference almost
to infinity. The astronomer classifies them
into descending magnitudes and the num-
ber runs through all the digits. As great
variation as this we are taught to expect
it is proporti med, and in this parable, to among the glorified saints,
the degree of diligence and fidelity—the A second similitude under which the
different degrees of glory being marks of same truth is presented is that of a build-
different degrees of complacency. But ing and the workman. “ Other foundation
where, as in the parable of the talents, can no man lay than that is laid, which is
there is a difference in the original number Jesus Christ. Now if any man build upon


this gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay
stubble, every man’s work shall be made
manifest, for the day shall declare it, be-
cause it shall be revealed by fire, and the
fire shall try every man’s work of what sort
it is. If any man’s work abide which he
hath built thereupon, he shall receive a
reward. If any man’s work shall be burnt,
he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be
saved ; yet so as by fire.” Here we have
two builders. The one builds with im-
perishable materials and has an ample re-
ward for his labour. The other piles up
perishable materials which are consumed
iu the conflagration and the builder saves
nothing but his bare life, and that with
great difficulty. Who would say that these
two men are on the same footing after their
work is done ? It is only necessary to recall
to mind that this is the illustration used
by the apostles to set forth the position of
the servants of God in the future world,
where man shall receive his own
reward according to his own labour.”
A third similtude is that of sowing and
reaping. “He that soweth sparingly
shall reap also sparingly; and ho which
soweth bountifully shall reap also
bountifully.” This is a most striking
illustration and very easily understo>d. In
another instance it is used to signify the
quality of that which is sown and reaped.
For whatsoever a man soweth that shall
he also reap ; for he that soweth to the
flash shall of the flesh reap corruption ; but
he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the
Spirit reap life everlasting.” But the
passage first quoted refers to the quantity
sown and reaped, be it less or greater, as is
shown by the words sparingly and bounti •
fully. The most ignorant tiller of the
ground understands perfectly, that the
measure of his expectation concerning the
harvest is to be conditioned by the measure
of his sowing. If he sow little, he ex-
pects to reap little ; and if he sow much he
expects to reap much. If we change the
terms from seed-time and harvest to time
and eternity, the relation is still the same,
and the rewards keep a similar proportion
to the work.
A fourth similtude is found in the idea
of a treasure which is laid up against the
time to come. It is used both in the
Gospels and the Epistles. “ Lav not up
for yourselves treasures upon earth, where
moth and rust doth corrupt, and where
thieves break through and steal; but lay
up for yourselves treasures in heaven,
where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt,
and where thieves do not break through
nor steal ; for where your treasure is, there
will your heart be also.” “ Laying up
for themselves a good foundation against
the time to come, tha.'c they may lay hold
upon eternal life.” Just as the men of the
world hoard up their money upon earth so
Christians are exhorted to lay up theirs in
heaven. But what cou'd varv more in
amount that the quantity of the treasure
which the men of the world can call their
own. ? Do not riches in this world vary
with every degree in the scale of figures ?
If there is any similtude, then, we are com-
pelled to think the same thing of the
heavenly treasures which must be of a
kind and character as will determine the
position of the saint iu the kingdom of
heaven.
There is still cn e more proof text whn h
has been purposely left to the close, both
because it clinches the argument and be-
cause it is combined with earnest exhorta-
tion. “ Look to yourselves,” says the
Apostle John, “ that we loose not those
things which we have wrought, but that we
receive a full reward.” The Apostle is
speaking of God’s servants. He puts them
in mind of a reward in heaven by the grace
of God, and exhorts them to seek it in full
measure. This is a powerful motive to
diligence in the work of the Lord,
and it is also a legitimate one to man
who is encompassed by so many tempta-
tions and subject to great infirmities. It
has proved an incentive to good men like
Moses who had respect unto the recom-
pense of reward, and may equally well be
a motive to ourselves. “ Therefore, my
beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, immov-
able always abeunding in the work of the
Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your
labour is not in vain in the Lord.”


LECTURE XI
Shall we know one another in Heaven?
Every question concerning the future
state of existence is unspeakably important
for this reason, if for no other, that our
condition then will be fixed and permanent.
All our circumstances in this world are
continually changing and we ourselves
must soon leave them altogether; “ for the
things that are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal.’’ If
an emigrant be removing only to a distant
part of the earth where he intends to
spend the remaining years of his life, he
uses all the means in bis power to get well
acquainted with that new country in which
his tuture lot is to be cast. How much
more is it the interest of the heavenward
pilgrim to know all he can know regarding
that better land in which he hopes to dwell
for ever. Is or is this entirely a question
of the future, for a man’s ideas of
heaven have a very marked practical effect
on the regulation cf his life in this present
world. A recent very able writer, Mr. Alger,
shows bow differently this influence will
operate in the experience of two Christians,
the one believing and the other disbeliev-
ing in the possibility of mutual recognition
in the heavenly state. “ Evidently it is of
much importance to a man,” says he,
which of these views he shall take, for
each exerts a destinctive influence in regard
to his peace of mind, his moral strength,
and his religious character. On one who
believes that hereafter, beyond all the
prived mostly—for all felt connection be-
tween them is hopelessly sundered—of
the good influences they exerted on him
when present. He must try, by all expedi-
ents, to forget them ; think no more of
their virtues, their welcome voices and
kindly deeds ; wipe from the tablet of his
soul all fond records of their united happy
days; look not to the future, let the past
be as if it had never been, and absorb his
thoughts and feelings in the turmoil of the
present. This is the only course; and
even then, if true to the holiest instincts of
his soul, he will find the fatal separation
has lessened his being and impoverished
his life
‘ For this losing is true dying,
This is lordly man’s down-lying,
This his slow but sure reclining.
Star by star his world resigning,’
But to him who earnestly expects soon to
be restored under fairer auspices and in a
deathless world to those from whom he
parted as he laid their crumbling bodies in
the earth, the death of friends will come as
a message from the Great Father—a mess-
age solemnyet kind, laden indeed with natural
sadness yet brightened by sure promise and
followed by heavenly compensations. If
his tears flow, they flow not in scalding
bitterness from the Marah fountain of des-
pair, but in chastened joy from the smitten
rock of faith. So far from endeavoring to
forget the departed he will cling to their
partings in this world of tombs, he shall memories with redoubled tenderness, as a
never meet the dear companions who now sacred trust and a redeeming power. They
bless his lot, the death of friends must fall, will be more precious to him than ever—
if he be a person of strong sensibilities, as stronger to purify and animate. Their
a staggering blow, awakening an agony of saintly examples will attract him as never
sorrow, taking from the sky and the earth before, and their celestial voice plead as
a glory nothing can ever replace, and leav- from on high to win him to virtue and to
ing in his heart a wretched void nothing heaven. The constant thought of seeing
can ever fill. Henceforth he will be de- them once more, and wafting in their arms


through the enchanted spaces of Paradise,
will wield a sanctifying force over his
spirit. They will make the invisible sphere
a peopled reality to him, and draw him to
God by the diffused bonds of a spiritual
acquaintance and an eternal love.”
The reason which has led many to doubt
the possibility of recognition in the future
world is the certain fact, that all, or almost
all, the outward marks by which one
friend is known to another here, will not
exist hereafter. The individuals we meet
with in every-day life differ endlessly
in form and features, so that we never
find two persons who are exactly alike.
But these same marks of distinction cannot
exist in the glorified state as they are now,
and therefore in the world above we can
know no man after the flesh. But are
physical characteristics the only means of
recognition even in this present life P
Certainly not. There are distinguishing
features of the soul as well as of the body.
The writer formerly quoted has some ex-
cellent remarks on this aspect of our ques-
tion. “Turning to the facts of experience,”
says he, “ we find that it is not alone, nor
indeed chiefly, by their visible forms and
features that we know our chosen ones.
We also, and far more truly, know them
by the traits of their character, the elements
of their lives, the effluence of their spirits,
the magic atmosphere which surrounds
them, the electric thrill and communica-
tion which vivify and conjoin our souls.
And even in the exterior, that which most
reveals and distinguishes each is not the
shape, but the expression, the lights and
shades, reflected out from the immortal
spirit shrined within. We know each
other really by the mysterious motions of
our souls. And all these things endure
and act uninterrupted though the fleshly
frame, alter a thousand times or dissolve
in its native dust. The knowledge of a
friend, then, being independent of the body,
spirits may be recognised in the future
state by the associations mutually sur-
rounding them, and feelings connecting
them. Amidst all the innumerable throng-
ing multitudes, through ail the immeasur-
able intervening heights and depths, of the
immaterial world, remembered and desired
companions may be selected and united by
inward laws that act with the ease and pre-
cision of chemical affinities. We may
therefore, recognise each other by the feel
body will be restored to a future life, or
that the soul has any resemblance to the
body by which it may be identified—*•
furthermore, if he shall maintain that the
doctrine of the revelation and recognition
of the souls of friends in another life by an
instinctive feeling, a mysterious attraction
and response, is fanciful, an overdrawn
conclus'on of the imagination, not war-
ranted by a stern induction of the average
realities of the subject, and if he shall then
ask, how are we to distinguish our former
acquaintances among the host of heaven P
there is one more fact of experience which
meets the case and answers his demand.
When long absence and great exposures
have wiped off all the marks by which old
companions knew each other, it has fre-
quently happened that they have met and
conversed with indifference, each being
ignorant of whom the other was ; and so it
has continued until, by some indirect
means, some incidental allusion, or the
agency of a third person, they have been
suddenly revealed. Then, with throbbing
hearts, in tears and rapture, they have
rushed into each other’s arms, with an in-
stantaneous recurrence of their early
friendship in all its original warmth, ful-
ness, and flooding associations. Many
such instances are related in books of
romance with strict truth to the actual
occurrences of life. Several instances of
it are authenticated in the early history of
America, when children, torn from their
homes by the Indians, were recovered by
their parents after twenty or thirty years
had elapsed and they were identified by
circumstantial evidence. Let any parent
ask his heart, any true friend ask his heart,
if, discovering by some foreign means the
object of his love, he would not embrace
him with just as ardent a gratitude and
devotion as though there were no outward
change and they had known one another at
sight. So, in the life beyond the grave, if
we are not able to recognise our earthly
companions directly, either by spiritual
sight or by intuitive feeling, we may obtain
knowledge of each other indirectly by com-
parison of common recollections, or by the
mediation of angels, or by some other
divine arrangement especially prepared for
that purpose. And, therefore, whether
in heaven we look or feel as we do here or
not, whether there be any provision in our
present constitution for future recognition
ings which now connect us, and which or not, is of no consequence. In a thousand
shall spontaneously kindle and interchange ways the defect can be remedied, if such be
when we meet in heaven, as the signs of our the will of God. And that such is His
former communion, ... If now the will every relevant fact and consideration
critical inquirer shall say, there is no would seejx to prove. It is a consistent
evidence, and it is incredible, that the and seemingly requisite continuation and


completion of that great scheme of which
this life is a part. It is an apparently
essential element and fulfilment of the
wonderful apparatus of retribution,reward
and discipline, intended to educate us as
members of God’s eternal family. Because
from the little which we now understand,
we cannot infer with plainness and cer-
tainty the precise means and method by
which we can discriminate our friends in
heaven need be no obstacle to believing the
fact itself ; for there are millions of un-
doubted truths whose conditions and ways
of operation we can no wise fathom.”
It should count for something in the
proof of this doctrine that it has prevailed
generally among all nations throughout
the whole scale of civilisation. Wherever
men have believed in the immortality of
the soul - and this belief has been prac-
tically universal—they have also held fast
to the doctrine of recognition in the other
world. Homer shows Ulysses —as Virgil in
like manner shows Aeneas upon his
entrance into the other world mutually
recognising his old comrades and recog-
nised by them. The two heroes whose in-
separable friendship on earth was pro-
verbial are still together in Elysium :
“ Then, side by side, along the dreary coast,
Advance Achilles’ and Patroclus’ gbost,
A friendly pair.”
And so the meeting of Aeneas with his
father Anchises in the other world is thus
described—He
“ Meets him with open arms and falling tears,
‘Welcome,’ he said ‘the gods’ undoubted
i ace,
0, long expected, to my dear embrace,
’Tis true, computing time, I now believed
The happy day approach—nor are my hopes
deceived.’
To the voices of the poets must be added the
more import ant testimony of the philosophers
of antiquity. The prince of sages, Socrates,
thus addressed bis judges in the closing
hours of his life : “ Will it not be unspeak-
ably blessed,” said he, “ when escaped
from those who call themselves judges, to
appear before those who truly deserve the
name, such as Minos, Ehadamanthus,
Aeacus, and Triptolemus, and to associate
with all who have maintained the cause of
truth and righteousness; or again to con-
verse with Orpheus, and Musaeus, and
Hesiod and Homer, at how much would
any of you purchase this ? Be assured I
would choose to die often if these things be
true ; lor to me delightful would be the
communion with Palamedes, Ajax the
son of Telamon, and others of the ancients
who died in consequence of an unjust
sentence pronounced upon them. What
would one give, O judges, to converse
with him who led the great arnament to
Troy, or with Ulysses, or with thousands
more whom one might name, of men and
women, with whom to discourse and
associate would be an inconceivable enjoy-
ment ? ” Cicero in his treatise on Old
Age expressed his belief in the same
doctrine in the following terms : —“I feel
impelled by the desire of joining the
society of my two departed friends, your
illustrious fathers, whom 1 reverenced and
loved, I desire not only to meet those whom
I myself know, —but those also of whom I
have heard, or regarding whom I have
written. Oh, illustrious day, when I shall
go hence to that divine council and
assembly of souls, when I shall escape
from this crowd and rabble ; for 1 shall go,
not only to those illustrious men of whom
I have spoken, but also to my Cato, than
whom one more excellent or illustrious
in goodness was never born. He himself
consoled me, judging that our distance and
parting would not long continue.” These
testimonies are spoken purely from the
light of nature and for this reason prove
themselves to be an original instinct which
God has placed in the human constitu-
tion.
Valuable as the foregoing presumptions
are in favor of this doctrine, it is neverthe-
less evident that it can be finally estab-
lished only upon the authority of the word
of God. To this source of evidence we
must now turn. In entering upon this
class of proofs it should be noticed as
giving countenance to recognition in
heaven that the corresponding fact of re-
cognition in hell is undoubtedly made
known in Scripture. The prophet Isaiah
gives a graphic description of the
reception of the King of Babylon
when he goes to his own place ; but
the scene could have no meaning apart
from the fact of recognition. “ Hell from
beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at
thy coming : it stirreth up the dead for
thee, even all the chief ones of the earth ;
it hath raised up from their thrones all the
kings of the nations. All they shall speak
and say unto thee, Art thou also become
weak as we ? Art thou become like unto
us ? ” It may be seen from this and other
kindred passages that memory, inscead of
being destroyed in death, survives and be-
comes intensely active in the future state.
It would indeed be a marvellously
strange phenomenon and every way un-
accountable if Christian friendship, which
is the most lasting the world has even
seen and has been sanctified, too, by the ex-
example of Christ, should die out with this
present life and find no place among the


glorified saints in heaven. If this were
so it would make the future state of
believers in some respects worse than the
present. But every consideration lies
against a misgiving which is so
ungenerous and 80 much opposed
to the whole tenor of Scripture.
On this subject the late Archbishop
Whately has the following judicious
remarks : “ It is supposed,” says he, “ that
particular frifendships will in heaven be
swallowed up in universal charity, and
that any partial regard towards one good
man more than another is too narrow a
feeling and unworthy of a saint made
perfect. Do we then find any approach
towards this supposed perfection in the
best Christians on earth P Do we find that
in proportion as they improve in charity
towards all mankind they become leas and
less capable of friendship—less affectionate
to their relatives and connections, and to
the intimate companions whom they have
selected from among their Christian
brethren ? Far from it. It is generally
observed, on the contrary, that the best
Christians, and the fullest, both of
brotherly love towards all that are of the
household of faith, and of universal tender-
ness and benevolence towards all their
fellow-creatures, are also the warmest and
steadiest in their friendships. Why, then,
should it be otherwise hereafter? Why
should private friendship interfere with
universal benevolence in heaven, more than
it does on earth ? lam convinced, on the
contrary, that the extension and perfection
of friendship will constitute a great part of
the future happiness of the blest. Many
have lived, in various and distant ages and
countries, who have been in their character
perfectly adapted for friendship with each
other, but who, of course, could never meet
in this world. Many a one selects, when
he is reading history— a truly pious
Christian, more especially, in reading
sacred history—some one or two favorite
characters, with whom he feels that a
personal acquaintance would have been
peculiarly delightful to him. Why should
not such a desire be realised in a future
state ? A wish to see, and personally
know, for example, the Apostle Paul, or
John, is most likely to arise in the noblest
and purest mind. I should be sorry to
think such a wish absurd and pre-
sumptuous, or unlikely ever to be gratified.
The highest enjoyment, doubtless, to the
blest will be the personal knowledge of
their great and beloved Master ; yet I
cannot but think that some part of their
happiness will consist in ‘an intimate
knowledge of the greatest of His followers
also, and of those of them in particular
whose peculiar qualities are to each the
most attractive. In this world, again, our
friendships are limited, not only to those
who lire in the same age and country, but
to a small portion even of them —to a
small portion even of those who are not
unknown to us, and whom we know to be
estimable and amiable, and who, we feel,
might have been among our dearest
friends. Our command of time and leisure
to cultivate friendships imposes a limit to
their extent, and the removal of such
impediments in a better world seems to me
a most desirable and a most probable
change. I see no reason, again, why those
who have been dearest friends on earth,
should not. when admitted to that happy
state, continue to be so, with full know-
ledge and recollection of their former
friendship.” We are well assured, also,
that our knowledge will not be less, but
greater than it is now in the most
advanced of Christians. Our present
methods of gaining knowledge by the
circuitous paths of sensation and reflection
will indeed vanish away and give place to
intuition; but the gain in amount and
certainty will be immense when we shall
know even as we are known. The fellow-
ship of believers which is rendered a fact
now by their being made members one of
another in the body of Christ, will surely
advance to a higher perfection in the
general assembly and church of the First-
born in Heaven. “We have great cause
to think,” says Richard Bacter, “by
many Scripture expressions, that our
heavenly union and communion will be
near and much more extensive ; and that
all the glorified shall know each other, at
least, be far less distant and strange than
we are now, and I must needs say, that it
is a pleasant thought to me, and greatly
helpeth my willingness to die, to think
that I shall go to all the holy ones both
Christ and angels, and departed blessed
spirits."
It is true, indeed, that the doctrine of
mutual recognition in heaven is never
attempted to be proved, nor even is it ex-
pressly asserted, in Scripture ; but the
same admission must be made regarding
the existence of God which is everywhere
assumed and acted upon as a postulate that
is too evident to be questioned. In all
courts of law circumstantial evidence, or
inferential proof, is reckoned of equal,
sometimes even of more value than direct
testimony : and it is upon this pivot that
the question of life or death usually turns.
If we shall find that the Bible takes for
granted the doctrine of recognition as a
self-evident truth and founds upon it,
nothing but sheer scepticism couM refuse


to accept it as a fact of revelation.
A very remarkable case occurs in the
history of David, King of Israel. In
punishment for his sin it pleased the
righteous God to visit him with a sore
familv bereavement. David’s child was
smitten with a fatal sickness. So long as
life held out, the afflicted father prayed
and fasted, and lay all night upon the
earth. It might have been expected, and
indeed, seems to have been expected, that
when the child was taken away the parent
himself would almost have died of grief.
But no sooner was the death announced
than “ David rose from the earth, and
washed, and anointed himself, and
changed his apparel, and came into the
house of the Lord and worshipped; then
he came to his own house; and when he
required, they set meat before him, and he
did eat.” After this marvellous change in
his demeanour, it is not surprising to read
of the astonishment of his attendants and
their asking for an explanation. Ever
memorable is the answer of the bereaved
father ; nor can we exaggerate its im-
portance as bearing on our present subject.
“ I shall go to him,” said David, “ but he
will not return to me.” Now let anyone
ask himself how David oould have derived
such consolation from the thought of
rejoining his departed child, if he believed
that the lost one would remain forever as
unknown to him as the greatest stranger
who might come from the ends of the
earth ? The only explanation is to be
found in the expectation of a restored
fellowship in heaven.
It is, however, to the fuller light of the
New Testament that we look for the prin-
cipal evidence of this truth. In many of
the occasional sayings of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the fact of mutual recognition in
heaven gleams forth unmistakably. Speak-
ing of the happiness of the saints in glory,
He said; “ Many shall come from the
east and the west and shal l sit down with
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the
kingdom of heaven,” Even in our present
state we reckon the pleasure of a feast as
consisting far less in what is to be eaten,
than in the company with whom we are to
associate. Are men to become more
sensual and less social in heaven ? The
announcement can mean nothing else, but
intercourse among the redeemed in glory.
Feasting in an earthly sense can have no
place in heaven—“ Meats for the belly and
the belly for meats, but God shall destroy
both it and them.” It follows, therefore,
that it is fellowship with the patriarchs
that is promised to Gentile believers from
the ends of the earth ; but this is simply
impossible if those who are to meet at the
heavenly banquet shall not be able to re-
cognise one another.
If we turn to the parables of our Lord
some will be found which cannot be
explained if the doctrine of future recogni-
tion be not taken into account. Take, for
example, the rich man and the beggar.
Recognition, in the fullest sense, lies at the
basis of this parable, if such it can be
called for many commentators have pre-
ferred to accept it as a fact rather than a
figure. Lazarus is comforted by being re-
ceived into Abraham’s bosom, which may
be an allusion to one reclining on the breast
of another at a feast, in which case the
foregoing remarks will apply, or it may be
better understood as a similtude taken from
the act of a parent hugging a disconsolate
child to his bosom, and if so. the argument
becomes all the stronger. For what com-
fort can we conceive Lazarus to have
received from being taken to the bosom of
owe he did not know, nor could possibly
know ? The point ot the argument lies in
the fact, that the beggar who had lain at
the rich man’s gate full of sores, is acknow-
ledged to be a true son of Abraham : and,
as such, is received into the parental
bosom.—Now, indeed, he is comforted in
the fellowship of Father Abraham.
The same truth seems to be intimated in
some of the miracles of our Lord. It is
unmistakably foreshadowed in the three
resurrections which are recorded among
the works of Christ in the four gospels.
Unbiassed intepreters have usually
noticed this truth as fairly implied in the
narrative of the raising of the widows’ son
at the pate of Nain. The scene is un-
speakably touching. Here was one cut
down by death in the prime of life, the sole
support of his mother and she a widow.
Christ arrested the funeral procession,
looked with compassion on the bereaved
rqother, and with His almighty word
brought back the dead to life. But mark
now hew he disposed of the young man
again called into the land of the living.
Christ had the mos> absolute claim on the
personal services of him whom he had
rescued from the grave. On another occa-
sion Christ said : ‘‘ If any man come to
Me, and hate not his father, and mother,
and wife, and children, and brethren, and
sisters, yea, and his own life also, he
cannot be my disciple.” Much more valid,
if possible, was the claim He had over this
young man. Did he, then, command him
to follow His master ? The narrative says,
“He delivered him to his mother.” Here
was fellowship, broken by death, now re-
stored by resurrection. And the same re-
storation took effect in the cases of the
daughter of Jairus and of Lazarus o


Bethany. Shall we expect it to be less a
fact at the end of the world when the dead
in Christ shall rise first P
Another argument in support of this
doctrine may be found in the circumstances
attending the transfiguration of the
Saviour, Whatever other purpose this in-
cident was designed to serve, it may safely
be accepted as furnishing a glimpse of
heaven. Apart from the splendour of the
scene, the most noticeable feature is the
fellowship, or social converse on the
absorbing theme of redemption. The law
was represented in Moses, the prophets in
Elijah, and the Gospel in Jesus ; whilst
the subject of the conference was the
decease to be accomplished at Jerusalem.
In this glimpse of the heavenly state
mutual recognition appears in unlimited
exercise. Christ was transfigured from the
earthly humiliation to the heavenly glory ;
but was still recognised by the disciples as
the same Saviour. Moses and Elijah
“ appeared in glory” and yet were well-
known to one another. Lastly, the dis-
ciples knew who these celestial visitants
were, and could distinguish the one from
the other by name ; for Peter exclaimed,
“ Let us build three tabernacles, one for
Thee, one for Moses, and one ,for Elias.”
He did not know what he said, but knew
well of whom he spake. How the disciples
came to the knowledge of persons they had
never seen before, it is immaterial to
inquire. The fact to be specially observed
is, that with all their imperfection, such
was their knowledge here, and it is unrea-
sonable to conceive that it would be less
hereafter.
Much confirmation of this doctrine might
be adduced from the Epistles did space
permit, which it does not; and, conse-
one or two instances must suffice.
Paul sought to comfort his Thessalonian
converts who were sorrowing over dear
friends removed by death ; and the method
he adopted was to direct their thoughts to
the prospect of a blessed re-union. But
what comfort could be drawn from this re-
flection if they would then be utter
strangers to each other F Again, in another
connection, he expresses the joy he would
experience in entering upon eternal
happiness with these Thessalonian con-
verts: *‘Eor what is our hope; or joy, or
crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in
the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at
His coming ?” It can well be understood
how this would happen, granting the
principle of mutual recognition ; but if this
is denied the Apostle’s hope could only be
regarded as one that maketh ashamed. But
he knew better: for he spake as he was
moved by the Holy Ghost. Hence it is
that this argument gathers strength from
all rides, and in its cumulative force should
beget full assurance of mutual recognition
in heaven-


LECTURE XII
“ Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God.” The impure mind sees
God nowhere in his own universe. The
defilement of sin intervenes like an im-
penetrable veil between the soul and the
knowledge of all that is divine. But the
pure heart sees God everywhere, and de-
lights in each fresh discovery of His
wonder-working hand. The royal singer
of Israel, who was described as a man
after God’s own heart, found the earth
below to be full of the goodness of the
Lord, and heard the heavens above declare
the glory of God. According to the
moral condition of the inner man there
will be the same discerning or undiscerning
of the hand of God in Providence. The
man who possesses no spiritual insight will
see nothing in his surroundings but the
operations of the ordinary laws of nature,
whereas a man of purity of heart and life,
like St. Paul, will observe the evidence of
Divine guidance in every event that falls
to his lot and shapes his conduct. The
same principles apply with still stronger
force to the vision of God as He is mani-
fested in gospel ordinances. In a very
special manner He deigns to be graciously
present in His Church below. God has
chosen Zion for the place of His rest and
there He desires to dwell. But this pre-
sence can be discerned only by the pure
heart ; it is wholly invisible to the carnal
eye. David could see this sight; nor could
anything else fill his soul with such glad-
ness. “ One thing have I desired of the
Lord, that will I seek after; that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days
of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to inquire in His temple,” It
was the deprivation of this blessedness that
constituted the bitterest drop in the cup of
his exile in the wilderness of Judah, and
hence his wailing cry for its restoration—
“ to see Thy power and thy glory, so as I
have seen Thee in the sanctuary.” These
several instances in which the sight of God,
The Beatific Vision, or Seeing God as He is.
in various departments of His works and
ways, is given to the pure in heart, may all
be reckoned as properly included in the
promise contained in Christ’s sermon on
the Mount, but, so far from exhausting its
meaning, they only point forward to its
perfect consummation in heaven. This is
the ineffable beatific vision which consists,
not in seeing God in a glass as He is re-
flected to the understanding by means of
images, but in the soul’s beholding Him as
He is in the fulness of His glory.
Every observant reader of Scripture
must have been strikingly impressed with
the fact that this vision of God in the
superlative sense has been always denied
even to the most saintly characters among
the children of men. If this honour could
have been shown to any one, we would
most likely name Moses as the highly-
favoured individual ; and, all the more so,
as it is written that “ the Lord spake unto
Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto
his friend.” But high as this privilege was
it did not rise to the enjoyment of the
beatific vision; for in the immediately
succeeding connection there occurs the
following memorable incident : “ And
Moses said, I beseech Thee, show me Thy
glory. And he said, I will make all my
goodness pass before thee, and I will pro-
claim the name of the Lord before thee,
and will be gracious to whom I will be
gracious, and will show mercy on whom I
will show mercy. And he said, Thou canst
not see my face for no man shall see me
and live, And the Lord said, Behold there
is a rock by me, and thou shalt stand
upon the rock ; and it shall come to pass,
while my glory passeth by, that I will put
thee in a cleft of the rock, and will cover
thee with my hand while 1 pass by ; and
I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt
see my back parts ; but my face shall not
be seen.” This is a classical passage on
the subject under treatment. Its signifi-
cance is greatly enhanced by this further


consideration that, before and after this
memorable occurrence at Sinai, a para-
lyzing fear lay upon the Hebrew mind lest
death should follow the sight or manifes-
tation of God, in a sense unmistakably
inferior to that which is known in theology
as the beatific vision. The Angel of the
Lord found Hagar in the wilderness by a
well of water which she hence called Beer-
lahai-roi, that is “ the well of the living
sight,” for this reason that she had seen
God and lived. And here let it be observed,
once for all, that the Angel of the Cove-
nant, so often mentioned in the Old
Testament, was none other than the
Second Person of the Trinity who in the
fulness of time was to appear for man’s
salvation. A remarkable passage in the
life of Jacob speaks of him being left alone
at the ford of the JabboK and afterwards
wrestling with a man till the breaking of
the day. Eventually the truth dawned
upon his mind that he had been wrestling
not with man but with God, and instead
of dying had prevailed, in memory of
which fact he called the place by the new
name of Peniel, “ for,” said he, “ I have
seen God face to face and my life is pre-
served.” The same consolatory inference
is drawn from the unexpected effect of
Israel’s hearing the voice of God at Sinai
and not dying; “Behold,” said Moses,
“ the Lord our God hath showed us His
glory and His greatness, and we have heard
His voice out of the midst of the fire; we
have seen this day that God doth talk with
man and he lived.” After Gideon had
seen the Angel of the Lord the fear of
death, as was usual on such occasions,
immediately fell upon him: “And when
Gideon perceived that he was an Angel of
the Lord, Gideon said, Alas ! 0 Lord God !
for because I have seen an angel of the
Lord face to face. And the Lord said unto
him. Peace be unto thee; fear not; thou
shalt not die.” Very similar was the ex-
perience of Manoah after a vision of the
same nature, “And Manoah said unto
his wife, We shall surely die because we
have seen God.” One more instance must
suffice and it will be taken from a well-
known incident in the life of the prophet
Isaiah. It was a vision of God in the
Temple when He appeared sitting upon a
throne high and lifted up with His train
filling the whole sanctuary. So over-
powering was the sight that the prophet
considered himself as good as dead and
cried out in despair : “ Woe is me! for I
am undone ; because I am a man of un-
clean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
review of relevant instances that the vision
of God as He is, was withheld from man
in the operation of a rule, which would
admit of no possible exception. Perhaps
it will not be deemed irreverent to ask
whether this reserve was maintained from
necessity, or with a view to serve an
ulterior purpose. It may well be that such
a discovery of the Divine glory would
crush frail man into the dust from which
he was taken. This opinion is sustained
by a remark of a famed Jewish teacher.
Rabbi Jehudah, who says:—“Of that
Divine glory mentioned in the Scripture
there is one degree which the eyes of the
prophets were able to explore ; another
which all the Israelites saw, as the cloud
and consuming fire; the third is so bright
and dazzling, that no mortal is able to
comprehend it ; but, should any one ven-
ture to look on it, his whole frame would
be dissolved.’’ This view of the case is
further supported by the distressing effect
which the secondary manifestations of
God’s glory had on those who were of all
men the most fitted to bear them. In ad-
dition to the names already given a few
others may be mentioned. When God re-
vealed Himself at Sinai “ so terrible was
the sight,, that Moses said, I exceedingly
fear and quake.” After a vision of sur-
passing majesty was made to Habakkuk
“ his lips quivered at the voice, rottenness
entered into his bones, and he trembled in
himself.” Even Daniel, the beloved, stood
trembling by the River Hiddekel with his
companions in the presence of One who
appeared in glory, and spake words with
a voice like that of a multitude : “ And I,
Daniel, alone saw the vision ; for the men
that were with me saw not the vision ; but
a great quaking fell upon them, so that
they fled to hide themselves. Therefore I
was left alone and saw this great vision,
and there remained no strength in me ; for
my comeliness was turned into corruption,
and I retained no strength.” In the New
Testament there are three equally remark-
able cases. Christ having manifested His
glory at the Sea of Galilee in the mira-
culous draught of fishes, the Apostle Peter
was so overpowered by the discovery that
he fell at His feet and said, “ Depart from
me for lam a sinful man, O Lord.” The
exalted Saviour having appeared to Saul on
the way to Damascus, in a radiance of
glory that exceeded the splendour of the
noonday sun, the persecutor fell to the
ground smitten with blindness from which,
it has been surmised, that he never alto-
gether recovered. In the opening of the
people of unclean lips; for mine eyes have Apocalypse the exile of Patmos tells us
seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.’ that, having seen such another vision of
It is abundantly manifest from this rapid the glorified Lord, “ he fell at His feet as


dead.” After this induction of instances
one might be free to infer that there is a
necessity for withholding the view of God’s
essential glory from man as he is at pre-
sent constituted ; and, were death the end
of all connection between the parties, this
finding might be acquiesced in as final and
satisfactory, although there might still be
room to raise the question, What was there
to prevent God giving man a temporary
endowment of supernatural power to en-
able him to behold this vision of his Maker,
seeing that, on this supposition, there was
no life to come ? But, once take in the
whole scheme of revelation, let it be dis-
tinctly seen that time is a probation for
eternity, and this present life a prepara-
tion for the next, and then, all other con-
siderations apart, it will be clearly per-
ceived why the vision of God as He is
should be retained with a studied reserve,
and be referred to only as the consumma-
tion of all blessedness in Heaven. This
surmise is greatly strengthened by taking
into account the successive stages of the
revelation of God as hbherto made to man.
The lowest degree is that whereby He is
manifested in the works of creation This
book is spread out before the eyes of all
men as written in the universal language
of nature. “ For the invisible things of
Him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even His eternal
power and Godhead ; so that they are
without excuse.” A higher stage of the
revelation of the invisible God was made
by means of the theophanies of the Old
Testament. The mode of the manifesta-
tions, too, was exceedingly various, the
form of the appearance having been deter-
mined by the peculiar necessities and cir-
cumstances of the particular case.' A third
advance was made in the advent of the Son
of God in human flesh, He came to reveal
the invisible God, and He did it in such
wise that He could say : “ He that bath
seen me hath seen the Fatherthat is to
say, so far as He could be known to man in
this mortal state, as is evident from this
other statement : “ No man hath seen God
at any time; the only-begotten Son, which
is in the bosom of the Father, He hath
declared Him.” Do not these several
orders of revelation, rising into successively
higher degrees of fulness and clearness,
lead on the mind to something inherently
more perfect, and which they postulate as
their necessary complement? Just as the
dawn of the morning eventuates in the per-
fect day, so do all the revelations of the
invisible God find their consummation in
the beatific vision when faith shall give
place to seeing God as He is.
Among all people, and especially in an-
cient times, it has been considered the
highest honor to bask in the sunshine of
royalty. One of Solomon’s proverbs ran
in these words, “ Seest thou a man that is
diligent in his business ? he shall stand
before Kings.” The Queen of Sheba, hav-
ing seen Solomon in all his glory, envied
the lot of those who had access to the pre-
sence chamber, “Happy are thy men,”
said she, “ happy are these thy servants,
who stand continually before thee, and
that hear thy wisdom,” In the Book of
Esther mention is made of seven princes of
Persia and Media, who were so honored,
that they “ saw the King’s face.” But an
immeasurably higher privilege was re-
served for the spirits of just men made
perfect in the promise that they would see
the King in His beauty and the land that
is very far off'.
The beatific vision was a favourite topic
of discussion among the schoolmen in
former times, as might have been expected
from their own addictedness to contempla-
tion. Their writings on this subject are
voluminous enough, but unhappily also
abound in unprofitable subtleties which
are now deservedly consigned to oblivion.
One much controverted point was the
question, whether the glorified will see
Go I with the eye of the body or simply
by spiritual vision. The former view was
advocated by a powerful party, but cer-
tainly to the oversight of many important
considerations. As the spirits of just men
made perfect will be apart from their
bodies from death till the resurrection, i:
would follow from the foregoing reasoning
that they must be destitute of this privi-
lege during their disembodied state. The
same theory of seeing God with the bodily
eye would also disqualify the holy angels,
and that for ever, since they are incor-
poreal by their very nature ; but this con-
clusion would do violence to the express
declaration of our Lord who said : “ Take
heed that ye despise not one of these little
ones ; for I say unto you, that in heaven
their angels do always behold the face of
my Father which is in heaven.” The sup-
position, in short, produces utter confusion
between the natural and the spiritual
which are essentially opposite. Spiritual
essences are not the objects of corporeal
sight, nor can be. God Himself is a pure
spirit and therefore can be discerned by
spiritual beings and in a spiritual manner.
Much more profitable is the reflection that
God will be known then by direct intu-
ition. In the present life He is kne wn by
images or by inferences; in the next He
will be known by immediate vision ; for
nothing short of this blessedness can reach


the meaning contained in the assurance xiii, 12, “ For now we see through a glass,
that the saints will see Him “ face to darkly ; but then face to face ; now I know
face.” There was little room for hesita-
tion in giving an affirmative answer to the
question, whether this vision of God will
penetrate to the essence of His being ; for
this perfection of insight seems to be fully
supported by the promise of seeing Him
as He is.
What the effects of the beatific vision
will be, is a question which will
lead us into a more practical line
of inquiry. The answer, however,
must be strictly confined within Scrip-
ture lines, for human speculation on
this hallowed ground would be the extreme
of irreverence. Led by the guiding hand
of inspiration we are conducted to four en-
nobling conclusions. In the first place,
there is the assurance conveyed in the 16th
verse of the 17 th Psalm. “As for me, I
shall behold thy face in righteousness. I
shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy
likeness.” This is a blessing of a compre-
hensive and general nature, It is satisfac-
tion. Man has many capacities, hardly any
one of which is fully satisfied by all that
this world can furnish. None was ever
in a better position to give an impartial
estimate of what this world, at its best, can
afford than King Solomon, and his verdict
was expressed in the emphatic words—
“ All is vanity and vexation of spirit.” But
when the glorified saints shall see God as
He is, they will be satisfied Every vessel
will be full to overflowing and no aching
void will remain. In the second place,
there is the assurance conveyed in the 11th
verse of the 16th Psalm. “ Thou wilt show
me the path of life ; in thy presence is ful-
ness of joy, at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore.” Joy is the highest
state to which the human soul can be raised,
superioreven to mere pleasure or happiness.
The psalmist can find no more elevated
expression to describe the blessedness of
seeing God as He is, and can add to its
intensity only by showing that this emotion
will be complete in every sense. What is
promised is not joy only in certain measure,
but fulness of joy. Just as the Apostle
John says in the opening of his First
Epistle, ‘These things write we unto you,
that your joy may be full.” It is the pro-
per effect ol perfect joy to break forth in
praise and acclamation, and so it will be
with the redeemed before the throne of the
Eternal King.
His presence fills each heart with joy,
Tunes every mouth to sing ;
By day by night, the sacred courts
With glad hosannas ling.”
In the third place, there is the assurance
of fulness of knowledge as given in I Cor.,
in part, but then shall 1 know even as also
lam known.” Yet this fulness must be
conditioned by the subject knowing rather
than the object known, just because the
finite can never comprehend the infinite.
The schoolmen, therefore, had good reason
for defining the knowledge obtained from
seeing God as He is, as apprehensive but
not comprehensive. The finite mind, even
in glory, will bear no measurable relation
to the infinite; but the vessel, neverthe-
less, will be filled to its utmost capacity.
And, from another point of view, it cannot
but appear of unspeakable importance to
be furnished with an infinite, because inex-
haustible object of knowledge, seeing that
the spirit is immortal. These two things,
therefore, go hand-in-hand—an eternity of
contemplation and an infinite object to
contemplate. In the fourth place, there is
assurance of assimilation to Him who shall
be seen as He is. This promise is given in
I John, iii, 2 : “ Beloved, now are we the
sons of God, and it doth not yet appear
what we shall be ; but we know that, when
He shall appear we shall be like Him for
we shall see Him as He is.” It is here
affirmed of the beatific vision that it will
have a transforming or transfiguring in-
fluence on the beholder, even changing him
into the likeness of God. Certain intima-
tions and earnests of this effect produced
by the glory of God have been given even
in this present state. Of the ancient saints
it is said that they looked unto God and
were lightened ; and their faces were not
ashamed. Stephen was so powerfully sup-
ported during his martyrdom by a sense
of the heavenly glory, that they who looked
upon him saw his face as it had been the
face of an angel. When Moses had spent
forty days in the Mount in the presence of
God, we read that his face shone with a
brightness that the Israelites could not
look upon, and he found it necessary to
conceal this glory under a veil before he
could deliver to them the tables of the law.
These instances show the beginnings of
transformation even in a physical sense.
But this is more especially a question of
the inner or spiritual nature of man ; and
here, too, it is found that grace is glory
begun in the experience of believers. This
statement meets at once with its illustra-
tion and its evidence in that remarkable
passage contained in II Cor., iii 18 : “ But
we all, with open (unveiled) face beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same image from glory to
glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord,”
The pre-libations and earnests of this
glory which are enjoyed now should have


the effect of quickening our aspirations too, suffereth violence, and the violent take
after the blessed reality. It is recorded of it by force. It is thoughts like these that
the ancient Gauls that, having tasted the enable the Christian to triumph in death,
luscious wines of Italy, they could not be
content with an occasional supply from the
hands of a chance trader ; but resolved to
conquer that goodly country for themselves
where they might dwell and revel in its
delights to their heart’s content. For this
purpose they poured their armies over the
Alps, and fought till they became masters
of Italy. In like manner let us be stimu-
lated by present foregleanas ef glory to
fight the good fight of faith and lay hold on
eternal life , for the Kingdom of Heaven,
because they show it to be the gate of
glory. There is on record a beautiful ex-
pression of an ancient anchorite regarding
this vision of God in Heaven. Extenuated,
infirm, sinking under a load of years,
and on the point of expiring, he broke out
into singing. Being asked why he sang,
the aged hermit made this reply : “I sing
because I see that wall tumbling down
which hinders me from beholding the face
of God.”
THE END.


r ,
■
-- tjf - -> ••
■
