

ISTiq
TWELVE MONTHS
WELLINGTON, PORT NICHOLSON;
for t f)t pufcltc
THE NEW ZEALAND COMPANY.
Lieut. JOHN WOOD, I.N.
Author of Travels to the Oxus.
ESPECIALLY INTENDED FOR THE PERUSAL OF INTENDING EMIGRANTS.
CONTENTS:
Introduction .... 5
10. Farming 37
Narrative ..... 7
11. Roads 3S
1. Site of the Port Nicholson
Settlement . . . .19
12. Land Claims .... 40
13. Wakefield System . . 49
2. Description of the Country 20
14. Charges against the New
Zealand Company . .50
3. Districts 20
4. Climate ..... 28
15. Writers on New Zealand. 52
5. Harbour. ..... 29
16. Puffing, or Self-supporting
Colonies 54
6. Town ...... 30
7. Society 31
17. New Zealand Company . 58
18. Advice to Emigrants . . 61
8. Clearing Land .... 34
9. Labour ...... 36
19. Conclusion .... 62
LONDON
PELHAM RICHARDSON, 23, CORNHILL.
1843.


LONDON:
Printed by W. Clowes and Sons,
Stamford Street.


PREFACE.
The writer of the following pages has just returned to
this country, after a twelvemonth’s residence in Welling-
ton, New Zealand. The only landed property he pos-
sesses is situated in the Port Nicholson settlement, and
thus his prospects are, in some measure, identified with
the success or failure of the New Zealand Company’s
colonization operations. He cannot, however, refrain
from protesting against the means employed to draw to
the Company’s settlements a class of emigrants for which,
at present. New Zealand is not calculated; and if the
result of his own experience should have the effect of
putting others on their guard his object will be attained.


;•••


TWELVE MONTHS
WELLINGTON. PORT NICHOLSON.
INTRODUCTION.
With New Zealand we have been partially disappointed ; by
the New Zealand Company not a little deceived. The object
of this little work is to call attention to the acts of the one, and
to make known a few facts illustrative of the present condition
of the other.
The shareholders and Directors of the above Company com-
prise as upright and high principled a body of men as any
association in the land ; but they have, unfortunately, been led
by designing individuals, who have counteracted the extended
usefulness of the Company, and made it a stepping-stone to
their own aggrandisement. Their glowing one-sided repre-
sentations of the “ Land of Promise,” induced respectable fami-
lies to forego the substantial comforts of a home for the dream
of independence abroad. Many who relinquished a moderate
competency in England are now suing for charity among
strangers in New South Wales. Numbers have returned to
Great Britain, and nearly all the settlers at Port Nicholson,
unconnected with Government and the Company, would also
return, could they but realize what they have sunk, and obtain
funds to defray their passage home. Nobles, honourables,
M.P.’s, and esquires, have all sanctioned by their names, and,
under the gaudy banner of a pseudo philanthropy, have been
parties in sending emigrants to New Zealand. Ship them off!
ship them off! is the cry, careless of what fate awaits the emi-
grant on reaching his destination. The New Zealand Com-
pany must, or should know, that the islands to which they
are sending them yield spontaneously no edible production but
the fern root: that hitherto Her Majesty’s Commissioner
has not decided on the Company’s claim to the territory which
they profess to have purchased of the natives —a purchase the
natives themselves deny: that Port Nicholson is girded by
nearly impassable mountains: that the land thus sold is, for


the most part, owned by absentees, and that, consequently,
there is no adequate provision for the employment of the poor
sent out: that they have made no provision for the making
of roads, the construction of bridges, and for other public
works, for want of which it is impossible that colonization can
succeed: that the Company, in their first appeal to the public,
promised employment to labourers at the rate of a guinea
a-week, with rations ; but now, when this inducement has done
its work of persuasion, they refuse to abide by their contract:
that the last of the town lands comprised in their first and
principal settlement was not open for selection before the begin-
ning of this year, and, consequently, no emigrants should have
been sent out before January last. These are matters of which
the Company must be cognizant, and yet they continue to cry,
Buy! buy! buy! —their sole object, disguise it as they will,
being a sordid, money-jobbing, speculation. Ten per cent,
blinds the shareholders, and needy men are provided for. When
public feeling wanes, fetes and “ honourable company ” are
resorted to. The Directors grumble, and it is forthwith pro-
posed that 1,500/. a year be set apart for compensation money
for attending to the affairs of the body, and thus do matters at the
New Zealand House wag merrily as a marriage-bell. We have
suffered grievously from such conduct, and fervent is our hope
that the British Government will grant no more diplomas for
Joint Stock Companies to practise “ ad libitum ” in the wide
and fertile field of colonial colonization. Of the islands of New
Zealand we shall say little. Our experience is confined to the
Company’s first and principal settlement at Port Nicholson;
and our object has been to describe that settlement as it is. To
others we leave the task of prophesying what it may hereafter
become, and shall conclude with a remark attributed to the
Lord Bishop of that new diocese, viz., that “five hundred
years hence New Zealand will be a great country; but in the
meanwhile there is certainly very much to overcome.”


NARRATIVE.
In August, 1841, a party of friends, of which I made one,
determined to seek a home in the southern hemisphere. We
embarked in the ship “ Mandarin,” for New Zealand. Our
social circle consisted of three families, or nine individuals, the
heads of which had served together many years abroad, and so
were knit by ties of no common kind.
The occurrences of similar voyages have been so often
related, that we shall pass over ours in silence, and while the
ship is pursuing her way across the deep, offer a few observa-
tions of a general character.
For some months previous to quitting England the question of
emigration had with us been seriously pondered, and every acces-
sible source of information diligently perused. Guides to emi-
grants, travels, newspapers, missionary reports, and such Parlia-
mentary papers as were accessible were all in turn consulted;
but here let us observe how extremely difficult it is to obtain
a true account of any one province of our Colonial Empire. If
solely guided by the avowed organs of the colony we can never
come to a sound conclusion. They colour high the advantages
of their respective fields of colonization, but observe a discreet
silence on their demerits. Statements from this source are'
invariably one-sided. Paid advocates may assume the appear-
ance of candour; but this should deceive no one ; “It is their
vocation.” As far as they do go, we give them credit for sin-
cerity; but it would ill accord with the express object for
which they are got up to tell the whole truth. Guide-books
owe their compilation to parties similarly interested; and
should the smooth current of the emigrant’s thoughts be ruffled
by a traveller’s plain tale, the disagreeable impression is not
suffered to continue long. Party organs teem for a time with a
host of seeming evidence for the other side, and the voice of the
individual is soon hushed amidst their clamour. Or, perhaps,
they seize on some weak point, and directing their critical
power hither, overturn him in the field of diction, if not of
facts. Every now and then a letter from the colonies finds its
way into some of our leading journals, and if they breathe, as
they too often do, a spirit of disappointment, the Company’s
agents are at work, and the writers denounced as misanthropes,
comfortable nowhere, —agitators busy everywhere, or persons
evidently not adapted to an infant colony, and who, conse-
quently, should have staid at home. And thus it happens that by
far the great majority of emigrants know little of the defects of
their adopted country until they land on its shores. But one
by one they unexpectedly make their appearance, and unable
longer to delude themselves, confess they have been deceived.


How then, it may be asked, does it happen that so little is
heard in England of the discontent existing in the southern
colonies, or rather in the first and principal settlement of the
New Zealand Company, for it is of this only that we write ?
Already has one cause been pointed out, and we will briefly
mention others. Capitalists have nearly, without exception,
bought their land in England. They must make the best of a
bad bargain, and those who are on the spot remain silent for
the sake of their own interest. Again, the principal landowners
are absentees who manage their property by an agent in Wel-
lington. Now it is the interest of this class to keep up the
market price of land ; but go tcf the Union Bank of Australia
and endeavour to effect a mortgage on your estate, and its
manager will tell you that the Company’s price is merely
nominal. It is not, therefore, from agents that absentees will
learn the worthless nature of their purchases; and in making
this statement we mean no disparagement to the men employed.
The means of giving expression to his sentiments was long
denied the colonist. At the time of our arrival the editor of the
“New Zealand Gazette, or Wellington Spectator,” seemed to
think his duty to the settlers consisted in virulent abuse of
Auckland and the Governor, combined with a slavish reverence
of the New Zealand Company. Its virulent articles on Cap-
tain Hobson at length nauseated every man of independent
mind in the place. This gave rise to a second paper, “ The
New Zealand Colonist,’’ but before its appearance the editor of
the “ Spectator ” was appointed the New Zealand Company’s
agent at Taranaki, or New Plymouth, another of their settle-
ments, having, by his manner of conducting the “ Gazette,”
given indubitable token of fitness for the situation. The origin
of the “ Colonist ” is explained in the following extract from
its first number:—“We have selected the title of the ‘New
Zealand Colonist,’ because it was the most significant that we
could find. This is emphatically a colonist’s paper. It has
been established by and for the colonists. It had its origin in
the growing perception of the settlers at this place, that
the ‘ Gazette’ neither advocated nor expressed the sentiments of
the community. Many, we believe that we may say most, of
the inhabitants of this place considered—whether justly or not
is not our present inquiry—that our contemporary took a
narrow and inaccurate view of the position and interests of this
place, and that it was intended to advance the cause of a party,
in defiance alike of justice and policy. In a numerous, thriv-
ing, and intelligent community, it was to be expected that such
a feeling would not be long in finding a voice; and that
measures would be speedily taken to supply so pressing a want.
The sum required to establish another paper was subscribed by


upwards of fifty persons, and after an unavoidable delay, occa-
sioned by the entire absence of all the materials for its establish-
ment in this colony, we have the satisfaction of presenting to
our readers the result of the efforts of those who directed, and
of those who supplied funds for the undertaking. We speak
under correction, but we believe that this is the first time that
any Company has been projected in this place, the object of
which has been carried out. No greater proof of the extent
and urgency of the dissatisfaction with our contemporary, to
which we have adverted.”*
On the 21st of December the “Mandarin” made the New
Zealand coast. Its appearance, as seen from Cook’s Straits,
was not very promising, but we were elated with hope, and
easily persuaded that though frowning mountains fringed the
shores, there might be open country beyond them. A strong
and favourable wind soon carried us inside the heads of Port
Nicholson. The passengers were all on deck straining their
eyes to catch a glimpse of civilization. Little was said, though
disappointment was visible on the countenance of every one.
In whatever direction the eye fell it was on mountains, rising
in the blue distance, ridge above ridge, in continued succession.
As the vessel shot up the harbour, a few cattle browsing on the
lower slopes of a fern-clad hill, were hailed as a favourable
omen, and our hearts gladdened as we counted them over to
each other. At length on rounding Point Halswell the settle-
ment came in view, and its picturesque appearance prolonged
the cheerful impression which the last sight imparted. A
canvas cantonment was what most of us had anticipated; but
here the beach was lined with wooden buildings, while along
the sides of the hills were dotted neat cottages, the smoke from
which, rising among the trees, sent many a heart back to the
happy firesides of similar structures in our own country. About
3 o’clock in the afternoon the “ Mandarin ” cast anchor in
Lambton Bay, abreast of the settlement. After landing we pro-
ceeded to the surveyor-general’s office to register our sections
of country land, and there learned, to our astonishment and
mortification, that these were to be given out 112 miles from
Wellington. A second emigration was thus rendered necessary;
and a fortnight after the “ Mandarin’s ” arrival, one of her
steerage passengers paid 60/. for the conveyance of himself and
family by sea from Port Nicholson to Wanganui. Before
returning to the ship we paid our respects to the Company’s
agent, who, as might have been expected, spoke great things
* The intending emigrant will look in vain for a file of the “ Colonist ”
in the news room of the New Zealand House. Surely there must be
something rotten in the state of Denmark” when the settler’s own
paper is discouraged.— Editor.
A 3


of the settlements; but while w r e sat with him we w r ere com-
pelled to listen to a settler’s opinion on this subject. Mr.
Mason, from the river Hutt, complained of native aggression
in no measured language, and requested the interference or
protection of the Company’s agent. Colonel Wakefield con-
fessed himself without power, and referred the complainant to
the police magistrate. The man retired, but not before he had
said enough to open our eyes to the true state of this question,
rendering more than doubtful the quiet possession of our land
guaranteed by the honour of the Company. When the gale
which set in on the night of our arrival ceased, our luggage
landed; and after seeing it housed, we proceeded to receive
from a surveyor possession of our town acres. One of these
crowned a ridge rising immediately from the beach, called
Wellington Terrace, which comparatively was a good situation.
The other w r as distant three miles from the inhabited part of
the town. In search of the latter we were accompanied by two
gentlemen who had been some time resident in the colony, but
who had not hitherto seen some town acres belonging to ab-
sentees, for which they were agents. In looking for the latter
in a swamp, the surveyor could not find firm footing, at which
the gravity of the party gave way, and they were fain to rest
content with a general indication of the locality of the acres,
without endangering their lives by a search in the morass.
This excursion proved to us that, save Britannia Flat, at the
north end of Wellington, and a swampy valley named Te-Aro,
near its southern extremity, there was not a level acre in the
township.
We now pitched our tents on the acre upon Wellington
Terrace. Mine was a sad failure, and stood only a night, while
those of my friends being smaller, weathered the gale for
months to the surprise of many in Wellington. The best tent
in the lot w T as made on the outward voyage by Captain Sharp
and Mr. Robinson. I succeeded in purchasing a small wooden
house upon the beach, and by the aid of a cradle and a train of
bullocks, drew it to the top of the Terrace. The very first
night we slept in this little building it blew a gale from the
south, and about midnight we were awoke by its rocking to
and fro. Fearful of being precipitated down hill, we were not
slack in ballasting the house with heavy trunks, boxes, &c.,
and when morning broke it w'as more effectually secured.
The suburban land attached to the acre upon Wellington
Terrace had been given out, and selected in Tukapu, and to
this district we now accompanied a surveyor to take posses-
sion.
The party w 7 as made up of a dozen gentlemen, going out on
a similar errand. The district i$ distant twelve miles from


Wellington, and is approached within four miles by the Porirua
foot-path. A surveyor’s line has been run through this last
portion, and along this cutting we scrambled over its hilly
surface, as often using our hands to climb as our feet to walk.
Darkness overtook us, and we spent a very comfortable night
in the bush, undisturbed by the fear of venomous reptiles or
beasts of prey. At daylight next morning we continued our
toilsome march, and arrived abreast of the section early in the
forenoon. To examine it very minutely was not possible. In
whatever direction we turned, a net-work of strong pliant
creepers repelled all advance, while the circle of vision was
limited to a few yards by the heavy foliage of majestic trees
and the uneven character of the ground they stood upon. At
this spot w r e left the party and struck down a surveyor’s cutting
for Porirua harbour. The line had been badly cut, and we
lost the direction ; but after floundering on for some hours we
came upon the bed of a rivulet, by following which we reached
the sea. There was no passage under the cliffs, but through a
mangrove swamp that lined the shore; this we got safely
through, though often above the middle in water, and between
nine and ten at night reached Wellington, considerably fatigued
by the exertions of the day.
Of Tukapu we had seen enough: it is a fine timber district,
and if there were a ready conveyance, the wood might be valu-
able. Like the rest of the country it is well watered. The
nature and capabilities of the soil remain to be determined.
Hitherto none of the settlers have been fool-hardy enough to
bury themselves in a wilderness barely accessible upon hands
and knees through a surveyor’s “ cutting.” Convinced that
nothing profitable could be done with the section in Tukapu,
early in April we proceeded to visit the rivers Manawatu and
Wanganui. Following the footpath through Porirua forest, a
walk of fourteen miles brought us to the harbour of that name.
This inlet being crossed we slept the night at Thom’s Whaling
Station, on the further side of the harbour. The country here-
about is claimed by the Polynesian Company of Sydney, who
have an agent in Wellington and a herd of cattle here. After
an early breakfast we continued our journey. Quitting the
Whaling Station we followed the beach for a mile or more, and
then diverging to the right hand ascended hills overlooking
the shore, and again entered the primeval forest. For eight or
nine miles we followed a native path through the wilderness,
and then came on the sea coast at Bukarui. The country we
had just passed through is hilly, heavily timbered, and well
watered. Descending the wooded hills above Bukarui, we
again found ourselves on the sea-shore, with high barren


mountains rising immediately from the beach on the right hand.
Along the base of these mountains we proceeded in a northerly
direction for some miles over heavy sand to Pari-pari. The
sand is now succeeded by rocks, the road over which, though
rough, is practicable for cattle. It continues of this nature
for five miles, or perhaps more, when the rocks give place to a
smooth sandy beach, extending all the way to Manawatu. At
night-fall we reached the Wykani river. Where the rocky
Deach of Pari-pari ends, the mountain-chain begins to fall back
Irom tbe sea-shore, increasing in distance from the coast line as
it runs north. The mountains are now succeeded by a belt of
low sandy hills, commencing at high-water mark, and widening
as the mountains fall back, till at the Manawatu the sandy belt
is nine miles broad. This belt is pierced between Pari-pari and
Manawatu by several streams which drain the inland country.
At Wykani, the first of these, there is a large extent of rich
alluvial soil, inhabited by a comparatively dense native popu-
lation. The inhabitants of the Pah or native village would
not ferry us across the stream but upon their own conditions;
and not content with dictating their own terms, upset the
canoe and gave us a complete drenching. These are trifles to
men, but when females are liable to similar treatment, it is
time that the Company's agent, if he has the power, should
establish regular ferries upon streams requiring them from Port
Nicholson to Taranaki.
Our next stage was along the sea-heach to the Otaki river.
Here, as at Wykani, the natives are numerous, and the cul-
tivable ground very considerable. Hence, still following the
shore, we came upon the Ohou stream, in passing which we had
again to submit to native insolence and extortion. Not many
miles beyond this a small rivulet discharges the surplus waters
of the Orewunua lake. Following up the stream through the
sand belt before mentioned, a walk of nine miles brought us to
the borders of the lake. Here we slept the night, and early in
the forenoon of the following day arrived on the left bank of
the Manawatu. We paddled up the river in a canoe to Keri-
keri, the head-quarters of the Manawatu surveying staff, and
the site of a steam saw-mill then in course of erection by the
Messrs. Kebbel, our fellow passengers in the “ Mandarin.”
Here we learned that the natives had deserted their Pah on the
Rangatiki, and as this river is not fordable, we were obliged
to return to Wellington without seeing our country land at
Wanganui, the object of our journey.
Four months had now elapsed in the pursuit of such infor-
mation as would enable us to form an opinion of the settle-
ment, and if this is no easy task upon the spot, how much more


difficult in this country. After a long sea voyage the eye does
not see things exactly as they are; and a residence of some
months is necessary to dissipate this optical delusion. W hen
the scales had fallen from our eyes, we perceived certain in-
fluences at work to cry up the New Zealand Company’s settle-
ments by other methods than a plain straight-forward descrip-
tion of their advantages and defects. We will first trace what
may be called the home machinery. At the Adelphi, in the
Strand, the Company skilfully laid the ground-work of their
future operations. From this spot issued those publications,
collated from every source, where anything favourable was said
of New Zealand, The country was declared a paradise —its
inhabitants not merely a superior race of savages, but astrono-
mers.* Public attention was aroused; visions of empire in the
Southern Ocean opened to the eyes of its Directors ; charters,
monopolies danced before them, until, overpowered with thoughts
of their growing importance, they grew ashamed of the other
emigration companies in the Adelphi, abandoned their fur-
nished apartments, and, assuming a bearing in unison with
their mighty destinies, henceforward addressed the public from
a New Zealand house. I well remember my visit to Broad-
street. The porter, after some hesitation, showed me into the
news-room, and took my card up-stairs to the secretary. The
onerous duties of this functionary, or the door-keeper’s mea-
sure of his master’s importance, left me ample leisure to admire
the apparatus of this apartment. Upon the table, interspersed
with picture-books of New Zealand, lay files of the “ Welling-
ton Spectator,” and other newspapers friendly to the Company.
Maps of the country, lithographed plans of its harbours, and a
bird’s-eye view of Port Nicholson ornamented its walls. In
one place lay some prepared flax, while a few stuffed birds
from the antipodes were judiciously placed in the further
corners of the room. On being at length ushered into the pre-
sence, we found Mr. Ward very sparing of his words; he had
no information of a practical nature to communicate, but such
as would be found in the news-room. He remarked that New
Zealand land was rising in public estimation, and that Colonel
Wakefield’s last despatch was highly favourable. From other
sources we learned that Government was still averse to make
the islands entirely over to the Company, and that Mr. Coates
and the Missionary Society still continued their factious oppo-
sition. When our minds revert to this interview, we are
strongly reminded of a similar scene which we witnessed at the
office of the London and West Middlesex Insurance Com-
pany, of unhappy memory. A friend quitting England went
* See the publication of the New Zealand Association.


there to insure his valuables, and the stiff formal manner of
our reception was just akin to the nonchalance of the New
Zealand functionaries. The name of his Grace the Duke of
Wellington had been freely used by the Baker-street fraternity.
This deceived many, and so have the names of high respecta-
bility that figure in the imposing emigration scheme of Gibbon
Wakefield, Esq.
To these exhibitions succeeded high-coloured reports, in
which facts are so distorted that the colonist is perfectly
astounded at what he reads.* Then followed the lure of a
large dividend from their profits in the emigration trade, pro-
fessedly derived from a settlement where, at that time, nothing
but garden-stuff had been produced. We might go on with
our home enumeration, but shall now briefly advert to the
minor agency at work in New Zealand. At the head of these
stands the press. Materials for a paper are carried out by the
first body of settlers; and soon afterwards their friends are ap-
prised of the great advancement of the infant settlement, as an
evidence of which they are told that it already possessed a bi-
weekly newspaper. To us its office appeared three-fold; to
abuse the local government, bewilder the settler, and laud the
New Zealand Company. Next stands the Union Bank of
Australia. There is a branch of this establishment in Wel-
lington, but it is time the public should be told that the ad-
vantages to be derived from it are nearly all of a negative kind.
This branch gives no interest upon deposits. If you pay in
sovereigns, 2% per cent, is charged to get them back ; and if
you remove to any of the Australian colonies, the same charge
is made for a bill payable thirty days after sight. True, you
can get it discounted, but for this accommodation you are
charged an additional 10 per cent. Even the current notes of
this bank are made payable in Sydney thirty days after pre-
sentation at a charge of 2\ percent., so that in Wellington
you cannot demand specie for a New Zealand Bank note.
The Australian colonies, it was thought, would help to people
Wellington. But the tide of re-emigration has set in an
opposite direction. It may suit the “Gazette” to characterize
such “ as the few malcontents and others who have left Port
Nicholson were generally persons who would not have benefited
their benefactors; and many who have left are now quite sen-
sible of their error, and are returning with as much expedition
as their diminished finances will enable them to do.” In the
vessel which took us to Sydney there were eight cabin pas-
sengers who left Wellington, two of whom were capitalists from
Yorkshire, one a son of Lord Stratford, another a cousin of Mr,
* See No. 16.


Ward, secretary of tlie New Zealand Company, and two mer-
chants. But the above extract has reference to mechanics and
labourers. While we were in Sydney the “ Clydeside” brought
over nineteen in the steerage, the “ Vanguard” thirty-four, the
“ Bright Planet,” a considerable number, and the “ Sisters”
nine, besides her cabin passengers.
Tonnage. —We have here another specious but fictitious sign
of prosperity. Had it suited the New Zealand Company to
have put down their emigrants upon one of the many barren
rocks off the west coast of Ireland, the amount of tonnage
would nearly have registered as high ; for at Port Nicholson
there is no article of export, and the return consists of the
vessels which took the people out, or emigrant ships; those
that bring them food, or foreign traders; and coasters, the last
only being of any real utility.
Letters from settlers often appear in the “ London New Zea-
land Journal.” The authors of these insidious productions are
the Company’s leading men —agents for absentees, and certain
of the labouring class. Some of these have been collected into
a volume, and widely disseminated. The felicitous tongue of
George Robins is here outdone, and wherever an expression
stronger than another occurs, it is put in italics, but of course
the Company had nothing to do with this.
Post Office. —How is it you do not send your friends in
England a statement of the position of affairs at Port Nicholson
is a" question we often asked. The invariable reply was, we
have done so over and over again ; but somehow or other our
letters never reach their destination, or, if they do, garbled
extracts only are laid before the public. The doings of this
department at the commencement of the settlement would be
incredible, were it not that we have the information from
sources above suspicion. The two years which succeeded the
arrival of the first settlers at Port Nicholson were spent in
melancholy forebodings by their friends at home. No letters
were received upon which much dependence could be placed;
and this darkness was only deepened by the gilded paragraphs
which flashed but to dazzle in the columns of the “ New Zea-
land Journal.” Sometimes a solitary epistle would find its
way to a district, whence a dozen families had emigrated with
the writer. The welcome messenger kindled the sympathies of
a neighbourhood, and for it many hearts were thankful. But
of these favoured letters, few and far between, it was remarked
that they all spoke one language, that of unexampled success,
and hence arose a suspicion that in New Zealand, as else-
where, “ all is not gold that glitters.” The establishment of
a post-office, under a goverment officer, has somewhat remedied


these defects. In England the character of New Zealand is
becoming better known, and to this nothing has more contri-
buted than the works of Terry, Esq., F.R.S., and Ernest
Diffenbach, Esq., books of a very different stamp from many
party pamphlets that have lately been published on the Com-
pany’s settlements.
Busy-Bodies. —A useful class in Port Nicholson, and we
presume in all the settlements in Cook’s Straits. They dog
the steps of new arrivals, depict the country beyond the moun-
tains as a perfect Paradise, and sura up by strongly advising you
either at once to build upon your town acre, or settle on a
country section. Their motto is, “ Don’t do as we do, but do
as we desire you.”
Promisers. —As you look round upon the mountainous amphi-
theatre which encloses Wellington perhaps your temper gets
ruffled. On such occasion one of this class is seldom far from
your elbow, and you are told, as we were by a member of the
Wellington bar, that thirty-three emigrant ships were expected
to arrive in 1842, or by the Company’s agent that he expected to
send some of these vessels back laden with colonial produce.*
But Port Nicholson is not so much a land of promise as of hope
and expectation. The cleared country produces only fern, but
we hope it may grow grass; and the forest land, when tilled,
promises good crops of grain. Flax, it is confidently expected,
will be a valuable export, and the settler, after being promised
his land for nearly four years, got paper possession of it in
January last. The Company’s agent promises roads, and the
settlement of the native question, while hopes are high that the
Company’s exertions in England will yet mar the prosperity
of Auckland, and establish the seat of government in Wel-
lington.
Money Loans. —The tactics of the New Zealand Company
in wishing others to undertake this responsibility should open
the eyes of the English capitalist. Does any one think that
the Company would not monopolize this also were the prospect,
of ultimate gain less chimerical than it is ? Look at their
conduct with reference to the Chatham Islands, and say if
moderation be one of their cardinal virtues.
Price of Town Acres. —The great value of town lots in
Wellington is another topic of panegyric, and accordingly in the
Company’s fifth report, we are told that the beach frontage
was letting for 1/. per lineal foot. An Auckland paper rests
* During the whole of 1842 great exertions were made to get a cargo
for the barque “ Clydeside,” of 232 tons ; but, owing to the failure of the
whale fishery, without success. She afterwards went on to Sydney, and
filled up with the staple produce of that colony.


the prosperity of that place on a firmer foundation. “ The
acquirement of a personal right to bits of land is a poor pro-
gress in the scheme of colonization—our business is to dis-
perse. The entrances and exits to ‘ Hobson’s choice ’ are not
circumscribed. We have neither inaccessible mountains nor
impenetrable forests to cage us within the confines of our
capital; on the contrary, the rich bosom of a luxuriant country
courts our occupation,—the liberal lap of nature requires but
unfolding to render forth abundance and to spare, —it will be
time to purchase allotments by the foot, and to measure 'public
avenues by the inch, when we have manufacturing towns, —
when an exchange of commodities is effected in our seaports, —
when our harbours are frequented by customers, as well as by
vessels laden with foreign supplies, —in short, when the plough
has given us an export.”
Company's Agents. —A thousand pounds are drawn yearly
from the settler’s pockets to pay the Wellington agent; and a
sum nearly as large is wrung for a similar purpose from the
Nelson colonists. Now these men are merely colonial news
writers, or at most emigrant agents, and receive such high salaries
for no reason that we or any uninterested person who has seen
the Company’s settlements can assign beyond their relationship
to Gibbon Wakefield, the great pillar of the edifice. The de-
spatches of their principal agent have been useful instruments
in the hands of the directors; but beyond this we failed to
detect, during our residence in Wellington, any tangible good
accruing to the settlement from his presence. He however
fulfils his instructions, and accordingly we are told “ that
Colonel Wakefield still continues to conduct the Company’s
affairs with admirable tact and discretion,” which a bond fide
settler would interpret to mean —nothing, or a constant shifting
of responsibility from the Company to the Government. He
is powerless for good, and his lethargic conduct is anything
but satisfactory to the colonists unconnected with the Company.
His brother at Nelson is far more energetic, and from all we
heard appears to give very general satisfaction.
Names. —There are some associated with the Company’s
settlements in New Zealand to which that body are much
indebted. These are Molesworth, Petre, Duppa, and Sinclair;
and the English public would perhaps like to hear something
of their New Zealand estates.
Mr. Molesworth has certainly set a good example, and
cleared more forest land than any other individual among the
settlers.
The “ Gazette” affirms that it pays him. His “ clearing” may
be called the Company’s experimental farm, for every new


comer is invited by that fraternity to visit the Hutt and see
what Molesworth has done. The Honourable Mr. Petre has
not cleared an acre of land, hut published a pamphlet in support
of his party.
Mr. Duppa. —This gentleman has found cattle-dealing and
jobbing in pigs more profitable than waging war with a New
Zealand forest. His house, or “ Castle Doleful,” stands upon
the beach with less than two acres of ground about it. Imme-
diately behind the house rise steep hills ; before it lie rocks
and the sea. This dreary looking spot is dignified with the name
of Oriental Bay. When the “ Mandarin ” first cast anchor
in Port Nicholson, an observation made to me by a shrewd
fellow passenger was, pointing to Castle Doleful, “ That’s
enough for me; there is not much to be done in agriculture
when Mr. Duppa has set himself down there.”* Mr.
Sinclair, to use the gentleman’s own expression, has turned
land-jobber. He is too shrewd to be guilty of clearing land in
New Zealand either with a view to sell or cultivate.
Trade and. Investment of Capital. —Comparing small things
with great, the English merchant who consigns goods to Port
Nicholson, must be prepared for even greater risk than attends
a consignment to the Australian colonies. The latter do make
a large return in wool, but the former have virtually nothing,
what oil and whalebone they can get being usually due to the
Sydney merchant, or nearest creditor. The place has hitherto
been kept up solely by the arrival of successive emigrant ships,
and the English gold brought with them. But these arrivals
become less frequent, and, despite the assertion ot Gibbon
Wakefield, “ That if you can only fill a ship’s ’tween decks
with labourers, her cabins are sure to fill with passengers,”
vessels do now arrive, and at the Company’s settlements in New
Zealand too, without bringing a single cabin passenger.f But
people must eat and be clothed, and there being nothing to give
in exchange for these necessaries of life, the capital of the settler
is gradually lessening. What New Zealand loses, South America
and New South Wales gain. There is, however, no lack of
enterprise among the settlers, but their energies have been
hitherto sadly cramped by their false and anomalous position.
Had the community of Port Nicholson the countenance of a
Government instead of a chartered Company, aspiring to the
prerogative of the former, but hitherto dead to every interest
* Mr. Duppa has removed to Nelson, where I am given to under-
stand he is doing more than he ever did in Port Nicholson.
t The bark “ New Zealand” arrived at Nelson with labouring emi-
grants, hilt without any cabin passengers. Hence the Company’s resort
to economic cabin passages was necessary to the very existence of the
colony.


but its own,* Wellington, with all its drawbacks, would con-
tinue to prosper: as it is, the place owns two vessels of con-
siderable tonnage, besides a number of small coasting craft.
The germ of advancement is there, and it remains with the
Company to make or mar the place.
SITUATION OF THE FIHST AND PRINCIPAL
SETTLEMENT.
Cook’s Strait was the locality selected for this settlement
before the preliminary expedition left the shores of Britain;
and the reasons which led to this choice were its central
position, and its being the route pursued by the wool ships of
Australia in their homeward voyage.
The first of these advantages it possesses, and so does Holy
Head for the capital of the British Isles. The other induce-
ment has been proved fallacious, not one of the above vessels
having looked into Port Nicholson since the settlement was
established. Cook’s Straits are avoided by the ships in ques-
tion, their course being directed either north or south of the
islands. A subsidiary reason was its proximity to the whaling
ground; but during my residence at Wellington we were
only visited by two ships, the “ Wallaby ” and “ Lady Mary
Pelham,” while in January of this year, no fewer than twelve
whalers were refitting in the Bay of Islands. But the New
Zealand Company having committed themselves to Port
Nicholson, plant other settlements to the southward, and
arguing from its central position and present distribution of
population, turn round on Government and inquire why the
Governor does not take up his residence at Wellington among
the people. On this question the “Colonist” naively re-
marks, “ The main error in the proceedings of Captain Hobson,
in his public capacity was, it appears to us, the fixing of the
seat of Government at a distance from the majority of the popu-
lation. If the New Zealand Company had not colonized Port
Nicholson, we think that no one would have excepted to the
* Although the ultimate prosperity of the Company is identical with
the success of their settlement, their present gain is solely derived from
the sale of land in London; and as the great majority of purchasers
never think of laying out one shilling in the colony, labour is sent out
without any adequate provision for its employment. The 25 per cent,
of the purchase-money which might be so usefully laid out in the settle-
ment is swallowed up by the Company in dividends, advertisements,
salaried agents, fetes, and the other machinery necessary to keep up a
winning game.


wisdom of the selection made by Captain Hobson.” And,
forsooth, because this dictatorial body have committed an error,
the prospects of thousands are to be as nothing. If amount of
population is to determine the position of the capital of New
Zealand, it requires no prophet to foretell this, despite the
efforts of the Company to the contrary. Auckland, in the
course of years, must become the chief colony, for here nature
has done what neither capital nor puffing can do for Wel-
lington.
DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRY.
Wooded Mountain. —Of New Zealand generally, it may be
remarked, that the principal mountain ranges are separated by
valleys of considerable magnitude ; but that the inferior ridges
of any given chain are parted by ravines rather than by valleys.
The prevailing character of the country for thirty miles in
any direction inland from Wellington is that of heavily
timbered mountains. The thin coating of mould which ad-
heres to their steep sides is supported by the surface roots of
the trees which spread themselves over the ground like a fabric
of net-work. When these are removed, the heavy rains wash
down the vegetable deposits and lay bare a red clay.
Fern Land. —Where the plant is rank, the ground is better
adapted for cultivation than the wooded mountain. The
depth of soil will admit of tillage where the acclivities are not
such as to debar the use of a plough. Dwarf fern , however,
like the moorlands of our own country, is worthless in its
present state, but improvable; although, at the antipodes,
30s. an acre is too much for permission to reclaim this
description of land.
Alluvial Valley. —The very best land. It is expensive to
clear, but the return is good.
Flax Swamps. —For many miles the Manawatu river is
fringed with these marshes. They are at present sad quag-
mires, but of course “ capable of drainage.” This, however, is
a question for the next generation, rather than for the present
one.


111.
DISTRICTS.
The first and principal settlement contains seventeen districts,
in which lie the suburban land attached to the town acres.
Sixteen of these districts have been selected in the mountain
group which all but environs Wellington; of this number it
may be said that the Hutt is the only one of importance, whe-
ther viewed abstractedly or with reference to the township in
the vicinity. —“ To expatiate upon the fertility of the Hutt
would be altogether superfluous. Tt is the only agricultural
district within forty miles of Wellington. Its soil is so ama-
zingly rich that it would produce corn sufficient to supply the
white population of this territory for many years, setting aside
all that might be exported. It would have been of little or no
consequence if Karori, Porirua, and the neighbouring districts,
had never been discovered; but the valley of the Hutt has been
formed by nature for the granary of Port Nicholson: without
it we can have no agriculture.” *
Karori, of which so much has been said in the Colonial
papers, is a high-lying valley,f of poor soil, embracing twenty
sections, or 2000 acres, —that is, about the size of a Norfolk
turnip farm. Mr. Brees, surveyor to the Company, tells us
that the whole of these districts, with trifling exceptions, is fit
for cultivation. To the emigrant we say, receive with caution
the opinion of the Company’s surveyor on the agricultural
capabilities of districts open for selection, —an auctioneer is
neither silent nor diffident on the merits of his goods. The
same may be said of the New Zealand Company. Receive,
then, the latter’s recommendation as you would the guarantee
of the former; if you do more, the fault is yours, not mine.
The seventeenth, or remaining suburban district, is the Mana-
watu river, eighty-four miles from Port Nicholson. The
northern coast of Cook Strait, w T here the Manawatu debouches,
is, from the prevailing winds, generally a lee shore, where the
surf must be seen to be credited. From this cause the diffi-
culty of taking the bar at the river’s mouth is considerable;
but once over it, there is a well-defined channel with from one
and a half to five fathoms water for forty miles up the stream.
Sand hills extend for the first nine miles above its mouth.
This steril district passed, the river enters a swampy region,
through which it serpentines thirty miles more, being margined
throughout this distance by a belt of trees about 100 yards
broad. Beyond this the forest fringe widens till it joins the
* ¥m. Swainson, Esq., F.R.S., E.L.S., &c. “ Remarks on the Present
State of the Colony.”
-f About 600 feet above the sea.


firm land, stretching down from the mountains. The stream
is sluggish, and well adapted for steamers. Were a vessel of
this description to visit the river weekly from Port Nicholson,
there is little doubt that the Manawatu would take the lead of
the other districts. For an establishment to dress and prepare
flax for exportation, no locality could be better suited. The
swamps nourish this plant in the rankest luxuriance; and to
sum up its advantages, the climate of this river is milder than
further south, neither wind nor rain being so incessant as among
the Wellington Mountains. It now remains to say a word or
two of Wanganui, where the country lands of the first and
principal settlement have been given out. This river is 112
miles distant from Port Nicholson. The stream is accessible
to vessels of very heavy burden, for the “ Clydeside,” of 230
tons, has gone over the bar at its mouth. The country along
its banks is described as bare of timber, but well adapted for
grazing. As we did not visit the district, we cannot speak of
it from our own observation ; but fortunately we have the letters
of those who can. These were published at Port Nicholson; but
even the “ Gazette,” so far from being able to contradict their
facts, was at length forced to confirm them. Now we entreat
the public to peruse these documents with attention, and then
judge between the New Zealand Company and their settlers.
“ To the Editor of the ‘ New Zealand Gazette and Wellington
Spectator .’
“ Sir, —In your paper of the 2nd instant are some remarks
not over complimentary to the settlers at Wanganui. We are,
with much lack of courtesy, called ‘ a listless, useless set of
grumblers,’ With what justice and propriety we are thus tra-
duced may be inferred from a brief sketch of our position.
“When, in January, 1841, we were induced to come hither,
it was under an assurance from Colonel Wakefield and Captain
Smith that sections would be ready for choice in the following
March, and that the natives were very friendly and desirous of
our settlement, so that no obstacle was likely to arise to prevent
the immediate location of our sections. Fifteen months have
now elapsed, and we are still squatters on the land which, on
our first arrival, necessity usurped,—still herding in all the
discomfort inseparable from a state of suspense, and the frail
and precarious nature of our tenure. ’Tis true, we are nomi-
nally owners of sections represented by certain parallelograms
on the surveyor’s plan —we have had Pisgah glimpses of the
allotted land,
‘ The outward show of earth and sky
Of hill and valley
but as to the occupancy, or even the appropriation to our use


of turf or tree, we are as far from it as when, two years ago,
we exchanged our property, and the moderate, but peaceful
enjoyments of life, for promised benefits ‘ beyond the Cape of
Good Hope,’ —in sober prose, in New Zealand.
“ We have, again and again, represented our situation to
Colonel Wakefield, but apparently without effect. If the fre-
quent expression of disappointment is to be considered grum-
bling, we shall still continue to * grumble,’ aye, and to agitate,
until some manifestation of sympathy and speedy redress is
exhibited. Colonel Wakefield was here for a few days in De-
cember, Did he do anything to smooth our difficulties ?
Nothing. He desired us individually to negotiate with the
chiefs for our sections, and that he would repay any reasonable
disbursement. We endeavoured to do so, but failed; the
natives refused our advances. But why leave to us the onus
of negotiation? We expect the promised peaceable possession
of the land ; we did not come hither to be the penny-splitters
between the natives of New Zealand and the New Zealand
Company. Why does not Colonel Wakefield himself meet the
chiefs in congress, ascertain their wants and wishes, and set
the matter at rest? ’Tis an affair of pounds, shillings, and
pence, and an hour’s palaver with a display of authority, and
the expression of determination, would secure that which years
of official sluggishness will fail to attain. To the most placable
person here is sufficient cause for grumbling ; but in addition,
let it be considered that many of the settlers absolutely require
their lands to secure to themselves the necessaries of life. They
possess but small capital, and naturally despond when they see
it assume what mathematicians would call an evanescent quan-
tity. We have that inalienable treasure, a fine climate, but of
what avail is it, and all the natural advantages of fertility, po-
sition, &c., when restrained in our industry by the inactivity
and vacillating policy of those appointed to aid us? We are
unable to undertake any enterprise which our sagacity or energy
might originate. We see our farming implements rotting and
rusting for want of use, and our wealth vanishing in the pur-
chase of articles which, under other circumstances, we would
be competent to supply.
“ A glance at the ground-plan of our block (this shadowing of
our substance) exhibits the name of the reputed editor of the
“ Gazette.” What has he done ? What have many other absen-
tees done for the settlement ? Have they done aught to further
its progress ? Are they not more justly ‘ a listless, useless set ? ’
Our hearts desire to be actively useful. Could we but obtain
our wishes, our rights, we would be bond fide settlers, tillers of
the ground, pioneers of civilization, and not the gloved and
perfumed loungers of the highways. Had we but the point


d’appui, we should have ‘put our shoulders to the wheel,’
and, without prayer to Jupiter or volunteer advice, have long
since cleared many a swamp. We might feel reconciled to the
injuries we have sustained, and allay our regrets at the loss of
property, could we hut see through the dim perspective any
hope of improvement; but so protracted and apathetic seems
everything connected with our settlement, that listlessness is
unavoidable. Long-cherished expectations have been so frus-
trated that a moral torpor is creeping over our faculties, and
we are likely to exhibit in reality that state of ‘ uselessness ’ to
ourselves and the community which you rather prematurely
proclaim.
‘ Years pass away, and still we're doomed to wait;
God grant attainment may not come too late :
When youth is pass’d, and health and strength decay,
And the mind's spring is dull’d and will not play,’
what then results? This I leave to the reflections of the
agent and abettors of the New Zealand Company.
“ Samuel King.
“ p.S.—I ought to apologize to the resident settlers for using
the collective pronoun, and thus assuming that their sentiments
are in unison with my own. From frequent association with
the majority of them, and occasional intercourse with all, I feel
a confidence that I truly represent their opinions, and that
I only echo the oft-repeated expression of their disappointed
expectations.”
In reply to the foregoing just remonstrance, the Company’s
paper (at that time there was no other) only laughed at the
settlers’ difficulties: —“ We have inserted elsewhere a letter
from Wanganui. Our flowery friend has made some pretty
quotations, but has neither refuted the charge of inaction
brought against himself and fellow settlers, nor alleged a suf-
ficient excuse for it. He should have proved that persevering
attempts were made to negotiate with the natives on the terms
suggested by Colonel Wakefield, and then that occupation of
the land was refused. We do not believe he could have adduced
such facts, because in the only instance which has come to our
knowledge of a Wanganui settler resolutely and perseveringly
setting to work, the difficulty of native resistance was overcome
at -a small expense. There was nothing miraculously seducing
about Mr. Bell, but he contrived to manage the natives ; and
other older residents at Wanganui might have done what he
did.”
This called forth the following. (We may mention that
Mr. Nixon stated much more to the same purpose, at a public


meeting, when nearly all the male inhabitants of Wellington
were convened and the Company’s agent present, and that he
sat down unanswered.)
“ To the Editor of the £ New Zealand Gazette and Wellington
Spectator .’
“ Wellington, 14th April, 1842.
“ Sir, —Having noticed in your last number of the Gazette
some remarks on the Wanganui settlers, I am induced to offer
the following observations. You seem to labour under false
impressions as to the difficulties a person must overcome in
endeavouring to effect any permanent arrangement with the
Wanganui natives. Mr. Bell is not the only individual who
has tried to accomplish this, though so far he has been un-
doubtedly the most successful. But the persevering exertions
of Mr. Bell have not been so highly rewarded as you represent.
You recommend him as an example for all to follow; but,
with greater prudence, we behold in him a warning. A week
rarely passes without some of the natives expressing their dis-
satisfaction at having allowed him to plough up the land. If
they confined their displeasure to mere remonstrance, it might
be tolerated; but such is unfortunately seldom the case.
Mr. Bell is no coward; he has stout sons worthy of their sire.
It is not the bullying and flourishing a few tomahawks that
would intimidate them; but even they have trembled at the
firebrands and threats of these Maories, when their worst pas-
sions are inflamed by brooding over supposed injuries, and
contrasting their strength with our weakness. Mr. Bell has
under cultivation, I believe, less than forty acres, and is most
anxious to proceed with his labours; but if he attempted to
plough the land within 150 yards from his own house, most
probably he would find the natives burn his house down, or
spear the bullocks. This he is fully conscious of, or he would
ere this have tried the experiment, as the land I allude to is
some of the most valuable in his section. Hitherto the natives
have never allowed him to cut a tree of sawdng timber, though
he has part of a considerable wmod within a few hundred yards
of his door. They refuse also to allow me to cut a single tree
in any of my woods, unless they are paid at the rate of 20 s. per
acre, though they are to receive a most liberal bounty for some
fifteen acres I contracted with them to enclose. These facts
speak for themselves. Mr. Bell has not overcome the native
resistance, and others have signally failed in attempting it.
I perfectly agree with Mr. King, the onus of negociation should
not be transferred to us; we have suffered enough from it


already. The task is not an easy one, and every day’s delay
only renders the natives more covetous and overbearing.
“ I have the honour to remain, Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ John Nixon.”
One month after this the “Gazette ” seemed to see objects in
another light. In April, the difficulties of the Wanganui
settlers were “laughable;” in May we find them declared
“ insurmountable.” “ There have been numerous complaints
from Wanganui, respecting the difficulty the settlers find in
obtaining possession of their lands; indeed, they would appear
almost insurmountable. We give insertion to a letter to-day,
from a sectionist, on the subject. The matter is now necessarily
in the hands of the Government. The Company have or they
have not purchased the land ; they have or have not completed
the terms of purchase. But, as the Company are not the
Government, to assert the claims of their purchasers forcibly
would be acting illegally. Their title must soon be determined,
and we have no doubt will be made good. It will then be the
duty of the Government to announce the fact to the natives,
and warn them that if they obstruct the settlers they will bring
down the punishment of the law upon their heads. If the
Government fail to perform this palpable duty it will be for
the colonists to address them on the subject; and, failing due
attention, to determine the course they must adopt for the pos-
session and maintainance of their own properties. We deeply
sympathize with the harassing position of the Wanganui
settlers, and feel confident we are justified in stating we believe
that better days are at hand —that brighter prospects are in
view.”
“ To the Editor of the ‘ New Zealand Gazette and Wellington
Spectator .’
“Wanganui, 15th April, 1842.
“ Sir, —The present state of this part of the colony ap-
pearing to be but imperfectly known, or much misrepresented,
I trust you will find room in your paper for the following
remarks upon it. It is perhaps known to your readers that the
natives here will not permit any sectionist to take possession of
his land without a payment for it. They allege that Mr. Jer-
ningham Wakefield either did not buy the land or did not give
sufficient payment for it. Colonel Wakefield, at the last selec-
tion of land in November, promised that the New Zealand
Company would return to the sectionists any amount of pro-


perty (under 10/.) they might give to the natives as payment
for the land, to say nothing of throwing a duty on the sectionists
in nearly the same state as before, as there is no one supreme
chief here from whom, after giving payment, they may receive
possession of the land; the payment has to be divided amongst
a dozen. The sectionists, therefore, ignorant of the language,
cannot or dare not give to any one or any number of chiefs the
payment, because some petty chief who may not have received
part of it will effectually prevent their purchase being of any
use to them. Four sectionists only have been able to settle on
their land; others have attempted, but after some trouble and
expense have been driven back into the town. The natives on
the east side of the lower part of the river will not treat for the
sale of any single section, but for the whole district. If the
Company had appointed a proper officer here to purchase
the land from the natives, and see possession given to the sec-
tionists, they might all by this time have been peaceably
settled. In the mean time the settlers are condemned to
inactivity. They have brought over cattle and implements;
they can look at their land, but dare not touch it. Every day
increases the difficulty. From the constant agitating of the
question, the natives become impressed with the idea that the
land is of great value, and consequently increase in their
demands.
“ But even if the sectionists had possession of the land, the
Company have not (as undertakers') given them servants
wherewith to cultivate it. If a sectionist wants a servant, he
must go to Port Nicholson; after waiting two or three months,
and paying his passage here, he will perhaps get one who, for
some trifling cause, may soon after leave him and go to Port
Nicholson or elsewhere. The marriage of a female servant
caused a dearth, and consequently rise of wages; it created a
vacancy which has not and cannot be filled up. A female does
not like to leave her friends at Port Nicholson; it is a second
emigration. This is of little consequence at present; but, had
the sectionists possession of their land, it would cause much
trouble.
“ The white people here amount to above 150, and are not
able to protect.themselves against the natives; theft, therefore,
prevails to an alarming extent. Leave your house, even in the
open day, and it is broken into. If you catch a native in the
very act, you cannot punish him. Not that the natives here
are worse than elsewhere. We are in no fear of our lives; but,
as they can thieve with impunity, it is not surprising they take
every opportunity. The natives have no objection to our
coming here; they rather desire it, and have, within the last
b 2


three months, built twelve large houses to sell to the white
people they expect to arrive.
“ A petition to the Governor is now preparing ; but the Com-
pany can assist us more effectually than the Governor, They
can send a proper officer to buy the land from the Maories, and
see the sectionists put into possession; and they can send a
number of labouring emigrants. These latter will supply the
want of servants, prevent thefts by strengthening the white
people and enabling them to punish the thieves, and add ma-
terially to the prosperity of the colony by forming roads to the
distant settlements ; a work which at present is likely, among
their other difficulties, to be thrown upon some two or three
individual sectionists.
“ I am, Sir, &c.,
“ A Sectionist.”
IV.
CLIMATE.
What has been usually promulgated on this subject refers to
the country about the Bay of Islands; but that there is a con-
siderable diversity of climate between the north end of the
islands and that of Cook’s Straits is proved by the fact of
Indian corn not being generally grown south of Hawke’s Bay.
This grain is, indeed, grown by the natives on both sides of the
straits; but only in small quantities for their own consumption.
The climate of the one is, therefore, milder than the other.
From December, 1841, to
Nicholson was as follows
December, latter hall
January .
February
March
April, first half
Mav .
June .
July .
August .
September
October .
November
December, first half
The climate of Port ]
end of 1842, the weather at Port
Agreeable summer weather;
but very windy.
1 Weather broken, hut not too
j wet; wind still strong.
’ The most tempestuous winter, as
a whole, I ever experienced.
Rain unceasing for many days
together; and an almost con-
stant gale, blowing often with
the strength of a hurricane.
Nicholson is boisterous, rather than
agreeable. The winds are its scourge; and yet we have met
Company’s men in Wellington who profess to like them, and


to regret a day’s calm. It is otherwise with vegetation, for we
are informed by Mr. Swainson that even in the valley of the
Hutt crops require shelter screens. Whale-boats are staked
down to the beach to prevent their being blown away ; and we
have ourselves seen a small jolly-boat twirled round in the air
like a hat. A house upon our own town acre had its verandah
torn off by the wind ; the poles were dragged out of the ground,
and the entire fabric, composed of one-inch plank and heavy
rafters, lifted clear over the tops of trees, and carried to another
acre some distance beyond the dwelling. Our own house had
its verandah consequently secured with ropes; and every time
the sky looked stormy an extra coil was passed along it, and
reeved through ring-bolts let into posts sunk deep into the
ground. It is really laughable to observe the subterfuges
employed by writers in the Company’s interest on this subject.
The idea of Port Nicholson being a windy place arises, we are
gravely told, from most of the Wellington settlers having come
from inland English counties. Their draughtsman is positive
that it is not more subject to boisterous winds than any town
upon the English coast equally exposed* Our opinion on this
point may, perhaps, carry equal weight with Mr. Heaphy’s.
We know but one place which can be compared to Wellington
for wind, and that is Mocha, at the entrance of the Red Sea.t
What, however, more than counterbalances this drawback is
the healthiness of its site. Disease is a stranger to Port
Nicholson ; and it is not possible to conceive a more pleasing
scene than the eye embraces, on a still morning, when looking
down from Wellington Terrace upon the town and shipping in
the harbour.
HARBOUR.
Decidedly good. When a beacon is placed on the outermost
rock of Barrett’s Reef, and a lighthouse built upon the heads,
nothing more could be desired. One acquainted with the har*
hour may enter it at night; but no stranger should attempt to
do this. The only danger to be apprehended in the day time
arises from a sudden shift of wind (which frequently occurs)
while working in between the above reef and steep eastern
shore. While we were at Port Nicholson the “ Middlesex,”
“Clydeside,” and “Martha Ridgeway” suffered from this
* See “ The Company’s Settlements in New Zealand,” by Charles
Heaphy, Esq. 1842.
f In a very late number of the “New Zealand Journal,” the violence
of the wind at Port Nicholson is denied.— Ed.


cause. The anchorage in Lambtou Harbour is well up to a
weather shore when the wind is at south ; but from an oppo-
site quarter the sea has a fetch, and the wind a clear sweep of
seven or eight miles. From these two points it blows with
about equal violence; but at all seasons northerly winds pre-
vail. A vessel that has a cargo to discharge should be made
snug aloft, and moored with the best bower to the north, and a
good scope of chain each way. The holding ground is good.
Several coasters were driven on shore while we were there, and
on one occasion a schooner of ninety tons was stranded with
her top-gallant yard across and a second anchor at the bows.
Such culpable conduct should be severely censured by the
merchants of Wellington. A circular wharf might be con-
structed abreast of the town, where vessels of large tonnage
might discharge and take in their cargoes. Several jetties have
been run out into a depth of water sufficient to suit coasters.
A great injustice has been committed on the community by a
large part of the beach frontage being considered private pro-
perty. The right of ground between high and low water mark
should* be vested in the Crown or the Company; and a broad
road, where practicable, reserved beyond high-water mark for
the free use of the townspeople. Wellington is a free port.
VI.
PLAN OF THE BOROUGH OF WELLINGTON.
The irregular outline of the town proves the unaccommodating
nature of the country. Its extreme length, from north to south,
is four miles; its greatest width two miles. Thus an area of
eight square miles has been required for a township of 1100
acres. What the nature of the ground reserved for public
gardens is may be inferred from its outline. Mountains
wooded to the west; mountains clad with fern to the south.
The plan of the township is inconveniently large, and out of all
proportion to the extent of arable land in the surrounding dis-
tricts, upon which ultimately its prosperity must depend. The
shores of Port Nicholson are precipitous, and, with the excep-
tion of the ground at the embouchure of the Hutt, there is not
a level spot in its circumference containing the number of acres
embraced in the plan of Wellington. The inundations of the
river drove the surveyor from the Hutt. But it was necessary
that 1100 acres should be marked off somewhere within the
heads of ithe port; and Lambton Bay, the least objectionable
spot, was accordingly selected. The site is convenient for ship-
ping, and sufficiently roomy for a good-sized town. One effect


of the injudicious size of the present one has been, that the
parties who were fortunate in the lottery picked out the valuable
acres, leaving little worth selecting to those who came after
them. A writer in an Auckland paper asserted that some of
the Wellington town acres were inaccessible to goats. This
was contradicted by authority, and the settlers informed by
Mr. Brees that these animals could climb them. If the sur-
veyor will only walk out to Jerningham Point he will there
find town acres, which, although they may be accessible to a
goat, are yet quite useless to their proprietors.
SOCIETY.
Much has been written on the superior tone of society in
Wellington. The Company invariably conclude their auctioneer-
like addresses to the British public by proclaiming New
Zealand free from the curse of a penal settlement. Their
correspondence with Her Majesty’s Government betrays an
angry jealousy on this head, which, if called for, amounts to
virtuous indignation.* But no cause exists for this parade of
philanthropy. The community at Wellington had not, up to
the time I left the islands, been troubled with convicts from
New South Wales, —the penal laws and regulations of that
colony being so stringent as to render a felon’s escape a rare
rather than a common occurrence. This allusion, however, to
a convict population answered the purposes of the Company.
It injured the elder Australian colonies in the eyes of the emi-
grant, while it impressed him with the superior morality and
consequent advantages of their settlements in Cook’s Straits.
Is this the case ? Let us see. The slate of religion, educa-
tion, and crime in Wellington will give a more correct picture
of its society than the most vaunted generalities and lavish
encomiums put forward in England for selfish ends. This
settlement, numbering upwards of 4000 souls, is in the fourth
year of its existence; and yet in this model colony neither
church nor chapel has been erected. Adelaide, South Australia,
could in her fifth year number two Episcopalian and one Pres-
byterian church, two Independent and one Baptist chapel,
besides a number of minor chapels, which scarce deserve the
name of public buildings.f During our residence we enjoyed
the services of two ministers of the gospel, —the Rev. John
* See the Blue Book,
f From the New South Wales Magazine for April, 1843.


M‘Farlane, of the Scotch kirk, and Mr. Aldred, of the Wes-
leyan communion. The latter gentleman, a missionary to the
aborigines, could not give that attention to his European brethren
which otherwise he joyfully would have done. Mr. M‘Farlane
preached twice every Sunday, and, when his strength permitted,
a Gaelic sermon in the interim to the Highland emigrants.
But the attendance was usually thin. The Exchange, a wooden
building, rented for the performance of public worship, was
seldom well filled. In July Mr. M‘Farlane observed, that on
two preceding Sundays his audience had dwindled to seven and
fourteen individuals. Week after week did the minister urge
the better observance of the Lord’s day; and often while speak-
ing was the truth of his remarks verified, the attention of the
congregation being disturbed by the sharp crack of a fowling-
piece, or by the clatter of horses’ hoofs, as those who should
have known better galloped past the door. Every Sunday
morning, if the weather was fine, sporting parties might be
seen on their march for the woods, bent on a day’s diversion,
and returning towards sunset with a few parrots or pigeons,
the only game a New Zealand forest supplies.* In the town
we have witnessed, not once, but often, the mechanic and la-
bourer working as on a week day. The inclement weather of
Port Nicholson, its almost incessant wind and rain, compels
the emigrant to provide a water-tight covering to shelter his
family when he quits the Company’s barracks, which he is
compelled to do three weeks after his arrival. His case is,
indeed, urgent; and the poor man may be forced to profane
the sabbath as above described, though very much against his
inclination. But with those who are more comfortably circum-
stanced, and who, from their situation, might be expected to
set an example to others, no such palliation can be offered for
their constant breach of the fourth commandment. There are,
doubtless, many good people in Wellington; but we can truly
assert that, if an observance of the sabbath and attendance on
Divine worship be favourable tokens, society in the much-
execrated penal colonies is better than at Port Nicholson. A
mechanics’ institute has been formed by the working men,
aided by a few of their friends. A circulating library, which
the class above them lacked energy to manage, has been made
♦ Mr. Jerningham Wakefield, a nephew of the Company’s agent, thus
deposed before the magistrate at Wanganui: —“ At Wellington, firing
on a Sunday outside the limits in which this is forbidden, is very com-
mon. Only the other day, while walking from Porirua to Wellington,
as soon as I approached within a few miles of the latter place, I am sure
that I met twenty or thirty different people firing at birds. This was
on a Sunday ; and the proceeding was too general and open to he
illegal.”


over to the institution. Here the elementary branches of edu-
cation are taught; and up to the period of our quitting Wel-
lington it was the only public school in the settlement. Dr.
Knox and Mr. Woodward are two gentlemen who deserve well
of the community. The former is indefatigable in his endea-
vours to diffuse the blessings of education ; while the latter is
equally zealous in the cause of temperance. On the occasion
of the bishop of New Zealand’s visit to Wellington, the
w Gazette ” expressed regret that Dr. Selwyn should have
omitted to visit their literary establishments. The settlers were
ignorant until then of possessing them; but this is of a piece
with the effrontery with which the hirelings of this Company
put forward statements to entrap the unwary. Unlike the
common herd, they do not rest contented with the usual appeal
to the avarice of mankind; but taking higher ground, as a
surer means of enticing a different class of emigrants, they
exclaim, “ The scientific and the literary will find those de-
lightful institutions of the mother country already grafted and
flourishing in the land of their adoption.” But this was car-
rying the joke too far, and gave rise to the subjoined notice in
the “ Colonist —
“ To the Editor of the * New Zealand Colonist .’
“ Sir, —In the c Gazette * of last Saturday I observe a para-
graph in which it is stated that Dr. Selwyn (meaning, I pre-
sume, the Lord Bishop) declined visiting any of our ‘ literary
establishments.’ Although not a very literary character myself,
I feel curious to ascertain where those establishments are
situate, their nature, &c., and any other information regarding
them it may be in your power to afford. By stating these
particulars in your journal you will confer an obligation upon
the inhabitants of Port Nicholson generally, and individually
on your obedient servant,
“ Observer.
“ (We are sorry to be obliged to state our ignorance of the
nature, locality, and even existence, of the literary establish-
ments mentioned by our contemporary. Our correspondent
had better apply for information to the fountain-head, and
whatever particulars he may obtain shall be willingly inserted
in our columns. It is, indeed, lamentable that a place pos-
sessing so large a population as Port Nicholson should not be
able to boast of even a common circulating library. It was,
we believe, some time since in contemplation to establish one,
but the endeavour failed, through want of energy on the part
of the projectors.—E. N. Z. C.)”
b 3


The statistics of crime we have not the means of recording
but the “’Colonist” of sth August, 1842, contains a letter from
which the following is an extract: —
“ To the Editor of the ‘ New Zealand Colonist .’
“ Sir, —When I was a boy, my father told me that an
essential part of my education would be to gain a knowledge of
the general laws of the land in which my lines might be laid ;
my experience in these colonies, however, shows me that this
knowledge is in nowise sufficient for my personal safety, nor
the security of my property, and especially in Port Nichol-
son.”
Here follows an account of some trials and convictions.
“ Before these convictions and sentences, crime did not
abound so much in this place as it now does; even more than
it does in the penal colonies.”
Again, on the 16th of August, we find his Honour E. S.
Halswell, Esq., Judge of the County Court, acknowledging to
the jury the grave nature of the offences in the calendar, and
confessing crime to be on the increase.
VIII.
CLEARING LAND.
The Canadian forest can be cleared at an outlay of from 41. to
hi. an acre. Not so the New Zealand, although the Company,
in defiance of the knowledge we derive from facts and the state
of our pockets, would persuade us to the contrary. An extract
from their fifth report betrays a fear that, despite their as-
sertions on this head, the truth will creep out. Whoever
penned the following seems to have been conscious that his
sincerity would be doubted; and, fortunately, the Jesuitical
bias of the paragraph is so obvious that the impression it
conveys is the reverse of w'hat it was intended to do. We
would ask, which of the two is more likely to give correct in-
formation, the party who sells the land or the settler who has
to clear it ?
Extract from the Company's Report.
“ Some discouragement has resulted to the agricultural
interest of the settlement from an incautious statement in a
letter from one of the principal colonists, and published in the
newspapers in this country, that the forest land could not be
cleared at a less cost than 401. per acre. Experience has


proved that the actual cost is between 10/. and I?/. per acre;
and it is not doubted that the work will eventually be done
much cheaper. As a proof of what may be effected by energy
and industry, Mr. Heaphy mentions the case of two young
Scotchmen, owning a section in the Karori valley, having
cleared about twenty acres of heavily-timbered land, and built
themselves a house, in the space of six months, with no assist-
ance but that of a native employed.”
Hear the opinion of an independent man on this subject: —
“ In order to bring the forest into thorough cultivation, we
must expend from 16/. to 55/. or 60/. upon every acre.* The
case cited on their draughtsman’s authority stands thus. In
December last we walked over the ground said to have been
cleared by the Messrs. Yules ; and without quibbling about its
extent, or the absence of any house upon the ground erected by
the parties referred to, we shall describe its condition. The
trees are certainly cut down, but the smaller branches and
underwood have only been consumed. There lie the trunks,
where they fell, blackened and hardened by fire, but present-
ing a greater hindrance to the cultivation of the soil than when
they ornamented the ground they now encumber. If this be
clearing , we confess we have mistaken the matter; in our
opinion, and that of any one conversant with the subject, the
principal operations have yet to be performed, namely, to saw
the trunks into manageable lengths, and then to log and burn
them. The latter, in a moist climate, is not an easy matter,
and in the present case, where the small wood has already been
destroyed, the difficulty is much increased. Then follows
grubbing, not the roots, but w hat may rather be called surface
branches, a very different operation in New Zealand to what
it is in an American forest. We will now state one or two
cases which came under our own observation. Mr. Hughie,
an Irishman, assisted by some of his countrymen, cleared and
stumped half an acre of forest land adjoining the Yules’ mis-
called clearing, which cost him at the rate of 50/. an acre.
Again, a labouring man, named John Campbell, had a few
days before we left Wellington contracted with a Mr. Tyser to
clear and stump an acre for 20/., every tree, however, above
eighteen inches in diameter to be left standing; and so fearful
was this man of the speculation not answering, that he had
limited his contract to one instead of five acres.” These
instances are in keeping with my own experience upon a town
acre w T hich was but partially wooded.
* “ Remarks on the River Hutt,” by Wm. Swainson, Esq., F.R.S.


LABOUR
The following extracts from the “ New Zealand Gazette ”
speak for themselves :
“ The Benevolent Society of Carpenters and Joiners are
■willing to contract with any captain that may be willing to take
any number, not less than twenty, to Valparaiso, Sidney, or
Hobart Town. Address to the secretary of the society, New
Zealander, Wellington, New Zealand.
“ James Reed, Secretary.
“ December, 1842.”
“ To the Editor of the ‘ New Zealand Gazette and Wellington
Spectator .*
“ Sir, —Knowing your impartiality, I trust you will not
refuse insertion to the following remarks. The New Zealand
Company’s agents at home, in inducing persons to emigrate
for their settlements, guarantee the emigrants, if unable to
obtain work at their own trades, employment, at the rate of 1 1.
per week, and rations. Every one who has arrived here has
come impressed with a belief in the truth of this statement.
At this period work is rather slack; and on those who left
England (believing in the faith of the Company) applying to
the proper persons for the fulfilment of the contract, they are
placed on the road, to receive a pittance of 95., 10s., or (some
very few) 12s. per week, with what is called rations —such
rations —the meat being positively gangrene; and I am sure
the hungriest cur amongst the Maori breed would turn away
in disgust from it. Is this the way to treat men ? Can the
Company expect favourable statements to be sent home, when,
instead of what is noised about in England, their emigrants
only receive from 9s. to 12s. per week, which, with the price
of provisions, will scarcely keep a family from starving.
(Signed) " “ Colonist.”
To which complaint the Company’s organ replies: —
“ We insert in to-day’s paper a letter signed ‘ Colonist,’
complaining of the wages paid by the Company, and of the
quality of the rations they supply. The writer is under the
idea that the Company are pledged, at all times, to secure the
emigrants in wages equal to 30s. per week. In this, we
believe, there is some mistake. To the emigrants who formed
part of the expedition which first left England, some pledge of


the sort, we think, was given; but we are assured that the
Company now decline giving any pledge of the kind.
“ The Company had the reputation of having the best rations
in the colony; indeed, their salt provisions and biscuit were so
excellent that they were in great demand among the colonists
generally. We have reason for believing, however, that ‘ Colo-
nist’s ’ complaint is not unwarranted; that, in fact, the Com-
pany’s rations are not now at all to be compared with those
issued in former times.”
As may be gathered from the foregoing extracts, the supply
of labour, when we left Port Nicholson, was very much in
excess of the demand.
Retail Prices of Provisions. —Bread, 2 lb. loaf, 7 d. ; potatoes,
from 14 lb. to 20 lb., Is.; pork, B d. per lb.; beef, Is. 2d. to
Is. 4 d. per lb.
FARMING.
The Company’s people tell those who are so foolish to listen to
them, that Mr. Molesworth is making money in the valley of
the Hutt. Hear what his next neighbour says; —“ All but
two or three individuals are deterred from cultivating its banks,
and even these I firmly believe are losing rather than gaining
money by their farming.”* This is in unison with all that
has come under my own observation. Mr. Compton, a pas-
senger by the “ Mandarin,” rented a section of land upon this
river; and shortly before we left Wellington he assured us
that he should have acted more wisely had he stayed at home
and laid out the same amount of money on the poorest land there
rather than in New Zealand. Tw'o brothers named Potts came
out in the same vessel. They did as Mr. Compton had done,
and took land upon the Hutt. During our stay at Wellington
their crops were twice destroyed by inundations of the river;
and when we left they had decided on moving elsewhere when
an opportunity offered. ' In the winter of 1842 the Hutt over-
flowed its banks seven times ; and to use the words of a settler
on its banks, —“ The late inundations of the river Hutt, greater
and more frequent than any yet experienced by the colonists,
have excited much anxiety and even alarm among the settlers
on its banks. Anxiety in regard to their present and future
prospects, and alarm for their personal safety. The water
having entered almost every house, scarcely allowing the in-
mates, in many instances, time to escape.”
* Wm, Swainson, Esq., F.R.S., F.L.S.


One gentleman, Mr. Martyn, has cleared and brought under
cultivation about twenty acres of forest ground situated in the
mountains, r about a quarter of a mile behind the town. This
in June or July, 1842, had cost him nearly 500/. Part of the
ground was an old Maori clearing, and yet with this advantage,
and that of proximity to a market, his receipts up to that period
were only 21. 2s. 9 d. He had a large field in cabbage, which
he told us it would not pay to send in to town.
Mr. Watt farms 100 town acres of fern-covered land. From
this he expected, for the first potato crop of 1842, 300 tons.
But what was the return ? Three tons of picked potatoes
instead of 300. The same gentleman, we are told in the “ Ga-
zette” of June, 1842, expected to have from some wheat unreaped
nine tons of fine flour; but whether his calculations on the
produce of his wheat turned out better than his potato crops,
we never heard. We should add that the ground cultivated
by Mr. Watt is of the poorest quality, and not a fair sample of
New Zealand soil. But here, as elsewhere, we wish these
things to be known; for when we are gravely told by the
“ Gazette ” that the wheat of Mr. Molesworth (what would the
Company’s agent do without him ?) yields at the rate of ninety
bushels an acre, and some of his potato fields fifteen tons to
the same,* it is right the public should be informed that
others are not so successful. What this gentleman is to the
Port Nicholson folks Mr. Bell is to the Wanganui people.
For what the latter has done we refer to Mr. Nixon’s letter
under the head of Districts.
Agricultural establishments at high money wages will not
answer. When capital is to be thus invested, the cotter system
of Scotland, where a large portion of the ploughman’s salary
is paid in kind, should be introduced. But even with this
improvement agricultural establishments in the colonies never
answer. Cut them up into small holdings, and the land that
would not before pay its expenses will then yield a small rent
besides a profit to its hard-working tenant.
ROADS.
Roads are as necessary to develope the resources of an agri-
cultural district as the plough, or any other implement of
farming husbandry. They are the great civilizers of a country.
In the means of internal communication, New Zealand is,
* “Gazette,” of 7th May, 1842. See, also, Effect of no Roads,
under the next head.


from its rugged character, naturally deficient. This defect the
Company has partly obviated by the construction of ten miles
of cart road and fourteen miles of bridle path. But the neces-
sity of similar works, and the impossibility of the settlement
making any great progress without them, is thus set forth in
the following extracts from the “ Colonist” paper :
“Effect of no Roads. —Our readers may remember a flaming
paragraph inserted in the “ Gazette,” about six months ago, on
the profit of growing potatoes on the Hutt; they yielded, we were
told, from ten to fifteen tons the acre, and “ some ” were sold
at fifteen pounds the ton. The whole was concluded with a
strong recommendation from the editor to “ face the bush ”
and reap a similar harvest. All this might have been true;
but that it was a most extraordinary instance of success, and
should not have been held up as an example, the following facts
will testify. No later than last month four acres of potatoes,
in Mr. Wicksteed’s section, were sold on the ground for the
sum total of six pounds ! The crop was not a fine one, but
the potatoes were fully as large as those usually sold by the
Maories, and there were from five to six tons to the acre ; that
is to say, in all about twenty tons, which thus fetched six
shillings per ton ! The purchaser urged he could not give
more, since the expense of bringing them to Wellington would
be twice as much as their original cost. This, no more than
the former instance, should not be taken as a fair average of
profit or loss; but it serves to show that without the easy
means of conveying produce to market, the Hutt is of no use
to us as an agricultural district.— Communicated.
“ But there are still two things requisite for the realization
of these advantages —to procure the acquiescence of the natives,
and to construct roads. The former, we tnist, will be now
speedily accomplished ; for the latter, we fear the settlers must
wait a long time. Until, however, the means of communi-
cation have been provided, it is matter of comparative unim-
portance that a person should be able to look upon a map, and
put his finger upon a piece of ground which he may call his
own, but which he can turn to no profitable purpose. Roads
are the great want of the Colony. Without them we can do
little more than form a small settlement round the shores of this
harbour. With them we may hope to develope, to their fullest
extent, the yet untried resources of the country.*
“ A great number of the residents in this neighbourhood are
the owners of sections of land which possess every element of
value hut accessibility; but which, wanting this, are utterly
worthless for all purposes of utility. The Karori, the Makara,
* October 21,1842.


and the Ohario districts are all in this predicament, as is also
the greater part of the Hutt district. In this last district, in-
deed, there are many sections of which, unless w r e are strangely
misinformed, not one boundary line ever has been traced.
There is not even a surveyor’s line by which they can be ap-
proached. The greater portion of the Manewatu and Orewenua
districts are also useless for want of means of communication.*
“ This brings us to the main question. If the valley of the
Hutt is to become an agricultural district, at whose expense is
the river to be cleared and a road constructed ? I shall not at
present agitate the question whether the Company are bound
to make their lands accessible or not; I can safely say that
the settlers are entirely without the means. This inability
partly originates in the exhausted state of our finances, and
partly in that incubus which presses upon the colony generally,
that useless and dronish body the absentee landlords. In order
to bring the forest into thorough cultivation, we must expend
from 16/. to 55/. or 60/. upon every acre, and with what re-
sults ! How then can we be expected to construct roads and
clear out rivers? The Company have been, and still are, em-
ploying surplus labourers in making roads to various districts,
as Karori and Porirua. Yet what are these, in comparison to
the Hutt, but mere cottage gardens —isolated patches, sur-
rounded by mountains, over which roads can only be constructed
at an enormous expense. I may be wrong in this opinion, but
as no one pretends to put these districts in comparison with the
Hutt, so do I humbly conceive it would be far better to concen-
trate all the assistance the Company can give us upon that
district, which is confessedly the most valuable in the colony,
and without which we can never grow our own food.
“ We confess that we see no reason for imagining that the
Government will undertake the performance of such a task,
simply for the reason that the fund which, in other parts of the
colonv, is specifically devoted to the construction of roads,
and the maintenance of internal communications is, within the
New Zealand Company’s territories, absorbed by that Com-
pany.” t
XII.
LAND CLAIMS.
Instead of allowing the New Zealand Company to prove the
validity of their titles to the satisfaction of Government, a party
* August 9, 1842.
f Swainson “ On the Present State of the Colony.”


in Wellington have been at great pains to complicate the ques-
tion, and to stir up in the minds of the settlers distrust of a
commission appointed by the Crown to adjudicate on this
question. The Company’s organ charges the Government,
among other things, with doing their worst to destroy the
validity of the titled upon which the settlers claim possession
of their land by stirring up the natives to oppose the occupation
of the land by the Company’s settlers. To this serious charge
the “ Colonist” replies :
“ If nothing more is meant than that the officers of Govern-
ment, following out the instructions of Lord John Russell,
have made known to the natives that they were not, without
inquiry, to be driven from their pahs and cultivation, under
the pretext of a purchase to which they were no parties, and
of which at the time many were absolutely ignorant, we can
easily believe that such has been the case; because these gen-
tlemen would have grievously failed in the performance of
their duty had they not done so.
“ There is one particular case in which the people of this
settlement are deeply interested, where the natives have re-
sisted, and hitherto with success, the occupation of the land by
the Company’s settlers —we allude to the district of Porirua.
But what are the circumstances of this case? We know
nothing of the Company’s title, except as disclosed by the
claims which they have advertised ; and from thence it appears
that this district is included in a deed extending from Mokau
nearly to Banks’ Peninsula, comprising, according to the esti-
mate of the New Zealand Company in England, about twenty
millions of acres, occupied probably by upwards of thirty
thousand natives; and that the deed is signed by a dozen or
so of chiefs. To assume that such a deed could ever have been
understood by the parties signing it as conveying an absolute
right to the purchasers to dispossess them of any or every
portion of the land nominally included in its limits, would be
to contradict anything that analogy and experience teach of the
native character; and to attempt to enforce the literal terms
of the deed as against the occupiers of any portion of ground,
would be to commit an injustice which no principles of public
policy could justify, and which no court of judicature within
the British dominions would sanction. In this case, however,
who are to blame ? They who seek to enforce or they who
seek to resist such a claim ? We at least cannot condemn the
latter.”
But the “ Gazette” preferred Jedburgh justice to the slow
operations of the law.


“ Measures must be taken to ensure their punishment, or
property within the vicinity of the Town will become of no
value whatever —a source of trouble instead of profit.”
We give, without any comment, the following correspond-
ence, originating in a public meeting of the settlers, called on
occasion of the dispute referred to, leaving the reader to form
his own opinion.
From the “ Colonist ” of the 6th September , 1842.
“ In the first place, then, we retort upon the principal agent
of the New Zealand Company the charge of tampering with
the native question. Almost from the first moment of our
establishment in this place, he has known that there were
questions of the gravest character at issue, between himself and the
natives, as to the validity of the purchases which he had nominally
made. For the adjustment of these questions we are not aware
that he has made any efforts. If, in this respect, we are mis-
taken, let his exertions but be made public, and we will be
among the first to acknowledge our error, and to give him the
fullest credit for his labours. Of such exertions, however, we
have never heard, and we must therefore presume that none
have been made. For this seeming apathy in so important a
matter, we should have been at a loss to assign a reason, had it
not been furnished by Colonel Wakefield himself. At a public
meeting, held at the Exchange, we heard the gallant Colonel
declare, that he had not taken any great trouble to urge upon
Captain Hobson the necessity for the settlement of the native
claims; because, in compliance with the instructions of the
Company, he was desirous of keeping the question open, in
order that it might be made an instrument in the hands of the
Directors for attacking the local government. If this be not
tampering with the question, we know not what is. And to
add to the impolicy and injustice of such a procedure, it has
since appeared that Colonel Wakefield was at that moment
authorized by Captain Hobson, to adopt the only really effica-
cious measures for putting a stop to the disputes thus occasioned,
by buying up all unsatisfied native claims !
“ We have asserted what we believe to be the fact, that
justice has not been done to the natives. If this is a mistake,
it is easy to disprove our assertion. And here, as before, we
shall be glad to perceive and acknowledge our error, if it can
be shown to be one. But if our view of the case be well
founded, our contemporary and the public may rely upon it
that any temporary ease, which may be secured by silence, will
be dearly purchased, and that every year’s delay will compli-
cate the question, and render it of more difficult solution.”


Reply of the Company’s Agent.
“ To the Editor of the * New Zealand Colo nist .’
“ Sir, —The writer of the leading article in the last number
of the ‘ Colonist,’ accuses me of charging him with tampering
with the native question.
“ It is true that the ‘ Gazette’ of last week makes this charge
against him, but I am at a loss to conceive why I am held
accountable for its opinions. I can only say that 1 knew
nothing of the article referred to until I saw it in print.
“I am further accused of having made ‘no efforts for the
adjustment of native disputes,’ and of having, at a public
meeting held at the Exchange, declared ‘ that I had not taken
any great trouble to urge upon Captain Hobson the necessity
of the settlement of the native claims, because, in compliance
with the instructions of the Company, I was desirous of keep-
ing the question open, in order that it might be made an instru-
ment in the hands of the Directors for attaching the local
government.’ This procedure is described as the more impolitic
and unjust, 4 as it has since appeared that I was at the moment
authorized by Captain Hobson to adopt the only really efficient
measures for putting a stop to the disputes thus occasioned, by
buying up all unsatisfied claims.’
“ I reply to these grave charges, because they are, unlike
some preceding ones, specific; because they affect the character
of the Directors of the New Zealand Company; and, lest my
continued silence under accusations contained in the * Colonist’
might lead the public to conclude that I have no answer to
them.
“In respect to the charge of having had the folly to utter at
a public meeting the wicked purpose of keeping open the native
question in order to furnish grounds of attack on the local
government, I declare, most solemnly, that 1 never at any time
made such a statement, or used words which can, by any con-
struction, bear that interpretation; and I confidently appeal to
the persons assembled at the public meeting in question to cor-
roborate my assertion.
“ My instructions from the Directors of the Company, to
assist Captain Hobson in any way in my power, and my own
acts of deference and submission to his authority, have been
too often published to render it necessary for me to say that
they are not consistent with the diabolical spirit implied in the
speech attributed to me.
“To revert to my supposed want of efforts for the adjust-
ment of native disputes. At the public meeting, held soon
after Ilanghiaieta’s attack on the Porirua settlers, I explained,


I believe to the satisfaction of all present (as evinced by the
manly congratulations of the gentleman who had felt it his duty
to question me on the subject), that I had done all in my power,
by representations to the authorities and to the New Zealand
Company, to remedy the evils complained of. Those repre-
sentations were made previously to the visit of his Excellency
the Governor to Port Nicholson. Upon that occasion I obtained
from Captain Hobson, with the assistance of the powerful and
enlightened advocacy of the Chief Justice and the Attorney-
General, what was considered by many influential settlers, who
were acquainted with it, an ample assurance of facilities to put
to rest all disputed questions between the settlers and the
natives. It was contained in the following letter from his
Excellency: —
“ ‘ To fV. Wakefield, Esq.
“ ‘ Sin, —In order to enable you to fulfil the engagements
which the New Zealand Company have entered into with the
public, I beg to acquaint you, for your private guidance and
information, that the local government will sanction any equi-
table arrangement you may make to induce those natives, who
reside within the limits referred to in the accompanying sche-
dule, to yield up possession of their habitations; but I beg you
clearly to understand that no compulsory measures for their
removal will be permitted.
“ ‘ I have made this communication private, lest profligate or
disaffected persons arriving at the knowledge of such an ar-
rangement might prompt the natives to make exorbitant de-
mands.
“ ‘ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ ‘ Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) “ ‘ W. Hobson.
“ ‘ Wellington, 6th September, 1841.’
“ Although the above letter did not guarantee a proportionate
award of land to the Company for any further outlay they might
incur in compensating the natives for their locations (as has
more than once been asserted to be the case in the columns of
the ‘ Colonist’), I took immediate steps, in conjunction with the
local Protector of Aborigines, to obtain possession for the public
of the site of the proposed Custom-house in the Te Aro Pah,
and other spots occupied by the natives. They had previously
expressed themselves willing to remove to their reserves ; but
the day after the departure of the Government brig, and four
days after the date of Captain Hobson’s letter to me, upon my
urging them, I was presented with the note of which the follow-
ing is a copy.


( Translation .)
“ ‘ Port Nicholson, 10 th September , 1841.
“ ‘ Friend Wairarapa, —You ask for a letter from the
Governor, that the white man may not drive you from your
pahs, or seize your cultivations.
“ ‘ Listen to the word of the Governor : he says, that it is
not according to our laws that you should be driven, if you do
not agree to go.
“ ‘ This letter is from the Governor.
(Signed) ‘“Clarke,
“ ‘ Protector of the Natives.
To Wairarapa, Chief of Pipitea.’
“ I need hardly say, that all subsequent efforts to effect the
removal of the natives from land sold by them in this district,
by the same means, have been in vain; but I have sanguine
hopes that, by facilities lately opened to me, I shall be enabled,
within no long period, to remove the obstructions to the quiet
location of settlers on the disputed spots.
“ I have been reluctantly compelled to extend my communi-
cation to this length, and to quote the documents above. I
submit them to the public in refutation of the serious charges
brought against me in the ‘ Colonist.’
“ I am, Sir, your obedient humble servant,
“ W. Wakefield.”
The same number of the “ Colonist ” which contained the
agent’s letter had the following remark: —
“With regard to the principal object of Colonel Wakefield’s
letter, the contradiction of our statement as to what he had said
at the public meeting referred to, we can do no more than
repeat that such was the impression made not merely upon
ourselves, but upon others who were present on the occasion.
We believe, that by reference to a memorandum made the
following day, we shall be able to state almost the precise
words emploved. The purport of them was certainly what we
have expressed in our paper of Tuesday *
“ We must reluctantly postpone any further comments upon
this letter until our next publication.”
And again, in a succeeding number :
“ Circumstances w T hich we could not control prevented us
from noticing in our last number the letter of Colonel Wake-
field, and an article which appeared in the “Gazette” of
* The italics are our own. —Ed.


Saturday last. The subject, however, will have lost little of its
interest by the delay,
“ We are, of course, bound to receive the letter of Colonel
Wakefield as a proof that he has no recollection of having
made such a statement as that which we charged upon him.
But as upon the occasion alluded to we were present as a mere
spectator, taking no part in the business of the evening, and
only anxious to learn what was said, and what was likely to be
done, and as we certainly heard him make that statement , we
cannot retract or qualify our charge. We should, however,
like to bear Colonel Wakefield’s version of what he did say; —
though perhaps his memory may not be quite so precise in
respect to what his speech did, as it appears to be in respect to
what it did not, contain.
“ The denial of Colonel Wakefield does not, however, stand
alone. It is supported by the unhesitating averment of our
contemporary —backed by certain solid reasons, showing the
utter impossibility of any such declaration having been made.
The testimony of our contemporary is one thing—his argument
another. We will deal with each separately.
“ In the first place, then, as we know that our contemporary
never pledges his veracity to statements of doubtful authenti-
city—never calls heaven to witness the truth of assertions
which he knows would not be credited upon any lower testi-
mony, and would never suppress a truth, or suggest a false-
hood, in order to carry his point, we should give the highest
possible credence to his denial. But, first, he does not ven-
ture to deny having heard the statement; and, secondly, if he
did—that he did not hear it, cannot destroy the impression
made upon us by the fact that we did. We remain, conse-
quently, unconvinced, even by the peculiar fervor and solem-
nity of our contemporary’s assertion of the falsehood of our
charge.
“ In the second place, however, we are informed that the
declaration alluded to was ‘so remarkable, so astounding,’
that it must have been heard, and, we presume, remembered.
Of all reasons to be urged in support of our contemporary’s
contradiction, this is the most extraordinary. The only thing
in the slightest degree remarkable in the matter was, that
Colonel Wakefield should have, to that extent, departed from
his habitual taciturnity. But certainly, among the entire
audience, there was not one person who would be astounded
by hearing that Colonel Wakefield had been endeavouring to
aid the Company in England, and the violent party in Port
Nicholson, in their endeavours to procure the removal of Cap-
tain Hobson. Nor, we venture to affirm, would any one have


been, we will not say astounded, hut even surprised, by hear-
ing that this was to be done hy turning to account the unset-
tled state of the questions between the natives and the colo-
nists. We believe it to have been so perfectly understood, that
the Company’s supporters in this place were, by all means, to
weaken the position of Captain Hobson, that the enunciation of
this particular mode of attack would excite no especial notice.
It might be remarked upon as ingenious; but, assuredly, no
one—not even our contemporary —would dream of being
astounded by it.
“ Perhaps, as tending to the elucidation of this question,
Colonel Wakefield would publish the extract which he read
from one of his despatches to the Directors, referring to this
subject. Probably we shall have the whole printed in Eng-
land, but this may be too late to effect the purpose for which
we now desire its production.
“ And this brings us to a consideration of the concluding
portion of Colonel Wakefield’s letter, in which he alleges that
he has failed in his attempts to remove the natives of Port
Nicholson from the land which they have sold, in consequence
of a letter written by Mr. Clarke, the Protector of Aborigines,
in contravention of the arrangement professed to have been
made by the Governor. We beg Colonel Wakefield’s pardon.
He does not allege this. But this, -whether rightly or wrongly
we do not pretend to decide, is the only meaning we can affix
to his letter. Possibly the involuntary error into which we
have fallen in this instance, which w T e are able to correct from
the circumstance of the letter being before us, may explain the
cause of the difference which exists between ourselves and him
on the previous topic. However this may be, we must com-
ment upon the letter as though our interpretation were correct.
“ Upon this subject then we have to remark, that the natives
of Te Aro, the only place to which Colonel Wakefield specifi-
cally refers, deny that they were parties to any sale to him;
that when Captain Hobson, in company with Mr. Halswell, and
we believe also with Colonel Wakefield, visited that Pah, in
order to persuade them to abandon it, the natives unanimously
declared that nothing but absolute force should make them
relinquish its possession; and that the letter written by Mr.
Clarke is nothing more than a simple statement of an unde-
niable principle of English law, at least as old as Magna
Charta, which it was his unquestionable duty to communicate
to them if the question were asked. We presume our contem-
porary will hardly, in writing, deny the validity of Mr, Clark’s
law upon this point. He will hardly affirm, that it is according
to English law that any person, even though a Maori, should be


driven from his property. Still less, we imagine, will he dis-
pute the obligation imposed upon Mr. Clarke, in his office of
Protector of the Aborigines, to inform the natives that they
were not beyond the pale nor beneath the protection of the
English law ; and that the jealous securities with which that
law has fenced round the possessions even of the poorest might
be claimed by them from the very moment their country was
proclaimed a portion of the widening dominions of the British
empire.
“ We cannot quite acquit Colonel Wakefield of having em-
ployed expressions which, however designed, certainly appear
calculated to mislead. Does he mean that the natives of Te
Aro have sold him their land ? That would appear to be a
necessary inference from the terms he has used; but we can
hardly imagine him to intend to make such an assertion. If
that is his meaning, we can only say that the natives most
firmly deny that they were parties to any sale, and that we have
never heard of any transactions in which they took a part, hav-
ing even the semblance of a valid sale. If he does not mean
to refer to the sale of Te Aro, then we should like to know
the circumstances under which he has made any * efforts to
effect the removal of the natives from land sold by them, 5 and
has failed in consequence of anything that could be traced
directly or indirectly to the letter of Mr. Clarke.”
The same paper had before truly remarked, that “as the
foundation of the assertion of British sovereignty in this island
is the. recognition of the native titles to land, it is obvious that
the Government cannot interfere summarily to dispossess the
natives, or to enable the European settlers to take possession of
land nominally conceded to them. When once peaceable pos-
session has been obtained, under such circumstances as would
deprive an English landholder of his right to proceed sum-
marily, then the occupant of land may fairly expect from the
Government authorities the same protection against unlawful
aggression on the part of the natives that he would be entitled
to claim against one of his own countrymen. In such case, if
the title of the native be valid, he must, we would submit, be
required to assert it in a court of law, through the instru-
mentality of the Protector of the Aborigines; or, if this should
be deemed inexpedient, as we imagine would be the case, his
title must be extinguished by purchase, either by the individual
claimant of land, or by the agent of the New Zealand Company.
We believe the latter would be, in almost all cases, the prefer-
able course, since the former could hardly fail to create a
feeling of insecurity dangerous ni the highest degree to the
progress of the community.”


These plain truths were unpalatable to the “ Gazette,” and a
charge of sacrificing the interest of Port Nicholson is brought
against the “ Colonist,” to which that paper replies, —“ We
believe that danger lies in the existence of injustice, not in its
being proclaimed ; and that to remove the evil complained of,
not to stifle the voice of complaint, is the true source of safety.
We do not think that justice has been done to the natives, and
we have never conversed with any one who asserted that it
had.”
Shortly after this was written, the Company’s agent shook off
his lethargy and departed for the seat of Government, having
for the object of his visit the settlement of this question, on
which occasion the “ Colonist” remarked, —“ The result of this
journey may be of the very utmost importance to this settle-
ment. Difficulties that might otherwise press upon us for years
may be at once removed, and disheartening doubts and harass-
ing delays may be altogether prevented. We have never had
any fears as to the ultimate adjustment of all the questions that
have arisen or may arise between the settlers and the natives,
upon terms which should be just to the New Zealander, but at
the same time should give to the colonists the lands they have
purchased. But, as Government would neither violate the
rules, nor anticipate the decision of the law, we did sometimes
fear that the inevitable imperfections in the titles acquired by
Colonel Wakefield might be felt as a very serious obstacle to
our progress. These imperfections may now be remedied, and
the work, which was necessarily left incomplete in the first
instance, may, under the auspices of the Government, and with
the aid of the Commissioner, be brought to a final and satis-
factory adjustment.”
XIII.
THE WAKEFIELD SYSTEM.
The new method of disposing of waste lands in our colonies
at a uniform price is a great improvement over the old mode of
grants. It creates a fund for the supply of labour, without,
however, in the case of New Zealand and the New Zealand
Company, making an adequate provision for its employment.
Capitalists, enticed by the bait of a town-acre, greedily pur-
chased to re-sell, or as a provision for children. It may answer
in New South Wales to devote the entire emigration fund to
the supply of labour. New Holland and New Zealand are
widely dissimilar countries. The forest of the former can be
traversed by wheeled vehicles, but in the mountainous fast-


nesses of the latter a man can hardly penetrate them on hands
and knees. Lord Stanley has, therefore, by directing half this
fund to the country’s improvement, done good service to New
Zealand. For surely it is better to give profitable employment
to a certain amount of labour, than by throwing more into the
market leave the greater portion idle. This is evident; not to
mention the still more urgent reason, of having in the one
case a country with roads, and in the other a country without
them.
We however go farther than his Lordship, and would employ
the whole land-fund in the internal improvements of the colony.
Emigration is a question for the consideration of the mother-
country. She has a surplus population to provide for; and
instead of grudging the means of sending them abroad, she
should rejoice that Providence has furnished her with so many
resources for her redundant hands. She should bear the burden;
and the land-fund should be the means of giving employment
in her colonies to labour when private enterprise is deficient.
The “ sufficient ” price of the Wakefield system is a fallacy
which every day’s experience only the more fully exposes.
Waste land is often dear at a gift. Sell it, therefore, not at
home hut in the colonies , and not at an arbitrary price, but for
what the land is worth, or in other words for what it will bring.
If a price must be put upon it, the safe side is to take a lower
scale of prices. Too high a duty amounts to prohibition. Most
men like to possess landed property, and thus the fund arising
from this source would, under proper regulations, become durable.
The New Zealand Company have discovered this, both at
Wellington and Nelson. Hence the rapidity with which they
form new settlements where the bait of a town-acre carries off
the country land.
XIV.
THE SETTLERS’ CHARGE AGAINST THE NEW ZEALAND
COMPANY.
Ist. They took our money in London for land which did not
belong to them; and which, up to the hour of our quitting
New Zealand, was virtually in possession of the natives.
Their land order implied quiet possession, guaranteeing us
against all but the acts of the British Government. But on
arrival in New Zealand, we find the native title to the land
which the Company have sold has not been extinguished, and
that we are refused its possession. Who is to reimburse the
settler for time and money wasted, not to mention the anxiety


which many have endured, who, during the three years of
inactivity which they have been compelled to live in Wel-
lington, would in more favoured colonies have laid the foun-
dation of a competency ? If the New Zealand Company will
not do this, is there no punishment for such men —a chartered
Company though they be? The Emigration Society of the
Cape of Good Hope advertise their ships to sail upon a stated
day ; and if not, the emigrant can claim a certain sum for
every day he is detained. Let a clause somewhat to the same
effect be inserted in the charter of the New Zealand Company,
namely, that the settler shall be placed in possession of his
land at the expiration of a certain period after his arrival in
the colony ; and that the Company, failing to comply with
this, shall pay to the settler a stipulated sum daily, until their
contract be fulfilled!
2nd. The land they have sold being inaccessible, even if
ours, is of no use for agricultural purposes. The Company
certainly did not bind themselves to open the country; but in
their compact with the public they are morally bound not to
take money for land which cannot be got at.
3rd. Instead of giving us our country land within a moderate
distance of their first and principal settlement, which was
tacitly implied in their contract, we found, on arrival at Port
Nicholson, a re-emigration of 112 miles by sea necessary, to the
river of Wanganui. To this district, up to the period of our
quitting New Zealand, the Company, had not, as promised,
sent a single labourer for its cultivation ! They must have
received about 25,000/. for this purpose from the settlers, but
instead of sending the labour thus paid for to Wanganui it was
sent to Wellington. Is not this a breach of trust ?
4th. WTiat means a dividend of 10 per cent, from their
profits in the emigration trade, w T hen the settlers, who have
given them the cash they thus dispose of, are yet without their
land.
sth. For all the evils with which the settlers have had to
contend we hold this Company responsible, although for the
present they have managed to shelter themselves by making a
scape-goat of both the local and home Governments. From
the commencement of their colonizing operations they have
proceeded upon defective information. This is the pith of our
charge against the New Zealand Company, and it is no light
one, for they must be held morally responsible for leading
many families into error.


WRITERS ON NEW ZEALAND.
“ Anonymous writers assert that all the land in New Zealand is
worthless, uncultivable, or inaccessible. Against this we have
the testimony of travellers who have visited the country —of
the Hon. Mr. Petre, whose word is above suspicion ;of Mr.
Bidwell, whom we know personally to be a good judge, and,
what is no doubt important, a disinterested witness; and of the
responsible officers of her Majesty’s Government. It was only
the other night that the Noble Lord, the Secretary for the
Colonies, stated in the House of Commons that there exists an
enormous quantity of fertile land in New Zealand. Upon
turning to Mr. Bidwell’s pamphlet, we find him speaking of
the country everywhere towards the south of the northern
island as admirably adapted for cultivation, with plains suited
for rearing herds of cattle ; and describing Port Nicholson, the
principal settlement of the New Zealand Company, as sur-
rounded by abundance of excellent land, ‘ sufficient for the
employment of any amount of population for twenty years to
come,’ as ‘ an excellent harbour, with a navigable river, the
Hutt, and a great extent of very rich land, an admirable site
for a town,’ and so on. Let it always be remembered that
these are the statements of a known writer, and that they are
confirmed by other known authorities ; while the statements
opposed to them are anonvmous.” —New Zealand Journal.
Hitherto few but the Company’s own people have had an
opportunity of bringing the merits of Port Nicholson before
the public. But even at this early stage we have known writers
(although the above paper seldom quotes them), proving the
injudicious choice of the Company in fixing their settlement
upon a stormy coast, among the mountains that buttress Cook’s
Stra// instead of at the river Thames. Here, as elsewhere, they
shoul d have been guided by our great navigator. Captain Cook
saw with a prophetic eye when he pointed out the Thames as
the proper site for the capital of New Zealand. When the
reader is reminded that the father of the Hon. Mr. Petre is, or
lately was, one of the most active among the Directors of the
New Zealand Company, and that the family have a large stake
in the colonial possessions of that body, he may view the son’s
testimony on this subject as a little one-sided, and not quite so
conclusive as the editor of the Company’s periodical seems to
consider it! It is well for Mr. Petre “ who never visited any
part of the island but the Company’s settlements, and for other
gentlemen who have like him irrevocably embarked their


money, to put a good face upon the matter, and believe all the
Company tell them, and repeat it over and over again ; but it
can have but little weight in the controversy.”* Great weight,
probably undue weight, has been attached by the public press
to all the statements, whether of fact or private opinion, of
hearsay or conjecture, contained in this gentleman’s work,
because the Hon. Mr. Petre declares that he is only a sojourner
here at present, and is preparing to return to a settlement
in which he had embarked his capital before he Jirst left
England.
Mr. Bidwell, the disinterested witness and good judge, will
find his answer in the following extracts from his own work.
Mr, Bidwell’s opinion of the Auckland district in
1838.
“Saturday, March 31st. Con-
tinued our descent of the moun-
tain and entered the great plain of
the Thames, or ‘ Waiho,’ the most
splendid piece of country I have met
with for the purposes of colonization.
This plain is, I should think, about
one hundred miles long, and vary-
ing from twenty to thirty broad;
The river Thames runs through it,
and is deep enough to be navigated
by track boats or light steamers,
for a great distance. At the place
I crossed, it was about five feet
deep and one hundred yards wide ;
the stream is however so strong, in
spite of the apparently perfect level
of the country, that it would be
useless to attempt ascending it by
oars or sails. The whole plain,
with very little exception, is clear
of wood; it is abundantly watered,
and would, I think, be one of the most
splendid situations for a colony, that
could be found in the whole world.”
1841.
“ There is no doubt, in time this
will be a fine country, but I cannot
help thinking the land around
Port Nicholson offers far greater
advantages ; it is true, round the
valley of the Hutt, the land will
cost iabour to prepare it for culti-
vation, but it is undoubtedly very
rich, and will make good and speedy
return for the outlay upon it. Now
the land on the IVaiho, which will not
cost much money to work, is not better ,
perhaps not so good, as the bare hilts
to the south of Fort Nicholsoti, and the
swampy lands of the IVaiho will cost
almost as much to drain as heavy-
timbered land to clear ; and it is well
known bogs do not immediately be-
come useful land , but that several
years must elapse after they are re-
claimed, before they will bear crops of
grain.
“ The Waiho, although a much
larger river, is not more useful
than the Hutt, as it will only serve
for the downward conveyance of
produce, for which purpose the
latter is equally capable.”
“ It is unnecessary for me to express my opinion of the trust-
worthiness of a writer who, however exalted in his eyes may
be the rank of the settlers at Port Nicholson, however gratified
he may be by their hospitality, how charmed with their society,
and however disinterestedly and chivalrously pledged to sup-
* “ New Zealand and the New Zealand Company,” by Theophilus
Heale, Esq.
c 3


port their cause with tongue and pen,* can yet deliberately
bring himself to designate the Hutt as a navigable river, to talk
of a paltry streamlet of seven or eight miles’ length as being
equally useful as the Thames.”
XVI.
PUFFING, OR SELF-SUPPORTING COLONIES.
It was observed by Lord Stanley that this, the theme of so
much laudation to fireside emigrants, had produced in opera-
tion much misery and suffering in South Australia; and we
have now to add not a little in New Zealand. The puffing
system has, indeed, been in England eminently successful, and
if we are to credit the Fifth Report of the New Zealand Com-
pany, their settlements abroad are at a high pitch of prosperity.
These yearly circulars, embodying the most captivating lures,
are put forward with an audacity well calculated to draw many
to New Zealand. As one example of the misrepresentations
put forward through the agency of this Company, and as a
warning to men who are still inclined to place implicit trust in
them, we will take the liberty of dissecting the paper in ques-
Fifth Report of the New Zea-
land Company! ;
“ Colonel Wakefield reported
in a letter dated the 7th No-
vember last— ‘ The produce of
the valley of the Hutt will this
year be nearly all exported or
consumed by ships visiting us,
whilst the cultivation of the
town-land and vicinity will sup-
ply the wants of the residents.’
Remarks.
We cannot believe Colonel Wake-
field wrote anything so false, for this
reason ; when we left the settlement,
twelve months after the date of his let-
ter, the only grain grown upon the
town-land was an acre and a half of
wheat, upon Wellington Terrace, by
Mr. Smith, of the Union Bank. Even
the ‘ Gazette’ J could not reckon Mr.
Watts’ previous crop (that which, ac-
cording to the Colonel, was to sup-
ply the settlement) at more than
rune tons of flour. This is really too
bad. Wellington, up to the hour we
left it, had been indebted to the abo-
rigines even for its supply of potatoes,
and these were chiefly brought by
sea from Wanganui, Manawatu, and
the Chatham Islands.
* Note by Mr. Bidwell.—“ lam at this moment residing with Mr.
Molesworth, brother of Sir William Molesworth, Bart., and among a
host of respectable settlers, who give a high moral tone to society here.
I may name Petre, son of Lord Petre ; Sinclair’s brother, or son of Sir
George; Dorset; Wakefield,” &c., &c.
f From the “New Zealand Journal,” of June 11,1842.
+ “Gazette,” of June 25, 1842,


The first Export.
“We have long exported oil
and other valuable produce
brought here from the coast, in
exchange for the various articles
obtained from the merchants of
the port; but we believe, until
now, no article produced within
Does the following extract from
their own paper * justify Colonel
Wakefield’s statements: —
“ I fear your market (Port Ni-
cholson) will be over supplied, large
quantities being on the way from
hence (Sydney). The ‘ Agnes ’ had
40 tons; the ‘ Eleanor’ and ‘ Bright
Planet ’ 233 tons; the ‘ Thomas
Crisp ’BO tons; the ‘ Brothers ’ will
also have flour; and doubtless the
‘ Lady Leigh ’ will take some.”
Or does the actual state of the Wel-
lington market in December last, as
exhibited in the ad\ ertising columns
of the “ Gazette” confirm the Com-
pany’s report.
Advertisement.
For sale, the cargo of the “ Cheer-
ful,” 150 tons of Chilian flour.
Ex. “ Elizabeth.”
300 tons of Chilian flour.
Ex. “ Amwell.”
30 tons of Sydney flour.
And to add to the above, three
vessels, the “ Brougham,” “ Jane
Goude,” and “ Nelson, ” had been
sent to Valparaiso for more flour.
Mr. Swainson, speaking of the in-
undations of the Hutt, writes—“ The
amount of damage to the standing
crops is not much; but these crops
are so small that they are scarcely
worth mentioning.”
After this who would not cry Shame!
shame! But perhaps we may be
told that potatoes have been exported
from Port Nicholson. True, and as
the history of the trade, as far as it
has gone, is rather amusing, we will
relate the particulars for the edifica-
tion of the New Zealand Company.
In the “Gazette” of May 7, 1842,
appeared the annexed flourish, in-
tended as so much dust for the eyes
of the English public. The same
chronicler had informed us in a
former number of his paper that
“ some ” of the same crop of potatoes
the port has been shipped to a had sold for 15/. a ton. 1 his price one
foreign country or neighbouring would have thought remunerating,
colony for sale. On Tuesday the But what of that 1 Had not the Direc-
‘ Lady Leigh’ commenced our tors been informed that the produce of
* “ Gazette,” of June, 1842.


export trade, by taking to'Syd-
ney twenty tons* of very fine po-
tatoes, grown by Mr. Molesworth
upon the Hutt. Mentioning the
Hutt we may observe, that we
understand that fifteen tons of
potatoes to the acre have been
obtained, and that a small patch
of wheat, upon measurement,
showed the crop to be equal to
ninety bushels to the acre. Poor,
pitiable, starving, helpless, Port
Nicholson settlers !
“ Your Directors are informed
by Mr. Heaphy, late their drafts-
man in the colony (several of
whose interesting views have
already been published,} that
when he left Wellington in No-
vember last thirty-one indivi-
dual capitalists were actually en-
gaged in clearing and cultivating
land in the valley of the Hutt,
in the Porirua and Ohiro dis-
trict, in the Karori valley, round
the harbour, and at Lyall’s Bay.
It may confidently be expected
that the first fruits of this ener-
getic attention to the great source
of all real and enduring wealth,
that effectual progress will soon
be made in the systematic growth
and preparation for shipment to
this country' of the flax, which
appears destined by nature to be
the staple export of the agricul-
tural districts of New Zealand;
and which it is understood is
already supplied in considerable
quantities to the Sydney market.”
“ There are 415 houses in Wel-
lington, exclusively of the neigh-
bouring villages; 195 substan-
tially built of brick or wood, at
an aggregate cost of 23,600/.
Many of the dwellings and ware-
the Hutt would this year be nearly all
exported; and in shipping fifteen or
twenty tons of potatoes to New South
Wales, the Company’s agent literally
kept his word.f
Supposing Mr. Heaphy's account
correct, can the New Zealand Com-
pany be in earnest in congratulating
themselves because thirty-one indi-
viduals have actually set themselves
down amid 110,000 acres of as rugged
land, as any in mountain-
ous New Zealand? It looks some-
thing like burlesque to talk “ of the
first fruits of this energetic attention,”
&c. Many months after Mr. Heaphy
had left the settlement Mr. Swainson
thus describes its principal agricul-
tural district:—
TheHutl. —“ Out of 75 sections, or
7500 acres, given out in this noble
valley, I do not believe there are 100
acres in actual cultivation, and not
more than ten or twelve sections have
been let. Such is the effect of appor-
tioning out land placed in a wilder-
ness. Who will ever think of grow-
ing produce for sale, if there are no
means of bringing it to market 1 It
is in vain that the agents of the ab-
sentee proprietors offer the most
‘ liberal terms ’ to such as will rent
the upper section of the Hutt. No-
body will take them.”];
The “ Clydeside,” after a twelve
month’s gathering, took to England,
according to the Sydney custom en-
try, one ton 6-J cwt. of flax.
When we arrived in Wellington, a
month after Mr. Heaphy had left it,
the only brick-built house in the
town was one belonging to a publican
named Jenkins. When we left it
twelve months afterwards there were
* While in Sydney, we learnt that these potatoes had then been dis-
posed of at about 71. per ton.
f The customs entry is fifteen tons.
+ William Swainson, F.K.S., F.L.S., &c., &c., a settler upon the Hutt.


houses are stated to be excellent,
and some of the former to possess
much architectural beauty.”
“From another authentic source
your Directors have learned that
the receipts of the custom-house,
in the first month after it was
opened, amounted to 1000/.”
“ Land suitable for building
near the beach was letting at the
close of last year for short terms
of years, for 10s. per lineal foot
of street frontage; and that on
the beach for 1/. per foot, water
frontage. Commerce and trade
were flourishing, as is indeed
proved by the great number of
vessels which have visited the
nine, including as one the new bar-
racks for emigrants. Yet this Com-
pany unblushingly assert that at the
former period there were one hundred
and ninety Jive houses “ substantially
built of brick or wood,” conveying an
impression that the majority of them
were brick buildings. Let the reader
judge for himself respecting such
glaring falsehoods. The architectural
beauty, the ninety bushels an acre,
and the Hutt export trade have no ex-
istence, and are got up merely for the
amusement of the Company and the
deception of the public.
Two things are proved by the fol-
lowing letter, namely, that the cus-
toms revenue has either not in-
creased, or that the Company have
been, as in other matters, grossly de-
ceived.
<■ To the Editor of the ‘ New Zealand
Gazette and Wellington Spectator.’
“ Custom-house, Wellington,
“ June 11, 1842.
“ Sir, —T observe in your paper of
this date a report of a speech by Mr.
Earp, at a public meeting, held at the
Exchange Te Aro, on the 7th instant,
in which Mr. Earp appears to have
made the following statement :— ‘ He
(Mr. Earp) had it from a source upon
whom he could place the utmost re-
liance, that the sub-collector of cus-
toms had acknowledged to him that
the last quarter’s revenue from cus-
toms duties alone was 4500/. or
18,000/. per annum.
“ From what source Mr. Earp has de-
rived this information 1 cannot imagine,
as it certainly did not emanate from me,
and is in itself most grossly incorrect.
“I am, Sir,
“ Your most obedient servant,
“ P. D. Hogg, Sub-Collector.”
« There may be a great show of
prosperity in Wellington—high rents,
handsome stores, and plenty of ships
—but it requires no great foresight to
predict the fate of a colony when
everything is consumed and nothing
produced, where there is no agricul-
ture, no manufactures, and no roads.
Growing potatoes on the sides of the
hills, and feeding a few herds of


port during the short period of
its settlement.”
cattle in the swamps and flats, is not
such farming as will save the colony.
This is the conclusion I have formed
after a year’s observation, and is
that of nearly all the intelligent men
I have conversed with.” From
“ Remarks on the present state of
the Colony,” by William Swainson,
F.R.S., &c. &c.
XVII.
NEW ZEALAND COMPANY.
The settlers in New Zealand are kept in total darkness with
regard to the Company’s future operations. They, however,
have a right to know, for “ upon the supposition of their deep
interest in this community, they are intrusted with the per-
formance of many of the most important functions of govern-
ment ; we have a right to expect that there should be at least as
much publicity given to their measures as to those of the
Government itself. And we cannot but believe that this is the
intention of the Directors.”
And the “ Colonist” adds on another occasion :—“ We do not
seek to disguise our conviction, that hitherto, from whatever
cause, there has been a degree of inactivity on the part of the
Company unfortunate, and perhaps even culpable, by which
the progress of the colony has been retarded, and by which
the ultimate gain of the Company may be seriously affected.
To whom this inactivity is attributable we do not know, and
we do not now care to inquire. It may be that the principal
agent of the Company has been fettered by instructions which
he has had no power to surpass. Should such be the case, he
ought, more than any individual, to rejoice in a demonstration
of opinion which may aid the effect of his suggestions, should
he have made such, by convincing the Directors that something
more is expected of them than they have yet accomplished,
and by giving some reasons for believing that their profits are
involved in our prosperity. We do not expect any contribu-
tions in aid of this colony, which shall not have a tendency,
direct or remote, to increase the value of the Company’s pro-
perty. But we believe that such works as we have indicated
(roads) would have this effect. Rightly understood, the inte-
rests of the colony and of the Company are inseparable. We
cannot prosper without increasing, nor fail without destroying,
the source of their future gains. Nor can they do anything in


this district for their own benefit which shall not advance our
interests; while our progress would receive a serious, and pos-
sibly a fatal check, from the cessation of their operations.
“ Upon every account, therefore, we have the strongest reasons
for desiring their prosperity; but we certainly shall not seek
to evince our concern for their welfare, either by concealing
what appears to us a well-founded dissatisfaction, or by neg-
lecting to point out any means by which their and our interests
may be advanced.”
To which the “ Gazette ” replies, w'ith a threat calculated, in
its opinion, to silence all further remonstrance, that “ there is
nothing to prevent them (the Company), as soon as the land
sold at Port Nicholson is surveyed, from choosing the re-
mainder of their grant in some remote district, and transferring
their head quarters to some other place.”
“ Nothing to prevent them ! We should be sorry to think
as meanly of the men who have the direction of the affairs of
the New Zealand Company as this statement would imply.
Are their promises to us, the settlers in their ‘ first and prin -
cipal settlement,’ nothing ? Are we to assume that they have
forgotten the degree in which their success has been influenced
by our labours, and that they would deny or disregard the
obligation thus imposed upon them to maintain us in the
position which they had themselves marked out for us?
Nothing to prevent them ! We believe that there is everything
to prevent them which can restrain men of honour from vio-
lating their pledges; which can impel men of principle to dis-
charge a debt of gratitude; and more, which can prevent men
of business from abandoning their surest source of profit.”*
We are decidedly averse to a system of emigration conducted
by Joint Stock Companies, for all experience goes to prove that
profit is their first consideration, public utility the last. It
matters not what names stand in the direction; to job and
trade in colonization is the express object of such associations,
and a goodly “ dividend ” the end constantly in view. Among
the shareholders of the Company, there may be individuals
who, in purity of motives, yield to none in the land. With
these, a regard to the welfare of others, rather than gain,
induced them to purchase emigration stock. Still, in practice,
we too often find that “ Boards ” are but screens for indi-
vidual mal-practices, and “ Directors ” an oligarchy to defend
“ Boards.”
It is a known fact that a body of honourable men (and the
“ Colonist.”


Directors of the New Zealand Company are “ all honourable
men ”) will do that in their collective capacity which, indi-
vidually, they would be ashamed of. Now it would appear
that this wealthy and highly influential body are held in leading-
strings by a few of their own number. At times an evident
stagnation of business is remarked at the New Zealand House.
We inquire the cause, and find that Mr. G. Wakefield has
gone to Canada; or perhaps an answer to some application is
delayed until Mr. Secretary Ward’s return from Germany,
where he has been negotiating the sale of a Crown dependency
in the name of the New Zealand Company, hut, strange to
say, without their knowledge.
No, if emigration is to be national, let it be conducted by
Government, who will manage its details for less than 25 per
cent., a sum exacted by the New Zealand Company as com-
mission for disposing of the land fund.
This Company have sent emigrants to New Zealand, and
spent much money in surveys. This they have done, but
nothing more. To colonize a country means to subdue it; to
extend civilization through it by means of roads, bridges,
ferries, and the like. To accomplish these objects seems not
to have entered into the New Zealand Company’s plan of
colonization. They have set apart no funds for this vital
purpose. True, they have landed some 5000 persons upon the
beach at Port Nicholson ; and these, according to their means
and taste, have built some sort of habitation. But is this of
itself any mighty subject for congratulation, and a dividend of
10 per cent. ?
The Directors of this Company seem to think that none but
the shareholders have a right to see the details of their expen-
diture ; but we contend that the public have as goud a title;
21,000/. is too large a sum to be swept oft’ in a line; they
should condescend to more particulars. Let a larger balance-
sheet be procured; the shareholder will not grudge the ad-
ditional expense, nor the public shrink from its perusal.
Publicity is the only safe guarantee for a proper application of
the emigration fund.
How is the Company’s capital employed?* We would
suggest that a portion of it be laid out upon the security of
future land sales, in making roads in their settlement. Why
are the Company averse to this ? They know, or should know,
the nature of the security better than strangers.
We are interested in the success of the settlements in Cook’s
* It is not yet paid up, although they have managed to get permission
from Government to raise a loan of 190,000/.!!


Strait, and therefore make bold to offer a few words of advice
to those who manage them.
Let them first of all learn to think more humbly of them-
selves. Plant prosperity abroad, and it will then be time
enough to fence the House in Broad-street with all that glitter
and parade which is now so premature.
Let them cease to ape the East India Company in dignity
while they are immeasureably behind the South Australian
Agricultural Company in usefulness.
Let them drop the word “ Governor,” and their chairman
bring before the Court measures of a practical nature, instead
of pompously reading some well-selected extracts from their
last despatches.
Instead of troubling themselves with the prerogatives of the
Crown, let them leave such things to Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment, and carry on the work, uprightly and sincerely, which
Providence has marked out for them at Port Nicholson.
Let them, above all, have no fetes at the settlers’ expense;
and let them not think of making a dividend of 10 per cent,
when the settlements from which they profess to derive this
profit have yet produced nothing, and are dependent on a
foreign market for every supply but potatoes and other garden-
stuff.
Proceedings of the description above detailed, which would
bring disgrace on an individual, can never become justifiable
because carried on by a chartered body.
XVIII.
ADVICE TO EMIGRANTS.
Those who have capital, we would council not to buy co-
lonial land while they are in England. Let them keep their
property till they have seen the country. There are hundreds
in all the colonies anxious to sell for ready money; it will
always command bargains. Whatever discount or drawback
the Company may take off your land-purchase (should you buy
of them), in part payment of your passage out, is dearly earned
compared to the advantages which, by this step, you forego.
A Company’s land-order is a clog to freedom of action ; it
binds you to a locality which you are soon compelled to admit
is not the most advantageous. You cannot, however, dispose
of it, for others are in the same position; and you do not like
to think the parchment, for which you paid so highly, like
a piece of waste paper; and yet what else has it been for the


last four years to those who hold it. But, possessing no land’
you can visit the other settlements and make your own choice.
We incline to think, from personal observation, that had the
same amount of capital and enterprise been directed to Auck-
land which has flowed into Wellington, the seat of Govern-
ment would ere now have shown more signs of prosperity than
are to be observed in the country around Port Nicholson.
Others may think differently; and we would again repeat, to
whichever end of the island you go, go untrammelled.
XIX.
CONCLUSION.
Is, then, New Zealand adapted for colonization ? Yes, although
its capabilities for supporting an export trade have been ridicu-
lously overrated. The country will rise to importance, but its rise
will be slow. It will produce readily every article, at least the
staple ones for home consumption. Were a family put down
upon any part of its coast, they would soon, with industry, such
is the moisture of the climate, raise a subsistence from its
poorest soil. This is high praise, and is no more than New
Zealand deserves. The seasons are sure, and the country
healthy; but it wants both level land to raise and markets
whence to convey grain, to enter into competition with the
broad corn land of Europe and America.
Let no agriculturist, then, think of visiting these islands with
a view of realizing a fortune, and returning to spend it in Great
Britain. This is quite chimerical. No one will be benefited
by emigration to New Zealand who is unable or unwilling to
work for a living. Those who go there must make it their
home. We are not speaking of men who go abroad to specu-
late in trade and commerce, but to the class best adapted for
the colonization of New Zealand, and these are the farmer,
whose labour is within his household; the small capitalist, who
with his hands upon the plough, can afford to wait until he
has a return; and, lastly, for the poor of the mother-country.
The mountains of New Zealand are higher, the morasses
deeper, and the forests denser than were those of Britain. It
is, in truth, a stubborn country, which only the nerve of a
peasant’s arm will subdue. The poor man covets a piece of
ground, and both Government and the Company should
facilitate its possession. A few acres among the mountains is
soon, by the labour of his family, transformed into a garden.


The ground is his property, and will be his children’s when he
is no more. He is never wearied in adding to its beauty. The
spot is the creation of his own hands, hallowed by a thousand
kindly recollections. From this source will yet spring, in New
Zealand, a numerous yeomanry and a bold contented peasantry.
Collage farms are what the land is calculated for , and they
are, doubtless, the best means of subduing a wild hilly country.
The New Zealand Company have hitherto done what they
could to reverse this picture. But avarice will yet have its
reward. In the Wellington settlement country land was sold
for 1/. per acre. It was afterwards raised to 1/. 10$. When
Nelson was formed, in order more effectually to exclude the
very class for which New Zealand is so pre-eminently adapted,
or in other words to give the Company less trouble, the section
of 150 acres was raised to 300/, The proprietors of land in
this settlement, even more than in the first, are therefore men
who do not intend to benefit the country by cultivation , but
themselves by speculation.
Let absentees continue to buy square miles of ground : like
the clergy reserves in Canada, it lies a clog to the advance of
the country and an incubus on the exertions of the industrious.
Absentees should be compelled to bear a share in improvements,
but at present their agent’s reply is, “ We have no instructions.”
The late much maligned Captain Hobson, R.N., acted on a
different principle; and, with deference to the collective wis-
dom of Broad-street, one better adapted to New Zealand.
The first, with the country before him, legislated for the
mountain territory he saw ; the latter, with only a map upon
the table, decreed otherwise. Captain Hobson’s measures were
practical —the Company’s theoretical. The result has been in
some measure correspondent. At Auckland, holdings vary
from nine to a hundred acres, and the country within three
and four miles of the town looks like a well cultivated garden.
But here, unfortunately, the high up-set price of land per acre,
and the Government mode of selling it, has nearly neutralized
the beneficial effect which would otherwise have arisen from
small allotments.
What, then, do the settlers expect of the New Zealand
Company ? First, they expect to get the land for which they
paid their money in London. Now, such is the nature of the
country that they cannot get this without roads. These, there-
fore, they expect the Company to make—bridle paths will do.
But if the settlement is to extend, something must be done to
open up the country, otherwise the settlers must remain where
they are put down, inactive upon the shores of Port Nicholson.
d 2


There are other ways in which the settlement may be aided.
For instance, w r e put it to the Company whether they should
not, ere this, have taken more decided steps to render flax an
article of export? A peculiar method of dressing is required,
and until this be discovered the wealth of the soil, like the
riches of the deep, must continue useless to the settler. A
draughtsman has been paid to make pretty pictures of the coun-
try; but would it not more become the names in their Directory
to endeavour to get an export for their settlement than to rest its
success on the efforts of a painter’s brush? Now we would
submit that if a portion of the 21,000/. lavished on home and
colonial establishments had been devoted to the end we have
in view, the result would have been far more satisfactory to
their own minds. Let them offer rewards commensurate with
the object to be attained, and British ingenuity will devise a
mode of dressing New Zealand flax. Every vessel from Cook’s
Straits should bring to England plenty of the raw material,
in its natural state, for experimenting upon ; and let the same
vessels bring bark from every forest tree to be analyzed by
the chemist.
The only profitable way of investing capital at present is
whaling, for which Port Nicholson is better situated than
Auckland. Some of the merchants of the former place have
engaged in it with spirit; but being left to contend single
handed with wealthy Sydney houses, Wellington has not
hitherto derived that advantage from this branch of industry to
which she is entitled by her proximity to the whaling grounds.
Let the Company shake off their apathy, divest themselves of
the idea which has so long possessed them of the extraordinary
fertility of New Zealand soil, and do something more than
sound the trumpet for their first and principal settlement.
Whaling will foster a commercial spirit, and be the means, as
capital accumulates, of opening up the country. American and
French whalers now fill up with oil almost within sight of the
Company’s settlement, and that, too, without so much as leav-
ing a dollar behind for supplies with those they are depriving
of a profitable employment of labour and capital. We say
again to the New Zealand Company,—Roll up your prettily ex-
ecuted maps of “ districts open for selection,” but which, in too
many instances, are inaccessible and worthless for all useful
purposes. Instead of raising loans to sink money on the soil,
to support a race of gentlemen farmers, for which the country is
non-adapted, apply it to make roads and fitting out colonial
whalers, and in establishing bay-parties on the coast, so that
your settlers may be enabled to engage in an occupation which,


taking one year with another, has hitherto been found profit-
able. Give up dazzling the minds of your settlers with the
visionary prospect of drawing New Zealand within six "weeks
of England by a steam communication with the Isthmus of
Darien. First aid them in getting the plough into the ground,
and that which is now pronounced visionary will in due time
become practicable. The question is not, “ Can it be done?”
but, “ Will it pay?” The sea is the highway to your terri-
tories. The coast of Cook’s Straits is emphatically a “ stormy
coast.”* The nature of the country has compelled you to give
out Wellington suburban acres 84 miles from the town, and
the country land no less than 112 miles. Both are upon rivers
difficult of access to sailing vessels, because the latter cannot
always hit the nick of time to enter them. This difficulty a
steamer would obviate. Regular communication would induce
emigrants not only to go and look at their land, but to settle
upon it. A means of sending produce to market would
encourage agriculture; and the discontent, now too prevalent
in Wellington, would give place to cheering anticipations of the
future. We are aware that the Company have offered a bonus
for the introduction of steam into the sister settlement of
Nelson; but if they really wish to see this done, they must do
something more.
That New Zealand will ever become the granary of New
Holland is a fallacy which an intimate acquaintance with both
countries at once dispels. All the Australian settlements but
New South Wales are grain-exporting colonies. Van Diemen’s
Land, after glutting the Sydney market, is shipping wheat to
England ;t South Australia sending hers to the Isle of France;
while a writer on this subject in the April number of the
“ New South Wales Monthly Magazine” mentions New
Zealand among the markets open to the Australian corn-grower.
At Swan River we find Governor Hutt attributing the temporary
embarrassments of that colony solely to over-production ; the
supply there far exceeding the demand. It will be a happy
day for many a family in Cook’s Strait when this, the cry of a
much-abused colony, is heard in the patented establishments of
the Broad-street Company. Sydney is the only market in the
Southern Ocean for grain ; and it can always be supplied with
* The following vessels were lost upon, or off, the New Zealand coast,
while we were at Wellington. “ Fifeshire,” emigrant vessel, and the
“ Transfer,” “ Louisa,” “ Lapwing,” “ Blossom,” <• Industry,” “ Specu-
lators,” “ Kate,” “ Lookin,” “ Jewess ” (brig), “ Mary Anne,” and
“ Brothers,” coasters.
f By Mr. Atkin Morrison, from the “ Hobart Town Advertiser” of
March, 184 3.


flour from Valparaiso at from 12/. to 20/. a ton.* The Van
Diemen’s Land settler, with a rich soil and convict labour,
cannot compete with these prices; and it is mere delusion to
think wheat can be grown cheaper either upon or among the
mountains of New Zealand.
* In February, 1843, the cargo of the “ Tam o’Shanter” was disposed of
to the Sydney millers, at 12 1, per ton, and the retail price of the best
flour was then 13s. and 14s. per 100 lb. bags.
THE END.
London : Printed by VV. (jiowr.a and Sons, Stamford Street.


.


I
4
s
**
