

Cmenty-Fifth Annibersarg of AMSCOL
14th January, 1922 14th January, 1947
A Short History of Progress,
Extracted from Annual Reports
With the Compliments of the .. .
Adelaide Milk Supply Co-Operative, Limited.
Carrington Street,
ADELAIDE,
South Australia.


Pure Rich Milk is Food fit for the gods.
Babies cannot live without Milk, and growing Children
grow the faster for it. It gives Vitality to Youth, Power
to Middle Life, and to Old Age it brings a Goodly Measure
of the Health and Strength of former years. Milk steadies
the Nerves, and adds to the Health, Physical Strength, and
Mental Energy of those who use it. It is Delicious, Refresh-
ing and Invigorating. It is Nature’s best gift to man.
Drink More Milk.


“AMSCOL”
is the Registered Trade Name obtained from the initial letters of the
Adelaide Milk Supply Co-Operative Limited
a company formed by dairy farmers to market their produce.
JN January, 1920, Mr. P. C. Manuel, who was dairying
at Enfield, and has always been an enthusiastic
worker toward bettering the conditions and improving the
methods of Milk Suppliers, organised the Dairymen catering
for the City of Adelaide into an Association for the purpose
of better trading with the Distributors who handled their
Milk.
As the Wholesale Milk Producers’ Association gained
strength they sought to get a bigger control of their produce
and it was decided in January, 1921, to form a Company with
the nominal capital of £lOO,OOO to absorb one or more of the
existing Distributors and retain control of their Milk from
Cow to Consumer.
As the result of much negotiation 579 Milk Producers,
representing 94% of the Dairymen’s Association, decided to
take up 47,642 shares and to exercise an option of purchase
over Beauchamp Bros., the largest Retail business in the
City.
This was accomplished by the issue of Debentures to
augment the capital subscribed and the formation meeting
was held in Adelaide on 14th October, 1921, but owing to
unforeseen delays it was not until 14th January, 1922 that
Amscol commenced business in Carrington Street, Adelaide,
in the premises depicted in the photograph showing the
Delivery Staff on the next page.
The Board of Directors consisted of: —
Geo. C. Morphett, of Woods Point (Chairman)
J. R. Lawrie, of Two Wells L. T. Cowan, of Blakiston
W. J. McNicol, of Salisbury Capt. H. S. Hudd, M.P.
with
Walter J. Beauchamp as Managing Director
P. C. Manuel as Organising Director.
Since then Captain H. S. Hudd, when appointed a Minis-
ter of the State, resigned and his place as representative of
the Encounter Bay District has been filled by Mr. G. V.
Rogers, a leading dairyman in that district.
Amsccl has lost the services of Mr. W. J. McNicol, of
Salisbury, through his death last year, but otherwise the
same personnel still function in control of the company.
Amscol was founded not as a trading concern but merely
as a broker to Pool its shareholders’ supplies, and initiated
the system of weighing and paying for Milk on a Butterfat
and Quality basis.
The first report of the Directors to 30th June, 1922,
shows that the initial moves in the direction of expansion
had already been made.
Mr. Frank C. Beauchamp was appointed Works Mana-
ger, and Mr. Harry Beauchamp was in charge of the Milk
handling depot at Murray Bridge. In order to satisfactorily
handle surplus supplies of Milk the Woodside Butter Factory
was purchased and Mr. J. Lauterbach took charge of the
Butter and Cheese Department, while a lease of the factory
at Blakiston was also obtained and placed under the care of
Mr, George Legg.
The Board’s report for twelve months to 30th June, 1923
discloses a turnover of £151,327, which on the principle that
Quality sells Quantity, has grown to £452,555 for the year
ending 30th June, 1946.


AMSCOL’S original premises in Carrington and Eden Streets in 1922.


In 1923, Mr. L. T. Cowan visited America and England,
and his enquiries into Milk handling methods in those coun-
tries gave great confidence in the system adopted by Amscol.
In this year the expanding business of Amscol justified
the purchase of the property on the west side extending to
Bewes Street, and in 1924 heavier Refrigerating Machinery
was installed and the manufacture of Icecream commenced.
In 1925, under the supervision of Dr. Gertrude Halley,
Amscol initiated the supply of Bottled Milk to selected
mal-nutrition and under-nourished children in two metro-
politan schools, which showed conclusive proof of the great
value of Milk to the growing child.
In 1926, the Chairman, Mr. Geo, C. Morphett, visited
England and Denmark, commissioned by the South Austra-
lian Government to enquire into Dairying and the handling
of City Milk suppliers.
View showing Property acquired in 1923 adjoining “Amscol's” Depot,
Carrington Street, Adelaide.
Bewes Street
Eden Street
New Purchase
Original Premises
“Amscol s” frontage to Carrington Street now extends from Bewes Street on the left to Eden
Street on the right, 251 ft., with a depth of 221 ft. to New Street at the rear.


Halton House.
In 1927, under advice from Mr.
George W. Beauchamp, of Chicago,
CJ.S.A. (brother of Messrs. W. J. and
F. C. Beauchamp), a Consulting
Engineer in American Refrigera-
tion and Dairy Plants, it was decided
to reorganise and enlarge the Car-
rington Street Premises and cold
storage, and Mr. Frank Beauchamp
was sent to America to secure
machinery, etc. The accompanying
photographs depict the extensions
achieved in 1927.
Shop
70 Ton Ice Tank.
Icecream Section.
Ice Tank.
Lawn.


Icecream Department.
In this year Amscol purchased premises at Mount Tor-
rens for use as a Receiving Depot, which have been developed
into the large Cheese Factory shown in the accompanying
photograph.
Sir Ewen Maclean, President of the British Medical
Association, inspected “Amscol" on 18th October, 1929, and
wrote in our Visitors’ Book :
“I am much impressed with the scientific and other
precautions taken.”
This is great praise from a Scientist of such high and
important standing.


In 1928 the Milk Section, shown hereunder, was com-
pleted in front of the Ice Cream Section, and alongside the
Ice Tank, which enabled the installation of the modern Milk-
handling Plant depicted in the following photographs.
Milk Section.
Ice Cream Delivery Fleet, 1928.


Milk Vats
Pasteurizers
Bottle Washer.
Empty Crates Meeting Bottles at Filler.


In 1929 Amscol purchased 6 cottages facing Xew St. and
2 facing Bewes St. to provide space for necessary expansion.
In 1930 Temporary Offices were erected on the lawn
fronting Darling House —vide photograph.
Offices.
First Delivery of Ice Cream by Air to Port Pirie in November, 1927.


In September, 1941, to properly handle the increasing
supplies of Milk received by Amscol from the Encounter Bay
district, it was decided to erect a Cheese Factory at Victor
Harbour (vide photograph), which to-day is capable of hand-
ling 15,000 gallons of Milk per day and, with Mount Torrens,
is turning out many tons of the best Cheese in the State.


Hygienic .... Safe .... Speedy .... System of Transporting Milk, the first in South Australia.


Milk Supplied in Cartons (as depicted) to Miners at Broken Hill.


AMSCOL Milk and Icecream transported by Air to the American Army in Darwin, Lae, Finschafen, Morotai, and Mindoro, 1943-44.


To provide for further necessary extensions 6 frontages
to Hanson Street, abutting on Bewes Street, have been
secured as a site for Offices and Produce Shop.
The growth of business is exceeding the capacity of our
plant and in 1946 Mr. Walter Beauchamp visited America
and Lngland in search of the latest refrigeration machinery
to cope with requirements.
During his absence the temporary offices shown in photo-
graph on page 8 ■were demolished and another 70-ton Ice Tank
and new Offices were erected (vide photograph), while the
extension of the Ice Cream Department is now in prog'ress.
Showing Extension of Ice Tank Building to Eden Street.


New 70-ton Ice Tank, giving Amscol an ice capacity of 140 tons per day.


VICE-REGAL APPROBATION.
Government House,
ADELAIDE.
13th April, 1922.
The Chairman of Directors,
Adelaide Milk Supply Co-operative Ltd., Adelaide.
Dear Sir,
I want to tell you how very interested and delighted I
was with everything I saw at the Milk Depot this morning.
One of the last public duties I was engaged in before leaving
England was the Acting Chairmanship of the British Govern-
ment’s Committee on Production and Distribution of Milk in
England. Several of our recommendations in relation to
public health matters I saw in actual operation to-day.
The value of the detailed co-operation of the actual pro-
ducer of milk cannot be over-estimated, whilst the system of
paying for supplies on a basis of quality and cleanliness,
coupled with the systematic sampling and testing of every
consignment daily, in addition to laboratory tests, is in effect
the most complete and efficient administration of Public
Health Acts. The value of the establishment of Herd Testing
Societies has been proved to the hilt by the first year’s experi-
ence of the only one fully working in the State at Murray
Bridge.
Your daily records of output and quality will, I hope, be a
practical incentive to the increase of these societies, and teach
producers that cows which cannot produce quality and quan-
tity standards are not worth keeping.
The opportunity which is now open to consumers to
purchase properly pasteurized milk in sealed bottles every-
day is giving an advantage to infantile life in the city, which
must commend itself to those who are interested in child
welfare in South Australia. lam extremely grateful to you
for giving me the opportunity of enjoying an extremely inter-
esting and instructive morning. Yours very truly,
(Signed) ARCHIBALD WEIGALL,
OFFICE STAFF, 1923.
Back Row (from left to right)—
A. Dally, P. Furler, G. L.
Anthony, M. C. Mills, F-
McGay, J. A. McCamish.
Middle Row—
Miss E. Hosking, Miss L.
Clare, Herbert F. Beau-
champ, Miss M. McMillan,
Miss J. Clare.
Front Row —
H. F. Stevens, J. P. Miller,
G. B. Lindsay.


Currie Street School Children selected by Dr Gertrude Halley.
EDUCATION DEPARTMENT.
Adelaide, 24th August. 1925.
Geo- C. Morphett, Esq.,
Chairman of Directors, “Amscol,'’
Carrington Street, Adelaide.
Memorandum from
MEDICAL INSPECTOR OF SCHOOLS.
Dear Sir,
The following is a copy of the Report I have furnished to
the Director of Education and he has asked me to forward it
on to you :
“I beg to submit a report on the Milk experiment in the
Currie Street and Sturt Street Schools for the six months
from Ist February to 31st July, 1925: —
“At Currie Street 31 children, and at Sturt Street 14
children are at present being supplied with a pint of milk
daily. The distribution of the milk has been carried out
with the same care as in the first stage of the experiment.
The children are provided with straws, the covers being
punctured to admit the straw. In no cases are the bottles
uncovered, thus ensuring the purity and cleanliness of the
milk.
“The average gain per child has been 7 lbs. Several of the
children at Currie Street gained up to 11 lbs. Not only has
there been actual gain in weight, but the children look much
healthier, have a better colour and firmer muscles. The
teachers report that there is an improvement in their school
work, showing that previously they were under or ill fed.
I consider that the experiment has been of great value to
the children, and that the Directors of the Adelaide Milk
Supply Co. Ltd. are to be thanked for the regular supply of
milk to these children free of cost.”
Yours faithfully,
GERTRUDE HALLEY.
Principal Medical Officer.


The annua! field day held at the
Amscol Cheese Factory, Victor
Harbour, on Alarch 12, 1946,
attracted a large attendance of
suppliers and others interested in
the dairying industry. The photo
shows some of the large crowd
on the spacious lawns facing the
factory. These lawns and flower
gardens are a feature of the
factory outlook.
VICTOR HARBOUR FIELD
DAY MARCH, 1946.
The chairman of directors. Air.
(j. C. Alorphett, welcoming- the
visitors to the field day. Those
on the platform include, from left
to right : —Alcssrs. P. Alanuel,
(1. C. Alorphett, \V, J, AlcXicol,
Ron. Xorman Brookman, A1.1..C ,
J. R. La wide. L. T- Cowan (partly
hidden), and W. J. Beauchamp.


BUTTER, CHEESE, ETC.
Our Butter, Cheese, and Egg Departments continue to
merit the favour of the consuming public and the Board are
proud that the quality of Amscol products is proving
unrivalled.
Following on our already reported Show Success in win-
ning the “Gold Medal” at the London Dairj' Show in compe-
tition with the British Dominions, we have further added to
our laurels by winning the “Orient Silver Cup” for Export
Butter, as well as Ist Prize for Butter six weeks cold-stored,
at the Adelaide Royal Show, 1934.


As further convincing’ proof of the Quality of Amsco!
Butter. our two exhibits at the Melbourne Centenary Royal
Show won the First and Second Prizes and also the
“Champion Prize of Australia" and the “Centenary Medal"
in open competition with Butters from the Commonwealth.
'I lie judge’s published comment was “The First Prize
and Champion liutter was prepared by the Adelaide Milk
Supply Co operative Limited and the liutter was of such good
quality that in Mr. Carroll’s opinion, were the public supplied
with Butter of this quality as a regular thing, the consump-
tion of Butter would go up by leaps and bounds.’’


EXTRACT FROM AMSCOL HALF-YEARLY GENERAL
MEETING HELD ON THURSDAY, 26th FEBRUARY, 1925.
Dr, J. Storrie Dixson, one of the leading Public Health
Authorities of Sydney, has written in the Visitors’ Book at
your Carrington Street Depot; “A great improvement in City
Milk Supply.”
This opinion has been verbally endorsed by Dr, J. H.
Purdy, Medical Officer of the Board of Health, Sydney, by
Dr. T. R. B- Pike, of Brisbane, by Mr. G, H. Hartigan, of
Launceston, Tas., and by Mr. E. S. Clarke, of Dunedin, N.Z.,
after their respective inspections of your Pasteurizing Plant
and Handling Methods.
Mr. Charles Collins, the City Treasurer of Wellington,
N.Z., acting on the advice of Dr. Storrie Dixson, recently
made a special visit to Amscol, and his comments were most
encouraging.
Dr. R- F. Matters, of Woodside, now touring the world,
has examined the leading City Milk Systems in England,
Scotland, Holland, Germany, Austria, Roumania, Italy and
France. He writes that few equal, and none improve on, the
methods adopted by Amscol to ensure the distribution of
Pure Milk, free from disease germs, to the City Householder.
We further gather from both the Municipal Authorities
and the Medical Profession that our efforts _ have already
raised the whole standard of the City Milk Business from the
Dairies to the Delivery Carts, and we are encouraged in our
determination to make the Adelaide Milk Supply a model of
Cleanliness, Quality, and Commercial Success that the Citizens
of Adelaide will personally be proud of.
Amscol introduced the system of paying milk suppliers
for their milk on a butterfat and quality basis.
Amscol introduced the delivery of milk in sealed bottles
in Adelaide and Suburbs.
Amscol pioneered the delivery of milk in sealed bottles
to Schools in Adelaide and Suburbs, thus being the first in
Australia to serve Milk in sealed bottles to Schools.
Amscol also pioneered the serving of bottled milk for
lunches to emplojmes in City Offices, Banks, Warehouses,
Factories and Shops in South Australia.
Amscol introduced the hygienic distribution of cream in
sanitary containers.
Amscol originated the first Milk Bar in Australia in 1925
at the Royal Show.
Amscol was the first, at Mount Torrens, South Australia,
to pasteurize milk for making cheese.
Amscol introduced and popularised the sale of Ice Cream
to Hospitals, Picture Theatres, etc.
Amscol was the first firm in Australia to manufacture
Clear Ice under the Filtered and Aeration System.
Amscol was the first Industrial firm in South Australia
to throw open their works for inspection by- school children
with their teachers, students, and other regularly constituted
organisations.
Amscol was the first firm to deliver milk in cartons to
the miners at Broken Hill (vide photograph on page 11).
Amscol supplied milk and ice cream by Aeroplane to
American troops at Darwin and South Pacific Islands.
Amscol was the first firm in Australia to place bottled
milk on Mail Boats proceeding to England for the daily use
of persons on the voyage, viz., S.S. Anchises, in 1922.


QUALITY SELLS QUANTITY
Smooth, Rich, Velvety, AMSCOL Icecream, made from
Pure, Wholesome Milk and Cream, is a Nourishing Food
for all ages and conditions of people. Amscol Icecream is
fh e Pure Produce of the Dairies and Free from any starchy,
fattening ingredients. Sick or Well, Rich or Poor, Old or
Young, all enjoy AMSCOL Icecream.
It promotes Rosy Cheeks, Bright Eyes, Health, Strength
and Happiness.
cMMSCOL ICECREAM
It’s a FOOD not a Fad.


The most Healthful Nation is one whose Children have
plenty of Milk, and Milk products such as Icecream.
If you appreciate Pure Food and Private Enterprise,
please pass this Booklet on to your friends.
Printed by R. M. OSBORNE LTD.
95 Currie Street, Adelaide
