

Twenty Reasons for being an Orangeman.
K hssss.
By the Late Eev. T. Drew, D.D.
Because I desire to live to the glory of God, and resisting error,
superstition, and idolatry, “ earnestly to contend for the faith once delivered
to the saints.”
Because I desire to combine with my Protestant brethren for the sake
of mutual testimony, protection and love.
Because connection with the Orange body draws men’s attention to the
histoiy of past deliverances, and arouses them to vigilance, energy, and
witness-ship for God.
Because I desire to remember the mercies of God bestowed at the
Reformation, and also at the glorious Revolution under William 111.
Because an Orangeman is bound to show forth, by his life, his desire of
man’s salvation, his obedience to the dictates of Protestantism, and his efforts
to deliver Romanists from mental perversion and spiritual slavery.
Because the members of the Oranere Institution have always been
enabled, by the grace of God, to exhibit loyalty, patience, firmness, and
brotherly love.
Because Orangmen honour the Holy Bible at all their meetings i
conduct their proceedings by its holy precepts; and frame the Orange
Ritual chiefly from its sublime prophecy.
Because the Empire has always flourished wlmm Protestant leaders
guided the helm of State, by the light of God’s revealed will, and when
Protestant truths were in the supremacy.
Because I learn by the doctrines, history, and daily practices of „ the
Church of Rome, that the lives of Protestants are endangered, the laws
of England set at naught, and the crown of England subordinated to the
dictation of an Italian bishop.
x.
Because the Papacy has never repented, and cannot repent, of its
Continental massacres of Protestants, of its demon Inquisition, and Irish
rebellions of 1641 and 1798.
Because Popery annually breathes denunciations at Rome, by a well-
known “ Bull,” against the existence of heretics (Protestants).
Because the Church of Rome teaches in her schools that heresy is not
to be endured, nor heretics to be permitted to live.
Because Popery is not content with equality ; and because it claims the
unconstitutional privilege of a double allegiance (to the Pope and Queen);
also, of a right for her priests to withhold treasonable and felonious
communications ; and for the Pope to be the arbiter of the lives, laws, and
liberties of mankind.


Because (notwithstanding the private worth of many members of the
Romish Church) that, generally, Roman Catholic jurymen refuse to give a
true verdict according to evidence when the cause of their church or party
is presumed to be at stake.
Because Popery maintains a continual rancour against the Protestant
people of Great Britain, receiving their charities with ingratitude, and
stimulating its followers to detest the “Saxon" and to loathe the rule and
realm of England.
Because Jesuits are openly tolerated in Great Britain and Ireland,
contrary to the express laws of the Empire.
Because all truckling to Popery has, in every instance, been attended
with renewed clamour for further concessions ; in violation of pledge given
by Roman Catholics.
XVIII.
Because it cannot be otherwise but that, under the downward progess, of
British legislation, God will be made angry, and the nation imperilled;
Protestant union and testimony are therefore required to deprecate God’s
indignation and to ‘ ‘ bide the time ’ ’ of needful resistance.
Because many, who were once Ramanists, have been led, by the rigour
and fidelity of Protestant testimony, to contrast it with their unholy bondage
system, and to forsake it, by God’s blessing, for ever !
Because the whole history of the Bible assures us that if we be prayerful
united, and zealous for God, the Time, the Man, and the Deliverance
WILL COME.
DEFINITION OF OBANGEISM.
What is Orangeism ?
It is Protestantism pure and simple, but thoroughly in earnest.
What further definition can you give of it ?
It is a Religious and Political Society.
What is its Religious basis ?
The principles of the Reformation are maintained, and the authority of
the Bible held up as man’s only infallible guide ; and Jesus CimisT as the
only Mediator between God and man ; also a firm and Christian resistance is
offered to the encroachments of Scepticism, Ritualism, and Romanism.
What is its Political basis P
Loyalty to the British Crown and Constitution, and the maintenance of
a Protestant succession on the Throne: also, Fealty to the Constitution of
the Colony in which we live, with a jealous watchfulness over our Civil
and Religious rights and privileges.
What Church does the Society recognise as its Religious Head ?
The Church of Christ, or, in other words, we embrace all sections of
the Protestant Church. Orangeism is a common platform on which all
Protestants can meet without danger of collision on account of minor
differences. All we ask is a steady maintenance of the principles of the
Reformation, to the glory of God, the honour of the Crown, and the Liberty
of the subject.


Is not Orangeism an Irish Society or Brotherhood?
Not at all. Though it was first moulded into a fraternal Society in
Ireland, it has spread through Great Britain and all her Dependencies, and
is now the essence and embodiment of British Protestantism.
I acknowledge the breadth of its basis, and the soundness of its
principles strongly recommend it; but is it perfectly legal ?
Yes; legal in every particular. The Constitution in Grand Lodge
Rules was submitted a few years ago to the inspection of Her Majesty’s
Attorney-General, and declared by him to be in accordance with reason,
Scripture, and the laws of the realm ; also, Lords Palmerston and Derby,
two of England’s greatest statesmen, declared the Society was not only legal
but eminently loyal.
Such high authorities put my doubts to rest on these points, but is it not
too offensive to Roman Catholics P
It is not designed to be offensive to Roman Catholics. It is contrary to
our rules to upbraid any man for his religious belief, or to interfere in any
way with our Roman Catholic brethren in the exercise of their civil and
Religious Rights.
Why then has there been so many riots between Orangemen and
Roman Catholics P
I shall answer that by simply seating that Orangemen are never the
aggressors, but self-defence is allowed by the laws of our country. Orange-
men claim no privileges beyond what they award to others, and they never
attack Roman Catholics when holding their festivals.
We are taught to render every kind service to'Roman Catholics as
citizens, to pity their errors, and pray for their enlightenment.
But look at the past—what riots we have had !
With the riots of former ages, and scenes in the old country, we have
nothing to do (but even there Orangemen were never the aggressors), and
I challenge any man to point to any scene of riot in these colonies brought
on by Orangemen. In New South Wales, where they are numbered by
"tens of thousands, the most perfect order and goodwill exist in every grade of
society.
I acknowledge the truth of what you say, but is there not something
objectionable in secret meetings, even to gain our rights ?
That is another misapprehension. We have no ’plottings ; we use no
means but such as are employed by all free citizens—that is, the right of
petition, the free use of the franchise, and open discussion. These are the
only means we employ. •
What need is there of a Secret Society to employ those means ?
We need an organisation to ensure united action and a vote on all
important occasmns. We need a common centre around which Protestants
may rally to resist the subtle encroachments of Jesuitism and to maintain
our liberties intact.
Just one question more. Are not Orange Lodge meetings likely to lead
to revellmgs and dissipation ?
On the contrary, there is a salutary check exercised on the members. I
do not know of any Lodge where ardent spirits are admitted into the Lodge
Room, and many Lodges will not admit intoxicants, even in the mildest
form. There is also a supervision exercised over the members outside the
Lodge Room, and any offence against religion or morality leaves the member
liable to punishment, either by fine, suspension, or dismissal.


JM v
OOJ
good c
holy Chu
the foot
Paul, by
by the bl
the Irish
red gore
track, ves
the Sasse
robbers a
our Lord
and root
ourselves
Ireland—
lands. I
us and be
shall leav
all over t
eyes blind
QUALIFICATIONS OF AN ORANGEMAN.
• An Orangeman should have a sincere love and veneration for
his Heavenly Father, a humble and steadfast faith in Jesus
Christ the Saviour of mankind, believing in Him as the only
mediator between God and man. He should cultivate truth and
justice, brotherly kindness and charity, devotion and piety, con-
cord and unity, and obedience to the laws. His deportment
should be gentle and compassionate, kind and courteous; he
should cultivate the society of the virtuous, and avoid the com-
pany of the evil; he should honour and diligently read the Holy
Scriptures, and make them the rule of his faith and practice; he
should love, uphold, and defend the Protestant Religion, and
sincerely desire find endeavour to propcisjcite its doctrines find
precepts; he should strenuously oppose the fatal errors and
doctrines of the Church of Rome, and scrupulously avoid coun-
tenancing (by his presence or otherwise) any act or ceremony of
Popish worship. He should, by all lawful means, resist the
ascendancy of that Church, its encroachments, and the extension
of its power; ever abstaining from all uncharitable words, action,
or sentiments towards his Papist brethren. He should remem-
ber to keep holy the Sabbath-day, and attend the public worship
of God, and diligently train up his offspring and all under his
control, in the fear of God and in the Protestant Faith. He
should never take the name of God in vain, but abstain from all
cursing, swearing, and profane language, and use every oppor-
tunity of discouraging those and all other sinful practices in
others. His conduct should be guided by wisdom and prudence,
and marked by honesty, temperance, and sobriety. The glory of
God, the welfare of man. the honour of his Sovereign, and the
• Book ot my
groaning at
;s Peter and
>rable Host,
5 fight upon
knee in the
not a single
trodden by
) Protestant
ce the swine
ake England
and possess
Saints —old
into foreign
do not join
e beast, we
ir holy faith
ir, with my
