

25 Years
; On the Stage,
OR THE LIFE OF
AN AUSTRALIAN ACTOR.
His Experiences and Vicissitudes.
BY J. GARDINER.
LATE POLISH MANUFACIURER, HINDMARSH.
Price--Eighteen pence.
* Sbrlaibr ;
PRINTED AT THE “COLONIST” OFFICE, PIRIE STREET




TWENTY-FIVE YEARS
ON THE STAGE.
The Career of an Australian Actor: His
Experiences and Vicissitudes.
There's a divinity that shapes our ends, rough-hew them as we
may. — Siiakspeare.
“ From Death unto Life.”
Price Is. 6d.
Hibflaiire:
PRINTED AT THE “CHRISTIAN COLONIST OFFICE,” PIRIE STREET.


INTRODUCTION.
TO THE PUBLIC.
Many have been the pros and cons, arguments and con-
troversies about the theatre. The question has been asked
over and over again, “ Is the theatre any benefit to the
community V’ If you think it is, read this book. It has
been asserted that education has done much to elevate
and refine the stage. If you think it has, read this
book. Thousands to-day will tell you that the theatre is
an excellent institution to moralise mankind. If you think
so, read this book. One says, the theatre, my dear sir,
ennobles the mind, expands intellectual culture, teaches
grace and deportment; if you think so, read this book.
Yours faithfully,
J. GARDINER.


HZSJJ/'- 7
CONTENTS.
Chaptee. Page
I. First Experiences as an Actor in Adelaide ... 1
11. A Melbourne Engagement ... ... ... 15
111. A Geelong Experience ... ... ... 21
IY. Ballarat in 1851 ... ... ... ... 25
Y. On the Diggings ... ... ... ... 31
Yl. From Digger to Actor Again ... ... 34
YII. Amongst the Stars-- An Adventure with Capt.
Moonlight ... ... ... ... 42
YIII. Overland to Sydney—A Providential Escape 46
IX. The Wizard of the North ... ... ... 48
X. Our Entertainment ... ... ... ... 50
XL Does the Theatre Ennoble the Mind? ... 54
XII. Does the Theatre Moralize the Character ? ... 59
XIII. An Evening’s Enjoyment at Home ... 65
VTI7 T7L* i- T -• A TT i 1 xr r-
XIY. First Impressions—A Haunted House ... 70
XY. A Jewess Baptised into the Christian Faith 77
XYI. A Temperance Lecture ... ... ... 81
XVII. Inordinate Indulgences The Infidel Miser 84
XYIII. Dedicated to Mothers ... ... ... 91
XIX. The Down Grade ... ... ... ... 95
XX. What is your Life ? ... ... ... ... 106
XXL Travelling Incidents—A Meeting with John-
son, the Bushranger ... ... ... 109
XXII. Arrival at Bourke—Blocked by the Floods 121
XXIIII. Conclusion ... ... ... ... ... 126
Supplementary Reflections—Behind the Scenes ... 138
The Private Life of Actors and Actresses ... ... 148
Incidents in the Lives of Actors and Others ... ... 152
A Conversation Between an Actor and a Minister ... 159




TWENTY-FIVE YEARS ON
THE STAGE.
The Career of an Australian Actor, his Experiences
and Vicissitudes.
CHAPTER I.
FIRST EXPERIENCES AS AN ACTOR IN
ADELAIDE.
If anyone had told me that day when I left the old
■“ Woozeer,” brig (Captain Sutherland) to see my brother of!
back again that I was going to become an actor for 25
years, I should simply have said, You are jesting, or talk-
ing about what you know nothing of.
The Adelaide Theatre in the year 1848 was not
overburdened either with, much talent or novelty. It
appears to have been the general thing for emissaries
from the theatre to visit all emigrant ships to see if they
could fish out something that would do, or somebody
willing to be made a catspaw of. “ The touter is there
any one here who can sing, or take part in a play. Now
is the time for any stage-struck hero to display his histrionic
powers ! Some poor victim is sure to be caught who can
strike an attitude and rave about the flocks his father fed
upon the Grampian Hills. That night, whilst sitting in the


theatre cogitating upon the woeful way the h’s were thrown
about most indiscriminately, and a general murdering of the
Queen’s English, the company consisted of really only
four —the leading men and two women ; all the rest—as
a man expressed himself beside me to another—are only
“ rag bags,” or “feeders.”
The question which has ofttimes been asked, “ Why do
so many young people turn aside from the path of rectitude
and religion in which they have been instructed ?” can be
somewhat correctly answered in my own experience—by an
act of disobedience to good advice tendered me when leaving
home. Three weeks would elapse before the vessel sailed.
I remained in London during that time, and was particu-
larly and earnestly advised to keep aloof from my uncle’s
“ gin palace,” but to stay at “ So’s-so’s.” I had been
many times in London before, and had been warned in the
same way. The reason of this disconnection was not so
much on account of my uncle’s vocation, it was in relation
to myself going there. But while occupied with so many
engagements the most of my time would have been passed
between where I was going to stay and the ship; and my
uncle’s would have been passed over altogether, but the up-
shot of it was, that house was the first I entered ; not
without many qualms of conscience ; and I date the first
step of my downgrade from that moment. I had often
heard about my aunt being the very embodiment of kind-
ness ; and so I found her. She kissed and welcomed me
most cordially. I was introduced to my cousins (very nice
girls), and then I began to make preparations to go where
I had been advised, and was expected ; but my aunt would
not listen to that for a moment. Just then my uncle
arrived on the scene, and after taking, as I thought, a very
special inventory of my appearance, he pooh-poohed any such
resolve as my going anywhere else. “No, no! If your
father and I are at variance, that is no reason it should be
visited upon his son.” Ah, he was a wily man of the world ;
he knew it would grieve father, who, I believe, he must have
wronged in some way, or he would not have hated him as
he did ; confirming the Italian proverb, “ The man who
has wronged you hates you.” I suppose no two lives could
be more antagonistic than my uncle and aunt domestically


speaking. My poor aunt was the most indolent, unselfish,
careless mortal in all her family surroundings ; my uncle the
very opposite : keen, vigilant, and discerning—sharp in
business, quick to discover anything in the household or the
the business that was awry. I don’t believe there were
many men his equal in governing business transactions. Yet
he was gay, and loved pleasure outside of it, doatingly fond
of music and the theatre. The club-room upstairs was
opened three times a week. Monday, a musical conversazione ;
Wednesday, free-and-easy ; Saturday, tripe supper and smoke
social. To all these, of course, I was invited. He took me
to the theatre, where his nephew, whom he had educated to
become a first-class musician, performed in the orchestra.
Shall I ever forget that night, my first visit to anything
approaching a theatre ; and when I told my cousin so, and
that I had never been to a concert, dance-room, or amuse-
ment of anykind, he stared at me with astonishment. He
lionised me everywhere. Of course he was hail-fellow-well-
met in all those city theatres ; and, after his two hours re-
hearsal, we went visiting and fraternising. I was taken by
him to see a new pantomime just put in rehearsal, (j-oodness,
what a change ! Was it possible that those men and women,
so shabbily dressed—the most of them were the same I had
seen strutting their hour upon the stage the night before—
were those poorly-clad girls the same whom I had seen in
their gewgaw tinsel and furbelows, so scantily attired 1 Yes ;
they now appear before you in their naked deformity, the
same veritable lords and ladies, who receive, some of those
girls, per night only one shilling, some eighteen-pence, and
the promoted ones, who become soubrettes, two-and-sixpnce
or three shillings. “Is this the usual condition of things
theatrical ?” I said to my cousin ; “ all bright and gawdy
at night, and a very limp and unwashed appearance in the
morning 1” “As a rule, yes ! but I can assure you that
this company is a creditable one compared to more than a
dozen city theatres, where business is more fluctuating.
Some of the small fry eat, drink, and sleep in the theatre at
night. They put four of the flats, or scenes, together and
make a shake-down the best way they can, the watchman
being instructed that no candles are lighted ; for which
ccommodation they pay one shilling per week each. There


you would witness dirt and misery enough to sicken you.
Their paltry salary is not always certain, aul most of them
spend it in gin and tobacco ; anl yet the glamour and
competition that is exercised to become an actor, which
they believe to lie the most jolly life, but who too soon
find it to be the most arduous. Strange to say most of
these men are fairly educated, some having been nursed in
the lap of luxury, but who have been seized with the craze
to become an actor; and having tasted the fascination of
the stage and its surroundings, have just fallen into the
careless routine of it, and ofttimes from a home of happy
and religious influences, to which nothing will induce them
to return, and eventually they become depraved, ruined,
lost. Some of them have possessed means at first to bribe
the manager to give them an appearance in some part
which they desired to play, and in which they signally fail,
nine out often. But while the man’s money lasts he always
finds flatterers to condole with him ; to get a free drink,
they say, “ You were not properly supported ; that is wny
you did not succeed, my boy. Try again at such and such a
theatre ; you will pull through, never fear.”
“ And do these small fry, as you call them, never achieve
any position?” I questioned. “ Oh, yes ; sometimes the
opportunity has offered, when sickness or incapacity through
drink of one of the principals. The man whom the
manager thinks the most eligible is singled out from
these ‘general utility men,’ as they are called, and the
part is entrusted to him. If he succeeds, as somffimeshe
does, well, you may say that he has placed his foot on the
first rung of the ladder ; and I have seen more than one
man take up his ‘forte’ from that opportunity and hold it,
making grand strides in the profession ; but where five out
of twenty do this, the other fifteen die of gin and fag. To
be a musician is quite a laborious life enough in a theatre;
but an actor s, unless he can hold his own in any particular
line of business, is worse a hundredfold.”
And now I am going to toll y >u a secret, which I know
will surprise you : that this life of mine, which you eulogise
so as being fraught with so much pleasure, I laave 1 ooked
upon for sometime past with unmitigated disgust ; and. were
it not for my uncle, who is theatre mad, I fancy sometimes I


should have thrown up my orchestra engagement long ago.
You see, his money paid for my education to make me a
proficient musician ; and although I can obtain a position
in two oratorios and one philharmonic society, he will not
consent, because he does not care for sacred music. Now,
that is just where my forte lies. His theatre taste is all in
hurryskurry, bluefire, and combats, staccata, and hurried
music. Sir Peter and Lady Teasle, with Mr. Farran and
Madame Yestris performing those characters would not inte-
rest him half so much as Coney and Blanchard in their
blood and thunder and bluefire business. Eight years ago
it was a novel life to me ; now it is an irksome one. You
see, lam a bit of a moralist; uncle is not. I don’t think
his whole body contains one atom of sympathy. Your aunt
possesses all that ; and but for her sake, who doesn’t want
me to go in opposition to my uncle’s wishes, I should hare
broken my trammels long ago ; but I am becoming too dis-
satisfied to take any interest in my work—to be daily and
nightly brought into contact with the misery and degra-
dation that I am, is becoming unbearable to my nature.
Just look at those poor miserable specimens of humanity at
the back, with scarce rags—you cannot call them clothes—
upon them to properly cover them, much more shield them,
from this inclement weather. They will be kept there
standing for two or three hours, perhaps like mutes, waiting
to be placed in their several positions by the ballet master.
Don’t they look as if they were about famished and wanted a
good square meal. Doubtless they have had nothing besides
a crust of bread this morning, even if they have had that; and
all for a paltry shilling a night. They get nothing for the hours
they stand here during the day. Now, if each one of those
poor wretches were only provided with a basin of soup, and
it could be done for a trifle, to say nothing about the huma-
nity of the purpose ; if that cookshop and soup propietor
just close by were spoken to he would send in a two-gallon
tin of soup for about two shillings ; it would only amount to
a trifle amongst the “ leading people,” and would put life
into the poor creatures. The most disgraceful part of the
business is that they have been admitted only for selection,
and each heart is palpitating to know if she will be one of
the chosen to add six shilling at the end of the week to the


too scanty funds. That group you see standing aloof from
their poorer-dressed neighbours, with better clothing ; but
theirs is the dress of vice ; they are the myrmidons of
unchastity, sent by the old haridans of questionable houses.
They will be accepted because each will be dressed by their
keepers, who send them to act as “decoy ducks,” and will
save the management expense. Do you know that
the theatre is responsible for the premature deaths of
sc ires of young girls in this season of the year through
being garbed in such scanty habiliments. It sometimes hap-
pens that some of them are engaged a second year, if they
are voluptuous enough in form, for amazons and the
statuary business ; but the petite, weak-framed ones,
through semi-starvation and cold, seldom ever appear again
after nine or ten weeks of exposure of limbs and bust.
Many never see the ten weeks through. First the hectic
flush, then the hacking cough, and their end is the work-
house hospital five out of ten. They have sanitary and all
kinds of inspectors except for theatres. Some of the abomi-
nations, especially that of making poses-plasfiques of young
girls and women, standing upon wheels which revolve, and
the barbarity of keeping human beings in such a position, is
abominable and degrading. Only fancy the protection from
cold of a pair of silk fleshings or tights, and a singlet for a
whole half hour perhaps, I think that, without exception,
theatrical managers are the most cold, unsympathetic men
extant, to point, scheme, and exact fines out of a most
meagre salary for the slightest delinquency. And the man
who can do ic most effectually stands the best chance of
securing that office. Half of these city theatre managers
obtain a “musical melange,” or interlude, which com-
mences the half-price admission—almost free. There are
hundreds of applications to the manager during the week to
obtain an appearance to sing between the pieces. If one
possesses a good testimonial, male or female, they are sent
on to the leader. If approved, they get their appearance ;
but in nine cases out of ten they don’t obtain another, nor
get any pay for the first, and the management makes a grand
thing out of it. The playbill announces, “The Death of
Nelson” will be sung to-night, by the special desire of his
friends and admirers, whose recommendations the manage-


ment have accepted. This gentleman’s debut will be his
first appearance on any stage, bat who is an aspirant for
fame. The poor dupe thinks all this palaver is to benefit
him ; but oh, no ! it is the management only. This sort
of crack advertisement induces many more to enter at half
price; and when he presents himself the next morning
for answer, he is told, “ Yes ; very good ; further on,
perhaps, something may be done ; just now nothing. Good
morning.” And so on all the way through, week after week,
the year round. And so our conversation ended. “And you
sail tomorrow ; well, I cannot go with you, but there are
more unlikely things happening every day than my not
following pretty soon after you.” And so we parted ; and
as we have not met since, I don’t suppose we ever shall in
this world.
So, straight from the theatre to the ship, and from the
ship to the theatre on landing. The down grade was fairly
commenced ; and while going out between the pieces that
night, a man accosted me: “I am looking for a Mr.
Gardiner, and by the description given me—” “ Yes,” I
said, cutting him short. There was something like the purr
of the feline species about the man I did not like. “I am
the man you seek. What is it you require of me?” “ I
am deputed,” he said, “by the chairman of the New
Chum Club to offer you an invitation unless you are other-
wise engaged. Gale, your friend, is over there, and has been
talking about your singing : will you come?” “ Well, as
I don’t feel any particular interest in sitting drawing con-
clusions between a London theatre and a colonial one, I
will accept the chairman’s invitation.” But it didn’t
satisfy me. After “White’s” in Bath-street, and
“ Evans’s” it fell very flat, stale, and unprofitable. I was
invited to sing ; and after complying with their request,
the man who had accompanied me there came to where I
was sitting and requested, in a very cofidential and myste-
rious manner, to speak with me apart for a moment.
The subject of it was that he assured me he had some
influence with the management of the theatre, and sug-
gested a first appearance in those two songs that I had
just sung; for he assured me, with a great deal of plau-
sibility, that if I did so he was convinced those songs would


ensure me an engagement. “ But lam not in quest of
one ; neither do ray inclinations that way tend. No, friend ;
thanks to you all the same. But I have served my time
to a better business than the theatre.” “ Not a more
money-making one in the talent you have just displayed in
those two songs. Your occupation will not return you
from three to five pounds a week; will it?” “No;
hardly more than half with board.” “ Well, surely five-and-
twenty shillings a night, for about four hours a day, will
take precedence of that.” “ Well, taking all that for
granted, how am I going to fill up all those hours of the
day ? Forewarned is forearmed. I have been made con-
versant of all this just before I left by one who has been
through the ordeal, and witnessed it in others—that wasted
time leads to the waste of money, because the man’s noto-
riety leads him to be sought after. He is toasted and feted
and made much of ; ofttimes becomes incapacitated
through it.” “You are a young man it is true, but it
doesn’t follow ; you have a will of your own.” “ Well,” I
replied, “I am not going to sing for any engagement. If I
sing those two songs I want two guineas. The management
can laud me to the echo if they choose on the play-bill, and
make ten pounds by my first appearance; but that is my
stipulated fee and I wished him good night.
On the following Friday night a missive reached me
to this effect—“ Your terms accepted. Attendance re-
quested Monday morning at eleven o’clock sharp for
rehearsal.” On the Monday night, while singing, I could
feel as well as see that something was wrong. The general
part of the audience approved, because they manifested it.
At the same time that this was being done, a clique of about
a dozen began to hiss. Though I was not conversant with
the secret then, I soon became so. It is an old managerial
dodge to disparage the singer in the event of his perform-
ance coming off’ with too much eclat. These men are what
is professionally called “packed,” or admitted free on pur-
pose ; and so, in making terms for a future occasion, or an
engagement, the manager will be enabled to aay, “ Ob, no ;
your terms are too high ; and, besides, you were not alto-
gether a success, you know, judging by the disapproval
manifested.” One of the actors, whose dressing-room I


shared, said to me, “So they have given you the Jew’s
goose.” “ What is that ?” I asked. “As you are a novice
in the running, I will inform you. Those men who let the-
bird loose” (meaning the goose, because it’s proverbial pro-
pensity is to hiss) “ were Jews ; were they not ?” “ Yes ;;
there was no mistaking that.” “ Just so ; and the manager
is a Jew; and you can take my word that he has some
ulterior motive. Excuse me asking, Is vours a trial ap-
pearance pending an engagement ?” “No; they wanted
that, but I refused.” “ Well, then, it is hard to judge the
motive, but that there is, or was one, I am convinced.
By-the-bye, who did you enter into this engagement with'?”'
I described the man. “ I thought so ; another Jew, and a
double-faced sycophant. If there is any way of working you
into the theatre and disparaging your talent at the same
time, he is just the one to do it. He is a manager’s man,
if you can understand—a busybody, and a generalissimo.”
This conversation took place while the Highland Eling was
being danced ; and now my turn again came for the other
song, a buffo, entitled, “Nonsense;” and the song is lite-
rally so full of nonsense that their little hissing was drowned.
I caught sight while I singing of the generalissimo
amongst them, and I finished my last verse thus :
And now my song is nearly done ;
I hope it pleased you well, sirs ;
But whether it be good or bad,
Why, that I connot tell, sirs.
There’s the ‘ busybody’ of this house—
He’s a ‘duffer,’ that I’m sure, sirs.
Spoken, and pointing him out, “Yes—that’s him, standing
by the door, sirs. Nonsense, non-common sense, is nothing
else but nonsense-non.” I don’t know what possessed
me, but the conception turned out grand for me; the
ovation was something tremendous, but the manager was
raging. “ A new chum to come here and take such an
unwarrantable liberty in my theatre.” I found out after-
wards that this man was a relation of his, and was greatly
disliked both in front and behind the curtain. He was
known as a great tittle tattler and tale-bearer. About a
quarter of an hour after he had delivered himself of his tor-
rent of abuse, the callboy brought me my fee into the


dressing-room, and I left, never expecting that I should
again have anything to do within the four walls of that
theatre. Oh, that I never had ! Strange to say the man
himself ignored me and my insult altogether, giving me no
chance of venting my pent up wrath upon his villainous act
of aiding and abetting in the hissing. And now, in earnest,
I began to look about for something to do in my own busi-
ness. “ Nothing at present” was the reply day after day,
until I became quite disheartened. Taking up the paper one
morning, I saw the following advertisement —“ Wanted, a
steady driver, Port cart ; day only—nine to six. Half-a-
crown a trip to a good, steady man. Apply Kant’s yards.”
I applied and obtained it ; and this was the conversation
which took place over the engagement : “ Why, you are the
man who sung that funny song the other night at the
theatre I ?’’ “Yes.” “ Well, if you can drive as well as you
can sing—by-the-by can you drive *? or are you going to try
your hand by way of experiment*?” “Well, for days to-
gether the reins have been in my hands delivering groceries,
six hours a day. I certainly never drove tandem ; mine
has either been single or two abreast.” “ Well, I’ll give you
an old leader, and you can try to-day. By-the-bye how
was it you did not keep on with old Jack.” This was the
proverbial cognomen the manager had given to him by the
Bills, Jacks, Toms, and Harrys of the community. I told
him. “ Ah, I see you hit him when you touched his pet.
Well, are you all right *?” “Yes.” “ Hallo ! —I thought
you said you never drove tandem 1 ?” “ Never that I remem-
ber.” “ Then, how is it you have put the leading rein over
your forefinger ?” “ Instinct, I suppose. I always saw my
father, who was a coach-proprietor, put his leader’s reins over
the forefinger.” “ Right you are. I wish my colonial boys
would do it ; as I tell them, How are you going to find
your leading reins when they are all mixed up in the dark *?”
And so 1 made ray first trip. The second day the landlord
of the New Chum Club-room rode down with me. “ Hallo !
—J’ve been looking for you everywhere ; why have you not
dropped in ? Look here, lam going to clean out and re-
decorate my room; it will be done in a fortnight, and I
want you to take the chair. Now, don’t say one word just
now—think about it.” “But how about Lindsay, your


present chairman 1” “ Going to Melbourne. I believe ; and,
to tell you the truth, lam rather glad than sorry. He
allowed the latter part of the evening to flag too much.”
“ But I had better tell you at once 1 don’t see how I can
combine the two things, the driving and the chair-taking?”
<( Well, that is just what I want you to think about.” “My
screw (wages) is good enough together with free board to
do without it.” “Or if you did a two-trip journey—eh 1”
Well, I will consider, and after I have heard what Mr.
Kant says I will let you know.
On my return I told Mr. Kant the conversation with
the landlord, whom he knew. He said, “ I would oblige you
if I could, but it is not in my power ; the only double journey
or two trips a day carts that leave my yard are contracted
for by the government for carrying the mails, and they supply
their own drivers.” Upon that information I left, after
telling him I should not drive after the end of the week.
The fact was I had about enough of it ; the whole concern
was an abomination altogether. The drivers, most all of
them, were a set of “ raps ” ; rendezvousing at the half-way
house, —“ Mother Gray’s ” as it was called, —shouting and
drinking, and taking the lynch-pins from any cart whose
driver would not fraternise with them either. The last day
or the day before, mine were taken out, while a very old
identity, the landlord of the Eagle Tavern in Hindley Street,
who was considered fair game for a shout all round, was
detained by them. He was a very heavy man and the only
passenger I had that trip. We had not got fifty yards away
when the wheel come off on his side, he was shot out and fell
heavily, of course I followed, with the happy result (for me)
that he made a very soft place to fall upon, for I alighted
right on top of him. On returning home for the last time to
be occupied as a “ port-cart ” driver, my landlady said to me,
*• You will find two notes in your room, both brought within
the last half-hour.” One contained the following from the
landlord, “ Come and have a look at the room, I think it can
be made fit by Monday night.” The other was to this effect,
Can you make it convenient to call upon me at the
Exchange on Monday morning between nine and ten,
George Coppin.” Well, I said to myself, I know what
they both mean, it’s either engagement for the club or the


theatre, because although Mr. Coppin was keeping the
Exchange Hotel it was believed that he had an interest still
in the leseeship although he was acting sub rosa for a
purpose of his own no doubt, I went first to the singing
room, to see and hear what the proprietor had to say. He
made me a very good offer, which I told him I would think
over, and give him an answer whether I would accept it on
Monday night or not, but I honestly told him I did not feel
myself equal to taking the chairmanship, as I was much too
young and inexperienced. “ Well,” he replied, “ take the
vice-chair, I will pay you the same.” “ Very well, if I make
up my mind to come at all it shall be so.” Monday morning
came, and saw mein Mr. Coppin’s sanctum sanctorum. The
conversation as near as I can recollect was.—“ Do you act as
well as sing V ’ “ lio, I never acted a part in my life.”
“Do you desire to become an actor, but before you answer
that, what was your object in connecting yourself with the
theatre ?” “I hadn’t the remotest idea of an object, I was
forced into it. ’ “By whom ?” “ The manager’s pet, as he
is called, he first requested me to sing for an engagement,
and I refused as I did not want one.” [I learnt some years
afterwards that it was at his instigation that I was paid].
“ W ell,” he said, “ my object in sending for you is that lam
going to run the theatre for seven or eight weeks on account
of a bespeak night from the Governor, Sir Henry Young,
who has chosen, ‘ Love laughs at locksmiths.’ ‘ Risk ’is the
part I play, and the piece is favorably cast, up to the
Captain, my master. It is mce of a singing than a dialogue
part, and although it is an operatic comedy the music is
exceedingly simple ; will you try it 1 I will give you all the
tuition and instruction you can require, and teach you the
music. You will have ample time, eight days from this.
Here is the part, take it home and scan it over, but come up
stairs and 1 will give you an idea 1” Taking up his violin
he said, “ You and I open the piece with this duet” ; and
he so wilily seduced me with its tantalising sweetness and
simplicity that I was fairly caught. “ Oh,” he said, “ you
know the duet now almost, we shall get on grandly.” So I
took the part and went home. To say it fascinated me
would only be the truth. The dialogue was sharp, piquant,
and to the point, bristling with humour, and would if


properly played be sure to please, for it was within the
range of discernment of almost any audience. But that was
where I felt my incompetence ; any one possessing an
unclouded intellect, with a passion for study, could master
the whole in three hours or four, but there was in the part
an impersonation of a Jew that when I came to it settled
the matter. “ No,” I said to myself, “ there are too many
Jews attend, and remembering the previous fiasco of the
hissing, determined me that I would not make a fool of my-
self for their diversion, for I did not possess a grain, I knew,
of Jew’s patter, or the slightest imitation of it, so back I
went and told Mr. Coppin of the difficulty which presented
itself in relation to the Jew. “ Well,” he replied, “it can
be knifed d iwn to a dozen lines or so, you see the plot of
the piece hinges entirely upon this impersonation. The
girl Lydia to whom you are betrothed without her guardian’s
knowledge, or possessing even an inkling of it: he hugs
himself in the belief that Lydia to be the wife of this his
nephew, whom you represent in order to gain admission to the
house, and so, while the old Jew receives you as his nephew,
who is daily expected to arrive from Vienna where he has been
for a number of years, almost from boyhood, so his uncle
cannot know much of him now he has grown to manhood,
and this is your opportunity to carry off the girl, while I am
waiting outside with the carraige, for ‘ Gretna Green.’
Your assuming this Jew nephew, and the byplay between
you and Lydia, together with the dawning suspicion of the
Jew as to your lineage, creates quite a sensation, especially
as soon as she discovers who you are.” “ Well,” I replied,
“ that is just where the difficulty comes in. I can comprehend
your meaning exactly how it should be done, and how it
would require a good versatile actor, which I am not, to do
it.” “ But why could you not as my servant do it 1”
After musing a while he said, “ Capital ! a capital thought,
the piece has never been played here, very well then, if I
relieve you of it will you take up the part ?” “ Yes, if you
will do as you said and put me through ?” “Oh yes, and I
want you to particularly understand that going on the stage
to play a part and gabbling it through like a pell parrot is
not acting, neither is acting a part a success unless you
represent it with proper deportment, and to remember also


you are an officer of the guards and I am your servant, and
such a character cannot be represented by a shambling,
shuffling gait.” I would advise you to go down to the
parade and watch the carraige and deportment of some of
the officers. Pick out one that you fancy and study his
actions and ways until you have become proficient, and so
make him your copy. That is all just now, study off the
part and when you are dead letter perfect, ‘ cues ’ and all*
come down again and w e will manufacture an audience up-
stairs and substitute an imaginary stage and I will put you
through all the minutiae.” Well, the night came and with it
my first faux pas, for by some accident, I began my line by
commencing after counting twelve bars instead of fourteen,
however I only had to repeat it again to meet the accompani-
ment and it wasn’t noticed by the audience. Mr. Coppin
said nothing after the performance, either pro or con , he only
said, “We shall play this piece again to-morrow night, come
down in the morning.” There was nothing particularly said
the next morning. George Coppin was not a man of many
compliments, he gave me a few valuable hints which I put
in practice the second night. He went so far as to say I
did better than he expected I should, and that was all ; and
now he said, “If you like to work through my run of seven
nights, take this part, it’s an old man character, very funny.
The piece is called, ‘ The Statue, or Hercules, King of Clubs.’
You will find my terms satisfactory at the end, if you try
to honestly do your best. I certainly had no reason to complain
at the end, of his terms. I continued to play on
when one morning came out in Mr. Stevens’ paper (it was
not called the Register then, I forget the name) a leading
article headed, “ A Licentious Stage.” the article can be
seen in the 1848 volume of “ May,” for I have seen it
myself, together with my appearance and a critique on the
song, “ Things I don’t like to see.” Amongst the actors I
was the only one, I believe, who stood on Mr. Stevens’ side.
Of course there was no longer any engagement for me so I
cleared out for Melbourne with Mr. and Mrs, Wheeler, the
former a musician, and his wife a very good general actress,,
both entitled to the title of lady and gentleman in every
sense of the word.


CHAPTER IL—MELBOURNE ENGAGEMENT.
In our trip over to Melbourne we discussed in what
piece we should make our first appearance. “What do you
suggest ?” Mrs. Wheeler asked me. “ I should like to have
the pleasure of doing so,” I replied, “ only it might not
coincide with your views.” “ Never mind, what is it ?”
“ Raunslaus, the Noble Soldier.” “ The very piece, but—”
“I know,” I replied, “you would be anxions about my
acquitting myself to your satisfaction, being only a novice,
but I can assure you it will be a success with you as Christine
without any manner of doubt at all, and that is what I
intend as ‘ Raunslaus ’ it shall do for me. It will be
four or five days before this old ‘ Harpy ’ gets within the
Melbourne heads, she is as crank as a bottle in a ‘ rip,’ she
does not carry half ballast enough, and instead of making
progress she seems to do nothing but ‘ yaw ’ about. I can
become dead letter perfect in the part in half that time. I
I have a good conception of the soldier, from having seen
you and Thomson perform it the first night I was at the
theatre.” “ Very well then,” she said, “ We’ll do it.” On
arrival, which was not altogether unexpected, as we had
written to the manager by the mail before we left the
intention of Mr. and Mrs. Wheeler and myself to come
over and that we should be glad of an opening, so the next
morning, after a good night’s rest at Menzies “ Royal
Exchange,” which we very much needed, having been tossed
about at sea for five days and four nights, we presented
ourselves at the old Queen’s Theatre, belonging to Mr.
John Thomas Smith. The manager and he were conversing
together as we entered the yard leading to the stage door.
Having introduced ourselves, the manager, after the pro*
prietor left, said, “ Come this way please, I’ll introduce you
to the Company,” and judging by the affability displayed we
had no reason to complain. There was no gush or
assumption, it was just formal, and certainly a more retiring.


and unassuming lot of people I have never seen since,
forming a company of actors and actresses. They were all
married and were not ashamed of the plain {, Mrs. So-and-So”
attached to any character they were cast for, there was only
one single man and two young females amongst them. “Oh
yes,” said the manager afterwards, “we are a very happy
family, and we have had no excitement amongst us to change
the general routine of our everyday life since Mr. Coppin
passed through some little time back, with his Launceston
Company Mr. Smith and himself determined upon a week’s
original business. It was arranged that the two companies
should appear in the same parts alternate nights. There was
no rivalry particular so far as each company was concerned, in
fact we rather enjoyed the nights off, but the outside public
thought there was, and were determined that the Coppimtes
and Smithites should be antagonistic whether they would or
not. So the Coppinites were not allowed the justice they
should have received, for the Melbourne people as an
audience, are rather fond of my family, as I call this company.
You see they are old standards, some have been here ever
since the theatre was built five years ago, and there is scarce
one amongst them but possess the confidence of the audience
and consequently is sure of a good benefit every four months.
Mr. Smith, as you came in, was delegating to me the power
of engaging you or not. I have determined upon offering
you a night for an appearance if it were only to break the
monotony that to me is bee timing almost distressing.” We
acquainted him with the piece we desired to play. “ Oh.”
he said, “ that is capital, it is a little piece I have wantei to
get possession of a long time, and you will have it all to
yourselves, with no jealous excitement amongst the ladies, as
I dont think any o c them hive seen it. Let me see, this is
Tuesday, say then Friday next ; two rehearsals will be
enough. Our little comedian will revel in £ Carlitz.’ Eleven
sharp please,Thursday morning ; when can I have the book ?”
“ Now,” I replied, “ I have it with me.” “ Thanks, good
morning.” “ Well,” said Mr. Wheeler, “ this is an
exception to any theatre or manager within the knowledge
of my experience; this man is courteous and affible, all my
previous acquaintance with managers has been to fiad them
blustering and opposed to almost any piece proposed for an


appearance by the would be debutant .” Well the thing was
a success in every sense of the word. I own to feeling, like
Mrs. Wheeler, a shiver of nervousness at the beginning, but
after the song which I introduced (‘ Upon the tented field a
Minstrel Knight ’) immediately after my entrance, it was
received with “go ” and gave me courage. We were offered
an engagement which we accepted, I appearing the following
Monday night as Brabantio in “ Othello,” Mrs. Wheeler as
Desdemona, much to the chagrin of one lady who considered
she was robbed of her part, But that is the life of a
theatrical company: Jealousy! Jealousy!! Jealousy!!!
So I now considered myself a full blown “actor.” The mistake
I made was when the manager asked me what line of
business I played I told him the truth, that I possessed no
particular line. I saw immediately that I had made a
mistake for I became a stock actor from that time and never
obtained an independent line of business except for two
months with George Coppin in Geelong, after his first trip
home.” “ How long have you been in the profession,” he
inquired. I told him my career. “ What !” he replied,
“ only seven months, well you have certainly made great
strides, why in my young days an actor would hardly have
got beyond “ The carriage waits my Lord,” or delivering a
letter. “ Well then,” he said, “ I must enter you as ‘ stock.”
“ What is that 1” Tasked. “ Well, outside of the ‘ leads ’
the hardest worked actor if he is any good and proves
versatile, in any theatre. You sir, will constitute ray
‘ emergency man.’ ” And then he explained to me the duties.
And after you have perused the following, whoever you may
be, who think an actor’s life is a jolly one—they were these
You are often cast for a leading part although you cannot
claim the privilege of the ‘ leads ’ for the next night, you may
have to perform a character diametrically opposed to the one
you played last. If one of the leading men is sick or in-
capacitated by over-indulgence in liquor, as soon as the man-
ager, who has an astonishingly quick eye to see, doubts the
man’s ability for his part that night, the “ stock actor ” has to
take the book and prepare himself for the emergency, whether
he is required or not ; and if he is not, that is the most
exasperating part of it. Fancy a man with a leading part
of perhaps seventy lengths, within forty-eight hours, studying


the context, and to make himself more conversant with the
words, copying them out (which I invariably did) to find
after all that his labor has been vain. But now first let me
show the general routine of an actor’s life below the ‘ leads/
Of course their life is easy enough, they hold their own
forte and go where they will. They have no fresh studies ;
I suppose in the common acceptation of the word “ jolly ”
it is so with them, but nine-tenths of those who enter on the
stage as a profession never realise that independent position.
Struggle as they may, their vaulting ambition in nine cases
out of ten lands them on the other side, and they become
just utility men, grovelling on—on to the bitter end ; for it
is very, rarely that they cut loose from the theatre’s fascina-
tion. They go on waiting for another chance to make a
hit—‘a palpable hit, my Lord ’ —which is never realised, and
so this is the round day after day, month after month, for
the sum of twenty-five or thirty shillings a week ; if they
never creep out of general utility into stock, then according
to their usefulness they may reach five pounds. Rehearsal,
II o’clock, sharp, and all actors below the ‘ leads ’ if fifteen
minutes behind time are fined two-and-sixpence. From
eleven to one-thirty rehearsal goes on frequently till two,
before they get away. After dinner the necessary nap must
be taken, then a good study of the part, tea, and now the
wardrobe has to be looked over for the night, ruffles, stein-
kirks, gloves, rosettes, plumes, hat, sword, buskins, wigs;
All these the actor has to find, the theatre wardrobe pro-
viding only the trunks, tab jackets, &c. Another look at
the part. At seven he must be in his dressing room, and
for the next four hours must remain in the theatre, whether
he finishes in the first part of the performance or the last.
By twelve, if he is a steady man, he will be in bed ; but
more often are to be found those who rendezvous at some
particular tavern till all hours. These men compose the
worthless small fry of the theatre, and are continually being
discharged for untrustworthiness, or for their slouching dis-
reputable appearance. Yet, strange to say, some of these
men are highly educated. Most of them fairly, and not a
few have been religiously instructed, and nearly all have had
a chance when the opportunity presented itself, if the
manager could provide one, to play a responsible part.


There are very few managers who will not yield to solicita-
tions that they would not otherwise do, only that if the man
is successful, he is advancing the interests of the theatre.
How many of these pass before my mental vision as I write ;
these men have so many opportunities of witnessing fine char-
acters represented, and their mimicry of the actor and his
rendering have been complete oft the stage, and at rehearsal
also, sometimes, but as soon as they stand before the
audience they loose all presenee of mind, and the result is a
lamentable failure. ' And yet these idiots will not go and
hide their diminished heads from the theatre altogether. Of
course they insist that the reason they did not succeed was
everybody’s fault but their own. One man in that company
was the most “ pig-headed ” self-conceited individual I ever
met ;he was really efficient in the roll of second or third
rate parts ; but his mind soared above this, and nothing but
Adam Brock : To play Adam Brock, he could and he
would. He had pestered the manager until he told him
plainly it was impossible. “ Your elocutionary powers are
not up to such a part, Jack.” “ What, sir,” he exclaimed,
“my (h)elocutionary powers not (h)up to (h)it.” “No
Jack, you are displaying them so advantageously at this
moment.” The laugh which succeeded this witty reply of
the manager’s was lost upon Jack, poor fellow, for he never
knew when he did aspirate ; but eventually the time came
for this man’s wish to be gratified, that was at the benefit
time, a notice of which is given,' and the price to obtain a
half share benefit is posted up in the prompt box and any actor
who can deposit that or gives good security for the amount
is entitled to produce any legitimate piece he pleases. This
man was rather popular outside, and had a good many
friends, if not admirers, of his histrionic talent, and
amongst the fast and sporting men he was an immense
favorite, his boxing powers having been brought into requi-
sition by them, of which Jack was very proud. These
men raised the needful, as they called it, and Jack’s ambi-
tion was gratified. Not so the audience, such a night had
never been passed through during the season—hooting,
cater wauling, hissing, and uproarious shouting characterised
the representation, for no one knew what the piece was
about only by name, or anything at all of it. Then Jack


could sing a bit. He had two songs which he had sung so
often that the audience was sick of them, hut his friends
called for them out of bravado. These two songs were
named, “ The Gouty Old Commodore” and “Never Buy
Tripe on a Friday,” and as soon as he appeared as the
Commodore, they would shout for the other and vice versa,
and keep him going on and off to change. Still the man
couldn’t or wouldn’t see that they were fooling him. After
this benefit season was over I left and went to Geelong. I
had no reason for this, only desire for change, for I can
truly say 1 spent the happiest and most profitable two years
there that I ever experienced afterwards anywhere.


CHAPTER lII.—A GEELONG EXPERIENCE.
I arrived there, as per engagement, and went straight
from the boat to the theatre—that is, it had the name
theatre painted on the front ; otherwise the structure
more resembled an auction mart or lumber repository. The
inside was of the most primitive construction—pit un-
boarded, stakes driven into the earth, and rough slabs
nailed on for seats. The tout ensemble of the whole concern
was that of rough and unskilled workmanship. Such a
place to be called a theatre was never more falsified by the
name. How disappointed I felt after leaving such a cosy
little theatre behind. Well, I was on the stage. The next
morning, comparing the difference between that and the one
I had just left, and whilst wondering where the people
dressed, the sweeper and generalissimo, cleaner, lamp-
lighter, &c., told me there were none. “ They all on ’em
dresses in their own ’ouse ’crost there ; them houses belongs
to Johnny Hasset, the proprietor.” At that moment Mr.
Hambleton, the manager, came in. “ Oh, you are ”
“ Yes,” I said ; “ Gardiner, at your service.” “ Well, what
do you think of the gaff—spicy affair, isn’t it 1” “ Very,”
I replied ; “ it’s architectural design is almost a pheno-
menon.” “Well,” he said, “it pays, so we can dispense
with beauty.” And now as this man plays a very important
part in this little book, he was, as I knew him, manager and
actor at that time, coarse and tyrannical. The company
was only small—eight all told, exclusive of himself. He
conducted everything harshly, and about as opposite to
the gentleman I had left as possibly could be. But
Mr. Hambleton was an enthusiast in everything to the
smallest iota in his company, ladies not excepted.
He was a splendid actor, a most versatile one, but about as
much fit to be a manager as a blackfellow. The man was
jealous of anyone getting any applause beside himself, and
a more impatient, passionate man in conducting the re-
hearsals I never saw ; in fact a real live Liverpool Irishman,
ready to box any of the actors who refused to do his will, or


play the part he had assigned them ; and it was chiefly by
his assumption of Irish character that brought the money
into the house ; for, taking the little company for all in all,
I suppose you could hardly find a more incompetent one.
It was a most miserable time for me, because I and
Hambleton were continually clashing in our songs ; but a
sudden change was approaching. This Mr. Hambleton had
been born of religious parents in Liverpool, and in a little
book which he published, giving the history of a life’s adven-
tures* he writes that his mother was the very embodiment
of religious precept and example combined. Not so his
father, although he was looked upon as a most pronounced
religionist, the boy knew that his father was covering up
evil propensities with the cloak of religion. At twelve
years of age it so disgusted him that he left his home and
got away to sea as cabin-boy. In course of flme he reached
Australia, and eventually became an actor of some repute
in Irish characters. At the rehearsal one morning he was
missing. Presently the caretaker came in and informed the
company that the manager had decamped, and was on board
the steamer Venus out in the Bay on his way to Melbourne.
By that time the proprietor had arrived. In answer to a
whole volley of questions, salary being the chief, “ Oh, yes,
your cheques are all right, and so is my lease. I can give
no other information but this, which is, that he has started
for Liverpool, assigning no other reason than that he was
obliged to go.” That was all ; and I don’t know that to
this day anyone except myself knew the reason. It was just
a nine days’ mystery, and then was forgotten. His little book,
which I have read, clears up the mystery of his sudden de-
parture. The night previous to his going he had a most
powerful dream and vision. He dreamt that his mother
was dying; it shaped itself into a vision; he saw his
mother and his two sisters kneeling by the bedside on which
she was lying, her hands were clasped together on her breast,
and she was praying for him, he felt convinced, for her
voice seemed to come right to him, “Johnny! my boy!
John Hambleton, come home, come home !” And upon the
* “ Buds, Blossoms, and Flowers ” is the title of the book,
price 6d. Could be obtained at Clarke’s, Randle Street, and Rose’s,
in Freeman Street.


strength of that singular vision he went ; and going straight
to the old home he found his sisters almost wanting the
necessaries of life. On going to his mother’s room there
was every minute detail just as he had seen it thir-
teen thousand miles away; it only required the presence of
the two sisters kneeling at the bedside to complete the pic-
ture. It made such an impression on him that, seizing hold
of his dear old mother’s Bible, he read as he opened it the
words, “My Word shall not return unto Me void, but it
shall accomplish that which I please, and shall prosper in
the thing whereto I sent it.” He made his peace with
God before he left that room, and made that verse an
initiative for a living. He came down, gave his sisters
what he possessed of money, told them to burn every
article belonging to his past profession, books and all ; he
was going to become a “ Bible seller,” and they should
never want. He had given himself to God, and he w a s
going to work for Him. A quarter of an hour later he
was haranguing the multitude on the wharf; amongst
them were some of the sailors he had come home with,
and who throughout the voyage had noted him for his
peculiarities and reticence; and now the man was shout-
ing and praising God, while he told the people of his
wonderful dream and its results. Within six hours of his
landing this Book, God says, which contains his own Word,
shall not return unto Him void, and I am from this time
going to help to disseminate it while I live. A gentleman
here stepped up to him, “If that is your full determi-
nation, come with me.” He went with him to the Bible
depot. His stock-in-trade was soon furnished, at satisfac-
tory rates to both parties. You may depend there were a
good many of the mob following him, as the gentleman was
known as a missionary. The next trouble was a convey-
ance. Here a poor costermonger, with his truck, stepped
forward, and, addressing the missionary, said, “ You know
me, sir, and if this gentleman will only accept me and
my truck, I will leave, my chance in God’s hands, and
wheel them for him anywhere he likes.” Mr. Hambleton
and the missionary conferred together for a short time, and
the result was the man’s offer was accepted, and they
started, pushing the truck from Liverpool to Manchester ;
and God prospered him in such a way that he soon had a


Bible wagon built and covered, the interior fashioned with
library, shelves, and for years he travelled in his cosy house,
preaching the Word and selling Bibles at fairs, on race-
courses everywhere. Not without much tribulation; the
world hated him ; the Master said it would, and they
kicked and cuffed and bespattered him with mud, and at
times left him almost dead. When his sisters passed away
be returned again to Australia, and, after the absence of
thirty-five years, I bad the pleasure of meeting him again,
and hearing him in the Town Hall, in the winter of 1884 or
1885, preach a most eloquent discourse from the words,
“ Watchman, what of the night V’ We had a most enjoy-
able time when I called upon him the next day. He
praised God that one of his old cc mpany was clothed and
in his right mind, like himself. I mentioned his sudden de-
parture ; then it was he told me of his dream. (The book
has been issued since he was here.) “Of course you know,”
he said, “it was a thing that could not be talked about
amongst such associates as you and I were then surrounded
with. To me it was too sacred ; my mind became chaos,
and I was like one moving in a dream all the way home.
Yes, it was a wonderful revelation of the Spirit of God ;
and so was my conviction relative to the dissemination of
the Bible. Oh, yes, it came direct from God. See how He
has prospered me, I have got my Bible wagon following
me to Melbourne. I wait here until the ship that is bring-
ing it arrives, when I intend, accompanied by my wife, pro-
ceeding round to Melbourne.” And there he continued to
pursue the even tenor of his way, for some time : he then
proceeded to Ge-elong. There his life of faithful usefulness
ended crowned with laurels. His last act was a grand
climax : he found the the old theatre, which was built ex-
pressly for him ; it was being used as a general sundries
store. .After a great deal of trouble he, with some Chris-
tian help and influence, secured possession of it, and
obtained a lease; had it cleaned and remodelled into a mis-
sion-house for God ; and there night after night, within
the four walls, where first he appeared as a votary ( f Satan
exactly forty years before, now on the Lord’s side preaching
His grand doctrine of salvation, and selling the Bible. His
wife survives him, and, I believe, carries on the work of
selling Bibles in Foster-street, South Geelong.


CHAPTER IV.—BALLARAT IN 1851.
The company, having lost its head, was, of course, dis-
banded. I returned to Melbourne. My old manager took
me on for the few weeks which remained before the recess.
News was now daily arriving that California was an
immense goldfield, and many were leaving for it, I o-ould
have gone with a company which was being made up in
Adelaide by an old identity, Jack Lamb, but I refused the
offer. A few months after, in 1851, news came down that
gold was being found at Buninyong ; then at Ballarat. The
excitement was intense ; men were dealing out for these
diggings by scores and hundreds a day. Of course actors
were touched with the desire to obtain gold, which was as
strong with them as other people. I took the fever im-
mensely, and soon set about going, but was detained about
a month after the first rush considering what was best to
do. I was offered a good engagement for Hobart, dallied
with myself a long time, and at length refused it. I had
been in communication with some of our people, who had
preceded me, and gained some useful information. I was to
bring a tipdray, but not to encumber myself with anything
in the shape of diggers’ implements, for scores were selling
out and returning. Horses were to be had very cheap, on
account of not being able to keep them. They had to be
entrusted to men to shepherd who wore in league with horse
thieves by wilfully letting down the fences of the improvised
stock-yards, and then complain to the owners that their
horses had got out on one side while they were strengthen-
ing the other side ; and there were very few diggers’
wives, or women of any kind. I decided to take mine, for
the simple reason that she declined to be left behind. There
was a knock-about man connected with the theatre whose
wife washed for us ; so I said to Sam, “ Would you like
to go to the diggings ?” “Yes, very much, sir; but my
little woman don’t want to be left behind.” “ Neither does
my wife, and I want you to take her to be company for


mine.” “ But I haven’t the means.” “Well, if you will
go with me and take the wife, I’ll find the means ; and as
we are going to dig up that nugget that is waiting for us,
you can repay me. Will you go ?” “ I should think I
would, and thankful for your kindness. You will never
lose by it.” “ I know that, Sam ; that is why I have
sought you out to make the offer. Now go and find a place
where we can store the household goods and furniture, while
Igoup to Farrall’s auction about a tipdray. In less than
a week we were on the road, with the shafts of the dray
packed into the back part of the bed of a bullock-dray, going
to Ballarat with stores. Our dray was canvassed over for the
women folk. All we took with us were two frames, and can-
vass for tents, with the usual tucker-box, as it was called,
and a frying-pan ; and wasn’t it a jolly life, especially after
the worry and study of a theatre. How we revelled in it.
Eat! well, we did pay great attention certainly to the com-
missariat department ; and, as Harry the bullock-driver,
remarked, it was a good job we had a double-barreled gun,
for a single one would never have kept us going. The trip
took nine days. It might have been done in less time had
we followed the usual track, but our teamster had decided
when coming down on his last trip, that he would make a
detour, to evade the usual camping grounds, for they were
becoming a rendezvous for all kinds of “ scow r bankers ” and
thieves, who stuck up the drays, which carried grog, and
which was often connived at by the drivers themselves, who
could share in the drinking of it without responsibility ; and,
as our man was laden with some amongst the general sun-
dries, he determined to explore for fresh camping grounds,
and was more successful than he expected. We found water
and feed in abundance each night, I was very pleased and
thankful to him for for this, as I had been dreading the
camping grounds. I was told that the wild orgies that were
indulged in at these halting places were something awful,
in fact dangerous for females. We arrived on the diggings
half an hour before dark, and the sight we witnessed from
the hill was something indeed to fascinate the gaze. The
hundreds of small fires flickering in front of the white tents
all along the creek ; the distant murmur of voices ; the
continued flash of diggers’ firearms, which every night they


■made a practice of discharging, I suppose to warn loafers and
thieves with what sort of reception they would meet if they
came prowling around their tents too closely. We
were met by our vanguard, as they had kindly promised,
and very soon found a most eligible spot near the creek to
fix up our tents. It was a lovely moonlight night, and we
at once commenced to set them up. While doing so the
patrol trooper came along, being saluted all the way by the
derisive shout of “Joe, Joe.” This man’s duty was to wait
until evening for the occupants of the tents, and to see for
any fresh arrivals, also to inquire for their licence. That
duty which he had to perform—to see if every man had his
paper—it was which made him so unpopular. As he passed
us while engaged in our work he inquired for ours, which I
told him I had not got yet, having but just arrived, but
intended to obtain it in the morning. “ All right, give me
your name, please.” I gave it him ; “ and yours ” (this to
Sam). “ Oh, no,” I said ; “he is in my employ.” “Oh,
well, at nine o’clock the Commissioner’s tent will be open,
and I,advise you not to prospect or do anything until you
have obtained your paper; following my advice will save
you a fine.” “ I will take care.” “ Are you going to
fasten that canvas on before you turn in ? I should recom-
mend you to, or you won’t find it there in the morning.” I
I thanked him, but I said “ I think my dog Schwartz will
take care of it.” “ Well, you can do as you please, but you
don’t know the rogues there are about these diggings. I’ll
wager you my horse under me against a sixpence that it
will go, if you don’t take it off or fasten it down.” “ Thanks
very much, I’ll follow your advice.” So we just left the
frame, and used the canvas for our beds underneath the dray,
as we had done all along. I hadn’t long turned in when I
heard a very menacing growl from Schwartz. I looked out
and saw that he had bailed a man up. “ What do you
want ?” I inquired of him. “ Nothing, only your dog
won’t allow me to pass on.” “ The dog would not have
troubled you if you had not been hanging round instead of
passing straight along on your way. Schwartz, let him
go and he went. That dog was a most valuable animal.
He had been trained by the Deptford Theatre Nelson Lee
family, to play the dog of Montargis in “ The Forest of


Bondi.” One of the Lees brought him out with two
others—Bruin and Cora—to play in a piece entitled “ The
Sleigh Dogs of Siberia,” but Lee himself never showed them
in that character. He drank on board ship to such an
extent that he finished his career on landing by delirium
tremens. His effects were sold by the late Harry Deering,
to whom, I believe, he was consigned under engagement.
Schwartz and the play were knocked down to me. What
became of tbe others I am not sure, but old Captain Fyans, I
believe, bought them. My dog played and worked well
with me. He was a sure draw for a benefit, and at no time
did he ever stick me up. The history of the acts of this
dog would fill pages. One peculiarity he had was that he
would allow any one to come up to the house front or into
the back yard when he was 100s p , but he never permitted
them to leave without the shout from myself or wife, “All
right, Schwartz.” Often I have found the baker and the
postman bailed up, if he had been accidentally loose when
wo were out. If it is possible for a dog to exercise ambition,
old Schwartz had a spice of it. He invariably acknow-
ledged his reception with a loud bark, and he has been
known, if the applause was loud and continuous, to go right
down to the footlights to bark at the audience. Of course
there were plenty who knew the dog, and shouting his name
out would have something to do with that part of the busi-
ness. If he was hired for another theatre I had only to
show him his props—viz., his lantern, pad, &c.—and give
them into the possession of the man who came for him, and
say “ Go,” and he would leave me without the slightest
compunction. But woe betide the man if he manifested any
nervousness at the end of the piece, where he tries to make
his escape from the dog, who meets him and seizes him by
the throat, or pad round the throat, pulling him to the
ground, and is supposed to be worrying him to death as the
curtain falls. I went to the front one night when he was
performing with strangers, and the man got frightened when
the dog went for him, and tried to run off the stage. It was
no use ; so long as he or any other man had his pad round
the neck the dog would have him, even if he jumped over
the orchestra into the pit, he would have followed him.
Now if the man had thrown the pad away the dog would have


picked it up and troubled nothing more, but the dog had
been trained to seize that pad directly any naan had put it
on. Well, on this occasion the actor lost his presence of
mind, and kept running all over the stage, off the stage,
back again, the dog still after him, sometimes catching
him at the back, then at the front of the pad, creating quite
a panic amongst the people on the stage, the man screaming,
the dog barking, and the audience cheering vociferously,
believing it all to be in the play. The actors created quite a
sensation with the people in front, who never saw them act
so earnestly and naturally before, while the panic lasted. I
saw the actor was becoming exhausted, and I went round
to tell him to throw the pad off. No use, the man’s pre-
sence of mind was lost, and I knew that, shout as I might
to the dog, who had become as excited as the man, it would
be no use. Fortunately the man came within reach of the
wing I was standing in. I drew him off, snatched the pad,
pushed him so that he fell prostrate upon the stage, threw on
to the stage the pad, which the dog seized and held in his
mouth as a trophy of triumph, and the curtain fell upon
most uproarious applause, the people shouting “ Dog ! dog 1”
I sent his pad on, which, of course, he fetched, and so
exhibited himself to their gratification. I learnt a lesson
that night, which was, that I determined in future to finish
the piece exactly as this man had through fear, but I would
do in reality, for I saw the effect of it upon the audience.
Another incident connected with this piece is worth re-
cording. The plot upon which all the work of the play
hinges consists in a rivalship between two young French
officers for the hand of Clotilde, the colonel’s daughter.
These officers, who are en route with their company, have to
pass through the forest of Bondi, on the margin of which is
the inn where the company is stopping for the night. Here
they quarrel, and adjourn to the forest, without seconds, to
fight a duel to the death with pistols. Landry, one of the
officers, is seen by a dumb boy who is about the place to
extract the charge from his opponent’s pistol, consequently
he falls dead while Landry lives. The dog belongs to the
officer who is shot, and, having followed them, Landry
endeavours to cover up the body with loose leaves and
boughs. He makes his way back to the inn, trying to


entice the dog with him, but fails, and so leaves him. In
the next scene the dog comes rushing on, with his master’s
scarf in his mouth, which he has torn off the body. The
dog pulls at the bell of the hostelry, and so alarms the
inmates. The old landlady coming out with a lantern, the
dog seizes it from her hand, and leads his followers to where
his master’s body lies, and the end is the dog seizes the
officer, who is trying to escape. Amongst the audience that
night, very close to the stage, sat a blowsy, full-faced woman,
with one, apparently her daughter, beside her. It was evi-
dently her first visit to a theatre, from her continual ejacula-
tions and audible remarks. She was of Hibernian extrac-
tion, and this is a sample of the way she went on. “Sure,
now, did you ever see the loike of that 1 Going to fight a
jewel, are they ? What is he taking the shot out for ?
Shure he hasn’t took it out of his own 1 What’s that for 1
Och, murther, too, if there isn’t a dog, and he’s a beauty.”
And in the next scene, where they fire, and fatally for one,
her horror seemed to know no bounds. She would not be
pacified, but continued to rave, “ Och, the murthering thief
of the wurrld; and you’ll all sit and see a murder done.
Faix, but I’ll go and fetch the polis at wanst.” And she
went, with the hearty concurrence of the audience.
ixPl


CHAPTER Y.—OH THE DIGGINGS.
Well, the next morning we finished fixing up the tent,
and obtained the licence. Sam and I started off on our
first prospecting expedition. Bj watching the diggers at
work I picked up a good deal of information which would
not be gained by asking. Diggers are too reticent, and too
much taken up with their occupation, to answer questions.
On the other side of the creek we saw men going up a black-
looking hill with empty bags, and coming down with full
ones on their shoulders. I remarked to a decent-looking
man, whose two boys were shovelling dirt into the cradle
whilst he himself rocked it, swilling the dirt through with
water, “ Have those men set about the task of clearing that
hill away ?” (Strange as it may seem, that immense hill
has been cleared away since; there was gold, more or less,
all through it). “Well,” he replied, “if you have not
set in yet, and are looking for something to do, I should
advise you to help them. There must be tucker to be
got out of it, if nothing better. Four days ago there
were not a dozen men working it, and now you see they are
swarming. “ Sam,” I said, “ we’ll be in it, come on.” “Have
we got any bags 1” I said, as we were returning to the tent.
“ I think so ; two or three.” The first salute I got from my
wife was, “ There have been two men here wanting to sell
their kit; there they are over there.” “Just the very thing.
Come along and let us see what constitutes a digger s kit,,
Sam.” The two men soon pointed out the use everything
was applied to, “and we’ll sell you the claim, if you like to
buy it,” “ What do you want for it ?” Here Sam took me
on one side. “ That’s the dodge.” “ What dodge 1” “ Oh,
I have been told all about it; why, digging a hole and salt-
ing it with a bit of gold, which they take care you will find
at the bottom of the dish.” I see. So we declined the
claim, very much to their chagrin, but bought the kit; and I
believe Sam was right. We got our kit home, and fixed the
cradle within sight of the tents, and left Schwartz in charge.


“I am thinking, Sam,” I said, “we had better go at it just
as we see these men do, and ask no questions.” I saw that
there were many there, like ourselves, for the first time. We
watched the men who had been as I guessed the longest
time at the work, and saw that they squared out an alluvial
patch, cleared the top off, then took the earth at just one
depth of the spade. They then bagged this, and so left a
square hole of about a foot down, and sought another likely
spot. We just did the same —here, there, or anywhere. I
saw that the two mates took turn about to carry the earth
down while the other remained getting another bag-full to-
gether, We did the same way, and by night we had taken
down about a dozen bags, which we shot down between the
two tents. We organised, that we would carry down earth
till dinner-time, and cradle it, and pan out the stuff’ in the
afternoons. If we had any time to spare before supper we
“ fossicked” about, soon becoming quite conversant with the
kind of soil which yielded gold, or that was called gold-
bearing. Well, the pleasant excitement of this life was
really enjoyable. We had been on the diggings about eight
weeks ; we had achieved no great success, as many of our
neighbours did. Our Saturday night’s washing up, I don’t
think, ever exceeded three ounces ; Sam was the fortunate
finder of a four-ounce nugget—a good evening’s fossick,
■Our wives prospected on their own account, some of the old
diggers good-naturedly showing them the likeliest spots,
with the result that they obtained more than an ounce of
alluvial gold, besides some small nuggets. And now, when
all was just as happy as the life could make us, the tempter
came along. It was on a Sunday afternoon when my old
manager found me. He was looking for actors ; the theatre
he said, must be opened somehow. People were flocking
into Melbourne by the Black Ball Line and Red Jacket
boats he said, and did I know where any of his old company,
oould be found. “ They have been at Forest Creek some
time,” I replied. “Well,” he said, “1 understand that a
great many actors have arrived, but I would rather have my
own people ; will you join me again ?” By this time he had
walked into the tent. My wife and Sam and his wife were
out strolling. “ No,” I replied; “I think not; I know it
is as much against my wife’s inclination as my own to go


back to the theatre.” Dining this time he was enjoying
what our tent could provide. “ While I am eating,” he
said, “ scan that book ; I have had a lot of new plays sent
out. I intended you to play the Kinchin, Paul Bedford’s
character, in that piece, “The Flowers of the Forest.” I
should think that that for an opening part, and”—naming
the amount per week—“ ought to tempt you to give up this
rough life.” “Your offer is not good enough to take me
away from it, rough as you think it,” I replied. “ I can see
the part will suit me, and if you like to engage us both at so
much, with a clear half benefit at the end of a four months’
season, and upon those terms only will I join you,” He
made not the slightest demur, but asked for Sam. I said,
“I think I hear their voices,” and they almost immediately
entered, very much astonished to see who was there. Sam
would not return ; he had made up his mind to be a gold-
digger, he said. Well, for the first time in our married life
my wife and I had a serious quarrel. She never had liked
the profession, and hoped we were free of it. I gave Sam
the tip-diay for his nugget: he would soon require it to cart
stuff to water, as it was getting short. Cobb’s coach took
us, and Sam was to send our tent and things down by a
bullock-dray. In three days we were again in Melbourne,
but, oh, what a change ! Not a house to be got, every hotel
and boarding-house full, people walking the streets all night
or sleeping under the post office portico. For days we
walked ; at last I obtained a square, bare room, for which I
was charged £8 per week, just to put up our beds l ead.
That we had to get from the store and pay £1 for, and
another to the drayman. I saw that to keep the things in
store was madness, so the saleroom got rid of them, and
when the tent came down a friend allowed me to fix it
up in his yard.


CHAPTER YL—FROM DIGGER TO ACTOR
AGAIN.
Shakespeare writes i—“ There is a tide in the affairs or
men which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune,” and if
ever a man missed the flood-tide of his fortune I did when I
lelt the gold-diggings to re-enter the theatre. I can now see
that the hapd of Providence was against me, for all the
money I ever made afterwards—and I did make some—
never really benefitted me. It was just squandered, nothing
else. Melbourne was at that time a pandemonium of vice
and x’ascality, inhabited by thousands of the very scum of
creation. The theatre was taken possession of entirely by
the most rowdy mob that ever entered such a place. Re-
spectable people dared not go; the ladies of the company in
a body informed the Mayor, who was proprietor of the
theatre, that they would not perform. He coaxed them
from their purpose by giving them Saturday night off, that
night being turned into a perfect bear garden, which they
called a concert night. But soon casinos and concert halls
sprang up like mushrooms, and soon weeded the theatre of this
most undesirable element, and gradually we fell into the old
routine. The company now was composed of a good many
new arrivals, and as “ The Flowers of the Forest” was a
success, running for three weeks, it gave us a rosy time.
Not so with the poor fellows going home at night. Canvas
Town had now come into existence on Emerald Hill, and
most of them either erected a tent or hired one. It was a
long distance to go, and the hordes of ruffians and thieves
infesting Melbourne in those days made it very unsafe. They
nightly got knocked about and robbed, and when the benefit
season came on these fellows knew that they then would
have some nice little hauls, and dodge as they would most of
the actors who could not afford to employ special help fell
victims. As for myself, I have often heard of a good
character being beneficial to help a man along in his every-
day life, but I had never experienced that a good theatrical
character would assist him very much, but mine did. The
part which I played in the piece was named the Kinchin, a
Gipsy thief, which took with these fellows immen'ely. I


believe the most ignorant of them thought I really was a
thief. At all events, I found it good policy for the time-
being not to undeceive them, and each night put myself
under the protection of one or the other, but generally the
one man only. At the benefit night, however, when I re-
quired him the most, he did not turn up, nor for two or
three nights previous. So when I took my half share, all
silver, 1 stepped out of the office into the yard leading to the
back way into the hotel, where these fellows were always
congregating, and I said to the manager, who was always
escorted home by two special constables with drawn swords
to protect the night’s receipts, “Very well; thank you for
taking care of it until the morning. I will just go and get
a quart of half and-half to take home for supper, unless one
of you lads will oblige me by fetching it?” “All right,
Kinchie,” and half a dozen of them stepped forward for the
money. Into that quart pot, after taking it into the office,
I put the silver, the beer overflowing into the wash basin,
leaving just enough to cover it. “You will never reach
home with that,” said the manager. “ Wait,” I replied,
“ and please ask me loud enough for them to hear what you
say, ‘ Gardiner, can't you get supper beer nearer home without
taking it all that way V and I will answer, ‘ No, sir, I am late,
and the house will be closed.’ ” In a very short time the
fellows cleared, and I arrived home with my quart pot and
contents all safe. I have never ceased to believe that the
fellow whom I had employed all along was either intimi-
dated by his confederates (of which he could have apprised
me) or he had put the job into their hands, conniving at it
from a distance. And now, the season being over, my wife
and I determined to shake the Melbourne dust off our feet.
Anywhere, anywhere, out of that sink of iniquity, which at
that time was without law or order. To take a cab at night
would not save a man from being robbed ; the cabmen, many
of them, were the confederates of these men. Then the wild
orgies of those who had become suddenly and enormously
rich ; racing about on horseback, showing their money, and
shouting, “ Richer than the Governor.” All com-
bined to make it a very sink of iniquity. Those who were
not fools did not know what to do with their money; the
gold-buyers and banks would buy their gold, but wouldn’t


bank their money unless they would leave it for three
months. The reason was, the banks had not a sufficient
staff of clerks. Just at this time an agent from the Hobart
theatre was in Melbourne, and an advertisement informed
actors requiring engagements where he could be seen. I
found him out, and engaged with him for “ leading old man’
or “ low comedy.” There were two agreements drawn up-
one for the actor, the other for the manager, and I found on
arrival by a bit of sleight-of-hand he had made it “ leading
old man” and “low comedy.” By signing such a bond,
which I had done without noticing it, I kept another man
out, and was forced into double work. I was annoyed,
because I was placed in bad odour with my brother actors
for monopolising two lines of business. I got little redress
from the manager, who said, “You saw what you signed, I
suppose V’ “ I did,” I replied ; “ the or leading low come-
dian, has been made and , since I put my name to it.”
“Then you charge us with forgery?” “Certainly I do,
and you dare not subject that word on that paper to an
expert caligraphist.” This first eruption didn’t end here;,
he was a worse Jew than my first manager, for this man
was a bully. On going on to the stage, where I expected
to meet an old friend acting as stage manager, I found him,
but not in that capacity, through some grievance which I
now forget. The man usurping his position was another
Jew and once costumier at the old Queen’s Theatre, some-
times going on for small parts, from which place he had
been kicked out for pilfering from the actors’ pockets. We
all marked our coins one night, and from each one’s pocket
two or three were taken. We had been suspecting each
other, and on this occasion all four of us belonging to that
room, which was next his wardrobe, were on the stage
together. I was the first up and missed the coins. I had
all along suspected the real culprit. When the other three
arrived each of their pockets, they found, had been dealt
with similarly. We now knew who was the thief, and, as
soon as he came upstairs to pass through our room to his
wardrobe, we threw him on his back and searched him.
Every coin was found except one, which had been changed,
no doubt. We thrashed him well, and he cleared out. And
this man was to be my sub-manager and stage director !


What was Itodo ? I had not seen him yet. How was h?
going to act ? How, indeed ! The moment he entered and
-saw me he walked up, holding out his hand, with the coolest
effrontery. I ignored this act, and turned to Gus, my old
friend. “ Gus,” I said, “that’s the mm.” He knew what
those words implied, and I meant that he should, although to
others I had never spoken a word of his delinquency. The
business of the theatre commenced, I was cast for nothing.
The fourth night a subordinate part was given me to take
home and study for the following Monday. I refused to
take it, and left it in the prompter’s hands. This became a
police court affair. The magistrate could not or would not
understand why, if an actor was paid, he should refuse to
play any part given him. He wouldn’t define the courtesy
due to a man wno was engaged for one particular line—pooh-
poohed it, of course. I could see the whole thing was cut
and dried, as M'Dowell, my lawyer said, and I received
no satisfaction. I still refused to play subordinate parts
under the advice of Mr. M'Dowell, who told me also to
present myself every Saturday at the pay table. “If they
refuse to pay you, then we’ll take the case into the local
court” I did so, and was refused my salary. “Then
destroy the agreement,” I said, “ and let me go.” “No !”
“ Well, there is mine,” and I tore it in pieces and threw it
on the table. That afternoon I started for Launceston by
the night coach, determined to get away by the boat which
sailed on Monday for Melbourne. At Bridgewater I was
stopped, and arrested under the Masters and Servants Act—
a piece of venomous spleen on their part. My profession
being gentleman, they knew perfectly well what they hazarded,
bat they could not have got me back otherwise. It was no
use for me to explain all that to the officer. I just had to
return with him. He sympathised with me, for, he said,
you will be subjected to a great deal of annoyance, as there
is no court on Monday ; the magistrate will be at Brown’s
River. His attendance there used to be Tuesday, but this
change is being tried to block the Saturday night drink
traffic. The drunks don’t care about being subjected to an
•extra day’s restraint, and it is certainly working very well,
for each Saturday night now they are becoming fewer by
degrees and beautifully less. “Bat how about bail?” I


asked. “ Well, there’s where you will suffer. If it were
obtainable to any amount, you, as a servant, are deprived of
it ; the Act has never been altered from the old convict
days, but I think the chief constable can get you over into the
debtor’s side of the jail for that time. If the governor will
receive you he can do so, and so long as you are in safe
keeping is all that is needed.” It was done, and on the
Monday night the governor came round enquiring for a
volunteer to sit up with a man who was to be executed
the next morning. He said, “ Although it’s the con-
demned cell, there is an ante-room fitted up with every
convenience with viands, coffee, and tobacco. The
warder whose duty it is to sit there has obtained leave
of absence just now, through some calamity at home.”
Now, I had selected a play for my next benefit, “ The Bot-
tle, or the Drunkard’s Doom.” In this piece he kills his
wife in a drunken fit by sinking her over the head with a
bottle. In the last scene he is discovered in a paroxysm of
madness in the condemned cell at Newgate. It - came into
my mind like a flash, you will never have such another
chance to study and fill in your character. “Very well,” I
said, “ I’ll go. What sort of man is he ? I mean his tem-
perament—is he ignorant, sullen, or dangerous ?” “He is not
ignorant, I think ; lam sure he is not dangerous. If he
were, there is a barred gate of iron between you, the key of
which is hanging up on your side.” Upon arriving at the
man’s cell, he was sitting with his elbows upon his knees, his
face buried in his hands. The governor told him 1 had
volunteered to stay with him for the night, and after show-
ing me where to find everything, left us. He neither
answered the governor, or looked up at me ; so, without any
hesitation I began Byron’s ode on melancholy :
“ Hence, loathed melancholy,
Of Ceiberus and blackest midnight born
‘ln Stygian caves forlorn
’Mongst horrid shrieks and shapes and sights unholy,
I ind out some uncouth cell where brooding darkness
Spreads her jealous wing,
And the night raven sings : there ’neath ebon shades.
And low-brow’d rocks
As rugged as thy locks
In dark Cimmerian desert ever dwell.”


“ Who are you ?” he exclaimed. “An actor,” I replied,
“come to cheer you up.” And knowing something about
human nature, how it likes to exhaust its grievances, I
started him with the question, “ Now, old boy, give us the
history of what brought you to this pass 1” and eleven
o’clock struck before he had finished his story and of
course I had sympathised with him, made some coffee, which
he drank, and turned in. What I drew from his history
was to this effect : He had been a farmer’s boy in the mid-
land counties at home, and, with other boys, had been
drawn into snaring hares, rabbits, and other game ; even-
tually he became a confirmed poacher, fell into the hands of
the law at last, and was transported for seven years. On
obtaining his ticket of leave, or probationary pass, or some-
thing, he was sent to a master, who was now his prose-
cutor. This man had been a convict before him, but they
got on very well together until a “ factory girl ” had been
hired by him, and she was the primary cause of his present
position. Evil doings had been perpetrated between the
master and this woman. The law was very strict in refe-
rence to illegitimate offspring, in order** to protect the
State from being overburdened with them. Fifty pounds
a year for fifceen years was the penalty imposed on the
master found guilty of this crime, and some lengthened im-
prisonment to both, where the fellow-servants were con-
cerned. His master came to him while ploughing one day,
and said, “I want you to take the place of the house boy,
and will have to get another ploughman. Sarah and he
don’t get on together. He is a lazy lout, and will have to
go.” The man accepted his master’s offer, and eventually
married the woman, principally through his master’s solici-
tation. A child was born six months after the marriage,
which opened the man’s eyes as to the reason of his being
brought into the house, and almost forced into the marriage.
Having received by this time his last paper, or document,
which gave him his freedom, he cleared out, but was taken
again and tried for wife-desertion, and sent back in lieu
of a further term of imprisonment. He knew, of course,
the guiltiness which existed between his wife and employer
before he went away ; and this rankled in his breast. How-
ever, on regaining his liberty he returned, and one day


wai sent to the township to buy a scythe. On his return, as
he entered the back way, he saw his master leaving his wife’s
bedroom ; he followed after him and struck him with the
weapon be had in his hand, and gashed his shoulder. He
was tried and found guilty of “ wounding, with intent to
murder,” and was sentenced to death.
I bad been dozing some little time after, thinking
over the man’s hard lot, when I was startled
out of it by such a scream and paroxysm of mad-
ness as I had never before witnessed in all my life,
and I had seen some poor wretches in delirium tremens.
He raved; oh, how he blasphemed, foamed at the mouth,
tore his hair, dashed his furniture about, rolled on the
floor, and eventually struck his head against something, for
I saw the blood streaming down his face. I was very
much bewildered, but gathered presence of mind to com-
mence singing a sweet, pathetic ballad ; it was, “ Dear
Mother, I remember well the parting kiss you gave to me.”
He had been speaking very affectionately of his mother.
This quieted him, and I went in and bathed his face. In
answer to my question, “ Were you dreaming?” “ Yes,”
he said ; “I had that wretch of a master who was taunt-
ing and jibing at me, in my grasp, as I thought, and I saw
that Jezebel of a wife jeering at me.” I looked at my
watch, it was four o’clock. He asked me the time and I
made some excuse about my watch not keeping proper
time, as I did not want him to know it was so near day-
light. He requested me to sing again, and I complied,
passing from grave to gay until I began to see that day
was breaking, and a happy thought struck me. I said,
“ The man lives you say ! how do you know that a re-
prieve may not arrive.” That thought seemed to occupy his
mind, and at last I get him into a calmer state ; when
bolts and bars began to be withdrawn, and the prison barber
entered to shave him : then I knew all hope was gone ;
and so did he, poor fellow. My self-imposed task being
now accomplished, I shook him by the hand ; the tears
would not keep back, and I left him. Oh ! that I had
known then the things that would make for my peace, but
they were hid from my eyes ! that lost soul might have
been saved. I met the governor going out from him, who


put a letter in my haul, and said, “I have to apologise
for keeping you in during the night. The gentleman who
brought that desired to see you, and I told him of your self-
imposed task, and that I was too glad you had accepted it for
the sake of the man. He said, I could release you ; here
is the order; and nothing more would be said about it.”
u That’s all right,” I replied. “I am glad you left me,
though I have not had a very pleasant time of it.” I
wished him good morning ; and as I walked along I opened
the letter ; it was from my friend Gus. It contained some-
thing like the following :—“Your friend went so fast down
the ‘ grave-trap ’ last night that he couldn’t get up again.
He was very much shaken, and I expect will lay up for
some time. lam instructed to say, 1 Come and fulfil
your engagement, as though nothing had happened.’
I am installed as manager and will see you righted ; also
that you can play which line you like—old man or low
comedy.” “ No, Gus,” I said, when I saw him, “not for
anything would I remain. I shall just put in ray three
weeks’ account, and for passage-money over, as per agree-
ment. If they pay it so, well and good ; if they don’t,
M ; Dowell is only too eager to take up my case without a
shilling fee, unless I obtain £IOO damages, the sum he
suggests. It is evident between him and the boss there is
an enmity about something.” My demand was complied
with, and the following week I was again in Melbourne.
My old manager had left the Queen’s and gone to Sydney.
I heard he was running a hotel, and very soon went the way
of almost all the actors I ever knew—a “ softening brain”
and a premature death. Another theatre had sprung up out
of Rowe’s old circus. It was run by a Commonwealth
Company. I played the dog two nights there, when George
Coppin came along on his second return trip from home,
bringing with him his new theatre in parts, all ready to be
put up. He offered me an engagement in Geelong, where
he intended to play in the new theatre, now under the
management of the late Harry Peering, until his own was
erected. He opened in “ Paul Pry,” myself playing old
Colonel Hardy.


CHAPTER TIL —AMONGST THE “ STARS
CAPTAIN MOONLIGHT ; AN ADVENTURE.
“ Stars’’ of the profession were now fast arriving. There
were no less than five couples waiting for Coppin’s open-
ing. Mr. and Mrs. Waller were to open in Geelong, the
Starks, the Holts, Miss Goddard, G. V. Brooke, and the
English Opera Company to follow on after finishing with
Coppin. I stayed on with Peering, and p’ayed with the
Wallers through their engagement. They were about to
proceed to Ballarat, and Mr. Waller invited me and one
or two others to gn, as actors were at a premium there on
account of being engaged gold-digging. The Wallers were
to open in “ Money,” and he gave the prompt-book to me to
copy out ray part. 1 did so, and thoughtlessly returned it
to the Geelong prompter instead of to his servant who
should have given it to Mr. Waller, but did not. On
reaching Corduroy, about twenty miles on the way to
Ballarat Mrs. Waller became so unwell through the jolting
of the coach that we had to remain there for the night.
After a little while Mr. Waller came to me for the book. I
told him I had returned it to the prompter. He expressed
much disappointment at my having done so. “Do
you know,” he said, “ that is a copyright book, and there
is not another copy extant out of New York. That fellow is
copying, you may depend, and will make money out of it.
How long has he had it ?” “ Four o’clock yesterday ; but
even if he sat up all night from theatre closing until eleven
o’clock rehearsal, ’ I said, “ he could not have written mo r e
than thirty pages, for he is a very slow writer and near-
sighted, and his time will be taken up all day with Holt’s
pieces.'’ “ Let us see the landlord,” he said. “What time
does the return coach reach Geelong?’ he enquired of the
latter. “It is due at eleven o’clock to-night, if ‘Moonlight’
does not stick it up,” he replied. “ Then, that’s no use,”
I replied. “ Have you any traps for hire,” Mr. Waller
asked. “Not one.” “Any saddle-horse?” “Yes—my


one old roadster, that knows his way to Geelong as well I
do.” “ Will you hire him to me?” I asked. “ Well,” he
replied, “ you can have him on one condition only, and that
is the amount of his value in case of that man sticking you
up and riding off with him.” Mr. Waller said, “If your
horse comes to grief in any way, I will give you carte blanche
to suit yourself with another, and will pay the cost. My
name is Frank Waller; and the American Consul, an old
friend of mine, will take up my bill for any moderate
amount.” “ Very well then,” said the landlord ; “ give me
writing to that effect, and you can have him.” And in less
than fifteen minutes I was cantering on my way back to
Geelong. The nights were drawing in, but I reached
“ O’Mara’s” just as the sun declined, and there 1 refreshed
myself and horse. There was a young moon, and, as I
cantered along between there and Fyan’s Ford, I saw a
woman coming in a lateral diiection toward me, as though
she expected me to be the person she was looking for ; then
all at once she turned round and went in the opposite
direction, I had heard that Moonlight had a decoy-duck,
and I was wondering if this was she ; but nothing took
place, and in half an hour I had covered the four miles,
which brought rue to Fyan’s Ford public-house. On alight-
ing I was surrounded by father, mother, and family. “Have
you seen a young woman on your way coming here ?”
“ Yes, I saw a woman, but whether young or old she did
not permit me to see. As I passed her by she turned
back to the way in which she appeared to have come” “ Were
you not one of the actors who went up in the coach to-day ?”
“ Yes.” “ Well,” said the father, “our girl has been missed
since two o’clock to-day, and now it is close on seven. That
must be she, mother,” he said, addressing his wife. “ Well,”
I said, “ what are you afraid of ?” “ Why, for the last month
past a fellow, who has called himself a digger, has been daily
calling at this place ; he has been making very free with our
girl, and she has taken to him like mad. I don’t believe the
fellow is a digger at all, although he seemed to have plenty
of the needful. He was here this mormng, and I believe he
has enticed her away to meet him somewhere ; and I can’t
get it out of my head but that he is Captain Moonlight in
disguise. Everybody believes him to be in this locality


somewhere ; and now I remember he always came in a
different garb ; and if he was in the bar and saw anyone
coming towards the house, he would slip inside. How far
away is it that you saw the woman ?” he enquired. “ I had
not ridden more than a mile, I think, from O’Mara’s. I
thought she was making to that house, when she saw me
and turned,” “Go and put the horse in the trap, Jim,”
he said to one of those present. We’ll go and look for her
again, mother.” So I mounted, and told the landlady I ex-
pected to return, and would require accommodation for
myself and horse for the night. “All right, sir,” she said.
I reached Geelong all right, and found the prompter. I
rated him for keeping possession of the book ; which he,
however, said he had mislaid, and only found it an hour
before the theatre opened. He certainly had it directed,
and it would no doubt have come up by stage in the morning
When I got back to Fyan’s Ford the searchers for the girl
had not returned. I was awakened the next morning by a
great hubbub in the house. The history of their search was
that while exploring off the road in the direction I had told
them the young woman went they found her, and something
else, which filled them with surprise and horror. In one of
those fastnesses, half a mile or so off the road, in a gully,
and then into another, which seemed to have been scooped
out of the depth of the former, as it were, and beside a run-
ning stream, browed over by heavy gums and rocks, they
found what evidently had been Moonlight’s camp. There
was the improvised brush-made stable for his horse, and
beside it a mia-mia for himself, which evidently had been
used for some time, as the leaves were withered. Below
this, and close beside the creek, a deep hole, which had evi-
dently once been prospected, but had been lengthened very
lately, for there lay the new dirt beside the old. Near this
they found one of the hotel tablecloths, a carving knife, a
pick, and a lantern, all which articles had mysteriously dis-
appeared lately. This was the result of their search, and
notice of it was sent to the Geelong police. There was only
one conclusion to arrive at: the fellow who had been hang-
ing about their house, and who had so fascinated the girl
as to lead her to brave the loss of a happy home and follow
him, is one of those mysteries I have seen enacted many


times by foolish young women. The police, who had been
patrolling those Salisbury Plains ever since they had in-
formation that he was located somewhere on them, believed
that he had been warned by some confederate of their close
proximity to him, for they had camped in the guise o&
diggers within 500 yards of his haunt the night before. It
was all in a nutshell: the man had seduced the girl, and
knew that she was acquainted with his real character. He
could not free himself of her ; he feared that she would
betray him, and had determined, but for the hand of Provi-
dence through me, to rid himself of her by murder most
foul. He had decoyed her away to meet him on some pre-
tence, and would have effected his purpose, but for the pro-
vidential fact of those constables camping so near which had
caused him to take flight before his vile deed had been com-
mitted.


CHAPTER VIII.—OVERLAND TO SYDNEY—A
PROVIDENTIAL ESCAPE.
Well, after playing the Wallers through, my wife and I
resolved upon a trip to Sydney, and reached there, but in a
way very unpremeditated by us. Whde returning from
seeing the Wallers off by coach I was accosted by a gaily-
dressed man, who, by conversation, I found had some time
ago been a sort of factotum of mine. What actor does not
know how a youth will hang about him, especially if you
have once employed him to carry a bundle of dresses down
to the theatre, and has been taken up into your room ?He
is always on the look-out; he will do anything to get
•behind on the stage. Such an one had this young man been
to me. He had come all the way from the other side of
Deniliquin to be married at Ballarat, his wife’s relations
being resident there. In the evening he called upon me,
and asked would I like to have a trip up to his wife’s home.
She had been a widow in an important dairy business. “Do
come, Mr. Gardiner. There is only one of her relations who
will return with us, and there is an express waggon, with two
good horses, which will take half a dozen comfortably.”
“ Well,” I said, “ go and fetch your wife down to see mine,
and we’ll talk about it.” The result was, we accompanied
them to their home on the banks of the Lachlan. It was a
most enjoyable trip. After being there some time he pro-
posed a run up to the Lachlan Diggings, which had lately
opened. I agreed, and the four of us reached there all
right, having led a regular gipsy life for about a fortnight.
A theatre was opened there, and I played the dog piece for
two or three nights. In a week they returned, and we pro-
ceded on our way to Sydney, having made arrangements
with a man who was going down with a six-horse covered
Yankee express waggon for stores. Nothing could have
been happier than this trip ; it recruited the overtaxed
brain, ar.d conduced much to our health altogether. A most
merciful escape from a very painful accident, and perhaps
death, occurred to me. As we rose to the top of a hill, down


on the other side was a beautiful lake, and on it close to us
was a covey of ducks. From the driver’s seat outside he
looked round to me, and, speaking low, he said, “ Don’t let
the dog out; get the'gun, here’s ducks.” Without think-
ing about its bein» loaded, I quietly jumped out at the back,
and, by a most fortunate coincidence, he had stopped the
waggon, the hind wheel being down in a very deep rut
almost up to the nave ; so to keep one foot out of the mud I
left it on the back of the waggon, and drew the gun towards
me by the muzzle. It exploded, how or by what means I
know not, and the charge went right between my legs, and
most providentially, without one shot hitting me or the
black boy just behind me, but the shot splashed the mud
into his face, and he began to roll over and howl. On
arriving in Sydney I found both theatres in full swing, and
full up. The town life now seemed irksome, alter our gipsy
experience, which appeared to have inoculated us with a
feverish desire to be again at it, and free of the theatre bonds
altogether. So seeing that nothing like an opening could be
expected for some time, I determined to arrange a small
Vaudeville Expedition Company. In a short time this was
done, and we started on an overland trip to Brisbane ; but,
ala*, I very soon found to my sorrow that to run four or
live people, all fond .of drink, was no sinecure. There was
money in the venture plenty, but the drink, and disappoint-
ing the people ruined us. The news travelled before us, and
I was glad when I got to Brisbane, where I disbanded them.
It was a great loss to me, because I had secured the School
of Arts a month before for three consecutive nights. Mr.
Fairfax also had the posters done, and put out for the night
we arrived. They now pleaded very hard for me to play.
No,” I said, “ you have treated me most scurvily. 1 told
you the time would come when you would be sorry. You
have all through done just as you liked ; you know how
money has had to be returned through your drinking and
negligence, and now Ihl do as I like ; you can go, and good
riddance.”


CHAPTER IX.—AN EXPERIENCE WITH THE
“ WIZARD OF THE NORTH.”
I saw by posters at the theatre that the “ Wizard of the
North,” Mr. Anderson, was going to make an appearance as
a dramatic actor in “ Rob Roy.” I was engaged as Dugald.
I remained through the engagement, and had many oppor-
tunities of picking up some of his tricks. The wizard and
great necromancer, Jacobs, arrived, by some unfortunate
mismanagement on the part of his agent, just as Anderson
had commenced his necromantic display. This clash caused
great excitement one against the other, the town was being
billed with all sorts of assertions of what could, would, and
should be done by each of them. Mr. Anderson went so far
as to state on a six-foot poster that he would do, act, and
perform anything the audience might request of him. That
evening his little daughter Julia, who did the clairvoyant
business, had just completed her task—for really it was only
a lesson learnt during the day which made her proficient to
answer all her father’s questions correctly at night. For
example, the child being blindfolded and placed in a chair,
with her back to the people, was asked what the articles
were which her father had collected from the audience. Ho
put the accent upon one particular word, which enabled her
to say what the article in question was. For example, if he
received a penknife, he would say, “ Now, what have I re-
ceived from this person?” That accent on the now was her
cue. “ A penknife, Pa.” “ Well, what has this gentleman
given me 1” Well meant a watch, and so on. He was a
man of infinite resources, and he knew that something
almost unprecedented in the annals of legerdemain would be
required of him following such an advertisement. He had
all kinds of dummies and one or two highly-finished auto-
matic figures—one, the counterpart of his child, very life-
like, which he had prepared for any anticipated emergency,
extremity, conflagration, or plausible accident. On that
occasion fire diet the business, so when the child was
courtseying to the audience to go off, a gentleman in the stage


box got up and said, “ Mr. Anderson, ycuhave announced in
your programme that you will do, act, and perform any-
thing at all which any person in the audience might require
of you. lam going to put your powers as wizard to the
test. This watch I desire you to place upon the reading-desk
of the church, a few paces from this building. I hold the key
of the church, and request that I might find it there within the
space of fifteen minutes.” “ Pass the watch please.—Thank
you.” To Julia who had just made her exit, he called :
“Come back here a moment, I have a pleasant surprise for
you,” (addressing the audience) “ which this gentleman’s
demand has caused me to omit.” Now instead of bringing
the living Julia back he substituted her “ automaton,” and
and making believe outside that the child was adverse to
returning, said: “Come now, Miss, no nonsense!” and
after what appeared to be a struggle between parent and
child, he entered with the figure in his arms, forced it into
the chair and proceeded to blindfold it ; then while turning
to the audience as if about to explain to them the thing she
was about to do, through a hole in the stage a light was
passed (it could not be seen by the people because the backs
of all his chairs used in his performance were solid,
reaching to the floor) the flimsy gauze which was saturated
with spirits, immediately enveloped the figure —which of
course the audience thought was his daughter—in one
volume of flame, Screams arose from amongst the women
in front. Then they cried ; “ Anderson ! Anderson ! look
at your child ! ” Some rushed from the wings with ah
kinds of cloaks and things t.o throw upon the blazing mass,
himself appearing ready to faint with distress and horror ; the
thing is borne off, the father tottering after it wringing his
hands. In a few minutes he returns, pale and agitated, and
returning the watch to the gentleman, hopes he will excuse
him the task allotted to him to perform that evening, as
through that unfortunate accident he will not be able to get
through anything but ordinary business, and hardly that.


“ My poor
Brother’s
PART III
Letter ” in which Mr. and
Mrs.
Gardiner will
introduce
their original Swiss Songs,
with
Finale Duet, “
We Hope
We’ve Pleased You Well.”
At
On
Tickets At...
Admission
CHAPTER X—OUR ENTERTAINMENT.
After making myself proficient enough we determined to
start on the homeward track to Melbourne with just one
musician as an accompanist. For my wife I was inde-
pendent, as I always attended upon her songs with the
concert flute. But he turned out to be a very decent fellow ;
he drank, but never incapacitated himself for business. The
following was our programme :
OUR ENTERTAINMENT,
PROFESSOR GARDINER
as the
Wizard op the Antipodes, Comedian, & Illusionist, and
Mrs. Gardiner s Overland Entertainment,
part I.
Will be introduced the Magic Boxes—Cards—Metamorph-
osed Pound Notes —Ladies’ Rings—Gentlemen’s Watches
—The Egyptian Juggling Trick ; or where do the Eggs
come from ?—Flying Shillings—together with a most novel
and amusing Finale.
PART 11.
Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner will appear in their celebrated
Comic Duets and Funny Dialogues; “The Drunken
Husband’s return” —“Matrimonial Squabbles”—“Con-
jugal Felicity ” expounded in the persons of “ Mr. and Mrs.
Clark,” Mr. and Mrs. Toddles,” &6.—“ The Tear Fell
Gently,” and (comic) “Passage-door Courtship.” by Mrs.
Gardiner—“ The Wife’s Mangle,” and “ The Laughing
Man” (comic) Mr. Gardiner.
Commence at 7.30 Agent.


What that trip did for us will be relate 1 as the incidents
occur. It was, suffice it to say, a series of successes and
failures right through. At Warwick I had to sell one horse
and the waggon, and get a c ivered spring-cart for the other.
I can look back now and see there was a power at work
above mine that was shortening my tether. I By the time
we reached Melbourne we were in a most dilapidated con-
dition ; what with crossing rivers, boggy roads, and want of
feed for the horse, it was indeed an amalgamation of suffer-
ings. And now I shudder to think of the hairbreadth
escapes, that by a merciful Providence we were preserved
through; and yet there are thousands to-day who will
declare that a theatrical life is a most luxurious one, and
that the theatre itself is a great benefit to the community
—that it has done more to moralize mankind than the pulpit.
To that assertion may be replied, it is not so much the duty
of the pulpit to moralize mankind as to teach (rod’s doctrine
of salvation and Christianisation. Let a man once become
thoroughly converted and there will not be much doubt of
his morality. The theatre doubtless is a benefit to one par
of the community, but to that part only who cater for it ana
live by it, and even that is a debateable question. The more
I look into the theatre and its surroundings convinces me
that it is a superfluous structure altogether, and that those
men and women who‘'strut their hour upon the stage”
would be better off, if they employed their lives in trade and
commerce, both for the present life and that which is to
come. It is only those who hold the “ leads ”in the theatre
who are benefitted at the expense of the poor hard worked
actor, who, in my experience, I have hardly ever known able
to achieve a competence for his old days.
I have already said the money I made after leaving the
diggings to enter upon theatrical life again never seem Q d to
accomplish any good ; no matter what venture I put it to
it never returned me any benefit. I had sleeping shares in
Inglewood and Lachlan Diggings, ran the Cricketers’ Hotel
on Inglewood, experimented on many things that seemed to
pay other people, but failed with me. That company which
I formed was nothing but a piece of ‘vaulting ambition which
o’erleapt itself.’ Yes! that company was the beginning of
the end ; I saw and knew at the time when I left the right


way of life to enter upon the wrong again, that I was
rebelling against the Spirit of God, and in doing so, truly
experienced that “ the way of transgressors is hard,” because
I was pinning against the light of my early instructions.
When I think of the many narrow escapes while crossing
rivers, being lost in the bush, upsets, narrow escapes from
bush firee, lost horses, breakdowns, every one of which
calamities began to make such serious impressions upon me
that over and over again I vowed a vow to God that 1 would
throw it all up could I only be released from my difficulties,
and so He did release me by mercifully sparing my life, but
bringing me down to poverty and humiliating me before
those who saw me leave them in self-confident pride. And
the more I go over my experience of the theatre, the more
am I convinced that the days of the Siddons, Elen Faucit,
Kemble, Macready, Charles Kean and other notables of the
old school are over, whose lives of morality were unquestion-
able, and also for the legitimate ploys and comedies of our
best dramatists which they presented to the public, I see
more plainly than ever that the thea tre of to-day is no benefit
to the general community, but rather a curse, and this I dare
assert beyond the power of the most plausible contradiction.
That the theatre is a hot-bed which engenders four distinct
vices, licentiousness, gambling, drunkeness and assignations.
This is not to be wondered at when the theatre provides
these very vices by its evil surroundings of drinking bars,
vile saloons, and questionable characters. And how many
thousands of our youth have been led away by one or all. of
these vices, incurred more or less by attending the theatre,
on to the downward grade, to become depraved, ruined and
lost, besides being responsible for the shortening of the lives
of scores and hundreds of young creatures who are exposed
in the scantiest of habiliments at the coldest and bleakest
time of the year at home; namely, in the Christmas
pantomimes, as has already been remarked. Then again,
the theatre is the very best school or institution presided
over by His Satanic Majesty for the education of our youth
in all kinds of vices, excesses, immorality and depravity,
and yet they say the days are past when the theatre was
corrupt. “My dear sir,” a gentleman was saying in a
railway carriage, the other day to another, “ education is


having a most beneficial effect to elevate and refine the
stage.” Well, whatever education might do in that direction
it is not made manifest in practice, judging by the almost
lewd diagrams exhibited of the opera houffe representatives.
A refined stage does not pay. Any manager extant to-day
who will speak the honest truth can tell you so. The pieces
to draw best are those which ara the nearest to the vicious
and lewd, and the thinner the veil which covers its obscenity
the more it is approved of. “Oh!” they exclaim, “is not
that too utterly utter, you know.” And yet they continue
to go and see it again and again ; and I have ever observed
from the time in May, 1848, that Mr. Stevens wrote a
leading article upon “A Licentious Stage” here in Adelaide,
and for which the management took proceedings against him
for libel and obtained one farthing damages, that the
broadest farces and pieces which admitted the most double
entendre to be worked in met with the greatest support, and
the managers who protested against it amongst the actors
were the most guilty when they played themselves. I re-
member many years ago the London Press agitating for a
thoroughly legitimate theatre to be kept intact for the re-
presentation of nothing but the beauties of Shakspeare and
the pure literature of the greatest dramatists. Mr. Charles
Kean took the matter up some time before he came to
Australia. He had the little Princess Theatre in Oxford
Street newly upholstered behind and before the curtain, and
sent satin bills and embossed cards announcing that the
representations would be of the most select type. Visitors
to the theatre would be admitted by ticket only, and ail the
demi-monde and questionable characters of both sexes would
be excluded. What was the consequence 1 ? After every
effort had been tried, with great loss of money, in less than
four months the theatre was closed for want of patronage,
which shows plainly enough that the real patrons of the
theatre go there not to gain intellectual culture or refined
deportment, but to gratify a sensual and depraved appetite.


CHAP. XL—DOES THE THEATRE MORALISE OR
ENNOBLE THE MIND?
I have read and heard a good deal about the moralising
influence of the stage, but in all my twenty-five years’ expe-
rience I only knew of one individual—she was a woman of
the demi-monde class—witnessing the representation of “ The
Maid of Milan.” The play represents the daughter of
parents growing old in the squire’s service. The young pro-
fligate squire kidnaps the girl off to London, and, having
robbed her of her virtue, leaves her to do the best she can.
This woman’s past career seems to have been of a kind
similar, as it so turned out. She was affected hysterically
and carried out. She became quite a reformed eharacter,
I was informed many years after while on a visit to that
town. A most laughable incident took place the same night
during the representation. The victim is seen crossing a
rustic bridge, at the back of the stage, coming back to her
home, in a very exhausted state. She enters the cottage,
high words are heard within, and the next moment the old
man is seen to push his daughter out, who totters and falls
upon the stage, exclaiming at the same time, “ Is there no
one in the wide world will protect me?” A sailor jumped
up in the pit, and, with stentorian lungs, shouted out, “The
lubberly old ruffian ! Hold on, girl; don’t you die yet.
I’ll help you.” And, before any one could intercept him,
he was over the orchestra and on to the stage. The old
man hearing the commotion naturally put his head out, and
the sailor seeing this tried to drag him out by the hair of
his head, but the old man’s wig came off in his hand, show-
ing his bare scalp ; and, as he held that wig up, looking at it
with an appearance of consternation and bewilderment that
would have made a grand picture for the pencil of Hogarth,
he then turned round expecting to see the girl lying help-
less upon the stage, but saw her holding her sides, shaking
with laughter. How the audience roared, and the actors,
too, at this unexpected innovation on the night’s perform-
ance, and the curtain fell upon such a tableau as was never
witnessed upon any stage. He was very indignant at the
old man while he was being shown out. “ Here,” he said,
giving him his wig, “ Put yer har on again and, turning to


the girl, he said, “ Why, you are all right. What did you
make a fool of a fellow like that fori” I never heard
whether that untoward act of his was the means of moralising
the man. I never saw him again at the theatre, it is true,
as most likely he dreaded the laugh of some of the old
habitues of the place, who would not fail to point him out
derisively to others, and, granting that his keeping away
helped to make a moral man of him, that is only two people
in twenty-five years. But I dare assert that a few years ago
I could have pointed out to anyone men, who when youths,
had been immoralised, by their attendance at the theatre in
one short year, in almost any street in Melbourne. Once
they were young men holding high positions of trust and
surrounded by a circle of friends of whom they were almost
the centre, looked up to by their young brothers, the pride
of their sisters, and depended upon by their old parents to
become their future comfort and blessing in their declining
years, but who, alas, went down to their graves bewailing
the lost one. I have seen these men shunned by their
acquaintance, and so reduced as to carry a banner at half-a-
crown a night in the very theatre which had been the
cause of their ruin. I could one night have shown
you half-a-dozen sons of fathers, high in authority some
of them, and all, or most all of them, God-fearing citizens,
after leaving the theatre go on what they called a “ night’s
spree.” That cab is going to take them to an hotel which is
allowed to be open all night three nights in the week for the
accomodation of the market gardeners, who halt there with
their heavy produce wagons, to refresh themselves and horses.
It was a half temperance house as well; they could obtain
hot coffee, saveloys, etc., as well as strong drink. Often
these and other young swells had rendezvoused there,
annoying the customers and committing all kinds of nuisances
but they reckoned that night without their host, for the
landlord had determined to put a stop to it by requesting
that two constables should be stationed there on these
particular night o . These youths have taken with them a
strong rope, with a hook at one end, which they intend to
fix to a spoke of one of the heavy wagons, and to secure
the other end to any object they wanted to see hauled away.
The constables secure them in the very act and escort them


back to the lock-up, too late for bail ; so there they have to
remain until morning. The magistrate, without the option
of a fine, sentenced the leaders, who were fastening the hook
and rope, to a term of imprisonment, the others were fined.
You can form no estimate of the heart-burning disgrace
indicted upon those parents, nor of the remorse of the
incarcerated ones themselves when left to their solitude.
That is one instance of the benefit (?) the theatre is to the
community. Oh, I could such tales unfold of forgeries,
till robbings, embezzlements, heartburnings, and hearths and
homes made desolate through the evil surroundings of the
theatre, that would “ harrow up the soul and make each
individual hair stand on end like quills upon the fretful
porcupine,” Dr, Talmage writes, “ L >ok at that youth
sitting away at the back there with his hat over his eyes,
coat collar turned up, his desire is not to be recognized, but
he is making himself more conspicuous by this very act.
That syren has been watching him. This is his third night
there, she is getting her bait ready for him and will hook
him to-night literally, for as he still sits there, between the
acts, with his feet upon the seat in front of him, she in
attempting to pass him artfully leaves a hooked pin, bent for
the purpose in some part of his coat the other one being in
her shawl, this, as she moves, pulls the shawl off, and she
manifesting much agitation and surprise as to how it got
hooked in his garment, and is making it more fast in pretend-
ing to take it out. This all leads up to breaking the ice and
a conversation follows. The poison of asps is under her
tongue, how the blood mantles on his cheek. Now they
adjourn to the drinking bar : that glass of wine partaken of,
the Rubicon is passed, and who shall say with what result,”
Kotsbue, in defining character, says, “an Englishman
possesses two currents, the phlegmatic current of the German
and the vivacious one of the Frenchman.” A pair of
sensuous eyes can be made to bring these two currents into
commotion like the back-wash of a steamer, and in its
results can be likened only to a pair of high spirited horses
which having taken fright madly career down that crowded
thoroughfare and if not restrained bring destruction not
only to the occupants of the vehicle to which they are
attached, but others with which it might be brought in


contact. A youth was once engaged by a relation of mine
who was a house valuator and appraiser, to sleep in his office
to protect valuables of a pery costly nature sent to him to
appraise. He was well recommended, but his master
spoke in confidence to the policeman on duty in
relation to it and requested him to keep an eye on the
office, and be would reward him. This place was Sun
Street, Bishopsgate. The policeman in one of his rounds
saw him sauntering up and down smoking a cigar, but on his
return he was not to be seen, and he, supposing that he had
gone inside again, troubled no more about it ; but the youth
had not gone in, he had sauntered round the corner as far
as the City of London Theatre, and the policeman saw him
return with two or three questionable characters, male and
female, about half-past eleven. As soon as they saw the
officer they made off again, leaving the youth alone at the
door. He questioned him as to whether he was acquainted
with them, and he saw that he was one of the “ doubtfuls ”
known to the police, and no doubt a false character had
obtained him the place. The next morning, while sweeping
the front of the office, he saw the policeman speaking to his
master. He was convinced the officer knew him ; a guilty
conscience needs no accuser : the thief takes each bush to
be an officer, and, while the master had his back turned talk-
ing with the officer, he rushed in and took some valuable
piece of plate, and the next thing heard of him was as a pri-
soner in Millbank—another instance of what benefit the
theatre is to the community. If the theatre had not been
there he might have remained honest to his charge, although
he was known to the police, but there he found temptation
by meeting the others. A friend said to me the other day,
“ Then you don’t believe that the theatre is “ mind en-
nobling ?” “Certainly not,” I replied; “but rather
debasing, judging by such representations as the people are
being educated up to to-day.” “ But surely,” he replied,
“ the theatre could be made a school of moral instruction V’
“ Yes, certainly it might be, but you must divest it of its
evil surroundings—drinking bars, vile saloons, and question-
able characters—and foster legitimate drama and comedy,
with the beauties of Shakespeare.” But the Macredy,
Phelps, Kemble, Kean, and Ellen Faucit school is dead, and


a new race of managers and actors have risen up in their
place, trying to cause immorality to appear like virtue. You
need not go out of our own city to see how vitiated the tastes
of theatre-goers have become. Take, for example, two of
the Potter troupe representations given not long ago—to
wit, “ Madame Tosca ” and “ Camille.” Of “La Tosca”
I know nothing, not having witnessed its representation,
but I draw my conclusions from a letter which afterwards
appeared in the Advertiser, signed “ A Mother,” which con-
cluded by saying that youths of either sex who had been
morally instructed could not witness such a vile abomination
without being corrupted. Of “Camille” I can speak from
knowledge, having played in the piece with Madame Durett,
Madame Provost, Mrs. Charles Poole, and others, and how
any woman possessing one spark of delicacy can enact such a
part I cannot understand. It represents a woman being in
league with absolute vileness, and in the actual perpetration
of it with her paramours, and who through her excesses is
attacked with a sickness which proves to be her last, and so
to pourtray this a bed is placed upon the stage, and in night
deshabille she awaits her hourly expected end, gasping, and
tottering to the cheval glass to weep and sigh over her
departing beauty, bewailing, not her sin, but the impossibi-
lity of returning again to her old follies, and so she ends her
attitudinising by falling dead in her attendant’s arms; and
this lewd abomination has just been represented in Melbourne
and Adelaide by Madame Bernhardt, who has received ap-
plause, shouted and howled at her, three and four times
between each act, the theatre in both cities crowded to its
utmost capacity. Now mark how the legitimate drama and
beauties of Shakespeare were received the week after these
vile productions, when Mr. Milne performed, according to
the papers, to miserably poor houses. Just produce any
play which will send women on the stage in scanty apparel to
attitudinise, posture, and grimace to excite the passions, and
you will beat the legitimate drama out of the running
altogether, and that is what the half the theatrical represen-
tations consist of to-day. “Well,” he replied, “ you have
made out a good case, 1 must admit, for 1 witnessed both
representations, and certainly they were not ‘ mind en-
nobling ’ pieces, That’s a fact.”


XIL—DOES THE THEATRE REALLY ENNOBLE ?
And now for an example of whether the theatre is en-
nobling or debasing. The following came under my own
knowledge ;—ln the days of the diggings, when the theatre
was crowded night after night and houses were at a pre-
mium, one two-roomed tenement was to let just below my
studying-room, and where I kept all my “ props” and sun-
dries. The window looked right down into the back yard of
this hovel, for it was nothing better. The people who had
vacated the place had not left it two hours before a dray
appeared laden with chests, boxes, trunks, and belongings,
which I could see evidently were owned by persons of
respectability. Following the dray came a young couple,
and with them a little two-year-old boy. They got what things
they could inside, and with the drayman’s help packed the
others as close as possible, covering them over with a tar-
paulin. On the next morning (Sunday) they came out,
evidently to go to church, for they had books in their hands.
They appeared to be anxious about their outside belongings,
so I hailed them from my window, and told them not to fear.
I should be where I was until they returned, and would see
that no one interfered with them, for which they thanked
me very much. I could not help admiring their frank
English expression and manners, and the dear little fellow
in his quaint attire of small frock and trousers. The next
morning he went out with a portfolio under his arm, and
manifesting in his general deportment a smart, business like
air. This he continued day after day, I wondered what
his vocation was, and my curiosity was soon satisfied. I
had to call at one of the drapers in Burke Street on my way
home from rehearsal one day, and there I saw him displaying
his wares. They were artistically-written tickets of prices
for the people to place on the different articles in the win-
dows. I addressed him; “Oh,” he said, “you are the
gentleman I see sometimes above me, excuse me not know-
ing you out of the deshabille I have always seen you in up
there.” “So this is your occupation V’ “ Yes; just by


way of employing myself and helping to keep the pot boil-
ing, as the saying is. I am by profession a glass Stainer
and emboss writer. “ Well,” I replied, “I am shortly going
to take my benefit, and should be glad if you would write me
out a few showcards to put in the shop windows. Just
“ Gardiner’s Benefit. Tickets obtained here.” “ Are you
an actor, then 1” “Yes.” “ Most certainly I will do them
for you. How soon?” “Oh, weeks yet; you can just do
them at your leisure.” Well, on the afternoon of my benefit
he called upon me for a ticket. He paid me for it, and I
said, “Allow me to present you with one for your wife?”
“Tnank you Yery much,” he said ; “ but she would not go,
and is rather averse to my going. It will be my first visit to
any theatre.” Well, I saw him there. Yes, and again and
again, night after night, and I saw also the effect of it.
Did it ennoble his mind ? Far from it. That smart, dapper
little man did not accompany his wife and child to church
the Sabbath after his attendance every night at the theatre,
and, instead of going to his business regularly, as he did
before, he went just as fancy led him, and came home the
same way, and, to a practical eye, I could see under stimu-
lating influence. His wife sulked ; he resented, and would
go off again. Why ? Because, in going to the theatre he
had met with some of his shipmates and other associates,
whom, if he had stayed away, he would not have met, and
these tempters had beguiled him to join them in their
excesses ; but he continued this down grade many days, if
not weeks, for I forget now, until his poor young wife went
almost distracted. Oh, how I have heard her sob after he
had gone off" each time as though her heart was breaking. I
I sometimes felt as though I would like to clutch the fellow
by the throat. It troubled me this continual strife, so
opposite to the quiet harmony and peace they once enjoyed,
and because I felt myself in some way instigatory, although
I knew I was not to blame for his going to the theatre—l
had not enticed him. I have heard her often wailing her
ejaculatory prayer, and God heard it, and answered. Yes,
she “ cried unto the Lord in her distress, and He delivered
her out of all her trouble.” “Oh that men would praise the
Lord for His goodness and for His wonderful works unto the
children of men.” One morning the postman brought a


letter to me. He said, “ Can you please direct me in rela-
tion to this English mourning-bordered letter ?” “ Not by
name I can’t ; but being off Russell Street, near Lonsdale
Street, it must be one of those two tenements at the back of
this house—there he goes,” I said, “ that’s the man you
want, most likely. I never heard his name.” “Hi !”
shouted the postman, and went towards him, I saw the
man receive it, and a very short time afterwards I went up
to my room to answer my just received missive, and then I
heard them weeping, she hysterically so. “ Poor mother 1
Oh, Charlie, dear Charlie, will you ?” “Yes, I will,” he
replied. “ The very next boat that leaves this, to me,
accursed place shall take us.” “ Oh, you dear, dear boy,
that I thought I had lost for ever. Only for my faith in
God, to whom I have cried day and night, and now to see
how wonderful. Oh God, how I thank Thee! And no
more theatre, Charlie?” “No more, neither here nor any-
where else, Milly, my wife. Oh, what a consummate fool I
have been, to let those fellows lure me from you and this
dear young blossom of ours; but, Milly, I didn’t think my
Milly could sulk?” “Well, there’ll be no more sulking
now’, Charlie; go and get a paper and read the shipping
news.” And in less than three weeks after that conversa-
tion they were on the ocean, homeward bound. The next
picture does not convey such a happy result. This youth
was the son of a printer of a most pronounced religious
character, who would not, on any pretence of emergency or
otherwise, pander to any theatre to do their printing. The
father died, and his successors, who still retained the ser-
vices of the youth, were of a very different calibre. I had
often been deputed by the manager to look over and correct
in his absence the proofs, and when this youth came to the
office one day I could not help being rather surprised, so
different he appeared to the slouching, dirty appearance of
the usual printer’s devil, as he is called. He was smart,
civil, and gentlemanly in his deportment. Once again, some
little time after, I had to look over a proof with him. He
then said to me, “ The lad who used to do your work at the
other printer’s told me he had an admission ticket, renewed
monthly, for Friday nights. Is that so ?” “I am not sure ;
just call the prompter, please, as you are the first one I have


attended upon in this theatre.” “Yes,” he said, when he
came in, “they (meaning the printers) are all admitted free
Friday nights.” “Very well; then let him have a pass.
Have you ever attended to witness a performance before ?”
“ No, sir.” “ Your father would not print for us, so I
thought you hadn’t.” I left that theatre about this time,
but I distinctly remember seeing him, not only on the
Friday night, but nearly every night, before I left. It’s the
same story repeated. If they go once, the glamour of the
theatre’s fascination takes hold, and as true as the magnet to
the needle they go and go. I have never but in one in-
stance known otherwise. I had been lionising a young lady
cousin of mine, one day visiting the Tower and other places,
and at night I took her to the theatre. She had not been
there more than half an hour before she begged of me to
take her away. Well, twelve years after the above I visited
that town again, “ clothed and in my right mind,” having
found the new life, and, while strolling around waiting for
the church bell, and thanking God for His mercies as I
passed some of the old haunts and remembered the evils I
had witnessed there, and in some participated, and that He
had said “ Thy sins and iniquities will I remember no more.”
In the vestibule, coming out, I came face to face with a man
whom I knew directly. He had served us with bread, and
his Sabbath mornings were usually spent in drinking.
“ Hallo, Heger !” I exclaimed ; “ what has done this for
you ?” He replied, “ I could refer you to the Rev. William
Taylor, if he were here.” And I may ask the same question
of you. “ Well, Mr. Matthew Burnett,” I replied, “ was the
instigation, though not exactly my immediate spiritual
adviser.” So, while conversing together upon different
topics, more especially the blessing of the new life, he
invited me to go home to dinner. “ That, lam sorry to say,
I can’t do, having already accepted an invitation ;” and, as
we walked along, in answer to my question had any other
persons known to me been converted under William Taylor,
“Yes, Prosser, the bootmaker; you knew him.” He also
mentioned some few others whom I did not know. “Oh,”
he said, “ you remember that woman who created such a
consternation a few nights before you left, when the
sailor ?” “Yes;” “well she is ouite reclaimed from


her old life and I was just parting with him, after pro-
mising to come to tea, when he said, “ There is a man
coming down on the other side, but don’t look, he will pass
us by at this corner, and I expect to have some vile epithet
thrown at me. You knew him once.” And presently a
man passed us by in dirty habiliments, almost ragged, with
slouching gait, bleared eyes, and debauched, grog-blossomed
visage. “ There,” he said, “ you once knew that man when
a youth as well as you know me, but I don’t hesitate to say
that you would not name him in a week from the resemblance
to any youth you knew then.” “ Who can that man be V*
I enquired. “He is no other than Medina the printer’s
son.” “ Impossible !” “ Yes, it does seem so, but it is no
less true. He is, without exception, the most degraded,
hardened man I ever met amongst the most vile, and I have
seen some, and so have you. He has just come out from
serving a month in gaol for striking his sister because she
would not supply him with money for drink. It took place
nearly opposite her husband’s office. She married Mr.
, the lawyer; you knew him 1” “ Yes.” “ Well, he
witnessed the act, and prosecuted him. He would not have
done it but for his shameless life ; he does not care who he
insults.” “Well,” I said, “you have shown me a picture
this morning which I could never have believed would
emanate from such a character of gentlemanly affability and
almost refinement which I knew that youth to possess; but
what will not drink and inordinate, depraved habits succeed
in bringing a man to if the passions are ungoverned 1”
“ Oh 1” I exclaimed,
“ That man should put an enemy in his mouth
To steal away his brains.
Kow the express image of his Maker,
Should by and-bye become a fool,
Pre.'ently a b-ast I
Oh ! thou invisible spirit of wine,
If there be no other name to know thee by,
Let us call thee devil 1”
These pictures I could continue, but will conclude them with
the following :—A young minister, possessed of great power
as a preacher, became a victim to the seductions of the
theatre, and surreptitiou-ly attended either for assignation,
or that, having gone once just to gratify his cariosity, he


continued to go because he had been fascinated. However,
he was recognised by some one and the mask torn off, and
so depraved had he become that after being dismissed from
his office he committed a criminal offence upon his servant,
was found guilty, and sentenced to seven years’ transporta-
tion. That man’s body-servant, who was living with him at
the time, and who afterwards followed the sea as a calling,
saw him in a chain gang in Launceston. This man, now
advanced in years, is still living, and resides in one of the
suburbs of Adelaide. So you see that the theatre confers no
benefit upon the community, but rather destroys, corrupts,
and spreads misery and disgrace through scores and hundreds
of happy homes by the utter ruin of one or the other of those
composing the family circle.


CHAP. XIII.—AN EVENING’S ENJOYMENT AT
HOME.
I know from what I have gathered that there are many
professing Christian households to-day where the young
people are growing up impatient of control about the theatre,
and whose fault is it but their parents’ own ? They allow
their children’s tastes too much latitude when very young,
and as they grow up there is too little restraint, for in many
instances they are allowed to form their own associates, and
in nine cases out of ten they are volatile, respecting neither
religion nor the advice of their parents. As for filial affec-
tion being found in families, it is almost a dead-letter. In
one house out of half a dozen you don’t meet with it, and in
many cases I have seen a mother defer to a young daughter
whether she (the mother) should do this, that, or the other
in reference to making a purchase. And I know that some
pai’ents have come to the conclusion that it is better to take
their children with them to the theatre while under their
control than that they should plunge into its pleasures after
they had gone out of it. “ Don’t you think it is better?”
was a gentleman’s query to me the other day. “ Well,” I
replied, “ you are only adding to your responsibility by lead-
ing them into temptation, which is easily done, but not so
easily wiped out. If I was at the head of a household cf
young people like yours, just growing up into young man-
hood and womanhood, I should feel quite certain that the
seclusion of the private box would not shelter them from the
pernicious atmosphere that permeates throughout the place,
and I should put my foot down at once. You are jeopard-
ising your own soul and theirs. Provide amusement of your
own. The parlour magic book is an excellent study, and
harmless, for young people. You have no idea what fun
can be got out of it, both for old ami young. Get them to
become interested in some games, such as charades. There
are many things to make home evenings enjoyable, and each
night will be anticipated for fresh results and surprises.
Why, I have seen the most simple thing engage father ■


mother, and children for a length of time. Just simply
stick a penknife into the wainscot, about breast high, lay on
it half a cork, or a third of one ; stand four yards away,
walk towards it at a smart pace, not a creeping one, cover
the left eye with the left hand, and, on reaching the cork,
knock it off, if you can, with the index finger of the right
hand. There must not be allowed any hesitation or stand-
ing still before the cork. It must be knocked off while you
are in motion, and then pass on, or the fun is lost. But
encourage more than anything good, smart, piquant, pure
literature, in dialogue ; or start them on short story-writing,
giving each the same subject. No looking over the others,
and when the allotted time is up—say, twenty minutes for
each—let them send up to father or mother his or her pro-
duction for the prize. It is wonderful how some children
will take on to simple story-writing, if induced by the offer
of a smell prize, which the winner holds possession of until
another competitor secures it by writing a better one. Then,
for the older ones, what a fund of amusement, as well as
artistic taste, can be formed out of a piece of black glazed
paper or calico, cutting profiles of father, mother, brothers,
and sisters. Vases, towers, edifices, spires, animals, birds,
fishes, patterns from window curtains—hosts of things—can
be made by using middling stiff tea paper and black-glazed
and coloured papers. Then lay the sheets which form the
ground in your album, alternately pasting your coloured
figures on as your taste dictates. You can emboss the
edges of your leaves, after you have cut out the width you
fancy for it, by damping some paper and laying it on figured
netting, run a warm flat iron over it, and when dry you can
fill in the indentations with a pen and coloured inks. A
pair of spectacles, by putting a silver paper in to form the
glass and sides, can be formed so artistically that a person
for the first time seeing them would think he could pick
them up, and these albums well filled in would become more
marketable than drawings or leather There are thou-
sands of moneyed people to-day who would pay a very high
price for them, because they could take out the leaves and
frame them to their own tastes. And, boys, you willsearcely
credit what a lot of artistic work and amusement you can
obtain out of a few old corks for architectural designs. You


can pick up plenty going backward and forward to school
every day. You can build any edifice or structure out of
them that suits your fancy ; all you require is a sharp
pocket knife and some bottling wire, such as is used by the
aerated water factories. This is pierced through the cork
while your design is being erected, then each cork is fastened
together with thin glue (Page’s patent liquid glue), and you
can put together a fabric which will last for years. I read
not long ago in the Christian Colonist an account of a poor
labouring man who worked at a design of the Lincoln
Cathedral, which was built entirely out of corks. These
would have cost him £6O, if he had purchased them, but he
picked them all up, and that man was offerel £BOO for it,
which offer he refused. He made a great deal of money by
exhibiting it at the 1865 exhibition in London, with which
he built cottages. The Christian Colonist of June 19th,
1891, contains the whole account of this man’s indomitable
perseverance. Oh, there are hundreds of ways to form a
systematic fund of amusement for the young, where interest
is taken by the parents or older members of the family, that
would keep the youngsters’ minds from wandering away
from home to obtain amusement. I have always noticed
that the father is the great factor in all these kind of things,
if he will only unb md from his reserved dignity now and
then : but there will always be two kinds of homes—the
father who finds relaxation in it amongst his family and the
father who does not. Tne latter sees nothing but vexation
and trouble with the children. He meets them with no
sympathetic kiss of welome. In fact he desires not to see
them at all, and looks upon them as so much goods and
chattels that can be disposed of anyhow or anywhere, so long
as they don’t interfere with his own selfish enjoyment.
41 Mother, how’s this, these children being up ? Am I not
worried enough with business without being pestered when I
come home with these children 1” But his wife is not in a
very amiable mood herself, and thinks that one evening in
the week at least for the family altar is necessary. “John
from one week’s end to another you hardly ever see your
children, except on Sundays.” So the evening paper that he
was about to read has to be put aside until the devotions are
over, which are gone through, one is led to think, without


possessing that happy frame of mind which is required to
commit those children to their Heavenly Father’s care. But
in the other home love is dominant. That latest small
specimen of humanity you can see there in the mother’s
arms, waiting for father at the gate, with all the little “ steps
of staift” about her ; and doesn’t that young man or
woman, as the case may be, get a tossing up. For the rest,
he is no sooner in his chair than they are all over him, and
as soon as the teaboard is cleared away they are all ready for
their romps with father, of course, before he reads for them
to go to bed, and with their united strength they haul him
off his chair under the table. “ We’ve got the big bear now,
mother, and we have just tied him up. He can’t get away
now, and we’ve got to kill him.” “ Oh, no,” mother says,
“ you musn’t kill the poor bear; you will want him to-
morrow night, you know.” bio in return for this forbearance
he gives them a ride round upon all-fours, and bundles them
in a heap in the corner. And now the reading time comes.
u Give father the Bible, and come and be very good while
he reads.” “ And now I wonder which of my little ones can
tell me the most about this book?” And the little toddler
says, “ I know Dtsus was ’orn in Bet’lem and another says
she can say “ Ho, everyone that thirsteth, come ye to the
waters.” And the boy says he knows all his mother’s psalm
“ The Lord is my shepherd.” So like the gentle dew the
truth falls upon their young minds. Not forced I Oh,
don’t force religion upon your children. You need have no
anxiety about the boy or girl who may have to go out into
the world to earn a living from such a home. That boy may
become mixed up in tbe busy world’s contaminating in-
fluences, but only let the first calamity meet him—be it ship-
wreck, lost in the bush, or laid upon a bed of sickness far
away from that dear home—the happy retrospect of it
flashes upon him ; he sees it all to the very minutest thing,,
from the old copper tea kettle that he seems almost to hear
singing on the hob. There the mother’s hand lies upon the
book, but that hand can never again open it. What would
he give to again feel the touch of it upon his aching head?
And there are her spectacles, too, on the old hymn book.
Ah, how he delighted to stand upon the hassock and sing
out of that book with mother ! And that blot on the page,


too, how startingly he remembers that. “ Mother, we sang
that hymn again with the blot on it. How did that come
there, mother ?” “ Some fly or insect has been shut up in
it, dear. Does my Willie know anything about the hymn 1”
“ Yes, mother, I know.”
“ I thirst, thou wounded Lamb of God,
To wash me in Thy cleansing blood ;
To dwell within Thy wounds : then pain
Is sweet, and life or death is gain.”
And the floodgates are now opened, and the praying hearts
emotions go up to that mother’s God. I have just said,
don’t force religion upon your children by setting them tasks
out of the Bible as a punishment. Teach them as much as
you like, both at the family altar and appropriate seasons, to
love God and reverence Him ; that their present life is only
probationary, that if they do not repent they cannot be
saved, and if they die in their sins they will not reach
heaven, and so clear your own souls. I feel what forcing
religion upon achild is, because lamaliving embodiment of the
evil of it, and have had many opportunities of hearing actors
with whom I have been brought into contact on Sunday
evenings in that rendezvous where they used to congregate.
Often the subject of religion would be talked upon. When
one would say, “ Well, I am going to church ; are you, So-
and-Sol” “No ; I had religion forced down my throat, as
the old sailor said, with a handspike, when I was a young-
ster.” “ Yes,” another would remark, “ that was just my
case.”


CHAP. XIY.—FIRST IMPRESSIONS—A HAUNTED
HOUSE.
My earliest impressions were associated with religious
surroundings, and as a family I don’t think any of us were
very much impressed or in sympathy with the religion of our
parents, which, from their point of view, we ought to have
been, as a matter of course, especially my father, who was a
most zealous enthusiast, and tried to force his family to
become partakers in that which he believed in himself.
His efforts signally failed, for this reason—he made it dis-
tasteful by his very rigorousness. Love did not dominate,
but was very much wanting ; in fact, it was short-sighted,
puritanic zeal without knowledge. He saw it in after years
when almost too late. It was onlv a year or two before I
was born that my parents were converted. I have since
learned from the elder ones of the family that before their
conversion both our parents were of a most genial disposi-
tion, but afterwards their natures became quite changed,
father’s especially. He grew morose, repellant, and un-
sympathetic towards his family, exacting, almost tyranically,
religious observances on the part of his children. Mother
seemed to be a complete negative, who just blindly followed
on in the general tenor of her domestic duties, and was
remarkable only for this, that whatever love or affection she
possessed was lavished upon her husband more than upon
the children. In fact, our family was not overburdened
with love. I remembered but one kiss that my father gave
me, and whatever drew forth that extraordinary act I never
knew. It was a very unusual course for him to adopt with
any of us, his general demeanour towards his children being
to inspire fear more than love. This characteristic of my
father’s nature after conversion was only a prototype of
hundreds of the early Methodists that I remember. They
never appeared to me to enjoy real happiness, even in their
worship. They seemed always despondent and cast down •
the general teaching and preaching of the early Methodists
would inspire this. The wrath of God was more than the
love of God, being dominant from the pulpit, and this was


ever the theme that was thundered forth when I was
a lad—God’s anger towards the sinner and his portion in the
lake of fire. Many a time I have been afraid to go upstairs
to bed for fear I might fall into hell before morning. That
greatest attribute of God—love—was very seldom touched
upon, so men and women became morose in their religion,
bearing their own sins, trying to sin less and sinning the
more, because they were not directed enough to the Sin-
bearer, who carried their sorrows and bore their sins in His
own body for them, whom, if they had been taught more of
and trusted in, they would have been made happy instead of
miserable. My first thoughts are of a haunted house super-
stition, which reigned supreme fifty years ago, especially in
the country parts of England. My father was in the coach-
ing line. The company with which he was connected
necessitated his residing half-way between the two destina-
tions. Hatcham was the name of the village, and a house in
every way adapted for the business stood there unoccupied,
but with the reputation of being haunted. No person or
family had lived in it for years. This house was offered to
my father, rent free for three years, by the owner, who, if he
would undertake to reside in it for that time, would have it
cleaned, renovated, and made habitable. Father closed
without hesitation with the offer, and one month from that
date we became the occupants. I was not quite three years
old at this time, and father did a foolish thing, as he had to
admit afterwards, in not making mother a confidant of the
circumstances and reputed character of the house Father
was a very impulsive man, and entered upon this transaction
without consulting his family or anyone else. In fact, it
appears he was sceptical towards the nature of the house,
and thought, no doubt, he was doing right in waiting with
much curiosity the issue of events. They very soon deve
loped—sooner, I expect, than he anticipated. Mother was
made acquainted by the neighbours, and a scene followed
which caused great discord. This was a source of much
unhappiness ; the children older than myself, averaging from
eight, ten, and fourteen, became frightened to be left at night,
or go into any of the different rooms unless together. They
had learned at school all about the house being haunted, and
the knocking every twelve hours that was heard at one par-


ticular door up in the old club room. There was no cessa-
tion to it while we resided there. That knocking commenced
as regular as eleven o’clock came, morning and night, and
caused mother a great deal of anxiety. Father at last
decided to turn this old club-room into a Methodist Chapel.
There was no cause at Hatcham. The few members who
lived there, about fourteen, used regularly to go to New-
bury, nearly two miles, and thus see if this evil spirit which
haunted the place could not be driven away by spiritual
worship. The minister of the circuit, the Rev. Mr. fSutliffe,
was communicated with, and the wish of my father was
adopted. The cause was formed and a plan issued, as
soon as necessary alterations were effected. Young as I was
I recollect that Sunday morning opening. I can see the
crowd coming up the broad stairs from the passage while
leaning over the bannisters. Crowded 1 Yes; curiosity
more than devotion was the cause, no doubt. More than
half the village knew about the knocking at eleven ; and it
came ? Oh, yes ; only not quite so loud. I believe it was
determined upon when the hour arrived to give out—
“Jesus, the name high over all
In hell, or earth, or sky ;
Angels and men before him fall,
And devils fear, and fly.”
Well, the cause prospered ; the usual meetings on week
evenings were carried out, and at the end of the first year
father gave a social supper after the anniversary services, as
many people had come a long distance. And now an
incident occurred which caused a sad falling off in the
attendance, which soon became smaller by degrees and beau-
tifully less. The occupants of the next house were of a
worldly nature, and, of course, bitterly opposed to religion in
any form, especially in such close proximity to them. The
head of the family had hung himself a short time before we
came to Hatcham, and a ghost story was in circulation about
him. The sensational part of this suicide was that the man,
after getting out of bed at two o’clock in the morning (sup-
posed to be in the horrors through drink), went straight to
the woodhouse and hanged himself. His wife saw him go,
and, knowing his state, went to look for him, and found him
hanging from a beam, and a man (so she declared) in the act


of cutting him down, who said, “Run for a doctor, quick.”
This statement she made at the inquest, and vouched for it.
She had never seen the man before, and wondered at his
presence, and was greatly istonished on her return with the
doctor that he was gone, and the body not cut down, which
she had told the doctor had been done. As the man, who,
she said she could recognise amongst a thousand, could not
be found though every search was made, it was circulated
and believed that it was his Satanic Majesty who played
that important part. But, to cap this, the next day follow-
ing this act of self-destruction, a girl had been sent to the
house for a pound of candles. (It was a candle-making
business which Hales had carried on.) The mother of the
girl said to her, “Is the inquest overl” She didn’t know.
“ Who served you ?”’ “ Mr. Hailes ! M “ Why, he is dead ;
you know that.” “Well, whether he is dead or not, he
served me ! When I knocked on the counter somebody on
the other side of the glass door, which was open, called out,
* What do you want V I told him ; and Mr. Haile j , in his
white apron and white sleeves, as he always is, brought them
to me, and I left the sixpence on the counter, and came
away.” So, ghost, mvstery, and sensation was dominant in
Hatcham, and was magnified in a most alarming degree.
Well, this Hailes’s family kept a large dog, who was made the
perpetrator of a most abominable hoax ; but it was more
than a hoax, it was a reality. To make this plain, the
reader must imagine the ceiling of the clubroom, or chapel,
removed. A view then was presented of the three sides of
the square, which were domitories, and the fourth a landing-
stage from the staircase. Running parallel with the left
side, supposing the person looking up stood facing the street
window, was a corridor of the other house (Hailes’s), which
was used for drying “ dips,” or candles; the whole would
present a most dilapidated, unsightly appearance. As the
rooms had not been used for years, the partition on the cor-
ridor side had been broken down, so that the children had
free access for ingress and egress, and on Sundays or any
other time when worship was going on, some louts of boys
got in there ; the elder ones, who were without exception
most depraved, and it is supposed that these boys, who often
disturbed the service by singing and shouting, had got this


dog up there, and on this particular night had thrown some-
thing on to the ceiling, which was composed of lath and
plaster only, for him to fetch, which he would do. He sprang
on to the ceiling and fell through right on top of the well-
spread table, bringing down with himself laths, plaster, and
volumes of dust. The consternation can only be imagined, it
cannot be described. The dust, the accumulation of years,
was blinding and suffocating; the women screamed and
fainted ; the men, trying to get away from their seats, fell
over the women, and tumbled upon each other. Of course
everything was confusion worse confounded. The dog, it
appears, was quite unscathed, the ceiling being low, and was
helping himself to the viands, which he had knocked over and
destroyed. This catastrophe brought the cause to an abrupt
close in that house, though it was carried on elsewhere ; and
father soon cleared out of Hatcham, as the Great Western
Railway was fast progressing, and pushing the stage coaches
off the road. From my home to my apprenticeship was a
jump from the fryingpan into the fire. So far as forced religion
was concerned, my master was a hard puritanical Methodist,
and bigoted to the last degree. There were seven appren-
tices and two shopmen. Every Sunday morning the order
was to go up to the nursery and find the lessons for the day,
and wait for him. This was immediately after breakfast ;
the same duty after dinner ; three times to the chapel,
evening piayers, and to bed. Now, this forcing of religion
upon youths who had been all the week confined to the shop
from seven o’clock to half-past eight at night was wrong ;;
they required some relaxation ; and if the master had said,
Perhaps some of you would like to take a walk this beautiful
morning ; don’t let there be any unseemly conduct; remem-
ber it is the Sabbath day, and return in time for church, that
man would have been a witness for Christ, and shown that
the religion he professed was something to be enjoyed
whereas thus forcing it, caused the lads to rebel, and I believe
most of them became depraved worldlings, myself included ;
and I date all my downward career to it. Fancy a child of
seven or eight years old being set to learn half a dozen, or a
dozen verses out of the Bible in a given time, and receiving
a smart slap, or going without a meal, if the le a son was not
learnt properly. It just excites contempt in the children’s


mind for the Word of God, which I have often looked upon
with distaste, and almost terror. The heads of both my
homes, ray own and my apprenticeship home, had declared
that, with Joshua, “they and their house should serve the
Lord,” but made a most lamentable failure in trying to force
the young people under their control to join with them.
Love and kindly admonition alone can accomplish that. The
whole five years I was under that roof I had but one fort-
night’s holiday ; and on the Sunday was taken to hear the
celebrated Wm. Dawson, familiarly called Billy Dawson, the
Yorkshire farmer, whom his dress represented more than that
of a minister. Top-boots, long square coat, and broad-
brimmed hat completed his general attire. After the preli-
minaries of the service were got through by the “ pastor,”
he came forward to the desk and, stooping over it as though
to look down a well, he commenced as though addressing
somebody down in it, “ Man, what are you doing ? Do you
hear 1 Fire ! Won’t that arouse you 1 Do you hear me ?'
What are you doing slouching in that boghole of mire and
clay and filth 1 Fire ! ! Do you hear ? Don’t you feel
yourself sinking fast 1 I can see you are sinking—do you
hear ? FIRE !! ! Put away that gin-glass and pipe, and
come up.” Then, as though talking to himself and evincing
the greatest consternation—“ Poor man ! poor man !he is
sinking fast—he is stupefied. What’s to be done? Fire t
—he is becoming engulfed, and will soon be where the
worm dieth not, and th ejire is not quenched ! Here !
come up out of that filth—you are sinking, man.” And, as
though hauling some one up hand over hand, “ There ! —now
you are right. For he drew him up out of the horrible pit
and miry clay, and set his feet upon a rock, and established
his goings. Glory to God !” And that mass, which all this
time had been kept on the very tenterhooks of excitement,
as if with one voice, shouted in response, “ Glory to God !”
And that was his text and the way he preluded it. Then,
looking straight at the people, he would say, “ We’ve got the
imaginary man up ; let me draw out from amongst you a
few real ones. You ” —as though pointing at some one, but
really none in particular, only conscience was awakened—
“ you ! —yes, you are in the mire ; come out of it—do you
hear ?—that’s right”—as one or another began to move —


“ follow these men ; they will lead you into Christ’s hos-
pital, where you will find the Great Physician waiting to
•cleanse you, and heal you, and place your foot upon the
Rock, and establish your goings in a new life !” And, as he
went on preaching—pshaw, there was no preaching at all
about it—the man had simply come there to do his Master’s
work—to save souls ; and he did it faithfully ; he just
weeded out the unsaved ones with the mightiest power that
I have ever seen delegated to a servant of God ; some times
in the deep-toned sympathy of a weeping father for his son,
and then would thunder forth, with all the majesty of a
divine law, the retributive justice of an offended God. I
am now sixty-eight years of age, then I was about fifteen,
and I can see that man in imagination still, and hear that
cry of Fire !as plainly as on that day. With a plastic
■nature ready to yield to anything, oh ! that I had had
«ome one then to whom I could have gone for sympathy.


CHAPTER XV.—A JEWESS BAPTISED INTO-
THE CHRISTIAN FAITH.
Whilst sketching the peculiarities of some of the actors, I
left out one who was without exception the veriest little
humbug and most self-conceited man I ever met with. The
characters he most monopolised were of the Lord Dundreary
type, idiotic boys and the like. Wc were one day sunning
ourselves outside between the parts, listening to the excited
conversation of two evidently converted coloured men. They
were, it seemed, in argumentive dispute about some
debate or lecture. One of them had attended the night pre-
vious. The first that I heard of it was, “ Nonsense, broder ;
you might as well tell me, or try to delucidate, dat dis world
does not devolve upon his own axletree.” “ Well, sar, I can
tell you with certainty dat dis worl’ does not devolve upon his
own axletree, and can prove it!” “What?” “ Yes, sar ;
dat has been a question I hab studied long time ; an’ when
I lived on old Boss Brown’s ’state, one cotton harvest, dey
was liftin’ off de roof of dat ole hut wid dar shoutin’, one
agen de oder about wedder dis worl’ went round upon his
own axletree or stood still, and the thought came to me how
I could find dat thing out for myself : so I went out to de
wood-heap and pulled out a long stake of wood, and wittled
de bofe ends, and I stuck one end into de groun’, and on de
top end I shoved de neck of a bottle. Now, I said, If I
finds dat first thing in de raornin’ all right, and standin’
right up, den I shall know wedder de worl’ goes roun’ or
stan’s still; and in de mornin’ dar was dat stake and bottle
jest as I left him. So, sar, I can prove to you, or anybody,
dat dis worl’ does not go roun’ upon his own axletree, but
stan’s still.” “ Well, what do de worl’stan’upon den ?”
“ Upon a rock, sar.” “ Den, what do dat rock stan’ upon?”
“ Stan’ upon anodder one, in course.” “De worl’ stan’ upon
a rock, and dat rock stan’ upon anodder rock, an’ you say
dat rock stan’s upon anodder one ; den, whar do de rocks
end ? Say, why can’t de worl’ stand upon de earth alto-
gether ?” “Cos de worl’ would fall through.” “Well,
what do de bottom one stan’ upon?” “ Stan’ upon nothing,


sar ; dat rock am de rock Christ Jesus; an’ if you keep
your feet upon dat rock always, you will be safe.” “Lord
Dundreary,” as he was called, said to the man, “ Ah, fellah”
—he was always acting either on or off the stage —“can you
tell me how—ah ! positively ah !—the fellah is to keep his
feet upon the rock if it is at the bottom 1 !” “ Yes, sar. By
continuing instant in prayer, which I recommend to you,
to get your feet firm on dat rock, sar.” “Ah ! positively ’pon
honor, now and for evermore, amen.” And he was con-
tinually tailing off his remarks that way, which he, poor fool,
thought was very funny. In that company, Gingal and
Raynor’s, Castlemaine, was a Jewess, and, without exception
one of the handsomest I ever saw ; she was Amazonian in build
and proportion, yet possessed every symmetrical contour and
deportment so graceful, that her largeness in figure was not
so very noticeable until you saw her beside a smaller speci-
men of humanity. She possessed one deformity ; one of
her pedal extremities was manufactured out of cork, but she
manipulated this false appendage so well that few would
have known it was there. There certainly was a slight halt-
ing peculiarity in her gait, but it was more piquant than
otherwise ; if royalty had possessed it, it would have been
aped. She was very sensitive over the deformity, and I be-
lieve only her most intimate friends knew of it. She was a
most lady-like person with a countenance very expre-sive.
She was without a relation in the world that she knew of, the
one who had reared her had died and left her pretty comfort-
able. Her three impersonations were Ellen McGregor,
Lady Macbeth, and Mrs. Malaprop. What endeared her to
Manager and Company was she never stood upon her dig-
nity as a “ lead,” but would give her aid to the Manager for
any small character if required. Her life was pestered con-
tinually by model hunters and sculptors but all to no purpose.
Well, this woman just threw her affections upon that little
profligate; he was what you might call a pretty man, and he
knew it. He had been reared by an uncle and aunt, who
were pronounced Baptists, and had religiously instructed
him. It was a source of great sorrow to them, his taking to
the stage ; well the fellow treated her love for him in the
most cavalier manner, sometimes even rudely, but she never
wavered, although her friends tried to persuade her against


him, but warn her as they might of his delinquencies and
what she would suffer, it was in vain. And it all came to
pass as predicted, but oh, how many foolish women I have
seen infatuated in the same way. Well they were to be
married, but the uncle and aunt put their veto upon it and
warned him to expect nothing from them, unless she abjured
her faith and was baptised into the Christian faith. She did
not demur a moment and if they had stipulated that she
should carry him, or wheel him to church in a perambulator
she would have done it, such was her blind infatuation for
this Hop o’ my Thumb, who was not half her size. Of
course we all went to witness the ceremony, which was spe-
cially appointed, in the afternoon. When the two lady
attendants brought her out robed for the font, they passed
her down to the minister, receiving her into the water. He
was a very strong-knit man, not robust, and there was much
speculation whether after letting her under he would be able
to raise her up again. “ Hallo ! what’s up ?” This from
some of the sight-seers and youths in the gallery, who, seeing
all the actors getting out of vehicles, and going into church,
o£ course must follow What was up, indeed ! Why, the
specific gravity of the legs was not equal, and the cork was
asserting its natural propensity to float in water. After a
great deal of shuffling and sliding on her part, and holding
on to the pastor like grim death, he got her into position,
wondering, no doubt, all the time at the woman’s antics.
He whispered something in her ear, which she told us after-
wards was, “ Get your feet well drawn in under you when I
let you down, and you will aid me to raise you, for you are
pretty heavy.” But it was all no use ; he let her down, when
up went the cork leg and knocked him down. Such a splash-
ing and spluttering; sometimes one head was seen, some-
times the other. She clutched him all the time. Of course,
plenty of willing hands went to their resue when they saw
something very unusal was being enacted, and they were
fished out almost breathless, and in a very limp state. Well,
they were married, and went off for a short honey-
moon tour. On arriving at their first intended halt-
ing place, to the open mouthed west-country hostler he
said, “now then young biped release this quadruped from the
vehicle, render to him u sufficient quantity of [farinaceous


food, and as soon as the aurora bursts forth with all its re-
fulgency upon the horizon replace the quadruped in the ve-
hicle, and your just claims fellow shall be liquidated, posi-
tively pon honour, now and for evermore, amen.” The
landlord on meeting the hostler leading the horse and trap
up the yard said, “ who have you got arrived now John.”
“ Blest if I can tell'ee master,” he replied, “ I can't make
nothin’ on him, he said summut about a ‘roarer bustin ’ but
I think he must be a furrin parson, cos the only thing I
could understand from un was, now and for evermore.
Amen.” “Ha! ha ! come and I will introduce you to them.”


CHAPTER XVI.—A TEMPERANCE LECTURE,
A few months after being made a G.T. at the Mutual Help
Lodge, Sandridge, I received the following :—“ Temperance
Hall, Ru»sell-street,Melbourne, 3rd Nov., 1875 : Mr. Gardner,
Dear sir—l am instructed by the committee of the above
society to write you to deliver a short address on Tuesday
next, the 9th instant, at 8 o’clock, at the weekly temperance
meeting, in the Temperance Hall. Trusting to have your
assistance on that occasion, I remain, dear sir, yours faith-
fully, Tnos. Ferguson, Sec.” Usually three persons are
programmed for these addresses, twenty minutes each. On
that occasion one man spoke capitally on thrift, warning
those who, by good fortune, had become possessed, by gold-
digging, of more money than had been customary for them
to possess, not to squander it upon luxuries ; that money
was useful, not useless coin to be thrown away upon anything
or everything that gratified the eye or taste, especially where
children were numerous, as many unwittingly cultivate a
taste and spirit of extravagance which would render their
future very distressing, should reverses set in, &c. The
other man then stepped forward. He was humour personified.
What an actor he would have made. He took from under
his coat a square gin bottle, and from the tail pocket a wine-
glass ; looking round to see if anybody was observing;
then he noddfd and winked at the audience, smacked his
lips, and prepared quite systematically to draw the cork ;
then taking another look round, he came forward, with bottle
in one hand and the glass in the other, as if about to pour
it out; then to the audience, That’s how it used to be
when I feared the old woman would drop in unexpectedly ;
but, thank God, friends, that sort of thing is all over. What
a blessing ! Well, this is not an empty bottle, and I’d like
to hear from you a few guesses of what you think it con-
tains. To this invitation all sorts of imaginable and un-
imaginable liquors were shouted. It does not contain any
liquor, friends, though it once used to contain one pint of
beer a day ; now it contains three hundred and sixty-five


threepenny bits, paid last year for those pints of beer, which
amounts to £4 11s. 3d. If you can speak favorably at all
about a man’s temperate habits, it is certainly of that man
who partakes of only one pint of beer a day, and yet you see
the result of not spending threepence a day upon that which
you and I can do without —£4 11s. 3d. Now, just fancy
yourself being very, very short of funds ; your children
require clothing, your wife a dress, and yourself a suit of
clothes, and yet you say, I have not exceeded my solitary
pint of beer, so no one can accuse me of extravagance in
liquor ; but look at what you have lost by that one pint a
day, £4 11s. 3d. Which would you rather have to-day, the
miserable pints of beer, which have done you not the slightest
good physically or otherwise, or the amount which has been
paid for them, that this bottle contains'! Well, I will relate
to you the incident which induced me to give up my pint of
beer, and hope it will have a like result upon you. Twelve
months ago yesterday my mate left me to go to a brother at
New Zealand. We had been working in the Brunswick
quarries together ; so this day I had to go alone ; my wife
Jenny had put up my lunch and a threepenny bit, as usual,
on the over night, for she is the banker of what I earn. On
arriving at my work I noticed three new hands put on, a
very old man and, as I soon found out to be, two stout
grown sons. When the time-bell rung the old man fixed a
billy upon three stones, and pushed some fuel under, and
started the billy boiling. I squatted down on my usual stone,
and commenced my dinner. In a few minutes the old man,
who was only a short distance off, sung out, in a west-
country dialect to me—“ Say, be you drinking beer ?”
“ Yes. I always have a pint of beer for my dinner.” “ Do’e
think it does’e any good V’ “Of course; freshens me up
and makes me work better.” “You be right there, it will
make ’e work, and keep ’e at it too. It have kep’ me at it
fifty yearn, instead of the last twenty bein able to sit down.
Ibeat it now at seventy yearn. All my sons here, who be
scholards, they be, and sons of temperance too, asked me one
day how many pints o’ beer I drank in a day all through up
to my age, which was then sixty, and I told ’em three pints
a day, never less sin I were twenty year oT; they reckoned
it all up and told me only one pint would ha’ been £4 11 s. 3d.


a year, but three pints was over £l3, and in the forty years,
if I had saved the cost of the beer, that I should have more an
£SOO. That were ten year agone, and I aint had none sin.
Thee take my advice, and try an do without un.” Well, I
said to myself while returning home, I have heard some
lectures on temperance, but that’s the most practical one I
ever listened to. My pint of beer a day, £4 11s. 3d, a
year. I must reckon that up, it can’t be ; but reckon as I
would I could make nothing else of it. Well, well, I said,
only to think. I tossed about a good deal first part of the
night, but as soon as I resolved what I concocted to do, I
went to sleep. In the morning, of course, my bottle, three-
penny bit, and dinner were ready as usual. Now, in the shed I
had an old tool-chest, and knew that Jenny, if she was
fossicking about for anything ever so, would never go there ;
so I made a place for my bottle, and dropped into it my first
threepenny bit. Jenny not finding the bottle was nothing,
because she knew that sometimes I left it at the public-house
to call for as I went along; and so each morning I con-
tinued to drop it in. If she put coppers I changed them
for the bit. I told Jenny last night I should not want any
dinner put out for the the morning, as I had other business
to do. So this morning I came down, started the fire, and
took the table-cloth off, and went out and shook my three-
penny bits into tbe clotb, brought it in and spread them all
over the table. I had only just accomplished my task when
I heard Jenny coming down. I stepped outside, leaving a
little space of the door open to watch. First she gazed
with amazement, then she lifted one, then another, seemed
bewildered ; then she screamed out, “ Jock, w’ere are ye,
nion, eh ! my conscience, what in the world can it be ? I
was dreaming o’ siller the whole night, and now it is spread
all over the table, Jock, man, where are ye 1 ” And, when
I told her the history, she hugged me more than she ever
did in our courting days ; for Jenny had never known the
taste of liquor herself, nor any of her family. “ Well, Jock,
we’ll have three sides of this bottle covered with polished
cedar, and on the front, painted in gold letters, the
‘ Fruits of self-denial,’ and it shall retain not only its pre-
sent contents, but we will add to them until it is full.”


CHAP. XVII. INORDINATE INDULGENCES—
THE SCEPTICAL MISER.
Inordinate pleasure doesn’t pay ; it uses up the vitality
quicker than hard labor on insufficient food ; for this reason
it diseases the vitals, which manual labor does not. Although
the former is fed upon every luxury, it is the luxuries which
disorganise the vitality, and leave the germ of future disease of
brain, liver, and kidneys ; whilst the laborer’s vitality is only
lying in abeyance awaiting resuscitation only, which a better
quantity of food will bestow. I have witnessed the above
to be true. A party was formed during recess, ten days’
leave, eight of us altogether. Everything w'as cut and dried.
Day first, picnic ; day second, boating excursion ; day
third, races and assembly ball; day fourth, well, I forget,
but there were only three came up to the trysting p’ace for
starting; sickheadaches, enervation, and general used-up-ness
were the order of the day—amongst the ladies especially ;
that’s the devil’s “ boghole ” for inordinate pleasure. The
“tippler” is another follower of Satan, one of his beat, but
who treats him, of all others, I think the most scurvily.
You see a man never thinks himself a “ tippler,” and scouts
the very idea, when he sees a drunkard staggering along or
trying to steady himself up against the proverbial lamp-post,
that ever he’s going to be such a fool as that! Amongst his
companions he puts on great side about what he has done
and can do yet! and ever intends to do—that is, to limit
himself to a certain quantity, just enough to do him good,
he says. “Now, you fellows don’t know how t«> drink! I
do ! Three glasses a day suffices me. It is very rarely I
partake of the fourth. Of course there may come exceptions
when meeting an old friend, or on some other particular
occasions.” Just so, my friend,! have both seen and met
you before, and after a few months you have not required a
friend, or anything particularly extraordinary to prompt
you to partake of an extra glass, and the devil, who is gloat-
ing over the man’s increasing propensity lures him on to
“ just another,” till at length the man becomes a slave to


“just another,” and at last he drops him into the “ bog-
hole ” of delirium. Haven’t I seen it? I believe there have
been more pros, cons, controversions, and arguments about
drink than anything else in the world, I mean in relation to
•conquering the propensity at any time they choose, whether
they ever had been intoxicated or not. The fact is, it just
amounts to how many times a man has been intoxicated.
The man who goes to bed semi-intoxicated every night stands
the worst chance of all in being able to conquer it, his blood
is so impregnated with alcohol. But a youth says,
My old father and mother, both drink, and have done so
since I can remember. Well, did you ever see them drink
immoderately? No. Then they could give up without the
slightest inconvenience so far as hankering after it is con-
cerned. Not so the man who is always imbibing at any hour
•or all hours of the day. They, your parents, never having
been otherwise than temperate, cannot understand the suffer-
ings of the confirmed drunkard when deprived of drink sud-
denly. If he is travelling and accidentally becomes deprived of
it by breakage or otherwise, he will go after it; if there is no
hotel on before within twenty miles, he will saddle up and
ride back to the one he left ten miles behind ; and any man
who has been used.fo drinking every day more or less, if he
•gives it up, at any time afterwards, if he should drink one
glass the craving comes over him for another. I took some
brandy once, after being an abstainer for years, to try and
conquer pain ; it nearly conquered me, and will, whatever is
said about it, bring back the desire for it little or much.
.Any man whoever he is, I care not if he has been a daily im-
biber for five or six years and a total abstainer for the same
period, he cannot drink a glass and be able to say, I don’t
care for another or any more ; he will have a craving that is
more torturing than can be described. How it is to be
accounted for is not within the limits of my knowledge,
'but in every case my experience has shown me it is so. I
don’t think I could enumerate a total abstainer during my
time in the profession. Temperate men I have known,
One lived next tent to me on Bendigo, on the “ Mechanics’
Institute ” ground, which they let at sixpence per foot; and
actors found the tent life more convenient than boarding-
house or hotel, Nothing could induce that man to exceed


three glasses. Coercion or pressing were alike lost upon
him during the two years I was his neighbor.
Of the “leads” you can only sometimes go by report, which
leaks out that that missive which came to the manager,,
containing a doctor’s certificate of the indisposition of so-and-
so, which will necessarily incapacitate him from appearing
that night, but who, if you could have been admitted, would
find the indisposition accounted for by a continuation of that
carousal which commenced last night, with half a dozen or
so choice spirits, including ladies ? Of course, on the next
morning, when friends call to enquire after his health and
offer their sympathy, the patient, by the doctor’s aid, can be
presented as a respectable convalescent from that severe
attack of cold 1 And it is a proverbial fact the greater the
man’s talent the less abstemious he becomes. “ Stars,” who
possessed none—and in the early days nearly every individual
actor? or married couple came out as “ stars”—they had de-
termined upon that way of making money; real adventurers,
nothing else, possessing not the slightest knowledge of stage
minutiae, but who, having been placed upon the top rung of
the ladder, either by influence or money paid to the design-
ing myrmidons at home, who advertise their capability to
make any lady or gentleman proficient in one month to take
leading parts in any theatre after having studied them ; and
some of these dupes came out expecting to crush the colonial
actors into subservience, and to astonish them with their
mighty talent 1 but, alas, met with grievous disappointment,
utter failures ; and, poor wretches, many of them took it so
to heart that they drank to excess, their pride not allowing
them to fall into the subordinate and climb by experience to
the summit they had fraudulently taken possession of. One
of these men came to take us by storm in the character of
“ Richard the Third,” and he did so literally if shouting,
raving, and “ tearing a passion to tatters” constituted its
representation. He so exhausted himself that, when his
strength was most needed for the sword combat with Rich-
mond on the field of Bosworth, he made a most lamentable-
defence, and fell without being thrust through. He had
with him a youth, either an attendant or relative, who was to
sustain the part of “ Catesby ;” he had been tutored on the
voyage no doubt, for he had the text all right at rehearsal,.


but it was plain to be seen he was a complete novice, and
had never stood in such a position before. When night
came the poor fellow was in such a state of excitement and
perturbation that anyone could see something unusual would
take place, and it did. When Richard exclaimed “ Who’s
there V ’ in response to a knocking given by the prompter,
“ Catesby” has to step hastily on to the stage and say, “ ’Tis
I, my lord. The early village cock has thrice done saluta-
tion to the morn ; your friends are up and buckled on their
armour but, in his flurry and consternation, he rushed on
exclaiming, “ ’Tis I, my lord. The early village cock ! n
and there stuck. Then Richard’s venomous wrath knew no
bounds ; he clutched the poor fellow by the throat, and
shouted, “ Go back to your dunghill, thou ill-omened bird
and, as Artemus Ward would say, he “ wented,” and was
never seen again, or Richard either, in that theatre. The
unbeliever passes through his life more untramelled by his
master the devil than any other of his fellows, I think, for
this reason, he so strenuously and earnestly tries to do his
master’s work in season and out of season. Only let him
hear religious conversation going on in “ railway carriage,
street, or train,” he is bound to intrude his conversation if
he possibly can, startling them with the abrupt question, “ Do
you believe that rot 1” and, by artful innuendo, draws the con-
versationists out of themselves to listen to his rhetorical
display 1 They not having answered him, and wisely so, but
are now listening to what he is saying to others—“ Yes, I
know your Bible declares that man to be a fool who says there
is no God ; but who is the biggest, you or I, to think God,
or any other supreme being, could put this magnificent world
together in six days ; pshaw ! I would sooner believe in
Darwin a thousand times, or that this world had evolved
from an atom millions of years ago. There would be some
sense in that, because you know how dust accumulates, and
how sandhills will form which eventually becomes islands
by choking up the mouths of rivers.” “Now, hold on,
friend ! Where did the rivers come from to be choked up V r
“ Why, by the rain, of course.’’ “And how came the rain,
then ?” “ Why, by the natural provision of nature.” “ What’s
that; what is nature anyhow ?” “ Why, nature is nature,
of course ; it is all around us.” “ What did it grow out


of ;it must have had a birth ?” “ Nary bit, my friend ;
nature has always been nature, and always will.” “ But it
must have been created to be all around ; nothing can exist
without a birth or creation. You believe, you say, that
this world was evolved from ah atom ; who formed the
atom ?” “ Oh, that’s too insignificant to talk about.” “Is it ?
well, sir, unless you'can explain to me how that atom was
formed and the nature shed around us, as you correctly say
it is, and ’which I know a great Creator, God hims-df, is
behind both, please address your conversation to some one
else, because 1 have learnt by experience that you cannot
bring proof to bear upon your arguments.” They are bold,
for this reason—to them the Bible is a sealed book ; they
gather all they know from the leperous papers
which are published and disseminated by gross, impure
minds, deriding the Word of God, some of them, for no
other motive than to make themselves conspicuous, for let
me tell you, T have never met with an honest infidel yet
ihey exist just to poison the atmosphere around them
deriving no benefit but that which self-aggrandisement affords’
them. There is not one who has travelled long railway rides
the week together but knows the nuisance of these pestering
cavilling-mongers. It generally emanates from abo )k,
especially if it is not a glaring yellow-backed one. The book
is out of hand on the seat only a minute, and the man, who
has watched his opportunity to get up a c mtroveivy, will
reach over and say, “ Something good, eh ? Allow me to
look 1” “ Certainly.” “ A minute or two elapses, and then
it is thrown down with a—“ Pshaw ! Rot!” But as I don’t
mean him, through me, to air his empty nothingness, I just
coolly pick it up and go on reading, for, as a minister said to
me one day, “You can’t rile them more, because you are the
man they want. By the book they know your views,” A
man one day made the sensible (?) remark, “ Why can’t
these parsons give a fellow his certificate for heaven without
all this preaching and humbug? I wouldn’t mind doing a
little hard graft (work) for it in placs of money, cos I got
none. A fellow would be ail right then.” As 1 knew they
weie going to alight at the next station, their tickets having
been given up, I hazarded the remark, “No you wouldn’t,
young man ; you would be all wrong. Do you attend the


house of God ?” “ Why ? Oh, yes, 1 have been to church, if
that's what you mean.” “Did you enjoy the service?” “Nary
hit,” “ Very well, then, what goo i would heaven be to you?
•Seek out the right way, and by the time your life is ended
you will many times say to yourself, ‘What a fool I was to
talk about a certificate to admit me to heaven.’ ” One of
these unbelievers had been an actor, I believe, or was con-
nected with the theatre in some way. As he was pointed
out one day I thought, what an object ! “ Yes,” he replied,
“an object with money-bags.” He became heir to some pro-
perty while on the diggings, and there was successful also,
and he has gone on adding, grasping, and accumulating ever
since. They say he was a smart, good-natured fellow once.
He is living in an old hovel all alone. He won’t admit a
soul only the woman once a week to do up his place and
bring his bit of washing. He is a real old infidel, too. He
believes in no God or devil—nothing, except his gold.
Well, it appears the woman came one day and found him
unconscious, lying on the bed. She fetched a doctor who
lived near. He was still the same when the doctor arrived.
How long he had been lying there no one could tell. Hours
nr days it might have been, for from week’s end to week’s
end not a s ml was ever seen to go in or out except the
woman. After administering the usual remedies he some-
what recovered, but, rambling in his speech, he could tell
nothing. The doctor soon discovered the man was starving
for food, of which in sufficient quantities he had debarred
himself. He ordered the woman to obtain proper nr urish-
ment, and not to leave him until he saw him again. On his
return he found him but little better than when he left, and
saw he was fast sinking. “ Have you any relations or
friends you would have sent for ?” “No.” But he had rela-
tions, as was afterwards proved. “Because I can hold you
-out no hope of recovery.” “ But I don’t want to die.”
“Have you any hope beyond?”—for this doctor could ad-
minister consolation spiritually as well as physically. “ Have
you made your peace with God ?” “ I know no God, and I
don’t want to die, and I won’t. Let me get up ? Do you
hear? Why don’t you bring a light ? What are you keep-
ing mein the dark for? Do you want to rob me? Ah, who’s
that ? Let me breathe ? Let me breathe ? Lights ! bring


lights ! Ah, God !—no, ah !” And old King Death,
who sits where no sun can shine, has clutched him, and the
old arch fiend is waiting. “So you have come at last ?
You didn’t believe in me, you know ! Ha, ha ! I have
got a few of your colleagues down below. Come, and let me
introduce you to them !”


CHAPTER XVIIL—DEDICATED TO MOTHERS.
In order that mothers who read the following and desire-
to go and do likewise I present it, just as the minister gave
the incident during the preaching of the funeral sermon of a
grand old mother in Israel, who at her death left behind her
forty children, grandchildren, and great grandchildren. Her
life had been one of love for the young. Her husband had
been a “ colt-breakerhis patron a man of opulence.
After her first child was born it was a source of great trouble.
Her husband said to her one day when the child was in one
of its fits and screaming tantrums, “ Our young blossom,
mother, requires breaking-in like one of my colts.” The
child was then near three years old, and had been the play-
thing and pet, as almost all “firstborn” children are. The
thought very sensibly came to her, after her husband’s
remarks ; if animals need breaking-in and training in order to
make them of service, it stands to reason a child’s will needs
to be governed by a stronger one in order to subject it to
proper obedience. So she commenced upon a system of her
own to train the child. Her method was love, combined
with a strong will, and a few weeks could witness a very
perceptible change, the weaker will of the child being subju-
cated by the stronger will of the mother, and of course
obedience followed, as in the case of the colt. From that
time to the end something like thirty out of the forty of her
own and her children’s children passed through her hands,
from three to seven or eight, and not one had received a
slap, and each one had grown up dutiful, obedient, full of
filial affection, a comfort and blessing to their parents. The
opposite picture to this was her neighbour who held a very
good position, the woman a thorough termagant to both hus-
band and children. Slapping and screaming was going on all
day long amongst the little ones, which, she said, made my life
most distressing to listen to the wailing of the poor children.
“Don’t, mother, don’t slap me again ! Oh, mother, don’t,”
was something so overpowering to my nerves, for I was
alwajs most sensitive to a child’s screams* and I said one


day to my husband that I believed the woman had treated
them worse since I had spoken to her. “Well, you see,
wife, like scores of others she is only exhibiting the lament-
able results of never having been broken in herself. But I’ll
fix her with my employer, who is a magistrate. I have
warned the man, because I knew the thing distressed you,
but he seems to be a nonentity, and without any governing
management in his own house.” And she received -warning
notice that proceedings would be brought against her for
cruelty and ill-treatment of her children, to which notice
she foolishly answered that, as a mother in her own house,
she should manage her children her own way. For this she
received a summons for contempt of c ;urt. The children
were examined by the doctor, all of whom, from the toddler
to the oldest child of ten, showed bruises of a most malig-
nant nature, some of them of long standing, for which
cruelty the husband was mulcted in a heavy fine, and
severely censured by the magistrate for his complicity in the
act by neglecting the duties of a husband in not restraining
his wife’s vile conduct towards his children. This woman
became bedridden in her old days, and had to depend upon
outside help, not one of her children caring the least bit
about her, for the reason that she had instilled her own
venomous nature into that of her children. After my hus-
band’s death, and our children all grown up into years of
maturity, more or less, and most all miles away—not but that
they would have travelled any distance to serve me—l felt
lonely, and looked about for a little maid whom I could train
up to be a helper and sort of companion in my old days.
I asked the woman who came to clean the house once or
twice a week. “ Yes, she had a girl, but nobody would have
her, and she was the torment of her life. She would not do ;
oh, no. She would not do, she knew.” “ How old is she ?”
“Eleven.” “Will you send her to me?” “ Yes, I’ll tell
her to come, but I know she won’t, without she likes. If
she saw any fruit in your garden, she would get in after that
if she could. She’s always had to be left to do as she liked
while I was out at work at some house or other.” And, as
she was leaving me at my gate and I was turning to go in, I
heard a child’s voice calling out, “ Be you going home to
give me summat to eat?’’ “ Here,” I said, “ come here and


I’ll give you a piece of cake.” She came with shuffling kind
of gait and scarcely a decent thing on. “ Come inside,” I
said, “and I’ll get it for yon.” And so having got her
inside, I said, “ Would you like to live with me altogether ?”
“ No.” “ Will you fill me that jug with water from the
pump which you will see in the yard ?” “ Why can’t you
get it ?” “ I don’t want to, because while you’re gone I’ll
find the cake.” So she went, and on returning I gave her
the cake, and I said, “ Now, you can sit there and eat it, or
take it with you and go.” “ Oh, I ain’t agoin’ till I gets
some more, Ibe hungered, I be.” I hardly knew what way
would be best to act at the moment. At length I said,
“ Well, you seem hungry, and I am thirsty, so I think I’ll
make some tea, and you can have some with me. Then you
can eat as much as you like; but you are very dirty.” Now,
it happened that I always kept a chest of children’s clothes
as a change for my dear little ones when they came to see
me, so I said, “ I think I can find you some nice clothes, and
if you will go into the bathroom and strip those dirty rags
of, then give your.-elf a good wash, I will bring you some.”
“ Let me see urn first.” I considered a minute. The child’s
curiosity is excited, I thought ; then I showed them to her.
“ I’ll go, if you will let me take ’em with me, cos you
mightn’t bring ’em.” So I humoured her by giving her the
clothes, and went with her. As I looked at that child after
her ablution, and watched the expression of her face, her
astonishment at each article fixed on her ; the expressive eyes
were really good, so was her forehead, chin rather too pro-
minent, depicting force of will by its squareness. “Now, I
said, I think you will do, and we’ll go and have some tea.
Are you not very thankful to me and proud of your clothes'?”
“Yes, ’m,” the first time she had used the pronoun, and
from that night she has never left me. That was the young
woman who let you in, and I can’t express to you the love
and affection, faithfulness and honesty she has manifested to
me, not only as a helper, but a most faithful friend, com-
panion, and nurse. Love ! oh, what will not love do 1 I
remember once waiting in a verandah to see a gentleman I
had to call upon. A little fellow at the far end was making
sad havoc with a handsome-looking volume which he had
dragged off the lounge-chair. The mother passed me by


with a ball of string in her hand and a pair of scissors, going
towards her flower plot. I called her attention to the child.
<l Oh, Willie, you bad little boy, leave your father’s book
alone, and come with me?” I was just then invited into the
house, and as I returned the child was screaming, the
■mother was slapping, and the volume lying in shreds. That
mother beat the child as a reward for her own carelessness.
Had she taken away the book the child would have been
saved the beating, the father the grievance over the loss of
■his valuable book, and herself all the annoyance and excite-
ment which followed. She could train her tulips, but not
her child. I have witnessed scores of instances during my
peregrinations, a house kept in a continued ferment the
whole evening by the continual slap, slap, and screaming,
when a little tact and judgment, with love combined, would
have managed the poor little things, who were sleepy and
eross, and should have been in bed long before, but the
mother was gossiping in the bar. There is no wonder at all
■about it that so many larrikins and larrikinesses are to be
met with in our streets and bye-ways when one considers the
way children are trained.


CHAPTER XIX.—THE DOWN GRADE.
The down grade is soon bottomed amongst some of our
youth, even where religious instruction and right precepts
have been their surroundings almost from infancy. If the
right example is lacking, together with consistent conduct in
business, a youth may have even been born attended by all
•kinds of outward show of religion. What then ? If the
sterling stamp of it is defaced by lax principles in that house
of business into which he has passed from his boyhood’s
home in the same township. His master professes the same
religion as his father, they attend the same church, and both
officiate in some of the duties of Sabbath school, prayer-
meeting, or class-meeting. They manifest outwardly an
interest in everything that appertains to the Church’s welfare,
but if the tricks of trade are perpetrated in that professing
Christian man’s business, as is done by the unprofessing or
worldly man’s house —and the town shopman says it is so,
for he has lived in the city and witnessed it, and the very
same thing is being done here which he did not expect.
The following conversation is not dug up from fiction, but
really happened between Judd, our own counterman, a local
preacher, and the London man :—“ What was meant by his
not expecting it was that he did not expect he was coming
to a professing Christian’s establishment.” “ Nothing of
this kind of thing has been done before you came. I was
positive our best teas had been tampered with, and that
green tea was being manufactured out of that coarse Bohea
after being broken up, but I did not know this artificial
green-made tea was being used to adulterate the best kinds.”
“ Well, you see, I came here expressly to do it, but I sup-
pose the head of this sanctified business has learnt his
lesson. I was only engaged for three months for that pur-
pose, and I am not sorry to quit this dull country life, I
assure you, and if he asks me to stay on I am not going to
do so.” “I am very glad you have told me all this, for I
shall now know how to act. I’ll take good care he does not
try his hand at it. I shall know if the teas come up right


and sound from the warehouse, which I knew they had not
done lately, and were not what they used to be, and I told
him that complaints had been made. If you are glad you
are going I am more glad, for I am sorry this abominable
London trickery has been perpetrated. I)o these youths
know anything?” “ ISTot that I know of ; they have learned
nothing from me. It isn’t likely I should make them
proficient in my knowledge, eh ? Why, ray pay is double
the ordinary shopman’s.” This employer's career verifies
the truth of God’s Word respecting him who “ maketh haste
to be rich.” For nine years he did a ready-money trade of
£2OO a week. His expenses, all told, were £l6O upon his
three establishments. Consequently in that nine years he
had accumulated £27,000. What the businesses were sold
for when he retired, I know not, but I do know this, that he
did not live to enjoy the fruits of his labour. He inhaled
the convalescent breath of one of his little boys who was re-
covering from typhoid fever, so I was informed, and in
thirteen days after was laid in his last resting-plac*. This
is only one example out of many that I know of men grasp-
ing the shadow and losing the substance of that real sterling
Wurth which steady perseverance and honest dealing will
always secure. Where, then, is the wonder if that youth,
though he has been religiously instructed, fails to pay any
heed to his master’s exhorting him to become a follower
of Christ and be a teacher in the Sabbath-school 1
That mechanic’s institute which is just finished is to be
opened by amateur theatricals, and nearly all the inhabitants
turn out to push the thing along. The proceeds are to help to
pay for it, after deductingtheexpenses generally, including the
one professional who had been engaged to put them through.
As a matter of course, he tells himself he must go, although
his master doesn’t nor any of his family, though they pur-
chase a ticket all the same, and now his mind is completely
revolutionised. This young man never had witnessed any-
thing of the like before. What fun ! They are going to
continue the same thing again to-night, by particular desire.
He shall go again. This acting is quite a new experience ;
it is the best thing, he tells the customers he’s serving the
next day, he ever saw, and now there is a discussion amongst
them about the merits and demerits of the actors. “ Well,”


says one, “I am sorry I went to see such rubbish. They’ll
get no three shillings from me again to-night, and if he calls
that grand” (meaning the youth) “ what would he say to
proper theatre acting?” Those last three words—proper
theatre acting—have settled the business for his future
destiny. His mind is made up now ; he will get away to a
situation in town. There he will have a free leg, not shut up
from enjoyments that this old township debars him from. A
good deal of dissatisfaction is expressed by his parents and
his employer, and they hope that he will think better of it.
But it is ail to no purpose. His mind, which he used to
exercise in reading and studying profitable books, is thrown
off its balance. All advice and pleading with him is thrown
completely away. The young men of his association remon-
strate with him. It is all to no purpose. Interest is then
brought to bear upon this decision he has made, and efforts
are made to get him into one of the large firms in town,
which succeeds. He has arrived, and stands in the presence
of the manager. “This is a copy of our rules. For your
trial month provision is made for you to remain under this
roof; it is one of the firm’s regulations. Your friends
acquainted you with that rule; did they not?” “Yes.”
“Well, when you retire, just read them up. Don’t neglect
them ; they are very explicit, and we require all our young
men to be acquainted with and abide by them.” This
short, sharp business way of being addressed by the manager
is something new to him, and makes him feel somehow just a
little bit as if he wished he hadn’t left that free and easy
home just to gratify a whim. “ Well,” he says, “ it’s only
for a month, and then” Little did he anticipate what
was going to befall him before that month was ended. So,
on his retiring, he opens and reads the rules. “ Diligent,
respectful, cleanly in habits. Pshaw ! what a lot of rot, as
if a fellow was going ever to be dirty in his habits.” “No
private conversation, gossip, or smoking during business
hours. Punctuality, and the immediate performance of all
duties.” All right, go ahead. “After closing, during the
trial month your time is at your own disposal until 10-30 ;
you are requested to be punctual.” “ Oh, well, a fellow can
see plenty from closing till that time.” “If you break this
r ule of 10-30 the watchman or caretaker who admits you


reports the over-time, and it will militate against you ex-
ceedingly.” “ Oh, bosh, I shan’t want any over-time.”
theatre is tabooed !” “ What, oh that be what
next? Why, bother, that’s interfering with a fellow’s
liberty. “ The firm enforces this rule most strenuously,
and you are at once informed, will oppose any request
for permission to go to it. If you are escorted
there by relations, not friends, with that we have
nothing to do, S ) now you see the way this young man’s
inclination tended, and how it was at once most properly
frustrated. Not so does he think—oh. no ! his mind is made
up ; he’s n t going to be frustrated by any such rule ; he’ll
throw the bothering situation up first. Ah ! and now a
little daylight dawns up m his mind. They knew at home
that this was a religious firm, and he diin’t—well, Dt them
find it all out He means to visit the theatre, and he goes.
He stands outside c igitating awhile what part he chould
patroni-e, and he sees that the more respectablv-dressed
people go into the b'>x entrance ; so he follows and takes his
seat. What a grand, glaring place it is. The new mechanics’
stage, pshaw! compared to that. But the time is up his
watch tells him, he must be moving ; but this new atmos-
phere has quite electrified him, and he is loath to go, but he
must. However, he determines if possible to see that piece
again ; his emotions were greatly excited, and he is wonder-
ing if that poisoned cup, the contents of which that woman
swallows, was really poison, when all at once he is brought
face to face with the manager, who fixes him at ones by the
question, “ Did you study those rules I gave you yesterday
not right through, but did }ou read as far as where the
theatre is tabooed?” “Yes, but ” “Well, sir, but
what?’’ “Why, what right has this firm or any other to
say a young man in their employ should not go anywhere
he wants in his own time?” 'Ft thi- reason, every firm
can make its own rules ; and this one is the most stringent
of all, because we do not countenance the theatre ;an 1 I
I am very sorry, for your parents’ sake as well as your own,
that your tastes for recreation or amusement tend that way.
Your worthy father, whom I know and highly esteem, and
your mother also, would be highly incensed and grieved at
your going to that theatre last night.” This manager’s


knowledge of his whereabouts last night rather staggers
him, but he is determined to carry it with a high hand, and
replies that he came to live in town expressly to go there,
and what harm was there in it he should like to know ?
What right had any firm to govern a young man’s pleasures,
or to say where he should go, or what he should do to enjoy
himself in his leisure hours'? “ Young man, I told you just
now that any firm had the right to make its own rules,
and if you had been honest to yourself and the firm you
should this morning have brought those rules to me and said,
I cannot comply with them, and if they were to be enforced
you desired to leave at once. Instead of this, you, by dupli-
city, determined to evade them ; you had read the rule and
immediately broke it. This act of baseness on your part, for
you can give it no other name, does not emanate from your
home training, but from a mind which has not been subdued,
which will naturally crave after the depraved, and will be
■satisfied with nothing else unless you bring it under subjec-
tion, and solicit a higher power than your own to do so. I,
for the sake of my acquaintanceship with your father, whom
I had a few years ago a great fellowship with, and out of my
respect for him, for at present I have none for yourself, I
will not report you this time, and earnestly hope you will do
justice to yourself by crushing out these bad tastes and
desires; and I warn you that the footnote to the rules has
been, and ever will be, carried out to the letter. Any infrac-
tion of these rules is visited with immediate dismissal.” But
the manager’s good advice and forbearance is lost upon him.
How many scores of young fellows of this class have I met,
obstinate as mules, without a spark of gratitude or love for
anything or anybody except their own passions ; any act of
kindness is thrown away upon them. For a little while he
keeps his inclinations in abeyance, but what young man’s
propensities for evil were ever subdued long by any act of his
own. His will is taken posses-ion of by the devil, he finds
out a way for him quickly. While passing by the theatre one
day he sees the very same piece announced which was repre-
sented on the occasion of his first visit, and which, he said,
he would like to see again. Ah, says the tempter, you were
a fool to go and make yourself conspicuous in that box, mix
yourself with the multitude in the pit, and you will he secure


from observation ; and being a willing follower of this kind
of advice, he immediately acta upon it. That very night, in
the back seat of the stalls immediately before him is a com-
mercial traveller who did business with his late employer.
He is just debating with himself whether he will speak to
him when the man turns his head, and all evasion is now
impossible. They exchange glances and nod to each other.
When the act is over the traveller accosts him. “ How are
getting on?—do you like your situation?” And still pro-
ceeds, “ But how is this—did you obtain permission from
the firm to be here?” “Permission—no; certainly not.”
“ But did they not supply you with their rules in connection
with the theatre ? That house is dead against it; and I
have heard the young men of your establishment say that
they prohibit their attendance here most strenuously?”
“ Yes, I know they are against it, but I don’t believe in that
sort of thing, nor am I going to conform to it either ;at
the same time you need not betray my presence here.” “ I
betray you ! my dear young friend, you are already
betrayed. That firm to which you belong shadow all their
young men on trial, in order to inform themselves of the
nature of their pursuits and pastimes, and how they spend
their evenings ; to see in what direction their tastes tend,
whether they are of a moral tendency or otherwise. Good
evening ; I must go ; some business has just crossed my
mind, which must be attended to.” “So that’s it, is it ?
Shadowed, eh? No wonder then they knew all about my
first night’s adventure here. Of all the scurviest things to
do!—to dog a man’s footsteps, eh ? Urn—oh, well.” And,
while leaving him to his cogitations as to whether he wont
pack up his things to-morrow morning and clear out without
facing the manager, I would explain that I am not aware
that the system of shadowing young men after entering an
establishment on trial is in vogue in Australia. lam deline-
ating a picture of one youth out of a score or more whose
downward career I have witnessed in the world. This sys-
tem of shadowing was in vogue in London in the firm of
Payne & Sons, 328, Regent-street, opposite the Polytechnic,
in which establishment I resided some twelve or fifteen
months. Their rules did not veto the theatre, but infamous
houses were prohibited, no doubt for the reason that our


establishment was within ten minutes walk of one of the most
notorious squares in the west of London. York-square was
its name ; and in every house the demimonde reigned
supreme. Any youth, in fact any member of the establsh-
ment, known to have visited any of these houses, or being
even found in the vicinity, would assuredly obtain his ticket
of leave immediately. Three passed through that ordeal
while I was there. The other rule was against gambling
houses ; a breach of that was met with the sfene conse-
•quences. But the rules gave no information that you were
shadowed, nor should I ever have known it except by hear-
ing it said by young men of other firms that it was so, and in
their establishments also. Well, the next morning as he
met the manager and bowed, but was not responded to, he
was called to the office of the head of the firm. “ You are
reported for having disobeyed one of our most stringent
■rules. Your first act was condoned by our manager. From
sympathy with your youthful inexperience, also on account of
this old friendship and respect for your father and mother, I
am rather vexed he did so, without bringing you face to face
with myself or partner, as I should have taken you out to
my residence, and so put you out of the way of temptation ;
but as reports have been favourable about you the last few
■ days past, I hoped you had profited by the advice which our
manager gave you; but this second flagrant breach of the
most stringent of our rules necessitates your dismissal at
once. Your people are already aware of our decision, and
the reason. I strongly advise you to return to them, and
give up these tastes for vile amusement. There is your
cheque with a week in advance. Good morning.” And
now the down-grade begins. “ Told them at home ?
Well, no home is going to see me.” By the end of the
following week, however, his small cheque is spent. He
has never missed a night at the theatre. He has met there
young men of his own calling. He must get something to
do; ‘‘do they know of anything?” “Yes; so-and-so.”
But so-and-so will not take on a youth without credentials,
which he does not possess, because from his last place he can't,
and where he could obtain them he icont, viz., from his old
master. He has got by this time mixed up with some of the
actors round at that little snuggery, where they most do


congregate at rehearsal time and after performance. In the
bar a large poster announces at the bottom that fifty super-
numeraries are required for the above, apply at the stage
between eleven and twelve on such a day ; but he doesn’t
see this yet. At home the old father and mother are grow-
ing very anxious. A fortnight has elapsed, and he has not
returned. What shall they do 1 His old employer is con-
ferred with. He decides at once what to do. Advertise !
“Yes, I wi}l doit. A vacancy for a good business young,
man in general store. Address, So-and-So. My late
assistant preferred. Now, he can see that, if he is scanning
the morning papers for a situation, and I think it very likely
he will return.” He does see it, and at the same time the
supernumerary advertisement. He is in that snuggery ;in
fact, most of his time is spent there since he has been on,
speaking acquaintance with some of the actors. All his
best wearing apparel is in the pawnshop, but he’s not going,
home to be jeered at, and preached to again by all the old
church fogies. Not he ; and yet he knows he will soon be
wanting food if something don’t soon turn up. Poor pro-
digal, how many of you pass before my mental vision as L
write ! “ How do they pay these supers,” he enquires of
one of the actors. “My lord, the treasury will disburse to
you the munificent sum of 10s , perhaps 12s. 6d. or 15s.
weekly, if you are nominated head super, and valiantly lead
them into position.” “Do you really mean, old fellow, that
you are that way inclined ? Because I have just witnessed
the departure of our ‘slapjack’ or ‘knock about’ man,”
“ What are his duties ?” he enquires. “ Well, I think you
will find them both onerous and infinite. Let me see,
between the hours of nine o’clock in the morning and eleven
at night the scene painter will require your service to mix,
some ‘ slapdash,’ from which euphonious occupation you.
derive the name ‘ slapjack or it may be to heat some size,
or to help the carpenter down below with the wedge blocks,
or the scene shifter with his scenes, or to clean the prompter’s
box, or to collect all the stray ‘props’ for the property man,
while the manager himself may have you in demand to run
to his house for that book. At night you will be in great
request. It will be—Jack, old man, here, and Jack, old,
man, there, unless you happen to be consigned to the


‘ flies’ on S' me special duly with the ‘ flyman’ to help
with the border*, sky pieces, and glories ; or start the cannon
ball rolling round the roof of the ceiling for the thunder, or
shake the sheet of iron for it. Then, perhaps, you may
have to run down to attend the ‘ lightning box,’ or turn the
‘crash’ to re [resent the breaking down of a carriage, or
help to shake the ‘ sea cloth’ to imitate the waves of the
sea ; and—but you appear to be quite satisfied—the gross
amount of emolument for this little pastime is 255. or 305.,
according to the way you acquit yourself in the eyes of the
manager. You can bear in mind also that the actors are
not forgetful of Jack fcrthe many little services he ca-n
render.” It’s all over now, and he is in the thick of it.
The poor old father has been so pleaded with by his mother
to go to town, and, although qu te unfit by age and decrepi-
tude for such a journey, he arrives. Does he sees him?
No ; how should he ? He has tottered past that theatre
a dozen times, but that young man in the short canvas
jacket and cap, and whitewashed splarhed continuations is
not his son ! But it is ; and the son knows the father, if
the father doesn’t the son, and is glad that the father does
not know him. What do you think of that? Yes, and I
have seen a mother come to the stage door, and plead with
tears for her son without avail. She could have forced him,
of course, to have been disgorged by bringing a policeman,
but I suppose she dreaded the exposure of the police court,
and still hoped on for his return. But he was too valuable
for enacting that “ monkey” part. The night has arrived at
last that seals him to be for ever an actor. There he is
dressed cap-a-pie in bright armour, helmet, battle-axe, and
shield, and for the first time has to speak. The captain of
the guard enters, the man in armour parading in front of the
castle guard. “ How many prisoners have you in this part
of the bastion ?” “ Four, captain.” “ Any requests been
made?” ‘’One has desired to see the captain.” “Very
well ; release them separately for the lavatory, allowing
each fifteen minutes patrol. By that time I shall return.
Be wary.” “ I will, captain,” He is bound to go on now,
and will shortly be a “ utility man.” With what result ?
Well, in nine cases out of ten it has been to my knowledge
blackness and darkness, from an early career of brightness.


the end, lying on that dying bed, with every vital organ
diseased, and the last opiate administered by the humane
physician. All hope of life being over, he does it to save him
from the horror of his situation ; and how oft have I heard
such as he in that last delirium acting some favourite part
over and over again, laughing maniacally. “ Well, good-bye,
old fellow,” and the next time we call he is gone ! Where ? I
don’t remember ever hearing any actor doubt about a future
state, but only of what it consists in, the most intelligent
believing too much in Shakspeare for that, who, in none of
his works that ever I have read or studied, but asserts it,
“ Sent to his last account with all his imperfections on his
head, unshriven and unannelled.” “ But for the thought of
something after death !” Poor G. V. Brooke, in that
Soliloquy on Death, excelled anyone I ever heard in render-
ing that one word after. It was accentuated in such a
modulated, subdued whisper, accompanied by an expression
indicating most reverent awe. I think we lost about seven
or eight up there on the Inglewood Diggings, and that
picture will about serve for all. At about the same time I
was stricken with sickness myself, but happily not cut off,
paralysed in every limb, but the brain in active life. I
understood both the doctors’ consultations, but could not
articulate sufficiently to make them understand. Life, on
the diggings, was a matter of very little consequence to some
of these butchers, for in many instances they were little else.
The first one was he who caused paralysis by treating me for
lung haemorrhage because I had vomited blood. He had me
stripped and dashed cold water on my chest, then rolled
tightly in a sheet, blankets being thrown over me, and then
he left, taking his fee, of course. Dr. Radcliffe was sent
for. He sounded me. “ Abscess,” he said to my wife, as
soon as he saw the vomit. “ It’s burst; he will be all
right, if we can only get that fool’s handiwork rubbed out,”
meaning the mischief of wrapping in the wet cloths. To a
friend who was present he said, “ Go over to my surgery
and ask them for a bottle of ‘green seal’.” “ Make some of
that hot at once,” he said to my wife, “ when he brings it,
and take two bricks out of the fireplace, put them to his
feet as hot as he can bear them, rolled up in something. I
have a crisis case below here. You can send for me in an


hour, if the rigidness is not subdued, but I have hopes that
it will.” Night was closing in, the diggers returning from
their work, some laughing, some blaspheming, dogs barking,
children screaming, guns firing, the tuning of the instru-
ments over at that dance-house, where by-and-bye, it would
be like a pandemonium broke loose. How my whole life
broke over me. The childhood days, the lisping good night
prayer ; the schoolboy days, the hopes and blights of youth,
the oft-repeated vows of repentance, alas, as oftimes for-
gotten. Then came the home-quitting, the mother’s last
kiss, felt as palpably as though just imprinted ; then the
shrill whistle of the boatswain piping all visitors to the
shore, and make ready to cast off ; down in that cabin, the
songs, the orgies, and the ribald jests, until I arrived here a
fit votary of Satan, accepting the theatre as a livelihood,
plunging into the very vortex of its surroundings, appearing
night after night before that gaping multitude, toasted and
feted until the cup incapacitated reason. “0, God,” I
exclaimed, “am Ito take this leap in the dark V’ It is,
indeed, a cardinal point in a man’s life to be brought face to
face with death, and yet lives ! One of these stage-struck
aspirants commenced and ended his career in just about two
years and a half from beginning to finish. He came over
from Victoria, and was engaged in one of the principal stores
in the town of Hindmarsh. He was a smart young man,
his age, I should judge, being about twenty-seven or twenty-
eight. He formed an assignation, I believe, at the theatre.
However, before he had been but a short time in his situa-
tion he was at the theatre night after night, till at length
the late hours so incapacitated him for business, that that
corner “pub” had to be visited for a stimulant until it
ceased to stimulate or build up, but to knock down. Of
course he was discharged, and he took up with the theatre,
hung about it until he got on the stage in some capacity or
other.


CHAPTER XX—WHAT IS YOUR LIFE?
And now, having given you a short, and, perhaps, not
a particularly interesting history—at least, to some of my
life and experience—what is your life, friend ? Have you
ever thought about it as being “ only a vapour which
reraaineth but a little while, an 1 then vanishes away ?” I
can tell that man what his life is who has occupied a place
in the world fifty or sixty years if he has lived to self-
gratification alone, and no other aim or object. Your life is
not worth the living. But first confine that to your own case,
please, because this life is worth living if the man chooses to
make it so ; and he can, as every provision has been made for
him to do so. The Word of God says : “ There is nothing
new under the sun.” But only in your case it is not so.
You have satiated yourself with everything the world can
supply to administer to your carnal appetite ; and it has be-
come a new thing and an a.-t onishment to you how it is all
these past pleasures which were so enjoyable one o , now pro-
duce no satisfaction at all, but are every day becoming more
and more abortive, was exactly my experience at fifty years
of age. It was both new and vexatious to me that I had
lost the inclination to participate in the old routine. Life
was becoming a burden. The extra glass had to be curtailed
for decency’s sake ; the constitution would not stand it ;
everything was becoming new to me ; but the Word of Truth
has made no mistake for all that, because these experiences
have attended upon everybody who have abused their lives
before you. “ They will not come unto me,” the Saviour of
mankind says, that “ they may have life ” —a new life, which
will make existence enjoyable here, and can, and will, make
them fit for a future everlasting life of unalloyed happiness.
If you talk to any of these men upon the subject of the
“ new Life,” they generally reply, coarsely, “ Oh, rot ! Don’t
preach ! Don’t tell me about these ‘ new Life ’ people, as
you call it ! Don’t I know ’em ! Pshaw ! A greater lot
of humbugs, deceivers, and hypocrites, never lived. I never
knew but one man amongst the whole boiling that I have
been brought into business contact with, but are all tarred
with the same brush, where self-interest and money are con-
cerned. Ah ! Bah ! Don’t I know ? Yes ; I should think


I did !” “ Well, what about this one man 1” “ Oh, well,
if there is such a thing as religion making a man to be a
man in every sense of the word, my old uncle was that man.”'
“ I am very glad that his life impressed yon, sceptic as you
are, so favorably with his religion. It shows to you at
once what true religion can do for a man, and, probably,
those whom you have such a credulous estimate of, may be-
very different if you were acquainted with them privately.
Business transactions, you know, often warp the mind, but
it is really a matter of no consequence to you what other
people are ; it is your soul, the loss of which Christ Himself
has pitted against the gain of the whole world, and nothing
can a man give in exchange for it.” What a blessing it is
that there are many good shining-light Christians scattered
over the world, living m the light of the Gospel, and leaving
the glimmer of it behind them. That sceptic’s life will ever
be haunted by it, and it will, eventually, save him. There are
thousands of poor and blind to-day if you were to ask the
question—“ What is your life V they would flippantly
reply, “Oh, my life; a combination, I suppose, of tissues,
made up of bone, blood, and muscle, with breathing
apparatus, which requires food and nourishment, and so
long as I can obtain plenty of it, and find a pound or two in
my pocket as I rub along, well, then, let this old world
wag as it may; I don’t care a jot.” And how
oft have I heard the toast shouted out, “ A short life and a
merry one, boys; it will all come right in the end.”
Somebody has said, or written, that if Christ could be
served as easily as the devil, the millennium would soon
dawn upon us. Such an assertion does not correspond with
my experience, I found it always a very hard life to serve
him. He was an abominably hard task-master, for ever
exacting, and, in return, was sure to drop me into some
“ boghole,” leaving me to get out the best way I could.
Wolsey said in his last hours, “ If I had served my God as
faithfully as I have served my king, my present dire calami-
ties would not have fallen upon me.” And of this I may
say with truth, If I had served Christ as faithfully as I served
the devil, my spiritual life to-day would be much brighter, and
my temporal welfare very much less perplexing than it is.
If the man had said it was easier to enter the devil’s service-


than Christ's, he would have been right, A man has only to
take up with one of the many vices extant, be it gambling,
pleasure-hunting, swindling, or blaspheming ; and of all the
vices the perpetrator of this last gets the least out of it;
neaily all the other vices confer some temporal gain but
blasphemy. Why, the man only perditions his poor soul
and obtains nothing in return ; while to enter upon the ser-
vice of Christ there is an ordeal to go through, he must
surrender and give up everything sinful to become His
follower. That man whose general toast was, “ A short life,
and a merry one,” I sat beside his dying bed for many
hours day and night before he passed away. Poor Gus, his
toast was verified so far as a short life was concerned, but,
by God’s mercy, within two 'days of his end it did come
right, but he had an awful time of it while I attended upon
him. I did not witness his end ; I had to leave ; and in his
delirium he has been heard to cry out, like a wailing child,
tor his mother to come and teach him his good-night prayer.
He startled me one night with the question, “ Gardner, are
you a believer in the Bible’” “Yes; certainly I am.
Why 1” “ Because I was instructed in its teaching when a
boy, but I have been very sceptical about its truths. Are
you V’ “No : I believe the Bible to be the Word of God,
but its records I have been very unfamiliar with many years.”
“ Well, would you mind reading out of that one the little
Bible woman left ?” And he said, “Do you know I have
studied about her a good deal, and I believe her to be a ster-
ling little Christian ; so far as my light in connection with
'Christianity goes, she is just simple ; I mean nothing put
on of affectedness at all.” “ Well, -what shall I read, Gus,
from the Old or the New Testament,” “ Oh, anything you
like.” So I read to him, but what lam sure I don’t re-
member now. I gained no consolation from it myself ;
whether he obtained any I don’t know, but I do know this,
when I heard he had died a saved man through the spiritual
agency of that little woman, I was glad. He was really one
of nature’s noblemen, possessing high attainments. He was
the son of Sergeant Arabin, of the London Law Courts.
His “ Master Walter ” in Knowles’s “Hunchback” was
the completest I ever saw. He was only forty-five when he
■died, another victim to alcohol.


CHAPTER XXL—TRAVELLING INCIDENTS.—
STUCK UP BY JOHNSON, THE BUSH-
RANGER.
A few experiences connected with our Brisbane return
trip, which was to prove the very last of our wanderings,
may be interesting. I don’t know whether His Satanic
Majesty was cognisant of it or not, though I strongly believe
he was, for this reason, that he “ bog-holed ” me more than
on any other previous occasion, as will be seen as you read
on. Our route from Brisbane to Melbourne took us by way
of New England, Tenterfield, the “ Moon-boys,” Armidale,
on to the Liverpool Ranges and over to the plains on which
stood the township of Gunedah, near to which was Orr’s
Station. And fortunately for us we were welcomed by the
owner himself, who after looking at our programme, said,
“You are just the people I want to help out the fun we are
going to have here directly. Here Sam, take these horses and
feed them well, turn them out with the mob in the morning,
they look like wanting a spell. And you,” turning to us,
“come along, I am going to fix you for the month’s carnival.
To-morrow I will get you to make out a list of the sports,
including your own, for this wedding.” The history of this
wedding is soon told. The Orrs were two bachelors, always
at variance, through the whiskey, and the one who received
us, to spite his brother, was going to marry a halfcaste out
of the camp of blacks on his run. And he did, but whether
it was a real or mock marriage I know not, for I didn’t
attend. We were very glad of the rest both for ourselves
and horses, but the house ! No, not at any price ! Whiskey
in every room. Blacks everywhere, in the kitchen, in the
drawing and dining room, in fact, it was a pandemonium.
He was very much annoyed at our going to camp, but I told
him “we would rather be in our tent,” which I and the
musician erected as well as his own some distance off, “ and
as we have got to amuse you to-night I must get away,
think and prepare my song about the “ Prince ” I am going
to give you” “ Bravo I let’s hear it.” “ But it’s not


finished,” I replied, “here is the chorus, ‘ So while I drive
along the road, through pannel, rail, or fence, the first salute
I’m sure to get, is, Hi! have you seen the prince ” The
mail 'brought the news that same night that the “ prince ”
had been shot at. After this, the blacks having found our
camp, became such a nuisance that we determined to get
away; and besides, continued invitations to the house at
night did not suit us at all. 1 obtained his “ Store Cattle
Track ” to Melbourne from himself, which would introduce
us to some large stations. Also he did us a great kindness
by exchanging our conveyance for one very much lighter and
more comfortable, as now the musician had provided himself
with a saddle-horse. Our track was nearly all back country
with good level roads, and which we were pleased to ascertain
at the first station would continue to the next township.
But the information we received at the last station, which
was some distance from the aforesaid township, was
most disheartening, and foreshadowed terrible sufferings.
Yes, we were fast making tracks to the deepest bog-hule the
devil had ever dropped us into, and which only by a miracle
of Providence, for I can call it nothing else, that we ever
got out of it. At the township the information given me
was, “You are going down into a mesh of waters. If the
sun’s rays have been more than usually hot on the snow
mountains the Namoi will overflow the lagoons along vour
track to such an extent that you will lose it ; but you are
pretty early and may reach the crossing, though the snow-
water is bound to come down. The river here shows no rise
perceptible, but no one knows how near or how far the
freshet is until the news is received from Brewarinna
where you will be safe unless ym are making for Bourke.”
“ Yes, we are.” “Then take ray advice and get over the
Brae as quick as possible for that’s a treacherous little river.”
■“Thanks : which road do I take to Canipbeii’s station, and
how far is it ? ” That upper road is the best. The distance
five miles, and if you hear any stray news that the water is
coming down, turn back.” “ Thank you, I will.” On
leaving Campell’s, the overseer, whom I had been speaking to
the over-night ab mt the route, gave me his key. “ You can
leave it on the last gate-post. I shall be through there
to-morrow, and it saves you three miles.” “Thanks, what


■distance is the crossing ?” Well, you ought to reach it by
two o’clock.” So we pushed on and came in sight of the
river. Seeing some men on the banks I hailed them with
the question, “ How far is the crossing 7” “ A mile, but it’s
covered this morning.” “Is it navigable for the trap ?”
‘ About as much as it is here. If you are going over to the
township I have got a boat here. We are pelt (wool)
washing, and we’ll put you over for a note.” “All right.”
So the belongings were got into the boat, and the two horses
tailed on, swimming behind. They then returned for us and
the trap was also tailed on behind the same as the horses,
and floated over safe and well. “ Thank God, that’s done,”
I said. How do you think the Brae is?”“ Well, the Brae
won’t be long behind this. It’s four miles good ; you’ll cut
the about a mile from this in that direction,” pointing.
“ You won’t do it to-night. You may reach the road before
dark, but this black soil with last night’s rain will give you
all you can do,” •* Well, have you got any rations to spare!”
“ Yes, and some maize too, if your horses will eat it.” And
so we parted with strict injunctions from them to make
tracks early. “You are now between two rivers and I
calculate this one is rising three inches an hour ; of course
it’s all according to what’s behind.” It was a blessing for
ns there was a moon, and that Stumpv was a good horse, for
every ten minutes about forty pounds of mud had to be
cleared off the wheels, and not less than seven from
each of our boots. It was eleven o’clock before we
reached the road after the most distressing labour I ever
experienced. We had a consultation should we go to bed for a
few hours? But we wisely decided to put the nose bags on,
•make some tea and push on while the men gave light, which
I think left us about 3in the morning. Then Sam rode on
to what we judged was a mile farther to the river, but he
returned in 15 minutes ; we were right clo-e up he said, “but
we’ll never do it by the sound, of course I can‘t tell until
daylight. The hotel light seems pretty close, so we can
shout for ropes and help.” Oh, can any tongue express, or
mind conceive the unutterable torture of those two hours be-
fore dawn ; dark black clouds continually passing on and
shutting out the stars ; the morning air nipping and bitterly
cold, piercing to the very marrow ; a rustling of something


in the trees, which just appeared to shiver the leaves with-
out any seeming or perceptible motion, but sounding to the
distressed ear like the wailing sighs from the throats of
thousands of lost souls. Accompanying this, the monotonous
continuation of the night mope-hawk, the bell-like bass of the
bull-frog, joined by the light treble of his smaller mate, the
opposum’s guttural uc-uc-er-ucer, in the distance, the short,
sharp, snapping bark of the dingo, which was immediately
followed by the wild baying chorus of scores, and the dis-
tressing eerie sound of that river. The poor wife, sitting
weeping on that log with her pet dog beside her, anticipat-
ing her coming trial, for to her the crossing of the smallest
volume of water would cause a nervous shuddering of her
frame which you could sympathetically feel as you sat beside
her. The inexplicable dread of something, and the stinging
conscience at work, for dragging my wife through such
miseries and subjecting her to scenes like the present one,
which I knew no cheering advice ot past successful accom-
plishing would surmount. At last the morning dawn is
breaking. “ Now Sara, we’ll go and look. Blessings! there’s
a boat, but oh, what a cockle-shell. There is a hut just
above, some poor man trying to live by it, I suppose.”
Cooee, then our conjointed howls and cooees, and the
door opens. “ Hurry that boat over here, please, and 10s.
is awaiting you to take a lady over safe, and render a little
help to us. I’ve got a trap, 1 shouted.” “ Right you are
Sir, I’m there,” he said. Our cooeeing had brought my
wife down just as the boat struck the bank. What a relief
to her, her eyes expressed how much better it was, than
riding over in the trap. There was a good deal of hesitation,
however, on her part, but the rough consolations of the
boatman seemed to give her confidence, and in a few minutes
I saw her on the way up to the “ pub,” being met by the
landlady, as I supposed. “So much unexpected relief and
part of the trouble over,” I inwardly exclaimed. The horse
not having been taken out, Sam had gone for the trap. The
consultation with this man amounted to very little that was
consoling. “ It‘s not more than five feet at present by the land
marks, your greatest difficulty will be the current, but that’s
close in, not more than fifteen feet from the bank.” “ Well,
take these belongings and keep them dry ; here’s your


money, and lam going to follow your pilotage over. Of
course you know the crossing 1” “ Yes, every stone of it, I
may say.” “Right, then I’ll wait for your getting over. Ah !
there's some men coming down with ropes ; hadn't you better
go over Sam in the boat, your horse is bound to follow the
cart 1” “No, I shall ride my horse over, and chance the
current. If I have to slip off and clutch at a rope, he is
bound to get out, and he might not follow unless made fast
behind. There's the boatman beckoning ; you go a-head.”
“ Ain't you going to drive ?” “ Certainly not, I’ll stick to
Stump’s head and wade ; go on, pilot, according to the man’s
directions.” And now lam in the water. How much more
depth ? none apparent’y, yes a little ; it’s up to Stump’s
nose and my chin. “ You are all right,” comes from the
bank, but the trap is begginning to wabble. I can scarce
keep my feet; the horse is beginning to stumble about
as though his feet were losing pressure. My arm is
getting numbed and cramped, holding up his head.
“ Ah, what’s that f ’ for I had long since been unable to
look away to anything but myself and horse. It was a rope,
and it fell right over ray head and the horse’s back.. A
shout comes directly after, “ Get the bight of that rope under
your armpits with your one hand ” “ All right ?” “ Yes,”
I got it over somehow, for I instinctively felt that that rope
was my salvation. The next shout was, " Look out, you
are in the current ; hold on to the horse’s head with both
hands.” Then I felt the rope tightening, and, looking up,
saw I was drifting from them down the stream. Now the
whole strain of the horse and trap is on me, surely I shall
have to give way, or be cut in two. My legs are taken
under, the water gushing into my ears and nostrils, while my
senses were going. A voice beside me was saying, “ You
are out, you are out ! It was a close shave, though.”
“ Now, then, you fellows, haul away.” “ You are all right,
ain’t you,” addressing me. “Yes ; loosen the rope, please.
I can’t, my fingers are too numb, the horse standing now in
water only up to the shafts.” The man took his head, the
ropes he had made fast round the shafts, and willing hands
soon hauled it up, myself clinging on behind, and nothing
broken. It was a providence, indeed, tome, so many willing
hands were there. They had come overnight to get the


cattle over. The lasso which saved me was intended to be
thrown over the horns of any of the cattle that could not
breast the current and began to drift. Well, it took us six
months to reach Bourke from the Liverpool Plains, within
which time I got my right arm broken, and, in swimming a
river to obtain a boat on the other side, I was all but lost
through exhaustion. It had to be done, for we were out of
rations, and it was just on sundown. I obtained the neces-
saries I went for, but the ferryman was so drunk that he
could not take me over, so I told the people if there was no
one to take me over and bring the boat back again, that I
should have to leave it on the other side, and that it didn’t
stand to reason I was going to return the boat over there and
again swim back, for I was in my wet clothes then. And
now ensued great trouble. The landlord and all the men
about the place were quarrelsomely drunk, and I could see
the object was to detain me. One of the men present knew
who I was, it seems, and wanted to get the musician over,
so I saw my best policy was to dissemble. “Very well,
then, send this youth over, who, I saw, had been willing
enough all along, but he had been restrained ; but Sam,
whom I told what the state of things was, refused to go, and,
as the camp had been fixed, we just determined to remain,
come what may. The result was plenty of hooting and
howling at us, but they were too incapable to come over.
We reached Bourke in pouring rain. Captain Johnson had
just arrived with the news that the Darling was over-
flowing, betokening bad results for Bourke, for the
water was coming down and the river was rising fast.
Consequently, the water being so high at the Wilcannia
Junction would stem back the flowing of the river,
and augment the certainty of Burke being flooded.
We were determined that no hotel should have our enter-
tainment there if we could help it. The villainy and scoun-
drelism we had experienced connected with bush “ pubs”
had long since determined us to cut them for stations, after
we found the welcome which in almost every instance we
received, and, of course, financially we benefitted, because
there was no bill to call for and find how grossly we had
been got at. They receive you with great suavity and
blandishment. “ Your lady would like to go to her room,


of course. Mary, show this lady into the best bed-chamber.
Wont you take a glass of wine first, madame ? And you ?”
“No, thanks. Let me see your ball-room?” “Yes,
certainly : step this way. This room is at your disposal,
and anything can be removed that you suggest. You will
have a good muster to-night. I know the shearers will be
here from Read’s Station.” Fool that I was I had not
gone to them ; but I had not begun to work stations then.
The first lesson I learnt about visiting stations was given
me at Warwick. I was riding out with programmes to the
Rosenthall Station, and met the manager, and offered him
one. “ Are you going to distribute these at the station?”
Yes,” I replied; “ but I was first going to call upon the
manager.” “Well, lamhe ; and I will bring my family
in to-night, and to-morrow night, if you like to come out
to the station, you will find every accommodation if vou de-
sire to stay the night over in bachelors’ quarters, as I don’t
want the men to come into town, because some of them will
be getting drunk, and the ‘ clip’ is close up finished. The
wool-room can be so arranged that the bales of wool will do
admirably for seats for the men, and the servants will bring
their own stools, chairs, &c., and a dray-wheel run up in the
centre to hang lights upon ; and there is your theatre.
What do you think of that for a little bit of improvisatoire,
eh ?” “ Thank you, sir,” I replied ; “ and lam more glad
to come out for the reason you have given in relation to the
men, and very thankful for your kind offer. Now I will go
up to the station and let the men know.” “ Yes. Good morn-
ing.” After breakfast the next morning after the perform-
ance he sent for me to his office, and asked if any money had
been paid for the entertainment by any one. “No : for
this reason, the overseer told me not to receive any.” “ That
was right. Well, then, let me hope this little cheque will
give you as much satisfaction as you gave us ; and if you
like to take in the ‘ Canning-down’ Station, I have notified
you and your entertainment in that missive.” And from
that out I never failed to obtain a credential from one station
to anothev. These landlords many of them are “ horse-
planters,” and I could fill a volume about their nefarious acts.
This particular pub that I have instanced was one of the class.
We were too late for to pitch our tents that night, and so we


became his victims. For the three glasses of hot negus during
the performance, and one each before retiring, 6s. ; stabling
two horses, 12s. ; room, £1 ; three teas, three beds, and
three breakfasts, 18b. ; attendance, half-crown—total,.
£2 18s. 6d. This little extortion is presented before the
horses came round. “ Oh, by-the-bye, that fool of a black-
fellow put your horses in the paddock this morning without
asking me—the fool ! But they will be here in a very few
minutes.” Those few minutes extended into a few days.
We obtained our information from the blackfellow addressing
the publican, as it was intended we should do, to make it
seem more plausible, “ Come, hurry up those horses.”
“ But one of ’em’s got out long a fence-top, end long where
Bullocky Bill’s got out.’ “Now, didn’t I tell you to fix
that fence'!” By this time, of course, we are outside, too.
“ Ah, ah, this blackfellow says one of your horses has got
out. Get away you and track him at once. Why for, you
big one fool come all long way back to yabber about it 1
Why didn’t you follow up tracks, eh 1 ?” And of course we
follow the blackfellow. We now pitch our tent down at
the creek, which blights his further extortion, and riled him,
you may be sure, to think we were independent of his shelter
for meals and everything. Of course now the horse can be
found as soon as the blackfellow likes, for he is in league
with him, and there is nothing to be got out of us ; and on
the third day he’s found, for which the blackfellow is paid
the pound promised, and which goes into the landlord’s
pocket. Oh ! the money spent and time lost over these
scoundrelly “horseplanting” publicans that I have expe-
rienced ! The worst of it is you are helpless, and he, pre-
tending to condole with you, is all the time laughing in his
sleeve at the success of his myrmidons plant when he sees
you return from your daily search unavailingly.
I managed to fix one just after leaving Orr’s Station,
at a township containing the usual blacksmith’s shop, public
house, and post-office, with about a dozen cottages
scattered about, and a district trooper’s residence. We
camped very nearly a quarter of a mile away, just in
the bend, where there was very good picking ; so we
did not tie the horses up, but “belled” and “hobbled”
them out. Abrut dawn I heard one of the horses, mine, I


knew by the bell, was being hunted right acres the Billa-
bong; so I caught Sam’s horse and started in pursuit. He
rode through, and not round, he believing if we did hear
by the bell that the horse was being hunted that we would
not dare to follow that way, but go round, which would give
him time to get away and slip off the bell. He had already
got the hobbles off. If he had removed the bell at the same
time I should not have been able half so well to follow him
up, but as I just reached the top of the rise I saw him down
in the gully, making round the bend of a small lagoon, and
then I heard the bell stop as though it was being taken off,
I waited where I was, because I could see quite plain now,
and I saw him plant the bell and the hobbles, then jump on
his horse’s back and ride quite nonchalantly back again—•
not to pass me and go through the lagoon again, but round
it, towards the township. I hastened up to the trooper’s
residence and told him my case. He had been down at the
camp the night before yarning with us, and, as he stepped
out with me on to his verandah, we saw the blackfellow
cantering along up towards the township, but as soon as he
saw us he wheeled right round and displayed just what the
trooper wanted to find out, whose horse he was riding, and
saw it was the publican’s. Three weeks ago, he said, four
bullock-drays camped on the same spot as you are, and one
of the men’s horses was lost then, and that fellow found
it, and obtained a pound. I thought that was a plant, and
said so, I remember, to the landlord. That fellow belongs to
him, and he is the one we must get at. It’s no use saying
anything until we do. Come and show me the plant of the
hobbles and bell; I’ll get my horse. I went straight to
the place : he saw them, and left them. In less than an
hour we found the blackfellow at breakfast, told him the
charge in the presence of the landlord, took him and locked
him up. He told the whole story. He was to plant all the
horses he could, and charge a pound for finding the horse,
the landlord to have it for “grog” and “tucker,” and a
few shillings also. “ Now, you come with me, and fetch hob-
bles, horse, and bell.” And in less than an hour we were
packed ready to start. In answer to my question should I
be required 1 he replied, “Of course, it would be all the
better. But the blackfellow has convicted his master, whom I


have also told I am going to lay a charge against for
employing the man to do the deed, and of his complicity in
the money received for finding what he authorised
to be planted, and, on my oath discovering, through
you, the bell and hobbles. The district magistrate will be
through here to-morrow to hold court at the township you
will next pass through ; but this case can’t come off until the
the next time.” So then we started on our way, and I
heard nothing more about it, being miles beyond. The next
adventure was with Johnson the bushranger. He had taken
full possession of the roadside “ trap” for unwary travellers,
yclept a “ public-house,” What possible business could be
done there except by drovers? There were no stations
within seven, nine, eleven, and fourteen miles. This John-
son kept a girl there, whom he had abducted from Mudgee,
near which locality he had hailed from also. His haunt was
not far away, and he was making one of his periodical visits
to his “ inamorata.” As we drew near he bailed us up,
with “ Stop where you are !” presenting his revolver ; and,
as he came nearer us, said, “How, what ‘talking irons *
have you got beside that gun V’ We told him none. “ Well,
hand that over. Now go ahead and I’ll escort you. As
soon as he got up to the house he ordered some one to take
the horse out; then he put a saddle on him and rode away.
The landlord then came up to me, and said, “ Can your
horse jump a fence ?” “ I don’t know,” I replied. “ Because
if he can you may wish him good-bye. That’s Mr. Johnson,
the bushranger. At present he is boss over me and the
house.” Yes, and from what I saw and could draw inferences
from, he was a very lucrative boss while he remained each
time. So he said, “You have got music and an entertain-
ment ?” What an idiot that Sam is, was my inward expres-
sion, to make our business known. We are in for, perhaps,
two or three days’ detention. He now came with the horse,
and I was glad to hear him say to the landlord, “ He’d be a
good staying horse, I believe, but no jumper.” Then they
conferred together, and Johnson came to me and said, “So
you can give us seme fun, eh ?” “ Yes,” I replied, “ and
here’s a programme. So while you read that we will go over
to the river and make down our camp.” “ Nary bit, ‘ old
horse 1 have got to count that cash you carry about with


you yet! which, I have no doubt, you are eager to plant
down there if I let you go. Here boss No 2, tell your
missus to find that lady the best accommodation, and no
‘ shenanikin.’ You understand what that means? Madam,
allow me to help you.” And ho just lifted my wife, and
placed her as lightly on the ground as he would a child.
Such a physique and form! as fine as any I ever saw, and
some two or three inches over six feet. “ Here, ‘ Snowy’
(this to the blackfellow), put this horse up, and let him be
found in the morning, or look out.” My wife told me when
I went to the room allotted to us that the landlady had told
her that nobody was bailed up. It was only a formula he
went through when any stranger came to the house while he
was there, and if we humoured him we would find he was a
real decent fellow, and by doing this we would save our
money, for he had plenty. His girl was away disguised,
looking out for anything suspicious, and to give him warn-
ing. We knew you were coming long ago, and had your
descriptions also, so we just let things drift, and I acknow-
ledged him as one in authority. After the performance,
which he prolonged until past midnight, he said to me,
“ Look here, old man, such a bit of fun as we have had to-
night doesn’t often occur, you bet. Now, I am going to
stand ‘ Sam’ for ’em all. What’s to pay ?” “If you are
satisfied with what has been done for your amusement, and
mean what you say, pay just what you think the entertain-
ment is worth,” I replied. “ Well, then, this ‘ stiff’ (cheque)
is for £3 17s. (I think it was), but it is all according to
where you try to put it away whether it will be any good to
you or not, cos all of ’em are queer.” Now this acknow-
ledgment put me into a quandary of thought. “ This
cheque,” I said to myself, “ will jeopardise my liberty if
found in my possession, but how to refuse it ? This moun-
tain of hot blood and muscle will reckon me up as being un-
sympathetic with his proceedings, and perhaps turn right
round and take from me what I have. How glad I was
Sam wasn’t there. He would not have hesitated a moment.
“Look here, Johnson,” I said, “ you say you are going to
marry that girl to exempt her from complicity in your ex-
ploits, and it shows to me you possess a manly nature, and
in consideration of that act will you accept our little enter-


tainment as a free gift, and all I ask is the return of the
gun.” “All right, old man ; if you shan’t have it
all, though I am collecting as many of them poppers as I
can find to keep up at my ambuscade.” So the next morn-
ing we just cleared out as we had arrived, and very thankful
that we were so well out of the adventure. Johnson was
sentenced by the Mudgee magistrate, who was also his
captor, to some term of imprisonment of a not very long
duration. He married the girl, who would not again return
to her parents, but, instead, went as servant to the magis-
trate until her husband’s time was completed.


•CHAPTER XXII.—ARRIVAL AT BOURKE—
BLOCKED BY THE FLOODS.
Well, our decision in relation to not performing at either
of the three hotels in Bourke was frustrated, there being no
public hall or institution there at that time. The one most
available room had just been completed, and was shortly to
he opened by the hospital committee with a concert to be
given by ladies and gentlemen to raise funds for the hospital.
As I have already remarked, it was raining heavily, and had
been all day, so just on entering the town and not far from
the hospital there was a small sandhill elevation, and we de-
termined to make that our camping spot, as being the most
available, until we could look around, and as I walked down
the township I saw people were engaged at “ banking up”
with earth all around their dwellings. There was also an
empty cottage standing quite isolated, and within easy access
of any part of the township and our camp also. My resolu-
tion was taken. I’ll obtain possession of that for a month.
I made enquiries, and was directed to the owner. I told
him what I wanted to do. “ Yes,” he said, “ you can have
it for a month, and welcome, for the tramps and ‘scow-
bankers’ will take forcible possession these wet nights,
and the place will be pulled to pieces.” Then we
got into conversation about our entertainment, and I
found that he was the principal of the hospital com-
mittee. It was he who acquainted me about what
they were going to do. The next day, after we had got our
belongings into the cottage, he called, with two other gentle-
men. The question he asked was, “ What night have you
decided on for your entertainment?” I replied, “It all will
depend upon the weather.” “ Yes,” he said ; “we are wait-
ing for that also.” “ Well,” I replied, “ I will be guided by
any suggestion you have to make, as I certainly would not
clash with the concert to raise funds for your hospital. I
would rather cast my lot in with yours, and so make one
great whole of it.” I saw both the wisdom as well as the
policy of doing this, because I knew I should have to depend


a good deal upon being on friendly terms with the people.
My present position was hampered by the floods, and there
was no certainty of how long I may have to be detained there.
“ That was just the very thing we came to propose to you,” he
said, “ and to know what your terms would be to mix it in with
our concert; but since you have so considerately proposed to
give your conjoint services for any night we may consider
available, lam very glad • and when you give your ‘night’
you will find you will be well supported in return for your
kindness.” After they went Sam came to tell me he had
engaged over at the “ dancing-hall” for three months. "“I
am very glad,” I said ; and so we parted. Well, Burke
was our “ forced” abiding place for over seven months. I
occupied my time with a school of about a dozen youngsters.
My cottage had been used as a school-house, but the master
had left some time, his excuse being, it didn’t pay. Well,
I can say that I was most liberally treated in not one but
many acts of kindness, my wife especially so. The Rev. Mr.
Johnson, Wesleyan minister, called almost every day after
the first Sunday of our attending his church service ; and an
excellent, good young man, I believe, he was. Well, all this
time the overflow from the river, the mailman told me he
had to swim yet, but it was now beginning to subside, and
in another month, he thought, would be almost evaporated,
but I wasn’t to travel that way, “ Man proposes, God dis-
poses.” He had a few more “stripes” to inflict upon me.
He knew why his servant Rev. Mr. Johnson’s advice was not
accepted and followed. He knew all about the vaunting
ambition that was innate in me, and all about my determi-
nation to possess that spanking pair of “ greys ” and highly-
finished vehicle that I was going to return to Melbourn with
and astonish some of them by my successes. But, oh, what
an opposite result awaited me ! One morning there was
great excitement in Burke. “Ten thousand” travelling
sheep were coming in to South Burke, to be crossed over.
Horses and drays, with any amount of labour, were required
to get pine saplings to improvise a bridge to send them over.
I gained much information by watching them, which I was
afterwards called upon to put into practice. “ Going to
Hay did you say ?” That was my question to the overseer.
“ Yes.” My next was, “ How long do you expect to take V


“ Well,” he replied, “that depends all upon the state of
things on ahead : if we encounter much water it will pro-
long the time greatly, ‘ bridge-making.’ We can’t get sheep
through water like cattle, you know.” “ I hope, for the sake
of my wife, we shall do it in nine or ten weeks. My
reason for asking you is,” I said, “ because I wished to avail
myself of your company.” “ Oh,” he replied, “ that is right
enough ; the more the merrier. If you can put up with the
the tediousness and monotony of four, five, and six miles a
day ; not more, unless the man who explores ahead finds an
available camp nearer or further.” “Do you start on the
road to Hay at once as soon as the sheep are got over 1” I
enquired. “ Yes ; but we camp them at the sandhill, six
miles from here, to count them and put them into two thou-
sand flocks, one for each man.” “ Thank you,” I said. “ I
can’t help the tediousness ; it will be our safest way.” I
saw him three days after, when I was haying the trap
looked over and getting some of the paddock dirt out of
“ Stumpy.” “ Oh,” he said, “ I didn’t know you had a con-
veyance. I thought you wanted to put your wife with mine
on the ‘ration dray.’ Look here,” he said, “you’d better
take a flock of sheep, and put my wife and yours together in
that trap, and you can have a pound a week and a double
ration. I have been trying to get the man belonging to this
dog, but he won’t leave the pub, and so I have bought it.
He will take a flock anywhere.” Well, I, poor fool, thought
that I had fallen upon quite a fortunate thing, and agreed
with him at once, and the next evening I made my first
acquaintance with a sheep camp as one of its belongings. It
took nineteen weeks to reach Hay ; and oh, the horrors of
that journey ! I can’t depict it, and don’t want to try. I
should be dreaming again of crawling over the sinking
sheep to get myself out of the spewey bogs, or going to sleep
on night watch and find more than half the sheep had got
away into the blackness and darkness and rain, or let the
fires go down, and the dingoes had rushed in and scattered
them in all directions. Then the counting, and the boxing,
and the temporary bridge-building, and the grass-seeds get-
ting up even under your armpits ! Oh, dear ! But once you
are in the thick of “ sandy desert” plains and scrub, miles
away from civilization, there is no getting away. So at la,st


we reached our desired haven ; and if my cheque for £l9.
should be quadrupled to do the trip again I wouldn’t
have accepted it. Why, the money scarcely paid the ravages
■of breakage and wear and tear of clothes, as well as consti-
tution, I obtained leave to camp in the corner of a paddock
by the river for a week to recruit and get new shafts and
■new tilt, felloes for wheels, harness repaired, &c. We started
on to the “ Old Man” Fifty-mile Plain at dawn the day
week of our arrival without playing at all in Hay. We
reached the shanty Half-way, paid a shilling for a bucket of
water for the horse, put on his nose-bag, and made ourselves
some tea. We sat underneath our trap until four, and
leached the end of our fifty miles by about nine or ten. At
that town of Deniliquin I first again heard of my brother,
after seeing him off in the Woozeer twenty-five years before.
A man by the name of Vowells hailed me the next day with
“ How do you do, Mr. Gardner?” I took no surprise at the
man accosting me, because a thousand people would know
me, though I might not know one of the thousand. Well, I
said, “ You know my name it seems, but yours I certainly
can’t call to mind.” “What, notYowells? Why, I have
sailed in the same ship with you.” “ Ah,” I said, “do you
know Mr. William Gardner?” “Yes.” “ Well, lam his
brother. Do you know where he can be addressed ?” Then
he told me, and we parted. Well, we performed at this
place, with very poor results. On to Echuca, the same ;
not enough taken to pay hotel expenses. On to Bendigo;
it was no use trying there, because the theatre
was open, Wolff, the manager, offered me a few
nights engagement, but I knew him of old. He was
an adventurer, and was in my debt for a week’s salary four
years before, so I declined ; not without refreshing his
memory about the little amount due by him to me, but with-
out receiving anything beside a promise to pay as soon
as possible. I now made my way across to Mount Black-
wood, with the' result that the township was being done
to death with Christy Ministrels, so I left there, and just as
we reached the foot of the Mount we had an upset, with a
tremendous smash. Fortunately we were neither of us in the
conveyance. We got patched up by a blacksmith and pushed
on to Melbourne, which we reached in a most forlorn con-


dition. Instead of the pair of spanking greys and a grand
vehicle, it was a worn out horse and a ramshackle trap, with
broken springs, the whole at the sale yard realising £5 14s.
net, after commission. “ Now then,” said my wife, “ I hope
you are satisfied ?”


CHAPTER XXIIL—CONCLUSION.
Well we took our travelling chest, cooking utensils, etc.,
and put them on a dray, telling the man to take them down
to the Sandridge train. “ Why ?” “Ah ! that’s the ques-
tion,” for didn’t I know lots that I could have left them in
eharge of while I looked about with my wife for some fur-
nished rooms. But have I not said there was a power above
mine directing ? However, my object certainly was to evade
the eyes of one or the other of our acquaintance in our travel-
worn appearance ; but why Sandridge? Wasn’t there Eme-
rald Hill, Collingwood, Hawthorn, Richmond, or half a dozen
other places for a man with no decided destination to meet,
act, or do anything particular ? Then why came the glib
order, Sandridge, without the slightest hesitation ? Why ?
Because as surely as God prepared the whale for Jonah, so
had He determined that that servant of His, the Pastor of
the Little Bethel at that place, was to meet me there. Well,
leaving our things at the station, we began looking about.
“ I’m thinking we should buy a few bits of necessary furniture
from that second-hand shop over there; there, don’t you see,” I
said. “ Oh, yes, I should like it, let us look for a cottage,’
she replied, “I don’t care about furnished apartments.”
Well, a cottage was found at about three o’clock in the after-
noon, and by seven, everything that was really needful —just
that, and no more—were in the two rooms, and everything
fixed, and with two one-pound notes at fifty years of age, I
started out to begin the world again. “Now Joe,” this with
a warning finger, which conveyed much that I understood.
Poor girl, she didn't know that I’d been swallowing brandy
all day, which in my state of dissipated excitement had taken
no more effect upon me than water poured upon a duck’s
back. Well, I wandered about aimlessly, having left
my wife making a home of what little she had to do it with
by putting things together her own way. In a short time
the excitement was over, I began to feel that my potations
required awakening with another, or else go home and retire
to bed, and I was just cogitating upon which would be master,


when I heard a person from behind walking briskly up.
Then he touched me upon the shoulder, and as I turned
towards him, he said, “Oh ! beg your pardon ; you are not
the gentleman I expected, but very much of his build from
behind in the deceiving sight of my eyes.” I don't
remember what my reply was, but, in my frame of mind it
was quite likely to be rude. He was about to go ; then
halted and stood still, as though irresolute what to do next.
He then came to me, and said, “You are evidently in
trouble, friend, about something, come inside, and let me
sympathise with you ?” He put his arm in mine ; I yielded
to his persuasion quite unresistingly, for I felt that I was
utterly satiated with everything. He led me into what I
could see was a little chapel of some kind. “It’s not a
service to night,” he said, “ and this is the little Bethel for
sailors. I came by appointment to meet some of the
stewards, and mistook you for one of them. lam the pastor,
so while we have got a few minutes to spare, tell me if I can
do anything for you 1” I said nothing. He continued—“ I
really should like to help you, if you will only confide in me.”
Well, it was not so much what the man said that affected
me, for I had heard the same words used many times, but I
felt that the man meant every word he uttered. He innocu-
lated me with a sympathetic magnetism which drew me to
him. I just acquainted him with what my position then
was and the cause of it. “ Poor man ! poor man !” he ex-
claimed, “ you are not meditating following that life again,
are you 1 ?” “No, 1 have done with it—sick of it.” “Ex-
cuse me,” he said, “ but does your present decision extend to
theatrical life altogether ?” “ Yes, altogether and such an
ejaculatory “ Thank God, thank God,” issued from his lips
that 1 felt ready to say the same in sympathy. “My dear
friend, there is no time to lose ; sign this pledge-book at
once,” picking up and opening a volume lying on a table
under the reading-desk. “Now,” he said, “doit with a
will; don’t hesitate; sign.” I did. “ That’s right, now, go
and fetch your wife, will you 1 I have a curiosity to see
her, and I can’t leave for just a little while.” Did Igo ?
Yes, that man’s sympathy, coming to me just as I was in
the very depths, made me feel changed, even in that short
time. My wife didn’t hesitate, when I told her what had


transpired, and came at once. That man had evidently
studied character. He didn’t begin to talk to her about her
soul and repentance then ; that was laid aside for after use,
to be worked in in due season, and neither did he neglect it.
But now he was condoling with her upon the untoward
results of the expedition, and wormed out of her how glad'
she was that it had ended so, for now there will be no more
of it. “ Well, now, who is your landlord? and—yes, furni-
ture, too, you will want, won’t you ? and I must find time
to call upon you to-morrow.” “ Where is it you live ?”
“In one of Mrs. Davis’s cottages,” I replied. “ Oh, I
know her ; you will find the widow and her sons very kind,
just people.” “Will you put your name here, Mrs. Gar-
diner, below your husband’s ? It might help him, you know.”
“ Yes,” she replied, “ and we are glad and thankful for your
kindness.” “ That’s right, now, don’t trust to yonr own
strength, but I must call upon you to-morrow. Good-bye.”
Well, the next morning there was, of course, the usual
internal craving for the morning stimulant after such an
indulgence as that of the previous day, but my head went into
a bucket of water instead and a saline draught was partaken
of. Whilst travelling, my wife and I generally halted about
eleven or twelve o’clock to have some bottled beer and a
mouthful of something to eat, so when that time arrived, I
said, “About lunch, wife, are you going to have any, or
wait for dinner?’ Not that I had any appetite, but just
to hear what she would say. “ Wait for dinner, of course ;
we are not travelling now to require our bottled beer and
to put the nosebag on the horse for an hour.” “No,” I re-
plied, “ but I expected you would feel the w ant of your glass
of beer.” “ No,” she said, “it don’t trouble me at all. In
fact I think it is more a use than a necessity.” “How do
you feel?” “Well,” I said, “ I can’t express my feelings ;
they are very much as though something was lacking,
yet too dosey and indolent to care about anything
except sleep.” Just then our landlady, who resided
close by, came in. “ Oh,” she said, “ I was not at
home yesterday when you received the key from my son.
I was going to have this cottage newly papered and the
fireplace done up a bit. Would you mind the inconvenience ?”
“ No, madam, certainly not, whan does the tnan want to


comment: 1 ?” I enquired. “Well,” she said, he ought to
have begun it and finished it long ago, but the man is
becoming worse every dav through drink.” “ Well, madam,”
I replied, “ if this cottage was my own I should do it
myself without any help except a lad just to level the bottom
part of the paper, and if you like to employ me you can for
I have no employment just now.” “ Well, lam very glad
you have mentioned it, for that released me from asking you
if you would. Now you can either take it out in rent or—”
“ I beg pardon for interrupting what I know you are going
to say,—would you consider four weeks rent too much ?”
“No, it meets my thoughts exactly.” “Very well, madam,
consider it concluded,! ’ll do it.” “Thank you, and will you
come in by and bye and choose the pattern ? I have no
choice, but I have heaps of wall paper.” Well, she had not
left us five minutes before the Rev. Mr. Johnstone and his
wife knocked at the door. I opened it and before I could
almost offer the morning salutation, the brisk little old lady
said, “ I want your wife and I am in a tremendous hurry.
Oh, that’s Mrs. Gardiner I suppose. You talk to Mr.
Johnstone here while I go and make friends with your wife.
I want to take her away from you but only for a few days I
hope.” And after she had passed in to her : he said, “My
wife is visiting a sick lady who has lost her day-nurse.
Oh dear, oh dear ! I hope it’s not the old disease broken out
again in her, but the tonic wine is certainly going fa.-ter than
the prescribed doses would consume ; my wife says, and oh,
—” just then the door opened and the lady came out “ Well
my dear,” she said to her husband, “ is Mr. Gardiner
agreeable ?” “To what madam ? I have had no proposition
made to me.” “Just like him Mr. Gardiner.” And having told
me my wife was agreeable to go as day nurse if 1 was, from
nine in the morning until eight o’clock in the evening, of
course I acquiesced and she went with them. Mr. Johnstone
saying as he went out, “ I am coming back to see you shortly.”
Upon his return his first words were, “ Your wife’s services
have been accepted, and the lady seems to take on with her
exceeding well ; also, I have just met a friend, there is his
address. I have recommended you to him, he is a manu-
facturing chemist, and he is just now engaged in preparing a
disinfecting solution. The scarlet fever which has manifested


itself sometime here and there in the city, has now broken
out in the Emerald Hill Orphanage. It will be ready in a
few days and he is wanting a man of good address and
business qualifications to whom he is willing to advance a
good percentage for running it. What do you think about
it and will you make it your business to see him ?” “ Yes,
certainly I will and desire to offer you my sincere thanks for
your kind thoughtfulness.” “ Very well, now don’t you see
in all this a hiddden hand held out to help you?” “My dear
sir,” I replied, “ it’s no use for me to dissemble, I cannot
feel oi see anything besides this, that I am a disappointed
man, and not at all in a subdued frame of mind enough to
feel anything besides rebelliousness at my position.” “ Poor
man 1 pjoor man ! how do you feel in health to-day ?” “ Well
I can’t express to you how very miserable I am. I just feel
as though I could be best off in some solitary darkened room
where I could lie and sleep existence right away. I saw the
dear man was evidently distressed so I changed the subject
by asking what hour he thought it would be most con-
venient to see this Mr. Graham—which I read was his name
on the paper. “ I think he said you are likely to see him at any
time during the day at his laboratory, but your desire to
sleep is to me a new experience of persons who have been
suddenly deprived of their usual stimulants. Their com-
plaint has always been that they could not sleep,” “ Yes, I
know,” I replied ; “ in cases of heavy and continuous drink-
ing I am aware it is so, for have I not been troubled with
these kind of sots 1 Yes, and had to my sorrow and dis-
grace to watch and tend them to keep them right to perform
at night. I never could understand that sort of thing before
I witnessed it—how men who, in their sobriety were most
pleasant company, could stand at the bar of one of those low
bush pubs., and drink, and drink, until thev became stupe-
fied, and, for the next two or three days, if they could not
obtain more, suffer the torments of the damned. The
ravages that I have witnessed through drink--the orgies, the
profanity, the paroxysms, and delirium which I have seen at
ssme of these roadside places amongst shearers and others,
some shouting for the Holy Virgin, praying and blaspheming,
all in a breath —scared me from partaking of any of their
vile spirits. Nothing but a glass of bottled ale or porter.


Yes, I have seen men on a Saturday night, four of them,
lifted bodily out of the bar stupidly drunk, and carried over
to a big gum tree by two of the great louts of sons and the
old publican helping. Then laid out in a row, with their
swags put under their heads, and a bottle of ‘lighting rum”
as it is called, placed under them, with a big can of water,
and there left, because they expected the trooper out on the
Sunday morning. All those men had been ‘ lambed down,
to the tune of perhaps £ls, £2O, or even £3O each in about
four or five days. The landlord obtains possession of the
cheques under the pretence of cashing them, and returns to
say, “ I find I have nothing but small cheques and two or
three pound notes, but you can go on, you know, with your
cheques all the same, and you can keep tally of what you get.
You and I will go into the township to-morrow and get some
change ; and the poor dupes, who expect to be driven in,
find to their sorrow, after recovering from their oblivion,
that, according to the landlord’s account, they are all more
or less in his debt. They are shown into a room full of
broken bottles, crockery, pieces of old furniture piled up in
heaps, a pier glass cracked across, all kinds of manufactured
debris, all of which damages he estimates at the very least
at £SO. “ There is your handiwork, gentlemen, and there
is the axe with which you performed the operation.” All
this in a bantering tone, and now he desires to know what
they think of their work. The above is a veritable fact. A
servant betrayed his master ; he swore that this debris was
kept locked up in an old shed, and was cleaned up every
year to be used for the same vile purpose of robbing the
poor men of their cheques.” “Is it possible,” he replied,
“ that such vileness can exist in the human heart!” “ Well,
my informant was the trooper who had the case in hand, and
that robber’s den was situated somewhere between Yandah,
on the Burnet River, and Dubbo, I think, in Queensland.”
“ Bless me, have you kept any diary of your travels ?” he
asked, “ No, only short mems. ; nothing consecutive.”
“ Well, will you let me know the result of your interview
with my friend, Mr, Graham ?” “ Yes, certainly; then
good-bye, and now don’t let your early lessons of Chris-
ianity, which you related to me last night, be lost; cherish
them afresh, and pray don’t forget that your own unsubdued


heart will never keep you from the snares of the tempter.
You will find a wonderful relief if you will only ask the
Lord to help you, and thank Him for what He has done.’
And he was gone. Then such a desire came over me, I
wished he would come back and pray for me. There is
something in a heart not quite callous that exercises a won-
derful desire to be definitely prayed for. Why is it that
ministers in general are so conservative 1 Surely if it is
necessary for actors to study human character in order to
pourtray it, it is equally incumbent upon ministers 1 I had
just informed him about my state of despondency, and what
better ground could he find to work upon than a heart
bowed down with grief ? Had he, before he went, invited me
to kneel down with him, then opened the little Bible which
had been in our possession since 1851, and showed to me
the last three verses of the 11th chapter of Mathew —which
three verses eventually became my salvation —and said,
‘‘Now, I earnestly invite you to study those three verses.
That invitation is to you ; accept it, plead for it at once
while you are alone, and here you will soon, very soon, find
His presence and the rest and peace He so kindly offers.
Exercise simple faith, that’s all, and tell Him you desire to
surrender all your future life to Him”—the great transaction
would have been done then, instead of lapsing into thirteen
weeks before it was accomplished. Oh, why will not minis-
ters study human nature ? Had he only read the facial
expression, which I could feel was manifesting itself by my
varied emotions and quivering lip ! Oh, I honestly believe
that if ministers as a body would come out from themselves
more into everyday life, what a power for good they would
be to those of their own denomination and the community at
large, instead of wrapping up their spiritual gifts and talents
in the napkin of cnnservativeness. Pope has said “The proper
study of mankind is man.” Yes, if human nature was more
studied by God’s servants, and they had a little friendly con-
versation with those especially, with whom they have to do,
it would wonderfully enhance their preaching powers, because
there would be more unity in church membership and less
faultfinding with the minister at his negligence of his flock.
I am acquainted with one minister only who is untramelled
by conservativeness, and it has in no way detracted from,


but rather enhanced, his good name in every circuit to which
he has belonged that I am acquainted with, and I have no
doubt it will gratify him to know what one man of the world
had to say about him. I could enumerate two or three.
This man was driving me to Saddleworth. The conversa-
tion at last drifted suddenly into him saying, “ That’s a jolly
parson I saw you walking with yesterday. Have you known
him long?” “Well,” I replied, “about thirteen years.”
“ And was he always the same kind of a ‘ card’ (man) ?”
u Just the same,” I said; “no difference.” “Ah, well, do
you know, he’s the only parson that ever got me to go to
church. They all seemed to me to be such a stand off sort
of a lot that I was very nearly insulting him the first day he
came up to me while standing outside of my hotel verandah.
He put out his hand. I was all but saying, ‘You’ve made a
mistake ; I don’t belong to your craft.’ But, as Mayor of
the town, my position flashed before me, and I shook hands
with him and invited him in, never expecting him to accept,
but he did, and my wife and daughter froze on to him, too.
Well, we all went to hear him preach the following Sunday
night, and I believe he must have known my thoughts about
the universe and how it came into existence. ‘ Some
people,’ he said, ‘ would tell you that this grand and beauti-
ful world just grew ; that this earth, which was without form
and void, became the vast beautiful planet that it is just by
nature only.’ 1 wonder what you would think of the pro-
prietor of one of these nice stores down town, whose window
is so artistically dressed and looks so pleasing to the eye, if,
on speaking to him and complimenting his handiwork, you
said, ‘ To decorate a window like that, Mr. So and So, must
cost you a great deal of zeal and patience,’ he should reply,
‘ Tut, tut ; my dear sir, that window just fixes itself, only a
little bit of haberdashery thrown in on this side and some
particles of grocery stuff on the other, that’s all, and each
window just forms itself into the appearance you witness.’
Would not that man say to the first speaking acquaintance
he met, ‘Do you know that man who keeps yon store
opposite, he must be either a lunatic or a consummate liar.
He has just declared to me that both his windows decorate
themselves without aid.’ But the cases are parallel, dear
friends. And so he went on. Well, he cornered me, any-


how, and made me to see that he was right.” Well, the
“ disinfectant washing solution” was a success always, both
for the purpose it was intended and myself, and my employer
and I travelled with it everywhere, as the fever in ’75 visited
most of the towns in Victoria, but, as it died out, so did the
use of it, as the odour was not pleasant. People would not
use it as a household requisite, unless necessitated. Just
then, most fortunately for me, I fell in one day with an old
brother actor who had some time since retired from the
stage, and was following his own business as a mattress
maker anti Fiench polisher. It was he who presented me
with the polish known as “ Gardiner’s furniture polish.”
It has now passed out of my hands into those of Mr. George
Eustis, news agent and polish depot, Alberton and Port
Adelaide, thiough domestic affliction. I started with this
polish, and visited the same people to whom I had sold the
solution. It was a success also in every sense of the word,
for I have never heard a dissenting voice upon its usefulness,
cleanliness, and general utility, wherever people sunk preju-
dice upon any other. I had arrived in Ballarat one Satur-
day by midday train with some of it, having done Melbourne,
and was looking about for a room, when I saw in Lyons
Street a single-room tenement standing by itself in a yard,
and*l went to the house to enquire if it was to let, and I
was greatly astonished to find the lady who opened to me was
an old acquaintance. She was once costumist at the theatre.
The kind old lady was only too happy to assist me in my
need, after I had told her what I wanted. “ Oh, yes,” she
said, “that little place is mine, and the old gentleman who
rents it has gone down to New Zealand. He won’t return
for three or four weeks yet. How long do you want it ?”
“ Only for a few days, Mrs. Laurence,” I replied. “ Oh,
well, then, that’s all right. You will find every necessary
thing in it you require. Come in and have a wee drappie of
something?” “No,” I said, “ thanks all the same; I have
not tasted any intoxicants for nine weeks now.” “ Given
up drinking, then? Ma conscience!” said the old Scotch
body, “ but I wish my Robbie would do the same.” “Have
you seen him ?” “ No,” I replied, “ I have only just
arrived.” “Ah, the poor laddie, lam afraid he is killing
himself fast since he has been in the public-house business.”


Poor Laurence, his mother’s words came true. He literally
did kill himself, for in less than five days after he was laid in
his last resting-place. A. splendid actor, a loving husband,
but, alas, another victim to alcohol. On Sunday night I
went to hear Matthew Burnet preach at the Albert Hall, and
he inflicted upon me such a shaking up as I had nevei before
experienced. I had been very proud of my success in being
able to refuse the many invitations I had been offer* d to
“ liquor up ” In fact 1 was encompassed around with the
garment of self-righteousness I was doing despite to the
love of God, thinking I was the author of all this myself,
forgetting that God helps any man who puts away wrong
and takes hold of the right. God helps that poor man ; it
is his attribute to do so, although the recipient does not
acknowledge it. That was my case, and he was finding me
out. That night, after the sermon, was one to be remem-
bered. I couldn’t sleep. Tortured? Yes, and that tortur-
ing influence of conscience followed me to Hobart. I had
got nine dozen of my polish with me. I had been very-
successful at Launceston, and had sent home the money to
my wife. Could I dispose of that which I had all right ?
but without I did I was fixed for coach fare. “No, no,
no,” every place the same ; “ we have had too many Mel-
bourne swindles.” This was Saturday afternoon. The
return ticket by the boat expired on Tuesday. I had sold a
bottle or two here and there. The “ Temperance House,”
where 1 was stopping, had taken three, and I was telling the
landlady my fix. “ Have you tried So and So ?” “No,” I
replied, “ I thought I had visited all the places that were
most likely.” Well, I went there. “No I showed it on
different pieces of furniture, and he saw its effect, then con-
sidered a little, and said, “ Have you sold any?” “Yes, a
few bottles.” “ Well, you bring me a bona-fide testimonial
from each, will you ?” “ Yes,” and I did so. Not one
refused, and he took the lot. Can I express the thrill of
elated satisfaction I felt after it was done ? “ No,” I said,
“ there is something in this.” Yes, there was, and I felt it.
The impelling influence of the dear Spirit of God was in it,
and after that night I was no longer troubled or tortured.
Why, because I just gave my thanks to Him to whom
thanks were due, and claimed the promise of pardon on my


knees, and knew that “thy sins that are many are all for-
given.” I was reading some time after some papers and
treatises, in one of which the author asks, “ Is it not reason-
able that any man who has been redeemed from an old and
evil life into the new and living way, as it is in Christ
Jesus, should not use all the ransomed powers God had
given him to help his fellow man to obtain the same happi-
ness ?” At the reasonableness of this, of course, I did not
demur, but how to set about it ? I wanted a manager for
Christ now to come and say, “ Now, Gardiner, you have
served the cause of Satan long enough, I want you to do
something for Him who has done so much for you.” But
no one came ; oh if some one only had, and put half a dozen
sermons into my hand and said, “ Study them, you have
been all your lifetime conveying the thoughts of others to do
evil, these are to do good, there will be an opportunity for
you some day. That was just what I needed, because all
my lifetime had been subjected to restraint, direction, and
management. There never was an actor yet, I believe, good
at extempore speaking. I have heard some of the best, when
suddenly called upon unprepared with their usual documents
of a farewell speech, make a most lame and disjointed
thing of it; and when I heard Mr. E. T. Smith conveying
John B, Gough’s lectures I said “ that was something of
the kind of thing that ought to have fallen to my lot, ’ for I
was a very cormorant at studying. It was an enjoyment
when it was forced upon me to do, but there scarcely ever
was an actor to be found who would voluntarily take upon
himself to study anything that he was not compelled to. I
I have known parts out for three weeks and never looked at
for the purpose of study until the peremptory order was put
up in the prompt box, “ Rehearsal on Monday ‘ without
parts.’ ” Well, evidently my first advent into Christian life
was amongst the deadliest surroundings. Couldn’t be worse
either at Emerald Hill or anywhere. I found my way into
it without help—human, I mean—and received no help from
any one. No wonder I drifte 1 into a spiritless spiritual life
until I arrived here and met my dear old class leader. He
was the first that manifested any care for my soul. Well. I
have written this book in the interest of common humanity,
for young men in particular, for who can help seeing the


abyss into which so many of them everywhere are sinking by
wrong ambitions, inordinate pleasures, and lustful affection ?
Having been in the vortex, I do not need to be told of the
■cause of that glazed and restless eye, the listless attitude,
and enervating yawn, but attribute it to the theatre and its
■evil surroundings, the billiard table, the syren’s abode, and
the accompanying glass. These victims and the dupes of
other victims can be spotted out any day in our beau-
tiful city, and these vile pleasures will grow unless
subdued, and become as wanton as the drunkard’s
cup—the more partaken of, the more desired, and the
bitter consequences of these uncontrolled passions can be
followed with only one result, debauchery, disease, and
a premature grave. Young man, don’t pooh-pooh ! the voice
of experience ; I want you to accept, not buy it, to your own
future life’s sadness and misery. Refrain from going into
that dark abode surreptitiously that you wouldn’t have the
dear ones at home know you visited. Save future sorrow
and a bitter ending of your present life ; crush out
these vile vices you have been led to participate in ; if you
don’t they will assuredly crush you, and blight every bright
prospect in this life and that which is to come ; and to you,
who have never yet sat within the four walls of a theatre, but
hive been tempted first to go once to gratffy your curiosity,
crush that out also ; and while you have a cricket-bat to
wield, a footbal to kick to goal, and able to stand, head erect,
in that croquet or tennis ground, with your young wives,
sweethearts, sisters and mothers, never mind about the
theatre, let it be a myth.


Supplementary Remarks.
BEHIND THE SCENES.
Of the actors in my time up to fifteen years ago, drink
was the dominant vice. As a rule actors do not swell the
criminal class, as the code of statistics will prove nearly all
over the world, and they live almost entirely within the
circle of their own community, and yet their lives resemble
most those of the Kilkenny cats—jealousy, backbiting, slan-
dering, and traducing are the characteristics of almost every
theatrical company. To prove the truth of this assertion
you have only to obtain an invitation on anv Sunday night
to that rendezvous where actors do most congregate, and there
you will hear discussed the merits and demerits of the different
greatest living actors and actresses, combined with a great
deal of egotism upon what “I did, my boy, on my benefit!
In the last company I was in I had long given myself the
determination to study and play ‘Macbeth.’ and I did it,
sir, very much to the chagrin of our leading man, but who,
after it was over, said, I cannot help but compliment you
upon your rendering many points, especially your reading of
the ‘ outward banners.’ Yes, gentlemen, and this was the
way I read it, Hang out your banners ; on the outward
walls the cry is ‘ still they come ;’ not ‘ Hang out your
banners on the outward walls.’ Don’t you see the originality ?”
“Yes,” replied one, “ only you have made the claim to it,
instead of telling us it was the outcome of a controver-
sial conversation between Mr. Macready and Mr. Phelps,
in which the latter was admitted to have given the
correct rendering.” So in the theatre now you find the
“ leads,” “ the stock,” and “ first utility,” and the “ second
and third utility and these different “grades” hold them-
selves just as distinct one from the other as does society.
So, in regard to actors themselves as a body, they are now
entirely conservative. You hardly ever see them mix up
outside their little world. All this has occurred since poor
G. V. Brookes’ time, who went down in the “ London,” in


’67. Before then you would find the profession associating
and visiting at private houses quite on a footing of a settled
acquaintanceship, and who would vie with each other on a
return engagement to that town, to make them the recipients
of their home hospitality. Yes, if the theatre of to-day could
only be crushed out, and made to fall back upon such as that
I first entered upon, my career in vice would not be clothed
to appear like virtue, and the tastes of the theatre-goers
would not be vitiated as they now are ! Instead of morality
being gained by the theatre representations of to-day, the
mind is corrupted ; instead of the theatre being a benefit to
the community to engraft the mind with plays from the
great dramatists, together with the beauties of Shakespeare,
that would help to lay the mind fallow for nobler and higher
aspirations, the vile abomination that the people are being
educated up to witness now is something startling; the
glare and glitter, and empty pomp, vanity, and fascination of
the theatre, with its vicious surroundings, are corrupting the
very vitals of modesty in the youth of both sexes. Much
has been already written and said about wreckers and home
wrecks. What else can happen to the fair young daughters
of this beautiful city if parents will take them to witness
such plays as are being portrayed on the boards of a theatre
to-day ? Modesty ! it will become a spurious counterfeit
within the casket ! and no one can possibly estimate the
demoralising consequences that such pieces as are being pre-
sented can, in the present and future infliction upon society !
The men and women impersonating such characters are
tainting their own atmosphere and spreading the influence
miasma-like to those who hang upon their lips for the next
“ double entendre so delicately administered as to appear
like a dewdrop of virtue ! Oh ! I know how these things are
done, and how many young girls have been kidnapped into
the theatres on the diggings when their father had gone
to his night-shift down the shaft; connived at by drinking
mothers in some cases, and in others openly by their
parents; and for what 1 ? To appear poised upon that re-
volving wheel dressed in a half nude costume for the
“ pose plastiques,” as they are called ; and what were
the consequences of these pestiferous representa-
tions ? a debauched and inflamed appetite to the onlooke


and ending in a thousand instances by a life of shame to the
poor victims. In such a company as I first had to do with
the ladies (all of them matrons and the older ones) could not
be induced to go round in the “ maypole dance” in a “ three-
quarter skirt,” and it was a difficult matter to get some of
the younger ones to. The manager, very considerate towards
the ladies, would reply, “ Well, ladies, the maypole dance
has to be done, and some of you older ladies will have to
take a ribbon to make up the number. You, of course,
know that it represents a gay village scene, therefore make
your chintz as bright as possible. As to the length, you are
at liberty to suit your own tastes.” And in all my different
engagements I never saw ladies so fraternize and stand ud
for each other. There were no bullying husbands in that
company; it was a wonderful school for suppressing matri-
monial squabbles and keeping husbands in order. While I
was there we had one pair who came round from Sydney.
The man was a real bully and nothing else ; his wife a most
inoffensive, ladylike little woman, who always appeared to be
living in a state of fear and subjection. They had not been
connected long before this could be witnessed, and he was
making a rod for his own back. The fellow was character-
istically abusive—a big, burly man. He was engaged for
what was called the O’Smith’s Business “ Ruffians,” and I
suppose he had played them until his very nature became
innoculated. His officiousness in dictating was very offen-
sive to the manager, because he had c< me from a Sydney
theatre he considered himself an oracle. He had been
quietly suppressed once or twice, but on one occasion he
countermanded a direction given by the manager to his wife.
When he asked him, “Did the Sydnev theatre issue rules'?”
he said, “Yes, sir, certainly it does.” “ Have you studied
ours that are put up in the prompt box?” “Yes, some-
what,” he replied. The manager said to the prompter,
“ Mr. , give the order to clear the stage, and put
down a fine opposite the name of any one refusing to do so,”
It was done. “ Well, sir, you have refused to obey the order
to clear the stage, and a half-crown fine is the result, and I
desire emphatically to acquaint you that your wife is
rehearsing a character which the lady is going to imper.
sonate, and that character is under my direction and manage.


ment, and for that special time out of your control alto-
gether.” So then he began to saunter < iT, muttering some-
thing about challenging the rules, of which the manager
took no notice. The next morning the lady, who appeared
to be very much distressed, after being sympathised with,
wrs asked the reasons. After a good deal of coaxing she
declared “ she did not know what to do. Her husband had
threatened to beat her unless she did the business of the
part as he directed, and not as the manager desired.”
So a conclave of the ladies was formed, and they took
the scene-painter, who was quite the ladies’ man, into their
counsel. *• All right, ladies,” he said, “ you command, I’ll
obey. To-morrow night the piece is to be played, and as he
does not perform in it, you’ll see a bit of fun in the morn-
ing.” “ Well, now, what is it? Because he is, as you can
see, a very stubborn sort of man, and 1 know your proclivity
of old for practical jokes.” “But for the sake of the poor
wife, you know,” said the leading lady. “ Dear madam,” he
replied, “the fellow needs to know that he belongs to the
Melbourne, not the Sydney theatre.” Leave all to me and
my colleague, besides I am not afraid ; these wife bullies
are all cowards.” And sure enough as the morning came
he urged her to do as he dictated, but in the middle of his
harrangue down came a coil of rope from the “ dies A
Willing hands, before he could recover from his bewilder-
ment, had it over his head, and made fast under the armpits,
and away he went, gyrating like a piece of meat on a turn-
spit, and there he hung. Upon a piece of canvas was painted
in large letters within sight of him, “ This is the way we
treat bullies ; when you apologise to the manager and com-
pany you will be lowered.” Well, that even did not stay
him from beating his wife, as he had threatened her for
doing it as the manager directed and not as he had. So
the ladies, headed by their “lead,” determined upon a plan
which, with the sanction of the manager, they intended to
carry out. It was to abduct his wife fur at least three days.
He not only connived at the idea, but enjoyed it. To obtain
the willingness of the lady herself it required a good deal of
persuasion, but, there being no family, eventually with the
co-operating influence of the manager himself it was to be
carried out the next morning. Mrs. 0 , the leading


Jady, took her home. The husband, who had gone some
time, as he had finished in the first part, on arriving at
home found an open sheet of paper conspicuously placed to
meet his eye, on which was written, “ You are a brute, and I
have left you !” The company knew nothing of this, only
one or two of the ladies and the manager Consequently
we were dumbfounded with amazement when the husband
came tearing back just as rehearsal was over, Mrs. C
and her protege having gone. “ Where is my wife, do any
of you know ?” “ Which way did she go when she left ?”
We, of course, were ignorant of what had been done. Well,
that man’s abjectness for three days was something distress-
ing. It was a good job, I think, for the benefit that after-
wards accrued, that it had been kept so secretly by those in
the transaction, or some one would have certainly divulged
the whereabouts of the lady. At first we thought it was all
moonshine, but when two days and nights passed and nothing
was known or heard about her, we began really to pity the
poor man, and we walked and enquired in all directions, of
course to no purpose. The manager’s advice on the second
day was, that all who needed to know should be made
cognisant, and one was to desire him to go this way and
another that. One was to say he had seen her walking in
such and such a direction, for they really did not know of
her whereabouts, and so lead up to at last finding her on the
banks of the Yarra as though contemplating suicide. It
was a delicate matter to accomplish, and required good
acting, but it was completed most successfully, and to see
that man weeping over his wife, having, as he supposed, just
saved her from self-destruction in the Yarra ! Well, he
invited us all to follow him home, and a very comfortable
place they had. He was a very decent sort of man when
out of his moods, and the abduction had a marvellous effect
upon both, for she, from being almost a nonentity, became
one of the jolliest little women imaginable. The change
in him was miraculous. When anything was going to be at
cross purposes with them she had only to put up her finger
and say, “ I shall serve you as I did before 1” But a change
for the very worst kinds of entertainment was fast approach-
ing. Through the news of the diggings at home shipload
after shipload of human freight was being landed upon the


Melbourne Wharf. Some of the poor wretches who arrived
without money expected to pick up gold in the Melbourne
streets, and if ever the two extremes of plenty and poverty
amongst one class, viz —the labouring—were to be met, it
was in those days when the lucky digger and the newly-
arrived, needy emigrant rubbed shoulder to shoulder as they
passed each other in those crowded thoroughfares. It was
not long before every large room at the hotels was turned
into a concert hall, and one in Collins Street, under a bright
and glaring exterior and glittering interior, had the most
lavish accommodation. But, oh, the pollution ! Chinese
boys, in native attire, were kept in constant attendance with
cigais and lighted pastiles, and from the portico, dais, or
rostrum—whatever they may have chosen to call the eleva-
tion, f<>r it was away up near the ceiling, so that the waiters
could pass in and out underneath whilst the multitude were
admitted at the other end—came the most obscene, degrad-
ingly sensual songs that only a depraved and debauched
mind could conceive; and this programme was carried out
night after night for weeks before the authorities suppressed
it. Well, they were paralysed and almost stupefied by this
sudden invasion of evildoers. Coming from the lowest
grades of London East and the “New Cutthere were coster-
mongers, sharpers, pickpockets, and from our own Tasmania
expirees and escaped convicts, some of them the very scum
of humanity. I had an opportunity of witnessing all this,
for I was just recovering from an accident caused by the
manager’s wife shooting me in the head whilst performing
the part of Captain Grampus in “ The Wreck Ashore,” and
narrowly escaping the temporal artery. While walking
round that evening I found no less than six or seven of
these vile dens of infamy, McNeice’s, of the Royal
Exchange (whose son is now station-master at Bowden)
being the only one which was orderly, the people being
admitted by ticket only ; but on Emerald Hill, “ Canvass
Town” now in existence, helped to drain the city of some
of its vileness. And now farewell to all the little
“ domestic dramas” and light farces, with now and again a
Shakespearian treat, for a new school of managers and actors
bad arrived, with new “extravaganzas” and spectacle pieces,
adapted to show off the manager and his wife, with two or


three favorites. Broad farce, also, was now the order of the
day, or rather night; There’.- not the slightest d'»ubt that
the falling off of the legitimate drama of the Phelps, Mac-
ready, and Keen’s «chool can be dated back, too, and all the
balderdash pieces that are continually being represented,
were written and costumed more to display the charms (1) of
actresses than any thing else. Mrs. Honey’s “ Ariel,” in the
Little Witch Street theatre, in the early part of the forties :
either under Buckstone’s or Madame Vestris’s manage-
ment, I forget which, her pedal extremities created such
a sensation that some of the faculty were heard to assert
that the “ Venus Medici’s” were only parallel to the beauty,,
contour,and anatomy of that lady’s. Well, the people flocked
there, and the adjacent theatres, the Strand and the Adelphi,
were almost deserted. Then what was to be done ? That
was the question. You see, up to this time the pantomime
season was the only opportunity given for “ columbine”
to display hers, together with a few “sprites” and
“gnomes.” There were needed some pieces for the con-
tinual display of this great attraction (1) Paris was found
to be the very emporium for the kind of thing in the
“ ballet-de-action.” No sooner was it found out than
theatre after theatre began to exhibit these “ ballets,” each
one struggling to vie with the other for the most display of
the anatomy of the human form, and it was extended to just
within the limit of decency, and that was all. Then the
opera took the fever and brought out the opera-bouffe ; and
now the minor theatres, were they to be shut out from this
display ? Certainly not ; neither were the music halls. The
devil isn’t long in supplying an opportunity to find out
something to extend his kingd m, and one of the grossest
was hit upon that ever could demoralize the chastity and
modesty of woman, if she possessed any, which she certainly
could not, for no decent-minded young woman could have
ever been induced to exhibit herself in such a vile represen-
tation as the “ posse plastiques.” No garb except a tight-
fitting singlet from the bust to the waist, from there one con-
tinuation of furbelows, tucked muslin, or flimsey gauze, ex-
tending down to withing six inches of the knee It had been
estimated by some that these abortions of stage representa-
tion will die out eventually ; that families who make the


theatre attendance a part of their weekly programme of
pleasure are already beginning to see the evil results in re-
lation to the younger branches. There is much doubt of it;
for actresses, as a rule, and a very proverbial one, too, pre-
fer the light and sparking gaudy business to the sombre and
serious, nine-tenths of them ; so that they are more in sym-
pathy with the present style than with the domestic drama
or tragedy ; and, as the ladies are made the chief attraction,
there is not much likelihood of the present class of pieces
dying out. Of course it rests with the community if people
were to discountenance these productions by non-attendace
at the theatre. Then it would become a matter or necessity
to withdraw objectionable representation in favor of pieces
that would influence morality and intellectual culture.
Let the patrons of the theatre demand such plays and
comedies as “ The Rivals,” “ She Stoops to Conquer,”
Sheridan Knowles’s “Hunchback,” “Money,” “London
Assurance,” and “An Unequal Match,” with a host of
other good plays from the pons of Bulwer Lytton, Dickens,
and Tom Taylor, “ Old as the hills,” I hear somebody
say. Yes, but these plays all possess merit, and will bear
analysing, and our theatres were never better represented
than when they were staged ; together with Shakespeare’s
plays and tragedies such pieces possess a moral tendency.
But how religionists and some having the care of souls on
their consciences can doubt whether Christianity is antago-
nistic to the theatre, displays as much ignorance concerning
the kingdoms of Christ and the devil and the question,
“ What is the end of man ?” as the poor Scotch piper who,
when asked by his pastor one day “If he knew the chief end
of man,” replied, “ Maybe I do, your honour, though I
dinna exactly ken the tune just the noo ; maybe yer honour
will just whustle it?” And just as Sir Walter Scott’s
donkey, Jenny, upon whose back he was never so happy
when a boy as while scampering her over the moors, one
day came upon a deep rift and stopped so short that he was
sent flying over it, and after recovering his astonishment at
the sudden flight he had been made the involuntary victim
of, exclaimed, “Vera weel pitched, Jenny lass, but hoo are
ye coming o’er yoursel’?” So neither the devil or Jenny
troubles about or considers its results. Only once obtain


the pastor’s consent or approval, or at least connivance with
the theatre, then God and mammon beome literally served
together, and the line of demarcation between the two king-
doms of Christ and the devil is rubbed out. It is a pro-
verbial fact that many ministers possess very crude and dis-
jointed notions about theatres. One minister himself told me
he had wavered a good deal while educating for the ministry
whether he should not take up with the theatre instead, but
the right dominated over the wrong, and he had been thank-
ful ever since, after witnessing the evil results following
upon our youths becoming habitues of the theatres, and
how it dis racts the mind from everything like serious
thoughts, and that fact alone ought to decide the question,
especially where ministers are concerned. This parleying
about the theatre generally arises out of the one question,
What harm is there in going to the theatre ? Doesn’t the
Governor go, and all the leading people of society, on
bespeak night ? No, not all the leading people ; there are
thousands who would not, because they know and believe
that doing so would be antagonistic to their religious prin-
ciples. But, in anwer to the question, What harm is there
in going to the theatre ? can be answered by asking
another question, Is there any good ? Do the theatre re-
presentations influence the mind for good ? do they
strengthen religious principles, supposing a professed
religionist went? or in any way at all enoble the mind?
Of course there is no more harm in the theatre itself than
there is in the stones, bricks, and mortar of which it is
built; it is its surroundings which contaminate, of which
the Governor, or those who attend on special bespeak
nights, are free of, because they leave their carriage for
the box, and the box for the carriage; consequently the
theatre is no harm to them, or they to it, unless they
bestow their patronage upon some vile representation. Not
so with some young people who go there, desirous, in the
first instance, to be quite select, or if joined by another,
or two or three friends, they determine to keep themselves
to themselves. But how futile this determination is thou-
sands can tell you to-day. Yes! that is where the fallacy
comes in. How many hundreds of acquaintances have been
made in a theatre, from the first night of attendance, with
persons who they never met before, and not for good, but


evil in nearly every instance. Yet there are those who
assert that Christianity and the theatre are not antagonistic.
Are not drunkenness, licentiousness, gambling, and assig-
nation antagonistic ? Then the theatre is accountable for
all these vices, and by its evil surroundings germinates
them. No matter how moral the actors are—and I have
associated with some of the most deserving of that charac-
ter, with virtuous wives and daughters-—nor how select
the pieces they represent may be, so long as the surround-
ings remain the same as they are to-day, so long must it
be opposed to Christianity. In many parts of the Conti-
nent, especially in Germany, the evils which the English
theatres retain, viz., the indiscriminate admission of ques-
tionable and immoral persons of both sexes, combined with
its drinking saloons and other unrestrained iniquities,
which in the German theatres at all events are not met
with, if the book entitled “Jottings of Travels” can be
unquestioned. The writer says, “ I was both pleased and
astonished when entering a large hall, or working man’s
club ; the language and general deportment I witnessed
were such as I could only have expected to find in a much
higher class of society, but my astonishment was greatly re-
duced when I saw the school they went to, which was the
theatre. I attended that night, and noted the absence of
everything like rowdyism ; the quietness and general de-
meanour of the audience, none of the loud demonstrations
and laughter that is to be heard in the English theatre ;
nothing pronounced, but everything subdued, except the
applause, which was genuine and often prolonged. I
heard no obsene or blasphemous expressions during the
evening; and if the “ demimonde” were present, they
certainly did not make themselves conspicuous, as they are
permitted to do with us. Somebody will say the theatre
there is supported by the State ; and if it is what then ?
Should that make our theatre the less moral because it is
not ?


SOMETHING ABOUT THE PRIVATE LIVES OF
ACTORS AND ACTRESSES.
Shakspeare writes, “Be thou chaste as ice and pure as
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny.” The above quota-
tion is applicable to a very large degree respecting the
general reputations of actresses. My intimate acquaint-
ance with many of the ladies with whom I have been
brought into contact confirms me in my belief more than
ever as I write of the many kind acts genuinely bestowed
in many ways, and also instances in which they have been
the victims innocently of licentious tongues. Their public
life is an open door, and many a villain, under the mask of
gentility, has taken advantage to enter it by missives of
the foulest overtures. They being public characters,
these sensualists look upon them as fair game at which to
let fly their shafts of pollution. Out of the number with,
whom I was personally acquainted three or four only had
violated their marriage vows through these pests of society,
who, if their vile proposals are rejected, vent their spleen
upon villifying and traducing their good name by circulat-
ing reports that they bestow their favours upon so and so,
and on not a few occasions these men have been brought
to bay, and requested to substantiate their assertions,
which they could not do, and received the chastisement the
circulation of their falsehoods merited. Most all whom I
knew were matrons with young families, and whose gene-
ral lives and characters as wives and mothers would hold
their own in the best society. On the other hand, I have
known married women, some of them holding respectable
positions in society, pursue actors, making of them pets and
paramours. But to-day, and for years past—ever since, in
fact, the opera bouffe was brought into vogue by the
Leopold family in Melbourne—those who look over a play-
bill will hardly ever see Mr. and Mrs. So and So. It
seems to have become quite the business of managers to
weed out conjugal names. The reason is palpable enough,
because it does not restrict the loungers and profligates so
much from pursuing their corrupt designs upon the


women, although they may have husbands, and many
of these wretches know it; still it enables them to cloak
over their baseness, and so offer their insulting pro-
posals beneath it. All this is done to advance the interest
of the theatre at the expense of virtue. One of these
insulters of women met with his deserts one night. This
actress was the wife of the carpenter; she was a very
showy woman on the stage, and certainly of a volatile
nature, but particularly susceptible to any improper
advances. She never permitted undue familiarity, and
why above all the rest she should have been selected by
this man, who had persisted in annoying her, is impossible
to say; but he had conveyed to her one night a missive,
which she showed to her husband. It requested her to
meet him. She had received one before, which she
destroyed. Well, the husband said, ‘‘Grant him his
wish.” “ What do you mean ?” “ I mean that in you he
will find me attired in one of your dresses.” That was not
much trouble, for he was about her own height, within an inch,
but stout of muscle and wiry. “ Who brought the note ?”
he enquired. “ The call-boy.” “ Well, tell the boy to say
in twenty minutes hence, at the back portico of the
theatre.” And he kept his tryst, and was met with such
a bang between the eyes from the supposed lady that he
measured his length backward on the earth in a manner
most unexpected. A young girl was also once almost
made the victim of one of these base, designing villains.
She applied one morning at the manager’s office for an
engagement to dance a “ pas seul” each evening, and was
accepted on trial. No one seemed to know her or where
she came from.. However, she retained her nightly engage-
ment, as she gave to the audience and manager every satis-
faction, and did her dance and went. My wife, in whose com-
pany she dressed, found her in tears one night, and natu-
rally enquired what her trouble was, and this is the his-
tory ;—She had only arrived a week or two before her
engagement. She was an orphan, consigned to an uncle
and aunt, at whose address she applied, and heard that
they had gone to one of the diggings’ townships. ' She
spent many unsuccessful days trying to find them, and was
at her last resource what to do. There were some ballet
girls who came out in the same ship, and by continually


watching them practice, she became quite an admirer of
their feats, and tried to perform some of the least difficult
ones herself; and one of them, becoming attached to her,
taught her the “ pas seul.” One day, tired, weary, and
with hut one shilling left, she stumbled upon a shipmate,
who invited her home. She told her one day she was
going to apply for an engagement to dance, but the good
woman advised her not; hut she did, and the result was
as we have seen. Well, on several occasions she had been
followed, but the man at last made himself obnoxious,
especially as he appeared intoxicated ; then he became
insulting when he found that she was fiiendless and help-
less. All this she told my wife. Also, she believed that
the husband of the woman where she stayed was aiding
and abetting her persecutor. 80 my wife consulted me,
and we determined to make room for her at home ; but
we did not keep her long. One morning, on my way to
rehearsal, I met a friend, who had once been drawn into
the meshes of the theatre, and who had tried his powers at
becoming an actor. It had been a youthful freak of run-
ning away from home, but his want of success disgusted
him, and he returned home again repentant. His first
enquiry was for Miss I) , and what was her address,
as he particularly desired to see her privately. “She is
staying with us,” I replied. And I may say particularly
so, my wife and I having sheltered her from the baseness
of some persecuting, designing villain. She has proved a
valuable acquisition to us, especially to my wife, with her
needle. “I hope you are not going to try your hand at
running away with her, Master Jim ?” “ Indeed sure and
I am, sir,” said Jim, with his true native Irish accent. “I
have never seen her since the first night she danced, and I
don’t want her to dance any more, if she will only become
my wife.” “Well,” I replied, “what are your future
prospects?” “Blacksmithing; father’s taken the shop
and business for me ; and I have come down for no other
purpose but to ask her.” “Well, you will find her at my
house.” “ The old place ?” “Yes! and if you meet my
wife turn her back with you, and make her your confident.
Tell my wife I will get her excused this morning, and you
stay at home till my return.” All which was done. It
very soon presented itself in the old story. That first night


THE PRIVATE LIFE OF ACTORS AND ACTRESSES. 151
that Miss D appeared in the theatre was Jim’s last,
but it appears there went out a mutual affinity, although
not a spoken one, which had been cherished towards each
other, and thus fortunately they were brought together
again, and that day month I and my wife attended their
wedding at the Collins Street Presbyterian Church. The
last time I saw them was at Cambell’s Creek, his business
good, and she a stout, buxom matron, and the mother of
four or five bouncing boys.


INCIDENTS IN THE LIVES OF ACTORS AND
OTHERS—A COMBINATION OF EVENTS.
These pages contain an experience which has been
gathered up into the lap of time, and will disseminate it.
The very best company of professionals that ever could be
brought together for any theatre was the first that I was
connected with in Australia. No wonder the manager,
who, by-the-bye, had never managed a theatre before in
all his life, but who was the essence of a gentleman, was
proud of his family, as he called his company, and they of
him. I have been under other gentlemen managers, but
none ever possessed the same honest and fair principle as
he. There were no distinct grades of position to separate
class from class in that company such as is to be found
in theatrical companies to-day, just the same as you find
in society the upper ten, the middle class, and the poor
or laboring class, &c. Actors will vaunt their power
of subjugating women as a thing to be approved. Even
those belonging to their own company are not exempt
from their vile passions. Yes, there are as a great vili-
fiers and traducers of women to be found amongst actors
as outside the theatre. One night one of them was vin-
dictively slanging one of the ladies, who, no doubt, had
repulsed him. Her husband, however, happened to be
seated in the landlord’s sanctum. His being there was a
pre-arranged thing by the landlord and one or two others,
who intended to draw him into a conversation in relation
to this particular lady, who was well known, and believed
to be above reproach, and it was a determinedly under-
stood thing that this vilifying Lothario, whose tongue was
never so happy employed as when recounting his seductive
powers over women, and of the presents he had received
from them, including the lady of the husband in waiting.
A glass door separated the rooms, and in the middle of his
derogatory speech the door opened. His back was to-
wards it, and before he could look round he was seized by
the scruff of the neck, and such a shower of sharp, cutting
strokes from a riding whip fell on his head and shoulders,


every stroke of which made him writhe, scream, and
squirm like an eel to get away. No use; the condign
punishment was intended, and the intention was carried
out, much to the approval of all present, except the reci-
pient of it. Mr. Phelps had a way of his own in repress-
ing these revilers of women by instant dismissal, if any of
the ladies complained, which they were requested to do on
all occasions when they were insultingly pursued. Macready
gave him the palm for conducting the most select theatre
in London. No loungers were in his green-room, not even
Loyalty. There is a story extant that one of the scions
presented himself at the stage door of Sadler’s Wells
Theatre one night, but could not be admitted by the door-
keeper, and was there detained until his requisition was
forwarded. The answer came. “ Mr. Phelps will have
the honour of paying his allegiance to his Royal Highness
after business, if he so pleases.” In saying that drink
was the dominant vice of actors it would not be far out to
say that two-thirds of them in my time killed themselves
with it. Many would have been saved from that unhappy
result if the rules of the theatre in vogue to-day had been
enacted then. An actor whom I met a short time ago,
who had belonged to the same company as myself, said
that the rules now are very emphatic. Not only is the
sending for it between the acts forbidden, but actors are
prohibited from bringing it into the dressing-room under
a fine, and the occupants of the room with him are
subjected to this rule also for the one delinquent,
if they refuse to give up the offender, and he is
unprincipled enough to remain silent. It is astonish-
ing the peculiar effect drink has upon different consti-
tutions. Old tipplers, or confirmed soakers, as they
are sometimes called, will be seized with a sudden lapse
of memory, and the mind will become a blank for five,
ten, an 1 even fifteen minutes, the curtain has had to be
dropped, and a sudden faintness has been the excuse
tendered to the audience. I can only account for it as
representing two currents meeting from opposite directions
emanating from the fumes of the j ust-partaken*stimulant
and an .overtaxed memory which clogs the mind—a sure
precursor of a softening brain or apoplexy. One of the
cleverest actors as a tragedian, and to whom GK V. Brooke


paid the honor of erecting a tablet to his memory, which
stands in the Geelong Cemetery, with the following in-
scription; —“To the memory of Frank Nesbit, in token
of many happy reminiscences of the past by his old friend
G. Y. Brooke. “ The poor actor who struts his hour upon
the stage, and then is seen no more.” That poor man
was many times a victim to such lapses, and his last
appearance upon ths stage was a most remarkable one, as
was also his whole Australian career. It was in Liverpool
where he and Brooke were brother actors just budding
into reputation as juvenile tragedians. ‘Nesbit is rumoured
to have been mixed up with the Chartists in the early
forties. They had become so troublesome, that it was
determined to make an example of the most prominent
leaders and agitators ; so he and others, on account of this
resolution—though Nesbit was only the tool of the others,
Frost, Williams, and Jones—were sent out to Australia,
and he was for some time made a police officer. His fame
as an actor soon was made known by sailors and others
who had seen him act in the old country, especially Liver-
pool ; and when that time arrived which entitled him to a
ticket of leave, which made him a free man, he was taken
in hand by some of the leading people of Sydney to give
readings from Shakespeare and other authors. He even-
tually made his appearance as Holla in “Pizzaro,” not
without a struggle, as history gives it. The fame and
furore he created was startling, the populace, or that part
who had attended his readings, were electrified, and it was
asked by the public and by the one daily j aper, How it
was such an actor was not engaged by the manager and
proprietor of the theatre ? For this reason —It appears
that the four prominent men there were doing a snug
little business, and were well aware that such a man as
Nesbit would require a large salary, which would make a
heavy strain upon their snug profits, not considering what
the extra attraction would do, and not only that, but their
fame would suffer, and if “Frailty, thy name is woman,”
then “Jealousy, thy name is actor.” Well, there was a
young actor who had but lately arrived, and had begun
to make a very good impression in juvenile parts, but he
had been kept back for the very same reason. This young
actor and Nesbit had become kindred spirits, and it was


determined that when the benefit season came round that
Nesbit’s first appearance was to be for this young actor’s
benefit. When the time arrived a hundred pounds was
offered for the house, which the manager jumped at, not
being acquainted with the secret. The money was ob-
tained from a gentleman who was let into it, and on that
night such an ovation greeted him as was hardly ever
excelled before. He speaks the words outside, ‘ ‘ Chain
bind and bring them before me.” But upon his entrance
with his splendid physique, and the deportment with which
he took the stage, the applause was of such duration that
it was some minutes before he could continue, and the
four principles paid the penalty of their laxity towards
the man by not engaging him before by being hissed
every time they appeared; and now it might be truly
written of this man that his career was unparalelled as an
actor. There is no biographical sketch of his life that I
know of. My information respecting the early part of his
career was obtained from those who had acted with him.
It appears the man was literally killed with kindness.
Society petted and fondled, toasted and feted the man,
until he was fooled to the top of his bent, and thereby
sowed the seed of drink, craving which germinated with
such vigor, that in less than a dozen years from that open-
ing night hts course had run. I only knew him in his
broken-down days, when he had to be cared for and
watched, and waited upon like a child to ready him for his
night’s performance, and then so long as the morphia
hadn’t been over-dosed, but just sufficient to balance him,
his William Tell was electrifying. His performances had
been confined to only the three towns —Sydney, Mel-
bourne, and Geelong. This was his last season there, and
alas, his last night’s acting on earth. On that night he
was billed for “ Othello.” Bulletins had been received
enquiring as to his general health and condition as being
his benefit night. Carriages wsre expected from all the
surrounding neighbourhood, and answers were returned,
“ Well.” But it was not so, and these were sent without
the knowledge ef his attendant, and who, if he had been
questioned as he ought to have been, would have told
them that Mr. Nesbit had passed through a very rest-
less night. This restlessness continued during the day,


and if sleep was denied him towards its close,
he knew his master would not be able to appear,
as he had already witnessed the disastrous effects
upon him of an overdose of morphia, and the
attendant knew that was what he had taken the night
before. The doctor remained with him until dressing
time. Well, it was doubtful when the time arrived to ring
up what was going to be done, but eventually he sent out
word to go on with the performance, and in his address to
the senate he got as far as, ‘ ‘ And to this extent, no
more,” and there he stopped for nearly five minutes sway-
ing himself. He then took the stage for the dagger scene
in Macbeth, on from that to King Lear, then bursts of
oratory from William Tell and Hamlet, rendered with
such telling effect that the audience was held spellbound
with delight and admiration, although they knew some-
thing was wrong. There was nothing to be done but to
let him proceed, which he did for upwards of an hour, the
Senate still sitting, and at last he burst out with the tent
scene from Eicbard 111., when, after “Dreams to-night
have struck more terror to the soul of Eichard,” down to
“Conscience, avaunt; Eichard’s himself again!’’ he
instinctively went off at the proper exit, then fell ex-
hausted, and was carried off to his room in almost a state
of wandering imbecility. The next day he was removed
to the hospital, where, in a very short space of time, he
passed away from disease of vital organization by alcoholic
poisoning, and the most curious coincidence of all was that
those last readings were the first of bis career in Australia.
The cause of intemperance amongst actors is the heavy
depression which follows upon an overtaxed brain, and the
getting through a heavy part on the previous night under
the influence of stimulants. If they performed without
them, there would be none, or at least no more than could
easily be shaken off by a good constitutional, and in warm
weather a shower or plunge bath ; but the invariable prac-
tice is to drink a deleterious decoction called a “cock-tail,”
or a brandy and soda, which they find a very efficacious
restorative for the time, but this only starts a craving which
must be fed, and in hundreds of cases it is. Then follows
some sort of an apology for a breakfast, then a nap for a
short time, and another refresher to fit them for rehearsal;


and so that man goes on day after day “ fitting him-
self up,” as he calls it. Is it any wonder that this sort of
life brings him to grief 1 I remember one American
gentleman who the doctor warned of the pernicious effects
this cock-tail drug was making upon his constitution, and
told him what the inevitable result would be in a very short
time if not crushed out at once. “ Well,” he replied,
“doctor, advance me a theory or antidote.” “Very well,
drink half a pint only of your favorite sherry instead of a
bottle to-night, and reduce the quantity every night until it
is nil ; then supply its place with oatmeal water in winter,
combined with chocolate or coffee, and the same beverages
iced in summer, and if I see you a yp«>r hence you will tell
me I don’t suffer from depression non,” I saw the gentle-
man some months after, and his pi ys'que showed, without
him telling me, he had followed the regimen. Another actor
suffered from the same cause; so extreme was his enerva-
tion in the morning, that he was ordered by a physician to
roll out of bed into his bath, which was to be placed by the
side of it. He did so, and so miraculous was the shock
that he invariably followed it out, and had one made to
utilize as a wardrobe, so <hat when travelling it answered
the dual purpose of both ; the lid bring shut down at night
was made convenient for books and night lamp. It is
most astonishing the power drink subjects its victim to—
the thraldom in which it holds him ; and the surprise is
magnified tenfold when the man sees plainly that the posi-
tion which he holds is tottering—that he is being systemati-
cally shunned, and by his friends warned—ignored by the
manager, who passes him over and gives that responsible
part, which by right of agreement is his, to one a grade
lower than himself ; and in answer to the actor’s question
why this is done, the manager tells him plainly the reason.
“ The fault is your own, sir ; remedy it by giving up your
propensity altogether, or at least moderate your potations
as you know is being done in this theatre by men who I
now can trust. Do it, and be quick about it, if you desire
to retain your engagement ; and were I to give you the
part, it would be studied under stimulants the same
as the last, and when the night comes you might
as well have not looked at it. Ho, I shall not give


you this part. Summon resolution to your aid, and
crush this vice out, then you can resume your
position. If you don’t, well, then your engagement in
this theatre must end.” But instead of taking this timely
warning and good advice, he clears out there and then,
because he knows on Saturday he will be discharged with a
week’s salary instead of notice. Not with a certificate of
being a trustworthy and useful actor but for quite the
opposite, and knowing this he is well aware that he may be
months out of an engagement. But now he can apply with
impunity to another manager under the grievance of
favoritism by the late manager, of giving his legitimate
business to another which he is not going to stand any
longer, and so has left. That man’s career in nine cases
out of ten is that having run the gauntlet of all the
theatrical managers he is branded as untrustworthy and his
days are ended in loafing and spouting in public-houses and
waylaying actors whom he has known to obtain a coin until
they refuse to give him any more. But somehow he lingers
on. Not unfrequently have I seen him on racecourses with
others, blacked up, with a pair of cymbals made out of two
tin plates, attitudinizing, singing and shouting, until the
hospital receives him, and he goes to a primitive grave at
the early age of forty-five.


A CONVERSATION BETWEEN AN ACTOR AND
A MINISTER.
On board one of the ocean steamers an actor and a parson
met one day, when the following conversation ensued :
“ How is it,” said the parson, “ that you, by the represen-
tation of fiction only, are so often successful in awakening
your audience to such emotion as to shed tears, whilst we,
who really portray the truth, so seldom succeed in doing
so?” He answered him—“ For this reason : I believe we
represent fiction as if it were truth , whilst you represent the
truth as if it were fiction ! Now, I want you to divest your
mind of anything liks scepticism on my part, for I am truly
a believer in the Gospel and of its truth. I was educated
and trained for the ministry, but became a disciple o
Thespis by choice ; and I suppose that during my career
have attended the services of more different churches than
any actor extant. I was always a great admirer of pulpit
oratory. I have heard Spurgeon, Farrar, Parker, Talmage,
and a host of other celebrities, whose names I cannot just
now remember ; but the most able discourse, and one
fraught with more logical argument, brought to bear upon
theology, together with the simple unfo'ding of Bible truth
and testimony that I think I ever listened to, was by a
Methodist local preacher in a town in Oxfordshire. That
young man’s simple lucid style, combined with fluency of
speech also, was the most refreshing sermon, I think, I ever
listened to ; and if ever D.D. deserve! to be appended to a
man’s name it was his. The subject, I remember, was in
connection with the absense of Moses on the Mount I forget
the exact words of his text, but the way he depicted the
wrath of Moses, and puerile pandering of Aaron in com-
plying with the people’s dastardly request to make them a
calf to worship, in the face of the known proximity of God
to them, constantly apparent in that pillar of cloud by day
and of fire by night, also with the glaring ingratitude of the
people, delivered, as they knew they had been, from their
dreadful bondage ; all this he lined down to the base
ingratitude manifested in human nature to-day, even as then,
towards God. He came smart up to his work, too |


none of the lugubrious expressions that you too often
witness in ministers on coming to their sacred duty as though
it were a task and a toil, which always seems to have a
deteriorating influence, I think, upon a congregation,”
“Well,” said the minister, “I am on a health-recruiting
tour. I expect to visit Oxford ; can you tell me the name
of the town and how long this was ago ? Perchance I
may have the opportunity given me to find out and hear
this young local preacher ; do you remember his name ?”
“I am sorry to say I cannot do either. I was travelling
up from Ipswich to London through to Liverpool on an
engagement, when an accident happened to a luggage
train, and we were detained at this small roadside station,
some two miles from the town, whither I had walked to
obtain a lodging for the night, having been informed that
there was not the slightest chance of proceeding before
ten o’clock in the morning at the very earliest. It was
about two years ago, I think. By-the-bye, that engage-
ment and journey were surrounded by a great many
incidents unparalleled by any in my whole career since.
In the first place, the engagement was so unexpected; an
opportunity to play second to one of our best leading
tragedians had long been my ambition, but the one who
did select me was really a surprise—indeed the most
eccentric, the strictest, and yet the most educated actor of
any that I knew. He invariably called for offers for his
4 juvenile tragedian,’ and, in answer to applications, made
his selections accordingly. You see I was not an ancient
actor ; only five years’ experience, and I thought that with
him it would militate against me. I had, however, heard
by a side wind that he had spoken favorably of my “ Mer-
curic.” The advertisement gave the pieces, viz.—six for
the six months. The one thing that satisfied me more than
any other was that I had climbed into the profession from
the lowest rung of the ladder, and cleared each one success-
fully, and, strange to say, though I had been severely scoffed
at for my temperance principles, I had always remained a
total abstainer, and yet my first advent upon the stage was
with with a manager whose dressing-room I shared, or
rather, when he performed, used mine. That man, sir,
would think one pint of brandy just about enough stimu-
lant to suffice him for “ Othello,” and yet he was my best


friend and tutor. He was a most finished gentleman and
and actor ; but that has ever been my experience—the more
qualified the man, where he did drink the less abstemious he
invariably was. Well, just as soon as 1 saw the advertise-
ment and the characters to be sustained, in which I was
well up to the letter, I said ‘ Faint heart,’ &c., and the
answer returned was, ‘ Terms and sell accepted ; presence
requested on 25th inst. without fail.’ Well, I arrived at
my destination all right, and it was there the circumstance
occurred which made me incidentally the agent, by a special
providence, of awakening a most pronounced religionist to
a re-conversion. Precisely to date I entered the theatre at
eleven o’clock. Having gone through the necessary formula
of introduction and a little business talk, he enquired at
what hotel I boarded, as he should like specially to know
my address. I replied that I had forsaken hotel accommo-
dation for some time, as I had found that there literally
was no gain in accepting the offer of half-price made by
landlords to actors. “Well,” he replied, “1 am very glad.
I wish more of the profession would do likewise ; but my
object is that we may have a private reading together, and I
hope you will understand that I am an adherent to one par-
ticular course of situations, however they may be in oppo-
sition to your own judgment. How my object also is that
my second ‘ lead ’ might not be subjected to the necessity of
being dictated to during a public rehearsal. My landlord
has been made acquainted with my maxims before to-day
in relation to callers. If you will not consider it a trouble
or inconvenience to call upon me any afternoon before our
opening night, it will straighten matters capitally. Do you
understand 1” “ Yes,” I replied, “and am very much in
debted to you for your kindness in relation to all your
wishes, and I am desirous you should know that I am a
learner still, and your advice, dictation, and directions I
shall rather appreciate than dare to oppose and so rubbing
his hands gleefully he replied, “ Capital; that’s it, that’s it j
don’t let success intoxicate you, as I have seen it do others.
Alas, poor dupes to self-conceit, how many have fallen 1
Have you succeeded in obtaining apartments yet ?” “ Hot
yet,” I replied, “ and will wish you good morning, and start
at once upon my search.” “ Stay a moment,” he said,


“ and enquire of some of these men.” “ Smithers 1” “ Yes,
sir.” “Attend to this gentleman, please. Good morning.”
To the carpenter I said, “ I am in want of apartments—a
furnished sitting and bed room. Can you help me ?” “ I
suppose, sir,” he said, “you would like it as near to the
theatre as possible ?” “ Yes.” “ Because I can tell you of
two or three half-a-mile away ; good ones, too. But there
is only one near here, and you being an actor I don’t think
you would suit the owner of the house. He is a very reli-
gious man, and why he takes in people at all 1 don’t know.
They say he is rich ; made so by business. His card in
the window says, ‘ Accommodation for three gentlemen;
application within.’ I will show you the house if you will
just step this way,” and he pointed to a church two
hundred yards away. “ His house is just below that ;
on this side you will see the card, but I doubt about
your success, sir, with him.” “ Thank you; there is
no harm in trying.” “Pardon me,” said the minister;
“ was the gentleman to whom you were engaged the cele-
brated tragedian Me—y ?” “Exactly so, the very man.”
“ I thought so, as I have often heard him spoken of. Is it
true that he prohibited his family from attending the
theatre ?” “ I can’t answer you as to its being a fact; I
have only heard it said ; but his peculiarities and eccentri-
cities would fill a book. I have known him myself com-
mand the subordinates and supers to bring their names
legibly written on paper, to be placed in front of their feet,
so that once their situation was pointed out they should fall
readily into their proper positions. Should one fail, that
man would get his conge , because he held absolute command
of the theatres for his own representations everywhere.
Well, the old gentleman himself answered the door, and lat
once made my wish known. ‘ Yes,’ he said, ‘I have what
you require. Step this way, please.’ So I followed him into
a very comfortable, clean sitting-room, scrupulously so.
Mentally I said, This will do. He opened a door which led
to the hed-chamber— ‘ These are the two rooms I have to let,
and my terms are eight guineas a month if they will suit
you; and your testimonials, sir ’ ‘ Well,’ I replied, ‘your
rooms suit me very well. You supply board also, of course V
‘Only two meals a day,’ he replied, ‘morning and evening.


On Sundays we dine en famile at two.’ * Very well. Now
to business. lam here on a six months’ engagement as an
actor, and ’ ‘ Tut, tut! you have said enough !my
dear sir, you have said quite enough ! My rooms are not
for you, sir—no,no.’ ‘My dear sir,’ I replied, ‘before you
so summarily dismiss me, I should like you to explain the
prejudices you have to my profession. For myself I can
refer you to to dean and chapter of St. Mary’s College, Cam-
bridge, who will only be too happy, I know, to inform you
who I am, and my vocation in that college, which was one
for holy orders ; but as I was, and felt myself by nature to
be, too volatile a nature for the ministry, I chose my present
profession. And now I will make a stipulation with you.’
And I began at the same time to count out eight sovereigns
and the eight shillings. The carpenter, having remarked
upon the old man’s greed, gave me the initiative ; and,
whilst toying on the table with the glittering pieces, I
noticed the pursing of the mouth and the sudden glittering
light that came into his eyes. Ah ! I mentally exclaimed,
greed is your propensity without a doubt whatever your
religion is. ‘ There, sir,’ I said, ‘is your amount for one
month in advance ; and if in that time you can say to me
in any relation of my life during my stay here, Your con-
duct is not that of a gentleman—never mind the profession,
leave that out—then I will permit you to turn your door-
key on me upon any occasion without returning my rent. I
have no friends or acquaintances to bring here, and even if
I had I should not do so. All I require is a comfortable,
secluded home for six months, I don’t drink—l am a total
abstainer ; therefore you will have no roistering or drinking
people here, and if you are, as I have been informed, a man pro-
fessing religion, you ought to be gratified at the oppor-
tunity offered you to place me out of the way of temptation.
Just half your terms would satisfy the landlord of the hotel
I stayed at the night of my arrival, but my objection lies
just there ; I never stay at an hotel longer than I can help.’
Well, that last was a clincher. I had studied human
character enough, although little more than thirty, to know
that argument or cavilling would not have answered at all.
I witnessed in his first expression at my declaring myself to
be an actor the very form of bigotry and determined oppo-


sition, and at once determined upon my course, which was,
not to allow him space to speak his thoughts until I had
run out and displayed the money ; and, fortunately for me,
I had succeeded, for I had set my mind upon having those
apartments if possible, ‘Very well, sir,’ he replied;
‘ enough has been said ; I will accept your month’s rent in
advance, and will require you to give me your written stipu-
lation, also the Dean and Chapter’s address, for, of course,
I shall assure myself of your statement.’ ‘ Certainly,’ I re-
plied. I wrote it out, obtained my receipt, and was leaving,
when he said, ‘ Did I understand you to say that the land-
lord of the hotel that you stopped at would receive you upon
half my terms T ‘ Exactly so, for this reason—actors of re-
pute can always obtain this concession on account of the
supposed benefit their staying will be to the house in the way
of callers and the attendant little suppers, supplemented by
the drink ; do you understand V And so I left him, well
pleased with my achievement. The young lawyer who
rented the rooms adjacent to mine went off into most immo-
derate fits of laughter, after we had become acquainted
when I told him of my success. ‘ Why, we always re-
ceive a tremendous rubbing in by the old gentle-
man Ihe next morning after our occasional visit to the
theatre- Why, he denounces it with all the anathemas you
can imagine. I am afraid he will not receive another
month’s rent from you.” “ Oh, but he has,” I replied,
“ and only this afternoon I left it with his housekeeper, and
we have been in conversation together since, so I am safe for
another month, at all events.” Well, the next Sunday
evening, as was my usual custom, I attended at the church
nearly opposite, and on coming out met my old friend in the
vestibule. I nodded, but whether he recognised me or not
I didn’t know at the time, as he did not acknowledge my
dumb salute. However, he did not leave me long in the
dark about it when we got home, for he began, like one
possessed, to abuse me. I can call it nothing else. “ The
incongruity of the thing,” he went on; “an actor to go
into God’s sanctuary as a worshipper, and to-morrow night
to play at the theatre—the house of the devil, nothing else
can you call it, gloss it over as you please with fashionable
company to attend there. It is and ever has been a hotbed


of vice and immorality, and also the ruin of thousands of
our youth, not only in this city, but all over the world ; and
you, sir, one of the devil’s agents who are nightly helping on
this ruin, can desecrate God’s house by your presence.”
Well, sir, this old man’s ire was so original to me that I
could not refrain from the rudeness of laughing at the man’s
idea before I could reply. “ Why, my dear sir, how do you
suppose God’s house would be attended every Sabbath day
if only true worshippers entered ? I ask you what would
become of the sanctuaries and their ministers if every one,
as the Sunday came round, were to take himself to task and
say, ‘ I have not been good enough the past week to go to
church.’ If the theatre-goer should say, ‘ I can’t attend,
and the gambler and blasphemer, or the grasping and
avaricious man were to do likewise, wherein would be the
greatest incongruity—the man who goes to church because
he knows he is a sinner, or the man who stays away for the
same reason ? Why, my dear sir, if such a thing took place,
what would become of your structures for religious oratory ?
Why, the preaching of the Gospel would become paralysed
for the want of a congregation to preach to.” But I soon
founcUout that I had to deal with a most bigoted, deter-
minedly self-righteous man, who seemed to think that the
churches were only for such as he to worship in ; and each
Sabbath night he would continue this sort of contention. I
followed him into his own pew one Sunday evening, and
when the collection plate came round I saw that he dropped
a sixpence only into it. “ Hallo !” I mentally exclaimed,
“ how about the incongruity here now ?” So on returning
home I thought it would be my turn to have a little bit of a
rub-in with him, and I commenced. I said “ I hope you
will pardon the liberty I am going to take in asking you if
that sixpence which I saw you drop into the plate is your
usual contribution towards the cause you so strenuously
uphold?” “Well, sir,” he replied, “ I don’t know what
induces you to ask the question, but one shilling is my offer-
ing every Sabbath—sixpence in the morning and the same
in the evening, and I have nothing to upbraid myself with
by so doing, and I only hope that all who attend that church
do likewise?” “And do you consider that offering to be
contributing according to your means ? for if you do, I hope


you will pardon me when I say I don’t, and a greater in-
congruity is manifested by you in so doing than in my going
to church and playing at the theatre, for this reason, that
the forms of your church request you to give in accordance
with your means, and you, by your own admission, do
nothing of the kind. Sir, you are known as, and generally
reported to me to be, a man of independent means, and how
you can reconcile that offering to God as being in accordance
with your wealthy position, I can’t understand. Now, sir,
you have been pretty hard upon me of late. Suppose we
take turn about by my demanding of you which of us is
committing the greatest incongruity, you or 1 1 Well, sir,
I go to church, not as a rich man, but really I give of my
substance. Do you ? I contribute to church life because I
consider church life and all that appertains to the cause of
God a duty I owe to him as my creator. Do you ? You
know you do not give of your substance, therein is the
greater incongruity between you and I, and yours certainly
is the greatest. I have told you already that I was educated
for the Church, and therefore am not unfamiliar, lam
happy to say, with Bible records. May I ask you the ques-
tion, how did you become wealthy in this world’s acceptation
of the word ? ” “By honest business transactions,” he
replied, “ and will defy anyone to say otherwise of me. I
rose early, and often labored hard until late to obtain what I
possess, and I don’t hesitate to say that I am proud of my
position. My money has not been made by questionable
means, I assure you,” “I do not doubt you for a moment,
my dear sir,” I replied, “though I question very much your
definition of ‘ questionable means;’ but let that pass. You
say you obtained your present comfortable position by honest
labor. May I ask you of whom did you receive the power
to do all that you have done to obtain a competence for your
declining days 1 Do you think for one moment you suffi-
ciently acknowledge that divine power for all these mercies
of health and strength and intellect by contributing a paltry
shilling a week to Him in return ? lam not unacquainted
with Bible lore, and would respectfully call your
notice to the teaching of Him who taught as no man ever
taught. He tells you, in the twelfth chapter of Luke, that
a ‘ man’s life consisteth not in the abundance of the things


which he possesseth then follows the parable of the rich
man whose ground has brought to him riches so plentifully
that he was quite inconvenienced for room to bestow them.
Ah ! he said, I must have room, larger barns ; yes, I will
pull down all these old rubbishing ones, then I shall be all
right, and I will say to ray soul—what ? I need not tell
you—you know ! don’t you 1 yes of course you do, and you
are that man. To-day, only God is merciful, thousands are
saying by their acts and in their lives, my money and
my God are nothing to each other. I hope you will give
heed to my warning, dear sir, for how do you know that this
very night your soul may not be required of you.’ Well, at
the expiration of my agreement I quitted Liverpool, and the
old gentleman’s abode; but it is a curious fact, there were
never any more Sunday evening cavillings; indeed it
always appeared to me as if he shunned my society after our
little altercation. However, it was so ordained that Liver-
pool was again to be my abiding place for another six months,,
and so I sent a letter, directed to the old gentleman, to pre-
cede my arrival ; the answer, as to whether I could again
take possession of my old quarters, to be left for me at the
hotel. Yes, there it was, and within it was an immediate
requiring of my presence there. On arrival I was ushered
into the poor old man’s presence, and found him in the last
stage of dissolution. As I drew near his dying bed he
stretched forth his poor, withered oand and said, “lam
glad, very glad, that my time here has been lengthened out
enough to see and thank you for what I thought at the
time, in my self-righteous dignity, an unwarrantable liberty
to preach to me upon my life’s actions. Oh, poor and blind !
Well, my dear friend, if you will let me call you so, a power
foreign to your mere speaking the words of warning which
you uttered that Sunday night took hold of me, but for
many, many weeks my hard rebellious heart would not hum-
ble itself to my Maker. At last, however, by the divine
blessing of God’s dear Spirit, I acknowledged my infirmity
and unworthiness, the sinfulness of ingratitude towards God,
who had done so much for me; and, my dear sir, let me
say it, But for your timely utterances I might have lost my
soul, even as that man did eighteen hundred years ago. God
blessyou, sir, and may your end become as peaceful as mine.”


