

TWO GOLDEN LILIES
FROM THE
EMPIRE OF THE RISING SUN.






Mrs. Ahok.


TWO GOLDEN LILIES
FROM THE
EMPIRE OF THE RISING SUN.
[By the Author of the Good Cheer Series.]
fjtflrart, Tasmania:
A
Bible Book Depot, Liverpool Street.
1891.
[All Rights Reserved.]




CHAPTER I.
The Visit of a Mandarin and his Wife,
Last summer great interest was felt in England by the
visit of a Chinese lady, who had undertaken this long
journey from home in order to plead face to face with an
English audience for volunteers to teach her people the
precious truths of the religion that had brought light and
gladness into her own life.
Hers was no ordinary mission, for never before had a
lady belonging to the ancient aristocracy of the “ Empire of
the Rising Sun” crossed the ocean to appear before the
British public, and the little, gentle, intelligent woman
found attentive and responsive listeners as she told them,
through an interpreter, the earnest wish of her heart.
Tiny embroidered slippers have long been familiar as
drawing-room ornaments, but now the poor little stunted
feet themselves—the “Golden lilies” of Chinese poets—
became for the first time realities to Mrs. Ahok’s sympa-
thising English friends, as she pathetically begged them to
excuse her for not standing while speaking on account of
the pain it gave her bandaged feet.
Mrs. Ahok’s visit was not a long one, but the impression
it made was too deep to be soon forgotten.
Many prayers and loving thoughts followed the brave-
hearted little woman as she embarked on her long home-
ward journey, and several Englishwomen, moved by her
appeal, have already risen from their homes to go forth with
Christ’s Gospel of glad tidings to that sunny but spritually
benighted land.
Therefore the writer of these pages has acceded to the
urgent request of friends both in England and the Colonies
to give to the public the following epitome of Mrs. Ahok’s
life previous to her visit to England, together with various
accounts of that visit and its subsequent sad sequel.


Very soon after my arrival in China in 1878 a Mandarin
called at the school-house to bid me welcome. I was
astonished, and asked him why he had called to
welcome me to Foochow. “ Because,” he answered,
“you have come to teach my country people about
the true God.” “Are you a Christian?” I asked. “No,”
he said, “but I‘like Christianity. I go to church some-
times, and I know the doctrine is true and the preachers
are good.” We held a very interesting conversation,
and when he left I pressed him to send his wife to see
me. I learnt afterwards that this Chinese gentleman was a
merchant; that he ranked as a Mandarin (a Government
official or petty governor, the position exempting the
possessor from corporeal punishment) ; that he was a very
kind-hearted man, and spent a great deal of money in rescuing
little baby girls who were doomed to destruction, also that he
was very liberal. But just at this time persecution was raging
round us everywhere. We were threatened with ejectment.
Part of the Mission premises were burnt down, and the
Chinese determined to make good their case by appealing to
English law—so the bitter present blotted from the
memory all that had occurred in the near past, and the
visit from the Mandarin, Hok Lee Sing Sang, was forgotten,
when one morning my servant, Lee Chi, came running in
exclaiming, “Kuniong, the Tai Tai is coming.” “Which Tai
Tai ?” I asked. Tai Tai being the title of a rich Chinese lady.
“ Hok Lee Sing Sang Nyiong,” he answered, and as he spoke
I heard the chair-bearers crying out, “Twai a Twai a”—a great
person is coming. Lee Chi opened the door, and several
slave girls and other attendants helped out of their chairs
and led in two ladies, Mrs. Ahok, as we will call the
Mandarin’s wife, and her mother. They had come to
luncheon, and did not let me know because they wanted to
see an English luncheon without preparation. They stayed
all the afternoon, looking at all my English things, and listen-
ing to all the matron ana I said, and then I called up the elder
girls to sing to them. We had several visits from other ladies
about this period, and God put the wish into my heart to
spend a little time every midday in prayer for them.




Mr. and Mrs. Ahok and Family,


CHAPTER II.
A Chinese Feast.
Shortly after this I was invited to a Chinese feast at Mr.
Ahok’s house. Bishop Bowman was there visiting Foochow,
and all the latest arrivals among the missionaries, with
others, were invited to meet him. We sat down to a luncheon
of fourteen courses, served in silver dishes, with cups and
spoons, as follows :
Pig Head Jelly and Duck Liver.
Boast Fowl and Ham.
Salted Pig Feet and Prawns.
Preserved Egg and Sausage.
Birdnest and Pigeon Egg.
Shark Fin and Crab.
Boast Fat Duck.
Baked Cuttle Fish.
Boast Pig Liver.
Fried Pheasant.
Chicken Soup.
Stuffing Bread.
Almond Tea.
Spring Boiled Cake
Sponge Cake.
Melon Seed and Almond.
Preserved Fruits.
Fresh Fruits.
I was very much pleased with the house. Entering
a large gate, my chair was lifted over a very high
sill into a yard where the chairs were kept. Through this
courtyard, over another high sill into another courtyard,
with rooms on either side for the gentlemen to read, smoke,
or drink tea in; through this, and over another sill into
a courtyard where flowers were blooming, and on either
side were ante-rooms for the sons and sons’ wives. Just
before us were some steps, and on the top of them was the
ancestral hall, or reception room. The picture given here is
the ancestral hall, with the occupants arranged along the
top of the stairs for the photographer.
But when I went, only the ladies were there, seated on
beautifully-carved Ningpo blackwood chairs, covered with
gold cloth, and scrolls hanging all round. Mr. Ahok met
me, and introduced me to his family, as he did with all the
invited guests. Then he escorted us up into his foreign
drawing room, explaining meanwhile that he had an English


dining-room, drawing-room, and other rooms, built for the
reception and convenience of his foreign visitors, as we were
styled.
He asked us if the drawing-room was furnished after
English style, and we said “ Not quite, but it is very nice.”
Then he invited us to re-arrange it, as he wanted it to be
“just like.” Then the ladies took us into their apartments,
where there were many idols. We asked the reason of
the high sills we had to get over before we could enter
any room, and the answer was “ the higher the sill, the
higher the rank.” I was quite sorry when it was time for
me to leave.


CHAPTER III.
Learning to Read.
A short time more elapsed and our lawsuit ended in our
having to vacate the city, and move into Nantai, the foreign
settlement. We had hardly settled down, when Mrs. Ahok
called and asked me to teach her English. At first I
objected on the ground that I did not go to China for that
purpose. However, I had a long talk with her, and promised
to bring her request before the other missionaries. Accord-
ingly, on the following Friday evening, I went, as was my
wont, to the prayer meeting held by the American Mission-
aries at Ponasang. There I told Mrs. Ahok’s request,
and one dear old lady, now in glory, said
“We have prayed for that family ever since we
first came to China, nearly 30 years ago, and perhaps
this is the way God intends answering our prayers. They
all prayed for me that I might be guided aright, and, on
the following Wednesday afternoon, when we met at our own
prayer meeting (C.M.S.) it was spoken of again, and I pro-
posed if Mrs. Ahok would read the Bible for one hour and a
half, I would teach her English for one hour and a half, thus
devoting three hours three times a week to her if one of the
married ladies could take my afternoon classes, and so set
me free for this work, there being no other unmarried lady
working in our mission at that time. Mrs. Lloyd, the wife
of the Rev. L. Lloyd, undertook this work, then I wrote these
proposals out, ancl sent them to Mr. Ahok. He approved of
the conditions, but, wished me to go to the Yamen, as his
house is called. This I could not do, so it was agreed that
Mrs. Ahok should come to me. Though much against the
custom, yet she braved it all, and often when she
has come, and I have gone downstairs to help her
up, I have wondered how she could steady her body at all
upon those tiny feet, only three inches long —bound,
crushed and crippled since early childhood, according to
Chinese custom. It is a most unusual thing for a Chinese
woman to know how to read and write the Chinese
characters; but Mrs. Ahok’s mother had learned herself, and
knew the value of it enough to let her daughter study with
her brothers.
We began our first day with the first chaper of St. John’s
Gospel, my favourite chapter among the heathen, and then


she took her first English lesson. She was an apt scholar ;
but she found the English language very difficult. However,,
she persevered. When the summer holidays were drawing
near she asked me not to go away, as was our usual custom,
but stay and let her come to live with me. “Why do you
wish to stay with me T I asked. “ Oh,” she answered, “ you
say all that is so nice ; I want to come and see if you live like
you talk.” “ But,” I urged,” I have only one room and one bed;
how can you come V “ Oh,” she answered, “ I will send a
bed and have it put up in your room, and I will bring my
own servant to wait upon me.” She came and followed me
about everywhere, asking me to translate all my home
letters and all I wrote home. She joined me in prayer
night and morning, that is she listened wdiile I prayed. One
night I went to bed with a bad headache and could not have
family worship. In the middle of the night she heard me
awake, and said “Is your head better ?” “ No,” I answered.
“ Then I do not believe in your God,” she said, “ for you
worship Him, and I asked Him to make you better.” This
led to a profitable conversation on asking according to God’s
will.


CHAPTER IV.
Sickness and Death.
After a few days she heard that her little grandson was
sick, and went home to see what she could do. I followed
her in the evening, and found the child very ill,
and I suggested that a foreign doctor be sent for.
«m°’' sa id, “ our own doctor will do to-night.”
W e will send for more medicine.” The messenger was
despatched with full particulars to a Chinese doctor, who
wrote a prescription, half of which Mrs. Ahok erased, and
them sent a servant for the other half of the ingredients,
and had them boiled down. I stayed until 11 o’clock that
night, and at 7 the next morning a messenger called to say
that the grandson was dead, and her own little adopted boy
was very ill. I went at once. The son’s wife was in sore
distress, her only child, and that child a boy, lay dead in the
house. . The wailing was very, very sad, and Mrs. Ahok was
mourning over the fading away of her own little adopted boy.
I sent ofi at once for Dr. Rennie, a Scotch doctor living at
Foochow, and when he came he said the little fellow was
certainly very ill, but he could not undertake the case unless
I would remain to nurse him ; “for,” he said, “You know they
will only get my medicine, smell it, throw it away, and then
child will die, and I shall be blamed with the death.”
What is he saying ?” asked Mrs Ahok, and when I explained
she said : “ Oh, do stay, you shall do as you like if you will
only stay.”
. I consented. They had the room off the English draw-
ing-room prepared for me, and a part of the verandah
turned into a bath-room. They did, indeed, do all they
could for my well-being. The doctor paid several visits
each day, for the child was very ill. Mr. Ahok’s mother was
living in the house, one of the most bigoted idolaters I have
ever seen. She very much wanted to offer all the child’s
food to the idols, before it was brought upstairs. We were
determined this should not be, so at last we prepared the
food ourselves. Mrs. Ahok’s mother came to stay in the
house at this time, and each morning she was in the room
before I was dressed. Each day I endeavoured to be before
her and failed, until one day I rose in the dark, and then
she refused to leave for breakfast. I wondered
why she wanted so much to see me dress. The morn-
ing was wearing away, at last she said, “ Are you
not going to pray this morning ?” “ Yes,” I answered,
B


“ I have prayed.” “ And you did not let me see you,” she said
in an aggrieved tone. “ Why,” I asked, “Do you wish to see
me pray 1” “ Oh, it is so very funny,” she replied. “ You
f)ray to nothing, how can nothing hear you V Here was a
ovely opportunity, and so I went on telling of our God, who
is a Spirit pervading everywhere with His presence, seeing
all we do, hearing all we say. She listened with wrapt
attention. Then she asked, “ Did your God ever do anything
wonderful?” “Yes, indeed, He did,” I answered. “Well,”
she went on, “ When our gods do anything wonderful we
write a book about it.” “ We have a book, too,” I said, “ God
inspired holy men of old to write what He said, and record
what others did and said. Only this morning I was reading
about Daniel and the three children in the fiery furnace.”
She expressed a wish to read it for herself. At that
instant my servant brought in my mail, and I sent him
for a Chinese Bible. When he returned, I opened at the
Book of the Prophet Daniel, and instead of going to her
dinner, she sat and read that book all the afternoon. The
little sick boy was improving in health, and as 1 had some
important business needing my attention at the school, I
went out, leaving strict orders that nothing was to be given
to the child, whom I called Charley, until my return. Alas!
Mr. Ahok’s mother would not be controlled. She persisted
in going up to see the child, and gave him something which
made him very ill again. The doctor was in constant
attendance, and all our efforts had to be renewed. When
Mr. Ahok came home, he was told what had happened, and
he and Mrs. Ahok and myself knelt down and prayed God to
forgive the grandmother, and take all angry feelings out of
our hearts. Then I asked that each night and morning,
while I remained, the family might be gathered and
I would read a portion of Scripture and pray. Mr. Ahok
gave orders that this was to be done, but no one knelt at
these gatherings except Mrs. Ahok until Sunday morn-
ing, when Mrs. Ahok’s mother knelt, saying “I, too, will
pray to Kuniong’s God.” She did not mean that she would
be a Christian, or give up her idols, but that she would pray
to God as well as to them. God answered our prayers, the
child again recovered, and I proposed going up the moun-
tain for the 10 remaining days. Mr. and Mrs. Ahok begged
me to take the little boy and his nurse with me, arranging
that fresh meat and beef tea should be sent up for him. I
consented, and at the end of my stay Mr. Ahok came up
with a few friends, bringing some very special tea buds to
drink tea with his friends, and thus show nis gratitude. We
returned from the mountain, the child went to his home, I
to the school, and Mrs. Ahok resumed her lessons again.


CHAPTER V
Bible Study with Chinese Ladies.
All went on as usual for a few weeks, when a request
came that I would speak to Mr. Ahok before the school
began. About 8 o’clock a.m. he came and asked me to begin
Lible teaching in his house. 1 pleaded want of time,
and he said. Oh Kumong, all your girls are Christians (?)
but all my females are heathen; cannot you come once a
week and teach them?” I explained that every day was
full; perhaps one of the other ladies would go. '“No ”he
said, “ you have lived in the house, they know you, and will
listen to you.” This request was laid before the other
workers, and Mrs Robert Stewart, the wife of the Rev. R.
_W. Stewart, C.M.S., undertook my class on Thursday even-
ings if I would go there. So it was arranged, and I asked Mr.
Ahok to provide a New Testament and a hymn book each
for the inmates, not that they could then read, but I hoped
that they would eventually do so. The first Thursday
evening came, and a chair with bearers w r as sent
for me. When I arrived at the house I entered
the ante-room to the left of the group shown on the
P r b a S e ) a h the ladies and female attendants
huddled together, and I invited them to be seated, and they
in turn invited me to sit. Finding they could not be per-
suaded to do so, I found a hymn for them, and commenced
singing Ja su tiangnu wa se ching ” (“Jesus loves me, this
1 know. ) When the hymn was finished I knelt down and
prayed. these friends evidently thought this all a good
joke, for they were laughing and talking all the time. When
1 arose from my knees I said, “Friends, my God is in this
room, and when I speak to Him please you must be very
quiet indeed,” and they were always so after this. Then
began my first Bible reading. I took the tenth chapter of
fet. Johns Gospel—The Good Shepherd and the lost sheep
While explaining about the sheep, how that when once
the meadow or paddock they are incapable
of finding their way back, and how the shepherd not
only looks after them, but keeps the wild animals, any
foe m fact avvay from them, they appeared so highly amused
that I said, “What is the matter?” “Why,” they said
you say we are like sheep, and we have no wool on our back’
and we have not four legs.” Then I tried again, and told of
our utterly lost condition, and how the Lord Jesus left His


glorious Home above to come and find us and take us back te
God. Here again they laughed outright, and when I asked
the cause, they answered, “ Oh Kuniong, you are wrong to-
night, we are not lost, we are all at home.” The time was
gone, and I was not sorry. We sang the same hymn over
again, then prayer, and I invited them to be seated, and they
invited me to “maing, maing, kiang” (slowly, slowly, walk) ;*
and I was carried home. As I was going along under that
starlit sky, I cried from my heart, “Who is sufficient
for these things?” and as they carried me through
my gate a voice seemed to say, “Am not I the Lord ?
“Yes, Lord,” I answered, “You are, it is your work, not
mine.” And the next Thursday when I went we read the story
of the blind man. Much prayer had been offered to God
for me, and “ I was helped,” but I found the room not large
enough. So I wrote to Mr. Ahok asking if we might use his
foreign dining-room, and he readily gave his consent. On
the third evening the room was well lighted, chairs, and
books put round, and as soon as I entered the ladies came in
and took their seats. When the hymn “ Jesus loves me was
well known we began another, “He leadeth me ; oh, blessed
thought.” And Mrs. Ahok would help each of them during
the week to learn to read one verse in the chapter we were to
study the following week, and very soon we were able to read
round a whole chapter, verse about. In time that Bible study
grew until we had thirty at one time going twice round the
table.
* A polite parting phrase.


VI.
Chinese Gentleman in Prayer, and some Wonderful
Answers to Prayers.
One evening Mr. Ahok came in just to see us, and I asked
him to remain and close with prayer. He did so, and took
each member to God by name, and told the special case all
out to Him. I remember only a part of it, where he prayed,
“ Oh, God Almighty, for Jesus, thy Son’s sake, look down on
my mother, she has one hundred idols, and her-heart is so
hard ; make her soft to worship Thee, for she is nearly 80
years old. There is my wife too. She has been learning
about Thee, but she does not want to give up her idols, and
she does not worship Thee ; make her a true changed heart.
Then her mother, she reads Thy word but does not believe
in Thee. My eldest son’s wife is very hard, she will not trust
Thee.” And so on, until all in the room had been specially
commended to God.
I mention this here, for in the time to come that prayer
whs fully answered, even to the very old woman nearly 80.
All, all the petitions were granted “ Bless the Lord, oh my
soul, and all that is within me bless His holy name.” He
always does cash His own promises when He is trusted to
do so. One day, when Mrs. Ahok was learning with me, she
seemed so sad, that I asked the reason. She said, “Oh !
Kuniong, I am so unhappy ; I am not head in my own
house. You know here in China, “ without children without
honour.” And Mr. Ahok’s first wife had children ; she died,
then Mr. Ahok married me. I have been his wife for 12
years, and he wants me to rule, and I cannot, because
I have no child. Would not your God give me one ?
Did He ever give anyone a son ?” The occasion was
unique. Here was I, young in years and in experience, being
asked a most difficult question, I turned to God’s word and
read the story of Hannah. Then I said, “It is true God can
do all things, and we are told to make our requests known
unto Him.” Then we knelt, and for the first time I heard
Mrs. Ahok pray aloud. Her prayer was, “Oh God, Jehovah,
I come to Thee now, help me not to doubt, teach me this
good doctrine, give me Thy Holy Spirit, and please give me
a son, for Jesus’ sake. Amen.” The summer came again, and
I was ordered away from Foo Chow, and took the oppor-
tunity afforded me of visiting friends in Australia. I just


went for the voyage in the same vessel there and back, but
owing to stoppages at many places, the time Hew by, until
nearly three months had passed away before my return. The
school had re-assembled, sickness was among the scholars.
One girl was so ill with typhoid that the other girls
were removed with the matron to one of the City
chapels, and I was left to nurse the sick. Some weary
weeks followed ere I could again find time to visit Mrs.
Ahok, and when I did I found her unable to come to me
again for lessons. I began the Bible readings again, and had
the joy of knowing that all the idols had been removed from
the house, and those belonging to Mr. Ahok’s mother were
taken to her own apartment, and also of attending, for the
first time, a gospel address, to be given weekly in one of
Mr. Ahok’s stores.
About this time the gentlemen of the household wanted to
have a Bible reading like the ladies, so it was arranged
that they should come into the dining-room at 8 o’clock,
when the ladies went out. Then Mr. Ahok began a
Sunday service at his house, and on one occa-
sion an eye-witness told me there were eighty
persons present. But up to this time Mr. Ahok had not
been able to see his way to cast out the idols from his store,
or to close his business on Sundays. He had not, either, come
forward for baptism ; but God is never in a hurry, and He
was surely leading him along. One morning, after my
patient had recovered, and the girls had returned to the
school-house, I received an urgent message to go at once and
see Mrs. Ahok, who was very ill. I went, and asked Mr.
Ahok how long she had been so ill, and he said three days.
I begged to be allowed to send for a foreign doctor, and he
consented. I sent for Dr. Adam, as Dr. Rennie and he
were partners, but the former was absent just then. Dr.
Adam quickly came, and before he left he put into my
arms the boy given in answer to prayer. He was,
indeed, the “ Christian doctrine little boy ” as they called
him, and great were the rejoicings over his birth. Such
grand presents, and so many of them. The house seemed
overflowing with silks, gold ornaments, and many kinds of
sweetmeats and cakes. Great was the ceremony on the
third day when the little fellow’s head was shaved, and for
many days afterwards. When Mrs. Ahok grew stronger I
said, “You will now serve God, will you not ? ” She said, “I
can no longer worship idols, but I do not know how to be a
Christian, I must pray to be taught.” This picture is Mrs.
Ahok with the little adopted boy on her left, the child I
nursed; the child on her right is the one given in answer
to prayer.


Son. Mrs. Ahok. Adopted Son.




The following letter to myself from Mr. Ahok at this time
may interest my readers FoochoW)
“ October 21, 1881.
“Dear Miss Foster, ,
“Tt is most kind of you, as you sent a servant to my house
to make enquiry after W Ahok. Yesterday she had a
little fever, and after taking medicine Y P
(Miss Sparr, M.D., an American), felt a little bette .
“ Yesterday Dr Sparr was in my house, and was obliged
to blthemy baby Zj cleanly I was sorry that you could
not come to see the interesting bathing.
u t was V erv busy yesterday receiving presents from my
So! a baby in a family fa^Wth^to
return thanks for their presents. . t fhink
“ I received great many chickens and ' tw i ce
if Mrs. Ahok can eat all of them, she will become twice
larger and heavier than she is now. , r
‘i lam extremely sorry about your heaf ache and that l
thewhom 1 spoke to you
Sne it till next week, when you are better and able to
accompany us in going to his house. ,
“ I shall have a meeting in my
nYlock pm I have invited Mr. and Mrs. Uhlinger, Jir.
and Mrs^Chandler, and Miss Sparr to come to join me
prayer, and I hope you will be able to come.
“ I remain,
“ Yours very sincerely,
“ T. Ahok.”


CHAPTER VII.
Anxious Questioning, and Departure.
On Saturday morning I used to visit the hospitals, and
frequently on my way back to the school I would go into
Mr, Ahok’s store and join him, sometimes alone, sometimes
with others, in praying for guidance, and for grace to obey
the guiding hand of God when clearly seen. When our
yearly conference commenced I told the Rev. Ting Sing Sang
about Mr. Ahok and his difficulties, and asked if he and some
of the other clergy (Chinese) would call on him on the morrow
and see what could be done. He promised to do this, so I
sent a note to Mr. Ahok, telling him what I had done. They
met. It was entirely a Chinese meeting, and the account,
as I sent it to the Church Missionary Gleaner for June,
1883, shall be copied here:—“The Catechists and Christians
unanimously agreed that the stores (places of business) must
be closed on Sundays, that it should be done slowly. First
an almanac should be drawn up denoting on what days in
the Chinese year the English Sunday would fall on, and
such days to be duly marked, and notice given that no busi-
ness would be transacted on those days. But as many of the
retail customers came from a distance, and as Mr. Ahok
would not like to lose the custom of those who had hitherto
so generously supported him, the stores would not be closed
until this notice had been well circulated. The employees
were to receive the same wages for that day if they
attended divine service instead of serving behind the
counter. If this was not agreed to they must leave.
Mr. Ahok willingly took these proposals, and submitted
them to his partners, who still stood out against Sunday
closing.” I remember well the following Saturday going to
see him and hearing him sadly say he did not know what to
do. I told him he must be willing to lose his earthly goods
if they stood between him and his obedience to God, and
then I read our Saviour’s own words from the Gospel of St.
Mark, chapter ix. Still the time went on, and nothing
seemed done, when again illness put a stop to my work, and
the doctor ordered me home. When the day arrived for me
to leave, many of the Chinese thronged the staircase and
my room. Foremost stood Mrs. Ahok, who had grown to be
like a sister to me, and I said, “ Oh, Mrs. Ahok, you have not
given your heart to Jesus yet?” “Yes, I have,” she said.
“ Ah, but,” I replied, “ you have not yet confessed Him before


men. Oh, I could die for you, my friends, if by my death I
could save your never-dying souls. Do, oh !do believe and
trust the dear Lord Jesus. I may never meet you again on
earth, but I do want to see you in heaven. W ill you not
promise to meet me there V’
Sobbings only were heard, until one old woman who had
occasionally attended the Bible reading at Mrs. Ahok s came
forward and said : “ Here, Kuniong, I have brought you my
idol, lam going to worship your Jesus now.” The idol was
black and old, but I kept it for several years, and still possess
its head.
After my arrival in England I held many meetings, en-
deavouring to stir up hearts to send some one to take up
this special Zena na work in China.
mi n
c


CHAPTER VIII.
“Good News from a far Country.”
Mr. Eugene Stock, Editorial Secretary of the C.M.S.,
listened to all I had to say, and he would so gladly have
taken up the work but at that time the C.M.S. were
not sending out ladies. True, they had a few ladies
at work, but they had left the ladies’ portion to
the “Church of England Zenana Missionary Society,”
and other female societies, so he directed me to the late Sir
William Hill, Chairman of the C.E.Z.M.S. I was with him
for nearly two hours, and very many times afterwards, and
we never consulted together w'ithout laying all before God
in prayer. There were many difficulties in the way, but He
who has promised to make the crooked places straight and the
rough places plain did so in this case, and very soon, He
sent in the special funds needed for this new departure, as up
to this time the C.E.Z.M.S. had only taken up India, and
also the worker was found, and before long Miss Gough was
on her way to China. About this time I received a good many
letters from Mr. Ahok and the workers in Foochow. I will
quote from Mr. Ahok’s own letter first. He had at this time
been baptised while at Hong Kong on business. He says :
“ I am happy to tell you that on the 18th of June last my
mother, wife, and brother, and his wife were baptised, and I
hope that they will carry on Christian work to be worthy
of true and earnest Christians. My brother’s wife had a
baby (boy) born a few days after (his mother’s) baptism, the
mother and baby are both doing very well. I think it is a
special gift from God, and I hope the baby may grow up to
be the means of doing God’s work and a comfort to his
parents. I have changed the Thursday meeting (Bible
reading) to Friday. I have a meeting at my store every
Wednesday (this meeting I have mentioned before), and one
at my house on Sundays.
“ Last Sunday I had a large society (gathering) at my
house ; there were about forty present. My store has not
been closed on Sunday, because all my partners do not
believe in God, and I hope you will pray God to help me in
bringing this important matter to a satisfactory ending.”
We did pray, and asked all friends in England to do the
same ; and the next year, on March 3,1 received this news :
“My two stores are closed on Sundays, commencing from


the beginning of the Chinese New Year. I continue to have
Wednesday meetings at my store, and Friday meetings at
my residence, and I hope God will lead me aright. At my
family prayers I never omit to pray for you and your
husband, and I hope you will often pray for me.” I had
been married, and directly afterwards Mr. Ahok always
ioined my husband’s name with mine in his prayers. I will
here insert one of Mr. Ahok’s letters, written to me while in
Foochow, to show their style :
“Foochow, 3rd March, 1881.
“My Dear Miss Foster,
“ Many thanks for your kind note received yesterday.
“ I beg to inform you that I have bought the books which
you ordered me to buy for the members of my family to
read.
“ 1 have prepared tea for you to take this evening. I
shall not be at home this evening, and I am afraid that
my family can not stand in ceremony with you.
“ Should they be wanting of politeness, I hope you will
kindly excuse them.
“ I hope you will be able to go to my house to preach,
so that all my family may have comprehension of hearing
God’s words.
“ Will you kindly tell Mrs. Ahok that it is her duty
to teach all the female relative in my family the doctrine
of God, and that she has power of governing them if
they do not obey her.
“ Though I am a master of my family, but I have
seldom been at home, and do not know as much as Mrs.
Ahok could.
“ I very much wish that you will kindly tell me which
one in my family has paid attention to hear your preaching.
“My first and second daughter-in-law are very dis-
obedient to me. When you see them will you kindly ask
them what is the reason they do not follow my advice,
and oblige.
“ Yours, very truly,
‘‘T. Ahok.”
And now I will give one of Mrs. Ahok’s. These letters are
verbatim.
“Foochow,
“ February 16, 1888.
“My Dear Mrs. Fagg,
“ Many thanks for your letter and the book and cards,
which you so kindly think of me to send them, and gave me.
lam so sorry that I could not write and thank you before


this, as I had not time, and learned little English, but I am
so thankful and glad that Mrs. Sing is staying with me tor
the Chinese New Year. She helped me to write this letter to
you. I have had very bad sore eyes last month, I could not
see or do anything, but very thankful to say that lam so
much better now, not quite well yet. I must put on spectacles.
I cannot read any letters without them. This is the Chinese
New Year, you are very often in my thoughts, and often think
your goodness and kindness to me, and to Charley when he
was very ill you took care and nursed him well. 1 never
forget it. When are you coming back to Foochow again, 1
should like to see you, hoping you will come here some day
for a change if you could. Mrs. Stewart, Mrs. Sing,
and some of the ladies used to go with me into the
city to visit the rich people, and tell them of the
great love of God to sinners. They all were very nice, and
attentive to hear, but they have not made up their minds to
believe. Also we used to visit the houses near my house,
and also to Po Na-sang, too, we pray God to open their eyes
that they may see Jesus, as their Saviour, who can save
them. I hope I shall be able to work again after the Chinese
New Year, if nothing happened. I dare say you have heard
about my mother, she has been baptised last year. 1 belie\ e
she is a true Christian, she seems quite happy. She sends
her love to you, she comes here very often to the prayer
meeting, and also to the service on Sundays. She is very
often think of you, and should like to see you too. My
children—Charley and Jimmy—go to the Sunday school now
every Sundays. I asked a Christian teacher to teach them
last year in my house. They learned the Bible picture book,
and they know some of the stories from the Ist to the 30tli
pictures quite well. My second daughter-in-law and hei
husband have been disgraced, and disbehave themselves. 1
am quite grieved about them. They have gone out from
my house, which lam so sorry to say. My second daughter-
in-law was very ill last year. She wished to be baptised,
and was baptised, but was very sorry what happened with
her now. Please will you kindly pray for her and her
husband that they may see of their own sins, and
come back again to God. If they are humbly to Him
He will not turn them away. My eldest daughter-in-law is
very hard-hearted, she was exhorted by many friends, and
prayed for, but she has not make up her mind to believe in
the Lord Jesus as her Saviour, I am very sorry for her, but
we pray God to open her eyes, that she may some day come
out boldly to confess the Lord Jesus, and trust Him as her
Saviour Last Conference Misses Newcombe invited me to
stay with them for a week ; I went to the meeting every day.


I walked over with them to go, and to come back six times
a day, and I did not feel tired, or hurt my feet at all ; I felt
quite well and strong, and was much refreshed. I enjoyed
it very much. My little boy, Jimmy, went with me too, to
stay with the Newcombes ; he went to the meeting and heard
about giving up wine, so he has given up wine now ; he
bought a button, which has the Chinese character “ Kai-
Chin.” If anybody invited him to the feast and gave him
wine, he would say “ No, I have given up wine.” I hope he
will keep it all the days of his life. lam very sorry to tell
you that Mr. Stewart is not well yet. lam afraid if he is
not well he will go to England, and we shall be so sorry to
lose them. Last March Mr. Ahok went to Singapore, to
Hong Kong, to Amoy and Formosa, all about five months.
He went to the jail and prison to preach to the heathen
about the Gospel of Christ. While he was in Singapore he
had very nice times there. Last night Mr. Ahok started to
Hong Kong for some engagements ; he said that he would be
back in a fortnight. Dr. Corey is going home soon, as she
is very ill. I am going to tell you about the great
marriage of the son of the richest man in Formosa to
the great granddaughter of the great Mandarin in Foochow,
whose grave so many people used to see, near the recreation
ground. It is a very beautiful big grave. His great grand-
daughter married tne richest man’s son in Formosa. He
came to Foochow to be married. It was a very grand wed-
ding. I never saw such a wedding ; it was a very crowd
of people; thousands of people went to see the bride,
whether rich or poor. The bride had to stand on the table,
where the people could see her. Some of the chairs and benches
broke down on account of the crowd of people who knocked
about and made such a rouse ; but the head man of the
wedding dared not say anything, lest they would make an
uproar. Their custom is that any people can go and see.
They went to see the bride from 7 to 11 o’clock in the night.
The head was very good and patient. He dared not say a
word to make the people angry or send them away. About
400 people carried the tablets and the bride’s presents, just
like they carried procession. Some of the missionary ladies
should like to go and see the bride, but they would not allow
it, as they are so afraid that many of the Chinese will come
and see too, and will make a rouse again, in case they should
get some troubles. They said, before they go back to For-
mosa, they will come out to my house, and invited some of
the ladies to come and see the bride ; I wish you were to see
her. Last Wednesday the bride’s mother-in-law came to
wish me a Happy New Year ; she will come again before they
go away, and stay here on their way to Formosa. This lady


knows about the Bible. She says it is a good doctrine. Some
of the Missionaries in Formosa gave her some books and
Bible to read. I talked to her about this religion ; she
seemed very nice about it. The Prayer Meeting on Friday
evening held in my house by you, we still keeping it now,
and we have it every Friday. The American Church ap-
pointed Mr. Sia, one of the Chinese clergymen, to go to
America to tell the people there about the work here, so Mr.
Sites goes with him to America to translate it for him. The
Church appointed Mr. Ahok to go, but he cannot leave his
work, so they asked Mr. Sia to go instead of him. I heard
you have four daughters ; you are quite rich with daughters.
Please give my kind regards to Mr. Fagg, and to yourself.
“Yours affectionately,
“ Sia Ahok.”


CHAPTER IX.
Letters, and Visit to England.
1 win n °w copy part of Mrs. R. W. Stewart’s letter, telling
me of the first time Mrs. Ahok spoke in public :
lou would be so rejoiced if you could see Mrs. Ahok
now, she is such a decided bright Christian. A short time
ago 1 went to one of the meetings at the Methodist Con-
ference. i hey had meetings in the morning for women by
themselves, and at one of them Mrs. Ahok was asked to tell
about the visiting in the City with Miss Gough. I was
quite clelighteci with the way she spoke—so simply, and yet
so well and clearly. She told us first of her own conversion,
how she was worshipping idols and knew nothing about
God, and did not even wish to know him ; but in His great
mercy He had sent one of His servants to her to show her
the light, and that servant was Miss Foster. She said at
j. i 6 i ' k puzzled at all she heard ; but at last the
light broke in and she learned to know Christ as her
Saviour. Then she felt so afraid and ashamed to confess
she was a Christian ; but now God had taken all that away,
ajid she never feels either fear or shame, but loves to tell
others about the Lord Jesus. Then she went on to tell of
her going in the City with Miss Gough and also with me,
altogether twelve houses, and of the willingness of the
ladies to listen. It was so interesting hearing her tell it all,
and to see her strong desire to see others converted.”
■«ir rs ' has also written a dear little book entitled
Womens Work in the Fuhkien Province,” and in it she
says:—
I wish I could give you, in Mrs. Ahok’s own words, her
account of this great change in her life, as she told it to a
small gathering of Chinese women to cheer and encourage
them. What I remember of it is as follows
“‘ I never thought of God, nur had any desire after Him,
but in His great love and mercy He had compassion on me,
and sent one of His servants to me to my own home. It was
Miss Foster.
At first I could not understand her message, and my
heart was all in darkness, but by-and-bye the light began
to shine : it was as you have often seen at sunrise, first a
faint light when nothing is seen distinctly, then the sun
itself appears, and in a flood of light all is clear.
V?° “ was *. n heart when Christ came in, all my doubts
and fears vanished, and I found a joy and peace I never


knew before. But my difficulty then was to confess that I
JeTget and wi tempted to think I might worship Chnst
m< “ e but'this also I took to the Saviour, and told Him my
weakness and fea r of confessing I was His servant ; and
Ip included her face beaming with ]oy He took it
SSSSHSSHSS
rich Liendfin the City of Foo-Chow, and he rnvited^teV
IliSgiHisss
“opportunities thus offered her for she was soomobl „ d
enoiTgh however,°to S£S£ her "ground was ready
for the’seed if only there were sowers ready to go forth,
for the seed . g th6n ent t , to extend their
pity to the women of China as they had done to Indias
J \ T y > nT ,j +Vipir answer was to send out a lacly v’liss
ao°uehl’ who quickly learned the language, and began to
Whin in ( theTity Sn Saturday we had many invitation 4
as Mrs. Ahok said we must w hear d of us, and
rskX ou/house to see us On
Monday we were invaded by seven very grand city ladies.
Sly SKrEd'‘‘C Oltoti &: Silver sin
tU Th^ K ther“olbwsf iff f rim‘E Ahok on page 10
uMy moTherindaw died last year in August, as you have


heard and while I was in mourning Chinese custom would
n °} al \hlv” oukf°o a tTk n e S it h afeoufet feelings ;
but i ha™ been once into the city with Miss Dsmae i to M
the ladies you used to call upon with me. Their tone is
Ling ; they were inquiring about you ,
among these people a =?^ ri „ (Chitnio), and
houses near my house. Yesjerday * uite
several of them asked us to come agamso ware g° g
this afternoon. Once a week I have 1 layer t „ Uesg
Hospital with the sick women there. PJ b in „ f ort h
the words that have been spoken that they may bring
frnit to His glory. My mother is quite happy since sn j
became a Christian, she lives next door to “Chew’s family
ofeVfelhltTefoTlong they may come out and
confess Christ before all men. xn«Vipt of
will’speak for themselves, which we insert later on.
of few. Of Englandjenana Mis-
sionarv Society to be held at Prince s Hall, I lccacui y
“ To leave her own country and travel the long and trying
voyage is an unprecedented step foi a Chine &nd
was greatly opposed b Y rs - n^ ks f (;vi i ;is sure to result
acquaintances, who augured all so • Christian as
tsiSSSiriTSs:


of her OAvn rank in China who are willing to listen to the
Gospel.
“ Anyone who hears Mrs. Ahok’s pathetic pleading in
broken English cannot but be touched, and all who have at
heart the extension of Christ’s Kingdom will surely join in
pleading that this longing, prayerful desire of her heart may
be granted, that those who are able may likewise be willing
to respond to her call, which we believe to be the call of
God through His child, whom He has already so greatly
honoured, in answer to prayer, and that those who cannot
go will give all they can to meet the expenses of those who
are willing to give themselves for work in that interesting
portion of the vineyard.—R.D. April, 1890.”
We insert two items from the daily papers, choosing these
short ones to avoid repetition :
“ The visit of the Chinese lady to Dublin, of whom we gave
a sketch last week, has resulted in deepening the interest in
Chinese missions. Rev. Mr. Bradshaw, with whose daughter
the visitor came from China, has received a letter k from a lady
offering to devote her life to work in China ; another has
sent a remittance of £25 in aid of the hospital at Foochow.”
“ The various religious meetings have been well attended.
The Metropolitan Hall was filled at the annual meeting of
the Church Missionary Society. The Bishop of Ossory pre-
sided. The Chinese Lady, the wife of the Mandarin of Foo-
chow, who is at present staying at the Rectory, Clontarf,
occupied a seat on the platform close to the Bishop, and gave
a short address in Chinese, which was translated by Miss
Bradshaw. Also ‘ Mrs. Ahok ’ (if we may thus describe her
for the sake of convenience) sang a hymn, ‘ Jesus loves me r
in Chinese, and requested the audience to join in the chorus.
The effect was most striking and impressive. The London
C.M.S. Committee should invite her to attend the great
Exeter Hall meeting. ‘ Mrs. Ahok,’ who has a very pleasing,
intelligent face, earnestly pleaded for more workers for
China.”
And a copy of her speech made at Prince’s Hall, London*
taken from “ India’s Women,” for July and August
“ Mrs. Ahok addressed the meeting in Chinese, which was
rapidly interpreted by Mrs. Stewart: —
“ ‘ I have just remembered that this is the 21st day of the
Chinese month, so that is exactly two months to-day since I
landed in England, and I am very happy to have this oppor-
tunity of speaking to so many people. I have not under-
stood all that has been said while I have been sitting here,
only that the gentlemen were speaking of India, and now
I wish to say a few words about China.


“ ‘ Since I have been here, what has struck me more than
anything is that the women of England have such wonderful
blessings from God. I see them go out, even at night, and
I think they must be very strong. As I see the blessings
that they here enjoy, it makes my heart still more pity
China. lam very anxious to tell you something about my
countrywomen. Many here may know it already, but I
should like to remind those who do not, that in China there
is the cruel custom of binding women’s feet, and it makes it
almost impossible for them to leave their own houses or to
walk out of doors. I myself have bound feet, and it is
extremely difficult for me to move about. You may ask how'
w'as I able to come to England ? It is solely trusting in
God’s great power. I have heard some people say that lam
come to England for pleasure ; but I do not think there can
be much pleasure in coming as I have done.' That long
journey alone is enough to make one cry. My one thought
is to get back to my own country as quickly as I can, after
doing the duty which God has called me to do. Since I have
been here these two months, I have never once been out for
my own amusement; but every day I have had some oppor-
tunity of speaking to people about the needs of the Chinese
women, and that is all my heart desires.
“ ‘ One thing specially fills my heart with pity as I think
o£ my sisters in China —the time of their death. I have
myself been with those who were passing out of this life
into unknown darkness; they murmur that they see evil
spirits coming for them, and say, “ I see this and that
other spirit,” so that one attendant dare not stay in the
room alone with them ; there must be five or six people.
They say the evil spirits are filling the room, and coming to
take away that poor soul. Sometimes as the watchers
beside the dying hear the cry of an owl, of which they have
great fear in China, they think it is a messenger from the
other world, calling the soul of the departing one.
“ ‘The reason of this terrible dread and anguish of mind is
that they do not know the love of God, but worship evil
spirits. Many of them, when they are very, very ill indeed,
do not ask the doctor to give them medicine, but send and
inquire at the idol temples what medicine should be taken.
If a man is very ill indeed, they send to the great temple of
Foochow’, and pray to seven or eight idols for his recovery.
These things ought to fill your hearts with compassion.
“ ‘ I will not now tell you about the customs of China,
because you have heard what is done in India, and, as far as
I can tell, the women are treated in much the same way. I
see so many people to-day all worshipping and loving the
same God, and it fills my heart with sorrow w'hen I think of


my city, Foochow ; very few women there have heard God’s
Name, because there are so few to teach them. These
Chinese ladies will not allow a Chinese man to go and tell
them about God and about the Saviour ; they could not
listen to a man, but if you ask them if a foreign lady from
England may come, they say, “ We will gladly hear her
speak.” I have heard that more than one hundred
ladies of this Society have gone to India, and are working
there, and now I hope that quite as many will go to China.
I should like you to remember that women in China are
going to ruin ; it is a matter of life and death. I ask you to
go and save them. I am thankful that some ladies have
gone already to China in connection with this Society. I
know the two Misses New’combe well, but they have moved
to Kucheng, 120 miles from Foochow, where they have
more work than they can do. Some more ladies went to
Shanghai and another to Fu-Ning, so that only leaves Miss
Davies for this great city with thousands and thousands of
women. How can these workers be enough ? I hope many
present to-day will soon go out and help Miss Davies, and
these poor Chinese ladies who are like lost sheep, with no one
to care for them.
“‘ I will give a few words of my own experience. Some
years ago I worshipped idols, just as these women do now,
and seemed to be quite under the power of the idols ; but
now, thanks to God’s great mercy, He has delivered me.
My husband’s mother, who had also become a Christian,
died about two years ago : her death was perfect peace, so
different from what I told you just now of the heathen’s
deathbed. As we sat in the room with her, we asked
whether she was afraid, and her answer was : “It is all
peace,” and so she passed away to be with her Saviour. If
Miss Foster had not come to teach me, I should be just as
much in darkness as any of my people, and now I want some
of you to come out and teach them. Will you have patience
while I read you some verses out of the Bible ? (St. Matt,
ix. 36-38). . , .
“ ‘ Our Saviour had compassion on the people who fainted
and were as sheep not having a shepherd. It is the same
now as He looks on the people of China. He sees that the
harvest is plenteous. When a cornfield is ripe, if many
labourers gather it at once, it may be all safely housed in a
few days ; but if they wait and let it stand three or four
years it may all be spoilt. I would remind you of one other
verse, which was spoken of at a meeting yesterday. It is in
St. Mark. Our Lord, before he left this world said to His
disciples : “ Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature.” ’ ”


CHAPTER X.
Opinions of the Press and Others.
A lady who heard her address a large meeting in the
Hampstead Town Hall says that never before had she seen
such eagerness to get seats at a Missionary meeting. Ine
hall was packed, gentlemen stood during the meeting, and
many were turned from the doors unable to find even stand-
ing room Great was the excitement and interest shown
when Mrs. Ahok appeared in her brilliant Chinese dress
leaning on the arm of her heathen servant, and -all listened
in breathless silence while she explained simply and patheti-
cally the reason why she must beg leave to give her address
seated—that her tiny crippled feet were a source of constant
pain. Mrs. Ahok was evidently an intelligent and observant
woman, notwithstanding the close confinement that custom
enforces on all Chinese ladies of rank, and the fact that she
had never been three miles from her husband s house.
She was passing a large gasometer in the suburbs, and
inquired what it was. Her English friend explained that it
was a reservoir of gas for lighting the London streets, I lien
she wished to know how it was got out of this reservoir to
the lamps. She was told it was by means of many pipes
laid along the roads. “ Oh, my dear friends, she said, is.
not England like this gasometer, a big reservoir of gospel
light, and my people are perishing in the dark m far away
China. Cannot you do for God’s light what you do with
your gas ; lay it on to those distant places and let them also
rejoice in that light that you have so plentifully in this
England so favoured by God T . _
And a report of one of her meetings held in Dublin copied
from the Young Women’s Christian Association Monthly
Journal for July, 1890:
“ Many of our country Secretaries will regret to learn that
Mrs. Ahok’s visit is terminating without their having had
the stimulus of a visit and address from her. The last
evening in Ireland was spent at the Central Institute, /u,
Harcourt-street, and feeling sure that Secretaries will like
to tell their Members as much as possible of our Chinese
sister, we give a short account of this meeting, and also
notes of her address.
il Such a crowd of Institute Members and then friends
assembled—many of whom had collected for years m their


my city, Foochow ; very few women there have heard God’s
Name, because there are so few to teach them. These
Chinese ladies will not allow a Chinese man to go and tell
them about God and about the Saviour ; they could not
listen to a man, but if you ask them if a foreign lady from
England may come, they say, “We will gladly hear her
speak.” I have just heard that more than one hundred
ladies of this Society have gone to India, and are working
there, and now I hope that quite as many will go to China.
I should like you to remember that women in China are
going to ruin ; it is a matter of life and death. I ask you to
go and save them. I am thankful that some ladies have
gone already to China in connection with this Society. I
know the two Misses Newcombe well, but they have moved
to Kucheng, 120 miles from Foochow, where they have
more work than they can do. Some more ladies went to
Shanghai and another to Fu-Ning, so that only leaves Miss
Davies for this great city with thousands and thousands of
women. How can these workers be enough ? I hope many
present to-day will soon go out and help Miss Davies, and
these poor Chinese ladies who are like lost sheep, with no one
to care for them.
“‘ I will give a few words of my own experience. Some
years ago I worshipped idols, just as these women do now,
and seemed to be quite under the power of the idols ; but
now, thanks to God’s great mercy, He has delivered me.
My husband’s mother, who had also become a Christian,
died about two years ago : her death was perfect peace, so
different from what I told you just now of the heathen’s
deathbed. As we sat in the room with her, we asked
whether she was afraid, and her answer was : “It is all
peace,” and so she passed away to be with her Saviour. If
Miss Foster had not come to teach me, I should be just as
much in darkness as any of my people, and now I want some
of you to come out and teach them. Will you have patience
while I read you some verses out of the Bible 1 (St. Matt,
ix. 36-38).
“ ‘ Our Saviour had compassion on the people who fainted
and were as sheep not having a shepherd. It is the same
now as He looks on the people of China. He sees that the
harvest is plenteous. When a cornfield is ripe, if many
labourers gather it at once, it may be all safely housed in a
few days ; but if they wait and let it stand three or four
years it may all be spoilt. I would remind you of one other
verse, whicn was spoken of at a meeting yesterday. It is in
St. Mark. Our Lord, before he left this world said to His
disciples : “ Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature.” ’ ”


CHAPTER X.
Opinions of the Press and Others.
A lady who heard her address a large meeting in the
Hampstead Town Hall says that never before had she seen
such eagerness to get seats at a Missionary meeting. The
hall was packed, gentlemen stood during the meeting, and
many were turned from the doors unable to find even stand-
ing room. Great was the excitement and interest shown
when Mrs. Ahok appeared in her brilliant Chinese dress
leaning on the arm of her heathen servant, and -all listened
in breathless silence while she explained simply and patheti-
cally the reason why she must beg leave to give her address
seated—that her tiny crippled feet were a source of constant
pain. Mrs. Ahok was evidently an intelligent and observant
woman, notwithstanding the close confinement that custom
enforces on all Chinese ladies of rank, and the fact that she
had never been three miles from her husband’s house.
She was passing a large gasometer in the suburbs, and
inquired what it was. Her English friend explained that it
was a reservoir of gas for lighting the London streets. Then
she wished to know how it was got out of this reservoir to
the lamps. She was told it was by means of many pipes
laid along the roads. “ Oh, my dear friends,” she said, “ Is.
not England like this gasometer, a big reservoir of gospel
light, and my people are perishing in the dark in far awav
China. Cannot you do for God’s light what you do with
your gas 5 lay it on to those distant places and let them also
rejoice in that light that you have so plentifully in this
England so favoured by God ?”
And a report of one of her meetings held in Dublin copied
from the Young Women's Christian Association Monthly
Journal for July, 1890: —
“ Many of our country Secretaries will regret to learn that
Mrs. Ahok’s visit is terminating without their having had
the stimulus of a visit and address from her. The last
evening in Ireland was spent at the Central Institute, 75,
Harcourt-street, and feeling sure that Secretaries will like
to tell their Members as much as possible of our Chinese
sister, we give a short account of this meeting, and also
notes of her address.
“ Such a crowd of Institute Members and their friends
assembled —many of whom had collected for years in their


various classes ‘ for China ’ —that an overflow meeting had
at once to be arranged in the dining-room, where, seated on
tables and forms, about 50 listened to such a graphic descrip-
tion of Chinese customs, that more than one felt Miss
Coulson spoke as if she had been out herself, so deeply may
a distant land be laid on our hearts. There must have been
nearly 300 in the drawing-room, the desire being so great of
those who could not attend meetings in the daytime, to see
and hear their Chinese sister. Mrs. Ahok sang in Chinese,
‘ Happy Day/ and all joined in the chorus. Then Miss
Bradshaw spoke of some of the phases of Chinese life and
introduced Mrs. Ahok, who said : —‘l invite you to look at
the Acts of the Apostles, chaps, ix. 6, and xxii. 21. Paul,
before he had received the Holy Spirit’s influence,
persecuted the Church and the Lord’s disciples; after-
wards he was changed by the Holy Spirit and was very
energetic in teaching many Christians. This is plainly
stated in the Bible, you all know it already. Paul
was trembling and said, “ Lord, Thou dost wish me
to do what ?” The Lord afterwards said (ch. xxii. 21),
u Go forth, I will cause you to go very far away to teacn
the heathen.” Paul’s words and the Bible words are at this
time spoken to us all. But look at this time at other
countries. There are very many people who do not yet
know how to worship God, because they have not at all yet
heard the Lord’s Gospel, they all worship false gods, images
and idols. Now we all have first received grace from the
Lord, we must also obey God’s words and go and save those
who do not believe in Him. Men and women though very
far away are created by your God, too, and you see Scripture
has said, “He sends rain, giving it to the good men and also
the bad men. He causeth the sun to come out on the
righteous people and also on the unrighteous people ” God
is righteous, not making any choice, but the same to all people.
Therefore we must learn from the Lord’s example, and pity
the hearts of all people. Now we also must go to save the
people in other countries, who have not now at all
heard that Jesus has come to the world, and has
suffered death for the world of people. Paul has
said, “to believe they must hear.” Now I have come such a
long road, it is that I want to tell you their needs. This
time of the year the warm weather is arriving in China, and
they are putting forth all their strength to parade Buddhist
idols through all the streets. All the people have to give
much money for their use and clothing. They are beseeching
the idols to protect their households, and give them long
lives, and not to let them have sickness or pain, and to let
them have peace. In the second and third months of their


year they have the festivals of the Tombs ; every household
of men go to sacrifice —that is, to buy gold paper and silver
paper, and go to the graves on the hills to sacrifice on their
relations’ graves. The women serve the goddesses day and
night. They think they can give them children, and there-
fore they worship them and burn incense before them. I
also used to do quite the same, but afterwards I received
God’s Gospel and threw away all such idols and images, and
came to worship God.
“ ‘ Therefore that is why I have come to this place to tell you
the worshipping of idols is so very harmful. There is much
more, I could never tell all , only a little for you to hear.
When I talk so much about the worshipping-idols’-business
in my country, it is only from their not having heard God’s
Gospel that they are in this state.
“‘ I greatly desire you all to obey God’s commandments,
and to go to other nations and teach them to worship God,
that the idols are false, and that they may receive God’s
salvation. Jesus says that there are other nations who are
not yet in His fold (John x. 16), and He wants you to lead
them to come to Him. I think we all must obey the Lord’s
words to go and lead them to come, and when with them
say, “ God has also grace for you ; it is because you do not
know God that you worship these idols.” We must go and
plead with them, and lead them to the fold. For if
we do not go and tell them, they will never know or
understand what it is to repent of their sins, or
how they can worship God. I think the words of
the Bible are commands to all of us. It does not matter
what country, what nation of men, all are created by the
same God ; but the other countries do not know at all that
God’s grace is for them, just because no one has been to tell
them, therefore they worship false gods and have strayed
very far from God.
“ ‘ I would like to make you listen to some of the customs of
China, the worst is. the idol worship. If a person is ill they
burn incense and invite the principal spirit, invoking the
gods and idols to cause him tooe well. Do you think this is
sad or not ? Because you have never told them the Gospel
they are on the road of pitch darkness. Now we must
quickly, quickly go and save them, and make them turn
round and come and belong to the fold. Another thing, if
they have no daughters this is of no importance, but if they
have no sons this is most important, because they are afraid
that when they grow old or die there will be no one to
honour and worship their ancestral tablets. The women,
bind their daughters’ feet to cause them to be beautiful.
Then when they become brides so many people look at them


and say, “ Ah, how can their mothers have made their feet
so small ?” But if their feet are at all longer than the right
size, the mothers are blamed and said they have not governed
their children, and they are laughed at. Therefore, the
mothers have to do it to them.
“ ‘You ought very much to pity the other countries whose
customs are so hurtful. I cannot come to an end of telling
you, but if you do not obey the words of God the blame rests
on you. lam free from it.’
“While Mrs. Ahok was resting, Miss Bradshaw gave a
further description of Oliinese life and customs, and told
many sad facts which stirred all present, as we felt how
God’s light was needed in that dark land. Do we ah know
that every third person in the world is a Chinese 1 That if
the population of China marched past in single file, it would
take twenty-three and a half years for all to pass, and only
two and a half days for those ivho have received the Gospel of
Christ ? 86,000 in China die daily. What are we doing to tell
them of the Saviour before they go down to a Christless
grave 1 ”
And now we will give what the Church Missionary
Gleaner for October, 1890, says about her, and give the
photograph above-named as a frontispiece: —
“ Readers of the Gleaner, especially those who were privi-
leged to see and hear Mrs. Ahok when in England this year,
will be glad to see the portrait on this page. It will be
remembered that Mrs. Ahok, who is the wife of the Christian
merchant at Foochow who has done so much philanthropi-
cally and spiritually for the welfare of his countrymen in
that city (see Gleaner, February, 1883), was brought to a
knowledge of the truth under the teaching of Miss Foster
(now Mrs. Fagg, of Tasmania), and since her conversion has
worked as nobly among Chinese women as her husband has
among the men.
“ In the spring of this year she came to England with
Miss C. Bradshaw, a missionary of the Church of England
Zenana Society, to stir up interest among Christian ladies
in her Chinese sisters, and for several months she travelled
much and spoke in various places in England and Ireland.
About one hundred meetings were addressed by her, Mrs.
Stewart, wife of the Rev. R. W. Stewart, of the C.M.S.
Mission at Foochow, acting as an able interpreter. Mrs.
Ahok is said to be the first Christian Chinese lady to visit
this country.
“ In the July number of India's Women, the magazine of
the Church of England Zenana Society, a literal translation


is printed of Mrs. Ahok’s own statement of her object in
coming to England :
“ ‘TO MY SISTERS IN ENGLAND.
“‘I have come from China —from Foochow—and come to
England for what business and what purpose ? The road
here was very difficult, sitting in a boat for so long ! Very
tiresome it was, to be on the rough sea, with wind and
waves for the first time !
“‘My servant (Dion Ohio) and I have come here. We are
strangers ! We raise our eyes and look on people’s faces, but
we can see no one we know —no relative, no one like our-
selves—all truly strange ! I left my little boy, my husband,
my mother—all this : for what purpose do you think ? It is
only entirely for the sake of Christ's Gospel I have come.
“‘ It is not for the sake of seeing a new place and new
people or any beautiful thing ; we have in China quite close
to us new places—beautiful places. I have never seen them
yet, so why should I come so far to see other places ? They
may be very good to see, but not for this could I leave my
household and people. I cannot speak your words ; I do
not know 7 any one,, and your food is quite different from
ours : nothing is at all the same as that to which I am
accustomed.
“ f You in England sometimes come to China, but often you
have one or two fellow-missionaries from your own country ;
but here I know not one fellow-countryman. Then for what
reason have I come ? It is only to obey God’s Holy Spirit.
When the guniong (missionary lady) suggested it, I knew
God wanted me to follow Him, and that He would use me.
So I trusted Him, and had no doubts or any fear. It was
God’s Holy Spirit that led me to come. He wanted me to do
what? Not to amuse myself, but to ask and invite you to
come to China to tell tlie doctrine of Christ. How could
you know the needs of China without hearing them ? How
could you hear unless I came to tell you ? Now you can know,
for I say the harvest in China is very great, but the labourers
are so few.
“‘ Now my great desire is that the Gospel of Christ may
be known on earth as it is in heaven. It is not yet known
in China, and because the great houses have not yet heard
the Gospel, all their money is spent on the idols, sacrifices,
and burning incense.
“ ‘ In this country some help to spread the Gospel, some go
to other countries to tell those w r ho have never heard, but
some (a great many) are not helping in any way : though
they have all heard themselves, they are living here only to


obey their own wills, for their own pleasure, in this world !
How pitiable! We all know the Gospel of Christ; let us
then not follow the heathen (who have never heard) in
caring for the things of this world. The Bible says.: “If a
man receives all the I’iches of this world, and loses his own
soul ” (and the soul of many others), “ what can it profit
him ?”
“ £ I left China to come to England ;it is only in obedience
to God’s command, to show that Christ loves the whole
world, that He wants you to follow Him, in living for those
who cannot yet believe in Him, because they have not yet
heard of Him. lam only here for a very little, then I must
go back to Foochow, where there are so many large houses
full of ladies ; the workers are so very few now. At this
time only one guniong (Miss Davies) is there to visit all the
great city houses. She is not enough to visit so very many ;
and it is said that in these Mandarin houses their ears have
never yet heard the doctrine.
“ ‘ The ladies all have tiny feet; they cannot walk ; besides>
the customs are so strict and so hurtful, they are not allowed to
see guests. So missionaries are still outside their doors ; they
cannot enter the women's part of the houses, therefore they have
never heard the. happy sound of the. Gospel of Christ, and they
are truly pitiable.
“‘ Now I pray God to cause, whether guniongs (unmarried
ladies), or sing-sang-niongs (married ladies), quickly to go and
enter these houses with the Gospel.
“ * Now I ask you, raise up hot hearts in yourselves and
quickly help us :
“ ‘ Ist. Will you come back to China with me 1
“ ‘ 2nd. If you cannot, will you cause others to come, by
sending them and doing what you can to help them to come?
Diong Ahok.’
“On June 26th Mrs. Ahok left London for her native home.
She was accompanied by Miss Mead, the first-fruit of her
appeal for Christian Workers. We commend Mrs. Ahok and
her work to the prayers of all who long for the spread of
Christ’s truth.
“Our portrait is from a photograph taken by Mr. G. Martin
Tait, Hon. District Secretary of the C.M.S. for Islington,
taken for the Gleaner.”


Mrs. Ahok and Maid,




CHAPTER XI.
“With Christ, which is far Better.”
We in Tasmania were praying daily for her, but hardlv
once thought of the husband whom she had left behind,
until a letter arrived from China, telling of his visit to
Formosa on business, and subsequent illness. Letters,
followed letters in quick succession, and told of much
prayer being offered to God to spare his life until his wifes
return. Increasing weakness warned all friends of danger,,
and they asked to be allowed to summon his wife home.
“ No,” he answered, “ God called her to that work, .and when
it is done He will send her home.” Mrs. Ahok had arranged
to leave England on the first of July, but hearing of her
husband’s illness, she hastened her departure, and fearing the
heat of the Red Sea, she returned via America, accompanied
by Miss Mead, a lady ot the C.E.Z.M.S., going out for the
first time. Friends in Foochow did not know of her departuie,
but the Rev. S. Lloyd had sent a cablegram to ask her
to return at once, when lie found that she had already started
on her homeward journey. Eagerly did tliefriends in Foochow
watch all tidings of the vessel which was due to arrive on
the 10th of August ; all that day they watched around Mr.
Ahok’s bedside, and towards evening hope deferred was
making their hearts sick, when a cablegram arrived with
the news that the vessel had been delayed at Vancouver
Island, and would not be in for a fortnight.
The next day the summons came, and dear Mr. Ahok was
called to “Be with Christ, which is far better.” There was.
a funeral service at the house, and another at the church ;
then the body was left screwed down in the coffin until his
wife’s return. We will now insert two letters—one from
Miss Bradshaw, and the other from Mrs. Ling (Chitnio)—as
appeared in India's Women for November and December
“ Ireland, September 23rd. —The sad news came last night
of dear Mr. Ahok’s being taken home. I enclose a copy of a
letter from one of the Chinese who was with him just
before his death. My heart aches for dear Mrs Ahok. I
shall never forget the bright way in which Mr. Ahok laced
all the dangers and difficulties of the journey upon which
he was sending Mrs. Ahok. As he said good-bye at the
Anchorage, he said he did it gladly for the sake of getting
more workers for China. May his death be a loud call for
us each to do, as faithfully as he did, what we can for


the same end. May we pray earnestly for the heathen, who
are saying, ‘ Where is now their God ? ’ and for Mrs. Ahok,
that grace, wisdom, and power may be given to her in
answering them, and that they may see ‘perfect peace’
personified in her.
“ Two mere weeks, [ fear, before we can hear of her arrival;
and then to think of her only seeing the coffin ! Will you
join me in praying specially for those wicked relatives who
have taken all that should be hers ? May she be given
Christ’s love and patience through all! ”
Letter from Mrs. Ling (the devoted teacher Chitnio),
to Miss C. Bradshaw.
“August Ist, 1890. —I am sure you must have heard by this
time that Mr. Ahok is very ill indeed. We are all praying
day and night, that if it is God’s will to restore his health
and strength, he may again work for the Chinese in Foo-
chow ; if not, we ask God to spare his life until Mrs. Ahok’s
return.
“ Mr. Ahok is very anxious to see Mrs. Ahok. He says if
God would call him he is very glad, but he wishes for Mrs.
Ahok to be here. I went to see him often, and prayed with
him sometimes—he always seems so pleased to see me. It
seems so strange for Mrs. Ahok to go to England, and Mr.
Ahok to be here so ill. There must be some reason. ‘ All
things work together for good to them that love God,’ as you
said in your letter. ‘He doeth all things well.’ ‘ What Ido
thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter.’
“ August 9th. —I saw Mr. Ahok this afternoon. He is very ill.
lam afraid he will not live till Mrs. Ahok comes back. We
expect her in four of five days. He is so weak—quite changed
—you would not have known him. I could not say much to
him. I asked him, ‘ls your heart at peace ? ’ He said, ‘ Yes.’
I said, ‘ Be anxious for nothing.’ He said, ‘ No, it is the
will of God.’ I said, ‘The Lord Jesus is always with you,
even to the end. He will bring you up to the heavenly
home above, where He has prepared a place for you, free
from all sorrow, sickness, and pain—would you like that ? ’
He said, ‘Yes, I like it very much.’
“ I also asked him if he had any messages for Mrs. Ahok.
He said, ‘No, I leave her to God.’ Then he added, ‘You
had better go home now, because it will be too dark for you.
The Lord is always with you, and He is with me too.’
“ Let us pray very much for Mrs. Ahok, that she may be
comforted and strengthened, and see that God’s loving hand
has done this, that she may not be cast down or discouraged,
but that she may say, ‘ Thy will be done.’


“ August 15th. —I am going to tell you what you will not.
be surprised to hear after my last letter about Mr. Ahok.
He is safe with Jesus now ; free from all sorrows, pain,
sickness, and trouble : he is most joyful in the presence of
his Saviour, who loved him and washed him in the Blood of
the Lamb. No more troubles now ; poor man, he had had
so many.
“He was so quiet all the time he was ill; he never said
anything about his money or his children, but often asked
when Mrs. Ahok would come back. He fell asleep on
August 11th, in the evening. It is a great loss to us, and to
all the Chinese. It seems so strange. We do not under-
stand yet what the will of the Lord is, but we may trust
Him : He is faithful.
“I wish you w T ere here now that I might talk to you. I
feel Mr. Ahok’s loss very much. He was so good and kind
—like a father to me. 2 Cor. 1., 3, 4.”
We now give what the Christian for October 3, 1890, says
about Mrs. Ahok :
“ This week we introduce to notice a Chinese lady who, for
Chistian devotion and strength of purpose, deserves to be
held in high honour in the Church of Christ. That a lady
of rank in the million-peopled empire should confess Christ
and serve Him among her idolatrous neighbours is a notable
thing ; that out of a yearning desire for the salvation of her
people she should make a journey to Europe, and beg those
who fear God to send, without delay, other heralds of the
light of life, is more remarkable still. Such a lady, however,
is the subject of our present sketch.
“ Mrs. Ahok is the wife of a Mandarin who has just fallen
asleep at Foochow. Brought up in heathen darkness and
superstition, they early knew what it is to serve false gods.
Ten years ago, however, they came to a knowledge of Christ.
The first English lady ivlio spoke to Mrs. Ahok was Miss
Foster, of the Society for Promoting Female Education . in
the East. The Mandarin desired his wife to learn something
of the English language, and, after hesitation, it was
arranged that Miss I oster should give her instruction, not-
withstanding the fact, at first unpleasant, that the Bible was
one of the books to be read. When Miss I oster could not
give the lessons, Mrs. B. W. Stewart, of the Church Mis-
sionary Society, did so. The Chinese lady showed, for a time,
the same firm attachment as formerly to the idols winch
filled her house, and the missionaries were tempted to
despair of Divine truth ever finding a lodgment m her heart.
Light comes from God, however, and when the day or Divine
enlightment arrived, the darkness rolled from the lady s.


mind, and all was ‘ Light in the Lord.’ Having confessed
Christ, Mrs. Ahok became, to the utmost of her power, a
home missionary among her people. For some years she has
visited the city of Foochow, and has introduced English
missionaries into the households of many rich Mandarins,
where otherwise they could not possibly have obtained
entrance. Her husband, until his death in August last, was
one with her in heart and soul, and, as well as working him-
self, did much to facilitate Mrs. Ahok’s labours for the
Lord.
“Women of the higher social classes in China are, as is well
known, in a very sad case. Their crippled little feet render
them to a large extent prisoners in their houses ; custom and
ignorance do much to make their lives tedious and miser-
able. Life has no serious purpose with them, so that their
days are passed in trivial occupations and unprofitable enter-
tainment. Mrs. Ahok had grace given her to rise above
these sad surroundings, and though her tiny feet made
travelling burdensome, and the confinement of her past life
fostered fear and timidity, she boldly responded to the call
of duty, and, as already intimated, came to England to give
emphatic expression to her heart’s prayer, ‘ Come over and
help us.’ She had never before been more than three miles
away from her home, yet she did not quail before a journey
of several thousand miles She is the first Chinese Christian
lady who has ever visited Europe on such an errand.
“Early in the present year Miss Bradshaw, of the Church of
England Zenana Missionary Society, came home to England
to recruit her health. Mr. Ahok had for some time been
burdened with a desire to visit England or America in order
to impress upon Christian people the need of more mis-
sionaries. So he proposed to his wife to accompany Miss
Bradshaw, and in two days the brave little lady had made
up her mind to come and plead with the women of England
to have mercy upon the women of China. She said :‘I
cannot think why more Christians do not come to China ;
it must be because they do not know how our women are
dying.’ At Mildmay Conference in June last, Mrs. Ahok
admirably formulated the appeal which she delivered on
many platforms in the United Kingdom, as follows
“‘Suppose our Lord had said He loved this world, but had
never left heaven to lay down his life for us, would his pity
have done us any good ? We should have been without
hope. But Christ gave the greatest proof of his love by
coming and laying down his life for us. So when we say by
our lips that we know Him, we should give proof by our
lives that what we say is true. She had not come all this


way from home and country for pleasure or amusement. She
was sitting in her house in quietness and peace, and thought
of the coming of the Lord. She felt she dare not meet Him,
and look in His face, having herself known the Saviour’s
love and pity, without having done anything for the salvation
of her brothers and sisters in China. She asked Christians
to give themselves for work in China. There is a Chinese
proverb : “ While the stone is hot, put the cakes on ; ” so she
begged her hearers to make no delay in putting their resolves
into execution.
“Neeedless to say, these earnest words were listened to with
rapt attention. At nearly a hundred meetings the appeal
was presented, being interpreted from Chinese by Mrs.
Stewart. Being, as already stated, a victim of the foot-
binding custom of her country, Mrs. Ahok had to endure
much during her travels. At the annual meeting of the
C.E.Z.M.S. she referred to the difficulties of the way as
follows :
‘“I have heard some people say that I have come to
England for pleasure. I do not think there can be any
pleasure in coming as I have done. That long journey alone
is enough to make one cry. My one thought is to get back
to my own country as quickly as I can, after doing the duty
which God has called me to do.’
“There was holy daring in the undertaking. At Hong
Kong Mrs. Ahok was told, in the language of the people,
‘There are a thousand miseries before you.’ Her reply
was : ‘lf there are a thousand more, I will go.’ She came,
and endured many hardships, deriving strength and comfort
from the words of Christ: ‘lf any man serve Me, let him
follow Me. If any man serve Me, him will my Father
honour.’
“The pity of the audiences that listened to Mrs. Ahok was
always stirred by her references to the sad deaths of the
women of China. As in India, females are unwelcome at
their birth and despised in their life. When death comes,
however, their experiences are grievous in the extreme.
Mrs. Ahok said :
“‘Some years ago I worshipped idols, just as these poor
women do. I seemed to be quite under the power of the
idols ; but now, thanks be to God, lam delivered. My hus-
band’s mother, who had also become a Christian, died about
two years ago. Her death was perfect peace, so different
from the death of the heathen. As we sat in the room with
her, we asked whether she was afraid, and her answer was,
“It is all peace.” And so she passed away to be with the
Saviour. If Miss Foster had not come to teach me, I should
have been in as deep darkness as any of my people. So I
want some of you to come out and teach them.’


“ During four months Mrs. Ahok pleaded the cause of her
sisters. She told us that Miss Davies was alone in Foochow
—a great city surrounded by many smaller places, with
hundreds of thousands of women. When once the attention
of these benighted people is arrested, it is surprising to notice
their experiences in heart and mind. To think that God
loves them is at first quite ridiculous. Becoming reassured,
however, they are amazed at the story of the Cross, and
among those who have confessed Christ are some of whom
Mrs. Ahok is a very worthy representative ; they are
earnest and devoted followers of the Lord that bought them.
“Our Chinese friend was a most interesting guest wherever
she went in Great Britain and Ireland. She enforced her
appeal by one sentence spoken in excellent English, namely,
‘ Come over and help us ;it is very important.’ How the
words did touch many who heard them ! We cannot say
that many responded. We trust some will yet cheer her
heart and ‘go over.’ Mrs Ahok left England for China.
via America, June 27. One English lady, Miss Florence
Mead, sailed with her, giving her life to missionary work.
We may fittingly conclude our sketch with words taken from
Region Beyond for August: ‘ A thousand Miss Meads are
wanted ! At least a thousand such, if China''s women are to he
reached in this generation.' ”
Mrs. Ahok’s return home was precipitated by intelligence of
the serious illness of her husband. She did not arrive at
Foochow until several days after his death. We sincerely
trust that, resigned to the dispensations of Providence, Mrs.
Ahok will find her path lightened before her with a bright-
ness shining “ more and more even unto the perfect day.”
There is a custom prevailing in the Southern part of
China that no bad news may be told unto the absent ones
until they arrive on the threshold of their own doors. Not
until then do they know that sorrow awaits them in any
way : consequently when Mrs. Ahok was met in Kong Kong
by her Chinese friends they never told her of her sad loss.
So on she went full of joy at nearing home —full of thank-
fulness for what God had done for her and by her, having
with her the firstfruits of her pleadings, Miss Mead, before
mentioned, and other friends. She was nearing the deepest
sorrow any woman can be called upon to bear on earth with
a joyous heart. Alas ! How little any of us know what the
next hour will bring ! She arrived at the Pagoda Anchorage
at the mouth of the Biver Min. Her husband’s house-boat
was sent down to await her arrival, and Dr. Sites, the
American Missionary mentioned before, was among her
friends. Mrs. Ahok was so glad to see them all and to tell
how the Lord alone had led her all the time she had been


absent. Mr. Sites knew not what to do ; he felt unable for
his task. They got into the house-boat, and were being
slowly rowed down the river, and all the time Mrs. Ahok
chatted on. Towards sunset Mr. Sites, feeling that it would
be terrible for her to get home and be met at her own door
by all her family in sackcloth, suggested that they should
have evening worship. She agreed, and they sang the
hymn—
There’ll be no more sorrow there,
In Heaven above where all is love,
There’ll be no more sorrow there.
Then he read Rev. xxii., and prayed asking for grace
to tell the dreadful truth, and also that Mrs..
Ahok might have preparedness of heart to receive
all he had to disclose. Then they arose from their knees
and he told her, oh it was sad to see her, such a brushing
blow when she was so joyfully looking forward to the
speedy meeting once more. She was carried to her home,
and many of her heathen friends and relations began
exclaiming against her God, whom she served and
whom they said treated her so badly. When our
missionary ladies went in to see her she was seated in a
rocking chair, swaying herself to and fro, weeping quietly.
She could not speak, so they just stood round her, singing
comforting hymns, and repeating comforting words of
Scripture, and praying for her.
Two letters which appeared in India's Women for January,
1891, are given here: —
A literal translation of her own words may be of interest.
“ Vancouver, July 26.
“All well, all peace. From the time I left England a
month has passed away. I keep thinking continually of the
meetings in England, which we had together.
“Now we are in this place, waiting for the ship, and
therefore we had this very good opportunity for work. I
have been invited by the minister of the Church here to
speak at meetings. I have done so six times. Because this
is a new place, and there are men and women who do not at
all believe the Gospel, but who like to hear about Chinese
ways and customs, therefore they all greatly wish me to go
to these meetings. I think this also is God’s leading for us,
that we could not proceed on our journey, but must spend
this time here ; I greatly thank the Lord for His goodness.
“ The Church here is a newly established one, yet it greatly
helps (Ehina.
“We also thank God for sending to us one gentleman to
help us. He formerly was in China, and sold Bibles and


preached the Gospel at Foochow and all the places round
about • he says, too, that he knew Mr. Stewart and Mr.
Lloyd there. He can speak Chinese, and has been a great
help to us. I think this is a wonderful thing ; man think-
ing cannot foresee, only God can arrange what work we
° U “ Now lask you to pray for this place, that the Church
here may extend rapidly, and may help China.
“ To-day is Saturday ; this afternoon at 3.30 we aie to
have another meeting ; to-morrow, Sunday, we go on board
ship to return to China. .
“ There is an American gentleman going to Foochow with
his family, to be Consul there ; they are worshippers of
God He has been in America preaching the Gospel for 31
years ; they are going in the ship with us now to Foochow.
f)r. Baldwin had told him of my visit to England ; I thank
God for this good opportunity of returning to Foochow with
you have an opportunity, give my greeting to all
m M? h Ahok’s f loss C will be greatly felt by the Chinese
Christians, and of his death we can only say lt is the
Lord, let Him do what seemeth to Him good What Ido
thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter.
Miss Florence Mead writes of her safe arrival with Mrs.
Ahok at Foochow, on September 6 She continues
“ The news was kept from poor Mrs. Ahok till she was in.
the houseboat, which met the steamer at the anchorage, to
take her up to Foochow. Her brother, her nephew, and Dr
Sites met her ; the latter knows her very well indeed lhe
news was broken to her about half-way up. (I was in the
steam launch). It seemed almost God s ordering that none
but the most immediate friends and Dr. Sites were with her
at the painful moment. She sat like a statue for some time,
then utterly broke down. A most painful time ensued when
she reached the house, the friends wailing round her. For-
tum tel v Chitnio, the Bible-woman, was there.
“ Yesterday afternoon I went with three of the ladies here
to see her. The expression on her face was altered, and,
according to custom, she was very shabbily dressed. Her
-jewels were taken off. She keeps saving, If I could only
see him once more, and tell him all I have done in England.
“ She sobbed for some time ; then I proposed singing a
hymn softly to her, and after a time she became more
composed and tried to talk a little, telling Miss Davies in
Chinese to tell me she would have had a room prepared fen
me if this had not happened. Mr. Ahok is not yet buried,
and I think some time will elapse first.


CHAPTER XII.
The End.
The following letter has been sent to Mrs. Ahok, signed
by nearly five hundred friends of the C.M.S. and
C.E.Z.M.S.: —
“To Mrs. Ahok.
“ Dear Sister in Christ,— We write to tell you that our
hearts are full of sorrow for you since we heard of the great
trial with which it had pleased our Heavenly Father to visit
“We have prayed, and will pray, that our God, who is
‘ the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort,’ will
comfort you and be a God to you and a Father to your
fatherless son.
“ Thank God ! you need not ‘ sorrow as others who have
no hope, for if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, we
know that ‘them also.who sleep in Jesus will God bring
with Him.’ Your dead husband lived and died in the faith
of Jesus Christ. _ . ,
“He is ‘ not dead, but sleepeth ’ ; ‘absent from the body,
he is ‘ present with the Lord.’
“We are sure that this which has happened will not be
allowed to hinder the Gospel. In some way which we cannot
now see it will be ‘ for the glory of God, that the Son of God
may be glorified thereby.’
“We bless God for your coming to England. We have
learned to know and 'love you. Your words are not for-
gotten. The seed God enabled you to sow is already bearing
some fruit, and will, we believe, bring forth much more. One
sister has gone with you ; we send this by the hands of three
more. We know others who were led by your words to ofier
themselves for Christ’s work in China. Two of these are
now being trained for the mission field. Phis will cheer
your heart. . . , ,
“ These words are sent, with much Christian sympathy and
many prayers, by your affectionate sisters in Christ.
We will give here a letter, written by the Rev. R. W.
Stewart, which appeared in the Christian for October 10,
1890: . . , ,
Rev. R. W. Stewart, C.M.S., whose wife interpreted for
Mrs. Ahok when in England, writes to us :
“ Many will be grieved to hear that this lady, who hastened


back to China to her sick husband, did not arrive in time to
see him again in this world. The last mail brought word
that he had gone to be with his Saviour, and that she had
not reached Foochow. What a bitter home-coming for that
poor soul ! She needs our prayers sorely.
“It was a feeling of intensity for her fellow-country
people still in heathen darkness that led Mrs. Ahok to leave
her home, her husband, and her only little boy, to plead
with the women of England to go and ‘ save them, the
burden of her addresses might be summed up in these words,
so frequently on her lips : —‘ The Chinese are like lost sheep,
you must go quickly and find them ; they are in utter dark-
ness, give them the light of God.’ W ith her whole heart she
gave herself to this work, not caring to spend any of the
precious time in seeing the wonderful sights of England.
‘Let me have
A MEETING EVERY DAY,’
she said, ‘ or two, if possible, that I may. tell a great many
people, and then go back quickly to China.’ In about 100
days she had over ninety meetings. Even before she had
finished all that were arranged for her, letters from China
made her feel anxious about her husband, and she felt she
must at once return home.
“ Mr. Ahok was fully in sympathy with his wife’s object in
coming to England ; indeed, she often said she came as his
‘ substitute.’ During his illness he wrote as follows I
realise how great God’s grace is in allowing Mrs. Ahok to,,
visit England, and lam so thankful to all the Christian
friends who have helped and been kind to her. Many good
people rejoice with me in this visit of hers, while, others
laugh and say my wife has been stolen away by the Christians.
Tell Mrs. Ahok I have been a little sick for some
weeks. I find it very restful staying quietly at home. This
slight illness has greatly benefited me, and drawn my heart
nearer my Saviour. Tell Mrs. Ahok, please, not to worry at
all about me.’
“When this letter reached England Mrs. Ahok had started
on her way back to China, feeling impelled to return thither,
yet sorry to leave before her work was finished. With much
earnestness she implored those who were to take her place
at the remaining meetings to give as her last message the
words,‘Come over and help us. The people of China are
(Jyingj dying ! They ur© without Grod 5 oh, quickly como
and save them.’ How solemn do her words seem now, —
‘ dying,’ passing away day by day out of our reach.


“‘A million a month in China are dying without God.’ Oh,
that the words might rine: in the hearts of all Christ’s ser-
vants rousing them to self-sacrifice in the cause of the Master
we profess to love ; leading some to follow the example of
those dear Chinese servants of Christ, who only 10 years ago
were bowing down to idols of wood and stone, but who now
show a love and devotion to the service of the Master that
puts many of us to shame. May our pity and prayers be
called forth for Mrs. Ahok in her terrible bereavement. She
will have yet other sorrows to bear. Many will sneer and
ask ‘ Where is now thy God V Letters told us of the
heathen relatives standing round like vultures, watching for
her husband’s death, to seize on his property before she
should return, and that it was possible she might, on reach-
ing home, find herself almost penniless.”
The following extract from the pages of The Gleaner
for November shows that our fears have been fully
realised: —
“ Still more sad is the death of the Chinese Christian
merchant of Foochow, Mr. Ahok. Only last month we gave
the portrait of his wife, our recent visitor in England, and
her most touching appeal in behalf of her heathen sisters ;
and before that number appeared, the news had come which
told'us that she would reach her native land again to find
herself a widow. She had hurried back to China on hearing
that her husband was ill : but she just missed the Pacific
steamer at Vancouver, and so arrived too late. The piteous
thing is that she is homeless and penniless too, the heathen
brothers having taken possession of everything ; and, still
more, that the calamity is attributed to the anger of the
gods at Mrs. Ahok’s conversion to Christianity. Many
sympathising prayers will be offered for her, we are sure.
‘Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is now her
God V ”
Mr. Ahok was such a liberal man. He responded warmly
to all appeals. At one time giving money, another land,
another a building, and so on. He was a cheerful giver, and
he always looked as if he were very happy. And now, dear
friends, will not each reader do three things 1
No. I. Pray daily for their sisters lying in heathen
darkness.
No. 11. Lay by a tenth of their income for God’s work,
and use a portion for the poor heathen.
I will gladly receive and forward any sums, however small,
to any part of God’s vineyard ; for although China lies very
near my heart, and I can truly say they snail be my people


until my God becomes their God, yet I do most earnestly
feel that we are bound to obey our Masters command to
“ Go ve to all the world and preach the Gospel to every
creature.” This Book, God’s Word, is settled for ever in
heaven, therefore this verse will confront you up there, and
when the Master says, “Did you obey this last command ot
mine V what will you answer ?
In this matter we dare not choose what we will do. This
command is to each alike who call the Saviour Master and
Lord.” We must show our obedience by our actions.
I need hardly speak of the need ; you know it well. But
I will give the following from the Rev. Daniel Wilson, V icar
of Islington: —
“ Is it not a solemn fact that, taking the world at large, of
every three persons walking on the vast globe, two have
never heard of the Saviour, have never seen a Bible, know
nothing of heaven and nothing of hell.
“It is my deep conviction, and I say it again and again,
that if the Church of Christ were what she ought to be, 20
years would not pass away till the story of the Cross will be
uttered in the ears of every living man. —The dying words
of the missionary veteran Simeon H. Calhoun.
In that day it will not do for any Christian to hide behind
the screen of the “ poor in our own land” and charity begins
at home,” for we know that, as a rule, those who do most at
home do most for the heathen abroad.
No. Ill—May I ask every reader of this book to get at
least one friend to purchase a copy.
Miss Gordon Gumming, in her admirable volumes on
« Wanderings in China,” writes most interestingly ot Mr, ana
Mrs. Ahok, and her visit to their house. If you have not
read it, we strongly recommend your doing so at once.


“BEHOLD THE HANDMAIDEN OF THE LORD.”
By the Rev. F. H. Wood, M.A.
Her words still linger in our hearts, though swiftly homeward
faring,
She hastes to hear the billows break upon her native strand,
Called by a loved and suffering voice, ere yet her holy daring
Has fully wrought the heavenly task that pity gave in hand.
But ere the shores of far Cathay she reaches, eager-hearted,
The gloom of desolating death has crossed her threshold’s floor.
A husband blessed her as she went: with prayer and hope they
parted;
The meeting of those loving hearts lemains a bliss in store !
And wherefore came her prowess forth, across the angry sighing
Of waves that roll in weary leagues around our stranger isle,
Save but to strive, with conquering plea, for those whose hopes are
dying,
For lack of love our slumbering zeal holds idle yet awhile ?
She sat among us, and We heard her tuneful supplication,
The very tones, within our souls, some memory seemed to greet;
And when we saw her mind revealed, by swift interpretation,
We knew again the old, old cry, “ Oh, give ye them to eat!”
Oh, sweetly came her burdened prayer, impressive in its sadness. —
“ A thousand gifts are yours,” she urged, “ that ye may have to give
From idol-god 3 my heart was weaned, I leapt from fears to gladness.
’Twas one of you who brought me life —let others hear and live !
“ For when the teeming fields are ripe, the harvest calls the reaper.
If many toil the barns are full; with few, the sheaves decay;
And see, how millions wander wide, while Israel’s loving Keeper
Looks sadly on the scattered flock, for dear to him are they !
“ They say I left my sunny home in search of changeful pleasure ;
My land is all aglow with sheen and rings with ancient fame !
Kay, ’twas for sister-lives from you to crave your holiest treasure,
O’er tossing seas, with bruised feet and shrinking heart I came.
« For, as I mused in silent thought within my peaceful dwelling,
My heart grew all aglow for Him, whose pity now I knew;
I marvelled how he came Himself, His own salvation telling,
And felt that they who hold His gift must tell it—will not you?”
—lndia’s Women for January, 1891.




addendum.
_ . nth from India's Women ,
Latest news received, April lltb, from
page 102 and from
-Letters were read from • _ Ahok was not in
Mr . Lloyd at
the destitute condition whrch had b u
be at once informed u any
promised aid.”






