

TWO LECTURES
COLONIZATION.
MAJOR-GENERAL SIR WILLIAM DENISON,
K.C.B.
RICHMOND :
HISCOKE AND SON, PRINTERS, HILL STREET.
1870.




h s n'X
LECTURE I.
I am about to address you on a subject which may appear at
first sight, to be rather hacknied, inasmuch as to the practice of
Colonization , in the common application of the term, that is, of trans-
ferring families or bodies of people, from one part of the world to
another, we owe the building up of nations, the occupancy of the
earth’s surface by mankind. This has been going on from the time
of our first parents till now ; and man, in obeying God’s command to
be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the Earth and subdue it, has
but worked out God’s purposes in conformity with the laws laid down
for his guidance.
Though, however, the practice of Colonization has been one
of very old standing, and though to us it would seem to be almost a
part of our nature, as if we conceived that the command of God to
replenish the Earth and subdue it had been especially addressed to
ourselves, there are some very marked peculiarities in our present
social condition, to which I wish to draw your attention ; rny object
being to make a special application of these general laws to the exist-
ing circumstances of our position as a people and an Empire.
Now there are certain characteristics of our mixed popula-
tions which seem to mark us out as a migratory race. We are less
social in our habits, less dependent upon others for assistance in


work, or for amusement during leisure, than other European nations;
while this very independence (mind, I do not use the term, as is too
often done, in a laudatory sense) begets a necessity for labour, and a
craving for tho returns of labour, the “ Atnov huhendi or love of
getting; which, while it is the mother of wealth, is also the parent of
a great many evils, both social and domestic# On the other hand tho
indifference to society makes the family and domestic tie stronger
and more binding among us ; hence earlier maniages, a more rapid
increase of population, which, pressing upon the available means of
subsistence, soon ruptures the slight tie which binds the Englishman,
the Scotchman, or the Irishman to his village, and, driving him to seek
a home elsewhere, plunges him at first into the cities and manufact-
uring towns of his own country, and thence sends him to the United
States of America or to our Colonies.
These, however, are characteristics of the race; they have been
acting upon us for centuries, and have spread the nation over large
areas of the Earth’s surface ; but they have very seldom induced what
may properly be termed “Colonization : ” they have acted upon indi-
viduals, upon families, upon groups of these, but have very seldom
influenced the action of the body politic. Now and then the Govern-
ment has been persuaded to take up the cause of a colony when op-
pressed by a neighbour; —occasionally the occupation of a miserable
tract of country, like the Falkland Islands, has been the cause of a
war ; we have seized upon the outlying possessions of our enemies,
such as Canada, the Cape of Good Hope, the Mauritius, or have
fought with the French and their allies in both the East and West
Indies :we have tried to get rid of our criminal population by expatri-
ation, as in the case of Virginia and the Australian Colonies, and we
have, under the influence of a theory that the Colonies were to be
producers of raw material, and consumers of the manufactures of the
mother country, insisted upon their relationship to ourselves ; but we
have never attempted to carry out Colonization in the mode in which
this was done in old times by the small states of Greece, who when
they felt the pressure of a super-abundant population, sent off sections
of their body, representatives in fact of all the classes comprised in it,
to make new homes for themselves elsewhere. We have never at-
tempted this, because hitherto we have never felt this pressure. The
ordinary amount of emigration has been, till of late, sufficient to carry


off all the excess oFour population; but within the last twenty years
a change has taken place in the relation of the people to the soil, and
to the means which this affords of feeding those congregated upon
it; and it now behoves us to consider whether this change does not
require a course of treatment different from that which we have
hitherto pursued.
Before, however, we consider the course of treatment which
it may be advisable to adopt, it behoves us to get a clear idea of the
character and extent of the changes which have taken place of late
years, and their action upon our social system.
I do not know that I can make my meaning more clear than
by giving you a description of the form in which these present them-
selves to me. My experience extends over a period of service of
upwards of forty years in the Colonies and the mother country. I
served for five years in Canada, returning to England in 1832: a
curious variety of duty in England for fourteen years enabled me to
form a fair conception of the relations between the workmen and
their employers, in both the agricultural and manufacturing districts ;
in 1846 1 was sent to Australia, and in that group of Colonies, and in
India, I passed twenty years without revisiting England, holding
employments which enabled me to form an accurate estimate of the
advantages which the Colonies hold out to settlers, and of the checks
to their progress and development arising out of a deficient supply
of capital and labour, while my position gave me the means of forming
a better judgment of the extent of the mutual interdependence of the
Colonies and the mother country than could be arrived at by the
Government at home, trammelled as this was, and is, by its relations to
the different sections of the community here, and by the action, on
these, of political and social theories. In 1866 I returned to England,
and in 1868 I was appointed chairman of the Rivers Commission. My
duties as such compelled me to visit both the agricultural and
manufacturing districts in England and Scotland, while the en-
quiries I had to make into the state of the Rivers, the causes of
their pollution, and the action of this upon the health of the
inhabitants, enabled me to collect a mass of statistical infoimation
which put me in a position to contrast the existing state of things in
the country with that which prevailed some twenty-five years ago.
The changes in this country, which force themselves upon the


notice of the most careless observer, are, first—the very great increase
of the population, and second, the still more rapid development of
wealth, or increase of capital; while that which struck me, most
unpleasantly, during my visits to the manufacturing districts was the
alteration for the worse in the relation between the workmen and
their employers.
Roughly estimated, the addition to the population, during
the twenty years of my absence in the East, was at least five
millions; the rate of progressive increase, which is measured by the
difference in excess, between the number of those who were bom,
and of those who died, or left the country, being such as would
double the population in half a century. While, however,
this was the general rate, taking ■ the country as a whole,
there were very marked peculiarities in the distribution of the in-
crease. In the rural districts, or rather in the purely agricultural
districts, hardly any addition had been made to the numbers of the
resident population, while the rate of progression in Lancashire and
Yorkshire, and generally in the manufacturing districts, was such as
to double the population in about thirty years. In fact, the whole
of the five millions of increase had found refuge or employment in the
manufacturing districts, in the towns, and more notably in London.
A very brief analysis of the returns of Births and Deaths will
make it evident that the mortality among the working class (whether
we consider the actual number of those who die, or the fractional
proportion of the class which passes away) is very far in excess of
that among the upper and middling classes. In the large towns,
especially, about half the children who are born die before they
reach the age of five years, and the cause of death in this case may
be traced to poverty, either directly or indirectly; directly , in its action
upon the means of the parent, lessening their capability of finding
food and clothes for their children ; indirectly in its action upon the
physical stamina of the parents, causing the production of a weakly
race of children. A very large proportion, too, of those who leave
the country and seek a fresh home elsewere is composed of the
working class; so that the relation between the number of these,
and of the upper and middling classes is approximating more and
more nearly to an equality.
The effect of this was necessarily at first an enhancement of


the demand for labour, which of course gave rise to a claim on the
part of the workmen to an increase of wages ; but this, which was
forced upon the employers at first, had the effect of stimulating the
inventive faculties of the engineers, mechanics, and intelligent work-
men, and every kind of mechanical expedient by which steam, water,
or animal power could be substituted for manual labour, has been and
is rapidly adopted ; the result being a gradual, but steady, diminution
in the wages of labour when measured by the amount produced by
the workman in a given time, while there may possibly be a slight
enhancement in the rate of daily, or weekly pay, due to other causes.
While this has been the effect upon the working class, there
has been a curious, but very marked change in a section of the
middling class, which, for distinction’s sake, I will call the professional
section of this numerous and rapidly increasing body; and to this I
wish to draw your especial attention. This section is composed of
men who earn a living, sometimes sufficient, but always precarious,
by the action of their brains: it comprises the majority of the clergy-
men, the lawyers, and the medical men, a large proportion of the
officers of the army and navy, and of the clerks in the public
and other offices. They marry as a matter of course, and their num-
bers increase rapidly, partly by the addition of the younger sons of the
upper class, partly by their own children, and partly by the steady rise
of individuals from the working class. While, however, their numbers
increase rapidly, the means of providing employment for this very im-
portant section of the community are in no way adequate to the
demand. The following statement will give you some idea of the
extent of the change which has taken place in the character of the
supply of, and the demand for, this description of labour.
In 1820, the Eoyal Military Academy at Woolwich, which
furnished officers to supply the vacancies caused by the casualties in
the Eoyal Artillery and the Royal Engineers, contained one hundred
and forty six Cadets; the two Corps at that time numbering six hundred
and seventy-seven officers of all ranks. There was then but dittle
difficulty in obtaining admission to the Academy, the instruction was
gratuitous, and the Cadet received pay sufficient to provide for his
board. In 1870, additions had been made to the strength of the
two Corps, which raised the number of officers from six hundred and
seventy-seven to two thousand one hundred and sixty; and the num-


ber of Cadets was increased to one hundred and ninety-seven. They
received no pay, and the cost to their parents of the training and
board amounted to £l2O per annum.
In 1869, three hundred and ninety-six young men between
the ages of seventeen and nineteen presented themselves as candi-
dates for admissions into the Academy; but as there were only
seventy-six vacancies, three hundred and twenty were turned back,
not because they were unqualified, but because there was no demand
for their services. In July of the present year, two hundred and
forty presented themselves, but only twenty were admitted; so that
in the course of eighteen months, out of six hundred and thirty-six
young men who had been preparing themselves for a particular pro-
fessional career by an expensive course of training, five hundred and
forty, or about six-sevenths, were disappointed, and had to seek for
professional employment in some other direction ; that is, employment
such as members of the class in question had been in the habit of
looking to for their children cannot now be found for more than one-
seventh of the number applying for it. It may, perhaps, be thought
tliat this is an exceptional case, arising out of our peaceable habits;
but upon enquiry, it will be found that the same plethora of people,
or deficiency of employment is found in the civil as in the Military
Departments. This will give some idea (if indeed your own expe-
rience may not have already pressed the conviction upon you) of the
difficulty of finding employment for your children. You are told that
it is your duly to educate your children, and as the term, Education, is
now made to include various branches of science in addition to what
used to be considered all that was required for a liberal education,
you may imagine that the cost to the parent of qualifying his sons, to
say nothing of his daughters, who are now entering into competition
with their brothers in various departments of the public service, is by
no means trifling.
1 will not, however, go further into this branch of
the subject, but will now lay before you such facts as I have been
able to gather relating to the increase of Capital, The amount of this
increase cannot of course be determined with anything like the same
amount of accuracy as that of the population ; still, a fair approxima-
tion may be made towards it. In 1846 I was called upon to investi-
gate the subject of the annual addition made to the capital of the


country, and I satisfied myself that the difference in that year between
the income and expenditure of the country was about twenty million
of pounds sterling. The result of similar enquiries made in the course
of the last year or two has satisfied me that the increase in 1870 may
be estimated at one hundred millions of pounds sterling.
While, then, the population of the country doubles itself in
about half-a-century, or say fifty-six years, our Capital increases in a
much more rapid ratio : it may, in fact, be said to double itself in from
twelve to fourteen years ; so that if the population increases from
twenty millions to forty millions in say fifty-six years, the Capital of
the country would, in the same period, double itself four times ; in-
creasing from say 1000 millions
to 2000 „ in 14 years,
4000 „ in 28 years,
8000 ~ in 42 years,
16000 „ in 56 years.
Having laid before you the extent of the change in the
numerical relation of the classes of the community, the product
of the last twenty years, as also the amount of the increase
of the capital of the country during the same period, I will
attempt to explain the action of these changes upon our social system.
Here again I shall bring before you the facts which have come
within my own experience, indicative of a change in the relation of
the classes of society to each other, corroborating these, of course,
by the testimony of others, when it is in my power to do so ; and rea-
soning from the fact of such a change, up to the causes which, in ray
opinion, have produced it.
It seemed to me, looking back some twenty or thirty years,
that I could remember the existence of a feeling of community of
interest between the masters and men ; that the master, though ex-
acting from the men the full amount of work which his own practical
experience told him ought to be performed, had yet a feeling of
sympathy with the men who were occupying the position from which,
by talent and industry, he had raised himself. I could not now see
any trace of such a feeling : on the contrary, the relation now seemed
to be one of jealous antagonism. The object of the master appeared
to be to get as much work as possible out of the men at the minimum
cost to himself; while that of the men seemed to be to limit the


quantity of their work, and enhance the amount of their wages by
every means in their power* I was disposed at first to doubt the ac-
curacy of my memory, and to fancy that, in my retrospect, I had
imagined a condition of things which had had no real existence ; but,
upon reference to others, I was assured that my memory had not
played me false, and that there had been a decided change for the
worse in the relation between the workmen and their employers.
Upon pushing my enquiries as to the cause of this change, I
was met by every variety of statement: by the mill owner I was told
that the change was due to the action of the Trade Unions; by the
members of these Unions I was assured that all the blame was attrib-
utable to the conduct of the masters; the Politicians gave me a
political reason for this social change, a mode of putting the cart
before the horse by no means uncommon; while by several sensible
men altogether unconnected with each other, or with either masters
or men, I was assured, in the first place, that I was correct as to the
fact of the change for the worse in the relation between the workmen
and their employers, and, in the second place, that this change was
due to the altered relation between capital and labour ; this being ex-
plained to mean that while the mill owner or employer had been ac-
cumulating property, and adding annually to his means ; the work-
man had remained stationary in his position, which had become
relatively inferior to that which he had occupied some twenty years
ago.
All then admit the fact of an alteration for the worse ; all look
back to the past as exhibiting a condition of things, so far as the rela-
tion of man to his fellows in this country is concerned, better than
that which exists at present; but the members of each class are dis-
posed to shift the blame of this change from themselves to their neigh-
bours ; that is each man is disposed to seek in the conduct of some
other man, or men, a cause for the discomfort or trouble which afflicts
himself, while he is in no way disposed to look into his own conduct
as creating, or at all events enhancing, the discomfort: neither will he
recognise this as the result of a state of things following almost necess-
arily from the pursuit of that wealth which he has been always taught
to consider as a special blessing. Let us now try whether we cannot
trace in the concurrent action of these two causes, namely the rapid
increase of our population and the still more rapid increase of our


wealth, a sufficient reason for the disturbances of our social relations ;
and, should we be able to establish this, we may perhaps find that a
better application of a portion of our surplus wealth, and an altered
distribution of the increase of our people, may perhaps bring about a
more wholesome condition of our political as well as of our social
system.
The action upon our social system of the large increase of our
population, coupled with the enormous development of our capital, is
very marked and peculiar; it is shewn, as I have before remarked,
in the mode of the distribution of the people over the face of the
country, in their tendency to follow the current of employment,
moving from place to place, from district to district; wherever there
is a call for labour, thither the stream of population sets ; and the in-
dividuals composing it exhibit but very small attachment to either
neighbourhood or neighbours. This, it is true, is to a certain extent a
national characteristic ; but it has developed itself in an exaggerated
form of late years, owing to the competition for employment, the con-
sequence of a redundancy of population. While the pressure of popu-
lation has acted thus, the accumulation of wealth, the produce some-
times of industry, sometimes of speculation, has held out temptations
to many which they have been unable to resist; it has, in fact, stimu-
lated the gambling spirit, one of those unwholesome tendencies of the
human mind which a sound moral and religious training only can
combat. There have been some curious instances of the tendency in
the Colonies to follow what may be termed a will of the wisp, and the
same tendency exhibits itself in this country, though, of course the
temptation is not so great here as it is in places where gold and dia-
monds are held out as baits. On one occasion in Australia, upwards
of 20,000 people travelled more than 1000 miles, the only attraction
being the report in the newspapers of the discovery of a gold field :
many of these people gave up employments of a lucrative character,
places yielding wages of ten shillings per diem; nearly all could
have earned to a certainty five shillings per diem ; yet, upon the mere
newspaper account of the existence of a gold field some 1000 miles to
the north of Sydney, they threw up the certainties of which they were
in possession, and spent large sums in preparations for their voyage
and anticipated work, and in a few months found themselves far from
home, and their hopes unrealized, the whole produce of the gold field


amounting to about 400 ounces, or about the worth of £ISOO, to be di-
vided among 20,000 people who had in the aggregate spent at least
£250,000 in coming to search for it. A similar state of things is said
now to exist in South Africa, the inducement there being diamonds in-
stead of gold ; while in this country we witness daily the production, the
development, and too often the destruction of schemes promising to
be short cuts to the wealth which we all so greedily seek after.
While the joint action of the increase of population and capital
acts thus upon the labouring class, the enormous annual addition to the
capital of the country, to which I have before alluded, developes a cor-
responding activity on the part of its possessors in seeking profitable
returns for its employment; few or no men, at all events few or no
Englishmen lock up the balance of their income, or their annual
savings; they seek a profitable investment for these, and if they can-
not find this in England, they ransack the whole world in search of it.
Now there is a practical limit to the profitable employment of capital
for the purposes of any given number of people ; it is evident that
in course of time the supply of capital, increasing as this does in a
much more rapid ratio than the population which is to employ it, must
be in excess of the demand in any given country. This has long been
the case in England : the plethora of capital has made us, as we may
almost call ourselves, the Bankers of the World. So long as the
temptation to lend was limited to Government, or to public bodies, no
great harm was done ; but of late years there has been a struggle be-
tween labour and capital, the former claiming for itself a larger pro-
portion than it had been in the habit of receiving of the profits of man-
ufacturing industry, and striving to secure this by means of trades
unions, co-operative societies, &c., the latter seeking to indemnify it-
self against loss by developing the application of machinery to the
utmost, and, in many instances, by seeking abroad for cheaper labour
than it can get at home. Now both these processes are to a certain
extent suicidal. The trades unions in objecting to piece work, and
striving to enforce uniformity of wages, irrespective of the quantity of
the work done, or the capacity of the workman, are in point of fact
doing their best to lower the character of the mechanic, by destroying
all that wholesome emulation which induces improvement; and by
such conduct they, in point of fact, compel, as it were, the capitalist
to seek for labour where it is cheap. The capitalist, in seeking abroad


for that which he might find at home, if better relations existed
between masters and men, is enhancing the evil of which he com-
plains; is becoming almost a citizen of the world, and ceases to bean
Englishman in his relation with his fellow countrymen in every thing
except in name. This is an evil state of things. We are suffering under
the pressure of a plethora of population, a superabundance of people of
all classes, while, coupled with this, there is a steady and rapid increase
of wealth which is seemingly employed solely for the purpose of ac-
cumulation, and which is, in fact, stimulating habits of selfishness and
self-indulgence, some of the lowest and most debasing of those which
degrade man, and in fact bring him nearer to the beasts which
perish. This then is our condition at Home. I propose in my next
lecture on Eriday to give a sketch of the state of things in the
Colonies ; to describe the relations now existing between them and
the mother country ; to point out what these ought to be, and to shew
how Colonization systematically carried out may be made to act as
a remedy for the evils arising out of the rapid development of popu-
lation and capital. In the meantime, should any of those present be
disposed to comment upon the statements I have made or the infer-
ences I have drawn, I shall be glad to listen to any remarks made, or
to explain any matters which may appear to be not clearly defined, or
liable to objection.
W. DENISON.




LECTURE 11.
When I addressed you on Tuesday, I said that I proposed
to commence this lecture by giving a sketch, of the state of things in
the Colonies, and describing the relations at present existing between
them and the mother country. It is difficult in a short statement
such as this to embrace the whole of such a subject. I must there-
fore ask you to excuse me should I find it necessary to overstep
the precise limits laid down in the printed syllabus.
The state of the Colonies can hardly be understood by those
who speak of them collectively, as if there was an identity of form of
Government; of character of people ; as if they were all constituted
upon the same pattern. I must therefore begin by protesting against
this generalization, and by assuring you that there is a most marked
difference between the American Colonies, —Canada, New Brunswick,
Nova Scotia, &c.; and the Eastern Colonies,—-Queensland, New South
Wales, Victoria, Tasmania, South Australia, West Australia, and New
Zealand. I must also point out to you that although Gibraltar,
Malta, Bermuda, and a variety of small Islands dotted about various
parts of the ocean, are called Colonies , they are most improperly so
termed, as they are, in point of fact, but garrisons kept up solely and
entirely for purposes connected with the maintenance of our naval
and military supremacy in various parts of the world. Then, again.


the West India Islands differ altogether from any of the classes above
alluded to ; while the Cape of Good Hope, and our other settlements
in Africa, form other varieties of the Genus Colony; which would
seem to have as many species as there are individual specimens.
That which typifies the Genus Colony is simply its relationship to a
common parent; and when I said that I proposed to sketch the
state of things in the Colonies, I must be understood to mean such a
general sketch as might be applicable to the Genus, and not to the
species. I have thought it desirable to draw your attention to these
very marked differences in the description of countries all called by
the common name of Colonies : but in what I am about to say, my
remarks must be understood to apply more particularly to those
large areas of country which afford a good opening for the Coloniza-
tion of numbers.
Now the condition of our Colonies is very much altered from
what it was some twenty years ago. As a rule, they are relieved
from the control of the Colonial Office, and are now looked upon
more as states acknowledging allegiance to the British Crown, having
a system of local Government, analogous to that existing in England,
but in most instances approximating more closely to that in force in
the States of the American Union. The local Governments have the
entire control of the Eevenues of the Colonies, they have possession
of the whole of the land enclosed within their boundaries, they have
full power to adopt any system of administration of the Land and
other Eevenues, and to impose duties based upon the principle of pro-
tection ; it is true that, theoretically, the Government at Home has
the power of refusing its assent to Bills, but practically it is content
to endorse the views propounded by the Legislature of the Colony,
however contradictory these may be to the policy advocated by the
British Government. The actual condition of the Colonies may be
made more intelligible to people who have not visited them, or made
themselves acquainted with the peculiarities of their social state, by
contrasting it with the state of things in Great Britain.
Here, although the people derive their origin from various
nations, and retain some very marked and peculiar traces of their
origin, yet time has done much to fuse the whole into one social mass,
and to give something like unity of action to the body politic. In
the Colonies deriving their origin from the emigration of individuals


and families we find a strange mixture of people, of feelings, and of
interests; in one place the habits of Germany prevail, as these very
commonly congregate together, having a strong national bias; in
another, some other national tendencies are found to prevail, but
more frequently, as the number of emigrants from Great Britain and
Ireland preponderate, the general principles and actions which prevail
here exhibit themselves in the Colonies. The case, however, is
different when we look to the Colonies which we have conquered
from our neighbours: there we find that the language, the manners,
and the practices of the original settlers maintain the supremacy.
The French language and system of law prevails in Canada, and in
the Mauritius ; while the Dutch language and habits prevail at the
Cape of Good Hope.
In India we have recognized the laws of the different tribes
to a very great extent, and we oblige the officers of the Government
to learn the language of the country which we have conquered and
govern, recognizing, in so doing, the utter impossibility of inducing
or compelling the vast majority to adopt the language or the practices
of the scanty minority of the dominant body.
Here we have a surplus of population, while in the
Colonies which owe their origin to Emigration, we find but a
scanty sprinkling of people, and each cluster separated from its
nearest neighbour by large tracts of uncultivated land : here
we have wealth exhibiting itself in the greatest profusion; in the
Colonies, though here and there we see evidences of wealth, yet,
generally speaking, we find money scarce. Here we have a super-
fluity of labour, and wages are low, though money is plentiful;
in the Colonies labour is scarce, and wages are high, though money
is also scarce. The relation between the number of the population
and the rate of wages would seem to be the same in both the colonies
and the mother country, while that between capital and the rate of
wages would seem to be rather anomalous. In this country, where
money is plentiful, the proportion given to the labourer is small, while
in the Colonies, where capital is scanty, the proportion which the la-
bourer receives is large. In point of fact, at home, the master has
the power of determining what the share of the workman is to be,
while, in the Colonies, circumstances have placed in the hands of
the workman the power of deciding what proportion of the produce of


labour is to fall to his lot. The relation between the Colonies and
the mother country has changed very much of late years, and I wish
to call your special attention to the alterations, as having a very
marked influence upon the question now before us.
Previous to the adoption of “ Free Trade,” the Government
looked upon the Colonies as valuable appendages to the country;
they were termed producers of raw produce, and consumers of our
manufactures; and our object or policy, if we can be said to have
had such, was the extension of our Colonial empire in every direction.
We looked enviously upon the acquisition by our neighbours of
Colonial territory, and were always ready to seize upon any stray por-
tions of land, whether these were likely to be profitable to us or not:
in fact, the Colonial Office was really an important section of the
Government, as our policy was essentially “ Colonial .”
Very soon, however, after the advent of Free Trade, (which
was, in fact, the result of the efforts of our manufacturing com-
munity to extend the market for their own products, without much
consideration for the effect upon others), a change came over
the feelings of the Colonial Office. The idea began to dawn upon
it that the Colonies were no longer the sole producers of raw pro-
duce, and that, although they were consumers of our manufactures,
yet, as they might, under the shelter of the Free Trade flag, go to the
market where they could purchase at the cheapest rate, our only guar-
antee for the maintenance of the monopoly of their supply was that
we were the cheapest producers. In our attempts to become such,
we have become selfish, short-sighted, and niggardly, and the result
has been productive of much misery at home, and of jealousy and
want of kindly feeling between us and our Colonies. I say that our
policy towards our Colonies has been niggardly, and I say it advisably.
We have of late years looked upon our Colonies as a set of expensive
appendages to the mother country, we have complained of the cost of
defending them, and have insisted upon a monetary return for every
sixpence expended: while we have never thought of making allow-
ance for the collateral advantages resulting to ourselves from the
connection.
I deprecate most emphatically this policy as being essentially
penny wise, and pound foolish. We commenced it about a century
ago, when we tried to make the American Colonies contribute towards


the cost of the Government of the Empire without giving them a cor-
responding share in the representation; they, most properly, resisted
this attempt, and we, having courage enough to maintain our opinion
by force of arms, were defeated; the result of this most unwise at-
tempt being that we have converted friends and relations into enemies.
We are now rehearsing the same economical farce, and are striving
to attain, only in a more cowardly way, that for which we fought just
a century ago. In order to get rid of the cost of supporting our
Colonies, we are trying to induce the Colonists to claim their own
independence, to persuade them that they would be more prosperous
and more happy were they disconnected with England, and made into
a set of little detached communities, having no parent to watch over
or assist them. We, on our part, altogether regardless of the advan-
tage of having relations and friends in every corner of the globe ; for-
getful of the prestige arising out of the enormous extent of our
empire; looking only to the beggarly saving arising out of the re-
duction of a few thousand men of our army, whom we should have to
replace with untrained and undisciplined men on the first alarm of a
war, are doing our best to isolate ourselves from our relations, and to
inclose ourselves within the narrow limits of our own native land.
We overlook, in so doing, the fact that we are unable to produce food
sufficient for the wants of our existing population; that we are
doubling that population every half century ; that we are, by our
policy of isolation, depriving ourselves of friends, and creating jealous
neighbours, not to say enemies; while we are, by indulging our
appetite for gain, transferring our capital to other countries, and
making them our successful competitors in the markets of the world.
We look, too, with indifference on the many evils of our social
state; we forget that we are nurturing up within us the seeds
which bid fair to produce the fruit of a bitter antagonism of classes,
similar to that which produced the revolution of 1789 in France, the
parent of all the changes which have for the last 80 years disturbed
the peace of Europe, and of which we are now witnessing a very
curious specimen.
The picture which I have drawn of our present social state,
and of the relation in which we stand to our Colonies is, I admit, an
unpleasant one ; but I believe it to be substantially correct. Ido not, of
course, mean to say that exactly the same outlines, or the same intensity


of colouring will be found to prevail everywhere, but there is such a
strong family likeness as would enable the most careless observer to
recognize the general correctness of the portrait. I think, however,
that much may be done to soften the shadows, and to bring out the
bright tints of the picture; and I now proceed to sketch out the pro-
cess by which I believe this might be effected. I must, however,
insist, as a necessary preliminary to any application of remedies, that
we recognize the relationship of parent and children as existing be-
tween the mother country and the Colonies. Till this is done, and
the selfish indifference to the welfare of the children got rid of, we
cannot hope to act on the affections of these, or to get them to take
an interest in our welfare.
We must not, of course, attempt to push the analogy too
closely, or to fancy that the child is always to retain its infant subor-
dination, or that the parent is always to exercise authority. The re-
lation is that of mutual affection, and as, when the child is grown to
man’s estate, he feels the moral obligation to aid and maintain the
parent, should age or infirmity compel the latter to claim such assis-
tance, so the parent should be ever ready to give a helping hand to
the child to the utmost of his ability. What, then, is our position at
present with relation to our Colonial children ? We, of course, look
upon ourselves as adults, in full possession of all our faculties, physi-
cal] and mental; what do we think of our children ? Our conduct
would lead to the conclusion that we considered them as arrived at
the full age of manhood, that the small islands in the TVest Indies, the
large territories in America, Africa, and Australia, are all on a par,
each equally able to provide for its own government, and its own de-
fence against attack either from within or without. Are these views
in any respect correct ? Most certainly not.
There is, as I remarked at the beginning of this lecture, but a
very remote analogy between the small Colonies, such as those of the
West Indies,'! which are open to attack at every moment, and those
gigantic territories in the East, such as the Cape and Australia, which
are remote from any enemy powerful enough to venture to land upon
them;—while there is no comparison between the risk incurred by
the latter, and that which would have to be encountered by our
American Colonies, were we to find ourselves at war with the United
States. At all events, the Colony, whether near or far off, which is


rendered obnoxious to attack in consequence of its relationship to us,
would not think we were acting like a parent, were we to tell it to
defend itself; neither would it take the assurance that it had arrived
at the full age of an adult, as a compliment, when it was saddled with
the obligation of fighting for us in our quarrel.
We, whatever we may now think of ourselves, should find the
change from affection to indifference, not to say enmity, on the part
of our Colonies, just as great an evil as the aged parent would feel the
desertion of his children to be, and we should, I have no doubt,
complain of the ingratitude in very affecting language, forgetting or
overlooking the unnatural conduct on our part which had, in point of
fact, brought about this desertion. The Colonies, on their part,
would very soon find in the conflict of interests among themselves,
and in the attacks to which they were subjected from without, the want
of the influence and assistance of the parent state.
Recognising, then, the relationship in which the Colonies
stand to ourselves, and the mutual obligations which this relationship
imposes upon us, I will proceed to shew how the Colonies can be
made active for good in relieving the mother country from the
pressure thrown upon it by the steady increase of population, and in
furnishing to themselves the means of developing their resources, and
stimulating their own growth more rapidly. I need hardly say that
“ Colonization ” is the process by which I hope to work out these
results. In making use, however, of a word to which so many mean-
ings are given, I must define clearly the precise signification which I
wish you to attach to it. By Colonization, then, I mean the trans-
ference, at the cost of the Government, of bodies of people from one
country to another, and their location upon sites previously surveyed
and marked out for their reception. These bodies should be composed
oi families belonging to all ranks and grades of society ; and should
carry with them such an organization as may enable them to act as a
body on all occasions when circumstances render such action neces-
sary or advisable for the benefit of the community. In fact I wish to
carry out a system analogous to that which was devised and practised
by the Greeks of old; who, when they felt, as we do now, the
pressure of population upon the means of subsistence, sent forth or-
ganized bodies to occupy portions of territory within reach of their
old homes; these bodies containing representatives of all classes of
the community.


The changes which have taken place in the relation of the
different portions of the world to each other, will, of course, modify
the details of such a scheme ; but the principle I maintain to be as
sound now, as it was when adopted by the Greeks.
I may be told, perhaps, that the Government, at home and in
the Colonies, has already carried out in various ways a practical
system of Colonization, which has produced successful results; but
this I deny. I do not, of course, mean that people who have emigrated
to the different Colonies have not themselves been rewarded, —they
have often returned to their native country bringing with them the
reward of their industry or skill in the form of abundant wealth ;
neither do I say that the mother country has not been benefited in
many ways by the active exertions of her children: but Ido mean
that she has not derived the benefit which she would have done had
she turned her attention to Colonization , properly so called, instead
of limiting herself to the promotion of “ Emigration .” The differ-
ence of the meaning of the two terms may be made plain to you by
an analogy which you will all be able to follow. Colonization may
be likened to the skilful formation of a garden, in which all sorts of
ornamental flowers are mixed with the fruit and vegetables which
form the main value of a garden. Emigration, as generally practised,
is, in so far as its action upon the mother country is concerned, more
like the sewer or scavenger’s cart, which, while carrying away much
that is offensive and injurious, does, in connexion with these, take
with it a great deal of matter which is useful and beneficial.
The following brief sketch will enable you to comprehend
the mode in which I should wish to see carried out a system of
Colonization in our present or future Colonies, and to form an opinion
whether, under the existing state of things, this scheme might not
most advantageously be carried out.
In the first place, any system of Colonization must, under
existing circumstances, be carried out by the conjoint action of the
Government of the parent state and that of the Colony. I will sup-
pose that the two Governments, Home and Colonial, have to act in
harmony. The parent state is interested in finding a home for its
children ; the Colony is in want of labour and capital to enable it to
cultivate the vast territory of which it is placed in possession. The
latter applies to the former for a specific amount of labour of a


certain description; it is told to select, through the agency, should it
please, of its own officer, such persons as it may require : the parent
State engaging to pay half the cost of the passage of such emigrants to
the Colony, as it is anxious to relieve itself from the burden of such a
population. The wants of the Colony being thus satisfied, those of
the parent state have now to be considered.
The Government expresses a wish to establish a settlement
upon some convenient, but unoccupied, part of the Colony for one
thousand families. It engages to take upon itself the cost of their
conveyance to the place of their destination; to maintain them
thereupon until they are able to provide for themselves, and, in con-
sideration of the benefit which the Colony will derive from the labour
of these families, it asks the Government to transfer to the Crown an
amount of land in one block, equivalent to two hundred acres for each
family, or forty acres for each individual, a family being estimated
to consist on an average of two parents and three children. The
possession of this land will be a guarantee to the people of England
that the cost of the passage of the Colonists, and generally the outlay
upon their transfer to, and maintenance on their new home will be
repaid with interest. In fact, this outlay will be analogous to that
which is made for the improvement of landed property at home ;
here the proprietor of an estate gets an advance from the Govern-
ment, for which he pays the ordinary annual interest, and such a
proportion of the capital as will cancel the debt in thirty years. In
improving our Colonial estate, we shall follow the same process; we
shall make to the Colonist an advance which will enable him to
settle on and cultivate his land, retaining a lien on the estate till the
amount of the advance is repaid; while the annual repayment of a
portion of capital, and the payment of interest, will provide a fund
which may be utilized for the same purpose perpetually. I have said
so much as regards the general principle of my scheme of Colonization ;
but I should not do justice to my motives, nor should I consider that I
had treated you, whom I have asked to listen to me these two evenings,
with proper respect, were I not to say a few words as to the benefits
which I believe may arise from a system which has for its object to
make men into well-organized communities, to provide in these the
means of educating the young, of maintaining the sick, the aged, and
infirm, and above and before all, the means of religious instruction


to all. Ido not propose to stereotype any special form of worship,
but I do think that all should contribute such a portion of their
income as has been sanctioned by God, namely, a tenth, to be used in
His service. And when I say “in God’s service ” I mean in the
performance of all those duties to God and to our neighbours which
we are told, in His word, are obligatory upon us ; namely the support
of His ministers ; the erection and maintenance of buildings for public
worship; the education of the people; the ministering to the sick;
the maintenance of the poor, the aged and infirm. The whole
system of “ Emigration" has reference to the wants of indi-
viduals, and has no social element connected with it. Men
who have no relation or connection with each other are crowded
together on board ship, are disembarked in a Colony where
they know nobody, have none to sympathise with or help them ; their
whole affections are concentrated on themselves, their sole object is
to benefit themselves, to gain for themselves the means of self indul-
gence ; with some this tendency leads to the indulgence of the sensual
appetites ; with others it takes the type of covetousness, of a desire to
accumulate for the purpose of being able at some future period to
purchase the means of satisfying some special appetite. What can
you imagine would be the effect upon a crowd of individuals, each
seeing his neighbour working for himself only, or combining, perhaps,
with a few others, for the purpose of working out some joint scheme
which has for its object the accumulation of wealth for the purpose of
self-indulgence. I can assure you that the effect is most unhappy.
The labour of the Missionary who devotes himself, honestly and
zealously, to preach the Gospel to the Heathen by whom he is
surrounded, who tells to these people what effects Christianity ought
to produce upon the lives and conduct of those who call themselves
Christians, is neutralized by the miserable example of those, who,
professing to believe in the Gospel, practically shew their unbelief by
disregarding the great principles of love of God and our fellow men,
upon which Christianity is based.
I wish, therefore, when I advocate Colonization, to lay the
foundation of a system which will bind men to their fellows, will shew
them practically that they are brethren ; and have common interests
here and hereafter.
This sketch will suffice as an explanation of my motives, and


of the mode in which I propose to apply the principle of Coloniza-
tion to the development and extension of our Colonial empire, while
it will also guarantee us at home from many of the evils arising out
of our complicated social system. That evils do exist, few will refuse
to admit; that these are developing themselves unwholesomely, I have
already shewn. My earnest wish is to check this development, and
to bind ourselves and our brethren together by the ties of interest and
affection into one vast empire, whose Flag will be seen and respected
in every quarter of the globe.
W. DENISON.
HISOOKE AND SON, PRINTERS RICHMOND.


