

1
3n rTlbemodam.
FREDERIC BARKER, D.D.,
Bishop of Sydney.
i








TWO SERMONS
Preached at BASLOW, on Sunday, April 23rd, 1882
BY THE
RIGHT REV. BISHOP RYAN, D.D.,
ON THE OCCASION OF
THE FUNERAL
OF THE MOST REVEREND
FREDERIC BARKER, D.D.,
BISHOP OF SYDNEY;
.A. BRIEF MEMOIR
ACCOUNT OF HIS LAST ILLNESS AND DEATH.
Sold for the Benefit of the Loan Fund of the
Diocese of Sydney.
London: James Nisbet & Co.:
Sydney: Church of England Book Depot, Pitt Street.




SERMONS
BY THE
RIGHT REY. BISHOP RYAN, D.D
The following Sermons were preached in Baslow Church
to crowded congregations on Sunday, April 23rd, 1882.
MORNING SERMON.
I frinqs, vit., 21,
“ And he set up the pillars in the porch of the temple; and he set up
the right pillar, and called the name thereof Jachin; and he set up the left
pillar, and called the name thereof Boaz.”
In the mystic names given to these pillars are signified
two qualities which should be earnestly desired by all true
servants and worshippers of God, namely : —Stability and
Strength. The word Jachin means, as you will see in the
margin, “He shall establishand the word Boaz, “ In it is
strength.” There is doubtless an allusion to these pillars in the
promise—“ Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the
temple of my God( 1 ) and we find abundant instruction in the
Scriptures respecting the stability which attaches to the Chris-
tian’s condition, and respecting the strength which it is his
privilege to possess for the discharge of his duties at all times.
The want of stability of character is very painfully illustrated in
the history of Saul, King of Israel. He was one of those
of whom it is said—“A dmble-minded man is unstable
in all his ways.” ( 2 ) Professing to follow the commands of the
Lord, and then obeying the voice of the people—honouring
David, then seeking to compass his death, then again relenting,
and yet afterwards resorting once more to plans for his destruc-
tion, putting down witchcraft in the earlier part of his reign,
and at last having recourse to it—we see in his wavering and
uncertain course, his double line of acti-on, his alternations of
feeling and of practice, a sad illustration of instability in his
(1) Rev. i., 12. (2) James i., 8


life which led him on to the slippery places in which he was
cast down and came to a fearful end. Now, a stability
which is opposed to this uncertain, tottering, backsliding
disposition, is presented to us under different aspects in Scrip-
ture, from the consideration of which we may form a
comprehensive idea of its excellence and advantages.
First, it is the matter of a promise. Every devout and
intellgent Israelite, who, on entering the temple, saw that pillar
with the name, Jachin—“ He shall establish”—might be
reminded of the words applied to every humble and true-hearted
worshipper, “He will not suffer thy foot to be moved.” ( x ) He will
give thee light to see the way, and vigour and energy to walk in
it. Here, as in so many other instances, a supply is promised
for wants which are felt. The allurements of the world tend to
draw the soul away from God, the terrors of the world, its jeers
and reproaches, its inflictions of suffering and loss, its various
kinds of death, tend to frighten the soul from God’s service ; its
errors tend to obscure the understanding and permit the judg-
ment to corrupt the heart. Very sore is the need, and very
abundant is the supply, of that need. “ The Lord is faithful,
who shall stablish you and keep you from evil.” ( 2 )
Then we observe that this, being the matter of a promise, may
also be made the subject of a prayer. Thus St. Paul (2 Tliessa-
lonians,ii.,l6 and 17 verses): “Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself,
and God, even our Father, which hath loved us and hath given us
everlasting consolation and good hope through grace, comfort
your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work
and St. Peter (IstEpistle, stli chap., 10th verse): “But the God of
all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal glory by Christ
Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, settle you.” When two apostles so earn-
estly pray for, and definitely speak of, a special effect of the
Grace of God, we may be sure that it is a benefit from Him which
we greatly need. Then the importance of this appears very
clearly when stability is a matter of exhortation. There is
perhaps no passage of Scripture where more cogent arguments
are employed, or more impressive similitudes, or more trium-
phant language to express the conclusion arrived at than in the
15th of the First Corinthians respecting the resurrection. When
we have read such words as these—“ 0, death, where is thy
sting? 0, grave, where is thy victory ? The sting of death is
sin; and the strength of sin is the law; but thanks be to God,
whioh giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ,”
what is the application ? “ Therefore, my beloved brethren, be
ye steadfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the
(1) Ps. cxxi., 3. (2) 2 Thesa. iii., 3.


Lord.” Surely stability of belief and practice must be a matter
of primary and paramount importance to a Christian when it is
thus the burden of promises, the matter of prayers, the applica-
tion of the sublimest doctrines of our religion ; and when finally
we find it entering into the ascription of adoration thus: “ Now
unto Him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present
you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding
joy; to the only wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty,
dominion and power both nowand ever. Amen.”—Jude, 24 and 25.
And now, my brethren, I would draw your attention to the
fact that the power of the promise which gave a name to the pillar
operated long after that pillar was thrown down. It would
have been intensely interesting if the Palestine exploration
could have found the pillar with the name, Jachin, inscribed on
it, but that was impossible, because we are distinctly told that
the Chaldeans broke the pillars, and carried the brass off them
to Babylon. But it is more than interesting; it is most profit-
table and edifying to observe that though they broke the massive
pillar they could not interfere with the working of the promise.
It might be put as a motto to the life and character of Daniel,
even in the depths of the Babylonish captivity, where everything
around was calculated to break his spirit, and to turn him aside
from the service of God; his heart was established in the prin-
ciples of righteousness, and neither the luxuries offered to his
youthful appetite, nor the temptations of place and power, nor
the terrors of the lion’s den, could make him give up his prayers,
deny his religion, or be unfaithful to his God. I agree with
those who attach a full and definite meaning to the words in
the first chapter and twenty-first verse—“ Daniel continued even
unto the first year of King Cyrus.” All through the long years
of that terrible captivity, he was one of those who, though they
could not “ sing the Lord’s song in a strange land,” yet stood
fast to their faith, and thus glorified the God of their fathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. See how appropriate to the life
and conduct of such a man are the words addressed to him in
his old age—“ Go thou thy way till the end be, for thou shalt
rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days.” ( J ) Best first
and resurrection afterwards ; and he who by God’s establishing
grace had been “ steadfast and unmoveable ” in the discharge
of his duty on earth, should stand as a pillar amidst the assembly
of the just. This subject applies very intimately to each one of
us. We possess a religion which is called the way, because it
shows the way to heaven. Rightly to tread that way, we need
every day that we live the fulfilment of the promise—“ He shall
establish.”
(1) Daniel xii., 13.


Our subject applies to the youthful Christian, to the des-
ponding Christian, to the working Christian, and to the dying
Christian. The youthful Christian: often in the first fervour
of conversion to God there is an alacrity of obedience, a readiness
to suffer, a joy in the exercise of devotion, and a brightness in the
hope of heaven, which make the path delightful and the burden
of Christ easy; and the temptation is to rely on all this impulse
and feeling as if it would last for ever. But bye-and-bye im-
pressions grow weaker, the charm and power of novelty passes
away, the road is long and steep, the sun strikes with ex-
hausting effect, the energies of the soul begin to relax, motives
which were at first all-powerful in their constraining influence
lose their power, and faintness and weariness steal over the
spirit. As the prophet Isaiah says, “Even the youths shall
faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall.” ( 1 )
Now, what is the remedy ?—“ But they that wait upon
the Lord shall renew their strength ; they shall mount up
with wings as eagles; they shall run and not be weary,
they shall walk and not faint.” ( 2 )
Then there is the desponding Christian—the believer who from
constitutional temperament, from a keen sense of his own weakness,
or from a discouraging estimate of the difficulties and dangers in
the way, is apt to take up the language of David, “I shall one
day perish by the hand of Saul,” ( 3 ) and thus finds himself,
from time to time, in one of the dark chambers of Doubting
Castle, exposed to the attacks of Giant Despair. The way out
of that castle is the promise of God—a key which unlocks all
the doors and lets the soul go free. Such a promise is this—
“ My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect
in weakness.” ( 4 ) No man is set on the road to heaven and told
to get there by himself. No, the language put into the believer’s
mouth is, “ The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom
then shall I fear; the Lord is the strength of my life, of
whom then shall I be afraid? ”( 5 )
The bearing of our subject on the working Christian is very
plain and direct. It was a very hard-working man in the cause of
the gospel who said, “I can do all things through Christ that
strengthened me,” ( 6 ) and when the work took the form
of fighting, and he was engaged in deadly strife with the
Emperor, who commanded the legions of the world, he
said, “The Lord stood with me and strengthened me;” ( 7 )
and therefore he stood as an iron pillar, strong and steadfast
as a wall of brass. One in the old time, too, tells us how,
in the midst of his work, he felt his need and, sending a
(1) Isa. xl., 30. (2) Isa. xl., 31. (3) 1 Sam. xxvii., 1.
(4) 2 Cor. xii., 9. (5) Ps. xxvii., 1. (6) Phil, iv., 13. (7) 2 Tim., iv., 17.


message beyond the flight of all telegraphic wires, secured an
answer the same day : “ In the day that I cried Thou answeredst
me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul.” ( 1 ) That is
what is needed to carry on the work aright. It is comparatively
easy to go through the round of duties in a perfunctory manner;
to fill up the list of engagements ; and to keep the promises to
the eye of man, but there is need of strength from heaven so to
work as under the Master’s eye, striving to do the Master’s
will, seeking to obtain the Master’s approbation—for this there
is need of the grace prayed for by the Apostle when he said,
“ I bow my knees before the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named,
that He would grant you according to the riches of His glory, to
be strengthened with might by His spirit in the inner man.” ( 2 )
That is the true source of motive and energy and progress, and
perseverance in doing work for Him.
Once more, stability and strength are needed for the dying
Christian, and most delightful and encouraging it is to see how they
are supplied according to that need. As in many other instances,
so in the description of the precursory .symptoms of approaching
dissolution the language of Scripture expresses in few words the
full state of the case. When he whose natural strength is
broken and whose animal spirits are exhausted—while the
shadows of the valley of death have settled on the bed
where he lies in weakness and languor of body—says,
“my flesh and my heart faileth,” how precious the privi-
lege of being able to add, “ But God is the strength of my
heart and my portion for ever.” ( 3 ) Very true to the reality
which often cheers the pastor’s heart and makes the memory
of the deathbed bright to those who remain, is the description
of the Christian poet when he says—
“ Look to that chamber where the mellow light
Gleams softly o’er the couch whereon one lies,
Whose footfalls print no more the ‘ sands of time ;’
An aged pilgrim there at length lays down
His palmer staff and doffs his sandal shoon.
Fought is his fight of faith ; finished his course
Of years and toil, and now athwart the films
Of gathering death, gleams the immortal crown.
No terrors darken round his head - no fears—
But like the ripples of a meadow brook,
Peace murmurs softly through his parting soul.
The Saviour’s hand in which he laid his own
Long years ago, still gently leads him on ;
And hopes that bloomed in youth are ripening now.
A prayer, a gasp, then victory and heaven!”
What was the reality in that case to which you all know I
allude ? The end of one whose character was one of steadfast-
(1) Ps. cxxxviii., 3. (2) Eph. iii., 14-16. (3) Ps. lxxiii., 26.


ness, consistency, courage, and strength ? The evening before,
he partook of the communion, and at the close of the service
gave them his blessing with uplifted hand. The face looked
strikingly beautiful—indeed, almost majestic—in perfect repose,
seeming to betoken the joy and rapture with which the spirit had
entered within the veil. My brethren, how thankful we all
ought to be for a life of stability and strength.
And now, my brethren, let me say a few words respecting
that departed servant of God of whose memory all our minds
are full. Here in Baslow, where in God’s good providence his
remains have been brought with loving care to be laid near those
of his parents and his brother, and where the pastor’s office was
filled by his father for thirty years, by his brother for the same
period, and for a few months by himself, it is meet and right
that we should utter words of commendation spoken by one,
sympathised with by all, and that we should bless God’s holy name
for grace largely given, and faithfully used; for the honoured
and useful life, and the peaceful and happy death of Frederic
Barker, Bishop of Sydney, and Metropolitan of Australia.
Nearly fortyyears ago akind message sent to me by him, when
I was engaged in a remote island parish, led to the formation of a
friendship which proved very full of blessing to myself, and to
our mutual satisfaction, we were consecrated on the same day to
the charge respectively of the dioceses of Sydney and Mauritius.
It was natural, therefore, that I should look with keen interest
to the account of his work, and I can truly say that one of the
greatest encouragements that I have known during all these
years has been the marked and abundant success which was
given to his labours. The question might arise to himself and
his friends, “ was it well for him to go from a sphere where there
was so much to call forth his affectionate interest in the welfare
of his flock—so much that was congenial to his own feelings
and sacred to his memories ? ” What is the reply that
we can now give ? First of all, at that time, those who knew
him best and loved him most, felt strongly that the invitation to
such a sphere, where his administrative power, his earnest zeal,
and his sound, well-proved jndgment, would find a fitting scope,
was one not to be put aside. The opinion of Archbishop Sumner,
who had known him in Cheshire and at Liverpool, was strongly
expressed on the point; and what is the testimony given by
results to the soundness of such counsel ? That in the first seven
years of his residence in Australia, he consecrated 88 churches
and school-churches; that a scheme for a church fund in a few
years raised and expended over £44,000; that the Theological
College made such progress, that at one ordination ten


students from it were ordained for Sydney, Melbourne, Bal-
larat, Bathurst, and North Queensland ; that, a school for the
daughters of the clergy, (a greatly needed institution,) was built
at a cost of £3,500, and already, in 1871, which was the latest
report I received, sixty of the daughters of the clergy had
there received a good education ; that a noble cathedral has
been built, with a district attached to it, so that it is used as
a parish church and also as a cathedral; that a Bishop s
residence has been built standing in about sixty acres of ground;
and that under God’s blessing—His manifest blessing—the
condition of the diocese, with abundant liberality from the
people, has been one of progress and of peace. The three
dioceses of Goulburn, Bathurst, and North Queensland were set
apart from the diocese of Sydney during his time, while those ol
Brisbane and Grafton were created or associated with other sees.
We are told by competent judges, well qualified to pro-
nounce an opinion from intimate knowledge of the facts, that
one of the most important events of Bishop Barker’s episcopate
was the formation of the General Synod, which may be regarded
as having perfected the constitution of the church, and as afford-
ing, with God’s blessing, an effectual safeguard against its being
broken in pieces by any internal schisms. The history of his
episcopate is a very good and encouraging instance of the effect
exercised from home and reflected back from the colonies. A
ministry of nineteen years in Liverpool had so conciliated to
him the respect and esteem of both laity and clergy that he
went out strong under the influence of accumulated sympathy
and good will, and substantial help was given especially for the
beginning of the various enterprises undertaken by him. When
a report of the first seven years’ work was given, one of his old
Liverpool friends said, “ Why, the Bishop has opened a church
for every month he has been out;” and he undertook, and, amid
great difficulties and hindrances, was instrumental in carrying
to a successful issue, the foundation of a bishopric for the
town of Liverpool. These are manifest results of labour known
and seen by all men, but those who were privileged to have
more intimate acquaintance with him in the exercise of his
ministrations in the parishes where he served in England, also
recall his special kindness and care for the young ; the intense
sympathy with which he endeavoured to clear away many, of
the perplexities of life ; and the powerful earnestness with which
he unfolded the truth of the Scriptures in confirmation classes,
in the schoolroom, and in the more elaborate discourse from the
pulpit. One result of the stability and strength of character
with which he was endued was his firm hold of the vital doc-


trines of the Gospel of Christ, and his affectionate concern for
the salvation of those entrusted to his care.
My brethren, our first duty on considering such a course thus
finished is to bless God’s Holy Name for His goodness to His ser-
vants—to be careful to offer a distinct act of praise to Kim from
whom such mercy comes. It will be very plainly seen hereafter how
the greatest of all blessings is the power and the will to glorify
God, and to help forward the salvation of men. It tends to
relieve the depression which comes from looking on “death and
darkness and the tomb,” to realise the effects of the Grace of God in
enabling men to use their talents for doing good, and so assisting
the work done for the love of Him who gives to them the rest in
His presence when the work is over. Very close too is the
connection we find in that solemn prayer where we bless God’s
Holy Name, for all His servants departed this life in his faith
and fear, praying for grace “so to follow their good examples
that with them we may be partakers of His heavenly kingdom.”
One very special effect of such solemn scenes as you witnessed
here last Tuesday should be to help us to consider our latter
end—that time which is coming when the lights and the
shadows of earth shall have passed away, when the world’s
busy transactions and its fleeting pleasures shall all have de-
parted, when each will feel that the undying soul is leaving the
body, and when the dust is returning to the earth and the
spirit to the God who gave it. Oh the blessedness then of being
prepared through the precious blood of Christ, and having the
witness of a holy life to the possession of the true faith. Then,
brethren, finally we should learn to cherish and exercise a spirit
of true and powerful sympathy with those who are mourning
their bereavement, with her whose loss is greatest, with the
many relations and friends to whom his affection was so precious,
and with the diocese for which up to the last he thought, and
cared, and prayed with a true pastor’s love. Let such feelings
mingle with our prayers and sanctify our regrets, and bring
down a blessing from Him who is the Father of all mercies and
the God of all comfort; a blessing that leads to the happy termi-
nation, “ Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple
of my God, and he shall go no more out; and I will write upon
him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God,
which is New Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven
from my God, and I will write upon him my new name.” ( 1 )
(1) Rev. iii., 12.


EVENING SERMON.
IRev. mU 17.
“ And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth
say , Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let
him take of the water of life freely .”
He said: In addressing you again this evening my mind is
very full of the memory of him of whom I spoke at length this
morning, but I do not propose to repeat the topics I then dwelt
upon, and my endeavour will be to improve the solemn occasion
by putting before you the fulness of the truth of the gospel of
salvation —that truth of the gospel of salvation, which was to
him who has gone the foundation of his hope, the joy of his
heart, the spring of his motives, his strength in the discharge of
his duties in life, and the cause of real peace in death. The
verse I have read contains much about the fulness of the bless-
ing of the Gospel. Perhaps no other verse in the Bible puts
more of the riches of the Gospel before us than this, while it
shows the inestimable benefits brought to man by the Gospel,
and in the most condescending manner presses the acceptance
of those benefits upon us. The verse naturally divides itself
into three parts, and they exhaust it. This division is an
exhaustive one. First there is the invitation, then the inviters,
and lastly, the invited.
First, the Invitation ; which is to take the water of life. And
if we ask the meaning of that expression, the Bible teaches us.
It means the true knowledge of God in Jesus Christ. The prophet
Jeremiah, in the name of God, expostulated with the Jews in
this way—“ They have forsaken me the fountain of living
waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can
hold no water ; ” ( x ) and our blessed Lord dwelt much upon it in
His discourse with the woman of Samaria, saying “ Whosoever
drinkethof this water shall thirst again,” ( 2 ) meaning that he who
looks upon the things of this world as capable of imparting
lasting happiness, without the knowledge of God, shall find that
he is mistaken. He who drinks “of this water shall thirst
again.” Take for instance, the valuable blessing of health. A
man is one day rejoicing in the best of health, in full vigour and
energy, and enjoying fully his recreation; but then comes a
severe sickness, or perhaps a crippling accident, and the same
man is seen to be disabled and perfectly wretched. “ Whosoever
drinketh of this water shall thirst again.” So it is with wealth
and fame, for riches, much as they may be desired before
being possessed, “ make themselves wings and fly away; ” and
of all these benefits it is true that “ Whosoever drinketh of this
water shall thirst again.” Then there are the purer joys of
(1) Jer. ii., 13. (2) John iv., 13.


domestic life, the joys of the home circle, the joys of the family
hearth. Those who depend upon these will thirst again. Take
the instance of that family of whom we have seen the last
committed to the earth this week; go back and think of the
time when there was an unbroken circle of them. By degrees
we see separations taking place among them, and the same
thing occurs with all the blessings of this world. How many
English families, for example, are gathered around a Christmas
fire in happiness and enjoyment to which there soon comes
separation—the going to distant lands—and perhaps all those
members of one household who met together last Christmas will
never meet again, for there is ever to be considered that
great spoiler among the works of God, Death, who is continually
writing the word separation, which is the cause of such deep
sorrow. Truly “ whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst
again.” That is a very melancholy topic in itself. Our Lord
does not dwell upon it thus, but He enforces emphatically the
truth of the words “ Whosoever drinketh of this water shall
thirst again,” for He speaks of another water, and says “The
water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water
springing up into everlasting life.” ( 1 ) What does He give ? He
gives the pardon of sin, reconciliation with God, the peace of God
which passeth understanding; He gives the help and grace of
the Holy Spirit; the power to man to live well and die happily;
and holds before the awakened, enlightened soul the prospect of
everlasting blessedness with “an inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fadeth not away.” ( 2 )
“ There heaven is gathering, one by one, in its capacious breast
All that is pure and permanent, and beautiful and blest;
The family are scatter’d yet, though of one kin and heart,
Part militant in earthly gloom, in heavenly glory part:
But who shall tell the rapture when the circle is complete,
And all the children tender’d before their Father meet—
One fold, one Shepherd, one employ, one everlasting home.’’
“ "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall
never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a
well of water springing up into everlasting life.” I was reminded
of that stream when this evening I saw and heard your river rushing
by. The stream is flowing; it is at hand ; the invitation is given.
Take then the water, accept the salvation, and realise the blessings.
Now, who are the Inviters ? First of all “ The Spirit and
the bride say, Come.” And how does the Spirit say, Come ?
Because it has indited this Blessed Book, in the pages of which
in many ways the invitation has appeared. Isaiah looks upon
men as poor pilgrims—as I have seen them in tropical lands—
wearied, faint, and almost dying from thirst, and as though from
an eminence he calls to them, “Ho, everyone that thirstetli,
(1) John iv., 14. (2) I Pet. i., 4.


come ye to the waters, and lie that hath no money; come ye,
buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and
without price.”*( 3 ) And so every single invitation you have in the
Bible for men to turn to the God of salvation is an invitation of the
Spirit. It is a solemn and encouraging thought, and if we have
the ear of faith open, we should hear the. invitation day and
night, and we should send it to people in all lands in that
Blessed Book. The Spirit also says, Come, in the inward
striving of the heart, when thoughts rise unbidden. We don’t
know how they come, but there they are. The Spirit is striving
with us, giving us desires of happiness, of heaven, to seek
God in prayer; and when the Spirit says, Come, it is wise to
come at once. You have an instance of this in the 27th Psalm —
“ When Thou saidst, seek ye my face ; my heart said unto thee,
Thy face, Lord, will I seek.” Oh, let us be earnest, let us he
watchful, let us be diligent in profiting by the Spirit’s invitation.
Then the Bride says, Come. Who is the Bride ? The Bride
is the Church, “ the Lamb’s wife,” and the reason there is
a Church established on earth, where Christ shall be in the
midst of his people, is that they may say, Come. Here is a
remarkable instance: —You have the Church at Antioch, and
who are the teachers ? Paul and Barnabas, and prophets and
teachers from Jerusalem. There they were in the freshness and
fervour if the first love of Christ, and they would doubtless say,
as Peter did, “It is good for us to be here. ’ But no, the Spirit
separated them to do the work for which they were called, so
they were sent out by the Spirit, some to one city and some to
another, to tell the people to come, and under the influence of
God many did come. There may be some among you who are
quite ready to use language such as I have heard many other
individuals use, and say, “ I am quite willing to give for objects
of philanthropy at home, but I have no interest in Missions.”
If any single church took that as its motto and acted upon such
advice, it would lose the feature of being “ the Lamb’s wife.” It is
one of our great causes of thankfulness to God that from our Church
of England, from many congregations in town and country, people
have been sent out, and are now in different parts of the world,
carrying the invitation to ‘’Come.”
One of whom we spoke this morning went forth, and
by him 88 churches were built; in the first seven years
he organised missions to the poor Aborigines of the country;
he helped other missions to the Melanesian Islands; and we
believe that in the future, the Church in Australia will send
forth her missionaries far and wide. We have here a delightful
instance of how, through God’s providence and blessing, the Bride
'3) Isa. lv., 1


is saying, Come. But there is something more in the inviters:
The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and let him that heareth say,
Come.” Wherever a man has so heard the Gospel as to embrace
it, on that man lies the golden obligation to say Come, as God
gives him the opportunity. See how you have this illustrated
in the Bible. As soon as Andrew found the Messias, what did
he do ? He went to his brother, Peter, and told him to come.
So it was with the woman of Samaria who, after talking with
Jesus, went to the city and told them to come. And can we
imagine anything more delightful than to see parents training
their children to come to Jesus ? What an example of true
friendship to persuade a dear friend to come! Here we have
shown to us the duties of laymen. At the beginning of this century
a certain amount of jealousy was displayed with regard to
the employment of laymen, and the Bishops for some time dis-
couraged it. But this was not the practice of the Bishops of
the early Church. St. Augustine says “ When you see a friend
far away from God, go to him and ask him what he means by it,
and do your best to bring him to a knowledge and adoration of
his Maker.” And St. Chrysostom puts it more fully. He says:
“ Don’t thrust everything upon the clergy. If you see a friend
needing spiritual care, do not say, ‘ Why does not such a one
care for him,’ or ‘lam too much occupied with worldly business.’
Rather seek to do the good and obtain the blessing. If you
came across a piece of gold lying in the road you would not
say, ‘ Why does not the minister pick it up ? ’ If you cannot
teach many do not despise the few; if you cannot teach a hundred
pay attention to ten; if you cannot reach ten do not despise
five, and if you have not five do not despise the one. If
you can do good to your brother, even if by so doing you
should endanger your own life, do not refuse. The Master
died for us; wilt thou not dare a word for Him ? What excuse
wilt thou have ? What apology wilt thou make ? How wilt
thou stand with confidence before the judgment seat if thou hast
carelessly overlooked so many souls going to destruction?”
There is an illustration of this in the words:—
“ I think I should mourn at my selfish neglect,
If sorrow in heaven should be,
And no one should stand at the beautiful gate,
Waiting and watching for me.”
How many will welcome those who have been labouring
and watching for many years ? This application of the text
has been put into words which are exceedingly beautiful, and I
will read you a few verses of the poem.
“ Wearied and worn with earthly cares,
I yielded to repose,


And soon before my raptured sight
A glorious vision rose;
I thought whilst slumbering on my couch,
In midnight’s solemn gloom,
I heard an angel’s silv'ry voice,
And radiance filled my room.
A gentle touch awaken’d me,
A gentle whisper said,
Arise ! 0 sleeper, follow me, ’
And through the air we fled.
We left the world so far away
That like a speck it seem’d,
And heavenly glory, calm and pure,
Across our pathway stream’d.
Still on we went —my soul was wrapt
lii silent ecstacy;
I wondered what the end would be,
What next should meet mine eye.
I knew not how we journeyed through
The pathless fields of light,
When suddenly a change was wrought,
And I was clothed in white.
We stood before a city’s walls,
Most glorious to behold,
We passed through gates of glistening pearl,
O’er streets of purest gold ;
It needed not the sun by day,
The silver moon by night,
The glory of the Lord was there,
The Lamb Himself its light.
Bright angels paced the shining streets,
Sweet music filled the air,
And white robed saints, with glittering crowns,
From every clime were there;
And some that I had loved on earth,
Stood with them round the throne ;
‘ All worthy is the Lamb,’ they sang,
‘ The glory His alone.’
But, fairer far than all beside,
I saw my Saviour’s face,
And as I gazed he smiled on me
With wond’rous love and grace.
Lowly I bow’d before His throne,
O’erjoyed that I at last
Had gained the object of my hopes,
That earth at length was past.
And then in solemn tones He said,
‘ Where is the diadem
That ought to sparkle on thy brow
Adorned with many a gem ? ’
I know thou hast believed on Me,
And life through Me is thine ;
But where are all those radiant stars
That in thy crown should shine ?
Yonder thou see’st a glorious throng,
And stars on every brow,


For every soul they led to me,
They wear a jewel now;
And such thy bright reward had been,
If such had been thy deed;
If thou had’st sought some wandering feet
In paths of peace to lead;
I did not mean that thou sliould’st tread
The way of life alone,
But that the clear and shining light
That round thy footsteps shone,
Should guide some other weary feet
To my bright home of rest,
And thus, in blessing those around,
Thou had’st thyself been blest.
*****
The vision faded from my sight,
The voice no longer spake,
A spell seemed brooding o’er my soul
Which long I feared to break ;
And when at last I gazed around
In morning’s glimmering light,
My spirit fell o’erwhelmed beneath
That vision’s awful might.
I rose and wept with chasten’d joy
That yet I dwelt below ;
That yet another hour was mine,
My faith by works to show ;
That yet some sinner I might tell
Of Jesus’ dying love,
And help to lead some weary soul
To seek a home above.
And now, while on the earth I stay,
My motto this shall be,
To live no longer to myself,
But Him who died for me;
And graven on my inmost soul,
This word of truth divine,
They that turn many to the Lord
Bright as the stars shall shine.’’
“Let him that heareth say, Come,” and be sure that in so
doing—in helping every agency instituted for that purpose
he is bringing down abundance of blessing.
These then are the Inviters. Who are the Invited ? “ Let
him that is athirst come.” That is the qualification—to be
thirsty. There is the water of life, and what does the thirst
mean? We have wonderful descriptions of it, and descriptions
of souls that feel it. lam going to give you the experience of
two souls one, you may say, at the very top of the list of those
glorious in the Church of Christ who have done good on a large
scale indeed, and another at the opposite end whose name even is not
known. Both were thirsty ; and both drank of this living water.


The first of these was the great Augustine—a wonderful
man, a man of immense learning, a man who was tutor in some
of the first families of the Roman Empire, and who had every-
thing surrounding him to make him happy. But he felt a void;
he was thirsting for true happiness of the soul, and he went
through a terrible conflict. One day he was with a friend under
a tree, and felt his heart so full of sorrow and wretchedness that
he was about to burst into tears. Therefore, he retired to some
distance, and when he came back he heard the words, “ Take
up the book and read.” He took up the New Testament and
opened it at the verse, “Not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying ; but put
ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.” ( 1 ) He had no need to read any
more, for with that exhortation there was the light of pardon
and peace infused into his soul, and that man, for forty years
afterwards, was one of the leading defenders and one of the
most eloquent and successful preachers of Christianity.
The other case is that of the New Zealand chief, a man in a
lowly condition of life, whose name, as I have said, is not known.
When he was dying— or, rather, when he was dead—his four
sons came to a missionary with a message from their father, and
the account was this : —When they came to report the death of
the chief, they said, “ Our father, when he died, said to us,
‘ You well know, my sons, that from time to time I have brought
you much riches. I afterwards heard of other riches called
Faith. I went long and perilous journeys in search of it, but in
vain. I then heard of a white man who had the spring, and to
whom I could go and fill my empty calabash, but that was in
vain, for he had gone away ill. At last I heard of another
white man who was coming over the mountains and through
the forests, giving drink from his pitcher to the poor, secluded
natives, the remnant of the tribes of the mighty, and I sent four
of my children to meet him.’” That is how it often happens,
for these poor people will come great distances to get what is
offered to you so freely. I myself confirmed two boys who rowed
twenty-four miles from one island to another, and what pleasure
it was to lay hands on those who had shown such diligence and
earnestness. “I sent you, my sons,” said the chief, “ and you
talked with him. You brought me a drop of water from his
pitcher; you told me he would visit this far off place. I
rejoiced; I disbelieved his coming, but I said he may come,
and I built a church, expecting his coming. You slept at nights;
I did not, but one day he came from the forest. I met him;
I shook hands with him ; I saw his face ; I heard him talk; my
heart bounded as I listened; he told me of God, of Jesus
(1 Horn, xiii 14.


Christ, of peace, of reconciliation, of a loving Father’s house
beyond the stars. I too drank and was refreshed. He left me a
book as well as words. I laid hold of the new riches for you and me,
and we have them now. My children, lam old ; my hair is
white ; the yellow leaf is falling ; I depart; the sun is setting be-
hind the great western hills, and it will soon be night. But hear
me. Do you hold fast the new, great, and true riches. We have
had plenty, of sorrow, pain and death; we have been harassed
by wars with our neighbours and our enemies ; but now we
have the true riches. Hold fast the true riches.”
If a whole volume was written you could not more thoroughly
explain the meaning of the words, “ Let him that is athirst come.”
But some may say, “I wish I had these feelings, hut I have
not; I wish I had the desire for pardon and peace.” Is the
invitation for such?—Yes; because it says, “Whosoever will,
let him take the water of life freely.” Here again, in God’s
wonderful providence, with one of his ministering servants in
London, the truth was illustrated. An aged servant of Christ
told myself and others at a clerical meeting—and as that / very
night he fell dead in his study, the words were more deeply
impressed upon us —that he was once sent for to see a parishioner
who was in the depths of despair, and as she was exceedingly
deaf the greater was the difficulty to bring the truth to bear
upon her. He, however, took great pains with her and said,
“ However bad you think yourself to be, you must come in with
the ‘ Whosoever.’ ” The next morning, very naturally, he was
going to that house as the first of his visitations, and as he went
he met the husband coming to tell him that she died in perfect
peace, and that she had charged him to tell the minister that
she died thanking God for the “ Whosoever.’’ “ Whosoever
will, let him take the water of life freely.” Such a verse is
full of the riches of the Gospel. It is delightful to think of the
course of one who has gone on for years endeavouring in every
way to cause the sound of that invitation to be heard ; and the
application to everyone is, “If I come really to Christ, I shall
obtain pardon and peace and sanctification.”
My brethren, if we could hear him whose memory we
endeavour to honour to-day, he would say to us, “By the
preciousness of your immortal souls; by those instinctive
desires of happiness you have in you; by the sorrows of sin,
even in this world, and by the joys of true religion ; by the
terrors of hell and by the joys of heaven, you are called to
listen to the voice,” —“ The Spirit and the bride say, Come.
Let him that heareth say, Come. Let him that is athirst
come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.”
God grant that it may be the happy experience of every one of us.


THE LATE BISHOP OF SYDNEY.
(From “The Record April 21st, 1882.)
The late Most Rev. Frederic Barker, D.D., Bishop of
Sydney, and Metropolitan of Australia, whose death occurred at
San Remo on the 6th inst., was born in the year 1808
at Baslow, in Derbyshire, where his father was vicar for
a period of thirty years. He graduated at Jesus’ College,
Cambridge, and was ordained in 1831, when he was appointed
to the perpetual curacy of Upton, a small village in Cheshire,
where he ministered for three years.
After a year of labour in Ireland, in connection with
the Irish Church Mission, he was in 1885 appointed by
theßev. Charles Swainson to the Perpetual Curacy of St.
Mary’s, Edge Hill, Liverpool, and for the space of 19
years he devoted all his energies towards the furtherance
of his Master’s cause in the church and district placed
under his charge. He early took a warm interest in
scriptural education and in the operations of the Church of
England School Society, which was established in 1886, Four
years later Mr. Barker became one of the founders of the Liver-
pool Collegiate Institution, and in 1851 one of the founders of
the Liverpool Scripture Readers’ Society. His fervent piety,
persuasive eloquence, warm sympathies, and affectionate zeal for
their welfare, won for him the hearts of his people, and he was
greatly beloved by all who knew him. To his brethren, the
clergy of Liverpool, he was especially endeared. His wise and
ready counsel was always at their service when sought, and in
all the good works in which they were mutually engaged they
did not fail to recognise and to avail themselves of the temperate
and considerate judgment which he could bring to bear on any
difficult or perplexing question requiring to be solved. One of
the works which he had much at heart, and which he was per-
mitted to carry to a successful issue, was the subdivision of his
district, including the erection and endowment of the church of
St. Stephen, in Crown Street, Edge Hill, for the service of the
separated portion.
Jjpon the death of his elder brother, the Eev. Auriol
Barker, Yicar of Baslow, the incumbency of that parish


was offered to him by the Duke of Devonshire. With
some reluctance, and to the sorrow of his Edge Hill flock, he
deemed it his duty to accept the charge. His health was at
that time somewhat impaired, and he felt that he was scarcely
equal to the work of so large a parish as that of Edge Hill. He
had been but three months in residence at Baslow when the
offer came to him of the Bishopric of Sydney, New South Wales,
rendered vacant by the death of the excellent Bishop Broughton.
He yearned for a sphere in which his energies and power of
administration should find wider scope, and believing that the
climate of Sydney would, as the event proved, be well calculated
to restore his health, he had little hesitation in accepting this
important post, and he was consecrated at Lambeth on St.
Andrew’s Day, 1854.
By his death, the diocese of Sydney has lost a Bishop who
presided over it for twenty-seven years with eminent ability.
The Church in Australia and Tasmania has also lost a valuable
prelate who, by the Queen’s Letters Patent, dated October 19th,
1854, was designated its Metropolitan, and, by the unanimous
vote of a General Synod of all the several dioceses, was constituted
its Primate. The Bishop was largely endowed with the various
qualifications requisite for the efficient discharge of the onerous
and difficult duties of his office. He was an eloquent preacher and
speaker, singularly skilful in adapting his arguments and appeals to
the audience he was addressing and the occasions on which he
used them. He was also a wise administrator. With great
decision and firmness he united remarkable gentleness and suavity
of manner, so that, while he steadily pursued the course he had
marked out for himself, he seldom, if ever, gave offence to those
who objected to it, or even openly opposed him in it. His loving
disposition and sensitiveness made him very careful to avoid
wounding the feelings of others. He was universally esteemed,
and won for himself the affection of the great body of both the
clergy and the laity.
During his episcopate great changes took place both in the
extent and in the ecclesiastical constitution of the diocese. His
predecessor, Bishop Broughton, had, by his earnest exertions
and self-denying liberality, procured the erection of the Sees of
Adelaide, Melbourne, and Newcastle; and Bishop Barker
was instrumental in forming the additional dioceses of
Goulburn, Bathurst, and Grafton and Armidale, together
with that of North Queensland, a territory which,
although separated from the Diocese of Sydney by those of
Newcastle and Brisbane, was regarded as under his episcopal


jurisdiction as Metropolitan. Thus the Diocese of Sydney was
reduced to moderate dimensions, such that a man of ordinary
physical strength and mental vigour need not now shrink from
the labour which its Bishopric would impose upon him.
At the time when Bishop Barker entered upon his episcopate,
the validity of the Queen’s Letters Patent to Colonial Bishops,
and the amount of self-government with which the Church in a
colony should be invested, had become the subject of much
earnest discussion both in England and in the Colonies them-
selves. The Church in Victoria had just obtained from the
Parliament there an Act enabling it to constitute an assembly of
the clergy and a body of lay representatives, which should be
empowered to manage, under certain restrictions, all its affairs;
and the Bishop of Melbourne (Dr. Perry) had gone to England
to endeavour to obtain the Queen’s assent to this Act. That
assent, after much hesitation on the part of the Colonial Office,
was granted, and the self-governing power thus secured by
Victoria was shortly afterwards acquired either by legislative
enactments or by “Consensual compacts” by the Diocese of
Sydney and the other dioceses of Australia, and by the Diocese
of Tasmania. Thenceforward the Bishops of these dioceses
ceased to be autocrats and became constitutional rulers, subject
to the laws passed by the clergy and lay representatives of the
respective dioceses, and assented to (for they all had the powers
of a veto given them) by themselves. Under this government
the Qiocese of Sydney, during the episcopate of Bishop Barker,
continued more and more to prosper; the number of churches
and clergy constantly increasing, funds for the erection of the
former and the maintenance of the latter being raised by the
liberality of the people ; a noble cathedral being completed and
paid for ; the requisite buildings and endowments for a college
for educating young men for the ministry (towards which a lay-
man, Mr. Moore, had some years previously bequeathed a con-
siderable property) being provided, and the institution brought
into use under two successive able principals.
Moreover, although the validity of his letters patent was dis-
puted, the Bishop considered that they imposed upon him a certain
responsibility towards, and invested him with at least a degree of
moral authority over, all the dioceses which were included in them.
He was therefore anxious that some arrangement should he
made by which the unity of the Church in those dioceses might
be maintained, and questions in which they were all equally
interested might be settled by common agreement. With the
view of effecting this object he invited his brother bishops to
consult with him at Sydney. Their deliberations issued in a


determination to invite the several Diocesan Synods to send
clerical and lay representatives to meet them in that city and
prepare a scheme for a General Synod, which should exercise a
legislative authority of limited extent over the whole Church in
Australia and Tasmania. The formation of this Synod may be
regarded as having perfected the constitution of the Church, and
as affording, with God’s blessing, an effectual safeguard against
its being broken in pieces by any internal schisms. It must
therefore be regarded as one of the most important events of
Bishop Barker’s episcopate. The third meeting of the General
Synod thus successfully instituted was held in October last (in
his absence), and we are glad to know that the report of its pro-
ceedings gave him the greatest satisfaction.
His death was, within a month of its occurrence, wholly
unexpected. He had been advised, in consequence of a paralytic
seizure in New South Wales, to come to Europe for rest and
change of climate, but he had recovered in a wonderful manner
from that attack, and cherished the hope of returning to Sydney
in the autumn. This hope he expressed in his letters to his
friends there in such confident language that they were looking
forward with the almost sure expectation that they would see him
again among them before the end of the year. But it was other-
wise ordained of God. On the 9th of March, whilst staying at
San Kemo, he had another attack of paralysis, which deprived him
of the use of one side and greatly affected his speech. Under
the effects of this attack, after some alternations, his strength
gradually sank, and he finally passed peacefully away on Thurs-
day, the 6th April. He will be sincerely and deeply mourned by
many, but his friends and relatives may take comfort in the
reflection of St. Paul, in the prospect of his own departure, for
assuredly he had “fought the good fight,” he had “finished
his course,” he had “ kept the faith,” and henceforth there is
laid up for him “ a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous Judge, shall give him in that day.” “ Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, saith the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labours, and their works
do follow them.”


THE BISHOP’S LAST ILLNESS.
It will be of interest to the late Bishop of Sydney’s numerous
friends, both in England and Australia, to know some of the
incidents which occurred during the last few weeks of the life of
this devoted servant of God.
During the three months which the Bishop spent at San
Remo, before the commencement of his last illness, many
acquaintances that he made ripened into warm friendships, and
the renewed intercourse which he had there with some whom
he had known in former years, was a source of great enjoyment
to him.
The letters which have been received from friends at San
Remo since his death, testify to the blessings that accom-
panied the words of the Bishop in life. He had much enjoyed
attending a Bible reading which was held every Saturday morn-
ing at the Villa Teresa. He spoke a few telling words on two
of these occasions which will never be forgotten ; one friend
writes as follows:
The last meeting at which we were privileged to have his
presence was held on Saturday, the 11th of February. The
subject under consideration was Phil., iii. I—ll. The Bishop,
and Mr. Gordon of Park Hill, Aberdeen, spoke on * Rejoicing
in the Lord,’ and of our completeness in Jesus Christ: their
words were listened to with rapt attention then, and often
recalled afterwards, and still oftener now, that in God’s pro-
vidence both the speakers have been taken from our presence
to His own —from the sphere of working for Christ to rejoicing
with Him. The Bishop’s melodious voice still rings in many ears,
and his peace-bringing message abides in many minds and
hearts.
Another friend writes:—Not many weeks ago, at a re-
ligious meeting here, the verse “ To die is gain” (Phil, i., 21)
was read thus: “To have died is gain.” The Bishop thanked
the reader “for reminding us of the true rendering,” adding,
Yes, to have died : death itself is no gain, it is the wages of sin;
but to have died , to have passed through the grave and gate of
death into the presence of Christ that will be great gain.


The good Bishop spoke with emotion, and another excel-
lent man who was present remarked that this reading of
the Word was as delightful to him as it was new. And now
they have both entered into the joy of their Lord. They could
both say, with truth, “To me to live is Christ; ” and both have
already realised that “ to have died” and “ to be with Him is
far better.”
His old and esteemed friends Bishop and Mrs. Perry,
visited the Riviera in February, with the object of seeing some-
thing of him. The Bishop and Mrs. Barker went to Mentone
to meet them, and, after spending a few days together there,
they all proceeded to San Remo on the 24th February. The
Bishop of Sydney seemed well and cheerful, and keenly enjoyed
taking excursions with his friends to Bordighera, Poggia, and
various other places of interest in the neighbourhood.
On the morning of the 9th March the Bishop rose as usual,
but not long afterwards complained of feeling tired, and said
he would lie down. He lay down, and was never able to rise
again. His left side became completely powerless, and remained
so to the last.
His recovery from the first attack of paralysis, which he
had in Sydney fifteen months before, led his friends to
entertain the hope that he would, once more, be restored to
them, though not to active work. Day after day however
passed away, and still there were no signs of returning power
to the limbs. He suffered greatly from weariness, but his
patience, gentleness, and submission to the will of God will
never be forgotten by those who had the privilege of ministering
to him.
During the Bishop’s stay at San Bemo, much pleasant
intercourse was held with the Rev. William Browne, one of the
Sydney clergy who was wintering there for his health.
Bishop and Mrs. Perry were staying in the hotel on the
9th of March, the day of the seizure, and on the 12th, by the
earnest desire of the Bishop of Sydney, Bishop Perry was
allowed to see him, and he offered up a prayer by his bedside
which greatly comforted him. Once more only was he permitted
to see his much loved friends before their departure for England
on the 24th March.
On the 16th, the Bishop seemed to he aware of the serious
nature of his illness. He said, “ I think this shews I must not
“go back to Australia. lam perfectly composed. lam resting


“on the Rock—the Rock of Ages. As I have had a second
“attack, there is no reason why I should not have a third.
“ Ebenezer! It is good that a man should both hope and
“ quietly wait.”
The 17th of March was the Bishop’s birthday. The previous
night he had been very restless, and he asked for a verse of the
hymn
“ At even ere the sun was set ”
to be repeated, mentioning the line
“ Oh with what joy they went away.”
A further medical opinion was deemed desirable, and on
Saturday, the 18th, Dr. West, of Nice, came over to consult with
Dr. Freeman, of San Remo. The Bishop expressed pleasure in
having his advice, and Dr. West entirely concurred in Dr.
Freeman’s treatment of the case.
On Sunday, the 19th, the Bishop suffered much from pain
and weariness. He said, “ I commit myself and you, and all
“ who are dear to me, to our reconciled Father in Christ Jesus;
“ all well —whatever happens.”
Dr. West had advised that a personal attendant should be
procured, and accordingly, one was sent from London. The
devoted service rendered by this man, Felix Castagnola, was of
the greatest comfort to the Bishop. And here testimony mnst
be borne to the kind and unwearying attention of the men-
servants in the hotel, who in the midst of their busy life, were
always ready to relieve the weariness of the Bishop by gently
moving him into a fresh position.
On the 20th, one of the family circle left for England. The
Bishop, on taking leave of him, expressed his longing to be able
to follow him. The idea of returning to his native country
was one which he cherished almost to the last.
On the 27tli, the Bishop spoke of Sydney in terms of great
affection, and requested that the following might be written to the
Dean ; —“X shall never see it again. I had no greater desire on
“ earth than to go back and do a little more for the Lord, who
“ has done so much for me. God will supply their need: the
“ Lord Almighty bless them all —that’s my message.”
At another time, speaking of Australia, he said:—“ My love to
“ all the friends. My peace is like a river. I die in the faith of
“ the Lord Jesus.” —Then, as if talking to himself, he said :
“ Sleep of death ? I have no fear of death—to be with my
“ blessed Lord through his most precious blood.”


On Saturday, the Ist of April, the Bishop looked very ill,
and on the Sunday following, Dr. Freeman brought a friend
to see him, Dr. Boberts, who was travelling through San Kemo,
The name reminded him of his own kind friend and doctor in
Sydney. Dr. Boberts saw him again on Monday, the 3rd of
April, and gave the sorrowful opinion that recovery was im-
probable, the strength being greatly exhausted by severe attacks
of coughing.
He entertained great regard ior his kind friend Dr. Free-
man, who was unwearying in his attention, and for whose skil-
ful care the Bishop had been most thankful throughout the
illness. On Wednesday, the sth, arrangements were made for
him to receive the Holy Communion from the hands of Mr.
Browne. The Bishop said, “Dr. Freeman stay.” His friend
was glad to have the privilege of joining the little circle around
the couch. Although in great weakness, the Bishop was
enabled to enjoy the service, and at its conclusion, he raised his
hand and pronounced the Benediction himself. On that day he
expressed a wish to be buried at Baslow, close to his father and
his beloved brother, “Auriol.”
At four o’clock on the morning of the 6th of April, a change
came over him. Dr. Freeman was sent for, but human aid was
now of no avail. The breathing was distressing, and nourish-
ment could no longer be taken. At length, to the great comfort
of his wife, he called her by name, and listened with the greatest
eagerness as she read to him the scripture speaking of the “many
mansions” and the passage “ Who shall separate us from the
“love of God.” He kept saying “Go on, go on.” The
23rd and 121st Psalms were repeated, and then the following
verse from one of his favourite hymns :
“ When on the other side thy feet
Shall rest ’midst thousand welcomes sweet,
One well-known voice thy heart shall greet—
’Tis I: be not afraid.”
The last text read to him was—“ The Lamb which is in the
“midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto
“ living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all tears
“from their eyes.” His last audible word was “Ebenezer!”
The beloved one soon afterwards gently fell asleep in Jesus—the
faithful servant entered into perfect rest.


THE FUNERAL.
Although the funeral of the Bishop was, according to his
special desire, to take place at-his. native village of Baslow, it
was thought befitting that the honoured remains should not
leave San Remo without an opportunity being given to his
many friends there to be present at the reading of a portion of
our beautiful Burial Service in the little English Church.
On Easter-Day, at a quarter to five o’clock in the afternoon,
this memorial service was held. The coffin (of polished olive
wood) was met at the porch by three clergymen, the Rev. Gr. L.
Fenton, British Chaplain; Rev. W. Browne, and Rev. R. H.
Borradaile, and was carried to the chancel, where it rested covered
with a black velvet pall, and with lovely wreaths of flowers.
The service was read as far as the end of the Lesson in i Cor. xv.,
after which an Easter hymn was sung, beginning
“ On the resurrection morn.”
It was touching to remember that the Bishop only five
weeks before had partaken of the Holy Communion and attended
the afternoon service in the same church.
The coffin rested in the church all night, and at an early
hour on Easter Monday was removed for the journey to England.
On the following Thursday, the remains, in charge of the faithful
attendant, Felix, of whom mention has already been made,
arrived at Bakewell, the nearest railway station to Baslow, and
through the kindness of Archdeacon Balston, was allowed to
remain at the Vicarage there until the morning of the funeral.
The funeral took place on Tuesday, the 18th of April, and
that day will long remain in the memory, not only of the people
of Baslow and its neighbourhood, but of a large number of
friends from different parts of the country.
Baslow is one of the loveliest of rural spots in the midland
counties of England. Close by the church and church-yard
rushes the river Derwent, spanned by an old stone bridge, and
clusters of trees as tall as the church spire, and as yet hardly
tipped with green, dip their purple branches almost into the
water. The houses and cottages forming the older part of the
village, nestle not far from the church-yard, and the distance is
backed on all sides by hills, some of them beautifully wooded.


Shortly before noon, a hearse containing the Bishop’s
remains passed slowly down the Bakewell road, followed by two
mourning coaches, the occupants of which were Mr. A. Auriol-
Barker, nephew of the Bishop, Mrs. Barker’s three brothers,
(Mr. E. Harry Woods, the Rev. Frank Woods and Mr. V.
Sydney Woods,) and the attendant, Felix.
On arriving at Baslow, the coffin was placed in the hall of
the Vicarage—the home of the Bishop’s childhood. Here it
was adorned with fresh wreaths and crosses of beautiful
flowers, and those which had been sent from San Remo were
arranged around it.
The coffin bore the following inscription on a brass plate:—
jfre&ertc Barber, ®.S>.,
JBtebop of Spbnep.
JSorn 17tb fDbatcb, 1808,
2>feb 6tb aprfl, 1882.
The hour fixed for the ceremony was three o’clock, by which
time most of those who w r ere expected to attend the funeral had
arrived. The interior of the church wore an aspect befitting
the occasion. The communion table, pulpit, reading desk, etc.,
were draped in black.
Before the procession started from the vicarage, every seat
in the church was occupied, except those reserved for the
mourners, whilst many persons remained outside the building
on account of the difficulty experienced in providing accommoda-
tion for so large an assemblage. The members of the choir were
present to take part in the service, and six clergymen in surplices,
the Rev. Vincent J. Ryan (Bradford), the Rev. Frank A. Mather
(Bridgnorth), the Rev. Charles Baber (Incumbent of Petersham,
near Sydney), the Rev. John Green (Rector of Eyam), the Rev.
G. Clapham (Vicar of St. Matthew’s, Sheffield), and the
Rev. E. P. Gregg (Association Secretary of the Colonial and
Continental Church Society), took up their places in the chancel.
The organ was softly playing “I know that my Redeemer
liveth ” as the procession entered the church. It was
headed by the Right Rev. Charles Perry, D. D. (formerly
Bishop of Melbourne), the Venerable Edward Balston (Arch-
deacon of Derby and Vicar of Bakewell), and the Rev. Henry
A. Barker, (nephew of the Bishop, formerly of Waverley,
Sydney) and the Rev. J. Stockdale, Vicar of Baslow.
The coffin followed, borne on the shoulders of eight men


from the village, who had personally known the Bishop, and it
was laid in the centre of the chancel. When all had taken their
places, the first portion of the service was read by the Rev.
Charles Baber and the Rev. H. A. Barker. The hymn—
“Peace, perfect peace,”
was sung; the Yicar afterwards reading the lesson. The singing
of the hymn —
“ On the Resurrection morn,”
was followed by a short and impressive address from Bishop Perry.
He commenced by remarking that be had been requested to say a
few words on that solemn occasion, but he did not intend making
a funeral oration. To those who came from various parts to
express their affection for the departed it was needless to
expatiate on his excellence of character. They all had had
more or less opportunities of observing his steadfastness of faith,
his Christian consistency of life, his devotedness to the service
of the Divine Master, his diligence in the fulfilment of his
onerous and important duties, his zeal for the maintenance of
the truth, his courage in acting upon his principles, his remark-
able gentleness, combined with resolute firmness; and his
extreme kindness and consideration for all with whom he was
in any way brought into communication. Some of them also
had known his wisdom as a ruler in the Church, and his power
both in preaching and speaking—especially in adapting himself
to any particular occasion. For himself, he might say that he
had never known anyone more universally esteemed and loved
by those who knew him, and he never knew anyone more
worthy of being universally esteemed and loved. The more in-
timately any of them had known him the more deeply would
they feel the loss to themselves occasioned by his removal. But
let all remember that the spirit in which the Church taught
them to regard those who had departed in the Lord was that of
joy for them and not sorrow for those left behind. Those
to whom their beloved friend was most dear were prepared, if
not for his immediate death, for a life passed in comparative
weakness and bodily suffering; and if he had been permitted, in
accordance with his earnest desire, to return to his diocese, to,
as he said, put things in order there before he finally left, that
would have been a time of peculiar anxiety and suffering to him,
and a season of peculiar anxiety also to those around him,
especially to her who watched over him with such exceeding
great solicitude. Many of those he was addressing perhaps
knew little or nothing of him for whom they mourned that day,
but were inhabitants of that chapelry where he and his father


and brother before him ministered—he for a very short period,
less than one year—but his father for thirty years, and his elder
brother for almost as long a time. After he was appointed to
the Bishopric of Sydney, he was succeeded by a brother in the
ministry, of whom he (the speaker) knew nothing, and who only
remained a few years, but he again had been succeeded by one
who had now held the charge for upwards of twenty years, and
wh >, like the Barkers, had been a faithful minister and watchful
pastor of the flock committed to his care. What a privilege it
was that for nearly ninety years they should have had the
Gospel faithfully preached to them, and that they should have
been watched over by those who really cared for their souls. He
feared there were not many parishes in England of which the
same could be said. He reminded them of the responsibility
which this privilege brought with it, and, in conclusion, urged
them so to live that they would not be afraid to die.
At the conclusion of the address, the “Dead March” was
played on the organ. The procession then reformed : Bishop
Perry and all the surpliced Clergy preceded the coffin, and the
whole congregation followed, including many ladies. The sun
shone brilliantly as the procession, leaving the church by the
south-west porch, wound slowly round the little church-yard to the
grave, which was prepared under one of the side windows of the
chancel at the north-east corner of the church. The bottom
was thickly strewn with spring flowers, chiefly primroses and
violets. Near this spot is the tomb containing the remains of
several relatives of the Bishop, including those of his father
and elder brother, whose ministry in Baslow is duly recorded
upon slabs which bear their names.
The large concourse of persons who surrounded the grave
listened with the utmost reverence as Bishop Perry read in an
impressive manner the verses commencing, “ Man that is born
of a woman.” After the body had been committed to the
ground, the remaining prayers were read by Archdeacon Balston,
and the funeral ceremony concluded with the benediction.
Including some already mentioned, tlie following relatives
and friends were present:—Mr. A. Auriol-Barker, Mr. Charles
Auriol-Barker, Lieut.-Col. Harden, Rev. J. H. Clay, Rev. Henry
A. Barker and Mrs, H. A. Barker, Mrs. Auriol-Barker, Mrs.
Arundel Barker, Mr. E. Russell, Mr. and Mrs. Charles Stanley,
Rev. E. A. Mather, Mr. Edward Woods, Mr. and Mrs. E. Harry
Woods, Rev. Frank Woods and Mrs. F. Woods, Mr. V. Sydney
Woods, Mr. Woods (Mickleham), Mr. Goodman, Mr. T. W.
Goodman, Mr. and Mrs. Alfred Woods, Rev. E. K. Green and


Mrs. Green, Bishop and Mrs. Perry, Archdeacon and Mrs. Balston,
Rev. J. Stockdale, Mrs. Stockdale, and Miss Stockdale,
Rev. Vincent J. Ryan, Mr. Nicholas Waterhouse, The Misses
Waterhouse, ‘Rev. J. G. Southby, Rev. F. Ramthwaite, Rev.
Thomas Harrison (Sydney), Rev. J. Green, Rev. T. S. Salt,
Rev. T. Abraham (Brisbane), Rev. Forster Ashwin, Rev. D. T.
Barry, Rev. Nelson Howard (Sydney), The Representatives of
the Colonial and Continental Church Society (Rev. E. P. Gregg
and G. W. Clapham, Sheffield), Mr. F. H. Dangar, Mr. Colin
F. W. Campbell, Mr. Thomas Clare Kershaw, Mr. H. W. G.
Bagshawe, Mr. J. Roberts (Sydney), Mr. C. M. Gee, Mr. J.
Denison Gee, The Misses Charlton.
The following friends, amongst others, were unavoidably
prevented from attending the funeral: —The Right Rev. Bishop
Ryan, the Right Rev. Bishop Short (late of Adelaide), the Agent-
General for New South Wales, Mr. G. Wingfield Digby, Rev.
W. Boyd-Carpenter, Canon of Windsor, Rev. R. H. Cobbold,
Rev. Henry W. Tucker (of the S.P.G.), Rev. Christopher Cliilde,
and Mr. Henniker Heaton.
This short sketch may be suitably concluded by the words
of the Archbishop of Canterbury, spoken at the recent anniversary
of the Society for the Propogation of the Gospel in Foreign
parts. In the course of his address he said:—
“ Speaking of being favoured. with the presence of Australian
“Bishops, it is suggested to me that we often hear most un-
“ worthy remarks as to how it is that so many colonial Bishops
“find their way to England. I think you will scarcely judge my
“friend Bishop Perry, after his twenty-six years’ assiduous labour,
“that he should devolve the work on younger hands; that he
“should have exerted himself to secure the services of an
“eminent clergyman of the Church of England, and sent him
“out to continue the great work which for many years he had
“superintended himself. I think my venerable friend who sits
“on my right hand (Bishop Short) may well be excused if, in the
“eightieth year of his age, having laboured since 1847, with great
“ success, he has come back to the friends of his earlier days. It
“is a long time now since my friend examined me for my ‘little
“go’ at Oxford. He has been labouring ever since then, and it
“would be little encouragement to those who devote their lives
“ to the service of the Gospel if we were to begrudge them a few
“years of rest after laborious lives of work. As to those who are
“younger, but who from time to time visit us, I am happy to


“think that our colonies are not anxious to separate from the
“mother country. I am thankful to think there is a great
“ desire on the part of our lay officials to keep up a definite
“ connection with the mother country. I can easily believe that a
“ missionary Bishop in the vigour of life may well think that he will
“better peform his duties in the sphere to which he is called if he
“ comesback to refresh himself with a sight of work which is doing
“at home, so as to carry out to his distant diocese information and
“knowledge such as scarcely can be obtained except by a visit to
“the mother country.” (Cheers.) “There are others which have
“not retired to rest, but to die. We have lost the Bishop of
“ Sydney—a grievous loss indeed—a man of the noblest charac-
ter, who was prepared to return, if he had been spared, to his
“(laboriouswork.” (Cheers). ‘ 1 This is a very important time in
“the history of our colonial churches. There are at this
“moment vacant the Bishoprics of Sydney and Adelaide. There
“is to be a new Bishopric founded in Australia, called Biverina,
“for the foundation of which we are indebted to a noble-hearted
“colonist. There is also the Bishopric of Tasmania vacant.
“Let us pray that the men who go there in the time to come
“maybe like-minded and like-spirited, and with similar courage
“to those who had gone before. We have every reason to hope
“that men will be found to step into the places of those who
“have gone before, for our heavenly Father will certainly not
“fail to watch over His Church in Australia at this crisis of its
“existence.”
[W. C. LENG AND_CO., PRINTERS, TELEGRAPH ” OFFICE, SHEFFIEi D.


HYMNS TO BE SUNG AT BASLOW,
April 18th, 1882.
“ hather, I will that they also, whom Thou hast given
Me, be with Me where I am ; that they may behold My
glory, which Thou hast given Me : for Thou lovedst Me
before the foundation of the world.” —John xvii, 24.
To be sung before the Lesson.
(Hymnal Companion No. 32)
“ Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is
stayed on Thee.”— lsa. xxvi. 3.
1 Peace, perfect peace, in this dark world of sin ?
/ The blood of Jesus whispers peace within.
2 Peace, perfect peace, by thronging duties press’d ?
To do the will of Jesus, this is rest.
3 Peace, perfect peace, with sorrows surging round?
On Jesus’ bosom nought but calm is found.
4 Peace, perfect peace, with loved ones far away ?
In Jesus’ keeping we are safe and they.
5 Peace, perfect peace, our future all unknown ?
Jesus we know, and He is on the throne.
6 Peace, perfect peace, death shadowing us and ours ?
Jesus has vanquished death arid all its powers.
7 It is enough : earth’s struggles soon shall cease,
And Jesus call us to heaven’s perfect peace.


