

TWO SERMONS
PREACHED nsr
st. |IM’S Qjluirdi Uaiiling faint,
On SUNDAY, JANUARY 3rd, 1864,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF THE
REV. GEORGE WALTER RICHARDSON.
PUBLISHED BY JOSEPH COOK & CO., 370, GEORGE STREET :
J. R. CLARKE, GEORGE STREET.
i ?'W




TWO SERMONS
PREACHED IN
St. Utah’s (|lmr(ih, Darling faint,
On Sunday , January 3rd , 1864,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF THE
KEY. GEORGE WALTER RICHARDSON,
INCUMBENT OF THE PARISH;
IN THE MORNING
By THE VERY REVEREND W. M. COWPER, M.A.,
Dean of Sydney ;
IN THE EVENING
By THE REV. W. H. WALSH, M.A.,
Incumbent of Christ Church and Canon of St. Andrew’s Cathedral,
PRINTED BY REQUEST.
PUBLISHED BY JOSEPH COOK & CO., 370, GEORGE STREET
J. R. CLARKE, GEORGE STREET.


SYDNEY I
JOSEPH COOK AND CO.,
PRINTERS.


PREFATORY NOTICE.
No apology is needed for tire publication of the following Sermons. Their
subject, not their originality or intrinsic merit, will commend them to the
notice of their readers. To the former parishioners, friends, and relatives of
the lamented George Walter Eichaedson they will, it is hoped, have a
melancholy interest as the thoughts of two independent minds upon the same
event and as embodying their testimony to the character and worth of the
deceased.
Some of the materials of the following brief memoir have been, as to his
early life, supplied by one who knew Me. Exchaedson from his boyhood.
George Walter Eichaedson was educated at the Manchester
Grammar School, where owing to his ability and sedulousness and perseve-
rance, he rose rapidly. He left school when about the age of 18 or 19 ; his
father having removed from Manchester to Liverpool. At Liverpool Walter
entered a merchant’s office and remained there for three years, giving great
satisfaction by the conscientious discharge of his duties. Conscientiousness
seems to have been the distinguishing characteristic of his boyhood and youth,
making him a dutiful son, an apt scholar, and faithful to his employers. At
the age of 21 deeper religious impressions took hold of his mind, and we hear
of his having at this period devoted most of his leisure time to going about
“ doing good ” in such ways as were opened to him for serving his Heavenly
Master. At this time also arose in his mind the desire to enter the sacred
ministry with a view to becoming a Missionary. Consulting his friends Mr.
Balloon of Liverpool, and Mr. (now Bishop) Barker, as to whether he should
abide in his then calling, or seek training for the work of the ministry, he, on
their advice, determined on the latter step, and at once entered the Church
Missionary College at Islington, as best suited to fit him for missionary work;
rather than accept the offer of a dear and generous friend to defray his
expenses at either Oxford or Cambridge. At the College he devoted himself
with great assiduity to his studies, and employed his leisure moments in
visiting the inhabitants of the crowded streets and alleys of Islington. He
remained at the Church Missionary College for twelve months ; but not
feeling satisfied with the tone of that Institution, he removed, after much
deliberation, to St. Aldan’s Theological College at Birkenhead, with
the same desire for missionary work strong within him, and with his zeal
for his Master’s service unabated.
fn ssssjrs7*rs
U -S'77


He bad been known to the Rev. Frederic Barker some seven or eight
years, and was for some time a teacher in his Sunday School at Liverpool.
When therefore this kind friend, to whom he had become warmly attached,
was made Bishop of Sydney, and proposed to take Walter Richardson
with him to his Diocese, the latter readily consented to accompany him;
feeling that although the Colony would not afford strictly Missionary work,
he was still leaving much for his Master’s sake, in leaving father, mother,
brothers, sisters, and all most near and dear to him in order to labour in a
distant land. Moreover the friend who had offered to maintain him at an
University, now offered to purchase him a living if he would remain at home.
But he steadily, though gratefully, declined to turn back when he had once
put his hand to the plough. With this single minded desire to live for his
Master’s glory and service he landed in Sydney with the Bishop of Sydney
in April 1855. In the same year he was ordained Deacon, commencing his
labours in the Parish of St. Philip, as Curate to the late Venerable Arch-
deacon Cowper, until the Archdeacon’s death in July 1858. Here “he was
distinguished for his constant diligence, unremitting attention to the duties
of his office, a remarkably devout habit of mind, and great gentleness and
benevolence of character.” In 1858, having been already ordained to the
Priesthood, he took temporary charge of the Parish of St. Mark, Darling-
Point, during the absence on leave of the then Incumbent; and on the
resignation of the latter, he was appointed his successor, and continued to
hold that charge until the day of his death.
How zealously, untiringly, self devotingly, wisely and lovingly, he gave
himself to his work there, those only know who knew him best. How in
spite of his youth and youthful appearance, his retiring manners, and deep
humility, he had won his way to the hearts of his parishioners and neigh-
bours of all classes and ages, the scene of genuine sorrow which his funeral
presented, and the general expression of warm sympathy in the community,
will best testify. The great day alone will reveal the intrinsic worth of those
untiring labours for the souls of his people in which he spent and was spent
in his Master’s service.
What his inner life was they knew who saw the manifold indications
afforded in his hours of privacy, of his deep piety and devotional habits.
Hone could hold intercourse with him without being struck with the spirit-
uality of mind which his conversation and modes of acting evinced. He was
a true honest Church of England man, ever delighting to shew how much of
spiritual life was to be found in a real acceptance of the Church’s doctrines,
in an orderly and devout use of her ritual, and in a reverent consistent con-
formity to the prescriptions of her Prayer Book. In this spirit he led his
people to beautify the House of God. In this spirit he gave all the modest
attractiveness he could to its public services. In this spirit he invited his
people to the public observance of the Church’s appointed holy days and
seasons. He followed up his public ministrations by diligent pastoral


visitation ; by careful systematic instruction given at the Parisli-school, in
private Schools, in the Bible Class, in the Servants’ Class. Among the
sick, the sorrowing, the distressed, his labours were as unremitting as they
were eminently effective. When the appeal was being made for the Belief
of the Lancashire Distress, he raised no less than £406 13s. 7d., by his own
personal efforts, appealing to every inmate of nearly every house in his
parish.
Once in every fortnight he visited the more distant part of his cure,
near the South Head and Watson’s Bay, generally walking both ways, and
in all weathers. On every Sunday except one in each month, he went to
the same locality to hold an afternoon service, not unfrequently going and
returning on foot.
He had long desired to see carried out a scheme originated many years
ago during the episcopate of the revered Bishop Broughton and much
favored by that eminent prelate, for building a church at Watson’s Bay.
Only a week before his death he had, to his great joy, succeeded in com-
pleting the necessary funds through the kindness (mainly) of the ever noble-
hearted churchman, Mr. John Campbell; and only the day before his death
he had accompanied the Architect to the church allotment on the road
leading from the Light House to Watson’s Bay, to fix the exact site of the
building—a contract having been already taken. His last sermon at
St. Mark’s was preached on Christmas Day, and was remarkable for touching
allusions (occurring also in the sermons of previous Sundays) to the
vacancies which death had created in the congregation.
He was spending his Christmas holiday at Major Banning’s, at Canter-
bury, by arranging with the Clergyman of that parish for a short exchange
of duties ; and was gleeful as a child in the enjoyment of his relaxation.
On the afternoon of the 29th December, he went to bathe with two boys,
one of them a son of Major Fanning, in the neighbouring river, (Cook’s
Biver) taking also with him his little son four years old. He had swum once
across and had nearly reached the bank again, when he was seen to go
under, —diving, as the boys thought, feet downwards. They watched him
working his hands about near a submerged jetty, which he tried to reach.
But he never rose again. His body was taken from under the jetty after
being nearly an hour under water. It was brought to St. Mark’s Church
on the 31st December, and was buried with much solemnity at Sandwich
Cemetery on the same afternoon, a vast concourse of mourners following
him to the grave.
Previously to the funeral, a Meeting was held in the Yestry, at which
nearly £lOOO were at once subscribed for his widow and children, and the
fund had reached over £2OOO within fifteen days from that time —
a most gratifying evidence surely of the estimation in which he was held,
as well as of the kindness and rightminded generosity of the Sydney
people.


More need not be said to shew what a loss not only the Parishioners of
St. Mark’s and his bereaved friends, but also the Church of England in this
Diocese, has sustained in the death so abrupt and unlooked for of George
Waiter Richardson. Let us not, however, omit to record how to his
other qualifications for Ministerial usefulness, moral, spiritual, and social, he
added a most refined taste, considerable intellectual power, a clear judgment,
good classical attainments, and acquirements, as a sound and well read
theologian, of a very high order, —in this certainly inferior to very few
Clergymen of the Diocese. May God comfort the widow, the mother,
the many hearts, to whom his death has brought a weighty sorrow!


SERMON I.
TIBI IE ZDIS-A-ILsT OIET STrZDZDsTIE'Y'.




The Revelation xiv. 13.
“ I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth ; Yea, saith the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labours, and their works
do follow them''
It should never be forgotten that we owe to the revelation
which Gron ha s given us in His Holy Word, all that we for certain
know concerning a future state of happiness and reward, and the
way and means by which we may attain thereunto. Reason and
fancy might have formed (and we know they did form) numerous
conjectures and theories of the probable condition of man after
this life. But these would have furnished no solid ground for
hope to rest upon, nor have supplied the motives which were
necessary to stimulate us to seek after an immortality of blessed-
ness. It is in fact the Glospel light which has been shed abroad
upon the world which has shown us beyond all doubt, first, that
there is a heaven of bliss, and secondly, by what means it is to be
secured. Were it not for this revelation, what hope should we
have to console us when mourning the death of friends, or to
cheer us amid life’s manifold sorrows, or to support us under its
burdens P
None, my brethren; none whatever. A gloomy cloud would
have enveloped the tombs of the departed, and fear and sadness
would have rested upon every reflecting mind as it realized its
own condition and dwelt upon its own prospects.
But how different now, is our lot, blessed as we are with the
Christian revelation! Its declarations upon this subject are plain,
simple, and unmistakeable. Not only does it inform us how
patriarchs and prophets, and wise men and kings waited for the
salvation of Con,.and died in faith of the coming Redeemer; not
only does it show us how they were thus enabled to hold on their
way, and to live in godliness and purity, and then to die happily.
It sets before us life and immortality as brought out from


obscurity to light by the Gospel; it tells us that “as by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection from the dead;” that
“ as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive
that as there is no salvation out of Christ, so there is no con-
demnation to those who are in Him ; and that though death may
seem to triumph over the righteous, yet it is only in appearance.
For to them “death is gain.” It is in fact the entrance into life,
and the termination of all those struggles which mark their pre-
sent warfare and often disturb their peace !
These are truths which we gather from various portions of the
Word of God. And in the text before us we have as it were a
condensation of much that was before revealed, confirmed, and
established by the additional testimony a voice from heaven. The
Apostle says—“l heard a voice from heaven saying unto me,
Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from hence-
forth ; Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours,
and their works do follow them.”
Most fitly is this passage introduced in the Burial Service of
our Church, to minister consolation to those who have just com-
mitted to the tomb the mortal remains of their beloved friends,
and are then standing around the grave stricken with grief on
account of their bereavement. She thus strives to raise the
thoughts from earth to heaven —from that which is mortal and
corruptible to that which is spiritual and eternal; from the sighs
and griefs of time to the rest and the joys of eternity.
And it is with the same view that I desire this morning to in-
vite your attention to the truths which the verse contains; that
you may know the grounds of consolation which you possess con-
cerning him who has been so suddenly snatched from you by
death; and whom you are now mourning for as both your Pastor
and your friend.
Mark then, my Brethren—
First. —The character of those whom the voice pronounced blessed;
and Secondly , the statement concerning their blessedness.
1. The character of the persons pronounced blessed —“ Blessed
are the dead who die in the Lord.”
To “die in the Lord” is to die in union with Him; joined to
Him, that is, spiritually, by a living faith and holy love'; both


which are manifested by obedience to His will and commandments.
The figure by which He Himself thought fit to illustrate this
union was that of the vine and the branches. St. Paul compares it
to the union of the members of the natural body with the head;
and St. Peter to the stones of a house built together upon the
corner stone of the foundation.
But whatever be the figure employed, it is a real and vital union
which is intended: a union of heart, mind, will and affection : like
that of the faithful spouse with her beloved husband, in whom she
confides, as he does in her with undoubting confidence.
This, my Brethren, is what the Scripture teaches us concerning
those who are indeed one with Cueist in life. They think, and
speak, and live, and act, with Him and for Him. They have the
same mind which was in Him. And this union is the fruit of the
Spirit which He has imparted unto them, who dwells in them, and
will dwell in them for ever. For such was the promise, and the
Scripture cannot be broken: “ I will pray the Father, and He
shall give you another Comforter, that He may abide with you for
ever; even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive,
because it seeth Him not, nor knoweth Him: but ye know Him;
for He dwelleth with you and shall he in you” John xiv. 16,17,
Those then who die in the Lord are those who thus live in Him.
They have accepted Him as their Saviour. They rely upom Him
for the pardon of every sin; for their justification before God ;
for deliverance from the power of their innate depravity and of
every evil habit which they have contracted.
They make use of Him as the way of approach to God, as the
Fountain of all grace, as the Author and Finisher of their faith,
as their Pattern, their Guide, and their Teacher. He dwells in
their hearts by faith; and they dwell in Him, by yielding them-
selves up to be a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God,
as a sweet smelling savour.
This union is one which death does not and cannot sever. There
is a spiritual death indeed which is the very opposite of such a
union; but from this they have been raised up, to walk in newness
of life. And the death which we see, and which most men so
much dread, is but the shell from which the kernel has been
extracted. It cannot hurt the spiritual and immortal nature


which the Bon of Hon has taken into union with Himself, and has
purified and made meet for the enjoyment of His own presence in
the paradise above. Oh no : they die as they have lived “in the
Lord whether the last messenger comes to them suddenly, with-
out any previous warning, or by slow degrees, as in lingering
sickness, or by any other method. And therefore they are blessed.
As in life, so in death, “ blessed from henceforth and for evermore.”
The question has sometimes been raised whether the souls
of the righteous pass immediately upon their leaving the body into
a state of happiness, or whether they remain unconscious till the
resurrection. But Holy Scripture gives no countenance to such a
cold and comfortless doctrine as that of the soul’s unconsciousness.
If the spirit of the dying believer does not pass at once into the
presence of Christ and there rejoice in his unutterable glory, why
did St. Paul say to the Philippians—“ I have a desire to depart
and to he with Christ , which is far better P "What then did he mean
by telling the Corinthians that “ whilst we are at home in the
body, we are absent from the Lord? and again “we are willing
rather to be absent from the body and present with the Lord ? And
why have we in the Book of the Eevelation so many intimations,
in the visions seen by St. John, that the saints departed this life
are rejoicing before the Throne of Hod and the Lamb ? No : the
testimony of Scripture all tends to establish the doctrine of
immediate blessedness. And therefore I believe we are warranted
in saying that there is no perceptible interval between the
departure from the body of the soul which is in the Lord, and its
beholding His face in glory. I believe, resting upon what the
Apostle has told us, that the instant that the soul closes its con-
nection with earth; its everlasting joy begins, although our perfect
consummation and bliss both in body and soul will not be attained
until the resurrection.
2. But let us now pass on, as we proposed, to consider the
statement concerning the happiness which belongs to those who
die in the Lord;—“ They rest from their labours /”
These labours may be either the labours and fatigues of active
service; or the troubles and sufferings which they had to pass
through in their day of trial; or more probably they may include
both.


While he is in the body the Christian is called to work for his
Lord: and in discharging the duties assigned to him in the place
he occupies in the Church of God, he has often much toil to
undergo, both bodily and mentally. Day by day his work awaits
him, in the sphere which God in His providence has appointed
him to occupy; and if he desires to perform it aright, and so to
avoid the condemnation which awaits the slothful servant, he must
ever be up and doing what is before him, regardless of ease,
pleasure, or relaxation.
Life is to him a battle field. He is engaged in a mighty
struggle, and in gaining a great victory. He has buckled on his
armour and gone forth with the warriors to fight for his king, and
to baffle the designs of his enemies. At times the conflict rages
furiously. The various points are hotly contested. And he dares
not to rest, or relax his exertions, lest haply he should lose the
ground which he has won, or be driven back by the foe.
And while thus engaged, how often is he called to suffer
adversity and to pass through affliction !
But as soon as the hour of his dismission arrives, all this toil
and conflict ceases. The labour of an active life; the warfare in
which as a soldier of Cu bist he was contending; and the sufferings
and trials of this world of woe are finished. His happy spirit
passes into the region of peace, tranquility and repose. It looks
around, and all is holiness and quietness and love. Glad souls,
redeemed from sin and transformed into the Saviour’s likeness
are there, occupying the mansions into which it has entered. And
mingling among them, holy angels who have never known sin
minister to their joy. The state on which they have entered is
thus one in which they do indeed rest from all their labours.
And here we cannot but remark that if the Christian’s warfare
is ended at death; if all the works which he has to perform for
his Lord in his day of probation are then terminated; and his
sufferings and adversities cease for ever; it is evident that after
death nothing can be done to remedy the past, or to gain what
may have been lost, or to obtain salvation. No atonement or
expiation can be made or applied after death, nor any thing
undone which during life has been done amiss and has not been
repented of while the day of grace lasted. Therefore we must


“ work while it is called to-day: the night cometh in which no man
can work!”
“ Their ivories ” the voice from heaven declared “ do folloiv them
The works which they did while here ; those works of faith and
labours of love, which distinguished them from the slothful and
idle, and marked them out as Christ’s servants, who were labouring
to fulfil His will, and to glorify Him in their day and generation.
And how do they follow them P In what character, and for
what end P Our Lord has told us in His account of the day of
judgment in the twenty-fifth chapter of St. Matthew. As
evidences of their love to Him, and manifestations of their regard
and affection for those who are His.
And so will they obtain a gracious, not a meritorious reward :
a reward, not because they have done their duty, but because He
delights in honouring those who honour Him. But upon this point
time forbids me to enlarge. Bor there is much to be said in the
application of our subject to the sad and solemn event of the
week past, which I know is filling all our minds.
It has pleased Don in His mysterious “wisdom suddenly to
deprive you as a Congregation of your highly valued Pastor; his
family of their natural Gluardian and Head ; and the Church in this
Diocese of one of her most zealous and devoted Ministers: and
this at a time when his services can be ill spared, and when w T e
should have especially desired his continuance amongst us. We
dare not question the wisdom, nor doubt the love of Him who has so
ordained. We bow with submission to His will, and say —“Even
so, Bather; for so it seemed good in Thy sight.” We wonder and
adore; but we must wait for the great day to reveal the mystery
of the dispensation, and to show ns why the Lord hath done thus.
Our duty now is to see what consolation and instruction we can
gather as regards him who is taken, and for ourselves.
And in the first place regarding him whose departure we mourn;
there is abundant consolation in the subject we have been con-
sidering. Bor all the conditions of the blessedness spoken of in
our text were assuredly to be found in his character.
So far as man can judge of his fellow man, there was good
evidence of his being in the Lord while he lived, and of his
abiding in Him until he was called away.


Many years have now passed away since lie was first led by the
grace of Gfon, and constrained by redeeming love, to surrender
biinself fully to the service of his Saviour. I have been informed
by one who knew him intimately at that time that after he was led
to think seriously upon religion his convictions of sin were very
deep, and that he could not for a season find that peace which the
Grospel is designed to impart. But having found it, he gave him-
self heartily to the Lord’s service, and resolved to devote his life
to missionary or ministerial labours; and we have seen how
zealously, and with how much consistent but quiet earnestness,
he strove to serve and honour Him.
In the Parish of St. Philip where he began his ministry as
Curate to the late Archdeacon, I know how laborious he was; how
diligent; how unsparing of himself; how attentive to duty; how
considerate of the sick, the aged, the poor and needy; how anxious
to “ make full proof of his ministry.” His habits were truly devout;
his life was pure and consistent; and his whole demeanour such
as to win the respect and regard of all who knew him. In the
Church and out of it, he aimed at serving Christ, and strove to
glorify Him before the world.
The course thus begun has since been continued amongst your-
selves. I believe he was truly actuated by love to the Saviour,
and that in the work he did in this Parish, his desire was to fulfil
his duties as Christ’s minister, and to save the souls for whom
Christ died.
He looked upon you as committed to his spiritual charge for
this end; and in his preaching and teaching and other ministrations,
private as well as public, I believe he had this object in view.
Whatever of infirmity and of shortcomings might have attached
themselves to his discharge of duty (and these he would have been
the first to feel and to acknowledge) he sought to win your hearts to
the Redeemer, and so to bring you to Him that when you should
die, you might “ die in the Lord.”
I am not acquainted with all the particulars of his work in this
Parish, and of the methods whereby he sought to attain this great
end. But I know of much which shews how untiring he was in
his labour, how self denying, how considerate of the circumstances
of the afflicted, bow tender in his regard for their feelings, and


how anxious that all the members of his flock from the poorest to
the richest should be benefited by his ministry. He was one who
thought of all, and eared for all, in his Parish, and wished that
alike the servant and the master, the maid and her mistress, the
laborer and the employer should participate in the privileges of
the Giospel. The young of the flock were especially on his heart,
and touching instances might be given of his loving thoughtfulness
for their highest welfare.
But I must refrain. I love to dwell on his memory; and
though in some matters of less moment I may have differed from
him, I trust that his many excellencies will ever be embalmed in
my remembrance, and that as they pass in review before me, I may
strive to possess a larger share of them, and better to serve that
Saviour whom he loved while he lived, and in whom he died.
But it is not enough on such an occasion to comfort ourselves
with the belief of his happiness and the remembrance of his virtues.
Another solemn thought occurs, and should present itself forcibly
to your minds. What has been the effect of his ministry upon
your own hearts and lives ? Have the ends he sought been
attained ? Do you love the Saviour whom he presented to your
view, and whose servants you by profession are ?
Could he now speak to this assembly what, think you, would he
say ? Would he not bid you to remember how suddenly he had
been called away —how necessary it is for each of us to live habit-
ually prepared for such a sudden call —how vain is all religious
profession without love to Christ, and obedience to His commands:
and how diligent, prayerful, and earnest we should be in our
closets, that we may attain the character of true and exemplary
Christians. Oh my brethren, he would tell you of the unfathom-
able love of that Saviour who died for you. He would tell you of
the joys of heaven, and the sorrows and despairs of the lost: and
he would urge and beseech you, in that Saviour’s name, to yield
your whole hearts to Him, and so to live that of you when you are
gone it may be said with undoubting faith and trust—“ Blessed
are the dead who die in the Lord.”
Let me then urge this upon you in the spirit of love and concern
for your everlasting welfare. And when the Saviour returns to
gather His Saints unto Him, may we all be found among His
sanctified ones and enter with Him into His eternal joy !


SEEMON 11.
The EEV, W. H. WALSH, M.A.




John xi. 35, 36, 37.
‘ Jesus wept. Then said the Jews, hehold how He loved him. And
some of them said, could not this Man which opened the eyes of
the blind have caused that this man should not have died."
The great incident of this chapter is unquestionably the miracle
wrought by our Lord in the raising of Lazarus. Its chief sig-
nificancy was in its connection with the great doctrine of which
it was in some degree the illustration and exponent. "We see this
in the words addressed by onr Loud to Martha, which not only
confirmed her belief in a resurrection at the last day, but also
proclaimed Himself to be the Loed of life and death, Himself the
quickener of the dead, the resurrection and the life. “He that
believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and he
that liveth and believeth in Me shall never die.” Thus at the
month of the grave of the dead Lazarus already beginning to
see corruption, He declares that mighty truth with which we
Christians now commit our dead to their last resting place. And
there he presently verifies and confirms that truth by bidding the
dead come forth.
Keeping therefore before us the purport of the great miracle
recorded in this chapter of St. John, I would now rather dwell
upon what we may call the bye scenes of the story. The words
of the text will suggest the outline of our subject.
“ Jesus wept ” —with the tears of full human sympathy at the
grave of His departed friend; sanctifying our grief in seasons of
bereavement,; teaching that there is no unreasonableness, no
nnmanliness in the demonstration of sorrow. Ho doubt of His
love: no heart ever beat so strongly with all the sweet impulses
of affection as that heart of Jesus. But, then we come to ask,
why those tears at all ? Men began to reason, ‘ why, if He so
loved Martha and Mary and Lazarus, did He not put forth that
love in the most effectual way P ’ How was it that He, who


wrought so wondrously in other cases, should not by that power
which He had, have prevented the calamity for which they
beheld Him sorrowing ?
You will remember hoAV the story itself brings out this very
point. He was away with the disciples beyond Jordan, keeping,
as it would appear, for awhile out of the way of the malicious
designs of His enemies in Judaea and Jerusalem till His hour
should come. Tidings are brought that Lazarus is sick. The
appeal is to His human affection, “ he whom Thou lovest is sick.”
But there is something more than human in His reply, “ This
sickness is not unto death but for the glory of Gron, that the
Son of Gron may be glorified thereby.” And then it is added,
“ Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarusand then, still
more singularly and illogically it is said, “ therefore ” —because
of His love for them, —“ He abode two days still in the same
place where He was.” In other words He let those precious
two days go by, and still gave no help, not a word or sign of
comfort to those whom He knew to be in the very deepest
affliction of anxiety and mental distress. In any other case we
should almost describe it as a trifling with the feelings of those
whom He had power to relieve.
Then , He proposes to go into Judaea again and to Bethany: but
then, as He knew, Lazarus was dead. True, we know, as He knew,
Lazarus was to be awakened out of that sleep of death. Delive-
rance was to come in time: but till then, much sorrow was to be
gone through. That bereavement was no common trial. It
snapped the strongest strand of that threefold cord which formed
the family of Bethany. It took from the sisters the prop and
stay of their home ; and they felt it keenly, bitterly. Why sub-
ject them to all that when He might have averted it? We have
already heard the answer to this question. By all those circum-
stances of trial, “the Son of Glod was to be glorified.” This was
the Divine decree, the Divine will. Human nature would have
had it otherwise. Both sisters, in words implying half faith, half
reproach, meet Him with the exclamation, “ Lord if Thou hadst
been here, my brother had not died.” And, as we have observed,
even lookers on entertained the same thought, Avhy all this sorrow


which surely He might by a timely interposition have prevented ?
The giver of sight to the blind might surely have healed the sick
Lazarus, now, alas! dead and gone; and such a loss, leaving such
a blank to those poor bereaved hearts! And yet He loved them.
Yes, and if ever, any had reason to expect exemption from
if any, by reason of nearness of heart to Hoi), had right to look
for freedom from calamity, surely it was this family. Loving Him
and beloved as they were by Him, surely in them should have
been fulfilled the promise to those abiding under the shadow of
the Almighty, and no evil should have happened to them, nor any
plague come nigh their dwelling. And yet, there this heaviest
stroke of Hod’s afflicting hand is permitted to fall.
But, reading on to the end of the story, we know why. We
know what a blessing was in store for them, and, —through them,
for others —in that raising of Lazarus, in the testimony it gave to
the Divine nature and power and authority of our adorable
Saviour, and to the glorious doctrine of the resurrection of the
dead. But where is the faith which can so look beyond the
present trial to the glorious end ? What does human nature say,
or if it do not say it, what does it think when some dread sorrow
or calamity comes to crush the heart ? Too often there is a doubt
of Hod’s love, a questioning of His justice —“What have I done
to deserve this ? What avail all my endeavours to please Hod ?
Of course this is simply earthly, a measuring of the laws of the
Divine government by man’s rule and measure of right and fitness.
We forget that our true destiny is in eternity, not in the things
of time. We forget that good and evil are not to be reckoned so
by their present effect, but by the influence they shall have had
upon the eternal future. And thus we call evil good and good evil.
We put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter.
He who tried the faith of the mourning sisters of Bethany and
awakened the sympathising remarks of the perplexed bye standers,
still says “ be not faithless but believingwhat I do thou knowest
not now, but thou shalt know. Meanwhile there is much that
is dark and perplexing. The present is oftentimes no indication
of the future. There is mirth whose end is heaviness; sorrow,
which shall be turned into unfailing joy; there are sufferings of


the poor and vile body which are working for it an exceeding and
eternal weight of glory; there is wealth which has in it the
canker of abject poverty and utter nakedness to the possessor;
and there is poverty which is laying up a hoard of unfading treasure.
No affliction seemeth now to be joyous but grievous: yet G-od’s
Fatherly hand, we are told, is there, and He is really “ dealing
with us as with sons.” We must look far beyond the present if
we Avould see our way out of the perplexities besetting our
interpretation of the ways of God. We must “ wait if we would
see the salvation of God.” We must shew the trustful love of
children if we would indeed be the children of our Heavenly Father.
Faith is practically the temper of trustfulness; it is seen in the
quiet confidence which nerves the heart with a strength not its
own, to bear bravely and hopefully every form of present trial, as
glorifying God in some purpose of blessing to ourselves. They
asked, “ could not this man which opened the eyes of the blind
have caused that this man should not have died ? ” Of course He
could. But when the mourning sisters presently received back
the dead Lazarus from his grave clothes, would they have
exchanged that joy for exemption from the trouble which went
before it ? Can we doubt of the love which was in that passing
trial P Can we think that £ anything ’ can separate from the love
of God which is in Cheist Jesus our Losd ? ”
This subject comes home to us with especial force at the
present time. Our hearts stagger with dismay at the event
which has turned all our bright happy hopeful Christmas thoughts
into mourning and„ sadness. Who can tell what a day may
bring forth! Who would have thought that he who so recently
in the full flush of healthful manhood stood up in this place and
told you of the glad tidings of the Saviour’s birthday, should have
passed away into the number of the dead! How hard to realize
that that voice shall be heard here no more, that the hands
which ten days ago dispensed to you the bread of life, should so
soon have been cold and powerless within the coffin in which we
saw him home to his burial! How difficult to believe that the
familiar form which has passed in and out amongst us, shall be
no more seen—that the calmly bright smile and friendly grasp


which greeted us when we met, shall no more gladden us! How
many of you who at regular intervals and on stated days looked
for his pastoral visit for the instruction of the young or for the
comfort of the sick, or for some purpose of usefulness or mercy,
will wonder that he comes no more! We are startled at the
abruptness of his removal; we are appalled at the unexpectedness
of the calamity which has taken him from us; we are amazed at
the smallness of the interval which stood between full vigorous
healthful life and death, at the seemingly trifling cause which
within three arms lengths of the shore left him lifeless beneath
the waters of a calm and placid river. And thus it is, while our
hearts are stricken and astonied with the appalling suddenness of
the visitation, we look back to the past, and wonder how it is
that we should have been so bereaved. The poor sorrowing
widow looks upon her tiny orphaned flock and thinks of the five
bright years of wedded life and wonders how it should be so soon
cut short. Triends who lived in the sweet intercourse of close
and endearing sympathy with him, day by day learning more
to value him, wonder how it is that he is no more at hand. You,
his beloved flock, amongst whom and for whom he lived, —and
would fain have died, if need were, —remember how during these
few short years of his ministry he had become identified with you
as the representative of His Divine Master’s love and care for
you. We turn to that past —we feel how precious it was—it seemed
but the beginning of blessings, but the opening of a work of G-on
amongst us; and lo it is done! In the morning it was green and
growing up, in the evening it is cut down, dried up, and withered.
So soon passeth it away and is gone. And here we ask musingly
—perhaps doubtingly—perhaps curiously —why He, without
Whom not a sparrow falls to the ground, should so have ordered
this arresting of so many hopes, this cutting short of a life so
valued, this ceasing of a work so precious to many souls amongst
His redeemed people ? We can turn to that Blessed One who wept
at the grave of Lazarus, and hear from Him how it were more for
the glory of Gron that Lazarus should have died, than that he should
have lived. Martha and Mary, those most interested would fain
have had Him near to heal their sick and save their brother from
death; but His words to the disciples—to His church, we may say


—were “ I am glad for your Bakes I was not there ” —for your
sakes who were to be gainers by that seeming loss. And may it
not be so here ? May it not be that God has His own work to
do by the very removal of His servant from amongst us ? It
may be that we did not enough esteem him; —it may be that
God would have ns learn by remembrance what perhaps we
failed to learn when he whom we have lost was present with us.
There are many instances of children upon whom the death of
parents has wrought a blessed influence by forcing upon the
memory the precepts and the example of parental love, which
were during the parent’s life-time little heeded. And may we not
with reverence say, that the very first office of the Holy Ghost
in the Church was, according to our Loan’s promise, to bring to
the “ remembrance ” of His little flock whatsoever things He their
Master had said unto them ? For His public ministry too was
but a short one. And though He had touched many hearts;
though His words of wisdom and works of wonder and mercy,
and most Holy life, had made their impression, still it was after-
wards when under the teaching of the Holy Spirit they remem-
bered what He had said, and how He had wrought, that the real
influence of that blessed earthly ministry of the Lord Jesus
made itself felt amongst men. It was expedient for Him to go
away, in order that a blessing, greater than that of His bodily
presence, should come to His church through the ministry
of the unseen Comforter. And it may seem in a far lower
degree, expedient for you, that this true servant of that
gracious Divine Master should thus be taken away from your
sight. Being dead he will yet speak to many hearts. "Words
of wise and godly counsel which he uttered amongst you,
will live in your memories even though his voice is silent as the
grave in which we have laid him. Comfort, which he knew so
well how to give, brought to many a mourning and wounded
spirit in the hour of sorrow or affliction, comfort derived from the
rich stores of his own spiritual acquirements and experience,—
will still rest sweetly upon your hearts as a remembrancer of him.
His patient instruction of the young and the ignorant in the
saving truths of Gon’s Blessed Word, will not pass away with
his absence. Many of those who received in the School or the


Bible Class his clear and intelligent teaching in Christian truth,
will be glad hereafter to testify that they owe their careful
grounding in the faith of the Hospel, and of the Church, to the
loving care of the good young Clergyman of St. Mark’s. And
those too with whom he reasoned in private of their errors, or
their sins, or their neglects—-those with whom he was so instant
in season and out of season in his efforts to persuade and to win
to the love of Cueist and to holiness—will not they remember
what he said, will not his voice still ring in their ears, now as
from the unseen world whither he told them they too are going ?
But how shall we all long continue to feel the still more
impressive influence of his life and character ! Whatever he wished
others to be, that he endeavoured to he himself. Whatever he said
and did, came with the full force of reality from the depth of his
own religious heart. The doctrines which he taught were doctrines
which had a living power upon his own conscience. He repre-
sented the true principles of the Church of England in all their
spiritual vitality. His loyalty to her doctrine and order was not
the loyalty of a partizan or of traditional prejudice. His stedfast
maintenance of our Church’s rules and discipline was that of
simple consistency —not of blind antagonism to others, or of mere
rigid formalism. The seemliness and decency of this beautiful
house and its solemnities, are a fitting memorial of the reverence
and orderliness of his own devout mind. Those who branded him
with party nick names —those who accounted him a mere dabbler
with aesthetics, with the externals, the fringes and draperies of
religion, —those who attributed to him fancifulness or pettiness or
want of spirituality in what he did for Q-od’s House or Hod’s
worship, grievously misjudged him. All came from the holy
instincts of his own devout heart; in all he sought your edification
and the glory of his Divine Master. I myself, as one who had
interchanged with him the closest confidence and who knew much
of the deeps of his inner being, may truly say that this one aim
entered into the least as into the greatest acts of his daily life.
With the simplicity, and gentleness, and purity of a child he
combined the most manly courage in the path of duty: and those
of you who know him best, will remember how fearlessly, yet


how considerately, and kindly, he contended for what was right
and rehnked what he thought to he wrong. Of his unsparing
self-devotion, where the good of souls or the assistance of the
temporal wants of his people were concerned, you know full well.
Of the patient toil with which Sunday after Sunday and week by
week he made his pastoral visits, for public or private ministra-
tions, to the distant parts of his large cure, you also know. And
we may humbly trust that a memorial of his zeal for the good of
that portion of his flock, will ere long be seen in the erection of
the church at Watson’s Bay, the funds for which he had, to his
great joy, succeeded in obtaining shortly before his removal.
In dwelling thus upon the labours and character of one dear
to us all —to me dearer than a brother —can I be wrong in saying
that, being dead, he will yet speak to you ? None more than he
would have shrunk from the thought of what he was or what he
haddonebeiugthusspokenof. Of his deep humility, of that religious
self-renunciation wddeh was so strong in him, his one thought
would have been like the great apostle’s “by the grace of God I
am what I am.” We too can adopt that thought. He was
indeed an instrument of the grace of Go dto us. But the Loed
gave, and the Loed hath taken away. We had hoped otherwise:
Ave had hoped for one so young and so healthful, length of days,
matured judgment, and a long career of usefulness. But God,
for His oavu glory doubtless, and for our sakes even, as Avell as,
it may be also, for the sake of him who is gone, has cut short his
time. He has left us therefore to gain by remembrance what we
cannot any more gain by the daily experience of his ministry and
life. Bor himself we dare not wish it otherwise than it is ; for
himself there is only gain. Abrupt Avas his death, but not as to
his readiness, sudden: and the burthen of that sweet hymn
which w r e sang over his grave, expressed what had been (as I
believe) the one thought of his life from his childhood to the
day Avhen God called him ‘to the land that is very far off,’
‘ Nearer my God to Thee, nearer to Thee. ’
My friends, the felloAVship which bound him to us in life need
not be severed by his death. He has but joined the great
procession of God’s faithful ones who are, out of sight, wending


their way toward the portals of the Heavenly Sanctuary, the
Eternal City; and to whom we, if we have hope at all, hope to he
gathered each one in his or her time. The hidden life of holy
faith, of nearness to Gron, of fellowship with Christ, which each
one now lives here, is hut another phase of the life which he is
now living out of the hody in the unseen state. And when, in the
prayer for Christ’s Church militant here on earth, which we use
every Sunday in the Communion Service, we hless Cion for all
who have departed this life in His faith and fear, we may remem-
ber our beloved friend as one of them, and pray Gron that we
may follow his good example and with him and them he partakers
of Gron’s heavenly kingdom.
In the midst of our sorrow we can hut sum up all our thoughts,
as we mourn and marvel at his early removal, in the words of the
aged Eli, “it is the Loun let Him do what seemeth Him good.”
Whoever may succeed him in the ministry amongst you Avill find
it hard indeed to attain to his high standard of faithfulness, and
must suffer in your estimation by the comparison. But whoever it
he, let him see in your unswerving piety, in your quiet persistent
walk in the good old paths of the Church’s godly order, and in a
living faith in the doctrines of the Grospel as taught by the
Church of England, the strong testimony to the value of the
ministry of Walter EiciiAßDSOisr ; let that successor see in your
reverence for his sacred office, in your hearty co-operation with
his honest endeavours for your good and his Master’s glory, the
powerful incentive to emulate the brother who has gone before
him.
And now, as your fellow mourner, I humble myself under Glod’s
afflicting Hand. I rejoice that your sorrow for the dead has ex-
pressed itself in sympathy and loving aid to his living widow and
orphaned little ones. It is a noble tribute of thankfulness to the
Gfiver of all your good. It is an act which will return in
manifold blessings to yourselves. Amongst those blessings may
there be the one of a faithful and true pastor to watch for your
souls and care for you, as he who is gone cared for you, and to help
you, as did he, by his bright example. More I will not say—and
it is the subject only which has justified me in detaining you so


long. But amongst the many lessons which I would ask you to
carry to your homes this evening, will you hear to hear from me
this one affecting the great law of charity P It has been the fashion,
now happily less prevalent than it was a few years since, to
designate by harsh party names the Clergyman who fearlessly,
consistently, religiously acted out the doctrines, the principles,
and the godly order of the Church of England of which we are
members. The life and labours of Walter Richardson will
ever remind us that the faith and work of a true representative
of our Reformed Church in her doctrine and her practice, not
only may, but must represent all that is evangelical in truth, deep
piety, and whatsoever is lovely and of good report in the sight
of Cron and man.
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 370, George Street, Sydney.


'?
■
■
■


