

Watertown Register
T H E
WATERTOWN REDISTER
lj Printed and Published every Saturday morning.;
'TERMS—To Village subscribers, who receive
their papers by the Carrier, s’2 50 per annum.
Office and mail subscribers, $2 00—when paid .;
in advance, 25 per cent, will be. deducted. No
subscription received for less than a year, un-
less paid iii advance. OUT Companies of ten or
more, when taken from the office in one pack-
age, jjjjl 59, payable in advance —otherwise $2.
Kates of Advertising—One square (15 linesor
less) for ane week, 50 cents; three weeks $1;
and 25 cents for each subsequent, insertion.
MONTHLY AND YEARLY ADVERTISING.
One square 1 month £1 25 I 1-4 column—l year $3 00
do do 3{months 300 | 1-2 do do 15 00
do do 6 .do 300 I One do do 25 00
number of insertions lor advertisements must be
marked in tie margin, or they will be continued until
forbid, and iharged accordingly.
J£|=»All letters m business must be post paid to receive :
attention.
lIV 1? \tvSi * TJ 3>xr v —IT. S. Dist. Court? c ,
NORTH El N DISTRICT OF NEW■ YORK. \
I, Anson Little, Clerk of the said Court, do certify
that the W teetown Register, a newspaper published
in the County o Jefferson, has been designated by the
jCourt as one in which Notices and other publications in
Bankrupt procenlings in said Court are to be published,
‘conformably to tie Rules of the Court.
ANSON LITTLE, Clerk.
In Bankruptcy.
Judre Conklin, off the Northern
District o : Use United States court.
PETITION FO. DISCHARGE AND CERTIFICATE.
jVJOTICE tcslmvv cause against the petition of
Henry D Sewall , of Pamelia, Jefferson
'county Nevv.Yjrk, for his discharge and certifi-
cate as a banknpt, at Auburn N. Y. on Tues-
day the 27ih d.Y of September 1842, at 10 o’-
'clock A. M. G. C. SHERMAM. Atl’y.
•MPOTICE todioiv cause against the petition
of Asa W)od, of Adams Jefferson county
N Y, for his and certificate as a bank-
rupt, at Auburn V Y on Tuesday the sixth day
of September IS!2, at 10 o’clock AM.
TKTPOTICE to siow cause agfinst the petition of
■a®** Jeremiah Baldwin, of Watertown Jeffer-
son county N Y, Ur his discharge and certificate
as a bankrupt at Auburn N Y, on Tuesday the
V>lh day of Si ptoivLer 1842 at 10 o’clock A M.
VVM, H. 8 HUM WAY, Atl’y.
■MP OTICE to show cause against the petition oT
f"®* William P- Worthington, of Brownviilc,
Jefferson county N A 7", for his discharge and certi-
ficate as a bankrupt at Auburn N Y on Tuesday
. the 30th dhy of August 1842, at 10 o’clock A M.
j. Moore, j r . Airy.
NOTICE to show cause against the petition of
Charles Reedy of Rodman Jr fferson county
N Y, for his discharge and certificate as a bank-
nVpt at Auburn N Y on Tuesday the 6th day of
September 1812, at 10 o’clock A M.
■MFOTICE to show cause against the petition of
a&rl Chaite'S Reed, of Rodman Jefferson county
N Y for bis discharge and certificate as a bank-
rupt at Auburn N Y, on Tuesday lire 6th day of
September ISI2 at 10 o’clock A M.
n OTICE. to show cause against.the petition of
Theodor's Bin f, of Adams Jefferson county
N Y, for his discharge and certificate as a bank-
rupt at Auburn N Y, mi Tuesday the 6th day of
September 1812 at 10 o’clock A M.
W. C. THOMPSON, Att’y.
NOTICE to show cause against the petition of
Nathan Paddock, of Champion, Jefferson
County N Y for his di-charge and certificate as
a bankrupt at Auburn N Y on Monday., the 20lh
day of August 1842, at 10 o’clock A M.
to show cause against the petition of
Royal Tasket, of Jefferson County N Y
for his discharge and certificate as a bankrupt at
Auburn N Y on Monday, the 29ih day of Au-
gust 1842, at 10 o’clock A M
DAMEL ANDRUS, Att’y.
*JK*TOTICE to show cause against the petition
of Alexander Jacobs, of Rutland, Jefferson
County, individually and as a member of the late 1
firm of Ford & Jacobs, for his discharge and cer-
tificate as a .Bankrupt at Auburn, New York, on
Tuesday, the 23d day of August, 1842, at 10 o’-
clock A. M.
NOTICE to show cause against the petition of
Lester Hungerford, of WaleWown, Jeffer-
son county N. Y. for his discharge and certificate
as a bankrupt at Auburn, N Y on Monday, the
15th day of August 1842, at 10 o’clock AM. j
IVTOTICE to show cause against the petition of
JAI Alfred fsham, of Rutland Jefferson county
N Y for his discharge And certificate as a bank-
rupt at Auburn N V on Monday, the 15lli day
of August 1842, at 10 o’clock A M.
NOti.CE to show cause agaihst the petition of j
Stafford Gates, of Champtdn Jefferson coun-
ty N V, for his discharge and ceitificale as a bank-
rupt at Auburn N Y on Monday, the 16th day of
August 1842, at 10 o’clock A Mi
NOTICE to shdw cause against the petition of
Simeon Rouse, of Leßay, Jefferson county
N Y. for his discharge and certificate as a bank-
rupt at Auburn NY, on Monday, the 15th day
of August 1842, at 10 o’clock A. M.
JOHN CLARKE, Att’y.
NOTICE to show cause against the petition of
Thomas J. Carter, of Adams, Jefferson coun-
ty N Y for his discharge and certificate as a hank-
iupt at Auburn N Y on T.mrsday the 251 h day of
August 1342 at i 0 o’clock A M.
NOTICE to Show cause against, the petition of
Joseph Carter, of Adams Jefferson county
N Y for his discharge and certificate as a hank-
Hipt at Auburn N Yon Thursday, the zolli day
bf August 1342, at 10 o’clock A M.
VV. C. THOMPSON, Atl’y.
NOTICE to show cause against the petition
of James 11. Esselstyne, of Watertown,
Jefferson county, N. Y. for his discharge and cer-
tificate as a bankrupt at Auburn, N. Y. on Thun*
day the 4lh day of August 1812, at ten o’clock
A. M. G.'g. SHERMAN, Atl’y.
TV}" OTICE to show cause the petition bf Hazel i
White, of Broyynville, jeifersori County n. y. for.his I
discharge dild certificate as a bankrupt at Auburn, n y on
Aforiday, the 3th day df August, 1842, at 10 o’clock A M.
NOTICE to show cause against the petition of Delonzo
Jt/cWain, of Hourisfield, Jetfersdn bounty n y lor his
discharge and certificate as a bankrupt at Auburn, n y on
Monday llie Bth day of ./iugust 1842, at fO oclock A. M.
D. N. BURNHAM; AiVy.
WOTiCE to show cause against the petition of Chan-
iAll cey Andrus, of Eliisburgh, Jefferson County, N. Y.
for his discharge and certificate as. a bankrupt, at Auburn,
N. Y., on Saturday the 23d day-of July, 1812, at 10 o’clock
A. M.
■JVTOTICE to show cause against the petition of Andrew
C. Earl, of Ellisburgh, Jefferson county N. Y., for
his discharge and certificate- as a bankrupt, at Auburn, N.
Y. on Saturday, the 23d day of July 1842, at 10 o’clock
A. M.
TV OTICE to show cause against the petition of Eher Ea-
ton, of Ellisburgh, Jefferson county N. FI, for his dis-
charge and certificate as a bankrupt, at Auburn N. F. on
Saturday, the 23d day of July 1842, at 10 o’clock A. M.
TV'OTICE to show cause against the petition of Alfred
-*■ ' S. Me lien , of Ellisburgh, Jefferson county N. F., Ihr
his discharge and certificate as a bankrupt, at Auburn N.
F. on Saturday, the 23d day of July 1842 at lOo’clock AM.
TV OTICE to shovv cause against the petition of William.
A. Gilbert, of JZdams, Jefferson county N. F. for his
• discharge and certificate as a bankrupt at JZuburn N. F.,
bn Saturday, the 23d day of July 1842, at 10 o’clock A .M.
TVOTICE to show cause against the petition of George
' W Powers, of Adams, Jefferson county N. F. for his
discharge and certificate as a bankrupt at JZuburn, N. F.
on Saturday, the 23d day of July, 1842, at TO o’clock A.M
TVT OTICE to show cause against the petition of Henry
_ Averill, Jun. of Adams, Jefferson county N. F. for
his discharge and certificate as a bankrupt at Auburn N.F,
bVfSaturday, the23d day of July, 1842, at 10 o’clock a.M.
to show cause against the petition of Henry R.
Ainsworth, of J&lams, Jefferson county If. Y. for his
discharge and certificate as a bankrupt at Auburn N. Jr.
on Saturday, the 23d day of Julv, 1842, at 10 o’clock A. M.
W. C. THOMPSON, Att’y-
•jVTOTICE to show cause against the petition ol Romeo
J-M W. Marshall, of Alexandria, Jefferson County, N.
Y. for his discharge and certificate as a bankrupt, at Au-
burn, N. Y., on Wednesday, the 27th clay of July, 1842,
At 10 o’clock, A. M. G. C. SHERM.JN, Ait’y.
7VTOTICE to show cause against the petition of Thud-
dens S. Chamberlin, of Sackets Harbor, Jefferson
County New York, for his discharge and certificate as a
Bankrupt, at Auburn N. F., on Monday the 18th day ol
uly, 181,2.iR 10 o’clock A. JNt. 4b H. HOWE. Att.y
J .f % ■
OTICE to show cause again-t the petition of Egbert
Dodge, kite of Orleans , now of Pamelia, Jefferson
County, N. F. for his discharge a'fld 'Certificate asa bank-
rupt at Auburn, N- Y. on Monday, the first day of August
1842 at 10o’clock A. M.
NOTICE to show cause against the petition of Thomas
L. Greenleaf, of WaleVtoWn, conuiy of Jefferson N. Y.
for his discharge and certificate as a Bankrupt at JZuburn,
N. F. on Wednesday, the 27th day of J uly 1842, at 10 o’-
clock, A. M. . . .
NOTICE to show cause against the petition of Gard-
ner Vincent . of'Clay.ton, Jefferson county, N. Y. for
his discharge anJ certificate as a bankrupt at jZuburp, N.
Y. on Wednesday, the 27th day of July, 1842, at lOo’-
clock A M. ...
N OTICE to show cause against the petition of Theo-
dore T. Woodi vff, of Brownville, Jefferson County,
N- Y. lor his discharge and certificate asa bankrupt at
JZuburn.N.F on TFednesday the 27th day of July, 1842, at
lOo’clock*# M.
NOTICE to show cause against the petition of,John
J. Ostrdricler, of Brownville, Jefferson county, N. F.
for his discharge and certificate as a bankrupt at Auburn,
N.Y. on Wednesday, the 27th Jay of July, 1842, at 10 o’-
clock A. M.
M OTICE to show cause against the petition of Peter
Howie, of Brownville, Jefferson county, N.Y. for his
discharge' and Certificate as a Bankrupt at Auburn N. Y.
on H’ednesday. the 27th day of July. 1842, at 10 o’clock
A. M.
mrOTICE to show cause against the petition of David
iYi Gould, of Alexandria, Jefferson county ,N, F. for his
(Jis> haree and certificate as a bankrupt at Auburn, N. Y.
on TFednesday,the 27thday of July,lB42,at 10 o’clockA.M.
NOTICE to straw cause against the Petition of Joseph
Church , of Clayton, Jefferson county, N. F. for his
discharge and certificate as a Bankrupt at JZuhurn N. Y.
oh TFednesday the 27th clay of July, 1842, at 10 o’clock
A. M.
■JVJOTICE to show cause against the petition of Orpitle
Kelsey, of Ue Ray, Jefferson county, N. F. (individual-
ly and as a member of the late firm of Gales and Kelsey)
fi>r his discharge and certificate'as'a Bankrupt at Auburn,
N. Y. on Wednesday, the 27th day of'juiy 1842, at 40 o’-
clock A. M. _
NOTICE to show cause against the Petition of William
C. Mack) of Brownville. Jefferson county N. F. (or
his discharge and certificate as a Bankrupt at Auburn, N.
Y.on Wednesday the 27th day of July, 1812, at lOo’clock
A. M
NOTICE to show cause against the petition of Peter
M Reynolds , of Wilna, jefferson county, N F. (in-
dividual lyand as a member of tho late firm of 4Fheeler,&
Reynolds) for his discharge and certificate asa Bankrupt
at Auburn, N.Y. on Wednesday, the 27th day of July,
1842,, at 10 o’clock, a. m.*
\TOTICE to show cause against the petition of Edward
i\ Dulen, of FFounsfield, Jefferson county, N. Y. for his
discharge and certificate asa Bankrupt at Auburn. N. Y.
on Wednesday the 27th day of July ,1842, at 10 o’clock, a.m.
IVT OTICE to show cause against the Petition of Henry
1M Hentzy, of'Brownville, county of Jefferson, N.F. for
his discharge arid certificate as a Bankrupt at Auburn, N.
Y. on TFednesday, the 27th day of ju1y,1312, at 10 o’clock
A M.
VTOTICEto show cause against the Petition of William
IN P. Cobb, late of Pamelia now of Brownville, in the
county of Jefferson, N.Y. for his discharge and certificate
as a Bankrupt at Auburn. N. Y. on TFed'nesday, tlie 27th
dav of jnly, 1942, at 10 o’clock, a. M.
NOTICE to show cause against the petition of Nathan-
iel S. Thomas , late of Rutland and now of Leßay,,
Jefferson county N. Y. (individually and as a member of
tlie late firm of Thomas at.d Munson, and of the late
firm of Thomas,Munson & Co. )(br his discharge arid cer-
tificate as a Bankrupt at Auburn. N. Y. on Wednesday
the 27th day ofjuly, 1842, at 10 o’clock, a. m.
TVTOTICE to show cause against the petition of Benja-
k' min R'idc'J\ of Brownville, Jefferson County N, F.
(individually and asa member of the late firm, of C. & B.
Rider) for his discharge and certificate as a Bankrupt at
Auburn, N. F. on TFednesday the 27th day of July,
1842 at 10 o’clock A. M.
B BAGLEF. Att’y
TVT OTICE to show cause against the petition of-Hanm-
bnl Sherwood, of Clayton, Jefferson County N. Y
for his discharge and certificate as a Bankrupt at Auburn,
N. Y. on Monday, the first day of August, 1842, at. 10 o’
clock A. M. 46d70 F. W. FIUBCARD, A.Cy.
11l Bankruptcy,
District Hie LuiSt * rSI
PETITION TO BE DECLARED A BANKRUPT.
TV'OTICE to show cause against the petition of John
Stewart, Jun. Daniel J. Stewart, JohnP. Yelverton,
and Addison G. Jerome , of the city of New York, cred-
itors of Thomas Loomis & Chailes K. Loomis, merchants
of Brownville, Jefferson county, that said Thomas and
Charles K. Loomis he declared bankrupts at Auburn New
York, on Tuesday tlie nineteenth day of July 1842 at 10
o’clock A M. JOHN CLARKE, Atfy.
THE MANDAMUS AFFIRMED.
The appeal of Mayor Morris from the
decision of the Supreme Court to the
Court of Errors has been answered—and
that decision has been confirmed —we are
proud to say, by the unanimous vote of
lliis highest tribunal in the Slate. More
eVen than at tbe original decision in the
court below, granting the writ of Manda-
mus, are we rejoiced at this resulf. Ii
rebukes with a severity which must be
most keenly felt, the course of the Mayor
and ills official corps in fsletiously obstruct
ing, for more than UVO months, the course
of justice, and in bidding defiance, by all
file arts of legal jugglery, to the plainly
expressed will oi the people of this city.
The question has now been brought be-
fore every tribunal vi’hich, in any way;
can have jurisdiction over it. Every at-
tempt has been made to take advantage of
political and personal prejudices in bring-,
ing about the desired result; judges
known to posses felings of strong sympa-
thy with tlie defeated party have been ad-
dressed by able and eloquent council in
the heated language of party politics; and
every effort possible under cover of iail\
has been made to sanction the action of
the Mayor and his hold over associates.
Yet they have one and all proved utterly
fruitless. Their pretended reasons have
been defeated by their own chosen judges,
and the unbroken voice of all the courts
in the State has pronounced their conduct
illegal and utterly without justification.
Most profoundly do we exult over this
most righteous judgement. It strengthens
our confidence in our courts of justice.
It increases respect for the Sacred forms
of Law. It points us to tribunals in our
midst where tho breath of party bias and
party feeling never disturbs the calm foun-
tain 1 of Justice. It redeems the spirit of
our free institutions from a thousand.re-
proaches, and plants the causo of Order
and of Liw upon a firm and enduring
basis.—A r . Y. Tribune.
A criuur carrying under bis arm a bun-
dle of printed blanks, headed 1 Great Ty
ter Meeting’ was seen hereabouts last
week, enquiring if somebody woule please
be kind enough to show him the Tyler
parly. He mizzled, as soon as bo was
told that, a man heard another person ask-
ing his friend if ho recollected to have seen
the gentleman who mentioned that some-
body had made an enquiry of tlie fellow
who started that report that a neighbor of
his believed a certain lawyer had express-
d an opinion that there was supposed to
be a Tyler party in the ‘ Banner county ’
but it was very uncertain if anybody be
longed to it. — Lancaster [Pa.) Examiner.
“Forty Million Debt.” —lt will not take long
to swell our State debt to $lO,OOOOOO, if Comp-
troller Flagg goes on selling property which
cost $300,000, for 4,000.
Vol. XVI WATERTOWN, N. Y JULY 16, 1842. N° 757.
Upon our arrival we were sent into the
interior to work upon the great road lead
ing across the island, from Hobartstown
to Laiicetown, and remained together for
six months, on What is termed Convict
Stations.
Through the unwearied exertions of
my eminent country men, Mr. Joseph
Hume, M. P., who spared neither time
nor money to effect otir liberation and
promote our comfort, and in consequence
of pressing letters from him to Mr. Law-
rence, a member of the ‘Council, since
dead, we were for the first three months
preserved from associating With thieves,
robbers, murderers, burglars and the scum
of thej iils of England, but after that vve
were generally mixed with felons, pardon-
ed or reprieved felons being 6ur overse-:
ers.
We were heavily ironed in most cases,
an iron band around each leg, joined by
an iron chain, and employed in digging l
trenches, breaking stone, sawing blocks
for pavements, and dragging stone and
limber like cattle, for wo had neither hor-
ses nor oxen. At the Loveiy Bant Sta-
tion every four of us had a hand-cart, and
our task was to haul a load of flint stone,
nearly a cubic yard, a mile, through rain
and sleet.and return fourteen times a day.
Thus we had fourteen heavy horse loads
to draw daily, in all a distance of fourteen
miles, and the cart to draw back the other
fourteen, being 28 miles a day, I having
fourteen pounds of chain on, while our
fare was nearly two pounds of coarse
brown bread, with a pint of water gruel
to breakfast and another to supper, and
about half or three quarters of a pound of
medt arid half a pound of vegetables at
dinner. At night, after eleven hours of
severe toil, we were locked up in misera-
ble huts, and as it is rainy in winter, vve
were often dripping wet, blit never allow-
ed to go near a fire.
One shirt at once was the royal allow-
ance and we had Saturday afternoons, and
a little soap allowed us, on which to wash
and mend our shattered garments. When
we took off and washed, our shirts on Sat-
urdays vve had to go without them till they
dried on Sundays. Although in the prime
of life; acousloiried to farm work, and
strong-made, 1 have often been weary al-
most to fainting, and never once in those
two tedious years did, I go to bed other
wise than hungry. During a passage of
four months, on my return to this free
land. I fared very differently in the Anter
ican Whaler, the seamen ol which so gen
erously rescued me.
The punishments to which vve were
subjected were cruel, and more,so because
inflicted by pardoned British Felons, re-
leased for the purpose, on account of their
known harshness and unfeeling character.
Nearly all the American prisoners have
been confined in solitary cells, and fed for
weeks on bredd dnd water there—many
of them nearly a dozen of limes, The
treadmill is also used asa persuader.
Not a lew have been in the chain gangs.
Some are now at Port, Arthur, in the coal
mines, but the triangles, ever before our
eyes, was the object of our greatest horror.
With the exception of the venerable
Chatincey Sheldon, now 76 years of age,
who commanded a troop of horse under
Gen. Van Rensselaer; in the last war on
the frontier, I scarcely remember one A-
merican or Canadian who has not been
flogged by felons, from two dozen of lash-
es with the cat o’ nine tales, up to six doz
en. The triangles accompany the party
to work, and are made of three long pie-
ces of wood set np and meeting together
at the top ; a ring is run through any two
of these pieces near the top—a strap is
run through the ring and tied round each
wrist of the sufferer, whose arms are thus
extended at their full stretch, as in cases
of crucifixion, his legs are then firmly
fastened to a cross bar near the ground.
The freeman of the new world stripped
stark naked, except his palaloons, is then
exposed to the lash of a felon of the old
The ffagellatbr is ordered by the police
officer to give two, four or six dozen
strokes of the heavy whip, as the caSe
may seem to him to require, on the suf-
ferer's naked back, who is then unloosed
from his degrading postufe and ordered
instantly to his work whatever it may be.
O, how ardently arid earnestly some of
our pure hearted patriots prayed that the
God of their fathers in his good time and
way would deliver them from this degra-
dation, even if it were by, an early death
on that far distant shore ! The prayers
of some were heard, and others are fast
following them to the tomb. A number
are tar gone in consumption, and accord-
ing to the best information t Could procure,
direct and indirect, more than half the po-
litical prisoners, though fine stout men
when they left these shores, are now rup
lured and otherwise injured, caused by
hard work, lifting heavy stones, and haul-
ing heavy loads, in vvel weather, over the
soft clay. Even Elizur Steavens of Leb
anon, Madison county, N. Y. a well built
stout man, of fine appearance, six feet higli
and about 27 years old isalready ruptured,
and Daniel Heusfis, one of the heaviest,
stoutest men in Watertown, though in
health, is a walking skeleton.
I was twice lied to the triangles and
flogged. First, for finding fault with our
wretched food, and next lime for hilling a
blow at a felon overseer, who, in the mere
wantonness of power had thrown me v.o-
lently over a heap of stones.
John Augustus Svvansburg, of Jeffer-
son county was six or seven times strip-
ped and flogged for being, as they said,
saucy.
Bachelors’ Hull.
BY MOORE.
Bachelor’s H?ll ! what a quare lookin? place it is /
Keep me from sich all the flays of my 'He !
Sure 1 think what a burn in’ disgrace it is,
Niver at all to be gatin’ a wife.
See the old Bachelor, gloomy and sad enough,
Placing his lay kittle over th e fire—
Soon tips it over : St. Patrick ! he’s mad enough
(If lie were present) to fight with the Squire.
Now, like a hog in a morter-bed wallowing,
. ./Awkward enough, see him knading his dough !
Troth ! if the brea d he, could ate without swallowing
lIoW lie vVould favor his palate you know '!
Pots,, dishes, pans and such grasy commodities;
./Ashes and pr'ata skins kiver the floor :
His cupboard’s a,store house of comical oddities,
Things that had never been neighbors “before.
His meal being over, the table’s left sitting so*
Dishes take cafe of yourselves if you can ] , ,
But hunger returns, then he's fuming and fretting so,
Och ! let him alone for a baste of a man !
Late in the night when he goes to bed shiverin’)
Niver a bit the bed made at all :
He crapes like a terrapin under the kiverin’—
Bad luck to the pictur’ of Bachelor’s Hall.
Those Ouls /—Strange things are the only new
th ngs now a days. The Southwestern Farmer
describes a singular sort.of oat cultivated about
Raymond It is called the live or jumping oat.
‘‘lfyou take the grains while fresh, and Bold
litem a while in your hands, they will first be-
gin to stir themselves a little, and then suddenly
inakea desperate leap like a grasshopper to some
distance.” The,Natchez Free Trader says he
has heard of the Irishman’s flea, and once saw a
kangaroo —but this out brings him to a dead
stand !
Coquette. —A young lady of beauty more
than sense—more accomplishments than learning
—more charms of person than graces of mind
more admirers than friends —mote fools than
wise men for attendants.
Sam Jones and the Prophet. —Capt Peck,
of Gen, Taylor, informs us [says the St. Augus-
tine Herald of the 24th tilt.] that yesterday
morning he was hoarded by Capt. Hubbard, of
the U. S. steamer Newbern, from Pilatka, who
informed him that Sam Jones and the Prophet
had sent word to Col. Worth that they were
coming in.
We understand (says the same paper) that
preparations are being made to convey to this
city the remains of Major Dade and his gallant
band, who were massacred on the Withlacoo-
chee, in December, 18136 ; —Charleston Cotir.
The Drunkard’s Last Pun.
Sam S. lay stretched on the bed of grim Death,
By brandy burned up, gasping deeply for breath ;
A friend with much fervor advised hint to think
On his awful approach to Eternity’s brink.
Says Sani, tor such summons I duly have cared,
And am well fur a world of good spirits prepard.
A Solemn Reflection. —When the storm
tossed ocean rises to lash the sky i when the wild I
tornado is abroad ; when the bdsora of the solid i
earth is shaken by internal throes, dr beneath the
glory and beauty of night, when the eyes of love
are drinking the light np from your soul ; at
such a moment, O ! let the sensitive mind re-
flect —“ How, in thunder, am I going to pay that
note 10-morraw ?” — Tattler.
A Hint to Blacksmihs — Tho cutting of,
bars of iron, or pipes, with a chisel, is a labor-
ious and tardy process. By tho following mode
the same end is attained more speedily, easily
and neatly : Bring the iron to a white heat,
and then, fixing it in a vice, apply the common
saw, which, without being turned in the edge,
or injured In any respect, will divide it as easily
as if it were a carrot.
The Wheat Crops. —Nothing could exceed
the fine appearance of the wheat crops in Ohio.
A few days since no doubts were entertained of
a larger yeld of wheat in this State than we ever
had before. The damp warm weather tor a few
days has excited a fear of rust. Indeed, we tire
sorry to learn, it. has made its apperance in some
fields in this neighborhood. The weather con-
tinues warm and rainy. Yet we see no reason
to doubt of our crop being Unusually large. The
harvest has commenced in this neighborhood.
Col. R. M. Johnson was invited to visit Co-
lumbus, Ohio, in company with Mr. Van Buren.
In his reply he took occasion to express his en-
tire approbation of the cauSe of the Rhode Is-
land insurgents; Such an infamous avowal is
enough to damn any man for ever and ever, so
far as this world is concerned . Louise.l. e Jour.
The Whigs of Georgia, in Slate Convention,
have nominated Henry Clay for the Presidency.
THE GREAT SPEECH OF HENRY CLAY.
We have received by this morning’s
' mail, by the enterprise of our Baltimore
Correspondent, a copy of the great speech
of HENRY CLAY at the Barbacue
given him in Lexington, Ky., on the 9th
ofjune. It is one of the ablest dnd most
powerful efforts of this groat Orator and
Statesman. He speaks first most elo
quently of Temperance, and then gives a
most interesting sketch of his early Uje
'and his whole political career. The great
Orator then proceeds to a survey of the
political condition of tho country —traces
all the fortunes through tho Administra-
tion of John Quincy Adams, and exposes
the source of all our present financial dif-
ficulties. He then suggests remedies for
all these disorders. He reviews the con-
duct of President Tyler at length, and
speaks of it with perfect plainness and
with great severity. He speaks of the
Rhode Island Rebellion at some length,
and concludes by a most eloquent appeal
to the citizens of the Union—to men of
all parlies —to rally around the glorious
banner of our country. We quote the
following concluding appeal to the Whigs;
Whigs ! arouse from the ignoble su-
pineness which encompasses you —a-
wake from the lelhergy in which you
lie bound—cast from you that unworthy
apathy which seems to make you indif-
ferent to the fate of your country —arouse,
awake, shake off the dew-drops that glit-
ter on your garments, and once more
march to Battle and to Victory. You
have been disappointed, deceived, betrayed
—shamefully deceived and betrayed.—
But will you therefore also prove false
and faithless to your country, of obey the
impulses of a just and patriotic indigna-
tion 1 As (or Captain Tyler, he is a
mete snap—a flash in the pan ; pick your
Whig flints and try your rifles again.
This speech is very long, and is deci-
dedly one of the greatest he has ever
made. It will bo read with the deepest
I interest by every man in the nation.
Tothe Editor of the Plebean.
TWO YEARS IN VAN OILMANS LAND.
BV JAMES GEMMELL, OP TOROJSTO, GORE, CANADA.
Sir—The account I am about to give,
of the,sufferings and hardships of a num-
ber of brave men who were transported to
Van Dieman’s Land for the part they took
in the political troubles of Canada in 1837
and ’3B, is not offered to the public with a
view to excite angry feelings between the
people of Great Britain and this country,
whoso vast energies may be far better di-
rected for their own welfare and that of
the human race, than in waging against
each other long, bloody and desolating
Wats, engendering bitter feelings, destroy
ing or maiming thousands, perhaps hun
drods of thousands, of the bravest of the
' populations, delaying the beneficial influ-
ences of education and useful industry,
and seldom accomplishing the immediate
objects in view so judiciously (though at
an infinitely greater cost,) as the patient
exercises of just remonstrance, friendly
communication and able and honest agen-
cy by good men would have done. My
desire is to interest the benevolent, true
hearted, and kind people of America and
Britain, and through them their respect-
ive governments, for the liberation and
restoration to their friends, families and
homes, of my truly unfortunate compan-
ions who yet remain in captivity on Van
Dieman’s Land; and as 1 am the first of
the Canadian or American prisoners ta-
i ken at Prescott, Windsor, of the Short
Hills, who has been enabled by the bles-
sings of a kind providence to escape from
the terrors of the far distant prison-house,
I earnestly entreat the editors of newspa-
pers of all parties, to lay the statement 1
am enabled to make, before their respect-
ive subscribers and readers.
In a brief notice of my arrival in this
city, your contemporary of the Herald de
scribes me as a native of New York.—
This is a mistake. I was born in Kil-
marnock in Scotland, emigrated in infan-
cy to this city with my father and his fam-
ily, joined my uncle Mr. James Reid, (for-
merly Land Steward to Col. Wynn, near
Sligo ) at the Gore of Toronto in my 17th
year, and continued an inhabitant of Up
per Canada until the troubles four years
ago, in which I took an active and decided
part against Sir Francis Head, the agent
of the British government.
I was then in my 23d year, and little
disposed to quarrel about forms of govern-
ment —but ■ had wj messed an accumula-
tion of leal oppressions and acts "of injus-
tice which I could see no other way to
get rid of—remonstrances to the legisla-
ture, or by it to the British power in the
colony or England had long proved una-
vailing ; deputation succeeded deputation
to London with no success. The Eng-
lish government acknowledged thejuslice
of our complaints, and said they had sent
Sir Francis Head to redress them, and he
proved a more corrupt and partial ruler
than any of his predecessors. Lower
Canada was still Worse used than us, and
as I had voted for the resolution to make
common cause with her, I kept tr.y word,
our interests being the same.
I was taken prisoner at the Short Hills,
carried Before Sir George Arthur, ajirl
promised a full and free pardon if I would
tell all I knew of the conduct of Win. Mus-
son, Wth. Ketchurii, and the Messrs. Mac-
kintosh of Toronto, whom he said he sus-
pected, but lacked evidence to convict. 1
declined freedom on these terms, was tried
before judge Jones at Niagara in August,
1838, with fifteen others, sentenced to be
executed, but aftewards ordered to Van
Dieman’s Land.
In November that year I sailed from
Quebec for England, with John G. Par-
ker and twenty-two others, and on the 22d
of September, 1839, was placed on board
the Canton, a British convict ship, with
Miller, of Chautauque and two others,
and carried to Cohort Town, where we
arrived on the 10th of January, 184 0, the
distance from our homes being, as I am
informed, about 18,000 miles.
The American Prisoners taken at
Windsor and Prescott reached Van Die-
man’s Land a month after us, in the Buf-
falo. The Lower Canada prisoners were
taken thence to Sydney in Austrilia, .where
their treatment as 1 leaf, was better than
ours.
The interesting part of our narrative
begins here. Very few letters from rela-
tives or friends have been permitted to
reach them. I believe I am acquainted
with all the political prisoners ; and except
one or two letters from Mrs. Waite to her
husband, and one from Mahlon Burwell,
a loyalist member of the Canadian parlia-
ment, to Ids nephew, Mr. Terrill, I know
of no letters received on the Island by any
prisoner during the two years I was there.
It was the wish of our jailers that we
should forget our far distant homes, and
be forgotten there.
Letters, in the Albany Journal from Al-
vin B, Sweet, and in the Norwich Journal
from Elizure Stevens, are no dqubt genu-
ine—but no prisoner would dare to tell
his sufferings in a letter, or if he did, the
authorities would detain it and punish
him.
Besides the above two, 1 have been
shown in this city a letter published in the
Ohio Statesman, signed by Mitchell Mon-
roe, of Toledo, Wood county, Ohio. The
facts stated by him are correct, but I re-
member of no such person on the island,
and believe the letter is from a prisoner
whose real name is suppressed for fear of
consequences, and presume it wag con-
veyed to America recently by some New
England whale ship.
! Hiram Sharp, of Salina, was flagella!
jed because he wquld not touch his cap
] to the superintendent, an English trans-
I ported felon, and say “sir” to him when
jhe spoke. But even after being flogged
; unmercifully he would not touch his cap
j to him.
Hiram Loup, of Jefferson county, be-
cause he grumbled or refused to work one
cold morning, rather frosty, he having no
shoes, was flo<rged at the triangles ; and
was Stephen Wright, son of a Methodist
minister there, because when sick the Doc-
tor refused to exempt him, and the oversee,-
er ordered him to wheel a heavy loaded
barrow up a plank which he failed in do-
ing from weakness. A stout felon then
wheeled up the barrow, young Wright got
his six dozen on the naked hack, and Was
sent to stone breaking.
Lynus W. Miller, a fine youth from
Chautauque county, was fed 14 days on
brown bread and cold water in a solitary
cell, because he absolutely refused to do
work assigned him on a Sunday. He of-
fered to work harder, if possible, any oth-
er day; but assured his employers that
his education and his principles alike for
bade him from performing unnecessary
labor on the Christian Sabbath'.
Owen W. Smith, formerly agent io Smith
& Merrick, of Oswego, was flogged at the
triangles because he had not loaded our
hand carts heavily enough with stones.
Elijah Woodman, formerly of Maine, a
magistrate, and member of (he legislature,
more recently of Upper Canada, where he
had a large property, has been cruelly
(logged several times ; and has tit various
periods been confined in a solitary cell,
and fed on bread and water. This line
old man has kept a journal of the Whole
proceedings of the Bril.-h Gdverment,
giving its cruelties and crimes in detail;
with the dates and names. And his of-
fence was a refusal to give it up to Sir
John Franklin, the Governor, lie wrote
on clips of paper, but where’be put liiose
strips the cell and the whip failed to dis-
close.
The free (migrant settlors, and not a
few of the editors, were our firm friends
t.oi so the convicts. lam not a Fiee-
Masdn, but many of us were satisfied that
it was a real benefit to us that some of bur
number belonged to that society. In what
way 1 may not now slate.
Matthew Whining, salt manufacturer,
Liverpool near Syracuse, brothr in law to
Chauncy Sheldon, was one day tied up to
the triangles, and most severely bastinado-
ed, lor a very trivial offence. It was a
humiliating sight, to see an old man of
good name and fame, with, I believe, a
large family 18,DD0 miles off; thus, disgrac-
ed and suffering. Many o! die younger
prisoners would gladly have taken his
place, but h id we spoken a word, our turn
would have come next, without mitigating
his sufferings.
Alvin Sweet mentions the death of Ly-
sander Curtis, of Lyme, in Jefferson Co.,
but be does not tell how he came I y hie
death. '1 he particulars are these:
Curt s was sent to the convicts’ hospital
in a high fever, where the doctor told Inn:
he wan shamming sickness, but that that
should hot serve his thru, arid bo sent him
back to the station to bard labor, pulling
at the hand-carls. Poor Curtis implored
the overseers in most piteous accents, -to
let him lie on the bare ground, as work he
could hot. tipi the overseers ins sted,
and when CmiU could steed no longer, he
lay down by the road-side, was carried at
night to our miserable prison and locked
up. Next morning be was taken back to
the hospital, where be expired in great
agony in a few hours.
Win. Noltago, fiom Lorain Co Ohio,
when injured severely by the accidental
blasting ol a rock, was carried at once into
the infested hospital,, typhus, or some oth-
er deadly fever then raging, and although
cured of his wounds, he there caught the
epidemic, which carried him off. Had
they been humane enough to carry him to
another hospital or piace, his recovery
was certain.
John Thomas, a merchant of Ogdens-
burgh or Madrid, who had his toes and the
half of one of his feet cut off, was cariied
into the same hospital, but survived.
1 was educated in the presbyterian per-
suasion, in the Church of Scotland, but
there wore none o( its fneache s near us.
None are allowed but iho.e of the Chinch
of England. Mr. Beiisly, a humane and
kind hearted ihethodist preacher, came
(rorii a distance to exhort several times,
but the established minister got jealous of
his popularity, and he was turned off,
much to our regret. For such as Mr.
Reasly there is much need. Van Die-
man's Land is one of tho wickedest, most
profane, immoral and degraded places on
earth. 1 will endeavor to conclude my
statement of facts in another letter, but us
! have alluded to some as being consump-
tive, I may here name 1!. Marsh, brother
of the Rev. John Marsh, methdist preach-
er, formerly of Chippewa, Alvin B. Sweet,
of Winfield, Herk mer co., , Moses A.
Dulcher of Brownville, Aron Dresser of
Alexandra, Leonard Delano of Water-,
town, Andrew Deeper of Antwerp and
Daniel Li-combe of Chaurnont, allot who of
are wasting under that disease
It is probable that this letter will be
copied on the frontiers. Let me earnest-
ly advise all who may read it not to do so
for purposes of retaliation, but to discoun-
tenance all frontier movements and endea-
vor to influence the Govermcnt of the
United States in the matter. In one of his
letters a copy of which I have seen, Mr.
Stevenson,'late American Minister in Lou-
don, wrote from thence,” I see no proba-
bility of relief, except through the inter-
vention of our government. You had beter
therefore aihhess the Wash-
ington on the subject.
My heart’s desire is to bring I aik (be
captives ; and frontier troubles, while (hey
will effect no good object, may bo made a
pretext, for continuing the dreadful tortures
of which 1 have begun to give you a faith-
ful recital.
I rema'n, Sir the grateful Servantof your countrymen,
My courageous deliverers, JAMES GEMMELL,
, New York, June 23, 1342.
PBINTEI) AMI PUBLISHED EVEBY SATCBDAI, BT WOT. WELCH, FOB THE PKOPBIETOB.


From the Tribune.
WBVP PROTECTION CANNOT DO.
One of the lesser lights of Loco-Focoism
in this City—we forgot which, but it mat-
ters little, since the same idea is repealed
in each of t hem, great and small, some for-
ty or fifty limes per annum—in giving
the Foreign News by the Caledonia, fa-
vors its readers with the following start-
ling statement and profound deduction,
viz :
“ Great distress still prevails in the Manuflic-
rnnnc districts of England, notwithstanding her
high Protcc ice Tariff ani National Bank.”
Now we must presume that there are
human beings to. whom this lame ghost of
a superficial analogy stands instead of an
argument ; who are really confirmed in
has l ily to Protection and a Bank because
England has these, and yet many of Iter
People are destitute! They do not trou-
ble them selves to think whether thir
destitution bears any relation to the mat
tuts iv iiit which it is thus arbitrarily con-
nected ; they do not care to ask how des-
troying the Bank and abolishing the Pro-
jection would mend lha matter ; they
swallow the portion as it is made up for
them ; and if it ran thus—" Liberty is not
worth having; for the Indians have that
in abundance, yet are ignorant, destitute,
drunken wretched,” —they should, to be
conststanl, lake this down also, with clos-
ed eves and hearty gusto.
Let us first consider what a National
Bank does for England:
It secures to her a perfectly sound,
convenient and sufficient Currency. Her
laborers are not paid in barter, ‘store pay,’
and such truck, nor in rags which must
be shaven to get rid of them, and cannot
safely be kept over night. There is no
such thing there as telling a laborer, 'I
want to heire you, but 1 cant pay money,’
Her travelers can take money enough in
a small wallet to carry them around the
world, and it will he worth its face almost
any where, and generally more. Her
farmers, mechanics, merchants, have no
tax on their receipts to pay for 'discount ;’
what they get as til mey they can pass a
way as money again, or remit to any part
of the Empire. We doubt not that more
money is paid for and more men live by
discounting uncutrent money in this City
titan in all Great B ritain, though the pa-
per transaction s of that country far ex
This is vv hit a National Bank
does lot : ’'’ritain.
Protection n greatly contributed to
render Great Britain the richest, most
commercial and powerful nation on the h
face ofthe earth ; having drawn hundreds'
of millions in precious stones and metals
from the rest of the world within a cen- :
tury, and involved nearly all agricultural
Countries deep'y in debt to her. At this
moment, she virtually owns the gold i
mines of Mexico and South America ,
and if they and we would but admit her i
manufactures free of duty, she would vir- ;
luaily own the whole continent, through i
debts, mortgages, etc. in another half cen- i
tury.
To see what Protection has done for
England, let us imagine that the People >
of this Country were but doomed to bear ,
the burthens under which those of Britain i
now stand. (The Population and Ctpi- j
lal of B ritain are greater than ours; but ,
on the other hand, our vast extent of fer- ,
tile soil, varied and genial climate, naviga- t
ble waters, natural productions, &c. &c.
so far exceed hers that it is fair to consid-
er the intrinsic capacities of the two coun-
tries equal.) Now suppose the Produc- i
live Industry of the Union saddled with a
National Debt of Four Thousand Millions
of Dollars, bearing an annual Interest of i
One Hundred and Twenty Millions, i
with a Government and Military costing (
an equal or larger sum. Let one-tenth
of all the fruits of the earth be absorbed
by an Established Chu-rch, besides what (
the People, if Dissenters, pay their own I
Clergymen ; lei a tenth in addition of the 1
arable land be absorbed in Hoval For-] 1
ests, Parks and pleasure grounds of the 1
Nobility, &c. &c. and how long could 1
our Industry bear up under it 1 Certain- 1
]y not the first year. 1
Now it is most true that while a judi- j
cious and steady Protection may do much
for a country, the Protective System of (
Great Britain, such as it is, does not and
can not correct all possible evils. It can-
not abolish the Feudal System of the Nor- \
man robbers who came in with the Con-
queror.— or the laws of primogeniture,
entail, &c. by which they perpetuated to j
their descendants the monopoly of ail
property which they obtained by the 1
sword. It cannot shake off the grasp of |
the S ate Church on a tenth of all the pro-
duct of the land. It cannot annihilate
the National Debt, or make an annual ]
drain of Two Hundred and Fifty Mill- :
ions from the Industry of the Country a 1
flea bile : though it may somewhat light-
en the burthen. In short, Protection 1
cannot work organic changes in the Po
litical and Social institutions of a Coun-
try, and its friends never supposed it
could. What it can do, we endeavored ]
to show in our article of yesterday.
Let us here explain once.more that any
Legislation or Policy which should ren-
der our Country a great Manufactory for
foreign consumption we should condemn
as heartily as the non-resistant Free
Trade System. To immerse two-thirds
of our population in mechanic arts, and
render them dependent for bread on ex
changes with Foreign Nations would be
the same in principle and probably worse
in effect than confining us to Agriculture
almost exclusively. What is essential to :
National well-being is the intermingling .
of Farmers, Mechanics, Manufacturers,
and Producers of every class, so that the
Products of Industry shall mainly find 1
their markets within a short distance oi '
the place of their production, leaving to ]
1 oreign Commissioners its appropriate t
function of interchanging such articles as ‘
we can produce with greatest facility for *
those to which our climate or soil is’ un- d
genial. England may grow rich by itn- a
porting Agricultural Stables and expor- e
ting manufactures; but the English la- *
jorer will not ; tha cost of exchange and
transportation is too great. In Home Pro-
duction and Home markets, mutually
ministering to and sufficing for each oth-
er, and saving ihe enormous expense,
loss and complication of Foreign Mark-
ets, we find the blessings of Protection.
ASSUMPTION OF STATE DEBTS-THE
TARIFF DISCUSSION CON'IINUED.
Washington, July 9, 1843.
( In the House of Representatives,
| to day, the Hon. W. Cost Johnson ac-
cording to previous notice, asked unani-
mous consent, which being refused he
moved to suspend ihe rules (or ihe intro-
duction of a resolution (preceded by a
long preamble with reference to the em-
barrassments of the Siaics) providing (or
the appointment of a select committee to
considef these embarrassments, and re-
j port hy a bill or otherwise a measure of
relief(which he intends by the issuing of
Government stock, to be given to the
Siaics.) The motion foiled (ivvo-thirds
not. voting therefor!) —Yeas 7, Nays
132
The Tariff bill was again taken up in
Committee of the whole. Mr. Summers
made an able and eloquent speech, advo-
cating ihe levying of a sufficient duly on
imports, for an economical administration
ol government, and under that a discrimi-
nation for the protection of manufactures
home Industry. He exposed the fallacy
of the free trade system, and of the argu-
ments which had been drawnin favorthere-
of from thealledged advance of England to
'hat system, staling that her taxes were
now at the highest possible rate that could
be borne, and that as a matter of policy
for the purpose of the collection of more
revenue, a slight reduction was made in
duty on some articles, falling infinitely
short of a free trade system. He dwelt
with much force on the absurdity of a-
dopling the free trade system, while Eu.
rope excluded or levied excessive duties
on our exports, and went for such a sys
tern of legislation as should force open
foreign markets to our productions, or se-
cure us a home market.
Mr. Smith of Va, expatiated on the
glories of a system of free trade and di-
rect taxation, and condemned our whole
import system, as one of plunder and rob-
bery of the people.
Mr. Stuart of 111., advocated the pas-
sage of the bill on the grounds of its ne-
cessity for Revenue, on account of its dis-
crimination in favor of Manufactures,
which he contended it was the interest of
the West to foster for the purpose of con
tinning their market with them for their
Agricultural productions, &c. He went
for retaining the distribution clause, con-
sidering himself and his State, although
not partial to it, y;-t bound to carry it out,
having accepted of the grant of lands to
ihe United States.
Mr. Reynolds of li!., opposed the bill
and the Protection policy, advocating a
system of Direct Taxation in preference
[hereto, and digressing widely on gener-
al political subjects.
Mr. Underwood of Ky , obtained the
fionr, and at the close of this was proceed
ing to show the. absurdity of the cry of
robbery and plunder raised by the oppo
nents to the Protective policy, by show-
ing that by this system prices were redu-
ed and that it was demanded by the inter-
est of the consumer as well as of all por-
tions of the community.
In Senate, a resolution of Mr. Sevier
was adopted directing, the- Secretary of
War to communicate the authority for
.ha contracts for the removal of the Miami
Indians and the debts paid under them.
Private bills occupied the remainder of
the Legislative session, and the Senate,
it an early hour, proceeded to the consid
eralion of Executive business. Argus.
The Ilhode Island Rebellion —is tin- 1
doubtedly at an end, The rebels are dis- .
persed in all directions, the military for- :
:es of the State are on their way to their
homes, and entire tranquility is restored ,
10 the citizens. Dorr the arch disturber, ,
is s fugitive, flying nobody knows where, ,
though there are circumstances fully suf
ficient to warrant the belitf that he is
skulking in this city, secreted by some of
his emissaries like a sneak as he-is, and
ay sneaks of kindred character and calibre.
Cambreleng, Yanderpoel, Allen, Bryant
ind their associates in this brilliant busi-
ness must now maintain him, and it
would not be amiss if they were to make
up their minds to fight a little for him.
11 is quite clear that he wont fight for
himself, and as the Governor of that state
in which he has raised an army and tried
lo master courage enough to shoot some-
body, has offered a pretty liberal reward
for bis apprehension, in order that he
may be handsomely hanged upon the
scene of his exploits. There is some lit-
lle danger that his Tammany troops may
try lo lake him hack to Rhode Island for
the sake of the current money which is of
fered for him in the Providence market,
it behooves his bottle holders to defend
him. Some ihirly B or forty of his latterde- i
malions came on yesterday morning in i
the steamboat from New London ; most
of whom expressed a desire to throttle :
him for leaving them in an inglorious
predicament at Chepachet. They swear ,
the will shoot him, and though we don’t j
believe they can raise powder enough for
that purpose, there is no doubt they would
shoulder him with as little compunction !
as they would steal a sheep—carry him
back to Rhode Island and sell him '
in the shambles, for money enough lo ,
buy them the unaccustomed luxury of a (
shirt. We exhort them, therefore, to ,
look out for ttieir protege, and not let him i
be lugged ofby his own men.— Courier. !
t
Female Spunk in Ilhode Island. —Wo have t
leant of But one single instance of hesitation a- t
riong the whole four thousand citizen militia .
,vho were called into-the field during the recent .
•chellion.. A man belonging to one af the coun- '
iy brigades, lagged behind his regiment, and fi
tally returned lo his family.—“Ar’nt you going t
vith the troops ?” says Ilia wife —'“Why o, my „
lear, I think on the whole it is my duty to slay .
nd protect you,” replied the husband. “Well 11
iow,” says she, “I can tell you just what it is ; 1
ither you or I have got to go with Governor a
ling’s men, against Tom Dorr’s rebels. If you j e
re not going, give me your breeches !” He li*
lent, ... ti
JOHN TYLER’S PROSCRIPTION OF A
WHIG POST MASTER I
Post Omen, Cooperstown, N. Y. \
July 8.1842. j
Friend Weed— The base wrong has
been consumated ! The grossest insult
to the feelings of the Whig party has been
deliberately perpetrated by the traitorous
imbecile of the While House. Davis, an
ulta Loco-Foco, lias been rewarded with
the office of Postmaster of this place.
He takes the office to night or to morrow
morning. His appointment came by this
evening’s mail.
The Whigs feel (his most atrocious
outrage keenly. This is my last official
document.
Very Iruiy yours.
ANDREW M BARBER.
This blow, suspended a few days by
the remonstrances of John C. Clark
and other staunch Whig Members of Con-
gress, has decended upon the bead of Mr.
Barber, the competent, faithful, obliging,
respected Post-Master at Cooperstown.
Ii furnishes conclusive evidence of the
treacherous coalition which John Tyler
has formed with Loco Focoism. It is
the most shameless and mendacious pros-
titution of official power that has ever dis-
grnded ihe Presidential office.
Mr. Barber was appointed Post-Mas
ter by Mr. Granger, with the approba-
tion of Gen. Harrison, He has faiih-
fully discharged ihe duties of his office.
There is no complaint or pretext of deiin-
quincy against him. And yet a man who
owes his power to the Whig party, has
removed a Whig Post-Master and given
the office to a Loco-Foco ! Such (reach
ery as this, as we have said before, has no
parallel but in that of Benedict Arnold.
These outrages will provoke a storm of
popular indignation that will send John
Tyler howling back to his miserable ob
scuriiy, loaihed by those whom he betrays
and scorned hy those who are the recipi-
ents of his treachery.
lllatcrtnum Register.
Saturday, July 16, 1842.
The situation of John Tyler is far from being
an enviable one. Fond as man may be of power,
we do not believe an individual could be found,
who is acquainted with his awkward position, and
regards character, that would accept the station
he holds, with the infamy aud disgrace which at-
taches to his name. Despised among his former
political friends, the object of ridicule with the
party into whose embrace he fain would throw
limself, we should suppose resignation would be
preferable to the allurements of office, when held
it the sacrifice of character. The office ot Pres-
dent has ever been looked upon as an important
Ration —and the individual elevated In it, os a
man of consequence and ability. But John Ty-
er has no! only proven to the world that he is
wanting in ability to perform its duties, but he
aas disgraced the station, and immensely lowered
it in public view, both at home and abroad. He
pays as Halo regal J li> tils fioi imjr cxpi - oed opin-
ons and sentiments, as the convicted liar does to
ais regard for truth; But he is not yet entirely
ihandoned. In both Houses of Congress be lias
i Cew friends who are anxious to use him in veto-
ng another tariff bill, when they well know the
‘waves of political damnation” will roll over and
nigulf him.
We trust the free exercise of the veto power
ay John Tyler, will arouse the people to the im-
portance of crippling the executive arm. This
measure lias frequently been urged by Henry
JUy, and is adopted in the whig creed as essen-
ial to the wall being of our political institutions
They contend that the sovereign people shall
■ule—that to them—not to the lender conscience
ifJohnTyler—belongs the righfto make laws.
Alexander Hamilton, with his federal notions of
Government, never contempli ted so gross an a-
inse of power, as John Tyler lias seen fit to ex-
ircise. His supporters urge in his defence, and
file as a precedent, the course of Andrew Jack-
inn; and some evil minded persons have succeed-
:d in making the man believe he resembles the
old general in many essential points:
The report is becoming rife that John Tyler
s not in bis right mind, else he would not assume
,o know more than the people’s representatives.
[n vetoing the “little tariff bill” no constitutional
scruples haunted his imagination ; but it was
lone on the ground of expediency, —thus selling
iis own contracted views of the wants of the
lonnlry against the assembled wisdom of the na-
lion. In opposition to the declarations ofhis in-
augural address, be vetoed the first bank bill
tud the second which was framed with the vvisli
o meet, as far as possible, bis views, a fear that
longress would receive the approbation of the
oeople, and Henry Clay —not himself-—reap the
■eward due to patriotism and devotedness to the
lountry, induced him to resort to the second a-
mse of Ihe veto —to strangle a creature of bis
>wn creation. But veto No 3, vve have reason
o fear, will ne followed by another. Unless con-
gress will consent to blast, for the sake of coming
0 “terms” with onr treacherous executive, one
if the noblest measures of the Extra Session, in
ill probability it will be compelled to adjourn
vithout providing for the wants of onr suffering
iountiy. Let the Whigs, in the meantime, stand
irm to their purpose, and award to John Tyler
ind the federal locofocos their just share ofeen-
;ure.
Notwithstanding the greatest care, accidents will occur
n the fourth of July- From various parts of-the country
ve learn of ihe Joss of life hy explosion's, drowning, and
nany other ways by which life is suddenly taken. Jli
.eneva.just as the exhibition of (he fire woiks were com-
nencing a fire cracker was thrown into a basket containing
ockels, &c. which exploded instantly, killing two persons
nd badly wounding others. We are happy to learn that
he day was observed in a- proper and appropriate manner
hroughout the country ; different from our former celebra-
ions so far as regards the use of intoxicating drinks.— 1
emperance principles have performed a great revolution j
1 public sentiment during the past six months.
— 1
H - The crops bid fair to return ample compensation for
le labor of the husbandman. Corn is, backward, and =
nlessrhe weather necessary to bring it to maturity con- j
nues late in the season, no reliance can be placed on half .
he usual crop. Al] kinds of grain look well; potatoes
re forward, and promise an abundant yield. In the pres- I
it distressed state of the country, the yield of our farms j
the only source to which wo can look with certainty for
e relief wc need.
Ths Sacketa Harbor Journal, heretofore conducted
by Mr. J. Grekne, has passed into the hands of Messrs.
Willson & Messenger. They pledge the Journal to the
continued support of whig principles. On their accession
the Journal Chy Banner. Success gentlemen.
The resolutions passed by the House of Representatives
i in New Hampshire, declining to district the State, receiv-
ed a check in the Senate, which refused to concur, but
wished to substitute some scolding resolutions in their
place. The House refused to ad.»pt,and the matter was
left. The Legislature has adjourned.
The “ Allegany County Advocate,” has just been started
at Angelica, N. Y.—by S. E. Palmer, —devoted to the 1
advocacy of Interna! Improvements and protection to Home
Industry.
Senator fiiom New Jersey.—Gov. Pennington has
appointed Wm. L. Dayton, of Trenton, to fill the vacan-
cy occasioned by the death of Hon. Mr. Southard.
The whigs ol Hanover Co Va., the birth place of Hen-
ry Clay, have called a meeting and nominated him for
President.
The Salem Register, the Springfield Gazette, the New
Bedford Bulletin, and the Lowell Courier, hoists the Clay
[ Banner, and proclaim their intention to support “Harry
of the West” for our next President.
We learn from the N. Y. papers that Messrs Harpers
& Brothers have repaired the damages they sustained
from the late fire, and with their large establishment are
now ready to prosecute business with their accustomed
despatch.
Well done — hut more remains yet to be
plished.— From reports made by the several Washingto-
nian societies in J- fferson county, it appears that about 18,-
000 have signed the total abslinance pledge—or about one
in four of our entire population.
U3 = ’ G. Jl. Bell, a preacher of the Methodist connexion,
was instantly killed by lightning at Elizabethtown, U. C.
or. the 3J inst.
Arrest of Mitchell..—A lettei published in New York,
says that C. F. Mitchell who was released on bail, has
been arrested at Zanesville, Ohio, on a requisition from
(he Governor of this state.
The rumor afloat that an adjustment of the Boundary
question had taken place, turns out to be untrue. No
terms as yet have been agreed upon, and it is feard some
time will elapse before the affair is settled.
We consider publicafions-in relation tbthe “mutual
dependence of employer and employed’ as uncalled for by
the public taste ; and as for administering reproof thro’ the
press, we beg leave to differ with‘employers. ’ They have
a sure remedy if their clerks do not perform their duty /
they hold the ‘parse and the sword,’ while the clerk, let
his privileges be what they may, leads a lifeofservitude—
a monotonous rpund. Viewing the subject in this light,,
we deem it proper to shut our columns against all commu-
nications on this subject; but, as ‘a friend to equal rights’
claims to be heard, we insert his communication for ihe
reason that he abstains from discussing the point in ques-
tion :
Mr. Editor:—l noticed by the last Jefferso-
nian that rny expression of opinion in relation to
the mutual dependence of employer and employ-
ed, has stirred up the bitter waters of contention
on the part of Mr. Employer. I had hoped that
a simple statement of facts on both sides would
be productive of good to all, and that a newspa-
per contention would be unnecessary ; but it
seems not. I shall give the article such notice
as it merits —not defending the stand I have taken,
for its truth and justice is too plain to be discred-
ited.
The article is cindoubtedly written by some in-
experienced hand—a glorious failure at sarcasm—
a rebuke tlrai is unjust , and unmerited; and the
article throughout is 100 indecent to appear in the
columns of any paper. And no editor who pos-
sessed to devote his paper to morality or com- 1
moh decency, would suffer it to be placed in his (
columns. 1
This is all that is necessary in answer to the '
foolish article. I hope that the author, before he s
attempts to write for the press again, will review
his composition more closely than he did his last. | ‘
A Friend of Equal Rights. I {
Young Men’s Stale Association. ’
The Annual Meeting of the Young i
Men’s Slate Association of ihe State of '
New York will be held at the village of 1
° i
Auburn, on Tuesday on the 4th day of (
August next. ,
The member of delegates to which t
each association is entitled will be seen c
from the 2d Article of the subjoined con ■ ! C
stilulion oj the Slate Association. \ 1
Article Ist. The objects of this Association, are the
adoption and carrying into effect such measures as are best v
calculated to secure union and concert of action among \
the Young Men’s Associations for mutual improvement,
now in existence, andihe promotion of their interests, and I
to secure the organization of similar institutions in the state. .
Art. 21. This Association shall be composed of repre- *
senfatives from each Young Men’s Association in the slate,
to be elected annually. Each Association 10 be entitled to
at least three delegates, and if it consist of one hundred
members it shall be entitled to select four deletes and 8
one delegate for each additional hundred members. Also 1
of permanent members, five of whom may be elected an- f
nually by the unanimous vote of the association ; and in *
addition thereto, the President of the association shall im- j
mediately on the expiration of his term of office by virtue j
thereof become a permanent member. I g
Art. 3d. The officers of the association shall consist of ;
a President, two Vice Presidents, a corresponding Secre- t
tary, a recording Sefcretary and Treasurer, to be elected 1 •
at each annual meeting. I 1
Art. 4th h shall be the duty of the Treasurer to safely I s
keep the funds of the Association and disburse the same
only on the order of the President and of the Recording ' I
Secretary.
Art. oili The association shalfmeet on the first Thnrs- 3
day in August in each year at such place as it may from ! <
time to time designate.
Art. 6. An annual Address shall be delivered by the | i;
President at each annual meeting, and it shall be his duty |
at the opening of each meeting to lay before the associa- • f
lion such business as he may deem proper lor its action 1
Art 7th. It shall be the duty of the officers in addition | F
(o ihe discharge of the duties of their respective offices, to ; j.
promote the objects for which ihe association is organised,
duiing the lime the same is not in session. d
The Local Young Men’s Association c
througout the State are earnestly request-
ed to select their full representation.—
From the interest and spirit evinced at the f
last annual meeting, we cannot but argue c
most prosperous results from the action of *■
the stale association, if the interest which r
has been awakened may be sustained and 1
continued. The energies of our young
men can be exerted -in no nobler cause 1
than in the advancement of their intellec- 1
tual progress as a class. i-
All Young Men’s Associations in the ll
state, formed for the purpose nf mutual v
improvement, are entitled to a represenla- r
tion at the state association, whether or- a
ganized under the name of the Young ii
MensAssocialion or other wise designated, u
Those not hitherto represented, are invi. rt
ted to send delegates to the ensuing meet- I
ing. GEO, R, FAIRBANKS, tc
Rec. Sec’y. Y, M. S. Association. a’
| Mr Editor:
j Dear Sir—When an editor lends and devotes his
whole sheet to the abuse of an individual, it is not unbe-
coming, tho’itmaybe unnecessary, in speak in vindica-
lion of the abused, and undeceive a deceived community.
In the last Jeffersonian we find two long articles under,
signed “Vinilex” and “X.” The whole force of these
articles is directed—with what malignity the articles iheni-
selves will show-against the orator of the 4(h of July.
No stone is left unturned, under which political animosity
can find a vulnerable part to stick his poisonous arrow. '
In (he articles they-have not hesitated to misrepresent
anil even to falsify, to accomplish their base purposes
But sir, these at tides as bitter as they were, were not
sufficient to satisfy the rancorous spirit that corrodes the
breast of our candid editor, who is ever lurking, like a
“snake in the grass,” to wound the feeling.and traduce
the characters of his political opponents; and here we
might advert to a series oi articles which have lately ap-
peared in that paper over fictitious names, which savor
strongly of superlative meanness, and a total disregard
of character.
He it seems, lias long been waiting fur an opportunity
to vent his spleen upon Mr. Chuuk. The 4th of July
afiords the pretext, and we see with what avidity he
snatches at it. -After all the vilifying of his ready corres-
pondents, there was nothing in the articles sufficiently
bitter, to suit the pal He of the tasty editor. They had
not been sufficiently catechised in the school of obloquy
and abuse. But his patriotic heart was too full of
holy indignation to find rent in one week-one sheet was
100 small to itold the contents of his overcharged stomach
and tile dregs of this bittercup are to be emptied upon
community next week.
But why this long tirade of abuse against Mr. Cu««b ?
-lh ’ forsooth, because in speaking plain truth, in appeal-
ing to fact-, he exposed some of the evils of locofocoism.
If the orator would degenerate into a nude state of hypo-
crisy like themselves, and let the flagrant evils that threat,
et.n our liberty with destruction, pass unnoticed and per.
mil the veil of obscurity to cover the outrages of the “self
styled democratic party,” ail would have been well. Jl
man must no more refer to historical facts, or speak of
those too lately transpired, to have received their record
if he would escape calumny and abuse, when such refer-
ences expose the schemes of the arch demagogue.
But to make some show of a pretext for his ar-
ticle, one of our worthy correspondents of the
Jeffersonian bluntly affirms that ‘theoralor started
with the proposition that whether there would-be
a dissolution of the Union was no longer prohle-
in at leal, but that the affirmative of the proposition
is at this day too well settled lobe questioned,
and that the only remaining question fur solution
is how long that dissolution can he averted I That
the people of the United States are incapable of
self government is equally clear and settled in
the mind of the very repullican orator.” Bui
all who heard the oration, know how widely the
above differs from the the truth. We should only
say what every one knows, who heard it, if we
called it false.
It is line, that from the experience of near six <
thousand 3'ears, lending to confirm such an opin-
ion, he (the orator) feared that a dissolution of <
the Union might happen. And no one wifi deny
but that he gave instances, more by half than we '
could wish where the task of self government was
more than equal to the abilities of the people.— 1
the deluded prisoners of Van Dieman’s Land '
if their own powers of self government, together '
with the mandate of President Van Btiren, was
sufficient to restrain their eager passions and head
strong zeal. Could their eyes then have been
“bedaubed with a little federal Clay," they would
at least fiave saved the coal-dust of VanDeimaa’s I
Land. Bui one of our correspondent's attempts i
to silence all such,by saying that the outbreaks of (
popular rage, are even worse in monarchic! gov-
ernments than in ours. How much soever vve
might rely, as we do most firmly, on the lasting *
Union of this confederacy, the stability ofour in- \
stitutions, and the benign effects of a republican e
form of government upon the feelings and hearts e
of men, his argument lias a direct tendency to
convince us that our reliance is unfounded.—
For, if riots, mobs, and insurrections exist most 1
supremely under the most despotic governments, c
their bare occurrence here, proves that the seeds
ofdespo’ism are sown in our republic. Ifsuch
discords in a nation are the legitimate fruits of
tyranny and despotism, as seems, he would have
us infer, then was the orator right in warning us °
ofour danger—or are they the fruits of some oili-
er cause, they are equally dangerons,and, the or- /
ator was highly reputable aud deserving of public f
esteem in laying them before us. These evils
exist ; and because Mr. Clarke had the courage
to speak fearlessly of them, is he to be loaded r
with all that approbrium which is due only to one
who should cause those evils? This seems to be
the policy of the editor and his correspondents;
they are heaping the odium upon him, that is due
the detested evils of which he spoke.
But the editor thinks, undonb-tedfy, that he can
shield himself from all blame, by skulking behind 8
his correspondents. True, if he can get behind a
falsehood it affords him abundant protection ! «
We hardly know in what place in society tocon-
srgn an editor of a weekly journal, who will upon
the mere ivse dixit of others, indulge in suchscur- J
ifons abuse. He is too mean for the companion-
ship of the open slanderer or libeller. Thieves are -
100 noble for his society. But sir, I fear that I J
am asking too much of your indulgence to notice q
“such vile trash.’ As far asMr, Clarke has “im-
mensely lowered himself in the estimation of his n
fellow citzens,’’ he is yet infinitely above the re- f(
proach or scandal of the editor. It will lake ma- J
ny more such ‘ immensely lowerings' to bring him F
down within the guUeral influence of the ribald p ,
editor. Spectator. tl
p
Death by Drowning. —lt becomes our
painful duty to record the second death by "
lc
drowning, this season, in Black River. i c
On Thursday last, in the edge of the eve- h
ning, a yonng man by' the name o? Pe- ci
ter Ward, who was in the employ of s .
D. Huntington, Esq-, repaired to the river
• . C(
in company with one or two others, for 6(
the purpose of bathing. After remaining
in the water a short time, he was observed p
to show signs of distress. Assistance
was immediately rendered, but for some
reason it proved unavailing. He sunk in ii
about 10 feet of water, and notwithstand- P. c
In
ing a long search for his body on that eve- t!l
. . . cr
(ling, it was not found until the following q
morning. We learn that he was about j 1
!o
19 years of age, and came from Ireland
o this country with three of his brothers at
tboul % years since. ; .
•/ .
, is j temperance.
e- I Dr - Henderson, of tl )e U. S. zlrmy, will de-
j_ j liver a leclute on the subject of “Zed, as an cle-
y- j meat in the temperance reformation;’ before the
; Washington Temperance Society, at the Univer-
,J s,iiat Church in this village, on Monday evening
y next, at o’clock.
,y We learn from °«r exchanges that on Saturday
last, the steamboat Shamrock burst her boiler, on tho
s <Tra '“’ Rlver ’ svtnewhere above Lad, i ne , killing about
o( fi'ty persons.
A! - a reeling held at Water,own, hi-
-1 'y 7th pursuant to a call for the purpose of
'v taking into consideration the general poll-
)r c y °f Fourier's system of assocfalion, and
d oforganizing a preliminary striely, with
a view to investigate and discuss its prin-
' cipies and their application.
e D r. BENJAMIN WALTON was
" CQ lled to the chair, and Eugene 11. C.
Let’s, appointed Secretary.
y R'Sohcd. That we organize a pelitninary sc-
,r ciety for the object above stated,
s Resolved, That a committee of fro be appoint-
h cd to draft Us constitution and by laws. The
following persons were nppointedto such com-
mi lee, A. M. Watson, Jonathan Munsell, Ly-
sander H Drown, H. K Newcanb. and Lib-
- erfv Comms.
r^ eS Ii l 6 iat 8 committee ofliree composed
nfj. Miinsell, R. Barnes, and A. D. Button,
be appointed, for die purpose ol procuring die
publication ofariicles on this suFfect, in the difc
. ferent papers of the coimty.
. R r solved, That the above conmilee report t<?
f the next meeting.
2 Resolved, That the proceeding of this meet-
C mg be signed by the Chairman and Secretary,
and, that the editors of the diftrenl papers ir>
tne county, are respectfully remested to publish
■ the same.
Resolved', That we adjourn h the 16th insf. nf
half past six o’clock, P. JVI. at'lhe rooms of the 1
3 oung men’s association. VVaKrfown.
benjamin walton, 0t, ...
I Eugene IE C. Leis, Sec’y.
Mr. Editor : —I observed in ihe Regis-
ter of the 9th inst, two Communications in
1 relation to ihe appointment of a Camp
. Meeting-o be held on the f3th inst., both
of which seem intended to implicate Mr.
. Minthorn in a contradiction of such no-
tice. Now sir, I take the liberty to inform
you, that I requested Mr. Minthorn to go
with me to the printing office iit order that
I might enquire by what authority the no-
tice was published, and was present at the
interview ; and it is due Mr. Minthorn, to
say that lie did not contradict the appoint*
ment, (as Rev. Mr. Sawyer terms h) but
only enquired by what authority he pub-
lished the notice inasmuch ns it is the
custom, I believe, of the methodjsts, to
have the notice sanctioned by ihe presi-
ding elder and preacher in charge. Mr.
Minthorn did not request the editor to
, to publish a notice to recall or contra-
dict the appointment, hut particularly re'-
marked that he did not know but a meet'-
ing might have been appointed by the
proper authorities Luther Scott.
Watertown, July 1 1, 1842.
Bristol’s Extract aj Sarsaparilla. —We
had intended before this to speak of the
wonderful effects ol this medicine in sev-
eral cases of Scrofula, Cancer, &c. in this
vicinity, but have neglected to do so—and
even now we have not room to give the
particulars of some most remarkable cas-
es which have come within our knowl-
edge. We can only say to all who are
afflicted, call at the Agent’s office and see’
ihe testimonials in its favor. It is /or sale
only by A. B. Hull.
JEFF CO. MEDICAL SOCIETY.
Annual JMeeling July d-lh . 1842.
The following: gentlemen were elected
officers for the ensuing year:
Dr. 1. B. Crawe. President—L. Barney, V. P.-
—C. Goodale, Sec’.—R. Goodale, Treasurer.—
A. Trowbridge, A. S. Greene. K. Hannahs, W.H,
Davis, J K Bates, Censors. A. S. Greene, R.
Goodale, Associate Com.
Resolved-, That the Treasurer be di*
recteri 10 collect the remaining tax of one
dollar from all delinquents whhin twenty
days, hy precess of sail if found necessary,
C. GOODALE, Sec.
1000 Coßn '? SPELLI* G B 10KS!!
sjsjyj (CT Ithica edition, printed on fine
while paper, being the best edition rhat is publish-
ed without one exception. For sale by
July 16, 1842. P. MILES, Bookseller.
The LOTTERY OF LIFE.—The
last Novel of Lady Blessinglon—ln
two exit a New World’s. Price 18 pence«-
Just received by P. MILES.
July 13. 1842.
TN CHANCERY before the V. C. of the sth
JLcircuit, PierrceJ. DeCaters et. al.vs Clinton G.-
Taylor et ux. Sterling & Ward well Solrs.
In pursuance and by virtue of a decretal order
madein this cause, 1 shall expose for sale a t pub-
lic auction at lbe.‘ ; Ametican,”’in the village ot Wa*
tertown County of Jefferson, on the ]sih day of
July next, at 10 o’clock A. M.—All that certain*
piece or paicel of land situite, lying and being
in the town of Le Ray, county of Jefferson &
stale of New York, being part of lot No. 2JI of
the subdivision of great lot No. 4 of Macombs-
purchase &. bounded &. described as follows, viz :
Reginning at a post &. stones marked D C, stand-
ing in the east line of Penet Square & is the south-
west corner of a lot ofland deeded to Gilbert Tay~
lor, thence along the south line of Gilbert Tay-
lor's land east twelve chains four links to a beech
tree the southeast corner of said land deeded to’
said Tayloi and the westcorner of6l 20 100 acres
contracted by the Antwerp Company to said C.
G. Taylor, thence along the southerly line of
said 61 20-100 south 52J dg east 20 chains 4S>
links to the centre of a creek, thence along the
centre of said creek south 8 dg west one chain
66 links to a point in the centre of the creek a
corner of Laws Lyons lot, thence north 73jdeg
west along said Lyon’s line 8 chains 95 links to a
post and stones in his N’iy corner, thence eoulh
38 degrees west 22 chains 75 links along saitf
Lyon’s N W line to a post & stones at his west-
erly corner, thence north 56J dg west 6 chains
41 links to a post and stones standing in the east
line ofPenet Square at the N corner of 50 acres
conveyed to Wm. Strong, thence along said cast
line north one degree east 25 chains 74 links to
the place of beginning, containing forty live a-
cres & 23-100 of an acre of land as surveyed by
C. W. Oandee, being the same land conveyed by
ihe Antwerp Company to said Clinton G. Tay-
lor. C. D. WRIGHT, Master in Chancery,
May 27, 1842.' 50
above sale is adjourned until the 26th insf.
at the same place and time of day.
C. D. WRIGHT, Master in Chanccrr,
July 15; kSi2. S7i-i
a /


In Bankruptcy,
Before Judge Conklin, of the Northern
District of the United Males* Court,
PETITION TO BE DECLARED A BANKRUPT.
■NOTICE to show cau-e against the petition of Simeon
Phelps, of Bi - ow„vi!le Jefferson County N F, to be
declared a bankrupt at Auburn N F. on Friday the utli day
of August 1812, at 10 o’clock A M.
■jVTOTICE to show cause a2ainst the petition of Isaac
x " Shimmel, of Pamelia Jefferson County N F, to be de-
clared a bankrupt at Auburn N Y. on Friday the oth day
cf August 1812, at 13 o’clock A M.
TV’ Of ICE to show cause against the petition of John
Giles, of Pamelia Jefier.-on county N Y,u» be declared
a bankrupt at Auburn N Y.on Friday the cth day of Au-
gust 13-12 at 10 o’clock A M.
■jVTOTICE to show cause acainsl the petition of James
x ' Boutweil , of Orleans Jefferson county N F, to be
declared a bankrupt at Auburn N Y. on Friday the sth day
of August 1812 at 10 o’clock A M
TOTICE to show cause against li e peiition of James
' 1 Carpenter , of Henderson'Jefferson county N }Y. to be
declared a bankrupt at Auburn N F. on Friday the sth day
tof Augu.-t 1842 at 10 o’clock AM. B. BAGLLY, Att’y.
In Bankruptcy.
Before Judge Conklin, of the Northcrto
district of the United States court.
PETITION FOR DISCHARGE AND CERTIFICATE.
'|N|TUTrCE to show cause against I lie prli 1 ion of
Alpheus Comstock, of Clayton, Jefferson
county N Y. for liis discharge ancl certlficalc as a
ha ikrupt at Auburn N V, on Tuesday Ihe 4tli day
of October 13!2, at 10 o’clock A. M.
yyOTICE to show cnnae against the peiition ol
“■'* Semall Brintna'l, of Watertown, Jefferson
county N Y. for his discharge and ccitificale as a
bankrupt at Auburn N. Y. on Tuesday the 4tli day
of Oclober 1843, at 10 o’clock A. M.
TbTOTICE to show cause against llie pet It ion of
«B»X1 Jonathan II Brown, ol Pamelia Jefferson
cotinly N. Y. for his discharge and cerußcite as a
bankrupt at Auburn N. Y. on Tuesday Iho 4th day
of Oclober 1842, a I 10 o’clock A. M,
to show cause against Ihe peiition of
Harry Finney, of RrownVille, Jefferson
onnty N. Y. for his discharge and cerlificalff ns
i bankrupt at Auburn N. Y on Tuesday the 4ih
lay of October, 1842 at 10 o’clock A. M.
'tvfOTlCE to show cause against ihe petition of
I&.S J. ha R. Taylor, of Philadelphia Jefferson
county N. Y. for his discharge and certificate as
a bankrupt at Auburn N Y. on Tuesday the 4th
day of October 1843, at 10 o'clock A. 61.
•SJfOTIGF. to show cause against the petition of
Andrew Swage, of Rutland Jefferson county
N. Y. (individually and as a member of the late
firm of Savage & Gipson) for his discharge and
certificate as a bankrupt at Auburn N. Y. on
Tuesday the 4th day of October 1342 at 10 o’-
clock A. M.
to show cause against the petition of
James S. Gipson, of Rutland Jefferson county
N. Y. (individually and as a member of the firm
of Savage & Gipson) for his discharge arid cer-
tificate as a bankrupt at Auburn *4 . Y. on Tues-
day the 4:h day of October 1843 ot 10 o’clock AM.
N°T1 CE 10 shovv ernse against Ihe petition of
Franklin Noble, of Clayton Jefferson county
N. Y. for liis discharge and certificate as a bank- 1
nipt at Auburn N. Y on Tuesday die 4th day of
October, 1843, at 10 o’clock A 61. J i
N°TICE to show cause against the petition of
Orsnmus Smith, of Antwerp, Jefferson county
N. Y, for his discharge and certificate as a hank-
at Auburn N. Y. on Tuesday the 4th day of Oc- i
loher 1842 at 10 o'clock A 61.
NOTICE to show cause against the petition of
Henry Ansled,nf Brownville, Ji fferson comity
N. Y. for liis discharge and certificate as a bank-
rupt at Auburn N Y on Tuesday the 4th day of
October 1842, at 10 o'clock A. 61. J
NOTICE to show cruse against the. petition of
Omitct Rogers, of Philadelphia Jefferson coun-
ty N. Y. for Ids discharge and certificate as a
bankrupt at Auburn N. Y. on Tuesday the 4th
day of October 1813 at It) o’clock A M.
NOTICE In show cause against Ihe petition of
Simon IV. Adams, oi Lyme Jefferson county
lor his discharge and certificate as a bankrupt
at Auburn N. Y. on Tuesday me o'li uiy o’,
t iher 1843 at 10 o’clock A 61 .
NOTICE to siiow cause against the petition of
George Sltbbins, of Housfield Jefferson coun-
ty N Y. for liis discharge and cerlificateas a bank-
rupt at Auburn NY. on Tuesday tlie 4th day of
October 1843 at 10 o’clock A 61.
T4JOTIOE to show cause against the petition of
, Jtncks P. Thompson, of Watertown, county
of -’eff.rson N. Y. fur his discharge and certificafe
ns a bankrupt at Auburn N Y on Tuesday the
Ai 'll day of Oclober 1842 at 10 o'clock A. 61.
OTICE to show cause against the petition of
Pd g E Idy, of .Alexandria Jefferson county
N. Y. fur his discharge and certificate as a bank-
rupt ui .Auburn N Y, on Tuesday (lie 4th day of
October 1842 at 10 o’clock A M.
N 0 ! 10 E to show cause against the petition of
Woodbridge C. George, of Clayton Jefferson
county N. Y. for iiis discharge ,and certificate as
a bankrupt at Jtuburn N Y. on Tuesday the 4lh
diy of Oclober 1842, at 10 o’clock A M.
IJ. iLAGLEY, Atl’y.
N°T [ .
>E lo show cause against the petition of
Eli jik G .re, of Edinburgh Jefferson county
N. Y. for liis discharge and certificate as a bank-
rupt at Hu burn N. l r . on Tuesday the 27 th day
ef September 1842 at JU o’clock A. M.
OTICE to show cause against the petition of
Warren W, Grant, of Henderson Jefferson
County N V. for his discharge and cert ficate as a
bankrupt at Auburn N Y. on Tuesday the 27di
day of September 1842, at 10 o’clock A M.
to show cause against the petition o'f j j
Nathan Simons, of Ellisburgh Jefferson conn
ty N Y. (individually and as a member of the late
firm of Simons and Crawford) for his discharge
and certificate as a bankrupt at Auburn N Y on
Tuesday the 27th day of September 1342, at 10
■O’clock A M.
OTICE to show cause against the petition ef |
Alonzo E. Buntham, of Henderson Jefferson 1
county N Y. (individually and as a member of
(he late firm of Cotton & Burnhan,) for his dis-
charge and certificate as a bankrupt at Auburn N
Y on Tuesday the 27th day of September 1842 at
10 o clock A M.
OTICE to show cause against the petition of
Otis N. Cole, of Henderson Jefferson county
NY. (individually and as a member of the late 1
firm of Cole fy Armstrong) for liis discharge and 1
certificate as a bankrupt at, Jfuburn NY. on Tires- 1
day the 27th day of September 1842 at 10 o’clock !
A. M. E. B. HAWES, Atl’y; J
NOTICE fa show cause against the petition o f
* William Bones, of Carthage Jefferson county
N Y (individually and as a member of the late
firm of Budd & Bones) for his discharge and cer-
tificate as a bankrupt at Auburn NY, on Tues- J
day, the 4th day of Oclober 1842, at 10 o’clock AM. c
JV OTICE to show cause against the petition of
Joseph C. Budd, of Carthage Jefferson county c
N y, (individually and as a member of the late
firm of Budd Bones) for his discharge and cer-
tificate as a bankrupt at Auburn N Ton Tuesday I
the 4th day of October 1*842, at 10 o’clock AM. s
WM, M. SHUMWAY, Alt'y. v
j
Agency &. Commission Store. {
I subscribers having more room than j
JL is necessary for their present business, will ,
undertake tb-e sale (on commission) of any
description of goods’which m- y be offered them.
They will also act as agentsfor the sale of Patent
Rights or patented articles of any kind. In ad-
dition lo their store in the Franklin Buildings, *
they have a large ware-room iti which they can ■
store a large amount of goods of any description, s
One of the firm will devote his particular atten- r
tion to-the business and no effort shall be Want- r
ing to effecta sale of all goods entrusted lo their j
care. The best reference given if required. 1
For sale as above, a good assortment of Bos- c
ton Rocking, and other Chairs, Beadsteads and i
light-stands, also a lot of very superior Segars in i
boxes, and bundles of 25<each. (
McDonald- & peck, \
N 0.3 Franklin Buildings. i
Watertown, July 16th 1842. (
N. B. They will advertise all articles-’on sale t
at their own expense.
NEW CHAIR SHOP
111 the FRANKLIN BUILDINGS, next door to the
“ Register Office. ”
OR «ale cheap, very cheap,
. exceedingly cheap for cash,
a lot of most elegant Boston
ROCKING CHAIRS, also a
variety of other Chairs from
$3.50 per set. upwards.—
BEADSTEADS of the most
approved style and workman-
ship. Also, Light-Stands of an
elegant pattern, nil of which will he sold for cash
at prices to suit the present hard times and sc.ar-
; city of money. Those who prefer bartering can
t have them at the lowest market price, in exchange
for Butter, Wheat, Tallow, or Feathers.
McDonald & prclL
Watertown, July 16, 1842 (* r >7)
Come get your Measures taken.
THE latest monthly reports of New Fmk
Fashions Just received by McDonald & Peck.
HaH times—ls per cent off for the cash down.
July i 2, McDonald & peck.
I Periodicals for July.
Boston Miscellany Ladys Book, Graham’s
Magazine, Lady’s Musical Library, and Ladies’
Companion, (received June 28th.) likewise THE
BUTCHERS OF GHENT, a thrilling Romance of the
flays of Philip 2d, of France, and IP ATT El SH2.
o’Coi% 7 M IBILiL, a Romance of Ireland, being
published in extra Br. Jonathan’s; price of each
18 pence. Also, a new supply of “Gasper,” the
Pirate, “Dancing Feather,” “Morley Ernslein,”
“Jacquerie,”&c ; and an entirely new and beau-
tifully written work entitled SUMMER AND
WINTER IN THE PYRENEES, by Mrs. El-
lis —in an extra New World, price one shilling;
P. MILES, Bookseller.
Watertown, July 9. 1842.
Peter B. Beedlk, ) Deed, dated 7th August. 1840. Re-
in > corded September 5. 1810, in Liber M
John Williams )3 of Deeds, page 150, &c.
DY Virtue of one execution i.-sued out of the court of
.O Common Pleas of the county of Jefferson, to me di-
rected arid delivered, I have seized and taken all the rL-ht
title and interest which John Williams had on the 25ih
day of May 1341, or at any time after Awards, to the follow-
ing described piece or parcel of land and conveys. All that
certain piece of land lying and being in the town of
Clayton aforesaid, on lot No. 61 of the subdivision of Pen-
. net Square, being bounded as follows, viz: Commencing
at the north west corner of land deeded to Harlow Hutch-
inson, in April 1335, by said Fox, thence running along
the margin of the street in a north westerly direction elcv-
cn rods to a stone stake, thence in an easterly direction on
a line passing about ten feet southerly of the east corner
of the barn of Aar >n Sumner, and running along the stone
wall erected by Fox in the spring of to the corner of
said wall, thence in a southerly direction along said wall
about three rods and five feel to a stone stake, thence in an
easterly direction at right angles, or nearly so, with the
street five rods and eight feet to a stake, thence in a south
erly direction about five rods umdl it intersects the norther-
ly line of the laftd of the aforesa'd Hutc'ninsort a little east-
erly of a large oak stump at a stone stake, thence in a
westerly direction along said line about six rods and ten
feet to the place of beginning, containing half an acre, of
land which I shall sel! to the highest bidder, at the Hotel
i now kept by Charles Perkins.’ in the village of Watertown
j on the 2Jih day of August, 1842.
A P. DRAYTON, Sheriff.
Dated, Watertown, July 9, 1842, 56w6
! Sherman’s Cough Lozenges,
ARE liis best remedy lor Coughs. Colds. &c.
in use, never Catling (o give entire satislac-
j lion to nil who use them.
Sherman's Worm Lozenges,
Proved in nearly half a Million of cases to be
infallibl.*: no other medicine can be used with
half the convenience or benefit.
Sherman's Camphor Lozenges,
give immediate relief in Nervous or sick Head-
ache, lowness of spirits, summer complaint, faint-
ness, &c. No person should ever attend church
or large assemblies without a box of Camphor
Lozenges. Several ladi *s in this village have re-
ceived great benefit from the use of them.
Sherman's Soda Lozenges
cure Heartburn in five minutes.
Sherman's Cayenne LoZcnges
cure Hoarsness and sore throat in a few hours.
Sherman's Cathartic Lozenges
cleanses the slomarn ttttu m,.. u oa ±
Cathartic ever used for billions persons, Tuey
prevent fevers and ate invaluable for persons of
sedentary habits.
Sherman's Poor Alan's Plaisler,
price one shilling—is the best as well as the cheap-
est in use.
The above medicines are kept at wholesale and
retail by my in Wate.town.
A. B. HULL,
Diuggist, No. 3central Block.
A. SH - RM\N. M. D.
July 2, 1812'. 106 Nassau st. N. Y.
Sherman s Comp. Tooth Paste.
Recommended by Chemists, Physicians, and
the Clergy, as superior to anything of the kind in
use.. For sale as above. 56
CLYDE WINDOW GLASS’.
rHE above article of various sizes in common
us°, can be hud at D. Huntington’s
Oil, Paint, and Glct?s~Slore,
on Washington street, on terms (as to price) more
favorable than windqW glass can he purchased at
any other establishment in Jeff'. Co. of equal qual-
ity and condition, being batter packed than is gen-
eraily the case—is found on opening less broken.
The Clyde Glass Factory being situated on the
Erie Canal (a few miles west of Montrzurnec,)
Glass is transported by water to Buckets Barber
with but little expense to breakage. Persons en-
gaged in building, and wishing for glass of*such ’
dimensions as may not at all times be on hand, can
be accommodated on a few days notice, of the size
and quantity required.
Paints, Oil?, Varnish, Oil Cloth Carpeting &c.
sold for cash lower than usual; 51
Our readers are referred lo the following letter
from Mr. Crosby, a highly respectable citizen of
(his county, who has experienced the most gratify- ■
ing results from the use of Bristols’ Extract of *
Sarsaparilla, in a case of Scrofulas Cancer.
Henderson , June 2t 3 1842.
Mr. A. B. Hull,
Dear Sir: —I feel it to he due to the public nnd
to the proprietor of ‘BRISTOL’S EXTRACT,’
to make the following statement. I have been
troubled with a cancer for more than twenty years ,
which has been attended with great pain, without
receiving any benefit from different medicines
until I commenced the use of “Bristol’s Sarsapa-
rilla.” The pain ceased after using the second hot
tie. 1 have used several bottles., and find great
benefit from it —*l have every expectation of a
complete cure. ELISHA CROSBY.
The above medicine is for sale only by
A. B. HULL, Agent, J
51 No. 3 Central Block, Watertown. t '
A Rich Reward for a little Trouble
can be had by calling at A, SALTZIVIAN’S new and
FASIIIOWABLrE STOKE,
on Court street, one door north of Welch & Co’s.
HAVING formerly resided in Switzeland, he is
now prepared with a splendid assortment of
PLATE, JEWELRY, I Patches, Clocks, and Mu- j
sic-Boxes of all sizes and descriptions lo meet the .
wants of all ; and also, having made arrangements
in Switzeland for the importation of Watches, he
flatters himself that he can sell them .at prices a
much lower than they can be bought elsewhere \
in the Stale. Watches, Clocks and Music Boxes a
repaired for a small compensation.
Watertown, June 22d, 18 12. (
Regimental Orders. r
DKPAUVTLLR, JUNES, 1842. ,
PURSUANCE of the power vested in me j,
■i* by Chapter 10, of the first part of tile revised
statutes of this state, — I Kimball Keyes, Colo-
nel and commanding officer of the 235th Regi-
ment of Infantry of the Melitia of the State of
New York, do hereby appoint a regimental Court
Martial for the trial of all delinquents and C
deficiencies in the said regiment, tocortsistof three
members, viz: Captain Erastus Wright, as Pres-, s'
ident thereof, Captain Alonson C. Corbin and t!
Captain James Krake, as members; the said court tt
will convene cn the 14th day of October next, at
(he House of Beriah Carpenter, Jr. in the town of o
Clayton, and adjourn from lime to time as shall h
become nectssarv for the transaction of business, n
52* KIMBALL KEYES,,Colonel.
UIST OF LETTERS
Remaining in the post office at Watertown
N. F., July 1, 1342:
Austin Crandall Matteson Benj
Ayers John Mark Sarah H
Angel Harriet Meeker Barney
i Adams John Mitchell H D Miss 2
“ Samuel Murphy Owen
Amelia William McCorrntch Win
Bsell Richard W Miller Lucinda
Benson Polly “ Joseph
Bud long Eber C “ Hiram
Baster George “ Sami 2
Bush Simeon Mirion Milfoil
Bush Ii Mcßride E J Miss
Baudrau Stivirt Munson Tnaddeus
Bruce A W IViles Sam! M
Blorlahly Jonathan l*ui lock George
Back George H Poweis A 2
Barton Uriah Palmer Dani
Baily B N “ Levi
Brown Jonathan H Pelham R W
“ David Felton R M
“ N A Puffer Wm
Cumins Mary Pettit Jose ph
“ Alexander Poss George
Cornwell Erastus R ;thbunJub 2
“ Giles Remington A
C >lin s Julius Robinson W J
Cole Harrison Richardson Abner
Crone Mrs Reilly Rose
Chase Mr Rider Jacob
Campbell Alex Richardson Cbas2
Congden S “ S
Capacbe S Robbins Philander
Conveise 1 Miss Russell E A Miss
Durham Peter Reylea Thos
Dodge John Smith Chas
Dodge Siml “ Ebenczer
Dennis Wm Searls Lanrilla L
Dudley C.ms Simpson Susanna
Drake Norman M Sherwood W W
Davis G D Sloat Wm
De’aoo Fred’k Sham A J
IForward Daniel Scotl C tas
“ James II S -per W W
FelpsS Smalley Jno
Foster Hiram Smith John
Flower Sarah A Seward Elizabeth
Fuller Reuben Starks Abial
Follansbee Clarissa Stalling James
Crregor § Sartwell Dan!
Green T heron Sprat I Wm
Gtbson S'afford J fy B
Gewelt Abraham Strickland Amelia
Gotham P SteaVens Henry
Guilman Catharine Steavens LamGcrt
ISutt Peter Stewart Jahn
Herrick F 2 Sawyer Susanna
Hough Alphonzo S ebbins Wm
Hungerford Peter Soutbworth Alsina
Hull Chlorinda Thrmpson George
Hunt Elisha Tolls Luther
Hungerford Maria Thayer E D
“ Chas B Tuttle L 2
Horth Lafayette Tufts Thomas
Hollenbeck John Town Joshua
Hosmer Walter Tolrnan Wm
Hildreth Wm Tripp Win
Huntress Joseph Tredway Moses
Howes Nathan A Ten Eyck da hob
c< SB Tubbs H H
Hastings Samncd VanWurmerd N
Huntington Julia Wiley ChannceyS
Johnson Sidney P Weaver George
Jerome L K “ B
Jeffries Tht s H ard Calvin
“ Anson “ Thankful
Kefchnm Sidney Wheeler Sami
Kei ny Patk “ Z
Erastus We< Elijah
Locotinl Joseph “ J -aeph.L
l.ewis Thos 2 Waltz Martini
Luther Martin “ CE
Lasher Lucinda u Cuonrod
Loomis J N Williams Ebenczer S
“ JL Woodruff Felix
M>rse. Hiram Whittier J S
McMiill'm I-saac Winne FI D
Morse Wm Wakefield Loftus
Standring L S K
Moore
Calling for ttie above Letter? will please sat
~3dvprn.sed. J. F. HUTCHINSON, V. M. *
SHERIFF’S SJfLR.— By Virtue of a wrjt of fieri fa eras
out of the clerk’s office, of the County of Jeffer-
son, Sfaie of New Fork, and to me directed and delivered
again?! the goods and chatties lands and tenements of
Frederick B. Vaugan, I have sie.zed and taken all the
right tiile and interest, which the said Frederick B. Vaugan
had on the Ist day of December, 1841, or at any time since
to the following described property, to wit, all that certain
piece or parcel of land lying and being in the town of
Lefay, County of Jefferson, State of'New Fork. Begin-
ning at lot No. 637, great lot No. 4 of McCombs purchaise,
bounded as follows, to wit: beginning at the most southerly
corner of the premise--hereby mortgaged, a point in the
centre of the road, being also the Northerly corner of
Mathias Roof’s land, and running from thence N 3;| ° E
8 chains7s links to a birch tree cornered and marked AE.
thence S 3 if o W 8 chains 25 links to a stake, thence S 524°
R3B chains 81 links.to the,place of beginning, containing
31 68109 of an acre of land, be the same more or less.
Which I will sell at public auction to the highest bidder,
at the-Public House of Joseph Siebins. in the village of
Felts Mills, on Saturday the 27th day of August next, at
10 o’clock A. M. Dated July 5, F 42.
A. P BR.3YTON. Sheriff.
13y R. R Brown, Dpt.
GEO. It. FAIRBANKS,
ATTORNEY AT LAW & SOLICTOR IN CHANCERY.
|£jf OFFICE WITH J . MULLIN, JH]
Over W. Sherm an's Bank. 51 ]
Law Fir m .
THE subscribers having formed a connexion
in the practice of the Law, will punctually
attend to all business entrusted to their care, in
any of the Courts of Law or Equity in this State,
and respectfully solicit a share of public patron-
age. Office in' the rear of the Post Office.
A. M. WATSON,
J; F. HUTCHINSON.
April 22, 1843. 45'(f
~wm o HL
attorney and counsellor at lAw,
AND IN CHA.NCKRY. OF PEACE,
CONVEYANCER, &C.
All call* in the line of his profession will he
thankfully received and promptly attended to.
Watertown, March 19, 1842. 40
J. M ULLIN,
Attorney at Law, and Solicitor in
CHANCERY.
OFFICE OVER L. PADDOCK’S STORF,.
Watertown, Sr.pt 31, 18189. ’Ofitf
Administrator’s Notice. |
A LL persons having claimsagainst Noah W. Kinisfnn, ]
tx. hue of the town of Watertown, in the county of J ef- .
erson, deceased, are requested to present the same with *
lie vouchers thereof to Daniel Lee, at the County Clerks i
Office, on or before the lOtli dav of January next. f
DOROTHY KINISTON.
Watertown, July 6, 1812. (56m6) Administratrix
©its ; 1
WOULtY inform her customers and the ladies
generally that she has removed to the cor- t
ler opposite the Centre House, whore she will be
lappy lo wait upon them as usual, and cxedute
ill orders in the line of
Dress Making , <
md to those who have not yet become acquainted s
villi her work, she would say that they can be
iccommodated in the UJost I'aslliOlial>lc
style, and in point of workmanship not interior
o any, as those who have favored her with their
jalronage are ready to affirm.
N. B. Dressmakers supplied with patternso K
he latest and most approved fashions on reasona
»le terms. Waterier 'town, June, 1812. 52m
NEW BOOKS.
\ COMMENTARY on the Bankrupt Law of
/jL 134 I, show ing its operation and effect—by
7 co. A. Bicknfll, Jr. member of the Bar of N*.Yoik, c
A MANUAL OF LAW for Ihe use of ha-
rness men, containing, alphabetically arranged,
lie Legal Principles of most frequent application “
r> ordinary business transactions.
The Constable’s Guide, being a concise treatise
n the powers and duties of a constable and col- J
ector. Cowen’s Treatise and Barbour’s Cnm> i 1
al Law. KNOWLTON & RICE. 1
May 20,, 184?-:
N, a iVew Recess •
EP RECTO HOMME would respectfully in-
• form the public that he lias opened a RE-
CESS on the south side of public square, No. 4
Perkins building, where he will keep constantly
on hand REFRESHMENTS of all kinds ; wed-
ding parties can be furnished on short notice with
CAi£E of the richest kind and most fashionable
trimmings, from the smallest size to the splendid
French pyramid. He will keep constantly on
hand all the luxuries of the season ; fruit flavored
ICE CREAM kept on hand during the fruit sea-
son ; CONFECTIONARIES of L e best quality
will be kept continually on hand, together with
Figs, Raisins, Nuts, Candies, Toys for children,
&c. &c. He feels confident that he can give
unusual satisfaction lo all who may favor him
with their custom.
May 2lsi, 1842. 49m3
THE COMPLETE WORKS OF DICKENS
(Boz,) for Five dollars !! The whole of the
work of this celebrated author are now being
published, and will be completed in 20 weeks.
Nos. at 25 cents each. They will be furnished
by the subscriber al the above rates for a part of
the whole set, payable on delivery. This edition
is illustrated by Wood Cuts designed by Sam.
Weller, and a steel plate likeness of IL'z.
PLINY MILES.
Watertown, March 26, 1842, 41
Tailoring Business.
CpHE Subscribers having established them*
ew selves in the village of Brownville, in the
Tailoring Business, (over the G:ncery of Webb
&. Steavens. formerly occupied by D. Case,) re-
spectfully inform the inhabitants of Brownville
and vicinity that they are prepared to execute a II
work entrusted to their care with neatness and
despatch. They trust from their long experience
in the business to secure a share of public pat-
ronage.
CUTTING.—The Culling Department will
be attended to by the subscribers in all its bran-
ches and warranted lo fit in all casts.
G. F. ACKLEY.
11. RUSS.
Brownville, April 9, 1842. 43tf
AN away from Hie subscribe.!, on or about
the 24th inst, William Hamilton, a negro
boy, about IS 3 cars of nge. This is the third
time he has i ft the subscriber. Now, this is to
forbid all persons harboring cr trusting him on
my account, as 1 shall pay no debts of his <on*
trading. JOHN B. BALL.
Lyme, dflpril 24* 1*842. 46
JVew Goodso
Central Block, No. | —May 0, 1842.
WATERTOWN, N. Y.
THE undersigned begs leave respectfully to an-
nounce to their friends and the public gener-
ally that they are now in rect i' of their usual va-
riety of Spring and Summer among
which are many desirable articles, winch added
to their former stocks makes their assortment one
of the best ever brought to this market, and which
will be sold al a great reduction fro-m former prices
43tf SAFE OR D & FI»K.
"I'O LET or Lease for a term of years —a valu-
able FARM in the neighborhood of the vil-
lage of Watertown. Apply to
HENRY F. SEW ALL,
April, 1542. Factory Square.
M I L LINE K y 7
Court Street—five doors north of Messrs. Welch
& Peck’s celebrated Cheap Cash Store.
MRS. WELCH wishes to inform her friends
and the public that she has just received her
second supply 0 f fashionable Straw, lap’d Leg-
horn, shell Braid, A bort, Rutland and other de-
scriptions of BONNETS for I lie present season,
also S;ravv Trimmings, Cord and Tassels, Aitifi-
cial Flowers, and Millinery articles in general, so
that Mrs. W. is prepared to accommodate her cus-
tomers with Bonnets of plain, figured larllon silks,
r tarlton muslins, and fancy lawns of the most ap-
proved style aud prices to suit the limes. Mrs.W.
rll s r ir z 9;’. .a nC 1 ”
j N. B. Eylets inserted in backs of Slays at Ihe
f shortest notice. * 52
i TANNERY RUsTnESsT
r HpHEsubscriber would inform the inhabitants
JL of Watertown and of the towns in Jefferson
Cotinly, that he is carrying on the above busi-
ness in all its branches, at the old stand formerly
r occupied by Burr & Wilks, in Jiihelville, ad-
joining the village of Watertown. He has now
on hand and offers for sale sides of slaugh-
ter SOLE LEATHER; 200 sides of UPPER
LEATHER of the best quality, Calf Skins, Kip
Skins, &c. &c., and will keep on hand for sale
at Wholesale or Retail, any quantity which pur-
chasers may require.
O 3 Purchasers of Leather in or out of the
county are requested to call at the estabtisment
and examine his stock. Prites as low as at any
other similar stand in this section of the country.
W. E. SARGENT.
Watertown, June 1, 1842. 51
Particular Notice !
BLOM 4* CO, at the One Price Store would
say, [in reply to the Barber-ous remarks
published last week} that when they advertise
goods at 20 per cent, below selling rates in this
village, they advertise the truth, and for proof
would refer all to their store and prices.
Most especially they would call the attention of
all 10 their ACCORDIONS, Jewelry &.c. which
are fully ner cent, lower than at other places.
“Tn ais stranger than Fiction,”
afrd in these limes, when cash is scarce, articles
will be sold low, it will be discovered that the
Pole-ar attraction will naturally diminish.
“One price and that a verv low one,” is our
motto. slif BLOM & CO.
WATERTOWN
BAZA A R & FANCY STORE.
THE subscriber would inform his old cus-
tomers and the public generally that he lias
received a large addition to his former stock 1
which makes it complete, among winch may be '
found the following—Musical Instinmen(s, such
as Flutes Clarionets, Picalos, Flageolets, Violins, {
Accordeohs, Drums and Fifes; —Hair Work, ’
Wigs, Braids, Bands with Ringlets, Curls, Brush-
es of all kinds, Combs of every description, Per- ]
fumery, Fancy & superior Shaving Soap, Razors,
Pocket Knives & Scisors, Shirts & Bosoms, Col- j
lars & Slocks, Fans, Fishing tackle of every kind,
Percussion Caps 5l Pills, Cards, FIRE WORKS
for Independence, Glass, Pewter, Tin and wood
TOYS. The subscriber would not Brag about
selling ‘2O per cent, cheaper than his neighbors.’ i
nor keeping the “one pride store,” as that is all 1
Humbug, but xinll say he will not be undersold
by any one. The public are respectfully invited J
to call and examine for themselves. j
W. GEN NET. .1
June, 1842- 60 f
SECOND HAND WAGON.-—A very good ■;
second hand two horse Wagon for sale, on ea- y
sy terms every way by KNO W ETON & RICE.
May 25, 1842.
Cherry Tables.
A QUANTITY of Good Cherry Tables for
sale, and very low, by
BATES BACON.
December 24. 28if c
JPowder!
1 KEGS Bfasting F. FF. FFF. RL p
Ji . fle and Cannon POWDER, for sale j\
cheap) for cash, by P. MUNDY. n
sdr“Neai door to the Banks. r i
Watertown, May 20, 1842. 49
—t;
“I YV YV CV SHARES of the Jefferson County s
1U U U Bank Stock for sale. Apply to b
JOHN BINSSE, or to the Cashier of the Jr f- (
ferson County Bank. Said Stock will be sold in a
lots lo suit purchasers. n
Watertown, I7lh January, 1842. 32
IS oqk. h i Mo & Fa' &i i
n- P . MB JL ES ,
Bookseller £y Stationer ,
ly at No. 3 Exchange Buildings,
J- S-i-ATE Street, Watci’town,
th M'AKESpI casurc in informing the public, that |
le T ( )e j;, prepared with a ninch larger assort- j
id ment of BOOKS for school Libraries than he j
n has heretOiO e kept. AH of the new Works of j
d merit received as soon as published ; (he Boston
a- School Library large and small series, Harpers
y do. the four series, kept constantly on hand and
h furnished at the lowest rites.
i, Now that prices of Books have been brought
e down by an individual not wi-hing one hundred I
n and seven'y-Jive per cent. priJU, (?) and a Book- I
store started in opposition to an old hard-fisted i
monopoly, it is very natural that there should 1
be a croaking about the prices of Books falling '
S like the prices’of Dry Goods, Stoves &c. But!
e this is all a humbug. The same, or s-milar
g works are, under the same circumstances, 1 pub j
i 5. fished no cheaper, as a general thing, than they
d were ten years ago—the "authority of the owner ;
if of the “ Girl Plaid Cloak ”to the contrary, not- |
n wit hstd nding,.
The proprietor Of the Now Establishment does
not ask the enlightened public of Jeffarson (?o.
to pat onise him hesn.e he runs an “(Oppo-
sition Line,” but trusts that they will find their
interest mi so doing.
Watertown, April 16, 1842.
e o'f Good Mur gain*
/ T HE . su^>scr '^' 1 ' wishing to concentrate his
business in the village where now resides,
® offers for sale his FARM of one hundred acres)
. good f irming Land, siuated near the head of
” French Creek, and about six miles distant from j
0 the villages of F. Creek & Dcpauville. There j
‘ a good Mill site on the premises, with fall I
sufficient for using the water twice. There is j
1 also on the farm as good a quarry of Water Lime I
l * as there is in the Slate, with every convenience)
and facility for manufacturing and transporting |
the article; There is also oh the farm one Saw
Mill, in successful operation, and a good Building
at the foot of the falls suitable for a Saw or Lime
Mill. The.above property will be offered low,
1 with one fourth of the purchase money down &
a liberal time given for tlie balance.
( The subscriber ha? also on hand a good supply
0 of ground JPKASTfISSfi. un<l WATER
n at fjis Cement & Plaster Mill in Depan-
* vilie. STEPHEN JOHNSON.
Depauviile, April Ist 1842, 42ffi8
- TO MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTbfiTnsi
pHILL'PS & CO. beg leave to announce
that they have now iff successful operation in
the city of Troy, N. Y. t their improved machin-
i- cry for the manufacture of Card Clothing. —
Cotton and Woolen Manufacturers may rest
assure ! that the Machinery and workmen enga-
!- ged in the establishment, —the arrangements they
d have made f>r the best stock which our home, or {
0 a foreign market c m afford, will w irfant them in
h promising an article of Machine Cards of a su-
; perior qualify. All orders will be promptly at-
tended o ifaddressed to their agents for making
sales—Me srs. Phillips S? Mather, 261 River
St. Troy. N. Y
.* PHILLIPS & MATHER arc also agents for
the sale of Kellogg’s celebrated Wool n and
Colton Pickers, Carding Machines, Napping
Machines, Satinet wire Harness, and Manufac
turf.r’s Findings generally.
Also, for sale a splendid slock of Foreign and ;
Domestic Hard Ware. Mechanic’s House!
1 Builder’s and Farmer’s Tools, at Wholesale 1
and Retail.- Travelling Trunks, Carpet Bags, i
Letter and Foolscap Paper by the case ; mer-
r chants may replenish their slock allow prices.
Troy, N. Y. April, 5842
The subscriber would recommend the est ib- '
: lishmenf above named, to the patronage of his
manufacturing friends and the public generally. ‘
DANIEL MIGHT. i
i
Cheap New one Price Store.
P)RY Goods and Laces are selling for Cash
any 01/, e 'Hfe e n «'
” yourselves. R 1,061 & CO. Ko2, Court si. ‘‘
Watertown, April 8. 1842 . 43 f
DUTCH DOC 1 OR.
’ A LI, persons afflicted will do well to call on
1 the Dutch Doctor over Welch & Perk’s
Store, Watertown, where he may be consulted on
diseases of ali kinds, either of long or short
standing.
Dr. Blotn refers to his long practice, having
been ten years Surgeon General in the Dutch
Army and Navy.
Surgical operations performed.
Dr. Blow offers his services lo lire Afflicted Poor
gratis, every day from 3 to 4 o’clock P. 61., at Iris
office, Sunday’s excepted.
Watertown, April 8, 18f2.
K N OW LTON &, RICE 7
Aube Cheap Css.sH Bookstore oppo 1 - (
site the Watertown Banks,
ARK Opening a second spring supply of I
Books. Stationery, Paper llang'ngs. b,' Fancy J
Jlrlicl-s, which, with former stock, renders lire r
assortment very complete. Those who are devi- j
i ons of parting with their money to the best advan-
tage, will find it an object to examine before sen- |
d ng to New York or Albany, as much of this j
stock has been purchased at Auction prices, and
will he thus sold.
LIBRARY PUBLICATIONS: ■(
Harper’s Ist 2<J 3d & 4ih series,
Boston Large &. Small series,
Select Miscellaneous Library, (areally 1
increased,) at less than New York and Boston *
prices, by the set. May, 1842. 50 \\
LAKE ONTARIO—IS42V
o team boat line :
~ JliLj Lj from Ogdenaburgh | j
to Lewiston, via French
CreHc. Kingston, Sack- -
els Harbor, Oswego, Rochester and the interme-
diate points on theKiver St. Lawrence. i
The Steamboat ONEIDA, Capt, R F. '
Child, will run during the season 3 times each
week from Ogdensburgh to Oswego, as follows: t
UPWARDS, | DOWNWARDS. J,
Leaves Ogdensburglj Mon- Leaves Oswego Tuesday,
clay, Wednesday and Fri- Thursday and Saturday I r
day mornings al 8 o’clock. mornings at 8 A. M. ’
Leaves Morristown at 9 A.M Leaves Sackeis Hkrbor Ji |,
” Brockville 9i do P. M. a
” Alex. Bay 12 M. Leaves Kingston afternoon. £
” French Creek 1 P. M I ” FrenCli Creek evening.
” Kingston 4 : J do ” Alex. Bay night.
Sackets Harbor 9 even- ” Brockville do
ing, arriving the next morn- ” Morristown do
ing at Oswego. “
The Oneida meets the Steamer St, Lawrence, *
Capt. Van Cteve at Oswego, on hfer arrival, ready to pro-
ceed to Lewiston, via Rochester with ail passengers wi-h- U
ing to gj up the Lake. The St Lawrence arrives on her it
downward passage at Oswego in time to put,all passen- „
gers going to Montreal or the'Northern ports, on board
the Oneida which boat leaves as above. d
Oneida and St. LavVtente iiave been fitted up u
in the best siyle.and wii! give entire satisfaction to ail g
who may lake passage on them n
Refer to j R. B. Allen, ) Ogdens- rl
J. H. Greer, Kingston; G.N.Seymour, s burgh. {|
Stow & Field, S. Harbor. J H. Fitzhugh, Oswego b
Ogdensburgh, May 4, 1342 * ](
~ “~ j I ■ " at
Regimental Orders. o
BIIOVVNVILLE, Slay 23, 1813. 81
:N PURSUANCE of (he power vested in me
by Chap. X. o! (he fir-U part of the revised _
statutes of this State, — I. Lonson C. Pratt, Co-
lonel and Commanding officer of the 21st Regi- „
ment of Riflemen of the Meliiia, ol the State if I
New York, do hereby appoint a regimental Court "T
Martial, for the trial of all delinquents and defi- , !
ciencies in the said regiment, to consist of three
members, viz: Capt. Charles P. Plumb, as Pres-
ident thereof, Capt. Alvin T Herrick, and adju-
tant Alanson P. Sigourney, as members. The
said court will convene on the 17ih day of Octo-
ber*next. at 9O’clock V- M., at tiie House of! Y
Charles P. Plumb, in the village of Brownville, *
and adjourn from time lo time as shall become di
necessary for the transaction of business. W
52ml L. C. PRATT, Colonel. re
SHERIFF SA LE -By virtue of a writ of fieri focoasf
issued out of the coiiVt of Common Pleas of the county
of J fierson, to me directed and delivered, against the
g o Is, & chatties, lands and lenements of Asa Bishop, I
have seized and taken all the right, title and ihterlst *?/!nch
the said Asa Bishop had on the 23d day of March . 1312, ,( f
at any time thereafter to the following described property,'
J to wit; —All that certain piece or parcel of land situated id
| tiie town of Clayton, on lot No. -269 great lot Ntv4 of Mo
Combs purchase, bounded as follows. Beginning at A
I pints stone marked F H in three mile creek flats, running
| thence uo.nh forty .eight dg forty minutes west along the
•j westerly hue OT a lot contracted to John Spark folly eiftht
chains forty links to a: post K il in the west line of lot No
two hundred and sixty nine (269) thence south thirty seven
degrees west along said Westerly line twenty two chains
r.inety links to the south westerly corner of said lot No two
hundred and sixty nine (No 269) ton black ash post mark-'
ed 353 269 2TI 27 1, thence south fifty three and a hah d«
east along the line between lots two hundred and sixty nine
I (259) two hundred and seventy one (271) thirty nine chains
| eighty links to a lime stone marked J R. thence north fifty
idg east said three mile creek twenty chains forty one
links to the place of beginning, containing ninety one a-
j cres and twentv one hundredths of laml be the s-me more
I or dess, which I shall sell at public auction to the highest
j bidder at the public house now kept by Charles Perkins
| in the village of Watertown, on Saturday 30thddy of Ju-
jly next at 12 o’clock A M A. I’. BRAYTO x Sheriff,
By R. R.BROWN, Dept.
! Dated May SOih, 18-12. - 52w0
; CHANCERY sth Circuit, Joseph Boyer,_
j vs Philander, Miller; Chu’s. D. Wright-
Solicitor. By virtue of a decretal order in this
cause, lyshall expose for Sale at public auction at
the “A tnciican” now kept by Blish Curtis in
the village of Wat -itown, county of Jefferson, on
the 23 J day of July next, at one o’clock I\ M, —
AII that ; icce of land in lot N number 533 (if
great lot No. 4 o! Maeornhs purchase in the town
of Leßay in the county and state aforesaid viz ;
bounded a? follows, to wit, beginning on the east-
erly bank of the Indian River at a point eight
links northeast ftom an Elm sapling cornered and
is S 40 dg VV 14 chs* thence S 8 dg W one chain
■ GO links from where the line between No 535
536 strikes said bank, thence 53 J rig cast 47 chains
j io a hemlock post marked 1 O S P M, thefice S'
j 36 dg W 12 chs 50 Iks (by compass here S 3-l|
1 dg W) to a hemlock post and stones, thence (by
j compass here N 56 dg W) N dg W 34 chs
) 70 Iks to the hunk ol said fiver at a soft maple
tree cornered and marked P M, thence along the
! bunk of said river, N29dg E 68 Iks, flier,he fv T 41
dg E one chain 76 Iks, thence Nl2dg E twef
chains, thence N 36| dg W I wo chs 25 Iks, thence’
N 4 dg W two chs 21 Iks, thence N 5 dg W I wet
chs 50 Iks, thence N S dg E 66 Iks to the place of
i beginning, containing filly one acres ahd 63 100
of an acre as surveyed by E Tucker, being the
same piece of land conveyed to said Miller by
Robert Lansing Master in Chancery on theSlsi
day o! September 1537, W. C THOMPSON,
bated, June 21, 1842, Master m Chancery
IN CHANCERY”, slh CircuP. John RlaßE, vs
William Smith. Cl as. D. Wright, Solicitor.
By virtue of a decretal order in this cause, I
shall expose for sale at public auction at the “A-
merican,” new kept by Ulish & Cu tis in the vri
luge of Watertown, county of Jefferson, on the
23d day of Jidy next at one o’clock Ik M. — Alf
that Certain M in Watertown on Black River, lay-
j ing t'ast of the- Union Mills, beginning nine bet
sontheilv from the south west Comer of the eld
Pulling Mill, running thence westerly to the old
Slone Mill in rear of the Union Mill, thence noV-
therly along the east line of the old mill fifty feet,-
thence easterly at rigid angles thirty five, feet,
(henee southerly a'onglhe west line of the old Ful-
ling M ill lot to the place o f ' beginning, it being
the same lot thisdiy (meaning the 20th day of
December 1839) deeded to the party of the first
part (meaning the said William' Smith) by- sarT
( Merrill ( meaning Hiram Merrill') Fdi FarWtdl and
| Josiah W. Baker. W. C. TiIOM'PSON,
Dated June 2d 1812. Master in Cnnncerv.
3 CHANCERY, sih Circuit, Stephen D.
, da Sf,oAs, vs. John J. Harter & others—Juur?
- Cr.ARKE, Solicitor.
By virtue of a decretal order in this can?e, F
shall expose for sale at public auction at ihe * A-
- merican,” now kept by Jslish &. Curtiss, in tiro
' Village of Watertown, county of Jefferson, oh the
. 23d day of July next, *at 10 o’clock, A. M.—Ail
those two certain pieces of land situate in tie
town of Le Ray, in I lie county of Jefferson, in the'
State of New - York, being parts of lots No. 529,
530, of Hie subdivision of G rent lot No. 4 of
i combs purchase and bounded as follows to wit:
I The first piece begins at the Corner of lots Nos
7- 4 *° ’r i” ! 0 £ 7'V« p"drnns thence along 111 »
Imes of lots No 244 & 530 North 30 dg i:;asi 30
ch tins 54 links to a stake 7 links north east from
a hickory tree cornered', fhelite along binds of
Daniel D S oan soutli 54 dg east 16 chains 40 links
to a slake and stones th e northwest corner of land
firmerly owned by, Bani Henry, thence along
said land soutii 36 dg west 30 chains 70 links to a
s’ake and stones, thenrco north 54 dg west ]6 ch’s
43 Pks along land formerly owned by Mode's
to the place of b ginning, containing fifty and 24
100 acres of land.
r l fie second piece'is hounded os follfiKvs to v\i;;
by lot No 530, westerly by Jot No
2-10, southerly by that part of said lot No 529
heretofore so'd to F Trevallee and C Hastings &
easterly by that part of said lot No 529 heretofore
sqlffto John McOmber comainirig fifty one- 54- JOO
acres of land, excepting and reserving tlu re fro in’
thirteen acres heretofore conveyed to Lvman Root
land aRo eight 93-TOO acres’Conveyed to John Me
1 Ornher, leaving twenty nine 63-100 acres of said
j last piece contained in and conveyed by said rnort-
CIIA’S D. WRIGHT,
| Dated June 2d 1842. Master in Chancery.
| A T a court of chancery held for the State of New York
| d~l. at the city of Utica, on the 29th’ day of April, ore
thousand eight hundred anfl forty two—Present Philo
| Grid ley, vice chancellor ol the fifth circuit:— Abner White
j vrf Si: I den Wells & ai.
I J' XWearlH* .ntlsKctorifjr to th is court t hat the tie fern!
ant Seiden V\ ells h a resident of ibis State hot raimni be
Oented with process by reason 6't Hh rominueil absence
I from Ins place of icsidence ; On motion of C. D. Wi igi r •
Solicitor f-r the complainant, it is ordered that said deter-
dant cause his appearance to he entered and notice there
ofserved mi the Complainant’s solicitor within £ months
from toe date ol this order—and in case he appeals that he
file his answer to comblajnanr-s bill and serve a copy
thereof on the complainant’s solicitor vvitimi 40 days after
service ot a copy of said 13 II and in default thereof said
I bill may be taken as confessed by him. And it is further
j ordered, that within twenty days the said complainai t
j cau-e this order to be published accco' dlng: to law jn (be
state paper and in the Watertown Renter. or that ho
) cause a copy of this order to be personally served on ti e
said defendant at feast twenty days before the time above
j prescribed fur his appears nee,
t 48w8 J. WATSON WILLIAMS, Clerk
BY order of the Ifm. Tliram Carpenter, judge of the
je.fi' t 'ori coi'inty’coin ts, counceilor Sir., notice is here-
by riven that an, attachment has issued asainst the esta e
nfpPKRRK MATHIVKTT as a non-resident debtor, pur-
suant to the statute concerning “Attachments against
absconding, concealed and non-resident debtors.” and
that the samtfi will be sold for the paymento.f His debts, un-
less he appear and discharge such attachment, according
to law, within nine months from the first publication ofthh
notice ; and that the payment of any debts due to him by
residents of this state', and the dHiVc»;y to him or to any
person for his use of any property within this stare be-
longing to him and the transfer of any property by him for
any purpose whatever, are forbidden by law’ and are void
Dated the 14th day of May iS42. * J MULLIN’,
49m9 Attorney for attaching creditors.
BY Order of JosephiVl ullin... supreme court
commissioner, residing in Watertown, Jef-
ferson County, notice is hereby given pursuant
to the provisions of ihe statute, entitled “of attach-
ments against absconding, concealed and non res-
ident debtors” that an attachment has been issued'
against the estate of Rufus Bari', a non-resident
debtor, arid that the saule will be sold frM he pay-
ment of his debts, unless he appears and dischar-
ges such attachment according to Law,within nine
months from the first publication; of this notice,
and that the payment of any debts due to him by
by residents of this State, and Ihe delivery 0 F
to any properly within this Slate belonging to
such debtor, to him or for his use and the trans-
fer of any properly, to him are forbidden by ] aw .
and are void, G C. SHERMAN,
Attorney for Attrehius Creditor
Dated May 6, 1842. 47 Dm
p a p {•: st.
T ETTER & FOOLSCAP, ruled and plain;
I.J :13 s * Easters Make— bitter and cheaper
than any made in "this Burgh." A splendid Va-
riety, and large quantity for sale VERY LOW.
PLINY MILES, Bookseller.
Watertown, June 11, 1’842. (52tf)
MRS. burgT~
TXT OULD inform the inhabitants of Water
» V town that she has just received a new-ad-
dition of Artificials at her residence cv
Woodruff street, which she offers wholesale < r
retail at reduced prices, June 4 1842. M od


DOCTORS VS LADIES.
The first number of the Philadelphia i
Monthly Journal nl Medical >c ence, edit-
ed by N. Pv- Smith, M. D-. Piofe-sor ol
Anatomy, contains an arti I* from the pen
of the editor On ihe Injuries resulting
from Ihe Confinement r J Ihe Chest by Drees
founded on the case of a young lean, e who
was brought into the Anaiomtoal Hah ot
Jtffjrson College f>r dissection.
She had died of pulmonary consump-
tion, “one of the greatest predisposing
causes of which we know (-ays the Doc-
tor) to he a confined chest ; anil it Cannot
be drnib'ed that lire fatal disease in this in-
stance had been aggravated, and might
have been provoked try the habit ofdrrss-
Omitting his description of .he appea-anC'
es p esetiled by this instance ot “artificial
mal confoTma'iorr,” (rather too technical
to be comprehended by the general read-
er,) we give a few extracts from the at li-
do, which we are apprehensive wi 1 ho
more generally understood than regarded
by those for whose benefit they are de-
signed.
It is a fact, although perhaps not gener-'
ally observed, that in females, by a peculi-
arity of mechanicism, tire whole structure
of the chest is more elastic and mobile,
and that the free motions ot lire chest in
relation to the function of respiration are
more important than they are in males.
From this observation it tollows lhat any
article of dress which constricts, in any
considerable degree, the chest, must be
infinitely more productive of mischief than
to males. F. m des ate exceedingly incre-
dulous in regard lo tire injuries resulting
from incarceration of the chest, because
the corset, after having been worn for a
ConsirleraTjle time, not only ceases to give
any sensible itrconrenience, but seems
necse.-ary lo (heir comfort as a support to
the body. This, however, only renders
the mischief invidious.
We very well know that by hahil the
body only be inured to almost any res-
traint as to become unconscious ol its pres-
ence ; but if it be persevered in the injuri-
ous effects sooner or later result. All ad-
mit that the corset, when first worn, cans,
eg much uneasin' ss, and young git Is are
often very refractory in regald to this part
of the ir physical education.
The injuries which result to the consti-
tution from long continued compres-ion of
thorax are manifold. Not only are mo
lions of the chest restrained, hut the capa-
city of the lungs for air is encroached upon
—the blood circulating through these or-
gans, is retarded, and its change, effected
by the atmosphere, ceases lo be complete.
The lungs becomes engorged are thus pro-
voked to disease. With us She disease
which will most frequently be developed
or originally caused, is tuberculous con-
sumption. Wilt inflarnatory affections of
the lungs diseases of the heart and circula-
tory organs are also in the train of its ef-
fects. It has been ascertained by experi-
ments that the alternate expansion and col-
lapse of the chest are almost necessary lo
a free circulation of blood as lo healthy
respiration. The mechanical pressure op-
erates imraedially upon the heart, rcsli_ain_-
inir its natural expansion lor Iho reception
ol blood.
The frequent occurrence of fain'ing in
ftmulca fashionably attired, especially
when breathing the impure air of crowded
rooms, and when the circulation is hurried
by exercise, are proof of the jii-tiiess of
our observations. Vv hen ever this occurs
in the presence i fan honest matron, ac.
quainter! with the mysteries of the modern
toilet, she immedialiy applies herself with
scissors, tooth and nail, to the lacings of
the corset, and wilh all the eagerness
with w hich one w.-uld cut the rope cf a
suicide. Palpha ion of the beart al o re-
sults from any cause which, restraining
the natural action of the organ, compels it
to struggle in Ihe performance of its office.
The itjuries also inflicted on the digestive
organs are uol less obvious than those of
the citculatory.
The argument w hich, of all others, may
perhaps with females be most effectually
employed against the u-re of this procrus-
tian girdle, is the fact that, beside its less 1
direct influence in substituting the pale en-
sign of disease for the “ crimson of their
lips and of their cheeks,” it often spoils
the symmetry of their form.
I h ave seen a fair actress upon the stage I
so begirt with whalebone and steel, that
in impassioned utterance, when the tide of
the bosom, should speak the emotion of
the heart, there was substituted for it an
onseemingly anhelation, the chest being
fixed like a bust of marble. Surely fe-
males would not willingly, for lhat which
is so graceless, sacrifice a charm that has
set so many poets raving
I could adduce cases which have fallen
under my own observation illustrative of
the evils of this too frequent cause of dis-
ease and deformity ; but perhaps we have
said enough to convince our professional
brethren of the importance of overlooking
nothing in which may lurk the embryo
cause ol disease and death, whether it he
a tight neckloth, a laced corset, a dish of
ill prepared food, the subtle principle of
contagion, or the desolating I realh of the
simoon. Let nothing w hich is hostile lo
health and life be deemed unworthy the
attention oftheir protectors.
A Fix.—J. B Longly, Chairman ot the
Loco Foco Central Committe in Guern-
sey County, Ohio, is making his party
great trouble by his factious refusal to
swallow their E l ree Trade notions. Ele
wages the warfare manfully in behalf of
Protection, and puls his friends to the
bluch hy quoting from a speech made by
Mr. Van Buren at Albany, July 10th,
1827, in which he earnestly defends a
Protective Tariff! The Committe of
Guernsey County have endeavored to
shake thei r Chairman off! but, by virtue
of his office, he vetoes their efforts and
holds his place. He advertises, moreover,
to address the People of lhat County on
ihe subject of the Tariff at sundry times
and places. He is very generally de-
nounced as a 4 British Whig.’
THE AMERICAN MECHANIC.
; Wliatfivt r may be the ” pomp, gl |l ry j
am) -circumstance ’’ of the great men in the. I
world—whatever may be Ihe dazzling 1
pagi nutty of life—ihe glitter of fashiona- 1
Lie society nrd splendid misery of those ]
who hr lieve that " those who think must
govern those who toi',” there is no sitna- 1
lion more enviable than (he plain Arneri- 1
cam HU clranic; free for every tiring which J
Heaven designed him ; untramelied in his |
opinions, and left lo tire guidance cf his ’
own genius, ho walks erect in the might 1
of mm. Earning wilh his own hands the ;
means by which lie supports himself, pro ,
tecied try a goverment which, like ihe sun, i
sheds ds light and fostering care, npon all; ’
who shall gainsay his right lo enjoy ihe '
fruits of Itis labor in the way which may
best please him T—Under our goverment,
prudence, indn-try and.economy are sure'
lo meet wilh their reward ; and it shunlri
Ire remembered by every mechanic lhai
the road lo preferment and official dignilv
is open lo eve y one. All trial the people*
want in those that serve them, is iidelry
■ and patriotism —truth lo (he Cnnsli ulion,
and intelligence enough to perform their
duty. It is the drily of every American
to rentier himself competent lo acl on all,
occasions as becomes the American citi-
zen. Intelligence, education, and study
are within the reach of every human being
The first American (lag lh.it was display-
ed in Great Britain, was hoisted on board
of the ship Bedford, Capt. Mores, of Nan
tucket. Site arrived at the Downs, Feb
3, 17G3, passed Gravesend the 4.h and
was reported at the Custom House on the
offi. A London journal of 1753 stales (hat
“she was not allowed regular entry until
some consultation had taken pi. ice between
Ihe commissioners of the customs anil the
lords of council, on account of lira many
acts of Pai lirnent yet in force against the
rebels in America. She is loaded wilh
4-17 butts of whale oil, is American built,
manned wholly by American seamen,
wears the rebel colors, anil belongs to the
island ol Nantucket, in Massachusetts.
This is the first vessel which displayed the
thirteen rebellious stripes in any British
[tort. The vessel is at Horsley, down u
little below the lower, and is intended im-
medially to return to New England.”
Arrival of thf Porpoise. — The U.
S. brig Porpoise, of the Exploring Expe-
dition, arrived here this morning from a
voyage round lire world, and last from Rio
Janeiro. On the 28 of June she was with
in two days sail ol (his port, but her arri-
val was delayed by light winds and calms.
The Porpoise is from the East Indies
>it St. Helena, and last from Rio Janeiro.
She has been absent 3 years and 11
months, (4 years and 3 months in commis-
sion,) has sailerl the distance of 95,C00
miles, sustaining no material injury or ac-
cident, and lost hut two of her crew by
death, viz ; George Reynolds, ordinary
seaman, 23d August, 1839, off Isles of Lis
appointment, a dangerous archipelago, and
David Bloriget, quarter master, Nov. 3
1839, harbor of Pango Pango, Tootooiila
Lie.
NEW CHEAP ONE PRICE STORE- j
BLOM & Co., No. 2 Court Street, 2d door from ;
die corner of Arsenal* sf. Watertown—res- \
peel fury invites (he citizens of Jefferson county to <
call and examine (heir New Spring GOODS, con-
sisting of Staple and Fancy DRY GOODS, -
Jewelry, Fancy Goods, Accordions & Cutlery,
which they are selling al 20 per cent cheaper
than any other store. Call and satisfy yourselves.
48if
—READ THE FOLLOWING—'
Cheapest Dry Goods, Lace & Fancy
Store in Watertown.
The One Price Cash S/ore.
CALL and satisfy yourselves at the New Cheap
Dry Goods and Lace Store—you can par-
chase lire real “chine'’ Patterns— Moselain De-
Lains, Linen, Thread, Laces and Edgings, Nee-
dle-worked Inserlings, Ribbonsofevery descrip-
tion and every variety of Fancy Dry Goods—al-
so a large assortment of Black and White Meri-
no, Lamb’s Wool, Worsted and Cotton Stock-
ings, Gloves, &c. The Fancy Goods and Cut-
lery consists, in part, of Knives and Forks, Rutter
Knives, Penknives, Razors, Scissors, Spoons,
Wallets, Toys for Children, Needles, Tape,
Thread, Shaving Boxes, Sealing Wax, and Steel
Pens, &c. *
JEWELRY in every Variety—ACCORDI-
ONS from Fifty Cents each—At the Ne w Store,
No. 2, Court Street, Fail banks* Buildings, Wa-
tertown. BLOM & CO.
N. 13. One price invariably asked,
MEDICAL NOTICE.
X H E subscriber informs the public that he has
resumed permanently, his professional business
in Watertown, at the office he formerly occupied
in L. Paddock’s buildings.
He oilers as some additional advantages, to
which he formerly possessed, of practicing, that
he has been engaged for the last seven years, in
teaching large classes ir. the science of Medicine,
particularly the principles and practice of op-
erative Surgery, and at the same time testing
these principles in an extensive field of practice,
with an accumulation of all the modern and nseful
improvements in surgical remedies and apparatus
necessary for success in this important science.
The favorable situation of Watertown, in the
northern section of the Slate of New York, lias
induced him to procure and arrange a place lor in-
valids with suitable accommodations at a cheap
rate, for the benefit of those who may desire that
attendance and attention, which is necessary to
cure many formidable surgical diseases Here
the afflicted can meet their object with less ex-
pense and receive belter attention than to employ
the surgeon'to travel a distance to attend them.
There has been much recent improvement in
treating many surgical diseases, parliculaily those
ol tlie Eye, Ear, Club-Foot, Squinting, Stammer-
ing, curvature of the Spine, and other distortions
of the joints and limbs, arrising from muscular
contractions and other causes. Success in all
those cases, ir. some measure, depends on makin.
tire necessary distinction ir. cases that are curable
from those that are not.
These have been subjects of special, anatomical
and pathological investigation and treatment adop-
ted which Iras been successful. He has practiced
srrcchssfully a new mode of remedying nil cases of
Hair-Lip, and other deformities of the face
MEDICAL INSTRUCTION,
The subscriber will give instruction at Lis rooms
in all the branches of a thorough medical educa-
tion. Ho has a very extensive Library, and col-
lections of healthy and morbid anatomy, so that
the student can derive great advantages, that will
enable irinr to progress with success in his studies,
preparatory to attending a full course of lectures.
If there should be sufficient encouragement, Ire .
will give a course of lectures on Surgical Anato-
my, and medical jurisprudenc, in the month ot’Sep-
tember, and a In 11 demonstration of all suraicalop-
eialiohs. AMASA TROWBRIDGE, M. D.
Mayl, 1842.
TNEFAULT having been made in the payment
U of a certain sum of money secured by mort-
gage, bearing date the Ist day of February, 1837,
i executed by George Smith and Lyman Smith, to
Danford N. Barney, and on the 25th day of Jan-
uary, 1842, assigned to Charles W. Bishop of all
that, certain piece or parcel of land situate and
being in Henderson, county of Jefferson New
York, bounded & described as follows, to wit :
Beginning at a red cedar stake in the centre of the
highway at-the south-east corner of subdivision lot |
No 2 on great lot No 44, according to a survey of
said town made i»y Benjamin Wright, running
thence North eighty degrees, West one hundred
and one rods and seventeen links along the south
line of said subdivision—thence North forty de-
grees fifteen minutes, East twenty two rods and
sixteen links to a red cedar stake —thence North
eigh'y eight degrees east sixteen rods eleven
links to a large elm tree near the distillery—thence
South sixty nice degrees east forty seven rods
eighteen links to a red cedar slake—-thence South ■
sixty four degrees thirty minutes east twenty rods
to the centre of Lillie Stony Creek —thence South
eighty five degrees and thirty minutes 'east eight
1 rods to the centre of the highway—thence South
nine degrees west nine s ods along the centre of the ,
highway to the place of Beginning : containing
nine acres three quarters twenty two rods and two
tenths of a rod of lund-*-a more particular deScrip-
! t ion of which will be found recorded in the Clerk’s
office of J. ff Tson county, in Liber S, of Mort-
gages, page 212, 4-c. on which mortgage there is
claimed to be due of Principal and interest $ 1,-
166 OT7,0 T 7, at the date of this notice.
Now therefore hy virtue of a power contained in
said mortgage and of the statute in such rase made
1 and provided, (he aforesaid premises will be sold to
the highest bidder, to satisfy the claims of said
mortgage, at the Inn now kept by Francis S. -Part-
ridge, in the village of Bellville. on the l Oth day of
September next, at 10 o’clock, A. M. Dated Ma.ch
22,1812. CHARLES VV. BISHOP,
Assignee.
E. B. Plawes, Att’y. 4im'6.
JW. BAKER, returns thanks to his custom*
• ers for their liberal patronage, and an-
nounces That he has associated with him in the
Mercantile Business his nephew, George Baker.
The business will be continued at the old stand
under the Firm of J. W. & G. BAKER.
Watertown, Oct. 19, 1841. 19
IS it not a wonder that Kemp & Son’s Clarifi-
ed Essence of HOREHOUND CANDY is
doing such wonders ? No medicine was ever of-
fered lo the public half so good or popular. It
cures sooner, easier taken, and the cheapest that
can be bought for coughs, colds, and all diseases
leading to the consumption. This medicine is to
be had at the American Recess, in the basement
story of the “American,” and of their Agents
all over the United Slates. 26
Coughs, Colds, Whooping-Cough.,
THESE complaints are very prevalent at
present lime, and all who are afflicted with
them will find Pease’s Hoarhound Candy the
most delightful and efficacious remedy in use.
For sale by P. MILES. Bookseller,
No. 3, Ex. Dld’gs.
From the N. Y. Sunday Mercury.
The following from an exchange paper is too
good to be lost. It speaks volumes duodecimo
in favor of our friend Pease’s candy :
“Sammy, my son, what aie you doing out there
in the wet with your shoes off.” “O, I want to
catch a big cold, and get some of Pease’s candy
lo cure it.”
“New-Yop.k, Oct. 20, 1841.
Messrs. Knowlton 4- fl ee : —We ship you to-
day, a Winter’s supply of our Horehound Can-
dy, which you will please advertise as the genu-
ine ortitle .
(Signed,) J. PEASE & SON.’
It will be seen by the above extract, that
Messrs. Pease & Son have been pleased to ap-
nnint --the nnldln 1 * ■»-> as Agents tor
tlie sale of tile above named celebrated specific
and palliative. The Candi’d, but more especially
the un Candl’d portion of community, is invited
to test the virtues of this modern panacea, which,
for tlie pleasure of taking, and faith in a speedy
restoration to health, it is supposed many have
voluntarily become sick !
•CP A satisfactory allowance made to tho
who buy to sell again.
Nov. 25, 1841. KNOW ETON & RICE.
Ij' OR SALE—A first rate two Horse LUMBER
WAGGON, strongly ironed and well paint-
ed, on liberal terras. D. D. OTIS.
Watertown, 10th Feb. 1843.
XNDIA RUBBERS, a large stock no handful
the lowest price. BATES $ BACON.
Watertown, Nov. 2, IS 11. 22if
Moffat’s Vegetable Life Pills &
Phoenix Bitters.
iWIE celebrity which these excellent Medicines
have acquired, in curing almost every disease
to which the human frame is liable, is a matlerfa-
miliar with almost every intelligent person. They
became known by their fruits—their good works
have testified for them—they did not thrive by the
faith of the credulous.
In cases of Cosliveness, Dyspepsia, Billions
and Liver A flections, Asthma, Piles, Settled Pains,
Rheumatism, Fevers and Amies, Obstinate Head
aches, Impure state of the Fluids, Unhealthy ap-
pearance of the Skin, Nervous Debility, tiro Sick-
ness incident, to Females in Delicate Health, ev-
ery kind of Weakness in the Digestive Organs,
and in all general Derangements of Health, These
Medicines have invariably proved a certain and
speedy remedy. They restore vigorous health to
the most exhausted constitutions. A single trial
will place (he Life Pills and Phoenix Bitters be-
yond tire reach of competition, in the estimation
of every patient.
Prepared and sold, wholesale and retail, at WM
B. MOFFAT’S Medical Office, 375 Broadway,
New York,
N. B. None are genuine unless (cy l ave the
fac simile of John Moffat’s signature.
ICPTho Life Pills are sold in boxes—Price,
25 cents, 50 cents, and $1 each, according to the
size ; and the Phoenix Bitters in bottles, at $ I or
$2 each, with full directions.
FOR GRATUITIOUS Dl STRIBUTION-
An interesting little pamphlet, entitled “ Moffat’s
Medical Manual, designed as a Domestic Guide
to Health—containing accurate information con-
cerning the most prevalent diseases, and (he mos'
approved remedies—by WM. B. MOFFAT.
Apply to the Agents.
The genuine for sale wholesale and retail hi
A. B. HULL, sole Agent.
No. 3, Central Block, Watertown.
Satinett Warps.
THE Watertown Cotton Mills Company con-
_ stantly keep for sale Satinett Warps ofasu-
perior quality mad, from New Orleans Cotton,
warranted ior sale very low for Cash or approv-
ed Bank paper. T. BAKER, Agent,
f eb. 25, 1843. Old Factory Store.
Potash Kettles.
FOR SALE, three 110 Gallon Potash Kettles,
cast at Sterlingville. Enquire of
T. BAKER, Agent, Old Factory Store.
March 11, 1841. g 7
Dwelling House for Sale,
SITUATED near the old Academy, and occn -
pied by Dr. Walton. BATES & BACON
/a.ienu / 184 .
Cash ! Cash ! I
PAID for Flax-Seed in any quantify, at the
Drug Store of T. H. CAMP. \
Kept. 1841. j 2
DEFA ULT having been made in the performance
of the conditions of ihe following Mortgages, execu-
ted to the Commissioners for loaning money in the County
of Jefferson, lo wilt
One executed by Benjamin Barney, bearing dale
the twenty first day of September in the year of our Lord
one thousand eight hundred and twenty four, to secure the
payment of the sum of seventy nine dollars slily eight
cenis,all that piece of land situated in i he town of Wa- j
lertown, in the village of Waienown, beginning at the
southeasterly corner of H. H. Collins lot on the westerly
side of JV/adisun street, thence westerly on the south line
of the said H H Coffinsand Sally Perry’s lot fourteen rods
lo the southerly corner of the said Sally Perry’s lot, thence
southerly parallel with the said Madison s'tr‘eet twelve
rods to a slake and stones, thence easterly and parallel
with the southerly line of the said Henry Hale and Sadly
Perry’s fourteen rods to the westerly line of the said Mad-
ison ■street, thence northerly along ihe said westerly line oft
Madison street tvVGIVe rods to the place of beginning, con-
taining one acre eight rods of land, also the dwelling hoMse |
standing in the said JJ/adison street wilh the land in front
thirty feet foe a door yard and in rear thereof thirty feet
for a wood house, also my right and title to the land in said
street between the first mentioned lot and the said house
and ground belonging to it in case of alteration or'removal
of said street at any future period.
«4lso, one executed by Oliver Pierce, bearing date the
first clay of June in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and thirty 4x, to secure the payment of
two hundred and fifty dollars, all those two cenain pieces
of land situated in the (own of Leray, and are parts of lot
No. 530 of the subdivision of great lot No. 4, of Jt/ac-
ombs purchase, and are bounded as follows viz. the
first piece begins at an oak post and stones at the south-
easterly corner of land said id belong to J. Bellinger, thence
south 36J° W 6 chains. 67 links to a point in the centre of
the road 37 links South degrees West from a post and i
stones thence S 52° East 25 chains 12 links along the cen :
tre of the road to a point 38 links S I4f dg W from afpost j
and stones, thence N 14| dg E 7 chains 46 links to an oak
post and stWies In the line 'of J Bellinger aforesaid, thence
Worth 52j dg W 22 chains 33 Jinks along the said Bellin-
ger’s land to the place of beginning containing 16 11-100
acres of land. The second piece begins in the road leading
from Evans Mills to Pameliafonr Corners at a stone buried
in the ground which is south 53 dg W 96 Iks southwester-
ly from the horse shed and running from thence N 2|dg VV
three chains to a post and stones, thence S S7£ dg W one
chain 96 links to a long stone set in ihe ground, thence N
£ deg E 2 chains 5-3 links to a stake and stones the south-
westerly corner of jo.-eph Buyer’s land to the centre of the
road leading from Evans Mills to the Dutch Settlement,
thence south 5 chains 29 links along said road to its inter-
section with the road to Pamelia four Corners aforesaid,
thence S- 87£ dg W 2 chains 99 links to the beginning con-
taining 2 acres 12 100 of an acre of land, excepting and
reserving a small lot of land owned by Doct. Horatio Orvis
of Le Ray’s ville. Notice is therefore hereby given that
in pursuance of the statute in such case made and provi-
ded, the above mortgaged premises will be sold by
the Commissioners ot loans on the third Tuesday of
September next, atthe Court House in the town of Wa-
tertown, in the county of Jefferson, at 11 o’clock in ihe A.
M. of that day, at public vendue to the highest bidder.
ABEL P. LEWIS, ) Commissonßi’s
Daniel eames, j of Loans.
Dated at TFatertown, May 24,1842- 50
To Magistrates & Lawyers.
. r o a
JUST received and for sale, a new supply of
Cowen’s '.Treatise, Magistrates’. Criminal
Law, Edward’s Treatise, Chilly’s Precedents,
Constable’s Guide, Clerk’s Assistant.
0ct.21,1841. KNOWETON & RICE.
Boots and Shoes
OF every description; kind, and quality, just
received and will be offered at prices unusu-
ally low, for Cash, Wholesale and Retail.
A. N. CORSS.
IFaterlown, June 5, 1841. 99
MAP OF TEXAS, on a large sca’e, for sale
by KNOWLTON & RICE.
April, 1842.
Domestic Goods.
A FULL supply of Brown Sheetings, Shirt-
ings, Yarns, WicKiNG,and Batting, man-
ufactured at the Old Cotton Factory and for sale
wholesale and retail on usual terms.
Oct. 1, 1839. lOtf T.BAKER, Ag’t.
Leather & Findings
MAY now be found at the old Establishment
of A. N. CORSS.
Watertown, sth June, 1841. 99
PEASE'S CLARIFIED ESSENCE GF
HOAR HO UNO CANDY.
ANEW supply just received. Those suffer-
ing from colds, coughs, sore throat, or any
disease of the lungs, will find this the most pleas-
ant and efficacious remedy now in use. £3~Re-
inetuber that confectioners are never
-- • «•>- pciauii m Watertown sells
Pease’s Hoarhound Candy butP. MILES,
Bookseller, No. 3, Exch’ge Bld’gs.
Watertown, May 10 IS4L 96
IL AND CANDLES.—Superior SPERM
OIL , bleached and unbleached Refined
Whale Oil, a beautiful article, old English
Linseed Oil, and Sperm Candles, just received
and for sale in large or small quantities, very
cheap, at the Drug Store of
May 25, 1840. T 11. CAMP.
Lands For Sale.
OA 000 ACRES OF LAND in JelTer-
OUj UUI7 son and Lewis Counties.—The
subscriber offers for sale, in lots to suit purchas-
ers,Bo,ooo acres of Land, situate in the towns ol
Clayton, Orleans, Pamelia, Alexandria, Le Ray,
Philadelphia, Antwerp and Wilna, in the coun-
ty of Jefferson, and Diana, in the county of Lewis.
These lands are mostly very valuable farming
lands, upon which there are many first rate water
privileges on the Indian River, OsWegatchie
River, and at the outlet of Bonaparte Lake. —
There are also a number of beds of iron ore, both
bog and rock, in vast quantities, easy of access,
and in the immediate vicinity of the v/ater privi-
leges, affording greatinducementslo persons who
are desirous ol going into the iron or furnace
business. There are now in successful and prof
itable operation two furnaces in Wilna, one in
Philadelphia* and one in Diana,in the immediate
vicinity, and upon the lands offered for sale,af-
ording employment for a great many persons,
both in winter and summer and at high wages.
TheTe are also upon the tract, some important
limbered lands, so located as to accommodate
purchasers with every means of payment, by the
?ale oftheir wood, or converting the wood into
3oal, or the sale oftheir ashes, by which favorable
ocation they can make a ready disposition of the
imber to be taken from theirclearings to pay for
heir farms. There are alsoseverai welltimbered
pine groves.
These lands are situated in a healthy country,
lurrounded by extensive and thriving settlements,
jetween the Black River and the Rive 'St. Law-
rence. Thetr vicinity to several flourisuing Vil-
ages, offer to these lands all the advantages ofan
>ld settled country. The improvements gr the
ract are already extensive, and a great many
arms are in a high state of cultivation. Griat-
nills and saw-mills arc in operation on the tract,
ind good roads connect the settlements in every
Erection.
The most favorable opportunity is offered to
persons to pnrcha.se farms, or large tracts; and
jasy terms of payment will be afforded. The ti-
de is indisputable.
Apply at the Land Offices, at Watertown, La
FargevUle,nnd Wilna atthe Checkered House.
JOHN LA FARGE.
September 10, 1839. 34tf
ffJjThe subscriber likewise offers for sale a
tavern stand, to which a post-office is attached,
situated on a good and well travelled turnpike—
and in which a good and lucrative business is
done Apply as above.
Feb’y 5, 1841.
Bell & Ride Establishment.
r V HE subscriber would inform the public that
X he colinues to manufacture BELLS and
BRASS CASTINGS of every description, &c.;
uich as Steamboat, School Mouse, Cow, Crier
>r Linnerand Sleigh BELLS. Copperßivets,
stove Trimmings, «&c. Brass Castingsof all de-
scriptions manufactured to order. Also, Com-
jfON and Cast Steer RIFLES. SLEIGH
oLLLScan be furnished in any quantity. with
>r without straps.
Merchants or dealers in any of the above arti-
cles, can be furnished on the shortest notice, and
vith as good and cheap an article, as at any oth-
restablishment in the State. All orders thank-
ully received and punctually attended to.
AUSTIN R. SKINNER.
natcrtoicn, August 26, 1839. 32tf '
I assurance against Fire!
THE undesigned having been appointed Agent
of Jeff. Co. for the Washington County Mu
tual Insurance Company, {in place of 11. Horr,
resigned,) will insure property against loss by
Fire upon application being made—this being
j the oldest company formed under the new act,
which has a large surplus Fund on hand, and al-
ways paid their Losses promptly. Pot'flirther in-
formation apply to D. C. GRID LEY, Agent.
Watertown, Feb. 16, 1842. 36m3
SF. BATES would inform his friends and
• customers that lie has assoriafed with lim .
j in business, Mr. N. E. BACON, and that the
I Mercantile business will herealter be carried on at
the old stand under the name of
BATES ft BACON.
We have now on hand a large stock of G’oodp,
j of almost every description ; —and particular atten-
| tion is paid to the manufacture and sale ol Boots
: Sn'oes. BATES $ BACON.
Nov. 1841.
By the above arrangement it wi I bo seenthat
the change in my business makes it desirable that
all out-standing debts due me, should be collected;
and 1 shail insist upon payment being madeforlh-
■ with, unless arrangements have previously been
i made for longer credit. S. F. BATES,
Dje Woods and Dye Studs
JUST RECEIVED! !
20 Casks cut Logwood.
20 do do Fustic.
10 do do Camwood.
10 do do Nicaragua.
5 do Ornbro Madder.
Also, Alum, Coperas, Red Argols, Blue Vitri
01, Press Papers, Tenter Hooks, ftc.
The above are of superior quality, and will be
sold at very low prices for cash, by
Sept. 1841. 12 T. 11. CAMP.
Great Bargains at the \
Celebrated Cheap Cash Store, '
\yfj*Courl-Street, ff cilerloivn . «=£g) <
WELCH fy CO. have just received a new i
• and very extensive assortment of DRY
GOODS, &c. for the pi-escnt season; and as they .
consider it DSeless to give particular description of <
them, will only say to their friends and the public
that they are still disposed to abide by their old
rule—light profits for cash and a studied attention
to please and suit their customers ; and they will ■,
further add, that such they believe are their ad- <
vantages in the best markets, that they are pre- (
pared to meet the strongest competition in the (
Slate. Oct. 22, 1841. ’i‘9lf <
"I /XLA Sides Ifarsfccss JLmillicr—
.l cJVJ good article —Just received, and for j
sale at the old establishment, Washington st. i
A. N. CORSS. i
More NeW Goods-. I
ft 3 W. &. G. BAKER are just opening their |
Sr © second supply of Fall & Winter Goods, a- i i
mongst which will be found a large and desirable j i
assortment of Muslin de Laines, Alpines, Tagli- 1
onas, Alapachas, Cashmere Cloths &. Scarfs; — j
Men’s & Boys Capss—Boots & Shoes; —Buffalo
Robes; —all of which will oe sold at unusually ‘
low prices. They respeclful y invite their cus-
tomers and the public to examine their Goods i
before purchasing elsewhere, as there ar'e great
bargains to be had at the old stand of Farvvell &
Baker. Watertown, Nov, 12, 1841. 22
Mrs. Newcomb
RETUR-NS her grateful thanks to the Ladies j
of Watertown and vicinity for the very liberal
patronage she has leceived since her return to this j
place; and would assure them that no exertions
on her part Shall be Wanting to merit its contin-
uance.
Mrs. N. will at all times keep the latest fash-
ions from Nevv-York, and on Tuesday, the I6ih
Nov. she will open a splendid assortment of MIL-
LINERY, direct from the city, ol the latent sh ip-
iL,.» ...:h . .u.j'oonu uy any one this side of
Albany,—consisting of Bonnets, Ribbonds, Fea-
thers, Flowers, &c. Her prices shall be such as
will suit all —as cheap as the cheapest.
Competent Dress Makers have been engaged
by Mrs. N., and she will be happy to Wait on La-
dies in die Cutting and making of Drosses. Her
work shall always be well done, and in the latest
style.
Nov. 8, 1341. 22tf
W A T 33 K T O W IS ~
FS. LAUB, at his old stand, in the East
• end cf Franklin Buildings, Public Square,
bason hand and is constantly manufacturing of
the best materials and woikmanship, a genera I as-
sortment of Cal>a 19 e t Fni'2i i i n r
which he will dispose of on as reasonable terms as
any other regular establishment in the County.
Also, Mahogany, Cherry & Pine COFFINS
made to order.
N. B. Mahogany Veneering on
hand for sale. F. S. LAUI3.
Watertown, May 23, 1841. 411
Lumber & Building Timber.
CLEAR and Common Stuff, Boards and Plank
of different widths and thicknesses Also
Yellow and White Pine building limber, for sale
by “the Watertown Cotton Mills Cod’
T. BAKER, Agent, Old Factory Street.
March 11, 1841.
Water Lime & Ground Piaste
rpHE subscriber keepsconstantly on hand athis
JL Cement and Plaster Mill at Depauville, the
article of Water Lime in barrels, or in bulk—also
Ground Plaster. The Water Lime has been test-
ed, and is decidedly of£oodqua!ity,and will be sold
ascheapas it can be bought in the State. The
Plaster is of as good quality, and will be sold as
low as at any other place in the county ofjeffbrson.
Allordersfoi the above article will be duly attend-
ed to. STEPHEN JOHNSON.
N.B, Mr. Wm. Buckley, of Sachet’s Harbor,
and Mr, ADRIEL ELY, of "Watertown, will
be kept constantly supplied with the amove article
of Water Lime, where if may be had. S. J.
Caldron Kettles.
THE Watertown Cotton Mills Co. have for
sale Caldron Kettles, made at Sterlingville
Furnace, of the following sizes;—oo gallons, 60
do. 40 do.—on reasonable terms; Enquire of
T. BAKER, Ag’t, Old Factory Store.
March 11, 1841. 87
Brandreth’s Pills.
A LARG E supply, just received, and for sale
wholesale and retail, by Walton & Kemp,
uffm have secured the genuine article when in New
York, at No. 4, Exchange Buildings, Waterlwon.
May 29, 1839.
Mmso wianj®
WOULD inform iter old customers and
friends in general, that site still remains
at the same place as formerly, where sne intends
to carry on the
Rsai.iLircEiiY misiNrss.
She therefore hopes to merit a share of public
trust. Ail orders attended to in a prompt and
proper manner.
Watertown. IVov. 93, 1840. 71 tf
Wool! Wool:! ;
WANTED of the ensuing Clip 50,©00
Pounds of Clean Fleeces delivered at out ■
Store early in the season in good order.
L. PADDOCK, & SON.
Watertown, Feb. 26, ]842.
BOOTS & SHOES. 1
WE have on hand a large stock of BOOTS fy j
SHOES , both of Home and Eastern make,
—and connected with the store is a large Shoe
Manufactory, where shoes are made of (he best
materials, and of every description, and sold at
less prices than have ever been sold at any other
place in this county, of good qualities.
Nov. 10, 181 L MATES & BACON.
WATCHES, SILVER SPOONS & JEWELRY.
11. K. NEWCOMB,
INFORMS the public generally that lie has re-
ceived from New York a good assortment of
Gold Lever and Lapine Watches , Silver Lever .
and Lapine, Quartier and oiher Watches,
which he will warrant to keep good lime. Sil-
ver table. Tea, Cream, Mustard and Salt Spoons;
Silver Butter Knives, Sugar Tongs, &c.; Silver
plated Table and Tea Spoons—together with a
good assortment of Gold Jewelry, Gold Fob and
Guard Chains, Keys, &c. ail of which he will
sell at the lowest price for Cush.
£3"*Watches Repaired and warranted at the
shortest notice. Cash paid for old Gold & Silver.
H atertown, May 28, 1841. 6Slf
~]BOOTS & SMCYEST
0000 of every price and quality,
UUUU cheaper than can he found at any
Store in Jefferson, ol same qualities,—Wholesale
ft Retail.
§OO pair Rubbers, a variety of kinds, —also-,
Sole Upper Leather, of Eastern Manufacture-, *
the very best qualities.
THREAD & FINDINGS, a good assortment*
Moroccos -& Linings, a variety of fcolbrfc.
N. B. Country Merchants wanting a supply of
Boots & Shoes, would make it an object by ex-
amining the stock. A. N. CORSS.
Watertown, Nov. 5. 1841, 21
Surgery*
DR. I. B. CRAWL, would respectfully in-
form his friends and the public, that he has*
just received from the city of Ncw-Yoik a com-
plete set of Intsinmcnts. and is prepared toper-
form the most important Surgical operations, ml h
as Amputations, Trephining, Lithotomy, Trach-
eotomy, for Aneurism, Strangulated Hernia, the
removal ol Tumors, &c. He is likewise prepared
to perform the new operation fur curing Club-
Feet, by which the most distort d limbs will be
immediately straightened, and the patient enable d
to walk with perfect casein a few days.
Operations will be performed according to (he lat-
est and most approved methods as practised iff
the New York and Philadelphia Hoff itals.
He is prepared to treat the most important Sur-
gical diseases, Fractured and dislocated limbs. Hip
disease, Lumbar Abscess, Diseases ol the Spinc|
White swelling, &e,
OPHTHALMIC SURGERY.
Dr. C .is also well supplied with Optical I nstiu
fflents for performing operations on the Eye, as
couching and extracting thecataract, formingai-
lificial pupils, removing opacities (films over the
eye) of the cornea, opening the Lachrymal duct?}
&c.
The new and ingenious operation for STRA-
BISMUS or SQ.UINTING, will be attended to;
It consists in dividing the tendon of one of the
muscles which turns the eye, the axis of vision is
immediately changed from an oblique to a straight
direction, ft requires only a n accurate knowledge
Gt the structure of the eye, and a steady hand.—
The operation is simple, easy and safe. Of sever l
al hundred patients that have been operated upon
ill this country within 12 months past, most
have been completely cured and all mateiially im-
proved.
Office in Central Block, No. 2, opposite the
“American,” and directly over J. Safford’s store.- —
Dwelling House on Com t-st. opposite J. D. Crow-
ner’s Hotel,
September 9, 1841. 13
To Merchants and others.
THE “ Water town Colton Mills Co.” offer fvt
sale the following articles, for cash or ap-
proved paper, at prices corresponding tviihlhg
times, viz:
75.000yd5. Brown Sheetings and Shirtings.
3.000 lbs. Yarns from No. 6 to 12 inclusive.
1,000 lbs. Baiting l —also, Satinet Warps ;
All of which are of the first quality. jPlease cull
and examine. Enquire of T. BAKER, Ag’t.
Old Factory Store;
Watertown, March 26, 1841. 89
rianing Business.
TH E undersigned take Ibis me f od to inform
lire public that the ; v haveptirebased till* FlaN“
ikg Machine lately otvncd by T. J. Frasier;,
which they have locate d in tl e Simp formerly oc-
cupied by said Frasier at the village ol Blaikßiv-
er, where they will be reailv tit ail iiHieS to attend
lo all calls in the line of Planing Fluor Boards)
ceiling, clap boards, &r. They con plane any
thickness, stuff from 2 inch to 1-2 infch;ohH match
or not, to suit customers. All Work confided to
their care shall be done in a style not to be beaten
by any Machine in (he couh'ty, alid also with
promptitude and dispatch.
Ti-lOS. MATTHEWS;
PETER POOR.
Black River. April 10. 1841. ’o4 if
Dissolution.
THE co-partnership he retofore existing between
the subscribers, isdissoived b}' mutual consent;
Eli Farwell is authorized to dose and settle!
the business of the concern. ELI FA II WELL,
J. W. BAKER.
IFatertown, Sept. J, 1841.
N. B—The subscribers desirous of closing a 3
speedily as possible Ihe above business. And in-
formal inn is hereby given that all defnands which
became due the past winter and previous thereto;
must be arranged without further delay.
The subscriber will remain fora short time at thfc
Store lately occupied by the said Farvvell & Bakfcr,
after wi ich he will remoVe the Books, Notes, &c.
lothe front room oversaid store, now occupied by
E. Ten Eyck & L. J. Goodale, Esqrs. as a law
office, where he will attend strictly In Ihe above
business. F.l.i FARVVELL.
Farms for Sale !
THE subscriber offers for sale 12 improvetl
Farms in the town of Diana, of frqm 50 to'
TOO acres each. These Farms are ail well wate r-
ed and fenced ; the buildings consisting of pood
Log Houses & Lng Barns, and in sofne instan-
ces good Frame Barns—and Ihe improvements
thereon varying from 36 to 25 acres.
The above Farms will be sold cheap if app lied
for soon, and the terms of payment made easy
and satisfactory. Six of these are distant only
3 miles from the Natural Bridge, in close prox-
imity to school houses and mills, and fronting
on good, roads. The soil is of the best in thfi
town. Bersons wishing to examine the same,
will apply lo Robert tf. Blanchard, Esq. ad
Joininglhe premises, or to Reuben Tyler, Esq.
OsWegatchie Settlement.
JOHN LA FARGE.
May 12, 1841.
Woollen Cloth• '
THE JEFFERSON WOOLEN COMPANY
are now prepared to supply the public with
a general assortment of
BROADCLOTH,
ol superior qnaiity, upon reasonable tern s, and
invite Merchants and other dealers to procure
their supplies at the Factory al Besfev.
The cloths are of a superior finish, and Willi
be soid to Merchants at New York prices, for
approved paper,at six months.
Cloth will be exchanged for Wool upon li-
beral terms.
The company have just received from Nettf
V ork a heavy stock of BCOBS, consisting of
a general assortment of
BKY GOODS, OROCBEXES,
CROCKERY, HARDWARE, NAILS,
Boots,Shoes, Hats, Caps, Buffaloßobks,*c.
which they offer at greatly reduced prices, for
cash pay only.
Dexter, Nov. 28, 1839. 20tf
Pig and Bai’ Iron.
THE WATERTOWN COTTON MILLS'
COMPANY have for sale for cash, or ap-
proved Bank paper,
10 tons Sterlingville §of( Fig-
Also, aquantity of BAR IRON, from Freemans-'
burg, Sf. Lawrence Co.
T. BAKER, JtgenC
June 22, 1840. Old Factory Store.
Matchless Sanative
CTTha genuine MATCHLESS SANATIVE,
or sale atthe Printing-Office of the “Register
