

The Church in Australia.
PART II.
TWO JOURNALS
OF
MISSIONARY TOURS
IN
THE DISTRICTS
OF
MANEROO AND MORETON BAY,
NEW SOUTH WALES,
IN 1843.
WITH A NEW MAP, SHEWING THE GRAZING DISTRICTS OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE SOCIETY FOR THE PROPAGATION OF THE GOSPEL ;
Sold at the Depository of
THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,
67, Lincoln’s inn fields;
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1845.
Dec.




ACCOUNT
OF
THE MISSION OF MANEROO,
BY THE
REV. E. G. PRYCE.
ADDRESSED TO THE LORD BISHOP OF AUSTRALIA.
Maneroo, January Ist, 181*4.
Mr Lord,
In the month of September I furnished your
Lordship with an account of my first tour through
the Maneroo district, and of my proceedings up to
that time. I have since been continually occupied
in the same itinerancy, and my proceedings have
been of exactly the same nature I then described.
Having no residence, and consequently no home,
I have been obliged to go from house to house ; and
during the whole time I have been in this district,
I have not at any time been more than three days at
once in the same place, except on one occasion, when
I was confined for a week with a violent cold
and sore throat at Dr. Robertson’s. But although
the fatigue has been excessive, and I have suffered
many privations, and much inconvenience from this
constant moving about, I have not regretted that
I was in a measure compelled to it from want of a
home, as I have thus been enabled more fully to


carry your Lordship’s instructions literally into effect,
in “ searching out the people amidst their flocks and
herds j” and have had better opportunities of ful-
filling the duties of my ministry, having thus become
acquainted with the inhabitants of every part of this
wide district, both the proprietors of stock, and the
labouring population, shepherds and others ; and
I have endeavoured to impress upon all the unspeak-
able importance of those ministrations which my
being sent amongst them was designed to supply.
I have generally been everywhere gladly received,
and my services thankfully acknowledged. After
twice travelling the circuit of the district, and con-
sulting the wishes and convenience of the inhabitants,
I fixed on the different stations where I have had
stated Sunday services at intervals of six weeks in
each place; and which I intend, God willing, to con-
tinue, varying from the regular routine occasionally,
in order to visit more remote and isolated places.
The following description will give your Lordship
some idea of the extent and locality of Maneroo, and
of the manner in which I am employed when making
my rounds. On crossing the boundary of the
county of Murray at Micalego, where my district
commences, the road runs due south, through downs
of greater or less extent, having precipitous moun-
tains on either hand, the Murrumbidgee River
and ranges on the west, and a continuous branch of
the sea-coast ranges on the east. Twenty miles from
Micalego, on the banks of the Murrumbidgee, is
Mr. Bradley’s head station, who is a very large pro-


prietor of stock in this district. Here I have occa-
sionally Sunday service. Ten miles further south
is Reid’s Flat, where the country becomes more
open, the mountains receding on either side, the
ranges on the right trending westward towards the
Australian Alps, or Snowy Mountains, and those on
the left falling back towards the sea-coast. From
Reid’s Flat, where I believe the Government have
had the site of a village surveyed, to be called by
the aboriginal name Binjura, and where the Maneroo
district properly commences, roads branch otf in
different directions. About six miles to the south-
west, Mr. Lambie, the Commissioner of Crown
Lands, resides ; from him I have received much
attention. Five miles south from Mr. Lambie’s is
the station of Mr. Dawson, with whom, I believe,
your Lordship is acquainted. Here I have Sunday
service statedly every six weeks, and on the same
day also at Mr. Ryrie’s station, about six miles to the
north-west, who has a large establishment, most of
whom gladly attend my ministry. On the follow-
ing Sunday I attend at Mr. Brooks’s, nine miles
S.S.W. from Mr. Ryrie’s ; and here I have gene-
rally a large congregation, from twenty to thirty ;
Mr. Brooks being a large proprietor, and conse-
quently employing a number of people, at the
same time that he is most zealous in the cause, and
very anxious for the permanent establishment of a
clergyman in the district.
Eastward from Mr. Brooks’s is Arable, the station
of Mr. Buckley, with whom I have not yet become


acquainted, he having been residing at Twofold
Bay since I came to the district. Ten miles south
of Arable is Mafra, Mr. Boyd’s head station, who
possesses very large herds and a vast tract of
country in this district. Paying occasional visits to
his and other stations in the neighbourhood, I
proceed to the eastern portion of the district, where
I have stated services on three Sundays successively.
On the first, at Dr. Robertson’s station, changing it
occasionally for Mr. Cunninghame’s or Mr. Moore’s,
three or six miles distant. On the second, at Mr.
Boucher’s, about eight miles N.N.W. from Dr.
Robertson’s, and taking in a large station four miles
distant, lately belonging to Mr. J. T. Hughes.
On the third Sunday I attend at a place called
Taylor’s Flat, fourteen miles north-east from Dr.
Robertson’s. Here I have a very promising con-
gregation, there being several small settlers in this
neighbourhood, and a very gratifying anxiety
amongst them for the ordinances of religion. On
the road from Reid’s Flat to the south-east, the
country is occupied for nearly twenty miles by Mr.
Bradley’s sheep-stations, where there are only soli-
tary shepherds and hut-keepers. At fourteen miles
is the Rock Flat Inn ; but, except the family at the
inn, there are no residents in the neighbourhood.
Twelve miles further south-east is Nimittry Bale,
where there are a number of Roman Catholic
settlers. Six miles further there is another inn,
kept by a Protestant; and as Mount Cooper, a large
establishment of Mr. Campbell’s of the Wharf, is


only seven miles distant, and there are a number of
small settlers around, I intend occasionally having
a Sunday service in this neighbourhood. Eight
miles to the eastward of Nimittry Bale is a tract of
country amongst the mountains, called Greenland,
where there are a number of small settlers, whom
I have visited ; and here also I have been requested
to have a Sunday service, which I intend to do occa-
sionally. About sixteen miles south-west from Dr.
Robertson’s is another large tract of country, called
Deligat, where Mr. Campbell and several other
stockholders have stations ; but most of the people
are Roman Catholics, and there is no place in the
neighbourhood where I could assemble more than
the people of one station. However, I visit them
occasionally. On the west and south the district is
bounded by the Snowy River, a deep and rapid
stream, very difficult to cross. Its course is among
the Snowy Mountains, north and south, till, about ten
miles to the southward of Mr. Brooks’s, it turns east,
and runs E.S.E. till near Deligat, when it turns west,
and, forming a sort of peninsula, it again winds to the
east, and falls into the sea, a few miles south-west of
Cape Howe. Beyond this river there are stations in
different directions, very isolated and difficult of
access from the steep mountain ranges; to the south-
west are the extensive districts of Omeo and Gipps
Land. Port Albert, in the latter, is upwards of
300 miles from the Snowy River, Omeo about 120.
I have been requested to visit the latter place, but
I really know not how to find time for it; however,


I am looking out for some individual or party going
that way who may act as my guide.
To the north-west from Mr. Lambie’s, about thirty
miles, is another extensive district, called Bollero,
enclosed by a range of the Snowy Mountains, and
the Murrumbidgee ranges. Mr. F. Mitchell has a
station here, at which his brother resides. It is
about two days’ journey from the Tumut River, on
the other side of the mountains, about sixty or
seventy miles. My district being of such extent,
having so large, and at the same time such a scat-
tered population, your Lordship may be sure that my
time is fully occupied ; and I have now to beg your
Lordship’s attention to the great inconvenience I
labour under from having no residence. It is true
I could not, were I not constantly travelling about,
perform my duty efficiently. But still it would
greatly lighten my difficulties, and greatly contribute
to the comfort of my situation, had I a home to
return to, were it only for a few days at one time,
after going the circuit of my district, where I could
enjoy a little relaxation, and find time for a little
study, from which I am, in the present circumstances
of my situation, almost entirely precluded. The
effects of an itinerating ministry on the minds of the
people are very desultory, —especially a people who
have been shut out for years from participation of
the means of grace, and who consequently have in
a great measure become careless about them.
Generally, they will give themselves no trouble
about attending them when offered. As to its being


their duty and their very great privilege in having
the opportunity to do so, this they scarcely ever
think of; and then, the recurring periods when
these opportunities occur being so wide apart,
tends to make them more careless. Thus they hear
the word, indeed, but for the most part they are
“ hearers only it is so long before they hear it
again, “they forget what manner of men they were.”
And it can hardly be otherwise among a population
engaged in such pursuits, and so widely scattered,
as that of this district. Still I know it is our duty
to labour in hope, not doubting but that some of the
seed of the divine word sown will fall upon ground
prepared for it by the Spirit of God, and will not
return to Him void. But I feel the effects of an
itinerating mode of life to be very dissipating on
the mind of a minister—that the difficulties in the
way of bis preserving his spirituality of mind are
very great. In his case, there is not, apparently,
the same necessity for that close and constant mental
application, and spiritual exertion and watchfulness,
which one must employ who labours among a stated
and regular congregation ; and therefore he is very
apt to decline into spiritual sloth, and there is
danger of his performing the duties of his high
vocation in a routine and mechanical form ; and
much more so must this be the case when he has no
opportunity of retirement for study, and he is cut
off from all intercourse and communion with his
brethren in the ministry. All this, I can assure
your Lordship, I feel very much ; and I think it


would tend, in some measure, to obviate the diffi-
culties of my situation had I a residence here. My
congregations consist, on an average, of from fifteen to
twenty persons, sometimes more, sometimes less.
The carelessness and ungodliness of the labouring
classes is very awful. It is difficult to get them to
attend divine service, when their occupation does
not hinder them, especially if their masters are
caieless about it. Some, the shepherds, who must
look after their flocks, are altogether precluded from
attending. That class who are designated as “ old
hands, the convicts who have become free, or hold
tickets of leave, are in a deplorable state ; and even
the immigrants who have been long in the Bush,
without the means of grace, are nearly as bad.
However, from what I hear and see, there is cer-
tainly some improvement taking place, to which the
introduction of immigrant families greatly con-
tributes ; and there could scarcely have been a
greater temporal good bestowed on the people them-
selves, and the colony at lai'ge, than the great
reduction that has been made in the rates of
labourers’ wages. Ten years ago, lam told, there
was not a single female in the district. Now, there
are almost as many married men as single, and, I am
happy to say, the sin of concubinage does not exist
here—at least so far as I have been able to learn.
The Commissioner of Crown Lands has the power
of preventing any person of bad character from
settling in the district; and Mr. Lambie has in
many instances used his authority in cases of this


kind. The number of married people in the district
is greatly on the increase, and this tends greatly to
the amelioration of manners. Up to the present date
I have baptized fifty-three children, a fact of itself
sufficient to prove how greatly a clergyman was
needed in the district. lam sorry to report that it
is not practicable to establish schools for the children
here ; the people living so far apart, that there is no
locality where even a few children could be brought
together. There are several single families who
have got teachers for their children, in different
places—men incapable of any other employment,
and frequently very unfit for this. But I really see
no remedy for it under present circumstances. Were
their affairs prosperous, I am sure the settlers gene-
rally would contribute to the support of schools
where their children might board and lodge.
I should have been glad if I could have fixed on
places where the people might assemble, and to
whom I could preach on week-days as well as
Sundays, .at some of the stations where I call, and
am frequently obliged to stop for a night in my
journeys, in addition to the places where I have
stated Sunday services ; but this, from the nature of
the people’s pursuits, I found to be impracticable ;
and the only plan I could adopt as a substitute, has
been to assemble as many as could be got together
in the evenings for family worship. I regret I
cannot say that I have succeeded in persuading any
masters, or heads of families, to continue this service
in my absence ; so lax, and dead to the spiritual


concerns of themselves and others have even those
who have been at one time religiously disposed
become from long disuse and absence of religious
ordinances.
Trusting that my proceedings will meet with your
Lordship’s approbation, I conclude this report, and
remain,
Your Lordship’s
Obedient faithful Servant,
Edd. Gifford Pryce.
The Lord Bishop of Australia,
fyc. tyc. cfe.
P.S. I forgot to mention that Twofold Bay lies
south-east about forty-five miles from Taylor’s Flat ;
and as Mr. Boyd has a number of people employed
there, I purpose visiting that locality the first
opportunity.
E. G. Pryce.


EXTRACTS
FROM
JOURNALS OF MISSIONARY TOURS
OF
THE MORETON BAY DISTRICT
OF
"New South Wales
BY
THE REY. JOHN GREGOR, M.A.
MINISTER OF ST. JOHN’S, BRISBANE.
1843.




JOURNAL OF A TOUR
TO THE
NORTHERN PART OF THE DISTRICT.
I left Brisbane at two o’clock in the afternoon,
(attended by my servant, William Sutton,) to per-
form a clerical tour through the northern part of the
extensive district which has been committed to my
pastoral care.
We have two horses, and are properly equipped
against heat, cold, and the attacks of the barbarous,
and too often ferocious, aborigines. We have pro-
visions for two days, at the end of which time we
hope to reach the first station, which belongs to the
Messrs. Archer, and is about sixty miles distant
from Brisbane, in a northward direction. We rode
fast till we arrived at the station of the German
Missionaries, seven miles distant from Brisbane, in
a north-easterly direction, where we hoped to meet
one of the Messrs. Archer, and to enjoy his com-
pany thence to their station. We reached Lionshill
by three o’clock ; but Mr. Archer had departed some
time before, leaving a request that, if we came in
the course of the afternoon, we should be informed


that he intended to ride -slowly, and would not pro-
ceed far that night. When we had procured from
the Missionaries a tomahawk and a tinder-box,
which we had forgotten to bring with us from Bris-
bane in the hurry of departure, we set off for the
purpose of overtaking Mr. Archer, having had the
road kindly pointed out by one of the brethren of
the mission. We rode over a very barren country
for a distance of seven miles, when we were happy
to come up with the gentleman who was to be our
companion for the night and the next day. We
rode forward about eight miles, when we encamped
for the night on the banks of a nameless creek, about
one and a half mile distant from the Pine River.
August 1 5 th. —l awoke once or twice in the course
of the last night, but I slept well considering it was
only the second night I had slept in the bush since
I came to the colony. The cloak and the fire pro-
tected me fully against the effects of the cold, which
I much dreaded before I left home, as I had for
some time been in rather delicate health. We got
up about five o’clock in the morning, soon after day-
break ; and after having a pot of tea, we started,
intending to perform fifteen miles of our journey
before breakfast. This design we accomplished, and
breakfasted at the foot of a remarkable round hill,
manifestly of igneous formation, on the banks of a
creek or stream, of which the water ran as clear as
crystal over a pebbly bottom. We then proceeded
on our journey about fifteen miles farther, when we
stopped at another mountain-brook, which was not


running, but in which there was plenty of good
water. We had a pot of tea, but did not feel inclined
to eat. We then advanced slowly forward on our
journey, over a very hilly country, as two of the
horses had begun to fag very much, —the one from
his age, the other from his youth. After ex-
periencing some difficulty in crossing some creeks
near the Messrs. Archer’s station, when the sun had
set, we reached the place of ouV destination, about
seven o’clock in the evening. When we reached the
station, the Messrs. Archer received us kindly. We
soon had tea ; and then conversed on various sub-
jects till ten o’clock, when I read a portion of
scripture, and prayed for myself and the others who
were in the house with me. When we had finished
our united devotions, the others retired to rest, and
I followed their example after I had brought up this
Journal to its present point.
August 16th.— The hut in which I slept this
night is very open ; and, as I was elevated on a table,
with only two blankets, I was very cold ; yet I slept
not unsoundly, as by the two previous days rides I
was somewhat fatigued. I arose this morning about
seven o’clock, and went before breakfast to the
nearest sheep-station, to pray with the men, and
exhort them to do their duty to God, themselves,
their masters, and their neighbours. At this station
there was only one Protestant; and as the Romanists
did not appear to desire, hut rather to decline, my
services as a clergyman, I addressed my observations
to the Irish Protestant. After I had read the


prayers of the Church, I returned and had breakfast;
and as I could not visit with advantage any of the
sheep-stations till the evening, when the shepherds
returned with their flocks to the fold, I made a
botanical and geological excursion in company with
Dr. Leichhardt, a Prussian botanist, and Mr. David
Archer, who has the chief control over the establish-
ment, in virtue of his being the oldest colonist. We
directed our steps to the westward, towards a very
high mountain, which would at once supply us with
botanical and geological specimens, and give us the
command of the country to the eastward. We could
not traverse the whole course of the mountain-stream,
as I had to return by four o’clock in the afternoon,
that I might visit a station at sunset. We returned
accordingly ; and when we had dined, I set out in
company with Mr. Thomas Archer, to a station
which is distant from the head-station about four
miles, and which we reached at sunset, just as the
shepherds had got their sheep into their folds. I
waited till they had their dinner ; and when they had
dined, I read a chapter of the New Testament, and
the prayers of the Church, and then addressed them
in a short extemporary discourse ; the drift of which
was to show them that they had immortal souls to
be saved, that they could not save them themselves,
and that Christ alone could save them. In order to
receive this salvation offered to them by God in
Christ Jesus, they must believe in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, as the Lamb of God slain from
the foundation of the world, to be the propitiation


for the sin of their souls ; as the power of God and
the wisdom of God unto salvation. They must not
only keep this commandment of God to believe in
his Son, but carefully observe all his other command-
ments, speaking the truth, doing justice, loving
mercy, and walking humbly with their Maker. The
poor men were visibly affected ; and I left them under
the impression that my visit to them had not been in
vain ; promising to send them Bibles from Brisbane
when their master’s dray came to it. We returned
to the head-station, had tea, and then conversed on
various subjects till ten o’clock, when we had
prayers. Soon after our devotions we retired to rest.
August 17 th. —After breakfast this morning, all
at Messrs. Archer’s head-station were assembled to
hear prayers read. When we had united in prayer
according to the order of the Church, I addressed
some observations principally to the servants, re-
minding them of what they owed to their God, and
setting before them the leading truths of the Gospel.
They were very attentive, and appeared very thank-
ful. Most of them were Presbyterians from Scot-
land ; yet they united with pleasure and interest in
the service of the Church of England. At one
o’clock we started for the Messrs. Mackenzie’s sta-
tion, accompanied by Mr. David Archer. We passed
over a well-watered and richly grassy country, lying
between two ranges of mountains, through which
the Brisbane flows. The road, which was very
heavy from the late rains, runs through an undu-
lating valley. Few rocks make their appearance ;


but such as appear are of a talcy or chlorite charac-
ter, similar to those around Brisbane. We saw, in
a brush through which we passed, a beautiful blue
flower, with a most delightful smell, of which the
corolla is formed of one entire leaflet or petal. The
plant had spinm ; but we did not know to what
family it belongs. On our journey this afternoon,
we also saw a number of the aborigines, who were
very vociferous in their calls of “ Name you,” but
did not attempt to deal us any blows. They were,
however, all armed with shields, spears, waddies,
and boomerangs. I really should not have liked to
have met or passed the savages, if I had been
alone or unprotected, as they had a most ferocious
aspect, and exhibited several points of barbarous
conduct. They were near a dense brush; and I
understand that they often encamp in such a posi-
tion, for the sake of a safe retreat, in case they should
be attacked successfully by Europeans. Their posi-
tion, otherwise, was also well selected for observation,
and for attack and defence, being on the point of a
terminating ridge, with a hollow on each side, along
the ends of which passes the road on which Euro-
peans travel. We arrived at the Messrs. Mackenzie’s
station about sunset.
August 18 th. —Although the hut was full of to-
bacco smoke, and though there were five gentlemen
besides myself at rest in it, I had the soundest sleep
last night that I have had for the last twelve months.
I awoke refreshed in body and mind, and arose about
seven o’clock. When I had dressed, Imade.arrange-


ments for visiting the out-stations, and for perform-
ing service at the head-station. After breakfast, in
company with Mr. John M‘Donald, I proceeded to
visit the out-stations, and by a route of between
fifteen and sixteen miles we visited three before
three o’clock in the afternoon. All the men at these
stations readily joined in the devotional exercises,
and some of even the most hardened were deeply
affected. I had considerable pleasure in addressing
some of these men, as they were very attentive, and
expressed their thankfulness when I had ended what
I had to observe to them. At five o’clock I per-
formed service at the principal station to about twenty
people. They were very attentive ; and I pray to
God that He may bless all that was spoken aright
to their everlasting welfare. There were a good
many Presbyterians present, who were as attentive as
those who belonged to the Church of England. I also
observed that one Eoman Catholic was present, who
appeared to join with fervency in our devotions.
To-morrow, by eight o’clock, I shall, I trust, have
performed all my duties at this station, which I wish
to leave as soon as possible for several reasons, that
I may proceed on my missionary tour, which will
likely require more time in the performance than I
anticipated at the commencement. A squatter’s life,
from what I have already witnessed of it, I do not at
all envy ; though I believe it possesses its charms in
the careless independence in which it is passed, free
from all the restraints of civilization. Upon the
whole, lam satisfied with the labours of this day,


which have, however, produced no inconsiderable
sensations of fatigue. Still, I can endure the hard-
ships of a bush-life much better than I expected,
from my previous habits and state of health, to be
able to do. Custom, probably, would make such a
mode of life not merely tolerable, but even desirable,
as conveying many pleasures highly acceptable to
man’s proud and independent spirit. I commit
myself this night to the care and keeping of that
merciful Heavenly Father, who has so often and so
long cared for me, and protected me far beyond my
deserts.
August 19 th. —l rose at six o’clock ; and by a
walk of eight miles, visited two stations before eight
o’clock. Mr. J. M‘Donald accompanied me ; and
our conversation turning on our collegiate education,
and the land of our fathers, many painful and
pleasant recollections were awakened in my mind.
I hope and trust that whatever happens to me here-
after, I shall ever submit in humility to the dispen-
sations, and bear with patience the dealings, of that
providence, the course of which is so wisely directed
by my Heavenly Father. This morning I had less
satisfaction in the discharge of my duties than I have
hitherto experienced during this missionary tour,
from a conviction that I was praying with, and
addressing those who did not unite in my prayer,
nor pay any regard to my address, much less feel the
force of it in their hearts. One of the men to whom
I spoke is the most hardened creature in iniquity that
has ever come under my observation. He is totally


insensible to every religious, virtuous, and good im-
pression. He stated that he had quite made up his
mind to go to hell, provided he could accomplish his
desires of this world’s grossest pleasures. I reasoned
with him for a long time; but fear that only a very
small, if any, impression was made on his obdurate
heart. I pray, however, that the Spirit of God may
open his understanding, and soften his heart, before
he descend to the grave, that he may not have to
meet his God with his sins unrepented and unfor-
given. When I returned to the head-station I had
breakfast, and then started, in company with my
servant, for the Messrs. Bigge’s station, where we
arrived at about three o’clock, after a very pleasant
ride. The country through which we rode this day
is hilly, with a range of immense mountains on the
right hand and on the left, covered to the very
summits generally with lofty pine-trees. The Messrs.
Bigge have by far the best head-station of all those
I have visited ; and everything about it betokens
order, regularity, and care. At this station I have
experienced a very kind reception, and have spent a
very pleasant evening in the company of the two
Bigges and one of the Archers, who is with them at
present on a short visit.
August 20th. —This day being Sunday, I made
preparations for regular divine service in the morn-
ing ; and performed it accordingly at eleven o’clock.
I am very sorry to say that only a few of Messrs.
Bigge’s men attend. After service and dinner, as
I could not meet with any of the men till towards


evening, I rode in company with the elder Mr.
Bigge to the top of a mountain, to obtain information
as to the position of the stations. By the time we
returned, the sun had descended ; and it was stated
the shepherds would have now their flocks in the
folds, and be in their huts or gungas. With the
view of finding them at home, and of preaching to
them the unsearchable riches of Christ, I set out to
visit them, along with the younger Mr. Bigge.* I
was happy to find them all at their humble abodes;
and I had very great satisfaction in praying with
these men, and in addressing them afterwards touch-
ing the faith of Christ, the resurrection of the dead,
and the observance of the Sabbath-day. These
men were all very grateful for my visit; and I left
them with great pleasure, promising to pay them
another pastoral visit as soon as possible. We
returned to the head-station, and had tea. I then
went to one of the huts at this station, and had
prayers with the men who were in it ; but regretted
to find that three of the men, who are Protestants,
persisted in absenting themselves. However, much
disappointed, I returned to the Messrs. Bigge’s
house, with the resolution of visiting these men
to-morrow morning, in company with one of the
Messrs. Bigge, that I might be at the bottom of their
conduct, and admonish them. We spent the re-
mainder of the evening principally in conversation
on religious and congenial topics. We retired to
rest about eleven o’clock.
August 21 st. —I rose early, and brought up my


journal. After breakfast I admonished the ab-
sentees of yesterday, with some effect I trust, and
then made preparations for proceeding on my tour.
About ten o’clock, I set out for the Messrs. Scott’s
station, only distant about seven miles to the south-
ward from the Messrs. Bigge’s station ; accompanied
by the elder Bigge as our guide through the bush,
the road being very indistinct. He left us about a
mile from the Messrs. Scott’s station, when we had
reached a position where we could not lose ourselves
before coming to the place we desired to make.
When we had crossed the river Brisbane, and ridden
about a quarter of a mile along its southern bank,
we reached the station belonging to the Messrs.
Scott. It is a cattle station only. On arriving, I
found that the men were busily employed in brand-
ing cattle; so that I could not,without inconvenience,
meet with them till the evening, when their work
for the day would be concluded. I determined,
therefore, to stay all night. When I entered the
Messrs. Scott’s hut, I saw order, comfort, and clean-
liness prevailed. I was kindly welcomed by both
brothers, one of whom was a sheep-farmer at home,
yet come of Scotia’s gentlest blood. I spent with
them a very pleasant afternoon and evening. I
read prayers in the evening for the men, and ad-
dressed them afterwards, preaching to them Christ
crucified, as the power of God and the wisdom
of God—as righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption. They were very attentive, notwith-
standing they were all Roman Catholics, as I under-


stood afterwards. They are the only men that, on
entering the hut, have welcomed me ; and I really
believe they were sincere in their expressions of
kindness.
August 22cl. —This morning, about eight o’clock,
I left the station of the Messrs. Scott, accompanied
by Paddy, the stockman, as our guide to the station
of the Messrs. McConnel. We reached the latter
place about twelve o’clock, having ridden a distance
of about thirteen miles, principally over a flat
country, through which Stanley Creek runs, which
is one of the branches of the Brisbane, and flows
almost parallel to the branch we ascended when we
came from the Messrs. Mackenzie’s to the Messrs.
Bigge’s station. The plain here is much more
extensive than it is on the other side of the Bi'is-
bane range, and the soil is much deeper and of a
better quality. When I arrived at the station, one
of the Messrs. McConnel gave me a hearty welcome ;
and I soon perceived numberless indications of the
wealthy squatter. The house is substantially and
neatly built of the wood of the iron-bark tree, a
species of the genus Eucalyptus, and is shingled
with the same material. There is a large stock-
yard, capable of holding 800 cattle, with an excellent
dairy, the principal apartment in which is covered
by an outer house, in the form of a shade, in order
to keep out the great heat of the sun. There are a
great many huts for the accommodation of the
servants on the establishment ; there is also a
large paddock for the use of the horses. After


dinner I was shown the whole establishment, and
was much pleased with all I saw. About sun-down,
Mr. D. C. McConnel accompanied me to the nearest
out-station, where I read prayers, and addressed the
men, who were very attentive. One of them asked
me to send him some tracts, which I promised
readily to forward to him with a Bible, by the very
first opportunity. When we returned from this
station, which is about three miles from the head-
station, we had tea ; and as two gentlemen arrived
just as we had finished, it was nearly nine o’clock
by the time the tea-apparatus, consisting entirely
of tin-ware, was removed. When the table was
cleared, the men at the head-station all assembled to
prayers. I read the prayers of the Church for
them, and then addressed them at some length, as
they appeared very attentive and susceptible of
religious impressions. I told them that Christ is
their all as the heirs of immortality, and that He
ought to be in them all; that Christ could not be
theirs without a living faith in Him as the Son of
God, and the Lamb of God slain from the founda-
tion of the world, to take away the sin of the world.
This led me to direct their thoughts to an eternal
hereafter, and furnished me with an opportunity of
exhorting them to place their affections on things
above, and not on things below. I exhorted them also
to remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy ; as well
as to place confidence in the good providence of God,
and to implore His fatherly protection in the midst of
the various dangers to which they were constantly


exposed. I retired to bed with the intention of visit-
ing the most distant out-station early in the morning
before breakfast. I forgot to say, and must now
add, that there were fifteen in all at evening prayers,
and that all, both gentlemen and working people,
were most attentive ; and apparently, and I trust
in reality, their devotion equalled their attention.
Mr. Mort, the superintendent, has a gentlemanly
bearing, and is a stanch churchman. The Messrs.
McConnel have been educated among dissenters in
Manchester, but are very favourably disposed to
the Church of England in this colony ; particularly
as there are only a very few of their sect in it, and
as there are, besides themselves, fortunately none,
as far as I yet know, in this district.
August 23d. —1 rose at dawn this day, and pro-
ceeded, in company with Mr. D. McConnel, to the
remotest out-station, in order to meet with the
shepherds before they went out with their flocks.
We reached the station in good time ; but when
I entered the hut, I soon learned that they were
all very strict Romanists, who would not willingly
accept my services as a clergyman. We therefore
left, without having accomplished the object for
which I went. We returned from this station,
distant from the head-station about six miles, by
nine o'clock ; and on our return we had breakfast;
soon after which I set out in company wflth Mr.
Francis Bigge, for the station of the Messrs.
Balfour, which lies farther up the river to the
northward than Mr. McConnel’s station. We


reached Balfour’s station about two o’clock, after
a ride of between twelve and thirteen miles, over
a hilly country chiefly, though the commencement
of the journey was on the rich flats forming part
of McConnel’s run. On arriving at the station, we
did not find either of the Messrs. Balfour at home,
the one being absent at Brisbane, and the other
among the out-stations. When Mr. John Balfour
returned from the out-stations, he gave us a real
Scotch welcome of gentlemanly kindness. We
talked over our future proceedings ; and Balfour
entered into my views with great zeal and kindness,
promising me all the assistance in his power. We
spent a very pleasant evening ; and I retired to rest
about ten o’clock, with the design of going to an
out-station early in the morning. I may here
mention, that I have seen, for the first time, the
celebrated Bunga Bunga tree, which is of the
coniferous family, and is very like the common
pine tree, but of a lighter colour in the bark and
leaves. The cone which it bears is highly prized
by the aborigines ; and is perhaps the most nutri-
tious natural production of Australia. The only
specimen of the cone which I have seen was nearly
of the size of a man’s head.
August 24th . —It rained heavily during a part
of the night, and the rain continued till morning.
There being no appearance of fine weather, nothing
remained but to resolve to stay a day longer at this
station, and postpone my visits to the out-stations
till such time as the rain should cease or moderate.


It rained heavily till towards four o’clock in the
afternoon, when it partially subsided. I took ad-
vantage of this abatement in the fall of rain, which
proved to be of short duration, and set out in com-
pany of Scott, the overseer, to visit two, and, if
possible, three of the out-stations. We reached
the nearest one just as the sheep were coming up to
the folds ; and I had time to read prayers before it
Avas dark. The men here did not appear to have
much sense of the importance of religion ; and ac-
cordingly did not join very earnestly in the devo-
tional exercises. We left this station just as it
became dark, and rode to the other, three miles
distant, over a bad road, in the midst of darkness
and drizzling rain. When we arrived, the oaths I
heard did not impress me with the idea of a very
favourable reception. I considered it my duty to
administer a rebuke, on account of the awful oaths
which I heard uttered by one of the men to the
dogs, that made a great noise on our approach.
When I had reproved him, I prayed with them all,
and spoke to them of the unsearchable riches of
Christ, of their obligation to keep the command-
ments of God, and of the danger of breaking them.
We left at the conclusion of my address to perform
a ride over six miles of undefined road, in the midst
of pitchy darkness and heavy rain. Although the
road was extremely rough, and my horse slipped
once or twice in descending the banks of the creeks
Ave had to cross, which were slippery from the rain,
we reached the head-station in safety, about nine


o’clock in the evening, when the rain increased in
heaviness and thickness. In the course of this ride
we passed and repassed the spot where the abori-
gines had murdered, with horrid barbarity, one of
the men on the station ; and the water-hole, or pond,
into which the mangled body was thrown by the
savages after the bloody deed had been wantonly
committed. The overseer, who was then a shepherd,
and living in the same hut with the unfortunate
man, narrated to me, with considerable feeling, and
rude Scottish eloquence, the circumstances attending
the murder. I had tea on my return to the head-
station, and soon after I retired to rest, as I was
wearied with this evening’s ride, extending over a
distance of about thirteen miles.
A ugust 2 5th. —I rose this morning at six o’clock,
and set out in a very light rain, or rather mist, to
visit Mr. Balfour’s third station. We found the
inmates of this hut almost all ready to receive my
services in a proper spirit. They were all Scotch
people, and were very respectable for their station
in life. They all joined most devoutly in prayer
with me, and were most attentive when I addressed
them, after we had offered up our prayers to our God
and Saviour. In this hut there was a Mrs. ,
the mother of three of the inmates, a young man, a
boy, and a girl,—a woman of somewhat superior
character, who had experienced many severe trials ;
and these marks of sad affliction were visible in her
personal appearance, and could be perceived, without
great effort, in the constitution of her mind. By


these dispensations she has, in as far as X could judge,
been disciplined into humble and genuine piety.
The simple and affecting account which she gave of
her bereavements was, that she had lost five childien
in her native land, and, since she came to this
country, her husband, and one of her remaining
sons, who was shot dead before her eyes, by the
accidental discharge of his companion’s musket. She
added, that the shock which she then received far ex-
ceeded any that she had before sustained, not even
excepting the death of her husband. X felt deeply
for this poor woman ; and as she has some intention
of removing to Brisbane, for the education of her
youngest son and only remaining little dauglitei, I
trust I may have an opportunity of being of some
use to her, as well as to her fatherless children. All
the inmates of this hut appeared to be people of
strict religious and moral principle ; and it were well
for this country if all its inhabitants were equally
well disposed to the fear and love of God, and the
observance of his commandments. I left this place
with perhaps ’more real satisfaction than any one
which I have yet visited. When I returned at nine
o’clock, after a ride of about six miles over a hilly
country of conglomerate sandstone formation, I had
breakfast, and then made preparations for retracing
my steps to the Messrs. McConnel’s station. At this
station I experienced the kindest and most gentle-
manly treatment from Mr. Balfour, a descendant of
Balfour of Burley. Mr. Balfour pretends not to vie
with his ancestor in wielding a sword, but, what is far


more useful, if not esteemed so honourable by the
world, far surpasses him in the management of
sheep. His flocks are all in excellent condition, and
have been improved in breed as well as multiplied
wonderfully in number; four years having witnessed
their increase from 1,800 to 9,000 and upwards,
exclusive of a loss of 2,000, caused by the abori-
gines in their repeated predatory attacks on his
stations. I left this station in company with Mr.
Francis Bigge. The day had cleared, and we had
a view from the Bunga mountains, in the north, to
the distance of between thirty and forty miles to the
northward of the hill or mountain on which we
stood. While on the top of this hill, we saw three
kangaroos, the finest specimens of that species of
animal which I had ever seen. When they started,
the sound of their leaps resembled that of horses
galloping at full speed. As we approached the
station of the Messrs. McConnel, we passed over a
very rich plain, close to the Brisbane, which I feel
persuaded would form a good sugar plantation. We
reached the station about two o’clock. We spent
the afternoon and evening pleasantly ; and after
prayers I retired to rest, with the intention of
starting at an early hour to-morrow, for the station
of Messrs. Graham and Ivory.
August 26th. —This morning I rose by break of
day, and made preparations for the journey to the
station mentioned in the account of yesterday’s pro-
ceedings. Notwithstanding the early hour at which
I rose, it was nearly nine o’clock before all was ready


for a start, as one of the horses cost some trouble
before he was caught, being one belonging to the
Messrs. McConnel, which has been kindly lent for the
use of my servant till we reach Ipswich. We joined,
at the most distant out-station, Mr. Mort, the super-
intendent, who rode with us about a mile, in order
to put us in the road which leads to the station of
Messrs. Graham and Ivory. Our ride was for about
five miles along the bank of a creek, between two
ranges of mountains, over very good soil, on which
grow the usual trees, —that called the Moreton-Bay
Ash predominating. There are also a good many
grass trees on some of the flats and basins. We rode
up the bed of a creek for a short way, the sandy
bottom of which is covered with particles of iron
pyrites, and produces an appearance not unapt to
deceive one into the belief that it is one of the
most precious metals. We travelled on, and crossed
a second creek, the boundary between the runs of
the Messrs. McConnel and the Messrs. Graham
and Ivory, at a place where there is a plentiful
supply of water, as clear as crystal, running over a
dark blue rock of primary formation. We have
now entered a country which deserves the name
of mountainous, the tops and sides of which are
covered with large boulders of real granite. I lelt
the road for a little, to examine the formation of one
of these mountain-ridges, and ascertain the character
of the rock which composes it. The rock I found
to be real granite, as fine nearly as that which
abounds in Aberdeenshire, which is so admirably


adapted for building purposes, and a great quan-
tity of which is constantly sent to London for the
erection of public and national works. It is to be
hoped I shall soon succeed in procuring at least
three blocks of this fine Australian granite, which
will take a good polish, to form a baptismal font for
the church of St John’s, Brisbane. Beyond this
pass and ridges, there is a fine basin, of not very
great extent, surrounded by granitic hills of con-
siderable elevation. As we advanced, we proceeded
through another pass, and over another ridge, when
we descended on the run which we wished to reach,
where our eyes were soon gratified with the sight of
two fine flocks of sheep. Here we passed along a
creek for a short way between two conical granitic
hills, one of which much resembles Dumbarton
Rock, and by this resemblance recalled to my mind
a world of not unpleasing associations. This part
of the country resembles the Highlands of Scotland
more than any other part of the colony which I have
yet visited. I spent with Graham and Ivory a
pleasant afternoon. In the evening I read prayers
for the Protestant part of the people on the station.
Those who attended were very respectable young
men from Scotland ; and having been well brought
up, were very devout during prayers, and as atten-
tive during my subsequent address. We soon
afterwards retired to rest in very primitive beds, as
these gentlemen have only been here a very short
time. The principal furniture in the hut is a number
of very excellent books, betokening the good and


religious education which the possessors had re-
ceived ; and which, I was most happy to find, they had
not, like many others, forgotten. lam quite certain
that both these young men are very religiously dis-
posed, both from the tone of their conversation, and
from their deportment. May God, of his infinite
goodness and mercy, grant that they may be pre-
served, by the power of his grace, in the paths of
truth, righteousness, holiness, and godliness, in which
they have manifestly been instructed with great care
to walk in their early years.
August 27th. —This morning I got up early, and
started, after an early breakfast with Graham and
Ivory, for the station of Messrs. Oliver and Borth-
wick. "We reached the station which we sought, as
it became dark, with considerable difficulty, as the
dray track was in many places indistinct. It was
stated to us that the distance between the two stations
is only thirty miles by the road we came ; but from
the pace at which we rode, and considering the time
we had been on the road, I think if Sir Thomas
Mitchell had chained it, it would have counted full
forty miles. At all events, having been on horseback
from eight, o’clock in the morning till six at night,
with only one hour’s intermission, I was very tired at
the conclusion of this day’s journey. The sensations
of fatigue may have been more acute from the circum-
stance, that for the last two days I have not been
quite well. I read prayers a short time after I reached
the station, and then almost immediately went to
bed, not expecting a very comfoi’table night’s rest.


August 28 th. —This morning I visited, before
breakfast, the out-station, in company with Mr.
Oliver. There were three protestants there, who
were all very devout and attentive. We went to
the station over a freestone elevation, on which
grew some beautiful flowers, which I had not seen
before. After breakfast, I read the prayers of the
Church for the people at the chief station, and ad-
dressed them thereafter ; pointing out to them very
briefly the leading doctrines of our most holy faith.
They were all emigrants, and were remarkable for
their proper behaviour during prayers and the
address. I waited after prayers till eleven o’clock,
when I directed my servant to make preparations
for proceeding to Mr. Wingate’s station. When he
had brought in the horses, I was very sorry to find
that my own fine young horse had received a very
serious injury during the previous day’s ride. As
this injury is in the wither, I shall not be able to
ride my horse any more on this journey, and must
therefore walk all the way to Brisbane. I set out
at twelve o’clock, with the intention of walking this
day’s journey. Accordingly I walked a distance of
thirteen or fourteen miles, over a very level country.
August 29th. —Although very tired last night,
from my unusually long walk, as, with one excep-
tion, it is upwards of ten years since I walked
thirteen or fourteen miles continuously, I feel quite
fresh this morning, as I had a comfortable bed and
very sound sleep for part of the night. It blew
hard the greater part of the night, and was very


cold in the morning. I walked about till breakfast-
time, after which I read the prayers of the Church
to the family and one servant, the only Protestant
on the establishment, besides the proprietor and his
relatives. As I proposed to give my horses half a
day’s rest, I accompanied Messrs. Wingate and
Fletcher with a dray, to a distant part of the run,
whence they intended to fetch bark to complete the
roof of their hut. We passed through a very rich
flat. When we returned from this excursion we
had dinner, and I then set out on foot to the tem-
porary station occupied by Mr. John McDougall, a
native of the colony, which forms part of Wingate’s
run. After a walk of nine miles, over alternate
flats of rich black soil, and low ridges of light sand,
I reached this station sometime after sunset, where
1 was kindly welcomed. Soon after my arrival,
I had all the Protestants assembled to prayers.
There were four who made their appearance on
Mr. McDougall’s summons, with whom I prayed ;
and whom, after prayers, I addressed at consider-
able length. They were attentive and devout, and
appear very decent quiet men. Mr. McDougall is
an experienced bushman, and has accordingly moie
comfort about him in the space of a few weeks,
than the less experienced men whom I have visited
have about them after a residence of years, and with
no design of relinquishing the position in which
they have placed themselves. After some conversa-
tion with McDougall on the natural characteiistics
of the colony, much of which he has seen in his


patriarchal wanderings after his flocks and herds,
I went early to bed, as I felt both tired and chilly
after my walk, performed under a clear sky and a
very powerful sun. My couch was as primitive as
it could well be, yet I slept sweetly and soundly from
previous fatigue.
August 30th. —It was my intention to start early
this morning, for the purpose of reaching Ipswich,
if possible, in the evening ; but this design, as many
others have been, was frustrated by the disappear-
ance of our horses, which were lost for the first
time since we left Brisbane on this very fatiguing
journey. It was a considerable time before they
were brought back by my servant, as they had re-
turned some distance towards the station we left
yesterday afternoon. The delay thus occasioned
rendered the prospect of reaching Ipswich to-day
hopeless ; and I therefore determined to remain with
Mr. McDougall till dinner-time, and then set out
for Mr. Owen’s accommodation-house, which is fif-
teen or sixteen miles from Ipswich. At half-past
three o’clock we reached Mr. Owen’s accommodation-
house, after a fatiguing journey of up and down
hill, and through a swampy flat of full eight miles.
On making inquiry, I found we could not reach this
night the government station, which is distant eight
miles from this place, on the road to Ipswich, owing
to the badness of the road, which in many places is
almost impassable.
August 31s*.—This morning I rose early, and
set out by seven o’clock to walk to Ipswich, which


is about sixteen miles distant from Owen’s house of
accommodation. On reaching Thom’s, at Ipswich,
I intimated that service would be performed there
in the evening, and spent the afternoon in arranging
some of my papers. In the evening eighteen people
assembled, when I read the prayers of the Church,
and delivered a short address.
September Ist. —Last night I was somewhat
fatigued, hut this morning I feel quite refreshed,
and ready to enter on my walk of twenty-five miles.
We started about seven o’clock, and reached the
government station at Red Bank, about nine o clock.
We left Red Bank, after having had a pot of tea,
about ten o’clock, and passed over a hilly country, of
very little use, for several miles, either for cultiva-
tion or grazing purposes. Around Ipswich there is
a good deal of flint, lying quite exposed to the sur-
face. There is also limestone here, but it is not of
a very good quality ; and I believe there is also
coal, though I have never had time to go to the
spot where it is to be found. The general character
of the country which I have traversed during this
missionary expedition, is mountainous. The soil on
the greater portion of it is poor, and can never,
even by the appliances of modern science and art,
be brought into a state highly fruitful in purely
agricultural productions. Until the colony at large
become so circumstanced as to be used for the ex-
tensive growth of the vine, the greatest portion of
the scene of my present travels can only be ren-
dered available for grazing purposes ; and much of


it is but poorly adapted even to the maintenance of
cattle, horses, and sheep. Though the general aspect
of the northern district be mountainous, and the
general character of the soil meagre, yet there are
within its limits several plains of considerable extent,
the soil of which is rich in the extreme, and is
suited to the growth of almost every description of
agricultural produce which may be made available
to the sustenance of man. On the branches of the
Brisbane especially, and its various tributaries, there
are many such rich soils, where wheat, corn, rice,
sugar, coffee, arrow-root, and cotton, would grow in
luxuriant abundance ; and where there can be little
doubt they will be cultivated, whenever labour be-
comes so cheap, that the crops thereby raised wi
afford a remunerating return to the grower, for the
risk and outlay of the capital expended. It will be
apparent, that among a population at once thin an
widely scattered, the erection of churches at present
would be an almost totally useless work, inasmuc
as no considerable number of people could assemble
in them for prayers, and the hearing of the word of
God ; and there being little prospect of an increase
of population, as well as great uncertainty respecting
the place in which population, when it does increase,
may concentrate, it is difficult to divine where, in
future times, temples of God may rise, with their
spires pointing to heaven ; and thus reminding man,
as often as he enters them, that he ought always to
aspire after heavenly things, and not set his affec-
tions on things below. If, in the midst of such


uncertainty, a conjecture may be hazarded as to the
places where churches may be built in these dis-
tricts, I should imagine that the site of one would
be somewhere in the district of the Pine River ; of
another, near the junction of the two branches of
the Brisbane into one stream, where the stations of
the Messrs. McConnel, Bigge, and Scott all meet ;
and of a third, not far from Mount Forbes, on the
ground included between the two roads which sepa-
rate at Ipswich, and lead to the northern and
southern parts of the Darling Downs.
It is, of course, very plain that Ipswich, now not
only fixed upon by Government, but also surveyed
and laid out as a township, is a place where a church
of the living God is required; and I trust that, at
no distant period, the means for the erection of a
small wooden temporary church may be procured,
as there is no suitable place here for the celebration
of Divine worship. Seeing it would be useless now
to erect churches in the rural parts of this district,
even were the circumstances of this portion of the
coiony such as to allow the erection of places of
worship in fixed parishes, it is manifest that the
devotion and religious knowledge of the inhabitants
can be kept alive only by missionary labour, expended
in going from station to station, praying with the
tew on each who can be conveniently collected in
one place, and preaching to them the Gospel of
Christ. As to the reception with which I met from
the proprietors of stations, it could not well be sur-
passed in point of courtesy and kindness. Every


one, I may add, was anxious to afford me every
facility in meeting with the servants on the stations
for the purposes of devotion and religious instruction ;
and all set a good example to those under them, by
attending prayers, and by listening to my address at
the head-station. Almost all, too, were active in
aiding me in the accomplishment of other objects
for the support and extension of religion and its
ordinances, which it was my aim to effect on this
journey, as it shall be on the others which Provi-
dence will permit me to make. More, also, besides
encouraging their servants to promise assistance for
the maintenance of religion in the district, stated
that they would themselves contribute to the support
and advancement of true piety to the utmost of
their ability ; and if, agreeably to my anticipations,
their actual liberality correspond with their promis-
sory declarations, their conduct will prove a pleasing
and gratifying aspect, when contrasted with the little
less than impious behaviour of some persons who
are callous to the momentous concerns of religion. .
The conduct, in general, of those who earn their
bread by the sweat of their brow, bore a favourable
appearance. Many who had not heard the sound o
the glad tidings of great joy for years, were visibly
and deeply affected with what was spoken to them ;
and not a few expressed their gratitude to me for
the exertions I had made to come among them, to
preach to them, in the wilderness, the gospel of
Jesus Christ. There were, however, some few
exceptions to these well-disposed and well-behaved


people. Still there was only one person so hardened
in iniquity as to appear to be beyond the reach of
good impressions in this world ; and, unless re-
pentance be wrought in his stubborn soul by the
glorious power of God’s Holy Spirit, the hope of
final redemption in the world to come. With this
desperado I conversed for more than an hour ; and
his conscience being seared as with a hot iron, I
could not discover a single avenue in his obdurate
heart through which there could be insinuated so
much as one iota of the truth as it is in Jesus.
I left him in the hands of God ; for I considered
and believe him to be beyond the power of man, as
an instrument for his conversion from sin, impurity,
and impiety, to righteousness, holiness, and the
service of the one living and true God. To this
miserable man my efforts did not appear to be of the
smallest service ; but I trust and hope that to most
others my labours, under God, were of some use in
awakening their minds to a sense of religion, and in
impressing on them the necessity of consulting the
interests of their immortal souls in the midst of their
endeavours to provide for the body which perisheth.
I trust that the above account of my proceedings
will not be unacceptable to the Incorporated Society
for the Propagation of the Gospel, from whose
liberality, administered by the Lord Bishop of the
diocese, I have derived my support since my
appointment to this district.
John Gregor,
Missionary of the S.P.G.F.P.


Memorandum added hy the Bishop of Australia.
Mr. Gregor has furnished me with two other
Journals, recording very minutely and distinctly,
his daily proceedings in two similar tours : the first
from the 21st of September to the 16th of October,
to the south ; and the second from the 30th of
October to the 10th of December, 1843.
These records are too voluminous to be tran-
scribed ; but I may testify that they are marked by
intelligence and good sense ; contain many most
useful observations on the character and condition of
the people ; and afford distinct evidence of the
laborious zeal with which Mr. Gregor devotes him-
self to convey the glad tidings of redemption to
those far separated members of Christ’s body, who
hut for such exertions to reach them , must he hope-
lessly cut off (as it may he feared too many actually
are) from all which can call to their remembrance the
words of eternal life: for “how shall they hear
without a preacher? and how shall they preach
except they be sent ?”
W. G. A.


GRAZING DISTRICTS BEYOND THE BOUNDARIES.
Statistical Information, up to the'end of the Year 1843.
DISTRICTS,
Number of
Stations.
Number of
Acres under
Cultivation.
Population.
Horses.
Cattle.
Sheep.
Spiritual Provision.
Free,
Bond.
17
26
41
30
83
136
46
66
133
172
129
not
ascertained.
ditto.
125
123
471
615
562
250
452
3,175
2,400
2,272
not
ascertained.
ditto.
191
290
407
227
721
372
510
816
1,473
1,196
not
ascertained.
240
26
45
113
142
231
75
138
136
236
154
1,290
710
215
445
390
375
777
1,598
454
588
1,711
2,315
2,928
1,889
1,367
4,028
9,267
12,457
16,192
37,196
125,420
29,4<;4
36,039
53,533
93,158
74,877
45,906
35,467
74,420
110,231
122,399
19,734
425,201
175,827
131,382
175,559
146,212
226,682
196,249
509,896
709,255
|*Rev. J. Gregor, S.P.G.
|Rev. J. M'Connell, S.P.G
Darling Downs....
Clarence River..
M‘Leay River
New England
Liverpool Plains
Wellington
Rev. W. Lisle, S.P.G.
Rev. E. G. Pryce, S.P.G
Morumeidgee
Moniera
Gipp’s Land \
Murray J
Western Port
Portland Bay...J
Rev. J.Y.Wilson, S.P.G.
NOTES. —Within the 19 counties, the country being
surveyed, the occupation licenses are of fixed areas; but
beyond the licenses are for indefinite areas.
The 19 counties embrace an area of about 25 millions of
acres, out of which about 5 millions only are alienated,
leaving 20 millions of acres of waste land within the 19
counties.
The Colony, up to the 26 th degree, embraces an
about 300 millions of acres of waste land.
area of
The respective boundaries of the 19 counties are
settled
by letters patent, and formed until lately the limits
which lands were alienated.
within
The other 6 counties have been provisionally proclaimed
for electoral purposes merely.
* Three of the Clergy in this list are entirely maintained by the S.P.G., two in part. See Extract, Part I. p. 47.


PUBLICATIONS
OF THE
SOCIETY FOR THE PROPAGATION OF THE GOSPEL.
£f)e Cfjurcf) tit Hje dToloities.
No. I.—JOURNAL of Visitation by the Bishop of TORONTO. With
a Map. Price 6d.
No. lI.—JOURNAL of Visitation by the Bishop of MONTREAL. With
3 No P III.—JOURNAL of Visitation by the Bishop of NOVA SCOTIA.
With a Map. Price B d.
No. iy._NEW ZEALAND. Part I.—Containing Letters from
the Bishop of New Zealand to the Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel, together with Extracts from his Journal of \ isitation, and a
Preface and Map. Price Is.
No V.—AUSTRALIA. Part I. JOURNAL of Visitation by the
Bishop of AUSTRALIA. Price 4 d. ™
No. Vl.—Ditto. Part 11. TWO JOURNALS of MISSIONARY
TOURS in the Districts of MANEROO and MORETON BAY, New
South Wales, in 1843. With a new Map, shewing the Grazing Districts
of New South Wales. Price 6 d.
No. VII.—NEW ZEALAND. Part 11. Price 6d.
No. VIII.—NEW ZEALAND. Part 111. Price id.
fHtsstons to tfje PKattjfiL
No.I.—MISSION of SAWYERPOORAM, in the District of TINNE-
VELLY, and Diocese of Madras. Price 3d. ._ TMWO
No. lI.—MISSION of EDEYENKOODY, m the District of TINNE-
VELLY, and Diocese of Madras. Price 2d.
No lII.—MISSION of SAWYERPOORAM. Part 11. Price 2d.
No. IV.—MISSION of CAWNPORE, in the Diocese of Calcutta.
p r i ce
No. V.—MISSION of NAZARETH, in the District of TINNE-
VELLY, and Diocese of Madras. Price Id.
No VI.—MISSION of LAKE HURON. Price 3d.
No VII—MISSION of SAWYERPOORAM. Part 111. Price 2d.
No’ VIII. —MISSION of SAWYERPOORAM. Part IV. Price Id.
No! IX.—BISHOP of MADRAS’S VISITATION. Price 4d.
THE COLONIAL CHURCH ATLAS, arranged in Dioceses; with
Geographical and Statistical Tables. Price 10s. 6d. ,
Also, a COLONIAL and MISSIONARY CHURCH MAP of the
WORLD, shewing the Dioceses and Missionary Stations, upon Mercator s
Projection. Coloured and varnished, on Canvas and Roller, size 6 teet
6 inches by 4 feet 5 inches. Price 325.
The Same on a smaller Scale (18 inches by 17 inches), on Canvas
and Roller, price 3s. 6d.—Folded in Case, pocket size, 2s.
MAPS of the COLONIES. Price (coloured) 4d. each.
1 British North America. 3. Australia.
2. British India. 4. British West Indies.
The same may be had on Canvas and Roller.
* » The whole of the above Publications are on the Supplemental
Catalogue of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.


