





TWO ESSAYS
DEAWN DP FOE THE
OFFICIAL EECORD OF THE EXHIBITION
HELD IN' MELBOURNE IN 1872-3.
ON COLONIAL WINES.
ON PRESERVED MEATS,
BEING FOR THE MOST PART A STUDY OF A PROCESS OF FREEZING
FRESH MEAT FOR EXPORTATION.
APPENDED TO WHICH IS A JURORS’ REPORT.
By REV. JOHN I, BLEASDALE, D.D., F.G.S.,
HONORARY MEMBER OF THE MEDICAL SOCIETY OF VICTORIA ; CORRESPONDING MEMBER
OP THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF TASMANIA : VICE-PRESIDENT OP THE ROYAL
TECHNOLOGICAL SOCIETY : TRUSTEE OF THE PUBLIC LIBRARY,
MUSEUMS, AND NATIONAL GALLERY OF VICTORIA :
OP THE ROYAL COMMISSIONS FOR
EXHIBITIONS, &C., &0.
llUltromriu:
MASON, FIRTH, & M‘GUT CHE ON, PRINTERS,
51 & 53 Flinders Lane West.
mdccclxxiii.


N.B. —The author of these Essays lays no claim whatever to
studied literary composition. Carefulness in working out details,
accuracy in recording facts, and truthfulness and plainness of
statements, are all that he has aimed at.
The reader will perceive that the matter of them has been
treated with a view to recording the present condition of two
industries, “ new ” to the population of Victoria as a whole, and
also to assist in advancing their complete establishment in a
country so admirably suited to them as is Victoria.
St. Patrick’s, Melbourne,
27th February, 1873.


INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION ESSAYS, 1872-3.
No. 6.
ON WINES.
By Rev. JOHN I. BLEASDALE, D.D.




ON WINES.
INTRODUCTORY.
In the following pages will he found an account of such studies
and analyses of colonial wines as I have been able to make during
the last five or six years, which are now thrown out as a very
small contribution to our common fund of information concerning
this interesting and valuable new industry. I venture to call it,
still, a “new industry,” for the colony has hardly yet been pro-
spected fully as to its whole capabilities for yielding wines; while
the vines best suited to each locality are by no means clearly
ascertained, and while the systems of making and maturing wine
must for some time longer be experimental rather than fixed ; as
will be readily understood when it is remembered that between
the Barrabool Hills and the valley of the Murray, Victoria
possesses every variety of climate, exposure, and soil that are to
be met with between Neufchatel and Lisbon.
And as the industry itself is, in my belief, but in an infantile
state, though making fair progress, and as the products of vine-
yards of the same district are known to vary so markedly, I con-
clude that very much remains to be learned by those who are
about to establish vineyards, and by makers and treaters of wine as
well as by the student of oeuology. Of course, I hold myself alone
responsible for any opinions, statements, or deductions here laid
down. I would premise, however, that the matter of this essay
has been collected, and the remarks recorded from time to time,
as opportunity offered, so of course I have made no attempt at
literary composition.
Circumstances, to which I shall have to refer hereafter, induced
me, many years ago, to make the study of vines and wines an
occupation for my leisure hours; the results of which I have, now
and then, laid before the public of the Australian colonies. I
would refer briefly to some of these. As chairman and reporter
of the wine experts of the Intercolonial Exhibition, 1866-7, I
drew a somewhat lengthy account of the introduction of the vine
into Australia, and the fortunes of colonial wine to the end of
1866. Subsequently I had opportunities of making more lengthy
and detailed inquiries into several matters affecting the making,
keeping, and maturing of our wines—to say nothing of efforts to
remove prejudices against them. Though those investigations
were by no means as thorough and complete as I could have


wished, yet they appeared to me then, and do so still, useful in
clearing the path of the vignerons.
The wine industry differs in multifarious ways from nearly all
others, because the subject matter of it is so various, and the
methods of treating the same materials so different in different
places.
WINE IN RELATION TO CLIMATE, &c
Climate, soil, aspect, any one or more of the hundreds of vari-
eties of grapes entering into the formation of a wine—the duration
of fermentation, the temperature of the cellar, racking, fining,
&c. —all have to do with modifying the ultimate product, the wine.
Then, again, the properties of nearly all the European vines
change very much in Victoria. No one can doubt for a moment
that the excellent judges, to whom were submitted recently some
hundreds of samples of Australian wines in Germany and France
(the remainder of the samples sent for competition at the last
Wine Exhibition, held by the late Board of Agriculture), expressed
their conscientious convictions of their merits or defects. But
this is remarkable, especially as regarded the white kinds, that in
nearly every instance where they ventured to name the grape or
grapes a wine was made from, they were wrong.
It must be borne in mind that wine is a very compound fluid;
among its principal constituents, such as are always present in it,
are water, spirit of wine, tannic acid, tartaric acid, phosphoric
acid, racemic acid, malic acid, sugar, and oxide of iron, and potash,
with generally a small quantity of lime. These are the principal,
hut by no means the only, ingredients of pure wine. The bouquet,
as it is called, is a true sether, and is formed by the action of the
acids on the alcohol in a nascent state, and the flavouring princi-
ple of the grape, from which each distinctive bouquet is derived.
The iron, potash, phosphoric acid, and the lime are taken up from
the earth; the elements of the other acids, sugar, alcohol, &c.,
from the air and water. A glass of genuine wine contains a varying
quantity, generally about one-fifth or a little more of its bulk, of
proof spirit and four-fifths water, when not fortified.
WINE IN RELATION TO THE HUMAN SYSTEM.
Wine, not must*, fortified to any considerable extent, say 5 per
cent, or upwards, produces in its action on the human system an
effect somewhere between that of pure wine, and brandy, or some
less pure spirit, and water. Hence the headiness of fortified wines.
The Portuguese, and probably the general Spanish, practice of
* Musi, the unfermented, or only partially fermented, and new juice of
the grape.


adding 2 or 3 per cent, of proof spirit to the fermenting musts, in
order to arrest a too great production of spirit and waste of
body, is a totally different affair; because the added spirit merely
destroys the albumen and other nitrogenous matters, and along
with them is itself deposited as an insoluble compound, the murk;
thus leaving the wine with a material to feed upon —a little of the
natural sugar of the grape —and less spirit than it would otherwise
have formed for itself at the expense of the gummy and other
quasi-saccharine matters contained in the must. Wines so made
seldom become “ ropy,” and hardly ever take “ the flour”
The proof spirit, however, in the case of wine, differs widely in
its action on the human system from so much distilled spirit and
water, for in wine it is not a mere mixture, but a combination,
and it stands in chemical relations with the tannic and tartaric
acids and iron. Tannic acid is a powerful astringent and tonic,
while tartaric acid, combined with potash and iron, has its own
peculiar action on the human economy. It is evident, then, that
wine must be slowly digested before it can get into the general
circulation; and it is also plain that it more nearly resembles
the nicely-adjusted prescription of a physician than aught else.
And it is a prescription prepared by the greatest of all physicians,
not alone as a restorative or alterative for the deranged functions
of the body, but one, meant primarily to strengthen and promote
the well-being of the healthy frame, and at the same time
intensify the sense of enjoyment of life. It is both an element of
food and a luxury. Had I time, nothing would be more pleasing
to myself than to illustrate by examples the wonderful and
merciful providence of God in maintaining His creatures in
existence, health, and comfort through every zone, from the
equator to the poles, supplying them with whatever is needful
under the very altered conditions, in which their existence has to
be carried on. What animal fat, and oil, clothing of skins or
feathers, are to the Laplander ; what his starch, no matter whence
derived, and his almost naked skin are to the equatorial African ;
what his bitter beer is to the inhabitant of Northern Europe; that
his wine, and a moderate quantity of animal and vegetable food, are
to the inhabitants of sub-tropical dim tes all over the world.
Again, if time allowed, it would be delightful to take up the line
of illustration, so exquisitely drawn by Mr. Babinet, of the Insti-
tute of France, and trace the action of Providence in the wool,
hair, feather, skin, and other integuments of animated nature in
the several zones. But we can do no more now than allude to it.
And so, if we reason consecutively, we shall find that every
climate has its own appointed conditions, under which alone the
human economy will be healthy and vigorous. You cannot here
subsist on the starch food which maintains in health and strength


the inhabitants of equatorial regions, nor can you think of sus-
taining life for any length of time on the fish oil, tallow, and
dried flesh of the Laplander, or man of Kamschatka. The beers
and ardent spirits, so much a necessary in moderation in cold and
damp regions, and the strong tea of China, when taken constantly
and in excess, produce diseases here, on which learned physio-
logists become eloquent, and from which are derived in no small
degree the need of the physician, and the waste of health and the
expense of sickness, to say nothing ot the miseries of declining
life. Health depends much upon the vigorous tone of the
nervous system ; the enjoyment of life wholly on that great instru-
ment in the human laboratory, the liver, tea, and such like, act
strongly on the nervous system, but are comparatively harmless.
Malt liquors and ardent spirits load the system with carbon; well
enough for the production of animal heat, but not needed here,
since the atmosphere supplies it abundantly.
When the temperature is not low enough to require a large
supply of carbon to maintain animal heat, then, as the carbon
must go somewhere, and be got rid of somehow, the liver and
kidneys have to do the work, when they are, perhaps, already
overworked.
I trust I am neither a theorist nor a quack. I hate quackery
of all kinds, and my education has taught me that theories are
worth little more than that they serve to arrange and harmonise
a certain number of facts. The fact in this case is that liver and
kidney diseases, nearly unknown in wine-drinking countries, are
almost universal in these colonies, and either form the basis of
prevailing complicated diseases, or are complicated with them.
Beer and spirits have their work to do in cold and damp climates,
not such as ours—-intensely hot and dry. Wine has its beneficial
work to do in Victoria, and it is gratifying to watch the steady
progress hitherto made, mainly during the last five or six years.
EARLY STUDY OF AUSTRALIAN WINES, FROM 1859
TO 1866.
I think, then, that any contribution to the further knowledge
of this important branch of colonial industries will be of some
use; and that I need no further apology for placing before the
readers an outline or resume of my investigations, chiefly since
1866-7, in the plainest manner I know how.
In the month of May, 1867, I read an essay on Colonial Wine
before the members of the Royal Society of Victoria, which was
afterwards published in the Transactions of that body, circulated
in pamphlet form by the late Board of Agriculture, and subse-
quently found worthy to be translated into German, which was
done by Mr. Methe, and circulated among his countrymen. That


essay, or paper, referred, in the first part, to certain studies of,
and chemical investigations into, most of the leading character-
istics of Australian Wines that came to my hand between the
latter months of 1859, and December, 1866. Many of the samples
tested were the produce of well-known vineyards in New South
Wales, the first and by far the largest number and variety being
either “ Camden Park” or “ Irrewang and Kaluda” brands, intro-
duced into Victoria by Mr. Blake, to whose enterprise in 1860,
when colonial wine was another synonym for anything detestable,
the Victorian vignerons owe no small debt of gratitude.
These investigations comprised the specific gravity of each
sample, its amount of absolute alcohol, unchanged sugar (if any),
percentage of residue after evaporation, power of keeping and
resisting acidity, and change of colour, and especially its total
amount of free acids, which was determined by alkalimetry, the
standards of reference being port, sherry, hock, and tokay, supplied
by the agent of the Messrs. Macarthur, of Camden, the late Mr.
Ralph Hutchinson, an educated and able judge of wine.
I record the above outline of the points I inquired into, that
others may follow the same, and, I trust, record their results.
With reference to the experiments to determine the power a
wine had of keeping, after exposure to the air, and of resisting
acidity, I would mention in this place that, next after determining
the quantity of alcohol, I sought for the amount of tannic acid that
it contained. In the case of white wines, this was an easy matter;
but difficult in the red. The following was the plan I adopted
with the whites: —I took samples of good sound sherry, as nearly
as possible of the same shade of colour as that of the colonial
wine I was going to test; and after putting about equal quanti-
ties of each in wine glasses of the same size, I added to each an
excess of carbonate of soda—say, a small teaspoonful; a little too
much makes no difference. After standing a few minutes, it will
be easy to observe the depth of dark colour shown by the sherry.
Now, compare this with the samples to be tried, and the greater or
lesser depth of colour in the samples will show how this important
point in the keeping of wine stands. If the wine be paler than
the standard of sherry, eggs or isinglass must on no account be
used for fining. If the sample is perceptibly darker after adding
the carbonate of soda, even then much caution is needed in using
eggs, or any other albuminous substance; for these abstract the
tannic acid by the chemical action they exert upon it.
Not living in a wine-produeing country, the English people
have no proper terms to express accurately many operations on
wine, and thus such terms as “ fining ” have a more or less
confused meaning. We say when wine is rough, austere on the
palate, bitter — “fine” it. White of egg, isinglass, bullock’s


blood, and milk, &c., will do the fining such wine requires. They
will remove the tannic acid, and probably some others. Again, a
wine, smooth and sweet to the palate, is muddy, off colour, &c.: we
say, “fine” it—and that means, clear it; but in this case albumen,
isinglass, &c., would ruin it, and sand or Spanish clay is alone
admissible. All fining is a sort of filtration; and as you cannot
put the wine through an ordinary filter, you put a filter through
the wine. The insoluble compounds formed by albuminous
matters and tannic acid on one hand, and the sand or Spanish clay
on the other, constitute such a filter.
SOME PERSONAL MATTERS.
I have been twitted at times by teetotallers with devoting too
much attention to these matters; and certainly I can say with
Cicero, “ Licuit otioso esse mihi but I preferred to fill up my
time in a way that was pleasant and instructive to myself, and not
without showing a prospect of future utility to the country of ray
adoption. Mingled with the above was, very likely, a little
harmless vanity; for in a new country, and in a limited popula-
tion, a little man is apt to delude himself by thinking that he is a
big one; and I honestly admit that, while there might have been
more experienced judges of wine and abler analyists than myself, I
could hear, in 1860, of hardly one who knew anything of the
young, unmatured wines of Europe, and not one, who at the same
time could bring a chemist’s knowledge to bear upon our produce.
And, furthermore, I thought the vignerons would trust my
statements, seeing that I had a character and public position to
maintain, and, also, that I had not a pennyworth of personal
interest in any vineyard, or its produce. But I had another
motive for taking up this subject—one not unworthy of a clergy-
man. Many years’ experience had impressed on my mind that
wine-producing countries, where wine is plentiful and cheap, are
invariably remarkable for sober, healthy, and cheerful populations;
that drunkenness is all but unknown, and many distressing
diseases common among drinkers of beer and spirits in warm
climates utterly unheard of.
It must also be conceded that there is a freshness and charm
about the first investigations of objects, such as wines, which are
liable to indefinite and almost innumerable varieties. In the
circumstances under which the vine has been introduced into
Australia, on one hand from old vineyards in the south of Spain
and south of France, and on the other by Swiss and Germans from
their own conntries, mainly the Rheingau and the Tyrol, changes
in the produce must of necessity occur. Change of climate,
perhaps, more than anything else, affects the vine and its produce.
Vines introduced by the Messrs. Macarthur, of Camden, into


New South Wales, and Mr. Gilbert, of Pewseyvale, into South
Australia, originally from near Jeres de la Frontera, and a few
varieties common about Roussillon, found themselves in climates
not very different from those they had been taken out of. But
when these same kinds made their way into Victoria, circum-
stances were materially altered. As a rule, the vine, brought from
a warmer into a colder climate, deteriorates for some years, both
in its growth and produce; and, on the other hand, those
removed from a colder to warmer, improve. One remarkable
instance of this is the Chasselas. It was brought to us, I think,
originally from the northern, or at most central, parts of France,
on account of its being a good table grape and a prolific bearer.
But in France it yields a wine generally poor in quality, bad in
colour, weak, and with a mousey odour. And, indeed, for a
length of time it retained most of these peculiar properties in the
colder regions of Victoria. At a time when it was considered the
correct thing to run down our native wines, I remember reading
in Melbourne Punch a receipt for making colonial wine, much
like the following: —“ No. 1 Chasselas. —Take one gallon of cold
water (Yan Yean will do), one pint vinegar, 2 lbs. sugar, mix, and
add two dirty, well-seasoned mousetraps. Product equal to the
ordinary run of this variety.”
ANTICIPATION OF FUTURE SUCCESS IN VICTORIAN
WINES.
Yet this same Chasselas vine produces in our warmer climates
—such as from Sunbury to Sandhurst —and with careful making,
one of our very best wines; while in the medium and cooler ones
I note its improvement in all the best vinous properties from year
to year. This is due, no doubt, to the vines having become accli-
matised, and to more extensive experience in the making and
maturing of the wine. If this colony ever produces novel wines
that will distinguish it in the markets of the old world, Chasselas
will be prominent among them. Another instance of a vine that
we have received from France is the Aucarbt. This pre-eminently
requires a warm climate —such as from Sandhurst all along the
valley of the Murray—and produces a wine that will most likely
be the first to attract attention as a peculiar product of our country.
Properly made, it yields a medium sweet wine, of good body, of a
dark, golden yellow, and having a bouquet that resembles that of
a handful of new sweet hay. It is, moreover, one of the few kinds
that can be safely used in moderate quantity for blending with
either white or red wines. But all the samples I have seen of it
from our colder climates have been poor and hard, as have also
been some from about the Murray, where the attempt had been


“As prize-takers for Yictoria, the wines at the Great Agricultural Wine
Show, 1870, rank as follows :—
Hermitage (pure or mixed), 6 prizes, 7
honourable mention
Mataro - - - -2
1
’’
Gamai - - - - 1
1
Reislings - - - 4
9 ?
1
> J
Chasselas - - - 2
1
? >
made to render it prematurely a dry wine. The awards of the
late wine jury of the Board of Agriculture, 1870, bear out my
observations on this head, and those samples still in my possession
are sweety-sour, one of the worst of bad properties. This is due
to bad making. Many other varieties of imported vines from dif-
ferent parts of Europe will, no doubt, show, if they have not
already shown, marked changes; and let us hope for the better.
I extract the following from the jurors* report, 1870: —
Yerdeilho (pure or mixed) 2 ~ 1 ~
Pineau (or mixed) - ) , ,■, , , ~
Rousette and Tokay - \ each 1 honourable mention.
“It will thus be seen that the Hermitage, Mataro, Reisling, and Chasselas
stand most prominent; but it is evident that the wines of the same name had
changed their character in each district, thus producing many varieties.
This is the most important point in the Exhibition to the vignerons ; and
although it cannot be denied that many of the wines are very fine, this
variety is a great drawback, which it is for the vignerons to remedy. To
make their wines marketable for foreign countries, the first condition is
uniformity ; and to attain this, the vignerons should set to work without
delay. We would suggest that in each district an association be formed,
whose sole object should be to ascertain, by careful examination over two or
three years of the wines produced, the most suitable grape for their particu-
lar district. Having ascertained this, they should lose no time in reorganis-
ing their vineyards, according to their means, by planting no other than the
grape selected for their district, and by grafting it, a certain proportion in
each year, on to their old vines. By this means, in ten, twelve, or even fifteen
years, each district would excel in its particular kind of wine, as the Rhine
produces hock; Bordeaux, claret; Burgundy, burgundy ; the Douro, port,
&c.; and our wines would then, through the agency of our wine merchants,
be introduced into the home markets, which will never be done to advantage
unless what we have recommended is carried out.”
The peculiarity of our red wines, and the same may be said of
Australian red wines generally, is a slightly earthy taste. Now
this I believe to be due to the faulty manner of making, and the
want of knowledge in maturing the wine, more than to anything
derivable either from the air or the soil, or the variety of grape
used. I have noted, however, that Mataro is generally the least
affected by it, and Malbec the most. Bed wines made by Mr. C.
Maplestone, at Ivanhoe, from grapes well matured in a small, well-
sheltered vineyard, and carefully chosen, on a plan substantially
the same as that recommended for a like class of wines by M.
Casalis Allut, were as nearly free from this objectionable taste as
any I have met with. It may, however, be said that much might


be done in making fine wine in a small vineyard, and under all
the most favourable conditions, and to a certain extent this is true.
But by adopting a plan in many of its points the same as that of
Casalis Allut, and on the large scale, S. Baldini, the able feitor of
the Hon. J. G. Francis, at Sunbury, has produced red wines that
commanded the admiration of the judges who examined the Vic-
torian wines at Sydney in 1870. I know not the plans adopted by
Weber Brothers, August Heine, Heine and Greiffenhagen, whose
red wines were nearly free from this gout de terrain, but think it
cannot be very dissimilar. As the red wines have to be fermented
on the skins to give them colour and tannin, there is reason to fear
they mostly receive more or less injury from the thick “ cap,” as it is
called, which is formed by the husks and stalks on the top of the vat.
To obviate this, the best French makers keep this “ cap ” pressed
down below the surface of the fluid so as to prevent any air from
touching it, by means of a false lid, a little smaller than the dia-
meter of the vat. This lid should be forced down a few inches
below the surface of the must, and the vat finally covered with
some thick cloth, such as a horse rug or two, I state this, because,
as a precautionary measure, it is of value, and the cost of it is
trifling. I have for several years been trying to ascertain if this
earthy taste is due to any change in the tannic acid, such as oxi-
dation of a portion of it into some higher form, such as gallic
acid. But I am not yet prepared to say with certainty that it is.
My opinion, based on some results obtained within this year,
inclines to this change. It must be remembered that fermenta-
tion frequently becomes very violent in Victoria, and when matters
are in their transition state, it is hard to tell what may happen.
Moreover we are not yet certain as to the part played in the
tumultuous fermentation by gummy matters and others in a
transition state from acid to sugar. Mr. Baldini acts, in my
judgment, wisely, by gathering his red grapes only when warmed
by the sun and perfectly dry, breaking the bunches as little as
possible, packing them in the vats, covering the vats when full with
thick woollen rugs, and leaving them so for a few days “ to sweat.”
In this interval much of this transition matter, and many not
perfectly ripe grapes, will be brought into a perfect condition.
There is now no doubt on my mind that the red wines of
Victoria may be vastly improved by the careful study by intelli-
gent vine-growers of the conditions of ripeness of grapes, methods
of crushing, vatting, and storing of their produce, in relation
mainly to climate. The FVench methods of making red wine in
most places south of the dividing range seem the best. The
German methods, as in use on the Rheingau, turn out the best
white wines south of the dividing range, and the Spanish and
Portuguese ones for the north. Of course there will be spots,


north of the dividing range, that will yield some varieties of dry
wines; but, as a rule, it is merely torturing the musts of high
saccharine strength, in a necessarily hot climate, to attempt to
make of them wines of the hock and sauterne character. The
Spanish grapes, which produce the manzanilla, would probably
yield a dry wine there.
WINES LEFT AFTER THE EXHIBITION OF 1866-7
FOR FUTURE STUDY AND REPORT.
There were sent to the Intercolonial Exhibition of 1866-7 not a
few samples of red wine from the north of the dividing range—
Hopwood’s, of Echuca; Guppy’s, of Benalla; one or two of
Piper’s, and some others—that obtained no distinction whatever
at the time. These were pure and simple wines—well made, but,
being young and full-bodied, they needed care and keeping. But
after lying quiet for five years, they proved to be quite equal to
the very best sent to the Exhibition—wines quite ripe at, say, six
or seven years old, that would be a credit to the colony in any
country in the world.
It is frequently remarked that the produce of young vineyards
becomes drinkable, and matures sooner, than that of old ones;
and all my observations go towards confirming it. There are no
old vineyards in Victoria, and very few in Australia. There can
be but three or four in all, that date back twenty-five years; but
there are a good many of ten or twelve years. Now I understand
by the produce of young vineyards those not older than their
third year of bearing. The produce of such as these does soon
ripen, and it also soon passes its best, deposits colouring matter,
and becomes thin and poor, though it may retain its distinctive
bouquet. It is, perhaps, providentially so arranged, that the cul-
tivator may not lay long out of a return.
One important object which I proposed to myself in studying
the samples left with me at the close of the Intercolonial Exhibi-
tion, 1866-7, was to watch from time to time, and ask the opinion
of good judges when they considered a sample was at its best.
The declared ages of all were marked on the labels. This has
been done. Not one of them, whether red or white, improved
after its eighth year, and but very few showed decided signs of
decay at that age. In every instance those which held their own
were from rather sweet to sweet kinds; and were, with two or
three exceptions, from South Australia. The whites kept their
properties longer, and in higher perfection, than the reds.
Prominent among the old white wines were those of Messrs.
Patrick Auld (Auldana); Gilbert’s Yerdeilho and Reisling;
Peake’s Reisling, Verheilho, Palomino Blanco, and Pedro
Ximenes, and one sample of strong sweet Gouais; Greig’s, of


Dirleton; Smith and Son’s Sherry ; one Highercombe white, and
two, known only at the time as AB and AZ, afterwards found
to be the produce of Morialta, the vineyard of the late Hon. John
Baker; and last of the South Australians, Messrs. Winckel’s and
Charlesworth’s samples of pure Tokay. With the two excep-
tions of the Highercombe and Morialta, the rest all partook of the
character of sweetish wines, and two only contained less than 20
per cent, of proof spirit.
The commissioners for New South Wales and for Western Aus-
tralia removed their samples remaining at the close of the Exhibi-
tion of the wines from those colonies, and I had to do the best I
could with a bottle or two of Bukkulla, a few of Carmichael’s, and
one or two of Doyle’s Kaludah. No doubt all these were fine
wines, and I regretted then and since that I had no chance of
thoroughly studying the king of New South Wales wines—the
Bukkulla white.
The Victorian wines, up to six years of age, held their own very
fairly, but hardly more than three could be said to be on the im-
proving side at the end of another year, that is, when about eight
years old. Of these three, one is a white wine of the late Mr.
Hopwood’s, of Echuca, a notoriously bad sample originally, and
not good even now ; one or two of Weber Brothers’; Depury and
Langdon’s white Hermitage; and one of August Heine’s. These
seemed to improve to the last. Of the rest, one or two of Mr.
Trouett’s, of St. Peter’s Vineyard, Great Western; one of
Dunoyer’s, a few of Mr. Kitz’s, one of Heine and Greiffenhagen’s,
and one of Galland and Junod’s, of Pollocksford, Geelong; two
of Meredith’s, of Chewton; two of Dr. Hope’s, of Batesford ; and
Billing’s Shepherd’s Reisling, held their own up to about six
years, but, for the most part, were then quite up to, if not past,
their best.
Owners of vineyards and traders in colonial wines who are look-
ing for foreign markets may, I think, not unprofitably make them-
selves acquainted with the above results obtained in wines sent for
exhibition; and, naturally, the best only in each owner’s estima-
tion would be sent. Nay, more, all these were bottled, and have
been carefully put aside in a cellar of equable temperature, in the
foundations of the Exhibition Building. It is not unfair to con-
clude that the circumstances I have just mentioned place these
samples in a far more favourable condition than they would have
been had they been shipped to Europe in wood, tumbled about
after arrival, and finally bottled and put aside.
The details of distillation of a few bottoms of bottles below show
the power of several of these samples to resist acescence. That is
a great matter truly. But what I wish to state here is, that few
showed any striking likelihood of improving after six years of age.


OPENED 1866.
DISTILLED
IN 1869-70.
Spirit
Strngth
Retained
Age of
Vintage
Name of Wine
Lost Colour.
Colour Fairly.
Hermitage
H. & Carbinet
very fairly...
lost a good
deal
Reisling
Mataro
colour good
good red ...
white wine
Auldauer ...
Mixture B.
Portugal
lost colour
to B,
Sherry
Carbinet
Palomino
Blanco
white
Verdeilho...
Pedro Xi-
menes
white
white
kept colour
White
Aucarot
kept colour,
yellow
white
kept colour
fairly
Reisling ...
Hermitage..
SPECIAL REMARKS OK WINES FROM CLARENDON
VINEYARD, S.A.
The interest I took in the produce of a vineyard, belonging to a fellow-
collegian, made me subject his wines to an especial study on his own
account. But after I had made personal inspection of nearly all the
vineyards, lying within a radius of fifty miles around Adelaide, I arrived
at the conclusion that Clarendon was a fair representative district for
that portion of South Australia. Situate in the gentle hills looking over
the pretty hamlet of Clarendon, and bounded on one side by the Onka-
paringa River, the vineyard rises somewhat steeply to at least 150 feet
from the cellar, which is placed at the lowest part. It is about 50 acres
in extent, and, with its surrounding of olive trees, realises fully what
one writer called it, “a gigantic pyramid of luxuriant verdure.” Far
cooler than the plains surrounding the capital, and by no means so
cool as many vineyards on the Barossa Range, it is, to my mind, a fair
exponent of the average wine districts of South. Australia. Hence I
have studied Clarendon wines because of that characteristic, also.
I trust I shall not be misunderstood by wine men, either in South
Australia or Victoria, because I have selected the wines of a personal
friend for especial study. It must be borne in mind that the examina-
tion of wine (though but partial) involves much time and some expense,
both of which fall on me personally, and that in such cases extreme


and exceptional defetcs, or excellences, must give way in the main to a
fair average.
In the tabulated statements next following those of the Clarendon
wines, will be found the detailed record of the spirit strength of a con-
siderable number of samples of South Australian and Victorian, and also
a few from New South Wales and Western Australia,
The following are the Clarendon wines, distilled by E. J, Peake, Esq.,
in 1869, and nearly all by me in 1870-1; the instruments used being
Saleron’s smaller and larger still; spirit strength estimated, in some
.instances, as will be observed, according to tables calculated by Gay-
Lussac ; in others, according to Sykes’ (the English standard), and in a
few according to Long’s balance, and mostly the mean of the three given.
Those results, obtained by me, are recorded according to Sykes’ strength
only, and where a mean is given, it is the mean of two or three
distillations of the same samples with the same instruments.
Name of Wine Distilled.
Percentage of
Proof Spirit.
Hydrometer Used.
1. Temprana
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
Long’s balance
I Gay-Lussac ... ~
( Sykes’ scale
j Long’s balance and I
| slide ruler j
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
Long’s balance ...
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
Long’s balance ...
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
Long’s balance ...
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
Long’s balance ...
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
Long’s balance ...
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
Sykes’ scale
Long’s balance ...
>l. Temprana, No. 1 )
hhd. for England )
23- I
25-7 (
24- 1
No. 2 hhd.
3. Do. No. 3 hhd.
25'3 i
25-8 }
25-3 )
Verdeilho, No. 1
23 - 6 I
22-6 V
22-7 )
Do., No. 2
23-6 j
23-0 >
23-4 )
Do., No. 3
23 6 I
23-0 }
23-4 )
Temprana, No. 4
25-3 I
257 >
25-9 )
[Red Wine, No. 1
Do., No. 2
21-9 I
21-2 j
21-9 I
21-2 (
Grenache, No. 1
Do., No. 2
23-2 j
21-9 (
21-8 I
Reisling
23-6 (
22-2 (
Verdeilho
27.8 f
Palomino Blanco
21-0 l
21-8 j
[6] 6


Age of
Wine,
Percentage of
Proof Spirit.
Name of Wine Distilled.
Hydrometer Used.
Temprana
Gay-Lussac
Long’s balance
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
Long’s balance
Sykes’ scale
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
24-8 f
Temprana, soon after its
first fermentation
23'6 I
23-1 )
Red Wines, Nos. 1 and 2
23-8 I
22-7 )
25-3 I
24-6 (
Grenachc
Taking the total as obtained by all the several instruments used, it is
24-265; but if we pick out those reported at Sykes’ strength, it is
found to be 23-625. Now, this is just -955, or substantially one per
cent, higher than the general average of South Australian wines
hitherto studied.
ELEMENTS AFFECTING THE KEEPING OF WINE
Now, as the spirit and tannic acid have so much to do with the
keeping of wine, upon which depends, in no small degree, its power
of travelling, and therefore its fitness to be sent into any foreign
market; I thought it most desirable that these two points should be
well attended to. And to them I have directed my attention, as the
following tables will show. I premise, however, that in the instance of
white wines, the standard of tannic acid was that of good old sherry and
Madeira for the sweeter kinds, and Deinhard’s hock for the harder
Rieslings, Chasselases, and Pineau Blancs. I treated only such as were
free from any taint of acetic change. Now, I found hardly one that
fell below the above-named standards.
For the red varieties I had to adopt other and more complicated
methods of forming a fair rough estimate of that element—white of
egg, in some instances; filtration through animal charcoal, and subse-
quent treatment; the examination of the residue after distilling off the
spirit, &c. In fine, I am satisfied that nearly all of them contained
tannic acid enough for home purposes, but hardly enough for exporta-
tion to distant countries. Red wines to be sent abroad in bulk should
be rough to the taste.
In considering the excellent effects of tannic acid on wine meant for
long voyages, I am bold to advise that all such should on no account be
“fined” with white of egg, or any albuminous matter, but well separated
from the natural deposits of dregs by racking at proper seasons; nay,
more, I feel certain that if ordinarily-prepared tannic acid, that may be
procured from any druggist, were dissolved in wine brandy, and a pro-
portion (say, a bottle) to a hogshead of wine added, instead of the two or
16
WINES,


three per cent, of spirit, the consumers at home would find a more
agreeable article. Of course the quantity per hogshead of tannic acid
added should be made known to the agent, that he might have it
removed to suit his customers, in the ordinary way, by “fining” it with
a proper proportion of white of eggs. Nothing is more certain than
that the quantity of superadded tannic acid can be completely removed
from the roughest or the most delicate of wines. The above observa-
tions apply to wines sent in bulk, not in bottle.
Were the above directions made the subject of an experiment or two
on pipes or hogsheads to be sent to Europe, I feel all but certain the
result would show how needless it is to fortify wine for exportation, and
what a saving in the cost of spirit alone it would prove to the exporter.
These tables relate to wines sent in to the Intercolonial Exhibition
1866-7, and were operated on from time to time since, as opportunity
proved favourable, not a few having been distilled several times over,
and different bottles used. The end in view was to test how great
were the differences observable in the produce of all the colonies.
By Sykes’
Hydrometer.
Spirit Strength.
Name of Maker.
Name of Wine.
New South Wales.
Wyndham, Messrs.
Bukkullah Red ..
Bukkullah White
Kaludah
19-6 20-4
23- 22-4
99
Doyle, J. ...
Marie, Louis
Muscatel
White
Carmichaels,
Fallon, J.
Lindeman, H. J.
Macarthur, Sir W.
Riesling
Cawarfa
22-3 24-
20-4
24-5 24-2
Riesling, 1856
General mean
of samples treated
Western Australia.
Hardy, Joseph
Red Wine
Verdeilho
Muscatel
Clifton,
Wayler, Dr.
General mea
23-983
South Australia.
Peake, E. J.
Red and White
15 samples.
17-4.
Auld, Pck.
Auldana, 1864 .
„ White
23- 23-6 24-8
20-3 22-4 22-7
„ Red ...
A.B. Morialta ...
99 99
Baker, John
23- 23-6
23-5 22-8
26-3 21-3
25- 24-8
18-8 19-
A.Z. White
99 99
Fisher, D.
Scott, R. and J.
Randall, David
Roussillon
Hermitage, 1864
Glenpara, White
„ Red
Marked F. Red
99 99
99 99
25-7 26-3
„ G. Red
Riesling ...
Auldana, 1'863
20- 19-2
Callender and Co.
17
WINES,


By Sykes’s
Hydrometer.
Spirit Strength.
Maine of Wine.
Marne of Maker.
( Con tAuved.)
South Australia. —i
23-3 23-
Smith and Son
Sherry ...
Hermitage
Highercombe, White
„ Red
Dulcetta. Red, 1864
Hermitage
» >*
Ross, R. D.
22-8 22-5
21-6 21-7
24-2 23-7
24- 23-9
25- 24-3
24- 24-1
Martin, W.
Stead, J.
Verdeilho & Frontignac
Riesling, 1862
Gi-eig, A. ...
Greig, W. ...
Hunt, F. R.
Charlesworth, T. W.
23-
22-1 22-6
23- 23-5
25-2 24-9
24- 24-
239 233
24- 22-9
20- 20-3
21- 21-
21 6
22-
Madeira
Tokay (a fine Wine)
Riesling
Hermitage, 1863
Mataro, 1861
Gillard, J.
Winckel, F.
Old Tokay (a splendid Wine)
Newer Tokay
Riesling, 1860
Verdeilho, 1860
5)
Gilbert, J.
5>
» 55
55 55
Riesling, 1864
Carbinet
Scyras ...
Riesling, 1862
23- 23-3
23-8 22-9
55 55
Green, W.
General average
Victorian.
Guppy,
Hopwood, —
Galland and Jarrard
Weber Brothers
Hope, Dr. ...
Dardell, J. H.
Adams, R.
Bear, T. H.
Knight, G. W.
55 5)
Piper, W.
55 55
Richmond, J.
Reid, Curtis
Heine, A.
5? „
Klernm,
Heine and Greiffenhagen
55 55
Panton, J. A.
55 55
Vlaeminick Brothers
Meredith, T.
Depury and Langdon
Ross, J., and Co.
Pin, J. B. ...
Elliott, S.
Everest, T. J.
Maplestone, C.
Murray, A.
Moody, Fred. A.
Hermitage, 1865
Echuca, Red
Hermitage
Hermitage, 1865
White Wine
Schiraz, 1865'
Hermitage
Mataro
Hermitage
Pineau Blanc ...
“Perseverance,” White
White Muscat ...
Chasselas
Muscat
Riesling, 1866
Chasselas, 1865
Riesling ...
Hermitage
Burgundy
Hermitage
Mataro, 1866
Burgundy
Red Wine
Tokay
Verdeilho
Hermitage
Chasselas
S.E. in diamond
Mataro ...
Hermitage
Mataro r> .
Burgundy
23- 23-3
25-2 24-8
22-1 22-6
22-6 22-1
20-7 20-2
23-3 22-9
21-5
19- 19-5
188 18-2 18-5
23 1 23- 23-05
20-3 20-6
19-9 20-2
24 1 23-4
23- 22-4
24- 24-
22-7 22-3
23-8 24-1
18-9 19-4
19-6 19-3
21-8
22-5 22-
General average
18
WINES,


It will be remarked, from the above tables of spirit strength, that the
highest average strength is found in the produce of Western Australia,
it attaining nearly 24 per cent., actually 23 - 983. Next comes South
Australia with 22 67. Third in order is New South Wales, 22T6.
Lastly, Victoria shows only 21-77.
Western Australia.— Probably the average for Western Australia
would have stood somewhat lower, had a larger variety of samples been
available. Still, it is not much matter for wonder that the produce of
that colony stands so high for pure wine, if we remember its geo-
graphical situation, and the fact of the great radiation of heat from
the sands near Perth, in which vicinity the vineyards above mentioned
are situated.
New South Wales.— The eight samples of New South Wales wines
distilled, though but few for so old and so large a wine country, repre-
sent fairly the best-known varieties ; and from the different districts
whence they were obtained, may not unfairly be said to be representa-
tives of the produce generally. They were, without exception, first-
class wines in their several kinds. Average strength, 22T6.
South Australia. —By far the largest and most interesting collec-
tion of wines sent to the Intercolonial Exhibition 1866-7, came from
South Australia. Their variety was striking, their range of spirit
strength surprising, and their general character very good indeed.
It was to these wines that I looked for information for our Victorian
vignerons; for though no inconsiderable number of the South Aus-
tralian vineyards have been formed in situations, whose annual average
heat is, perhaps, higher than any Victorian, yet those situate on the
high and exposed hills are as cool as the districts about Geelong or
Yering ; so that there is not so very great difference, on the whole, as
regards the vineyards now in existence in the two colonies. The
Auldana, Morialta, Highercombe, and Pewsey Vale growths find ana-
logues, if not their counterparts, in the Barra bool Hills and Yering,
and their equals at Ivanhoe, near Melbourne. The difference in spirit
strength, as obtained from the general average, is 0'39 in favour of
South Australia.
As to the keeping power of South Australian wines, it was excellent
wherever the tannic acid was present in its normal quantity. But with
the exception of very sweet, luscious wines, like those of Mr. Stead, I
cannot say that any of them continued to improve after the sixth or
seventh year. I have no means of knowing how they would improve
in bulk. I can only speak about bottled samples.
Speaking of the white wines very generally, I found in the prevail-


ing character of the bouquet something to rem ind me of the faint odour
of apples. Could this be malic aether, formed by a portion of the malic
acid on the spirit in a nascent state 1 ? And if it be disliked, could it not
be removed by the use of small quantities of partially calcined gypsum
during the pressing 1
Not a few of the reds either had already, or soon after the bottle was
opened, acquired a very distinctive smell and taste, which were not
pleasing to every palate. Some persons, not professed judges, called it
smoky, others leathery. But the acquiring of this in no way affected
the keeping of the wine. Both in the instance of South Australian and
Victorian produce I conducted a long series of chemical experiments,
with a view of determining whether this peculiarity was due to some
altei’ation in the tannic acid or not; for instance, the oxidation of it
into some higher form, as gallic acid. It very generally occurs in
Victorian red wines, but at first has more of an earthy quality. But
my results hitherto are not conclusive. I have also consulted all the
best and most recent works of the Portuguese cenologues, and find
Senhor Lapa, Professor of Chemistry, and Royal Commissioner for
Vineyards and Wines, attributes it in Portugal to the conversion of a
portion of the tannic acid into alcohol! To whatever cause it is due,
the vineyard proprietor should never rest till he has found means of
getting rid of it. The French methods of fermenting red musts
advocated by Mr. Casalis Allut, and to be found in extenso in the last
useful volume which Dr. Kelly has contributed to our scanty libraries
of works on “ Vines and Wines,” seem, from points of reason, to be by
far the best, and if needed in any one colony more than another, I
should consider that one to be South Australia.
Last in the relation of average spirit strength, come the products of
Victoria with an average of 21 ‘77. Though not quite so numerous as
the South Australian, it represents not inadequately the produce of this
colony. Stated in general terms, the Victorian wines are wonderfully
good in their several kinds. But it must be observed in limine, that
whether light or full-bodied, they are the produce of French or German
vines. Hardly any other, except the Verdeilho (Madeira Vine), is to be
found as a standard sort. Not a few vineyards in South Australia,
such as that of Sir George Kingston, Mr. White, &c., contain nothing
but Spanish kinds; and Clarendon, Pewsey Vale, Morialta, and Higher-
combe have mixtures of these with French; so it is impossible to institute
exact comparisons. Yet from the circumstance of the Spanish vines
being grown for the most part in hot situations, with plenty of lime in
the soil, and the mode of treating the musts being more German than


Spanish, these vineyards turn out white wines as fine and delicate as
any that have been produced at Yering or the Barrabool Hills, but
of course of a different bouquet, and slightly higher alcoholic strength.
No matter how remote Victorian wines may yet be from the glorious
bouquet of Deinhard’s or the Johannisberg Hock, the produce of the
south side of our dividing range comes the nearest to them of anything
south of the equator. But if the treaters of the Spanish produce in
South Australia only understood the requisites for managing their musts
as such are treated in the instances of manzanilla (the bitter, fine, hard
wine, so called from the hitter partaking of the character of camomile);
the montilla, another dry wine; and the paxarete, a medium sort, it is
hard to understand why these light, firm sorts might not be supplied
abundantly.
In the valley of the Murray all the Spanish vines would have a fine
chance; for there a deep gravelly soil, heat and shelter, and no hot
winds, would indicate their natural home. And if ever the produce of
this colony is to rapidly supersede the hot brandied sherries, and retain
the pure sherry flavour without the adventitious impure alcohol, it is
clear that from Sandhurst and Benalla to the Murray the requisite con-
ditions must be looked for.
SPECIAL BEMAEKS ON CERTAIN MATTERS AFFECTING
VICTORIAN WINES.
Among the kinds to which I have devoted time for a more than
ordinary study in this colony are as white wines the Chasselas, the
Aucarot, the Shepherd’s Riesling; and in reds the Mataro, the Grenache
and the Donzellinho (black Portugal). The Chasselas is in this colony one
of our most useful grapes; it is a first-rate table grape, and will await the
convenience of the wine-maker without complaining for a week or two,
and the produce is frequently excellent.
If ever Victoria gains a name in the world’s markets for any distinc-
tive growths, the two first I prophecy will be Chasselas and Aucarot, and
the third, Shepherd’s Riesling, or some blend of it. As yet nothing has
come to my knowledge sufficient to mark a distinctive character upon any
of the red kinds, except perhaps Grenache. It yields enormously; and in
rich soil and warm localities appears to have improved in the quality of
the wine, I have met with a few samples from Echuca and South
Australia, that possessed a well-marked character; and in 1866-7 a medal
was awarded to a sample grown at Clarendon, South Australia.
Concerning the blending of wines for the production of better results


and greater varieties, and also for supplying a uniform article when one
has been found to suit a particular market, much remains to be said,
which cannot, however, be attempted in a short essay like the present.
Thus much, however, may be placed on record—that until this branch
of the art of wine-making and preparing is carried out, the present uni-
versal complaint will continue to be as universal as ever, both among
our own and foreign consumers. “We can never rely on getting the
same colonial wine twice together.” “We have no sooner become ac-
customed to a particular kind that suits us than we are informed there
is no more of it.” Now, on the other hand, when a Portuguese or Spanish
house finds that an article has “ taken,” the very same can be supplied
for ever if it continue to be popular in the market. Duff Gordon’s
sherry, Hunt’s and Offley’s ports, &c,, come to us year after year the
same. To do more than hint at this point would inevitably lead me
beyond my limits. Hitherto I have found by experiments only two
white wines that I consider perfect for blending with red kinds—
(kucarot and Shepherd’s Riesling.
One cause of the want of uniformity in the produce of many of our
vineyards is the great variety of kinds of vines to be found in not a few
of them. It is a mistake to allow this practice to continue one season
longer than is necessary to ascertain two things—lst, which of two,
three, or four kinds yield the best wine in the particular locality 1 2nd,
which, bearing the above in mind, resist disease best ? Graft all the
rest with these kinds. Were something of this nature done, and a dis-
tinctive character stamped on the produce, and consequently an almost
regular demand created for it by customers at home or abroad, there
would remain no reason why the banks should not advance upon the
stock in cellar as they do in Spain and Portugal, and as they do here
on wool and other merchandise.
I would now direct the attention of the reader back to the “ tables of
spirit strength” and to the general averages which I have recorded. I
hardly need say that I took all care when distilling that lay in my
power. From time to time one or two were subjected to actual balance-
weighing, to satisfy my own mind that the hydrometer was correct, and
that I was not led into error by such a thing as air-bubbles, produced
when diluting the spirit with water or by plunging in the hydrometer—
the two fruitful sources of error. In either case the spirit strength
would be altered. In thus directing attention to this important
element in wine, I would add that I know I am open to much
criticism—still, facts are facts. Exceptional samples, made rather from
raisins, than naturally ripe grapes when their elements were all nicely


balanced, I have found yield over 26 per cent. I take the following
from Dr. Druit’s fine little work on wines :—“ When we look through
Mr. Keen’s report on the wines which were sent to the International
Exhibition, London, from almost every country except Spain and Por-
tugal (from which no samples were analysed ), we shall see that, although
from southern countries, as Italy and Algiers, the average is a little
higher, and on the Rhine and Moselle a little lower, still the fact re-
mains, that of the 569 samples of liquid sent to the International Ex-
hition as Wine from France, Italy, Germany, Austria, and our own
colonies of Australia—all, in fact, but a few exceptional specimens—
yielded 18 to 22 per cent, of proof spirit.” (Druit, pp. 9-10.) Now, in
order to Lilly appreciate any question about cheap wine, we must fully
realise the distinction that exists in composition, properties, uses, and
doses, between what I will venture to call pure virgin wine , the refresh-
ing beverage that a man drinks at a draught, with its 18 to 22 per cent, of
proof spirit, and strong or fortified wine, the stimulating dram, which he
sips, pregnant as it is with its 35 to 45 per cent, of spirit. The two
things differ toto ccelo.
I could have wished to insert a complete list of vines which yield the
wine best known to Englishmen, but have been able to verify only a few
kinds, either here or in South Australia.
SPANISH VARIETIES OF VINES KNOWN IN THE
COLONIES.
The grapes which enter into the Spanish wines we call sherries are, as
the basis of sherry—
1. Palomino Blanco.
2. Pedro Ximenes.
3. Temprana (meaning early)] it differs apparently from Palomino
Blanco only in ripening earlier.
4. Doradillo, a capital bearer.
5. Jaen.
With the solitary exception of Pedro Ximenes, I am not aware if any
of the above kinds of vines have been successfully planted in Victoria.
But there are plenty of places north of the Dividing Range where they
would succeed—the old diggers’ spoil-heaps about Huntly, for example
—and probably yield a fine light wine in character not unlike Manzan-
illa. In South Australia they produce light wine somewhat of the above
character and strength ; and, to my mind, are among the most agreeable
and distinctive in character, as white wines, that I remember to have
seen from that colony.


FRENCH VARIETIES OF VINES.
There is hardly a popular variety of vine in France that has not been
introduced into Victoria, all of which succeed south of the Dividing
Range. Hermitage (often called Scyras), Miller’s Burgundy, Carbinet,
and Carbinet Sauvignon, with now and then Mai bee, are common and
yield well. The Pineaus grow well, and some day will be the founda-
tion of Champagne and other effervescent sorts.
PORTUGUESE VARIETIES OF VINES.
The district whence come the finest Port wines is that of Traz os
Montes, and they are made from the following kinds of grapes. I trans-
late from the report of the Viscount Villa Maior, Professor of Chemistry
in the Polytechnic School, to whom was deputed the examination of the
processes of wine-making of the above-named district, called also the
District of the North. In passing, I would submit that the Portuguese
Government Departments might help us, in these colonies, to a bit of
common sense in the selection of members for appointment as Royal
Commissioners, in the matter of agriculture at any rate :
“ His Majesty the King of Portugal has vouchsafed to appoint,
through the Minister of Public Works, Commerce, and Industry, a Com-
mission, composed of the Viscount Villa Maior, Professor of Chemistry
in the Polytechnic School; John Ignatius Ferreira Lapa, Professor of
Agricultural Chemistry in the General Institute of Agriculture; and
Antonio Augusto de Aguiar, Professor of Chemistry in the Polytechnic
School and Industrial Institute, in order to visit, during the time of the
vintage, and of the wine-making, the principal wine districts of the
kingdom. The department allotted to Viscount Villa Maior is that of
the districts north of the Douro ; Antonio Augusto de Aguiar, the dis-
trict comprised between the Douro and the Tagus, except that of Lisbon;
and John Ferreira Lapa, the district of Lisbon and the other districts
lying south of the Tagus. The Commission will draw up a report em-
bodying its labours and studies, and forward it to the Government not
later than 15th November. Commission dated 10th August, 1866.”
I consider the above a model of a working Royal Commission !
Work, report, and all, finished in three months. Returning to the
“ studies and labours ”of Viscount Villa Maior, he says : —“ The predomi-
nating kinds of grapes in this region are, among the reds, one called
Alvarelhao, the Bastardo, and some deep red kind they call Molle (soft).
And among the white varieties the Arinto, which they call Bnal (our
Riesling), the Terrantez, and D. Branca. The red kinds are far more
abundant than the white ; and the wine they make is red.” The lagares


{places in which the grapes are trodden and pressed) are rectangular
tanks of ordinary masonry (and such are in common use in the province),
mostly small, affording little accommodation, and seldom clean, not to
say that they are often deplorably dirty. Formerly the vintage took
place not before the 29 th of September • there being usually made a
proclamation of the time by authority. At the present time the vintage
takes place earlier, and, as a consequence, the wine is, as they say, in-
ferior to that made in former times. The better class of cultivators,
even still, hold their vintage later, and succeed in making excellent wines.”
The method followed in the making of wine by the greater part of
the cultivators is the following
“ As soon as the lagar is full of the mixed grapes, without any attempt
at separating the dry, rotten, or green berries, all together is trodden
out for wine, and plenty of men put on at once, so that the first part of
the treading may be done in the shortest space of time ; afterwards the
work is carried on with fewer men during two days and the halves of two
nights.
“ When the fermentation has been well set up, they wait to ascertain
how the wine offers to turn out. The fermentation is allowed to go on
from two to eight days. The proof which is required is its having a
vinous taste and smell, and a certain roughness of flavour on the palate.
When it arrives at this point it is put into large casks, without any ad-
dition of brandy, until it is racked previous to being sold, and even
then only a small portion is added. The Senhor Campilho, one of the
best vignerons in these parts, and whose wines are made with more than
customary care, gives two almudes of brandy to every 700 gallons.”
PERSONAL EXPLANATION.
Certain remarks in a leading article in the Argus (6th November)
some months ago seemed at the time to demand a reply, because, without
mentioning any name, they pointed towards myself, and I took them to
have been aimed at me:—“But there was one point in connection
with which we certainly consider that the exhibitors had a good
right to consider themselves aggrieved. Their wines were adjudicated
on here, and then disappeared altogether from mortal view. It was
understood they would be sent home, and submitted to judges in
the mother country; but, beyond the decision of the colonial jurors,
nothing has been heard of them since the day the exhibition cellar
opened and swallowed them up. This is a great grievance. Had
faith been kept with the growei's, they would not only have had
the advantage of hearing an opinion expressed by a different set of


experts, but they would probably have succeeded in exciting interest
amongst the wine-trading community in England, which would have
brought them fresh customers, and perhaps opened up a large trade.
It is to be hoped that such mistakes will not be made on the present
occasion, and that a strict account will be exacted of the Commissioners
of what becomes of the wine sent for exhibition.”
Now, if this vague and general language means anything at all, it
refers either to the samples of wine sent in to the Intercolonial Exhibi-
tion 1866-7, or to the late Board of Agriculture’s last Exhibition, 1870.
If it refer to the samples given to me for study, then I must inform
the editor that I published an essay on them in 1867, to be found in the
Transactions of the Royal Society, circulated privately, but extensively,
by myself, reprinted by the Board of Agriculture, and finally translated
into German for circulation among the wine people of that nation. As
occasion offered, these samples were studied, and the present essay gives
some account of what was done with them, and through them for the
wine interest generally. If the remarks fall upon the samples sent for
competition to the Agricultural Society (1870), then the reply is simple
indeed. The judges recommended that certain suggestions of mine
should be acted upon, mainly to the effect that the untouched bottles
should remain in the Exhibition cellars for a year—be again tasted
and the best of them sent to the Agent-General in London, for the-
opinion of some competent European experts. This advice and recom-
mendation were thrown aside, and the wines ordered off to London
forthwith. Then were handed over to me, “to do what I liked with, ,r
the bottoms of bottles opened for the experts, and a few bottles of one-
year-old stuff, too poor I suppose to be sent home. I blended, as well
as I could, these parts of bottles, and have a lot of them lying here now;
but, of course, after having been left open, some with bits of cork in
their necks, and very many without any at all, for three or four weeks,
they were useless for any kind of careful study. The writer declares
that a very rigorous account of those sent in on the present occasion
shall be taken. He is at liberty now to take it. I can tell him that
nearly all the vignerons who got medals have left with me the balance
of their exhibits, while those, who got nothing, have taken them away—
just what I wished.
BEMARKS ON WINES SENT TO THE EXHIBITION,
MELBOURNE, 1872.
It would be out of place now to trespass on the report of the wine
experts, further than to add that during the period that has elapsed
since I had an opportunity of personally judging of any large collection


of Victorian wines (1867), there is the most unmistakable evidence of
vast improvement in nearly all their vinous properties. Most of our red
wines then had, when young, a well-pronounced disagreeable earthy taste;
but witli more care, and improved methods of fermenting, and after-atten-
tion, that has in many instances disappeared. And while our Victorian
wines will have a character of their own, it is now certain that it will be
a pleasant one. Young wines from new vineyards on the valley of the
Murray were quite clean on the palate—in one instance remarkably so.
From a vineyard near Echuca there came, in 1866, two lots of white
and red wine, so offensive from this earthy taste, that the experts could
find no terms strong enough to characterise it. In the instance of the
reds, after four years they became good, but the whites, some of which
remain, are still simply execrable. Yet a German vigneron, Mr. Vettler,
has shown that by care and attention all these bad qualities can be
avoided. None of his wines were more than two years old, yet the
number of medals awarded him by experts, who had not the remotest
knowledge whose wines they were judging, shows his complete success
in wine-making.
■ I often hear persons interested in wine talking about foreign markets
for their produce; but it has always seemed to me that our own people
form the best consumers of our produce. One thing is certain, that
we are gradually and steadily becoming a wine-drinking people. The
city is well spotted over with shops that deal in little else than colonial
wine, which they retail at 2d. a large glass and 6d. a bottle! Now, I
have had many years experience of wine, as taken by the Portuguese,
and I am bold to say that such wine as is retailed in Melbourne at 6d.
per bottle cannot be had for twice the money in either Lisbon or Paris
at this day.
In the absence of any official information, I take the following from
the Argus of 15th February, 1873:—“The decrease in the import of
wines from £213,852 in 1862, to £64,766 in 1871, is clearly to be
traced to the manufacture of wines forced upon us by the extension of
our vineyards, and to a change in the drinking habits and tastes of our
people. Our import of wines of all kinds in 1871 was 188,150 gallons,
against 629,219 gallons of colonial manufacture, which increased to
713,589 gallons in 1872.” The italics are mine, and lam delighted at
seeing these statistics. They are all in favour of health and sobriety.
What is now to. be desiderated is the utter expulsion of bad brandy and
worse “ square gin,” and one or two other “ evil spirits”—which, let us
hope, time will soon effect, and substitute in their place both a taste for,
and the needful supply of, wine brandy. Wine brandy does not ordi-
narily create any craving for it, but all this raw manufactured stuff does.


Government Statistics of Acreage under Vines, and its gradual
INCREASE FROM 1863 TO MARCH, 1872.
Year ending 31st March.
Vines.
Acres.
1863
2,006f
1864
3,076
1865
3,594
1866
4,078
1867
4*111
1868
4,340
4,046
1870
4,950
1871
5,466
1872
5,523
In an essay read before the Royal Society of Victoria in 1867, I said r
—“ Experience has long ago convinced me that pledges and resolutions
to abstain from ardent spirits are but ‘ poor safeguards of unstable
virtue;’ and that, to effect a lasting cure, the natural instincts must be
not violently assaulted with resolves, but steadily and gently turned
towards sources of reasonable and healthy gratification, while the danger
of excess is effectually removed.”
Am I wrong in thinking now that our pure native wines are doing their
share in effecting a change in the drinking habits and tastes of our 'people f
The following is a list of a portion of the Victorian wines, sent to the
Exhibition just closed in Melbourne, and left with me for further study
and report, which have been already distilled, and their spirit strength,
according to Sykes’s tables, determined by me. They have been drawn
from the representative wine districts of Victoria, viz. : —North of the
dividing range is represented by August Heine, Bruhn Brothers; Castle-
maine, by Mellon ; the Loddon River, William Botten ; Sunbury, by
Hon. J. Gl. Francis; Yering, by Hubert de Castella ; Melbourne district,
by Charles Maplestone and John Davis ; Geelong wine districts, by the
Hon. Dr. Hope and Mr. Jacob Weber; and the high country about
Daylesford, by M. Jean Merle.
The necessity of having this essay printed in time for the Official
Report of the Exhibition Commission prevents me from carrying on my
inquiry further into the character of the wines sent to the Exhibition;
but I trust to be able to continue it, and publish my results in a paper
for the next volume of the Acclimatisation Society’s Transactions.
Meanwhile, I will just add that they show, as a whole, great progress in
the arts of making and treating wine.
If the Victorian vignerons will make their wines carefully, and sell
them cheap, they will clear out all but the very best from year to year,
and have no need to look for exorbitant prices in foreign markets.


Return of Vines
i Grown .
Victoria,
Wine
Brandy
, ENDING
Manufactured
in THE
Colony of
31st March, 1872.
FOR
YEAR
Grapes Gathered,
Number of
Vines.
Brandy
Manu-
factured.
County.
Produced.
Not Made
into Wine.
Made
into Wine.
Anglesey .
Benambra
Bendigo .
10,450
8,700
821,095
1,604,286
317,933
1,560,570
58,234
172,198
17,410
65,784
Bogong
Boruck
Bourke
Buln Buln
Croajingolong.
Dalhousie
26,786
12,330
59,710
Dargo ..
Delatite
Dundas
Evelyn..
Follett..
127,215
19,448
12,435
777,000
10,741
78,515
Gladstone
Grant ....
.226,307
2,423,811
3,076
15,461
17,271
108,233
Grenville....
Gunbower .
Hampden .
Heytesbury.
Kara Kara .
Karkarook .
Lowan
40,167
60,350
Millewa
Moira ~
572,650
73,530
19,875
33,000
57,410
222,746
688,376
66,980
5,260
Mornington.
Normanby .
Polwarth ....
Ripon ...
Rodney
Talbot ...
Tambo...
Tangil ..
Tatchera
Villiers...
Weeah ...
2,508
10,242
17,420
68,383
44,550
Wonnangatta
Total.
9,691,292
30,896 106,791
713,609
According to the above tables the number of acres under vines has
been substantially trebled in nine years—from 1863 to 1872. Yet this
is hardly in keeping with the history of most of our new or localised
industries. The rule is that we look on and say nothing until an
industry has got well into the experimental scale, and then we rush
madly into it. For many a year prior to 1866, a few colonial breweries
struggled on, and their beer was tolerated by a small portion of the


August Heine
Riesling
1869
20 0 ,
Sand-
Hermitage
1869
22-7 >
hurst,
« )>
Mataro
1868
18-1 '
20-26
people; by some because it was cheap, by the patriotic because it was
native produce; but it was generally decried and detested. But in 1866-7,
at the Intercolonial Exhibition, it was brought into really public notice;
and the dissertation upon it by Mr. Foord, and the medals awarded by
the jurors to Carlton and Castlemaine ale, and one or two other’s, awoke
in no small degree the attention of the public ; and forthwith came the
“rush” of brewers, and, as a result, the practical expulsion of the
European article. It is so with woollen cloth making, and generally
with other industries in Victoria : they struggle hard and finally
flourish.
But there have been, and still exist, heavy obstacles in the way of the
wine interest. Firstly, we are not, as a people, wine-drinkers as yet,
else we should consume the produce of the colony in less than a month.
Secondly, every vigneron has a pet idea of his own, that his little patch
of vines is the real Australian “Coted’Or;” and his wine must soon
bring a guinea a bottle. Thirdly, we want two or three merchants of
large means, or two or three companies of not more than four or five
partners, with ready cash, to the amount of (say) £50,000, and suitable
cellars not far from the city, and if possible on the river, who would buy
anything, even the worst at its brandy value, and the better sorts at
higher prices. Tims every grower of a hogshead or a pipe of wine
could bring it in, have it tested, and obtain at once, in cash, its fair
value, as he could for a load of wheat or oats. Such companies would
soon supply the whole of the retail shops, and from the quantities in
their cellars something like a uniform article might be supplied.
Fourthly, in the instance of the more wealthy owners of vineyards,
while their stocks of middling wines would be kept down by selling to the
companies, their experiments on their better growths would be carried
on with more care and less anxiety aboutm on ey matters. And lastly,
the banks would be brought to the ordinary common sense of banks in
Portugal, and make advances on wine in the cellar, on the report of
competent judges, just as they now do on gold or station produce.
I have caused the following samples of Victorian wines to be dis-
tilled, and have determined their spirit strength according to Sykes’
(British proof) strength.
VICTORIAN DISTILLED WINES.
Name of Wine. Vintage. Colour. Average.
Name of Maker.


Victorian
Distilled
Wines —( continued ).
Name of Maker.
Name of Wine.
Proof
Spirit.
Vintage,
Colour.
Average
Bruhn Brothers
99 99
99 99
F. Mellon ”
99 99
99 99
99 99
H. de Castella
99 99
Charles Maplestone
99 99
Hon. J. G. Francis
99 99
Franz Schmidt
99 99
99 99
John Davis
99 99
Jacob Weber
The Hon. R. C. Hope,
Geelong
99 99 99
99 99
99 99 99
Jean Merle, Daylesford
99 99 99
99 ' 99 99
William Botten, Loddon
» )> »
99 99 99
August Mueller
!) »
99 99
J. G. Francis
» 99
99 99
99 99
Otto Jung
Carl Pohl (857)
*> » (855)
» „ (861)
)) 99 •••
J. S. Johnstone, Sunbury
» » )i
Messrs. Docker, Bon-
tharambo
„ ” 99 99
Fred. Egli
Carbinet Sauvignon...
Carbinet
Riesling
Yerdeilbo
99
Muscat
Pineau
Esparte (Mataro)
Pineau
Chasselas
Hermitage
Large & small Riesling
99
Chasselas
Gouais
Riesling
Ngarveno (White)
„ (Red)
Hermitage
Chasselas
Hermitage
Second sample
Gouais and Riesling
Riesling
Hermitage
Gamais
99 •• •
Another bottle do.
Another sample
Shiraz
White Hermitage
Shiraz
Muscatel
Shiraz
Yerdeilho
Mataro
Hermitage
Yerdeilho
Rousette
Hermitage
Mataro, Hermitage &
Pineau
Yerdeilho
Carbinet & Hermitage
Yerdeilho
Eiesling
Yerdeilho, a little
mixed
Riesling
Hermitage
Hermitage
White
Red
White
Red
White
White
White
White
17-4 (
20-1 '
20-8 I
23-8 \
22-0)
28-8 [
26-3 j
18-6 I
22-2 f
20-0 )
25-5 f
24-4
22'6 I
22 0 j
23-2
22-0 V
25-0 )
16-2]
22*0 f
22-0 (
24-4)
21-8)
24-3 1
21-8]
24-9 >
20-0]
21-8 V
19-8
22-4 j
Sand-
hurst,
23-92
Yering
22-1
Iv’nhoe
S'nb’ry
22-3
Ber-
wick
24.03
Ngar-


Victorian Distilled Wines—i
■( continued ).
1 Average
Proof
Spirit.
Name of Maker.
Name of Wine.
Vintage.
Colour.
John Yettler, Echuca.
Joseph Best
Jacob Deppeler
» )>
Wm. McDonald
Trouetti
Cowan Paton
!) »
Robinson
Creppa, T.
Seidd
Gouais
Sherry
W. Morillion
Gloria Australia?
Mataro
Burgundy and Black
Pineau
Muscatel, Chasselas,
and Tokay
Hermitage
Riesling
B. Muscat
Riesling
B. Custer
Riesling
Shiraz
Burgundy
Hermitage
Muscat
Pedro Ximenus
Yerdeilho
White
White
White
Red
White
Red
White
Brown
White
Red
White
Red
Red
Red
Red
White
White
23-
20-0
22-4 V
24-
21-8)
22- |
23- f
23-6 I
22-4 [
20*41
17-5 j
21-6 i
19-5 j
21-0
22-6 V
28-8 )
s I began, saying that hopeful as our colonial wine
as yet quite out of its nonage.
I conclude, then,
industry is, it is not
NOTE.
For the guidance of persons testing the spirit strength of liquids, the following will
be useful, as there were until within the last two years hardly any other than Gay-
Lussac’s tables to be had, with Saleron’s small stills. Lately hydrometers and
tables calculated on what is known as “ Sykes,” or English proof spirit, have been
procurable ;
• Comparative Value of French and English Degrees of
Alcoholic Strength.
The different modes of expressing the strength of liquors adopted in England
and France, is the source of much inconvenience and confusion. In both countries
the operation of testing or trying the strength is by distillation of a determinate
quantity, and then taking the temperature and density of the distillate by thermo-
meters and hydrometer, but here the similarity ends. The instruments, as used in
the two countries, differ essentially, and therefore the results are shown in different
terms. In England, Fahrenheit’s thermometer and Sykes’ hydrometer are used ;
in France, the Centigrade thermometer and Gay-Lussac’s hydrometer. These
thermometers differ in the fact, that the range between the temperature of frozen
and boiling water is divided in the latter (Centigrade) into 100 parts or degrees,
and in the former into 180. Gay-Lussac’s hydrometer is graduated to show 100
divisions or degrees between absolute alcohol of -796 specific gravity, at 15-5 Cen-


tigrade or 60° Fahrenheit, and pure water ; while the scale of Sykes’ hydrometer
starts from a definite mixture of water and pure alcohol, nearly in equal volumes,
•920 at 60° Fahrenheit, and called proof spirit, and the
■ the spirit under test is of greater or less strength
having a specific gravity of
instrument shows whether
under test is of greater or less strength
than such proof. In various
scientific works tables are given of the equivalent
degrees of these two scales.
but none of them exactly correspond. The following
figures are very nearly exact
Sykes.
Gay-Lussac.
Gay-Lussac.
Sykes.
Gay-Lussac,
Under the excise laws of France, wine generally is not allowed to be fortified
Tor home consumption ; but, under certain limitations, spirit to the extent of 5
per cent, may be added to the produce of the eastern Pyrenees, the Aude, the Tarn,
the Herault, the Gard, and the Rhone. All wines for exportation may be fortified
without restriction, and most vintages are so strengthened before being shipped—
Roussillon wines for Brazil to the extent of 10 per cent., and for England from 5
<to 8 per cent.




INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION ESSAYS, 1872-3.
No. 7.
ON MEAT PRESERVING,
ESPECIALLY WITH REFERENCE TO
Mr. JAMES HARRISON’S METHOD OF FREEZING
MEAT.
By Rev. JOHN I. BLEASDALE, D.D.




ON PRESERVED MEATS:
ESPECIALLY WITH REFERENCE TO MR. JAMES
HARRISON’S METHOD OF FREEZING MEAT.
It may be fairly doubted if any “ new industry” has made suck
rapid progress in Victoria as that of preserving meat fresh for
exportation at reasonable prices. Of course, there is little or
nothing altogether new in the principles, or art, employed in the
process. Manipulation and skill in applying the art of cooking in
almost closed tins will be found to constitute the main difference
in the product. But the industry, as such, has been not merely
introduced during the last five years, but has spread over the
principal pastoral districts of the colony; and already the British
public are familiarised with the names of these localities, and to
some extent with the character of the different preserves.
It is foreign to ray present purpose to write a history of meat-
preserving by the process of “tinning” in Australia. I would,
however, remark that, so far back as 1816, prizes were awarded
at Sydney “ for preserved meat, fish, and vegetables,” to an enter-
prising colonist, Mr. Sizar Elliot, now residing near Melbourne.
Its production never passed beyond the experimental stage, and
little or nothing was heard of preserved fresh meat in these
colonies till a few tins of meat were exhibited in the Intercolonial
Exhibition 1866-7 by the Australian Meat Company, Clarence
River; and a few also by Mr. McCracken, who had preserved
their contents in Tasmania in 1861-2.
The Exhibition, just closed in Melbourne, brought together
samples of “ tinned meat” from nearly, if not quite, all these
establishments, which afforded the experts abundant opportunity
for judging of their quality. The variety, also, was extensive,
and included several kinds of game. Legs of mutton and rounds
of beef slightly salted were among the exhibits. Soups ready
prepared, and needing only to be heated, were very numerous.
The detailed accounts of the experts will be found among the


reports and awards of the jurors, and need not be mentioned in
this place, further than by the general remark that both the
il tinned meats” and the soups were most excellent in their several
kinds, and commanded my fullest approbation.
Yet, notwithstanding the excellence of meat, preserved by the
(< tinning process,” there has been, and still is, a backwardness
among the labouring classes of Great Britain to receive them into
general consumption. And the old problem still comes up, “ How
are we to preserve meat by the carcase, and deliver it in such a
state in British seaports, as to admit of its being kept in suitable
chambers, on arrival, till required, and distributed over the inland
districts.”
The following pages contain the details of experiments made,
facts established, and the method, by which the results have been
attained.
“ Frozen meat ” is known familiarly enough to residents in high
latitudes, and also to many hundreds in this city, whom business
or pleasure have caused to travel in ships trading from North
American ports to the West Indies. From not a few of these I
obtained information regarding the way in which this meat, fish,
game, or fowl was preserved; and all agreed that it was thrown
promiscuously into the ice compartment of the vessel, and nothing
else done to it. One or two seafaring gentlemen asked with sur-
prise, “ What more could be done to it ?” All I heard confirmed
the few personal observations I had made many years ago in
London, in the instance of American frozen pork, viz., that it
must be thawed by being placed in cold water, and then cooked
without delay, no matter what kind of meat, fish, or fowl it may
be, or it will become flabby and rapidly pass into decay.
Among others whose opinions I sought was Mr. Cosmo New-
bery, scientific superintendent of the Industrial and Technological
Museum. To my regret he was absent during the time the
experiments were conducted, it being the Christmas holiday
season; but on his return I obtained from him as much as is known
about American frozen meat, and this substantially confirms the
opinions of others, and he also added what I had not heard of before,
viz., that the red flesh of deer and bear became short and brittle in
the fibre, and perceptibly softer than it should be when cooked.
It will readily occur to any one, who has turned his attention to
processes of refrigeration, and is acquainted with the nature of
albuminous and gaseous matters, that mere ice will never effect
much more than a superficial freezing of bodies, holding them in
solution; in other words, ice will abstract the caloric out of thick
pieces of animal matter, placed in contact with or near to it, only
to a little depth below the surface. Consequently, meat thrown
into the ice-house of a ship, or other like receptacle, will be, and


will remain frozen at the outside, quite sufficient to hold elements
of ferment and putrescence, such as albumen, from being altered
to any appreciable extent, and the gaseous bodies from escaping,
or effecting new forms of combination. But in every instance,
where the meat has been but superficially frozen, when once the
ice casing, so to speak, has been removed, the albumen and those
hitherto arrested gases are ready to rise in rebellion, especially on
the access of atmospheric air. And the rapidity with which they
avail themselves of the chance, has not been exaggerated in the
instances related to me of American frozen meat.
Up to this time our knowledge of the methods of preserving
fresh meat had gone no further than what I have described, and,
viewed in an economic light, could not be availed of by Victorians.
But supposing it possible to land a cargo in a British port, how
could it be distributed through the country in any but about two
months of the coldest weather ?
With meat at famine prices in England, and ice, and fish, and
flesh without limit in North America, no very great distance to
travel, and no warm seas to cross, it might well be a subject of
wonder why so little should have been attempted to meet the
demand, by a nation, thrifty and inventive above all others, and
continually on the look-out for profitable markets. The explana-
tion may lie in the practical experience gained in every-day life,
that the iced meat would not “ do.”
If it were my object to write a detailed account of what has
come to my knowledge of attempts to preserve meat by the carcase,
in ice, or in some gaseous preparation, I should refer at length to
the extensive and extremely expensive efforts of T. S. Mort, Esq.,
of Sydney, all of which, after an expenditure of j 610,000, have as
yet come to nothing.
Four or five years ago, I began, at the instance of the late Hon.
J. H. Plunkett, of Sydney, to examine certain samples of essence
of meat, prepared on Baron Liebig's plan, by a Sydney firm, and
at the same time also a sample of soup, put up in a portable form
by Mr. Whitehead, of Mossman's Bay, Sydney, the best of its
kind I ever met with, and one deserving of all commendation.
My processes and observations by the way soon showed me that I
must direct my attention to find out what particular substance or
substances first commence to ferment or decay, and become the
source of organic change in the rest of the flesh. I found it to
start with what cooks call pot-scum, in reality albuminous matters,
and, next after them, blood and fibrine. The details of these and
some investigations were laid before the Medical Society of
Victoria, and discussed by that large body of learned men, for the
benefit of the preservers of meat by what is now universally known
as the “ tinning process,” and published in the Medical Journal .


All that I then, and since, acquired, threw light, as I thought, on
the unsuitability of the freezing process; and, taken along with the
experience of the North American frozen meat, made me
extremely sceptical about Mr. Harrison’s recent experiment on a
great scale; great, both as to the variety and quantity of flesh,
and also as to the magnitude of the pieces operated upon. These
consisted of quarters of beef, and halves of large sheep, upon
which no grain of salt had been put.
The preserving-house had been erected under Mr. Harrison’s
directions, in a rough, but substantial way, of common deal
boards, in the very hottest portion of an unlined iron-building.
At the end of 25 days, this place was opened in my presence, and
the half of a large sheep, fat, kidney, and all complete, taken out
and examined.
Of course, my curiosity was thoroughly aroused, for I saw
plainly that one of two problems, in this most important concern,
was on the point of being solved. But I hardly anticipated that
I should have an exemplification of the American ice meat-
preserving alongside of Mr. Harrison’s plan. But so it was.
Whether he had thought about it beforehand or not, I did
not ascertain; but at any rate, at the last moment of closing the
place, he put in the half of a large sheep, not previously frozen,
and not in exact contact with the ice, but near enough to be kept
as such meat necessarily would be, when flung promiscuously into
the ice-chamber of a ship.
Now this meat was just frozen on the outer surface and no more.
The insertion of a penknife blade near the kidney, about an inch
deep, drew a small quantity of a fluid coloured by blood. And
when, five hours afterwards, the loin or middle portion was placed
before the experts, it had acquired a perceptibly musty, mawkish
smell, and the lean flesh felt soft and flabby to the touch. An
hour afterwards the leg, previously thawed in cold water, and
then roasted, was found perfectly good. Here we had an exact
exemplification of the American meat. And to confirm it, the
neck-piece, after the shoulder had been removed, turned quite
bad, and had to be buried in less than twenty hours. Naturally, I
began to fear deeply that we were yet in our former difficulty
about distributing the meat, even if it got home sound.
I had a piece of beef 14 or 15 lbs. weight cut off the next lump
that was taken out. The whole might have weighed 60 or 70 lbs.
It was all that an experimenter could desire, being from between
the loin and rump; and for the size of the piece, presented a
more than average surface to the air, and not too much fat.
I caused this piece, and a corresponding lump, fresh from
the butcher, to be hung up in a corridor close to my office
in the Exhibition buildings, with a thermometer midway between


them. During the whole period of the first experiment, it ranged
from 63 deg. to 68 deg. Fahr. Other portions of this beef were
thawed in the orthodox way, in cold water, and cooked in the oven,
and found quite equal to newly-killed beef, of good quality; full
of gravy, and rather tough, as new meat usually is.
At the expiration of twenty-four hours (II a.m. Christmas
morning) I called the officer in charge of that division of Exhibi-
tion work, a very intelligent man, and he took down the meat, and
reported the thermometer at 67 deg. Not without some mis-
givings I cut off a steak of about 34 ozs., and ordered it to be
cooked in the ordinary way for breakfast.
While the cooking was in progress it occurred to me to try the
then temperature of the lump, and having some good ther-
mometers at hand, I inserted one in the lump and left another in
contact with its outer surface. Even then they both indicated
what I should have expected if the meat had been ice, certainly
not what I then anticipated. The inserted one indicated tempera-
ture of ordinary ice, and the one on the outer surface that of ice
passing into thaw, rather lower than the other.
Now for the first time I began to hit upon the difference
between Mr. Harrison’s work and the American practice.
The meat was cooked, and the officer and I made an excellent
Christmas breakfast off it. The lump was suspended again in the
same place, and the fresh meat examined; but beyond the slight
bleaching of the fat and blackening of the lean, there was nothing
worthy of remark.
About 10 p.m. of Christmas Day, when this lump had been
thirty-five hours out of the ice, it was re-examined in presence of
several ladies and gentlemen, and found to be not only perfectly
sweet, but assuming the ordinary characteristics of kept meat. But
the fresh butcher meat, hanging not six feet from it, had turned sour
and was beginning to show signs of greenness, and in order that it
might not be lost was given to the housekeeper to cook.
I then began to think there was no further use in following up
the investigation, for if meat would keep in a temperature of
68 deg., it would on arriving in a British port have a fairer chance
than that newly killed. So thenceforth the remainder of the
piece was let hang, and every six or seven hours re-examined to
see if it had become rotten. But what was my utter astonish-
ment when the remnant, say about 5 lbs., was directed to be
cooked, and found when served up to be excellent. The chief
medical officer, Dr. M'Crae, Dr. Gillbee, and myself, partook of it.
The chief medical officer dined off it, Dr. Gillbee lunched off it, and
I carved it, and tasted both the meat and the gravy. Now this
was at least seventy-five hours after I first hung it up.
Intelligent persons will admit that here were fresh materials


enough to excite the interest of an experimenter. Here were the
most precious of all materials—well-ascertained facts. So I then
gathered up all that I knew of animal matters, and in my humble
way went into the causes.
It will now become intelligible that there are agencies at work
rendering meat preserved in the same way as was this by Mr.
James Harrison available in large quantities, and equal, if not
superior, to any ordinary freshly-killed meat exposed in the sham-
bles, and capable of being distributed over the inland towns of
Great Britain.
Now, I would briefly record the observations I have been able
to make since I commenced inquiring into these “ agencies/’ or
causes, that others following me may correct my errors, or add to
the general information upon the preservation of fresh meat on
the large scale. Even Mr. J. Harrison said he had learned some-
thing fresh while conducting this experiment ; and surely no one
among us can claim to know as much about refrigerants as the
discoverer of the process of making artificial ice reasonably cheap.
The meat, as such, the albumen, fibrine, blood (if any), are
not frozen; only the water which renders such bodies fluid or
moist passes into ice. In our instance the whole of this water
had become ice. In a science point of view it became extremely
interesting to learn what became of this water when the thaw
took place. Did it gradually drip out as the change took place,
and fall on the ground ? or did it resume its normal position in
relation with the bodies above enumerated ?
I obtained for the purpose of this investigation a large fore-
quarter of the “ frozen mutton,” and suspended it, after removing a
piece, in the corridor above mentioned, and beneath it a vessel to
receive anything that might drip down. When the piece was com-
pletely thawed (temperature 66 deg.), I found about three-fourths
of a wine-glass of water, slightly coloured. On being evaporated,
only a very minute quantity of animal matter was found, the water
being, as one might anticipate, that deposited from the atmosphere
on the cold surface of the joint. Consequently there was some
ground for assuming that the actual water of the meat returned
-slowly, as the thaw took place, to its normal condition in the flesh.
Such experiments as obtaining the juices from the raw flesh after
thawing appear to render this important point all but a certainty.
How much this has to do with arrestment of gases, and preven-
tion of decay when the thawing is complete, I hardly venture to
say, but, no doubt, it has important influenee. Certainly the
gravy of the meat, when cooked, differed in nothing from that of
fresh meat. lam not aware if any one but myself has boiled any
of this meat. While I was testing this point of the condition of
the fluids, I cut through a thick leg of mutton, and had one piece


of it boiled; and I watched the rise of the pot-scum (the albumen)
at its proper temperature, about 178 deg., and then the fibrine and
blood, at 201 deg., when each put in its appearance at the proper
time. The cooked piece was preferred to the other, which had been
roasted, by some competent judges. I assume, then, that the
natural juices are found in the thawed meat in their normal condi-
tion, and that the British consumer, when he gets it, will not have
to complain of dryness and want of gravy !
The above detailed experiments were repeated over and over
again.
To those who may think proper to criticise these observations
from the theoretical point of view—the expansion and contraction
of water in freezing and thawing—exemplified in the bursting of
water-pipes, &c., I would just say, that there is no analogy what-
ever between the bursting of a rigid body like a water-pipe, and
the yielding of elastic substances like the cells and fibres of meat.
I have often had my shoes frozen, but can remember no instance
in which the leather was made brittle or its substance broken up
by either the freezing or the thawing.
The fact is, that by Harrison’s process the meat is frozen to the
bone ; and bearing in mind what I have established by experiment,
viz., that there is no waste of the natural juices of the meat, nor
disintegration of its fibre in the process of thawing, the joint is
thus presented to the consumer in precisely the same condition as
that in which it was when it left the butcher’s shop.
The action of this complete freezing is to annihilate time and
space, and to present the joint in a condition to keep like newly-
killed meat, with this advantage, that during the process of thaw-
ing of, say, 20 lbs. of any ordinary joint, an interval of twenty
hours, at a temperature of 63 deg. Fahr., must elapse. When
completely thawed, and on attaining the ordinary temperature of
the air, it will start on its course of keeping on a level with a
fresh joint from the shambles.
On the 40th day after the meat had been first placed in the pre-
serving-room, Mr. Harrison directed the remainder, a number of
very large pieces, some of 40 lbs. or 50 lbs. weight, to be cooked,
and on successive days given in the refreshment-room to any one
who might think well to lunch oft' it. The further prosecution of
this most interesting and valuable demonstration is in the hands of
squatters, stockowners, and merchants.
Perfect cleanliness and care in the bleeding and preparing the
carcases for the freezing-house, and all reasonable precaution had
been taken to keep it as clear as possible of any germs of decay
that might be moving about in the air; and this is quite
necessary.
When the whole water of flesh meat has been converted into ice,
t


each lump resembles a block of ice of that size ; uud, as X have
pointed out already, thaws only at the outer surface at first, and
very slowly afterwards on towards the centre. A block of ice never
begins to thaw in the centre; and, as every one knows, if the water
be & allowed to drip completely away from it, so as to be no longer
in contact with it, the thawing will go on proportionately slower.
Just the same with this frozen meat.
Now, as regards the fitting up of any portion of the hold of a
ship, and taking advantage of any cheap non-conductors of heat,
all this is a matter for the ship’s carpenter. But as regards the
packing of the frozen meat, supposing it to have been frozen
ready before being packed, the principle will be to render the whole
quantity as nearly like one solid block of ice as possible ; because,
just as the thaw commences only at the outside of the lump, so,
if this whole chamber be made to resemble one solid block, the risk
and expense are both diminished in proportion. .
The cost of sending frozen meat, as compared with that of tire
“ tinned,” is a matter that I need not enter upon farther than to
lay down the unit of calculation. It is this. There will be a
certain loss on a cargo of 500 tons of ice brought from New York
to Melbourne; that loss represents the amount of ice required to
take to London or Liverpool 500 tons of frozen blocks of meat.
The loss of ice on the meat cargo would not be quite so much.
But this need not be gone into at present. _
So far, I think, I have stated nothing which is not fairly borne
out by ascertained facts. There are some other matters of detail,
and quite secondary importance —such as the best, sweetest, and
cheapest substances to be used as non-conductors of heat, ventila-
tion, &c., which present no obstacles to the success of this grand
discovery. Mr. Harrison was awarded a gold medal for his
successful experiment.
When I state that I believe there are in Australia very many
millions of acres that will perhaps never be useful for anything but
growing timber and feeding cattle; and there are corresponding
millions of ill-fed stomachs among our own countrymen, craving
for the fresh carcases of such cattle; any one will understand the
interest with which I carried out the above investigations, and the
pleasure I have in giving them publicity.
N OTE- The following is Mr. Harrison’s note furnished to the Royal Commissioners
for the Catalogue:—“Harrison, James, 3 Earnbank-terrace, Carlton. 639. Fresh
Meat, frozen and packed as if for a voyage, so that the refrigerating process may be
continued for any required period. By this process, the inventor states, the hold
of a ship can be filled with the carcases of sheep and cattle, which are frozen in
the act of being stowed. The expense of freezing 500 tons before starting will be
£lOO, and of keeping the cargo in a frozen state during a voyage of three months,
£75; or seven shillings per ton in all.”






INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION, 1872-73.
REPORT OF THE WINE EXPERTS,




THE REPORT OF THE WINE EXPERTS,
The following gentlemen, on invitation by the Royal Commissioners
for the International Exhibitions of London and Vienna, 1873, accepted
the responsibility of selecting samples of wines, which, in their judgment,
would “ effectually represent” this department of our agricultural pro-
duce at those Exhibitions, viz.:—Mr. Justice Barry; W. Bailey, Esq.;
Col. Rede; J. B. Were, Esq ; F. W. Haddon, Esq.; I). S. Campbell, Esq.;
Rev. Dr. Bleasdale, Hon. J. P. Bear, Dr. Gillbee ; R. K. Hammond, Esq.;
W. H. Wright,Esq.; D. B. Gibbs, Esq.; Lieut. Col. Stephens; J. A. Panton,
Esq., P.M.; Hon. J. F. Sullivan, Dr. Jonasson, E. Klingender, Esq.
Before entering on the subject-matter proper to this report,
I would premise that, from the late date at which the great bulk
of the wines arrived at the Exhibition cellars, and the indispensable
labour of classifying them as strong and full-bodied, medium, and light,
and these again as red and white, much time and labour were neces-
sarily expended; and to Lieut.-Colonel Stephens warm acknowledg-
ments are due for his assiduity and skill, and personal exertions, in con-
j unction with a member of the commission, in carrying this heavy work
through.
The experts commenced their examinations on November 18th, 1872,
and held in all sixteen meetings, the reviewing of samples, reserved from
the first tasting, requiring much care, and consequently fewer of them
could be dealt with at each meeting. They continued their labours by
adjournment, examining about twenty samples each day, until the whole
had been carefully passed before them once. Bearing in mind that
their first duty was to select samples, suitable for “ effectually represent-
ing at London and Vienna” this branch of Victorian produce, they, for
the most part, during the first examination, picked out, and reserved for
a second testing, the principal portion of what they thought good enough
for this purpose. A few only bore upon them indisputable evidence of
being fit to be sent, without revision.
The experts then agreed that all those samples, receiving from a
majority of their body a number of 16 marks or above, 20 being the
highest, should be forwarded to both London and Vienna, unless there
should appear to be some especial reason why any one should be sent to
either the one, or the other only. Such wines to be awarded a bronze
medal. It was decided that wines receiving between 12 and 15 marks


should have honourable mention ; and those having 10 or 11 marks
inclusive, “ commended The names of the wines receiving these
various marks of distinction will bo found in the official list of awards.
In regard to the character of wines to be sent to Vienna, the experts
received two diametrically opposite advices—the first, from Mr. Thone-
man, consul for Austria, and the other from Dr. Jonasson, both of them
believed to possess especial knowledge of the wines most likely to
command the attention of the wine experts at that exhibition.
Mr. Thoneman advised the sending of only wines of a heavy, full-
bodied character, while Dr. Jonasson’s advice was to send the lighter
kinds, even in preference to the more full-bodied.
In this state of perplexity a question arose about the definition of
those terms light and full-bodied; some finding difficulty in drawing the
line, and none of the experts receiving the names given by the exhibi-
tors for more than they themselves considered them justly to convey, and
properly so. For a vigneron on the Murray, where nearly, if not quite,
every character distinctive of body is higher on those hot plains, far
removed from our chilling southerly winds, has another scale by which
he estimates the terms light and full-bodied, from that of almost any
brother wine-grower south of the Dividing Range. Hence the
need of discretion in the experts. However, in this state of perplexity
between the opinions on this matter as between the Austrian
consul and Dr. Jonasson, an expert himself, and a well-known
critical judge of wine, there came to our knowledge the opinion
expressed by the best-known judges of wine in France and Germany, and
that turned very much on a wine, grown at Lilydale by the Brothers
Deschamp. Now we call this a light wine, but these judges considered
it of the character of the Rhine wines !
It was thenceforth decided to send to Vienna as well as to London
what we call light zoines. Surely nothing at present can be more inte-
resting to a new industry than to obtain from the most experienced, and
most honourable, and entirely disinterested judges the fullest expression
of their opinion upon what the vignerons of Victoria at this date
consider their best.
The subjoined lists show the wines, selected for each exhibition,
according to the published catalogue numbers, viz.: —
Catalogue
No. Light. Full Bodied. Red. White. Remarks.
702 ~ ~ London & Vienna.
704 „ „ L. and V.
711 ~ „ L. and V.
716 „ „ L.
721 „ „ L.
725 „ „ L.
727 „ „ L.
729 „ „ L. and V.
733 „ „ L. and V.
738 „ ~ L. and V.
739
741 „ „ L. and V.
742
743 „ „ L.


Catalogue
No.
Light.
Full Bodied.
Red. White.
Remarks.
744
99
99
London & V ienna.
748
99
99
L.
752
99
99
L. and V,
754
99
99
L. and Y.
756
99
99
L.
757
99
99
L.and V.
759
99
99
L.
761
>9
763
99
>9
L.
766
9 *
99
L.and V.
786
99
99
L.and V.
787
99
99
L. and V.
788
99
„
L. and V.
793
99
99 99
L. and V.
797
99
L.
799
99
99
L.and V.
800
99
99
L.and V.
801
99
99
L.
802
99
99
L. and V.
803
99
L.and V.
804
99
L. and V.
805
99
5J
L. and V.
807
99
L. and V.
808
99
L. and V.
810
99
9*
L.and V.
812
99
L. and V.
813
99
9 9
L. and V.
820
99
99
L. and V.
822
99
99
L. and V.
823
99
99
L.
828
sweet
99
L.and V,
832
99
99
L. and V.
833
99
,,
L.
834
99
99
L.
835
99
99
L.and V.
836
99
99
L.
838
99
L.
839
99
99
L.
843
99
99
L. and V.
847
99
99
L. and V.
851
99
99
L.and V.
852
99
99
L.and Y.
854
99
99
L.
855
99
99
L.and V.
858
99
99
L.and V.
859
99
99
L.and V.
860
99
99
L.and V.
58 Total London
39 Total Vienna.
Of the 24 exhibits sent to London, 15 were white and 9 red—wines
of light body
: the 34
remaining
samples being either intermediate, or
red, and full-bodied.
To those 58 samples sent to London, bronze medals were awarded as
above.
There being no single exhibit specially deserving a
gold medal, the
jury have awarded a
silver medal in cases where the exhibitor’s wine


readied the maximum number determined upon by the experts—all
medals to have the kinds of wine engraven thereon.
It may now fairly be suggested by the experts, that the time has
arrived, when the peculiar and best produce of each of the older wine
districts should become known, not alone for the credit of the district,
but much more for the guidance of those desirous of forming vineyards.
It is of the utmost economical importance that the vines, best suited
to each locality, both in relation to their vigorous growth, and healthy
produce, and time of maturing, should be correctly ascertained, with a
view, as is the case in the various communes of France, of producing only
the best growths the district can yield. In every instance the number of
the best yields will be very limited, and of course to these attention
should be directed.
Medals taken by the Exhibitors in the different districts, as arranged
alphabetically in the catalogue:—
District. Names of Exhibitors. Medals.
Ararat Joseph Best Silver.
Beech worth ... ... Messrs. Docker .. ... ... >»
... W. M'Donald Bronze.
’’ Curtis Reid
f Aug. Mueller
Castlemaine Wm. Botten
F. Crippa »
Otto Jung »
T. Meredith ... Silver.
M E. Schroeder »
Echuca Echuca Vineyard Company, J.
Vettler, Manager
Geelong Jacob Deppeler Bronze.
.. R. C. Hope Silver.
~ ... •• ST
Goulburn
Melbourne ... ... H. de Castella ... ... ••• Silver.
... J.'Davies Bronze.
” ... ... J. Foy »
” J. G. Francis Silver.
” . ... J. S. Johnstone Bronze.
” C. Maplestone Silver.
” F. Schmidt »
Murray •• • •• • Geo. Smith ... ... •• • .• • »
Sandhurst Bruhn Bros Silver.
rnurst •••
H. K. Fick Bronze.
” ... ... Aug. Heine ... ... ... ••• Silver.
Heine & GreifEenhagen ~
... F. C. Klemm Bronze.
... Carl Pohl Silver.
” ... Carl Pohl
Total Number Name of District,
of Exhibitors.
2 Ararat
g ... Beech worth
g ' ... Castlemaine
I [ Echuca
3 Geelong
3 Goulburn
H ... Melbourne
4 Murray
20 __ m ... Sandhurst


On no former occasion was Victoria so generally represented by
wines as the present. There seems not to have been one district, with
capabilities for special kinds, whether light, medium, or full-bodied, that
did not put in an appearance. Forty-eight vineyards supplied 16G
samples of wine. Now, though these 48 growers by no means whatever
comprise more than a fraction of the Victorian producers’ yet
it is matter of congratulation at this time that they represent the general
suitability of their respective districts for becoming the centres of pro-
duce, each good in its kind, but varying in several important vinous
properties, from the line delicate white and red wines of the Yering and
Geelong districts, through all gradations as we travel north, till we
meet with country on the Murray that forces on the vigneron musts,
which, if properly made and treated, would vie with the choicest
growths of Southern Europe.
The experts on the present occasion had to select wines, that would
effectually represent Victorian produce in this particular, and have been
gratified to find that they have selected 58 samples, fit to send to the
London International Exhibition, and 39 of thoseselected to the Universal
Vienna Exhibition, out of IG6 sent in. There were only 19 over four years
old, the great body being three years and under, many being only of the
vintage of 1871. Nevertheless, these young wines were, on the whole,
really well made—clean on the palate, and almost free from that peculiar
gout de terrain , that used to form so general and so disagreeable a feature
in all, but distinctively the red varieties. This seems due much more to
the care in making and keeping, careful fermentation, and scrupulously
clean cellars and utensils, &c., than to the greater or less age of the
vines, or the character of the cultivation of the vineyard. But to
whatever cause it is due, this much is certain, that the peculiar and
disagreeable smell and taste of these young vines are now but rarely
met with. In adopting means of making and treating their several
musts , in their very different localities, there is but little reason
to fear that our red wines will soon take their stand on the same level
as wines of corresponding isothermal degrees in Southern Europe,
There are two points to which the experts would direct particular
attention.
Ist. The general bad quality of the corks in use, hardly better than
common porter corks ; many of them having a bad smell of their own,
and imparting some of it to so susceptible a body as wine.
2nd. They would suggest that in future exhibitions, when a wine is
not made from one description of grape, the exhibitors should be invited
to mention not only the name of each variety of which it is composed,
but the proportionate quantity of each kind, noting whether the blending
was performed with the grapes or with wines, and whether before or after
fermentation had commenced; also, in case of the wines, to add the ages
of the several kinds entering into the blending.
The Sub-Committee, appointed by the final meeting to carry out its
instructions, and to revise the Report of the Experts, assembled at G. 30
p.m. on the 26th February, 1873, when, having taken into consideration
the subject matter of classifying medals, they decided that the memo-


randa at their command did not enable them to determine the class ol
medals that should be awarded, and they therefore fall back upon the
suggestion made at a previous meeting, and award a silver medal in
cases where two or more bronze medals have been granted.
JOHN I. BLEASDALE, D.D.,
Chairman and Reporter.
P.S. —The wine experts are accountable for the above stated speci-
mens ; any others sent to either London or Vienna, have been sent as
Commissioners’ exhibits only.
Fearing that a long time would elapse before such another oppor-
tunity would offer, I caused letters to be sent to the Exhibitors, asking
them if they would wish to leave the remaining samples of their exhibits
for further study and report at a future time. Subjoined are the names
of those who consented to do so, with one or two additional, whose wine
had been already distilled. I have not yet had time to do more than
determine the most prominent feature in pure wine—viz., its spirit
strength.
DISTILLED
WINES,
VICTORIAN
Proof
Spirit.
Colour.
Name of Maker.
Name of Wine.
Vintage.
Average.
August Heine
n )>
11 11
Bruhn Brothers
F. Mellon
H. de Castella.
)) 99
Charles Maplestone
)> 99
Hon. J. G. Francis
99 99
Franz Schmidt
99 99
John Davis
Jacob Weber
ii ii
Riesling
Hermitage
Mataro
Carbinet Sauvignon...
Carbinet
Riesling
Yerdeilho
99
Muscat
Pineau
Esparte (Mataro)
Pineau
Chasselas
Hermitage
Large & small Riesling
99
Chasselas
Gouais
Riesling
99
Ngarveno (White)
„ (Red)
Hermitage
Chasselas
20-0 j
22-7 V
18-1 \
23-31
21-8
23-0 >
25-
26- )
17-4 (
20-1 I
20-8 I
22-0)
23-8 }
26-3)
18-0 1
22-2 J
20-0)
25-5 f
Sand-
hurst.
20-26
Sand-
hurst,
28-92
Yering
22-1
Iv’nhoe
S'nb’ry
22-3
Ber-
wick
24.03
Ngar-


Victorian Distilled
W inks— (continued).
Name of Maker.
Name of Wine.
Vintage.
Proof
Spirit.
Colour.
Average
The Hon. R. C. Hope,
Geelong
” 99 99
99 99 99
99 99 99
D ff if
Jean Merle, Daylesford
» » »
» )> »
11 II II
William Rotten, Loddon
» » n
August Mueller
ff >)
ff »
J. G. Francis
ff ff
» ))
y't »
Otto Jung
Carl Pohl (857)
* (855)
~ » (861)
J. S. J ohnstone, Sunbury
» » »
Messrs. Docker, Bon-
tharambo
>i n ii
Fred. Egli
John Vettler, B chuca..
f) if ff
ff ff ff
ff ff ff
ff ff ff
Joseph Best ...
ff ff
Jacob Deppeler
ff ff
Wm. McDonald
Trouetti
ii
Cowan Paton
ff ff
Robinson
Creppa, T.
ii ii
Seidd ...
Hermitage
Second sample
Gouais and Riesling...
Riesling
Hermitage
Gamais
ii ••• ...
Another bottle do. ..
Another sample
Shiraz
White Hermitage
Shiraz
Muscatel
Shiraz
Verdeilho
Mataro
Hermitage
ff
Verdeilho
Rousette
Hermitage
Mataro, Hermitage &
Pineau
Verdeilho
Carbinet & Hermitage
Verdeilho ... ...
Riesling
Verdeilho, a little
mixed
Riesling
Hermitage
Hermitage
Gouais
Sherry
W. Morillion
Gloria Australia
Mataro
Burgundy and Black
Pineau
Muscatel, Chasselas,
and Tokay
Hermitage
Riesling
B. Muscat
Riesling
B. Custer
Riesling
Shiraz
Burgundy
ff
Hermitage
Muscat
Pedro Ximenus
Verdeilho
White
Red
White
Red
White
White
White
White
White
White
White
Red
White
White
Brown
White
Red
White
Red
Red
Red
Red
White
White
24-
22-
25- f
24-4
23- j
19-1 f
197 )
24-4 )
22-6 i
22-0 )
23-2
22-0 i
25-0 )
16-2)
22-0 f
22 - 0 (
24-4 )
21-8 )
24-3/
21-8 j
24-9 >
20-0)
21-8 |
19-8 j
22-4 f
22- j
23 - |
23-6 I
22- 4 f
20-4 I
21-6 I
19-5 |
16-2)
18-5 I
21-0 )
22-6 I
23 8 J


Victorian Distilled Wines —( continued).
c*»- stSfh.
Age of
Vintage.
Average
Name of Grower.
Name of Wine.
George S. Smith
John Foy
Muscatel
Tokay
White
Red
Burgundy
Claret ,
Una Blanc
Verdeilho
Tinta
George S. Smith
Walter Clark .
White
White
Red
Curtis Reid
1870'
White
White
Red
C. A.Reid,Yackandandah
J. Schroeider
Riesling
Hermitage
Mataro
Hermitage
Verdeilho
Riesling
* J. G. Francis
F. Kingshaw
James Webster
George Spink
—Siedl
Gilberts (S.A.)
T. Meredith
White
White
White
White
Red
White, Mixec
Riesling
25 yrsold
1868
Shepherd’s Riesling,
Mataro, &c.
Hermitage ... v..
Carbinet Sauvignon
Hermitage
Chasselas, Riesling..
Bruhn Brothers.
White
White
White
Heine and Greifienhagen
As a last test I took
after allowing ten
the whole residues of all these
or more to elapse, I found by a
ie distillations,
actual weighin
weighing
and
g of
less
the distillate of the 95 samples that it was just 21-832, or "678
than got by distillation.
Taking the general average over all these 95 samples, I find the
average to be 22-51. Now if we take out of the lot two—one of 27 and
the other 32"2 per cent. —we find the actual average to be 22-199 for
Victorian wines. Out of the 95 samples 13 are 24 degrees and over
and in nearly all these instances the distilled spirit led me to believe
that they had been considerably fortified. The presence of extraneous
spirit, especially if not made from wine, is not difficult to detect when
it has been recovered by distillation.
JOHN I. BLEASDALE, D.D., F.G.S




