

■ ■ —=
TWO LETTERS
■TO THE
Rev. GEORGE IF 1 . 3yC^.O-A.^TBCTJ^
RASTER OF THE JCING’S J’ARRAMATTA,
HIS ATTACKS UPON THE WESLEYAN METHODISTS.
BY THE RET. RALPH MANSFIELD.
Published at the Wesleyan Book Depot, Sydney.


THE KEY. GEO. E. MAO ARTHUR’S ATTACK
ON THE
WESLEYAN METHODISTS.
The following letters were originally published in the Cumberland
Times , a Parramatta newspaper, and are reprinted in their present
form for the purpose of giving them a wider circulation than they
'have hitherto obtained, the reverend gentleman to whom they are
addressed still persisting in the offensive course they denounce, and
their author having no inclination to prolong the contest through
the columns of a newspaper.
•In excuse for the tone of rebuke which he has not felt it
unbecoming to assume, the writer may be permitted a reference to
the facts, that the disparity of years between himself and his
correspondent is equal to the disparity between father and son;
that he is one of the oldest Ministers of Religion, and, he
believes, the oldest Wesleyan Methodist Preacher, in the Austra-
lian Colonies, having been ordained early in the year 1820, having
commenced his ministerial labours in Tasmania and New South
Wales in the same year, and having been mercifully spared to
continue those labours to the present time, thus completing a
full half century.
During this lengthened series of years he does not remember
having ever witnessed an assault upon the Wesleyan Methodist
Church breathing a spirit so virulent, expressed in language so
coarse, persisted in so long and so rancourously, and, above all, so
entirely unprovoked, as that which has called forth this publication.
And he is bound to add, that, in his judgment, the assault is
in no small degree aggravated by the consideration that the
assailant is one to whom have been confided two important trusts,
—the education of the sons of some of our most respectable
families, and the Chaplaincy of our Volunteer Force. It will be
generally admitted that in neither of these departments of
social responsibility can such an example of sectarian rancour be
expected to produce any but the most pernicious fruits.
The first of the following letters, as may be inferred from the
mildness of its tone, was written under the impression that upon
reading it Mr. Macaethue. would see the errors he had fallen
into, and regret the step he had taken. The sequel proves


the impression to have been far too charitable. The first offence
was mild compared with the second; the second is said ':o have
been mild compared with the third. And the author is informed
that these attacks through the newspaper have been followed by
attacks from the pulpit; that on Sunday last, in All Saints”
Church, Mr. MACARTHUR, officiating for the incumbent, then sor-
rowing under a deep domestic affliction, preached so pointedly and
so bitterly against the Methodists that several of the congregation
signified their displeasure by taking up their hats and walking out
of the church.
Parramatta, 20th September, 1870.
No. i.
TO THE REV. G. F. MACARTHUR, THE KING'S SCHOOL,
PARRAMATTA.
Rev. Sir, —A friend has invited my attention to a letter published
in the Cumberland Times of Saturday last, addressed to the Rev. J. H.
Dash,* and signed with your name. I have learnt that Mr. Dash had
never heard or seen anything of this letter until it made its appearance
in the newspaper. lam therefore free to believe that it was published
by yourself, and that you wrote it for the public rather than for the
gentleman named in its superscription.
Although you here speak ostensibly of a religious body to which I
do not belong, I cannot doubt that most of your readers would under-
stand you to allude also, in the main points of your letter, to the body
of which lam a member —the Wesleyan Methodist Church. Nor can
I doubt that such allusion was intended. I must therefore beg per-
mission to say a few words in reference to those points.
You state it to be the “ especial glory ” of the church of which you
are a member “ to represent in her polity Apostolic order , no less than
Apostolic doctrine.” The inuendo obviously is, that this polity of your
Church differs essentially from the polity of Methodism. I meet the
inuendo by affirming that Apostolic order, not less than Apostolic doc-
trine, is the especial glory of the church of which lam a member. The
Wesleyan Methodist Church holds that the authority of her Ministers to
preach the doctrines which the Apostles taught, is founded on the
scripturally attested and duly recognised fact of their having been called
to the office and work of the Ministry by the same Divine Spirit which
called the Apostles to that office and work.
* A Minister of the Primitive Methodist Church, who had written to Mr. Mac-
arthur soliciting a contribution towards the erection of a place of worship in Parramatta.


THE KE
The followin
Times , a Par
form for the
have hithertc
addressed stil
their author
ithe columns
■ln excu
unbecoming
the facts, tl
corresponder
that he is
land
ssent
they
j are
, and
nigh
It it
ce to
d his
son;
I, he
believes, the oldest Wesleyan Metnoclist Hreacner, in me Austra-
lian Colonies, having been ordained early in the year 1820, having
commenced his ministerial labours in Tasmania and New South
Wales in the same year, and having been mercifully spared to
continue those labours to the present time, thus completing a
full half century.
During this lengthened series of years he does not remember
having ever witnessed an assault upon the Wesleyan Methodist
Church breathing a spirit so virulent, expressed in language so
coarse, persisted in so long and so rancourously, and, above all, so
entirely unprovoked, as that which has called forth this publication.
And he is bound to add, that, in his judgment, the assault is
in no small degree aggravated by the consideration that the
assailant is one to whom have been confided two important trusts,
—the education of the sons of some of our most respectable
families, and the Chaplaincy of our Volunteer Force. It will be
generally admitted that in neither of these departments of
social responsibility can such an example of sectarian rancour be
expected to produce any but the most pernicious fruits.
The first of the following letters, as may be inferred from the
mildness of its tone, was written under the impression that upon
reading it Mr. Macarthur, would see the errors he had fallen
into, and regret the step he had taken. The sequel proves


the impression to have been far too charitable. The first offence
was mild compared with the second; the second is said ':o have
been mild compared with the third. And the author is informed
that these attacks through the newspaper have been followed by
attacks from the pulpit; that on Sunday last, in All Saints*
Church, Mr. MACARTHUR, officiating for the incumbent, then sor-
rowing under a deep domestic affliction, preached so pointedly and
so bitterly against the Methodists that several of the congregation
signified their displeasure by taking up their hats and walking out
of the church.
Parramatta, 20th September, 1870.
No. i.
TO THE REV. G. F. MACARTHUR, THE KING'S SCHOOL,,
PARRAMATTA.
Rev. Sir, — A friend has invited my attention to a letter published
in the Cumberland Ti7nes of Saturday last, addressed to the Rev. J. H.
Dash,* 1 and signed with your name. I have learnt that Mr. Dash had
never heard or seen anything of this letter until it made its appearance
in the newspaper. lam therefore free to believe that it was published
by yourself, and that you wrote it for the public rather than for the
gentleman named in its superscription.
Although you here speak ostensibly of a religious body to which I
do not belong, I cannot doubt that most of your readers would under-
stand you to allude also, in the main points of your letter, to the body
of which lam a member —the Wesleyan Methodist Church. Nor can
I doubt that such allusion was intended. I must therefore beg per-
mission to say a few words in reference to those points.
You state it to be the “ especial glory ” of the church of which you
are a member “ to represent in her polity Apostolic order , no less than
Apostolic doctrine.” The inuendo obviously is, that this polity of your
Church differs essentially from the polity of Methodism. I meet the
inuendo by affirming that Apostolic order, not less than Apostolic doc-
trine, is the especial glory of the church of which lam a member. The
Wesleyan Methodist Church holds that the authority of her Ministers to
preach the doctrines which the Apostles taught, is founded on the
scripturally attested and duly recognised fact of their having been called
to the office and work of the Ministry by the same Divine Spirit which
called the Apostles to that office and work.
* A Minister of the Primitive Methodist Church, who had written to Mr. Mac-
arthur soliciting a contribution towards the erection of a place of worship in Parramatta.


You allege that the “ Methodists have separated from the church of
their forefathers, and gone out from her.” As regards my own Church,
I must be allowed to attribute this assertion to a misconception of his-
torical facts. Our venerable father in God, the Rev. John Wesley, was
indeed a member and a Minister of the Church of England, and
never “ separated” or “ went out” from her; but was rudely ejected
from her pulpits, and despitefully used and persecuted by not a few of
her dignitaries. If the bond of fellowship between her and him was
broken, it was broken by herself. Nor did the Wesleyan Methodist
Church ever “separate” or “go out” from the Church of England, for
to that Church she never belonged. Of her original members, some no
doubt had been accustomed to attend the services of the Church by law
established ; others might have been connected with the various non-
conformist churches of the day; but the history of her early times abun-
dantly shows that the great bulk of them had belonged to no Church at
all, but were gathered by the instrumentality of Mr. Wesley and his
fellow laborers from the moral wastes of the world.
In thus addressing you, Sir, I would wish not to be misunderstood.
I do not complain of your having written this letter,* but I think you
ought not to have published it. I cannot see that the circumstances
called for such a step; and it appears to me that in taking such a step,
you went out of your way to wound the feelings of many of your peace-
able and unoffending neighbours.
I am, Rev. Sir,
Your obedient servant,
R. MANSFIELD.
Hanley Yille, Parramatta, 24th August, 1870.
No. 2.
TO THE REV. G. F. MACARTHUR.
Rev. Sir, — I have read with attention your long letter in the Cumber-
land Times of last week. My chief object in doing so was to see
whether you had justified, or explained, or regretted, in a way that I
could deem satisfactory, the improper act which had induced me to ad-
dress you. You have done neither. Your explanation is an open avowal
of the fact of which previously I had only circumstantial proof; and your
attempt at justification is a pitiable failure.
In contempt of the well understood usuages which regulate the inter-
course of gentlemen, you had answered a private letter, without its
author’s consent, through the columns of a newspaper. You have not
Justified that. You had made your unauthorised answer the weapon
of attack upon the religious tenets of many of your peaceable neighbours.
You have not justified that.
* Meaning, not that I approved of his having written it, but that his having
written it was not the poi7it to which I was then addressing myself.


Instead, indeed, of either justifying or apologising you have re-
peated the offence in another form, and in more amplified detail, and in
more insulting terms; and have attempted to unchurch not only the
religious communion of which I am a member, but every religious
communion in the world which does not submit to your own narrow
dogma of priestly succession.
From the gentleman with whose private letter you had taken so
nnwarrantable a liberty, you have turned upon the humble individual
who had publicly dealt you what he thought, and still thinks, a well
merited rebuke. And you have turned upon me as if the main ques-
tion between us was one of creeds and systems of Church government;
while the question demanding your attention related to your own con-
duct. Admitting all you say about creeds and Church government,
what can be. said of your unprovoked onslaught on the religious
concerns of your neighbours, dealing your “apostolic blows and knocks ”
right and left, in reply to a civil private note ? Was such conduct be-
coming a Christian gentleman, a Christian minister, and the Head
Master of a school for Christian youth? That is the point; and upon
that point I think there are not many persons, either in your own
Church or in any other, who will differ with me in the opinion that you
had “gone out of your way,” made a grievous mistake, and ought to
be heartily sorry.
Of your flippant remarks upon my own Church, my former letter
adverted to two points. You had insinuated that while she might glory
in Apostolic doctrine, she did not or could not glory in Apostolic order.
I met your insinuation by affirming that she gloried in both. For in-
sinuation you now substitute direct assertion, and will have it that her
glorying is vain ; that all the glory belongs to your own Church, and
not a glimmer of it to mine.
You have charged the Methodists with having forsaken the Church
of their forefathers. I attributed your charge, in so far as it was aimed
at my own Church, to a misconception of historical facts. You reply
by quotations which prove one part of my case, but do not disprove the
other. They prove that Mr. Wesley had not himself separated from
the Church of England, and was unwilling that any of his adherents
(such of them, that is, as had been wont to attend her services) should
take a course different from his own ; although he did not hesitate to
acknowledge, “ The Uninterrupted Succession I know to be a fable,
which no man ever did or can prove”—an acknowledgement which
perhaps you did not find it convenient to quote. But your quotations
do not disprove my assertion that the Wesleyan Methodist Church
had never separated from the Church of England, seeing that to
that Church she had never belonged.
But suppose you had disproved it. What then ? Had she not
a right to separate if she thought proper to do so? Had she not
as good a right to separate from your Church as your Church had
to separate from the Church of her forefathers ? And if it was right
for you to come out from the Roman Catholic Church because of
what you believed to be her corruptions, was it not just as right for
us to come out from the Church of England because of what we


believed to be the corruptions of the great bulk of her clergy, many
of whom even Mr. Wesley, with all his High Church prejudices, was
constrained to brand as “ Heathenish Priests and Mitred infidels f’
If you reply that your Church was a branch of the Catholic
Church long anterior to Martin Luther’s day, your answer applies to
my Church as well as to your own. Methodism is a branch, and
not an unfruitful branch, of the Church Catholic, and existed long
anterior to John Wesley’s day. The essence of Methodism, sir, is
New Testament Christianity, the life of God in the soul of man,
holiness of heart and life. It flourished on the day of Pentecost;
and, blessed be God, from that day it has never ceased to exist, but,
under many names and many outward forms, Episcopalian, Presby-
terian, Congregational, Quaker, Methodist, &c., &c., has come down
to us from generation to generation, and will surely grow and pre-
vail until it cover the earth as the waters cover the sea.*
And now, sir, I must tell you that I shall not follow you into that
interminable wilderness of bootless controversy into which you have
thought fit to wander from the central point at issue between us, namely,
the rightness or the wrongness of your own conduct.
To put that conduct the more plainly in what I conceive to be its
true light, allow me to suppose a case. Let me suppose that a member
of your Church sends me a private note asking a subscription towards
the erection of a Protestant Episcopalian place of worship. ' Let me
suppose that I answer him through the columns of a newspaper to the
following effect:—“ Dear sir,—l cannot conscientiously send you a
subscription for the following reasons :—Although your Church professes
to glory in Apostolic order, I do not believe there is on the face of the
earth a Church that exhibits so shocking a spectacle of Disunity, both
in doctrine and in worship, as she does ; she is torn to pieces by schisms,
not only among her laity, but among her Bishops, Priests, and Deacons;
they have marshalled themselves under the antagonistic banners of High
Church, and Low Church, and Broad Church; of Ritualism, Rationalism,
Puseyism, Colensoism, and Eyangelicism; some of them extol their
Church as the bulwark of Protestantism, otters execrate the name of
Protestant, and hold up their own noble army of martyrs to ridicule
and scorn; some of them insist that her baptismal water regenerates
the soul, others that the fable of baptismal regeneration is a perilous
delusion; some that at the bidding of her priests her sacramental
elements of bread and wine are miraculously turned into flesh and
blood, others that this pretence is downright popery; some that her
clergy can forgive sin, others that to forgive sin is the incommunicable
* That Methodism is not an unfruitful branch -~f the Church Catholic is shewn by
thefollowing statistics, taken from Dr. Jacoby’s History of Methodism, recently published
in two volumes at Bremen, in the German language. Number of Methodists throughout
the World: Enrolled Members, 3,389,166; Ministers, 19,049; Local Preachers,
57,934; Sunday School Scholars, 3,654,215 ; besides probationei'S and attendants on
Public Woi'ship not included in these numbers. The figures comprise Wesleyan Metho-
dists, Primitive Methodists, the Methodist Episcopal Church of the United States of
America, and other branches of the Methodist communion. The attendants on Public
Worship who are not enrolled members average about 50r6t0 1 of the latter. This
gives for the whole Methodist family an aggregate of above Twenty Millions of Souls.


prerogative of Deity. You will therefore admit, dear sir, that I see
good cause for declining to give one farthing to a Church so deformed
with error, and so frightfully divided against herself. . I am, dear sir,
&c.”
And if, Mr. Macarthur, I should be blamed, as well I might be, for
taking so impertinent a method of dealing out my asperities upon a
large body of my fellow Christians, I could plead that I was only follow-
ing the example of the Rev. Head Master of the King’s School at
Parramatta.
Your personal allusions to myself are scarcely in good taste, and
were certainly no more called for than your original attack upon your
Methodist neighbours. If I, though an ordained Minister, am earning
my bread in a secular pursuit, you, sir, though an ordained Minister*
are doing the same thing. And if you can account for the anomaly of
your reasons satisfactory to your own conscience, so can I.f
It may not be out of place to remark, that towards the venerable
Church of England I have ever cherished kindly and respectful feelings.
For half a century I have occasionally attended her services, and par-
taken of her Holy Communion ; and with not a few of her clergy it
has been my privilege to enjoy brotherly intercourse, both in the private
circle and in public movements.
Nor may it be unseasonable in me to refer to the odd coincidence,
that some one and thirty years ago it devolved upon me, as a public
journalist, to defend your late respected father, Hannibal Hawkins Mac-
arthur, Esq., against the censures of his Bishop for having laid the
foundation stone of the Wesleyan Centenary Chapel in this town of
Parramatta; and that now, in this same town of Parramatta, it has
devolved upon me to rebuke the son of that lamented gentleman for
having gone out of his way to insult the very Church to which his father
had thus publicly bidden God speed.
Here, sir, our contest ends. On this arena I shall have nothing
more to say to you about yourself or your Church; nor shall I read
anything more that you may say about my Church or me.
But in retiring from the lists, let me say a few heart-breathed
words : May you long be spared to sit under the vine and under the
figtree of the Church of your affections, reposing in quiet beneath her
tranquil shades, and banqueting on her pleasant fruits ; and may you
have grace to breathe a like kindly prayer for all your neighbours who
love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, whatever name they bear.
And with regard to that better land in which I humbly hope to
+ The circumstances which, many years ago, .induced the writer to withdraw
from the service of the Wesleyan Missionary Society have been publicly explained by
him more than once. They involved nothing of which he ever was or ever needed to
be ashamed, though much that he deeply lamented. He is not aware that the cir-
cumstances which induced Mr. . Macarthur to exchange the cure of souls for the business
of a school-master, though pretty well understood, have ever been explained by him to
the public. It is known that he left the incumbency of a Church in the suburbs of
Sydney ;_that he set up a school at Macquarie Field ; that the speculation was not a
commercial success ; that he thereupon turned to his present enterprise at Parramatta •
and that his friends entertain the hope that this adventure, if not damaged by impru-
dence and mismanagement on his own part, may prove remunerative.


meet you when we shall have done with the conflicts of the
Church Militant, allow me to relate an anecdote of good and large-
hearted John Wesley : “It is said that once, in the visions of the night,
he found himself at the gates of Paradise, and asked who were within.
“ Any Wesleyans here ?” “ No,” was the answer. “ Any Presbyterians?”
“No.” “Any Church of England men?” “No.” “Any Roman
Catholics?” “No.” “Whom have you, then, here?” he asked in
astonishment. “We know nothing here,” was the reply, “of any of
those names that you have mentioned; the only name of which we
know anything is Christian; we are all Christians here, and of these
we have a great multitude which no man can number, of all nations,
and kindreds, and peoples, and tongues.”
To that great multitude may you and I, sir, be added in the day
of our Lord’s appearing.
I am, Rev. Sir, your obedient servant,
R. MANSFIELD.
Hanley Ville, Parramatta,
September 6, iB7o.
To this letter a rejoinder appeared in the Cumberland Times
of Saturday last, the 17th instant. I have not seen it, nor do I
intend to see it; hut I am informed by many persons that for
malevolence and vulgarity it excels its predecessors. The mildest
epithet I have heard applied to it is that it is “ shameful! ”
R. M.
TAff ;
&(6UO
y i y
Printed by Gibbs, Shallard, dr Co., 108 Pitt-street. Sydney.
