

Bio
Two Letters
DESCRIBING
Voyage of the May Family to South Australia
IN 1839,
And its Settlement near Mount Barker, in that Colony
EDITED BY
WM. LEWIS MAY,
OF ‘MAYDENA,’ SANDFORD, TASMANIA
WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
JOSEPH COLEMAN,
OF ADELAIDE
«
F
Ijobart:
I. Walch & Sons, Printers, 130 Macquarie Street’




Two Letters describing the Voyage of the May Family
to South Australia in 1839.
yo Copies printed for private distribution .
This is No. £L>
U o <3tJ ■» Q/K
With W. L. May’s Fraternal Greeting




JOSEPH AND HANNAH MAY
With their Sons and Daughters, by Birth and Marriage.
1ST ROW (from top left hand corner) — Henry Phillips— Maria (May) Phillips; George Phillips— Margaret (May) Phillips;
Frederick Mackie— Rachel Ann (May) Mackie; Edward May.
2ND
ROW —Emma Sophia (Coleman) May—Frederick May; Hannah (Morris) May—Joseph May; William May—Mary
(Cotton) May; Arthur Coleman, and Lucy (May) Coleman.
3RD
ROW— Hannah (May) Barritt— Joseph Barritt; Thomas May—Margaret Sarah (Wheeler) May; Elizabeth (May)
Sanders—William Sanders; Joseph May, Jnr.


PREFACE
little book is intended primarily for distribution amongst
my own relatives —descendents of Joseph and Hannah May
—and its object is to place in a more permanent form, and to
make more generally accessible, these two very interesting letters,
describing the voyage from England and first settlement in South
Australia of our immediate ancestors.
My cousin, Joseph Coleman (whose very able Introduction
will be found most interesting and instructive) and myself, have
been for a number of years collecting materials for an historic
account of our family, but this necessarily takes a long time, and
the date of its completion and publication is quite indefinite.
In the meantime, and as a beginning, I thought well to print
these letters, which are of great interest, and in their present
manuscript form are probably known to few, and are not access-
ible to many, and it is quite possible that they might be eventu-
ally lost or forgotten. The original letters are believed not now
to exist, but copies are in the possession of Emily Phillips, of
‘Violet Bank/ North Adelaide, who has kindly allowed us to copy
them for printing.
The family group, forming the frontispiece, is a reduced copy
of one in my possession, and is probably as complete as it can
now be made. It is presented with the best wishes of the
Editor,
WILLIAM LEWIS MAY,
‘ Maydena,’ Sandford,
Tasmania.
3rd Month, 1911.


Jntroductlon.
The two following letters were written, respectively, by Williaim May
and; Maria May, members of the family of Joseph May, of Hertford, England,
who, with hia wife and children, emigrated to South Australia in the year
1839.
Joseph May was by occupation a chemist, carrying on business at a
shop in the Market Place in the town of Hertford. He was a member of
the Society of Friends, to which hits forefathers, for at least three genera-
tions before him, had belonged. In the earlier years of his married life
he had lived at Henley-on-Thames where he was engaged with his father in
an ironmongery business. His wife was Hannah, eldest daughter olf William
and Ann Morris, of Ampthill, Bedfordshire, and a family of twelve children
were born to them, three at Henley and the rest after their removal to
Hertford. The youngest of these, a boy, died in infancy, but all the others,
comprising five sons and six daughters, accompanied their parents to the
new home in the ISlouthern Hemisphere. Joseph May’s only brother Henry,
referred to in the letters as “Uncle Henry,” being a bachelor, and left, by
the death of a sister, without any other very near relatives, decided also
to throw in his lot with the pioneer colonists. He was however at this
time a man of more than 53 years of age, of a retiring disposition, and of
somewhat weak intellect, so that he became a very unobtrusive member
cf the family circle. Hannah May, like her husband, was descended from
ancestors on both sides who had been consistent Members of the Society of
Friends for generations. She was a most excellent wife and mother, and
a vary capable manager of her household. As a true helpmeet to her
husband in his business she had acquired a good deal of practical (skill in
the relief of common ailments, and was frequently consulted in regard to
these by neighbors in the Australian bush isolated from professional assis-
tance; and amongst all who came in contact with her she was held in the
greatest respect and esteem. She died in 1860, from the after effects
of a surgical operation; hut her husband survived her nearly 18 years, and
when his end came, on March 11, 1878, he had attained the extreme age
of nearly 91 years.
The eldest of Joseph May’s family was his son Frederick, horn in 1815;
and next in age came William May, the writer of the first letter. He was
born on October 29, 1816, so that he rwas about 22% years of age when the
family left England. These two brothers had lived for a time with some
relations of their mother’s who were farmers, near Ampthill, and had there
learnt something of farming methods as a preparation for their new life as
colonists. To them fell the direction of all the operations connected with
working the land, and rearing the live stock on the new (Settlement, and
they afterwards remained in partnership for many years, until William
finally moved away to Tasmania. He had married, in 1856, Mary, second
daughter of Francis Cotton, a Member of the Society of Friends, and an
early settler on the east coast of Tasmania; and it was owing to his wife’s
connexion with a large family of relatives in that island that William May
was led to make a (fresh start there, after experiencing a sulccession of very
Dad harvests on bis farm near B let oh ley, in South Australia. He purchased


a property at Sandfondi, about 12 miles east of Hobart, and adapting his
employment to the changed climate and conditions prevailing in his new
location, he engaged chiefly in growing fruit for export to the other
Australian colonies, or to England. His death took place on November 10,
1903. Although he 'had then attained the age of 87 years he had maintained
much physical vigor til] very near his end, and his mental alertness, and
the characteristically bright interest he took in all outward affairs, and In
the welfare of the Society of Friends of which he was ever a most devoted
member, were manifest to the last. All his surviving children remain
settled on the same property, and the farm and orchard produce they
continue to send to distant markets well maintains the good name it
acquired during their father’s lifetime.
Maria May, the writer of the second! letter, was the eldest of Joseph
May’s daughters, and came next in age to her brother William. Born in
1818, she attained her 21st year two days after the “Anna Robertson” had
cleared out on her voyage from Gravesend. In 1843, being about three
and a half years after her arrival in iSouth Australia, she was married to
Henry Weston Phillips, of Adelaide, a merchant and importer, and a son
of John and Ann Phillips, of Peckham, Surrey. He had emigrated to the
new colony in 1840. This marriage was the first, except one, celebrated
between Members of the Society of Friends in (South Australia, and it took
place in a building originally built and used for the purpose of a dairy,
on a farm belonging to John Barton Hack, at Western Plat, between Mount
Barker and Echunga. At that time it served as the local Meeting House
of the -Society. Henry and Maria (Phillips lived in Adelaide until the death
of the former in 1898, -and Maria Phillips then made her home with her only
son at Blackwood, about 11 miles hr rail from Adelaide. About two years
before her death she moved with her son and his wife to Hurd’s Hill, a few
miles further from Adelaide. She survived the 70th anniversary of the
landing of her family in 1839, but only by a few weeks, for on October 12,1909,
sihe very peacefully passed away. Her long span of life, extending to 91
years and 4 months, exceeded even that of her father. Like most of the
May family who reached extreme old age she preserved her mental faculties
almost unimpaired, and she was able to enjoy much reading and to do
beautifully fine needle work until within -a few days of her end.
It may seem remarkable that such home-loving people, anil so extremely
unlikely to choose an adventurous life as were Joseph and Hannah May,
should have ventured on an emigration to such a very distant and almost
unexplored country, with a large family of children dependent upon them.
Joseph Mtay at that time was in his 52nd year, and his wife in her 50th, and
both were personls to whom a serveranoe from the social and religious
associations of their native land would be very seriously felt. But the first
suggestions for this enterprise arose with their two eldest sons, who had
read glowing reports of the prospects of the new colony from John B. Hack
and his brother, -and who became filled with the desire tie make their start
in life in a land 'where there appeared such promises of success in farming
and grazing pursuits. The difficulty, too, of finding suitable openings for the
young people in the home-land no doubt had its influence upon the parents;
and Hannah May confessed to the hope that, forming an almost self-satisfy-
ing community amongst themselves, her children, as they grew up, would be
less likely to be scattered to homes amongst strangers than must inevitably
be the case Whilst their parents continued to live at a tradesman's islhop in
an English country town. And thus her strong desire through life that they
might all remain settled close about her, found, in the very size of her


family, ground for the fancy that this diream of her heart might be realized
in the isolation of a ibush isettiement.
At the time when this Family landed on its shores South Australia was
not quite three years olid! as a duly constituted Colony. It had been first
settled in 1836 by bodies of emigrants from Great Britain sent out under
the auspices of the South Australian Colonization Association. In August
of that year Colonel Light, with a surveying staff, had arrived to lay out a
site (for the future capital of the Colony, and it was on the 28th December,
1836, that Captain (afterwards Sir John) Hindmarsh, R.N., the first governor
of the colony, estblished the government by a proclamation in the presence
of the assembled colonists at Glenelg, the landing place off which tne
“Anna Robertson'’ first anchored, less than three years afterwards'. The
first sale of town allotments in Adelaide took place in March, 1837; so that
the state of the town in 1839, as described in these letters, indicates a very
rapid advancement during that interval. At a date within a month of the
landing of the May Family it is recorded that 250,320 acres of land had been
sold; and the white population of the colony at that time appears to Ihave
been somewhere about 11,500 souls.
The family had not been long settled in its new home when Joseph
May purchased an adjoining section of land, and in preparation for the
house he intended to build upon it of a sufficient size to comfortably
accommodate the whole family, he laid out and planted the garden and
orchard, which afterwards extended on more than two sidels of the .building.
The trees and isihrubs grew excellently under his careful management, but
through long delay in Obtaining legacies to which he and his brother became
entitled by the death of a cousin in England, the building was postponed
for many years, and it was not until near the middle of 1846 that the house
was completed and occupied. It remained a charming home, and the scene
of many family gatherings, until a second generation of Joseph May’s
descendants who occupied it had grown up and found homes of their own
elsewhere. His daughter Lucy Coleman, who had bought the property at
her father’s death, disposed of it again in 1897; and in the summer of
1905, whilst held by other owners, the house was completely destroyed by
fire. Another off quite a different type has since (been built on the ruins;
but through the vandalism of later occupiers very little indeed now remains
of the large productive garden. Most of the fine native and English trees
also, which helped to make it a residence almost unequalled in the country
as regards the natural beauty of its surroundings, have been ruthlessly
destroyed. Thus neither the “Fairfield - ’ of the first settlement, which was
afterwards known in the May family as “the old place,” nor yet the family
home so much longer recognised as a centre of social life for members of
the Society of Friends from far and near, can any longer be said to exist.
The uncle to whom William May’s letter is addressed was his mother’s
bachelor brother, Joseph Marsh Morris, of Ampthill. This worthy Friend
carried on the baker’s business in that town which had been Mis father’s;
but after the father’s death he took the management of a corn and seed
business at Esher, in Surrey, which formed a branch of a large concern
carried on by his two nephews, Joseph and Bedford Marsh, in the neighbor-
ing town of Kingston-on-Thames. His elder sister, Maria Morris, was the
“Aunt Maria” to whom Maria May addressed her letter. She, too, remained
single, and lived with her brother as hi® housekeeper throughout their joint
lives. After the removal to Esher she whs, for about 30 years, a most
faithful correspondent with the May family. During moist of that period
her regular journal letters reached the colonists by each of the monthly


mails then forwarded from England. When age compelled the brother
and sister to give up the business at Esher they moved into Kingston, and
spent tflieir remaining days together, until her death took place at the age
of 83. His followed about four years later when he was in hits 79th
year.
Three of Joseph and Hannah May’s sons, and all their six 'daughters
were married; hut the youngest daughter, Lucy Coleman, widow of the late
Arthur Coleman, of Saddlewortih, is now the only survivor of those numbered
amongst the original 14 icolonists whose voyage Js recorded' in these letters.
She lives with one of her married daughters at Blackwood, in the Adelaide
hills, and is now in her 79th year. Twenty-six grandchildren of the pioneer
parents have married, and in their turn have brought up another generation
of the good old stock. Most of these descendants are to be found in South
Australia, but a few are scattered in four of the other Australian States
or in New Zealand. With but few exceptions they may be said to have
proved themselves worthy colonists, holding respected positions in town
or country, and though many no longer retain membership in the Quaker
Society, all of them venerate and prize their association with the esteemed
family that made the long voyage to the new land, and labored so strenu-
ously as pioneer 'colonists of 1839.
154 Wakefield Street,
Adelaide, March
JOSEPH COLEMAN.
1, 1911,


Cwo tetters
Describing the Voyage of the May Family to
South Australia in 1839.
EXTRACT FROM “THE TIMES,” LONDON, FRIDAY, MARCH 22, 1832.
For South Australia, tiro fast sailing first-class teal; Ibuilt ship, Anna
Robertson, burden 448 tons register, Augustus Munro commander, lying in
the London Docikis. Fitted up for cabin and intermediate passengers, and
will carry an experienced surgeon. For freight or passage apply to G. F.
Angas and Co., merchants, 2 Jeffrey’s Square, St. Mary Axe, or to Thomas
Brown, broker, 17 London Street.
THE JOURNAL OF THE VOYAGE OP THE BARQUE “ANNA ROBERT-
SON,” PROM LONDON TO ADELAIDE IN 1839.
BY WILLIAM MAY.
Deal Uncle,—
As I wish to give ais full an account as I cam of our voyage, I shall
proceed without preface to note down in the form of a journal every
incident which the fullest interpretation of your wish to hear everything
will justify.
1839, sth mo., 27th, It-past 7 o’clock. Captain Munro has just arrived
with Captain Brown, —Mills, etc., the ship is cleared and orders are
given to weigh anchor immediately. Just at this instant and at the very
last moment a boat has come alongside with a passenger named Henderson
in it, whose wife and children are on hoard; the children had just welcomed
their father, when another boat arrived, and a Bow street officer scrambled
up the side and presented his warrant to Henderson who directly jumped
into a boat and tried to row away, but the attempt was unsuccessful, the
officer seized his prey, and bore him back to Gravesend. His wife ana
family went off to Adelaide in a (situation more easily conceived than
described. We are again taken in tow by the steamer, half-past 9. Cast
anchor for three or four hours to wait the tide.
28th. Again in tow by the steamer. 8 o’clock, midway between the
Nore and N. Foreland, wind N.E.; 10 o’clock, rounded the N. Foreland,
and are now in full sail; the wind laying across us causes the vessel to
roll very much on one side. Steam tug has left us, and we are now fairly
out of port; 4 o’clock, off Deal —the pilot has just left us .with three letters
of ours, he is gone ashore with three Deal boatmen who came alongside two
hours before we rounded tlhe N. Foreland 20 miles from Deal, no doubt
according to orders. Mother, Maria, and the four little (ones sick and in
bed. 7 o'clock, off Dover, we had a most beautiful view of the cliffs, castle,
and town, running within two or three miles of the shore, the cliffs of
Calais indistinctly seen in the distance. We are now, being round the 6.
Foreland l , going in splendid 1 style, right before the wind with all our sails


set, including stud sails. The whole of our party are ill this evening, except
Uncle Henry and myseM.
29th. 8 o’clock in the morning off the Isle of Wight, the cliffs very
indistinctly visible, getting on famously, wind and tide in favor at the rate
of eight or nine knots an hour, we could none of us eat anything to-day
at dinner except uncle, who seems scarcely affected by the motion of the
ship, and eats all his meals well. Mother, Maria, and the five younger ones
very poorly indeed and in bed all day. The committee appointed by the
intermediate passengers to form the messes, anil to see to keeping all
things clean and in order between decks, etc., etc., met this morning—Father
is one —and I hope we shall soon get into more regularity about meals and
the distribution of rations than hitherto, the steward is very ill, wlhicn
makes matters worse, some of the passengers being obliged to do his work,
the cook holds up well. I have had a touch of sickness this afternoon,
indeed we are now all ill except Uncle. Reading the Scriptures', and prayers
begun to-day in the intermediate dining room, morning and evening, by the
Rev. Quaife.
30th. 8 o’clock, off the Eddystone, but not in sight, ship’s course
almost due west, wind due east. A most lovely morning. We are all
better and were up on deck, with the exception of Maria, who is much the
worst; by 8 o’clock mother has had breakfast on the poop, andi she, as well
as the children, is all the better for the fresh air. 9 o'clock, Maria has
just crawled up, but 'she cannot eat yet. Peggy is fairly well, and with
the men folks of our family made a good breakfast, and has kept it down
well, she is able to stay below and keep things In order. Uncle seems
quite as well as on shore. Busy this morning serving cut a week’s provi-
sions to each mess. Our rations are so much in quantity, we have some
difficulty in getting things to hold them all. Some of the passengers
having inadvertently left their scuppers open, a wave rising higher than
usual, came into two or three cabins, drenching the ibeddling, etlc., so the deck
is enlivened with sheets, counterpanes, and blankets flying in the wind.
2 o’clock, off the Lizard light. 7 o'clock, the wind has almost entirely
dropped, and we hardly move along on the water, hut the little air there
is, catching the topsails makes the vessel rock backwards and forwards very
uncomfortably, and has soon sent our invalids to bed. 9 o’clock, the wind has
increased a little, many of us have been trying to catch mackerel this
evening with baits of red rag, and raw beef, but without success). We
cannot have seen lesis than 20 sail to-day.
31st. 9 o’clock, quite clear of the land now, still almost becalmed,
the mate says we have not made more than 100 miles in the last 24 hours.
We must be content however that we are going on in the right way though
slowly, he has been three weeks doing what we have this time in three
days. It is curious to see the various passengers essaying to concoct
a pudding; ais we still have fresh beef, most are attempting a sort of
Yorkshire (on the Atlantic) pudding to bake under it, and a rare mess
some of them make in the business, we find the cook very civil, making
toast and boiling water for us when we want it. 2 o’clock, the captain
having trimmed the sails and braced the yards one way or another to
no purpose, declares there is no wind, and is gone to his dinner to wait
its pleasure. The ocean is as auiet and flat as a river, without so much as
a ripple, but the rooking of the ship from the same cause as last evening,
still keeps mother and Maria ill, They were up most of the morning but
have been obliged to go to bed again. Margaret is pretty well but cannot
eat, the rest have enjoyed a tolerable dinner. The intermediate dining


room has been cleared out to-day and the floor well scraped. The mate
is very obliging and attentive to any requests for his aid, and our captain,
instead of changing for the worse on board, is more agreeable than on
shore, when the perplexities of freighting the ship annoyed! him much. This
evening a swallow flew into our cabin much exhausted, we gave it some
fresh water and it flew off again after remaining about a quarter of an hour.
G mo. Ist. Still becalmed, the sea iis Mike agitated quicksilver and from
the ground swell there is a great deal of motion. The mate tells us we
have not come 20 miles in the last 24 hours. A few vessels have been in
sight to-day. The captain has hung up a paper requesting none of the
intermediate or steerage passengers to go on the quarter deck. The cabin
passengers having it all to themselves are killing their time Iby firing at a
board with candles 1 , at some dogfish which have appeared in sight, and at
corked bottles floating in the water. YVe are rather less quaking (?) to-day,
but some of our provisions are so bad that we can hardly eat them, the
biscuit is exceedingly hard and worse and universally complained of, and the
sugar is such filthy stuff that it spoils everything it is 1 put into, if in each
case they had provided us with one half of the quantity of superior quality it
would have given far greater satisfaction; 8 o’lclock, a slight breeze is
springing up.
6th mo., 2nd. First day. A pretty fair wind carrying us on four or
five knots an hour, but with vast swell, which has made several of us worse
again. Mother and Maria have not been out of bed to-day. We bad meeting
and reading in our cabin this afternoon accompanied by R. Marriage and
Joseph Barritt, the two Bveritts were too unwell to join us. Spoke a brig
this afternoon at some distance steering W. Wind iS.W. YVe cannot have
seen less than 25 sail to-day.
6th. mo., 3rd. Ship’s course S.YV. Iby S., wind W. Mother and Maria
are very poorly to-day, and the morning having been showery has prevented
them from getting on deck, the appetites of our family generally are return-
ing, but not being free from some feeling of sickness we have great difficulty
in eating our meals, as the articles pnovidied are so very inferior in quality.
The surgeon (a very active and agreeable young man) kindly parted with a
pretty large tin of mixed biscuits to us for mother’s use, which are a very
valuable acquisition, as in her present state it was (difficult for us to find
anything she could take. A young man named Thompson from London
having been very ill ever since w© left the Downs, and being quite alone
wretchedly low-spirited, has obtained the captain’s consent to re-ship him in
the first homeward bound vessel we fall in with that he may get back to
England. He has sent word to us that he shall be iglad to take a letter
for us. I intend therefore to send what I have here written by him if he
has the chance of returning, but as the notice may be very short you must
not be surprised at an abrupt conclusion. Lest I have not time to write
more before this letter is despatched, I may just remark now that on the
whole we are proceeding on our voyage favorably, if dear mother waisi noc
so unwell, as I am sorry to report she is (for I hope all the rest of us will
be convalescent in a few days) and as I fear she will be for a considerable
time, and if some of our pro visions .were less objectionable I think we
should not have much -cause to, tho’ of course we feel as all others
do the monotony of our situation and the discomfort necessarily incidental
to a sea voyage, in the foregoing particulars there is very little of any
interest, but as you desired to know whatever circumstances befel us
however trivial, I have endeavored to comply therewith. Father is pretty


well, but troubled with headache from the motion of the vessel, Uncle FI.
has not been affected at all.
6th mo., 4th. A pleasant day, wind S.W.
6th mo., sth. Off Cape Fdnisterre, Lat. 42deg. 53min., Long. lOdeg.
lomin. west. The wind still continuing directly in our teeth we are obliged
to tack every few hours, running N.W. and S.E., which is very disagreeable,
when on the starboard tack the vessel lies so much on her side that it is
almost impossible to stand, our scupper windows are frequently under water,
and the waves come bounding over the forecastle making the deck wet and
slippery. In the evening it blew a gale, we saw large shoals of porpoises
which seemed quite to enjoy the roughness of the sea, jumping quite out
of the water in their sport, but it affects those who have not yet got their
sea legs sadly.
6th mo., 6th. Wind still iS.W., pretty fine day but squally, the brig
which has kept company with us since we left the Channel lost her foretop
royal mast in the gale last evening.
6th mo., 7th and Bth. Wind as foul as it can be.
6th mo., 9th. Ist day. The wind having almost dropped we hope for
a change. It has been very warm to-day, but as there has been much less
motion, mother and Maria have improved wonderfully, we all sat down to
tea together to-day, which is ithe first meal we have been able to do so
since leaving the Downs, and while enjoying the preserved milk with our
tea which Uncle Beck so kindly provided for us, did not forget the dear
friends we had left an England, we had a meeting in our cabin in the morning
and reading in the evening.
6th mo., 10th. Our prognostication yesterday that the wind would
change in the night has been verified, a delightful breeze right in cur favor
has sprung up, which I trust will last some time. Off Lisbon this morning.
Mother continues nicely, all the rest are well. This evening was most
beautiful, I went forward between 9 and 10 o’clock, and slat across the
bowsprit, the sky was as starry as in England on a frosty clear night, the
air warm and pleasant, and the sea splendidly luminous, the foam as it
dashed forward on each side the bows of the ship as she ploughed! through
the waves looked like brightly illuminated smoke, sprinkled with sheets and
stars of light, the water when drawn up and agitated exhibited the same
appearance.
6th mo., 11th. Getting on well. This morning off Cape St. Vincent.
All well, as our appetites return we begin to lock forward to our meals with
greater pleasure, the biscuit, sugar, tea and coffee are bad, the rest is pretty
fair. We can make capital plum puddings, and bread every day, we procured
some leven to begin with from the cuddy cook, and leaving daily a piece of
dough to ferment, keep at up ourselves. We breakfast on oatmeal gruel in
which we sop the biscuit, and occasionally treat ourselves to a rasher of
bacon. Always enjoy the dinner, either of excellent salt pork, preserved
meat, beef, or a meat pie, potatoes or pease pudding, and plain suet, plum,
or baked or boiled rice pudding. At tea we have soft bread and butter,
and for supper soft bread and cheese, with beer or porter, and I can assure
anybody if we don’t get fat it won’t be for want of food, or an appetite to
enjoy it. 'The captain told father privately yesterday that he should give
us an opportunity of seeing Madeira as we passed, if he does so and I can
send this letter there I shall, if not I must wait till Thompson leaves us,
which there does not seem much probability of his being able to do until we
get about the Line.
6th. mo., 12th. Progressing with a steady breeze.


6th. mo,, 13th. About noon passed, the Madeira Isles, but without seeing
anything of them. We have seen many nautilus sailing along.
6th mo., 14th. The wind high (but variable, between N. and E. The
ship has given several such heavy lurches that threaten to set everything on
the move, and doing damage to many passengers’ crockery, we have
hitherto escaped well. At 12 olcloek this day we were in Lat. 30dieg. 32min.
N., Long. 19ldeg. 38min. W. A pair of turtle doves settled on the rigging
to-day, one was cruelly shot land dropped into the water.
6th. mo., 15th. Passed the Canaries, but did not see the Peak of
Teneriffe, being at 12 o'clock in Lat. 27deg. N., Long. 20deg. W.
6th mo., 16th. Ist day. We had our usual meeting and treading;
service was performed on deck, the Idaiy was beautifully fine, and as there
is as little work done on this day as possible, it had more the appearance
of a Sabbath than I expected to see on board ship, the same may be said of
this day last week. The Lascar sailors adorn themselves gorgeously in
their native costumes, looking very much like a troupe of mountebanks.
The thermometer this morning stood at 78deg. in our stern cabin, but only
at 71deg. in the poop cabins, so that they are cooler after all than we are.
I expected a very hot day to-day, but owing to the air being brisk and the
sky occasionally cloudy, it is not uncomfortably so.
6th. mo., 17th. This day we entered the Tropics, and as the sun is
almost as far north as it ever shines vertically' we are now passing under
it. We have seen both yesterday and to-day large and very numerous
shoals of flying-fish, they are much smaller than I had expected, not appear-
ing larger than sprats, or whitings, but they skim along the water very
rapidly, occasionally touching the crest of the waves for 20 or 30' yards, they
are as pretty a sight as we have seen yet. Although we roll about a great
deal we are all in good health, and quite free from sickness, neither father
or mother have much appetite, in other respects they are pretty well.
6th, mo., 18th. In Lat. 23deg. N. Thermometer 76deg. To-day the
sun at noon appeared exactly overhead, looking straight down upon us,
which is of course a novel sight to us, our shadow being just round our feet.
We have seen no vessels for several days mow, so that the cry of a sail In
sight, when such a sight happens will set us all agog to see it, as there is
very little to attract our notice beyond the bulwarks of the vessel save the
sea and sky, our whole attention is taken up by what passes on board, so
much so that the idea of our being afloat seems scarcely ever to intrude
itself; I fancy our life is most like that of the inmates of the King’s bench,
or Fleet prison, for prisoners we certainly are, though mot confined to our-
selves hut allowed to amuse ourselves with catering for our stomachs as
far as possible, and walking backwards and forwards or skipping in the
prison yard. Not that I find it more disagreeable than I expected, for now
we are all quite free from sickness, and not at all affected by the motion of
the vessel the time passes as pleasantly as I should think possible on
shipboard, at the same time I think the life of a sailor is a very monotonous
one, and one in which the pleasures and pursuits are very much restricted.
I thought even worse than that iof it the first week or ten (days, (but I know
the cause of that now. I should advise all landsmen when they intend
performing such a voyage as this, not only to make up their minds to a
fortnight’s sickness, but the effect of the sickness on the mind producing
miserable dullness and ennui, which causes things to wear a very so-so
aspect, therefore everyone should refrain from passing sentence on the
comforts of the ship, and of life at sea, till the health is restored. I like our
■captain better every day, he conducts himself remarkably well, and is on


very good terms with us. The quietness of the officers and crew is observed
by all, we hear no swearing, nor do the officers ever get out of temper; a
few nights ago owing to the light in the binnacle (over the compass)
suddenly going down so as to give a very indistinct light, the man at the
helm mistook his course and steered the vessel in such a way that the wind
caught the sails as though it would have torn them in pieces, and gave the
ship such a shake as made some people think we were going to turn over,
the (captain was on deck in an instant, and soon set everything to rights, but
he was so calm that the sailors afterwards expressed their astonishment at
it, saying that many would (have stormed and sworn like madmen at such
an occurrence.
6th mo., 19th. A flying fish came on hoard to-day and gave us an
opportunity of seeing one closely, it was about 8% inches long, which was
larger than they look on the water, the fins 61ns. long. The thermometer
this morning was at 77 deg., but hitherto the weather has not been uncom-
fortably warm, there is a delightful air, I have felt the heat more oppressive
in the 9th and 10th months in England. To-day Eat. 21deg. 30min. N., Long
25deg. W. Our water Is still very good, particularly when filtered, we have
lime juice served out to each passenger, which; when diluted with water and
sweetened, makes a most agreeable drink.
6th mo, 20th. Cloudy day. Therm. 79deg. Lat. 16deg. 55min. N.
Yesterday evening the sailors caught Edward and me half-way up the bow-
sprit, and, as usual when out of bounds for the first time, commenced tying
us to the rigging; but finding .it of no use to expostulate we soon came to
terms, paid our footing, and are now free to go anywhere about the ship.
Before this day week I hope we shall cross the Line.
6th mo., 21st. We had a good wind last night, which carried us along
well, but it has almost died away to-day. The captain expected it would,
as we are just on the verge of these Trade Winds. We get into the S.E.
Trades a few degrees south of the Line. Having very little to do except
to read all day, I employ my time now for two or three hours every morning
by writing for the Captain in his cabin, copying the Log, etc,; so that I have
an opportunity daily of seeing how we get on. The ship’s course is
marked down every day on the chart; and the Captain pointed out to me
to-day the course which he intends to take from this point to Adelaide.
We shall cross the Line as near 20deg. W. Long, as may be, and then,
winding round by the little island of Trinidad in Lat. 20deg. S., make for
the Cape of Good Hope and then across to Australia. This is the longest
day in England. It will not get dusk till a quarter-past 9 with you, while
here it is dusk at 7 o’clock. This day we were at 12 o’clock in Lat. 13deg.
Imin. N.; Long. 24deg. W. We passed the Island of Brava, the last of the
Cape de Verde’s, yesterday evening about 10 o’clock, distant 20 miles-
steering S.E. Ther. to-day, 78deg. in our cabin, 76%deg. in the Captain's
above.
6th mo., 22nd. Ther. 78deg. Cloudy and not too hot. Lat. lldeg. N.
6th mo., 23rd. First Day. Meeting in the morning and reading in
the evening as usual. A very fine day, hotter than wo have had it yet.
Ther. 80deg. in our cabin, 87deg. on deck, in the shade. It was, however,
very pleasant, there being a nice air. An awning is raised every day
between the main and mizzen masts, and, with the addition of a sail on
each side to-day, makes the deck liki a largo tent. Mother is very well
now, unless the motion of the ship is more than usually great—which is a
great comfort. The chief mate has lent her for the voyage a comfortable


aim-chair to sit in on deck; and the Captain invites her on to the poop
almost every evening to take the air, which is of great service to her,
enabling her to sleep much better this warm weather.
6th mo., 24th. This morning, when we got up, was pretty fine, though
rather cloudy, but about half-past 8 the sky ifiackened, it became dark and
close; the therm, stood at 82deg.; it was evident a heavy shower of rain
was coming on and in a very few minutes it did come in regular tropical
style—not in drops but bucketsful. About half the male passengers were
on deck, and finding we must either get wet through or go below, where,
from the hatches being closed, they were steaming away like a lot of pigs,
we all preferred the former alternative, and with two or three exceptions
took all our clothes off except trousers and shirt, and enjoyed for 1y 2 hours
a most delightful shower hath. There was plenty to do to keep us from
getting chilled in carrying the bucketsful of water as they were caught to
the large water casks, of which they nearly filled four, besides as much as
the passengers could convey away. We filled our cask, and ail our empty
cans. The waiter stood, or rather ran about the deck in a sheet Sin. or
4in. deep, in which we splashed about without snoes or stockings, like youog
ducks, throwing buckets of water at one another, etc., etc. I have not had
such a bit of fun for some time. About half-past 10 the rain abated, and
ceased about 1 o’clock, after which we had a bright afternoon.
6th mo., 25th. Wo had another fall of rain almost equal to yesterday’s,
but accompanied by a gale of wind. It occurred between 11 and 2 o’clock.
The wind was for about an hour very powerful, and the scene altogether
very exciting. The loud shouting of the captain and his mates giving their
orders to take in one sail after another until none was left unfurled but the
fore-sail; the roaring of the wind and rain, which came across the vessel
as if it was sent from the mouth of a cannon, and the raging of the sea, which
was changed in a few minutes from a surface as smooth as the Thames to
the semblance of a boiling cauldron, the spray from which, mingling with
the rain, prevented us from seeing more than 20 or 30 yards from the ship
—formed altogether a scene of great interest. When the wind subsided a
good deal more water was caught.
6th mo., 26th. Fine day, with occasional showers. In Lat. Bdeg.
16min.; Long. 19deg. 40min. We have not got on 3deg. of Lat. since the
22nd. Ther. 81deg. in our cabin. About 2 o’clock a shark was spied in our
wake. Preparations were soon made for his capture, by baiting a hook
with meat, which he very soon snapped at, but without being hooked. We
were afraid he would not venture again, but we under-estimated his courage,
for in a few minutes he was seen coming forward again, and a bone being
thrown to him he swallowed it like a dog, and again retired. But he did
not keep us waiting long, for in a few seconds he was seen making boldly
for the bait, which he this time laid hold of as if he meant to have it. The
hook instantly went through his upper lip, and with loud shouts he was hauled
out of the water, and suspended in mid-air until he should be dead, right
opposite our stern windows, from which most of those of our family who
were not on deck saw the sport, and from which Edward sketched him as
he hung. He was by no means large, not measuring more than sft. in
length. From his inside were taken the entrails of a sheep which were
thrown overboard five hours before he was caught, so that he had been
following us some time.
6th mo., 27th. Becalmed 7deg. from the Line. Made 8 miles of south-
ing in 24 hours.


6th mo., 28th. Still becalmed. Made 24 miles since yesterday. Heavy
rains both yesterday and to-day. Caught another shark, 7ft. long, and had
a good piece of his flesh baked with pepper and vinegar, and we all pro-
nounced it most excellent, except Father and Mother, who would not have
anything to do with it. I forgot to mentoin that on the 24th we saw a
ship 10 miles off. We hoisted our colors, but she took no notice of
them.
6th mo., 29th. Showery. Ther. 79deg. Standing still. Caught
another shark.
6th mo., 30th. First Day. Wind south-west, though running against
us. I hope we isihall get away from this part soon. Caught several
bonitas.
7th mo,, Ist. Still becalmed. Ther. 80deg. Caught more fish.
7th mo., 2nd. About midday a brisk wind sprang up from the S.E., on
which we are running SW, at noon to-day in Lat. sdeg. 54min. N. I trust
we are now in the S.E. Trades, and have done with the tropical calms. We
are only sdeg nearer the Line than we were 10 days ago.
7th mo., 3rd. The wind continues steady. In Lat. 4deg. 42min. N., having
run 150 miles the last 24 hours', 72 of them southward. A few fish are
speared daily, but no event worthy of record happens.
7th mo., 4th, Lat. 2deg. 56min, N, Fine weather.
7th mo., sth. 10 o’clock. The cry of a sail in sight has sent us all
below to find our letters in case there should be an opportunity oi sending
by her. We expected to cross the Line at 3 o'clock to-morrow morning,
the 6th of 7th mo., being six weeks from leaving the London Docks, 5 weeks
and 4 days after sailing from Gravesend. The shaving of those of the
crew who have not passed the Line before takes place to-morrow. The
passengers contribute each something in money, which is to be given to the
Captain to 'take care of for them, and is to be spent in clothing, not in
drink. If we are fortunate enough to be able to send letters by this ship
I must once more conclude this first part of my journal. Father and Mother
are both quite well to-day,, but Mother is always affected when the motion
of the ship is increased, and it is evident she will never make a good sailor.
Uncle Henry has had uninterrupted good health since he has been on board.
Maria and Margaret are well, as are Fred, Tom, Edward, Joe, and myself,
and the girls. The whole ship’s company and passengers are well except the
wife of one of the cabin passengers, who has been ill ever since we left the
River Thames. Our captain we like better and better every day. He is
getting quite intimate with us, and the mates are very civil. To sum up,
therefore, we are getting on very comfortably. Of food —the beef and
biscuit are not eatable, and consequently we never receive our allowance of
either. I don’t know whether the young man Thompson will go home now
or not. He changes his mind daily, but that is of no consequence. Father
has written to W. Manser, Uncle Beck, and Aunt E. Clark; Mother to Cousin
A. Merrill; Maria to Cousin Christiana Clark. Mother hopes Aunt Maria
will excuse her not writing to her, but she has so seldom been able to stay
below to write that she could not manage more than one letter.
7th mo., sth. About Lat. Ideg. N. This morning a ship hove in sight,
which proved to be bound from Batavia to Amsterdam. A boat was de-
spatched with the letter-bag containing six letters from us. I, to my great
regret, omitted to send my love to Uncle Charles Morris in the hurry at
last, as my letter was directed to Ampthill. I sent my love and that of our
family to those of our relations who reside at A., and Uncle C. was for the


moment forgotten. Father, we find, forgot to mention Uncle T. Morris. I
hope our relations who may not be named will excuse it, and believe that
it arises from no want of love on our part. In the afternoon a booby was
shot. It unfortunately fell into the water, but appeared a beautiful bird,
apparently sft, from the tip of one wing to that of the ether.
Lat. Ideg. 25min.; Long. 20deg. SOtmiin. Had damson pudding for
dinner —such a treat! This afternoon four sailors and boys belonging to
the crew, who had not crossed the Line before, were shaved, and buckets of
water were dealt about pretty liberally, but the captain would not allow the
usual mummery to take place. The parson got three or four bucketsfu),
which wetted him to the skin, greatly to his vexation and mortification.
About £8 has been subscribed by the passengers as a tribute to< Neptune,
which the captain is to keep till the sailors get ashore.
7th mo., 6th. At noon in Lat. Odeg. 9min. S.; Long. 20deg. 29min. We
crossed the Equator at 9 a.m., in Long. 20deg. 20min. W., exactly six weeks
after leaving the Shadwell Basin, and 39 days after sailing from Gravesend.
Ther. 79deg.; moist delightful weather. Our fresh water keeps remarkably
well, and when filtered is really very good. The filter answers adimrably,
taking away any unpleasant taint there may be lin the water.
7th mo., 7th. Yesterday afternoon spoke another Dutch skip. This
day being the first of the week, we had Meeting and reading as usual. At
12 o’clock in Lat. 2deg. 23min. S. Therm. 80deg. Splendid day. See
abundance of flying fish daily.
7th mo., Bth. Lat. at noon 4deg. 37min. S. Therm. 81deg. Two sails
are in sight, outward bound, both of which we are rapidly gaining upon. I
believe I am correct lin saying that we have passed every vessel going the
same course that we have come in sigh; o’ yet.
7th mo., 9th. Lat. 6deg. 45min. S. Therm. 80deg. Showery.
7th mo., 10th. Lat. 9deg. 16min. S.; Long. 26deg. W. Therm. 80deg.
Weather fine.
7th mo., 11th. Lat. lldeg. 57min. Therm. 79deg. Fine. These last
three days we have got on gloriously, but very quietly.
7th mo., 12th. Lat. 14deg. 16min. S. Therm. 76deg. Fine.
7th mo., 13th. Lat. 15deg. 53min. A whale has been seen both to-day
and yesterday, but not distinctly. A specimen of the flying-fish was taken
on board this morning, measuring 1114 in. in length; Ift. iy 2 m. from the tip
of one flying fin to the other. Each fin measured 614 in. This is the
largest I have iseen.
7th mo., 14th. Lat. 17deg. 2min. S. Saw a brig this evening ahead.
We see every night the Southern Cross constellation, but are quite disap-
pointed as to its grandeur. It consists merely of four stars, by no menus
as bright as many around them. King Charles’ WaJin, without the horses,
is just as splendid; and it does not bear to be mentioned with Orion —that
is my opinion.
7th mo., 15th. Lat. 18deg. 18min. S. Therm. 78deg. The American brig
still in company.
7th mo., 16th. The sea very calm, with scarcely a breath of wind. Lat.
18deg. 57min. We have lost the S.E. trades.
7th mo., 17th. Lat. 19deg. Slmin.; Long. 32deg. 22min. Ther. 76deg.
We saw a whale to-day spouting away within rifle shot of the ship. Lost
the American brig.
7th mo., 18th. Ther. 73deg. Lat. 2(>deg. 20min.; Long. 30deg. 34min.
Sun sets at 6 o’clock. We have seen several whales to-day.


7th. mo., 19th. Ther. 73deg. Lat. 21-cleg. 42min. S. During yesterday
and to-day there has been a sensible change in the weather. It is much
cooler and very squally, giving us a foretaste of what we are to have round
the Cape. The crew have been employed changing our fine weather sails
for stronger ones. The fresh water is very good. The only fault to find
with it is a little smell when first drawn out of the hold, which is. removed
by filtering. I can drink it with pleasure, and without any jam or jelly.
As I have said before that the salt beef is not eatable, it is hut fair to
contradict it now that, driven by necessity (the mother of inventions), we
have discovered how to cook and prepare it. We first soak it in two salt
waters; then digest it in water in the oven (having sliced the joint up), and
lastly make it into a sort of pie, with slices of pork, sliced potatoes, and
batter poured over the whole. Well peppered, it is a savory dish, and well
relished at our table. Such a pie as this, and a large rice pudding with
raisins in it, and wine sauce, serves for a makeshift on beef days. Are
we not in danger of starving? Oh! the miseries of ship fare!
7th mo., 20th. Lat. 23deg. 30min. We passed the Trinidad Isles on
the 18th without seeing them. This morning we passed the Tropic Capri-
corn, eight weeks from London; 53 days from Gravesend. We have seen
many whale-birds, and one or two Cape pigeons. The weather has been
very rough to-day; a gale from the S.E. blowing steadily, with heavy rain—
the sea running higher than we have seen it yet. As dusk came on the
wind and rolling of the sea increased. During the whole day the waves
had broken over the vessel, the forecastle was covered with water at every
pitch, the main deck was constantly wet, and occasionally a wave came quite
over the poop. About 9 o’clock p.m. we were sitting on the quarter-deck,
and the whole scene was delightful. Our good ship lay every now and
then down on her side. I should think the deck was at an angle of 65deg.
The captain, as he stood by the binnacle, in maintaining his perpendicular,
frequently leaned with one hand upon the deck. Such was the strain upon
the vessel, for we were going along at between eight and nine knots an
hour, that it was necessary during the whole of the night to pump sh ! p
every two hours. A gale of this sort is the most agreeable style of sailing.
A calm is wretched; a steady run is monotonous; but a gale is really good
fun. There is so much to do with the ropes, and so much rolling about
among the live and dead stock, as keep us all alive. And as for danger, I
don’t hear the children mention such a thing.
7th mo., 21st. First day. We have had a rough night, as was to be
expected. I slept till midnight, and was then awoke by the combination
of noises that existed. On crawling to the door of our cabin to look out,
I was just in time to see three or four waves, one after another, burst down
the hatchway, and, by the number of passengers who were engaged wirh
mops and pails, I guessed they were not the first. I found this morning
that the hatches had been taken partly off to allow a little fresh air to get
below, and when they wanted covering again the passengers could make no
one hear, until the water was deep enough in some of the midship berths to
float the boots and shoes. In the midst of all this tumult the number of
passengers was increased by the birth of a little boy, the son of the person
who was arrested at Gravesend. This has been another stormy day; wet
and windy. We have shipped two or three iseas in at our stern windows;
but are all pretty well. Even Mother stands it uncommonly well. At
noon we were in Lat. 26deg. 20min. S.; Long. 32deg. Ther. 74deg. We
were under the necessity of giving up our usual Meeting this morning:
neither could service be performed on deck.


7th mo., 22nd. Lat. 28deg. 36min.; Long. 30deg. 54min. W. Ther.
72deg. Wind moderate.
7th mo., 23rd. Lat. 30deg. 15min. S.; Long. 28deg. 56min. W. Fine.
7th mo., 24th. Long. 25deg. 30min. W. Ther. 66deg. Feeling very
cold. The south wind is keen.
7th mo., 25th. Lon. 21deg. 26min. W. Cold.
7th mo., 26th. Long. 19deg. 30min.
7th mo., 27th. Quite becalmed again, which I had hoped was not to
fall to our lot any more. We see many sea fowl daily. To-day an albatross
(said to be so) visited us—-apparently 7ft. across. Passed a Danish brig,
homeward bound.
7th mo., 218th. First day. We held our usual Meeting at half-past 10
a.m.; and reading at 6 p.m. At noon in Lat. 30deg. 2min. S.; Long. 16deg.
7min. W. This morning Mrs. Morton, who, as I believe I mentioned before,
was taken ill the first day of our sailing, and who has been gradually
sinking awaiy—being unable to retain sufficient food on her stomach to sus-
tain life —died. It is a great stroke to her husband. He was very desirous
to set his wife on shore at Rio, but Captain Munro did not consider himself,
of course, authorised to put in, having no other ground for doing so. It is
very unfortunate that they came in a vessel that did not touch anywhere.
Mr. Morton very much wished the remains to be buried at the Cape, but as
that also is impracticable they are to be committed to the deep on third
day. They are cabin passengers. He has been brought up a sailor, and had
crossed the Line 30 times before, but is now going out to settle in South
Australia. They were married a few months before leaving England.
7th mo., 29th. Wind light: slow sailing. We see a great many birds
—albatrosses. Cape pigeons, Cape hens, etc., but we do not succeed in.
catching them.
7th mo., 30th. Showery; almost calm. We came to the end of our
potatoes to-day, which have lasted much longer than I expected. It was
such a bad time of year to take them on board. It is about full moon
now, and we have beautiful evenings, both moonlight and starry; but the
Southern Cross is still at zero with us all. The bodiyi of Mrs. Morton was
consigned to the deep at 5 p.m. The ceremony was conducted with great
decorum. The chief mourner was much to be felt for —without one relative
or old friend to stand by him on the trying occasion. It seems much more
trying to witness the turning adrift of a corpse to float about the restless
ocean than committing it to a quiet grave.
7th mo., 31st. Lat. 32deg. 51min. S.; Long. lOdeg. 30min. W. Wind
light and cool.
Bth mo., Ist. Fine breeze. Nice bracing weather.
Bth mo., 2nd. Lat 33deg. 52min. S.; Long. 6deg. 50min. Ther. 65deg.
Bth mo., 3rd. Both yesterday and to-day we have had most beautiful
weather and very light winds, which are equally unusual in these latitudes.
Nothing but sunshine from morning till night, and the air is so fresh that
it reminds me of the fine days that are frequently enjoyed in October in
England. We see albatrosses of the brown species in abundance, but we
have not yet seen the Wandering Albatross. The Cape hen, or Nelly, is
frequent in its visits, and Cape pigeons, in considerable numbers, folio*
the ship from sunrise to sunset. We have altogether lost the flying fish,
which appear confined to the Tropics, or nearly so; but a few days since I
saw three porpoises, none of which I saw in the Tropics.
Bth mo., 4th. First day. A brisk wind, very favorable for us, sprung


up yesterday evening, which is pushing us along seven or eight knots an
hour. Lat at noon, 35deg. llmin. S.; Long. 3deg. W. So we are now in the
latitude of Adelaide and longitude of England. To-morrow we shall pro-
bab’y dine at the same time with you at Ampthill. The day is delightful
as usual. We have had Meeting and reading. I have not for some time
reported the health of our family. lam happy to say the reason has been
beca/use we have all been well. At the present time Mother is as well as
when she was at Ampthill. She has become quite a good sailor. Father
and the rest are well. Uncle Henry has had a cold the last two or three
days, but he has all along enjoiyied good health.
Bth mo., sth. Lat. 36deg. 37min. S.; Long. Odeg. 9min. E. (?)*. Two
large white wandering albatrosses visited us to-day—loft. across.
Bth mo., 6th. Lat. 37deg. 30min. S.; Long. 3deg. 4min. E. (?)f.
Bth mo., 7th. Long. 7deg. 12min. E. A Cape pigeon was caught yester-
day by one of the passengers, which measured 14in. long —stretch of wing,
2ft. 9in.
Bth mo., Bth. Bitter cold to-day, the wind being very strong from the
south. The thermometer on deck at 48deg.; with a long swell. Hundreds
of Cape pigeons, Nellies, and other birds are in sight, their numbers
increasing as we near the Cape.
Bth mo., 9th. The wind last night chopped round to the east, blowing
right in our teeth. We meet with such a succession of light and foul winds
that it is plain our voyage will be by no means a short one.
Bth mo., 10th. Lat. 37deg. smin. S.; Long. 13deg. 56min. Wind light,
but still east. The day fine and warm.
Bth mo., 11th. Long. 16deg. 39min. E. Before noon to-morrow we
shall pass the Cape. Though it is the latter part of winter in these lati-
tudes, this day (First day) has been so very fine and warm that even Mother
has been reading on deck most of the afternoon. This morning we saw an
immense flight of sand-birds. There must have been some thousands. I
never before saw so many birds together in myi life. Albatrosses and Cape
hens and pigeons in plenty. '
Bth mo., 12th. About 2 o’clock this morning we were off the Cape of
Good Hope, 76 days from Gravesend. Weather fine and wind fair. We
have got through a good part of the voyage now, without anything of a
storm, never having had the thermometer above 83deg. or lower than 48deg.;
and with plenty of good fresh water and a tolerable stock of provisions there
is nothing in a sea voyage to be minded but the tedium of imprisonment.
At noon Lat. 38deg, 33min. S.; Long. 20deg. 22min. E. We have run 226
miles in the last 24 hours. All well. A birth in the steerage this
morning.
Bth. mo., 13th. —Wind moderately brisk, Lat. 38deg, 44min. S., Lon.
23deg. 55min.
Bth mo., 14th, - A lovely day. Thermometer in our cabin with doors
and windows open, 68deg., quite hot in the sun. But the worst of this
fine weather is that the winds are light and variable, instead of the boisterous
blowing weather expected at the Cape which would carry us on our way
* There is some mistake here in the Longitude, as it is written in the copy of the Journal
from which this is taken. It reads “59deg. E.,” which is, of course, impossible. It may be
that Odeg. 9min. was the correct reckoning.—J.C.
t Here again there is a mistake in the Long. The copyist of the original Journal
has written 30deg. 4min. E- I have supposed 3deg. 4min. may have been intended, from
comparison with the figures for other days.—J.C.


in good style, The wind is light and balmy, and changes daily. Lat.
38deg. 42min. S., Lon. 27deg. 54min.
Bth mo., 15th. Soon after writing my remarks yesterday the wind
increased, and having a strong current in our favor, we have (been going
at a tremendous rate. At noon to-day our Long, was 34dog. BBmin., Lat.
39deg. 36min. —having made the astonishing rum of 400 milelsi in 24 hours —
upwards of 16% knots an hour. The weather fine and warm. Altogether
our run round the Cape has been wonderful. Captain Mumro says if he
were to tell many captains that he rounded the Cape without reefing a sail,
which we have done, they would not believe him. The Hacks were
round here three months later, in the beginning of summer, yet they com-
plained of chilblains, and longed for Gloucester boots. Chilblains are as
much out of the question with us as snow in harvest. Thermometer 67ideg.
Yet it is not often that ships go so far south as we are now. The wind
being from the north accounts for the warmth we enjoy, together with the
bright sunshine. Thomas and Edward have both procured specimens of
the Cape pigeon, which are skinned and preserved.
Bth. mo., 16th, 17th, 18th. Cloudy, mild weather.
Bth. mo., 19th. Lon. 44deg. E. Wind east. Patience is a virtue'
A four months’ voyage is a good exercise of it. I amuse myself daily by
writing for Captain Munro. We are on such very good terms with him, and
he is so fond of the children that he comes down now into our cabin almost
every evening to play at dominoes, etc., with them, and it is quite amusing
to hear and see how heartily he enjoys the games. He sends out every
day a large plateful of fruit pie and pudding for the children, and R.A., H.S.,
and Elizabeth take tea with him at the cuddy table every afternoon, and this
they have done for the last six weeks, besides eating some jars of preserved
ginger, orange marmalade, etc., for him. We have found one of the cabin
passengers, a young man, a farmer, from Cambridge, a very agreeable fellow,
and as he is very fond of talking about farming matters Fred and I often
spend an evening with him in his cabin, and always reckon on an hour’s
walk in the course of the day. So the time wiles away.
Bth. mo., 20th., 21ist. Fine dry weather, but the wind being eastward
prevents our getting on in even course.
Bth. mo., 22nd. Wind changed to iS.W., and the barometer falling nearly
an inch, indicates a heavy gale. Another birth on board.
Bth. mo., 23rd. The wind was so high last night 'that we carried
only three sails, reefed up. In our cabin, and below generally, there was
more noise than before. Hardly any one slept during the night. It
seemed impossible to Lalsh things tight . Ouir water cans turned upside down,
emptying their contents on the deck, and some things were broken. Tne
following day two of the hatchways were .battened down for almost the
first time, for the waves rolled over our high bulwarks. The swell from the
S.W. is so great that the captain is convinced the wind was much stronger
than we had it, farther south.
Btlh. mo., 24tih. The 9.W. wind died away, aN. wind succeeding it.
Bth. mo., 25th. First day. Wind west. Making 7% knots. Rolling
heavily from side to side. We are obliged to have our stern dead lights
up, as the water comes in if they are open. The things in the lockers have
been pretty well soaked both to-day and yesterday. Lon. 59deg. 12min. E.,
Lat. 41 deg. smin. S. Fine overhead. Sea very fine.
26th. A lovely day, and a fine breeze.
27th. At daybreak a ship discerned, about five miles behind. It has
furnished matter for conversation all day, numberless being the speculations


as to its name, etc.; some affirming it is the “Dumfries,” which has caught
us up, and others that it is the “Recovery,” which they eay must have put
in at the Cape. The most feasible guess is that it is the “Duncan,” for
Sydney, which lay off Gravesend with us. But up to this hour —3 p.m.—it
has refused to answer our signals, though we shortened sail for two hours
to allow it to near us. It is now about two miles behind. At noon —
Long. 67deg. Imin., Lat. 39deg. 41min. S. About 4 o’clock p.m. the ship
came up with us, at about a quarter of a mile distance, and we immediately
commenced a most amusing conversation by signals. The other captain
however plainly was not used to signals., for he made two or three most
laughable blunders. To the question, “How many days have you been out?"
he answered, “I am going to anchor.” To another question he answereJ
“She is ahead,” and said Ms name was the ' Legal Tender.” After playing
the game of cross questions and crooked answers for half an hour he got
tired of it, and ran up almost within stone’s throw of us; and then we
learned by the trumpet that the name was the “Lascar,” —bound to Batavia,
from Greenock —out 68 days. We have been out 92. His Lon. he gave as
65deg.—ours 67deg. It was a beautiful ship, apparently quite new; much
lighter of course than ours, and carrying more sail. I cannot describe to
you the pleasure the near view of the faces of other men afforded us. We
gave them three hearty cheers, which were returned with merry shouts from
our countrymen. The captain seemed quite a young man, and neither he
nor his mates were to be distinguished from the men. We ran alongside
till near dusk, when, making one beautiful sweep almost close to us. he ran
off to leeward, dropping astern, and then skimmed along, keeping the ship
close to the wipd, until he had got to windward of us. Sailing faster than
we do, he will soon get ahead. Never was there a finer opportunity of
admiring the full sailing of a beautiful vessel. There is a splendid breeze.
Bth mo., 28th and 29th. A strong westerly wind, which increased last
night to a gale. The vessel shipped so much water that the hatches were
fastened down. This morning a very heavy sea running, the ship rolled till
the jolly-boat hanging over the starboard quarter dipped into the sea. Lon.
75deg. 32min, E.
Bth. mo., 30th. Squally, with rain. Passed, at 8 a.m. 'between
the Islands of St. Paul’s and Amsterdam. The former island, distant about
10 miles, seen tolerably plain, affording a bigh rocky outline. Out from
Gravesend 95 days. Rolling abominably all to-day. No sail set, but close
reefed topsails and foresail. Our seeing i9t. Paul’s exactly when the captain
predicted shows the correctness of his reckoning. Unless the captain of the
‘ Lascar” keeps better reckoning be will jam his toes against a rock some
day. Yesterday W, Everett caught a Nelly which measured 3ft. in length,
and 6ft. 2in. in extent of wing. They do not lock near so large at a distance.
The albatrosses which we see constantly sailing about cannot measure less
than 12 or 14 feet across. Excuse bad writing. Our dead lights are put up
close, and the scuttle lights go under water with every roll of the vessel
Bth. mo., 31st. Lon. 82deg. 12min. E., Lat. 36deg, 16min.
9th. mo., Ist. Both this day and yesterday the wind has been high and
boisterous, so that we have not been able to carry more than three sails:
and the water breaking constantly over the ship, we have had the hatches
closed the last three or four days, giving us a taste of rough weather with
which wo are quite satisfied.
9th. mo., 2nd. Weather quite stormy. Wind blowing a gale from the
S.W. Battened down all day, the only exit being through the steerage. The
sea has been breaking over the ship, 'both fore and aft all day, and in spite of


the hatches gets below deck in such quantity that it is ankle deep in the
intermediate berths and public space. I should advise no one to take a
berth near midships. The “Anna Robertson” is I believe a thoroughly sea-
worthy vessel, but her main deck is so leaky that all those cabins which are
not protected by the poop are annoyed by water getting through! This
has been the case for the last four or five weeks. Some of the passengers’
beds are literally rotting under them. Our cabin being under the poop, and
higher than the cabins in the midship, is generally dry; but not so with the
rest. The Everetts (whose cabin is next to ours), carried up seven buckets
full of water in one day, which they had baled up from the floor. Yet the
passengers are very healthy. The sea broke over with such violence to-day
that it burst in the cuddy doors, and rushing in rolled backwards and
forwards 10 or 12 inches deep under the chairs and tables. Some of the
passengers were alarmed, and thought we were going to the bottom. The
rolling was tremendous (for even the sailors said 1 there was a very great sei
on), and the blows which the waves struck the ship sounded as though she
had struck upon a rock, and made the old girl quiver from head to foot. At
night meteorite lights were seen on the masts and rigging.
9th. mo., 3rd. Fine weather. Lon. 92deg. 51min. E., Lat. 37deg. 19min.
S. The gale has left an immense swell, but is gradually subsiding.
9th mo., 4th. Wind fair and moderate.
9th. mo., sth. Fine, steady, favorable breeze. This day we made out
a list of the rations which have not been drawn, and find there is owing to
us, and which we shall take ashore- —scwt. of biscuit (of bean meal and bone
dust —very useful for pigs); a small cask of good split peas; a cask of
oatmeal; 31bs. of tea, 121-bs. of coffee, 161bs. of cocoa, besides butter, sugar,
etc. There will be five bags of biscuit (Itawt. each), for all our biscuit has
been from bags, though Brown assured us it was in casks before we sailed.
The Cape pigeons have left us, except one or two stragglers. They disap-
peared about the meridian of 90deg. Bast of Greenwich. We first saw them
about 30deg. W. Lon. These pretty -birds therefore enliven the ocean for
120 deg., or reckoning 50 miles as- the average of a degree in this parallel, they
extend over a space of 6000 miles. We see more white albatrosses now than
ever, and many other birds of which we know not the names. I quite forgot
to bring a synopsis.
9th. mo., 6th. Getting on famously to the place where we would be.
9tih, mo., 7th. Wind fair.
9th. mo., Bth. Lon. 112de,g. 8., Lat. 39deg. 30min. S. Unfortunately
just a© we reach the land of Australia the wind has sprung up in the ea-sr,
right ahead: and, more discouraging still, has set in with a new moon, thus
stopping all our calculations, for everyone had settled in his own mind the
day that we were to drop our anchor in Holdfast Bay. Some had even calcu-
late the hours. It would be vain for me to attempt to describe how anxiously
we watch every variation of the wind. Such a complete dependence on the
most unstable element is very unpleasant. I shall he glad when we are
rather less dependent on it.
9th. mo., 9th. Wind east; blowing softly.
9th. mo., 10t(h and 11th. Wind east; almost calm.
9th mo., 12th. A wind from the west sprung up yesterday; so now we
are off again. I hope another week will find ns in Adelaide. The last two
or three days have been beautifully fine. Saw a large sperm whale to-day
very near the ship.
9th. mo., 13th and 14th. Lovely weather; a sample of Australian spring.
We all hope to see Holdfast Bay on 4th day next, Preparations are going


on in all directions for landing. We saw to-day a large shoal of porpoise?,
paler in color than those in the Atlantic. Albatrosses are in abundance, and
Cape pigeons have made their appearance again in as great numbers as ever.
9th mo., 15th. First day. The wind dropped almost to a calm; but the
weather is very fine. Six Cape geese were caught to-day.
9th. mo., 16th. Wind N.N.E. Another Cape goose caught. Edward
has stuffed one for himself. It measures 7ft. 3in. from the tip of one wing
to the tip of the other. Lon. 128 deg. 20min. E., Lat. 37deg. 24min. S. We
shall not anchor now before sth day. The sailors got the anchor chains up
to-day.
9th. mo., 17th and 18th. Wind variable. Very fine days, with rain at
night. Lon. 133 deg. 7min.
9th. mo., 19th. All up betimes to look out for land, though Kangaroo
Island is not likely to be seen before 10 a.m. At a quarter past 10, as the
captain prophesied, land was seen in the direction of east by north, our
course being east half north. We were at first puzzled to know what land it
was, as it was expected Kangaroo Island lay S.W. of us. As we got nearer,
however, and the land became more distinct, it was found to be Cape Bed Out,
the southern point of the island. We have therefore been running due
north, and are now, whilst I am writing, just doubling Cape Borda, the
north-west headland. We have a famous breeze from the west, which, if ir
lasts 20 hours longer, may leave us quietly at anchor. The western coast is
very beautiful —high cliffs, scored with deep gullies and ravines, and some of
them as white as the cliffs of Dover. The land beyond the cliffs is high,
Mount 'Torrens 3 being visible in the background. A good run in the after
noon carried us along the north coast of the island, which is very precipitous.
9th. mo., 20th. Up at 5 o’clock to see the first view of South Australia.
We were in Aldinga Bay—the land rising gradually from the sea, and looking
green and fertile, and finely timbered. It was not until 3 p.m. that we came
to anchor in Holdfast Bay, into which we were guided by the flagstaff at
Glenelg. We found the “Recovery” lying there, having only arrived the
previous afternoon.
On 7th day morning, the 21st of 9th mo., Father, Fred, and myself
landed at Glenelg. The landing is awkward on account of the surf. The
sailors had to carry us as much as 30 or 40 yards through the water; but
the sand is very firm and dry when you reach the margin of the water.
We looked about the place a little while, and then walked off to Adelaide.
Glenelg is merely a signal station. There are not more than a dozen houses
and huts, including a public hotel where gin is sold at 6d. a glass. The
road to Adelaide is across a perfectly level country, and, with an exception in
one or two places, where brooks cross it, is excellent. The ground is
covered with a great variety of pretty flowers, but nothing at all splendid.
The soil is light, sandy, and of a reddish white color. It is sprinkled over
pretty thickly with trees, but they are all very small, and contain a great
deal of dead wood. They appear cut by exposure to westerly winds.
Emigration Square is the first part of the town seen from the Glenelg road.
It consists of about 40 cottages in which the free emigrants are acoomm >
dated for a time, and is about a five minutes’ walk from Adelaide. We
called and left letters with J. B. Hack, and afterwards with Rachel Deane-
her husband being from home' —with whom we took dinner. She said they
were very well satisfied with having come, and liked the country much
After dinner we called at Plaxman and Rowland’s (Angas and Miller’s
* This must have been Cape Torrens (near Cape Borda), behind which there are high hills.
There is no Mount Torrens marked on any map of the Island I have seen.—J.C.


partners), and found that Rowland had, in obedience to A. and M.’s instruc-
tions, and very promptly too, hired us a house, which we looked at. It is
in Halifax street, near Hurtle Square—a good, five-roomed (brick house, with
cellar and loft; well papered and painted!; with a large yard containing a
detached kitchen, a pig-sty, and hen house; likewise a garden with very little
in it —and all well fenced in with palings. In the afternoon we walked back
to Glenelg with several others of the passengers who landed: in the morning.
We did not reach the beach until 6 o'clock, when it was too dark to see a
signal at the ship, and the man at the station had no blue lights. We found
the crew of a whale boat, who offered to take us at 10/ a head, but that being
exorbitant even at colonial prices (there being seven of us) we beat them
down to 5/; but as all would not pay so much, and they refused to take a
part, we were 'Obliged, for there were no beds to be got in the place, to be
content with a bush fire. Father, being afraid of the night air, sat all night
on :a bench in the one room of the public house —the rest lay on the gras,
round the fire. As we none of us had great-coats it was very cold on that
side away from the fire, and a very heavy dew fell. However, we took no
harm, and got on board by half-past -8 next morning. They told us before
we started that we should feel so strange at getting on solid ground again
that we should not be able to walk steadily, and that our legs would ache
before we got half a mile; but it is all stuff. There was nothing strange
about it. If my attention had not been drawn to it by others I should have
forgotten that I had not been on land the day before; and not only Preid and
myself, but father, actually walked 16 or 17 miles, and we all thought we
never were less tired.
On First-day we moved round to the head of the creek preparatory to
unloading at the port, but as our ship draws too much water to allow of her
going over the bar until she was lightened the captain sent nearly all the
passengers on shore on Fourth day, including all our family except myself.
I stayed to get ashore the drawers and other things in our cabin which were
left after the first trip. This was not accomplished until Sixth day, when
they and myself were taken up* the creek in a lighter. It was 12 miles
from where the ship lay to the port, and we did not get to the port till
the tide had fallen so low as to prevent our landing until morning. Sp here
was another cold night to pass on the goods on board the lighter. But
Captain Munro, who was with us, having plenty of ham sandwiches, etc.,
kept things pretty comfortable. I landed early and walked to town to
breakfast. We have appointed an agent at the port to land and warehouse
our goods, which is the only way to have them taken care of. The creek is
beautiful, but the port is a wretched place. They are beginning a new one,
a mile or so lower down, which will I doubt not be more worthy of the
Colony.
As provisions are enormously (dear we set to work to get into the country
as soon as possible, which we find must be a long way from town. Fred
and Mr. Hallack (the young gent from Cambridge, before mentioned) hired
horses and went to the southward to look at Uncle R.L. and E. Beck’s
land. They found some very fine land, particularly in Hurtle Vale, about 13
miles off, and on the Onkaparinga River, about 22 miles; but all the good
land is taken and the Becks’ land is all in sections a long way apart. Con-
sulting with J. B. Hack about this matter he advised us to go and look at
land in Mount Barker, up by their domain which is in a special survey now
being taken, and which contains so much good land that a great deal will be
* This reads “ down the Creek ” in the copy of the Journal from which this is taken, but
the course was certainly “up ” from the sea to the Port. —J.C.


left for public competition. This we determined' at once to do, and being
fortunate enough to borrow horses, Fred, Hallack, aniii I went by Stephen
Hack’s invitation, and under his guidance, up to their farm.
On 4th day, the 2nd of 10th mo., we started, accompanied by a young
man named Lines, who rents a farm at 12/ per acre under them, and which
we are in treaty for if we can get our own land by it. The ride is beautiful.
About three miles from Adelaide you reach the foot of what may be called
the pass of Mount Lofty. You first ascend the “big hill,” a monstrous
steep place, and which few horses will draw up, and after that ride up and
down hill through far finer mountain and forest scenery than I ever saw
before. The hills are crowned for 14 miles with a magnificent forest of
stringy bark and white gum trees. We found the land rich and beautiful
beyond description. We left the plains round Adelaide dry and dusty, and
found this land so wet that in the middle of the valley the horses plunged
half way up their legs in the rich black soil. We have since agreed to take
Lines’s farm. It is in a valley, S. Hack says 1800 feet above the level of
the sea. The climate is more temperate, and the seasons are at least six
weeks later than at Adelaide. At the latter place nothing will grow except
during the four months of winter, whereas at Mt. Barker things grow
luxuriously [sic] during the six months of summer, but not in winter, just
as in England, and they have over the mountains a vast deal more rain.
Our valley is covered with the most beautiful grass, and is now as yellow
with buttercups as any English meadow I ever saw. Down the middle is
a chain of water holes, some of them large and very deep, and they are now
connected by a beautiful stream which runs great part of the year. It
is finely timbered, but not too thickly, and the hills on each side are crowned
with wood. The whole scene is equal to the finest and richest English
park I know. There are on the farm two cottages, a stable, dairy, double
stockyard with calf pens and milking bails, pigsty, poultry-house, dog kennels,
pigeon house, a large garden fenced in, and three acres of land ploughed
up, and which we are going to plant with potatoes directly. The farm
is about 27 or 28 miles fromj Adelaide, and 1 V 2 miles from S. Hack’s. J. B.
Hack and his family are coming up there this summer, as Adelaide is
unbearable as a place to live in, in hot weather. The dust already begins
to blow in such clouds as I can only suppose to be equalled in the Great
Desert. J. 8., and S. Hack have promised, if we cannot get land out of
MacFarlane’s survey, near that we rent of them, to let us have two sections
out of their own survey. We are to pay 12/ per acre for the 80 acres we
rent of them, and have in addition the very valuable rignt of run for 100
head of cattle on their territory. J. B. and S. Hack have upwards of 2000
head of cattle, besides horses in number about 50, and working bullocks.
Their survey is for 15,000 acres of which they will take care to buy all the
good land in the valleys and by that means secure the whole tract for
£4OOO or £5OOO. People are not very particular what sort of houses they
live in in the bush. S. Hack has just finished one in which he now lives.
It is built of slabs of wood set upright, but so rudely put together that you
may almost get your hand between each slab, which makes the house nice
and airy.
Sixth day afternoon, 10th mo., 18th. We have made one journey with
our cart and four bullocks up to Mount Barker. At the big hill we had
to unload and carry up half the load, and were two hours getting up. A
I This is an over-estimate of the distance. By the present road, through the Township of
Mount Barker, the distance from Adelaide is not more than 24 miles, and a more direct route
may have been taken at that time.—J.C.


few miles further on the cart rolled right aver. We got about 11 miles, to a
roadside inn the first day. The second day we started at 8, and reached
Hack's station at 9 o’clock, having done about 14 miles in 13 hours, with
only one more upset. In nine instances during this day we had to fasten
trees behind the cart on going down hill to prevent it from tumbling over the
bullocks’ backs; and in many instances to ford through rivers and creeks
when the bullocks were up to their bellies in mud and water. We arrived
at our journey’s end about 11 o’clock a.m. of the third day. Fred and I
came back the next day, having left father, Tom, Peggy, and Rachel Ann up
there. Finding it impossible for us to draw up our goods, the Hawks have
offered the use of their teams and drays, and I hope next week all our family
will be up there. The man who is leaving the farm wishes us to take his
11 cows, from which be makes 401bs. of butter per week, at £1 per week, and
S. Hack will let us have as many heifers as we like for the trouble of
breaking them in to milk. Butter is worth now, wholesale, about 2/6 per
lb., potatoes £25 per ton, maize 10/ per bushel.
We are all quite well, and all desire our dear love to grandfather,
uncles, aunts, cousins, and friends in England. The “Dumfries” arrived
three weeks after us. lam sorry to hear so poor an account of J. Bennell.
Trusting this will reach you all well and happy, I remain dear uncle.
Thy affectionate nephew,
WILLIAM MAY.
Put into the Adelaide Post Office 10th mo., 20th, 1839.
A LETTER FROM MARIA MAY, OF FAIRFIELD FARM, NEAR MOUNT
BARKER, SOUTH AUSTRALIA, TO MARIA MORRIS, OP AMPTHILL.
BEDFORDSHIRE, ENGLAND.
Fairfield Farm, 12th mo., 29th, 1839.
My Very Dear Aunt,
I am really quite ashamed to let thee see the date of my letter, but we
are so very busy it seems almost impossible to find time to write, much as
I wish to let thee know how we are going on. Oh! dear aunt, if thou
wast with us how delightful it would be; but that is not possible, so that
I must endeavor to tell thee all that we do, that thou mayst fancy us
exactly.
I think from the long letters William wrote he must have told you all
particulans of the voyage, so I shall begin at the time we landed at Port
Adelaide, which we did on the 25th of 9th mo. We, our bedding, and a
few other things we could not do without, were landed in one of the ship’s
boats, and most thoroughly did we enjoy that row. The iday was fine —-the
sight of the green trees that grew on the banks of the beautifully winding
channel, with the thought of soon being on land again, and of beholding
our new and adopted country—all united their charms to make that long
wished for time delightful. We saw no odious mangrove trees, nor were
wo carried through the mud on the sailors’ balcks as James t talked about
in his book, but we stepped from the boat on to dry ground.
f I do not know who this “Janies” can be if it is not Janies Backhouse; but in his
“ Narrative of a Visit to the Australian Colonies,” chap. 43, describing his visit to Adelaide, he
never refers to the mangroves as “odious,” nor is there any reference to being carried ashore
through mud, for he landed at the Patawalonga Creek, Glenelg.—J.C,


At Port Adelaide, which is a most curious, disagreeable place, and does
not give a very favorable impression for the first sight of the country, we
stayed Iby our baggage whilst Fred went to engage two bullock carts to
convey it, and such of our party ais could not walk, to the city of Adelaide.
He soon got some, and we saw our things safely packed in, and mother,
uncle, and the four children, with father as their guide to our house (the
drivers not knowing the street) seated on the top. The rest of us set off
to walk, with the exception of William who was left behind at the ship a few
days longer to see to the landing of the rest of the things that were left
in our cabin. We had a very pleasant walk, and amused ourselves Iby
picking a variety of wild flowers which we found in great abundance. They
were most of them very different to any we hail ever seen in England.
Those that had any resemblance were more like the garden flowers. They
were nearly all very sweet-scented. We passed a great many yellow wattle
trees in full bloom. The blossom is exactly like the English mimosa, with
the same almond-like smell. The leaf is more like that of the oleander.
It looked very pretty to see the trees covered with large bunches of yellow
blossom, and the air is so filled with the perfume that when the wind blew
off the land we smelt it on board the ship while we were lying at anchor
though we were some distance from land. There are several other sorts
of mimosa such as we used to have in pots in England, and one that I have
seen only in the conservatory at J. Warner’s, of Hoddesdon, growing wild as
shrubs in the streets of Adelaide.
We had not walked far before we (saw somebody walking very fast
behind us, as though he wished to overtake us, so we slackened our pace,
and on his nearer approach who should we find it to be but Joseph Cook.
He had come over from Van Dieman’s Land on business, and was going back
the next day. He does not like Adelaide at all, so that he did not give us
a very favorable account of it; but perhaps it was a true one, for I should
not like to live there at all. I think I never saw such a dusty place before.
J. Cook walked with us the -rest of the way, and warned us of the short
twilight; but we did not seem much inclined to hurry, this being our first
walk for such a length of time, so that it had become nearly dark before
we reached Adelaide, and Fred, who was the only one of the party that had
seen the house before, having entered the town quite in a different direction
when he visited it before, was rather at a Ices, and although we were in the
town we saw very few houses, and nobody seemed to know where Halifax
street was, so that we were some time before we found it; but we did
succeed at last. We found father and mother had arrived some time before
us. A kind woman who lived in one of the nearest houses saw them come,
and concluding they had but just come on shore, came over to know if she
could render any assistants. She fetched some of her own wood, lighted
a fire, and filled our tea kettle at the nearest well, which they would have
been troubled to find had not she come to their assistance. So that by the
time we got in the tea was ready for us, and to taste baker’s bread, and to
drink tea made with nice, sweet, clean water, was a great treat. It really
felt quite strange to be able to sit still after being rolled about iso long.
We spread our beds upon the floor, and were glad to get into them pretty
early, where we all enjoyed a good night’is rest.
We were up early the next morning, anxious to see about us. We found
we had quite a splendid house, being one of the best in Adelaide. The
rooms were neatly papered, and there was a verandah both front and back.
The rent was very high, but that we had nothing to do with. We were all
high busy the first week receiving our goods from the port, and finding places


for them. Father bought four bullocks, so that Frederick and William
brought most of the things up, which was a great saving, as carters charge
25/ for every load they bring, though it is only five miles.t
We were now getting anxious to be doing something. Provisions
being very dear it would not do to be idle. So Frederick and William
set off to Hurtle Vale, to see the sections of land belonging to Uncle Beck,
etc., but finding the best of them was let, and that all the land in that
direction was bought so that there was no chance of getting our own near it,
which would have been very inconvenient had we settled there, they
concluded to give it up altogether. They went next to Mount Barker, to
look at a section which belonged to. J. B. and S. Hack, and was occupied by a
young man named Lines, who was wishing to leave. They were so much
pleased with this, and it appeared in iso many respects advantageous, that
an agreement was soon made with the young man, and we had to prepare
for another move. We stayed about four weeks in Adelaide. That was
quite enough, for it is not a nice place to live in, and we were so swarmed
with fleas that after the first night we could get very little rest, and it really
hindered so much time to look for them that we did not know how to get
on at all. We used to find 20 or 30 in each bed when we got up in a morning.
We thought we must be a great deal worse off than other people, and could
not make out how lit was, until one day we were telling G. and R. Deane how
we were troubled, and they said it was the same with everybody. They had
endeavored to get rid of them by giving their little girls so much a score for
killing them. Poor William was so persecuted with them that he was
obliged at last to sleep on the table, for they came through the cracks in
the boards, and were sure to find him out if he was within reach.
We went to meeting on a First-day in a large parlour of J. B. Hack’s.
They had been used to meet only once a day before we came, but they
considered as there was no week-day meeting it would be better to meet
twice on First-day, which we did at 11 and 6 o’clock. After the morning
meeting J. B. Hack read some portion from the “Book of Extracts.”
E. and C. Coleman live about six miles from Adelaide. They came to
town once whilst we were there, and called to see us. They had their two
daughters with them—the elder a very nice girl, about 15 or 16 t —the
other quite a little thing. They met with a sad accident on returning
home. They stayed in Adelaide rather later than they intended, and their
road crossed the River Torrens, which was very shallow just at the
crossing, but there was a deep water hole a little distance further. They
had just got across when the horse began to back, and E. C. being unable to
stop it, they were all precipitated Into the hole. The eldest daughter,
and the horse, which was worth £lOO, were drowned; the others managed
to scramble out somehow, though it seemed wonderful that any of them
escaped. We attended the funeral, which took place the following First-
day. Poor E. and C. Celt man were almost inconsolable for the loss of their
daughter. She seemed from what we hear, to have been prepared for such
an awful event, Which may tend to reconcile her parents. The burying
ground is in North Adelaide. It is a piece of ground belonging to J. B.
Hack. He has built a sort of lodge, where a person lives to look after it.
We took several pretty walks round Adelaide. The banks of the
Torrens are in some parts very beautiful. It is very winding—in some
places deep, in others very shallow. It wifi require an immense deal of
fAn under estimate of the distance. From the part of the river where the "Anna Robert-
son" was probably moored, to Halifax Street, Adelaide, would be at least 8J miles.—J.C.
J This girl, Charlotte Fowler Coleman, was only 13 years and 8 months of age at the time
of her death under such sad circumstances.—J.C.


labor if it is ever made navigable. There are some good buildings in
Adelaide. The bank and the Governor's house are the best. I must
not forget the Methodist Chapel, which is quite an ornament to the place.
There are many very good shops and stores; quite as hantisome as we see
in an English country town. They do not quite come up to London yet,
but the people here are not inclined to be much behind the Mother Country
if they can help it. Most of the houses are low, having only the ground
floor, which gives the place a mean appearance until you are used to it, and
they seem stuck about amongst the trees without any apparent order, though
care is taken to keep to the line of the streets, and there are hand-posts at
the corners of the streets with their names on them. It locks at present
like a large and flourishing village. We used often to say, when returning
from a distant part of the town, loaded with firewood which we picked up on
the way—“ What would they say in England if they could see us walking
through Victoria Square, and some of the principal streets of Adelaide, loaded
with wood?”
We now and then saw some natives about, but they' are not at all
numerous. They seem very quiet and inoffensive, and by no means so ugly
as we expected. They are very short —particularly the women —and have
remarkably slender legs, short curly hair, and very white teeth. We found
it best to take no notice of them, for if they have anything given to them
once they come so. often that you cannot keep it up, and then they get angry.
J. B. Hack told us that most of the disputes between them and the settlers
had arisen in this way, so that they are now supplied weekly with rations
from Government. They do not like to be called “blacks.” We were
out for a walk one day, and one passed us. Bessie said, “There is a black!"
He turned round quickly, and said “Me no black; me aboriginee.”
Now, dear aunt, I think I have told thee all that is worth relating of our
stay in town. I must next give thee an account of the journey to Mount
Barker, for we did not all go together. The first party consisting ol
father, Thomas, R. Ann, and Margaret, and Frederick and William as their
drivers, set off on 2nd day morning, 10th mo., 17th, with our own cart and
four bullocks, loaded with bedding, cooking utensils, clothes, and provisions
to last until the next supplies could arrive. The distance was 21 miles.
They started from Adelaide about 7 o'clock in the morning, Margaret and
R. A. riding in the cart, father on a Timor pony, which he had bought, and
the rest walking. I must now tell thee that the section of land to which
wo were going, although it Is called Mount Barker, is in a very extensive
valley, or flat —as it is called here —between the Mount Lofty and Mount
Barker ranges. The valley itself is beautifully diversified with hill and dale,
and we had the Mount Lofty range to cross.
The party got on very well till they reached the bottom of the first
hill, which was about four miles, although it had begun to rain, and seemed
likely to come on much faster. This first hill, which generally goes by the
name of the Big Hill t mother says is about as steep as the Lewes Hills,
and very long. Margaret and R. Ann got out of the cart to walk up, and
having made everything secure they tried to make their team mount the
% Mr. E. W. Hallack, a son of the Cambridgeshire farmer who is mentioned by William
Mayas being a fellow passenorer in the "Anna Robertson ,” tells me that this is what is now
known as the Green Hill, and is the next hill north of Waterfall Gully. The track followed in
1839, however, was not on the site of the present road up this hill. The Inn that the travellers
reached the first night was no doubt the well-known Crafer’s Hotel, on the present road to
Mount Barker; and to reach it the party may have passed from the ridge of the Green Hill
round by the eastern side of Mt, Lofty. It can be readily understood by those who know the
locality that the route via Glen Osmond, and the Eagle-on-the-hill Hotel, was impracticable
before any road was made through that glen. Mr. E. W. Hallack, who lives in "Wakefield
Street, Adelaide, is an authority on the topography of the Hills District of South Australia;
and has written various articles and pamphlets descriptive of this part of the country, which
have appeared first in the “ Register ” newspaper.—J.C.


hill. But they soon found it was no use, the poor bullocks being quite
unable to draw the cart up so steep a place; ami thinking it would never
do to give up, they determined to unload the cart, and carry its contents up
themselves, which (to our astonishment when they told us) they succeeded
in doing. Some of the luggage consisted of heavy packages that had not
been opened since we left England. The rain too was descending very fast.
This difficulty over, they got on pretty well, though very slowly, to a rude
sort of inn, which was about half way. Here they concluded to stay for
the night; but the accommodation was miserable indeed,they being obliged
to lie down in their wet, clothes.
They started again early in the morning, but this day’s journey proved
more disastrous than the last. As it was nothing but up and down hill it
was Quite unsafe for anybody to ride, so poor Margaret and Rachel were
obliged to walk all the way, sometimes up to their knees in mud. They
tried the pony, but not having a side-saddle they slipped off. The poor
cart was upset three times, and then they had to stay and reload, and they
cut down a tree in two or three places to tie behind the cart as a drag,
in going down some of the hills. So that it was quite dark before they
reached Stephen Hack’s, which was still three miles from our own place.
Here they took up ttheir abode for the second night, which was rather more
comfortable than the night before, as they got their idotbeis dried, but he
has only one sleeping room, so that Father, Thomas, Margaret, ahd R. A. slept
in that, and the rest in the sitting-room downstairs. But they got nicely
rested, and were quite ready to finish their journey the next morning, which
they did in safety, and were glad enough to get to a house they could call
their own, after being without a home for so many months. I shall give
thee a description of the house and land presently.
Thou must now go back, dear aunt, to us who were left in Adelaide.
We found plenty to do in getting ready everything we should want in such
an out-of-the-way place. Frederick and William returned with the cart in
a few days, and ventured to try the journey: once more with a load (S. Hack
having lent them two more bullocks), and taking Joseph with them this
time. But although they had six bullocks they got on very little better,
upsetting the cart several times. Once it turned so completely over that
the wheels were twirling round in the air instead of supporting it on the
earth. F. and W. mow gave it up as a bad job, and agreed with S. Hack
to send down drays and bullocks to bring up the rest of us, and our goods,
at once. Fredi returned to help us clear the house, and to settle about the
rest of the goods which had just arrived in the “Dumfries,” but were not
unloaded.
Everything ready, we all quitted Adelaide on Third day, 25th of 10th
month, looking quite a formidable cavalcade. First went a waggon drawn
by 10 bullocks, in which were Mother, Uncle, Frederick, Edward, the three
children, and myself, with our beds to sit upon. Then came two drays
drawn by eight bullocks each, and lastly another dray with six bullocks
Having beard such a description of the road thou mayst think we did not
much like the thought of the journey; but we soon found we had not much
to fear, as we had su'ch an excellent driver. $ He is considered the best
bullock driver in the Colony. It was quite admirable to see how he
managed isuch a long string of bullocks, guiding the waggon through fallen
trees that were so close that sometimes there were only a few inches
between them and the wheels. We all walked up the first bill, which was
I It seems from the mention, a little further on, of Stephen Hack welcoming the party at
his house, that this excellent driver was not he himself, as might have been supposed.—J.C,


really the Hill Difficulty. It seemed almost impossible that a loaded cart
should ever be got up it. We watched them slowly winding their way
amongst the trees, as v/e frequently stopped to rest.
On reaching the top we had a most beautiful view of the surrounding
country. We could see the whole extent of Adelaide, the creek with all
the vessels lying at anchor, and the sea stretching beyond as far as the
eye could reach, whilst before us was a most romantic scene. Our road now
lay on the tops of the mountains, so that we had deep valleys on each side,
with other hills rising directly beyond them. These hills, as well as those we
were on, were covered with trees, and beautiful flowers Oh, dear aunt,
how I wished thou wast with us! Thou would’st have enjoyed the ibeautiful
views. It put me in mind of the scenery described in the “Lady of the
Lake.” But I did not wish thee to have the jolting ride we had. There
are so many dead trees and branches lying about, and deep water courses,
that our driver was obliged to keep calling out to us to hold tight when we
were going over anything. The poor children became so frightened at last
that they all began to cry when he called out, and it really was with the
greatest difficulty we could sometimes hold on. One of the water courses
was so deep, and the descent so sudden, that the waggon gave a pitch down
into it, so that the front wheels were completely buried, and gave u® such a
shake that we thought the waggon was broken to pieces. We remained in
that position about a minute to give the bullocks time to muster all their
strength; but it was a great effort to get it up again. After a great many
joltings we reached the Cattle Company’s station, where a good-natured
Scotch woman, who manages the dairy, brought us out plenty of new milk,
and I enjoyed a good draught for the first time since I left England. They
sell it at Bd. per quart in Adelaide, ©o that we were obliged to make very
little do when we were there.
We had now only a few miles to go to reach S. Hack’s, but it wais nearly
dark before we reached there. J. B. and S. Hack came to welcome us in for
the night, and we were glad enough to leave our unicomfortable seat in the
waggon for one on S. H.’s sofa. He told us he had a most splendid house,
so that we were hardly prepared for such a one as we found, for whilst
I was sitting on the 'sofa I could see all that went on in the yard through
the cracks in the walls; but he seemed to think that was rather an advantage
than otherwise. He was very kind!, doing his very best to make us comfort-
able for the night, which we should have been had we not been too tired;
and, having had some green tea into the bargain, neither mother nor I could
get to sleep till the light of the morning began to peep through the number-
less spaces in the roof.
Father walked over to breakfast with us, and as we were in a great
hurry to reach our own home, we did not stay long after that meal was
finished. It is a very pretty walk. We pass one farmhouse between S.
Hack’s and ours, which belongs to Captain Field, who is our nearest neighbor,
being about half a mile off, which is considered very near for the bush.
We occasionally call upon them, for the captain has such very poor health
that it makes it very dull for his wife. We reached home about 11 a.m., and
found our house, though a very poor place, rather better than we expected,
as father had done a great dieal to it to make it a little more wind and water-
tight. I must in future call it our farm, as I cannot call it a house, for it
consists of four detached buildings, the largest of which is the sitting-room,
with a bed at one end for father and mother. The next largest is divided
into two rooms, in one of which Margaret and I sleep, and in the other the
four children. The next building is one room, in which uncle and my


brothers sleep. They are rather too close, but they manage pretty well by
having their three hammocks hung up over the other beds. The other
building is the dairy. We have a very pretty view from our farm. It is
exactly like a gentleman’s park, in England, and I think none that 1 ever
saw excelled it in beauty. We have had several visits from fresh comers,
and persons from Adelaide, and they all unite in admiring our “park,” as
they call it.
I must now tell thee the [composition of our houses. The sitting-room
is built of the stems of young trees cut of an equal length and nailed as
close as they can be together, but of course the trees are mot perfectly
straight so that where there is the least curve it leavs a hole. Some of
these holes are large enough to get one’© hand through; but with plastering
some with mud on the outside, and nailing up old sacks within, we have
stopped up some of the worst. The roof is pretty respectable. It is
boarded, and only lets the wet through in a very few places, where it runs
down between the boards. The floor in this, as well ais in all the other
houses, is the bare earth, which we do not much mind this dry weather, as
it gets trodden down quite hard, and we lay a carpet over it. But w r e
had a few days very wet; then it was miserable indeed, for the wet trod in
and made it so muddy that we could not keep ourselves 'dean at all. It is
so uncomfortable that father has concluded to build a nice large sitting-
room, with a boarded floor, before winter. Our rooms are of turf, so that
if we rub up against the wails the mould comes tumbling down. We have
hung matting round as far as we can, which makes them more comfortable —
indeed thou wouldst be surprised to see such rough places look so tidy as
they do. We do not intend to settle down contented with such places.
Father means to build a good substantial house on our own land, which
we have but just purchased, iso that it is too late to think of building this
season, but we hope to do so next summer. Thou wilt wonder, no doubt,
why we did not put up the house we brought out with us. We found that
the expense of getting it up here would be so great that we could build a
much stronger one cheaper than that would be with the carriage added to
it. So we left it in Adelaide to be sold, .which they think may be done
pretty well, so that we shall not lose by it. We have kept the doors and
windows for our house up here.
i will now give thee an account of our day’s employments, and as they
go on pretty regularly, only varying the work as each job is finished, thou
will be able to fanlcy us pretty correctly. We rise at 5 o’clock. William
goes off directly on the pony to find the cows, for we have no fields as in
England to confine them. They wander about just where they please. They
have the calves out with them in the day, but they are shut up at home in
the night, so that we are pretty sure of not losing the cows in the morning,
and Joseph is careful to look well after them in the day. We have been
very fortunate, having only lost them once for any length of time. One
day, soon after we came up here, Joe was prevented fetching them up at
the usual time, when they strayed away so far that we did not find them
again for three days. Now to return. The rest of my brothers employ
themselves until William’s return in feeding the pigs, fetching water from
the creek at a short distance from the house, and getting the calves into
their pen to prevent them sucking their mothers before they are milked.
Mother is busy in the dairy getting the tins ready for the fresh milk. I
skim, and set the breakfast table. Margaret makes two large saucepans-full
of porridge, just such as we used to have at Ackworth. Father works in
the garden, and the children feed the poultry. We breakfast at half pajt


six. Directly we Lave finished, Frederick, William, Tom, and Edward take
their pails and begin milking. It is Joe’s business to get the cows tied
up ready for them, and to let the calves out as they are wanted. The whole
management of cows is so different here to what it is in England; even the
cows themselves seem different. Very few English ones like to be touched
when they are out in the fields, but are quiet enough when being milked. It
is exactly the reverse here. Father generally has some carpentering job in
hand. Uncle amuses himself by fetching home woo'd, and sawing it up for
our fires. We have no lack of wood. I could not help wishing that some
of the poor people in England could have all the dead trees we have burned
up because they looked untidy lying about. Father sometimes has two or
three great bonfires burning at once. Mother, Margaret, and I are busv
about our domestic concerns, which we generally manage to get done so as
to sit down to needlework for an hour or two before dinner, except on
washing and churning days. Fourth-day is churning-day. Tom or Edward
churns, and I make the butter. We used to make about 401bs. a week, but
the time for which we hired Lines’ cows has just expired, so that for a few
weeks, until more of our own cows calve, we shall have much less. The
people in Adelaide are very particular. They do not like the butter in
plain lbs., so we have to make it up into V 2 lh. pats-, and stamp it. We get
2/6 per lb. for it. We have just finished washing up the things that 'were
used on board ship, having been three months about it, hut as we could
not get any help we were obliged to do it very gradually. The boiling
answered very well, taking out the mildew and making the things very clean.
When my brothers have done milking they are generally engaged in
some agricultural employment. They have ploughed four acres of ground,
two of which are planted with maize, and two with potatoes. The latter
look very fine, and are almost ready to dig. It was almost too late in the
season for planting anything when we came up here, but they did not like
to lose so much time, so by great exertion they got so much into cultivation.
We have had two men employed for about two months putting up a fence,
which they have nearly completed. It will enclose 20 acres. F. and \\.
have just commenced ploughing it up. We long to see it all in cultivation.
One o’clock is our dinner hour, when we generally sit down to a famous
great pudding, a joint of meat, and vegetables with which we are well
supplied from our own garden. We drink nothing but milk and tea. The
latter we have with all our meals. It seemed rather strange at first to
drink it with our dinner, but we soon got used to it. It is the common
drink of everybody in the bush. Even our two workmen bring their tea-
kettle up with them when they come to work. They have built themselves
a tent, a short distance from the place where they are working. We
unite tea and supper together, and have it at 7 o'clock, and all retire to rest
at 9, and having been busy through the day, enjoy a sound sleep at night.
Thou dost not know, dear aunt, how often we think and talk about
you all during the day, and wish we could see you again. We are just nine
hours before you, so that when we are going to bed at 9 on First-day night
it is 12 at noon of that day with you. I have not told thee how we spend
First-day. We contrive to get all our jobs done very early on that morning,
and sit down to meeting in our own parlour at 11 o’clock, and sit about an
hour and a half. In the afternoon we sit down quietly to read to ourselves;
and again meet at 6 in the evening, when father reads two or three
chapters in the Testament, and some Psalms. Then, after a pause, William
reads a part of some Friends’ book. I think we all enjoy First-day. When-
ever thou thinks of us, 'dear aunt, fancy us very happy, and enjoying number-


less (blessings which we do not deserve. Oh, that all our beloved friends in
dear Old England were with us!
I have written parts of this letter at many different times, but have
not put the dates. lam now arrived at the 16th of 2nd mo., 1840. We
have had A. H, Taylor i staving with us for two or three days. Lie left
us this afternoon for Adelaide, but talks of coming up this way again in
a few days to endeavor to get employment, until a situation which J. B. Hack
is trying to get for him under Government is ready. Ido not know whether
he will get anything to suit him up here, as he does not like hard work.
He told us that his uncle J. J. Lister particularly: wished him not to stay
in Adelaide. Father urged him to follow that advice, which he said be
quite intended to do, as he dislikes Adelaide very much.
We have not been at all inconvenienced by the heat this summer,
although the thermometer has often been above lOOdeg. It is only just
in the middle of the day that it is so very hot; the nights are cool and
pleasant. We have had three blankets on our bed all through the summer,
and have not been at all too warm. Father feared the sudden changes
would affect us, but they do not, for we have all had remarkably good health,
not having had even colds since we came on shore. To give thee some
idea of the sudden change of temperature, I must tell thee that on the 17th
of 2nd mo. the thermometer at 6 o’clock in the morning stood at 42deg., and
at 9 the same morning had risen to 86deg. It hangs quite in the shade.
The most uncomfortable weather is when we have a hot wind. It feels
just as if it was blowing off a furnace. It is generally succeeded by rain.
We heard a short time since that they had a very plentiful horvest in
Sydney, and an importation of wheat is expected daily, which we are very
glad of, as provisions, particularly flour, are extravagantly dear. We use
a great deal of rice, which is much the cheapest thing we can buy. We
have six saJcks full of it by us now, for some of which we gave Id. per lb.
We feed our pigs and poultry upon it, as well as using it in a variety of
waya ourselves. Our mill grinds it very nicely.
I must return thee a great many thanks, dear aunt, for thy nice long
letter. It made us almost fancy we were within reach of you again. 1
hope thou wilt write us as many as thou canst, for they cannot possibly be
too long, or come too often, Please urge a’l our dear relations to write.
You have so many opportunities of sending, whilst we find it very difficult
to get a letter oft. There is nothing in the Colony to freight vessels with
at present, so that they all go either to Sydney or China for cargoes, and
ii is a long time before they get back to England. We were talking about
it a few days ago, and were afraid you would he blaming us for not having
written sooner, but we have really done our best. We have sent letters
I Anthony Harris Taylor, here referred to, afterwards had a farm at Charleston, South
Australia ; and his membership in the Society of Friends was transferred to the Two Months
Meeting of South Australia early in 1862. He died on 13th February, 1870, leaving a widow, two
sons, and two or more daughters. His widow afterwards married Mr. Mellor, the agricultural
implement maker, of Adelaide. From the fact that Joseph Jackson I Y ister is spoken of as
being his uncle, X think A. H. Taylor’s mother must have been a daughter of Anthony Harris,
of Maryport, Cumberland, a sea-captain who lost his life at sea, and whose widow, Isabella
Harris, was principal mistress or governess of the Girls’ wing at Ackworth School for
nearly a quarter of a century. This admirable Matron also certainly had a daughter, Isabella
Harris, junr., who occupied the post of Girls’ Reading Mistress in the School, and was, in her
turn, unsurpassed in the excellence of her reading, and her general influence with the children.
She married, in July 1818, Joseph Jackson Fister, F.R.S., the wine merchant, of Tokenhouse
Yard, Fondon, who was the discoverer of most important principles in connexion with the
manufacture of microscopes. They were the parents of Ford Ulster, the celebrated Fondon
surgeon, who discovered the anti-septic treatment so invaluable in surgery. Anthony H.
Taylor was 52, at the time of his death. —J.C.


in several different ways, in hopes yon might receive some (before a very
great while.
1 am (preparing this to send by the “Katherine Stewart Forbes,” which
is to sail direlct home, laden with oil and wool. I believe Stephen Hack,
after changing his mind a great many times, has at last concluded to return
to England in her, on a visit to his relations. He has kindly offered to
go to any place to which we choose to send him, to tell you all about us,
but I must give you warning that it will not do to believe more than half
he says; he exaggerates so very much. For instance, he called upon us
after we had had a great deal of rain, to ask how we got on. We told
him we managed very well. The wet dripped from the roof in one or two
places, but not enough to inconvenience us at all. Father went down to
Adelaide a short time after, and called at J. B. Hack’s. As soon as he had
sat down they began saying how sorry they were we had been so troubled
with the wet. Father Looked quite astonished, not knowing what they
meant. They then told him that Stephen had been down, and told them wo
had been completely washed out ol our house. Father said it was quite
wrong; that wo had got on very well. Stephen makes out such strange
stories ol everything.
We have had a great deal of the grass burnt round us this summer. It
is a beautiful sight When burning. We went out one evening when it was
dark. It looked like a large town on fire, for it burned not only the grass
but the brushwood, and flamed up to the top of some of the old decayed
trees. We could enjoy the sight because we knew no one was suffering
from it. When it had reached as near us as we wished to have it, we all set
out with boughs to beat it out, sio as to turn its course another* way. The
grass is generally set on fire by accident, either by the natives, or by
travellers in the bush not leaving their fires safe. The long grass gets
very dry at the end of the summer, and easily catches fire. Thomas Corder
nearly had his tent burnt down lately. He lives about six miles from us.
He walked over to dinner a few days ago, and told us that the day before
they set fire to a large tree they wished to get rid of, at a (considerable
distance from the tent. The grass caught, and the fire ran along so fast
that it burned down their haystack, which they had just completed, and it
was with the greatest difficulty they saved the tents. His partners (named
Bond), were from home. He looks as stout and well as ever although he
works very hard.
Margaret and I went for a walk last 3rd day, and got into such a beautiful
place. We thought we had never seen anything to equal it. We directly
wished for thy company to make it still more delightful. We wandered
on, admiring each prospect as lit opened to our view, and talking very
earnestly about you all at the same time, till we were completely lost.
We then mounted to the top of one of the highest hills to take a survey of
the country round, hoping that we should see something by which to direct
our course. But we could see nothing but Mount Barker at a very great
distance, which we knew was on the left of our house, and from the time
of day the sun should; be on the right. J So we steered our course over hill
and vale by these, until, to our great joy, we get into the right track again.
We mean to take better care in future.
f From this it is evident that the two girls were wandering amongst the hills to the north
or north-west of Fairfield, and it is very likely the beautiful spot alluded to may have been
what was sometimes called Fern Gully, in the Stringy-bark Range in a direct line between
Fairfield and Hahndorf, or the German hamlet of Friedrichstadt. The fern-covered gullies
amongst the hills in that direction would, no doubt, in 1840, be very beautiful.—J.C.


Please give our very idiear love to Uncle Charles. We should he much
obliged to him for a letter if he can find time to write. If he cannot, we
hope, if he meets with anything in his journeys likely to intereist us, thou
will not omit to tell us in thine, for we like to know what you are all
doing.
We should like our love given to all the Hertford Friends when thoa
hast an opportunity. Tell our friends the Lucases we long to come and take
tea with them as we used to do, but they must mot think we at all regret
coming here. It is only the thought of having left all our friends behind us.
John Godlee lives at Stephen Hack’s. My brothers see him almost every
week when they go over. He is so busy that he has had our mangle-wheel
to repair for three months, and has not had time to do it yet. The poor
mangle was sadly broken in coming up, for it was in one of the drays that
was upset. Father is carpenter enough to mend the woodwork, so that it
only wants tha wheel.
I am now writing in mv own room on the Ist of 3rd month, with the
thermometer at 105 deg. in the shade, and am not so hot as I used to be
shut up in our parlour at Hertford on a summer’s day.
I must now give thee a list of our live stock, as I fancy thou will
like to know how our farming goes on. We have six working bullocks —
great favorites —15 cows, 3 calves (at present), a bull, a pony, 7 pigs, 28
fowls, and two broods coming off very soon, a cat, and a magpie. We are
to have a dog that is just come overland with some sheep. They have not
Quite got up vet. We are to have him as soon as he is at liberty. Our
bullocks’ names are Punch, Brandy, Farmer, Rodney, Captain, and Blucher.
The first four were named when we had them. Poor Rodney had a sad
accident about «ix weeks ago. He fell down going down hill, caught
his horn, and broke the bone down his forehead, so that the horn hung
down quite loose. S. Hack told us it was quite impossible he could live. He
never saw a bullock sc injured before, and advised us to have him killed
But as he was the flower of our team we were unwilling to take such advice.
So he was hied, and his horn bandaged up, having a piece of wood as a
support to prevent it shaking about when he walked. It has answered
very well, as he is now quite recovered, and! the bandage was removed
last week. It has altered his face very much, and his horns are uneven, so
that he is not quite such a handsome looking fellow as he was before, but
he is as gentle as ever. Since writing the above our stock of fowls has
increased to 50, one hen having 18, the other 9.
We hear a rumor of the Queen being likely to marry. Should such
an ©vent take place we should much like a newspaper containing a full
and particular account.
I hope I shall be able to collect some seeds of the beautiful wild flowers
next spring for thee. I should like that thy little garden should be gay
with Australian flowers. I cannot help fancying they would grow. Our
garden is well stocked with all sorts of vegetables and herbs, and a little
fruit. We have some nice melons, and a great many Cape gooseberries,
which very much resemble the winter cherry. Father wishes me to say
he planted the fir cones soon after he came up here. They came up nicely,
hut the hot and dry weather in the summer was too hot for them, and they
are nearly all gone off. He would therefore be obliged to thee for some
more.


Father and mother unite with us all in very dear love to dear grand-
father.! Oh! if he could but see how happy we all are!
I must not omit to tell thee that we left our troublesome neighbors, the
fleas, behind us in Adelaide.
With very, very dear love from all our family to all our relations and
friends, I conclude —and accept an unbounded share for thyself
From thy ever affectionate niece,
MARIA MAY.
J This, of course, was William Morris, who lived with his son and daughter—Joseph
Marsh Morris and Maria Morris—at Arapthill. He died on 3rd of stno„ 1843, aged 89 years
and 5 months.— J.C.




J. Walch & Sons, Printers, Hobart, Tasmania.






hi ck
V'O-. P.c> '
C ~^ ) S \SI
\l .
J J/{ tuylM / V*AS* I* MO |“/ t-/" 4
azz^,
Ls/CH> ~rt-G. ot^(Xvt/i/jCVv\
cAav. k<WL u^C^Uitc^.
(X Q7£/U-| I* 4 ** 3 WV*o lctly. CcicXt, *
kocuuL OL.
t O-d^tot^v.
U . c**W?" u " . ,
A A .fi /*• IfYi IJl\OVv£»a^ljM — IvA-fl/iJA C/CiJAtV» v/
k c£_i 't CVj .
iKjfli?. J)
Oa (TVo f 4 • ( Tksu-c<
"fe *fkc. c* y-'f" -fi f /^O
Jo </)- J_s J- C%~AQjJh
U*jiXt LL3CH <fi V/(~ <Lo <ATVI <L ° /IX <XcJ~i-J ~~~
Ca£i£*i C~vx**~j**Jl* ''Vi olaaq-Xc«-*j£
Q<? *J IvOUjIC
■is "ik k XTcMi H cfWv\ , H%u/>
<3 LW A. «CfCjLA O C oUJUir -01~ *J C-*aa*M,
(d - i-
