

||I ■
' ~ ■■
There’s a
■ g ood time coming’
There’s a good time coming, hoys—
Good time coming—■
We may not live to see the day,
But earth shall glisten in the ray
Of the good time coming.
Cannon balls may aid the truth.
But thought’s a weapon stronger—
We’ll win our battle by its aid—
Wait a little longer.
There’s a good time, &c.
There’s a good time coming, boys—
A good time coming—
The pen shall supersede the sword,
And right, not might, shall be the lord.
In the good time coming.
Worth, not birth, shall role mankind.
And be acknowledged stronger—
The proper impulse has been given—
Wait a little longer.
There’s a good time coming, boys—
A good time coming—
And a poor man’s family
Shall not be his misery,
In the good time coming ;
Every child shall he a help,
To make his right arm stronger.
The happier he, the more he has—
Wait a little longer.
There’s a good time coming, boys
A good time coming—
Little children shall not toil,
Under or above the soil,
In the good time coming.
But shall play in healthful fields,.
Till limbs and mind grow stronger—
And every one shall read and write—
Wait a little longer.
There’s a good time coming, hoys—
A good time coming--
The people shall be temperate.
And shall love instead of hate.
In the good time coming,
They shall use and not abuse.
And make all virtue stronger—
The reformation has begun—
Wait a little longer.
There’s a good time coming, boys—-
A good time coming—
Let us aid it all we can,
JJvery woman, every man,.
The goou £?« coming,
Smallest helps, if rightly given,
Make the impulse stronger —
’Twill be strong enough one day-
W ait a little longer.
There’s a good time, &c.
The British Songster
Ivy Green.
Ah! a dainty plant is the ivy green,
That creepeth o’er ruins old ;
Of right choice (bod are his meals, I wean
In his cel! so lonely and cold.
The wall must be crumbled, the stone decay’d.
To please his dainty whim ;
And the mouldering dust that years have made,
Is a merry meal for him.
Creeping where no life is seen,
A rare old plant is the ivy green.
Fast be stealeth on, though he wears no wings
And a staunch old head hath he;
How closely lie twinelh—how tightly he clings
To his friend, the huge oak free;
And sidy he (raileth along the ground,
And his leaves he gently waves,
As be jealously hugs and crawleth round
The rich mould of dead men’s graves.
Creeping where grim death hath been,
A rare old plant is the ivy green.
Whole ages have fled, and works decay’d,
And nations have scattered been ;
But the stout old ivy shall never fade,
From its hale and hearty green.
The brave old plant in its lonely days,
Shall fatten on the past;
For the stateliest building man can raise,
Is the ivy’s (bod at last.
Jessy Hie Flower o’
PninMaiie.
The sun has gane down o’er the lofty Benlomon'
And left the red cloud to preside o’er the scene.
While lanely I stray in the calm simmer gloamin
Tomuse on sweet Jessietbe flower o’ Dumblane
How sweet is the briar, wi’ its saft faulding blos-
An’ sweet is the birk, wi’ its mantle o’ green.
Yet sweeter and fairer and dear to this bosom.
Is lovely young Jessie, the flowero’ Dumblane
Is lovely, &c.
She’s modest as ony, and blithe as she’s bonny
For guileless simplicity marks her its ain j.
An’far be the villain divested offeelino-,
Wha’d blight in its blossom the sweet flower
of Dumblane.
Sing on, thou sweet mavis, thy hymn to the e’en-
ing,
Thou art dear to the echoes o' Calderwood glen
Sea dear to this bosom, sae artless and winning.
Is charming young Jessie, the flower o' Dum-
blane.
Is charming, &c.
WEEif SMI TIE HEEL MOW.
As I cam thro Sandgate, thro’ Sandgate, thro’ Sandgate, 1 He wears a blue bonnet, blue bonnet, blue bonnet,
As I cam thro’ Sandgate, I heard a lassie sing, | He wears a blue bonnet, a dimple in his chin:
Weel may the keel row, the keel row, the keel row, Weel may the keel row, the keel row, the keel row,
Weel may the keel row, that my laddie’s in. | And weel may the keel row, that my laddie’s in.
Fair Phoebe. The Days when we went
THERE was a comely young lady fair, Gipsying.
Was walking out to take the air, T „ ,
She met a sailor upon her way, In £tinXneTo gyPByi “ &
So 1 paid attention to hear what they did say. The ,°3f anTlafse’s in their best
Said William—Lady, why roam alone, f re dl , ess d rom tO P tto to ® 5
The night is coming and the day near gone ane . a I K sun S the jocuna song
She said, while fears from her eyes did fall, . ,P 011 , oiest » r f eu ’
A dark-eyed sailor is proving my downfall. And nou f ht but “ ,r . lh aild J olllt y
J r ° J Around us could be seen.
It’s two long years since he left the land, I CHORUS
I took the gold ring off my hand, And thus we pass’d the merry time,
We broke the token, here’s part with me, Nor of care or woe,
And the other rolling at the bottom of the sea. ln the days when we went gipsying,
Said William, drive him from your mind, A l° n o time ago.
Some other sailor as good you’ll find, All hearts were light and eyes were bright.
Love turns aside, and soon cold does grow, And nature’s face was gay,
Like a winter’s morning when lands are cloth- The trees their leafy branches spread,
ed in snow. And perfume filled the May;
, j•, ni, ~ , .■ a ’Twas there vve heard the cuckoo’s note
These words did Phoebe s heart inflame, ...c.i,, .. ,
c, ~ i n i teteal sottly through the air.
She said, on me you shall play no game- While every scene around us look’d
She drew a dagger and then did say Most beautiful and fair.
lor my dark-eyed sailor a maid 111 live and . , ~ „
J And thus we pass d, &c.
His coal black eye and his curly hair, We fill d a glass to evei} | ass ,
And pleasing tongue did my heart ensnare, . , 1K a /’’y nen s sc | ear.
Genteel he was but no rake like you, And lsh d th T mn ’L v ha PPy days,
To advise a maiden to slight the jacket blue. w nt man J a iappy j ear ,
° J We gave the king with all our hearts.
But still, said Phoebe, I’ll ne’er disdain And “ May his subjects be
A tarry sailor, but treat the same, A nation’s pride, all lands beside,
So drink his health—here’s a piece'of coin, And glory of the sea.
Still my dark-eyed sailor has this heart of mine And thus we pass’d, &c.
Then half the ring did young William show. And should vve ever pay again
She seemed distracted ’tween joy and woe, A visit to the scene,
Oh, welcome, William, Tve lands and gold. We’ll sing, with all our hearts and voice,
For my dark-eyed sailor so manly true & bold “God bless our gracious Queen,”—
May she live long o’er us reign,
Then in a village down by the sea, And by her actions prove,
They’re join’d in wedlock and do well agree That she has gained her utmost wish—
So maidens be true when you’re love’s away, A people’s lasting love.
For cloudy mornings off brings a pleasant day.
And thus we passed, &c.
Mary fllane.
I once did lub a pretty g-a!
1 lub’d her as my life—
She came from Lousiana,
And 1 made her my dear wife.
At home we lib’d so happy,
O, fiee from grief and pain,
But in de winter time year
1 lost my Mary Blane-
CHORUS.
Oh, fare de well poor Mary Blane,
One feeling heart bids you adieu—
Ob, fare de well, poor Mary Blane.
We’ll never meet again.
I went into de woods one day.
To hunt among de cane,
De white man come into my house.
And took poor Mary Blane.
It grieb me berry much to link.
No hope I entertain
Of eber seeing my dear gal.
My own poor Mary Blane.
Oh, fare de well, &e.
When toiling in de cotton field
I cry and say, good bye.
Unto my broder comrades,
Dat, oh, soon—oh, soon I die,
My poor wife gone—l cannot lib
Amidst this world ob pain—
But lay me in de grabe to find
Out my poor Mary Blane.
Den fare de well, dear Mary Blane,
Do we are parted here on earth.
Oh, fare de well, dear Marv Blane,
We soon shall meet again.
Rise g-entle Moon.
Day has gone down.
On the Baltic’s broad billow.
Evening has sighed her last,
To the lone willow.
Night hurries on,
Earth and ocean to cover,
Bise gentle moon.
And light me to my lover.
It was by thy beam.
He first stole forth to woo me;
Brighter since then
Has ever seemed to me.
A Parody on there’s a good
time coming, boys.
There’s a good time coming, boys ;
A good time coming ;
We may not live to see the day,
But then our little babbies may,
In (he good time coming.
When every one will be so rich,
With long purse come oat stronger,
Of work, catch any doing a stitch ;
Wait a little longer.
There’s a good time coining, hoys;
A good time coming,
When Government shall cease to ax.
Us for the blessed Income Tax,
In the good time coining.
The sevenpence saved on ev’ry pound
Will make us eorae out stronger ;
Myself a new coat, spouse a gown :
Wait a little longer.
There’s a good time coming, hoys ;
A good time coming;
When penny loaves will be unknown,
And quarterns so extensive grown.
In the good time coming.
Let your family be e’er so thick,
Say, ten or twelve, or stronger,
’Twill take a week to eat a brick ;
Wait a little longer.
There’s a good time coming, boys ;
A good time coining ;
When not a woman in the land
Unmarried shall be left on hand,
In the good lime coining.
Not one must be left on the shelf,
(Excuse my language stronger,)
I’d sooner marry you all myself,
fSpokenJ—but then,
Ladies, you’d have to Wait a little longer.
There’s a good time coining, boys;
A good time coming ;
When beef-stakes shall in the garden grow
And plenty tobacco for to blow.
In the good time coining.
Peace shall guide the great machine,
The feeble and the stronger.
We’ll shield and shout “ God save the
Wait a little longer.
[Queen
A Teetotal Song.
Bet ilka drouthie neighbour, that likes a wee drap,
Rejoice o’er the gill.sump, and laugh o’er the cap,
Let them boas t o* their fuddle, and crack o’ their spree
But the Teetotal job’s been a guid thing for me.
Let them host, &c.
I ance was as fond o* the bottle and dram,
As ony that lives—tho* I tell’t to my shame,
I could ne’er get enough, tho* as full as the sea,
But the Teetotal job’s been a guid thing for me.
How oft ha’e I drunk baith my coat, hat and sark,
And sat frae the morning till it was clean dark,
I ne’er staggered hame while I had a bawbee.
But the Teetotal job’s been a guid thing for me.
Wi’ muckle ado I howk’d into my nest,
When first sleep was over then farewell to rest.
Tor blue devils danced round me wi’ wrath in theire’e
But the Teetotal job’s been a guid thing fox me.
Then I’d rise the next morn, half dead and half
daiz’d,
My head runnin’ roun’ and my brain nearly craiz’d.
Then I’d rin to the de’il a drap mair for to pree,
But the Seetotal job’s been a guid think for me.
When I got a drap mair then my cares are a’ gone,
Tho’ wretch like, and ragged, 1 cared no a pin,
Now I’m meat like, and claith like, and decent to
see,
For the Teetotal job’s been a’guid thing for me.
Now to gang sober hame’s a’ my glory an’ pride,
To enjoy the delights o’ my ain fireside,
I rise in the morning as brisk as a bee,
Fcr the Teetotal job’s been a guid thing for me.
My house was ance cheerless, nae comfort was there
My beds were thin happit, my shelves they were
bare,
Now it’s snug, clean and tidy, a pleasure to see.
For the Teetotal job’s been a guid thing for me.
And my bonny wee wife, that smiles in the neuk,
How altered her temper, how changed her look,
For now she’s as happy as happy can be,
For the Teetotal job’s been e guid thing forme.
And my wee toddin’ weans ance the picture o’want
When what they should eaten was a’ drunk & spent
Now their cheeks are as fresh as the braidon thelee,
For the Teetotal job’s been a gnid thing for me.
A* ye wha delight in’the glass or the horn,
It will work ye a’ mischief as sure as ye’re born,
Sae leave it off an’ consider what drinkers maun dee,
For the Teetotal job’s been a guid thing for me.
Past 1® 'A Chirks
OR,
REMEMBER, LOVE, REMEMBER.
■’Twas ten o’clock one moonlight night,
I ever shall remember,
When every star shone twinkling bright.
In frosty dark December.
When at the window tap, tap, tap,
I heard a certain well-known rap.
And with these words most clear.
Remember ten o’clock, my dear.
Remember, love, remember.
My mother doz’d before the fire.
My dad his pipe was smoking;
I dat’d not for the world retire.
And was not that provoking.
At length the old folks fast asleep,
1 then my promised word did keep.
And for his absence did denote.
He on the window shutters wrote—
Remember, love, remember.
And did I heed a treat so sweet,
O yes—mark the warning,
He said at church we were to meet.
At ten o’clock next morning.
And then we met no more to part,
To twine forever hand and heart,
And since that day in wedlock join’d.
The window-shutters bring to mind.
Remember, love, remember.
■> *
-A-
MY NANNIE, O.
Behind yon hills where Lugar flows,
’Mang moors and mosses many, O,
1 he wintry sun the day has clos’d,
And I’ll away to Nannie, O.
The whistlin winds blaws loud and shrill;
The night’s both mirk and rainy, O;
But i’ll get my plaid and out I’ll steal,
And o’er the hills to Nannie, O.
My Nannie’s charming, sweet and young ;
Nae artful wiles to win ye, O;
May ill beta’ the flatt’ring tongue
That wad beguile my Nannie, O.
Her face his fair her heart his true.
As spotless as she’s bonnie, O;
The op’ning gown, wet wi’ dew,
Nae purer is than Nannie, O.
A country lad is my degree,
And few there be that ken me, O ;
But what care I how few there be,
I’m welcome aye to Nannie, O.
My riches a’s my penny fee,
And I maun guide it cannie, O;
But wad’s gear ne’er troubles me,
My thoughts are a’, my Nannie, O.
Our auld gnidman delights to view
His'sheep and kye thrive bonnie, O ;
But I’m as bad that hands his pleugh,
And hae nae care but Nannie, O.
Come weel, come woe, I care nae by.
I’ll tak’ what Heav’n will sen’ me, O;
Nae ither care in life have I,
But live, and love my Nannie, O.
Van Dieman’s Land.
Come all you gallant poachers, that ramble void of care.
That walk out on a moonlight night, with your dog, gun, and a
snare ;
The hare and lofty pheasant you have at your command.
Not thinking of your last career upon Van Dieman’s Land.
Poor Thomas Brown, from Nottingham, Jack Williams, and Poor
Joe,
Were three determin’d poachers, as the country well doth know;
At night they were trepann’d by the keepers hid in sand,
And fourteen years transported were upon Van Dieman’s Land.
The first day we landed upon the fatal shore.
The planters came around us —there might be 20 score;
They rank’d us up like horses, and sold us out of hand,
They yok’d us to our ploughs, my boys, to plough Van Dienjan’s
Land.
Our cottages we live in are built of clods of clay,
And rotten straw for bedding, yet we dare not say nay ;
Around our cots a circling fire weslumbtr when we can.
And drive the wolves and tigers oft upon Van Dieman’s Land.
Ofttimes when I do slumber, 1 have a pleasant dream,
With my sweet girl sitting near me, close by a purling stream
Thro* England I’ve been roaming, with her at my command,
And waken broken-hearted upon Van Dieroan’s Land.
God bless our wives and families, likewise that happy shore,
The isle of great contentment, which we may see no more;
As for our wretched families, see them we seldom can,
There’s twenty men for one woman upon Van Dieman’s Land.
There was a girl from Birmingham, Ann Summers was her name,
For fourteen years transported, we all well knew the same;
Our planter bought her freedom, and married her out of hand;
She gave to us good usage upon Van Dieman’s Land.
For fourteen years is a long time—that is our fatal doom,
For nothing else than poaching —God knows that’s all we have done;
You would leave offdog, gun, snare, and poaching every man.
If youdid but know the hardships upon Van Dienian’a Land.
Now if I had a thousand pounds laid down all in my hand,
I’d give it all for liberty, if that I could command:
Again to England I’d return, and be a happy man,
And bid adieu to poaching, and to Van Dieman’s Land.
Burns and Highland Mary.
In green Caledonia there ne’er were twa lovers
Sae enraptured and happy in each ither’s arms.
As Burns, the sweet bard, and his dear Highland Mary,
And fondly and sweetly he sang o’er her charms;
And lang will his sang, sae enchanting and bonny.
Be heard wi’ delight on his own native plains.
And lang will the name of his dear Highland Mary
Be sacred to love in his heart-melting strains.
O! ’twas a May day, and flowers o’ the simmer
Were blooming in wildness, a’ lovely and fair,
That our twa lovers met in a grove o’ green bowers.
Which grew on tho banks o’ the clear winding Ayre ;
And O ! tae them baith ’twas a meeting fu’ tender.
An’ it was the last for awhile they could ha’e.
True love’s purest raptures they tasted thegither,
Till the red setting sun showed the close of the day.
O ! my dear Mary, exclaimed her fond lover,
Ye carry my heart to the Highlands with thee;
Every burnie and.bank, every grove and green bower,
May talk o’ the love o’ my lassie and roe;
My life’s sweetest treasure, my ain charming Mary,
To thee I’ll be ever devoted and true.
For the heart that is beating sae fast in this bosom.
For the heart that can never love ony but you.
0 ! dinna bidelang in the Highlands, my Mary,
0 ! dinna bide Jang in the Highlands fra me.
For I love thee sincerely, I love thee o’er dearly.
To be happy sae far, my dear Mary, frae thee.
1 winna hide lang, my dear lad, in the Highlands,
1 canna bide lang, for ye winna be there ;
Altho’ 1 hae friends 1 like weel in the Highlands,
The ane I love bast is on the hanks o’ the Ayre.
Then he kissed her red lips, they were sweeter than roses,
And he stritinPd her lily white breast to his heart.
And the tears.fell like dew-drops at e’en on his bosom.
As she said, my food lover, alas! we must part.
Then farewell, he said, and he flew frae Ids Mary,
O farewell, said Mary, she could say nae mair !
Oh ! little she kent they wore parted for ever.
When they parted that night on the banks o’ the Ayre
Yet the green summer saw 1 but a few sunny mornings,
Till she, in the bloom of her beauty and pride.
Was laid in her grave, like a bonny young flower,
In Greenock church-yard, on the banks of the Clyde.
And Burns, the sweet bard of his ain Caledonia,
Lamented his Mary in many a sad strain;
O sair did he weep for his dear Highland Mary,
And ne’er did his heart love so deeply again.
Then bring me the lilies, and bring me the roses,
And bring me the daisies that grow in the vale.
And bring me the dew of the mild summer evening,
And bring me the breath of the sweet scented gale;
O bring me the sigh of a fond lover’s bosom.
And bring me the tear of a fond .lover’s e’e,
And I’ll pour them a’ down on thy grave, Highland Mary,
For the sake of thy Burns, wha sae dearly lov’d thee.
Star ©f Glengarry.
The red moon is up, on the moss-covered moun-
tain ;
The hour is at hand when I promised to rove.
With the turf cutter's daughterb}' Logan's bright
water,
And tel! her how truly her Donald can love.
I ken there's the miller, wi' plenty o‘ siller.
Would fain win a glance from her beautiful e'e
But my own bonny Mary the star of Glengarry,
Keeps a' her sweet smiles and soft kisses for me.
Tis long since we both trod the Highlands to-
gether—
Two frolicsome bairns gaily starting the deer.
When I ca'd my life my ain bonny wee wife ;
Never were sic joys seen as when Mary was
And still she's the blosom I wear in my bosom,
A blosom I'd cherish and wear till I dee ;
For my ain bonny Mary, the star of Glengarry,
She's health and she's wealth, and a good wife
to me.
The Woman who wish’d she’d
never got married.
Young ladies’ have pity on me,
Let me in your company mingle,.
I once was a maiden so free,
Like you I was happy and single.
My mother advised me te wed,
When till seventeen I had tarried,
To church I set off in a trice,
With a man hek-a-day to get married.
I wish I was lying alone,
A short time he loved me sincere,
And used me both kindly and civil;
But the honey moon scarcely was over,
Before that he turned out a devil.
The bellows he threw at my head,
My clothes to the pop shop he carried,
I often had wished I’d been dead,
Before that I had ever got married.
One night he came home in a pet,
And burnt my new boots to a cinder,
The cat he kick’d under the grate,
And the table he threw out of the window;
The bed he took up on his back,
And off to the brokers he carried,
He sold both the poker and tongs,
Oh! I wish I had never been married.
He has but one shirt to h-tf back,
To the gin shop he likes to be dashing,
Sunday all day he lays in he bed,
Whilst his shirt and his stockings I’m washing.
His trowsers are all full of holes,
Long my aprons before him has carried
He grunts and he snores like a pig,
Oh! I wish I had never got married.
My husband is a comical man,
He is a regular out-and out nipper,
He lays out his money himself,
In tea, sugar, candles, and pepper;
Some times for a ha’porth of starch,
A week or a fortnight I’ve tarried,
I’m bothered to death and half starved,
Oh! I wish I had never got married.
Whever lie buys any meat,
Once a month, or I’m greatly mistaken,
It is only a sheep’s head and pluck,
Or a small bit of liver and bacon.
He says bread and butter is dear,
And times are most shocking and horrid,.
I drink water while he drinks strong beer,
Oh! I wish I had never got marr led.
To the landlord the rent he won’t*pay,
Because he declared h’s not able,
He has nought to be taken away,
But two broken chairs and a table ;
For the bed clothes the kettle and broom.
And washing tub off he has carried,
May old Nick fetch him off very soon,
Oh! I wish I had neverjgot married.
I should be happy and joyful once more,
If I could but just see it all right
May old Nick come and whip him away,
Some morning before it is day light.
While you ladies do single remain,
By a tyrant you’l never be hurried,
If I was but single again,
Oh! by jingo, I’d never get married,
I’m a Gent.
I’m a gent, I’m a gent, I’m a gent ready made:
1 roam through the Gtuadrant and Lowther Arcade,,
I’m a register’d swell from the top to the toe ;
I’ve a moustache and a light paletot.
I’ve a cane in my hand and a glass in my eye,
And I wink at the gals, demme, as they go by,
Then, lor, how they giggle to win my regards!
nd I hear them all say, he’s a gent in the guards;
I am a'gent, &c.
I m a gent, I’m a gent, in the Regent-street style,
Examine my waistcoat and look at my tile!
There are gents, 1 daresay, who are handsomer far,
Bat none that can puff with such ease a cigar.
I Can sing a flash song, I can blow on the horn,
I lik e sherry cobblers, I’m lond of Cremorne;
1 love the Cellarius, the Polka I dance,
And I’m rather attached to a party in France.
The girl I adore is a creature divine,
Though dev’lish partial to lobsters and wine,
She was struck with my finger, and caught with*a
hook;
For I took her to visit my unde, the duke.
I’m a Bt, &C.
Tailor and the Treacle
Cask.
Come listen awhile and a story I’ll tell,
I warrant the joke it will please you tight well,
’Tis concerning a tailor of fame and renown,
A buxom youdg tailor of great London town.
Fal the dal the di do.
This buxom young tailor had long cast an eye,
On the wife of a grocer who lived hard by.
Says he, tho’ I am the ninth part of a man,
111 cuckold the grocer (that is if I can.)
Two yards of broad cloth now the grocer did take.
To the house of the tailor a coat for to make;
The very next day, O the coat being done,
Away went the tailor to carry it home.
My husband is out, then the lady did say,
But tell me the charge and the money I’ll pay ;
0 then, said the tailor, I’ll cross it out quite,
If I can but enjoy you, my dear lady, one night.
N’ow the lady invented a plan that was deep,
Says > she to herself, my own council I’ll keep,—
1 ne’er will enjoy the ninth part of a man,
But I’ll send for my husband as soon as 1 can.
Then she to her husband a kind letter did write,
And desired him to come home at 10 the same night,
Then so loving and kind to the tailor she spoke,
And she kept him in town just to make up the joke.
At the hour appointed the grocer came home,
She says to the tailor we are surely undone.
Then she took the poor tailor and up she did pop,
On a large cask of treacle that stood in the shop.
Then the grocer came in, and she told him the joke.
He lighted a candle, but not a word spoke;
The tailor with fright he slipt into the cask,
And up to his middle in treacle snuck fast.
O then, says the grocer, my honest old friend,
If treacle you like, why I’ll dip t’other end.
So out of the cask the poor tailor he took,
And into the same, head and shoulders he stuck.
With treacle besmeared from the foot to the head,
They rolled him in a large feather bed,
AVhen the feathers and treacle they cut such a show,
That he looked like a devil just rolled in snow.
With a light on his head to make him complete.
They with a horsewhip started him down the streets
The folks were all frightened to see him run down,
And swore that the devil himself was in town.
Then straight home he ran to his dear loving wife.
But as soon as she saw him she fell down in a fright.
Threw his arms round her neck and squeesed her so
tight,
That’s murder, she cried, and fell down in a fright.
When she found her mistake they up stairs went
together,
She soon set him free from the treacle and feathers;
But the grocer did laugh till his sides they were sore,
To think the poor tailor was fairly done o’er.
So all you poor tailors wherever you may be,
Be contant with your wife and your own family.
Another man’s goads never covet nor ash.
But always remember the large treacle cask.
Hearts of Oak.
Come, cheer up, my lads, ’tis to glory we steer.
To add something new to this wonderful year ;
To honour we call you, not press you like slaves.
For who are so free as the sons of the waves.
Hearts of oak are our ships, jolly tars are our men
We always are ready.
Steady, boys, steady;
We’ll fight and we’ll conquor again and again.
We ne’er see our loes but we wish them to stay;
They ne’er see us but they wish us away;
If they run, why we follow, and run them ashore.
For if they won’t fight us, what can we do more?
Hearts of oak, &c.
They swear they’ll invade us, these terrible foes,
They’ll heighten our women, our children, our
beaux;
But should their flat bottoms in darkness get o’er.
Still Britons they’ll find to receive them ashore.
Hearts of oak, &c.
Weijll still make them run, and we’ll still make
them sweat,
In spite of the devil, and Brussels gazette ;
Then cheer up, my lads, with one voice let us sing
■Oar soldiers, our sailors, our statesmen and king,
Hearts of oak &c.
Bonny Bunch of Roses.
By the dangers of the ocean,
One morning in the month of June,
The feathered warbling songsters
Their notes so sweet did tune ;
There I espied a female,
Seemingly in grief and woe,
And conversing with young Buonaparte,
Concerning the bonny bunch of roses, O,
0 then, said young Napoleon,
And grasped his mother by the hand,
Do, mother, pray have patience,
Until I am able to command,
1 will raise a terridle army,
And through tremendous dangers go,
And in spite of all the universe,
I’U gain the bonny bunch of roses, O.
When first you saw great Buonaparte,
A on fell upon your bended knees,
And asked your father’s life of him,
He granted it most manfully,—
’Twas when he took an army,
And over the frozen realeras did go,
He said, I’ll conquer Moscow,
Then go to the bonny bunch of roses, 0,
He took three hundred thousand men.
And also kings to join his throng,
He was so well provided,
Enough to sweep this world along,
But when he came near Moscow,
Near over-powerd by the driven snow,
All Moscow was blazing,
Then he lost the bonny bunch of roses, 0.
Now, son, ne’er speak so ventersome,
For England is the heart of oak—
England, Ireland and Scotland,
1 heir unity ne’er has been broke ;
And, son, look at your father,
In St. Helena his body lays low,
And you will follow after,
Beware of the bonny bunch of roses, O,
Oh, mother, adieu for ever,
Now 1 am on my dying bed,
If 1 had lived I should have been clever,
But now 1 drop my youthful head ;
But while onr bones do moulder,
And weeping willow o’er us grow,
The deeds of Napoleon,
We sing the bonny bunch of roses, O.
Come let me take
tliee t® my breast.
Come, let me take thee to my breast.
And pledge we ne'er shall sunder,
And I shall spurn, as vilest dust.
The warld's wealth and grandeur.
And do I hear my Jeanie own
That equal transports molte her ?
I ask for dearest life alone.
That I may live to love her.
Thus in my arms, wi' a' thy charms.
I'll clasp my countless treasure ;
I'll seek nae mair o' heaven to si are.
Than sic a moment's pleasure.
Andby thy' e'en sae bonny blue,
I swear I'm thing for ever ;
And on thy lips I seal my vow.
And break it shall I never.
PRINTED BY J, BOSS,‘ARCADE, NEWCASTLE,
