

"SS , z
72e. 3 7354-
£ 7 7
The State Savings
OF VICTORIA
Types of
Timber-framed Dwelling Houses
available for selection by applicants
under the Provisions of
Housing and Reclamation Act 1920
These Types are also available for selection by applicants for
Credit Fonder Loans.
JULY, 1927
Price 1/•


The State Savings Bank
OF VICTORIA.
State Savings Bank Commissioners:
Sir WILLIAM G. McBEATH, K.8.E., Chairman.
Lieut -General Sir J. W. McCAY, K.C.M.G., K.B E., C. 8., V.D., Deputy Chairman.
G. ANGUS YOUNG, Esq. C. FORRESTER, Esq. W. WARREN KERR, Esq., C.M.G., C.B.E.
GEO. E. EMERY, C.M.G., J.R, General Manager.
ALEX. COOCH, J.P., Assistant General Manager
G. BURRIDGE LEITH, A.R.V.1.A., Chief Architect.
Types of
Timber-framed Dwelling Houses
available for selection by applicants
under the Provisions of
Housing and Reclamation Act 1920


HEAD OFFICE, ELIZABETH STREET.


THE STATE SAVINGS BANK OF VICTORIA.
HEAD OFFICE : 139-153 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.
HOUSING AND RECLAMATION ACT
Types of Dwelling Houses
which will be erected for Applicants
according to the Bank’s standard plans and specifications.
WARNING. —Do not buy land without first consulting the Bank. We do not advise you to sign any
contract, nor pay any deposit, until the Bank has approved the purchase. The Bank will not take over
land purchased within six months of date of application if the price paid is in excess of the Bank’s estimate
of value.
Each purchaser for whom a house is erected must personally occupy the house.
Standard plans may he Inspected at Head Office or any Branch of the State Savings Bank.
CONDITIONS.
1. Applicant must not own a dwelling house in Victoria or elsewhere, and must not be in receipt of an
income of more than £4OO a year. A married woman will not be eligible for a house under this Clause
unless her husband is also eligible; but only one of them may obtain a house.
2. The capital cost to the Commissioners of dwelling house and land, including outbuildings, fences,
lighting, water supply, drainage, sewerage, and all other costs, must not exceed £B5O if the dwelling house
is of wood, but the total cost may exceed this amount provided the applicant pays the excess.
3. Applicant must provide a minimum deposit of Fifty pounds, in addition to the amount of any such
excess, unless the excess amounts to £75 or more, in which case the deposit may be waived at the discretion
of the Commissioners.
4. The amount provided by the Bank will be repayable by monthly instalments of 13s. 4d. for each £lOO.
Such instalments will include interest at 6* per cent, per annum, and will discharge the whole debt in
241 years.
5. Instalments must be paid punctually on the last day of each month at the nearest or most convenient
Branch of the Bank.
6. When the balance of debt has been reduced to two-thirds of valuation (such valuation to be made by
the Commissioners’ valuator as required), the rate of repayment and interest may lie altered to correspond
with the rates for Credit Foncier loans, subject to the Commissioners’ approval in each case, and subject to
the loan or advance having been current for at least three years.
This concession may be allowed to Discharged Soldiers, Sailors, and Nurses, Dependants and Red Cross or
Transport Workers, when the debt is reduced to three-fourths of valuation.
7. Any purchaser who is not in arrear may at any time deposit with the Bank any sum to be held for
future payments, and interest will be credited on such deposit at the same rate as is payable on the amount
of debt (now 6J per cent.).
8. Every house shall be insured in the State Savings Bank Insurance Trust Account, and the purchaser
shall pay the premium.
9. The purchaser shall pay all rates and taxes, and shall keep all buildings, fences, &c,, in good repair.
10. The purchaser cannot let, lease, sell or mortgage the property without the consent of the Commis-
sioners.
11. If a purchaser sells a property with the Commissioners’ consent, ho may purchase another property
under these conditions, provided the Commissioners are satisfied with the reason given for making the sale,
and that it was not for purpose of profit or speculation.
12. The purchaser may at any time pay off the balance of his debt in full with interest to date of pay-
ment, and obtain a transfer and release, the cost of which must be paid by the purchaser.
Application Forms may be obtained at Head Office or any Branch of the State Savings Bank, or by writing to —
The General Manager, State Savings Bank,
Elizabeth-street, Melbourne.


INSTRUCTIONS TO APPLICANTS.
1. Bequests for alterations and amendments to type plans must not be lodged with the application,
but must be made on the prescribed form, which will be forwarded to applicant when the recommended
tender is submitted for approval.
2. All details relative to finish, fittings, materials, water and gas supply, &e., must be completed on pre-
scribed Building Form, to be signed by Applicant and lodged with Application Form.
3. Estimated costs, obtainable on application to the Bank, are to be taken as approximate only and
liable to variation in particular instances, according to locality, site, fencing, sewerage, water supply, and
other contingencies.
4. Number of Type Plan selected must be clearly defined on Application Form,
5. Types numbered 31 to 35 inclusive are for erection in country centres only.
6. Types numbered 8, 11 and 12 have been withdrawn, and are not now available for selection.
7. As minor amendments to standard types are made from time to time, applicants are advised to
inspect plans and specifications prior to closing of tenders.
TABLE OF PURCHASER’S INSTALMENTS.
Table showing the apportionment of the Monthly Instalments ol 13s. 4d,
(thirteen shillings and fourpence) for each £lOO and the position of the
account at the end of each year.
Balance
Owing.
Principal.
6th
7th
Bth
9th
10th
11th
12 th
13th
14th
15 th
8 0 0
23rd
24th
24 5/12


Summary of Specification covering various Types.
Foundations
Red Gum or Jarrah.
Timber Framing —Hardwood or Oregon,
Chimneys
Brick.
Weatherboards -
(a) Baltic ; painted.
(b) Hardwood ; stained and oiled
(c) Weatherboards and Asbestos Cement Sheeting.
Gables
(a) Shingles.
(6) Asbestos Cement Sheeting.
Linings
(a) Lath and Plaster; (b) Fibrous Plaster Sheeting.
Timber Dado to Bathroom, and the Kitchen if desired.
Ceilings
Fibrous Plaster Sheeting.
{a) Terra Cotta Tiles.
{by Gal. Corrugated Iron.
Windows -
(а) Double Hung Sashes. 1 ,
(б) Cement S.sto., } Stond " d S ‘“'
Standard Design, 3 or 4 panelled, Red Pine,
Internal Joinery
Red Pine, plain sanitary finish..
Flooring
Main Building, 6" x Baltic.
Verandahs. 4" x Jarrah.
Lighting
Electric Lighting throughout.
Gas Service (where available) to
Stove.
Fencing
Boundary Fences—s' paling.
Frontage—Cyclone Wire Fabric, Style A.
Gates : Single or Double if required to match fence.
Sewerage -
Properties will be sewered where Retie. Branch is available.
In all other cases all sanitary plumbing will be carried out for future connection
and temporary connection made to storm water drains
Storm Water
(a) Three Brick Open Drains.
(b) 4" Pipe Drains.,
Water Service, where supply is available, to all house points and one tap in front
garden and one at rear.
Water Service -
Fittings
All Fittings in accordance with Standard Selection —
(1) Mantelpiece, Grate and Tiled Hearth to Living Room (other rooms open
brick fireplaces).
(2) Bath (a) 5' 6" Gal. Iron, Rolled Edge; (b) 5' 6" C.I. Porcelain Enamel, R.E.
(3) Sink 15", Porcelain Enamelled.
(4) Stove, Applicant’s selection.
(5) Copper (a) 12-gal. capacity, seamless, built in ; (6) Gas Copper ; (c) Portable
Copper.
(6) Cement Wash Troughs (2 compartment)
Internal and External Wood Work —(a) Stained and oiled ; ( b) Painted
Painting






Front Elevation.
t a-—«H—|-
VERANDAH. \w ' l
Kitchen <^N
gjLimcß" ]
/*? Q"*/2‘o'' :1 ;
? 1
lO
bedroom z
/2’Q"t /O O"
VERANDAH
fl ~ fgl'
27 6" J
Ground Plan


Type No. 4








Type No. 9


Type No. lO
fnrr| gag Mn
*| f ~n 11 ■ii■ii■g. i < n . ii IL -JI ■! -II .u - u '.u -n >' 1 IJ 7
JMfliL
*
Front Elevation
Ground Plan




Type No. 14
Front Elevation.
Ground Plan




TYPE NO. 16
Front Elevation
Ground Plan




Ground Plan








TYPE NO 22
Front Elevation
Ground Plan




Type No. 24
Front Elevation
11 fu/t/re
|l /o'* /o' ||
!| i 1
I 1 ft- - —-n
y j
Ground Plan


Type No 25








Type No 29


Type No. 30
nmf jmn
E fill E [■■■[[■■■l ===== u I ».| iu 7-
IiSSgPggWIiP
J J ~ --v r \_L


For Country Selection Only.


Type No. 32
For Country Selection Only.




For Country Selection Only.




Type No. 36






Type No. 39




Type No. 41
Front Elevation,
Ground Plan.


























Printed by
McCARRON, BIRD & CO.,
479 Collins Street,
Melbourne.
