

FOURTH EDITION.
Box 12-
Ultra-Ritualism
RfllD ITS
Romanising Tendency:
The Attitude of some of the Churches
of England to Paganising Practices.
Past and Present Proselytisers.
The Old and the New Church.
Baptism.
The Lord’s Supper.
Romish Inventions, etc.
A BRITISH LAYMAN.
Melbourne *
Green & Fargher, Printers, 14 McKieeop Street




Ultra^f^itaalism
ITS
Romanising Tendency:
The Attitude of some of the Churches
of England to Paganising Practices.
Past and Present Proselytisers.
The Old and the New Church.
Baptism.
The Lord’s Supper.
Bomish Inventions, etc.
A BRITISH LAYMAN.
Melbourne :
Green & Fargher, Printers, 14 McKieeop Street




PREFACE.
Mr. Henry Reeve, C. 8., D.C.E., who held the office of
Clerk of Appeals and Registrar to the Privy Council, and for over
fifty years was in office, said : “It would be well for a suitable
lay person to review the works of Manning, Pusey, and
Newman, and expose their dishonest dealings.’’
These pages contain selected passages, extracted from the
works of eminent and learned men, and their authentication can
be tested by reference to volume, page, and edition supplied in
each case. The publication is neither polemical nor controver-
sial, but leaves the reader to form his own judgment as to the
methods adopted to enmesh the people of the Church of England
in the toils of the Church of Rome. The compiler adopts the
aphorism of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus—“ I seek after truth,
by which no man ever yet was injured,” and holds the Rev. Mr.
Chapman’s statement to be undeniable, namely: “That (infallible)
Rome was stronger than truth, and more authentic than facts.”
“ Know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” (John
viii. 32.)
God give us men ; a time like this demands
Great hearts, strong minds, true faith, and willing hands ;
Men whom lust of office does not kill ;
Men whom spoils of office cannot buy ;
Men who possess conviction and a will ;
Men who have honour, men who dare not lie.”


INDEX
Abbott’s Anglican “Career of
Cardinal Newman ” ... 14-19
Addendum ... ... ... 50
Ancient Irish Church ... 28-30
Altaror Table ... ... 36,37
Anastasius on Confession ... 50
Apostolate of Press ... ... 3
Appendix (Romish Practices
and Dogmas) ... ... 45-49
Archbishop Carr ... ... ... 35
Archdeacon Farrar ... ... 10
Archdeacon Langley ... ... 28
Archbishop Parker ... ... 28
Arches, Court of Decision ... 12
Augustine ... ... ... ... 27
Baptismal Regeneration ... 40, 41
Bible, Final Authority .... ... 36
Birrell, Augustine... ... ... 44
Blunt, Professor ... ... ... 32
Boniface, Pope, Bull ... ... 13
Brain well, Lord ... ... ... 9
Brunoj Giordano ... ... ... 8
Bryce, James ... ... ... 28
Cairns, Dr. (Melb.) Opinion ... 21
■Catacombs, Worship in 27
Celtic Race ... ... ... ... 28
Christianity Paganised 32
Church Standards 5
Church, What it is ? 26
Confession 49, 50
Constitutional Church Govern-
ment 5°
Constantine’s Edict 27
Clonfert Cathedral 29
Councils of Ephesus, Chalcedon
and Trent... 33, 34
Creeds, Comparison of ... 30-3 2
Dodsworth ... ... ... ... 22
Durham, Bishop of 23
“ Edinburgh Review ’’ .. ••• 29
“ Essays on Miracles ” ... ... 17
Evans, Rev. H. M. M. ... ... 11
Far well, Justice 29
Freeman, E. A 28
Fronde, Hurrell 14. 15, 16
Froude, J. A. .. 44
Gal ton, Arthur ... ... .. 28
Galileo .. ... ... ... 8
Gladstone 5
Godby, Canon ... ... ... 44
Gorham Case ... ... ... 40
Halifax, Lord ... ... ... 11
Hampden, Dr. ... ... ... 17
Hobbes 9
Hole, Dean, on Pusey ... ... 21
Hook, Dr ' ... 20, 21, 22
Huxley’s Essays 4
Incense ... 32
Ingram, Dr. ... ... ... n
Inventions of Rome ... ... 38
Irish Nation, when Papalised ... 28
Jesuitism ... ... ... ... 17
Lee, Vicar C.C., Doncaster
Reasons .... for disobeying
Bishops ... ... ... ... 8
Liddon’s “Life of E. B. Pusey” 19-21
Lignori ... ... ... ... 49
Lottery at Mexico for Souls of
Dead ... ... ... 24, 25
Macaulay, Lord, “ Review of
Gladstone’s Essays ” ... ... 50
Manning’s Craft and Deceit ... 13
Merivale, Dean ... ... ... 33
McCarthy, Michael J. F. ... 29
Morris, J. B. ... ... ... 21
National Review ... ... ... 28
Newman’s Career ... ... 14-19
Newman’s Opinion of John Bull 16
Newman’s Monastic House ... 16
Novel Articles of Pius IV. 30-32
Nye, G. H. F 28
Northumberland, Earl of ... 6
Oakely, Letter to V. C. ... ... 12
Ordination Oath ... ... ... 14
Old and New Church ... 26-36
Oxford, Bishop of, Opinion of ... 22
Pagan Origin of Errors ... 32, 33
Pusey, Life of ... ... 19-22
Pusey, Wilberforce’s Opinion of 22
Queen’s Declaration ... ... 8, 9
Reservation of Sacraments ... 44
Roman Catholic Authors on
Romanism ... ... 45-49
Rubric 5
Russell’s, Lord John, Letter ... 23
Sacraments ... ... ... ... 39
St. Jerome ... ... ... ... 28
Selborne, Lord, Chancellor ... 6
Smith, Goldwin ... 50
Spinoza ... ... ... ... 9
Stanley, Dean 21
Stephen, Sir Janies Fitzjames,
Opinion on Schisms in Church
of Rome 19
Temple, Dr. 7
Tractarians’ Duplicity 15
Ultra-Ritualism Unveiled ... 1-13
Universities of France ... ... 4
Vestments and Ornaments 36,37
Wilberforce, Dr., Letter, etc. ... 22
Wilberforce, Newman’s Sugges-
tion, etc. ... ... ... 22
Ward’s Life of Wiseman ... 22
Wiseman, Cardinal, Opinions,etc. 23
Williams, Isaac 15


Ultra= Ritualism
Unveiled.
This work is published in order to direct the attention of the
members of the Church of England to the means adopted for altering
ithe ceremonial and corrupting the doctrines and practices of the
Church, and to expose the subtlety by which these changes have in
some cases been effected. But not alone for the members of the
Church of England has the matter contained herein an interest.
Every member of the true Catholic Church, of which Christ is the
Head, should be awakened to the fact that Romanising action is not
■confined to the Church of England, but that an active organisation
is in existence to discredit Scripture teaching, to diffuse tenets and
practices which are opposed to the teaching of Christ and His
apostles, and to extend the civil and ecclesiastical power of the
priests and the Pope.
The Manchester City News of 28th April, 1894, contained the
following:—“The Independent and Nonconformist says:- —The
Apostolate of the Press’ is busy in England, ft is one of the
methods employed by the Roman Catholic Church in recovering
England to subjection to the ‘ Roman obedience.’ The organisation
has constantly on hand a corps of writers always ready to reply in
the secular press to anything which seems inimical to the Papacy.
Many\of them have been ritualistic devotees in the Church of England,
and are versed in the Romish controversy. The entire country is said
to be mapped out, and whenever anything appears in any of the
■districts, hostile to Rome the paper is sent to London and an answer
is sent back meant for the local journal. The replies are smartly
written, and all Ultramontane claims are urged and maintained with
great zeal and adroitness ”
.If we are careless or indifferent to the changes in the ceremonial
of worship made by the Ultra-Ritualists or Roman Catholic sym-
pathisers we may some day discover that these insidious innovators,
who arrogantly assume the right to depart from fixed definite stan-
dards and be a “ law unto themselves,” have worked a grievous mis-
chief that it will cost us dearly to undo. Not only will our ecclesias-
tical liberty of conscience be fettered, but our civil rights, which we
owe to the Reformation, will also' be taken from us. No one who
has read history or who is observant can be blind to the fact that
the object of the Romish priests has been, and is, to bring the people


into subjection and unquestioning obedience to their rule. The
Vatican has a more effective force in the polling-booth than in a
Papal army, and will use this force on every occasion for its aggran-
disement.
Referring to the secular Universities of France, a recent writer
uses the following language in reference to the position of the Church
of Rome : —“ The object which the lay spirit has in view is to secure
the political and scientific independence of laymen, so that they may
manage the affairs of the State and follow all kinds of intellectual
pursuits without asking the permission of the Church of Rome. The
object which the Sacerdotal spirit has in view is to establish such a
domination over laymen that they may not venture upon any political
course of action, or upon any course of intellectual study, without
being authorised by the priesthood. On the other side, the Sacer-
dotal party carries on a warfare, silently gaining influence wherever
possible over families and schools; over tradesmen and professional
people; over the National Assembly —government of all description.
Rome dislikes parental influence, and endeavours to detach young
people from it wherever possible. In the seminary, and now by the
new Roman Catholic Universities, the Church is endeavouring to
crush the State University in France.”
There should at all times be a determined repression of the
efforts of religious bodies to usurp the authority of the State. How
far this usurping of authority would go if the Roman Catholic Church
held sway may be seen by reading the Appendix to this publication.
Pope Pius IX. denounced freedom of conscience as an insane folly,
and freedom of the press a pestiferous error. And this is the bondage
that the High Church followers of Manning, Newman, and Pusey
would lead the people into!*
There is urgent need for men to declare themselves in no uncer-
tain way if they love truth and freedom. In Vol. 111., pages 192-210,
of Huxley's Essays occurs the following passage:—“Persons are
beginning to see the fact that matters of belief are of infinite import-
ance, anti to range themselves under their natural banners. . . .
Roman cardinals were more familiar with Virgil than with Isaiah, and
Popes laboured to re-paganise Rome. The High Church followers
of Newman and Pusey are seeking to paganise the English Church.”
In whatever combined employment of men there exists in the
world, whether in the army, navy, or any kind of service—political,
civil, or industrial--it is an admitted necessity that there be discipline,
and that the directing powers shall enforce a salutary obedience to
established authority. Does it not seem within the past half century that
the bishops, archbishops, as well as deans, archdeacons—dignitaries
of all grades—in the Church of England have rather been actively
engaged in restoring errors and abuses, both in doctrine and in the
practices of public worship, which it was the main work of the Refor-
mation to correct, and which it has been the constant effort of the
* See Addendum at end of Appendix.


Church, in articles, homilies, and canons, to- designate and condemn
as false, unscriptural, and corrupt, and even, to denounce as dangerous
an:l heretical ? And when there have been irregular practices and cor-
rupt doctrine introduced into the Church of England by men holding
clerical orders and powers in the Church, there has been a distinct
inclination to use the authority which the ecclesiastical and civil law
has placed within the control of the Church officials for the suppres-
sion of abuses and maintenance of uniform practice and creed within
the Church. * There is no one who can regard the significant and
abrupt changes which the Church has undergone within the period
mentioned without recognising a broadly-spread action to alter and
Romanise the Church of England, and to give it an aspect which
many regard with pain for the present and dread for the future of the
■Church.
The late Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, on a certain occasion in
the House of Commons, said:—“There is no principle on which the
Protestant Church can be permanently upheld but that it is the
Church which teaches the truth.’’ It is my object to show in unmis-
takable terms the undermining influences which are at work to over-
throw this principle. It is incumbent on every lover of civil and
religious liberty, of which the Church of England has been the
faithful supporter, to jealously guard against and steadfastly resist
any encroachments upon that liberty by the Church which always has
been opposed to freedom.
The toleration of a great many evils is due to- apathy. We are
too prone to leave to departments of State and religious organisations
the settlements which should be the active concern of every individual
churchman and citizen. British yeomen —sons and daughters —
organise ; so that by exposure and refutation the aims of the High
Church followers of Newman, Pusey and Co. may be defeated.
The law of the Church is as easily read and comprehended by
laymen as by the clergy; and are laymen blameless if they suffer
without protest any departure from the Church rules? To concede
the point that all matters affecting the conduct of worship should be
left to the clergy is to weakly concede what Ultra-Ritualistic ministers
desire to attain —the subjection of worshippers to such practices and
Innovations as they may please to indulge in. It is through this
stifling of conscience that the Romish Church has maintained its
power over its adherents. They meet all objections to their creed
and ceremonies with the statement that the Pope and cardinals have
the power to make whatever decrees they deem proper.
The Liturgy and Rubric, with the Articles, are standards which
all candidates for Holy Orders must conform to, and do in the mast
solemn manner pledge themselves to maintain. If the bishops
permit the clergy to reject these standards, or the clergy decline to
adhere to them, they both break the honest conditions under which
they accepted their respective powers, and act alike in fraud of their
ordination obligations. The bishops are the conservators of the
Church’s orthodoxy, and if they countenance disloyalty to the Church


standards, or do not insist on reasonable conformity to them, they
are all abettors of dishonesty, and may be said to have compounded
a spiritual felony. The late Lord Selborne, to whom nobody could
attribute any sympathy with law-breaking, declared judicially in the
House of Lords that “ every person chosen to- fill the episcopal office-
will be properly sensible of his duty (2V inetcenth Century , April, 1903;.
And is it not part of the duty of God’s ministers, and more especially
of the bishops, to guard His flock from treachery within as well as
assaults from without—from those who, while professing to adhere
to the faith of the Protestant Church, are, by their practices and !
avowed beliefs, secretly—whether consciously or not—undermining
the principles of Protestantism and causing serious injury to' the
spiritual life of the Church ? Shall it he said of those who are set
as “ watchmen upon the walls” that “His watchmen are blind, they
are all without knowledge, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark,
dreaming, lying down, loving to slumber” (Isaiah, Ivi., 10). Can any-
one in authority in the Church justly advance as a reason for tolera-
tion of evil and abuse that he is “ all things to all men ?’ ! Paul said
he was, but only that he might win them to the truth, and not at the
sacrifice of principle.
Let us therefore hold fast the form of sound doctrine, and resist
steadfastly those who seek to make innovations to the forms of
worship not only not provided for, but as is shown clearly in this
publication, strictly forbidden. The contention of Ultra-Ritualists
that their practices are not essential divergences from the rules for
guidance contained in the Book of Common Prayer is false, and it is
inconceivable that they can honestly justifv such a claim. Their
practices are neither lawful nor expedient.
In the memorials of the late Lord Chancellor, the Earl of Sel-
borne, who was a highly distinguished churchman and an active
personal worker in church and schools—indeed, in every good work—
the following significant passages occur:
“ The interpolation of anything into which it is not directed is,
in substance and in fact, a departure from, ‘what is directed.’ It is
inconsistent that abolished ceremonies mav be reintroduced or
revived by ‘ the minister' or the bishop at his pleasure, merely be-
cause there are no negative words in the Rubric that they are not to
be used” (see page 406). “ Some clergy really seem to think they can
make or unmake legal jurisdiction at their pleasure, which enables
them to dispense with all legal methods.” Vol. 1., page 402.
It is expressly stated in the Rubric preceding the Morning
Prayer that “ such ornaments of the Church and ministers . .
be retained and be in use as were in the Church of England by the
authority of Parliament in the reign of King Edward VI.” In the
reign of Charles 11. the Earl of Northumberland proposed as an
amendment—“ That the Rubric be not altered.” The amendment
was lost, and the motion for the present Book of Common Prayer
was carried. This is the authority for the worship of the Church
subscribed to and acknowledged by solemn oath by the very men who-


interpolate according to their own fancy, and insidiously revive
abolished, because pernicious, practices. Their conduct is illegal
and dishonest. Why do they not seek to obtain authority for their
actions in an Amending Act of Parliament, or join that Church
where they might indulge to the fullest extent their fancy for corrupt
ceremonial ? Such a position would be more honourable than the
one they continue to occupy in the Church of England.
Would any man in civil matters claim that because certain,
things (which would be harmful or give offence to the other party to
the contract) were not expressly forbidden they were therefore allow-
able. Were he to act on such an assumption, his illogical inference
he would find expensive, as reference to any civil tribunal would
convince him that he must respect the spirit and intention of hi;>
agreement.
Simh fallacious, illogical reasoning in connection with the forms-
’of worship leads very easily to a reduciio ad absurdam. It is not
forbidden that the officiating clergyman should stand on his head or
perform somersaults —he might, indeed, in an excess of religious
fervour, dance before the Communion table (which he delights to
call the Altar)—but his own sense of the incongruity of such pro-
ceedings and respect for the worshippers would prevent such an
exhibition. Put are the genuflexions, Bcq., of Ultra-Ritualists one
whit more defensible on the ground that they are not expressly for-
bidden ?
If the bishops allow their clergy to be a “ law unto themselves, ’
what is the use of having rules for guidance of worship at all ?
* Is Dr. Temple, the Archbishop of Canterbury (1899), the
impartial arbiter of the matter, to l whom can be entrusted the decision
on subjects now exciting question and division, and which demand
fearlessness and honesty, to be ’esteemed sound and correct when he-
avows as follows:—“To pray for the dead is not forbidden by the
Church of England” (Prayer Book). Such a flagrant sophism is not
to be countenanced by any lovers of truth. Where is logical reason-
ing if such conclusions are possible from such premises ? A written-
contract cannot be given to show that the meaning of it is different
from what the words import, so neither can the evidence that the
clergy have acted upon the supposition that it is different have that
effect. It is common-sense that inferences from a set of documents
cannot be placed against express statements in the same document.
The Thirty-nine Articles are an abstract of the theological dogmas.
Thev are a businesslike agreement with the clergy of the Church of
England.
There is the great danger of establishing a falsehood by giving
* Scholarship is no warranty of sound reasoning. Spinoza remarked
concerning a book bx r Gratz that it did not contain “ a single rational
sentence, yet leading Rabbis in Germany and Poland accepted the puddle
of nauseous blasphemy as a fountain of divine wisdom.”—See Spinoza, by-
Pollock, page 10.


undue emphasis to antiquity as a sanction, or having convincing
force. A lie may be as old as the Tower of Babel, and yet be a
monstrous delusion; a sophism as ancient as Cain's —“ Am Imy
brother's keeper?”—and be as reprehensible to-day as on the day
it was uttered. That it has its pernicious effect, read the follow-
ing:—
The vicar of Christ Church, Doncaster (the Rev. E. Lee), on
Sunday evening explained his reasons for not obeying the ruling
■of the archbishops with regard to the use of incense. He said ‘‘ he
did not believe it was within the right of the two- provinces to change
a practice which had received the universal assent of the Catholic
Church, nor could he see that the use of incense was forbidden by
the Prayer Book.”
It is therefore, we infer, allowable to do any act, or perform any
ceremony, or introduce any innovation into our beliefs or formulae, or
use any documents which are not expressly forbidden by the Church
Prayer Book. This seems to justify the assumption of a right to estab-
lish any doctrine, or to extinguish by force any outside statement of
truth, natural or religious, such as that for which the gentle and wise
Giordano Bruno was ordered to be burned, and the infallible wisdom
and charity which decreed the imprisonlrient of Galileo. Surely it
opposes all rules of justice and logic to assert that all matters not
specially denounced in an Act of Parliament or any other document
are lawful to be done, although manifestly opposed to the spirit of
the law ?
It seems as if there was a strain of effort to obtain power such as
that which the Popes of Rome once exercised over the minds and
•consciences of men, and this may be sought to be exercised by such
Christian institutions as the Inquisition, with the present existing
methods of persecution and oppression. We may hear again of
future followers of the gentle and wise Giordano' Bruno being subject
to like treatment and being burned, or modern Galileos being im-
prisoned for making statements of truth. The Church of Christ may
be poisoned or undermined by some means not yet enrolled in our
■“ Index Expurgations,” as for instance the acceptance of the simple
ipse dixit of the Pope, Jesuits, and Dr. Temple as conclusive logic.
It must be observed that while it is stated that “ things not for-
bidden in the Prayer Book," although notoriously condemned by the
Church, are not to be made subjects of judgment by Archbishop
Temple ; that the use of the words in the Communion Service,
Grant that we receiving these thy creatures of bread and wiue," and
also the last clause at the end of the same service, ‘‘ For the Sacra-
mental bread and wine remain still in their very natural substances,”
are not dealt with in His Grace's judgment ; or thirty-first Article,
Wherefore the sacrifices of masses, in the which it was commonly
said that the priest did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to
have remission of pain or guilt, were blasphemous fables and dan-
gerous deceits.”
Declaration which under the Act of Settlement was made and


signed by Her Majesty in the presence of the Houses of Parliament,
20th day of November, 1837: —“ I, Victoria, do solemnly and sin-
cerely, in the presence of God, profess, testify, .and declare that I do
believe that in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper there is not any
transubstantiation of the elements of bread and wine into the body
and blood of Christ . . . and that the invocation or adoration
of the Virgin Mary or any other saint, and the sacrifice of the mass,,
as they are now used in the Church of Rome, are superstitious and
idolatrous. ”
The fourteenth Canon enjoins that all ministers shall observe
the orders, rites, and ceremonies prescribed in the present Book of
Common Prayer, as well in reading of the Scriptures and saying of
prayers as in the administration of the Sacraments, without either
diminishing in respect of preaching or in any other respects, or add-
ing anything to the matter or form thereof.
Hobbes and Spinoza denounced ecclesiastical pretensions at
every opportunity. On the subject of “ Special Revelation’ Spinoza
says :— ■“ No man can have immediate assurance of its truth except he
to whom it is actually revealed, and therefore no private citizen is
bound to take notice of anything alleged for revealed truth by another
who, being a man, may err, and which is more, may lie.” .
“ The State is supreme over all persons, and in all cases ecclesiastical
and temporal.”— Spinoza , by Pollock, p. 319.
Lord Bramwell, on juridical grounds, condemned the exercise of
a discretion which was prohibited for a breach of the law for reasons
personal to the accused person, or connected with the policy or ad-
ministration of the law itself (Nineteenth Century, 15th May, 1903, p.
753)-
It seems consistent with even ordinary commercial morality that
if a shipmaster signs articles under an owner he is bound to discharge
his duties faithfully by that owner so long as he continues in his
employment under those articles, and each man engaged on the vessel
under the same articles is under the same obligation. If such a
master and crew were to alter the destination of the vessel, or to-
divert the objects of the voyage so that the advantages should become
the possession of an admitted rival, there is very little question as to
the verdict which would be passed on such conduct by public opinion.
It is among the misfortunes of the Church of England in the past
half century that not only Newman, Pusey, and those who followed
their teaching and examples, have seriously transgressed the sailing
orders of the Church of England, and of the sacred Scriptures, but
that many of the bishops have fanned the flames of dishonesty
instead of quenching them, and by their actions aided and abetted
the wrong-doers.
Although Newman and Pusey and their followers gave their
bodily health and intellectual powers to serve the Pope, and sacri-
ficed their goods to feed their propagandism, yet, being unjust and
dishonest stewards of the Church of England, their industry and
liberality cannot wipe out their unfaithfulness and dishonesty. They'


may have been zealous, and even self-sacrificing, after the manner of
the victims who flung themselves beneath the car of Juggernaut, but
this species of pagan devotion can by no means atone for the base-
ness and chicanery which seem to be so> easily deducible from the
•course of long intrigue and concealment which marked their treachery
towards the Church establishment they so solemnly swore to main-
tain, and on the specific lines, too, laid down in their obligations.
Archdeacon Farrar is by no means a harsh judge of ecclesiastical
delinquents, and he says in his “ Social and Present-day Questions" :
■“ The most elaborate ritual in the world is not one whit more pleasing
to God than sounding brass or tinkling cymbal” (page 125). “With-
out honesty, without truthfulness, and that rarest of all virtues —the
love of truth— all our opinions or rituals may only mean that our
leprosy is as white as snow” (page 126). “ Put if the Church of
England should dwindle and degenerate into a feeble imitation of
the Church of Rome, and copy her practices, she will collapse into
irremediable ruin” (page 128).
One more consideration seems to strike us on reviewing the
effects of the moral license claimed by these men generally, and that
is that there is such an amazing effort to be freed from, the simple
rule and integrity taught in the Church from the sacred Scriptures,
they must conceal from themselves the inevitable serfdom into which
they voluntarily precipitate themselves.
The directors of a great joint-stock enterprise would not certainly
continue to employ managers who undermined the allegiance of the
servants, or diverted the business of the concern into an antagonist
establishment ; nor would the tolerably acute Dissenters keep for any
length of time in the position of professors, men, however skilful they
might be as linguists and rhetoricians, if thev discovered that the teach-
ing was subversive of what they considered essential truth, ami that
the loyalty of the students was being undermined by subtle and
specious influences. It seems to come very closely into analogy with
the familiar figure of “ the wolves in lambs’ clothing,” and, indeed, if
-one would not fear being considered as judging too harshly, it beyond
question suggests to us that the wisdom of the serpent and his ver-
micular sliminess seem to be joined to that cunning so long attributed
to the fox.
The tractarian clique in Oxford have certainly, by their methods
of deception, covered by the terms “ oikonomia ” and “ phcnakismos"
•(the secret meanings of which are specially defined in Vol. 1., page
155, of Abbott), adopted the very tactics which have gained for the
Jesuits the reputation so fatal to their character for straightforward-
ness and truth.
“ The Church and nation seemed to have fallen into the lifeless
condition figured in the ‘ dry bones’ of Ezekiel, and both Church
and nation seemed at once subject to a destructive agency, for which
their indifference to spiritual life specially adapted them. The con-
vulsion which has shaken the Church has been accompanied by an
indifference and insensibility to religious influence which has no doubt


opened the way for the injection of formalism, spectacular worship,
and semi-paganism, which demonstrates itself, not in the higher
Christian development of holiness and Christian character, but in the
floral displays, genuflexions, orchestral expositions, and other demon-
strations of a dead religion, which must be followed, as a natural
consequence, by sacerdotal assumptions, and the spiritual, national,
and social degradation which has invariably sprung therefrom.”
In contrast to the inaction displayed by the authorities of the
Church of England on the subject of Ultra-Ritualism, it is gratifying
to read the following extract from The Argus-. —
“ London, 30th April.—At the Diocesan Conference yesterday
Dr. Ingram, the Bishop of London, condemned in scathing terms the
Rev. H. M. M. Evans, late, vicar of St. Michael’s, Shoreditch, who in
February last was suspended by the bishop for declining to desist
from certain extreme ritualistic practices. Dr. Ingram accused Mr.
Evans of having surreptitiously introduced forbidden services into
his Church, and of having deceived him. Mr. Evans was lately ad-
mitted into the Church of Rome.”
At a recent Church Congress in London there was a studied
effort to keep the ritualistic controversy in the background, but it
asserted itself not only at the preliminary meeting of the Church
Union, but at more than one of the congress gatherings. Among the
other subjects discussed was the maintenance of a type of Anglican
service and the limits of possible variations, which gave ample scope
for an interchange of views on ritualism. The most notable sitting
was on the Thursday, the proceedings being characterised by several
scenes of heated discussions concerning the principles of ritualism.
Principal Robertson admitted that law demanded the allegiance of
all, but thought the difficulty of finding an authoritative interpreta-
tion of it might be solved by patience. “ Lord Halifax characterised
as cruel the spirit which would lead the rulers of the Church to treat
the desire of Christians [Romanisers would be the more correct term]
to express their feelings of religious devotion through certain Chris-
tian rites as betraying a dangerous tendency that ought not to be
tolerated.”
Lord Halifax's attitude on the question of Ultra-Ritualism is too
well known to require comment on such a remark from him.
The following extract is taken from the London Letter of The
Argus of Ist July, 1903:
“ A remarkable movement in the Church of England has been
■started this week, which is likely to have far-reaching consequences.
It has to many persons been a matter of some anxiety that the tradi-
tional High Church party have for years past made no endeavour
to restrain the mad career of leading members of the English Church
Union, such as the supporters or followers of Lord Halifax, in their
endeavour to introduce distinctly Roman practices and doctrines
into the Church of England. The representatives that are left to us
of the old-fashioned High Church party have now spoken out. Thev
have signed a declaration affirming their sense of the ‘ sacred obliga-
tion’ of the clergy to use the Prayer-Book in public prayer and


administration of the Sacraments, and no other form, except so far
as shall be authorised by lawful authority. This statement is a
distinct blow at the endeavours that are being made in some places
to introduce into our Chufches the sacerdotal services and strange
litanies of the Roman missal. The declaration also urges that,
pending the restoration of the synodical action of the Church, the
admonitions and requests of the bishops, acting in formal consulta-
tion with their clergy, should be obeyed. A still more controversial
point in the declaration is the affirmation of the right, under the
Ornaments Rubric, to retain the ceremonial of Edward Vl.,"which for
peace’s sake should be recognised as the lawful inheritance of the
Church. This statement by implication condemns the Lambeth
‘ opinions,’ and magnifies the Lincoln judgment. Under the Rubric
of Edward. VJ. the ritualists have introduced vestments and many of
their medieval practices. The value of this declaration lies in its
signatories. it is headed by the Rev. Russell Wakefield, the Deans
of St. Paul’s, Worcester, Lichfield, Christchurch, Canon Overton,
Professor Collins, Principal Headlam, Dr. Mason, Mr. Dearmer, Mr.
Erere—historians, scholars, and liturgiologists. Altogether, about a
hundred of the most prominent and most scholarly men in the Church
have given their adhesion to this declaration in the course of a few
days,”
“ Know the truth and the truth shall make you free"' (John vii.,
32). It is only: through ignorance that error and superstition pre-
vail, and mens minds are enslaved by those false teachers in the
Church who, loving power or vainglorious show more than
righteousness and faithfulness, turn themselves and others from the
true worship of the Christian Church to Romish practices. They
who labour for the truth are the best of friends and they who uphold
error are the .worst of enemies of Christian progress.
In the year 1845, Mr. Oakely (a clergyman of the Church of
England) had declared in his letter to the Vice-Chancellor that “ he
held all the Roman doctrines,” and subsequently, in a letter to the
Bishop of London, he repeats the same statement. On 30th June
Sir Herbert Jenner Furst, Dean of Arches, revoked that gentleman’s
license. The judge held that “If any Roman, doctrine was opposed
to the doctrine of the Thirty-nine Articles, Mr. Oakely must, accord-
ing to his own statement, hold it, and that such teaching was incon-
sistent with his engagement as a minister of the Church of England.
Mr. Oakley’s open avowal of belief was more creditable than a secret
holding to it and proselytising would have been.
The following extracts and opinions concerning notable converts
to Romanism will serve to show their duplicity and dishonesty to the
Church of England —drawing the emoluments of their positions and
yet perverting and underlining the principles they were sworn to
uphold. Prominent among these was
HENRY EDWARD MANNING,
who was at Oxford with the late Mr. Gladstone, and with Henry
and Robert WilberforCe. He was then bent upon following


a political career, but the loss of his father's fortune prevented him
from entering into public life, and so he took orders in the Church
of England, and married, while he was officiating as curate, the
daughter of the Rev. John Sargent. Sorne letters addressed by
Manning to Robert Wilberforce at this period were shown to Mr.
Gladstone, in which the writer said that the Church of England was
heretical, and a deluder, and that she was devoid of authority accord-
ingly. Mr. Gladstone, on reading these statements, could hardly
believe his eyes, and although he refrained from accusing Manning of
insincerity, he certainly considered he had not been straightforward.
After joining the Church of Rome, Manning, feeling probably the
inconsistency of which he had been guilty, told Robert Wilberforce
that any criticism of the Church of Rome was simply the expression
of private judgment, as against the judgment of the Church, and was
therefore heretical in method as well as in substance. The same
duplicity marked his conduct towards his parishioners, inasmuch as he
was engaged in religious ministrations which were contrary to his
inmost convictions.
Subsequently he wrote to Mr. Gladstone asking for a return of
the letters which he (Manning) had written to him, and on receiving
he burned them. “ Had I dreamt that he would destroy these
letters,” observed Mr. Gladstone, “ T would not have returned them
to him.”
In becoming a pervert to the Church of Rome, Manning, it is
painfully obvious, was actuated by a craving for power and eminence,
and he obtained both. It was the policy of the Papal See to pro-
mote able and distinguished renegades in England as a means of
inducing others to follow their example, and his acquisition of a
cardinal's hat in 1865 was followed by the elevation of Dr. Newman,
another apostate, to the same dignity in 1879. Both men expected
to find peace, perhaps, in the bosom of the Church of Rome, but
they were deceived, foi; they found plenty of rancour, discord, and
jealousy. The Jesuits were hostile to their reception from the first,
•especially as they professed to believe that Manning’s perversion was
the result of his disappointment in regard to politics. Baffled in his
ambitious views of making a name as a statesman, he saw a con-
venient avenue to place and power in the Church of Rome, and those
who have studied his ecclesiastical career have discovered in it a
■distinct decline of his moral nature after that turning point in his life.
It is difficult, indeed, to imagine a man of his ability honestly
accepting the extravagant pretensions and incredible dogmas of that
Church. As regards the former, we have a remarkable illustration
■of them in the Bull, Undm Sanctam, of Pope Boniface VIII., which
says: —“We declare, assert, and define that, for every human crea-
ture, it is altogether necessary to salvation that he be subject to the
Roman Pontiff ” Anv appeal to the contrary, upon historical
grounds, has also been scornfully dismissed by the haughty declara-
tion that the Church of Rome is the only infallible interpreter of
historv ! And if the voice of conscience protests against this pre-


posterous doctrine, the Church calmly asserts that its own utterance
is divine, and that, as such, external authority must silence internal
conviction. Hence the autocratic pretensions of that Church have
always been antagonistic to freedom of belief and liberty of con-
science. It has, whenever and wherever it could, stifled the political
aspirations and obstructed the social progress of every nation in
Europe subject to its baneful influence. It has fettered the press,,
placed a ban upon free discussion, and lit the fires of persecution.
And among the most active in this nefarious work have been the
Jesuits, and especially those who, in quite recent times, were educated
at Oxford, and afterwards entered the Anglican Church, and having
seceded from it, hated it, as Froude says, “with the frenzy of rene-
gades.'’ Men of this stamp fomented the endless conspiracies which
troubled - the reign of Queen Elizabeth. But such as these, whether
in the Church of Rome or with palpable leanings to it, as Ultra-
Ritualists in our own day, are not to be tolerated. Whether securely
entrenched in the former, or fighting under the banner of Newman,
Pusey and Co., they are equally hostile to truth, and equally to be re-
sisted by the true churchman, struggling for purity of worship, purity
of belief, and purity of life.
NEWMAN and PUSEY
These two both occupied the positions of professors in
Oxford University, and of clergymen in the Church of England.
The following extracts from “ The Anglican Career of Cardinal New-
man” (Edwin J. Abbott) and “ Life of E. B. Pusey” (H. P. Liddon,
D.D.) will show what unfaithful stewards they were, and how lightly
they regarded the oath taken at their ordination, which is as fol-
lows :
“ I, A. 8., do swear that I do from my heart abhor, detest, and
abjure, as impious anil heretical, the damnable doctrine and position
that princes excommunicated and deprived by the Pope or any
authority of the See of Rome may be deposed or murdered by their
subjects, or any other whatsoever. And Ido declare that no foreign
prince, person, prelate, State, or potentate hath or ought to have any
jurisdiction, power, superiority, prominence, or authority, ecclesias-
tical or spiritual, within this realm. So help me God,”
It is significant that this Oath has been left out of some later
editions of the Prayer Book. The excision of such an important
matter seems to have been the work of Ultra-Ritualistic Roman
sympathisers.
Extracts from Abbott’s “ Anglican Career of Cardinal
Newman.”
“Froude* learned 'economy’ from Newman. This 'principle’
(if it may be so called) is that of tact or management, especially in
* Not Froude the historian, of course, but Hurrell Froude, who was one
of the most ardent of the Puseyite party at Oxford.


the diffusion, colouring, and sometimes in the reservation or suppres-
sion, of religious doctrine with a view' to surmounting prejudice and
instilling truth (i.e., Romanism) . . . underhand proselytising.’
The phrases ‘ undermining, poisoning,' and the like, became numerous
in Froude’s correspondence with Newsman. ‘lf is done in Codrington
College, Barbadoes.’ ” Vol. 1., pp. 151 and 152.
‘‘ln February, 1832, he suggests a quarterly magazine .
which might dispel the popular false notions about the Reformation,
‘to be at hrst only historical. ... A thing of that sort might
sneak into circulation, if well managed . . . might undermine.
“ Since 1 have been at home I have been trying to proselytise in an
underhand way.” “Will your worships get together a few sets of the
tracts? For 1 shall try hard to poison the minds of the natives out
here. . . . it has occurred to me that something attractive and
poisonous might be made out of ‘A History of Missions.’ . .
The very same letter that describes these poisonous intentions (by
Frorde from Barbadoes College) contains a request that parts of his
Breviary may be sent to him.” Vol. 1., page 153.
Newman started a society for the diffusion of tracts, “great
things are accomplished by single persons.” “At that time Newsman
and Fronde were the only members.” Newsman wrote to Keble that
“ he might join it or not, but the league was in existence.
“ If you have an oracle to> fall back uppn, you can prove any-
thing, and the question arises—Why was not Fronde content to recog-
nise in name Newman’s ‘ distinctive Anglican doctrine’ of ‘ the supre-
macy of Scripture/ if, in reality, by giving tradition the power ot
deducing whatever it likes, from Scripture, he could make tradition
paramount.” Vol. 1., p. 380.
“ This tractarian league was exalting tradition and antiquity, re-
serving the task of determining, by a process of picking and choosing,
what tradition and antiquity meant —this Bunsen called ‘ introducing
popery without authority/ and he was right. He was not aware that
Froude, if not Newman, had discussed the propriety of ultimately
excommunicating the evangelical party. That even Rose had been
combining with Newman to consider the establishment of a real
‘ Working Court of Heresy/ w'hich might serve as a practical curb
upon the exercise of the King’s power, and by which ‘ the whole
Church might be kept in order.’ The same pair of conspirators had
been asking whether a clause might be slipped into the Ecclesiastical
Commission Bill, and that Froude before his death had entirely
severed himself, and practically severed Newman also, from all con-
nection with the Reformers who had framed The Articles of the
English Church,”
Isaac Williams, Newman’s curate at St. Mary’s, recording a con-
versation that took place between himself and Newman in 1841,
says :
“ One evening when alone in his room, he told me he thought
the Church of Rome was right and we were wrong, so much so that
we ought to join it. In consequence of this Williams wrote to New-


man that they could not be together as they had been, but they con-
tinued as vicar and curate.” Notes to Vol. i 1., p. 46.
Is not this a sacrifice of principle and honesty to friendship?
“Fronde’s Breviary lay' always on his [Newman's] study table.’
“ We have seen that Fronde's legacy to Newman was the Breviary.
Newman was now purposing to publish it as one of the tracts. How-
ever revised, such a publication was at any time likely to renew 7 the
accusation of Romanising against the Tractarians, and just now,
immediately after the Bishop’s remonstrance” [Remonstrance ! Merely
a weak protest against certain expressions in the Tracts for the Times,
subtle distinctions and fruitless attempts at pacification by the Bishop
of Oxford] “ followed by his kindly assurance of goodwill, such a pro-
ject seemed peculiarly unseasonable.” Vol. IF, p. 97.
“To take one instance, they [Newman and others] had stated
that the understanding was that the Anglican Liturgy was not to be
altered” [a blind to the bishops and clergy], “yet Newman was pro-
posing in ‘ Home Thoughts’ to revive the Romanising forms in King
Edward’s first Prayer Book.
“Tract 85, published in 1838, is a sceptical advance from Bible
Christianity. This is a clear strategical device of breaking down the
bridges behind his [Newman's] advancing army, so as to make it
impossible to retire. Henceforth he is committed to tradition. "
“ Newman asked himself whether there might be a more
spiritual path to the attainment of the truth [Romanism]. He con-
sidered, so he tells us, there was a middle race of demons or spirits,
neither in heaven nor in hell, partly fallen, capricious, wayward, noble
or crafty, benevolent or malicious, which gave a sort of inspiration
or intelligence to races, nations, and classes of men. . . . Take,
for example, England, w r ith many high virtues, and yet a low
Catholicism. It seems to me that John Bull is a spirit, neither of
heaven nor hell. . . . Has not the Christian Church in its parts
surrendered itself to one or other of these simulations of the truth ?"
Vol. IF, pp. 89-00.
The expressions,'^-May St. Mary and all the saints intercede for
us” and “ St. Mary, intercede,” in prayers used in Newman’s Monastic
House at Lrttlemore, indicate his falseness to the position he
continued to fill.
In attempting a justification of this position he shows the real
Jesuitical spirit that animates him. In a letter of September, 1843,
Newman speaks of “ who feci they can with a safe conscience
remain with us while they are allowed to testify of Catholicism
[Romanism] and to promote its interests. . . . I hey think they
may stay w'hile thev are moving themselves and others, nay, say the
whole Church, towards Rome. He adds, "Is not this an intelligible
ground?” Vol. IF, p. 195.
It is difficult to reconcile Newman’s statement that “ An incum-
bent who is not in hostility to the Church of Rome is no true divine
in the Church of England,” with the suggestion to a friend that “ it
might be their duty by remaining in the heretical Church of England


to promote her return to the Church of Rome.’’ He states, “ The
great Anglican divines have taken me in. Their arguments may be
against, but their sympathies are with Rome.”
“ Tract 90 was to supply an answer by showing that an Anglican
might sign the Thirty-nine Articles and yet virtually accept the whole
.cycle of Roman doctrine. The inference would then be obvious.
If a Romanising Anglican could lawfully Romanise where he was,
why should he not stay where he was? . . . But having regard
to Newman’s natural capacity for using words inaccurately and un-
naturally, I should prefer the word coined by his follower Ward, and
briefly say ‘ The interpretation of the articles in Tract 90 was non-
natural.’ ” Yol. 11., pp. 243-245.
“ Hampden, who had all along actively supported the admission of
Dissenters (to Oxford), had sent a pamphlet of his in favour of the
measure (November, 1834) to Newman, who replied that, while
acknowledging the ‘ tone of piety’ in which it was written, he objected
to its principles.” “ Under Newmah’s leadership the Tractarians' had
played a prominent part in keeping Protestant Dissenters out of
Oxford; now they seemed bent on letting Romanists in.” Yol. 11.,
pp. 39 and 253. The heads of the University of Oxford “printed a
strong resolution that Tract ‘No. 90 suggested a mode of interpreting
the Articles which evaded rather than explained’ them, and which
* defeated the object and was inconsistent with the observance of the
statutes’ about them.” Yol. 11., p. 254.
“As for the great mass of English Protestants . . . was it
not inevitable that they should realise Pusey’s own fear and receive a
lasting impression of the Jesuitism of all the Tractarians in general
and of Newman in particular as the Arch-Jesuit?” Yol. 11., p.' 282.
M It is a terrible warning to us how far we may allow mere intellectual
demoralisation to creep almost into our hearts, and to affect our
moral judgments, when we find such a one as Newman first in his
letters assigning to himself the part of an Autolycus who- has cheated
the English bishops into, making a silly and immoral bargain, and
then in the Apologia holding up the Episcopal Bench to perpetual
infamy as a set of treacherous swindlers who have broken faith with
his confiding self.” Yol. IT., p. 285.
Newman’s advice to his followers was:—“The very best way to
keep in the Church of England was steadily to contemplate and act
on the possibility of leaving it.” “In his own heart he . . . was
by anticipation in Rome, but his duty to. the [Roman] Catholic
Church, and the responsibility of leadership which he could not feel
it right to cast aside, obliged him to remain in ... a double-
faced position. . . . Things were not as yet ripe for secession.’
Yol. IE, pp. 294 and 299. After the publication of Tract 90 Ward
and Newman corresponded with the Romanists. The feeling on the
Roman side was—“ Come over at once.”
Speaking of the “ Essays on Miracles,” there is,“a fitful alteration
with extravagant, audacious, and aggressive demands upon credulity,
all of them disguised and confused by a smoothly flowing rhetoric.


and by that subtle and shifty use of words, to which —when he (New-
man) was hard pressed—he lures us on, and himself too*, to give up
the contest against lies and legends; to swallow anything that will
make us feel comfortable, and to say— 4 what does it matter if our
conclusions are false,’ provided they are religious.” To this bad and
base conclusion he prefaced one of his poetic outbursts. It was an
eulogium on music. 44 There are fourteen notes in the scale. 4 What
do you mean?' writes Newman's sister. But when it came to the
simplest facts he cannot be trusted. It reveals the double nature of
the man. - ’
44 The next sermon is difficult to criticise, because Newman in-
serted in it, when it was published, sentences that ought not to have
been, and were not delivered from the pulpit.”
■ 4 Among others, a sentence about sacramental confession and the
‘celibacy of the clergy, as tending to make the clergy rulers and the
laity subjects, led Kingsley to the conclusion that Newman was un-
faithful to the English Church. Less than three months after he
wrote to Keble of his unfaithfulness to the English Church. 4 ls not
my position a treachery towards the Church ?’ . . . The truth
then is, lam not a good son enough of the Church of England. I
love the Church of Rome too well. Now please burn this, there's a
good felloiu .” Newman wrote to Manning:— 44 1 think the Church of
Rome the Catholic Church, and ours no part of the Catholic Church,
because not in communion with Rome.” What did Lockhart think
of all this? Lockhart would ask (Newman) for absolution, and had
received an injunction to go to' Pusey. 44 Three years had passed
since I (Newman) said plainly in subscribing to the Articles:— 4 I
renounce no Roman doctrine, yet 1 retain my fellowship which I hold,
on the tenure of subscription, and have received no 1 ecclesiastical
censure in any shape.’ ” What little regard for their responsibilities
the bishops had. Was this the attitude of honest men?
44 He would wait for seven years.” 44 He would endeavour to
show how the Roman system, instead of being a collection of arbi-
trary and sacerdotal fiction, was an organised growth.”
44 Hence arises the logical need of a Purgatory. Sin must have
its punishment; he will be absolutely indifferent of pains and worldly
motives —meritorious work. Where can we find it better than in the
Monastic rule? where penance or satisfaction that man can pay to
God ?” 44 The surrender of the mind, the intellect, the understand-
ing, and the will to some ecclesiastical superior—of the judgment and
will—to command of another.” 44 Put Newman’s statements together
and prove his unique competency to write a grammar of English
thinking adapted for the loosest theological thinkers.
“ The sacrifice of the intellect was demanded of Newman’s
eulogy of the Order of the Jesuits, written but a few days before his
joining the Church, of Rome.”
44 The absolute surrender of the judgment and will to the com-
mand of another. For want of right notion about faith and respect
for the teaching of facts, some Anglicans appear to be in danger of


errors, which St. Paul might have called Judaising. Newman was
certainly a Judaiser.”
“ Newrnarii spoke of facts as illusions, but he treated them as de-
lusions.” :,!■
His way of classifying the errors of Romanists —“ Some are cur-
tailed, some enlarged, some altered, some invented, some borrowed
from foreigners, some transferred from one sense to another, some
tacked on where they are not wanted, and some confounded together.’’
Sir James Fitzjames Stephen, one of the keenest students of
character, one of the ablest lawyers, and most judicially minded men
of his time, made this significant remark about one of the two*
founders of Ultra-Ritualism, with whom he was personally ac-
quainted :—“lf Dr. Newman was honest he would become an atheist.”
Extracts and Notes from Liddon’s “ Life of E. B. Pusey,”
&c.
“ Dr. Pusey would say, ‘ I learned at least in principle from my
mother,’ but then he would add, ‘ Behind my mother, though, of
course, I did not know it at the time, was the [Roman] Catholic
Church.’ ”
On 4th April, 1823, Newman remarked concerning Pusey, and,
speaking of the election of Fellows: “ Two men have succeeded this
morning—E. B. Pusey and W. R. Churton,” and he goes on to pray
that they may be brought into the true Church. Pusey was born in:
1800, so he was twenty-three years old at the time, and in the Church
of England. Four months after Pusey wrote to Newman: “They
are not separated 'who are not visibly with us. Dare we pray for
them ? Will you answer me when I see you ?”
Newman to Pusey; “ The Bishop of London thinks your censure-
of rigid traditionary system in a church casts suspicion on the
soundness of your ecclesiastical views. It might be as well to-
disclaim any opinions favourable to self-willed separation from the
Church, especially if you would say some sharp things against
dissenters.”
Pusey sent Newman a manuscript of his pamphlet. “It was
acknowledged to make some alteration, such as that of terming Calvin
a giant instead of a saint.’
Newman to Pusey: “ The names Augustine, &c., look sadly
shorn without the St., and 1 have some misgiving, lest the dropping
it should be ultra-Protestant.”
Pusey, in 1837, points out that “The Reformation in the
English Church was in no sense completed until the Caroline divines
had appeared on the scene, and that our standard of doctrine is not
the Prayer Book of 7552, hut that of 1662”
Pusey, in 1838: “Neither Froude, nor any of his friends, wish
for, or would have anything to do with, any change in our Liturgy,
Articles, or Rubrics.”
Newman to Pusey, 1838: “I can truly say I would do anything
to serve him (the bishop). When I have stood by as he put on:


his robes, I felt as if it would be such a relief if I could have fallen
.at his feet and kissed them.”
This is the class of men Newman, Pusey, and those in sympathy
with them, would constitute priests, who would “ worship the creature
.and his garments.”
Pusey: “We are neither Cranmerites nor Riddleites, but an
Apostolic branch of the Church Catholic. 1 fear this plan should
tend to increase the vulgar impression that we were a New Church
.at the Reformation, instead of being an old one purified."
Pusey, in 1839: “‘The next time I held her little cast of our
Saviour before her [Pusey's sick wife], she could hardly speak.’
Mrs. Pusey was buried on rst June. Pusey wrote a Latin inscription,
and added : Requiem a cctcrnun et lux perpetua luccat us.’’ —Pusey
took this from the Breviary.
Pusey to Newman, 1840: “I wish in The British Critic to have
an article on the use of R.C. (Roman Catholic) books of devotion.
It is much needed, the prayer at the end of the Breviary is so-
valuable.”
Newman to Pusey, 1843 : “My feeling is that you must not
.seem afraid to publish the sermon. Will you not be hailed by the
Pope, who I find has just given you up?”
Pusey had been suspended in 1843. Newman writes: “I am
not a good enough son of the Church of England, 1 love the Church
-of Rome.”
Newman to Pusey, 1843: “I am quite of opinion that any
Breviary, however corrected, &c., will tend to prepare minds for the
•Church of Rome. I fully think you will be doing so by publication,
it is like sewing a new piece of cloth on an old garment. Did I wish
to promote the cause of the Church of Rome, 1 should say, do what
you propose to do. Now 1 am not unwilling that Breviaries should
be published.”
Newman to Pusey, 1843: “‘Whether the publication of a
Breviary is to lead our Church towards Rome,’ or individuals in it—
which is your question—can only be decided by experiment. As to
the fathers, to. return to your remark, f that their study leads to
Rome; it has thus wrought in me.’
Rev. Dr. Hook to Pusey, 1845 : “ Infidelity and Romanism will
■always go hand in hand, except where, as in England, Romanists act
with caution, and take the philosophical line.
Pusey to Manning: “ Thank you for your charge, while it is
-cheering to me. Is there quite love enough for the Roman Church?
I only desiderate more love for Rome.
Manning to Pusey, 1845: “A Roman Catholic said some time
ago, of certain Oxford men, they are forging new chains for them-
selves and riveting ours. The Church l of Rome for 300 years
-desired our extinction ; it is now undermining us. Suppose your own
brother to believe that he was divinely inspired to destroy you, the
highest duties would bend you to decisive form and circumspect
precaution.”


Newman to Pusey, 1845 : “ I have written to' the Provost to-day
to resign my fellowship. On 9th October Father Dominic, the
Passionist, was at Littlemore (Pusey heard that Newman was prayed
for, by name, in so many Churches [Roman] and religious houses on
the Continent. Pusey did not shrink from tracing Newmans con-
version to the prayers which had been offered for him in the Roman
Church).”
Pusey to Dr. Hook: “ The only condition which the person.
(Pusey) giving to> build a church at Leeds wishes to- annex
is such as this: ‘Ye who enter this holy place pray for the sinner
who built it.’ This was granted, provided the person was living,
thereby favouring practically the effort to inscribe on a Church of
England building an invitation to pray for the dead.”
Mr. J. R. Morris, “ writing with the unrestrained fervour of a
neophyte, who no doubt, without meaning it, read his reflections or
wishes into Newman's words, ventured to report to his brother inter
nos : —“Newman thinks from past events in Pusey’s life that he
must ere long be deranged or a [Roman] Catholic."
Newman to Pusey, 1846: “T will say that T cannot conceive and
will not that the subject of so many prayers now offered for you,
beginning at Rome and reaching to- Constantinople and England,
should ultimately remain where you are. I think the year could
hardly be named which you ended with the same view of the Roman.
Church as you began it, and every change has been an approximation
to that religion.”
According to Dean Hole, Pusey was a consummate actor ; and
full of “ the pride that apes humility.” He was always .posing.
His gestures and attitudes in the pulpit were carefully studied ;
and he “ bequeathed his adoration of church millinery and costume-
to a numerous following,” who were weak enough to- be carried away
“by an imposing ceremonial and a supernatural-ly endowed
sacerdotalism.” The weaker sex were more particularly enamoured'
of Puseyism, which thereby rendered itself amenable to the
Apostolic reproach of “ leading captive silly women” and bishops’
wives.
Speaking of Newman and Pusey in connection with some
extracts they had made from the works of Dr. Hampden, the then
recently-elected Regius Professor at Oxford, the late Dean Stanley,
a man extremely temperate and moderate in statement, said: —“If
the extracts had been made by anyone else than Newman and Pusey,
T should not have hesitated to attribute them to wilful dishonesty ;
as it is, I must call it culpable carelessness, blunders and recklessness,
in matters of the most vital importance to the Church and nation,
and to the peace of good men.” Can they bear any other interpreta-
tion, indeed, than that of dishonesty?
Perhaps the late Dr. Cairns, of Melbourne, came as near the
truth as any of the critics of this weak imitation of Romanism,
when he stigmatised Puseyism as “ the weakest, pitifullest, wrong-
headedest, and faintheartedest of ecclesiastical abortions.”


Dr. Wilberforce, writing about him to Miss Noel in November,
1845, seems to have taken the true measure of the man when he
says:—“l see that he has greatly helped, and is helping to make a
party of semi-Romanisers in the Church, to lead some to Rome, to
drive back from sound views those amongst us who love Christ.
There must be some cause, and that cause, I believe, is a great want
of humility, veiling itself from his eyes under the appearance of entire
abasement. His letter about Newman I think deeply painful, utterly
sophistical and false. He says, for instance, that he does not think
himself, as an English Churchman, at liberty to hold all Roman
doctrine, but he does ‘ not censyre any Roman doctrines,’ whilst he
holds his canonry at Christ Church and his position among us, on
condition of signing articles, one-half of which are taken up in
declaring different figments of Rome to be dangerous deceits and
blasphemous fables. All seem to me full of egotistic assumption.”
The Bishop of Oxford likewise struck the keynote of Pusey's
character, when he frankly told him that he discerned in him “ a
subtle and, therefore most dangerous form of self-will.” Dr. Hook,
of Leeds, one of the most eloquent preachers of his time, accused
him of having been guilty of conduct that only a Jesuit could justify,
adding: “I believe you to be under the.influence of Jesuits. Your
own representatives here say as much. They seem admit that
you were only the puppet while others pulled the strings.’ *
Dodsworth, writing to Pusey in 1850, says:—“By precept and
example you have been amongst the most earnest to maintain
(Roman) Catholic principles; by your constant and common practice
of administering the sacrament of penance (the Prayer Book states
only two sacraments) ; by encouraging everywhere, if not enjoining
auricular confession and giving special priestly absolution, ' by your
introduction of Roman Catholic books,’ by encouraging the use of
rosaries and. crucifixes.”
The real drift of Ultra-Ritualism maybe plainly seen by reference
to Mr. W. Ward’s “ Life and Times of Cardinal Wiseman,” in which
the Archbishop of Westminster is represented as being confident that
■“ the Church of England could not be the ultimate goal of the
Tractarian movement, because if that movement was to secure any
large band of adherents, it must necessarily, in the first instance,
take form in Newman’s via media y’ that is to say, in a sort of half-
way house between the Reformed Church and Romanism.
In 1839 “Newman suggested to Henry Wilberforce that it might
prove to be a duty to join the Church of Rome. Wilberforce replied
that he hoped they might die first.” This proves that Newman
contemplated the possibility of secession six years before the date
of his apostacy, so that these were six years of insincerity, duplicity,
and treachery on his part.
* See Lord Robert Montague’s Recent Events, a Clue to Jesuits.”
See Nineteenth Century, “ Auricular Confession in Church of England,”
January, 1895, Rev. Canon Teignmouth Shore.


Then, again, when Newman took up his abode at Olcott,
Wiseman drew up a programme for his career, with the express
purpose of drawing “ the (Roman) Catholic movement in the Estab-
lished Church, and towards the Apostolic (or Papal) See,' “ for,”
said the Cardinal, “ it would be a beacon light and the reflection of
‘ dear Rome.’ ” These plotters certainly displayed “ the wisdom of
serpents,’’ although they were by no means “ as harmless as doves.”
It appears, from the same book, that some of the heads of houses
and tutors in Oxford told Newman that he was creating Roman
sympathies, and therefore was acting wrongly, and Wiseman’s remark
with respect to this was that “ Catholic principles must eventually
lead to the (Roman) Catholic Church, and therefore the tracts must,
in the long run, tell in our favour.” Naturally, therefore, his
attitude, on the whole, “ was deeply sympathetic towards the spirit
and intentions of the Tractarians.” It could not well be otherwise,
for, while nominally belonging to the Church of England, they were
insidiously preparing proselytes for the Church of Rome.
So pleased indeed was Wiseman with the efforts of these secret
allies, that he thought what they were doing should be brought under
the notice of the Pope, without mentioning names, however, except
Newman’s, but this he proposed to suppress “ when referring to what
he had privately written.” Probably Wiseman experienced some
twinges of conscience when he reflected upon the duplicity of which
the Tractarians were guilty, but he seems to* have silenced them by
concluding, with the Jesuits, that the end justified the means, for we
find him writing: “ I can conceive the Divine Wisdom permitting
them (Newman and Co.) to remain within the Church of England
in schism for the working out of good!”
On the 4th November, 1850, Lord John Russell issued his
famous letter to the Bishop of Durham, and it is interesting to observe
that his strongest language was directed, not against the Roman
Catholics, who are open and avowed enemies of the Protestant
religion, but against those treacherous and dishonest clergy of the
Church of England who were striving to introduce a Papistical ritual
into her form of worship. Their conduct was stigmatised by him as
insidious tactics adopted by unruly sons of the Plstablished Church,
“ who were striving to introduce the mummeries of superstition, to
confine the intellect and to enslave the soul. Similar language was
adopted bv the Bishop of London and other prelates.
As was said at the time, “ clergymen who had subscribed to the
Thirty-nine Articles, and acknowledged in explicit terms the Queen’s
supremacy, had been the most forward in leading the people, step by
step, to the very verge of the precipice. Ihe paying of honour to
saints, the infallibility of the Pope, the superstitious use of the sign
of the cross, the muttering of the Liturgy so as to disguise the
language in which it is written, the recommendations of auricular
confession, penance and absolution —all these things were taught by
clergymen of the Church of England as worthy of adoption.'
Ultra-Ritualism may be characterised as an attempt to make


truth conform to men’s beliefs, whereas all beliefs must sooner or
later conform to truth, because “ beliefs are temporary, whereas
truth is eternal.” Therefore we should “ hold fast that which is true,,
irrespective of the authority claimed for any statement, since authority
bears no relation to truth.” In fact, both sacred and secular history
bear testimony to the fact that authority is generally hostile to the
truth. It certainly was in the days of our Lord, fox while “ the
common people heard Him gladly,” the chief priests and the Levites,.
and those who exercised political authority in Jerusalem, persecuted
Him to the death. “Truth is immutable, and should not bend to-
circumstances.” We have also one divine standard of truth, for did
not the great Teacher say, when praying to the Father to sanctify
His disciples: “ Thy word is truth !” And He also pointed out the
way to its attainment when He exclaimed : “ Let him that hath ears
to hear, hear.” “ Add to your faith knowledge, and to knowledge
understanding,’'’ for He who created us endowed us with reason, in
order that we might get understanding, although Roman Catholicism
seeks on all occasions to subjugate this to the authority of the Church,
and proscribes the right of private judgment with respect to the Holy
Scriptures.
The vast mass of errors which now disfigure the faith and
practice of the Church of Rome have been the gradual accretion of
ages, and could some of its early fathers come back to the world,
they would be unable to recognise the institution to which they once
belonged.
This should be a lesson to the Ultra-Ritualistic party in the Church
of England to beware of once deviating into the path of error, for
they can never know whither it will lead them.
Just as a final illustration of the extraordinary lengths to which
superstition will conduct the priests of the Roman Catholic Church,
we will quote from an American paper, the Express, of the 7th June
last, the following news item:
“ Heaven in a Lottery.”
“ The following advertisement was recently addressed to the
faithful in a Roman Catholic parish in Mexico:
“ ‘ Lottery of Souls. —At the last drawing, the following numbers
came out as winners, and their holders may be assured that their
well-beloved are now delivered from the flames of purgatory:
“‘No. 841. —The soul of the advocate, James Vasquey, delivered
from purgatory, and has entered into joy celestial.
“ ‘ No. 41. —The soul of Senora Calderon has been rendered 1
happy for ever.
“‘No. 162.—The soul of the widow Francisca de Parras has
been liberated for ever from purgatory.
“‘A fresh drawing will take place on the Ist January in the
same church of San Salvador, and for the four prize tickets, four


suffering and martyrised souls will be transported from purgatory to’
heaven.
“ ‘ Tickets, price one dollar, can be procured from the priest.
Will you, for the sake of a dollar, leave your dear ones to languish
eternally in purgatory ?’ ”
Comment is superfluous.
If the Pope or the priests who organise lotteries of this kind
can extricate souls from purgatory and translate them to heaven,
what monsters of cruelty they must be not to rescue these poor
creatures from such intense suffering without demanding payment for
it, whether in the shape of money disbursed for masses or expended
in the purchase of lottery tickets. They disclaim the power to heal
the sick in this world, and pretend to far greater authority in the
other world, of the exercise of which they can give us no proof
whatever.*
Let us remark, in conclusion, that although Popes, princes,,
prelates and priests may combine —just as Newman, Pusey and Co.
conspired—to corrupt the minds of the people with the insidious
poison of Roman Catholic errors, to defile the water in the pure well
of Truth ; and to impose their fetters upon minds which are hungering'
and thirsting after the unadulterated doctrines of Christianity, yet the
people, in their unity and strength, resolute of purpose and faithful to
the principles of the Reformation, will arise and frustrate the
machinations of perjured princes, priests, and prelates.
* The priests of the craft and the like cannot be of Christ ; for Christ
commanded His Apostles to heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the
the dead, cast out devils, saying: “ Freely ye have received, freely give.”
(Matthew x. 8.) This is the test Christ has given us to distinguish these
pretenders from His true disciples. Instead of freely giving they extract
the “ last pound of flesh,” and none of these things that Christ commanded!
His disciples to do can they do.


The Old and the New Church.
The definition of the term “ Catholic” (or Universal) cannot be
•exclusively applied to any local church (or assembly of believers).
The Greek. Church, the English Church, the Roman Church, the
Churches in Asia, Alexandria, and Antioch have definite meaning and
location, but the “ Church Catholic” embraces the professing members
of Christ throughout the world of every kindred and every tribe.
,(See Acts ix. 31, xi. 26; Gal. i. 2; Mark ix. 38-40; Rom. xi. 13;
Matt. viii. 14.)
Creeds are essential to the various churches, being a definition
and a declaration as to what an adherent must accept, and subscribe
to, as the basis of his belief.
What is the Church?—This is clearly defined in the 19th of the
■“ Articles of Religion” as agreed upon by the archbishops and bishops
of both provinces {i.e., of Canterbury and York), which is to the
following effect:-
“ The visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men,
in the which the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments
be duly administered according to Christ’s ordinance in all those
things that of necessity are requisite to the same.”
And the 55th Canon of the Church of England is of the same
tenor. (See Mark ix., 38 and 39 ; Numbers xi., 28 and 29.)
By the same Article the Church of Rome is pronounced to have
erred, not only in their living and manner of ceremonies, but also
in matters of faith.” And as truth can have no fellowship with error,
it follows thar union with the Church of Rome is altogether
impossible.
In fact, the hatred which that Church entertains towards the
truth is shown by the fact that the book in which Copernicus pro-
claimed the revolution of the heavenly bodies was forbidden to be
read, under pain of damnation; that Giordano Bruno was burnt alive
for reiterating the same facts; and that Grlileo was tortured and
imprisoned for declaring that the earth revolves around the sun.
But our globe still continues its annual revolutions around the centre
'of our system, and the planets- continue to move without perturbation
in their respective orbits, in spite of the solemn asseveration of an
•“ infallible” Church that they do nothing of the kind.
It may be mentioned here, in corroboration of the statement


previously made, that there were no churches or other places of
worship for Christians in Rome during the first two centuries after
the death of our Lord, that the earlier professors of the new faith
used to assemble for prayer and praise in those vast subterranean
•cemeteries known as the Catacombs,* in order to escape the persecu-
tions of Nero and Domitian more particularly. And the mere fact
that Sunday was not observed as a day of rest and worship in the
Roman Empire until the edict issued by the Emperor Constantine,
in the year 321 (for which one of the Westminster divines compared
him to Moses), shows that public worship in churches was not
•celebrated previously. Where were the Popes or bishops of Rome,
then, during all that time?
“The Apostles and about 120 disciples, men and women, met in
an upper room at Jerusalem, and Peter stood up in the midst and
preached to them.’’—Acts i., 13-15.
“ Barnabas and Saul assembled with the Church and taught
much people. And the disciples were called Christians first in
Antioch” (Acts xi., 26). This shows the first named Christians as a
Church at Antioch. No fewer than ten councils were held there
between a.d. 252 and a.d. 480, and the Church acknowledged no
ecclesiastical submission to any other see in the world. “ Barnabas
and Saul assembled themselves with the Church for a whole year and
taught much people.” “ The Emperor Justinian repaired the city in
a.d. 529 and called it Theopolis ; that * is, ‘The City of God.’”
(Calmet’s Dictionary of the Bible). Tertullian, a.d. 190, states:
“ Places inaccessible to the Romans are subdued to Christ,’ and
Origen, a.d. 240, states that: “ The Church in the British Isles holds
the religion of Christ.” British bishops were present at the Church
■councils held at Arminium, a.d. 359. The Saxon conquest was
complete and pagan darkness reigned in a great part of Britain. Two
young men from Britain, of fair complexion, were offered for sale in
the slave market at Rome. Pope Gregory the Great saw them, and
being interested in their appearance and nation, he organised a
Roman Catholic mission with Augustine to proceed to Britain,
a.d. 596. About seven years after the landing of Augustine the
ancient Welsh British Church, with their bishops and clergy, met
Augustine in conference.
When Augustine landed in Britain, a.d. 597, he found no fewer
than seven bishops and one archbishop in existence, and that “ the
British Church had customs which the Roman Church had followed
until a.d. 458, and that it knew nothing of Romanism previous to that
date. Subsequent to that date the Church of Rome had introduced
changes with which the British Church refused to conform or to
submit to its supremacy. On the contrary, the foreign bishops
became Anglicised, but neither priest nor people became subservient
to Rome, although for some years it was in communion with, but
* Interment within the w r alls of the City of Rome was strictly forbidden,
which originated the Roman Catacombs.


never under the control op Rome.* —G. H. F. Nye, “ Church and Her
History,” 189?
St. Jerome i:. 386 retired to Bethlehem,- pilgrims from the
British Isles visited him there. (See “ Roman Society,” by S. Dill,
i 899-)
Archbishop Parker, Primate in the reign of Queen Elizabeth —
one of the preservers of that time of the Independence of Canterbury
against Papal Rome—partly rested his argument on the independence
of the early British Church. (See E. A. Freeman’s “ Historical
Essays,” page 316, 1892.)
The British never accepted the law of Rome, and never saw a
Papal Roman Empire existing in Great Britain.
“ I discovered that the so-called Roman Catholic was not even
the Latin Church, and less the Roman, and that the Papacy as we
understand the term now, so far from being Apostolic or Primitive,
was later than Gregory the First.” —See National Review, June,.
1900, page 589, and papers by Arthur Galton in the same Review,.
from April to July, 1900.
“An ancient church has been discovered at Cilchester in
a.d. 1890, which has its apse toi the west, but otherwise resembles,
in places, the numerous chapels of the fourth and fifth centuries in
Syria. The British examples can hardly be later than 410 a.d., and
therefore two centuries before the mission of Augustine.” — Edin-
burgh Review, January, 1895.
“ Strictly speaking, it is from the year 800 a.d., when a king of
the Franks was crowned Emperor of the Romans by Pope Leo. HI.,
that the beginning of the Holy Roman Empire must be dated. When
King Charles had knelt in the Church, as soon as he rose the Pope
placed a crown on the king’s head. —See “ Holy Roman,” by James-
Bryce, D.C.L., pages 3-48-60.
“ There was not a single Latin cross before the days of Con-
stantine. The earliest known Latin cross is 451 a.d.” —See “Life
of Lives,” by F. W. Farrar, 1900.
The Ancient Irish Church.
In Ireland the Church of Rome has a hold on the religious
element. And yet there is abundant proof that the ancient Irish
people worshipped in the simplicity of faith of the early Christian,
disciples until they were subjected to Papal rule. The grant of
Ireland by Pope Adrian was but the seal of approbation to the con-
quest by the Normans. Celtic Ireland was neither Papal nor inclined
to submit itself to the Papacy until Henry 11. riveted the Romish
yoke upon it. Why will her sons continue to bear this yoke ?
Irishmen in ordinary business will not buy before search as to
* “ Communion ” does not necessarily imply either union or sub-
mission, e.s., the Episcopal Church in America was in communion with the
Church of England, yet was in no way controlled or ruled by it.


:facts and value of the goods; how much more is it necessary to search
the Bible to see that their religious belief is in accordance with the
Holy Book! (See Acts xviii., n.) “If the blind lead the blind
they both fall into the ditch.” (Matt, xv., 14.) “'Eyes have they and
will not see; ears have they and will not hear.” Let them cleanse
their beautiful Churches as Christ cleansed the Temple, and freeing
themselves from spiritual bondage to Rome and its “ traditional
accretions,” adhere to the simple teaching of the correct translation
of the Scriptures. If they prove the dogmas of priests and popes
by this standard their falsity will be manifested.
Mr. Michael J. F. M'Carthy, 8.A., of Trinity College, Dublin,
said:—“ft is folly for us Roman Catholic Irishmen to deceive our-
selves by attributing Catholic Ireland’s degeneracy to causes which are
secondary, and are not found incompatible with progress and pros-
perity elsewhere. It is sacerdotal interference and domination {Age,
Ist November, 1902).
“ The Church, when reduced to the same level as other political
and social institutions, lends powerful assistance to the liberties of
-countries” (Reeve, p. 375).
Clonfert Cathedral was built a.d. 558, thirty-nine years
before St. Augustine landed in England. This Cathedral is
one of the smallest, yet one of the most beautiful and ancient, his-
toric Cathedrals in the three kingdoms before Trinity College,
Dublin, was founded, Clonfert was proposed as a site for a Univer-
sity, being in the centre of Ireland. The Cathedral has existed as a
place of worship until the present day, and they are collecting money
to repair it.
During more than 600 years from the time of Tacitus the his-
torian, in the first century, who mentioned the strange way in which
they (the Irish) affected even the organisation of the early Christian
Church, which to a very large extent was shaped in Ireland after the
habits and ideas of the tribes and septs, its great monastic institu-
tions were “ essential clans, and abbots were rulers in virtue of their
birth after the manner of succession which prevailed among their
chiefs and kings” {Edinburgh Review, April, 1885).
In fact, it is highly probable that the Christian Churches in early
Ireland were founded upon a model of which the New Testament
■affords several examples. For instance, “ Greet Priscilla and Aquila,
my helpers in Christ Jesus. Likewise greet the Church that is in
their house” (Romans xvi., 1-5),
“ And all the brethren which are with me, unto the Churches of
Galatia” (Gal. i., 2). (And be it remembered the Galatians, like the
Irish, were of Celtic origin.)
Mr. Justice Farwell, of the Chancery Division of the High
Court of Justice, recently decided that the Celtic gold ornaments
found in Lough Foyle in 1896, and afterwards purchased by the
British Museum as valuable specimens of Irish art of the 12th
century are “treasure trove,” and, therefore, belong to the


Crown. The ornaments have been presented by the Crown to
the Royal Irish Academy at Dublin [Argus, 10th July, 1900).
“ Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea and Nymphas, and
the Church which is in his house” (Colossians iv., 15).*
Ireland, since abandoning the old Irish Church, forms an almost
solitary example of a nation in which national interest and national
pride are sacrificed to Romanism.
A COMPARISON OF CREEDS.
Let the reader give attention to the facts set out hereunder, and
there will be no confusion of ideas as to which is the old and which
the new Church. Whatever Church holds the true and ancient
faith, which can be proved to be so by councils, and can stand the
test of the Scriptures, is the true and ancient Church. And what-
ever Church holds the new faith, that can neither stand the test of
proof by councils nor by the Serif
THE CREED OF THE ANCIENT
Scriptures,
this is the new Church.'
THE CREED OF THE MODERN
CHURCH OF ROME.
CHRISTIAN CHURCH,
[Pope Pius IV. added to the
Ancient Creed of the Christian
Church twelve Novel Articles, which
were published as the New Creed of
the Church of Rome on December 9,
A.D. 1564. This Creed was not
known in the Christian Church until
this date ; it was never heard of by
St. Patrick, and yet it is now the
Creed of the Church of Rome.]
I.—l most steadfastly admit and
embrace Apostolical and Ecclesias-
tical Traditions, and all other
observances and constitutions of the
same Church.
As Composed at
The Council of Nice, A.D. 325,
Recapitulated by
The Council of Constantinople,
A.D. 381,
The Council of Ephesus, A.D. 431,
The Council of Chalcedon, A.D. 451,
lI.—I also admit the Holy Scrip-
ture, according to that sense which
our Holy Mother the Church has
held and does hold, to which it
belongs to judge of the true sense
and interpretation of the Scriptures ;
neither will 1 ever take and interpret
them otherwise than according to
the unanimous consent of the
Fathers.
Proved to have continued unchanged by
The Council of Trent, Feb. 4, A.D.
This was the Creed of the Christian
Church up to December 9th, 1564.
HI.—I also profess that there are
truly and properly seven Sacraments
of the new law, instituted by Jesus
Christ our Lord, and necessary for
the salvation of mankind, though
not all for every one ; to wit, Baptism,
Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance,
Extreme Unction, Orders and
Matrimony, and that they confer
This was the Creed of St. Patrick,
and is now the Creed of the Pro-
testant Church of the United
Kingdom.


The Creed of the Ancient
Christian Church.— Cont.
THE CREED OF THE APOS-
TOLIC CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
I believe in one God, the Father
Almighty, Maker of heaven and
earth, and of all things visible and
invisible.
And in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the
only begotten Son of God, begotten
of His Father before all worlds, God
of God, Light of Light, Very God of
Very God, Begotten, not made,
being of one substance with the
Father, by Whom all things were
made : Who for us men, and for our
salvation, came down from Heaven,
and was incarnate by the Holv
Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was
made man, and was crucified also
for us under Pontius Pilate. He
suffered and was buried, and the
third day he rose again according to
the Scriptures; He ascended into
heaven, and sitteth on the right hand
of the Father. And He shall come
again with glory to judge both the
quick and the dead : Whose kingdom
shall have no end.
And I believe in the Holy Ghost,
the Lord and Giver of Life, Who
proceedeth from the Father and the
Son, Who with the Father and the
The Creed of the Modern
Church of Rome.— Cont.
grace ; and that of these, Baptism,
Confirmation and Orders cannot be-
reiterated without sacrilege ; and I
also receive and admit the received
and approved ceremonies of the
Catholic Church, used in the solemn
administration of all the aforesaid
Sacraments.
IV. —I embrace and receive all
and every one of the things which
have been defined and declared in
the Holy Council of Trent concern-
ing original sin and justification.
V.—l profess, likewise, that in the
mass there is offered to God a true,
proper, and propitiator)' sacrifice for
the living and the dead ; and that
in the most holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist there are truly, really,
and substantially the body and
blood, together with the soul and
divinity, of our Lord Jesus Christ
and that there is made a conversion
of the whole substance of the bread
into the body, and of the whole
substance of the wine into the blood
which conversion the Catholic
Church calls transubstantiation. I
also confess, that under either kind
alone Christ is received whole and
entire, and a true sacrament.
VI. —I constantly hold that there
is a Purgatory, and that the souls
therein detained are helped by the
suffrages of the faithful.
Vll.—Likewise, that the saints,
reigning together with Christ, are
to be honoured and invocated ; and
that they offer prayers to God for us,
and that their relics are to be hdld
in veneration.
VIII.—I most firmly assert that
the images of Christ, of the Mother
of God, ever virgin, and also of other
saints may be had and retained
and that due honour and veneration
are to be given them.
IX.—I also affirm that the power
of indulgences was left by Christ in
the Church, and that the use of them
is most wholesome to Christian
people.
X.—l acknowledge the Holy
Catholic Apostolic Roman Church


The Creed of the Ancient
Christian Church.— Cont.
Son together is worshipped and
glorified, Who spake by the Prophets.
And I believe, one Catholic and
Apostolic Church. I acknowledge
one Baptism for the remission of
sins, and I look for the Resurrection
of the dead, and the life of the world
to come. Amen.
“John said, Master, we saw one
casting out devils in Thy name, and
we forbade him, because he folioweth
not with us. Jesus said, Forbid him
not, for he that is not against you is
for you.”—Luke ix. 49, 50.
Of these, it is important to
9, 10, 14, 16, 17, and 19, were of
could not Christianise paganism,
The Creed of the Modern
Church of Rome. — Cont.
for the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches ; and I promise and swear
true obedience to the Bishop of
Rome, Successor to St. Peter, Prince
of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus
Christ.
XI.—I likewise undoubtedly re-
ceive and profess all other things
delivered, defined, and declared by
the Sacred Canons and General
Councils, and particularly by the
Hoi}" Council of Trent ; and I con-
demn, reject, and anathematise all
things contrary thereto, and all
Heresies which the Church has
condemned, rejected, and anathema-
tised.
XII.—I, N.N., do at this present
freely profess and sincerely hold this
true Catholic faith, without which
no one can be saved ; and I promise
most constantly to retain and confess
the same entire and inviolate, with
God’s assistance, to the end of my
life. And I ivill take care, as far as in
me lies, that it shall be held, taught, and
preached by my subjects, or by those the
care of whom shall appertain to me in my
office; this I vow, promise, and sivear—so
help me God and these holy Gospels .*
* The words in italics constitute this
Creed the oath of all Roman Catholic
Priests, Professors, and Bishops, who must
take it, and these are used when it is
administered to them.
ir in mind that Nos. 1,2, 4,5, 7,
purely pagan origin. Finding it
the Church of Rome paganised
Christianity, in order to render it more acceptable to* the nations of
Europe who had adopted the religion of their Roman conquerors.
As Professor Blunt observes: —“The heathen temples became Chris-
tian churches; the altars of the gods altars of the saints; the cur-
tains, incense, tapers, votive tablets, remained the same; the aqna-
minarium was still.the vessel for holy water; St. Peter stood at the
gate instead of Cardea; St. Roque or St. Sebastian in the bedroom
instead of the ‘Phrygian Penates;’ St. Nicholas was the sign of the
vessel instead of Castor and Pollux ; the ‘ Mater Deum’ became the
Madonna; alms for her became alins for the Madonna; the festival
of the Mater Deum, the festival of the Madonna, or Lady-day ; the
Hoslia, or victim, ivas now the Host; the lugcntes campi, or dismal
regions, Purgatory ; the offerings to the Manes were masses for the


dead. ‘ The feast held in honour of Saturn was changed into that of
the Nativity; the one in honour of Pan into that of the Purification ;
and the one in honour of Ceres into the feast of Rogations.' ’ Surely
this proves the truth of Dean Merivale’s statement that paganism was
assimilated, not extirpated, by the Church of Rome.
Let us now ask—Was this whole creed of the Roman Catholic
Church composed or known at the first general council? NO! The
Church of England creed, that is, the first part, was composed at the
Council of Nice, establishing and expanding the Apostles' Creed, and
thence called the Nicene Creed, a.d. 325. The latter creed, that of
Pope Pius IV., ‘a.d. 1564, was never heard of in the Church at that
time.
Then—Was it composed at the second general council, the Coun-
cil of Constantinople? NO I This council, held a.d. 381, recited and
improved again the Nicene Creed, but never heard of this new creed.
Let us go to the third general council, the Council of Ephesus,
held a.d. 431, and let us ask which of these creeds was held by that
council ? Hear the very words of the council itself. The Nicene
Creed, that is the first creed, is read aloud ; circumstances are related
of some who attempted to alter it ; then the council decrees as fol-
lows :
Decree of the Council of Ephesus.
“ These things h iving been read, the Ploly Synod decreed that it
should be lawful for no one to profess, to write, or to compose any
other form of faith than that defined by the Holy Fathers, who, w'ith
the Holy Ghost, had been assembled at Nice.
“ Rut those who shall have dared to compose, or to, profess, or
to offer any other form of faith to those wishing to be converted to
the acknowledgment of the truth, whether from paganism or from
Judaism, or from any sort of heresy, that these, if they were bishops
or clergymen, that the bishops should be deposed from their Episco-
pacy, and the clergy from their clerical office ; but that if they were
lavmen they should be subjected to an ‘ anathema’ ” ( Mansi ., Vol HE,
p. 1362.
We see this creed, then, established up to the year 431.
Now we shall see the decree of the next general council, that of
Chalcedon, in the year 451, and see which of these creeds was set
forth there
Extract from ihe Council of Chalcedon.
“The Catholic faith delivered by the Holy 318 Fathers (viz.,
at Nice), and by the Holy 150 Fathers (viz., at Constantinople), also
by the other most Holy and glorious Father (viz., at Ephesus), we
guard, and according to that we believe. The most rev. bishops
exclaimed, ‘No person makes any other exposition of faith. We
neither attempt nor dare to do so. For the Fathers have taught,


and writings preserved those things which have been set forth by
them, and other than these we cannot speak.’
“ Those principles which have been set forth are sufficient; it is-
not lawful to make any other exposition.”
We learn, then, from the Council of Chalcedon that this was the-
faith of the Church for 451 years after our Lord.
Now, we have another infallible witness to- prove that it had
never been changed up to the year 1546. This witness the Church
of Rome must admit, for it is no less than her own Council of Trent.
This council, in the session held 4th February, 1546, declares as fol-
lows :
Extract from the Third Session of the Council of Trent,
4TH February, 1546.
“ In the name of the Holy and undivided Trinity of the Father,,
and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
“ This holy, oecumenical, and general synod of Trent, lawfully
assembled in the Holy Ghost, the same three Legates of the Apos-
tolical See presiding in it, considering the magnitude of the subjects,
to be treated, especially of those contained under these two heads —
the extirpation of heresies and the reformation of morals—on ac-
count of which chiefly it has been assembled; but acknowledging with
the Apostle that it has not to wrestle with flesh and blood, but with
spiritual wickedness in heavenly places. With the same Apostle it
exhorts all and everyone, in the first place, that they should be ‘strong:
in the Lord and in the power of His might; in all things taking the
shield of faith by which they can quench all the fiery darts of the
most wicked ; and that they should take the helmet of the hope of sal-
vation, with the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God.’
“ Therefore, that this its pious solicitude may have its beginning
and continuance by the grace of God, it determines and decrees that
before all things the confession of faith is to be premised, following
in this the examples of the Fathers, who- in their sacred councils
were accustomed to oppose this shield against all heresies, in the
beginning of their actions, by which alone they sometimes drew
infidels to the faith, vanquished heretics and confirmed the faithful.
“ Wherefore it (the council) commands that this creed, which the
Holy Roman Church uses as that summary in which all who prof css
the Faith of Christ necessarily agree, and that firm and only-
foundation against which the gates of Hell shall never prevail, shall
be read in those words in which it is read in all the Churches,
which is as follows
Then it recites the Nicene Creed, and not one article of the
new creed.
Now, mark these witnesses for the truth of the creed.
We have first the Council of Nice, establishing and expanding
the creed from the days of the Apostles, a.d. 325.
Then, this confirmed by the Council of Constantinople, a.d. 381..


Then, again, both by the Council of Ephesus, a.d. 431.
Then, again, these three by the Council of Chalcedon, a.d. 451..
We have the Council of Ephesus denouncing those with am
anathema who shall dare to alter it, add to, or take from it.
Then we have the Council of Trent proving them all, asserting
not only that this was the trua. faith of the whole Christian Church,
but that it was ‘ 'the firm and only foundation of faith , against which'
the gates of Hell shall never prevail ,” and this to the year of our
Eord 1546.
Now, which of these creeds do these five councils prove to be
the true creed of the ancient Holy Catholic Church to the year 1546 ?
What Church holds it, and throws open the Bible to prove its truth
to the people ?
The first creed only, the Apostolic Nicene Creed, is proved that
of the Holy Catholic Church.
This is the creed of the Church of England. She throws open the •
Bible to prove its ti nth to the people.
Whence came this new creed, then, with its twelve novel articles ?
What council set it up? What council published it? What ancient
Church professed it? In what records of the Catholic Church is it
to be found? Where did it originate? What Church maintains it
now ? and does she throw open the Bible to prove it to the people ?
No council ever set it up. No council, ever published it. It
was never seen in any book of the ancient Catholic Church. The
Council of Ephesus pronounced a curse on any who- should ever
publish any such. The Council of Trent disowns it in the creed she
recites, and declares the old creed to be the “ firm and only founda-
tion of faith, against which the gates of hell shall never prevail;”
and this in a.d. 1546, the very year that Luther died. This was the
faith of the Christian Church before Luther, and it is the faith of
every true Christian this day.
The twelve articles of the new creed, first published in the
year 1564 by the Pope at Rome, who- calls himself the vicar of Christ
on earth, are the Creed of the Church of Rome. She has tinned
from the andent faith to this novel Creed , and she fears that the
people should read the Bible , or their children be taught it, because
these prindples of their new Creed are not found in the Word of Cod."'
“ Prove all things. Hold fast that which is good” (1 Thessa-
lonians v., 21).
In order that we Protestants for all time may truly worship in
the Church universal, in accordance with the Holy Scriptures, our
forefathers sacrificed their lives and their all, thereby protesting
against the very errors and corruptions which in these days hordes of
priests, and laymen too, are striving to perpetuate.
The latest illustration is supplied in the Argus of the 12th of
August, 1895, where Archbishop Carr is reported as saying, in a
lecture on “ the Catholic (Romish ?) Church and the Bible,” that the
Roman Catholic Church, from the earliest times, “ had made enact-


merits enforcing the fullest, education in Scriptural knowledge for
aspirants to her priesthood.”
Infinitely wiser and more Scriptural is the Protestant teaching,
that this priceless knowledge should be shared by all mankind, and
not remain the exclusive possession of a professional class.
* “ Search the Scriptures” (John, v., 39).
“ They received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched
the Scriptures daily” (Acts xvii., 11).
The books of the Old and New Testament were first written in
Hebrew, Greek, Chaldaic, Syriac, the language then spoken in Judea.
If written in any other language it should agree with the before-men-
tioned if correct as to the part written.
“ There is the same conviction that, taken with all its difficulties,
the Bible is still the book of books to all mankind, the fountain and
the bulwark of truth and holiness, the guide both of LEARNED and
UNLEARNED into communion of thought and feeling. There is
the same quiet confidence that, standing high above the human
speculations which have gathered round it, it contains treasures of
wisdom, justice, toleration, freedom, and love, which have never yet
been exhausted."—Dean Stanley.
The Bible contains history and events beyond our comprehen-
sion, and difficult for us to explain, yet the vital points are few and
plain to the dullest intelligence.
ornaments of the church.
The priests of the Church of Rome, copying Jewish and heathen
-customs, erect an altar on which they profess to offer up the sacrifice
of the mass, and they decorate it with a number of glittering orna-
ments, such as the pax, the ciborium, the montrance, &c., and these
are often made of the precious metals, and enriched with costly
jewels. Huge candles are also lighted upon these altars, as if their
feeble flame could be supposed to be a sight pleasing to the Most
High, who has created the myriads of stars which shine above us in
the heavens.
The Ultra-Ritualists also call this piece of furniture an altar, and 7
bow when they turn to it, and decorate it with a crucifix and flow r ers,
and sometimes with candles. For this there is not the slightest
w r arrant in the Book of Common Prayer, where it is called the
* Many Priests say, “ Read not the Scripture.” It is a sin to take their
dictum as to what you read and believe. Believe Christ, the true
Teacher, and not false teachers.
It is clear that in all civilised cities there are whole colonies—principally
of the feminine sex—of what may be called predestined dupes. They have
the helplessness of childhood, without, alas! its innocency. They are mere
food for the prowling rogues that hunt for their prey in human life as sharks
do in the sea-depths. And the most deadly of all rogues is the one who
plays on the religious sensibilities - or rather the superstitious fears—of his
\-ictims.


“ Lord's Table, and is directed to be covered with a fair white linen-
cloth, in memory of that impressive occasion upon which He and
His disciples supped together for the last time, and observed the
feast of the Passover, which was celebrated at that period of the
year.
In fact, the altar necessarily suggests the idea of sacrifice, and
sacrifice connects itself with the celebration of the mass, so that Arch-
deacon Langley, when speaking of the [Sacerdotal party in the Church
of England, might well remark:—“it is no want of charity to de-
clare that they may remain with us in order that they may substitute
the mass for the Communion." And it is important to observe that
when a bishop is inducted into his office, he makes a solemn declara-
tion that, “ in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, there is not any
change in the elements of bread and wine into the body and blood of
Christ at or after the consecration thereof by anv person whatsoever.”
He also ratifies this oath on taking his seat in the House of Lords.
And in the directions at the end of the Communion Service it is
emphatically and explicitly declared that “ the sacramental bread
and wine remain still in their natural substances, and therefore may
not be adored.”
All the idolatrous practices and the superstitions of the Church
of Rome have had small beginnings. They commenced much as the
Romanising tendencies of the Sacerdotalists commenced in the Church
of England, and they went on increasing from year to year, and from
century to century, and for this reason every lover of the Reformed
Church, every well-wisher to the truth, and every person desirous of
maintaining purity and simplicity of worship, should earnestly resist
every attempt to revive the errors and evils of the past.
In the Rubric (which is the rule for the guidance of public wor-
ship, and must be adhered to), which precedes the Order for Morning
and Evening Prayer in the Book of Common Prayer occurs the fol-
lowing explicit statement:
“ It is to be noted that such ornaments of the Church and of the
Ministers thereof at all times of their ministrations shall be retained
and be in use as were in this Church of England, by the authority
of Parliament, in the second year of the reign of King Edward the
Sixth.”
Therefore all the ornaments and vestments introduced by
Newman and Pusey and their followers are clearly prohibited by the
foregoing distinct and emphatic declaration, which is mandatory in
its language. They are illegal ; and an Act of Parliament icon Id
have to be produced in order to legalise them.
Nor can the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other prelates of
the Church, effect any alteration whatever in its ritual, or in the
method of conducting Divine Service, unless “ in such order and form
as is mentioned and set forth in the Book of Common Prayer (at the
commencement of the Morning and Evening Service), and none other
or otherwise.”


A. 13.
A.D’
I.
Invocation of Saints
375 ' 16.
Corpus Christi Day
1264
2.
Prayers for the Dead
400 17.
Procession of the Sacrament
I33 6
3-
Worship in an Unknown
18.
Withholding the Cup from
Tongue ...
600
the Laity
1415
4-
Supremacy of the Pope ...
606 19.
Purgatory
1438
5-
Worship of the Cross,
20.
Tradition ...
L546
Images and Relics
787 21.
Apocryphal Books
1547
6.
Constrained Celibacy of
22.
Priestly intervention neces-
the Clergy
1000
sary to the validity of a
7-
Canonisation of Saints ...
1000
Sacrament
1547
8.
Infallibility of the Church
1076 23.
Venial Sins...
1563
9-
Chaplets ...
1090 24.
Sale of Indulgences
1563
IO.
Sacrifice of the Mass
1100 25.
Creed of Pope Pius IV., in
ii.
Seven Sacraments ...
1160
which 12 new Articles of
12.
Transubstantiation
1215
Faith were added to the
13-
Confession
1215
Nicene Creed, composed
14.
Elevation of the Host
1220
a.d. 325
1564
r 5-
Ringing of a little Bell at
26.
Immaculate Conception ...
1856
the Mass...
1227 27.
Infallibility of the Pope ...
1870
The Inventions of Rome.
PAGAN AND PAPAL.
Dates of the Adoption of the New Doctrines and Ceremonies by the
Church of Rome. The Dogmatic Acts of this Church exceed
Comprehension and Contradict Reason.


The Sacraments.
Now let us inquire into the most important subject of the Sacra-
ments, for on this point there is the widest divergence from the true
faith and practice of the early Christian Church and the definite
teaching of the Church of England on the part of High Church fol-
lowers of Newman and Pusey. It is on this matter that the gravest
offence is given by the Ultra-Ritualists.
As every true Churchman knows, the Catechism teaches that Bap-
tism and the Lord’s Supper are the only two sacraments generally
(note generally, not absolutely) necessary to salvation. What is the
doctrine of the Church which Newman, Pusey, and their High Church
followers would lead us into?
Article HI. of the twelve Novel
Articles of Pope Pius IV., published
as the New Creed of the Church of
Rome on December 9th, 1564, is as
follows :
HI.—I also profess that there are
truly and properly seven Sacraments
-of the new law, instituted by Jesus
Christ our Lord, and necessary for
the salvation of mankind, though
not all for every one ; to wit, Baptism,
Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance,
Extreme Unction, Orders and Matri-
mony, and that they confer grace ;
and that of these, Baptism, Con-
firmation and Orders cannot be
reiterated without sacrilege ; and I
also receive and admit the received
and approved ceremonies of the
Catholic Church, used in the solemn
administration of all the aforesaid
Sacraments.
CHURCH CATECHISM.
“ Q.-How many Sacraments hath
Christ ordained in His Church ?
“ A.—Two only as generally neces-
sary to salvation, that is to say,
Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.”
And in Article XXV. is the
following definite teaching :
“There are two Sacraments or-
dained of Christ, our Lord, in the
Gospel, that is to saj% Baptism and
the Supper of the Lord. Those five
commonly called Sacraments, that
is to say, Confirmation, Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme
Unction are not' to be counted for Sacra-
ments of the Gospel , being such as have
grown partly of the corrupt following
of the Apostles . . . they have not
any visible sign or ceremony ordained
of God. The Sacraments were not
ordained of Christ to be gazed upon
or to be carried about, but that we
should duly use them. And in such
only as worthily receive the same
they have a wholesome effect or
operation ; but they that receive
them unworthily purchase to them-
selves damnation, as St. Paul saith.”
BAPTISM
foregoing that the doctrine of the
; ordinance is that it is essential to
It will be seen from the
Church of Rome respecting this


salvation. This view is held and taught by the High Church fol-
lowers of Newman and Pusey in the Church of England. How can
they defend their position? Not by any reference in the Word of
God or interpretation in the Prayer Book, certainly. Then it will be
seen that their only authority is to be found in the teaching of that
corrupted Church with which they should be in antagonism if they
are faithful to their trust.
Baptismal regeneration is one of the Papal revivals introduced
into the Church of England as a foremost doctrine propounded by
the Ultra-Ritualists, but not in the sense taught by the twenty-seventh
of the Articles of Religion, which form the doctrinal basis of the
Church of England. This defines baptism, when rightly received,
to be a sign that the recipient has been “ grafted into the Church,
and the whole question was raised in connection with the famous
Gorham controversy.
The Rev. G. C. Gorham was presented to the vicarage of Bram-
ford Speke, but Bishop Phillpotts refused him admission to the
vicarage. The matter in dispute was dealt with and finally settled
by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, “ the court consisting
of two archbishops and the Bishop of London, with seven lay judges, ’
on Bth March, 1850. “This Judicial Committee gave its award, the
Vice-Chancellor and the Bishop of London dissenting (the two arch-
bishops and six judges agreeing to the verdict) that the Rev. G. C.
Gorham be admitted to the vicarage of Bramford Speke. The
doctrine held by the Rev. G. C. Gorham appears to us to be this :
That ‘ baptism is a sacrament generally necessary to salvation, but
that the grace of regeneration does not so necessarily accompany the
act of baptism that regeneration invariably takes place in baptism..
That the grace may be granted before, in, or after baptism. That
baptism is an effectual sign of grace, by which God works invisibly
in us, but only in such as worthily receive it.’ ”
Thus the highest legal tribunal in Great Britain and Ireland
affirmed, with only two dissentients, the accuracy of the views held
by the Rev. G. C. Gorham, and strenuously denied by the Bishop of
Exeter, his diocesan, namely, that “ baptism is a sacrament generally
necessary to salvation, but that the grace of regeneration does not
so necessarily accompany the act of baptism that regeneration
invariably takes place in baptism ; that the grace may be granted
before, in, or after baptism, and that baptism is an effectual sign of
grace, by which God works invisibly in us, but only in such as
worthily receive it.”
This decision is obviously consonant with both the letter and the
spirit of the New Testament. For what does “ regeneration” signify?
A re-birth ; that is to say, that the person who has been regenerated
has been born again of God, and what is the language used by-
John the Evangelist when speaking of this new birth? “Whosoever
is born of God doth not commit sin ; for his seed remaineth in him,,
and lie cannot sin. because he is born of God.”


Our blessed Lord being without sin was baptised with water
(Matthew iii., 16), while a malefactor was saved without baptism
(Luke xxiii., 43), which seems to show very clearly the reason of the
Church’s answers to ; “ How many sacraments there be as generally
necessary to salvation?” Pusev, Newman, their followers, and the
Church of Rome hold that the sacrament of baptism is necessary to
salvation , whereas the teaching of Scripture and the catechism of the
Church of England show that it is only “ generally' necessary. It
seems from Act xvi., 15, when the Lord opened her heart, Lydia was
baptised with .all her household, although she is the sole person to
whom faith is attributed.
Calmet savs : “ Regeneration is used in two senses by the sacred
authors of the New Testament. The first refers to a change of state
(Matthew xix., 28) : the second to a change of profession
■(Titus iii., 5)."
Now, as a matter of fact, we know that millions of Christians
who have been duly baptised do> commit sin, and, therefore, as the
impossibility of committing sin is declared to be one of the conse-
quences of having been born again, it follows that, in all such cases,
regeneration cannot have taken place at the font ; so that it can only
occur when, as the decree of the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council has declared, baptism has been worthily received. This is
in strict conformity with the terms of the 27th Article of Religion
subscribed to by every minister of the Church of England, and
-disposes effectually and for ever of the whole question of baptismal
regeneration as raised in the celebrated controversy referred to.
James Bowling Mozley, Reg. Prof. Divinity, &c. ; —“1 now
entertain no doubt of the substantial justice of the Gorham decision,”
—Rivington Letters, 1887.
THE LORD’vS SUPPER
Article V. of the New Creed of
the Church of Rome ;
V.-I profess, likewise, that in the
mass there is offered to God a true,
proper, and propitiatory sacrifice for
the living and the dead ; and that in
the most holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist there are truly, really, and
substantially the body and blood,
together with the soul and divinity, of
our Lord Jesus Christ; and that there
is made a conversion of the whole
substance of the bread into the body,
and of the whole substance of the
wine into the blood ; which con-
version the Catholic Church calls
Article XXVIII. of the Kook of
Common Prayer :
. . . Transubstantiation (or the
change of the substance of Bread
and Wine) in the Supper of the Lord
cannot be proved by Holy Writ, but
is repugnant to the plain words of
Scripture, overthroweth the nature
of a Sacrament, and hath given
occasion to many superstitions. The
body of Christ is given, taken, and
eaten in the Supper only after an
heavenly and spiritual manner. And
the means whereby the Body of
Christ is received and eaten in the
Supper is faith.
transubstantiation. I also confess, “. . . grant that we, receiving Thy
that under either kind alone Christ creatures of hteadand wine."—in praver
is received whole and entire, and a
True sacrament.
to be used by officiating minister at
the Lord’s Table.


The teaching of the Church of England, it will be seen by the-
foregoing parallel columns, is distinctly and vitally opposed to that,
of the Roman Catholic Church, and admits of no misinterpretation.
The second paragraph of the Rubric for the Communion reads:
“ And to take away all occasion of dissension and superstition which
any person hath or might have concerning the Bread and Wine, it
shall suffice that the bread be such as is used to be eaten/' and at the-
end of the Communion Service will be found the following instruc-
tion “ Whereas it is ordained in this office for the administration,
of the Lord's Supper that the communicants shall receive the same
kneeling (which order is well meant for a signification of our humble
and grateful acknowledgment of the benefits of Christ therein given,
to all worthy receivers, and for the avoiding of such profanation and
disorder in the Holy Communion as might otherwise ensue), yet lest
the same kneeling should by any persons, either out of ignorance or
infirmity, or out of malice or obstinacy, be misconstrued and
depraved: it is hereby declared that thereby no adoration is
intended or ought to be done either unto the Sacramental bread or
wipe there bodily received, or unto corporal presence of Christ’s
natural flesh and blood. For the Sacramentae Bread and
Wine remain stiel in their very naturae .substance,
and therefore may not be adored, jor that were idolatry to be
abhorred of all faithful Christians.
As is shown above, the 28th Article of the Church of England
emphatically declares that transubstantiation is not only incapable of
proof by Holy Writ, but that it “ is repugnant to the plain words of
Scripture,” which directs that the Lord’s Supper shall be partaken of
only after an heavenly and spiritual manner.” In the 19th Article it
is directed that “ the Sacraments shall be duly ministered according
to Christ’s ordinance,” which is thus set forth in the prayer offered
up by the minister in the Communion Service: —•“ Our Saviour, Jesus
Christ, in the same night that He was betrayed, took bread, and
when He had given thanks He brake it, and gave it to His disciples,,
saying, ‘ Take eat, this is My body, which is given for you; do this
in remembrance of Me.’ Likewise after supper He took the cup,
and when He had given thanks, He gave it to them saying, ‘ Drink
ye all of this, for this is My blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for you, and for many, for the remission of sins ; do this as oft
as ye shall drink it in remembrance of Me.”
All were to partake of it, and not the priests only. It was a
spiritual rite which was instituted in order to keep His great act of
self-sacrifice alive in the minds of His disciples after His departure.
The Church of Rome has materialised it, as much SO' as if that
Church imagined Christ had given a portion of His actual body to be
eaten, and had opened one of His veins so that the Apostles might
drink of His blood.
After the Crucifixion we are told that His followers “ continued
steadfastly in the Apostles’ doctrine and fellowship, and in the-
breaking of bread and in prayers.”


“The daily communion of the primitive believers was conducted'
in private houses, without the intervention of priest, but was not
mysterious, as implying any magical or supersensible efficacy. There
are some people who believe that the hands of a priest and his words
can change bread and wine into different things, for which no
evidence can be produced. Bread and wine are not changed in.
substance in the smallest degree by the words or by the action of the
priest during the service of the communion or at any other time by
such efforts.”
“ The words I speak unto you, they are spirit and they are life.”
—John vi., 63. Body and blood are material, and any such things as
spiritual body and spiritual blood no one in his senses, you would
suppose, could imagine. Jesus said: “ A spirit hath not flesh and
bones.” —Luke xxiv., 39. After supper Christ said: “ I will not
drink henceforth of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink
it with you in My Father’s kingdom.—Matthew xxvi., 26-29, Priests
of the Newman and Pusey class say it is not the fruit of the vine.
By so saying they want people to believe them and not Christ.
What is verily and indeed taken ? Bread, which our Saviour
called His body, and wine, which He called His blood.
The said bread and wine are verily and indeed taken under the
name “ body and blood,” so called by Christ. Not that body out of
the mouth of Christ which speaketh to you, but this bread and this
wine is to be taken; this is the command of our Saviour.
As, for instance, “ Macadam’' is known to us as broken stone,
so called after the name of a man. “Euclid” is a book, also so'
called after the name of a man. If I ask a carter to' bring me a load
of macadam he will bring a load of broken stone, or if I ask a pro-
fessor to bring me a euclid he will bring me a book. If I call these*
two persons together and say the load of stone and book are flesh
and blood, because they are named after flesh and blood, what
think vou the answer would be?.
Christ called Himself a door: it is not necessary that He was
iron, wood, or any other material that the like are made of. Christ
said :“I am the way.” It is not necessary that way was a way
made of macadam, or a way made of any other road-making
material. Would it be reasonable because we read in Isaiah xl., 6,
that “All flesh is grass,” to assume, therefore, that flesh is of the
nature and substance of grass ?
Priests of the Newman and Pusey class say they have the power
given to them that Christ gave to the Apostles. If so, let them show
it after the same manner of the Apostles, as stated in the New
Testament: “ Heal the sick, cleanse the leper, raise the dead”'
(Matthew x., 8), &c., in the name of Jesus Christ, and by so doing,
show that they have the power which they assume.
In the play it is said by Glcndower —
“ I can call spirits from the vasty deep.”
Hotspur. —“Why, so can I, or so can any man;
But will they come when you do call for them ?”


Ye priests, the mere saying you can do this or that is no proof
you can do it.
“ As the doctrine, then, of the so-called real presence of the body
and blood of Christ in the Sacrament must be understood spiritually
to be understood truly, so whenever priests or people pretend to
change the bread and wine into something else by some words and
manoeuvres of theirs, believe them not; as disciples of Christ follow
the command of our Saviour —break bread and drink wine at the
commemorative feast of the Last Supper in palace, church, or cot
with or without a clergyman. Christ has promised that when two or
three are gathered together in His name, there He will be with them
in spirit.”
Canon Godby stated in the Church of England Assembly, 1901,
that “He did believe in the real presence of Christ in the
Eucharist. —See “Church Year Book,” 1900-1901.
The Lords Supper is the communion of all true Christians with
Christ, and all true Christians with each other."—“ Dean Milman of
St. Paul’s, by Arthur Milman (1900), p. 267.
The Rev. James Anthony Eroude visited Ireland just after
taking his degree. He tells us of a clergyman, afterwards a bishop
in the Irish Church, who declared in his hearing that the notion of
the Sacraments as having a mechanical efficacy—an effect upon the
mind of the receiver—was an idolatrous superstition ; also that the
Church might have bishops in England, and dispense with bishops
in Scotland and Germany, that a bishop was merely an o'fficcr.
Eroude also states that the object of the Oxford tract-writers was
to un-Protestantise England. (See “ Miscellanies,” 1992, by
Augustine Birrell, Honorary Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.)
The following is from the cable news in The Argus of 3rd May,
1900 :
“ A Church Question,—Reservation of the Sacrament.—London,
Ist May.—ln July last year the question of the legality of the reser-
vation of the .Sacrament came before the Archbishops of Canterbury
and York, sitting as an ecclesiastical court at Lambeth Palace. The
archbishops have now given their decision, which is that the Church
of England does not permit of the reservation of the Sacrament in
any form.
“ [By the Rubric following the Holy Communion it is ordered that
none of the consecrated bread and wine be taken out of the church,
but be reverently consumed by the priest and such communicants
as he shall call. This is no doubt to prevent adoration of the
Sacrament. But many clergy have desired that leave be given to
them to reserve the Sacrament that they may the more readily take
it to the sick and dying, without having to reconsecrate more bread
and wine, especially in times of much sickness. At the sitting of
convocation last vear a memorial affirming the desirability of reser-
vation of the Sacrament in cases of the sick was presented by many
.influential medical men.]"


APPENDIX.
The following extracts in a great measure show the church
and system which Newman, Pusey and their High Church
followers were and are trying to get the people to embrace.
Attention is directed especially of the members of the Church
Assemblies, who are the Guardians of our Church in Australia,
to the following Papistical Code :
THE POPE AND THE COUNCIL.
Janus. 1869.
pAGE.
xxix. The 800k —written by Roman Catholics, is .made up of fact: —from
original authorities, given in the said book.
10. The (Roman) Church has the right of employing external coercion ;
she has direct and indirect temporal power.—Power of civil and
corporal punishment.—The Church (Roman) has an external
jurisdiction.—She can impose temporal punishment.
20. They are in damnable error who regard the reconciliation of the Pope
with modern civilisation as possible or desirable.
24. Pius IX. pronounces freedom of conscience an insane folly, and
freedom of the press a pestiferous error, which cannot be sufficiently
detested.
40. The power of the Church is purely monarchical, and neither knows
nor tolerates any limits. He (the Pope) is to be the sole and absolute
master.
46. A thoroughly ignorant Pope may very well be infallible, for God has
before now pointed the right road by the mouth of a speaking ass.
86. The monarchical authority and the magisterial power of the Pope is
the chief article on which all the rest depends. If the Pope is
infallible in his decisions . . . every one must say : I believe this
or that article of faith, because I believe in the Pope’s infallibility.
110. We desire to show the world that we can give or take away, at our
own will, kingdoms, duchies, earldoms—in a word, the possessions
of all men .... the Pope, the bishop of bishops, stood in un-
approachable majesty over all monarchs of the earth.
113. This doctrine of the personal sanctity of every Pope . . . was adopted
into the codes of canon law . . . But as notorious facts, are the
crimes and excesses of many Popes, which no denials could get rid
of . . . Even if a Pope is so bad that he drags down whole nations
114. to hell . . . nobody can rebuke him ; for he who judges all can be
judged of no man.


176. The oath of obedience or vassalage the bishops had now to take to the
Pope was understood as binding them to unconditional subjection in
political us well as ecclesiastical matters.
227. St. Bonaventure, whom the Popes had loaded with honours, and who
was bound by the closest ties to Rome as a cardinal and General of
his Order, declared Rome to be the harlot who makes kings and
nations drunk with the wine of her whoredoms . . . He adds that
the prelates, corrupted by Rome, infect the clergy with their vices,
and the clergy, by their evil examples of avarice and profligacy,
poison and lead to perdition.
230. Trionfo, commissioned by John XXII. to expound the rights of the
, Pope, showed that ... he could empty Purgatory at one stroke,
by his Indulgences, of all the souls detained there, on the sole
condition that somebody (pay for masses) fulfilled the rules laid
down for gaining those indulgences. (A Pope, as is said, having
this power, and keeping the people in Hell and Purgatory—what
a monster of cruelty he must be !)
232. The Popes heaped up for themselves teachers after their lusts, having
itching ears, to invent cunning devices for building up a system
which made it lawful for the Pope to do exactly what he pleased.
239. It was Papal legates who induced Louis IX., when barely fourteen
years of age, to make the cruel law which punished all heterodoxy
with death.
241. The practice of the Inquisition . . . became further and further
removed from all principles of justice and equity . . . Here mere
suspicion sufficed for the application of torture ; it was by an act of
grace that you were imprisoned for life between four narrow walls,
and fed on bread and water, and it was a conscientious obligation
for a son to give up his own father to torture, perpetual imprison-
-242. ment, or the stake. Here the accused was not allowed to know the
names of his accusers, and all the means of legal protection w T ere
withheld from him ; there was no right of appeal, and no aid of
legal adviser allowed him .... The family was deprived of its
property by legal confiscation , half of it passing into the Papal
treasury, the other half into the hands of the inquisitors.
244. The inquisitors derived their whole power from the Pope ; they were
his delegates, and no one was ever condemned to torture or the
stake but in his name, and by his general or special order.
245. Whoever contradicted a Papal decision . . . was handed over to the
secular power to be put to death. . . ’. The Popes themselves had
long since laid down this principle.
246. Contradicting the Pope was treated and punished as heresy . . . and
paid with their lives for disputing the right ... on the strength of
which they sentenced to the stake.
261. The Popes have asserted that this or that prerogative belongs to
them, we must therefore believe that they really possess it
262. We are taught by the Roman Church that no one may call in
question its decisions.
267. The Pope has the right of establishing a new confession of faith, and
whoever rejects his authority is a heretic, for it belongs to him alone
to decide on every doctrinal question.
271. The Papal svstem, with its theory of Infallibility, was as indispensable
and valuable to them as to the curia itself.


283. The Pope conferred the right of election on certain princes, and gave
to kings and emperors the power of the civil sword . . . that every
emperor is bound to take an oath of fealty to him.
289. Interdicts.—To all these means for supporting the universal supremacy
of the Popes, and bringing the belief of their infallibility into more
general acceptance, were added the interdicts to which whole
countries were frequently subjected. God’s Vicar upon earth, it
was said, acts like God . . . who shall dare to contradict the Pope?
... his acts cannot be measured by the rules of human justice.
292. The Pope the sole ruler of the Church, to the exclusion of all others.
299. The corruption of the Church, and the demoralisation which was its
result, had penetrated deeper in Italy than elsewhere . . . *. the
Italian bishops were the most steady opponents of every, remedy
and reformation.
.321. The Roman Church knows howto make the yoke she has laid on
persons press heavily. . . . The English Sir John Mandeville related,
after his return from the East, that the Greeks had answered
322. laconically to John XXII.’s demand for their submission, “Thy
plenary power over thy subjects we firmly believe ; thine im-
measurable pride we cannot endure ; and thy greed we cannot
satisfy. With thee is Satan, with us the Lord.’’
,322. Eugenius wanted them to acknowledge his monarchical power over
the whole church in the form usual in the west, and when the papal
theologians overwhelmed him with a mass of forged or corrupted
passages . . . the Emperor said that if the Pope insisted ... he
would depart with his bishops. . . . The Emperor replied that the
courtly rhetoric to be found in the letters of ancient bishops and
emperors could not be transmuted into the logic of strict law.
,341. Of Papal bulls, Eliminations, begging monks, clerical place hunters
Erasmus could say in his letter to the Bishop of Rochester, “If
Christ does not deliver His people from multiform ecclesiastical
tyranny, the tyranny of the Turks will at last become less intolerable.
343. ... If the Pope, the cardinals, and the prelates, with the rest, swore
in God’s name that they wished to reform themselves, they would be
perjured. From head to foot there was no soundness in the church.”
345. Rome—the great school of iniquity, where a large part of the German
and Italian clergy went through their apprenticeship as place-
hunters, and returned home loaded with benefices and sins, as also
with absolutions and indulgences.
346. Everyone who came from Rome brought back word that in the
metropolis of Christendom, and in the (so-called) bosom of the
great mother and mistress of all churches, the clergy, with scarcely
an exception, kept concubines.
345. The Pope has full authority over councils, and can summon, suspend,
or dissolve them at his pleasure. . . . The rule of such Popes as
Paul 11., Sixtus IV., Innocent VIII., and Alexander VI., each of
whom had striven to exceed the vices of his predecessor. Paul 11.,
according to the expression of a contemporary, made the Papal chair
into a sewer of his debaucheries. . . . He says the lives of the
Popes, cardinals, and prelates is stronger still.
.353- When the (Roman Catholic) Carmelite, Thomas Conecte, who had
long been labouring in France, Flanders, and Italy, as a travelling
missionary . . . had distinguished himself by the saintliness
of his life” at last lashed the vices of the Court of Rome. . . .
Eugenius IV. had him by the Inquisition, and burnt alive.
Alexander VI. treated Savonarola in the same manner. That


famous orator and theologian had called aloud for a reformation of
the polluted (Roman) Church ; urged the sovereigns.
354. The Pope excommunicated him. . . . Papal commissaries were
sent there (to Florence), and Savonarola, with two other brethren
of his order, were executed, and their bodies burnt. Savonarola
. was one of the most gifted men ; composed a learned work
in defence of the universal monarchy and infallibility of the Popes.
. Pope Benedict XIV. declared him worth canonization.
36?. Gaspar Contarini, a secular statesman, whom (Pope) Paul 111. made
into a cardinal . . . told the Pope the whole Papal system was
.wrong and unchristian . . . nothing can be devised more
opposed to the law of Christ, which is a law of freedom, than this
363. system, which makes subjects Christians to the Pope, who can
make, unmake, and dispense laws at his mere caprice. No greater
slavery than this could be imposed on the Christian people. Paul
111. was not minded to swerve a hair’s breadth from his claim of
absolute power. The two Councils —the Lateran in 1516, and the
Tridentine in its earlier period—these speeches and descriptions
reproduced (this statement) :—“We cardinals, Italian bishops, and
officials of the curia, are a tribe of worthless men, who have neglected
our duties. We have let numberless souls perish through our
neglect, we disgrace our episcopal office, we are not shepherds but
wolves, we are the authors of the corruption prevalent throughout
the whole Church, and are in a special sense responsible for the
decay of religion in Italy.” Cardinal Antonio Pucci said publicly,
before the Assembly of 1516: —“Rome, the Roman prelates and
bishops daily sent forth from Rome, are the joint causes of the
manifold errors and corruptions in the Church.”
365. Bishop Coriolano Matorano, of San Marco, in his opening speech at
the Council of Trent, created astonishment. The picture he drew
of the Italian cardinals and bishops’ bloodthirsty cruelty, their
avarice, their pride, and the devastation they had wrought in the
Church, was perfectly shocking.
367. An Italian Cardinal, Archbishop of Albano, stated that all the evils
and abuses of the Church came from Rome. . . . When on one
occasion a foreign bishop mentioned an historical fact which would
not fit in with the Papal system, the storm broke out. Vosmedians,
368. Bishop of Cadiz, had observed that formerly metropolitans used to
ordain the Bishops of their provinces by virtue of their own
authority. Cardinal Simonetta promptly contradicted him, and
then the Italian bishops raised a wild cry, and put the Bishop of
Cadiz down by stamping and scraping with their feet. They cried
out that this accursed wretch must not speak ; he should at once
be brought to trial.
366. There is a letter extant of the famous Anto-nio Flaminio, who asked
What will a Council, compound of such monstrous bishops, do for
the Church ? There is nothing episcopal about them except their
long robe. He knew of but one worthy bishop in Italy, who was
now dead —Giberto of Verona—but nothing was to be hoped from
the existing bodv, who had become bishops through royal favour,
through solicitations, through purchase in Rome, through criminal
acts, or after long years spent in the curia. . . . They quietly let
themselves be described as wretched, unprincipled hirelings ; rude
and ignorant men.
381. Bishop Cornelio Muss, of Bitonto, preached in Rome on the Epistle to
the Romans. . . . What the Pope says we must receive as though
spoken by God himself. In divine things we hold him to be God.,


i6. The Church of England in his college days . . . became so papalised
as to be little worth an honest Protestant’s adherence. This was
said by one of the greatest scholars of the day, viz., Dr. Burton,
53. Professor, Oxford College had, before him, to give M. F.
382. The Pope, who, as “ Pontifex Maximus,” is God’s representative on
earth, has full authority and power over nations and kingdoms ; he
judges all, and can in this world be judged by none. (And yet the
civil power removes him from Rome and imprisons him.)
Citizens of the Roman Church, see to these words, spoken and written by Roman
Catholics :
“ Rome is infallible, Rome is eternal,
Rome is unchangeable, cruel, and strong ;
Leagued with legions of darkness infernal,
Crushing the right and upholding the wrong.”
And this is the Church which Newmanites, Puseyites, and their
High Church followers try to get the people into.
My Life (Martin Farquhar Tupper, D.C.L., F.R.S.) as an Author, 1886 :
Tupper a prize of worth of books. He requested Mr. Tupper
to allow Mr. Gladstone to have worth of them, as he was a good
second certainly.
59. In matters theological I was strongly opposed to the Tractarians,
especially denouncing Newman and Pusey for their dishonest “ non-
naturalness ” and Number Ninety Tract. I have by my life and
200. writings excited against me the theological hatred of High Church,
and Broad Church, and No Church, and especially of the Romanisers
amongst our Established clergy.
203. In reply to some excellent members of the Roman Church, who have
publicly accused me of maligning holy women and sacred retreats,
my obvious answer is that I contend against the evil side both of
nunneries and monkeries, whilst I may fairly admit some good to
be found in both. My real protest is for liberty both to mind and
body, and against coercion of any kind, material or spiritual. Give
perfect freedom. I would not meddle with anyone’s honest
convictions. “To a nunnery go, if thou wilt ; only let the resolve
be revocable, not a doom for ever.”
t Liguori “ Selva,” p. 254. —Is there no danger in a nun confessing to a
priest ? “ Yes,” says Augustine, “ there is danger ; you ought the more to
fear and fly familiarity with her ; for the more spiritual and holy a woman
is, the more easily she gains the affections of men.”
“A Guide for Priests,” Page 68.—8 y the Roman Catholic Bishop of
Shrewsbury, Dr. James Brown :
‘‘What is woman? St. Jerome* (a Roman Catholic priest) gives
the answer. (Mark this, ye women that go to confession.) ‘ She is
the gate by which the devil enters, the road that leads to sin ; she
is the sting of the scorpion. Woman is a fire, man the tow, and the
devil the bellows.’ St. Maximus writes of women, ‘She makes
t [A pamphlet issued by Charles Hastings Collette, No. 9, Strand, W.C., London—
” Roman Priests, as described by Themselves,” Liguori’s “ Selva.”]
*St. Jerome made the Scripture translation for the Roman Catholics. The Douay
version of the Scriptures were printed for the Roman Catholics a.d. 1610.


shipwreck of men, a tyrant leading them captive, a lioness tearing
them with its claws, a monster decked out to lure them to destruc-
tion, a malicious evil beast.’ And St. Anastasius, ‘ She is a viper
clothed with a shining skin, a comfort to the demon, a laboratory
of devils, a flaming furnace, a javelin wherewith the heart is pierced,
a storm by which houses are overthrown, a guide leading to dark-
ness, a teacher of all evil, an unbridled tongue speaking evil of the
saints.’ A fair woman tricked out with finery is a keen and sharp-
edged Sword in the hands o tfhe devil.”
Women of the elite, what say you of such conduct? Have these
particulars been obtained at the confessional, and thus caused to be revealed
to the world by Roman Catholics? and is the religious order which Newman,
Pusey, and their High Church followers were a'hd are wanting you to embrace,
and become the polluted sinks, to keep you in bondage for their own purposes,
suitable to themselves ?
ADDENDUM.
Our constitutional Government guards every legal right. The pro-
perty of the American churches, and the legal rites attached to membership
of them or to their offices, are in the keeping of the civil law. When
churches by their own code cannot enforce their dictum they apply to the
civil courts in the matter, all over the British Empire. -(Goldwin Smith, in
his Questions of the Day, pp. 63-65.) Macaulay, in his Review of Gladstone's
Essay, had no difficulty in showing that “ Governments are meant to govern,
not to settle theological questions. Governments and people may adopt
what form of religion they please, and are entitled to their freedom in
practising it (within their civil rights), i.e., except where it is inconsistent
with the order and tranquillity of the community. In no case shall ‘‘creeds
of any religious body make void civil enactments.” If we grant that
burglars, smugglers, and evildoers generally, acquire a right to continue
their unlawful practices because of a long immunity from punishment or
prevention, we may think Lord Halifax, Messrs. Pusey, Newman, and all
their followers entitled to continue their unlawful claims and practices in
consequence of the length of time these claims and practices have been
permitted to deceive, oppose and degenerate the people whom they have for
such a lengthened period misled and oppressed. What may further be
added is that ‘‘ the Romanising section of the ritualists wishes to take the
Church from under the control of the State altogether, forgetful of the fact
that the Government of the country must always decide on the disputed
rights of corporate bodies as well as of individuals.”




