

UNDER
SIX
FLAGS
BEING
NOTES ON CHINESE
IN
Samoa, Hawaii, United States,
British Columbia, Japan,
and China.
BY
ALEX. DON,
DUNEDIN, N. Z.
DUNEDIN:
J. WILKIE & Co., Printers, Princes Street
1898.


ERRATA.
Page 4, line 33, for work read world
~ 4, ~ 34, ~ the ~ they
„ 5, „ 3, ~ in „ on
~ 11, ~ 34, „ Won ~ Wong
„ 18, „ 10, ~ close, ~ chose
~ 18, ~ last, delete “ the.”
~ 21, ~ 18, for Exteriorily read Exteriorly
„ 33, „ 6, „ Tehacapi ~ Tehachapi
„ 42, „ 20, „ suberb ~ superb
~ 53, ~ 35, ~ folks „ folk
„ 122, ~ 17, ~ position ~ partition


UNDER SIX FLAGS:
BEING
NOTES ON CHINESE
IN
Samoa, Hawaii, United States, British
Columbia, Japan, and China.
BY ALEX. DON,
DUNEDIN.
DUNEDIN, N.Z.
J. Wilkie & Co., Printers and Publishers.
1898.




NOTES ROUND THE PACIFIC.
I.
NEAR APIA,
Tuesday, October sth, 1897.
I left Auckland in the Alameda on the 2nd,
and have been four days out. Yet this is only
the sth, for after a Monday in the Eastern
hemisphere we were allowed another in the
Western ; and if we do not get back to the
Eastern before the end of the year, it will con*
tain for ns 366 days, though it be not leap year.
This is the third steamer we have been aboard
since leaving Dunedin on September 28th. The
Anglian took us the first stage—to Lyttelton,
and for roominess, comfort, and official civility,
this boat is immensely above the Takapuna,
which carried us on to Onehunga. We would
rather travel a month in the Anglian than a
week in the Takapuna; indeed, a month in the
latter is to us almost unthinkable. I have
heard the Anglian called (by a U.S.S. captain)
“ an old tub,” but we prefer an old tub to a new
coop. Here are samples of what one may ex-
pect in the coop. Joe Ings asked the chief
officer : “ About what time do you think we


shall get to Onehunga ? ” And got: “ I don’t
like to answer such conundrums.” He deserves
to be told that he wasn’t asked to answer a
conundrum, but simply a polite question. After
I had given my ticket up to him, the purser
asked again twice for it, and when I mentioned
the fact in a jocular way, he—instead of apolo-
gising—said stiffly; “You maybe asked a fourth
time.” The stewards were buzzing round a
select few of the passengers, while others
could ask thrice for a sheet of writing paper
before getting it. Even a lady passenger had to
ask twice ; her comment was, “ I am a stranger,
and I suppose it does not matter.” In our
cabin from Lyttelton to Onehunga there were
four berths and three passengers—three or-
dinary-sized adults in a room 6ft. x 7ft. x Bft.,
while the next cabin to us had only one occu-
pant. The weather was somewhat rough the
first day, causing the little steamer to pitch
about considerably, so that we did not get up to
breakfast and lunch. On any other U.S.S. boat
that I know the bill of fare would have been
brought to us; here it was too much to expect.
We got to Onehunga shortly after midnight, and
the second train for Auckland left the wharf at
8.5 a.m. Breakfast could easily have been
served at 7.45, but the passengers were allowed
to whet their appetites by an eight miles’ rail
way journey.
On reflection, it occurs to us that those Taka-
puna people want civilising by glimpses now and
then of the work beyond the small towns they
visit, and the little boat the occupy. Possibly
they imagine that, because twice a month they
carry a ton or two of the Queen’s mails up and
down the coast, the whole commercial and social
fabric of New Zealand would go to pieces with


out them. Seriously, the Company’s authorities
should take into consideration the question of
sending their mail steamer at times in the round
Australian trip. Unless something of this sort
is done speedily, certain of the officials, and
perhaps the boat itself, may swell up and burst.
Before leaving for ’Frisco we had to sign a
form containing answers to twenty questions
put to us in the interests of the Great Republic.
These are three of them : “ Have you more than
30 dollars; if less, how much?” “Were you
ever in prison, or almshouse, or supported by
charity ? ” “ Are you a polygamist ? ” Our
answers were, “ Not much.”
We are in the steerage on the Alameda, hav-
ing thought i'4o for twenty days’ travelling too
dear pay for one’s whistle. We are not peculiar
in this opinion; our shipmates include two
families in comfortable circumstances. Here
are five women, thirteen children, and a score
of men —mostly young fellows intending to stay
at San Francisco till spring opens the way to
Klondyke. Two of these are from Skippers, in
our own Otago. Other steerage occupants are a
collection of Australian cockatoos and shell-
parrots (love-birds). There are 108 of these,
roosting five tiers in one box, little higher than a
kerosene case. The shipment of love-birds
across the Pacific is very common, though some-
what risky. Of former shipments, of 135 and
75, by this boat, the numbers alive in ’Frisco
were 16 and 5. Who, what, and whither bound
are our saloon passengers is unknown. Hie
gulf between them and us is only a ship’s length
in width, but in depth unfathomable.
Our ship is roomy and steady; the stewards
are polite as Chinese; even the chief steward
forward readily gave me a day’s use of an


empty cabin to do some photograph work, and
we are, on the whole, very comfortable. Things
are, of course, a bit rough, but better than we
expected, and much better than we were told.
This is the bill-of-fare for one day :
Breakfast (7 a.m.) —Porridge; ox liver and
bacon; dry hash; Irish stew; roast potatoes ;
fresh bread ; fresh rolls ; fresh butter; IXL
jams; tea or coffee, with milk.
Dinner { 11.30 a.m.)—Soup; hot roast beef;
hot corned beef; potatoes, cabbage, and pars-
nips ; fresh bread and butter; bread pudding.
Tea (4.30 p.m.)—Cold roast beef; stew and
potatoes; fresh bread, butter, and IXL jams;
sponge cake; tea with milk.
We have 224 bags of New Zealand mails
aboard, which, the assistant sorter tells us, is
rather a light mail. The mail outward is
always heavier than that inward, and a heavy
one is expected on the trip back in November.
But the December steamer carries the heaviest
mail—sometimes 80,000 circulars and papers
from Dr Barnardo, or a similar number of
Ayer’s Sarsaparilla Almanacs.
We have had a fine passage, and expect to
get to Apia (Samoa) about noon to-morrow. If
I have anything to say, Note 11. will be from
near Honolulu.


II.
Nearing Honolulu,
October 12, 1897.
On the broad Pacific again ! Memory darts
me back eighteen years this month, when I was
sent up the Pacific from New Zealand to Canton
to get on the way of learning Chinese.
A critical period, I confess, occurred after the
eighth year, when the catechist, Kwok Wai-
shang’s failure, combined with a rather unsym-
pathetic study of Chinese character, brought
the demon Despair rather near. But the height
of one’s hope is measured by the depth of one’s
despair, and the darkest hour is nearest the
dawn. The Annual Inland Tours then began
in earnest, on which so much kindness from
Chinese and Europeans was met, ana so much
better ground offered for studying Chinese
character uncritically, that the crisis passed.
To-day I have more than ever love for, and
faith in, my work.
Fellow sympathy cannot be weighed or
measured : its effects, too, are beyond measure
and weight. It was in Dunedin that I found
Mr Henry White, a broad-minded Anglican,
who has been the right-hand man of the Mis-
sion these eight years.
Once I went up the Pacific alone; this time,
like the Apostles of old, we travel two together.
Again it is from outside my own denomination
that the companion comes. —Mr Joseph Ings
comes of a Baptist family that has already two
members working with the oldest British


Protestant Missionary Society. How Joe comes
to be here exemplifies “ the unexpected happen-
ing.” Six weeks ago, neither of us, nor anyone
else, had any notion that this Pacific partner-
ship was probable. But on August 29th, as we
were discussing the coming visit to America and
China while sitting at tea, when my wife sud-
denly said to him, “ You should go, Joe,” I felt
she had said the right thing at the right moment
—and had not the slightest doubt that he
would. Before the week was out, he had
decided to go. His parents said : “ Go, if you
believe it is God’s will. His will is all we want
concerning our children.”
Why is Joe Ings here ? He has been for a
year past during his spare hours studying
Chinese, in view ot work either in China or
abroad as the way opens. Before the opening
of the Walker street Church, he had had for
seven months a meeting of Chinese at his
father’s house on Sunday evening, which he
gave up to throw in his lot with us when the
church was opened. The temper in which he
thus co-operated is a good token of future
usefulness. To see work among the Chinese at
home and abroad, to see and live among them
in their own land, to talk to and hear them talk,
all the time carrying on the study of the
language as written and spoken, and all the
time in the company of one who speaks Chinese
and has been in China—this was a chance,
indeed, such a chance as rarely falls to the lot
ot the student missionary.
Why am I here ? For years I have felt
painfully limited by inexperience of Mission
methods among Chinese beyond China, and
have longed for the opportunity to look into
this work as it is carried on at the headquarters


of such work —the United, States of America.
I want, too, another look at the Mission work
in and around Canton, whence come the
Chinese to New Zealand and Australia. We in
Otago and Southland liberally support mission-
aries among the Chinese far from Canton, and
practically unconnected with us : can arrange-
ments be made for a missionary of our own
right to the homes of the sojourners among us,
and thus a strong link be formed connecting
Mission work there and here? I want also to
see how Chinese professing Christ abroad are
treated, and how they conduct themselves on
return to China. Then there are some hun-
dreds whom, when in Otago, I knew personally.
Will this friendship show itself again at home ?
Does it prompt them to send their boys to
Mission schools within reach ? Does it result
in their own attendance to hear the Gospel ?
Two-thirds of the Chinese in Otago are natives
of two districts that I did not visit when
formerly at Canton. A knowledge of these
districts, and acquaintance with their features
—their walled cities, market towns and villages,
their hills and rivers, their temples, pagodas,
and bridges—would be of considerable value.
Moreover, observing the keen interest mani-
fested when views of their city of Canton were
shown by the lantern, I have thought it pos-
sible to create even keener interest by photo-
graphed lantern scenes from their own villages.
But to carry out very barely this programme
would require an absence from Dunedin of
from eight to ten months. Until we possessed
a suitable meeting-house, I could not invite
anyone to work in my place during such an
absence. We have now the church in Walker
street, and in Timothy F. Loie the man. To


leave wife and six young; children, for such a
time and distance, was hard for me, but harder
for my wife. But she felt that lam on the
King’s business, and so said not Nay.
Whither are we going ? Where our Captain
leads. The “ Round of the Pacific ” may be
made thus : —A passing look at work in Hono-
lulu : some five or six weeks’ inspection of such
in California, Oregon, and British Columbia :
then a lew days at Yokohama (Japan), to ar-
range for making and painting lantern-slides :
on to Shanghai, stopping-over to see the great
Mission Press establishment: arrival at Canton
in time for the Chinese New Year (January
22nd) : some months on trips by house-boat
from the city into the surrounding districts:
return to New Zealand via Sydney.
How long we shall be away depends, after
life and health, mainly on two things. One is
the weather. If the winter is prolonged, and the
spring cool, we may stay at Canton till May;
if summer comes early, we may be home that
month. The other is the nature of our recep-
tion in the country districts —friendliness will
prolong, while hostility will curtail our stay.
In the latter case we may visit Singapore.
The unexpected happened again at Apia
(Samoa). We looked twice at the sign :
RESTAURANT.
AH SUE.
that stared at us from over a shop-front. Surely
that little word “ Ah ” had not been stolen by
some Samoan, unwittingly avenging the theft


so long ago of the name, “ Sandy Macpherson,”
by an Otago Chinese? No, we found a verit-
able Chinese in the shop, and learnt from him
that there are thirteen of his countrymen there.
He and two others belong to the Roman
Catholic Church, and one other is a Protestant.
We saw three Chinese —one from Shanghai,
one from Amoy, and one from Sanning—repre-
senting thus three Provinces of China.
“AH.”
Everyone has noticed the prevalence of this
prefix to the names of Chinese abroad, and many
are the attempts to explain. Generally it is sup-
posed to represent our “ Mr,” but on one occa-
sion a Supreme Court Judge gravely informed
the jury and counsel that he had discovered it
to mean “ Bachelor ” ! In China it is used only
to familiar friends, to close relatives, to inferiors,
servants, and such. In the Colonies one finds
the head of a large importing firm, known as
“Ah , ” with “ & Co. ” often attached.
The nearest parallel to this in English usage
would be to style the firm, Robert Wilson &
Co., as “ Bobby & Co.” For the prefix “Ah ”
has much the same force as our familiar and
diminutive affix “y” or “ ie.” For the Britons,
James Brown, John Smith, and Thomas Jones,
to be known among the Chinese in China as
Jimmy, Johnnie, and Tommy—this is one with
the Chinese Lee Wun, Chan Wing, and Wong
Ping, bearing among us the names Ah Wun,
Ah Wing, and Ah Ping. Their full names may
be—probably are —Lee Yeong-Wun, Chan
shing-Wing, and Won Ping-Kwong. They
would never be called Ah Lee, Ah Chan, nor
Ah Wong; for these are surnames. Equally


Ah Yeong-Wun, Ah Shing-Wing, &c., are not
used, just as we do not call a boy Tommy
Willie for Thomas William, but either Tommy
or Willie separately. Chinese, not knowing
the meaning of “ Mr,” say, when asked the
meaning of “ Ah,” —“ All the same Mr,” And
thinking that we have onlj names —not sur-
names—prefix “Ah ” indiscriminately. So I
am sometimes called “ Ah Don,” and Mr Ings
“ Ah Joe.”
MOONSTRUCK !
Ashore, the moonlight sleeps ! at sea, she is
the spirit of motion and beauty. To see her on
the blue Pacific, shining from the full moon in
a clear sky, is sometimes to see what can never
be forgotten. Balls of pure gold roll in twos
and threes along the ripples made by the
steamer cleaving her way, now breaking into
zig-zag flashes like those of an angry sky, then
re-forming into globes, and uniting in a shooting
shaft of golden light; or shivering by a puff of
wind into showers of radiant sparks that curve
and stream and quiver, to be again transformed
by calm into sheets of living fire. Far out as
the eye can see, bright lamps rise and fall like
lights on a low shore. Nearer, millions of tiny
points dance on a broad track, crossed at
intervals in the unruffled troughs of the swell
by stars in bands of thousands twinkling and
glancing, appearing and disappearing quicker
than the eye can catch, and seeming in the
rapidity of their motion to be of many tints.
Satiety there is not, for variety is endless: with
a ship in motion, a slight swell on the ocean,
the rising moon, and a fickle breeze, the scene
of glory never repeats itself.


P.S.—Six “ ladies ” from the saloon have
been smoking with the men in the smoking-
room for an hour past, to the no small disgust of
the steerage passengers—old and young.
III.
S. S. Alameda,
October 20th, 1897.
THE PACIFIC DESERT.
We expect to enter “ The Golden Gate ” to-
morrow morning. It will not be a grievous
matter to leave for a while the Pacific Desert
—I call it desert because, excepting at Apia
and Honololu, hardly a sign of life has been
seen these twenty days. A school of porpoises
escorted us out of Auckland Harbour; a few
flying-fish scurried from us near Samoa ; now
and then a bird or two follow in our wake, with
some flashes of phosphorescent animalcules —
only these on the waste of water; while for
days not even a bird was visible. The Pacific
voyager generally supposes, when he looks at
the clusters of islands mapped on the ocean —
specially in the South—that land will be visible
most of the way. The fact is that the ship
keeps as far from land as possible. The average
passenger prefers safety before variety, but the
interminable thud , thud of the screw, and
swish , swish of the waves become wearisome
even before the ship’s bell loses its music.


HONOLULU.
We were pleased and surprised at Apia:
Honolulu fascinated and bewildered us. The
bewilderment arose from the scope and variety
of the whole work among the Chinese : the
fascination from that branch of it that deals
with the Chinese children on the islands. Next
to my own sphere in Otago, place me among
the lovable Chinese children in lovely Hawaii. °
Thursday, 14th inst., will long be remembered
by Joe and myself. The superintendent
of the Chinese Mission, Rev. F. W. Damon,
who works under the Hawaiian Evangelical
Association, aided by the American Board of
Foreign Missions—welcomed us right heartily,
and though he is an over-busy man, placed him-
self at our disposal by disposing of us as he
would, and filled our five available hours with a
panorama that is, I believe, unique. Place after
place, and person after person, passed before us
so rapidly and with such variety, that our in-
tense interest in the wonderful object-lesson
could not flag. The outstanding features were:—
Chinese church, Chinese and Japanese kinder-
gartens, Montague Hall, Chinese Y.M.C.A.,
Chinese Gospel Hall, Elder Goo Kim, Chinese
Hospital, public schools for Chinese children,
Morrison Hall, and Chinese Guild Hall.
In and about Honolulu, there are 7000
Chinese, and here, besides the Superintendent
and Mrs Damon, who was born at Canton, there
work an assistant, two Chinese preachers (Poonti
and Hakka), and near a score of school and kin-
dergarten teachers.
church is a fine, tall-spired wooden
building, seated for six or eight hundred, and
holding a good pipe organ. The membership is


124, of whom 22 were received last year. Two
services are held on Sunday —one in Hakka, the
other in Poonti. Right in the Chinese and
Japanese quarters stands the “ Chinese Gospel
Hall,” where during the day a school is held,
and on Thursday and Sunday evenings an evan-
gelistic meeting, with the shutters open to the
street, so that hundreds outside supplement the
audience within.
POONTI AND HAKKA.
The church members are mostly Hakkas, who
muster strongly on these islands. In China, work
among the “ strangers ” is distinct from that
among the “ Natives” —combined work among
both here has several times caused sleepless
anxiety to the workers, lest at any moment
latent hostility between the two factions should
become open. As evidence that God Himself
has set His seal upon the work done with such
admirable tact by Mr and Mrs Damon, the two
parties worship together in one church. Be-
sides this, they also occupy the same Guild Hall,
the President of which is also President of the
Y.M.C.A. This is
ELDER GOO KIM,
a Hakka, elected by the united vote of Poontis
and Hakkas, whose forefathers not so long ago
thirsted for one another’s blood. It is as if the
Scottish President of an Orange Society should
be chosen by the Irish members of a Hibernian
Society to preside over them also ! The elder
is a remarkable man, who has worked his way"
up from labourer to contractor and merchant,,
till he stands at the head of the resident Chinese
population—Christian and heathen. Mr Damon
testifies that he is a man of very deep spiritu


ality and great might in prayer, whose influence
here has been such that he says : “ I could not
tell in a day what a help Mr Goo Kim has been
to me ; ” while at home he has built a church
for the Christians of his own district. He has
not obtained popularity by trimming, for his
Christianity is uncompromising. He insisted
last year on opening the new Chinese hospital
with a Christian service, silencing objectors
thus: “ This hospital is built for the cure of
disease. Who is like to God in the curing of
disease ? ”
mills’ institute
comprises the Superintendent’s residence, Mon-
tague Hall, and Morrison Hall—three distinct
buildings. Montague Hall is a boarding-school
for Chinese and Japanese youth learning English,
along with which the pupils are taught to read
the Scriptures and to sing Christian hymns.
Nearly sixty students are on the roll, most of
whom attend the public schools of the town in
the forenoon, andjhe Hall in the afternoon. An
elementary day school is also held here, and
two evening schools for adults.
Morrison Hall is a training home for Chris-
tian students, with class and lecture-rooms,
dormitories, kitchen, and gymnasium complete.
At present three young men are training to be
catechists.
These halls have been erected with subscrip-
tions from friends in America and Hawaii. Thus
last year Mr Damon received over 6000 dollars.
SCHOOLS AND KINDERGARTENS.
Throughout the group nearly 1000 Chinese
boys and girls attend these. In Honolulu, 200
boys and 130 girls, of school age, are on the


public schools’ rolls, while about another 100
are little ones, receiving instruction in the
kindergartens. One class we came upon modelling
fruit with clay, that seemed to lend itself more
readily to the shape of infant hand and fingers
than to the forms of apples and oranges.
Another was busy with building blocks ; another,
with coloured sticklets, formed letters and
words; a fourth was wrestling with the mathe-
matics involved in answering the problem:
“ Five teachers had each two pupils at school.
Besides these, two pupils were absent. How
many pupils were there altogether ?” The
children worked this out by drawing rude
figures to represent teachers and pupils—at once
a lesson in sketching and counting.
A class of fifty girls from 10 to 14 sang for
us in English the “ Thanksgiving Song,” adapted
to local circumstances, and “ Hail to the New
Year.” They kept remarkable time, led by a
young Hawaiian woman, without instrumental
accompaniment. Every word was heard dis-
tinctly, and only a practised ear could recognise
that the singers were not British.
A kindergarten of thirty mites from 4 to 6
gave us one of their action songs. The little
ones, as soon as a tune was struck up by one of
the teachers on an organ, arranged themselves
round an oval painted on the floor, and danced
in single file, singing. Then, upon the other
teacher holding up five fingers, five boys stepped
into the ring, and proceeded to choose girl
partners. But here a hitch occurred. Three
couples were readily formed, but the fourth re-
ceived several times a shake of the head from
those he would choose. He seemed on the
point of retiring, when he caught sight of a little
girl beckoning to him, and pointing to herself.


The little fellow readily accepted the partner
who had thus popped the question. But the
fifth boy failed to get a mate. Music began
again, and the four couples, hand in hand,
skipped round, ending with the boys leading the
girls back to the circle, where, after a mutual
bow —first by the boys—they took their original
places. Again the teacher held up five fingers—
the signal for five girls to step out. These
quickly close, boy mates, and the whole per-
formance was repeated. The object of this
lesson is to teach politeness and equality.
Chinese are given to dressing young children in
bright colours —notably green and red. This
class, thus dressed, with their sweet little voices
and quaint actions, fairly took our hearts by
storm.
ADDENDA.
Westerns outnumber Easterns in the Hawaiian
group. The latter are represented by 24,400
Japanese and 21,600 Chinese—the former by
31,000 Hawaiians, 8500 half-castes, 15,000
Portuguese, 3100 American, 2300 British, 1500
Germans, and 1500 others.
There are 225 Christian Chinese altogether
on the group, besides nearly 200 baptised
children.
At Kohala (Hawaii I.) are two English
teachers, a Chinese teacher and a Catechist; at
Wailuku (Maui I.) are two teachers and a
catechist working among the Chinese.
Three newspapers are published in Honolulu
The Hawaiian Chinese News , The Honolulu
Chinese Times, and Honolulu Chinese
Chronicle. These are all weeklies, and all
lithographed; but one is to come out next
month printed from type. We were shown the
the font in course of arrangement —a formidable


silent army that soon will speak for good or for
evil.
Mission work here differs much from that in
New Zealand. Here are nearly 1500 Chinese
children; in New Zealand not 20. With us the
English classes are for men, here for children.
In Hawaii are hundreds and thousands of
Chinese in one place, in New Zealand tens and
scores mostly.
IV.
Portland, Oregon, U.S.A.
A week ago it was hard—it is now still harder
—to begin giving briefly our impressions of
rough San Francisco, sweet and sunny Los
Angeles, slow Sacramento, and this city of
sullen rain, dead leaves, and pine. It is easier
to write ten columns than one or two.
SAN FRANCISCO.
On reaching the pier our saloon passengers
were forthwith allowed to land; for, having
paid more money, they are esteemed worthy,
without questioning, to enter the land whose
dollar bears the inscription, “in gold we
trust,” the l in “ gold ” having somehow been
omitted. But we forty in the steerage were
strictly guarded until it pleased His Highness
the U.S. Commissioner of Immigration to leave


his cosy office chair that wet day, and come to
inspect us. This he did at noon, after we had
waited just two hours. Having landed, we were
introduced to those fearful streets —narrow,
rough, and dirty.
A CITY.
I have heard San Francisco compared with
Melbourne : this is the comparison of a turnip
and a peach—Melbourne is not the turnip.
Melbourne is a city, and looks what she is ;
San Francisco is a—collection of buildings.
Some of these are wonderful, doubtless. There
is the nineteen-storied Call building just
erected—a white tower against the sky; there
is also the Palace Hotel, of 1015 rooms, with its
great white courtyard—a thing of real beauty;
there are Mills’ Building, the City Hall, the
new Ferry Station, with six or eight other piles
of brick or stone, If mere size and wealth, and
aggregations of materials and humanity, con-
stitute a city, here certainly is one. But to my
mind the disposition of the materials and the
character of the people count somewhat. When
fine towering buildings cease to be flanked by
ramshackle shops; when the rough stone-
pitched streets, where to stand five minutes is
to have one’s nerves torn into shreds by the
clitter-clatter, rickle-rackle, ding-dong, ding-
clang, and bumble-bump of cars and carts, bells
and waggons, are made smooth; when the
human diversities have been somewhat unified
by love to God and man —then San Francisco
may look like a city.


COSMOPOLIS.
Here are the shop signs in one small street,
taking them in order :
NORTH SIDE.
Cut Rate Pharmacy
Botica Espanola
Bavaria Lager Beer Shop
Salone Pella
The World Beater Dinner
Chas. Winkler : Zum
Freischiitz
Mexican Restaurant
Racine and Co.
Woon Lung Co.
SOUTH SIDE.
French Liquor Store
New Geneva Saloon
Restaurant Francaise
Franco - Swiss Billiard
Saloon
Caf6 de L’Aveyron
Yoke Kee and Co.
CHINATOWN.
Ten or twelve blocks of the city are practically
given over to some eighteen thousand Chinese.
Exteriorily, if the streets were only half the
width in some places and quarter in others, one
might almost fancy himself back in Canton.
The men walk about in full Chinese dress except
their rather tighter trousers, the women in full
costume with bare heads and waxed coiffures,
the children run about more freely than at
home, and all—men, girls, and children —wear
the queue hanging down. There is much more
glass in the shop-fronts here, but some are open
to the street when the shutters are down. The
sights, smells, and sounds are from China.
Interiorly, Chinatown is as rough as its Ameri-
can surroundings. The roughness of both can
be judged without personal experience. One
can'tell a hedgehog is prickly without touching
him. Many visitors hither “do ” Chinatown;
we have in Dunedin enough opium-smoking,
gambling, &c., to convince us that the Chinese


have a very seamy side. The character of
other visitors was shown the evening of our
arrival, when a well-dressed Chinese touched
me on the shoulder, smiled approval, and
pointed to the chambers of death.
CHINESE NEWSPAPERS.
The number of these published shows that
Chinese are readier to take up new notions than
most of us think. Though the great majority
of the men here come from districts where there
is no newspaper, there are six weekly papers
published in Chinatown, while a seventh will
start early next year. These are The Oriental
Chinese, The Chinese Recorder, The Weekly
Occidental, Chinese Commercial News, The
Chinese World, and the Chinese Herald. The
number of issues to date run from 1156 to 76.
All excepting the first-named, which is the
oldest, are lithographed from a written copy*
This one is printed from type, and I am told by
an old compositor, who has been in the office
since it opened, that nearly 8000 different
characters are required. The number of types
is over 700,000, and the gross weight between
5000 and 6000 lbs. It requires the marvellous
memory of a Chinese to manipulate these.
CHINESE AMERICANS.
There is another class that readily adopt new
ideas. These are mostly young men connected
with Christian Missions schools, specially in the
Eastern States. They cut off their queues, part
their hair in the middle, curl their moustaches,
get into tailor - made English clothes, affect
English visiting-cards, wear gloves and tan
shoes, and generally make spectacles of them-
selves. For those who work with white people


something may be said ; but it passes my com-
prehension how a Chinese preacher can expect
to have more influence standing queueless and
frock-coated before his heathen congregation
in queues and smocks. His action, to my
mind, must widen the gulf between them and
him. No wonder that they believe —as they
very largely do —that a knowledge of English
is an essential part of Christianity. I fancy
that the poor fellows themselves must to some
extent think this ; yet it is no sillier than the
very commonly-accepted notion among our-
selves that a Chinese cannot be a Christian and
retain his queue. As a matter of course the
speech of these young men is in American-
English, with the nose strongly in evidence.
At the Presbyterian Chinese Church I heard a
young Chinese thrice use “ I guess ” during a
short conversation with Joe Ings.
MISSION WORK
among San Francisco Chinese was begun by the
Presbyterians in 1852. Later there followed the
Baptists, Methodists Episcopal, and Congrega-
tionalists, who continue to this day. Recently,
the Salvation Army (here called by the Chinese
41 Save World Army in New Zealand, “ Total
Abstinence Society”) opened fire on Chinatown,
and claim to have a large number of converts.
The three first-named have commodious build-
ings of their own—churches on the ground-floor
and English class-rooms upstairs. The finest
Chinese Church building outside China is
Loomis Memorial Church, which was origin-
ally the First Presbyterian Church of San
Francisco, having been conveyed to the Mission
Board when the congregation built elsewhere.
It seats easily 600, and at a pinch 800, in com-
fortable upholstered seats.


a week’s programme.
The Presbyterian preacher, Bev. Soo-hoo’
Nam Art, gave this outline of the week’s
work :
Sunday : 11.30 to 12.45 Service.
12.45 to 2 Sunday School.
2.25 to 3.30 United Open-air Meet-
ing.
6.30 to 7.30 Men’s Sunday School.
Junmr Y. P. S. C. E,
Meeting.
7.30 to 8.30 Service.
8.30 to 9.30 Y.M.C.A. Meeting.
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
\ 9 a.m. to 12 noon—Two Children’s
Schools in Chinese.
1 p.m. to 3 p.m.—Two Children’s
Schools in English.
( 7 p.m. to 9 p.m. —Adult Classes in
English : during the last half-
hour a Bible passage is ex-
/ plained by Mr Soo-hoo.
Saturday : 8.30 to 9.80 p.m.—Senior Y.P.S.C.E.
Meeting.
On Friday, the last hour (2 to 3 p.m.) of the
Children’s School is devoted to the meeting of
the Children’s Missionary Society, when the
pastor conducts a children’s service, and a col-
lection is made for Missions.
The work of Baptists, Methodists, and Con-
gregation alists is along almost similar lines-
The Baptist Mission has also a Kindergarten
five afternoons of the week. With the Method-
ists, the Epworth League takes the place of the
Junior Endeavourers, while a class meeting is-
held at the close of the Sunday evening service-
The Congregationalists have no children’s day-
schools. All unite in the open-air meeting.


STATISTICS.
We attended a number of the meetings, and
found, at the three schools, 102 children ; at the
four men’s English classes, 162; at the four
Sunday services, 279 (179 men, 61 women, and
39 children) present.
To the work of these four bodies have to be
added that done by the Salvation Army, the
Protestant Episcopalians, and other Missions at
times, besides that of the Presbyterian (and also
Methodist?) Homes for Women and Girls,
where just now there are 38 inmates. It will
thus be seen that something is being done for
the Chinese here. But at most only 1800 of the
18,000 are reached —but one in 10. By a calcu-
lation made five years ago, the State of California
contained 71,681 Chinese, of whom 1950 were
receiving Christian instruction, though there
were Missions at 31 places in the State. Ihe
number of Christians connected with over 50
classes and churches was 715 ; it is now over
800. Loomis Church and the Methodist Church
have each just on 100 active members.
A REMARK.
This batch of Notes leaves us still in San
Erancisco —Los Angeles, Sacramento, and Port-
land must stand over. We have now spent four
weeks in this country, and may be asked what
we think of it. I can give no opinion, for we
have seen only part of three States. lam per-
suaded that the East and South are very different
from this West. I came hither favourably pre-
possessed. My best beloved on earth was born
here. Next to the land my Master trod, and
wherein the Prince of Missionaries toiled, I
longed to see this one; best it is of all lands for


the worker among Chinese abroad to be equipped.
It may be that longer acquaintance would re-
place the lost prepossessions. But at present ?
The longer I am here (sweet Los Angeles is
excepted throughout), the more my feet ache to
tread British soil ; the more my ears ache with
the “ clack ” for clock, “ gnaw ” for know, and
u daller ” for dollar ; the more my eyes ache to
see women with less art and more nature in their
faces, and to see children looking less like adults
—my heart, to meet more men with ideas not
bounded by “ dallers ” and self.
V.
Victoria, 8.C., November 22nd, 1897.
CHRISTIAN CHINESE MARRIAGE.
In this part of the world a marriage may take
place any hour of day or night. It was 8.15
p.m. when the Loomis Memorial Church organ
gave out slow (sorrow at leaving parents is sup-
posed to be the dominant feeling when Chinese
are marrying) music, and two processions filed
funereally up the side aisles. The bridegroom
with two young groomsmen and several close
relatives came on the left; on the right, with
eyes fixed on the floor—like a lay-figure slid
along, for all the movement discernable—came
the bride. Preceding her, looking charming in
their silken jackets and chaste brow-bands—the
younger’s with pearly fringe—were two Chinese
maidens of ten and twelve. The processions


met before the pulpit, where a short ceremony
made them one —the bride’s gaze all the time
riveted. Then the two files appropriately united,
and with bride and groom side by side to the
same slow measure glided down the centre aisle,
thence upstairs, where cake, fruit, and ice-cream
were served to the guests. After a short prayer
the eatables were discussed, and thus the wed-
ding feast passed off. A chapter of Lamentations
might have been read, and a penitential Psalm
sung. Gloom and cold meats may suit a
heathen wedding. At a Christian ceremony
one felt inclined to scandalise the proceedings
with an address of congratulation.
MID-WEEK SERMON.
This we heard at one of the Mission rooms,
when the Chinese pastor preached from: “If
any man serve Mj, him will my Father
honour.” The pith of the address illustrated
the affirmative part of the text. Examples were
given'of earthly Governments —British, Chinese,
and American—honouring men. Then the his-
tories of Joseph and Paul were recapitulated,
followed by examples of nations—Britain, Ger-
many, America, and Japan—that are prosperous.
He asserted very plainly that China lost in the
war with Japan because she serves idols, and
urged strongly that the only way for her to
assume her place in the world is by worshipping
God.
As a Christian statement it lacked definition
of the word “ serve,” while only material ad-
vantage was mentioned, and no word of sin,
cross, nor Saviour. But these seems character-
istic of Chinese preachers outside of China. To
no people more than Chinese is Jesus Christ a
rock of offence; alas ! that even His own


preachers should stumble thereat. I have
heard one preach from John iii., 16, without
showing that the way of salvation is through a
crucified Saviour, though he stated it very
clearly in English . And this pastor, when ask-
ing me to speak to his congregation, said in
English. “ These young men are hungering for
the truth.”
On the evening of October 28th we began the
480 miles (21 hours) journey to Los Angeles.
When we reached
SWEET LOS ANGELES,
“ The Angels’city ” captivated us. With her
wide, well-paved streets, fine public buildings,
thickly-fringed boulevards of pepper-tree and
palm, charming creeper-covered and rose-bow-
ered villas and cottages, enchanting parks and
gardens, rich orchards and orange groves, and,
above all, her 90,000 inhabitants, full of health
—though many of them had come from other
States to die—with the bloom of her peaches
and flush of her roses reflected full in her
womanhood and childhood —who ever saw this
fair city and did not become her slave ?
The city of fruit and flowers is here. Though
late autumn, the Luitstalls carry abundance of
figs and grapes, tomatoes, guavas, oranges, per-
simmons, lemons, pears, and strawberries, with
a few peaches, plums, and apples—prince of its
tribe, the “ Bellflower.” Cherry and prune
orchards, vineyards, orange groves, and apricot
fields stretch far on every side. Last year, Los
Angeles sent away 62,000 tons of fruit. The
largest rose-bush in the world is here; pinks are
planted by the acre, and cut by the million :
wild flowers, gorgeous and shy, weave in spring
and summer a carpet of surpassing loveliness'


A pretty red bell — Fauschneria, some yellow
Composites, and a heath or two, are now the
only remnants of their glory.
The wealth of vegetation reminds one of
Honolulu; but that fair town must give way
here, for latitude 33deg. is preferable to 22deg.
Opposite the railway station is a Californian fan-
palm over 30ft. high, which, according to an
inscription on its stem is nearly 100 years old,
and was removed nine years ago from a certain
street to its present spot. It has stood trans-
planting well. If ever Ibe transplanted in old
age, let it be to Los Angeles !
south versus north.
In San Francisco, unless money can be made
out of you, few care to speak to you. In the
very place whence I expected much light from
the accumulated experience of thirty years, 1
might as well have looked to a thistle-bush for
figs. Here, every question asked was answered
courteously, all information sought, given toithe
full, and even assistance offered. An Alabama
naan —three years Major in the Southern Army
—was a fellow-passenger by rail, returning from
Synod to his pariah near Los Angeles. rhia
warm-hearted Southerner, and the Clerk of the
Californian Synod, a Los Angeles pastor, made
the two strangers from the far south-east debtors
for ever. The Presbyterian Chinese preacher,
the moment he knew the object of our visit,
said: “ You must see the other mission schools,
I shall take yon round,” and kept his word to
the letter then and there. On Saturday evening
in San Francisco one’s nervous system is racked
by jar and jangle, bang and bustle: here, with
the traffic reduced to the electric trams, the


citizens saunter along the main streets just as
in Australasian towns. All seemed so home-
like that we too sauntered along, hugging the
delusion that we should see a home face. These
are but part of the things that, coming after
northerly coldness, won our hearts outright. I
know no place that in four days laid such hold
of me.
JEW’S HARP V. VIOL.
Such is the creaking, impatient twang of San
Franciscans, compared with the rich measured
tones of these people. Verily the voices of the
people of “ The Angels’ city ” are sweet. To
listen to the conversation between a younger
visitor and a middle-aged woman, who was
showing me some views, was like listening to
soft music. The “ good ”in “ That is good ”
raises the expression out of sight above our
“ That’s splendid,” under similar circumstances.
And to hear our hotel waitresses dwell on the
“ ing ” in “ drink ” when asking the diners—
“ What will you have to drink ? ” was to hear a
new word!
CHINESE MISSIONS.
The 1500 Los Angelian Chinese are confined
to one suburban corner. Among them are some
200 Christians connected with seven missions—
Presbyterian, Baptist, Congregational, Method-
ist Episcopal, United Presbyterian, Campbellite,
and New Methodist. Five evenings a week,
English classes are held by all seven, five of
which we visited, with 48 pupils and 14
American teachers—all women. Four missions
have regular Sunday service, but only the Pres-
byterians own a church building. Their minister
(E,ev. Ng Poon Chew) went through the usual


theological course of an American pastor. The
Methodist Episcopal preacher is a recent arrival
from Canton, with a considerable reputation for
pulpit eloquence.
PRESBYTERIANS
began here in 1876 ; in 1883 the church was
built, and the congregation organised in 1884,
There are now 47 church members, two elders,
and 80 Sunday School members. For last year
the contributions of this little church amounted
to .£92. There is no regular Sunday collection,
but the money is gathered on stated days for
special purposes. The Morrison Mission Band,
and a branch of the Canton Book Lending
Society meet once a month, The Condit Mis-
sionary Society meets every two months to help
the Church at Sanning, in China.
Admirable work is done in the Children’s
Day School, which is open six days in the week
for 27 hours’ teaching in Chinese and 15 hours
in English. Most of the hundred Chinese
children are under three years of age; 17
attend the school, and make a very charming
picture of young China. These children are
also the Sunday School children, who have a
Mission Society of their own called Kum Sing
Ui (Golden Star Band), meeting every month
and giving to Missions. Sometimes 25 children
are present, and the collection is two dollars.
CHINESE DOCTORS
Abound on the Pacific Coast, wherever there is
a Chinese community. Many of them have
American patients. “ DRS. WONG and YIP ”
is the sign on elegant rooms in a main street.
Another advertises in a railway car thus :


WONG WOO describes all diseases by
feeling the pulse.
Cure guaranteed for every ailment.
CALIFORNIAN SUNDAY.
Sunday in Los Angeles is much quieter than
in San Francisco, yet its “ Continental ” char-
acter is very evident. All the fruit shops,
restaurants, tobacco shops, and liquor bars are
open; also many clothing boot shops. I
am told that, owing to the powerful foreign
element —Spanish, French, Italian, and Jewish
mainly—there is no Sunday law in this State,
but each one pleases himself in the matter. I
noticed, however, little actual trading in boots
and clothing; it seemed that the shopkeepers
open their shops and hang about the doorway
for want of a better way of spending the day.
The theatres are open afternoon and night.
Tram-car placards announced, for 2 p.m., base-
ball matches in Festa Park, and a “ Grand
Picnic ” in another park.
SYNOD OF CALIFORNIA.
We were very cordially welcomed by the
Stated Clerk, who resides in Los Angeles.
Seven presbyteries form the Synod, with a
membership of over 500, of whom 206 (150
ministers and 56 elders) attended the recent
meeting at Oakland. The place of meeting is
changed every year, with considerable benefit.
In the State there are 235 Presbyterian churches,
21,570 communicants, and 24,400 Sunday School
members. The total contributions for 1896
amounted to nearly .£76,000, whereof £‘2600


was for foreign and .£3600 for Home missions.
Los Angeles Presbytery has 78 churches; San
Francisco only 15.
BACK TO EOUGHTOWN.
We had daylight on the up-journey, where
had been darkness on the down. Tehacapi Mt.,
with its 27 tunnels and wonderful loop, was
crossed at night, and day broke as we descended
to the rainless region on the northern slope.
But as the day grows older the country grows
tairer, for we are in the famous San Joaquin
(pron. Hwah-keen) Valley. The deep olive
green of live oak and eucalyptus is varied by
bands of poplar and willow, with patches of
fruit trees disrobing in reds and yellows before
the leaflessness of winter. The orchards and vine-
yards widen out, immense fruit-packing and
preserving stores rise, and we are introduced to
one of the greatest fruit regions in the world,
focussed at the town of Fresno.
RAIL AND WIRE.
Telegraphs and railways here are private
property, with exorbitant charges. A telegram
from Fresno to ’Frisco, that in New Zealand
would cost 12 cents, cost 25. Oddly, just at that
station there are five competing lines. Three
run side by side near the railroad, in many
places pole for pole like jealous antagonists.
Here and there in rocky and steep places one
goes off on a preferable route, soon to return —
after a lonely ramble among stones and scrub —to
keep watch. For the 480 miles by rail to San
Francisco, second-class, one pays 12 dollars (50s),
and must go right through without stop, for
this class has no return tickets, and no privilege
except that of inhaling, nolens volens, tobacco
smoke. Those who book to or at intermediate


stations must travel first-class. One almost
wishes to be a millionaire just to make some;of
these rail and wire companies flutter !
CHINESE OPINIONS.
Journeying both to and fro there were several
Chinese. These all spoke well of Christianity;
but I found the purely material aspect the only
one considered, except in the case of two
Christians. An educated storekeeper, by name
“ Pine,” said :
“ Teacher, there are in China various ruinous
things. The worst is the belief in fungshui, which
prevents the construction of railways and the open-
ing of mines ; there is also the corrupt condition of
official circles. I believe that just now there is be-
ginning in China a time of great prosperity for
Christianity. The sign of the cross is working
marvels. Recently, in our district, it was noticed
that newly-hulled rice placed in the open air to dry
turned blood-red, and became unfit for the food of
even dogs and pigs. That was a great loss, and
this is how it was averted. With the finger a cross
was marked on the surface of the rice, which re-
mained white. Again, much sickness and many
deaths followed the pulling down and erection of
houses by those who had returned from foreign
lands. All evils were avoided by placing on the
new 1 house the symbol of a cross—this plan being
even more effective than the inscription of Great
Keung’s name over the door as a terror to evil
spirits.”
Speaking about the suppression of the truth
in connection with the Chino-Japanese war,
Pine said: “In the long run it was best that
the truth should be made known. The China
Recorder in San Francisco at first translated
into Chinese the cablegrams that appeared in
American newspapers. When this was found


to conflict with reports from China, The Recorder
was reviled, and for a while boycotted. But
now it is more widely read than ever, because
the reports were seen to be true ; whereas the
Commercial News, that all along gave reports
favourable to the Chinese, in the end got called
all manner of bad names.”
“ Gold-bearer,” a Christian not long returned
from visiting the home land, says : “ When at
home, I made very many and general inquiries
concerning the propagation of Christianity,
resulting in mv conviction that if the teaching
of Christ were*now for the first time presented
to the Chinese, it would be universally received.
It was the evil deeds of French Roman Catholic
priests that gave our people a hatred of
Christianity which is difficult to uproot, for
they do not distinguish between Protestant and
Catholic.”
TEHACHAPI LOOP
and the summit deserve a paragraph. At the
Pass —4025 ft. above the sea—there is a settle-
ment, one-streeted and this one-sided. The
thirstiness of its visitors, sojourners, and resi-
dents is indicated by this half of the shop signs,
taken in order: —
SOCIAL SALOON,
SALOON,
CITY MEAT MARKET,
BLUEWING SALOON,
YELLOWSTONE SALOON,
CASH STORE,
PALACE SALOON.
The railroad rises the last 8600 feet in 48
miles, in places nearly 200 feet to the mile. At
one place it makes a complete loop. Entering


a short tunnel, it presently turns back, and
going right round a knoll, finally crosses along
an embankment over the same short tunnel.
The length of the loop is 3795 feet, and the
height gained—the difference between tunnel
and embankment—is 78 feet. Various accounts
are given of the inception of this wonderful
piece of railway engineering, all of which agree
in crediting youth with solving the problem that
had baffled mature years—how to cross Tehach-
api.
[Honolulu, December 4th, 1897.
FREE AGAIN 1
I began these Notes on British soil. How
glad I was to get there was foreshadowed when.
I wrote from Portland. The realisation fell in
nowise short. Maybe it was sentiment that
made me feel a free man once more ; and maybe
it was ridiculous of me to pocket a pebble to
look at, and perhaps caress ! when again in a
foreign land. Americans may say that I am
prompted by insular prejudice. lam sure lam
not. Twenty years ago, a cable bound me to
republicanism—a cord to monarchy. Now the
cable is of sand—the cord of silk.]


VI.
s.e. Rio de Janeiro,
11/12/ 1897.
A square far oft —another nigh :
The near one sea—the far one sky.
This is just now our outlook. After visiting
Sacramento, Portland, Seattle, and Victoria
(8.C.), we returned to San Francisco, which
was finally left on November 27th to recross the
Pacific. At 5 a.m. yesterday we crossed the
180th meridian, and so regained the day lost
after leaving Auckland. Till 5 a.m. was Thurs-
day : the rest of the day Friday, and we liter-
ally lived two days in one I To-night we shall
be on the same meridian as Dunedin, and for a
short time can think of our home friends with-
out allowing for difference in time. Till three
days ago we had a smooth sea —one night al-
most glassy —with wondrous risings and settings
of sun and moon: since then the dark sea and
gray sky have peeped alternately into our cabin
every twelve seconds —7200 times every day I
Thus, “ rocked in the cradle of the deep,” to
merely write is difficult: to concentrate thought
and condense matter are well nigh impossible.
We hope to reach Japan on the 16th, and after
a few days there and at Shanghai to get to Can-
ton about January sth. That my pen would
keep pace with our feet was a vain hope : wheel
and screw are now five weeks ahead, and I must
resume at San Francisco, whither we returned
from Los Angeles on November 3rd.


M. E, MISSION.
Dr and Mrs Masters, of the Methodist Epis-
copal Mission, formerly of the English Wesleyan
Mission at Canton, welcomed us most cordially,
invited us to spend an evening with them, ex-
changed hours of notes on Mission work, loaded
us with papers and pictures relating thereto,
and made another oasis in the general desert of
unsympathy. It is odd that among the mis-
sionaries on the United States coast the only
invitation to eat their salt came from outside our
own denominations.
When Dr Masters came here some twelve
years ago, he found far more provision made for
teaching English than for preaching Christ.
Everywhere the Mission buildings’ sign was
“ School ” —not “ Church.” “ The idea,” he
says, “ seemed to be that all we had to do was
to get the Chinese together, teach them ‘ e-a-t,
cat,’ or ‘ This is a fat hen,’ and in some unac-
countable way they would become Christians.
At once I let it be understood that I came not to
teach English but to preach the Gospel. How-
ever, it is hard struggling against what was so
long accepted as the only way to reach the
Chinese. Now, they and we are working at
cross-purposes. They come to our schools in-
tending to learn as much English and as little
Christianity as possible : we intend to teach as
much Christianity as we can.”
REVIVALS.
1896 in the M. E. Mission was marked as no
former year had been by revivals in San Fran-
cisco, Oakland, Sacramento, and Los Angeles.
Dr Masters had watched closely the directly
personal work of the Salvation Army—which


claiirs 200 Chinese converts during the two
years’ work—and reasoned thus: “I believe
there are many Chinese here who know enough
to save them. Now is the time to urge them to
believe what they know. More personal work
must be done that we may reap the seed sown.”
So the Christians met frequently for united
prayer, tracts were widely distributed, and
posters put up calling on men to repent. Then
every evening for a week Chinatown wondered
to see steady-going Methodists—Superintendent,
preachers, teachers, deaconesses, and members
—parading the streets with torches, singing,
preaching, and witnessing. The church was
crowded : many remained to the after-meeting
Right after night. The Christians were on fire:
penitents in fear. Declarations of desire to for-
sake evil and follow good, by accepting the
Truth in Jesus Christ, were signed by forty-two
men and women, of whom thirteen were after-
wards received as members.
Across the bay to Oakland sparks were carried
and burst into flame. Meetings were held for
prayer and consecration. Christians who had
been almost dead preached boldly the Gospel of
repentance. In consequence, twenty professed
conversion, of whom eleven have been baptised.
To Sacramento ninety miles away, and to Los
Angeles over 400, the good work spread, and
more baptisms took place. One convert was a
notoriously evil character: now he reads daily
with Dr Masters, to prepare for preaching the
Gospel.
CHINESE PREACHERS.
When, speaking of a sermon heard at Los
Angeles, I mentioned : “ Nothing was said of
sin, or repentance, or salvation by the cross of


Christ,” Dr Masters said : “Is not that a com-
mon characteristic of most Chinese sermons?”
He, too, feels the vital omission keenly. Just
whom to blame is not clear. The fault may
and likely oftenest does, lie in the preacher him-
self, from his dislike to reduce his audiences by
preaching what they stumble at, and his desire
to increase such by sermons on morality, science,
and civilisation. Sometimes the fault may be
due to his training. Certainly, as far as my ex-
perience goes, there is one thing to be laid at the
door of the ordinary course of training, and Dr
Master’s experience coincides. It fosters self-
conceit, and puts the trainee among the aristoc-
racy of letters, whence, Chinese-like, he looks
down upon the illiterate ; thus actually lessen*
ing instead of increasing his fitness as a preacher
of the Gospel of Him who humbled Himself.
This defect will be remedied when the course of
training is continued till the student knows how
little he knows. There are of course exceptions,
for there are men that no semi-training can
spoil. Such a one is
ANOTHER PREACHER.
He is Chinese pastor of the Baptist Church.
There is no uncertain ring about him. We
heard him first in the united open-air meeting,
where, for half-an-hour—before an audience of
about 150—he gave a searching address on “ Sin
and Salvation.” By quotation upon quotation
from Chinese classics, and by citation upon
citation of rites and customs, he showed that
not only Christianity holds that man is sinful,
but that Confucianism, Tauism, and Buddhism
—if they do not actually assert, yet plainly
imply such. In speaking of the futility of mere


partial riddance of sin, he used a very homely
illustration: “If you merely chop off the head
of a cockroach, you make matters worse, for its
evil-smelling body remains.” In closing, he
showed plainly the Christian remedy for sin.
In his church he preached from “ The Word
was God,” The proofs he classed threefold : (1)
Proofs before Jesus came to earth ; (2) Proofs
during His life on earth; (3) Proofs after His
ascension. Striking proofs were given under
each head, especially the last two, and he con-
cluded :—“ The world will soon be won for Jesus
Christ. The advent of Christianity is like
the rising of the sun upon the earth—the higher
it rises the brighter it shines. So the longer
Christianity exists the greater its power in the
world. • . . Sometimes a Christian sins.
This does not prove that he is not a Christian,
but that his faith in Jesus Christ is imperfect.
If he were perfect in faith, he would be perfect
in goodness. The object of our faith determines
our character. Thus the Greeks and Homans
with faith in evil gods, did all manner of evil :
the Hindoos sacrifice their own children : you
know what Chinese do. Those that worship
idols will become like the idols: those that
worship the devil will be like him: those who
worship Jesus will resemble Him. The Word
came to reveal God to you that you might have
eternal happiness.”
A well-trained man and a pure Cantonese
speaker, Mr Tong Hit King has been called
“perhaps the best biblical scholar and closest
thinker in the Chinese Church.”


SACRAMENTO.
From San Francisco, on November 9th, we
Started on the 1000 odd miles journey northward
to Victoria, B.C. At Port Costa our train
divided, and running aboard the largest ferry-
boat in the world (the “ Solano ” —424 ft. long,
116 ft. beam, 3500 tonnage) was borne across the
estuary to Benicia, where the halves reunited,
and we ran the ninety miles to Sacramento in
three hours. This is the state city of California,
has a population of over 30,000, well laid out
streets —wider than those of San Francisco,
electric tramways and street lamps. But,
among the photographers at least, there seems
lack of enterprise ; for we had to search nearly
two hours at seven shops to get a photograph of
the city’s pride—the State Capitol, built on the
model of the White House at Washington at a
cost of three million dollars (£600,000), looking
suberb amid ordinary surroundings.
There are 2000 Chinese, among whom the
Methodist —Episcopal, Baptist, and Congrega-
tional Churches work. But the Chinese are not
at all friendly, and of many heathen spoken to
I found not one to say —as at Los Angeles and
San Francisco that Christianity is a good
thing. The three missions combined have only
some fifty regular pupils and hearers. Here too
the “School idea” predominates. At the
Methodist class, six young children sang for us
in English, “ Now I am happy all the day ”
and sang very sweetly.
“ ETERNAL REST.”
This is inscribed in a Sacramento cemetery, orr
the front kerbing of a grave over which is raised
a memorial, that we broke our journey north-
ward to see. The gate-keeper took us straight


to the stone—a white marble monument eight
feet high, topped by a floral cross. Beneath two
clasped hands is a scroll, bearing
FIDELITAS,
followed by
W YE GON LUN
DIED
JUNE 23, 187 4.
Aged 18 Years.
Look unto Me, and be ye saved,
all the ends of the earth, for I am
God, and there is none else.
He lived and died a
& &
Judge Curtis, in whose family Gon Lun
served some years, did not think ,£2OO too
much to spend in marking his appreciation of a
life of which he said —when the Missionary came
to conduct the funeral: “ I had been looking
for a model Christian life, and I have found one
in this Chinese lad from across the seas.” Yet
there are who say that Chinese are soulless.
This silent white pillar witnesses otherwise.
IN A PULLMAN
we travelled the 682 miles to Portland. It was
a cheap ride, because the Northern Pacific
Railroad Company, competing with the coastal
steamboats, carry second-class passengers 722


miles for five dollars (21s), and throw in the
Pullman sleeper. But a berth on a steamer is
much preferable to one on a train. The rumble
of the wheels, the starting and stopping, the
fine dust and coal ashes from the engine, with
the stuffiness caused by the car stove, are all—
in spite of clean and comfortable bedding—in-
imical to sound sleep. Moreover, the Com-
pany, advantageously to its patrons, might
invest in some effective insecticide.
BY BRIDGE AND TUNNEL
we climbed the Cascade Range. We break-
fasted at Redding, passed through twelve
tunnels and crossed the Sacramento River
eighteen times in 80 miles, dined 3555 ft.
above the sea at Sissons where bears —black,
cinnamon, and grizzly abound, saw many
gold mines and crushing plants, rushed through
more tunnels—one 3108 and another 4160 ft.
long, crept over more bridges—great wooden
trestles that vibrated visibly and creaked
audibly,wound round many curves and The
Great Bend—five miles run for half a mile ad-
vance with a gain of 600 ft. in elevation, passed
Castle Crags—a pile of bare, grey, jagged rocks
6000 ft. high, praised Mossbrae Fall, drank of
Shasta water, viewed Mt. Shasta—l4,442ft.
high with 6000 ft. of snow atop, and reached
Siskiyou Pass—4l3oft. above the sea—at 4 p.m.
SPRINGS AND FALLS.
At Shasta Springs the train stopped eight
minutes, that the passengers might drink freely
of the famous waters, strongly charged with
carbonate of magnesium and bicarbonate of
sodium.
Of the many waterfalls, that called Mossbrae


is supreme. The water comes forty feet over a
bank of many-tinted mosses, that lend the
crystal stream all their colours. At the edges,
where the water just trickles down, the shower
of myriads of liquid gems is a rare sight.
BUT,
with all its beauty, I should not advise one with
“ nerves ” to travel on this section of the
N. P. R. R. All glory of mountain and valley
and fall and spring might be darkened by fear
of the wooden trestle-bridges that span the
gullies and gorges. Little wonder that down at
the mountain foot many passengers bought
accident assurance tickets: great wonder that
accidents are not more common. Certainly the
train runs slowly over these flimsy-looking
structures; but one cannot help thinking that
the engineers have solved too well the problem
of maximum strength with minimum material.
At one moment, the whole train —two engines,
five Pullman sleepers, two tourist cars, and three
baggage cars, each and all twice the weight of
our heaviest in New Zealand —was running
over one of these viaducts, in height at the
middle fully 200 ft.
GREAT EATERS.
Here I note what we both have often re-
marked concerning the average Pacific-coasc
American. At hotels and restaurants where we
have dined and supped, the eaters very com-
monly ordered at once two courses. On this
train were two men, seemingly father and son,
who had with them an oblong box of food, full
before breakfast, but empty after tea. The box
measured 14 x 9 x 7 inches. On the journey
to Los Angeles the breakfast bill-of-fare in-
cluded seven dishes —Blackberries and cream ;


fried oysters; Californian quail and potatoes
beefsteak ; eggs and bacon; hot cakes with
honey; hot rolls with butter and coffee. My
table neighbour, a medium-sized man travel-
ling first-class, made a clean sweep, remarking
“ I guess I can get through.” As the charge
was 75 cents, he may have been saving a meal.
DOWN TO OREGON.
During the night we descended gradually, and
in early morning went down 2300 feet in 17
miles. Part of this is the “ Shasta Loop,”
where the line almost doubles on itself with a
grade of 174 feet to the mile.
This side the range differs much in climate
from the Californian side. Overhead was a real
Otago wintry sky, not unwelcome after the long
spell of clear warm weather in California. The
vegetation changes with climate—a thick forest
of firs and pines, spruce, arbor vitae, cypresses,
oak, holly, and laurel. Thus the tables are
turned. In Californian parks and gardens Aus-
tralian gums are planted: in Australian parks
and gardens appear Oregon pines and firs. For
beauty, the latter certainly are preferable.
Passing through the State city Salem —a
comparatively small town containing the State
Capitol and Indian Industrial Schools—34 hours
from Sacramento we cross the Willamette
river by a fine steel drawbridge, with fixed spans
820 and draw-span 840 feet long, and are in the
largest city in Oregon.
WOODEN PORTLAND.
This city has a population of some 60,000. It
is well laid out with not over-wide streets at
right angles. The cars and lighting are electric.
From Portland Heights—like our Mor.iington—


it is said that in fine weather a grand view is
obtained, when the gardens and parks are all in
leaf and flower, and snow-topped Mts. Hood
(11,225 ft.) and St. Helen’s (9750 ft.) appear to
East and N.E. But what most struck us were
the dead oak leaves strewing thick and making
slippery the secondary sidewalks ; also the uni-
versal shingled roof in most cases green with
moss. There are some stone and brick build-
ings certainly, among them three fine stone
churches —Presbyterian, Baptist, and Congre-
gational—but wood is king. Besides the wooden
sidewalks and shingled roofs, the streets are
planted with oak. It is a wooden city. We
noticed the rain also. We were in Portland six
days, and saw the sun three hours. Oamaru in
the same latitude has a very different climate.
The annual rainfall here is 47 inches. For 1894
the sunshine was 39 per cent of the possible,
while rain (or snow) fell on 176 days. The
citizens accept the thick drizzle unmurmuringly
saying, “ We shall have 120 days of this before
fine weather comes in March.”
AN OREGONOPHILITE.
She is a middle-aged American woman, the
wife of a professional man. No word against
Oregon dared we utter before her. There is a
few miles from the city scenery that world-
travelled tourists have pronounced the finest on
earth : a friend of hers has a century plant that
in one night added to its stature eight feet: a
tree in her own garden grew 30 feet in five
years : when we remarked how bare the pas-
tures looked and wondered how stock were fed
in winter, we were told, “ They are just turned
out, and in Spring come back as fat as butter.”
To cap the whole, when we spoke of our Aus


tralian gum-trees, we were informed that there
is in Oregon a native tree that sheds its bark
and is called a eucalyptus.
SOME SIGNS.
Portland is one of the places that expect to
benefit by the rush to Klondyke next Spring.
This is evident from a glance at the sign-boards
—Klondike Restaurant, Clondyke Chophouse,
Klondyke Heating Machines, Clondyke Second-
hand Shop, and at a tobacconist’s a “ Clondyke
cigar,” nine inches long and an inch thick.
A feature of signboards on this coast is their
wondrous modesty The best in the city,”
“ The best in the town,” “ There is no place so
good as ours,” lead up to “ The best on
earth,” and “ We lead the world.”
Three Chinese signs are John Wah, Wing
John, and John Lee. Evidently Portland
Chinese have not the objection that N.Z.
Chinese have to the name John, which the
latter regard as a term of contempt akin to
“ Monkey.”
An American sign is :
“ CHARLES and SUN
Labors and Housework.”
At Los Angeles, in Tenth street, I noticed
“APPLE and SON, Grocers.”
and “ DR. A. J. FORGET.”
Perhaps oddest of all is in Elizabeth street,
Hobart, where at one street corner is :
“ J. LAMP, Greengrocer,”
and at the corner right opposite :
“ E. LAMPKIN, Butcher.”


UPHILL MISSION WORK.
There are 4500 Chinese in Portland living
mainly in one street. Presbyterians, Baptists,
Disciples, United Brethren, and Methodist-
Episcopalians work among them; but these
Missions are far from flourishing. All have
schools for English five evenings a week. At
all five schools we found a total of only 59
pupils to 34 teachers—33 of these women. A
good feature of these classes is that the teachers
are paid mainly by the pupils, instead of by the
Mission Boards, as in California. Only the l
Baptists own a church building, though at pre-
sent they have no regular preacher. The domin-
ance of the “ school idea ” is seen in the Chinese
name over the doorway— not “ Baptist Church,”
but “ Baptist School.” This Mission is suffer-
ing a relapse owing to the admission of men
who were not true Christians. The Presby-
terians have a membership of 21, two of whom
were admitted last year. This is the strongest
body. The “ Disciples ” preacher said, when I
told him that one object of my visit is to learn
from Chinese preachers how best to present the
Gospel to Chinese, “ I fear too many Chinese
preachers are doing like many American
preachers—hunting alter popularity by giving
pleasing lectures instead of preaching the Gos-
pel.” The United Brethren have been working
some 16 years : their Sunday service is attended
by about 20. The M. E. Mission is very sick.
The Baptists have a children’s school—where
we found seven wee folk ; the Presbyterians, a
Women’s Home, besides a Dispensary twice a
week at the Rooms. There is no open-air
meeting, only one Sunday service, at which the
congregations in the aggregate amount to less


than 80. What are these among so many ?At
no place visited did Satan seem to have such
full sway.
INTENSELY ANTI-CHRISTIAN.
Calling at a score of Chinese shops and
laundries, we found this the general character
of the people. Chinatown seems steeped in
gambling. At one place I counted twelve
packets of lottery tickets, representing that num-
ber of lottery-houses. Love of gambling and
hatred of the foreigner again coexist. Hundreds
of men roam about out of work till the recur-
rence of the salmon-canning season in the north.
“ A man with nothing to do is the devil’s
playfellow.” We saw only ripples on this
anti-Christian sea. When I asked a nine-year-
old boy, “Do you go to Sunday School ?” he
turned his back Ito us, shrugged his shoulders,
shook his hands as if to rid them of something
filthy, and walked off —all to show his utter
abhorrence 1 The boy’s pantomime was not
original: he merely copied his elders.
FIRST PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.
Presbyterians have the finest church building
in the city, erected at a cost of £2s,ooo—prac-
tically free from debt. I attended service one
morning (10.30 a.m.). The Sunday School meets
at noon : the rule here is to hold the S.S. imme-
diately before or after the morning service. The
pastor (Dr Hill) preached an able sermon on
“ Making Life Beautiful” from Psalm xc., 17.
His language, like that of the Los Angeles
minister, was free from Americanisms. It is
evident that the American people have to thank
their clergymen for helping to keep the language
pure. The choir of eleven (4 soprano, 3 bass,


2 alto, 2 tenor) sang exquisitely. A member
told me that it used to number four members
and cost S2OOO a year : now it numbers sixteen
and costs SISOO. After the first hymn, pastor
and people read verse about from “ Responsive
Readings ” included in the Hymn Book—an
excellent item. The congregation numbered
some 600 —about five women to one man. I
noticed, as at Los Angeles, that very few used a
Bible.
F.P.C. MEN’S league.
The Tuesday following I attended by invita-
tion the annual dinner of the Men’s League.
Ninety members and fifty guests filled the room.
After the dinner, the President—a layman—
stated the objects of the League: to promote
fellowship among the men of the congregation
and to get into harness on church work men
that would otherwise be idle. Standing com-
mittees for Missions and other objects had been
formed with success. Then Colonel Anderson,
of the U. S. Army, spoke of “ The Church
Militant,” an Englishman recited one of Mark
Twain’s sketches, and Dr Hill concluded with a
few well-chosen words.
Dr Hill and four others spoke to the New
Zealander. We regretted having to leave next
morning for British Columbia, so that we were
unable to accept the pastor’s kind invitation to
the manse. On my right at table was a young
man, English-born and very sociable: my left
neighbour, when asked, gave his name and
whence he came ; then turned his back and so
sat the rest of the evening. Need I add that
he came from San Francisco ?


VII.
Yokohama, Japan,
December 31st, 1897.
MOUNTAIN, CLOUD, AND SUN.
Leaving Portland, we presently crossed the
great Columbia Eiver. As we ran parallel with
it and the Cascade Range, some thirty miles
off, we enjoyed a scene of rare glory. With a
cloudless sky the view would have been fine ;
yet tame by comparison. The mountains were
Hood (11,225 ft.) and St. Helens (9750 ft.);
the sun was setting. Mt. Hood rose clear
above a cloud-bank that hid all surrounding
heights, only some 3000 ft. of the top being
visible—a pyramidal iceberg on a gold and
purple sea. Dark clouds shut out both base
and top of St. Helens, the intervening part
shining bright in the sun. These clouds pre-
sently divided lengthwise, and then three bars
of gold parted the four of lead. The topmost
bar rose higher and revealed the golden peak
itself. Then yellow St. Helens and white
Hood exchanged colours—the latter, by its
greater height, putting on its sunset robe later.
Soon it too turned white, the purples deepened
into black, and all passed into the night.
Returning, we got a splendid view at Tacoma
of Mt. Rainier (14,400 ft.) not 35 miles off, rising
from a mass of snow-topped peaks like a great
white boulder from a bed of pebbles.
AN ARTIST
was on board the Portland-Seattle train—the
news-agent, who vends “ Apples, nuts, and
pears ” as well as papers. His art lies in


naming his wares. He offered, as “ Australian
pea-corn,” broken-up walnuts. And cracked
peanuts, boiled in brown sugar, he called
41 Spanish nut poi.”
FARTHEST NORTH.
A day by rail and a night by steamer carried
us from Portland to Victoria, 8.C., the
northernmost point of our Pacific round. Here
we are farther north than is Port Pegasus
south; and, having passed through a belt of
heavy rain in Oregon and Washington, we spent
a few days in a climate colder but drier. Between
train and steamer we were five weary hours at
Seattle, a city famous in the new-born annals
of Klondyke ; and how it did rain! We thought
the day we were in Wellington, on our way up,
a wet one ; but there the rain-drops did not fall
ten to the square inch.
“ FREE COLUMBIA.”
This is the odd name that we gave to British
territory after a month in that “ Land of
Liberty," the United States of America. But
one’s adjectives should express one’s feelings.
Our approach boded well. We had not, nolens
volens, to hand over our baggage checks to the
agent of a Transfer Company ; we were free to
handle our own baggage, and to pay as little or
as much as we thought fair. After the “ Checks
please,” that, on approach to every town over
the border, placed us at the mercy of a monopoly,
we once more tasted freedom, which is sweet in
even a small matter.
Ashore, the good impressions deepen.
Sounds and sights gratify the ear and eye.
These folks, especially the children, speak and
look so like New Zealanders ; the houses are so


like Otagan houses; the gardens—with holly,
laurel, stocks, sweet peas, snapdragons, and
berry-laden rowans —so like Dunedin gardens;
that our minds naturally sweep right across the
Pacific to our own “ tight little islands.”
CHINESE.
There are 3000 Chinese in Victoria, many of
them cooks and general servants. At the hotel
where we stayed are three Chinese cooks and
two attendants, but the dining-room waiters
are European. Immigrants have to pay .£lO poll-
tax on entry, but may visit their homes and
return free, if within six months.
For the first time, since leaving home, we
visited them in their gardens, and so home-like
were the surroundings that we found it difficult
to realise that we were not visiting Forbury or
Anderson’s Bay. I found some clansmen of
Dunedin Chinese, and was the medium of com-
munication between men who had not heard of
one another for 20 years.
There are two missions here —the Methodist
Episcopal and Canadian Presbyterian—both
pervaded by a warmth and life that, coming
after coldness and deadness farther south, were
quite exhilarating.
M. E. MISSION.
The Methodists have a fine brick, two-storied
church, built seven years ago at a cost includ-
ing site of .£2OOO, towards which the Chinese
contributed The floor seats 250, while
the upstairs English class-room accommodates
80 pupils and their teachers. Three attached
rooms in each storey are occupied by the
Chinese pastor and his family. The evening
we visited the school we saw 57 pupils, with


five teachers —all women. Forty of the pupils
seemed over 17 years of age, the others between
16 and 11. The lady superintendent of the
school teaches English, and the pastor Chinese,
to the younger children five days a week- -fore-
noons and atternoons respectively. From 25
to 50 attend the two meetings in the church on
Sunday.
C.P. MISSION.
The Presbyterians rent a spacious room near
Chinatown. Their English school has now
forty pupils, with an average of 35 in winter
and 26 in summer. We were delighted to find
here all voluntary teaching—the first we had
met on the coast —and to be introduced to two
women who have taught one night a week
without intermission for five years. The
school, like the Methodist, closes every evening
with half-an-hour’s Bible teaching.
Last September a three days’ Conference was
held, attended by 23 out of the 25 Presbyterian
Chinese in the Province.
The Conference decided to put two of its
number into training. Of four ready to go,
two were chosen by prayer and lot; which fell
upon Ma Seung, now in the Canton College,
and on Lo Cheung, who is working and studying
at New Westminster. It is expected that a
third will soon be sent. Mr Ma refused to
take more than will keep him in food and
clothing, while Mr Lo gave up lucrative
position. The spirit of these two indicates that
of their fellow disciples. Mr Winchester speaks
of the inspiration that the mere thought of that
Conference gives those who took part. Here
is a bright spot on the Pacific coast of North
America.


THE CHINESE PREACHERS
are fine men. The Methodist’s pure Cantonese
delights the ear after the brogues of many
country districts. He is a well-educated man,
speaks forcibly and clearly, is a good running
commentator, and skilful in using parallel and
illustration. The Presbyterian has less learning,
but commends the Gospel by his pleasant manner
and great aptitude with homely parable, intelli-
gible to the most ignorant of his hearers.
These two preachers and myselt took part in
the Sunday afternoon open-air meeting. The
first spoke on “ Sowing Seed,” I on “ The
Great Day of Judgment,” while the other’s
subject was “ The Necessity of Recognising
God.” Here is a sample of his homely
hypothesis:—“ The Great Court that Teacher
Don spoke about will be held, and you will be
judged. Suppose that you are asked : —‘ Who
are you ? Whose house did you live in ?
Where did you get your clothes ? How did you
get your wealth ? ’ You may reply : —‘ My name
is So-and-so; I lived in a house built by my
ancestors, and handed down to me—my very
own; my clothes were spun and woven by my
own wife ; the gold I dug from the earth with
my own pick and shovel.’ Then the Judge will
say:—‘ Who made the stone and wood for build-
ing ? Who caused the cotton and flax to grow
for cloth ? Who put the gold in the earth ? I
did all these. Why did you not recognise and
thank Me ? ’ Then you will be silent.”
MR WINCHESTER.
From the human side, the success of the
Conference is mainly attributable to the Super-
intendent of the British Columbia Presbyterian
Mission to the Chinese. His pure, deliberate


English speech charms like sweet music, but it
is (he soul of clear crystal lying under and
shining through that attracts men. One feels
that here is a man that would scorn to use a
word conveying a false impression. Both Chinese
and Columbians know this and love him.
THE QUEUE.
We discussed a number of subjects—one
was the retention or otherwise of the queue.
Somehow it is an article in the creed of Colonists
that a Chinese cannot be a Christian while re-
taining his queue. The fact is that a Chinese
man’s queue has no more to do with his religion
than his shoes have. He is no more a Christian
with shoes than without: neither is he anymore
a Christian without queue than with. “ The
people of Columbia think that if a Chinese learns
English, cuts of his queue, and puts on English
dress, he is civilised and Christian.” Personally,
I very strongly advocate the retention of the
queue. I believe that its removal creates a
needless barrier between the Chinese Christian
and heathen, and gives the latter occasion to
object to Christianity, because it destroys his
nationality. Mr Winchester and his preacher
both oppose the practice, but do not forbid it.
The chief argument of the young men is that by
cutting off the queue they are freed from con-
tinual indignity at the hands (and feet and
tongues) of many of their white neighbours and
associates. There is certainly a dilemma ; but
to me it seems that the loss of influence with
one’s own countrymen is too great a price to pay
for exemption from insult.
SOUTH AGAIN.
On November 23rd we regretfully said farewell
to British Columbia. We felt like leaving our


own for a foreign land. But He who is the same
everywhere goes with us and makes all well.
Victoria is rather a pretty place. After all, it is
the people that make any place really beautiful.
The people here do so. What are fine church
buildings, if the bustle of the world drowns the
message of the preacher ? Victoria has many
churches—two of these, Methodist and Presby-
terian, are splendid buildings. But better than
ten thousand churches, is the stillness of Vic-
toria streets on the Lord’s day. We are leaving
a people who somewhat honour the God of their
fathers.
SLUSHY SEATTLE
was graced by our presence for a night. It was
still raining—had been so three weeks —for 64
inches is the annual precipitation in “ The
Queen City of Puget Sound ” —thus she calls
herself. Off the two main streets was slush
everywhere.
Yet Seattle is a great place. It has 65,000
inhabitants, and grows rapidly. Two of its
public schools cost £6OOO and .£B4OO to build.
Here the s.s. Portland arrived last summer from
Klondyke with those “ sacks full of gold,” the
news of which electrified the mining world.
N.Z. LAWS.
We met one man whose only knowledge of
New Zealand is connected with the coal he
burns, called “ Wellington coal,” and it does not
come from New Zealand ! But others have had
their attention drawn to us by the recent death
of the Single Tax apostle. One said : “ You
come from New Zealand. You have a fine system
of Government down there, I understand.”
Another : “ I hear you have fine Land Laws


there.” Yet another : “ You have the Single
Tax, haven’t you ? ” I told him that we have
a triple tax —land, property, and income, besides
Customs’ duties.
CHINESE.
There are nearly 300 Chinese in Seattle,
amorlg whom two Baptist churches work. We
visited the larger class, and were cheered by the
glow in the faces of ten Chinese and four
teachers.
PORRIDGE.
This once much-despised dish seems destined
to conquer the stomachs of the world. Every-
where ashore, from the 10-cent to the 75-cent
houses, porridge is a breakfast item. But they
are called “ mush.” As well call them muck.
When I was asked : “ Will you take mush ?”
and in turn asked: “ Haven’t you any por-
ridge ?” I was told: “ Well, that's mush.”
On our return to San Francisco from Los
Angeles, one of the advertisements staring at
us from every other pile of the ferry landing
was:—
THE BREAKFAST CALL I
OUR MOTHER’S
MUSH.
Of three lists of articles considered necessary
for the outfit of a Klondyke miner, one gives
the year’s supply of oatmeal as 501b5., one does
not mention it, the other gives lOOlbs.


ANOTHER CHINESE DOCTOR.
On a hoarding near the railway station there
stares at every passer-by the colossal bust of a
Chinese in official garb, surrounded by this
text: —
“The accompanying picture is
DR. T. FOO YUEN, of 903 S. Olive
Street. He is here represented in
the attire suitable to his rank as a
Member of the Faculty of The
Imperial Medical College at Pekin,
and Physician to the Emperor of
China. Dr Foo has prepared a new
book free of charge. Advice and
examination free.”
Imagine H.l.M.’s physician crossing to these
barbarian shores ! Does any one suppose that
a Bengal tiger would notice a cockroach ? As
for the “ Imperial Medical College,” it simply
does not exist.
A group of Chinese had a good laugh at the
relationship to the Emperor. One reasoned
thus ; “ American doctors advertise lies—he is
justified in doing likewise.”
THIS A, B, C, BUSINESS.
On return to San Francisco, I called again on
Dr Masters. His first question was, “ Well,
what do you think of this a, b, c, business V*
I replied, “ I have grave doubts about its good.
It seems to me that when a Chinese learns Eng-
lish, he generally adopts English clothes, cuts off
his queue, parts his hair in the middle, affects
English visiting cards, wears kid gloves and tan


shoes, and makes a donkey of himself. Any-
way, he denationalises himself, and thus be-
comes separated from his heathen countrymen.
If he is mixing much with white people, and
little with Chinese, perhaps little harm is done ;
but if he has much intercourse with Chinese,
and especially if he is a preacher of the Gospel,
I feel sure he must lose influence. In the East,
where there are no Chinese-speaking mission-
aries nor catechists, and where English is the
vehicle of Christian instruction, the case is
quite different. On the Pacific Coast there
seems an expenditure of much time and money
(for the teachers are nearly all paid), which
results in converting the Chinese churches into-
close corporations that are wrapt up in them-
selves, and hardly touch the mass of the heathen
right at their doors. Except the open-air meet-
ing once a week, what is done to reach this
mass ? How would it do to open week-day
street chapels ?”
Dr Masters replied : “ I have been fighting for
that for ten years. [ln his Mission Report for
1890, he said, ‘As the day for schools is past,
what we urgently need is a chapel in the heart
of Chinatown. We ought to have had this years
ago. The Gospel can be preached and understood
without knowing a word or letter of the English
language.’] These great premises were built
for teaching English. Some of the greatest
loafers and gamblers in San Francisco, and
some who have the greatest influence against
Christianity, are men who were taught English
in our Mission schools. Time after time, I have
urged our Board to sell this building, and get a
footing right in Chinatown.”
I added, “ Teaching English would be less
objectionable if voluntary. Why not let those


who want it pay for it ? Mission funds are
being used to teach what admittedly sometimes
makes rogues. lam aware that the teaching is
used as a bait. Probably, the Chinese know
this, and all the harder steel themselves against
Christian influence. Of course, something can
he said in favour of the schools. Not only are
rogues turned out; but, I suppose, most of the
Christians here have passed through the Eng-
lish class. My opinion having been asked, it is
given for what it is worth. It is that at least
the non-voluntary schools should be closed, the
pupils asked to pay for their tuition ; these fees
and the money now paid for teaching applied
to opening street chapels, and getting more
preachers; these street chapels opened every
afternoon and evening; and open-air meetings
lield several times a week. The disciples
preached the Gospel, and I believe the simple
preaching of the Gospel will effect the calling
out of the Christian Church.”
Dr Masters concluded: “ The idea of teach-
ing English is so deeply rooted here, both in
Chinese and Americans, that it is very hard to
remove. But I am sure it is not the right
method. The Apostles did not open schools in
Antioch and Jerusalem for the free teaching ot
Greek. We read that they preached the Gospel,
not that they taught school. But our people
argue : ‘ See how many have become Christians
through having attended the English schools.’
I reply : ‘ How many more would have become
Christians by merely preaching the Gospel ?’ ”
I believe he is right.
THE QUEUE AGAIN.
Dr Masters is not greatly opposed to its
removal. He relates : “ One of our preachers
toutly refused, for six or seven years, to cut


off his queue, though often urged thereto by
Americans. He said : ‘I am a Chinaman, and
am not ashamed of my nationality.’ But one
day in a crowd he was severely kicked—by
whom, of course, no one knew. A bystander
said : 1 It is very mean of anyone to kick you.
But why do you wear the tail ? Cut it off, and
you won’t be kicked. So long as you wear it,
you seem to invite people to kick you.” Soon
after, the queue came off, and he has not been
annoyed since. Chinese here do not think
much of cutting off the queue. In ten years
from now I believe most of them will be queue-
less. Many Americans, and some Chinese too,,
think there is no hope for China unless all her
old customs are swept away—queue and all.”
I said : “ Let the queueless preacher go into
a Chinatown shop where the people are
absolutely heathen. How will they receive
him ? Will they not sniff with contempt at
him for denationalising himself ? ” Dr Masters
admitted they would. “ Then,” I argued,
“ merely to avoid personal inconvenience from
ignorant white people, he opens an impassable
gulf between himself and those he is called to
influence favourably. It seems to me that such
preachers should remember that the Kingdom
of God is more important than any individual
member of that kingdom,”
A. D.
[P.S. —I began these notes at Yokohama,
which we reached on December 18th, and
finish them at Canton. We left Fair Japan on
January Ist, and spending two days at Shanghai
en route, arrived at Hongkong on the 11th, and
here on the 12th.]


VIII.
East River, Canton,
February sth, 3898.
WHAT OF AMERICA ?
Every visitor to Sydney is asked, “ What do
you think of our harbour ? ” Vulgarly, Sydney-
ites are said thus to “ fish for compliments.”
Americans in Honolulu, Yokohama, Shanghai,
and Canton have asked us, “ What do you think
of America ? ” If they expected like the Sydney
folk, they were disappointed; for we had to say
that we had not seen America —only the Pacific
Coast, which, with the exception of one corner,
had sadly disappointed us. If ever I land in
America again, may it be on the east; if on the
west, may it be as far from San Francisco as
possible:—at Los Angeles south, or Victoria
north.
The captain of our steamer to Japan said—
and we are ready to believe him—that in the
south and east we should find a hospitable,
quiet, and contented people making the land
beautiful. It must be so.
Yet there is something that taints east and
south as well as west, though perhaps in less
degree—a taint of political and judicial corrup-
tion, attributable, it is stoutly held, not to the
system of Government, but to the presence of
riff-raff from European monarchies. Whatever
the cause, it strikes even the visitor from New
Zealand. Every American admits it. One said—
“ The whole judicial system of this country will
soon have to be overhauled, or there will be
trouble.” And another, revisiting his fatherland


after several years’ absence, remarked—“ There
has been progress in every direction except one;
political corruption has increased rather than
otherwise.”
LIFE ABOARD.
We left San Francisco on a fine afternoon,
and thus obtained what was denied us on enter;
ing—opportunity to test the comparison often
made between San Francisco bay and Sydney
harbour. They can be named together as
beautiful no more than can San Francisco and
Melbourne as cities. But of course, being an
Australian, I am prejudiced I
There were aboard 304 Chinese and 61
Japanese passengers from America and Hono-
lulu to their native lands. Among the Chinese
we found three Christians, and among the
Japanese two. A young Chinese had been six
years in Honolulu, where he often went to
church. He had not joined the Christians—
“ because I had not time to learn sufficient
English.” Asked what learning English had to
do with becoming Christian, he replied : —“ If
with only a slight knowledge of English I
joined the Christians, everyone would abuse me
for being too forward.”
There was far less gambling among the
Chinese than I had expected, and among the
Japanese I saw none. No Chinese were seen
reading; two or three Japanese only. Sleeping,
small talk, and eating filled the time, broken
only by the lost papers incident and a great
growl about the quality of the food. On three
evenings, from 60 to 80 Chinese gathered on the
forecastle, where a hymn in Chinese —copies
of which were distributed —was taken as
the subject of a Gospel lesson, and then sung


by Joe and myself. Bad weather limited the
number of such meetings.
It will surprise many to learn, as it did me to
see, that the Chinese seemed much fonder of
light and of pure air than the Japanese. Of the
latter, two-thirds lay all the time in their bunks
amid semi-darkness and vile smells; of the
former two-thirds were on the deck all day, and
fully fifty slept there all night rather than en-
dure the hole below.
STORMS.
The monotony of the Pacific roll was broken
by a storm that reduced our daily runs thus :
328, 281, 262, 239, 170 knots, and made our
arrival two days late.
Another storm there was —within the ship f
Four days from America a Chinese lost his ticket
check, with the check and return certificate of
his twelve-year old daughter a full-blooded
Chinese, yet with pale-brown hair and eyes and
very fair complexion. He posted a notice of
the loss, offering ten dollars reward for their
recovery. Another Chinese passenger, who
asserted—quite uncredited—that he had found
the papers, wanted at first 100 dollars, and
later 40 to hand them over. The ninth day
out the passengers were mustered to show
their tickets and checks. The alleged thief was
hauled from hiding with a look of guilt. His
protestations of innocence were received de-
risively. Shortly after the muster the storm
burst. Two men seized the culprit’s queue, and
winding it round a hand each, dragged him—
with face pale-blue, and sweat in great beads—to
the upper deck, amid yelling, cuffing and push-
ing from others. Those who were too far off to
jostle the prisoner jostled their neighbours,


while all yelled in execration. With his queue
eked out by a piece of rope he was tied near the
foremast; but just then officers came forward
and ordered his release, placing him for safety
in the wheelhouse. The accused was alone
among the 800 ; had any clansmen been present
a severe clan-fight might have occurred.
DEATH ABOARD.
Two Chinese, brought aboard in the last stage
of consumption, died on the voyage. An officer
says that there is always one or more deaths
among them, and thinks that they are put
aboard in hopes that they may die before reach-
ing China, so that the burial will cost little. The
bodies were embalmed by the ship’s doctor, put
in coffins provided by the Tung Wan Hospital
of Hongkong, and placed atop of the deck cabins
behind the mainmast. From 30 to 40 dollars
were subscribed by fellow-passengers to pay the
embalmer and the American ship-hands assist-
ing—for no Chinese would have anything to do
with the dead bodies. Doubtless many of the
passengers ascribed the bad weather met later
to obstruction by the dead men’s manes. When
the storm was fiercest we saw one burning wax
candles and scattering mock-money from out a
port-hole. He was so doing to propitiate the
spirits, just as mock-money is scattered before a
funeral procession ashore.
GREENHORNS.
Crossing the 180th meridian, stories were told
of others who had done so. One who was
greatly exercised over the matter was told that
a buoy placed to mark the meridian is some-
times seen trom the ship if a strict look-out is
kept. An empty barrel was obtained, thrown


overboard one lunch-time, and the cry raised :
“ The buoy, the buoy I” All rushed on deck, the
tenderfoot greatly wondering at such accurate
navigation.
One of our watchmen was almost as green.
He remarked, as the sun set, that it did not
show such variety of form as at San Francisco.
When the cause of varied shapes and increased
size was explained, he said : “ Of course the
size is greater because the sun is nearer; we
have been sailing towards it since we left San
Francisco, and are all that distance nearer itl”
Perhaps our storeman —a full brother of Mrs
Malaprop—may come in here. The best thing
he said was one evening as we were admiring
the seas during the height of the storm : “ Isn’t
it expiring !”
JAPANESE TRAITS.
Through her children aboard we were intro-
duced to Japan. There is a very distinct differ-
ence between the ways of Japanese and Chinese
female passengers—very much in favour of the
latter. Of the Asiatic passengers the steerage
steward said : “It is said that Japanese are
ahead of Chinese, but I don’t think so. Any-
way, tho Chinese are much more decent than
the Japanese. ... In the Jap’s corner of
the vessel the stench is fearful; the Chinese part
is comparatively sweet.”
When we sighted Japan the Japanese became
greatly excited. A cabin passenger moved about
the deck like a Frenchman. He said : 11 1 can-
not keep still—the sight of my homeland moves
me so.” The ship’s doctor says that sick
Chinese, seeing the excited Japanese preparing
to land at Yokohama, also get excited, and thus
spend their remaining strength. He never saw
healthy men excited over return to China.


Japanese language is polysyllabic: Chinese
monosyllabic. Our first impression was that it
must take longer to express a given idea in
Japanese than in Chinese. For “ I am going,”
the full expression is “ Watakushi wa yuki-
mas:” Chinese is u Ngo hii.” But hearing a
hotel tout, who boarded the ship on mooring,
convinced us that it might be possible to ex-
press eight syllables as quickly as two. His
speech was as the sound of a winnowing
machine.
NEW AND OLD.
The approach to Yokohama showed us a
living people. I counted 244 small sailing
vessels at one time within sight, besides scores
of fishing-boats, and four large steamers going
out as we came in. There were anchored in
the harbour 26 steamers over 2000 tons, besides
three large barques.
A promontory on the south literally gleams
with cannon. Half a mile of the hills has been
turned into a Japanese Gibraltar. An island
fort there is also, and hard by another islet
is being reclaimed, presumably to hold more
cannon. . .
It is easily seen that a good deal of this life is
new-born. The steamers are modern, the
earthworks fresh, and many of the small
sailers are schooner-rigged. Yet scores of these
represent old Japan —clumsy hulls, high sterns,
and square sails, one to a mast. The foreign-
shaped Custom House, with pagoda-like tower,
blends new and old.
CHINESE AND JAPANESE.
There are 8000 Chinese in Yokohama, half of
them Cantonese. Very striking are some con-
trasts. The stately Chinese move about very


leisurely : the under - sized Japanese very
nimbly. Canton streets are very narrow—B
feet to 10 feet; Yokohama streets from Bto 10
yards in width. In Canton streets women are
comparatively rare; here they are nearly as
many as men. There no young girls are to be
seen; here are scores. The Chinese are long-
haired ; the Japanese have what we term “a
prisoner’s crop.” Babies under three and old
people over 50 are remarkably like Chinese
facially. Between those ages the types of face
are quite distinct. In appearance, I should say
that the Chinese are handsome by comparison.
Mentally, one Chinese probably possesses more
gumption than two Japanese. In bodily cleanli-
ness, the Japanese excel the Chinese. Someone
has said, “ A Japanese crowd is the sweetest in
the world.” Bathing-houses are common in
some streets. Notices on the doors state the
charges thus : “ Adult, 2 sen (£dj; Child, 1|
sen." The water is very warm—about 130 deg.
Fab., I should judge. In winter they bathe to
warm, in summer to cool themselves. But
their clothing is washed more seldom than the
Chinese. Of another difference, a Chinese said,
“ The Japanese are patriotic to the extreme ;
Chinese officials have not the least patriotism.”
And this, surely, is true of the people too.
Chinese shop-signs are carved in wood, and
gaily painted; Japanese are usually of cotton,
white and black. Chemist shop-signs alone
approach the Chinese form.
MORE SIGNS.
Another class of shop-signs affords the visitor
scope for amusement and perplexity :
Mr WAKAMEISHA sells “ RECENT MILK.”
Mr KOMASAKI has a “ CURIOUS STORE.”
Mr U. SAITO is a “PAPER MANGER.”


A terrible crux is the word “ lacquer.” In one
street are these attempts :
“ LACQWARE.”
“ LACQUEWARE.”
“ LACQURED.”
A restaurant advertises :
“ MEAL ’SAT ALL HOURS.”
A factory is styled
“ MANUFAKATUARY.”
A bootmaker has for sale
“ PATENT SHOE OF IRON BED.”
And a Chinese tailoring firm, styled Kwang
Cheung, hangs out this signboard—
COCK EYE
TAILOR.
THE MEN.
We were a fortnight in Yokohama and Tokio,
therefore have every globe-trotter’s privilege of
expressing an opinion on everything.
One’s first impressions of Japanese men are
apt to be rather favourable. So, the day after
landing, when a German said, “ They are the
meanest lot of people I ever came across,” I
thought his judgment unjust. There is so
much bowing and smiling, so many “ Thank
you ” and “ I beg your pardon,” that one for-
gets the truth thus expressed by Confucius:
“ Fine words and an insinuating appearance are
seldom associated with true virtue.” One gets
a start when the veneer comes off, and the
mahogany becomes very common deal. An
Englishman said : “ All Europeans who have


been in Japan for some time say that the men
are the essence of meanness. It is only people
whose acquaintance is short or superficial that
are full of praise about them. As for the
women, they are charming.”
THE WOMEN.
I am inclined to agree with his verdict on the
women. There is nothing charming in their
gait—for they wear sandals without ties at the
heels, so that their walk is a half-shamble, half-
waddle. Their features are not beautiful, nor
their figures pleasing, to our taste. But the
sweetness of their voices and the winsomeness
of their manner only a misogynist can deny.
To see a Japanese mother busy at housework,
with the baby strapped on her back looking
intently over her shoulder; or walking out sing-
ing and crowing to it crowing back; or at the
family washing with it rocked fast asleep; or
standing in the church aisle gently swaying
from side to side to soothe her restless charge ;
to see the young woman in gay obi singing or
reciting at the school break-up, or in every day
dress shopping for the family; to see the old
woman climbing the steep Bluff hill with a load
of fuel on her back—these are all of a piece.
The variety of situation cannot change the
charm of the central figure. The universal
method of carrying the babies, begun by the
girls when quite young, seems not to cause any
stoop ; rather it acts contrariwise.
THE CHILDREN.
And I would include the children. One could
watch child-life by the hour. To do this there
is every opportunity, for—there being no yards
—the street is the playground, while in the


daytime the shops are open full to the street.
The boys troop out of school with their smart
caps on, carrying lunch-holders, books, and
abacus : after school they fly their many-coloured
oblong kites, or play tig across the street. The
girls play battledore and shuttlecock (some of
them with babies aback), or bounce a ball and
turn right round in time to strike it again; or
mind the shop during the meal time; or help
the mother to sweep and dust. One yearly
festival belongs to the boys and another to the
girls. Japan would be worth visiting just to see
them preparing for and enjoying these.
Six little ones, from seven to nine years old—
four boys and two girls stood before a
“ sweetie ” shop swinging in and out, holding
the bamboo guard—now wheedling, then bounc-
ing the old dame that she might part with some
of her wares cheap or gratis. What a chance
for a “ snap-shot 1”
Joe and I were present at the break-up for
Christmas of the Baptist Mission School. The
recitation and singing of over twenty items by
40 boys and 70 girls passed off without a hitch,
and with an absence of self-consciousness alto-
gether in contrast to an English break-up. The
girls—small and great —all wore the obi, and
the variety of patterns being as great as the
number of girls, while the prevailing colours
were shades of red, cream, and green, the scene
was a bright one.
I saw very few children playing on the streets
after 7 p.m.
THE LAND.
This is Fair Japan. There is no doubt con-
cerning the physical beauty of the country. In
this respect it resembles strongly parts of our


own New Zealand; but its beauty is more
general than ours, and somewhat more tropical.
These are not the only resemblances. Both are
in the Far East. Because maps have New Zea-
land on the “ Western Hemisphere,” the world
puts us west. It is amusing how writers and
speakers refer to Japan as the most easterly of
lands. The name “ Japan ” means “ Source of
the Sun.” Mr Chamberlain calls it ‘‘the most
eastern of all lands.” And he is a University
professor 1 In an address I heard a Cambridge
graduate say that “ nearly 1900 years ago the
Easter sun rose first on Japan.” Poetic, but
not true. As a geographical fact Eastern
Australia sees the sun half an hour before any
part of Japan, and New Zealand two hours
earlier. Both Japan and New Zealand consist
of a chain of islands running N.E. and S.W.
Both cover nearly 14 degrees of latitude. Both
contain active volcanoes. Both have a peerless
snow-capped mountain—Fuji, 12,865 ft. high,
and Cock, 12,349 ft.
POLITENESS.
There is much bowing and bobbing when
friend meets friend or buyer seller. Time after
time some compliment calls forth a bow, sure to
be followed by its complementary bow ; some-
times one sees three pairs of bows with not a
spoken word. At the close of his sermon the
preacher bows to the congregation and they to
him. No one thinks of saying “ Good-bye ”or
“ Thank you ” without this salute. But obser-
vation leads to the belief that the formality
exceeds far the reality, and that much of the
politeness is only a thin skin deep. What people
with any idea of politeness would shout “ Shaw I
Shaw ! ” right in your face a hundred times a


day in the senseless way Japanese jinricksha
runners do ? We travelled four times by rail,
and each time women came into full cars, but
we did not once see a Japanese man offer a seat
to a woman. In one case, into another com-
partment full of men there came three women —
two with babies a-back —but they had to stand
all the journey. I gave my seat to one who
came our way, but no one saw the example.
Then came an exception. A young man, seeing
me standing, rose, doffed his cap, and offered me
his seat.
This note refers to the men only : I think
that the women really mean something by their
honorific language and demeanour.
NEW THINGS.
All Government officials —railway, customs,
postal, etc. —dress in foreign costume. Many
civilians do likewise, especially of the younger
men ; some of whom, not content with wearing
foreign-shaped hats, clothes, boots, and spec-
tacles, actually ape foreigners in their walk.
This they do so well that one has to see the lace
to know that the man is not a badly-dressed
European.
We have to thank the good taste of Japanese
women for avoiding the foreign dress. It is said
that the Empress follows Parisian fashions; but
the only woman we saw in European dress was
a street actress, who looked quite as ludicrous as
any monkey in full dress-suit.
Japanese railways are a great success. Though
the fares are only 3,2, and 1 sen per mile for
Ist, 2nd, and 3rd classes respectively (4 sen
equal 1 penny), they pay 6 per cent on their
construction —a consummation that all our
Australasian Colonies devoutly *vish.


The soldiers deserve passing mention. Hardly
a day passed but we saw cavalry or infantry.
The look of admiration given them by the popu-
lace shows Japan’s present spirit. The shops
full of boys’ caps in military shape point the
same way. While we waited twenty minutes at
a railway station, five military officers paced to
and fro with trailing swords. Conceit shone in
their faces, swelled out their bodies, and creaked
in their boots. If they only knew it, they are
very far from looking “ every inch a soldier.” I
should say that each was about 64 inches high,
and looked about 30 inches a soldier ! As for
the rank and file, those we saw are mere boys—
from 17 to 21; and more conceited, because
more ignorant, than their officers. In a
crowded railway-train a boy soldier and two
civilians occupied a seat sufficient for five Japan-
ese or four Europeans. A fourth place was filled
by the boy’s military overcoat. When Joe
moved it slightly and sat down, the boy scowled
fiercely. He was only a boy ; but somewhat of
his spirit possesses many of the men. It is
this that makes many Japanese spit offen-
sively when a foreigner passes. One cannot
help thinking of iEsop’s fable of frog and bull.
If the pride of J apan come in conflict with a
European power it will have a terrible fall.
EAST V. WEST.
Since the war with China, Japanese foreign
trade has increased amazingly. Factories have
sprung up in scores, and before long the West
must protect itself from goods made with wages
at 8d per day. In these days of competition,
London book-publishers may pack up their
plants and migrate to Tokio, where matrices
can be cut, types cast and set, books printed and


bound for one-fifth the British cost. It is well
for European and American dentists that it will
not pay their customers to visit Japan. A San
Francisco dentist charged me 29s to do that tor
which a Yokohama dentist charged 4s. I priced
a 26-inch solid leather portmanteau at 17s, and
bought splendid safety matches at the rate of
thirteen boxes (ordinary sized) for one English
penny !
globe-trotting.
Joe and I struck the globe-trotter’s trail for
four days. We visited the Kamakura Daibutsu
—a bronze image of Buddha, 49Jft. high, wit
eyes of pure gold, and a 301 b. silver boss on its
forehead ; also the Kwannon and Hachiman
Temples there. At Tokio we visited the Mor-
tuary Temples of eight shoguns in Ueno and
Shiba Parks, and saw the great Zojoji Temple.
The carving and painting m one of the bhiba
temples is marvellous. I had no idea that any-
where in the world was such carving. o see
that oratory, with the golden glory of its coffered
ceiling, with the perfect forms and living
colours of birds and flowers on its walls, was
alone worth our visit to Tokio.
We saw also the tombs of ‘ Forty-seven
Eonins ” —the heroes of a thrilling story ot
faithfulness and revenge known by every
Japanese boy of twelve. There are 48 tomb-
stones in six rows (for a man who insulted the
leader, and in remorse committed suicide at his
grave, lies with the 47) from Chikara Great-
stone the boy of 16 to the greybeard followers
of 69 and 77. Close by is the grave of the lord
they avenged ; their swords and dirks and
armour, preserved carefully for neai jy ,
years; and the well wherein they washed the
head of him they slew.


Here is another straw showing how the tide
flows in Japan. At all the temples named, the
total Japanese visitors seen were three: to the
Tombs of the Ronins there was a constant thin
stream.
We had quite an “ adventure ” at Kamakura
—now a straggling village of about 1000 inhabi-
tants, but 400 years ago the capital of Japan,
with a million souls. A Japanese inn is there,
to which we betook ourselves to lunch. Doff-
ing boots at the inn door, and donning slippers
provided, we squatted on mats beside a “ table ”
about ten inches high. A waitress brought in
trays containing covered dishes. Before un-
covering these, she said, “Go sen ” (five cents),
and we each gave her that sum, marvelling at
the cheapness of food, and wondering what the
dishes might hold. Their contents were—Rice,
soup, boiled salt fish, fried fresh fish, pickled
beans, saner kraut , raw red fish, and raw grey
fish. I tasted all the dishes, but Joe left all,
except the rice and cooked fish, severely alone.
The waitress was very attentive, and we each
gave her “go sen ” for herself. Then, promis-
ing to return for our overcoats, we visited the
Daibutsu. Afterwards we sent our guide to
the inn for our overcoats; but he returned,
sajing, “ They want to see you.” Then our
hostess smilingly presented an account in ex-
cellent Chinese penmanship, showing that we
owed for lunch : 135 cents. Etiquette forbade
us more than smiling as we paid, but as soon as
we got beyond the inn gates we had to laugh
till our sides ached.
MISSIONS.
Thirty years ago, when Japan had thoroughly
opened her eyes, there was a great demand for


Western education. Christian missionaries
were eagerly desired as teachers, the schools
and churches were crowded. To-day the
Government has its schools, and the Mission
schools are comparatively deserted. The pre-
sent attitude of the people seems to be that of
the French. Having lost faith in their
Buddhism and Shintoism, as the French in
Roman Catholicism, they are inclined to believe
in nothing immaterial. One of themselves —a
highly educated man —said to me : “ You will
find my countrymen very careless in religious
matters.”
There is considerable work done in Yokohama
and Tokio by the Protestant Episcopal, Method-
ist, Baptist, Congregational, and Presbyterian
Missions —nearly all American. In Yokohama
I attended the Methodist, Union, and Presby-
terian Mission Churches. The congregation at
the first-named numbered 87 —36 women on
one side and 51 men on the other, but without
the dividing screen of Chinese churches. The
preacher, a man of some fire, at the close of his
sermon called on six people, who rose from their
seats in the congregation and went to the front—
four men and two women. An impressive bap-
tismal service was gone through, part of which
consisted of responses on behalf of each convert
from Christians in the congregation, who rose
in their places and spoke a word or two. This
seems a live church of over 200 members.
The Union service was attended by about 40
men and 120 women. It was the morning after
Christmas, and the church was well decorated
with evergreens —a bunch of pine on the end of
each seat, six green bamboos nearly reaching
the ceiling; sprays of pine, yuzuruha leaves,
red aolii and nanten berries twined round the


pillars and front of the organ. The organ is
rarely sweet toned, but the singing was thin for
such a congregation of women.
The Shiro Presbyterian Church, popularly
called Dr Hepburn’s, was built over 25 years
ago, almost entirely with money raised in the
United States of America. It is of brick, has a
fine tower and spire, and arc-shaped seats for
fully 600 people. The service began 15 minutes
late, when the congregation was eight women
and thirteen men. These increased later to
fourteen women and seventeen men. This
church was not decorated in the least, though it
was Boxing morning. It seems nearer dead
than any other church I have seen.
We went to one of the Baptist Mission street-
chapels—they have six in Yokohama and
found a young man speaking very earnestly to
a small score of people.
“ HEPHZIBAH MISSION ”
is a side-street sign in the Yokohama Chinese
quarters, with, in addition :
“ A HOUSE OF PRAYER FOR ALL PEOPLE.”
We attended the meetings here on two Sun-
days, when four nations were represented—4
Japanese, 6 Chinese, 5 Americans, 3 British ;
three hymns were sung, each simultaneously in
three languages; there were three prayers
offered—in English by an American, in Japanese
by a Chinese, in Chinese by a Briton. And
there were four addresses —in English by an
American, interpreted into Japanese by a Japa-
nese ; in Japanese by a Chinese, in Chinese by
a Briton, and in Chinese by a Chinese. Truly
it was a service of tongues.


DECORATIONS.
The Japanese, having recently adopted the
Oregorian calendar, have their New Year corre-
sponding with ours. Among foreigners here
the most prominent plants in decorations are the
nanten berry and the mistletoe. The latter is
the tohi-tsuru (“leaping vine”) found growing
on a plane tree, and is so called because its
berries when ripe leap from their cups.
Native decorations have three universal ele-
ments —a fringe of rice straw hanging the full
width of the shop, bamboo, and pine branches.
Many houses had this combination : —Pine and
bamboo by the door-posts meeting over the
lintel, where the arch was crowned by a varie-
gated bunch —yellow rice-straw, green Daphni-
phillum leaves, grey edible seaweed, a red cray-
fish, and an orange. The main idea in these
decorations is that of unchangeableness —a
quality much needed by modern Japanese.
NEW YEAR FAIR.
Tokio’s main street is 80 feet wide, with
18 feet footpaths. During the last week of the
year, six feet of each side walk is taken up with
matting booths, wherein are displayed many
kinds of wares bj many sorts of sellers from
the boy of twelve selling, for £d and Jd, large
and small bamboo flutes made by himself,
whereon he plays tunes to attract buyers, to the
dealer requiring 10 feet to 25 feet of space for
the sale of charms, sweeties, sandals, metal-
ware, hats and caps, woodware, brush and
broomware, delf and china, socks ( tabi , lit.
“ foot-pocket ”), curios in stones and seals and
coins, fruits, kites, battledores and shuttlecocks,
hot cakes, tobacco pipes, or pouches and purses,
&c., &c.


In the side streets are tree and flower fairs—
plum and pine branches, red nanten berry trees
and branches, and pot plants with autumn-
tinted leaves. At one corner a little girl of nine
and a young woman were singing and playing
for coppers, at another a man and woman; in
a back street an oblong tent contained a
theatrical party, with the actors —male and
female —dressed in European dress, the latter
“ a perfect fright.”
The complete absence of beggars was as
noticeable as their swarming presence in China.
NEW YEAR.
New Year in Yokohama is very tame com-
pared with Chinese New Year in Canton. The
red papers there stuck on everything, from stone
and tree to pagoda and city wall, are here
entirely absent. Within, the shops are all well
lighted on New Year’s Eve ; while without, a
row of white lanterns bearing the shop mark
painted in black, stretches right across the shop-
front. Two or three strings of coloured lanterns
cross the street, but otherwise—excepting the
evergreens —there are no special decorations.
The display of fireworks that we expected at
midnight, and that we climbed a height to see,
was —one rocket. In this home of lanterns and
fireworks we had reason to be disappointed.
By 12.30 a.rn. the streets were practically de-
serted ; many shopkeepers were sweeping their
shops and footpaths; sandal and clog-makers were
very busy at work, as if to finish a pair before
retiring; while the metal-workers made great
clatter. I gave away a number of Dr McCartee’s
tracts with the New Year greeting :
“ 0 medeto gozarimasu 1"


to stray citizens, only one of whom refused,
while several returned the salute.
FAREWELL TO JAPAN.
We voyaged to Shanghai on January 1 to 5,
staying a few hours at Kobe, where the “Inland
Sea ” trade centres, and thirty-one good-sized
vessels lay. The town kept closely the New
Year holiday. A great many girls were playing
in the streets at shuttlecock with their gaudy
new-year battledores. The boys were absent on
the hills kiteflying. A Chinese bootmaker told
us there are 800 Chinese in Kobe, and about the
same number in Nagasaki.
We were 22 hours in “ The Inland Sea
said to be one of the finest sea-scenes in the
world. It looked in the moonlight like a broad
lake studded with many dark islets, setting off
the countless lights that gleamed from shore and
vessel and .lighthouse. By daylight the islets
were green, and the surface of the water dotted
with thousands of fishing and cargo boats, their
sails white in the sun or brown in the shade,
making a charming picture. The hills on both
sides bear a remarkable likeness to serrated
ranges in Otago —like the Dunstan and Pisa
ranges rather than the Lammerlaws and
Obelisk.
Issuing at Shimonoseki strait, earthworks and
cannon appear everywhere from 50 to 500 feet
above the water. Five steamers ot fair size
were coming in and four going out; a railway
train going south and another corning north.
Scores of craft old and new in style flitted about.
So our last look at Japan resembled the first
many guns and many ships.


IX.
Canton,
April 2nd, 1898.
This is the eve of our return to Hongkong, where
we hope to spend a week before sailing for Australia.
Most of our time has been spent on four houseboat
excursions into the country—east 120, north 20
twice, and south 150 miles from the city.
SIGNS OF CHINA.
Daylight on January sth showed our ship in
yellowish water, brought down by the mighty
Yangtsze River, plainly discolouring the sea a
hundred miles out. At 10 a.m. we entered this
great “ Son of the ocean ” ; two hours later, turned
into a smaller stream ; and at 3 p.m. landed in
Shanghai, where we spent two clear days.
This low flat shore contrasted with the hilly
rugged outlines of Japan no more than the smart
sea-craft there with these boats of ancient pattern.
A passing fleet of ocean junks (called “ Great-eyed
cocks”) recalled forcibly prints of the vessels
wherein Columbus sailed into the unknown. Large
white eyes, with black balls, stare from each side of
the bow. Poor China ! How badly she needs eyes.
A GREAT EYE-OPENER
is the American Presbyterian Mission Press at
Shanghai. Its Chinese composing-room contains
fourteen fonts. Each font has 6660 separate types
distributed over a three-sided box sloping sides,
about five feet square at the floor, and ten at the
top, like a great grain-hopper with one side out.
There must be over five millions of types in that
room. The English composing-room has sixteen
fonts. Then there are the Paper-room, the More


room, full to the ceiling ; the Hand printing-room,
with six presses; the Machine printing-room, with
five cylinder and two jobbing presses; the Foreign
binding-room (the Chinese binding is done outside,
as there is not room here), and the Despatching-room.
The 'Jype foundry and Stereotyping-room are very
interesting. The Strong - room contains 70.0U0
matrices, with the body of brass, into which is
inserted the character cut on copper. Impressions
for stereotyping are taken from the type with paper
pulp instead of clay or stucco.
If the pen is mightier than the sword, what a
mighty power is this Press, here near the mouth of
the greatest water-way in the world. Last year
were printed 536,072 copies of books and tracts,
representing nearly 51.000,000 pages In three
weeks, without seriously affecting ordinary work,
an extra edition (10,000 copies) of a 170-page book
was set up, stereotyped, and printed. Not count-
ing the outside binders, there are over 130 em-
ployees.
A FAMOUS TRIO.
Dr Allen, Dr Faber, and Rev. T. Richards, whose
writings are moving millions of Chinese, have mos
of their works printed at the P.M. Press. Dr A 1 en
issued 13,000,000 pages last year, not counting tne
pirated editions of his “ Chino-Japanese War His-
tory." Dr Allen told me that in connection with
this book the Emperor sent him a letter of thanks,
stating that he believes it to be trustworthy and
impartial ; while the King of Korea sent a present.
Li Hung Chang himself supplied the MS. war
telegrams. He gave an intensely interesting
account of the change towards Western science
and Christiapity that is coming over edu °a ted
Chinese. One scholar said to him : ‘ Confucianism
is in ruins,” and many others : “ We are done with
Confucianism.” An official from the intenor after
conversation with Dr Allen, bought a BiWe at the
Society’s depot. Hearing of his mother s serious


illness, he returned home—to find her dead. After
the funeral, in his great grief, he turned to the
Bible ; and this is what he told Dr Allen shortly
after:—“ I read right through the Bible in five
weeks. There is one thing in it that touches me
keenly in my sorrow. Jesus spoke of a resurrec-
tion. This is something new to me. I want to
know something more about it.” Dr Allen read
with him John xiv., and the mandarin left deeply
affected.
ANOTHER EYE-OPENER.
I saw over the headquarters of the China Inland
Mission, which counts in its ranks ten young New
Zealanders. Along three sides of an extensive quad-
rangle stand the buildings—the great Receiving
Home, the Hospital, the Chapel, the monster Store-
room, the Packing Room, the Baggage Room, the
Treasurer’s and the Secretary’s Rooms. An item
in the last gives an idea of the wonderful develop-
ment of the C. I. M. One wall is covered by an im-
mense cabinet containing missionaries’ corre-
spondence, in little boxes, alphabetically arranged.
The number of the boxes then was 741.
MORE EYE-OPENERS.
We were present on Foreign Mission Niuht of the
Universal Prayer Week. The Shanghai Missionary
Association reported great advance during the year ;
the B. and F. B. S. Secretary reported the issue of
761,000 books, and a strong movement towards
Christianity in Manchuria, where 64,000 Bibles and
portions had been circulated; the P.M. Press re-
ported an immense demand for educational books ;
the Master of the newly-opened Government Boys’
School that 200 names had been enrolled, and
accommodation for 500 provided; other Mission
Societies that the outlook is very encouraging.
A Government Girls’ School is getting under way.
Two Christian Chinese women had been engaged
to conduct it; but when they saw by the prospectus
that the tablet of Confucius was to be placed in the


school for the pupils’ homage, they threatened to
resign, and were assured that it would not be so
placed. Dr Baldwin, of Foocbow, was present, and
said a few words. Travelling in North and Central
China, he had everywhere found the work encour-
aging and the workers in good heart, Specially
was this true of Foochow, and nowhere more so
than at Kucheng, where the massacre of
occurred.
TO HONGKONG.
We reached “ The Fragrant Port ” on January
11th. For full thirty hours we sailed through sea
yellowed by the Yangtze. One night, under a lull
moon, twenty miles from land we passed through a
fleet of twenty fishing boats sailing in pairs. As
pair after pair of the tiny craft came out of the
semi-darkness into the bright track of the moon s
rays, the scene from the deck of our great P. and U.
steamer was very striking.
There was a Russian aboard, whom I tried to get
to talk about Germany’s action at Kiao-chau and the
probable next move of Russia regarding a railway
terminus-this was before Port Arthur was seized ,
but he said—“ We leave that to the politicians : the
Russian people care nothing about the foreign policy
of the Government.” But more than likely he was
a Russian spy.
A daughter of Eve was aboard too—a little
Chinese maiden in her fourth year, under the wing
of her mother. The first day, when she caught
sight of a foreigner she twisted a face of great tear
and set up a scared scream; the second day_ she
came to play with pencils and books, and to tease
without end^to have figures drawn for her and to be
tossed in air.
CANTON AGAIN.
We took the first night boat to Canton, and _at
5 a.m. on January 12th heard the three characteristic
Canton sounds—a gong clanging on a passing jun ,


a watchman’s drum ending the fifth watch, and a
volley of firecrackers. During the night I had tried
vainly to recall this journey seventeen years ago :
these three sounds brought back Canton so
vividly that it seemed only yesterday that I had
left.
Can anyone describe the scene at the wharf as the
passengers teemed ashore ? At one spot yells and
commotion were greatest—like a cencentrated can-
nonade in battle. There two men raw country youths
despite their long gowns—ran the gauntlet between
eleven boatmen. They wished to embark, and each
boatman was impressing on the young men that his
boat and fare were the only ones thinkable. When
they reached the end of the plank jetty the fire con-
centrated. There were boatmen to front of them,
boatmen to left of them, and boatmen to right of
them roaring and bawling. Little wonder that the
youths lost their heads and took to their heels in
retreat. But they had not gone far, when a boat-
man bolder than his fellows seized one of them,
and actually pulled him into his boat, while his
companion followed. “ And there was a great calm ”
there.
PEESONAL.
A sampan came out of the floating mass much as
a hook out of a knot of hooks, and on it we went to
the Medical Missionary Society’s Hospital, where
Dr and Mrs Kerr heartily welcomed the Antipodeans.
Dr Kerr is still senior surgeon of the Hospital that is
as closely connected with his name as Knox Church
with Dr Stuart’s. Though 74 years of age, he has
the same genial smile, full voice, and elastic step
that were so welcome to me seventeen years ago,
when for some weeks the smallpox yellow flag at
my bungalow gate kept out all but him and my
cook. Dr Kerr’s medical jubilee will occur next
July. At present there are living only four men
who have been longer on the Mission field in China.
We were guests of the Kerrs in the intervals of our
four country excursions; and when from one of


these I was brought back in great haste, completely
prostrated by influenza—that I must have broug
from Japan—it was a sweet haven whither I was
carried. We bad our meals at a historic table
made from timber of the British ship on which
“The Star-Spangled Banner” was written, the
author being then a prisoner of war.
CHANGES.
The mission ary personnel has changed greatly these
eighteen years. Of the 85 missionaries who were
herein November 1879, only ten remain among
the 81 now here. Since 1874 the number that has
left from all causes-incapacity, sickness, and death
—is just 80. This fact hints at the character of
Canton climate. Of the eighty, 29 belonged to the
English Wesleyan Mission. The record for
brevity is held by a young ™ n i £ o ™ a
Boston church, sent by the I.P.S.C. .
mained in Canton two days. The plague was rag g
then and he got so scared that he shipped home y
Te ship that brought him. How he explained
matters at home is not on record.
“ eice-money.”
Before thirty hours in Canton, we enR *
house-boat for the first country trip. ne w
“ hands ” —three men and two women (women count
here though not reckoned in the census)— was en-
gaged for 2s 9d per day. One of the grew accom-
panied me from the anchorage to Dr Kerr s to ge
some money “to buy rice.” Everyone seems o
the eve of starvation. When anyone is engaged to
do anything, at once some money must be paid t
keep away the wolf. The presumption is that non
employment would be followed by hung .
necessarily. We are in China. n , iat
Then we laid in a supply of rice Oataeal at
4d per lb., honey at Is., and butter at Is od, were
the only things dearer than in
meats and fruits, cocoa and tinned fh ,
same price: while flour (lOlbs. for Is sugar


(2d), lard (4d), eggs (2£d per dozen), and bread
(lOlbs. for were cheaper. Oddly, flour is
dearer than bread ; but the storekeeper explained
that the pr ce of bread has been the same for many
years, and nan not be altered, while the price of
flour varies. Another reminder that we are in
China.
OUR BOAT AND CREW.
Of the twelve souls on board, the three passen-
gers—Joe, his Chinese teacher, and myself—have a
room 16 x 7 x 6 feet: the other nine have less than
half that space. This is the Kwong K’iin Chau
(Vast Power Vessel). The doors and sides slide
freely—too freely for comfort in winter, and privacy
any season. Within are Chinese furnishings—a
folding square table, six stools, two fixed lounges
that form bedsteads by expansion laterally, a fair
kerosene lamp, an exasperatingly irregular clock,
and the floor raised a foot at the inner end to serve
as opium smoker’s lounge and bed without, and
within as a baggage and stores compartment. Above
this there hangs a well-executed Chinese painting
—a pine tree, three sages, three boys, and three
birds. Boys, sages, and two birds are all busy;
the third bird looks on forlorn. A couplet flanks the
picture:—
“ With peaceful waves and calm ripples grasp firm
the cassia oars.
“ With flowing tide and fair wind hoist high the
graceful sail.”
Above is the cross inscription :
“ BRIGHT MOON AND CALM AIR.”
The nine are :—Captain and owner “ Power,” chief
mate “ Full,” the crew “ Sharp,” the captain’s
wife, his mother, and four children under eleven—
viz., “Ability,” “Three,” “ Lucky ” (a girl), and
“Glory.” The stcond son was so called as an
anticipatory call to a third son.


AT NAM-KONQ.
Against a strong current the boat was poled
slowly up-stream, and evening found us only 15
miles from morning. Old memories returned
as we sailed past banyans, lichees, bananas, guavas,
longans, water-pines, and tallow-trees, and sighted
grackleand kingfisher. “ South River ’' he ,
lage where we anchored, a place of 2000 souls.
Here I met a man who knows intimately the family
of my first Chinese teacher, and another who lives
a few doors from a man known in New Zealand for
14 years. The world—even including China—is
growing smaller. Seventy or eighty, half of them
hoys, stood by us as I preached the Gospel from a
stone bench. They listened well, except one man,
who left sayiig: “Tell me some way of getting
more opium, and I’ll listen.” Afterwards we sat in
a shop full of men, and were plied with questions
about railways, electricity, armies, and warships.
All ears they were for my answers ; but though the
proprietor is convinced that China will be at t e
mercy of the West so long as she keeps to her anti-
quated notions, he soon turned back the conversa-
tion when I directed it towards the need of something
more than material reform.
TO SHEK-MA.
This is the “ Stone-horse ” village, which I
reached next morning, thus realising the desire of
many years ; for hundreds of Chinese in Otago come
thence. Here live five clans, each in its own
« side ” of the village, numbering in all some 7500 ,
counted. It faces east, with Clear Hill a mile to
N.E., Star-Scraping Range some fifteen miles m
front, and to the S.E. the White Cloud Hills hiding
from view the pagodas of Canton city. A sma
stream touches the village plantation (every yi age
here has a wood to rear and sides, and an artificial
pond in front) at the corner where stands the lately
renovated temple; and behind is a low hill, ove


whose shoulder the path runs to the nearest market
town “ River Village,” where we anchored. There
by the path-side is a large flat rock, on which one
of the Immortals stood awhile : Is not the impres-
sion of his foot clearly visible to this day ? Each
clan has its Ancestral Hall, with tablets of an-
cestors back to the founders of the village. The
Hall of the Cham (= Smith, because the commonest
Chinese surname) is finest: the money to build it
came almost wholly from Cham in Otago and
Westland.
EECEPTION,
Walking to Shek-ma I greeted every man met,
and was delighted at the friendliness of the re-
sponses. At once I felt that I was not in a strange
land; for scenes hitherto visited only in dreams
were now realised. A group of men and women, on
their way to the Bridge-head market, chatted
freely as I walked with them part way. At part-
ing, they directed me across a flat of rice fields,
with its thin forest of well-sweeps, and pointed out
” the tops of the tallest trees in Shek-ma wood,
peeping over the shoulder of yonder hill.”
At the village, I asked for “ Cloud ” —the ad-
dressee of a letter I bore from a nephew, mining at
Waikaka—to be told that “ Cloud ” is dead, but his
widow would be called. As I waited, a crowd col-
lected—mainly boys and old men near at hand
(the young men are mostly away at Bridse-head,
where the market is held two days in five), the girls
and young women at some distance. But the
elderly women too crowded round, and rather sur-
prised me by their freedom of speech with the first
foreigner seen by most of them.
NEWS FEOM AFAE.
Confucius said: “Is not it pleasant to have a
friend come from a far land?” It would take pages
to tell of the wonderfully familiar way in which
these villagers met me. I am not a pessimist, but
my rosiest hopes were much under-coloured. I


shall merely outline some of the incidents daring a
stay of two hours. What happened here happened
too everywhere in this district.
A pleasant-faced, wrinkled old dame asked if I
know “ Shining Face,” her only son. When I
answered affirmatively, she said, “ What is he
doing?” And when told, continued: “I am 70
years old, he has sent me no money for years,
and lam very poor.” The bystanders pointed out
Shining Face’s nephew “ All,” popularly known as
“ Fatty,” whose looks match his nickname.
One “ Glorious P> ace ” proclaimed himself the
elder brother and uncle respectively of two men I
know. lam to tell the former that he must come
home when he can pay his passage ; the latter,
that “ his mother has no rice to eat.”
A man came to say, “ ‘ Coral’ wishes to see you.”
Soon Coral (an old Round Hill man) came and wel-
comed me warmly. He is on his way to Bridge-
head mart, but his brother (also from Round Hill)
is waiting at the family quarters to see me.
Cloud’s widow now appeared. lam to tell her
nephew that his home has gone to ruin since his
mother died, three years ago, and there is no
shelter for his father’s soul-tablet. She led the
way, that I might see with my own eyes half a
house, and a tree growing among the tiles and clay
of the other half.
The father and brother of “ Perfect Dog a
Hokitika man—gave me a letter to take to him.
A youngish woman announced herself as sister-
in-law of “ Faithful,” now of Alexandra.
A still younger woman, sister-in-law of ” True
View,” asked for his whereabouts and circum-
stances. She was not surprised to hear that he is
a vagrant.
Coral’s brother “ Hill Lake ” appeared, and led
me away from the crowd straight to his house.
But on the very threshold he suddenly thought
that it might not be the proper thing for me to be
introduced to his wife and mother, or he may have


been ashamed of the poverty of his surroundings ;
for he stopped abruptly and led me back again to
the public hall, into which he ushered me. Then
he returned to his house, and brought thence tea
and cakes. The crowd increased, but was very
respectful. I did not once hear the common
epithet, “Foreign devil.”
The mothers of “ Green Wave,” “ Nourishing,”
and “ Myriad Perfections ” gave me letters to their
sons, with verbal messages.
Then a messenger came for me to visit a family
that has members in New Zealand. My guide took
me to a handsomely-furnished guest-room, where
two men welcomed me—the son and brother of a
Greymouth storekeeper.
After photographing the village temple and
stream, I returned to the public hall, where Hill-
Lake had hot lunch ready for me.
“ QUITE AT HOME.”
This phrase expresses my feelings as I went from
village to village—Stone Horse to Basket Weavers,
Bridge-head, Great Embankment, Dragon Lake,
Lower Rushes, Clear Lake Hill, and View Hill.
Many greeted me as “ Seen-Shang ” (Teacher),
some who had returned from Otago insisting on
treating me if a tea-house was anyway near. At
Bridge-head one caught sight of me in the crowd,
and made a rush to me that nearly carried me off
my feet. The news spread rapidly among the
3000 or more gathered there, and as I sat at rice
in a restaurant one after another from all parts
of New Zealand came forward and claimed
acquaintanceship. It began then to dawn upon
me that here was some result for the years of toil
in Otago; but I was not assured till an old mis-
ionary said: “ The freedom with which you go
about among those people is wonderful. If you
had done nothing more in New Zealand than make it
possible for you to do so, your work is not in
vain.”


Some of my friends aired their English with more
or less _ generally less success. At Officer’s
Bridge old market, one who has been back from
America some years has forgotten what he knew.
But some remnants he gave us, raked up from
among the almost forgotten things of his mind,
and brought them out one by one as he trembled
with excitement —five words in all !
ROBBERS.
As the afternoon wore on, strings of men and
women returned from market village-ward. Near
the close of the year robbers infest the by-ways,
causing the marketers to leave in time to be home
by 5 p.m. And not one lone person was met—
always two or more for safety. A man warned me :
“ Beware of walking at night; and even in the day-
time, be on your guard if you see three men
together.” We had a joke with the first three men
met after this warning. “ Are you robbers ?” I
asked. They looked a question, and laughed
heartily when I answered it with, “ Because we
were told to beware of three men in company.”
Many strangers expressed surprise at a foreigner
who had never before been in the locality going
about without a guide so freely ; and one advised,
when I told him that I intended going to ‘‘Grow
Lake ” village, “ Don’t go by the upper road ; 1 was
there robbed of two dollars at 8 o’clock this morn-
ing.” Another asked, ‘‘Do you carry a pistol.
and when answered, “Of course not; why should
I?” replied : “ For robbers. Look here ! and,
lifting a fold of his girdle, he showed a brightly
polished little revolver. At several crossways wooden
slips stuck in the ground bore a written notice,
offering $4 reward to anyone effecting the arrest of a
robber, and concluding:—“When you are attacked,
call for help; have the robber seized taken to the
village temple, and handed over to the Magistrate
for punishment: then claim the $4.”


SCRAPS.
Nearly all the women in this district are cramp-
footed. Of the girls and women seen at the villages
and on the ways, about one in ten have natural feet.
Of scores of cramp-footed women met on the ways,
I saw only one being carried : the others limped
along as best they could.
Here are no waste-lands. The rice-fields are in
stubble, some of them being ploughed for the spring
crop. Sweet-potatoes and water-caltrops are being
gathered in, mostly by women and girls. Small
plantations of tall sugar-cane appear here and there;
and many peach orchards—the earliest bearing
pretty blossom. Hundreds of years tillage—two or
three crops a year—has sensibly lowered the level of
the fields. Blocks of solid ground left in places,
because of some grave probably, rise four or five feet
above the surrounding farms.
There are no fences. A strip of turf some 6or 8
inches wide divides the fields. A strange landscape
where all is fields and tombs—where are no high-
ways nor hedges, only byways and banks.
Why every inch of ground is laid under tribute
is evident when the density of population is
considered. Within eight miles square are forty
villages with fully quarter a million inhabitants.
There are also no “ roads.” The widest paths
are only three feet, many of them not two. The
bare and stony hillocks and hills are occupied by
pine plantations or by graves. It is easily under-
stood how the word for hill is now commonly used
for “ grave.” Pointing to some sugar-loaf mounds,
I asked what they meant. “ They are hills,” was
the answer. “ But what a curious shape!”
“ True, but those who buried their dead there
wished to make the hills (graves) that shape.”
Animals are scarce. The struggle for human
subsistence is too severe to allow many such.
There are a few dogs, and fewer cats. Here and
there some sleepy water-buffaloes browse on the


temple grounds or among the graves, tended by the
young children or the greybeards. I saw a plover
or two, some grackle, several large crows, and a
smaller one—tail and wings white-tipped—called
locally and onomatopoetically “Ah sbaak.” One
of these we saw killing a small snake. Rising some
hundred feet with the snake in its bill, it then flew
rapidly groundward, and with a sudden movement
when about ten feet in air dashed it down. So
three times. Thus the reptile’s back was broken,
and fierce pecking then ended its struggles. One
evening we met the brother and nephew of a Crom-
well man. The former carried a bag from which
came odd sounds. Our curiosity was satisfied when
we were shown five frogs that they would take to
market on the morrow. Stewed frog, I can person-
ally testify, is a very delicious dish. In the bam-
boos some cicadas chirred ; crickets, too, chirped ;
some fireflies made two pale streaks of light one
in air and one in water —at our anchorage ; a
brimstone butterfly was seen by the wayside, and
an early grasshopper. In the bamboo groves many
ant-nests hang. These are formed of leaves and
slime ; some are fully eighteen inches in diameter,
and twenty feet from the ground. The ant is dark
coloured, and less than half an inch long.
A GBEAT WANT.
Here are no chapels nor missionaries. The dis-
trict is supervised by the American Presbyterian
Mission ; but beyond a short itinerating visit now
and then, the missionaries are kept busy with work
elsewhere. At Officer’s Bridge mart was Mr Lau,
who has been back Irom Waikaia twelve years. A
bystander heard us conversing, and asked Lau . ‘ls
he a merchant ? ” I replied : “NoI am a preacher
of Jesus.” “ Jesus ! what is that ? he further
asked, and Lau replied : “He preaches the Sacred
Edict.” I then asked him : “ Did you never hear
the name of Jesus before ? ” “ Never,” he replied.
As I sat in the court of a former Adam’s Flat


miner, who introduced his daughter of sixteen and
his daughter-in-law, a great crowd—mostly women
and girls—collected. The old man, in excusing their
curiosity, said : “ They are not at all mannerly, but
they very rarely see a foreigner.” I asked him; “ Since
your return two years ago, has there been a preacher
of Jesus here?” He replied: “Indeed there has
not; ” his sister-in-law added : “ Don’t speak of
two years. There has been no preacher of Jesus
here in my time, and I am 53 years old.”
X.
S.s. Menmuir,
Tasman Sea, May 9th, 1898.
Our ship is almost alone on this sea to-day.
One of Mr Wragge’s storms swept all shipping
in, where promise of more keeps it. We entered
Port Jackson at 4 p.m. on the sth. Two hours
later a gale raged over fifty miles an hour, and
that awful night of wind and rain saw six
vessels wrecked and over thirty lives lost on the
N.S. Wales coast. We are battling Tasmania-
ward against mountainous seas and fierce
squalls. But the Menmuir is a good sea-boat,
so we have made 120 miles these first 24 hours
out.
On the evening of the 14th ult. we again saw
the Southern Cross. At Honolulu, an American
in my hearing called it “ one of the disappoint-
ing constellations.” But he was not born under


it, nor has he under it a wife and six bairns.
Perhaps, under these circumstances, he would
prefer The Cross before The Golden Gate.
Eight days later, my pulse quickened at sight
of the Australian mainland. Physical beauty
there was none, and my birthplace is nearly
2000 miles further south; yet was it not my
fatherland ? One needs winter to value spring.
Eoaming sweetens homing.
This is my last batch of Notes—reduced by
ruthless space nine-tenths. To give an account
merely of our three months about Canton would
take a volume. Eighteen years work among
the Chinese had given me new eyes and ears.
The strange world wherein I walked on my
former visit dazed and bewildered : this time it
lay like an open book that one wanted to read
24 hours a day.
“ FOREIGN DEVIL.”
In the villages this epithet was seldom heard.
Once two women and a child crossed our path
some sixty yards ahead. They walked as fast as
cramped feet allowed, but too slow for a man
watching them. Ke cried, perhaps more in run
than earnest, “ Run, run! Foreign devils are
coming 1” ,
In the market-towns it was frequent. Jdigh-
Pool is a mart on the outskirts of our “ Forty
villages.” It has the name of being a rough
place, where some time ago a chapel opened had
soon to be closed because of virulent opposition.
It consists of one street running parahel with
the river for three hundred yards. The first
time I passed through —I know no one from
this town—the phrase was hurled at me unceas-
ingly. A crowd of boys yelled it, and near' •?
every shopkeeper echoed it. In such a case the


missionary’s best course is to move quietly
along as if he was earless.
On Canton streets it seemed much commoner
than on my former visit, and one was set won-
dering if the Tonquin and Japan wars had em-
bittered the people more. I noticed that it
was rarely used by those who knew I spoke
Cantonese. From two shops often passed there
came the hissing “ Kill the devil ” several times,
before any notice was taken. After a mild re-
monstrance —though, of course, the thing was
denied point blank —it ceased. Indeed, when it
was known that I spoke their own tongue, much
friendliness was shown. Joe and I got to be
quite well acquainted in one long street, and
met many a smile of recognition there. The
remark was often overheard : “ That is the
foreigner who speaks our native tongue.” In
scores of shops I made inquiries about localities
and streets, and always got civil answers. And
in this city of a million and a half inhabitants
the foreigner from the far south-east was thrice
distinctly recognised. Twice in crowded streets
I was hailed as “ Teacher by men returned
from Queenstown and Alexandra : the other
time, as I was looking at some tea samples in a
large shop, I beard a man say: “ Yes, it is he ”
—and a moment later, in a louder tone,
“ Teacher!” came from a fellow-passenger on
the voyage from Honolulu to Yokohama.
CANTON BEGGARS
are as numerous and persistent as ever. Singing
songs, acting plays, reciting pieces, moaning
plaints, knocking heads on the pavement, gash-
ing faces with potsherds, in rags and dirt and
misery—there they are by the thousand. Five
old men stood together near a chapel door.


One put out his platter, and I fell into the trap.
Immediate! v four more platters were produced.
A common device of the active beggar is to get
his alms, and then slip ahead stealthily to pre-
sent his howl a second time or a third. New
Year’s Eve is the Beggars’ Day Out. Hundreds
—a great many blind —were then seen, a few
solitary but mostly in companies of two to
twenty. On New Year’s morning the closed
shop doors hear slips of red paper —on some
one, on others two, thus •
May the Desire be Exceeded in All
Things.
May Great Fortune Come on Opening
the Door.
Register Compared. Money Received.
and
Attain Wealth and Honour, Happiness,
Emolument, Longevity.
Register Compared. Third Order.
Money Received.
Many Thanks Hall.
These are put up by the Beggars’ Guild, in
proof that the annual levy of cash has been
paid.
SWEET SINGERS.
At Dr Kerr’s we were within earshot of the
Presbyterian Girls’ Seminary, presided over by
Miss Noyes, who lends her sweet voice to teach
over a hundred apt pupils. It is a price ess


privilege to have so often heard, morning and
evening, the city’s harsh roar drowned by sweet
sounds from “ The True Light School.”
On Chinese New Year’s morning I sat writing
some notes, when there came floating upstairs
the song of children, wonderfully sweet. My
first thought was: Children’s voices are the
same the world over—in Australia, in New
Zealand, in Hawaii, in America, in Japan, and
in China, I have heard these hymns sung, and
can make no choice. But as they sang on,
something ethereal in the quality of the voices
forced me downstairs to see who were the
children singing “ "What a Friend we have in
in Jesus,” sweeter than ever heard before. On
the stair I met Dr Kerr coming up with “ Come
and hear the blind girls sing.” So it was.
There were 23, from six to eighteen years of
age —the girls of Dr Mary Niles’ Blind School.
Surely God has tuned anew their tongues to
compensate for sightless eyes. The sight of
these well-clad and well-taught was gladdening ;
but how saddening the other side —the thousands
on the streets the day before, groping along in
rags and hunger and woe.
“ koong—hei 1”
“Congratulations!” This is the New Year
salute. Joe and I walked the streets the last
and first hours of old and new years. The new
was welcomed with far less noise and glitter
than eighteen years ago. Then, from midnight
gun till 3 a.m. was one incessant and universal
explosion of cannon, bomb, and cracker : now,
owing it was said to dullness of trade, the dis-
plays were isolated and fitful. The streets were
quite as crowded, though, so we got a good chance
to study the holiday-maker. The utmost good


nature prevailed. I accosted scores of strangers,
yet got not one rough answer. Nearly every-
one carried —overhead, to prevent injury in the
press —some flower home. Commonest were
narcissus and bell-flower; rarer were cocks-
comb, cassia, polyanthus, and chrysanthemum.
By 12.45 a.m. the crowd —all men and boyß|
not a woman was seen —had thinned consider-
ably as we went into the city, the gates of
which are open this one night of the year. In
the half-deserted streets we attracted more
attention, and heard many times the cry,
“Foreign devils, look I” One man coming
suddenly round a corner, said in surprise and
some fear, “ Oh, I’ve met a devil I” This is
specially unlucky on New Year’s morning, when
the object of fireworks is to ward off evil spirits.
It is to be hoped that that man meets no trouble
this year. Should he do so, most certainly the
“devils” he met that morning will be the cause.
We spent three hours before 6 a.m. at the
Emperor’s Temple, to witness the worship of
the Imperial Tablet by the twenty civil and
thirty military officials of the city—a very inter-
esting ceremony.
RED, WHITE, AND BLUE.
On New Year’s Day red paper reigns. No
one is too poor to forego this way of attracting
good influences and repelling demons. Strips—
plain, ornamental, or written —are pasted over
every door, while inscriptions appear in all con-
ceivable places within and without. The
Beggars’ Guild notices are red, the “ door-
gods ” pictures too ; also on the city walls, on
all vessels from sampan to junk, on all altars
and shrines, even on many large stones by the
way-side, and on the trunks of many fruit-trees
are pasted red papers “ for luck.”


The exceptions are white and blue. The
white I noticed in a busy street of Canton, on
the shutter-doors of a late exchange and barter
shop, styled “ Bon accord.” There were pasted
twelve white accounts of unpaid bills, besides a
notice stating that all debts should be paid forth-
with. The occupier had become bankrupt, and
his creditors thus openly proclaimed the fact.
When the neighbouring shops all re-opened, it
remained closed, with those white witnesses to
insolvency staring at the passers-by.
Where a death has recently occurred, the
paper of the New Year inscriptions is blue and
the ink white, white and blue being the mourn-
ing colours. A blue couplet I copied :
“ Those in mourning cannot return compliments.”
“ Memories of the dead prevent New Year con-
gratulations.”
Permanent inscriptions and pictures inside the
house are turned faces wallward during the
period of mourning.
IN THE LAND OF FRIENDS.
On the 6th of the first moon we started on
our East River excursion. As we weighed
anchor, companion boats gave us “ First
voyage ” salutes by beating large gongs, which
we returned in kind. Clear of the city, out on
the broad bosom of the Chukiang (Pearl River),
a fleet of eleven passage-boats, like immense
one-winged black moths flew rapidly ahead
with a fair breeze.
We visited the district whence go most of the
Forbury and Anderson’s Bay (Dunedin) gar-
deners, and saw many old faces —in men re-
turned from Dunedin, and reflected in others
whose fathers, sons, or brothers are still there.
My reception here was somewhat similar to that


given in our “ Forty villages ” near Canton.
At Sandbank village I was directed by one
after another to the house of “ Coming
Prosperity.” Last of the series was a little
maid of eight, named “ Pretty Mat,” who
tripped gleefully ahead. To others who won-
dered at her conduct, and shouted to her —
“ Run off ! he is a foreigner! ” she returned,
in her sweet treble, “ 'M fong ! 'm fong! ” (“ I
don’t fear : I don’t fear ” ).
LIFE.
A busy place of 4000 souls is Whitestone
Mart, backed effectively by a luxuriantly lichee-
clad hill, from whose top one gets a good view of
the villages whence go Chinese abroad. Six miles
straight north is the “ South Scented Mount,”
about 3500 feet high ; a mile south is Toad Hill,
over-shadowing New-street village, and with
Understone hamlet at its very base ; east are
Sandbank and Melon-collar villages ; west are
Whitewater, Upper Shiu, and Dambank; to
north-east is a rich flat, on the further side of
which lies the great Tile-kiln Mart, with its
15,000 inhabitants. When market opens—
every third day —the narrow paths converging
here from all the surrounding villages are liter-
ally alive with strings of men, women, and
boys—girls over ten must stay at home —on
business bent.
DEATH.
The sunny southern slope of Whitestone Hill
is covered with tombs. In one newly-made
lies a bit of my heart, buried with a former
pupil from Anderson’s Bay. I had for months
looked forward to meeting again Coming Pros-
perity’s younger brother, but he died two


months before our arrival. On his deathbed,
when told of my expected visit, he said, “ Alas!
alas 11 shall not see the teacher when he comes.”
“ ARRESTING THIEVES ! ”
We went up the East River to Wai-chau and
Kwai-shin cities, where Berlin mission work
flourishes. On the way back an amusing affair
occurred. Influenza had suddenly seized me,
and we were making a quick run for Canton.
At 6 one evening Captain Power anchored within
sixteen miles of the city, giving as a reason for
not going on that it would be dangerous to do so
alone. When urged to proceed, as a favour to
the sick passenger, he eventually agreed on
these terms: “ When the tide turns I shall go
on ; but if robbers attack us, and I lose any-
thing, you will make it good.” Soon after
resuming, Joe came in to ask “ Why have we
a flag flying ? ” The first mate replied :‘‘ So
that if any robbers see the boat they will think
it is a police-boat.” A minute later he came
with a second query : “ Why is the big lantern
hung out ? ” followed by his teacher, laughing
and holding up the big lantern for me to read
its inscription. On one side was :
1 CANTON
I DISTRICT
| MAGISTRATE in large letters,
and on the other : I ARRESTING I
1 THIEVES |
“ Tell the captain,” I said to Joe, “ that unless
he puts out that lantern I shall not make good
one cent lost by robbery. Tell him we are
trusting to our Heavenly Father, and not to
his miserable cheat of a lantern.” Joe delivered


the message—the lantern was put oat, the flag
hauled down, and we got to Dr Kerr’s just
before 1 a.m.
A ROUGH CITY.
A fortnight later we started on our excursion
South-west into the five districts whence go
most of the Chinese to Australia and America,
and a few to New Zealand. One of these
district cities is notorious for its roughness.
There the term “ Foreign devil! ” was yelled at
me, with every accent of hate and contempt,
hundreds of times every day as I went
through toward the villages. Indeed, had I not
spoken Chinese, and known the names of some
of the villages and villagers, to show that I
really had a legitimate object, I might have
been roughly handled. One must go about
there quite empty-handed, lest he should be
tempted to strike, and so set free a flood of
hate that might engulf him. In one street
four dogs at once attacked me thus unarmed,
yet not |an onlooker interfered; in another, a
perfect avalanche of boys followed, yelling all
the offensive names they could command ; again,
as I was asking some direction of a shopkeeper,
some rubbish was thrown upon me ; yet again,
I was followed in a crowded street by a man
who said at intervals, “ Beat the foreign devil.’
Had I taken offence, or had his cry been taken
up by others, the matter might have ended
seriously. As it was, I turned and said.
“ Someone says ‘ Strike 1 ’ I am not here to
harm anyone —strike if you please.”
THE OTHER SIDE.
One of the crowd slunk away, while another
one, dressed in a teacher’s robe, said—l heard
you say that you are going to Sand-hill village.


You are not on the right way. I shall direct
you.” He walked with me a full mile, till we
were clear of the city, and could see the village
across a plain. Rom. viii., 28.
At Sand-hill I asked for the house of “ Peace
Director,” whom I knew at Skipper’s. He was
at breakfast with his family. When I appeared
at the door, he jumped to his feet, as if a sud-
den powerful spring had come into action, and
seemed almost beside himself with joy. The
half-eaten meal was cleared away, some snow-
white rice got from outside, with a dish of
delicious cured pork-sausages, and I was made
eat a second breakfast. Then I held a “ recep-
tion ” of fully fifty women and children, after
which Peace-Director guided me all day round
the villages to see other friends.
A SUPERSTITIOUS CITY.
This rough city is steeped in superstition.
Over nearly every door is placed “ for luck ” an
octagonal board inscribed with the eight tri-
grams—a scheme of divination. Shops are
numerous for the manufacture and sale of paper
effigies to burn at funerals. I noticed two tem-
porary sheds, each containing between 100 and
200 figures, about one-third natural size, of
men, horses, palanquins, &c., &c.—the full
retinue of a high official—all to be burned at the
house to accompany the dead men into the un-
seen world. On many doors are the names or
portraits of two deified exorcists.
INSCRIPTIONS.
Every house has a red paper on its outer door
lintel. The commonest inscriptions are :
The Five Blessings Come on the Door.
Happiness Comes from Heaven.


Heaven’s Judge sends down Blessing.
May it please Heaven to send Happiness.
Happiness issues from Heaven.
And —
Blessing, Blessing, Blessing, Blessing, Blessing—
another way of expressing the first. Two cup-
boards in one house bore :
“ GOLD HEAP.”
“ GEMS STORE ” (the rice-bin).
“ PEARL BOX.”
To speak of eatables as gold, gems, and pearls
is surely “ flowery language.”
A LEVEE.
As I sat for over an hour in the reception-
room of a well-to-do villager, waiting for a letter
to be written to his brother in New Zealand, I
held quite a levee. The room was full all the
time, and as the onlookers kept continually
changing, there must have been fully 200 to see
the foreigner. At one time I counted 15 women,
20 children, and 12 men present. Quite a
number of women came with babies in arms,
whom they told to look at me ; and some who
had come without the infants, returned to bring
them for that purpose. I was evidently the
greatest and tamest lion that had ever been
there ! Not the slightest disrespect was shown.
The photographs of my wife and children com-
pleted the exhibition, to the thorough enjoy-
ment of the women and girls especially, who
handed them round and took close looks at
them.
CHARMS.
A fat fellow about five, who gazed at me
earnestly for nearly an hour, had round his neck
a long silver chain that I would give something


to possess. But it is beyond price, being made
up of charms that preserve the boy’s life, and
make him fat and healthy. From the chain
hung four articles : a five-sided silver box, with
its sides inscribed “ A Hundred Sons and A
Thousand Grandsons ” (or, “ One Hundred
Thousand Descendants ”) also “ Long Life,
Riches, Honours;” a jade-stone seal, with the
character “ Longevity ” on its face ; a curiously-
wrought silver pendant; a little bag containing
a silver octagon—the eight trigrams—from
which three small silver pendants hung. Con-
trasting with the expensiveness of this boy’s
chain was the plain brass neck-ring of a girl,
to which were attached a small piece of green
ginger and a miniature bottle-gourd floater
about an inch long. Probably the floater worn
by the boat-babies on the Canton River is in-
tended more as a charm than for actual use,
though no doubt the original object was to keep
the child afloat should it tumble into the water.
Green ginger is a sort of panacea.
FIRE AND ROBBERS.
These are the villagers’ black beasts. Straw-
stacks are quite common among the houses in
some villages. They are never seen in the
fields, and one wonders that fires do not oftener
occur. But sparks from the cooking-furnaces
rarely get outside, as there are no chimneys for
their exit; while pipe, lamp, and furnace are
almost universally lit with flint and steel or the
slow-match. A common wall notice is this :
“ When the wind is high and things are dry,
Beware of a conflagration.”
And another:
“ Bolt and bar doors and gates ;
Be on guard against robbers.”


Nearing Canton on our way back, we got a
ghastly object lesson that made real to us the
fact that robbery with violence is here a capital
offence. Rounding a bend in the river, our
house-boat was moved shoreward to let us off.
There stood a bamboo frame —two uprights and
a cross piece—from which hung two objects
that I took to be scarecrows or offerings to the
field gods. But suddenly one took on the out-
lines of a white face, and then the other, hang-
ing in open wicker cages. Lying stretched out
on the ground below were two headless bodies,,
clothed and swollen. We were within forty
feet of the bank now, whither our boatmen,
gazing calmly on the hideous things, were
taking us. Suddenly we realised that we were
to lee of the horror, and that it had been there
for some days ! Then we found tongue to say
that we did not wish to go ashore.
HOW “ THE LONG LEVER ” ACTS.
Christians in the lands to which Chinese
emigrate occupy, in a sense, more or less ad-
vantageously strategic points from which to
attack heathenism and substitute our Gospel of
love, life, and liberty for anti-foreign hate,
deadness of soul, and the thraldom of super-
stition, ancestral worship, and dernonolatry.
Every Chinese who returns from abroad
does so either a better man or a worse ;
so that neglect of trying to make him better
necessarily carries with it acquiescence in his
becoming worse. Most of the American and
Australian Chinese go from these five districts.
The Wesleyans and Anglicans in Australia, with
the Baptists, Congregationalists and Presby-
terians in America, have their work followed up
here by the Church Missionary Society (Angh


can), English Wesleyan Mission, American
Baptist South, American Board, and American
Presbyterian North. In four of the five dis-
tricts the last-named Society has now fifty
preaching stations, which it is intended to double
within five years hence. I visited 14 of the
principal stations of all five denominations, and
collected a little evidence of the effect of work
abroad. Such as it is I present briefly. A long
lever has advantages and disadvantages.
To my question: “ How many of your members
were baptised abroad ?” an Anglican preacher re-
plied : “ None ; but I believe many are baptised
in America who fail to confess Chiist on their re-
turn. Perhaps one in ten will declare himself
a Christian. One has a wood-store here, who
made money in America and joined a church
there. He has come to our meeting several
times, but will not join us. He says it is very
hard to do so. I say it will be harder to go to
perdition.” A Wesleyan preacher says that of
their 34 male members, three —one of them
himself—were baptised abroad. A Presbyterian
church has over 100 members, five from abroad.
Another Presbyterian church has 48 members,
of whom 15 are returned from America, and
one—the preacher—from Australia. Another —
also Presbyterian—has a returned American as
preacher. He said: “We have a great many
members, but they are still in America. There
are five resident members, four of them from
America. A great many come back from
America, and do not confess Jesus.” When I
asked further: “ What do they say for them-
selves ?” he said: “ They say they went to the
English classes and learnt the rules, so were
baptised. They think they have to be baptised
here again.” Another Wesleyan preacher—


a returned Australian—said: “ We have over
40 members—B from Australia, and 12 from
the United States. Very many, from both
places, do not confess their faith when they
return. We have from 20 to 40 hearers on
Sundays : if all who were baptised abroad joined
us, we should have to take in the adjoining
two shops—there would be over 100.” Ttie
preacher of a large Presbyterian church—also
a returned Australian : “We have 40 or 50
members, mostly returned from America.
About half of those baptised abroad do not
confess their faith on returning.” The Wesleyan
preacher at Water-mouth mart says : “We have
eight or ten members, of whom three have re-
turned from Australia, and one from Portland,
Oregon. I know well one man who was a
prominent Christian abroad, but refuses to join
the Christians here.” The Wesleyan preacher
for 12 years at Banning city also testifies:
“ Very many on their return refuse to confess
Jesus.”
Passing Waterbourne Garden village one day,
a man hailed me as “ Teacher.” He said he is
a Christian, having been baptised in the Con-
gregational church at San Francisco. He gave
his name as “Faithful”; but he belies his
name. Though he has been back seven years,
he has not gone near the Banning churches —
only six miles away, though he used to communi-
cate regularly in America. When asked why
he had not done so, he replied evasively : “ I
have been expecting to return to America, but
have not had money enough.”
At Pear Garden village lives a Christian who
was a member of the Baptist church in Boston,
U.8.A., but who is not strong enough to join


the nearest church (Presbyterian) only three
miles off.
One fair Sunday we attended the service in a
large Presbyterian church with a long member-
ship roll —many absent in America. The con-
gregation numbered seventeen men, besides
four who had come with us. And this included
members also of the Wesleyan and Congrega-
tional churches of the same city, which are less
than half-a-mile away, and hold their services
at different hours, so that this may be a united
gathering. Next day, I met at Three Unions
mart one of the worshippers, who excused non-
attendance on the part of many by saying:
“ They live too far off.” When asked “ How
far ? ” he replied: “ Six to ten li ” (2 to 3
miles). He looked amazed when I told him I
knew an old Scotchman, of 70, who used to
walk over 50 li each way to and from the
church once a fortnight; and thought me severe
when I said that Christians who cannot go 20 li
to church in fine weather must be very poor
stuff.
OCCI-ORIENTAL MARRIAGES.
I have always denounced marriages between
Chinese men and European women abroad.
There are exceptions when such unions result
happily ; but the rule is untold misery to the
man often, to the woman oftener, and to both
sometimes. Ministers who officiate at such
without full inquiry ought to know that not
only is this the rule, but that they often like-
wise in so officiating are abettors of bigamy,
when the man has a Chinese wife at home. If
only they had to suffer one-hundredth part of
the woe thus caused, and specially of the
misery endured by the women who go with


their “ husbands ” to China, I think they would
sooner cut off their right hands than be parties
to the matter.
Near Water-mouth mart is the native village
of a man who emigrated to U.S.A., where he
became a member of a Christian Church. The
year before last, he returned from America and
got married at home, with all the heathen rites.
A year later, he went back to America, and
doubtless is again a “ Christian ” there. What
is to hinder such a man from marrying an
American girl ?
Another, from Banning district, went to
America, joined the Christians, and sometimes
preached.' He left behind him a Chinese wife
and two children—boy and girl. In America
he married an American woman, who bore him
three children. In course of time these accom-
panied him to China. He left them in Hong
Kong while he visited his native town. Later,
he returned to America, leaving both wives in
China —one at home, and the other in Hong
Kong. Then he got married to another Ameri-
can woman —a school teacher —and had the
hardihood to visit China with this third wife.
As soon as she saw how matters stood she re-
turned to America. Then the Chinese wife
heard of the second one in Hong Kong : thither
she went, and made some ado. The trigamist
is now in his native place. My informant, an
earnest Christian, commented thus: “I think
that man is surely a false disciple of Jesus.”
The bystanders echoed : “ Surely.”
At a shop in Hong Kong, kept by Chinese
professing Christians, a young Australian
woman, about 23, was brought out and asked
to shake hands with me. She is the wife
of a returned Chinese who is just now


visiting his native town and wife, of
course ; while she is staving in this shop, with
no other woman on the premises. She seemed
to feel her position very keenly. I believe if
the man who introduced me had not been a
greybeard, I would have kicked some Chris-
tianity into him, though he had already been
baptized in Australia. I tried to put the poor
girl at her ease, but how could I when I felt so
uncomfortable myself? Ido not yet know that
she can speak, for she said not a word.
A man whom I knew well—he is now dead
—left a wife and family in China, and came to
Dunedin. In course of time he sent to China
for another woman to come here. She came,
and they—both heathen —were married by a
Presbyterian minister. At Sweet-side village I
met this second wife and her two daughters : in
Hong Kong I met her son, who is a member of
the Anglican Church there. He told me that
he and his sisters were both baptised in Presby-
terian churches in Dunedin. Yet his father
and mother never made the slightest prolession
of Christianity. He said : “ People told my
mother that it was the right thing, as she had
been married by a Presbyterian minister, to
have her children baptised in a Presbyterian
church.” Talk about the Chinese being super-
stitious !
RAYS OF LIGHT.
I am recording what I believe to be facts.
But I am very glad to turn from the dark side
to the light. I met in these districts many
things showing the golden cords of Christian
faith, hope, and love multiplying and strengthen-
ing from abroad. Two excellent young Baptist
preachers from America are rousing the Chris


tians and awakening the heathen in one district
—their salaries paid by Chinese Christians in
the United States. A fine Presbyterian church
that cost 7000 dols. was built recently, over
6000 dols. having been subscribed in America,
and 800 dols. in Australia —mostly by Chinese.
The janitor of Poon-House village school spoke
with pride of two sons in America who are
Christians, one teaching in a Mission school.
At a small market town called Water-head a
very friendly young man approached and called
me “ Pastor.” He has been a Christian for
some years. As our ways partly coincided, we
walked together some distance, and I was much
cheered by his bright manner. Having given me
full directions for reaching Ancient-lane village,
he turned towards his own town, by name
Eternal Peace. Late one evening I inquired
my wav to Grass-flat village. As I was leaving,
cries followed : “Jesus Pooi wants to see you,’’
so I waited till a young man named Lum Pooi
came and welcomed me, inviting me to stay
overnight. He has recently returned from
America. I stayed that night at Sweet-side,
where I met a fine young Christian just a fort-
night back from Los Angeles, whither he in-
tended returning soon. Next morning, at the
foot of Double-Tuft Mount, a man caught me
up and said, “ Pastor.” He declared himself a
Christian, for seven years member of the Los
Angeles U.P. Mission. He had recently re-
turned with the Sweet-side man, and like him
intended leaving soon. When I asked why his
stay here would be so short, he replied: “We
are now different men from our fellow-villagers,
and find it hard to get on with them.” It is a
case of light versus darkness. I found him an


intelligent man, who conversed freely on re-
ligious topics.
“ FATHER CROSS.”
In one district many houses are marked with
St. George’s Crosses t+ , the Chinese character
for “ ten ”) on the outside walls, about three or
four feet from the ground. They usually extend
the full length of one wall, and are placed more
or less closely together so that the number
along an eighteen feet wall is from 6 to 18.
Sometimes they run right round the house —on
one thus marked I counted 30. One man gave
the object as “ stopping evil influences.” An-
other said the same, and added: “ There is a
Father Cross”—a sort of new deity. This is
what I heard and made a note of at San Fran-
cisco.
“ PLUM ” PUDDING.
On our fourth excursion we ran short of bread
and preserved meat. In the emergency I made
my second “ plum ” pudding, sans raisons, sans
suet, sans spice, sans peel. Here is my re-
cipe :
3 cups flour ; 2 teaspoons baking powder ; 5
hen eggs; 4 tablespoons sugar; 2 tablespoons
honey ; 1 tablespoon lard ; half an orange rind ;
1 cupful currants; some salt. Pudding-cloth a
pockethandkerchief. Boil three hours.
Our boat-folk watched the operation with in-
tense interest. Captain Power’s son and heir,
half-an-hour after the mass was put in the pot,
rushed to where I stood with : “ It’s swelling,
sir ! it’s swelling, sir I the pot lid is coming
off!”


PRESERVED MILK.
The Chinese are getting to use cow’s milk
quite extensively. One may buy preserved
milk in many shops inland. But intending
travellers may be advised to carry sufficient
from the city. We got three tins in the country,
all bad. I have a label, perfect in colour and
style, of the famous American “ Eagle Brand.”
The “ Directions ” begin :—“ Ten be not at the
Lettered.” And some of the mistakes are “ day
spoon” for dry spoon, “ bilvte ” for dilute ,
“ cryotais ” for crystals , “ precented ” for
patented, “ coonsed ” for CONDENSED,
“ babel ” for label, “ lamps ” for lumps, “ pad-
dings for puddings. We wonder no longer why
we could buy a tin cheaper in China than in
Dunedin.
“ STEAMERS.”
Steam launches towing the country passage-
boats are getting to be quite common about
Canton. The first steamboats were a source of
much surprise to the Cantonese, who were
greatly taxed to produce similar vessels.
One man devised a “ steamer ” after this fashion.
Waterwheels were placed at the side for paddles.
Above these were placed large water-tanks,
which before starting were filled. To start,
the water was allowed to flow over the wheels,
causing them to revolve, and so propel the
vessel. To refill the tanks, he had pumps
driven by the same waterwheels. He never
could explain why the ” steamer ” soon came
to a stop.
Another vessel was propelled by a gang of
men turning the rear paddle-wheel. Amidships
was erected a funnel. On nearing and leaving
Canton, a bundle of grass was set afire in the


base of the chimney, so that a volume of smoke
issued, and the appearance of a steamer was
presented.
FINIS.
Intensely interesting are the great Medical
Missionary Society’s Hospital at Canton, Dr
Kerr’s Asylum for the Insane —the first in
China, I believe, whereof I have the honour to
be the first photographer, and the L.M.S. work
in Hong Kong; but these Notes must cease.
We reached Thursday Island on April 26th.
There are 70 Chinese and 700 Japanese. The
latter are greatly disliked —their part of the
town is most unsavoury. A resident says he
thinks this settlement the most immoral place
in all Australia, and the Japanese are the main
cause.
We met here a Christian Chinese recently
from Sydney—another morsel of the Leaven of
the Kingdom. Thus, right round the Pacific we
got evidence of the leavening going on. First
at Apia—a Roman Catholic ; then on the cars
to and from Los Angeles ; several on the steamer
to Japan ; one between Shanghai and Hong
Kong; numbers in the country round Canton ;
one on the Menmuir from Hong Kong this
voyage ; now one in Australia’s farthest north.
His kingdom come.


INTERVIEW WITH REV. A. DON
On His Return from China.
{Christian Outlook.)
Q. What do you think of Hong Kong ?
A. It is a wonderful Colony. It is not merely
British prejudice that makes one think that no
other modern nation could possibly have turned
a mass of bare rock into the eye and heart of the
great East —a small fishing village into a city of
over quarter of a million —all in forty years.
No wonder that French and German turn green
at the sight. If only they can make Kiao-chow
and Kiung-chow rivals of Victoria —but if only
they can appropriate the moon ! Germany is
making a great bid to match Britain abroad;
she is increasing enormously her foreign mer-
cantile fleets, and He of the Mailed Fist is the
first of her great “ Mandarins ” in the East.
German residents in other parts of China are
massing at Kiao-chow, and we shall see what
we shall see! As for France —poor France :
what can she do with her Colonies when she
gets them ? Only vote so much annually from
the Home treasury to wipe off their deficits.


Q. How was the proposed partition of China
regarded ?
A. We were in China for the first three
months of this year, when the air was thickest
with rumours of war, and Britain seemed get-
ting hopelessly entangled with Russia and
France. It seemed to be generally thought that
Russia had outwitted us. Territorially, doubt-
less, she for no one can pit Wei-hai-wei
(pronounced Way-high-way) against Port Arthur
and Talienwan (pronounced Tah-lee-en-wahn).
But the moral advantage gained by Britain
sends her side of the scale down dump ! If
Britain and China see that Russia keeps diplo-
matic promises only when she must, and that
her friendship is purely selfish, much is gained.
The position of China meant war—at least
internal: the ruin of mission work in general for
a considerable time, and of some Protestant
missions for an indefinite period ; and the facing
by the partitionists of problems in government
compared with which Western difficulties are
childish. Humanity has to thank Britain for
averting all these ; and if there is one man in the
East who should receive special thanks, it is our
representative at Peking—Sir Claude Mac-
donald.
I saw Prince Henry in Canton, where Chinese
and foreigners received him right royally. It is
said that the Viceroy of the city did not sleep a
wink during the 36 hours of his visit. Lest any
harm should come to his guest, he literally
lined with soldiers the streets through which
he was to pass. The Prince spoke at a banquet
given in his honour by the British in Hong
Kong, and then it seemed that the mail had


become kid. Perhaps the sight of China’s
swarming millions had brought his common-
sense uppermost. It would do his Kaiser
brother good to feel himself a unit on the
Chinese ant hill.
Q. How do the Chinese themselves regard
the matter ?
A. The immense majority is far more easily
moved by the price of rice than by rumours_ of
war. Yet many of these, besides the minority
who think about the question, would gladly
welcome a change from the corruption and
weakness of the present regime. But then you
know that Cantonese have never been asked for
loyalty to the Manchoo dynasty. Sun Yet Sen,
whose abduction caused such a sensation in
London eighteen months ago, is a native of Can-
ton, wanted by the Chinese Government as
leader of an anti-Manchoo movement supported
by many thousands. The British are recognised
in the South, where vision is clearer than in the
North, which is blinded by loyalty and deceived
by Russian diplomacy —as China’s best friends.
It is believed that we would favour the restora-
tion of a Chinese dynasty. Travelling in the
country, we were almost invariably asked our
nationality. The reply was satisfactory ; but if
a bystander hinted that we were Frenchmen,
Germans, or Russians spying out the land,
there were mutterings not at all friendly. In a
rough market town, a crowd of some forty boys
one day followed me, yelling—“ Foreign devil!
Stone the foreign devil! ” An old man added
his shout thus :—“ Yes, a foreign devil. Per-
haps he is a Russian devil: maybe he is a
French devil; if he is a red-haired (British)


devil, leave him alone.” I did not proclaim my
nationality, whereupon one boy yelled—“ A
foreign devil’s head !” and the others took up
the cry, and made the narrow street ring with it.
But they were only boys. The men looked on
and laughed ; I was conveniently deaf.
Q. Did you see any changes from the Canton
of eighteen years ago ?
A. Considering Chinese conservatism, the
changes are many and remarkable. There has
been a great increase of steam power. Engines
erected along the river front pump water into
pipes running along the principal streets. In
February a fire destroyed nearly 100 shops;
only the improved water supply prevented many
times that damage. An excellent mint turns
out silver coins; but most Chinese as yet prefer
the Mexican dollar and Hong Kong smaller coins
before those bearing their own dragon. They
test every one of the latter, but the former
usually go unchallenged. A great improvement
is noticeable in the currency. Formerly, all
small payments had to be made in brass cash
or in broken silver weighed out; now, 5,10, and
20 cent, bits are current as far as we went —150
miles from Canton—and bronze cents in Canton
itself.
Quite a fleet of small steam launches tow
west, south, and east of Canton fleets of passage
boats that used to be rowed and sailed. A
curious combination is seen in a number of
boats that have a stern wheel worked by relays
of men on the tread-mill principle.
Letters can now be sent from point to point
in the province with tolerable speed and safety,
and the Imperial Customs Service has estab


lished a post office, which will doubtless soon
become national. The electric telegraph, too,
connects principal cities.
There are now three daily newspapers printed
in the city, while the number of books printed
with movable type is rapidly approaching that
printed on the old-lashioned wooden blocks.
Kerosene is almost exclusively used for light-
ing, and in several shops electricity. The nmt
and steel lire lighter will soon be a mere curi-
osity ; matches of Japanese manufacture are on
sale all over the city, and at some distance
inland I bought 13 boxes of ordinary size for
one penny English. Clocks and watches are
very common, and the number of shops where
foreign goods are sold has increased many fold.
Among these are foreign-equipped chemist
shops, the efficacy of Western medical science
slowly gaining recognition. Glazed windows
are multiplying.
On the streets one noticed that the "W estern
umbrella of cloth and steel has almost dis-
placed the native one of oiled paper and bamboo.
Here and there, too, leather shoes are seen, and,
very rarely, foreign stockings.
On the other hand, the streets are not nearly
so clean as they used to be, and seem to be
getting narrower. Certainly the canals and the
river here have become considerably narrower
by private reclamations on both sides, ihe
attitude of the citizens seems more anti-foreign.
In 1880 I went scores of times through a part ot
the western suburbs without the slightest
molestation, where now we were followed by
yells and a few missiles. And the way we were


greeted by loud hawking— the Chinese are
handkerchiefless and spitting was specially
noticeable.
What about the advance of Christianity ?
In the city itself there was not the visible
progress I expected. The citizens keep true to
their character as the hardest Chinese to move.
Yet even among them headway is made. But
in some parts of the surrounding country there
has been great advance. In the districts S.W.
from Canton, whence most of the emigrants go
to America and Australia (not N.Z.),the number
of churches and chapels has increased from 9 to
45. Quite a number of these have been built
with contributions from Chinese Christians in
America and Australia. One Presbyterian
church cost 7000 dollars to build, of which over
6000 came from Chinese abroad. Many of the
pastors, too, are supported in the same way.
Walking from village to village in the country,
I was overjoyed at meeting here and there men
who called me “ Pastor,” and announced their
brotherhood in Jesus Christ. I learn this very
clearly—that residence abroad makes a Chinese
either better or worse, so that the responsibility
of Christians near them is two-edged. To
refuse help in improving them is to acquiesce in
their deterioration.
The number ot foreign missionaries having
Canton City as headquarters has increased from
39 to 81, and the number ot Christians from
1580 to over 5000.
Q. I suppose you met on your travels people
who object to foreign missions ?


A. Surely. It is odd that people worst-in-
formed about missions are found among travel-
lers. Their information is the hearsay evidence
of foreigners at the ports, whose lives are anti-
Christian, and therefore their testimony anti-
missionary. And incorrect information is worse
than none at all.
Q. What was the nature.of the chief objec-
tions ?
A. Sometimes missionaries were classed, with
exceptions, as indolent, supercilious, and urn
sympathetic. It cannot be denied - since
missionaries are human—that here and there
one such may be found; but to invert the excep-
tion into the rule is hardly fair.
But the main objection is to the “ high style
of living. On the face of it, missionaries at the
ports do thus live. The rooms of their houses
are large and lofty, the furniture seemingly
costly, their table luxurious. But the table is
thus spread in honour of visitors, who forthwith
proclaim that the missionary goes eating and
drinking: the furniture is Eastern-made, and
£ls will furnish a drawing-room that in tne
West would cost that to carpet. Spacious dwel-
lings seem essential to the health of foreigners,
at feast in South China. Within the last ten
years, several young people have tried living in
Chinese style, but all have been compelled to
give it up. Last October, I heard in San Fran-
cisco of two young women who had just gone°
South China in connection with the Salvation
Army. They were shocked at the style m which
the missionaries in Hong Kong and Canton live
In April, one of these was on her way back to
America, while the other was living with one of


the Hong Kong missionaries ! And this was in
the cool season. I advocate very strongly
simplicity of living, and the lowering of our
mode to meet as far as compatible with health
—mere comfort must not be considered—the
Chinese. But a great mistake is made in trying
all at once to live in Chinese houses and on
Chinese food. One meal a day of the latter—
which some missionaries take, and the four
coolest months of the year in the former, should
serve at first; and in course of time most young
persons of sound constitution might become
acclimatised. But the great obstacle is insani-
tation. One sees everywhere on the outskirts
of cities and towns houses built over filthy pools
and drains, and one meets everywhere full-faced
smells that call a sudden halt! According to
our ideas, the germs of disease must there be
produced by billions hourly. Yet what would
wipe us out completely in a month seems to
have no effect, except perhaps to make septua-
genarians scarce. The children that sleep in
those houses are no thinner nor paler than those
that breathe the purer air of the villages. The
week we were in Hong Kong from 15 to 20
Chinese were dying daily ot the bubonic plague,
and the people were terribly harassed by the
sanitary regulations; for, to their mind, in-
sanitation has nothing whatever to do with the
disease.


J. Wilkie & Co., Printeesand Publishers, Dunedin.


