

UNDER THE
KAISERS
THUMB
BY
IRMA CARON
FACTS ABOUT GERMANY 1./
THE KAISER RIDDEN EMPIRE




Under the Kaiser’s Thumb.




Under The Kaiser’s
Thumb
Irma Caron
Cover Designed by G. H. Dancey
IHrUtmmtf •
Renwick, Pride. Nuttall Pty. Ltd., 27-29 Tattersall Place
1914




The Kaiser, showing his short arm.


The Kaiser and the late King Edward on the Kaiser’s
Yacht.


FOREWORD.
BISMARCK, the man of blood and iron, who
inculcated the stern, unbending methods of make
or break in Germany, is responsible for the
systematic and thorough way things are done
throughout the German Empire. The Kaiser had
his training in the Bismarck school, and the lessons
he learned in his youth have since been elaborated
and turned into Kaiserisms, which are felt the
moment one enters the German Empire. One feels
oppressed by the innumerable rules and regula-
tions which surround one. The great German
system handles all persons who enter the Empire
as a bricklayer would lift a brick and put it into
its place. The traveller is not usually long
enough in the country to become oppressed by
German law and order, though many a traveller
has been subjected to the over-riding, bombastic
and conceited ways of the German military
officer. Living in Germany for any length of
time is quite another matter. To one used to the


utmost freedom of Australian laws, living in
Germany is akin to being subjected to prison
restraint.
“ Under the Kaiser’s Thumb ” contains absolute
facts concerning the nation that has succeeded
in upsetting the equilibrium of Europe, and
generally made things uncomfortable to a far-
reaching extent. The information in this little
book will, no doubt, appeal far more readily to
women than to the militant male, who at break-
fast slays the Kaiser and annihilates the whole
German army, and after a good dinner is satisfied
he could direct the British with infinitely greater
skill than General French. In the following pages
Miss Caron writes of the people and their ways
under peace conditions. Looking through a
woman’s eyes, she sees things that undoubtedly
appeal more to her own sex. She points out the
big disadvantages women have under the German
laws, which are indeed man-made laws in the
extreme. In fact, whether one be in profession
or trade, poor or wealthy, one is under the
Kaiser’s thumb in every sense of the expression.
M.P.A.


CONTENTS
Foreword. Page.
Arrival By Rail 9
Board and Bed ” 10-14
Music, Study, Opera and Entertainment ~ .. 15-23
The German Xmas and New Year 24-26
Saxons Honour Bismarck 27
Duelling and Outdoor Life 28-33
The German Soldiers 34-40
Laws of the Land ~ 41-50
The German Home 51-56
Education, Social Life 57-60
A Day with the Painters 61-65
Fashions in Frocking 66-67
The Kaiser 68-60
No Politics 70-71
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Overhead Footway leading from the King of Saxony’s
Palace to his Catholic Church.
The Kaiser.
Wagner’s Grave at Bayreuth.
Opera House, Dresden.
The Lohengrin House at Graupa, Saxony,
Entrance to Moritzburg Castle, the present King of
Saxony’s Hunting Lodge.
Dresden Railway Station.
Bismarck’s Memorial at Berlin.
Wagner’s Theatre at Bayreuth.
General View of Moritzburg Castle, built by Augustus
the Strong of Saxony.
’i’he Kaiser and the late King Edward.
Count Zeppelin.




UNDER THE KAISER’S THUMB.
ARRIVAL BY RAIL.—BOARD AND BED.
“ How neat and clean the porters look! ” is in-
variably the first exclamation of the traveller
on entering Germany by rail. Even the most
hardened globe trotter is apt to sit up and say
things quite complimentary to the German rail-
way official. On arrival at the Dresden railway
station, the orderly appearance and civility of the
porters quite verified the first-glance opinion I
had formed of him. In fact, whether it be at
Dresden, that great German centre of art, science,
music and model municipal government, or else-
where in Germany, the orderly appearance and
civility of manner of all Government officials is
a noticeable fact. In Dresden the station is built
under a railway bridge, where as many trains


pass overhead as underneath. There is a
“foreigner’s enquiry bureau,” where persons of
almost any nationality can obtain information
gratis about hotels or board and lodging houses
of all classes and tariffs. Policemen are now
obliged to know how to speak both French and
English, and are usually most obliging men to
deal with. He will escort you as far as his beat
allows, pass you on to another officer, or direct
you very politely and distinctly towards the
street or building you wish to reach.
There is a very useful establishment in Dresden
for women travelling alone, known as the
“ Damenheim, ” a place run by an order of
charity sisters,” who provide you with a room
and plenty of food for anything from two marks
(2/-) to five marks per day. While on the subject
of food, I might say that the German idea of
delicacies ” does not generally meet with
Australian approval! For instance, a favourite
hors d'oeuvre —even on the menu of very
fashionable hotels—is minced raw beef, with a
raw egg, and likewise onion spread across the top
of the meat, with pepper and salt to taste!


Another recognised ** dainty ” is a dish of
uncooked ham or raw herrings, boned, rolled,
spiced and placed in vinegar. Consequent upon
this rather primitive taste and somewhat barbaric
desire for raw stuffs, many people in Germany
are subject to internal troubles, such as cancer
and tape-worm, the latter being an especially
prevalent presence, though the complaint is taken
quite as a matter of course by the sufferers and
their doctors. Of course, there are some really
nice dishes, too, and “ Schnitzel ” (fillet of veal,
fried in breadcrumbs, served with green peas and
potatoes) is one most generally called for.
However, pork is the usual boarding-house bill
of fare -hot for dinner, cold for tea and cold
slice of sausages—one kind, by the way, being
composed of raw meats again!—with little bread
rolls are, without exception, always on the
boarding-house tea-table. The “ black ” bread—
really a dirty brown in colour—is sour to the
taste, and not easily digested by those un-
accustomed to eat it ; but there are many nice
coffee-cakes and other confectionery, really good
and quite cheap. Dried beans, peas and other


vegetables are often made use of in Germany, and
some of the soups are unique. Beer, boiled with
sugar; white wine and water; fish water and bits
of cauliflower; and the briar-rose berries boiled
to a pulp and the juice made thin with water,
are a few of the extraordinary soups which the
German declares to be “ delicious.” The soup
is frequently taken at the end of a meal, and
forks are used more in the capacity of shovels, the
average German never being able to get enough
in his mouth at once! Really, it is an amusing, if
not altogether a pleasing, sight, to take a seat in
a restaurant and observe all the weird and crude
ways Germans adopt at table! The markets are
worth an inspection—if only to note the price of
the food. Mutton chops are seldom sold for less
than 4|d. each, and rump steak brings as much
as 1/10 a pound. Lamb is procurable but once
a year, and then sold at a price far beyond the
means of the economical “ hausfrau ” (house-
wife) ; consequently, the butcher shops which
can afford to display a lamb are always a source
of excitement and attraction to the passer-by.
Crowds stand around the window, gazing


rapturously at the single little animal all
decorated with coloured papers and ruffles, and
one feels sorry to think that death has deprived
the glorified creature of the power to enjoy the
state and honour of his court! In the fruit line,
cherries and strawberries are very plentiful and
cheap, but apples are scarce, and they charge
thirty pfennigs (3d.) a piece for Australian
apples, which have lost all their flavour and have
been bruised and knocked about in transit.
Passion-fruit is entirely unknown, bananas cost
anything from to 4d. each, and pineapples
are seldom sold under 5/- each. The fish shops
have a really “ all alive ” stock, swimming about
in tanks of water, and immediately the customer
selects a fish, the fishmonger makes a smart
capture with his net—one that would disgust the
expert angler—then neatly kills, weighs and
hands the fish over. Before leaving the food
problem, a few words about German restaurants
would be in place. These are, for the most part,
very fine establishments, beautifully fitted, fur-
nished and decorated artistically. In the better
class of cafe, even the cups and saucers—mostly


made of fine china—match the colour of the
surroundings, and there are breeched and gloved
butlers to relieve visitors of their cloaks and
wraps, whilst a really excellent little band of
musicians entertains the public with great
success. These cafes are open all day and night,
waiters, butlers and musicians coming on in
relays. The music is often quite classical, and
some violinists scraping out their meagre
livelihood in this manner would be considered
first-class artists in a country less productive of
musicians than is the “ Vaterland.”


MUSIC.
The Dresden King’s Conservatorium of Music
is recognised as one of the best—if not the best—
musical school in Germany. Supported by the
King of Saxony, it has at the head of its staff
some of the leading people in society, and all
conservatorium concerts are given in the presence
of Royalty or a court suite. Quite a number of
the pupils are sons and daughters of titled
people, and they do not make the least brilliant
exponents of musical art. Besides the main or
head building of the conservatorium there are
numerous branches in different parts of the city
to suit the convenience of all students; the
teachers attending each shool in turn. The tuition
is very thorough, the motto being throughout:
“ Slow but sure.” The pupils are divided into two
classes, namely, “ einfachschuler ” and “ voll-
schuler.” The “einfachschuler” or “single-
scholar ” is one who attends the conservatorium
for one subject only—these are in the minority,
as it is the German idea to make a musician of
every singer or player of instruments. The
“vollschuler,” or “full scholar,” is one who takes


theory, harmony and all rudiments and accessories
of music in addition to the principal study. For
instance, should a “vollschuler” specialise in
singing, the student is also obliged to learn
piano-playing, chorus-work, elocution, languages,
etc. A violinist adds orchestral work and a
pianist chamber-music to their studies. It is also
considered part of one’s musical education to be
present on every possible occasion where good
music is to be heard, the Conservatorium itself
giving regular quarterly concerts at the various
halls and a few churches of Dresden. Students,
who have appeared at one of these concerts, are
allowed one pass per month into the Opera House
—a privilege very greatly coveted—but pupils do
not depend solely upon this to be present at
operatic performances and concerts. The latter
take place every night of the week, as there are so
many visiting artists to Dresden, and the pro-
fessors distribute “special concession” tickets to
their girls and boys. It is wonderful to note the in-
tent and serious expressions on the faces of such
very young people as they listen with wrapt com-
prehension to the most classical and difficult of
music. The prices of admission to the Opera
House are within the reach of everybody, as they
range from about 30 shillings to 7|d. The
building is composed of stalls, four tiers of boxes,
and one of ordinary backless seats. The middle


Dresden Railway Station.


Bismarck’s Memorial at Berlin.


tier is devoted to the King, his court, and people
of rank. The fourth and fifth are patronised by-
students and all true lovers of music who would
rather pay 7£d. to stand up all night than miss
seeing their favourite opera. There is a kind of
pavilion at the back of the fourth circle, which is
generally occupied by blind persons and cripples,
who are brought there by attendants in all sorts
of invalid chairs to hear the music without seeing
the stage. There is also a‘ ‘ promenade ’’ at the
backs of the second and third circles, where well-
dressed people lounge, smoke, and parade in
couples in a complete circle. It is an acknow-
ledged fact that the Americans, English, and
other visitors to Dresden really support the Opera
House. The Germans themselves do not spend
.sufficient money on the place to keep it going.
Here, as at all public functions in Germany, the
very strictest order prevails. Theatregoers are
arranged in a queue, and with the most military
precision. The opera boxes are locked by the
ushers in charge, and those who fail to arrive
before the beginning of the orchestra, are not
permitted to take their seats until the overture is
finished. After the overture is played, the boxes
are opened and then closed again until the
interval. The lights are put out all over the
theatre as soon as the musicians take their seats,
.and the overture is listened to with keen appre


ciation, as is every other item throughout the
performance. Each opera has a double and some-
times treble cast of artists, and really there is
nothing to choose between them, either in ability
or popularity, which enables the management to
keep firm faith with its public. The programme
is changed every evening, including Sundays, and
the gala orchestra numbers 150 performers, every
member being something more than a thorough
musician. There are always six musical direc-
tors ready to take their turn at Italian opera,
Wagnerian music, operettes, and so forth.
Wagner’s “Ring of the Nibelung” is regularly
produced once a year, and booking begins fully
six, and often nine, months ahead for the
Wagnerian productions.
Of course, it is generally known that the people
of Saxony are Protestants, but it is not generally
known that the King of Saxony and his immediate
court are Roman Catholics, and the one beautiful
Catholic Church in Dresden is joined to the King’s
palace by a covered-in, overhead passage, or foot-
way. The inside of the cathedral is very vast,
and there is a gallery half way up the building,
with four boxes, closed or opened by sliding glass
windows, built directly overlooking the sides of
the altar, like the circle of a theatre, with the
difference that the boxes in this instance are
occupied by Royalty only, and the gallery by the


court and military officials. At the end opposite
the altar is an organ, choir, and full orchestra—
drums and brass instruments included. Every
Sunday morning from 11 till 12 o’clock there is
a very fine religious concert given free to all who
care to come and listen. Often singers from the
Opera take part, and the musicians all belong to
the Opera House orchestra. There is no collec-
tion, but there are dozens of little boxes at all
doors and pillars of the church, dedicated to
different charities, etc., in which one is supposed
to drop a small coin, and really, were one to pay
the value of the wonderful music one is thus
enabled to enjoy, one would have to return home
with quite an empty purse. Even those who have
religious objections to attending a Catholic Mass
are provided for in their own churches, there
being a free concert of almost equal merit given
in a Protestant church on the Altmarkt (market-
place) every Saturday afternoon.
The usual length of time for a singer to study
her art in Germany is about five years, after which
she takes a two years’ engagement with a pro-
vincial company, and then seeks an opening in a
city theatre. As she is generally 20 years of age
when she commences to learn, and seven years
elapse before she is considered a ‘‘finished”
artiste, there is seldom an operatic singer makes
her debut before a city public under the age of


30! Hence tlie old voices and matured figures
one nearly always associates with the German
prima donna. A violinist is supposed to study
over a period of eight or more years, and the
average time allotted for daily practice is from
six to eight hours.
With the exception of the Berlin Theatre, set
apart for such pieces, musical comedy and comic
opera are very third-rate productions in Ger-
many. Before I knew this, I once had the im-
prudence to mention to my singing teacher that
I thought I was physically and vocally suitable
for the better class of comic opera. The dear lady
threw up her hands in dismay, exclaiming: ‘ ‘ Herr
Gott! I train my pupils for Grand Opera only ,
you understand? Comic opera, indeed! Ach!
AV uat an insult! ’ ’ And, really, after having
witnessed a performance of the “ Fledermans ”
(“ Nightbirds ”) and the “ Waltzertraum ”
( AV altz Dream ”), I was quite in sympathy with
my teacher s opinion. Although the music was
exquisitely played by a fine little orchestra, the
voices and the floundering attempts of the artists
to be bright and light were quite appalling! But,
“ Das Komische Opern Haus, ” in Berlin, stages
some magnificent spectacles, nevertheless. It is
a great managerial gag to advertise the principal
lady as French or English—sometimes the person
has never been out of the Yaterland! Although


I was only seventeen at the time, and had no idea
of the art of singing, I was offered ten pounds a
week to sing English ballads, even in my un-
trained condition, at the Berlin Wintergarten
Music Hall. No mean salary for a start in
Germany ; but, of course, it was entirely impossible
to break off my studies to accept the engagement,
so I sighed a refusal. Cabarets and music halls are
much frequented, and a better entertainment of
their kind could hardly be wished for than the
programmes presented to the Dresden public. The
variety theatre is fitted on the “ parquette,” or
stalls, with little marble-topped tables and easy
chairs. Here the spectators may drink beer and
smoke while they enjoy the “ turns ” of the
artists before them.
In the circle above, each seat is provided with
a stand to hold a glass, and a waiter takes the
orders from the patrons for ale, wine or coffee.
The cabarets generally take place in supper-
rooms. There is an entrance fee, and supper is
extra. Very often wedding-parties and other
social festivities are elegantly celebrated in these
places. On the platform appear, in turn, a
symphony orchestra, a French soubrette, an
English balladist, a German singer, and an
emotional monologuist, with lights and darkness
to suit. Whilst in Dresden, I had the extreme
pleasure of hearing the late illustrious violinist,


Pablo de Sarasate; the virtuoso had beautiful
white hair and a lovely smile, and, although he
played with spectacles and a music-stand, he
never failed to thrill his audience and make them
weep, as so oft happened in his younger days.
This was his last appearance in Germany. He
then left for Vienna, where he subsequently died,
feaiah liernhardt was another much acclaimed
artiste upon her visit to Dresden. The theatre
was booked to capacity long before the great
Sarah arrived in the city, and on the night of her
first appearance there the audience rose and
cheered her again and again. As the sublime
artiste quitted the theatre after the performance,
hundreds of girls and women threw flowers in
her path, and some of the men unharnessed the
horses of her carriage and they themselves drew
the Queen of Dramatic Art to her hotel. It was
a sight which roused one to the highest pitch of
enthusiasm. A very quaint entertainment was
that of a little company of Japanese. These
wonderful little people took one of the Dresden
theatres for a fortnight, and played to very good
business. Everything was spoken in the Japanese
language, and the programme consisted of two
short dramas, in one of which, amidst weird cries
and lamentations, an actor committed “ Kara
Kiri ” (suicide by disembowelment) in full view
of the fascinated audience. The leading lady of


this small band of artists was no more than three
feet ten inches high.
Picture shows are nearly all continual, and
seats can be had from 2d. upwards. Where there
is no piano or orchestra there is a gramaphone,
and I remember once listening to a record of the
great Caruso, which was so realistic in the
darkness of the hall that the sweet tones and
words of the Italian singer brought a flood of
tears to my eyes. For all dramas screened, there
is a man engaged to explain, in simple, distinctly-
spoken words, the whole plot of the piece as it
unfolds.


THE GERMAN CHRISTMAS AND NEW
YEAR.
Christmas and New Year rejoicings commence
in the early part of December and continue
through the month of January, Families issue
invitations to their friends for any day, before or
after Christmas, so that re-unions and rejoicings
take place the whole time, making December and
January ve?y festive months indeed. The
German way of keeping up Christmas and New
Year is a very satisfactory one, and a near
approach to the old-fashioned festival of our fore-
fathers, The snow and pretty, frosty moonlight
nights make an artistic and romantic setting for
the annual revival of such rejoicings. Every
family, however poor and humble, must have a
Christmas tree to see them into the next year, or
bad luck will be theirs! In the market-place and
along the middle of broad roads, there are erected
booths and stalls, where one may buy all sorts
of quaint things to decorate the home and place
on Christmas trees. Fairies, silver stars, frost,
snow-balls, and snow-men (made to look very real


Opera House, Dresden.


Wagner's Theatre at Bayreuth.


with white wadding); but what pleases the
children most are the apples, biscuits, and sweets,
which are hung in profusion from the pine-tree
branches. Christmas trees are sold from 1 mark
to 60. The tops of pines are cut and fixed into a
wooden stand, which upholds the smaller tree on
a table, and the larger one on the floor.
Most trees are placed in such a way that the
passers-by may catch a glimpse of them through
the windows, as the window blinds are drawn
back purposely. As each storey of almost every
house is occupied by different families, the sight
is a very pleasant one, especially at night, when
at least one window on every floor has an
illuminated tree. The cafes have an enormous
tree, generally lit up by tiny electric lights. In
the home there is a very impressive, almost
religious, scene. When all the guests have
arrived, a Christmas hymn is sung, and then the
host or a favoured guest will make a touching
speech about the immortal and religiously his-
torical event which they were then gathered
together to commemorate. Afterwards, the
visitors file into another room, where the presents
and gifts are laid upon a table (not hung on the
tree), with a little card attached to each bearing
the name of the intended recipient.
Then the fun and real rejoicings begin. Wine
and punch are drunk in toasts, and “ bruder


shaften ” (“ brotherhoods ”) are made for life.
The German idea of a Christmas present
invariably takes the form of something very
useful, such as dress material, handkerchiefs,
gloves, etc., and seldom, if ever at such a time, are
gifts given such as jewellery, etc. Flowers or
confectionery are often presented in addition to
other gifts. Flower shops in Dresden are always
worth looking at, especially at Christmas and
New Year. In these shops expert window-
dressers are employed to create wonderful,
artistic, and picturesque displays. Window-
dressing is an expert and remunerative trade. On
New Year’s Eve, most people go out of doors, and
spend the evening making a round of the cafes,
throwing confetti over all whom they meet.
They decorate themselves with flowers and
ribbons. It is a very jolly occasion, and where-
ever they happen to be when the clock strikes 12
a.m., they join hands with their neighbours, and
sing in the New Year with great enthusiasm.
Trumpets, horns, and other kinds of weird
instruments make a fearful din.


SAXONS HONOUR BISMARCK EVERY YEAR.
Once a year, the “Bismarck Saule,” or monu-
ment in Dresden, is visited by the male students
of art, science, and mechanics. They do honour
to the memory of the great Bismarck (the old
gentleman whose ideas are directly responsible
for the awful war) by a torchlight procession
through the city at about 9 o’clock at night.
Students in black velvet suits and floppy caps
carry lighted torches on either side of the road,
while others form into groups and ride in car-
riages or on horseback between the lines of
torches. These groups represent in turn the dress
and style of about five hundred years ago up to
to-day. The procession is a long one, and is re-
ceived with great enthusiasm, crowds of women
onlookers throwing flowers to the students as
they pass. The flowers are often caught or
picked up and pinned on to the students’ coats,
so that very often the fronts of the boys’ suits
are one mass of flowers. When Bismarck’s
monument is reached, some dignitary delivers an
oration, after which wreaths are left surrounding
the monument.


DUELLING AND OUTDOOR LIFE.
Although duelling is not generally permitted
in Germany, there is no student who
would admit to never having crossed swords
with some friend or foe. In fact, so proud
are they and their women-folk of the number of
scars they have obtained, that they vie with their
fellow-students as to how many sword-thrusts one
can receive more than the other! They provoke
one another “by arrangement, ’’ and likewise “by
arrangement” they strike the nose, cheek, or
head of their opponent.
I have seen a student scarred nowhere but on
top of his head, and in order to display his
valour, he had his hair coronletely shaved off!
Another man I met had the profile of an Apollo
on one side of his face, while the other was
hideously distorted by cuts and scars. He was far
prouder of the disfigured side of his face than the
unblemished other half.
The average German is fond of out-door life,
and all who can possibly afford to do so go into
the country for a few weeks in the summer. The


pine forests are a marvel of health and beauty,
and are kept always full of trees by a perfect
system of replanting. The young things are set
and grown in nurseries set apart for forest
replenishing only. Animals such as deer and
squirrels are protected, and run about in these
glorious forests. Many country roads are lined
on either side by cherry trees, and cherries may
be bought at little stalls by the wayside, which
are occupied by the owners of the trees. In the
springtime, it is a glorious sight to visit the fields
of “Lilies of the Valley” growing wild in the
shade of hill-banks and trees. Tennis and rowing
are the two principal summer sports, and walking
is indulged in in all seasons. The forests in
winter are, if possible, even more fascinating
under their great mantles of snow. There are
beauties of nature quite beyond description, and
most forests and roads in Germany are left
entirely to the training and up-bringing of their
own good picturesque mother. When freezing-
time comes round, all tennis courts are flooded,
and turned into open-air skating rinks. It is
glorious to sway on the ice at night in the sharp,
bracing air, and the moon’s pure rays to light
your way, while the soft strains of an amorous
waltz makes one skate as if on air.
When the River Elbe is frozen, no one is allowed
to walk across before the Bang has opened the


way, likewise with skating on the “ Queen
Carola See”—a lake in the Grosser Garten. While
I was in Dresden, there came a big thaw. The
River Elbe overflowed, and traffic was stopped
in the vicinity of the river for a period of seven
days, tram-lines having been completely sub-
merged. Wonderful examples of winter sport
take place each year in the “ Ertzgeberge ”
mountains about a four hours’ train journey out
of Dresden. The snow-shoe sportsmen are won-
derful in their flights through the air of some
hundreds of yards, landing erect on the plain
below. After alighting from the ordinary train,
one enters a very small carriage with a tiny
engine—a miniature railway—which takes the
passengers to the final station before the very
summits of the mountains. All the way along,
this little train rings a bell, which sounds very
much like “ pim-pim.” Owing to this and pro-
bably also to its miniature size, the train is
nicknamed “ The Pimple.” Another favourite
place for a Sunday resort is “ Moritzburg,”
where the King of Saxony goes hunting boars.
In this same place, there is a chateau, surrounded
on three sides by an artificial lake, which was
built and made by the present King’s ancestor,
‘ ‘ Augustus the Strong. ” On a little island in the
same lake, there is still standing a small house,
which was erected by the same “ strong ”


monarch for the purpose of concealing his latest
conquest, should the mistress have been the wife
of another, which was not seldom the case! The
worthy Augustus is said to have been the father
of no less than jdo children, and there is a statue
erected to his memory in Dresden, with four
female figures surrounding him, the faces of
which are said to be reproductions of his most
famous paramours. To return to “ Moritzburg,”
the boars there are not really wild; they are kept
cooped up in pens, and are fed by a caretaker,
being let loose to run through the forests for the
King’s pleasure in the hunting season. Dozens
of people go to see these animals fed at 4 o’clock
in the afternoon.
Two pleasures greatly looked forward to in
Saxony are the “ Yahrmarkt ” and the “ Yogel-
wiese.” The former is a fair—old-fashioned and
quaint—which takes place in the streets of
Dresden, especially set apart for the occasion.
Many of the salespeople come in from little
country places, and are very amusing to the town-
folk. The latter is more in the shape of
entertainment—big-wheels, merry-go-rounds, and
hundreds of amusements arc set up in paddocks
of several acres in distance, and are the means of
giving thousands of people many jolly hours, for
a month or more, in the year. It is generally
believed that “ Dresden China ” comes from that


city itself, but, as a matter of fact, the china is
manufactured and painted in Meissen, now a
suburb, though once the capital of Saxony, and
sent to Dresden for sale. In Meissen, there is an
historical castle built upon rocks, which used to
be the town residence of the royal family of
Saxony, but, although kept in perfect order, is
now seldom used by any of its members. The
sister of the present King has a residential
mansion on the banks of the River Elbe, the
grounds of which are thrown open to public in-
spection during the absence of the Princess. In
the garden is a camelia tree, over two hundred
years old, and this precious plant is tenderly
looked after in the summer time, and in winter
is covered by a wood and glass structure, with
a German heater or stove to keep the temperature
even. The tree is a tremendous height and
breadth, and when in bloom is one big mass of
exquisite whiteness. At Graupa, a little village
not far from this palatial residence, I had the
pleasure of visiting the little old house in which
Wagner thought of and partly composed his
world-famous opera, “ Lohengrin.” There is a
special matinee performance given annually, the
proceeds being devoted to the “ Lohengrin ”
house. German Switzerland is very picturesque
at both summer and winter seasons, and is acces-


Overhead Footway leading from the King of Saxony's
Palace to his Catholic Church.


Count Zeppolin. Zeppelin No. 3, which met with disaster.


sible by steamer from the River Elbe. It is a very
popular place for Germans to spend their
vacations —a charming and happy-natured
country.


THE GERMAN SOLDIER.—A SYSTEM THAT
MAKES OR BREAKS.
A German’s military papers are a passport
into any State of the Empire and a guarantee of
good character to his employers. On the other
hand, one “ black mark ” against the soldier’s
name—even for ever so slight an offence—is often
sufficient to thrust him beyond the channels of
success in the “ Vaterland,” and he is compelled
to seek his fortune abroad. It can be readily
understood, the three years set apart in a
German citizen’s life for military training are
looked forward to with mingled feelings of desire
and fear. When a man is physically unfit, he is
exempt, but there is one other way of dodging
this much-dreaded system, and that is by paying
the Government a fine of about 3000 marks—a
sum well beyond the means of most Prussian and
German families. Therefore, when “ duty ” calls,
pens, instruments, and machines are perforce
deserted for the far less enticing scenes of
barrack-life. The peasant works beside the town
clerk, the man of letters has for companion an


ignorant fellow, verging perhaps upon sheer
animalism!
Titled people (and there are many such in Ger-
many, with more or less hereditary or legal right
to their “ handles ”), and men with money,
generally manage to secure a commission and its
accompanying rights to swank.
During my residence in Germany, I made the
acquaintance of several gentlemen who had
shouldered the rifle for the allotted three years.
One in particular had suffered many privations
during his period of training, complaints about
which were very softly and warily related, for,
had he been overheard by a Government or mili-
tary official, his words of dissatisfaction would
have been the means of landing another helpless
prisoner in the well-filled cells of the city jail—
another victim to the iron-handed system, under
which the poor German is permitted to exist.
The young fellow in question was the only son
and spoilt boy of a large family. He had never
done any physical exercise or out-door sport
beyond what he had been obliged to go through
as a boy at school, and spent the greater part of
his days in his father’s office. the
difficult and unmerciful preparation was too great
a call on his physique, and before he had com-
pleted his first three weeks' training, he was stricken
down with a fever which necessitated his going


to the military hospital and convalescent home.
These places are by no means useless institutions,
as they claim hundreds of similar cases.
Lven the man’s evident constitutional inability
to cope with the tremendous exertions demanded
of him did not suffice to exempt him from further
military hardships, for, as soon as he had
recovered from his first illness, he was sent back
to his regiment, only to be again on the sick list
before many months had passed.
Certainly there are others who are fortunate
enough to be possessed of sound physique, and
to them the German discipline would only serve
to strengthen their natural powers of endurance.
Upon one occasion, I made one of a party invited
to a training-home of the first stage. It was a
brick house, built in an acre of cultivated land,
and could hardly be called a barrack. We were
heartily welcomed by these all but “ prisoners of
State, to whom a friend’s face from the city
bi ings back so many memories of comfort and
pleasure, seemingly already so remote from their
present monotonous surroundings. At 4 o’clock
we were ushered into the mess-room—a long, bare-
walled hall, with two rows of unvarnished deal
tables and forms with no back supports—where
the meagre repast of inferior lager in enormous
metal pewters, together with some cheese and
dry bread, was served out. Here we learnt


something of their method of initiation! Each
man takes it in turn to clean the windows,
scrub the floors, make the beds, cook the
food, prune the trees, attend to the gardening,
and wash the clothes of his companions, and
wait on the officers, who have their own
dining-room and kitchen and the best of
food. The ordinary soldier is kept in utter
subordination and servility by his arrogant and
over-bearing “ superiors,” who never by any
chance condescend to mix with the men, except
when they are forced to give an order or com-
mand in connection with their official duties. A
soldier’s “ pay ” is 15 pfennigs (about l|d.) per
day, and with this whole l|d. he is expected to
provide his own evening meal!
Later on, there comes the “ active ” part of
the training, when guns, etc., are manipulated
and the usual military manoeuvring is taught on
the remorseless blood and iron theory and brutal
command. One of the many and severe tests is
the forced march. No mercy is then shown to
the tired or weak; they must run and walk as if
on active service, many falling by the wayside
from sheer exhaustion, after losing consciousness
altogether.
Another very trying ordeal is that of running
barefooted along miles of heavy sand, the only
reward for their labour being a piece of dry-baked


bread called “ zwiebach ” —hardly sufficient
nourishment for a child. However, it is un-
deniable that all these nerve-racking, spirit-
breaking trials attain a certain amount of good
result. The average German soldier has un-
limited powers of endurance; he obeys blindly
and unquestionably the command of his officers,
can exist upon a “ starvation ” ration, and is
really a machine, and with astounding confidence
in the power of the Kaiser and Army. It is also
a fact that every port and military station in the
“ Vaterland ” is so thoroughly provided with
ammunition and food stores, that within three
hours, at any time of the day or night, every man
in Germany can be fully equipped and prepared
for war!
The “ Deutsche” soldiers on parade make a
splendid show of both horses and men. They
move as one man, and all heads are level, the
smaller bodies being of a separate regiment.
There is never a smile on an officer’s face, and his
men follow his example. “ Eyes front ” is the
order of the day when parading! They give one
the impression of being a solid, “ thorough ”
mass of creatures, with fine clothes (kept spot-
lessly clean), massive helmets (which, by the way,
have sometimes been known to give a soldier
brain fever from their excessive weight during the
first few days he is called upon to wear them),


and plenty of “ show ” and colouring; but they
fail to inspire one with anything like enthusiasm.
The populace look upon them with a reverence
which almost amounts to awe. With regard to
the German officer, he is not generally liked,
although his position demands the respect of all
soldiers and civilians, upon whom he looks down
with an air of contempt and disdainful pride.
His self-satisfaction is something to marvel at!
He is always scrupulously clothed, often corseted,
and sometimes wearing a really beautiful
“ military ” overcoat of a fine grey cloth, lined
with scarlet satin and ornamented with solid
brass buttons. The German officer “in society ”
is a source of amusement to all those who are not
of his own nationality. With his white kid
gloves, his spurred heels which clank together
noisily as he stands to salute a fellow-officer, or
stoops to kiss the hand of a lady of rank,
and his overbearing arrogance of manner, all
make him resemble some great mechanical and
theatrical doll, rather than a “ real live ” human
being! It is part of their military law that no
officer may marry unless his wife can bring him
a dot sufficient to pay for her husband’s equip-
ment, and the expensive exigencies of his social
standing.
The German airships and men-of-war have been


built by taxing the people to the limit—and
beyond!
While living in Germany, I was called upon to
contribute towards the rebuilding of Count
Zeppelin’s airship No. 111., and was also compelled
to donate twenty-five pfennigs (2|d.) towards
the making of one of their flying Goebens,
With an ever-eagle eye to his army, the Kaiser
becomes godfather to every sixth son in a German
family, and so incidentally claims all the boys for
his army, even if the unfortunate couple has only
five sons. Still, it is an acknowledged fact that
every German does his level best in laying a very
solid family foundation.


SOME LAWS OF THE LAND.
I felt the heavy hand of the law laid on me
immediately I entered a German house to take
up my abode. The landlady confronted me with
a legal looking document, which demanded all
sorts of questions of me. I had to till in name,
previous address, present address, occupation,
age, whether married or single, nationality, etc.
This paper had to be placed in the hands of the
police within twenty-four hours of my arrival in
the house, otherwise the landlady or whoever is
in charge of the place is fined. The same demand
is made of you at every change of address, with
the addition of 2£d. tax, which must be paid over
the counter at the police office—a special apart-
ment being set apart for this purpose.
Not even the student escapes taxation in any
part of Germany. After my first six months’
residence in Dresden, I received a summons to
attend the police court, and was there put through
a cross-examination as to income, etc. Although
my interests were entirely in Australia, a tax of
was put on the money I spent in the country!
Everyone is so well-known to the police in


Germany that there is hardly a possible chance
of escape from justice in the case of crime—a fact
which certainly gives the public a great feeling
of security.
Really—and perhaps owing to the strict super-
vision of the law—there is very little dishonesty
in Germany. Bicycles are left standing in the
streets for hours, and nobody would ever think of
running away with one. Another example of the
Law’s severity is the fact that every window on
the ground and first floors of a building must be
closed when music or singing is in practice, thus
ensuring the peace of the outside public and
traffic.
Begging is likewise strictly forbidden, and little
enamel notices to this effect are attached to nearly
every house in the land; consequently those who
are crippled are given a special license to sell
flowers, matches, and such like in the streets, and
there are Government institutions for the aged.
To my knowledge, there were only two cripples
selling things in the streets of Dresden—a woman
with one arm, and a man with one leg. All able-
bodied men and women are given work, which
they must either accept or go to gaol! You see
there are advantages and disadvantages in a coun-
try so thoroughly under municipal control. Every
new bridge erected over the River Elbe must be
eventually paid for by the people themselves by


a toll on all foot and vehicle passengers across
the bridge in question the sum of one or two
pfennigs (about half a halfpenny in value) a
journey.
All battleships and public buildings, etc., are
paid for by direct taxation. Although one pays
dearly for most things in Germany, housing and
domestic service are ridiculously cheap, and the
Government certainly caters well for its people.
The streets of Dresden are kept scrupulously
clean by a uniformed staff of men, who in summer
time water and sweep the streets (hand labour),
one man watering the footpath very carefully
with an ordinary can, and another sweeping
“ dustlessly ” behind; and in the rainy weather
using mechanical road-cleansers; but the way
they do their work during the mid-winter months
is truly remarkable! I have often retired to my
bed at 11 p.m. with the snow quite three feet deep
on the roads and streets outside, and at midnight
the silent workers had commenced operations,
which were so successfully carried out, that long
before morning the city was as free from snow
as if there had never been a fall! These toilers
had swept the snow into great hard piles, which
in turn had been carted away and thrown into the
river to melt. The Dresden electric tramway
service is excellent, and serves the citizens well,
running for miles into the surrounding country


for a twopenny or threepenny fare. The tram
conductors are models of civility and courtesy.
They are clad in dark green uniforms with brass
buttons, and with small red neck and cap bands.
In winter time they wear great dark green coats
to match their clothes. All uniforms are provided
by the Government, and the tram-men keep them-
selves wonderfully spotless and smart. A tram
conductor in Germany always alights first when
the car stops, and is ready to offer his aid to any
passengers getting off or on, touching his cap
politely to wish them “ guten-Tag ” (good-day).
Children and ladies with parcels receive special
attention, but I cannot say that the conductor’s
kindness is wholly disinterested, although a certain
amount of civility towards the passengers is de-
manded of them by the Government. However,
they are never above accepting a tip, even if it
is only a one pfennig piece. Incidentally, all such
people as waiters and civil servants expect to
receive some slight recognition for their services,
but it must be said in their favour that they
always perform their duty even without a reward,
and are content with a halfpenny or penny tip,
where here in Australia the tips invariably run
into a couple of shillings.
Dresden itself is a beautiful city, with parks
and gardens thrown open for the use of the
people, wherein are also placed banks of sand


for children to play in. The gardeners are kept
very busy uprooting and replanting to keep the
beds in constant bloom throughout the year, and
there are several very fine statues and fountains,
some of which are very valuable, and must have
cost a great deal of money. In the “ Grosser
Garten, ” a tremendous park quite near the city,
there are restaurants where the elite like to meet
and be seen. In the same immense garden, there
is also an old chateau (now turned into a museum
of ancient armoury), which was originally built
for the nocturnal pleasures of “ Augustus der
Starcke ”of Saxony. The same monarch did
much towards the beautification of Dresden, but
left a debt behind him, which was but recently
discharged. The law does not permit steam or
other laundries to be carried on within a certain
radius of the city, and it is quite a common and
painful sight to see washer-women harnessed
beside a dog to a little cart, in which they bring
and take the linen. All dogs are muzzled and are
made great use of for drawing purposes, bakers
being seen with two poor animals barking and
yelping as they struggle along with a small cart
of bread, while the baker himself saunters heed-
lessly by their side. It must be admitted, how-
ever, that these dogs are well cared for, having
a bag to lie on while the baker takes orders from
his customers, and being fed on the best of food.


It is often said of a German that he is apt to
think more of his dog than his wife, but we’ll
speak of that subject later on. It is not legal to
marry in church without having first been made
husband and wife at the Government Registrar.
Many couples divide the ceremonies into two days,
and remain apart in the interval. It is not an
easy matter to get married in Germany; there are
quite a number of formalities and red-tape busi-
ness to be got over. There is no such thing as
becoming united in a hurry! The bride has to
be of age, or have a personal or written consent
of father or guardian, failing these, the next of
kin is sought. The parents’ marriage certificate
on both sides must be forthcoming, likewise the
bride and bridegroom’s birth papers, and the
latest notice given to the police of their addresses,
etc. Should any of the parents have been
naturalised, these papers must also be forth-
coming, in addition to which the bridegroom must
show his military papers, and declare himself able
and willing to support a wife. In many instances,
however, ’tis the wife who supports him, as she is
always supposed to bring a dot into the newly-
made family, besides buying all the furniture and
house linen, and paying for the wedding break-
fast as well! Should a husband contract debts
he is unable to meet, the wife is called upon by
law to do so in his stead. If the husband is out of


work any length of time, it is considered nothing
more than the duty of the wife to keep him and
the family going. In short, what is the husband’s
is his, and what is the wife’s is his also! A mar-
riage is seldom contracted under six weeks from
the date of first notification, although very urgent
cases can be got through in less time. There are
no diamond engagement rings in Germany, the
lady and gentleman present each other with a
plain gold band, like our ordinary wedding ring,
which is worn on the third finger of the left hand
as fiance’s, and which the minister changes over
to the third finger on the right hand at the altar.
It is not necessary to have rings at all for a
Government Registrar marriage. It is quite a
common thing for the bride to be dressed in black,
and the recognised bridal wreath is made of
myrtle —a rather sombre and unbecoming decora-
tion for such a festive occasion!
To go back to Government catering, I should
like to say a few words about the postal arrange-
ments, There are no pillars erected at street
corners, as we have them in Australia, but little
blue square boxes are attached to the outside
walls of some buildings, which are cleared
regularly once an hour. The man who under-
takes the responsibility of emptying these boxes,
rides a bicycle, in order to waste no time, and
carries a canvas bag, with a square frame at the


mouth, which exactly fits the underneath of the
letter boxes. He presses a button and the bottom
of the box opens, the letters fall into the canvas
bag, the box is closed again, and the man takes
his letters to the general post-office in perfect
safety, without ever handling an article with his
fingers. Letters are delivered four times daily
and twice on Sundays. The postmen are very
conscientious workers, and as nearly the whole
population of Dresden lives in fiats—even board-
ing-houses being kept on the flat system—the poor
“posty” is compelled to climb up to four and
five stories to deliver his mail. In justice to the
officer, letters seldom go astray in Germany,
Probably owing to the fact that so many
families are living in the same house (the care-
taker and poorer people contenting themselves
with a room or two underneath the building) there
is a law prohibiting the use of any musical in-
strument, singing or other noises during the
German “ hours of rest,” which are daily from
1 to 2 p.m. Each flat is fitted with all con-
veniences, and nearly every house in Dresden
has a roof yard; but, strangely enough, in a
country so far advanced in most things, their
method of getting rid of debris is particularly
primitive. There is a general rubbish-pit into
which the different households empty their dirt-
boxes, and this is hermetically closed, being


Entrance to Moritzburg Castle, the present King of Saxony’s Hunting Lodge.


The Lohengrin House at Graupa, Saxony.


cleaned periodically by Government workers.
Nearly all the houses in Dresden city are without
baths, so the institutions set apart for human
cleansing purposes do a roaring trade at 1 mark
(1/-) per bath.
It will be perhaps of interest to know that all
street crossings are regulated by mounted police—
mostly on white horses. These animals are very
well trained to stand still, and they remain in
exactly the same position for a matter of two
solid hours at a time.
There are no hoardings or disfigurments of any
kind in German cities; all advertisements are
pasted on to a circular structure of unobstructive
circumference and height, which is erected in the
centre of places and broad streets by the Govern-
ment. People desirous of learning the latest
police news, the evening’s programmes at the
theatres, or any other subject down to the newest
make of boot-polish, gather around this pillar
and read with far more attention than if they
could see all they wanted to know in flaring
letters on the tin fences and walls surrounding
them.
Public telephones and an encyclopaedia are
encased in wooden bureaux at street corners and
in the middle of large blocks. They are auto-
matically available by the insertion of a nickel
<?oin—a ten pfennig piece, equal to our penny.


Cabs, as we have them in Victoria, are unknown
over there. Four-wheeled open carriages, with a
liveried coachman, make a pleasant means of
conveyance; but, of late years, the taxi has been
rapidly usurping the place of the old-fashioned
horse-drawn vehicle, and now even the taxi is
not too swift for the hitherto slow-going Germans.


THE GERMAN HOME
Where the husband is master and tyrant, even
as the Kaiser is lord and commander in the
Vaterland.
Once a girl becomes a “ Deutsche ” wife she
is nothing more or less than a “ haus-frau,” which
amounts to “ cook,” “ housemaid,” “ nurse-
girl ” and “ valet,” according to the German’s
idea of the married state.
A girl is brought up under the impression that
her one aim in life is to marry and look after a
husband and family. Everything the husband
expects her to do comes under the heading of
“ duty,” and must be performed without
objection or remonstrance. The man is master and
tyrant, even as the Kaiser is lord and commander
in the Vaterland. It is a common thing to see the
man dressed in a frock coat, top hat, and with a
large cigar between his teeth, while his poor little
wife walks behind him, with a blouse made out
of some ancient shawl, or a renovated skirt and
hat, and a large mob of children hanging on to
her hands and dress, making altogether a


very dejected-looking group. The arrogant
husband struts along, and certainly takes more
notice of another man’s wife than he does of the
poor creature who serves him! Nevertheless, ’tis
seldom a “ Deutsche haus-frau ” will be heard
complaining; she is humble, affectionate, and dog-
like devoted, kissing the hand that strikes her,
and being satisfied with her lot in life. They are
really wonderful women, very clever in their
particular work, and models of patience, bright-
ness and hospitality. There are many “marriages
of convenience ” contracted in Germany, pro-
bably owing to the obedience the children practise
towards their parents, and particularly on account
of the Teuton’s love of money—hence the cases of
suicide and broken-hearted lovers one so often
reads of in the German papers. In the “ Upper
Classes, ’ should the “ lover ” be a man, he is
usually accepted into the house as a “ friend of
the husband’s,” while the husband himself
attends to his clandestine meetings with the lady
upon whom he lavishes his true affections. In
such cases as these, the couples live in respectful
comradeship and perfect understanding.
As an instance of German thrift, I shall relate
a case which came under my own observation
whilst residing in the Vaterland. A gentle-
man of my acquaintance, holding a good social
and financial position, very often invited my


mother and self for an afternoon’s outing. Never
did he fail to accept the re-imbursement of a
tram fare—no matter how trivial the amount—
and upon one occasion when his wife was with
him, he called for their little bill at a cafe where
he had “ invited ” us to have tea, leaving my
mother to settle for ours! The same gentleman
has been known to permit a lady to pay for his
seat at a theatre, and once, when his wife, who
was in delicate health at the time, begged of him
to allow her to ride home in the tram, as she was
feeling faint, I heard the “ fond ” husband reply;
“ Not so long as you have legs to walk on—it’s
a penny thrown out of the window! ’ ’ And yet
so amorous was this man of his own small person,
that he boasted of the very expensive wardrobe
he kept for himself, being then possessed of:
Twelve suits, of varying colour and style; eight
hats, not one of which resembled the other;
twelve pairs of shoes and boots to match his
suits; six walking-sticks, gold-mounted and other-
wise ; twenty-four pairs of silk socks, and a fifty-
guinea gold watch, which struck the hour, quarter
and minutes! Another German gentleman who
wished to pay me special attention once presented
me with an article of jewellery. It was hardly
given when the German in question could no
longer contain his desire to let me know how
economical he had been, and burst forth ex


citedly: “ Ach! ja! very pretty, isn’t it? And a
great bargain! I only paid so-and-so much for
it, and I bought it at a second-hand shop in the
city! ” It is well for such people that labour in
Germany is so cheap! There wages would make
some of our working-men in Australia gasp their
last with shock and incredulity! A scavenger
thinks himself well paid at 3 marks 50 pfennigs
(3/6) a day, a postman is content with a
pound per week, and a general servant works 12
hours a day for twenty shillings a month.
Families of four and six people will often live
on 10 or 12 shillings a week, and all Government
and trust positions are more glorious than they
are remunerative.
A few cases have been pointed out to me where
the employer forbids the marriage of his work-
men under a certain salary, and, in consequence
of this enforced wait, the young couples, rather
than waste the best years of their lives, have
reared quite a little family of children before the
law makes their union legal. The man is per-
mitted to give the babes his name by a sworn
declaration to the effect that he is the father.
While on the subject of domesticity, I may say
that a “ double bed ” is an almost unknown
commodity in a German household. Married
couples occupy two single beds, sometimes placed
at close quarters. The coverings consist of two


enormous eider-down cushions —one over and one
under—with a two-foot square pillow for the
head; really, they make most comfortable sleep-
resorts in winter, being changed for much lighter
cushions in the summer. Some people prefer an
ordinary mattress to lie on, with the eider-down
as a top covering only.
The well-known Dutch or German china
“ oven,” for room-heating purposes, is a con-
venient and sensible invention. I have seen some
of exquisite workmanship, and others which
looked decidedly clumsy and plain; but they emit
an intense heat without dirt, smoke or odour. It
is quite possible to wear light summer frocks in
a German house in the winter-time, with these
ovens all aglow; but it is necessary to take extra
precaution not to catch cold when leaving them
for the snow-covered streets outside.
Little German babies are seldom brought up to
become accustomed to the mother’s arms as the
best place to lie. Almost from the time they are
born, they are placed on a long, flat pillow, with a
washable covering buttoned across the top, which
prevents the little legs from kicking it off, and
just leaves the head, shoulders and arms of the
infant on view. This pillow can be placed in all
safety on a table or on the floor, and the mother
knows she can attend to the cooking and other
household duties with her baby in sight and yet


unencumbered, This is also a splendid way for
keeping the child’s back straight and its body
at an even temperature. The wealthy families
engage nurses for their children from Switzer-
land, and they retain their native costume, which
would look like the dress of an escaped actress
out here, picturesque and quaint though it be.
It is composed of a striped or coloured skirt to
just below the calves; a black, tight-fitting bodice,
laced in front over a white chemisette; a tiny
white muslin apron; a big bow and ends of black
taffeta attached to the back of the hair, and a
pair of white stockings and black shoes complete
the picture. The parents ’ word is law in Germany,
and the children hold them (the father,
especially) in fear rather than deep affection.
Even at the age of twenty-one, it is seldom a
daughter will marry against the parents’ wish;
or a son cease to ask advice and counsel of his
father, whom he will implicitly obey.


EDUCATION, AND SOCIAL LIFE.
Education is compulsory from the age of five
years to fifteen, and it must be admitted that
their present method of imparting knowledge is
a credit to the Teuton race. Their schools of
languages hold classes of from twenty to forty
pupils at 2d. a head per lesson, and all professors
are native-born of the country whose language
they teach. In a French class, nothing but French
may be spoken, in an Italian class the same, and
so on. Children, whether attending a State or
private school, whether paying or not for their
tuition, must take a course of French and English
lessons, and learn to write their own language in
two ways, viz.: the “ Latin ” script (which is as
ours), and the “ Teuton,” or ancient German, in
which most books and papers are still printed.
School-hours are from 8 a.m. to 12 noon and from
1 p.m. to 5 o’clock, and it would be an unheard of
liberty for a child to rush through the streets
screaming, yelling and playing as soon as the
day’s studies are over—no, they must all walk
sedately, two by two, for quite a block from the


school before they are permitted to disperse and
quietly take their different ways. I have never
seen a child attempt to ride on the back of a tram-
car in any part of Germany. Scripture and
gymnasium are considered very important
exercises for the mind and body.
“ Sweet sixteen,” is the “ coming out ” age
of the German “ Fraulein ” —she hopes to be
married and settled down before she is twenty-
one! The occasion of her first ball is one of the
most exciting and memorable events of her life,
for which all manner of preparations have to be
gone through. Here she wears her first long
frock, and has her hair dressed by a real hair-
dresser, in the latest or most becoming style.
No girl appears at a ball without a gentleman
escort and a chaperone. The escort provides the
maiden with a bouquet, to which is attached a
ribbon, with his initials embroidered upon it. It
is rather a quaint custom, as this ribbon is
eventually tied on to the handle of the girl’s fan,
and unless she already has a fiancee, she generally
has a different gentleman escort at each and every
dance; consequently, by the time the young lady
is 18 years of age, there hangs from her fan quite
a dozen or more various coloured ribbons with
their accompanying initials—surely much more
fascinating souvenirs than an ordinary dance
programme.


All balls in Germany are conducted much after
the style of Melbourne 11 Palais de Danse.’ ’ En-
trance tickets cost from 2 to 10 marks—unless it
is a fancy-dress affair, and then tickets can run
up to almost any price—and each dance is paid
for in addition. Refreshment tables are arranged
around the walls of the hall, and chaperones can
sit there and pay for trifles, jellies, wine, beer, and
so forth, while the young couples indulge in a
joyous whirl to the music of a really good brass
band.
From personal experience, the average German
is not a good dancer —he is either heavy and
clumsy, treading on your poor toes till they ache,
or he seizes you so tightly around the ribs that
you nearly suffocate, and he simply lifts you in
the air in one wild rush, during which your feet
scarcely ever touch the floor, leaving your head
in a whirl and your heart beating at a rate quite
exceeding ordinary speed limit. Still, I have met
a few Germans whose rhythm and lightness in
dancing left nothing to be desired. Apart from
these balls and dances, a woman’s life in Germany
is serious in the extreme. Even when she sits
in a concert-hall, she brings knitting or fancy-
work to keep her hands going while her mind
drinks in the music. Even the Sabbath is no day
of rest, as we understand it, for the house-wife’s


fingers are never idle, and her needle takes the
place of our book.
After marriage, dancing is quite a pleasure of
the past, and a wife’s usual enjoyment consists
of a glass of lager at a busy cafe, where she and
hei husband can sit and watch the people come
and go.
Germans are very fond of money, and one meets
with ariee and meanness in almost every class
of citizen; although they are sometimes hospitable
enough in their own homes,
\ oung girls under the age of sixteen are not
allowed out after 9 p.m., unless accompanied by
their parents. Should a policeman happen to sus-
pect the age of a girl walking alone or with a
young gentleman, he does not hesitate to enquire
of the maiden her name and address. He does
not rely upon the girl’s declaration as to her
home and age, but very often escorts her to her
place of residence himself, and then makes a
systematic search through the birth registrations,
and should he discover the “ suspect ” to be
under the age of sixteen, he reports to head-
quarters, and the parents or next-of-kin are sub-
sequently served with a summons for having
allowed their young relation to disregard the law
of her country. Nothing is too much trouble for
the zeal of the German police force to adequately
represent, maintain and demonstrate the orders
and rules of their Government.


A DAY WITH THE PAINTERS.
There is a magnificent building in Dresden
called the “ Zwinger " —it is constructed in a
circle, and on the outskirts of a very handsomely
laid-out garden, in which fountains play in the
sunshine. This place was originally designed and
built for a town residence of the gay old King,
“ Augustus the Strong," of Saxony; but it has
now been turned into a Museum and Art Gallery
for the free use of the public. This Art Gallery
now runs a very close second to the Paris Louvre,
and contains some original paintings of many very
great artists. It may be of interest to our painters
and lovers of art to read a list of some of the best-
known works at present to be seen in Dresden.
“ Betrothal of St. Catherine," by Andrea del
Sarto, who lived in 1486-1531.
“ Bacchanal," by Benvenuto Pisi da Garofalo.
“ Her Hieronymus," by Guido Beni, who lived
in 1575-1642.
“ Susana Bathing," a much discussed picture,
by Paulo Caliari.
“ Crowned by Cupid " and “ Venus with the
Lute-player " are two ancient and brightly


coloured paintings by Fizian, whose dates are
1477-1576.
There are also several interesting versions of
‘ ‘ Leda and Siran, ’ ’ the mythical legend, of which
is well-known to art students, the generally
acknowledged best treatments of the subject
being by Veranese and Grosse.
Antonio Molinari’s “Cupid and Psyche’ ’ makes
an excellent study, as does also Guilia Romano’s
“ Pan and Olympus,”
“ Christ Taking Tribute Money,” by Torre.
“ Lot and His Daughters,” by Presto, and
Correggio’s two pictures, “ Madonna Enthroned
with Four Saints ” and “ Madonna with Angels,”
are amongst the most original and best-liked
Biblical subjects of the Art Gallery.
Dresden is happy in the possession of Correg-
gio’s masterpiece, namely, “ Adoration of
Shepherds,” but for rich and life-like colouring,
and figures which seem to breathe from the
canvas, his beautiful picture, entitled “ Madonna,
Child and Saints,” is most generally admired.
Another painting which attracts attention by
its magnificent harmony of colours is one by
“ Potti,” called “ Four Church Fathers.”
“ Portrait of His Daughter as a Bride ” and
“ Portrait of His Daughter as a Matron,” by
Necclli, are historical paintings in the annals of
Italian art.


“ Noah Addicted to Drunkenness,” by
Molinari, is decidedly humourous and quaint.
An excellent portrait of “ Napoleon I.” has
been immortalised by Gerard.
Some other artists of the Italian school, of
whom the Dresdenites are justly proud, are the
following:—Vecchio, Tintoretto, Celesti, Robust,
Dolci, Barbieri, Giordano, Calassi, Carracci,
Merisi, Varotari, from whose brushes originals
decorate the walls of the Zwinger Gallery.
Some of the German artists are not by any
means to be despised from a technical point of
view. Preller’s “ Grave of Moses ” an ex-
cellent piece of work, and a reproduction of the
“ Dresden Theatre Curtain,” by Keller, is often
admired, and even envied by those who under-
stand and appreciate the delicacy of fine and
detailed painting. Grosse is, perhaps, the most
popular amongst German artists, and there are
more of his pictures than of the others in the Art
Gallery we speak of. Kaulbaeh and Knaus are
also well known, but nearly all the rest are as
yet too new and modern to have created much
attention; although one by name of Hans Hobein
painted a very life-like portrait of “ An English
Lord ” in the fourteenth century. Passing over
the dozens of less-interesting names, we come to
our Dutch masters, Paul Rubens and Van Dyck.


[ am proud to say I saw the originals of several
of these artists’ works, those of Rubens being:
The Garden of Love,” t( Hero and Leander,”
Satyr and Girl with Fruit,” “ Satyr and
Tigress,” “ St. Jerome,” “ Drunken Hercules,”
“ Bathsela in Bath,” “ Neptune Calming Sea,”
and “ Ruben’s Sons.” Van Dyck’s “ Portrait
of Himself” and his “ St. Jerome,” together with
Charles I. ’s Children ’ ’ and portrait of
“ Henriette de France, Queen of England,” are
all excellent examples of the artist’s style, while
his “ Drunken Silen ” expresses the humour of
his day. There are only two paintings of Rem-
brandt in the Dresden gallery, these being
“ Sacrifice of Monah ” and a portrait of his own
wife. I have kept the “ bon mot ” to the last,
and that is the world-famous picture and altar-
piece, “ Madonna di San Sisto,” by Raphael.
This is the original painting by the master of
masters, and was procured at enormous expense
for the Dresden Art Gallery. To briefly describe
the grouping, it is as follows:
The Virgin Mary is depicted supported and
surrounded by fleecy clouds; she holds in her
arms the infant Jesus—a sweet, blue-eyed babe.
A portrait of St. Sixtus stands to the right, and
one of St. Barbara l« on the left of the central
figures; just below the leet of Mary are the heads
and tiny white wings of two cherubs. Overhead


Wagner’s Grave at Bayreuth.


General View of Moritzburg Castle, built by Augustus the Strong of Saxony.


is written the inscription, “ Raphael Sanzio, 1483-
1520.’ ’ It is a very large painting, and stands
alone in the middle of a room, supported on an
enormous easel, and covered by curtains, which
are drawn aside to permit the public’s gaze to
rest on the beauties they disclose, and then
religiously dropped again over the prize they
guard. Visitors come in hundreds to see this
masterpiece alone.
In the adjacent Museum there are the usual
trophies and curiosities, amongst them an iron
horse-shoe which Augustus the Strong is said to
have snapped in two with one mighty effort of his
bare hands.
On the ground floor of the same building there
is a carriage, very richly ornamented, which once
belonged to Napoleon 1., and which was taken,
amongst other things, at the time of the great
Emperor’s final defeat.
Standing in the centre of one of Dresden’s
market-places, there is a fine statue, representing
“ Fame,” which was one of the spoils of the
Franco-Prussian War of 1870, It is to be hoped
that “ La Belle France ” —my beloved country—
will now recover all she has lost, including this
piece of true French workmanship.


FASHIONS IN FROCKING.
Frocking is not expensive in Germany, although
there are shops and shops. Of course, if you go
to a store which is recognised to be the smartest
and most up-to-date in the city, whence all the
leaders of fashion purchase their toilettes, you
can expect to pay as much for your clothes there
as you would in the best shops in London or
Paris, but there are other places where you can
get both quality and cheapness. Even in the
smallest of businesses, the customer meets with
civility and prompt attention. The same dis-
cipline, which is the backbone of the German
Army, pervades the rank and file of shop-walkers
and counter-attendants to a very solid degree.
There is no “ leave-it-if-you-don’t-like-it ” air
about the German serving-girls; and they don’t
mind taking any amount of trouble to please the
clients, and are seldom seen without an amiable
smile upon their faces. Men and girls alike are
particularly smart in procuring the change and
wrapping up parcels very neatly—there is no
waste of time, and a customer is never kept


waiting. Shops are open from 8 a.m. to 9 or 10
o’clock at night, and all day Saturday, too —the
weekly half-holiday takes place every Thursday.
The average German woman is not a good or
tasteful “ dresser.” To begin with, her figure
does not lend itself to the wearing of anything
out-of-the-common—it is too heavy and square,
corsets not being considered an essential article
of apparel. Nevertheless, nearly all the “better”
class of women devote much time and thought to
their appearance, and, although I have noticed a
lack of appropriateness in their attire, I have seen
quite as smart frocks in Dresden as in Paris, and
Berlin leads its own fashions. “ Unter den
Linden ” is noted as a promenade for smart and
original styles, worn by Berlin’s most elegant
women.


THE KAISER.
For years the Kaiser has caused his Ministers
more trouble than enough. Wilhelm 11. has
shown lack of tact and diplomacy by the many
injurious statements he has made in after-dinner
speeches at Berlin,
Secrecy has been the German policy in con-
nection with all preparations for the present
military crisis, and the Kaiser has, upon more
than one occasion, nearly given the whole show
away with his unruly and impulsive tongue. His
Ministers have had to apologise on the Kmperor’s
behalf for the detrimental insinuations and
dangerous remarks which have been published in
Germany as coming from the lips of their “ War-
God.’ ’
Once, during my sojourn in Saxony, it was
given out that the Kaiser was suffering with his
ear-disease, and had to be confined to his own
room, but popular rumour had it that his
Ministers had practically imprisoned him to pre-
vent him from doing their schemes any serious
harm, and that it was feared the Kaiser’s brain
was losing all reason. The utmost care and


precaution had to be taken to prevent him from
becoming utterly insane.
It is also generally understood in Germany
that the Kaiser has a second daughter and
youngest child who is both deaf and dumb.
Although the young Princess has every luxury
and tender care, she does not receive the homage
due to her rank, as she does not attend public
functions, and is kept very much in the
background on account of her sad affliction. I
have heard it said that she is liked by all who
know her, and is kind and considerate to her
attendants.


NO POLITICS.
During the time of my residence in Saxony, 1
remarked an absence of interest in things
political, and though 1 participated in many after-
meal discussions with Germans of average in-
telligence, the subject of conversation was never
politics, as we understand them in Australia. The
man in the street accepts the laws as they are
meted out to him, without comment or criticism—
he knows full well that he must sit down and take
them. Generally speaking, there is a philosophical
apathy which permeates the German people. I
cannot speak as an authority on this subject, but
I do know that the women do not take the
slightest interest in the Government administra-
tions, and when spoken to about women’s rights
they look upon such things as being quite out of
their sphere, and evince no desire to exchange
their lot in life for such benefits as we derive in
Australia, Of late years there has been a big
movement among the highly-cultured women of
Berlin to claim recognition from the authorities
of their talents in order that they may enter the


professional ranks, and vie with men in science,
law and medicine. Everything is so methodically
arranged that one’s very life is almost regulated
Each and every person is directly under the eyes
of the law—in other words, “Under the Kaiser’s
Thumb.”
