

A. S. SHCHERBAKOV /ss
Lr X i
UNDER THE BANNER
OF LENIN AND STALIN
VICTORY WILL
BE OURS!
W (42)
FOREIGN LANGUAGES PUBLISHING HOUSE
MOSCOW 1943


I'tr.ttfe.if til 4h*. fhit Oft <»/ HefiuOtir-


A. S. SHCIIERBAKOV
UNDER THE BANNER OF LENIN AND STALIN
VICTORY WILL BE OURS !
ADDRESS DELIVERED AT MEMORIAL MEETING IN COMMEMORATION
OF THE NINETEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE DEATH OF V. I. LENIN,
MOSCOW, JANUARY 21, 1943
Comrades, the people of the Soviet Union and the Red Army and Navy
are commemorating the nineteenth anniversary of the death of our
great Lenin in the midst of our Patriotic War against the German-
fascist aggressors for the honour and independence of our country,
and for our present and future existence.
The past year has been a year of severe trials, a great historical test
of the correctness of the path pursued by our Party and our country in
this greatest of all wars. This war has no precedent in history, either
in the scale on which battles are fought, or in the character of the
armies against which the Soviet Union has to contend —armies which
have set out to devastate our land and to enslave and exterminate our
people.
The war has been a stern test of the strength and stability of the
Soviet system. Last year our state came through the trials which fell
to its lot with flying colours. During that year the Soviet people and
the Red Army, under the guidance of our leader and military command-
er Comrade Stalin, changed the course of the war and paved the way
for new and still more significant victories. The past year saw the
triumph of Leninism in the most difficult period the Soviet regime
has ever experienced.
THE MILITARY SITUATION OF THE SOVIET UNION
For nineteen months the Red Army has been waging fierce battles
on the various fronts of our Patriotic War. During the past few months
the course of the war has undergone an important change. The Ger-


mans are not pushing our troops back today as they were doing last
summer and autumn. On the contrary, the Red Army is hammering at
tile ferocious enemy and is clearing our Soviet soil of the Hitlerite scum .
Today, it is not the Germans and their satellites who have the initia-
tive in military operations, but the Red Army, which is operating in
conformity with the plan of our Supreme Command, and striking
blow after blow at the enemy.
It is worth while making at least a brief review of the present mili-
tary situation of our country and comparing the positions of the bel-
ligerents at the present stage of our Patriotic War in order to bring out
the important military results already achieved by our Army, and in
order that the Soviet Union's favourable prospects in this war may be-
come clear. That these prospects are indeed favourable is proved by
the following facts.
By its heroic resistance the Red Army thwarted the adventurist
plans of the German forces already in the course of the summer and
autumn last year. As Comrade Stalin incontrovertibly proved in his
speech on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Great October Socialist
Revolution, the German-fascist army failed to achieve a single one of the
strategical objectives which Hitler set them last summer and autumn.
Taking advantage of the absence of a second front in Europe, the
Germans and their allies hurled against the Red Army all their avail-
able reserves. Their plan was to capture Stalingrad, outflank Moscow
on the east in order to isolate it from the Volga and Urals hinterland,
and then to deliver a crushing blow at our capital and bring the war
to a close in 1942. Hitler mustered scores of crack divisions against
Stalingrad., For many weeks, hundreds of thousands of Germans pushed
forward to that city, carpeting every kilometre of our Soviet soil with
their corpses.
Furthermore, primarily for the purpose of deflecting our reserves
from the Moscow front in order to facilitate the effort to crush it, and
also for the purpose of seizing our oil, the Germans struck a supple-
mentary blow in the South, in the direction of our oil districts. These
plans, however, were built on sand; the Germans failed to take into
account the actual strength of their own forces or those of the Red
Army. In other words, the plans wore a sheer gamble.
Last summer and autumn our country, and our Red Army, with-
stood the fierce onrush of Hitler's hordes, displaying wonderful heroism
and staunchness in the process, and upset the Germans' strategic plans.
Meanwhile, thwarting the designs of the German Command, the Su«


preme Command of the Soviet forces made preparations for a power-
ful counter-stroke. On November 19, last year, the Red Army passed
to the offensive and brilliantly carried out Stalin's strategic plan
for the rout of the German-fascist forces at the approaches to Stalingrad.
In a matter of only six weeks' fighting at the approaches to Stalingrad
the Red Army utterly routed 36 enemy divisions and completely sur-
rounded 22 more. The extermination of the German-fascist forces in
the region of Stalingrad is on the verge of completion. The approaches
to the city which bears the name of our leader and military commander,
Comrade Stalin, were transformed into a vast graveyard for the Ger-
man-fascist invaders (load applause).
Continuing to carry out Stalin's strategical plan, the Red Army
shifted its offensive operations to the North Caucasus, the Central
front, to the region of the Lower Don, to the region of the North Donetz,
to the region south of Voronezh and near Leningrad, and in all these
directions achieved important successes.
In the North Caucasus, the Red Army has flung back the Germans
for more than 300 kilometres and is continuing to drive them further;
under the blows of the Soviet troops the vaunted German troops are
continuing to retreat, abandoning their armaments and their wounded.
On the Central front the Red Army inflicted serious defeat on the
Germans and captured an important strategical point in the shape of
the city and railway junction of Veiikie Luki.
The Red Army struck a terrific blow at the German-fascist aggres-
sors south of Voronezh. Here, too, our Soviet troops are wiping out
many thousands of German invaders, taking tens of thousands of pris-
oners, capturing enemy war material and liberating thousands of in-
habited centres of the Hitlerite scum.
In the region of the Manich, the Lower Don and Northern Donetx
our troops are continuing to pursue the enemy.
Only three days ago our Soviet people were overjoyed to hear that
the troops of the Leningrad and Volkhov fronts have broken the sieg<*
of Leningrad.
People's Commissar for Defence, Comrade Stalin, said in his Order
of the Day of November 7, 1942: "The day is not far distant when the
enemy will feel the weight of fresh blows of the Red Army."
Today the whole world can see how the words of our great leader
and military commander come true, how the Red Army is raining blow
after blow on the heads of the arrogant German-fascist invaders. (Loud
applause.)


During the two months our troops have been on the offensive—from
November 19, 1942 to January 19, 1943 —the German-fascist army has
sustained the following losses on the Soviet-German front: our troops
have captured over 200,000 prisoners; the German-fascist army has
lost in killed alone over 500,000 men and officers; it has lost over 6,000
tanks, about 12,000 guns of different calibres, as many as 3,500 aero-
planes, as well as large quantities of ammunition, machine-guns, rifles,
motor trucks, and other war material.
The vast losses of the German army in man-power and armaments
during the two months' offensive of the Soviet forces signify a severe de-
feat for the German-fascist forces. These losses have sapped the strength
of the Germans and have seriously shaken the stability of their army;
whereas the victories of the Red Army have enhanced the fighting
spirit and organization of the Soviet forces and of the Soviet rear,
and have proved that the Red Army can beat the German army.
Vivid proof of the Soviet people's devotion to the cause of Lenin
and Stalin is provided by the widespread guerilla movement in the
rear of the enemy forces. The Soviet patriots in the rear of the enemy
have remained loyal to their country and are fighting dauntlessly to
free our soil from the fascist invaders. In spite of all the efforts of the
Hitlerite punitive expeditions to crush the guerilla movement, our
Soviet guerillas are rendering increasing assistance to the Red Army
by daring raids on enemy bases, wiping out the hated invaders, wreck-
ing enemy trains, blowing up bridges and destroying the enemy's
communications. The guerilla movement is growing in intensity and
area day after day.
The blows which the Red Army is inflicting on the German forces
are important not only from the military, but also from the interna-
tional political point of view.
By its successes, the Red Army has won the sympathy of all
freedom-loving nations. It is now the object of universal respect
and admiration, for it is bearing the brunt of the burden of the war
against Hitlerite Germany and her associates.
Another important point to note is that in the course of the war,
the ideology of German imperialism has been thoroughly undermined
and utterly exposed. The nations of Europe have learned what the
so-called "new order" which the Hitlerites are implanting in Europe
really means. They have learnt from bitter experience that the sole
aim of the Hitlerites is to exterminate all other nations, or else convert
them into slaves.


The successes of the Bed Army have shaken the faith of Hitler's ac-
complices in Europe —the Italians, Rumanians, Hungarians and Finns —
in the strength of the German army, and they have caused friction among
the accomplices of the fascist gang which will increase as time goes
on. The blows struck by the Bed Army will eventually lead to the dis-
integration and collapse of this robber gang who have united for the
puprose of plundering and exterminating the nations which refuse
to be slaves and to submit to Hitler's tyranny.
For weeks after the Red Army commenced its offensive the Hitler-
ite misrulers did their very utmost to conceal from the German people,
and from the world, the grave defeats the Red Army inflicted on the
German forces on the Soviet-German front. But truth will out, and
when the facts became known the Hitler Command gave its own in-
terpretation, a false one, of course, of the military situation. Judge
for yourselves how ridiculous is the position in which Hitler and his
henchmen find themselves again today.
On September 30, last year, Hitler boastfully stated in the German
Reichstag: "We have launched an assault on Stalingrad and we shall
capture it —you can be quite certain about that. . . . Once we have
occupied a place nobody can shift us from it. ' It is now evident to
everybody that every word Hitler uttered was sheer bluff. The Hitler-
ites did not capture Stalingrad. On the contrary, the German troops
have been hurled back from Stalingrad for more than 300 kilometres,
and the extermination of the 22 German divisions surrounded near
the city is nearing completion. Hitler would be glad to be able to
"shift" these divisions of his to some other place, but this is no longer
a matter that he can decide (laughter).
The forecasts made by Goebbels, Hitler's armour-bearer, were no
less unfortunate. With the object of influencing public opinion in the
neutral countries, he stated during an interview with Turkish journal-
ists last autumn, that the Red Army would be smashed before the
winter. He said: "I, who always weigh every word I utter, can safely
assure you that the Russian Army will cease to be a menace to Germany
before the winter sets in. In saying this I am convinced that, as always,
events will net let me down. I want you to recall this in a few months'
time." These few months have passed, and it is now evident to
everybody that this time, too, Goebbels lied. Jhe Red Army, which
Hitler threatened to destroy before the winter, is now inflicting severe
blows on the German forces, and is a greater menace to the German in-
vaders than ever it was before. (Applause.)


During the past few weeks the German Command have on several
occasions published the following official communique on the situation
"On the Eastern Front"': "It is learned in Berlin that the German forces
are shortening their line according to plan by withdrawing forward
bases. Heavy fighting is now proceeding in the region of the middle
course of the Don. The Russian forces have achieved some success,
but it may be said that they are conducting their operations within the
limits of the plan foreseen by the German Command." (Loud laughter.)
Thus, you see that the Gorman Command has gone so far in its prevari-
cations that it is floundering in its own lies.
In publishing such twaddle, the Hitlerites evidently imagine that
those who read or hear their communiques are unmitigated fools, for
what is the meaning of all this rigmarole about "straightening the
line," occupying "more favourable lines of defence," about events
developing on the initiative and according to the "plan foreseen by the
German Command" and so forth? If we are to take these communica-
tions of the H. tie rite General Staff seriously, the only meaning they
can have is:
that the rout of 33 German, Rumanian and Italian divisions by
the Red Army at the approaches to Stalingrad, and the surrounding
and extermination of 22 German divisions near Stalingrad, had been
foreseen in the plans of the German Command;
that over 200,000 German, Rumanian, Italian and Hungarian men
and officers were taken prisoner by the Soviet forces on the initiative
of the Hitlerite General Staff (laughter)-,
that the districts of North Caucasus—for the occupation of which
last summer and autumn the Germans paid with the heads of many tens
of thousands of their troops—are now being abandoned by the German
army in order to occupy more favourable lines of defence;
that the extensive territory hitherto occupied by the Germans be-
tween Stalingrad and the Don, and between the Don and the Northern
Donetz, are now b jing abandoned for the sake of straightening the
line! Is not this explanation of the situation on the Soviet-German
front offered by the lying and floundering Hitlerites enough to make
a cat laugh? What stupid and clumsy liars are the German Command!
It is not for pleasure that the Hitlerite misrulers are trying to hush
Up the true state of affairs on the Soviet-Gorman front!
What are the deductions and lessons to be drawn from the course
of our Patriotic War? They may be briefly summed up as follows.
This war has confirmed, even more strongly than previous wars,
6


the rule that a nation which fights self-sacrificingly for its freedom
and independence cannot be vanquished. Here, as in all things, our
great Lenin is proved to have been right when he taught our Party
that a nation which had tasted the fruits of liberty, which had set up
its own rule, and was willing and able to fight for its grand and noble
ideals will emerge victoriously from any struggle, no matter how ardu-
ous and complicated it may bo, and how stubborn and fierce the enemy.
The plans of the German imperialists to smash the Red Army and
to conquer the Soviet Union have now failed completely. The course,
the progress, the trend of the war has changed; but it has by no means
changed in favour of the Hitlerite army. It has changed in favour of
the Red Army; and as time goes on this advantage will increase. We
need have no doubt that the Red Army will succeed in making the
utmost use of this advantage. That is why the Soviet people look for-
ward to the future with such confidence.
During the course of the war, the majority of the nations of the world
have united against the Hitlerite would-be conquerors and their can-
nibal designs; the coalition of anti-Hitler states is becoming more closely
united and stands every chance of beating the Italo-German coalition.
During the nineteen months of the war, our Army acquired immense
military experience. It has become a modern army in the fullest sense
of the word. It is more organized. It is equipped with the most up-to-
date military technique and is fighting in conformity with the most
up-to-date rules of military science elaborated by Comrade Stalin.
The Soviet art of war, which Comrade Stalin has raised to a level worthy
of our great country, has already borne fruit in the shape of the
important victories of the Red Army and the grave defeats sus-
tained by the armies of our enemies.
THE SOVIET REAR IN OUR PATRIOTIC WAR
Lenin taught us that "to wage war as it should he, waged, it is nec-
essary to have a strong, organized rear. The best army in the world,
and people most devoted to the cause of the revolution will be imme-
diately exterminated by the enemy if they are inadequately armed,
provisioned and trained." These words of Lenin's have oven greater
significance in the present war than tliey had during the period of the
Civil War and foreign intervention. Military technique is a far more
important factor in the present war, than it was in previous wars.
To this we must add that the enemy who wantonly attacked us has


at his command the resources of almost the whole of Western Eu-
rope .
In launching their Avar against the U.S.S.R. the Germans calculated
that our industry and agriculture would be dislocated as a result
of the very first bloAvs and would be unable to keep our front continuous-
ly supplied Avith arms, ammunition and food, and that our country
Avould be plunged into economic chaos. But the Germans sadly miscal-
culated. It AA'ould, of course, be absurd to maintain that the losses our
country has suffered in the Avar against the German aggressors are neg-
ligible and that Ave can afford to ignore them. We have lost consider-
able territory, and Avith it Ave have lost people, grain, metals, fuel,
railroads and manufactured goods. Every commander and private of
the Red Army should keep this Avell in mind. Our country has sus-
tained grave losses. Nevertheless, it is a fact that in spite of the enor-
mous difficulties created by the capture by the Germans of important
industrial and agricultural regions, the Red Army's rear has succeeded
in coping Avith its tasks and in supplying the front Avith all that it
needs. The Germans AVIIO boasted that they have destroyed Soviet in-
dustry are UOAV more and more often asking themselves A\hcre the Rus-
sians are obtaining such large quantities of arms.
Under the guidance of the Soviet Government and of our Party,
our country has succeeded in organizing our economy under AA T ar con-
ditions in such a w r ay that the front is receiving everything it needs
in proper time and in the required quantities.
In the course of this, our country has solved problems far more
difficult than any that confronted the nations of our Soviet Union, and
of the world, in any period of history. One of these problems Avas that
of transferring our industries from the threatened regions to new bases
in the Eastern parts of the country. First of all it Avas necessary to pre-
vent our industry from falling into the enemy's hands, to evacuate all
that was possible and to destroy all that could not be evacuated. That
problem Avas solved. The Hitlerites failed to derive any benefit from
our industrial wealth.
But the problem Avas not only to evacuate the factory equipment
from the threatened regions, although this was complicated enough,
but also rapidly to install it 011 new sites and set it going. Hence,
it Avas not merely a matter of evacuating this equipment, but of find-
ing nenv bases for entire branches of industry, of transferring to the
East numerous Soviet factories and works, and at unprecedented speed
at that. The evacuated plants were quickly installed in their new sites
8


and put into operation. Many of them are now producing more than
before the war.
Simultaneously with the problems of transferring these plants to
new bases we were confronted with another extremely urgent problem r
namely, to increase in the East the output of fuel, electricity, metals—
ferrous and non-ferrous—iron ore and manganese, the production of
coke, and so forth. For this purpose it was necessary, in addition to
making better use of the existing plants and mines, to build new, or
enlarge the existing, plants. This problem, too, is being successfully
grappled with. Capital construction on a large scale was undertaken
in the East. New blast furnaces, open-hearth furnaces and power sta-
tions were erected and new coal and iron mines sunk. This work is still
proceeding. A number of extremely important plants have already
begun to function. This new work of construction is proceeding at a
rate unprecedented even in our country.
We have solved a problem which is one of the most difficult in war
time, namely, that of recruiting and training new workers for our in-
dustries and transport system. The trade, railway and factory appren-
tice schools organized on Comrade Stalin's proposal before the war
have been an important factor in the solution of this immense problem.
Since the war these schools have provided our industries and transport
system with about 1,000,000 skilled workers. In addition, many hun-
dreds of thousands of new workers, particularly women, have gone
into industry. These new workers learned their trade in an excep-
tionally short period and are now working successfully to supply
the needs of the front.
Inspired by their sense of duty to their country, our people are
displaying boundless enthusiasm in their work which finds expression
in the unprecedented scope of the All-Union Socialist Competition
now taking place all over the country. The Soviet patriots in our fac-
tories, mines and on the railways, are devoting every ounce of strength
to the cause of defeating the enemy. The heroic and self-sacrificing la-
bours of our Soviet people are an expression of their deep-seated love for
their Soviet motherland and of their readiness to suffer any sacrifice and
privation, and to overcome all difficulties, in order to defeat the enemy.
Needless to say, our industry was, and still is, confronted with
serious difficulties, particularly, the fact that the iron and steel in-
dustry and fuel and power bases are not keeping pace with the
requirements of industry and of our national economy as a whole.
These difficulties, however, are surmountable.


The urgent task before our industries is to accelerate the erection
and starting of new batteries of blast furnaces, new power stations,
coal mines, and other mines, and also to make better use of the exist-
ing plants.
Of enormous importance at the present time is the economizing of raw
materials, fuel, electricity and metals, and the mobilization of local
resources of every kind. Experience shows that local initiative
can be an extremely important auxiliary factor in increasing
supplies for the front and the output of articles of general utility.
The war has created considerable difficulties for agriculture. The
collective farms and state farms were obliged to increase the output of
agricultural produce, to learn to cultivate a number of new crops, and
to make good to some extent the losses our country has sustained as a
result of the capture of important agricultural regions by the enemy.
Our agriculture has succeeded in coping with these tasks.
The area sown last year was 2,000,000 hectares larger than that in
1941. Since the war our grain base in the East has been expanded and
the area under potatoes, vegetables, sugar-beets and other food and in-
dustrial crops has been enlarged.
Agricultural work is performed not only by all the able-bodied
adult population of these farms, but also by the aged and schoolchildren.
Industrial workers, office workers and schoolchildren in the towns
came to the aid of the collective farmers.
In the overwhelming majority of regions the spring sowing, the
harvesting and also the autumn sowing were carried out last year far
better, more quickly, and in a more organized manner than in 1941.
As Comrade Stalin said, our collective farms and state farms are
"honestly and punctually supplying the population and the Red Army
with food and our industries with raw materials."
The basic factor in the successes achieved by our agriculture is the
collective farm system, which was built up at the behest of Lenin.
Needless to say, small, individual peasant farming would have been
unable to bear the burdens of the war, and unable to supply the Army
and the country with the necessary food and raw materials. It is thanks
to the collective farm system alone that the Soviet State is surmount-
ing all the difficulties created by the war.
The collective farm peasants are exerting every ounce of energy
to help the Red Army to crush the hated fascist invaders. Last spring
many collective farms cultivated extra plots of land and contributed
the crops to the defence fund, thereby supplying the Red Army with


large additional quantities of grain and vegetables. At the end of last
year, the collective farmers in the Tambov and Saratov Regions started
collecting funds for the building of a tank column and a squadron of
army aeroplanes. In addition, out of their collective and private
stocks, they are contributing to the Red Army fund grain, vegetables,
meat, and other produce.
The example of the advanced people was enthusiastically followed
by the vast masses of collective farmers, industrial workers and office
employees all over the country, and a flood of individual contributions
are now coming in to supply the needs of national defence. This popular
patriotic movement to collect funds for the building of tanks, aeroplanes
and other armaments for the Red Army vividly reveals how inseverably
the interests of the collective farm peasantry are bound up with the
fate of their Soviet motherland. For the first time in history, the
peasants are fighting in a war to defend their own state, which has
ensured them a free, cultured and prosperous existence. For the first
time in history, the peasants regard a war as their own cause, the
outcome of which will determine their future destiny.
Two extremely important tasks now face the collective farmers:
the first is to complete their grain deliveries to the state. A number of
regions have already done this, but a number of regions and districts
are still in arrears. It is their duty to fulfil their obligations to the
state and to the Red Army at the earliest date, and to the full.
The second extremely important task which confronts the collective
farmers is to prepare for the coming sowing season. This year we must
obtain more agricultural produce than we obtained last year. This
imposes upon us the obligation to utilize the winter period to the
utmost for the purpose of making careful preparations for the spring
sowing.
In this Great Patriotic War our Soviet intelligentsia are standing
shoulder to shoulder with the industrial workers and collective farmers
and are devoting all their energy and knowledge to the cause of fighting
the German-fascist aggressors. Since the war, our intelligentsia have
given exceptional proof of what Soviet designers, engineers and techni-
cians are capable of by designing and organizing the production of
new types of weapons. An important factor contributing to the military
might of our country is the work our Soviet scientists have performed
in discovering new sources of raw materials and fuel in the Eastern
regions of our country, and in devising new methods of utilizing them.
Our engineers and technicians have performed an enormous task in


reorganizing our industries for war purposes, in transferring our plants
to new bases in the East, and in erecting new plants. Soviet medical
men and women, and all workers in the medical service, are self-
sacrificingly doing their duty towards their country and have
saved the lives of many thousands of our fighting men. A vast amount
of work has been performed since the w r ar by our Soviet agricultural
scientists, Soviet schoolteachers and workers in art and literature.
Inspired with patriotic fervour, and working hand in hand with the
workers and peasants at the front and in the rear, our Soviet intelli-
gentsia are helping the Red Army to crush the hated fascist invaders.
The organizational work our Party has performed during the past
year has transformed our entire country and even the people in our So-
viet rear. As Comrade Stalin said, people "have become more efficient,
less slipshod, more disciplined; they have learnt to work in war-
time fashion, and to realize their duty to our motherland and to
her defenders at the front—the Red Army. . . .
"... Never before has our country had such a strong and well
organized rear.'' (Applause.)
THE SOURCE OF THE STRENGTH AND INVINCIBILITY
OF THE SOVIET UNION
The whole world, friends and enemies alike, ask: what is the cause
of the unprecedented staunchness and heroism of the Red Army?
What is the source of the strength, might and invincibility of the,
Soviet Union?
The answers to these questions are provided by the history of our
country during the past quarter of a century. As a result of the Great
October Socialist Revolution, the nations of the Soviet Union, guided
by the Bolshevik Party under the leadership of Lenin and Stalin,
liberated themselves from tyranny in every form, built a new social
system, and instituted a genuinely democratic, Soviet regime. For
the first time in history the people are the masters of their own destiny.
The destiny and the interests of every worker in our country are merged
with the destiny and the interests of the state as a whole. The Soviet
regime is the regime of the working people themselves. This is the
source of its strength, stability and invincibility. Every worker in
our country can honestly say that in this Great Patriotic War against
the German-fascist aggressors he, or she, is defending the people's
rule, their freedom and independence.


Tlie Soviet State is strong because it is based on the indestructible
alliance of the workers, peasants and intelligentsia. It is this alliance
that is the source of strength of the Soviet system. This alliance has
become still more firmly welded in the course of the Patriotic War, and
this means that the Soviet system has become more stable than ever.
On the basis of complete equality of all races and nations, the
Soviet State united the nations of our Union in one, strongly cemented
family, and thereby enhanced our country's might to an enormous
degree. Every nation affiliated to the Union of Soviet Socialist Re-
publics can honestly say that in this holy Avar against the German-
fascist aggressors it is defending the freedom, independence and right
to happiness for itself and for the entire family of nations of our country.
In the course of two decades of peaceful construction, the Avorking
people of the So\ T iet Union raised Russia out of her age-long back-
Avardness and converted our country into a progressive state. The
Lenin and Stalin plans for the industrialization of the country and
the collectiA T ization of agriculture AA'ere carried out in an exceptionally
short period of time. The new socialist economic system is the result
of the great construct ia 7 c efforts and talents of a people freed from
tyranny in e\ 7 ery form. Thanks to the labour heroism displayed by the
masses, our country has become an industrial, collective farm, and
therefore, a powerful and mighty country. Kvery man in our army
knows that he will not be left without weapons, ammunition and
food as \A*as often the case with the soldiers in the Tsar's army in the
last world war. The source of strength and staunchness of our army is
the devoted support it is receiving from the entire Soviet people;
for every fighter in the Red Army knows that he is backed by the entire
Soviet people.
The strength of the Soviet people lies in their indestructible moral
and political unity. Our entire people are today more united than ever
around our Bolshevik Party and its leader, Comrade Stalin. (Loud
applause.)
Our Great Patriotic War has most vi\ T idly revealed what enormous
confidence the people have in the Party of Lenin and Stalin. In this
stern and grim time of war, thousands of new and devoted fighters
are pouring into the ranks of the Bolshevik Party. Men and women are
joining the Party who are prepared not only to suffer privation, but
to sacrifice their lives in the struggle against the enemy. It is sufficient
to say that last year no less than 1,340,000 working people joined the
ranks of the Party. This fact alone proves what confidence the people


have in the Party, and how inseverable are the ties which bind them
with the Party of Lenin and Stalin.
The peoples of the Soviet Union are fully aware of the danger that
hovers over our country and are mobilizing all their material and
spiritual forces to combat the enemy. The history of Russia knows no
few examples of patriotism, of progressive representatives of the
people sacrificing their all for the sake of their country. But history
has never witnessed such mass heroism and such unanimity as is being
displayed by all the nations constituting the U.S.S.R. in this war of
liberation against the German imperialists. Our people have never
been so organized as they are today. This is due to the fact that they
have at their head a leader and organizer like the Party of Lenin and
Stalin. These strong ties with the people have enhanced the Party's
strength: and the people who have united round the Party are invin-
cible.
The Red Army acquires invincible strength from the consciousness
that it is fighting in a just cause, for noble and lofty aims, for the
honour, freedom and independence of our country. Every fighter in
our Army is aware that he will not be able to save his life and liberty,
and the life and liberty of his family and of the entire nation, unless
he destroys the enemy. Either fight to the last drop of blood and save
his country or surrender himself, his family and his nation into slavery
to the German cannibals —this is the alternative that confronts every
Soviet fighter. This explains the mass heroism of the Soviet fighters,
their staunchness and determination, and their unquenchable desire
to master the art of vanquishing the enemy.
Such are the sources of the strength of the Red Army and of our
country, thanks to which our Soviet people and our Red Army will
crush the German aggressors and purge our soil of the fascist scum.
UNDER THE BANNER OF LENIN, AND UNDER STALIN'S
LEADERSHIP VICTORY WILL BE OURS!
Notwithstanding the grave losses and sacrifice our country has
had to bear, the situation at the front in this Patriotic War is more
favourable for us than it was last year, althougii even then our Army
struck the enemy heavy blows. This is evident from the successful
offensive now being conducted by our Soviet troops, who are steadily
carrying out the strategical plans of our Supreme Command.


The defensive and offensive operations of the Red Army in the-
period of the war under review, the stubborn fight it has waged against,
the German-fascist aggressors, have created the conditions and a firm
foundation for victory over the enemy.
The Red Army became steeled and strong in battle, and is now
stronger and more organized than before. It has acquired rich experience
in the conduct of modern warfare; in the flames of battle its men and
commanders are successfully learning the principles of the art of war.
Our Soviet troops have learnt not only to defend our lines, but also
to smash the enemy's defences, and by skilful manoeuvring to surround
and exterminate the enemy.
In the course of the war the organization and discipline of our
Soviet rear have improved, and new and mighty sources for supplying
the needs of the fighting forces have been tapped. There can be no
doubt that in the struggle for the liberation of our land from the fascist
invaders the Red Army will receive the increasing support of the
Soviet people.
Now that the foundation for victory over the enemy has been laid,
the liberation of our land from the fascist invaders depends on the
exertion of all the efforts of the Soviet patriots and the mobilization
of all the resources of our country.
Great as the successes achieved by the Red Army may be, it would
be naive to believe that the enemy is already defeated. The enemy's
strength has been sapped and is being strained to the utmost, but he
is still strong; the German aggressors may still plunge into new adven-
tures and give us serious trouble. It would be dangerous and harmful
to the cause of victory for us to become complacent now.
It is not in the nature of the Bolsheviks to become panic-stricken
and despondent when things go badly; 011 the other hand, Bolsheviks
cannot , they have no right to become intoxicated with success. Intoxica-
tion with success is as harmful as panic and despondency over failure.
We must look truth soberly in the face. Cur people, and our Red Army
and Navy, still have severe trials ahead of them. Final victory over
the ferocious gangs of German-fascist robbers and their allies needs
time and still further sacrifice on the part of our fighters, workers,
collective farmers and intellectuals.
To achieve victory we must display self-sacrificing heroism and
iron discipline at the front, and self-sacrificing labour, iron discipline
and organization in the rear. There can be no doubt that our Soviet
people, who have proved capable of withstanding an onrush of Hitlerite


invaders such as no other country could have withstood, will have the
strength utterly to rout the German fascists and their allies!
All efforts to support the front! All efforts for victory!
Long live the great Soviet people and their heroic Red Army and
Navy!
Long live the great and invincible banner of Lenin and Stalin,
which is calling us to victory!
Long live our leader and military commander, Stalin! (Loud and
prolonged applause.)


508
00167859


USTS.ALI
.? y r rr
