

UNDER FURRED HATS
(6th Light Horse Regiment)
BY
G. L. BERRIE (Lieut.)








UDER FURRED HATS
(6th A.L.H. Rest.)


Brig.-General C. F. Cox, C. B., C.M.G., D.S.O., V.D., First
Commanding Officer 6th A.L.H. Regiment.


UNDER FURRED HATS
(6th A.L.H. Regt.)
BY
GEO. L. BERRIE (Lieut.)
SYDNEY
W. C. PENFOLD & CO. LTD.
88 PITT STREET
1919


Printed by
W. C. Penfold & Co. Ltd., 88 Pitt Street, Sydney


DEDICATED TO
OUR FALLEN COMRADES




FOREWORD
JN the following pages I have briefly described
during its term of service abroad, the career
of the 6th Light Horse Regiment, from
December, 1914, to August, 1919.
Written in 1919 from memory, aided only by
the scanty information to be gleaned from the
Regimental War Diaries, the narrative is unavoid-
ably incomplete in many respects, and I can only
ask the indulgence of my readers in this regard.
At this late date it has also been very difficult to
obtain a really complete series of photographs, and
my thanks are due to members of the Regiment,
notably Lt.-Col. Fuller, Major Tooth, and
Corporal Marsh for the use of their collections.
I have attempted In the narrative and accom-
panying sketches to portray that spirit and morale
which were unshakeable features of the Regiment’s
careei, and if the perusal of this little book brings
back memories of the good—the work accom-
plished no matter how hard or dangerous, in
those days of glorious mateship—and helps forget-
fulness of the bad—the petty annoyances and
heartburnings—then this souvenir of Its service is
more than justified.
The Author.




DECORATIONS AWARDED THE REGIMENT
D.S.O. AND ORDER OF THE NILE
Lt.-Col. C. D. Fuller
D.S.O.
Major H. D. White, Major S. A. Tooth, T.-Major H. S. Ryrie
M.C.
Lt. R. G. Black, Lt. H. Dickson, Lt. R. B. Ronald, Capt. H.
Hardy, Capt.-Chaplain A. H. Teece
D.C.M.
Sergt. P. Ryan, Lieut. W. T, Macansh, Lieut. F. L Ridgway,
Sergt. J. M. Bargh, Sergt.-Major B. P. Sheridan, Cpl. C. H.
Livingstone
M.M.
Lieut. C. R. Capel, Sergt. D. Baird, Sergt. H. Thompson, Sergt.
R. J. Foster, Tpr. W. Bassett, Sergt. W. Potter, Sergt. T.
Sheridan, Sergt. S. G. McNair, Cpl. D. Smith, Sergt. McNamee,
Cpl. Hindmarsh, L.-Cpl. F. Arnott, Sergt.-Major W. Kilpatrick
CROIX DE GUERRE
Major M. F. Bruxner
SERVIAN STAR
Hon. Capt. J. Hanton
MEDAILLE MILITAIRE
Q.-M. Sergt. J. Cheater, Sergt. H. Foran




CONTENTS
Gbapicr Page
I. The Birth and Training of the
Sixth ~ ~ .. .. , #
11. Early Days on Gallipoli .. .. 23
111. Later Days on Gallipoli .. ..
IV. Days of Romani ~ .. .. 5 0
V. The Promised Land .. .. .. g 2
VI. Amman and Es Salt 121
VII. The Jordan Valley !3 9
VIII. The Last Lap
Casualties—Gallipoli .. .. x 7 x
Casualties —Sinai and Palestine .. 173


ILLUSTRATIONS
Page
Brig.-General C. F. Cox, C. 8., C.M.G., D. 5.0., V.D., First
Commanding Officer 6th A.L.H. Regiment .. Frontispiece
Regimental Lines, Maadi, February, 1915 .. .. Facing 16
At the head of C Squadron Lines, Maadi, 1915. Designed
by Sergeant S. McNair Between 16-17
Swimming Horses at the Delta Barrage, May, 1915 Facing 18
Shell Green .. .. .. . • •• •• •• ~ 36
Reserve Areas behind Ryrie’s Post ~ 4°
Entrance to Ryrie’s Post ~ 4 2
Lieut-Colonel G. D. Fuller, D. 5.0., 3rd Class Order of the
Nile, who Commanded the 6th Regiment from Novem-
ber, 1915, until taking Command of the 2nd Light Horse
Brigade, December, 1918 .. .. .. . • >, 46
“Lloyd Lindsay” Section, Maadi Sports, January, 1916 „ 60
Maadi Sports, January, 1916. 6th Regiment Team winning
Final of Tug-of-War event Between 60-61
The Regiment moving from Serapeum to Salhia, April,
1916 .. .. . • •• •• • • • • Facing 62
Regimental Horse Lines, Salhia, April, 1916 .. Between 62-63
Romani .. .. .. •• •• •• •• >< 64-65
£t Maler .. .. .. .. •• •• •• » 64-65
Watering Horses at Bir-el-Abd .. .. •• •• Facing 66
Burning Captured Enemy Material at Hod-el-Bayoud, May
16, 1916 ~68
Watering Area, Et Maler .. .. .. .. ~ 7 2
New Year Sports, Bayoud, 1917 .. .. .. ~ 9 2
Signal Station, Zagadan .. .. .. .. .. Between 92-93
Regiment Camped at El Mazar .. .. .. .. ~ 94"95
The Regiment Bivouacked near Lake Belah .. .. Facing 96
A Patrol Dismounting near El Fukhari .. .. Between 96-97


Page
The Wadi Ghuzze near Shellal .. .. .. Facing 100
The Caves at Khaseif ~ .. .. ~ ~ ~ 102
Demolition of a Viaduct, Beersheba-Asluj Railway ~ 104
Temp. Lieut.-Col. H. D. White, D. 5.0., who Commanded
the Regiment from November. 1917, to March, 1918,, no
Watering Horses at a deep well on the Beersheba-Hebron
Road .. .. .. .. .. .. Between 110-in
Between Talaat-ed-Dum and the Jordan Valley .. Facing 122
The Brigade halted during Amman Operations, March, 1918
Between 122-123
Part of the Regiment going into action at Amman, March
28, 1918 .. .. .. .. .. .. Facing 126
Mount of Temptation .. .. .. .. .. •• >, I 2&
Watering Horses at the Mellahah-Auiah Junction .. 140
Dust Scene, Jordan Valley .. .. .. ..
Dust Scene, Jordan Valley Between 146-147
Village of Ain-Es-Sir Facing 148
Jericho Jane Between 148-149
Aziza Railway Siding .. .. .. •• •• Facing 152
Regiment Camped near Jerusalem after Final Operations
Between 152-153
The Regiment moving out from Jerusalem for Wadi
Hanein .. .. • • • • • • • • Facing 154
The Zig-Zag near Enab Between 154-155
Lieut.-Col. Fuller on “Illawarra ” Facing 156
“The Mascot” .. .. .. •• •• •• » *s^
A Squadron (Wadi Hanein) .. .. .. .. ~ 158
Farewelling a “1914 Leave” Man .. .. Between 158-159
“Dipso” Facing 160
“Cobar” .. .. •• •• Between 160-161
“The Mascot ” Facing 162
Major Cross .. .. .. .. •• 168




CHAPTER I
THE BIRTH AND TRAINING OF THE SIXTH
AIL roads led to Victoria Barracks. From
city, village, farm and farthest-out station
they came during the dying months of
1914; a never-ending stream of men borne
thither by the variable tide of their own reasons.
Who could in those early days analyze or fathom
his own reasons? The “old soldier” came back.
There was the man who sensed change, excitement
and travel; the gambler who decided on the spin
of a coin; and there was he who felt instinctively
that man’s greatest job was at hand. There came
the man who saw all his mates going and the many
thousands who could find no reason at all save the
irresistible magnet of a great unknown adventure.
Blended into the early Australian Battalions and
Regiments, they formed a true volunteer army;
they acquired a corporate pride and belief in them-
selves that is difficult of attainment save amongst
men who enrol together, train and drill together,
and finally start off scratch to test that training and
themselves. Such was the material of which the
6th Light Horse Regiment was formed in
September, 1914.
It is not too much to say that during its early
training days; those days at Rosebery Park, Rose-
hill, Liverpool and Holdsworthy, the 6th Regi-


merit acquired one of its most valuable assets, that
quiet confidence in itself which characterized it as
a unit throughout, and which time and time again
justified its possession. From the enrolling stage
at Rosebery Park, and throughout its various
Australian camps, the Regiment trained steadily.
Both men and horses were carefully selected;
finally, on December 19th, 1914, Lieut.-Col. C. F.
Cox marched his Regiment out of Holdsworthy
for embarkation, and early next morning the
Suevic, with the Regiment on board, moved from
its berth at Woolloomooloo and dropped anchor
out in the harbour. Early in the afternoon the
Suevic cleared Sydney Heads and the first stage of
the Regiment’s active service commenced.
Taken as a whole the voyage was uneventful.
Few horses were lost; the health and spirits of the
unit were excellent; and one and all looked for-
ward eagerly to their first sojourn, in uniform, on
foreign soil.
After brief stays at Aden, Suez, Ismailia and
Port Said, the voyage of the Suevic finally came to
an end on the Ist of February, 1915, at Alexandria.
Disembarking the same day, the Regiment en-
trained to Cairo, and, walking and leading horses,
proceeded to Maadi, where it took over part of the
camp previously occupied by the Ist Light Horse
Brigade.
By the 7th of February, various detads from
other transports marched in and the personnel of
the Regiment was practically complete.
Camped on the edge of one of Camo s few white


Regimental Lines, Maadi, February, 1915.
B




At the head of C Squadron Lines, Maadi, 1915. Designed by Sergeant S. McNair.




spots, the Regiment settled down to the task of
completing Its training, exploring between-whiles
the mysteries of an ancient Eastern City. The
English residents of Maadi worked nobly for the
comfort of all ranks; recreation huts, a soldiers’
club and tobacco store, were speedily provided,
and many an early Light Horseman in Egypt will
ever remember gratefully the genuine hospitality
of English homes open to them without any
differentiation as to rank.
Beyond the camp lay the training grounds; a
few miles of sandy waste bounded by the Mokat-
tam Hills. We got to know those hills pretty
thoroughly; we reconnoitred them, captured them
at the extended gallop, and did outpost against an
Imaginary foe. We despatched foraging ex-
peditions which generally returned with nothing
but an alarming thirst; we built stone walls and
dug trenches, we drove each other from hill to hilt
and finally fought a pitched battle with the Ist
Brigade out towards the “Petrified Forest.”
Needless to say both Brigades claimed a victory.
We spent days on the rifle range, we route marched
to Helouan and the Barrage; we took the new and
enthusiastic soldier’s pride in our horses and gear;
and all the while the rumour of something big
afoot whispered incessantly in our ears.
The Infantry were going somewhere, that was
certain; and where was there a handy battleground
where we and our horses w r ould be of any use?
We began to look askance at our steeds; were they
to be our albatrosses? Finally we knew that the


Infantry had gone somewhere; slowly news came
to us magnified and distorted of the “Landing/’
but as we were destined to know a few weeks later,
the wildest figment of fiction that leaked through
to us paled beside the reality. Then we knew that
the Infantry were only hanging on, and an insis-
tent longing permeated the Regiment to be allowed
to volunteer to go to their aid. Rumours came and
went that we were going, and finally, the climax
came one night at the Stadium, where General
Ryrie announced to the Brigade the news of our
early departure for Gallipoli.
Much has been written of the vehement eager-
ness of the Light Horse Regiments to take part in
the Gallipoli undertaking. But some had to be
detailed to stay behind with the horses, and many
a man after vain endeavours to be included in
the marching out strength, quietly marched out
independently and turned up out of the stokehold
when the transport was well at sea. Beyond an
Issue of infantry ruck-sacks and puttees, the Regi-
ment retained Its Light Horse equipment; a short
route march or two and the preparation was over.
The Transition
“To the halt, on the left form platoon.”
The old mess huts at Maadi rang with strangely
unfamiliar shouts, the while a Lance-Jack, with a
smattering of infantry drill, tried vainly to initiate
his section Into the art of forming fours.
“Cut It out, Corp.,” remarked a burly bushman
from his perch on the table. “I’ll bet you all you


Swimming Horses at the Delta Barrage, May, 1915.




won at the two-up school last night that we never
leave the horses.”
“You haven’t got the latest, though,” returned
the Lance-Jack, “the storeman belongin’ to the
R.Q.M.S. says he saw indents go in for new equip-
ment a few days ago and there was one for Tommy
rooksacks, and the Orderly-room Sergeant says the
Ist Brigade is going for a cert, in a few days.”
“Well, why don’t they send us,” another chipped
in; they want us bad enough, and for all the good
the horses will ever be to us they might as well
give the lot to the Gyppos. The blasted war will
be over before we get a smell.”
“I wonder who’ll be left behind If we do go,”
speculated a third.
“Why 25 per cent, and all farriers and trans-
port drivers.”
“Here’s one transport driver who won’t be left
in Maadi, anyway,” chimed in a tall fair-haired
lad from Albury.
“You’re just the one w r ho will be left, Snow,”
came a chorus of replies. “Old Robby doesn’t
love you well enough to take you over there to get
potted.”
“Well, we can see some stoush at the Stadium,
to-night, even if we can’t get the real thing. Bon-
soll, the middleweight Tommy, is fighting Cameron
out of the 2nd Regiment, and there’ll be mobs
over out of the Ist Brigade. The “Old Brig.” is
refereeing and there’s oceans of booze in the can-
teen; it ought to be some night.”


Slowly the crowd dispersed to the tent lines.
Only the usual afternoon stables cut into the
ceaseless quest for dinkum ‘‘furphies, and the
speculation concerning, and elaboration of the
latest and most startling. Signallers went about
with an exasperating air of possessing secret infor-
mation, and the orderly trooper reposing in the
shade of the tent, never listened more acutely to
the snatches of telephone conversation or the con-
fabs between the Adjutant and the C.O.
But the arrival in the evening of big batches of
men from the Ist Brigade, and the early rush to
the Stadium in anticipation of the evening’s box-
ing, eclipsed temporarily the one insistent thought
uppermost In everyone’s mind. The Stadium was
packed to its uttermost capacity. Practically the
whole Brigade, and, In addition, the visitors from
the Ist Brigade and the Tommy Garrison from the
prison camp, were seated round the ring.
Several preliminary bouts over, the event of the
evening—Bonsoll, an ex middleweight champion
of Ireland, and Cameron, a lean, tough-looking
Queenslander —was announced. A ten-round con-
test, brimful of Incident, game and clever, ended
in the Brigadier’s decision being given to Bonsoll
on points. The excited plaudits of the Tommy
contingent over their representative's win, were
seconded no less heartily by the vast concourse of
Light Horsemen present.
Thoroughly worked up by the evening s sport,
on top of the intense anxiety as to the longed-for


move, breathless silence cut instantaneously
through the vociferous cheering as General Ryrie
walked into the centre of the ring and held up his
hand. Instinctively every man in the vast gathering
knew w T hat was coming, and the very air seemed
charged with the welter of mental emotions in
every breast, now pent up to breaking point
As if to emphasize the supreme drama of the
moment, the “Old Brig.” remained with uplifted
hand for several moments before he began.
"Lads,” and his powerful voice carried to the
furthest corners of the Stadium, “this is the first
chance I’ve had of addressing you since our mates
fixed bayonets in earnest over yonder, and I want
you to join me in three cheers for our gallant com-
rades in the Infantry, the men who made the world
ring with their deeds on the 25th of April, and
who are now hanging on and in dire need of help.
Now then”—and the vast volume of cheering
echoed and re-echoed over the desert spaces and the
quiet streets of Maadi,
“I know that you are all anxious to give them all
the help you can, and I can tell you to-night on the
best authority that It won’t be many days before we
are alongside of them.”
Then a veritable pandemonium of sound broke
loose. Hundred of hats flung repeatedly sky-
wards; hundreds of men wringing each other’s
hands; a babel of cheering, yelling; a tumultuous
surging backwards and forwards of the excited
throng; the floodgates of human emotion had burst


at last, and the Intense anxiety of the past ten
days, mingled with the haunting fear that the
chance would not come had at last been allayed.
They had the “Brig’s.” word for it; they were
going.


CHAPTER II
EARLY DAYS ON GALLIPOLI
the 14th, 1915, will always dwell in the
memory of the early members of the
Regiment. After dark that evening, the
parade quietly assembled, and except for a general
tenseness of feeling and the burden of the ruck-
sacks, it might have been an ordinary night route
march. But from Bab-el-Louk to Cairo station,
the feelings of the Regiment found vent in a
vociferous answer to the cheers of the population.
And many a broken section w r as completed before
the Cairo platform was reached. Infantrymen,
wounded lightly at the landing, and anxious to
return, quietly fell in as, we marched along.
Eagerly we plied them with questions and as
eagerly drank in their answers. And with one and
all the main reason for going back was —their
mates. Entering, as we were, the threshold of
one of the great moments of life, a moment of
intangible and fascinating mystery, the sight of
these infantrymen, and the knowledge of what
their action stood for, quickened in us the blood of
manhood already stirred by the prospect of the
great unknown.
The night passed, a welter of physical and
mental emotions; the march through Cairo, the
crowded troop train, and finally, at daybreak the


transports lying alongside the wharf at Alexandria.
We embarked during the morning on the Lutzow,
a name which stood for a long time as an example
of what a troop transport should not be. But
packed as we were, and suffering the worst of
accommodation and sanitary arrangements, who
cared? At the most It was for a few days, and
everyone was in the humour to make allowances.
We sailed from Alexandria on the afternoon of the
15th of May, and on the morning of the 18th,
passing by Cape Helles, beheld the truly thrilling
spectacle, as it was then, of a naval bombardment
and an aeroplane surrounded by puffs of smoke.
Finally, on the evening of the 19th, after a run
along the edge of the war zone, we anchored off
Anzac Cove, and spent a large part of the night
listening to incessant rifle fire. We had come to a
war at last. All night long the heavy firing con-
tinued, waning only with daylight, and by mid-day
arrangements had been made for our disem-
barkation. In broad daylight we took our places,
on lighters and mine sweepers, and headed to-
wards Anzac Cove. Each vessel as it drew in to
the beach ran its gauntlet of shrapnel; cover on
board was Indifferent, the shooting was excellent,
and the curiosity of many extreme. But our land-
ing was effected and our first baptism of fire cost
nothing in casualties.
We neared the landing-places; the rugged cliffs
and scrubby hills frowning down on the narrow
patch of shingle, brought to us in full force the
almost Incredible feat the infantry had performed


a few weeks previously, and as we struggled up
Shrapnel Gully through thick low scrub, and along
single file pads, the general feeling of wonderment
became intensified. We reached a point where a
friendly pinnacle hid us temporarily from view,
and here we received orders to dig in.
As if to emphasize the order a number of shells
fell in quick succession unpleasantly close to our
camping area. In remarkably quick time every
man had a funkhole of some sort handy, and
practised the rabbit act many a time during the
afternoon. But for the evidence of the grim reality
on every side of us, the picture of Shrapnel Gully
that spring afternoon would remain indelibly Im-
pressed on many a memory.
Gradually widening from the Neck, as its slopes
approached the beach, the valley, emphasized at
intervals by abrupt knolls and sharp gulleys, lay
clad in the soft green of the holly and arbutus,
speckled at intervals by a species of everlasting.
And the setting sun cast the shadows of Imbros
and Samo-Thrace like a gentle pall, over what be-
came later, the graveyard of many of our best, the
ultramarine of the placid Aegean Sea.
The Regiment’s casualty list was Inaugurated
early. Trooper Berghelin, of C Squadron,
received a shrapnel pellet in the eye soon after
landing, and Colonel Cox, on the following day,
was wounded In the leg and evacuated.
The big engagement of the 19th of May pro-
duced its aftermath of night activity. The
Turkish trenches vomited a constant and rapid fire


from dark until daylight, and till the evening of
the 22nd the Regiment stood to in Shrapnel Gully
in nightly expectation of a repetition of the Tur-
kish attack.
We discovered early what “fatigues” meant on
Gallipoli. Road-making, water-carrying, ration-
loading, wood-gathering —we were fresh and
eager; but our anxiety was mostly directed towards
knowing when and where our turn in the trenches
was coming. About mid-day on the 22nd, we
moved in single file up a track made slippery by
rain, towards the Neck. Branching off to the right
into a deep sap, we wound along a narrow and
tortuous communication trench. The occasional
crack of rifle fire sounded directly overhead. At
length we took possession of our sector of the
front line, relieving part of the First Infantry
Brigade. Our range card showed Lone Pine about
half right, Johnson’s Jolly to the front, German
Officers’ trench and the Chessboard to the left.
Initiated into the use of a periscope few will
forget that first glimpse of No Alan’s Land and
the Turkish trenches. Just in front of our sector
lay one of the few flat pieces of ground on the
whole line; to right and left It broke into gullies
heading towards Lone Pine and the unoccupied
marine trenches. The gullies were piled with
Turkish dead, and the flat ground from almost our
own parapet to that of the enemy was dotted with
inanimate forms, and as if In pity the wild
everlasting swayed gently In the spring breeze.
The costly defeat sustained by the Turkish


Army a few days previously, had resulted in
feverish digging activity by day, and rapid firing
by night.
We settled down quickly to the routine of trench
life. Dug as it was in action, our sector needed a
good deal of consolidation and improvement. So
for the 28 days we remained in possession, con-
tinuous work, in addition to observation post duties,
prevailed; sapping, tunneling, beach fatigues and
road-making.
Night Post
“Any scran left, Sergeant?”
The Bushman leant his rifle against the wall of
the communication trench, and put the question
with an air more hopeful than expectant.
“Your section drew it; spoonful of spuds and a
drop of Joe Smart s onion tea. You’re back late,
aint you ?”
“I stopped half-an-hour at the corner well trying
to get a drink. Had to come away then without
a mouthful.”
“Better get your tea into you then, you’re on
post to-night. Number one post and second shift.”
“What about possies?”
“Some of them are camping on the firestep and
some in the sap; there’s only the green stripe
possy empty.”
“Hell,” muttered the Bushman.
He picked up his rifle, pushed past the tunnel
fatigue carrying bags of earth to the dump in the
rear, and made his way to where Number One Post
c


was stationed. Silently he located the drop of tea
and mushy vegetable mixture, and groped about
for a tin of bully and a biscuit. Sitting on the fire-
step he had just about completed his meal, when
the sergeant on shift appeared and moved over to
where several huddled figures lay on the firestep.
“Your shift,” he whispered, touching one. The
figure sat up, yawned, rubbed his eyes, and seized a
rifle leaning against the side of the bay. The Bush-
man picked up his and followed him to the Obser-
vation Possy, where a motionless figure stood
gazing through a loophole. Silently the relief took
place.
The Bushman took his stand, with fixed bayonet,
in the bottom of the trench, his mate clambeied up
alongside the observer and took over the loophole.
For half-an-hour he remained there. Fifty yards
away lay the Turkish trenches. A succession of
rifle shots came at regular intervals. Mostly
aimed too high they whistled harmlessly over the
parados, but an occasional ‘*phut” on the sand-bags
round the loophole made the observer wonder
were they only flukes or was the place maiked.
Only last night ... It seemed hard to be potted
like a rabbit looking out of a burrow. Surely on a
night like this they couldn’t locate a loophole at
the distance, unless a sniper had crawled out.
Something moved, or was it a flicker of light, a
rat or a swaying of the low scrub. Wasn t the
half-hour up? “Bill!” The Bushman climbed up
beside him. “Just on the tick, old son. See any-
thing?” “I can't be sure,” came the whispered


reply, “but they keep peppering the loophole and
I could swear I saw something move near that
dead Jacko straight in front. I saw a flash twice
that seemed closer than their trenches. Don’t
look over, Bill”
A second later the Bushman’s head was lowered.
“Nothing moving just then, anyway. Damn
these loopholes,” he thought savagely, “you can see
nothing through them except things that don’t
exist. Another few shifts on nights of this sort
and that boy will be done; he’s as good as gone
now.”
His usual custom was to chance a look over the
top every five minutes if the firing wasn’t too
heavy.
The night was cloudy and windy. Through the
loophole the utmost eye-strain could tell him
nothing, but the fitful starlight enabled the Bush-
man to reassure himself in a momentary glance
over the top.
A movement of the grass, the gleam of light on
a tin, a darker patch of shadow and the shapeless
blotches of humanity, anything or nothing at all
would put the wind up a man, once his nerve
began to go. And he wouldn’t get the wind up.
Better risk a bullet through the head than lose his
confident alertness and break up like the boy stand-
ing In the trench below him. Stay, something did
move then, near the dead Jacko. Perhaps the boy
was right. Stopped now, but there was no glint of
light there before. He must chance a look over


A jet of flame and a breath of air on his cheek.
Some clods rolled off the parados on to the boy
below. Like a flash he was alongside the Bush-
man, leaning against the bay wall and breathing
hard.
“Bill, did he get you?”
“No; but close enough. You were right, lad;
there’s a sniper near the dead Jacko, and he s ours.
I’m going round into the next bay. I can get a
good shot there between the sandbags. When I
chuck a clod over put your hat up over the para-
pet.”
A few seconds later the clod fell and up went
the hat. Two almost simultaneous reports, a
bullet hole in the hat and then quiet.
“We’ll know in the morning if we ve got him,
whispered the Bushman. Our shift s finished, the
sergeant’s waking that chap on the firestep. You
turn into his nap.”
A minute later the Bushman stumbled along the
firing line and turning down a sap stopped in front
of a long and narrow hole scalloped in the wall.
From the loose earth piled above a stripe of
greenish moisture oozed out, and trickled to the
floor of the sap. Someone —no one knew whom
had been buried there in the days of the landing,
by the natural formation of the sap. Crawling
into the narrow cave, the Bushman, feverishly
anxious to make the most of his two hours, closed
his eyes and endeavoured to forget the narrow
escape of his just finished shift. But sleep re-
fused to come. He might as well have kept on


shift and let Some other poor devil have the rest.
That stink overhead was awful. He could almost
hear the ooze dripping. Something fell on him.
What odds. If those cursed tunnellers were only
carrying their dirt along any other sap, he might—
“ Wake up, Bill; your shift. Gosh! the blow-
flies must be bad where you come from. You’re
lyin’ in a nest of squashed maggots!’’
♦ * * * *
An eight-hour armistice had been arranged for
the 24th of May. It came none too soon.
Towards eight o’clock in the morning, the
hour fixed for the cessation of hostilities, firing
died away on either side, and a white flag, followed
by a red crescent and a party of Turkish stretcher-
bearers, appeared on the enemy parapet. Simul-
taneously our own burial parties went over the top.
An approximate boundary line was pegged in No
Man’s Land, and the grim task of collecting and
interring the dead began. A large number
had to be buried where they lay, others on
our side of the boundary rolled into stretchers,
carried over and delivered to the Turkish burial
parties. Prominent officers on either side stood at
the boundary and interchanged such ideas as they
could. The occupants of the trenches were under
strict orders to keep well under cover, but the
curiosity regarding one of the most remarkable pro-
ceedings of the campaign, found vent In many a
hurried glance between sandbag gaps, and snap-
shots taken of the world at large through loop-


holes. A few of our own men, mostly on our own
side of the line, were recovered and identified, but
the day’s work was for the Turkish Army, and the
dead buried along the whole front ran into many
thousands, an eloquent reply to their boasted inten-
tion of driving the Australian into the sea. By
four in the afternoon the work was completed, the
burial parties were withdrawn, and the armistice,
strictly observed by both sides, came to an end in a
brisk interchange of rifle fire.
On the 19th of June, with a strength of 16
officers and 403 other ranks, the Regiment left the
trenches for a spell. Twenty-eight days in the line
had resulted in a considerable casualty list, but
sickness had not yet begun to raise its head to any
extent. That was reserved till later. We moved
round to Deadman’s —later known as Rest Gully,
and established ourselves there, hoping for a well-
earned rest before being asked to take up another
front line sector. The hope was as short-lived as
the rest. That same Saturday evening the digging
of Chatham’s Post began. Loading up at dark
with pick and shovel, 220 rounds of ammunition,
rifle, rations and waterbottle, the Regiment moved
up hill and across valley towards the extreme right
of the Anzac position. There we emerged into
No Man’s Land, close to the water’s edge; a long
sap was pegged out, and, covered by a party some
distance in front, we dug. The phrase “swinging
it,” and the spirit which it embodied, was unknown.
All night long picks and shovels rang unceasingly;
just before daylight we collected our gear and an


exhausted body of men stumbled, gasping, over the
hills towards Rest Gully, and climbed with drag-
ging steps to the possies on the terraces above.
The weather had now become intensely hot.
Few men there were who were not on day fatigues;
and continuous night digging completing the sap
and forming the first redoubt on Chatham’s Post,
broke, to all intents and purposes, the health of
the Regiment. Dysentery and diarrhoea made
their dread appearance, and at the end of ten days,
when we moved to our position In the Brigade
sector, on the extreme right, the iron grip of
disease was indelibly stamped on the personnel of
the Regiment. Among the casualties to date, the
deaths included Sgt. Parkes, and Troopers Murray,
Brown, Jefferey, Bonnar, Pattrick, Bellinger and
Dunn; and the wounded, Captain Bruxner, Lieut.
Hordern, Sgts. Moffat, Collins, Pattrick, Lam-
borne, and Cpl. Baldie.
Digging Chatham’s
Rest Gully! at sundown.
Not too much rest about It, it seemed to the
Bushman as he sat in his possy on the top terrace.
They had come out of the trenches early that morn-
ing and the fatigues shifting Headquarter’s stuff
round from the top of Shrapnel Gully had been
solid and lasted well up to mid-day. He was feel-
ing none too good; a touch of dysentery had sent
him on sick parade that afternoon and the M.O,
had put him off duty. Everyone had hoped for a


few days real loaf, and here was the whole Regi-
ment falling in on the roadway across the gully for
an all-night digging stunt.
One of the senior Majors was talking and frag-
ments of what he was saying drifted across:
“Dangerous job.” “Likely to be under fire.”
“New position on the right Hank.” “Infantry
won’t tackle it.” “We’ll show ’em,” etc., etc.
All the usual guff.
The Bushman got up and put a few things into
his haversack. He threw on his gear, and descend-
ing to the roadway, quietly fell in on the end of
the line. The sunset glow was fast dying away as
the party moved in single file up over the first ridge
and commenced the descent Into Victoria Gully.
Rifle and full gear, with an additional 60 rounds,
haversack, waterbottle and either a pick or a
shovel made the Bushman hope that the new
position wasn’t too far away.
The pace was slow —it had to be —and fully an
hour passed before the long line filed across Shell
Green and down a steep narrow sap towards the
beach. Then, through a brief tunnel, it emerged
out Into No Man’s Land, a fairly flat strip with a
steep ridge rising on one side and the wavelets of
the Aegean Sea lapping on the other. The ground
had been already pegged out. Several hundred
yards of communication sap seemed to be the first
job, and with little delay each man was placed on
his allotted ground. Pick and shovel were plied
unceasingly. The earth, save In very few places,
was bad digging; scrub roots and loose stones made


shovelling difficult, but silently the long line lowered
itself gradually.
The short summer night passed slowly away.
Unceasingly men toiled, but the first halt was called
as the presage of dawn, the faintest breath of
moving air, stirred the stillness of the scrub and
stunted pines. Climbing again the hillside sap,
men made their way to Shell Green, stacked their
picks and shovels, and moved off in straggling
groups for the pad that led over the hills to Rest
Gully.
The Bushman realized during his journey back
how much of his waning store of vitality the night’s
w r ork had cost him. The dead weight around his
body and over his shoulders seemed to increase
with every hundred yards. His breath came in
short gasps, and the intense weariness of body and
soul made him wonder whether he could keep up
till he reached his dug-out in Rest Gully.
With sagging steps he began the final climb.
Along the winding road, around the dug-outs
where exhausted men already lay in the sleep of
semi-unconsciousness, up the steps cut in the hill-
side, and staggering along the top terrace he
dropped his gear on one side of the dug-out and
himself on the other.
And daybreak came to Rest Gully.
* * * * * *
The Brigade took over the extreme right flank
of the Anzac position. The sth Regiment
occupied Chatham’s Post, the 6th and 7th taking


over successive sectors inland. For some little
time we enjoyed the novelty of being a considerable
distance from the enemy trenches. From certain
concealed spots day observation could be done
without a periscope, and by night the hideous strain
of loophole observation could be reduced to a
minimum. But the approaches from Shell Green
to our position were a veritable death-trap. In-
cessantly “Beachy Bdl paid calls on his vay to
Anzac Cove, and rarely a day passed without
casualties, nearly all in the rear of the front line.
The road to Anzac Beach was partly exposed
to snipers from the direction of Gaba Fepe, and
fatigue parties had the choice of doubling a few
hundred yards along the beach, or climbing a
number of heart-breaking hills. Generally they
risked it one way. Risks were also cheerfully
taken for the sake of a swim at night. The utter
absence of fresh water and soap, and the continued
occupancy of trenches, had given the louse scourge
full play. What wonder the men risked anything
from a sniper’s bullet to a court martial, for the
unutterable relief of -a salt water swim. It is
difficult to say how much the Aegean Sea contri-
buted towards the upkeep of such health as re-
mained m the Regiment, undermined at it was by
continuous work day and night, scanty rations of
mostly shocking quality, and unnecessarily primi-
tive sanitary conveniences. The latrine was merely
a deep open pit. There the fly pest multiplied m
millions and dysentery spread broadcast. Fever
and cholera were mostly unknown, due, let us sup-


Shell Green.




pose, to careful inoculation of all ranks. Men
who were mere walking skeletons from continued
diarrhoea, could be found, if off duty, sleeping
nightly alongside a foul latrine pit. Reinforce-
ments were scarce, the small stream coming in was
quite Insufficient to allow for the evacuation of any
save absolute nervous breakdowns.
But the morale of the Regiment remained un-
changed. Men endured the depth of physical
suffering for the sake of hanging on, of remaining
alongside their mates and refusing to be beaten.
Early in July the gradual approach of the enemy
trenches necessitated the occupation on our part,
of Holly Spur, later known as Ryrie’s Post. Saps
and tunnels were driven across Poppy Valley and
gradually linked up; the new line forming the
future support trenches of Ryrie’s Post. The
further digging and consolidation of the position
was fraught with considerable danger from
snipers, concealed in the almost impenetrable
scrub which covered the hollow and succeeding
ridge behind Holly Spur, Parties to cover the
sappers from surprise attack, lay, day and night,
In front of the sapheads. By night snipers fired
unceasingly at the sound of the picks and shovels
on the ridge above them. Cramped by hours of
motionless silence, the covering party, lying in half
sections, spent Its nights listening alternately to
the overhead whistle of lead and the steady work-
ing of Mauser bolts less than thirty yards away in
the thick scrub below them. By day the slightest
movement brought a barrage of shrapnel along


the edge of the spur. Lying face downward, or
crouching amongst the prickly wild holly, the day
post spent its shifts amid torments of heat, thirst
and flies. Then, as always, the water supply was
very scanty. One pint a day, sometimes not that,
was the allowance, beside the meal issue of tea,
often so nauseating as to be undrinkable. _ ?
On the 12th of July, the digging of Ryne s
Post still being in progress, a demonstration took
place along the whole of the Anzac Front with
the view of assisting operations then in progress
at Cape Helles. Thirty men from C Squadron
under the command of Lieut. Ferguson, advanced
across the dip in front of Flolly Spur, and taking
up a line on the succeeding ridge, opened hre on
the Turkish positions in front. Immediately
heavy shrapnel enfiladed them from the direction
of the Olive Grove; rifle and machine gun fire
replied from the Brown trenches, and by the time
the withdrawal was ordered, thirteen of the little
force had become casualties. Three Kidman,
O’Brien and L/Sgt. Ellis—were killed outright;
K Ronald and Creer died of wounds shortly
afterwards, and among the wounded were the
brothers Body, the brothers Capel, McCarthy,
McKeown, Rodd and Walker. The bodies ot
O’Brien and Kidman were recovered with great
difficulty, costing two more men in the process,
Troopers Paul and Wiggins, wounded. For work
done on July 12th, Lieut. Ferguson, Sgt. iooth
and Troopers Foster and Fenner were mentioned
in despatches.


One Mail-day
“Orderly-Sergeant for mail!”
The welcome order was passed eagerly and
rapidly along the support trenches and firing line,
and the Orderly-Sergeant soon appeared making
his way to the main sap leading out to Head-
quarters, amid a running fire of comment and ex-
hortation.
“Wonder if she’s a big one.” “Fifty bags on
the beach yesterday for the Brigade.” “Hope
there’s some parcels.” “Bring me one, Sergeant;
I’ll do water fatigues for you for a month for just
one blooming letter.” This from the Bushman
seated on the firestep cleaning his rifle. “Poor old
Fred,” he continued, “hope he gets a good swag
of It himself, he hasn’t had a single letter since we
landed, and it’s just about got him down.”
The Orderly-Sergeant made his way to Head-
quarters, and collecting the letters for his Squad-
ron, sat down on the terrace and rapidly ran
through the bundle for his own. It was a big
mail, scarcely a man In the squadron whose heart
would not be gladdened by the distribution; but,
for himself, not a solitary letter. And this was
the fourth mail since they had landed, and each
time he had had to swallow the same disappoint-
ment. What had happened to his mail. He knew
they had written and he had written himself every
week. It seemed uncanny that his should have
been singled out to be sunk, lost, or mislaid. With
an effort he tied up the bundle and returned to his


squadron in the trenches, nerving himself for the
bitter task of handing them out and of seeing the
joy in every heart reflected on every countenance.
At least his week as Orderly-Sergeant was up that
morning and surely some would come before such
a task fell to him again.
His appearance in the firing-line was greeted
by a roar of expectation. Passing rapidly from
hand to hand the letters were distributed and the
lucky recipients for a brief space forgot their
troubles in their mental flight to home and people.
“No luck, Fred?” queried the Bushman.
The Orderly-Sergeant shook his head and
gazed out across the ocean towards Samo-Thrace
with a set and bitter look on his face. Then he
walked slowly away to his dug-out.
“Well, he’s stiff, and no mistake,” said a
trooper, unfolding a precious missive for the third
time. “Stiff enough to get knocked this afternoon.
What’s the exact strength of the stunt?” to his
neighbour in the next bay.
“Only a demonstration. I think,” was the reply.
“Over the top on to the next ridge and get nicely
shelled. There’s a big attack on Achi-Baba this
afternoon and the idea is we stop reinforcements
going down. They’re doing the same right along
the line.”
“More likely to stop a few shrapnel pellets our-
selves,” grunted the first speaker. “How many
going?”
“Thirty, I think. A few out of each troop.


Reserve Areas behind Ryrie’s Post.




They’ve not been detailed yet, but I know we’re
going, and so is Fred. Here goes to give my gun
and ammunition a special clean, anyway.”
* * * * * *
The next spur in front of the trenches was as
yet unoccupied. Beyond that again, and across a
deep gully the enemy held a strong position, and
from it a natural get-away whence reinforcements
could easily be hurried towards Cape Helles.
Simultaneously with other small bands of “demon-
strators” along the Anzac Front, thirty men went
over. Moving rapidly through the thick scrub
they lay extended on the next spur and with no
cover save the semi-invisibility afforded by the
prickly holly, poured a rapid rifle fire into the
enemy position across the deep gully. But in-
visibility proved no protection against incessant
shrapnel fire. In withering blasts the batteries
from the Olive Grove searched for and found the
thirty men.
* * * * * *
The burial party had been working hard on
Shell Green since dusk. But before the first
shovelful of earth had been thrown back a figure
came running across from Brigade Headquarters.
“Which Is Fred’s grave?” he panted. “Better
put these In with him; they came a few minutes
ago in a bag of buckshee mail from the beach,”
and the shovels rang again over a still figure with
a bundle of letters on its breast.
* * * * * *


The strength of the Regiment had now been
reduced by death, wounds and sickness to 13
officers and 344 other ranks. In a bare three
weeks our strength had wasted to the extent of
60 men. A reinforcement of 55 other ranks
arrived on the 13th of July; by the end of the
month the temporary increase in strength had
more than disappeared. The work of trench con-
struction seemed never ending; the heat had now
become intense, and the flies unimaginable lo
compensate slightly, firing-line activity a ate
somewhat, as if to prepare for the strenuous
month of August, close at hand.
But outside the front line the daily routine
continued to be the same ever hazardous under-
taking. Never a fatigue left the post without
knowing that luck alone would determine whether
or not it would be the last. Lieut. Robson was
killed by shrapnel on July 24th, and Sgt. i res-
silian met his end a few days previously from a
sniper’s bullet.
Early in August preparations began to be made
for a big advance. Kits, blankets and coats were
stacked in Poppy Valley, the “white rags ’ were
issued and sewn on, and everyone waited breath-
lessly for something stupendous to happen.
Fortunately, as events turned out, the Regiment
was not called on to storm the Turkish positions
opposite. The whole episode of Suvla Bay and
Lone Pine proved, in the end, ineffectual. Our
machine gun section and a squad of bombers took
part in the defence of the captured Lone Pine


Entrance to Ryrie’s Post.




position and suffered heavy losses, including Lieut.
Lang, who died of wounds on the 12th of August.
The casualties among officers necessitated a
number of appointments to commissioned rank:
R.S.M. Paulin, R.Q.M.S. Thompson, S, M.
Jordan, Sgt. Morell, Sgt. Tooth, and Corpl. Close
became 2nd Lieutenants.
Towards the end of August, C Squadron of the
12th Regiment, became attached to us as a 4th
Squadron, and things settled down again to the
drab monotony of trench occupation. Daily the
ranks were thinned by sickness and occasional
killed and wounded. But by the middle of Sep-
tember a change in the weather took place. Light
rain fell and the worst of the summer heat seemed
to have passed away.


CHAPTER III
LATER DAYS ON GALLIPOLI
ON the evening of the 16th a demonstration,
with heavy shelling, took place along the
whole front, the enemy replying briskly
with both artillery and rifle fire. A seventy-five
struck the top of the parapet at Ryrie’s Post,
killing Capt. Richardson, Lieut. Buskin and three
other ranks. As if in return, the enemy demon-
strated vigorously next morning. A bombing raid
was attempted on one sector of Ryrie’s Post, but
was easily and effectively driven back.
Lor several days demonstration was followed
by counter-demonstration. Lieut. Drummond was
badly wounded by shrapnel, and Brig.-Gen. Ryrie
was also among the casualties, his place In com-
mand of the Brigade being taken by Col. Cox,
leaving Major J. L. White In charge of the Regi-
ment. On the 2nd of October a welcome draft
of reinforcements arrived, Lieut. Hordern and
127 other ranks, bringing the regimental strength
(4 squadrons) to 23 officers and 442 other ranks.
October passed by uneventfully; occasional
heavy firing demonstrations on either side, and the
gradual diminution of sickness being the only
noticeable features. Towards the end of the
month some bitterly cold days forewarned us of
what we might shortly expect, and with the scanty


materials available, dugouts were made as weather-
proof as possible. Major J. F, White, who had
hung on gamely up to now, was evacuated in a
very low T condition, and Temp. Major H. D.
White took command.
hurther promotion to commissioned rank had
become necessary, and between September and
November the following N.C.O.’s became officers:
Sgt.-Major Marks, Sgt. R. G. Black, Sgt. M. C.
McKenzie, Sgt. S. M. Menzies, Sgt. H. Hardy,
Sgt. N. Dickson, Sgt. A. J. Britten, Cpl. A.
Walker, Sgt. K. Alford, Cpl. O. Tooth, Cpl. A.
Reynolds, Sgt. R. B. Hedley.
The Regiment’s bombing organization had now
reached a high state of efficiency. Enemy rifle
and machine gun fire from positions opposite to us
were effectively silenced by means of a trench
mortar and catapult, the latter worked chiefly by
d rooper F. J. Collins, who had since the earliest
days made a name for steady courage and un-
shakeable nerve.
The gradual advance of the Turkish lines along
the spur towards Chatham’s Post, made the rear
of Ryrie’s Post and Poppy Valley very insecure.
The sth Regiment successfully attacked and
occupied the most advanced enemy position, and
then by sapping and tunnelling, Wilson’s Outlook,
distant only a few yards from the enemy, was
established. The post became the scene of
vigorous bombing duels and a veritable death-
trap, but it had the desired effect of preventing


any further advance of the enemy towards Chat-
ham’s Post.
Major Fuller returned from England on the
20th of November, and a little later took charge
of the Regiment vice Lt.-Col. Cox, who assume
command of the Ist Light Horse Brigade. On
the 26th inst. the Regiment exchanged places with
the sth Regiment, and took over Chatham s Post
and Wilson’s Outlook. As if to signalize the
change, the weather, which had gradually grown
colder, set in wet, with violent windstorms, culmi-
nating on the night of the 28th with a heavy fall
of snow, the thermometer showing 26 degrees ot
frost The trenches were practically unprepared
for such weather. Beyond the issue of a few ram
coats, we were equipped only for the torrid
months just passed by. A few observation posts
were roofed with iron, but no sleeping possy was
protected by anything but oilsheets. ihe cold
continued to be intense for several days and nights
Numbers were evacuated with frostbitten feet, an
the strength of the Regiment became so low that
continuous night duty was unavoidable. tor S*
consecutive nights one post was occupied by the
same three observers. It became second natuie
to sleep for just as long as the spell lasted, an
many an observer offered up a heartfelt prayer
when the bright searchlight from our little friend,
the destroyer, crept slowly round the beac rom
Gaba Tepe and rested on the Turkish trenches
opposite Wilson s Outlook and the seaward slopes
in front of the Beach Post line. The slightest


Lieut.-Col. C. D. Fuller, D.S.O., 3rd Class Order of the Nile,
who Commanded the 6th Regiment from November, 1915,
until taking Command of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade,
December, 1918.




sign of a target on the other side of our red light
glaring seaward was enough to bring a salvo of
shells from the little destroyer’s ever-ready guns;
yet, in spite of both guns and searchlight, the
Turks managed to build a barbed wire entangle-
ment right to the water’s edge. To our surprise
one morning we saw that about a quarter of the
distance had been completed, and machine guns
and rifles were carefully trained on the spot in
anticipation of the next night’s operations. What
it cost the Turks in casualties to complete that line
we could not estimate. As a job we made it as
hot for them as we could; but completed it was
several nights later, and we ungrudgingly took off
our hats to the enemy’s courage and tenacity.
In spite of the incessant night duty and intense
cold, conditions had vastly improved. The fly
pest had vanished; lice had abated considerably;
both quantity and quality of rations had im-
proved, and the length of the winter night made
possible at least seven hours sleep, which although
broken, differed very much from the short periods
of the earlier days—those brief snatches of sleep in
cramped dug-outs, interrupted by false alarms.
During the early part of November we ex-
perienced one of the most unique proceedings of
the campaign, known as the “silent stunt.” For
a week, along the whole front, not one single
round of ammunition was fired, save for a few
shots from the batteries. The whole position
might have been inhabited by the dead as far as


activity went in the firing-line. As if to make the
situation more perplexing to the enemy the silent
stunt was followed by several very heavy artillery
demonstrations.
On the 10th of December, a number of des-
troyers, lying well out to sea, off Chatham s Post,
bombarded with concerted salvos, Gaba Tepe and
the enemy’s positions in the neighbourhood of the
Olive Grove.
With the abatement of the blizzards of the end
of November and early December, came fine and
warmer weather, and once more the remaining
handful of the Regiment settled down to a philo-
sophic acceptance of trench life, tinctured with
speculative wonder as to what would be the out-
come of it all. By the middle of the month per-
sistent rumours of an impending move developed
Into the certainty of a complete and final evacua-
tion. The removal of artillery, the departure of
all medically unfit, the destruction of various
stores and the different sham fatigues exhibited to
the Turkish gaze for mystification purposes, all-
pointed to the inevitable end. It Is difficult to
analyze the feelings of the attenuated Gallipoli
garrison when the matter was placed beyond al
doubt by the issue of evacuation orders.
For those of us who had, throughout seven
lurid months, dwelt in an inferno of death and
disease, the underlying sentiment was not for our-
selves, but for the men who had fallen in a
desperate and unsuccessful gamble. The little


graveyard at Shell Green, the tiny crosses
scattered about Chatham’s Post and Poppy Valley,
and always the sight of the Aegean Sea, never
failed to remind us, if reminder were necessary, of
those whom we seemed to be abandoning. But we
knew none the less, that the enterprise had failed,
and If our hearts were heavy with the thoughts of
what Gallipoli stood for, there came eventually
the hope of succeeding later in some other venture.
And, finally, when parties had to be detailed, com-
petition was keen for a place In the post of honour,
the last garrison to leave the trenches.
The dispatch of baggage on the 14th, Cpl.
Baird in charge, was the first tangible move made
by the Regiment. Numerous shows for the mis-
leading of Turkish observers were instituted.
Large parties of men marched solemnly across
Shell Green carrying empty water cans and empty
boxes into the sap near Brigade Headquarters. • A
turn to the left and a few hundred yards brought
them back to their starting point, and if the Turkish
field glasses had been equal to the distance, they
would have revealed Brig.-Gen. Ryrie exercising
himself with an empty bully beef box on his
shoulder. Strangely enough, Shell Green, which
had always been a spot particularly favoured by
the enemy’s shrapnel, was left almost unmolested
during the period. So were many points on the
ridges behind Chatham’s and Ryrie’s Posts. It
now became apparent that the success of the
evacuation depended mainly on the weather, the
navy, and secrecy. Silent nights were alternated


with the usual expenditure of rifle and machine
gun fire and bombs. On the 17th heavy weather
appeared to be working up again; slight rain fell
and a stiff breeze prevailed, but on the following
day a lull followed, and everyone wondered if at
least one phase of luck was going to stick to us.
The programme had by now been well mapped
out. On the evening of the 18th the first large
party, 13 officers and 116 other ranks, filed quietly
out of Chatham’s Post and embarked safely at
Anzac Beach. The last two days were remark-
ably quiet along the whole line.
The strength of the Regiment on the last day
consisted of 13 officers and 142 other ranks.
Divided into nine parties they left at various Inter-
vals from 6 p.m. to 10.30 p.m., leaving 51 all
ranks to garrison Chatham’s Post until the fina
move at 2.30 the following morning. The night
was calm and bright moonlight prevailed.
Occasional clouds threw shadows on the trenches
opposite and played tricks with the scrub along the
base of Poppy Valley and the beach.
The destroyer’s searchlight swept persistently
the coast line from Gaba Tepe, and occasionally
shot across the hills towards Maidos. The last
parties had been stationed in Wilson’s Outlook
since nightfall. Crouched in forward listening
posts they waited, stolidly fatalistic, for the never-
ending hours of suspense to pass. At first a
sniper opposite proved a welcome break, but his
persistence, the regular thud on the parados and


the trickle of dirt soon assumed an iteration that
became maddening.
The last night was not a “silent stunt.” Shots
were fired at intervals from Chatham’s Post and
the beach line, but Wilson’s Outlook remained
wiapped in the silent and freezing moonlight.
The frozen midnight air chilled thoroughly the
small band of watchers during that last long vigil.
Neither blankets nor greatcoats were left to
possibly hamper their movements. No one closed
his eyes even momentarily during those nine
lingering hours. Sleep seemed as impossible as
the whole proceeding. It seemed incredible that
everything should go off successfully; that the
enemy should not guess that during those early
morning hours all that remained to oppose them
was a handful of calmly desperate men.
Just after midnight the faint hum of a distant
aeroplane was borne by the night breeze along the
thinly-held line. Turkish it proved to be. Pass-
ing low along the whole of our line, it seemed im-
possible that discovery could be avoided. And
three shots fired in quick succession by “Beachy
Bill” made many a heart steel itself in anticipation
of the expected Turkish charge. Was the great
forlorn hope to miss after all by a “short head?”
It wanted only a couple of hours, at the most, of
luck, to bring off successfully the last moments of
a desperate gamble. With ears, eyes and souls
astrain, the little band remained breathlessly tense
for those last gradually fading hours.
Fortune had, though we knew it not, decided in
E


our favour, and one of the great feats of the war
went off without a single hitch. _At half-past one
20 of the remaining 51 filed quietly out; half an
hour later they were followed by sixteen more,
leaving the final party of 2 officers and 13 men in
possession of both positions. Of these, two men
patrolled the front line of Chatham’s Post
glancing occasionally over the parapet towards
Holly Spur, peering into outgoing tunnels, and
meeting every few minutes at the head of the tunnel
to Wilson’s Outlook. The party at the latter post
busied itself setting a number of mechanical rifles
and connecting a number of bombs with slow
fuses. Timed to go off at intervals for hours after
the departure of the final party, they must have
contributed to the deception of the Turkish
trenches, if such were really necessary.
At last the moment arrived. Meeting at the
tunnel head at half-past two, the sentries in Chat-
ham’s Post heard soft footfalls coming along the
gallery. Silently they took their places in the line,
and with muffled footsteps the final party of ‘‘die-
hards” followed the long sap up the main ridge
from Chatham’s Post, through the top tunnel and
out on the terrace beyond, Lieut.-Col. fuller
bringing up the rear and blowing out the candles
as he passed. Pausing a moment at Brigade
Headquarters, where our little band arrived
almost simultaneously with similar bodies from
the sth and 7th Regiments, we moved across
Shell Green, crossed the head of Clark s Gully,
wound over Gun Ridge, passed through the cover


mg parties stationed there, and moving by way of
the Beach Sap, reached our rendezvous at “B”
Depot. Few knew the way to “B” Depot better
than the diehards of the right sectors, yet even
that was not left to chance; the road was clearly
marked with a whitish substance. A string of
rowing boats rocked gently alongside the little
jetty. As if in farewell a solitary shell from
“Beachy Bill—possibly his last—screamed over-
head on its flight to Anzac Cove.
With the same silent efficiency that had
characterized the whole of the evacuation, the
boats were rapidly loaded; a steam launch went
ahead and gradually disappeared in the waning
moonlight; we realized that the almost impossible
had happened. As far as our Brigade was con-
cerned not a single mishap had occurred. A mine
sweeper awaited us several miles from the shore.
We climbed out of our row boats, and waited,
shivering and conscious of the inevitable reaction,
for our journey to Lemnos.
By now a series of sheets of flame marked the
coast line from Suvla Bay to North Beach, and a
mighty explosion, the blowing up of Quinn’s Post,
followed by an Instant crackle of Turkish rifle
fire, had told us that the last man, whoever he was,
had embarked from Anzac. Now that it was all
over there were few who did not feel the unutter-
able relief. None there were who did not know
that one mistake, one backhand stroke of luck must
have made the concluding hours of Gallipoli the
same story of ghastly tragedy which had lasted


since the landing. For the labour, the suffering
and the losses of our blood brothers had been
sacrificed, and well we realized it, on the altar ot
incompetency. But none of the blame attached
to the men who fought. And looking back on a
never-fading period, the outstanding feature,
apart from his courage and dash, was the astound-
ing morale shown by the Australian soldier.
It is almost ludicrous in these later days of ex-
perience to look back and remember the needless
hardships, the primitive methods and the petty and
useless-restrictions placed on the trench dwellers.
We knew well enough in those days when anyone
blundered with regard to the smaller parts of our
existence. But the same spirit of pride that made
men practically die before they were evacuated,
the determination to do a bit better and hang on
a bit longer than the next man, lasted rig tto t e
bitter end, and it imbued the A.I.F. with the know-
ledge that its unconquerable belief m itself was
justified, as it was right till the firing of the last
In the gradually waning gloom of that Monday
mornino- we moved away towards Lemnos, and a
few hours’ steam brought us into Mudros Harbour
and alongside the troopship Beltana. I hen we
realized the feelings of those who had left us on
the previous evenings. Men leant over te e
railing straining their eyes to catch a glimpse o
some particular mate; and heartfelt greetings and
expressions of relief as our mine sweeper dr-ew up
alongside, brought home to us what they had felt,


the men who would have given worlds to have
been with us to the last. We quickly transferred
to the Beltana, and with the exception of a small
party on the Anchises, the evacuation strength of
the Regiment was complete.
For two days we remained in Mudros Harbour,
and then the Beltana sailed for Alexandria,
arriving there early on Christmas morning. That
Christmas Day compared well with one in the
workhouse. The rations on board throughout had
not been remarkable for either quantity or quality.
Whether they had been exhausted or not remains
one of the mysteries of the war, as far as the
humble ranker was concerned at any rate. But
Christmas dinner left more spaces unfilled than
overloaded, and from three o’clock in the after-
noon till nine at night we sat on our kits on the
upper deck. Fed only by savoury odours issuing
from the saloon we fasted—and prayed. Entrain-
ing towards midnight, we reached Zeitoun in the
small hours of the morning and, scorning sleep,
spent the remainder of the night profitably in a
steak and eggs canteen.
We sunned ourselves in the soft warmth of the
Egyptian wfinter morning, and ejected from our
clothing most of our “companions” in the evacua-
tion, meantime discussing our future movements.
The Last Night
“Don’t block the way there, file on quickly;
this isn’t a picture show!”


The snapped-out command came from a Naval
officer standing on the end of the little sandbag
and planking jetty. The momentary delay over,
the Bushman stepped off the pier into the little row
boat, one of a long string with a tug at the sea-
ward end, and sank in a huddled heap in its stern.
Almost immediately the tug went ahead and the
shore slowly receded.
Was it really over. All of the Regiment was
off, anyway, because he had seen the Colonel step
in and he had brought up the rear. And someone
had said something about a picture show. _ Some
parts of the whole show might make good pictures,
the essence of a man’s brain couldn’t be put on to
a. film though. They couldn’t photograph his
thoughts and feelings when the Sergeant told him
he would be in the last party of all, the “C 3,” or
those of the fellows who wanted to buy his place
in it. Funny, too, those mates who had gone the
previous night never expecting to see him again,
and who, all the same, wanted to swap places. It
seemed ages since they went, and yet it was only
nine hours or so since “C 3” filed along the forward
tunnel and took up their listening posts in Wilson s
Outlook.
Some cynic must have named that post. Why,
where he had crouched alert, but shivering, for
eight out the nine hours, the dirt thrown over on
jacko’s side blocked all view, unless you put your
head and shoulders over the parapet. And
jacko’s bullets only had eight yards to travel.
Eight hours within eight yards of them. Still,


hours had passed without a shot being fired, and
cramped and shivering he had crouched alongside
of his mate listening for the faintest sound of
Turkish activity. The monotony of that had been
maddening, and they had blessed the sniper who
thought he had found a loophole, and who for a
couple of hours put about three shots a minute into
some sandbags on the parados. His mate had
whispered that the cow fired every time a different
louse bit him, and after calculating for a time he
came to the conclusion that no cuckoo could spare
that Jacko sniper any.
Then the monotony of the shots and the result-
ing trickle of earth out of the ripped sandbags
became worse than the silence. Midnight came.
Only 2J hours to go. A slight humming noise
came faintly to his ears. The very trench Itself
seemed to shudder in sympathy with the tremor
of his brain and body as he realized that a Jacko
aeroplane was moving directly along and low
down over the whole position. Well, if they had
spotted anything It would soon have been over,
anyway, at the worst a long rest alongside the
others, at the best, Constantinople. What would
happen to the graves if they did get off? Thank
heaven, Bill had been buried at sea.
God! it was cold; his tunic was frosted. They
couldn’t have their coats; nothing to carry away
with them but a couple of Mills bombs In case of
accidents before they got off. He must move to
take the cramp out of his legs; just a couple of
steps and then back alongside his mate. Hours


were slowly passing; why, it was just on two
o’clock and he could hear the Sergeant creeping
along the trench, his muffled feet making a peculiar
swishing noise.
“You two go back into Chatham’s now,” he
whispered. “You’ll be the only ones there; C 2
party is just pulling out. One of you take from
the tunnel round towards Ryrie’s, and the other
towards the Beach Line. Watch the saps closely
and take a look over now and again. It’s pretty
quiet.”
They had lost no time getting back to Chat-
ham’s Post. Thank heaven they could move
about there, and an occasional look over w T as a
relief after the unutterable strain of eight hours
listening. And only half an hour to go. Minutes
passed, and meeting his mate at the tunnel mouth,
they had heard the soft footfalls coming along
from Wilson’s Outlook.
They had fallen in on the rear of the now
quickly-moving, yet noiseless, single file, and
rapidly and unerringly made their way to B
Depot. And now they were off, all of them; in-
fantry and all must be off by now.
But all that wouldn’t go on pictures. Why, his
best mate was buried somewhere about here, the
tug might be right over his ocean grave. And
some of the best and bravest who lay in shallow
graves; all the blood and sweat of the past
seven months, and greatest of all, the brotherhood
Incarnate of mateship, were back there, and no


picture show would be game to go there to-
morrow.
A mighty explosion woke the Bushman from his
fitful sleep. Quinn’s Post had gone skyward.


CHAPTER IV
THE DAYS OF ROMANI
THE following day the Regiment marched
out for Maadi, and by nightfall its
strength of 26 officers and 257 other ranks
had been established in the old camp.
A large number of reinforcements, who had
arrived too late to take part in the Gallipoli cam-
paign, were stationed there, and during the en-
suing few days the re-organization of the Regi-
ment proceeded apace. All hope of a short rest
was speedily disposed of. We had ai rived at
Maadi on the 27th of December; on the last day
of the year training re-commenced. The strength
of the Regiment had been completed with the pick
of a large number of reinforcements, and the
body of unabsorbed men, with the squadron of the
12th Regiment, which still remained attached,
were formed into a details depot, the total
strength of the Regiment amounting to, at one
period, over 1,000. umbers of old hands kept
gradually returning from Egyptian hospitals,
Malta and England. Certain undesirables were
quietly sent to the Detail Camp and we knew them
no more. But a large number of first-class men,
for whom there was no room in the Regiment,
transferred to other units, chiefly the new infantry
battalions and artillery brigades then being
formed.


"Lloyd Lindsay” Section, Maadi Sports, January 1916.




Maadi Sports, January, 1916. 6th Regiment Team winning Final of Tug-of-War event.




The Regiment had also become considerably
over-strength in officers, due to promotions on
Gallipoli, vice men who eventually returned, and
to a number who had come over in charge of rein-
forcements. Inevitably some had to drop out, and
here the Regiment lost some capable and promising
men.
During our seven months' absence the horses
had been well cared for. Many reallotments had
to be made, and by the opening of the New Year
the most profitable period of the Regiment’s train-
ing was in full swing. Up till now we had had no
chance of fulfilling our destiny as mounted
soldiers. That was close at hand, and as If realizing
it unconsciously, officers and men threw themselves
vigorously Into the new training. The obvious re-
sult was the singular Individual and corporate
efficiency which characterized those Light Horse
Regiments to whom fell the initial pioneering
work in the Desert of Sinai.
Competition everywhere was keen, from squad-
rons to individual sections; and probably the out-
standing feature of the general efficiency was the
work of sections and their leaders in such tasks of
reconnaissance, outpost, flank and screen work.
Meantime Maadi became the same home as in
former days. January quickly passed away, and
early in February rumours of an impending move
became rife. These proved correct and during
the night of the 24-25th the Regiment rode out,
and entraining at Aub-el-Ela station, proceeded to
Serapeum, the last party arriving there at 7.45


p.m. A couple of days were spent in placing the
new camp in order, and training was resumed. But
training at Maadi and Serapeum proved to be two
different matters. Speedily the weather became
Intensely hot. Drill had to be done mostly in loose
sand, khamseens made life unbearable, and beyond
the occasional swims in the Suez Canal, relaxa-
tion of any sort was nil. Even at meal times the
monotony was varied very little. An anathematized
institution —the Regimental cookhouse—was still
in existence, and a few miserable Greek canteens
only supplied inferior goods at extortionate prices.
The Regiment had to learn by years of experience,
the ideal way to feed a body of men. As may be
imagined, the seven weeks’ sojourn at Serapeum
did not carry many pleasant memories when we
rode out for Salhia on the 4th of April.
Passing through Ismailia, we camped the first
night at Moascar. Leaving early next morning,
we reached Salhia shortly after midday. Several
days were spent in fixing horse lines and the camp
generally. Training was continued, but the end
of training days was at hand. Rumours came
through of the happenings across the Canal, and
at midday on the 23rd of April, 1916, we started
on the long ride, which began at Salhia and ended
two and a half years later, on the Tablelands of
Moab. Our baptismal day on trek was excessively
hot, and few there were -who did not feel like a
good night’s rest when Kantara was reached at
sundown. But nothing like that was in store.
Horses were watered and fed; so were we; and


The Regiment moving from Serapeum to Salhia, April, 1916.
F




Regimental Horse Lines, Salhia, April, 1916.




at 10 o’clock we clanked across the pontoon bridge
and headed for Hill 70. Arriving there horses
were picketed and men snatched what sleep they
could for a few hours. Starting again well before
daylight, we left the light metalled road and
entered the trackless desert of Sinai. A little
after midday we reached the railhead and re-
mained there for the rest of the day and
the succeeding night. The horses had not
had water since the previous evening at Kantara,
and the water-bottles were getting very low. A
scanty supply of precious liquid was obtained from
the railhead, but the horses mostly had to spend
their first day in Sinai unwatered. Strong outposts
were placed round the bivouac area during the
night, and shortly after daylight the Regiment
moved out for Romani. We knew that some mis-
fortune had befallen a Y eomanry Brigade some-
where in the locality. Before long we passed a
column coming in. They wore a dejected air, the
reason of which we were not long finding out.
Two hours later we rode into a deserted camp at
Romani, where everything stood just as it had
been left. From a couple of shallow brackish
wells we watered our thirsty horses, and during
the remainder of that day we established our camp
on the eastern slope of the Hod. We had come to
a war once more.
The Hod at Romani lay in a depression at the
south-eastern corner, and inside a chain of giant
sand hills. By the time the outposts had dragged
themselves and their gear through the heavy sand


to positions commanding the approaches to the
camp, and everyone had done the usual “stand to
the following morning, there seemed to be no
doubt that the war was still on, and the dead
bodies of a Yeomanry trooper and his horse, just
outside the semicircle of hills, grimly emphasized
the fact.
On the morning of the 27th the Regiment moved
out for Katia and Oghritina. The 7th Regiment
had, on the previous day, patrolled to Katia and
recovered several wounded Yeomen. With screen
and flank guards in position, C Squadron of the
Regiment passed to the north of Katia and made
straight for Oghritina. For the first time we had
a job for which we had trained; the carrying out
of an armed reconnaissance into enemy territory.
Few realized the awful spectacle waiting on the
sandhills between the Hods of Oghritina. Several
dead Turks lay in the path of the screen as it
floundered up the loose sand dune. But dotted at
intervals among the wild confusion of the rifled
camp, lay the remains of numbers of the
Yeomanry who had fallen in the action four
days previously. Some had been paitially
' buried. In a little shallow redoubt close to the
camp lay at least a dozen bodies. Fully fifty
lay around the top of the hill, and numerous
dead Turks showed that the little Yeomanry garri-
son had put up a good show till overwhelmed by
heavy odds. Someone had obviously blundered.
The topography of the ridge between the two hods
was such, that a well-entrenched battalion would










have had no light task in holding the position
against the body of Turks, estimated at 4,000,
which had attacked it on the 23rd. To the north
and south-east the steepness of the sand dunes
formed a slight barrier, but to hold these points
and also gently sloping ground to the west and
south meant spreading the little Yeomanry force
—a squadron and a half—along a defence line of
at least a mde. On the other hand, to concentrate
as they had, and they could do little else, in a small
cup-like hollow on the hill top, made their annihila-
tion a certainty, and the Turkish attack coming
from all quarters, and finally, judging from the
bodies, up the gentle rise to the south could hardly
fail.
Such was the picture of death and desolation
that greeted the eyes of C Squadron’s screen.
Search was immediately made in neighbouring
hods and it resulted in the discovery of three
wounded men—two Yeomanry and one Turk.
1 wo were able to ride back to Romani, but one of
the 1 eomen had a badly fractured leg. Sufficient
material was obtained from the remains of the
camp to improvise a stretcher, and working in
reliefs, A and C Squadrons carried him the whole
way back to Romani.
The Regiment now settled down to one of the
hardest phases of its career. Both horses and men
were more or less soft. No training includes
learning to quench a raging thirst with brackish
water. A series of wells were sunk in the locality,


but with few exceptions, they were brackish to a
nauseating degree. Gradually the canid tianspoit
system became organized and fantasse watei was
supplied in small quantities. The Regiment found
outposts with at least half its strength evciy other
night; early reconnoitring patrols and day observa-
tion posts, and the monotonous regularity of the
early morning “stand to’ became painful.
The sth Regiment had been stationed at Duei-
dar since the crossing of the Canal, so the whole
of the pioneering work of the first month in Sinai
—the exploration, well sinking, reconnoitring
dashes —devolved upon the 6th and 7th. On the
7th of May the Regiment moved out to recon-
noitre Bir-el-Abd, which was supposed to be a
camping place of forward Turkish patrols.
Leaving Romani in the afternoon we reached
Katia early, fed up and watered there. Moving
on again shortly after dark we arrived at
Oghritina and stood by our horses thei e fall day-
break, then moving on again towards Bir el Abd.
Signs of a recent camp were visible there, but
what was much more welcome was the old stone
well with its plentiful supply of soft water. We
“boiled up” and shortly afterwards moved back
by Oghritina and Katia to Romani, reaching
camp at 7 p.m. Outposts as usual.
Life speedily became one stunt after another.
The small daily patrols kept us from forgetting
the bigger weekly ones, and the next big one never
needed any effort of memory to remember it. A


Watering Horses at Bir-el-Abd.




draft of 29 other ranks, under Lieut. O. W.
Tooth, marched in on the 13th inst, and on the
afternoon of the 15th the Regiment moved out on
the famous Bayoud stunt. The day had been In-
tensely hot. By 9 p.m. we had reached Sagia, halt-
ing and feeding up at Katia on the way. But the
desert night, Instead of cooling down considerably,
remained at furnace heat. Outposting around
Sagia that night we sat coatless and hatless and
few there were who did not begin the following
day with an already parched throat, for we knew
that until we reached Katia on the return journey
there was no certainty of any water being obtained,
and one bottle a man only was carried.
Daylight found us well on the way to Bayoud.
From sunrise the heat was intense and the air stag-
nant. The sand dunes became almost impassable
mountains; we climbed up on foot and slid down
the other side. A tantalizing glimpse of a Tur-
kish camel, patrol disappearing over a distant sky-
line was the only sign of the enemy. By nine
o’clock the advance guard reached the Hod-el-
Bayoud, finding, besides a number of wells and
some troughing, sufficient Indication that the camp
had been hurriedly abandoned. But only the ad-
vance squadron reached Bayoud and luxuriated
momentarily in Its sweet-well water. The re-
mainder halted a mile or so from the Hod, and
about ten o’clock the return journey was begun.
The heat was now frightful. The morning still-
ness had gone. A stiff breeze like a blast from the
fiery furnace broke the sand peaks into quasi-


volcanic action. It blasted the already desperately
thirsty men and horses and rendered the few
drops of bottle water that remained undrinkable.
Steadily we moved back towards Sagia, the screen
and flank guards exploring every handy hod in the
vain hope of finding water. The sand dunes
seemed to become more and more mountain like,
the miles seemed to become leagues. We rested
a few minutes in a hod half way and then pushed
on to Sagia where we knew there was a small well.
At last we rode in to Sagia. Alas! the supply was
a mere trickle, which meant hours to water men
alone, besides the already frantic horses. Colonel
Fuller took charge of the well and speedily re-
duced what was fast becoming a rabble to an
orderly parade, but it was a cage of sauve qui
pent.
Seeing the length of time it would take to water
the entire Regiment, numbers of men obtained
permission to ride on to Katia, about four miles
distant, where the supply was unlimited. In
parties of two or more they rode doggedly along
towards the distant patch of grey-green that
marked the Katia Oasis. The horses, realizing
equally with their riders that a last effort was
necessary, plugged along gamely, and after two
hours agony were rewarded. Bucket after bucke
was drawn up from the old stone well, horses and
men drank side by side, and when at last the
raging demon had been quenched the horses were
unsaddled, washed, and led Into the shade of the
Hod and tempted with their nosebags. But the


Burning Captured Enemy Material at Hod-el-Bayoud, May 16, 1916.




eftort for many had been too great. Lying down
they rested with closed eyes as if trying to forget
the nightmare of the previous 24 hours. The
Regiment gradually strung back towards sundown
into Katia, and reached camp at Romani by
degrees during the evening. The reaction at
Sagia proved too much for numbers. On the
following day four officers, Major O’Brien, Capt.
Ryrie, Lieuts. Pearce and Hedley, and eleven
other ranks were admitted to hospital suffering
from sunstroke or heat exhaustion. The Field
Ambulance had been stationed at Katia during the
day. Its thermometer, placed at midday under a
palm thatch, registered 122 degrees!
Bayoud
The sands of the desert seemed to be continu-
ally getting hotter, to say nothing of the winds.
I he water was more brackish, and stunts longer,
and the palm hods scarcer and scantier; or, so it
seemed to the Bushman as he saddled up on the
afternoon of that 15th of May. Just what this
stunt was no one was exactly certain, possibly the
usual all-night ride, and a dash at daybreak on a
Turkish outpost, then a burning and exhausting
ride back to Romani with a night cossack post to
follow. But the heat promised to be a record, and
ominous warnings about looking after the contents
of water-bottles pointed to an extra dry stunt.


By nine o’clock the following morning “halt”
and “dismount” had been given and the squadrons
in support sat in their horses shade and vainly
tried to keep the weary and thirsty beasts from
moving. The advance squadron was all right, it
had gone on to Bayoud and filled itself with a
water supply like a camel. The march from Sagia,
the overnight outpost camp, had begun at day-
light, and the atmosphere of the early morning
hours had hung fetid and stagnant, like a pall
over the giant sand dunes.
The Bushman’s horse moved. Cursing, silently,
he shifted into the new patch of shade and took
the cork out of his water-bottle. On reflection he
put it back again. There was less than half a
bottle and they would certainly never get back to
Katia before well into the afternoon. There
might be the chance of a “boil up,” he had tea;
not that it would take much boiling, but a mouth-
ful of tea would be worth the lot as it was now.
He noticed a tiny whisp of sand rising on the
sand peak against which they had halted, _ and
mechanically he reflected that the wind was rising.
Anything seemed better than the awful stillness
of the burning air, yet if the wind rose much the
blast off a bush fire would be nothing to it. Ah,
the officers were mounting. The Bushman swung
into the saddle and followed his wheeling troop
round in the direction of home. He looked at his
watch. A quarter past ten; perhaps they would
halt at Sagia. There was a well there, but a very
poor one; if he only got a chance to make his drop


of tea, he didn’t care much if he didn’t get a
drink till Katia. But the poor old horse flounder-
ing up the loose sand of the hillsides, he would
have to suffer.
The wind was rising fast. At intervals in the
sea of burning sand the precipitous sides of the
dunes were veiled by a creeping, shimmering film
moving gently upwards and rising In little spiral
wreaths several feet high from the pointed peaks.
And, occasionally, as the blast grew fiercer, the
whole razor-backs broke Into sweeping crests of
sand which fell into drifts of molten powder on
their leeward sides.
The Bushman, riding on the right flank guard,
caught a glimpse of a distant hod through the
burning shimmering haze of sand. It couldn’t be
Sagia, he knew. Ah, the directing troop was turn-
ing towards it; there might be a well there. A
quarter of an hour later the flank guard was sig-
nalled to close in to the main body, and the Bush-
man rode into the hod. Men and horses were
scattered about getting what scanty shade they
could from the lofty palm trees, and the few who
had water left In their bottles were busily “boiling
up.” A small well there certainly was, but the
water stank. He saw one or two thirst-mad men
take a few mouthfuls only to pay the penalty with
a violent attack of nausea. His last drop of bottle-
water quickly became strong tea; but, shared with
his mates, it meant little more than a few gulps
>each. He saw men go out to it with sunstroke
G


and exhaustion and others carrying them to shade
to await an ambulance cart.
A very brief rest soon ended. Mounted once
more he pushed his horse out on to the flank again.
Sagia could not be very far off now, and doggedly
horse and man steeled themselves to endure the
next few hours.
Sagia at last. Everyone was struggling towards
the well, and many a heart sank as men realized
that it would take hours to water both men and
horses. The order was passed round the Bush-
man’s troop for fit men and horses to make to
Katia. Could he do it; two hours more. But
there was plenty there for man and beast, and
urging his horse made nearly desperate by the
smell of water, he rode out of the hod and headed
for Katia. Others were going too. Nerved by
the companionship, he moved slowly onwards.
Hill after hill he crossed, an hour passed and he
could see the dark blotch of the palm trees at
Katia; or he thought he could. Might it be a
mirage and the well be miles further on. But the
old horse was stepping out gamely; he knew, at
any rate, that water was close. Why now It was
quite close. He could see the old stone well and
one or two of the fellows there already drawing up
bucket after bucket. Only a few hundred yards
to go. “Come on, old man, the bucket and the
rope is all we want now.” And, side by side at
the old stone well, they drank till they could drink
no more.


Watering Area, Et Maler.




Truly we were experiencing the limit of climatic
conditions. Six months previously we had nearly
perished in 26 degrees of frost, now we were en-
during the extremities of heat and thirst. But a
welcome relief was at hand. On the 22nd, having
been relieved by the Ist Brigade, we moved back
to Hill 70 and went into reserve. Although by
no means a physical or mental paradise, a month
in reserve at Hill 70 was very acceptable. Short
leave was granted to Port Said and, beyond the
usual stables, regimental fatigues and occasional
patrols, duties were not excessive.
On the 24th of June we marched out
again In the small hours of the morning
and proceeding to Bir et Maler, a series
of hods close to ' Romani, relieved a regi-
ment of New Zealand Mounted Rifles camped
there. Once more we settled down to the
unattractive desert existence of patrols, long and
short, night and day, outposts, and well sinking,
together with the hundred and one minor duties
which fall to the “askari.” Twice we made night
dashes for Bir el Abd and Bir Salmana. At the
latter place we were rewarded with a skirmish
with an enemy outpost, but as a general thing he
was too wily to be caught, and had only to fall
back a few miles to get safely out of reach. The
night march over heavy sand always placed the ad-
vantage with the enemy’s camels when it came to
a test of speed. We had practically despaired of
ever doing anything more than resultless patrolling
and rounding up Bedouins, when the unexpected


happened and the enemy came to us on, perhaps,
the only occasion save the general attack on
Gallipoli on the 19th of May, 1915.
On the 19th of July the Regiment, in con-
junction with the rest of the Brigade, which now
included the Wellington Mounted Rifles in place
of the sth, moved out for a further reconnaissance
of Bir el Abd. A strong Turkish force had put
up a remarkable feat in reaching Oghritina unob-
served. Our column had passed Katia on its out-
ward march when an aeroplane dropped a message
to the effect that the enemy were in strong force
at Oghritina. But for this timely information it
is certain that the screen at least would have met
with casualties, if not disaster. Falling back to
Katia the Regiment bivouacked and outposted
there for the night. A determined reconnaissance
next day showed that the enemy’s forward
positions covering Oghritina were well advanced,
and reached a strong natural position on a ridge
behind Hod um Ugba. We withdrew at sundown
and arrived back at Romani well towards mid-
night. It seemed obvious that the enemy was pre-
paring for another desperate attempt to reach the
Suez Canal. Also we soon saw that our tactics
were calculated to gradually draw him on to
Romani, while delaying the final battle as long as
possible.
We now began what was probably one of the
most strenuous periods In our existence. Working
on alternate days with the Ist Brigade our pro-
gramme was as follows: —Moving out just after


midnight we halted in the big gap known as the
Booby Hatch, the main gateway to the Romani
and Et Maler positions, till dawn. Thence we
moved on till the screen was pulled up by the
enemy outposts. Watching and worrying these
outposts, driving them in where possible, flank-
ing demonstrations and occasional attacks on any
positions that appeared to offer any chance of
success. This was the daily programme until dark-
ness covered our weary withdrawal back to Et
Maler. And daily we endured the pitiless heat
of midsummer, the eye-racking glare of the never-
ending sand, and an unquenchable thirst. Yet the
spirits and energy of the Regiment remained un-
checked. As soon as the returning column passed
a point beyond the earshot of the furthest enemy
outpost, troop after troop broke into a chorus of
song, and the remaining miles back to Et Maler
reminded one of the end of a day’s picnic, rather
than the grimness of its actual reality. On the
28th of June we reached our usual positions be-
yond Katia, and shortly after midday D Troop of
C Squadron, commanded by Lieut. R. Black,
being then posted on a ridge towards Um E T gba,
received orders to attack the hod in conjunction
with a squadron of the Wellington Mounted
Rifles working on the northern flank. A well-
timed gallop enabled us to make at least half a
mile of ground. The enemy fire from the ridges
behind Um Ugba was nullified by the speed with
which we moved, and finally we dismounted for
action behind a rise overlooking the hod, and here


we were joined by a section of our Machine Gun
Squadron, under Lieut. Cunningham.
The hod now lay only a few hundred yards
below us. It appeared to be occupied by a hand-
ful of snipers only, but from the ridges to the east
and south, machine gun and rifle fire played on us
from a convenient range of about 800 yards. At
a concerted signal from the Wellingtons, D
Troop advanced in extended order on the hod;
Lieut. Cunningham at the same time removing his
machine gun to a small eminence which enabled
him to reply to the fire opened on to us directly
the advance began, Lieut. Cunningham’s superb
handling of a particularly efficient crew, and his
characteristic disregard of personal danger, ex-
posing himself repeatedly to locate targets, was
probably our salvation.
Walking quietly along we must have presented
a splendid target to the enemy guns on the ridge
behind the hod, but repeated bursts from the gun
in our rear kept them moderately quiet until when,
about a hundred yards from the hod, we doubled
for the shelter of the palm trees in the cup-like
hollow. Immediately heavy cross fire was
directed at us, but we reached the hod with the loss
of one man (Trooper R. B. Smith) slightly
wounded. The Wellingtons had meantime ad-
vanced to the north and were coming through the
main hod. About a dozen snipers who had
sheltered there retreated as we made the first palm
trees. One attempted to make the hill top behind,
and was brought down running. The remainder,


retreating northwards, were captured by the
Wellingtons, and during a double across an open
space between the palm groves, our second
casualty occurred, 1 rooper h. J. Collins receiving
a, bullet in the back. Our machine gun, in spite of
two casualties, still gave us splendid covering fire,
and the horses had meantime been brought to the
western end of the hod. Mounting here, we
retired at the gallop, enemy fire again proving In-
effectual as we crossed the open ground to our
original starting point. The machine gun crew
got out with the same careless dash that had
characterized them throughout the afternoon.
Their horse-holders galloped right to the forward
position they occupied, and In a few seconds both
gun and crew 7 , followed by a futile stream of fire,
had made a safe position further towards Katia.
Upon the withdrawal of the Regiment that
evening, a listening post of Corporal R. Thorne
and 2 men under Lieut. Pearce, remained behind
on a ridge overlooking Hamisah to ascertain any
enemy movements during the night. Lieut.
Pearce was shot dead at close range by a sniper.
Corporal Thorne, discovering his officer to be
dead, decided to withdraw. Finding almost
immediately that all retreat through Katia was cut
off, he plunged Into the enemy country to the south
of Hamisah. But whenever he attempted to
strike a direct course to Romani, strong Turkish
patrols blocked the way. By dint of riding all
night, and by superb bushmanship, he succeeded,
in spite of several hairbreadth escapes, in bringing


his party right round the flank towards Dueidar,
eventually making to Hill 70 by 9 a.m. Lieut.
Pearce's body was recovered next day and brought
to Et Maler for Interment.
The same tactics continued —24 hours in and
24 hours out of camp —and each day the enemy
advance came gradually closer. By the 3rd of
August they had taken possession of Katia and
Hamisah and the ridges on either flank, and a
general battle seemed inevitable. We reached our
camp that evening at nine o’clock, praying al-
ternately for a good night’s sleep and for the
speedy culmination of the fortnight’s constant
strain. The latter came a few hours later.
Awakened partially by the sound of distant rifle
fire, and thoroughly a few moments later by the
order to “stand to,” we turned out at 12,30 a.m.,
and made ready for the events of the day. Hold-
ing our horses and formed up ready to move out,
we dozed till 4 a.m., while the gradual approach
of Intermittent rifle fire to the south warned us that
the day had arrived.
At 4 a.m. the whole Regiment mounted, and
moving out at the gallop went to the support of
the Ist Brigade, which had been bearing the brunt
of the attack since midnight. In less than a mile
S.E, of Et Maler we dismounted for action, and
advancing several hundred yards on foot under
heavy fire, rifle, machine gun and shrapnel, took
up a line which we held against repeated attacks
till 7 a.m. The enemy appeared to be having
things much his own way. All around Romani


and Et Maler positions his artillery roared, aero-
planes, unopposed, bombed our camps, led-horses
and railhead depots, to their own sweet will; in-
effectively, nevertheless, thanks mainly to the
heavy sand. The Ist Brigade withdrew at the
gallop shortly after 7 o’clock, and when soon
afterwards our firing-line dropped back to the led
horses and we also mounted, and pursued by
heavy shelling galloped out and away towards the
railway line, the ordinary man in the ranks might
have been pardoned for imagining that Jacko had
scored a bit of a win.
But an inspiring figure had been amongst us all
the morning, and with such a leader how could we
lose. Brig.-Gen. Royston had taken command of
our Brigade on the departure of General Ryrie
for England in June. “Galloping Jack,” as he
was popularly called, came to us with a reputation,
and never did leader make good or enhance a
reputation like he on that 4th day of August.
Wherever the fire was hottest, wherever a word of
command, or the sight of his heroic figure, a
cheery word of encouragement, or the example of
his extraordinary dash and courage were required,
General Royston appeared at the opportune
moment. None of those whom he led that day
can ever remember him without that thrill which
makes every good soldier know that it was worth
while.
By nine o’clock we had occupied a new position
to the right of Wellington Ridge and gradually
the tactics of our retirement became apparent.


Drawn on by our withdrawal the attacking force
had attempted to cross the precipitous sand
mountains towards the railway line, while their
efforts to reach our camp at Romani and Et Maler
had been completely held up. A large force was
quietly allowed to occupy a hod almost sui rounded
by steep sand hills where they were compelled to
remain by our frontal fire and a barrage of shrap-
nel in their rear. Heat, thirst and exhaustion now
had their effect. Threatened on their western
flank by a regiment of New Zealanders and a body
of Scottish Infantry coming up from Kantara,
they gave up the unequal struggle and hoisted the
white flag. Even at this dramatic moment General
Royston appeared then, as always, at the gallop,
and never a throat among us that was too
cracked to cheer as he disappeared in a cloud of
sand. At sundown we advanced a short distance
on foot finally taking up a position where we out-
posted for the night, the led horses being brought
up close under cover of darkness.
Daylight found us again in the saddle, and ad-
vancing towards Katia by a route which circled to
the south. The enemy had, during the night,
decided on a general retirement. We soon came
into touch with his rear guard, which made a very
half-hearted attempt to stay our progress. Each
hod yielded up its complement of prisoners;
abandoned wounded freely marked the line of re-
treat, and the dead on Wellington Ridge testified
to the effectiveness of the delaying action of the
previous day. At Hod el Ene our largest capture


took place, three hundred of the exhausted and
demoralized enemy surrendering without firing a
shot. Our advance towards Katia continued till
midday. The sweltering heat w r as merciless; what
wonder, after the happenings of the previous fort-
night, capped by the just-gone twenty-four hours,
that physically, the Regiment, both horses and
men, \\ as near breaking point. The horses
suffered worst. They had had nothing to drink
since the evening of the 3rd inst; we at least had
started the battle of Romani with one full water-
bottle. Few felt inclined for such food as re-
mained in the haversacks. And the most trying
time of the whole strenuous fortnight was yet to
come. We had to wait. It mattered not why, but
for several hours we crouched under our horses,
taking, when possible, advantage of their shadows,
the only shade available in a wilderness of burn-
ing sand.
At two o’clock the welcome order to mount was
passed along, and we moved off to take part in a
general attack upon Katia. The long straggling
hod was evidently strongly held by the Turkish
rear guard, and the flanks from Hamisah to Hill
245 were almost impregnable owing to the
numerous sandbag redoubts built by the Turkish
army during its occupation of Katia. Five
mounted Brigades took part in the general assault:
the Ist, 2nd and 3rd L.H. Brigades, the New Zea-
land Mounted Rifle Brigade and the sth Brigade
of Mounted Yeomanry. Dismounting two miles
from Katia and directly opposite the main hod,


the Regiment advanced, at first steadily, and
finally in short rushes. The enemy guns sought
vainly for our led horses, but the machine guns
and rifles concealed on the edge of the hod played
effectively on our ranks as we doubled acioss the
dry swampy ground fronting the oasis. M c
reached a small line of sand eminences several
hundred yards from our objective and waited
there preparatory to making the final assault. But
it all depended on the success of the flanking
attack towards Hamisah, and this failed. All
credit to the tactics of the lurks and their deter-
mination at all costs not to be outflanked. For in
the now pitiable condition of semi-exhaustion our
men found themselves in, it was impossible to carry
Katia by a direct frontal attayk. For several
hours we lay behind the sparsest of cover and
returned when possible the resolute fire of the
Turkish machine guns. Towards sundown, the in-
evitable happened, a withdrawal was ordeied, and
just prior to retiring Colonel Fuller was wounded.
It seemed as if the withdrawal must be attended
with heavy loss. Many men were too exhausted
to do anything but walk slowly away from Katia,
and parties carrying wounded men moved under
fire for upwards of half a mile. But the sun was
now setting behind us, and made a blur of the
weary and dispirited figures making their way
slowly to where the led horses had been left.
More than anything though, our safety was made
possible by the heroic work of Lieut. Cunningham
and his machine guns. With his usual disregard


of personal safety, he posted his guns in command-
ing positions, and during the hottest fire coolly
superintended their effective use.
Shortly after dark the Regiment had re-
assembled and started back for Et Maler. Both
horse and men seemed to make a final call on their
waning resources of endurance. But the horses,
first at the water troughs and later with their nose-
bags, found life worth living again, and the men
soon briefly forgot in the oblivion of sleep the
agonies of the last two days. The total casualties
for the 4th and sth of August amounted to 7
killed and 45 wounded, of which several died
later, including Sgt. M. Johnston, of Molong,
N.S.W., who in death, as in life, set an everlasting
example to his Regiment.
Katia
It was midday.
The column halted in a cup-like depression a
couple of miles from the long straggling hod. The
older passed to dismount, and, lying on the burn-
ing sand on the shady side of his horse, the Bush-
man shook his empty water-bottle and wondered
what the afternoon would bring. Since daybreak
they had advanced from behind Et Maler on the
heels of the beaten Turkish Army, exploring hods,
collecting prisoners, and praying for water. The
last fortnight had been severe enough, but yester-
day was the limit, and to-day—well, whatever
happened he hoped it wouldn’t be delayed.
They were winning, anyway. Jacko was going


for his life and how must the poor devils have
suffered. Every possy they passed was littered
with green date peelings, and the prisoners they
took looked like hunted devils. What on earth
was the waiting for ? They had been there an
hour now, literally frying on the sand. He knew
they were going to attack Katia. Plenty of water
there, and probably a strong Turkish rear guard.
But this infernal waiting was taking the last rem-
nants of vitality out of everyone. He thought of
something long, drawn through ice, if he ever
went on leave again. He could hear a couple of
chaps rowing over their horses disturbing each
others’ shade. They were agreeing to settle the
argument after they had settled the Jackos. They
were mates, too. Well, it was enough to make
any man quarrel with his best friend, this infernal
waiting on top of everything else. But no sign of
a move. Some Jacko guns were thundering from
behind Katia, and he could see shrapnel bursting
away towards the left flank. Theie seemed to be
no one over towards Hamisah. Perhaps they were
waiting for another Brigade to come up.
Thank God the front of the column was mount-
ing. Swinging out into artillery formation they
moved quietly towards Katia. Crossing the first
skyline was enough to draw shrapnel, but a steady
gallop, screened by the hollows between dunes and
a scanty hod or two, brought them safely to the
series of little sandhills fronting the dry swamp
behind which lay Katia.
A few minutes later the Bushman found himself


part of an extended line doubling from one sand-
hill to another and wondering why more men
didn tgo down. Jacko had evidently plenty of
machine guns planted in Katia, and from the burst
of his shrapnel away to the rear it looked as
though he had located the horses. They were
now on the edge of the dry swamp. It was a good
half-mile to the first palm trees and the only cover
worth talking about was a small outcrop of sand
running parallel to the hod. Two or three
hundred yards away it was. The men who got
there would be lucky. Ah, they were off again.
The ground was hard; better to run on. They
were going down now; the man on his right
pitched forward on to his face; and, glancing
along the extended line as he ran, he could see
figures lying still and others trying to crawl or limp
back to the shelter of the sandhills they had just
left.
That was close. Flecks of dirt spattered up all
round him. Another minute and he lay panting
behind the friendly shelter of the last cover they
would get before the final assault. He turned his
head to watch the second line coming up. Con-
tinuous bursts of machine gun fire were following
them all the way. They had got the range
properly now. A sergeant was making towards
him; another twenty yards and he would be safe.
Ah, they had got him, and it looked like for keeps.
The Bushman joined in the rush of several others
and dragged the sergeant in behind the nearest
sandhill.
H


“How in hell are we going to carry him out?”
“On our rifles and crossed arms. Two on each
sid(§, one take his head and the other his legs.
Now, lift him steadily and keep in step as much
as possible. Make straight for the sandhill.”
They had padded the rifles as best they could.
But no matter how carefully they stepped they
knew that every movement cost the silent figure
untold agony. Yet not quite silent. The wounded
man spoke as they started: “You fellows are
Britons to stick to a man like, this.”
Walking almost on each other’s spurs and
cramped by their necessarily crouching attitude,
the huddled group of men moved at a snail’s pace
for the nearest shelter. They crossed the dry
swamp almost unmolested. The sun was setting
and its flickering rays dancing on the background
of red sandhills blurred them as a target. But
as they struggled up the first ridge the sand spat
about their feet and the quiet figure spoke again.
“Put me down behind the hill and, send a sand-
cart after dark. Six of you make a big target,
you know,” and in a whisper as they struggled on,
“It’s good to have mates like you chaps.”
* * * * * *
In the British Military Cemetery of Old Cairo
stands a monument erected by his comrades to one
of the bravest of the brave —Sergeant Major
Johnston.


tor two days we rested, buried our dead and
collected from the battlefield any gear abandoned
by the enemy. On the afternoon of the Bth we
moved out once more in pursuit of the enemy, now
retreating everywhere, but concentrated in force
at Bir el Abd.
Leaving Katia at 10 p.m. we moved forward to
take part in a strong reconnaissance of Bir el Abd.
An attempt was made to encircle the position.
I he 3rd L.H. Brigade operated from the south,
the New Zealand Brigade from the west, the 2nd
Brigade from the north, and the Ist Brigade, it
possible, was to menace the position from the east.
Less than an hour after sunrise the following
morning the action started. Accompanied by the
Ayrshire Battery, the 2nd Brigade approached its
position by daylight and was warmly welcomed by
a series of 4.7 Ll.E.’s bursting in close proximity
to the column. As reserve to the Brigade, the
Regiment, now under Major Bruxner, w r as
stationed several hundred yards south of the Ayr-
shire Battery’s position. All day long the
Battery waged a vigorous duel with the enemy’s
4.7 and shrapnel, and one unlucky direct hit put
several teams of horses, a gun, and its crew out of
action. Vainly the enemy tried to locate our led
horses, but although several high explosives came
very close, we suffered no material damage. A
general attack took place at 11 a.m. and the New
Zealand Brigade was drawn into an awkward
position during a heavy encounter. To assist in
their withdrawal during the afternoon, the Regi-


ment went into action, and finally covered the with-
drawal of the badly knocked about Ayrshire
Battery. We withdrew to Oghritina where we
drew rations and forage and bivouacked for the
night.
Returning to Khirba next day we found the
deserted Turkish camp to contain some very
acceptable articles of loot. Barley for the horses
was plentiful, and besides tea, dates, meal and
olives, there were several hundredweights of
dried apricots pressed into rolls like brown paper.
Under the comprehensive name of “mungaree”
we learnt during the next few days to envy the
Turks its possession as a ration issue. For two
days we remained at Khirba, and here we said
farewell to “Galloping Jack.” In a brief address
he bade us good-bye from the saddle, and his exit
in a cloud of dust over a sandhill and followed by
deafening cheers, was truly characteristic of our
brief but unforgettable experience of his leader-
ship.
From Blr el Abd to Katia we saw evidence of
the great difficulty the enemy had had in trans-
porting his heavy artillery through the heavy sand.
Besides temporary roads of brambles, they had
used some thousands of feet of 9by 2 inch plank-
ing, placing it in front of the guns and moving
them along with what must have been snail-like,
If sure, progress. But what can be said of the
great feat of the Turkish Infantry. We, on horse-
back, knew what it was to campaign during the
desert midsummer. Their secret march to Oghri-


tina unobserved by aerial patrols was in itself re-
markable enough, but their sufferings during the
weeks culminating in the battles of Romani and
Katia must have been intense. On foot, carrying
full infantry gear, living partly on green dates,
and during the last two days waterless, their effort
to drive us from Romani was, in spite of failure,
such as to rouse the utmost admiration amongst
their conquerors.
The enemy were now in full retreat eastwards
of Salmana, and for the time being our acquaint-
ance with him was ended. Withdrawing via Katia
we returned to Et Maler on the 13th of August,
and for the rest of the month, both horses and
men enjoyed a badly-needed rest. The casualty
list of sickness and death made a number of vacan-
cies amongst the officers, and the following were
promoted to commissioned rank:—Sig. Sgt. J.
Back, Sgts. Allman, Ronald, Lomax and Corp. H.
Dickson. Popular also were the captaincys of
Lieuts. Thompson, Tooth S., and Close. The
worst of the summer heat had now passed, and
horses were beginning to be inured to the hard-
ships of desert life. But a number had succumbed
to the strain; sand colic and sore backs were the
predominant ailments, and many had to be evacu-
ated to Veterinary Hospitals and replaced by re-
mounts. We left Et Maler on the 11th of Sep-
tember and, moving by Katia, reached our new
camping area, Hod el Hasaniya, the same after-
noon. Lieut.-Col. Fuller returned three days
later having recovered from his wound, and again


took charge of the Regiment. Preparations
were soon on foot for an attack on the Turkish
position at El Mazar.
Moving out at 2.30 a.m. on the morning of the
16th we marched to Hod el Ge’eila, where we
camped for the day. Sundown found us on the
move again and joined up with the 3rd Brigade
and the Inverness and Ayrshire Batteries on the
Mazar Road, four miles east of Salmana. A
tedious all-night ride was followed by an equally
wearisome day. A Squadron of the Regiment
remained posted six miles from Mazar, in event of
a covering force being required during a possible
retirement. C Squadron had a wildly exciting
time as artillery escort, and the remainder of the
Regiment was in reserve. After a half-hearted
and Ineffectual attempt on the Turkish positions,
the column withdrew, and a heart-breaking jour-
ney back to Salmana commenced. For no very
apparent reason, the Mazar stunt is usually ad-
mitted to have been one of the most wearisome
desert rides we ever experienced. Perhaps the
knowledge of the utter futility of the whole ex-
pedition permeated the parched throats and
weighted the aching bodies with the last straw.
It was a still weary Regiment that withdrew the
following morning to Hasaniya and settled down
to holding part of the front line. Alternately
squadrons camped at Homossia, linking up with
the Camel Corps and the 3rd Brigade on the right
and left respectively. But we were not long to
■sweeten our outpost and front line work with ripe


dates moist with the desert fog of early morning.
On the 29th we marched out again, proceeding by
Romani, where we stayed a day, moved back to
Hill 70, which we reached by the 2nd of October.
Here we settled down in reserve. Training, sport,
an occasional patrol or detached duty, and leave to
Alexandria and Port Said; such was the pro-
gramme for the following six weeks.
Football came very much into favour during
our spell at Hill 70. Contests between troops and
squadrons finally culminated into inter-regimental
matches. The standard in the Regiment soon
reached that excellence which hardly ever
deteriorated during Its front line career. Most of
the players came from C Squadron, which,
throughout, supplied the bulk of the Regiment’s
athletes. Prominent among the footballers at this
period were Holt Hardy, Billy Weir, Clive
Capel, Steve Brown, Neil Ross, “Snow” Lester,
Bruce Webb, the brothers Lowe, Rock, Fred
Walker, Sedgwick, Artie Reynolds, Joe Nevitt,
Noel Dowling, the brothers Fenner and Lester
Meares. We beat the sth Regiment at Duiedar
and lost to the 7th, but the game had taken a firm
hold and during the ensuing winter months did
much to liven the monotony of desert life and
keep men in a fit condition.


CHAPTER V
THE PROMISED LAND
TOWARDS the end of November the Regi-
ment left Hill 70, and travelling by
Romani and Khirba, reached Bayoud on
the 25th inst. C Squadron, under Major Fergu-
son, took over a detached post at Mageibra, and
the remainder of the Regiment established itself
at Bayoud. Settling down to the same old desert
life we passed the midwinter months at these two
posts. Stationed as we were on the extreme flank
of the line, a great deal of patrolling to outlying
points, day observation posts and night outposts,
formed the main points of our programme.
From Bayoud, A and B Squadrons despatched
patrols daily to Geisi, Wilegha, Bir Jameil and
Rueishe, and from Mageibra C Squadron supplied
them to Aweyda, Hill 484 and Bada. Reconnais-
sances in force were also carried out to El Barga
and El Rakwa, Hamaiyir, and in conjunction with
three sections of the 1.C.C., through Zagadan.
The weather towards the New Year, and early
in January, became very inclement. Rain fell on
Christmas Day, and while its quantity was not
great it was sufficient to make the hessian bivvies
of the men inhabitable only with great difficulty.
The nights became intensely cold, and sand storms
blew with hurricane force, often partially covering


New Year Sports, Bayoud, 1917.




Signal Station, Zagadan.




an outpost during its hours of attempted sleep.
But notwithstanding, both health and spirits rose
with the cold weather. Canteen supplies became
available, and together with parcels from home,
and issues from the Comforts’ Fund, combined to
make the Christmas of 1916 compare very favour-
ably with any other. Football was vigorously re-
vived, particularly in C Squadron. It almost be-
came compulsory for everyone to play, as many as
six squadron teams taking part in a local Mageibra
competition. And the squadron reached the
height of its success by first drawing with, and then
beating, the 7th Regiment, by 3 to nil on their
ground at Hassaniya, Noel Dowling scoring after
a magnificent run from behind half way.
As the month of January wore on, news of
Magdabah, El Arish and Rafa began to make the
Regiment restless, and it was with delight that,
after a short stay at Hasaniya, we marched out on
the 2nd of February for the gradually extending
front line which by now had crept well beyond El
Arish. We moved via Moseifig to Mazar, where
we camped for five days. Thence we trekked to
Masaid, and camped near the beach close to
several other Brigades, who were spelling after
their successful dashes on Rafa and Magdabah.
For eleven days we remained at Masaid. A good
deal of time was devoted to mounted training in
tactics calculated to repel cavalry attacks and
safely negotiate shrapnel barrages. A few minor
patrols had to be found but most ranks found time
to enjoy the surf and a series of football matches.


Towards the end of our stay at Masaid, Major
H, D. White returned from leave to Australia
and was posted to the Regiment as 2nd in com-
mand. Lieut. R. Black was admitted to hospital,
Lieut. Hardy reported to the School of In-
struction, Zeitoun, and Lieut. Britten returned
from detached duty with Brigade Headquarters.
On the 22nd of February we moved out for our
final trek in Sinai. Practically from the time of
leaving Bir Salmana the country had very gradu-
ally improved. The bare sand mountains of
Romani and Bayoud, the sparsely scrubbed hills of
Oghritina and Bir el Abd, had changed. The
scrub had grown denser, the occasional long,
rough desert grass became more frequent, new
herbages appeared, and even clusters of spring
flowers waved alongside the old road, that elo-
quent epic of the history of the world. Older by
far than the world’s most ancient landmarks, the
old caravan route had throughout countless ages
marked the march of conquering armies and the
fleeing of defeated hosts. The most ancient
legions had followed its path, Assyrian, Persian,
Roman and Saracen, in turn, had camped in its
wayside hods. Napoleon had led his victorious
hosts along it from Egypt to Syria, and now the
latest born of the world’s armies had signalized its
crossing of the dividing line between ‘‘desert and
strown,” by the victory of Rafa.
We reached Sheikh Zowaid early in the aftei-
noon. The sand had become firmer and
occasional wheat crops told us that the passing of




Regiment


El Mazar.




the desert was at hand. At 1 o’clock the follow-
ing morning we moved off again. Towards dawn
we could feel a difference In our horses’ stride, and
dismounting more than once In the dark, our feet
found firm ground and brushed something—could
it be wet grass— that brought back recollection
of by-gone days. And daybreak came. The sun
rose on the ridges towards Khan Yunus, Clad in
the softest green, with the darker sheen of the
young wheat crop frequently showing, speckled
with the scarlet and yellow of the poppy and
anemone, they lay before our dazzled gaze. The
lark fluttered skywards from under our hoofs, and
the glorious breeze of the spring morning came
like a harbinger of peace breathing on paradise,
or so it seemed to many men after a year amid the
desolations of the Sinai desert.
Moving towards Khan Yunus we became sup-
ports to the New Zealand Brigade, which, with a
battery of artillery, made a reconnaissance of the
village. While the guns thundered out a few
rounds we lay on the grassy hillsides above Rafa
enjoying the glories of a Palestine spring morning,
while our horses cropped the newly-found grass,
and (be it whispered) enjoyed many a mouthful
of green wheat. Withdrawing later in the day,
the Regiment returned to Sheikh Zowaid and es-
tablished itself In camp on the beach opposite the
village. While at this camp, Chaplain-Captain
M. R. Maley reported for duty, and was attached
to the Regiment. For ten days we remained at
Sheikh Zowaid, and on alternate days made strong


reconnaissances in the vicinity of Khan Yunus.
The enemy had gradually withdrawn from the
village and appeared to be holding lightly the
village of Belah, several miles beyond, and his
fortified positions around Well Sheikh Nuran. A
small force of his cavalry were occasionally
sighted patrolling south and south east of Khan
Yunus, but all attempts to persuade him to a test
of strength proved unavailing. Gradually we
made good the villages of Khan Yunus and El
Fukharia, up till then No Man’s Land; and on
March the Bth we moved to a new camp site
several miles up the beach at Bir Abu Shunnar.
Reconnaissance work continued. It proved a
welcome change from the similar occupation of
our days in the desert. In place of ploughing
through endless sand to some hod possibly not
marked on the map, we moved through cultivated
land, among villages, and Bedouin encampments.
The weather remained mild and dry, and the re-
turn ride after the longest day, was always over
firm ground and ended at an ocean beach camp.
From Shunnar we patrolled thoroughly the
country to the south of Khan Yunus and El
Fukhari. Frequently we observed patrols of
enemy cavalry, but all attempts to draw them to a
much-desired trial of strength again failed. They
were not out to fight and small blame to them.
Meantime a large body of our Infantry had been
gradually brought up to the front, and the
mounted brigades, resting at various points, were
moved up in readiness for the first attack on Gaza.


The Regiment Bivouacked near Lake Belah.
I




A Patrol Dismounting near El Fukhari




We marched out from Shunnar during the early
morning of March 25th and reaching Deir el
Belah the same afternoon, bivouacked there for
the remainder of the day and subsequent night.
The strength of the Regiment at this period con-
sisted of 22 officers and 426 other ranks. At 3
o’clock on the morning of the 26th we marched
out from Belah as part of the mounted force
whose task It was to envelop and Isolate Gaza. By
one of those unlucky strokes of fortune, the whole
enterprise was handicapped by a very heavy fog,
which did not lift till well into the forenoon. The
dash around Gaza was a peculiarly difficult feat,
testing to the utmost powers of leadership and
individual horsemanship. But well before mid-
day we had quietly completed the encircling
movement, and, the Regiment being Brigade re-
serve, established itself on a series of ridges to
the north-east of Gaza and commanding the main
entrances to the town. Three troops under Major
Cross, and one under Lieut, Hardy, were posted
on positions overlooking the beach and the eastern
road to delay any possible enemy reinforcements
arriving from that direction.
The delay caused by the fog proved fatal to the
frontal attack launched by the infantry. Gallantly
all day they attempted to force the difficult re-
doubts commanding the southern and eastern
quarters, and they suffered very heavily in attempt-
ing to storm positions with the bayonet. The
Turks had chosen their positions well. For miles
to all fronts the gentle slopes were absolutely


coverless. Not one yard of the general advance
could be made, once within range, except under
a hail of shrapnel and withering bursts of machine
gun fire; and even then it was darkness which
robbed the British Infantry of their victory.
Sundown found them hammering hard at the
historic gates of the famous city. But sufficient
support was unavailable to enable them to hold
what they had won, and darkness proved to be the
signal for a general withdrawal.
Meantime the Regiment had during the day
remained in reserve behind Gaza. Towards even-
ing the mounted cordon around the city began to
be threatened by strong bodies of the enemy ap-
proaching from the east and south. It became
apparent that the withdrawal, if withdrawal there
had to be, would be a difficult and hazardous
undertaking. Towards midnight the Brigade
quietly assembled to the east of Gaza, and moving
by a route marked only by our horses’ tracks,
began a night march that was as weird as it was
perilous. Wrapped in a continuous dust cloud,
the column to avoid losing touch, moved at that
concertina pace which was ever the bugbear of the
night ride. Galloping desperately through
the dust cloud In the tail end of the column
disappearing ahead, over stony hills and
broken wadis, the only indication of regain-
ing touch was the shock of one’s horse being
thrown back on his haunches. Rarely did the dust
cloud lift sufficiently to enable one to see just
exactly who was ahead. Dotted freely over the


country were the dry stone cisterns o%the Bedouin,
and a few yards outside the edge of the dustcloud
meant a probable fatal accident. A wonderful
escape was that of Sgt.-Major Stevens. His horse
becoming aware of the cistern just too late to shy
off it, made an effort to jump the gaping and stone-
circled cavity. Failing to quite clear it, the horse
slid down tail first, carrying its rider unhurt 12
feet underground. Fortunately the next man to
Sgt.-Major Stevens caught a glimpse of something
disappearing in the dust, and pulled up to investi-
gate. Stevens was easily assisted out by ropes and
bridle reins, but his horse had to be shot and left
In the cistern. Quite easily the disappearance of
both horse and man might have remained one of
the unsolvable problems of the campaign.
Daylight found us crossing the Wadi Ghuzze,
and a few hours later we reached Belah. We
bivouacked among some very fine wheat crops now
out in ear, and remained in the same camp until
the following afternoon when we withdrew to the
beach and formed camp opposite the lake. Here
we remained for nearly three weeks. In turn, we
found day and night flank outposts to the south of
Khan Y unus, and patrolled the flat country towards
Weli Sheikh Nuran. We also took the usual
pleasure in preparing for a G.O.C.’s inspection,
which, after several false alarms, failed to
eventuate. Preparations were being quietly made
for another attempt at Gaza, and the Regiment
got its share of roadmaking and filling cisterns in
the neighbourhood of Tel el Jemmi.


The second battle of Gaza was not long iit
coming. On the evening of the 16th we moved
out from Helah as part of the Divisional Column,
and after a painfully slow all-night ride, found
ourselves in the neighbourhood of Shellal. I laving
watered in the wadi we crossed to its opposite
banks, and moved out as divisional support in a
demonstration towards 1 lareira. Ihe weather
had by now begun to he reminiscent of the desert
heat; but this proved to be one of our easy days.
We remained in the vicinity of Goz el Gelieb,
where a Bedouin cistern afforded a plentiful sup-
ply of good water. Withdrawing at sundown we
returned to Shellal and bivouacked for the night
on the western bank of the Wadi Ghuzze.
The following day we supplied the screen for
another demonstration towards I lareira. We
came into touch with the enemy’s outposts about
midday, and his artillery vainly attempted to
reach our supports. Withdrawing again at dark,
we returned to the wadi, and having fed and
watered, stood by ready to move again just after
midnight. Moving off at 1.30 a.m. we reached
our rendezvous, south of Mendur, by daylight.
The second attack on Gaza had been launched that
morning (April 19th). As Brigade reserve we
remained in the vicinity of Mendur till the early
afternoon. Then, receiving orders to report to
General Chaytor, we moved up in readiness to go
into action if required. Forming up in line of
troop column we dismounted and stood by our
horses. Just over the skyline the battle raged; it


The Wadi Ghuzze near Sheilal.




was not long before our turn came to receive the
enemy s attention. An enemy plane came, saw,
vanished, but ere many minutes passed, it came
again, this time in company with three others.
Kept at a respectful height by our ceaseless rifle
and machine gun fire, they nevertheless spent most
of the afternoon dropping bombs on our area, and
undoubtedly their inaccuracy of aim alone saved
us from a heavy casualty list. But a battery of
the H.A.C. had been toiling incessantly close to
us during the afternoon, and a thrilling duel re-
sulted with a high explosive gun of the enemy’s.
And, later, when we moved off, our medical
limber, mistaken possibly for an ammunition wag-
gon, was blown by the very first shot into match-
v ood. Riding away as we were in line of troop
column in rear of the limbers, the big H.E. passed
directly overhead. The limber, horses and drivers
had barely disappeared in a cloud of dust and
smoke, when the rarely-failing second shell was
heard coming. But a number of stretcher-bearers
had already dashed out and were galloping madly
for the medley of timber, iron and mangled men
and horses. One—Trooper L. R. Henderson, of
C Squadron—timed it to a nicety. His horse
and the second shell stopped simultaneously, the
latter exploding directly underneath the former.
The horse collapsed in the dense black smoke, and
few expected to see Henderson again except in
pieces. But a few seconds later he emerged from
the cloud unhurt, and assisted the others In extri-
cating and carrying to safety the wounded limber
drivers.


Withdrawing at dark we moved via Mendur to
Heseia, where we bivouacked for the night in
support of the outpost line west of the Wadi
Ghuzze. The following day patrols left in a
southerly and easterly direction. A squadron
patrolled to Goz el Geleib, where it engaged a
couple of squadrons of enemy cavalry, which, after
a brief demonstration, retired towards Hareira,
and the squadron returned with half a dozen Tur-
kish ponies and several prisoners. Relieved that
evening, the Regiment withdrew to Well Sheikh
Nuran; C Squadron relieved a squadron of the
New Zealand Brigade at Tel el Fara. Towering
above its banks, Fara was one of the most remark-
able landmarks of the W adi Ghuzze. The Tur-
kish occupants of the previous months had dug a
strong redoubt on its summit, and In places the
trench revealed the masonry of a many thousand
year-old fortification. We now settled down to
our usual occupation of holding and safeguarding
a flank. Frequently we patrolled to the south and
south west of Fara, and in conjunction with other
bodies, reconnoitred the No Man’s Land between
Wadis Ghuzze and Imleh. Finally, by the end
of the month, the Regiment, with the rest of the
Brigade, consolidated at a point one mile noith-
west of Fara. We now began to know the play-
ground across the Wadi much as we had known
the neighbourhood of Romani. Large digging
parties laboured incessantly on roadways across
the wadi, and such names and localities as Goz el
Gelieb, Karm, Khasif. Goz el Bazal, and different


The Caves at Khaseif.




numbered hills, became as familiar as Katia or
Oghritina,
The country which had been green with the just
turning crops in the previous month, was fast be-
coming a dust-heap. We soon found that as far
as material discomfort was concerned, the Shellal
front vied with the desert in holding the record.
The slightest breeze was sufficient to start the dust
clouds moving and the twice daily task of watering
the horses at the wadi made teeth grit in more than
one sense.
On the 18th of May we moved camp to El
Sha'uth, which took us a good three miles off the
precious Wadi water. Big improvements were
being made in the supply. At Shellal, a concrete
embankment impounded a miniature lake several
feet deep; troughing had been installed at
numerous points, and cisterns of drinking water
were available at every recognized watering
station; but it was largely through their own
efforts that the men obtained a supply sufficient for
the necessities of health. Few men returned from
a watering parade without a bucket on either foot
or their section’s water-bottles round their necks.
And the chronic dust nuisance, combined with the
growing summer heat, made the possession of the
Wadi Ghuzze water supplies essential to the
maintenance of mounted troops on that flank. At
Sha’uth we camped in Turkish dug-outs which
had been abandoned almost unused.
On the 22nd the Regiment moved out to take
part in the demolition of the enemy railway which


ran from Beersheba through Asluj. Crossing the
Wadi at Fara we joined up with the Ist Brigade
early in the afternoon, and proceeded to Bir Esani,
about nine miles up the wadi; arriving there by 6
o’clock. After a couple of hours’ spell we
marched out for Khalasa. Riding till 2 o’clock
the following morning, we eventually surrounded
and outposted Khalasa, cutting the telegraph line
to Beersheba. One troop of B Squadron, under
Lieut. MacKenzie, accompanied the Ist Brigade
a further 10 miles to Bir Asluj. There the demo-
lition of viaducts and the railway line generally
was successfully carried out. The Regiment spent
the day outposting and patrolling In the vicinity
of Khalasa. During the afternoon we withdrew
and returned to Esani, and after a “feed up and
boil up” halt, resumed our journey back to
Sha’uth, arriving in camp about midnight. The
return march was a very trying one. The night
was particularly hot and devoid of any breeze, and
practically the whole country had become a dust-
heap. But a welcome relief was at hand.
On the 28th we were relieved, and after a few
hours’ ride established ourselves in a soldiers’
paradise, a camp in the soft clean sand at Tel el
Marakeb. For three precious weeks we rested.
The soft sea air and the rolling surf made Nature’s
original idea of nakedness irresistible. Except
when on duty, clothes were practically discarded,
and before long the beach might have been mis-
taken for a resort of South Sea Islanders. The
climate on the Palestine beach was truly magnifi-


Demolition of a Viaduct, Beersheba-Asluj Railway.
K




cent. Hot only for a couple of midday hours, the
remainder of the day was fanned gently by the
soft warmth of the Mediterranean breeze. After
the dust of the and areas of Sheikh Nuran and
Kara, we decided that the cleanliness of the desert
sand, still represented in the chain of giant sand-
hills fringing the Palestine coast, was something
we had never quite given it.credit for during the
days in Sinai.
Towards the end of June we moved out again,
and being now r in reserve to the Division, a short
ride brought us to a camp site just beyond El
hukhari. Here we remained for a fortnight. Be-
yond ordinary regimental and brigade duties and
the eternal stables and watering parades, life was
quiet; but the spectre of never-ending dust haunted
both waking and sleeping hours. We found time
to meet and defeat the Ist Regiment at football,
and after another brief week’s camp at Marakeb,
we marched out for our last turn in holding the
flank positions on the Wadi Ghuzze. Camping
close to the wadi banks at Um Urgan, we settled
down again to the same round of patrolling No
Man’s Land, reconnaissances of the enemy’s
strongholds across the Wadi Imleh and the never-
ending work of improving and consolidating the
sector.
One noteworthy night’s work was the explora-
tion on foot of the enemy’s territory across the
Wadi Imleh. Leaving camp after dark, the Regi-
ment crossed the neutral ground between the two
wadis, and leaving horses concealed under the


steep banks of the Imleh, A Squadron, under
Major H. D. White, proceeded on foot out into
the blue. One troop of C Squadron, under Lieut.
Black, accompanied A Squadron, and remained on
post some distance out overlooking the Beersheba
Road. Cut off practically all night by trains of
Bedouin and Turkish camels, and running the
hourly risk of discovery by patrols of Turkish
cavalry, the night became a supreme test of vigi-
lance and absolute control, under the most trying
circumstances, with the knowledge that the
slightest error would imperil the success of the
squadron reconnoitring further out. Lieut. Black
and Sgt. Rldgway were awarded respectively the
Military Cross and Distinguished Conduct Medal
for their work that night. But by one of those
peculiar coincidences, neither ever wore the ribbon
of his distinction. Lieut. Black was mortally
wounded several weeks later during an outpost
skirmish at Hill 630, and died several days after-
wards, the news of his decoration coming through
the day he was wounded; and some nine months
later, the belated news of Sgt. Ridgway’s D.C.M.
came to us several days after he Ijad fallen in
action at Amman.
In losing Lieut. Black the Regiment lost one of
its most conscientious and fearless officers. A man
who played the game of soldiering right up to the
hilt; It was over conscientiousness which exposed
him to the 111-fortune of a fluke. In charge of a
day patrol to Hill 630, overlooking the Wadi
Imleh, he had seen a section correctly posted and


returned to the main body of his troop. But a
burst of fire from a Turkish post concealed in the
wadi made him return to the post. After satisfy-
ing himself that all was well, he crawled away
down the hillside, and well below the skyline stood
up to return to the horses, when an “over”
wounded him fatally in the back.
Alternately we supplied front line, support and
reserve with the rest of the Brigade- We became
case hardened to the never-ending dust, and our
closeness to the plentiful water supply of Shellal,
made life a good deal easier. The health of the
Regiment, beyond the inevitable daily septic
parade, remained good, and the horses proved
then, as they had been throughout, that for en-
durance the Australian bred animal has no equal.
Still a number of the original 1914 horses re-
mained with us, and it was remarkable how they
had gradually narrowed down to a type, the com-
pactly built “big” little horse, which had nearly
always proved a good “doer.” Finally our last
stay on the Shellal front came to a close. Early
In August we were again relieved, and marched
in once more to Marakeb, settling down to a well-
earned enjoyment of rest and surf. The establish-
ment of a Y.M.C.A. and a brigade stadium
helped to vary the daily programme of sleep and
surf. Once more we decided that Chidley
deserved canonization instead of mockery. The
month wore away and we spent it storing in a new
supply of health and vigour for the big move
impending.


During the first seventeen days of September,
the Regiment remained in its rest camp at Tel el
Marakeb. Instructional work continued, a
number of officers and N.C.O.’s attended Vickers’
gun classes supervised by the O.C. of the Brigade
Machine Gun Squadron, and at D.H.Q, the
Divisional Gas Officer lectured to classes of
N.C.O.’s. Musketry practices with, and without
gas helmets worn, were carried out, and the whole
camp area, arms, saddlery and all gear were
thoroughly cleared for the Corps Commander’s
Inspection which took place on the 13th inst.
The rest at Marakeb was greatly appreciated by
all ranks. The various boxing tournaments and
other sports, surfing, sunbathing and the sea
breezes heartened up the men a good deal for
another turn on the arduous and dusty front of
the Wadi Ghuzze.
The Regiment, with a marching out state of 23
officers, 438 other ranks, and 565 horses, left
Marakeb on the morning of the 18th inst., and
after two hours’ ride reached its new camp at El
Kazar, taking over the site previously occupied by
the 9th L.H. Regiment. Being in supports here,
instructional work continued, gas drill, Hotchkiss
and rifle practice and tactical schemes being the
chief features. The regimental lines were in-
spected on the 28th inst. by the Commander-in-
Chief.
The first three weeks of October were unevent-
ful. Ordinary camp routine and Instructional
work, similar to that of the previous month, con


tinued. Ihe dust nuisance was very great, owing
to the prevailing wind being invariably from a
certain quarter, horses going to water had to move
in a continuous dust cloud both ways.
On the Bth October we enjoyed the spectacle of
a thrilling air fight in which the enemy plane was
finally brought down, crashing across the Wadi
Ghuzze at Goz el Basal.
During a divisional presentation of medals by
the Commander-m-Chief, R.S.M. Hanton and Sgt.
Macansh were decorated with the Servian Star
and the D.C.M. respectively, and on the 18th
inst. Lt.-Col. Fuller left for Australia on four
weeks’ furlough.
On the 21st inst. the Regiment moved out of
camp and having joined up with the Brigade, left
at 5.30 p.m. for Esani, 14 miles distant, and
arriving there at 10 o’clock, bivouacked for the
night. During the march C Squadron provided
the left flank and rear guards. Next morning the
camp was moved three miles up the wadi, and
during a stay there of three days we provided
working parties and various patrols and outposts.
On the 24th inst., the Regiment joined up with
the rest of the Brigade and moved to Bir Asluj, a
distance of 17 miles S.E. of Esani, arriving there
at 1.30 a.m., bivouacking and outposting for the
remainder of the night. Major H. D. White took
command of the Regiment as Temporary Lt.-Col.,
vice Lt.-Col. Fuller on furlough, and Sergeants
Crane and Sharpley were granted commissions.


For five days the Regiment remained at Asluj
cleaning out wells which had been blow r n in by
the enemy. This work proceeded in shifts day
and night and was undoubtedly one of the most
arduous undertakings the Regiment ever accom-
plished. The water supply available was so small
that a large number of horses had to be sent back
to Khalasa. In addition we found day patrols to
various points and night outposts around the camp
area.
On the night of the 30th, the Regiment moved
out to take its part in the flanking movement
around Beersheba. The country travelled over
was very difficult, hilly and stony, but by daylight
the flanking movement was complete. Reconnais-
sance was carried out towards Sakaty, and that
night outpost positions were taken up astride the
Beersheba-Hebron Road. The water supply in
this locality was almost non-existent, save for a
few Bedouin underground reservoirs and a scanty
surface supply in the wadis, the latter due to a
providential storm a few days previously.
On the 2nd November the Regiment moved out
along the Hebron Road to the Dhaheriyeh Hills,
and were held up by strong forces of the enemy
and by snipers in impregnable spots about 12
miles from Beersheba.. Till the 6th Inst, a very
unequal warfare continued in rough country, the
difficulty of water supply for both horses and
men, the heat by day, and the continuous night
outpost work, was very trying to all ranks.
The Dhaheriyeh Hills will remain in the


Temp. Lt.-Col. H. D. White, D.S.O., who Commanded the
Regiment from November, 1917, to March, 1918.




Watering Horses at a deep well on the Beersheba-Hebron Road.




memory of the Regiment as one of the worst spots
it ever campaigned In. The number of casualties
was not great but its personnel was sorely missed.
C Squadron, in losing Captain A. C, Thompson
and Sergeant R. J. Foster, M.M., suffered an
irreplaceable loss. Enemy snipers in this locality
commanded great respect, both Captain Thomp-
son and Sergeant Foster being among their vic-
tims.
The case of Sergeant Foster was particularly
hard. He was one of the early 1914 enlistments,
and up till the time of his death he had been off
the strength of the Regiment for 14 days only,
due to light wounds received at Romani. On com-
pletion of his three years’ service, which Included
30 weeks on Gallipoli without being off duty a
single day, Sergeant Foster, a married man with
two children, applied for furlough on family rea-
sons. His application for leave was refused on
the grounds of insufficient reinforcements from
Australia, while the genuineness of his case was
admitted. Now his gravestone stands in the ceme-
tery at Beersheba, far from his New England
home, and remains one—and not the only one—-
of the monuments to the selfish cowardice of a
large number of his countrymen.
Just prior to the 6th Inst. Tance-Sergeant F. L.
Ridgway and S.Q.M.S. A. B. Campbell were
granted commissions.
On the 6th inst. the Regiment, less two troops
left behind on observation posts under Lieut,
Hardy, withdrew from its position to within two


miles of Beersheba. The same afternoon a move
was made in a northerly direction and after travel-
ling practically all night and next morning we
camped at Kh. Umn Ameidat, near the Turkish
railway line. The following day, the Bth inst.,
the Regiment moved in support of the sth, and
working round on their left engaged part of the
retreating Turkish force, capturing a field piece
with limbers and ammunition. During the day
Lieut. H. Dickson was wounded and Sgt. Barrow
killed. The Regiment bivouacked for the night
near the Reservoir at Jammameh. Next day, the
9th inst., the w r hole Brigade moved in pursuit of
the retreating Turkish Infantry. The Regiment
became engaged with the enemy at Beit Affe,
capturing two guns and co-operating with the 7th
Regiment on our left.
During the Beersheba operations and ensuing
advance towards Jaffa, the great advantage of
mounted mobility was strikingly demonstrated
again and again, but never more so than by the
flanking movement carried out by the 6th Regi-
ment at Beit Affee on the 9th November. For
several days the Turkish Infantry, driven from its
strongholds on the Gaza-Beersheba line of de-
fence, was gradually retreating northwards, taking
every advantage of the hilly formation of the
country to hold up the constant pressure of the
mounted troops in rear. For two days the 6th
Regiment had been taking part in this piessuie,
and at Beit Affe on the 9th inst. seized a unique
opportunity of proving how a retreating and de


feated army is at the mercy of a mobile mounted
force, directed by a cool and resourceful brain.
Moving out from Kb. Jammameh on the morn-
ing of the 9th, the 6th Regiment at midday sighted
a body of about a thousand i urkish Infantry two
miles to the N.W. in full retreat. Co-operating
with the 7th Regiment on its left the pursuit was
at once begun. The formation of the country,
hills lunning at right angles to the line of advance,
greatly assisted the enemy in fighting a stubborn
rearguard action. Flanking tactics, alternately to
the light and left, carried out with daring disre-
gard of the enemy’s rifle fire and at full gallop,
forced him to abandon in turn one position for
another, two striking phases of the drive being the
pi actical immunity of the extended and galloping
horsemen from the enemy’s rifle fire and machine
gun fire, and the extreme speed with which the
enemy evacuated one position after another.
The drive continued the whole afternoon, ex-
tending over a depth of ten miles, and finally about
5 o’clock the enemy were driven from the hills
and took up a strong postion in the Wadi Ghuet,
a deep waterway traversing flat and coverless
country on which a frontal attack was impossible.
One squadron of the Regiment moving at the
gallop, immediately proceeded across the enemy’s
front to some low ridges on the right flank whence
the Wadi Ghuet, distant half a mile, could be
more or less subject to enfilade fire.
"I he enemy at once attempted to move from its
position, but the flat coverless nature of the ground


placed it at the mercy of our rifle and machine gun
fire, and those who survived the attempt immedi-
ately retired to their position in the wadi. Mean-
while the remainder of the Regiment moved to
the same flank and by shifting ground to a position
about a mile south of Hill 194, while still cover-
ing the country to the rear of the Wadi Ghuet by
rifle and machine gun fire, made any further re-
treat impossible. *
A troop on patrol was immediately despatched
completely to clear the ground in rear of the
Wadi Ghuet. Similar tactics had been carried on
all day by units working on the left flank, with
the result that, with a few exceptions, who
escaped during the darkness of the night, the
whole of the Turkish force, which for ten miles
had been harried and flanked were glad to
surrender to the 7th Regiment, Our casualties
during the day were four wounded, due to the
speed with which the Regiment moved, and the
unerring judgment of troop and squadron leaders
In selecting positions of advantage. The enemy s
losses were severe, 50 killed being counted in the
Wadi Ghuet. Both pursued and pursuers were
similarly armed; neither side had the assistance of
artillery, but the outstanding advantage of
mounted mobility made all the difference in the
day’s drive, to our light number of casualties, as
well as to the final result.
The water difficulty had, since departing from
Beersheba, been very severe, all the horses had
been without for 60 hours and some for 72. Wells


had been discovered in villages, but mostly at too
great a depth to allow for quick watering; a neces-
sity In view of the fact that many of the wells
were under enemy observation and artillery fire.
For several days the pursuit continued, the
Regiment finally moving on to the beach at Ham-
mame for a two days’ rest. Here the two troops
left under Lieut. Hardy on the Hebron Road re-
joined us.
On the 12th inst. the Regiment moved east-
ward and then northward by Kezazeh, El Kubeide
and Ramleh to two miles N.E. of Ludd.
For several days we carried out patrol and
reconnaissance work around Wilhelma and to-
wards Ras el Ain and Mejdel Yaba.
During one morning on which C Squadron was
on patrol, the enemy heavily shelled and attacked
Wilhelma, then occupied by Imperial troops. One
troop of C Squadron, while withdrawing from
range of snipers’ fire, became aware of an enemy
movement attempting to flank the railway line east
of Wilhelma. The N.C.O. in charge, Sgt. J. M.
Bargh, Immediately galloped his troop into
position near the railway station, and from a cut-
ting completely held up the Turkish advance with
rifle and Hotchkiss fire, thus preventing the
probable flanking of the village and its capture.
This gallant conduct won him the D.C.M. decora-
tion.
On the 26th inst. the Regiment moved on to-
wards the front line beyond Jaffa, and eventually
took over part of the outpost line, which consisted
ti


here of a series of small redoubts on ridges sur-
rounded by a large orchard of almond trees.
Large digging parties were found every night, and
on the 29th inst, two troops of A Squadron, to co-
operate with the I.C.C. in an attack on point 265,
moved forward on a bombing raid on the enemy
post immediately in front of the salient. They
drew very heavy rifle and machine gun fire, and
eventually were driven back to their supports by a
strong enemy counter attack. Lieut. Ronald was
badly wounded, and two other ranks were killed
and two wounded.
During the month the following decorations
were awarded; —Lieut. H. Dickson, the Military
Cross, and Sergeants Potter and Sheridan,
Troopers Smith, McNamee and Hindmarsh, the
Military Medal.
The month of December opened with the Regi-
ment still holding redoubts in the almond orchard
around One-tree Hill. The horses had, mean-
while, been sent back towards Selmeh village for
safety from shell fire, and on the night of the Ist,
the Regiment was relieved by the sth L.H., and
withdrew into reserve about half a mile behind the
firing-line.
The enemy had been observed digging in on the
salient in front of One-tree Hill. A raiding party
from C Squadron, comprising 5 officers and 100
other ranks, Captain D. C. Close In command,
was detailed to attack the salient, the principal
object being to discover whether the enemy were
intending to fortify and permanently occupy this,
point or not.


The scheme of attack was as follows:—The
raiding party took up a position in the orchard In
front of the One-tree Hill post, covered by an
artillery barrage which after 10 minutes firing had
orders to lift for 10 minutes and then again con-
centrate on the salient. During the 10 minutes
following the lifting of the barrage the party was
to rush the salient, scupper its occupants, deter-
mine the nature of the enemy’s position, and re-
tire on the forward post at One-tree Hill. But
owing to inaccuracy of aim, or a defective gun,
the whole of the raiding party came under heavy
shell fire during the 10 minutes barrage. In that
short space of time 23 casualties occurred, yet the
only men who moved from their ground, were the
stretcher bearers, whose work that night well
earned a decoration for every man. No severer
test was ever put on a squadron of the Regiment,
and In spite of its heavy loss, the raiding party
rushed its objective as soon as the barrage lifted,
bayoneted 20 of the enemy, and returned to One-
tree Hill bringing a number of enemy rifles, four
prisoners, some of our own wounded, and the re-
quired information regarding the enemy’s position.
The squadron’s total casualties during the raid
were one officer (Lieut. Owen Tooth) and one
other rank killed, and one officer (Lieut. N. Dick-
son) and 22 other ranks wounded.
On the 6th inst. the 2nd Brigade was relieved
by an Infantry Brigade in the front line, and that
night moved back to Ayun Kara, near Richon.
Rain set In during the night and continued inter-


mittently for the next two days. On the 12th
inst. the Regiment moved, with the rest of the
Brigade, to Esdud, and for the remainder of the
month carried on usual camp routine, instructional
work In gas drill, musketry and Hotchkiss gun-
nery.
For work done during the salient raids, Sgts.
McNair and Baird, Corpl. Capel, and Stretcher-
bearer Bassett were awarded the Military Medal.
Lieut. Ronald also received the Military Cross.
On the 14th inst. one officer (Lieut. H. Dick-
son) and seven other ranks were presented with
their decorations by the Divisional Commander,
and on the same day three N.C.O.’s (S.S.M.
Stevens, Sgt. Berrie and Corpl. Busby) left for
the Cadet Course at the School of Instruction,
Zeitoun.
The New Year opened with showery weather.
On the 12th inst the Regiment moved out with the
Brigade and proceeded to a new camp at Wadi
Hanein. Rain fell throughout the day, night and
following day.
The month as a whole was uneventful. Various
branches of training were continued with, and
officers and men availed themselves of leave
granted to Port Said and Alexandria. Major
Ferguson and Lieut. Marks were transferred to
the 2nd L.H. Training Regiment at Moascar, and
Major O’Brien returned to the Regiment for duty.
Lieuts. W. J. Weir and A. W. Farquhar were
transferred to the Australian Flying Corps as
observers.


During both January and February the weather
continued very inclement; cold, rainy and windy.
1 he monotony of training and the weather was
varied to a certain extent by a Divisional Football
Competition. In hebruary, Lieut. Crane was
attached to the Cadre at Moascar. Lieut. Phillips
left for a months’ leave to Australia. Lieut.
Hewetson rejoined the Regiment from duty on
railway construction, for a week, and then returned
to detached duty. Lieut. A. B. Campbell was
taken on the strength from Moascar. The
Divisional Football Competition was concluded,
by the Auckland Mounted Rifles team beating the
6th Regiment in the final by 6 to nil.
A number of officers attended school during the
month: Lieuts. Sharpley and Campbell the Junior
Officers’ School at Kelab, Lieut. Allman a Hotch-
kiss course at Zeitoun, and Lieut. Ridgway re-
ported back from the Cavalry course.
The first two weeks of March were uneventful.
On the 9th inst. Lieut. H. Dickson and an N.C.O.
were sent on a special duty to Jericho, the first
move made by the Regiment towards the Jordan
Valley. On March 13th we marched out with
the Brigade and proceeded to Latron en route for
Jerusalem.
The three days’ camp at Latron will be long
remembered by the Regiment. Rain fell almost
unceasingly, bitterly cold winds prevailed, and mud
rendered the camp almost uninhabitable. On the
17th inst. Latron was left behind and the long
ascent up the Judean Hills to Jerusalem was com-


pleted by nightfall. The Regiment bivouacked
outside the N.W. corner of the walls of the old
city. Parties in turn were to visit the historic
places in the old city, then rather in an insanitary
condition, its occupation by our forces having not
been sufficiently long to work the vast Improve-
ment noticeable a few months later.


CHAPTER VI
AMMAN AND Es SALT
ON the 22nd inst. the Regiment moved out
again and began the long descent into the
Jordan Valley. During a three days’ halt,
just beyond Talaat ed Dumm, Lieut.-Col. Fuller
rejoined the Regiment from his Australian leave,
Lieut. Campbell from hospital, and 2nd Lieuts.
Berrie and Stevens from the Cadet School,
Zeitoun.
From Talaat ed Dumm glimpses could be ob-
tained of the Jordan Valley, the Dead Sea, and the
frowning ramparts fringing the Land of Moab.
Since crossing the Suez Canal, the blue line of
the Judean mountains had always arrested the eye;
speculation as to what lay on the other side of that
blue line, always looming like a will-o’-the-wisp on
the horizon, had been rife since the early days in
Sinai. Now at last the divide had been crossed,
and the night ride down Into the Jordan Valley,
and the crossing of the historic river at daybreak,
were the culminating points to the long weary
months in the desert, the waterless, trackless day
and night patrols, and the subsequent sequel to
historic Romani, the gradual pushing of Turkey
from the sacred spots of antiquity.
Daylight found us traversing the eastern plain
of the Valley. Traces of the previous day’s con-


fllct when the crossing of the river had been forced
by the New Zealand Brigade were noticeable in
enemy dead and wounded.
The route taken passed through a magnificent
wheat crop, Irrigated by water drawn from the
perennial wadis at the junction of plain and foot-
hills. The first objective, Tel el Muslim, was
attained without serious opposition, a forward
move was made to get into touch with large bodies
of enemy horsemen observed on ridges four miles
to the south. The enemy withdrew as we ad-
vanced, and by four o’clock the ascent of the Moab
Mountains had commenced. Rough as they had ap-
peared from the western foothills, the reality far
transcended the worst estimate. The ascent, during
a night of rain and pitch darkness, in single file by
what were goat tracks, along sheer descents, up
steep grades made slippery by wet flagstones, was
accomplished by daylight, and without one serious
accident; a striking proof of the claim that in no
phase of the Sinai-Palestine Campaign, were Aus-
tralian horsemen and their camel transports unable
to take part.
The achievement of the camel transport in
supplying practically full rations during the whole
of the Amman campaign, over the worst country
and over rain sodden soil, was unparalleled, and if
ever devotion to duty was conspicuous, the officers,
N.C.O.’s and Gyppo drivers of the C.T.C. ex-
hibited it to the highest degree.
By four o’clock the Regiment had reached a
spot three miles east of the village of Naaur,


Between Talaat-ed-Dum and the Jordan Valley.




The Brigade halted during Amman Operations, March, 1918.




where it remained all day, finding outposts on the
surrounding ridges. The rain, which had been
falling intermittently during the night, set in
steadily at daylight and continued to fall in tor-
rents during most of the day. Except on the stony
tops of the ridges, the ground, roads included, be-
came a quagmire, and the night march which
followed will long be remembered.
Further rain and icy winds chilled the already
soaked and weary men to the bone, and the water-
logged soil necessitated standing up during the
brief and usually precious dismounted halts. The
route followed took the Regiment through Naaur
and northward along the Es Salt Road, thence
branching off this on to a track leading to Amman.
El Fuheis was reached by 7 o’clock where we
bivouacked and outposted for the day. Patrols
sent out towards the village of Suiveilah brought
back 61 Turkish prisoners.
On the morning of the 27th inst. the Regiment
moved with the Brigade towards Amman and
came into contact with the enemy N.W. of the
village by 10.30.
B Squadron, working on the left flank of the
7th Regiment, moved a considerable distance
towards Amman, and the remainder of the Regi-
ment, supported by the Machine Gun Squadron,
made a direct attack on enemy sangars a little to
the right of the village. Further to the right
flank a battalion of the Imperial Camel Corps and
the New Zealand Brigade attempted an envelop


ing movement. C Squadron bore the brunt of the
regimental attack that day. Dismounting and
leaving its horses behind a high stony hill, the
Squadron advanced in skirmishing order down a
long slope, the only cover being low ledges of rock
at long intervals. During the whole of the ad-
vance, enemy shrapnel and machine gun fire were
delivered in full force. Absence of artillery on
our side placed the advancing force at a great dis-
advantage. Casualties commenced immediately
the first ridge was crossed, and though the advance
was made with characteristic bravery, the fight was
too unequal, and only the opportune fire of one of
our machine gun troops from a stone hut on the
left flank averted a disaster. The advance con-
tinued to within a few hundred yards of the
enemy position. By this time the heavy percent-
age of casualties had so told on the strength of
the attackers that a withdrawal was inevitable,
and here again the machine guns’ covering fire
enabled our men to retire to the original starting
point, carrying all wounded and most of the killed,
Amongst the killed that day the Regiment lost
one of its best soldiers, “Snowy” Collins. A trans-
port driver, when the Regiment embarked tor
Gallipoli, he was* compelled to remain behind
when the first move was made from Maadi; never-
theless, when the Lutzow was safely out at
sea, Collins appeared from somewhere. A owed
to remain with his unit after landing on Gallipoli,
he carried on during the ensuing seven months,
save for a few days when wounded by a bomb


splinter at Lone Pine, and up till a week before the
final evacuation, when a second bomb wound in the
leg sent him to hospital. i\gain, a few days before
Romani, he was wounded a third time, this time
seriously in the back by a bullet which burst after
entering. No one expected to see Collins back
again; nevertheless, he returned despite a stiff back
which could have got him his discharge any day.
Throughout the ensuing two years, Collins’ name
throughout the Brigade became synonymous with
cool courage and careless disregard of personal
safety. INo one can go on for ever. Lie was
instantly killed while working his Hotchkiss gun,
after three years and six months’ service, and
amongst all ranks it is safe to say that no man
was more genuinely regretted or harder to replace.
"The enemy still held his main positions around
Amman, and along the railway line to the north,
having heavily reinforced his numbers during
the two preceding days.
On the 28th inst,, a day for ever historic in the
6th Regiment, a general attack took place. In-
fantry reinforcements, which had come up the
previous day from Es Salt, advanced in the centre,
the 7th Regiment on their left, and on their left
again, B and A Squadrons of the 6th in that order.
A deep, and in places, precipitous wadi ran cir-
cuitously through Amman and the different Tur-
kish positions. On the farther side their artillery
concealed in gullies, and in some instances boldly
in the open, shelled unceasingly as soon as the


attack commenced. Each ridge-top was fortified
by a stone sangar from which a remorseless
machine gun fire played on the attackers. Steadily
the advance continued until finally it reached the
top of a high bare hill overlooking a series of
strong enemy sangars several hundred yards in
front and surmounting rough points just beyond a
gradual and coverless descent. To the right of
the hill, where our advance became arrested by un-
erring and ceaseless machine gun fire, lay a deep
hollow and again a gradual ascent to a ridge run-
ning parallel to a line of advance.
The 7th Regiment was extended from the
bottom of the valley to the ridge on the right; B
Squadron, 58 strong w’hen it started, had spiead
out up the steep hillside and along the top to the
left. Major Ryrie had previously become a
casualty, leaving Lieut. H. Dickson in command
of the Squadron. Seeing the strength of the
enemy positions, both to the front and left flank,
he passed a message down to the C.O. of the 7th
Regiment, under whose command he came, that a
further advance was Impossible. The reply was
an order for a direct frontal attack, during which
covering fire would be delivered by the post on the
right of the deep valley.
Realizing that an advance was little'short of
suicide, Lieut. Dickson three times in all passed the
message down to that effect; on receiving the final
order to advance at all costs, the advance was
made and the cost to the squadron proved stagger-
ing. Lieut. Dickson, wounded in the leg just as


Part of the Regiment going into action at Amman, March 28, 1918.




the desperate enterprise started, handed his com-
mand to Lieut. Ridgway, who with three troops
dashed over the ridge, and under withering
machine gun fire, made an heroic attempt to reach
the Turkish sangar. Lieut. Dickson’s estimate of
the impossibility of the task proved only too true.
Of the men who crossed the skyline in the last ad-
vance, only one, wounded in four places and with
clothes in ribbons, succeeded In beating the enemy
machine-gunners in a desperate rush back to safety.
Simultaneously with the advance over the top the
remaining troop of B Squadron and the 7th Regi-
ment moved up along the valley and immediately
were met by the same withering cross fire from
several sangars.
The advance was at once stopped; but for the
three troops of B Squadron, which had advanced
at all costs, it was too late. A general retirement
was then ordered. A Turkish counter-advance
followed at once and was sufficiently held up by a
machine gun and two Hotchkiss rifles to allow
those wounded before the final race to death to be
carried safely back. Of the 58 men in B Squad-
ron, 40 were killed, wounded and missing. The
missing included Lieut. Ridgway, Sergeants King,
Burlace and Sharpe, Corporal Redman and 18
other ranks —In all 23.
The officers’ casualty list in the Regiment
during the actions on the 27th and 28th was heavy.
Majors Cross and Ryrie, Lieuts. Evans, Lomax,
Campbell and H. Dickson were wounded, and


Lieut, Ridgway missing; the latter eventually dis-
covered to have been killed in action.
The total casualties in the Regiment during the
two days was between 90 and 100, During the
29th and 30th the Regiment held with a very thin
line the ridges around its bivouac areas. Two
very striking spectacles were noticed during these
two days. Horseholders, sole survivors in many
sections, leading the saddled horses of their miss-
ing mates, silently echoed the “empty saddle” ap-
peal of Sydney recruiting picnics. No women here
leading around saddled-up horses though, and no
recruits heartened by Dutch courage, bribed by
insurance policies or conscripted by white feathers,
to fill the empty saddles.
Reinforcements did turn up though during the
day. A number of armed Bedouins galloped into
the hollow behind the ridges manned to resist an
attempted Turkish advance, dismounted and took
their places in the firing line, a touch of comic
opera in broad contrast to the deadly tragedy of
the two previous days and a biting satire on Aus-
tralian recruiting methods.
On the last day of March, a general withdrawal
took place towards Es Salt via Suweilah and El
Fuheis. Rations and forage were drawn at the
latter point, and in driving rain and piercing cold,
the ride to Es Salt began. By one o’clock in the
morning the bivouac area was reached, and after
a few hours’ rest the long descent to the Jordan
Valley by the Es Salt-Jericho Road began. The


Mount of Temptation.




weather was still bitterly cold and showery; the
downward road to the valley wound round curves
and along gorges following the rushing course of
the Valley of the Nimrin, then a blaze of colour,
the green of the rank growth of herbage plenti-
fully speckled with the scarlet poppy and white
and yellow everlasting. With each mile of descent
the air grew warmer, and for once at least the
Jordan Valley was a welcome sight as the column
gradually drew out of the foothills.
On the 2nd of April the Regiment moved across
the Jordan to a bivouac site on the Wadi Kelt,
near Jericho. For several days we rested, shaking
off gradually the bitter feeling of unrewarded
sacrifices. But ever to the eastern front the grim
and frowming mountains of Moab, rising scarp-
sided and sheer, reminded us of what seemed
almost Incredible, that we had ascended them and
fought on the tableland beyond, the stiffest en-
gagements of the Regiment’s history, and suffered
irreplaceable losses in officers and men.
On April 11th the Regiment moved to a new
position in the Wadi Aujah, taking over part of
the West Jordan patrol and outpost work.
Daily a patrol reconnoitred the gap between
Musallabeh and the Wadi Mellahah, generally
drawing enemy artillery and rifle fire as it ap-
proached the neighbourhood of the Wadi Bakr.
Another patrol watched the approaches to the
Um esh Shert Ford across the Jordan.


On the 18th inst. the Regiment left its bivouac
area .in the Wadi Aujah and moved across the
Jordan early next morning to take part in a
demonstration attack on the Turkish positions on
the eastern foothills.
Shortly after leaving the broken wadi ground,
near the river, we came under heavy shell fire
while crossing at the gallop several miles of flat
and open country in the direction of the Wadi
Kefrein. Again the speed of the horsemen proved
their salvation, only one man during a several
miles gallop being wounded. Finally we took
cover in the Wadi Kefrein. The enemy held the
foothills too strongly to admit of any definite
attack, so our withdrawal commenced. At sun-
down the Jordan was recrossed and we proceeded
to our former bivouac site at the Wadi Nieumeah,
and on the following day to our old camp in the
Aujah.
Till the 25th inst. we carried on the old routine
of patrol apd outpost, and on the 26th moved back
to the Wadi Kelt, crossing the Jordan by the
Ghoraniyeh Bridge and proceeding down the
eastern side of the river to Hadjla Crossing, on
the following day.
For two days we remained there patrolling and
outposting, as usual, and on the afternoon of the
30th the Regiment, less A Squadron, which had
gone on detached duty to the 179th Infantry
Brigade, moved up the river and proceeding along
the Um esh Shert Road finally branched off on to-


the No. 7 Es Salt Road, and once again began an
arduous night ascent of the Moab Mountains.
By daylight the precipitous passes and rocky de-
files of the ascent had been safely negotiated, and
we halted for an hour three miles west of Es Salt
and fed up. Moving forward again we proceeded
along a very difficult track through Es Salt and
out on to the Amman Road beyond the town.
In the early afternoon we moved out in the
direction of Ain es Sir, reconnoitring some very
rugged country. Our advanced guard soon dis-
covered that the enemy held strongly various van-
tage points around Ain es Sir; so after passing
through the village we gradually fell back on to
the Amman Road. Here the whole Brigade
finally assembled and by midnight had moved back
to a point a mile beyond Es Salt on the Shunet
Nimrin Road, where we bivouacked till daylight.
During the morning we were attached to the
5 th Mounted Brigade, which was holding
positions on either side of the Shunet Nimrin Road,
several miles from Es Salt towards the Jordan
Valley. Dismounted we moved along the road
several miles and remained in reserve until 5 p.m.,
when we took up outpost positions for the night on
a precipitous ridge on the left of the road.
Meantime, after dark, the horses had been led
down the road to the rear of the outpost lines.
Orders had been received to withdraw and report
as reserve to the Australian Mounted Division
beyond Es Salt, the outposts were withdrawn by


-2.30 a.m., and by daylight we had moved back to
Es Salt.
The strain of sleepless nights and strenuous
days of hill climbing was beginning to tell on both
horses and men. The supply of horsefeed had
been exhausted the previous day, and after a
scanty morning meal no one knew where the next
one was to come from.
At 8.30 that morning (May 3rd) we moved
several miles along the Amman Road to support
three squadrons of the 3rd Brigade, which had
held off for several hours that morning a deter-
mined enemy attack, finally capturing over 300
prisoners of the assaulting force. Remaining In
reserve till midday, we then gradually took over
the 3rd Brigade posts, and when darkness fell a
very thin line in a very precarious position made
its dispositions for the night. A general with-
drawal of our forces was to take place that night,
and the outpost line, extended to very attenuated
limits, was ordered to hang on at all costs, until
instructed to withdraw.
An Illustration of the precarious nature of the
position can be found In the fact that one troop of
18 men had to cover 300 yards of front in four
posts. During the day enemy snipers had been
very active and accurate, and a good deal of shell-
ing at the right of the line had taken place. To
the extreme left of the position for the last few
hours before the withdrawal, there was no outpost
line at all; had the enemy attempted to flank the


position during the night nothing could have pre-
vented him from cutting the Es Salt-Amman Road
behind us.
fortunately the severe check inflicted on the
enemy by the 3rd Brigade that morning had a
salutary effect and, except for occasional sniping,
the weary outpost line was left undisturbed until
two o clock in the morning, when having received
orders to withraw at once, it moved back quietly
lo its horses, and by half-past three we had passed
through Es Salt and reported to B.H.Q. two miles
west of the town. The withdrawal to the Valley
was continued almost without a halt; we descended
again in single file, and generally on foot, the
difficult and tortuous 7vo. / Road. Finally, with
both men and horses nearing the exhaustion stage
from loss of sleep, lack of food, severe physical
exertion and nerve-racking hours of anxiety, we re-
crossed the Jordan and bivouacked on the Wadi
Kelt a mile from Jericho.
For a week we remained at this camp, and here
we were rejoined by A Squadron which had been
on detached duty with the 179th Infantry Brigade
in the frontal attack on the foothills east of the
river.
Till the 10th inst. the Regiment took what rest
it could in between the various fatigues, guards
and regimental duties. On two successive morn-
ings enemy aeroplanes bombed the Brigade area,
no casualties resulting to the Regiment.
A Squadron, during its five days’ detached duty,
had had an eventful time. During the general in-


fantry assault on El Haud —the main enemy
position on the East Jordan foothills —the
squadron acted as left flank guard. The
march commenced at 7.30 on April 30th, the
infantry taking the route via the Wadi Nina-
rin, with A Squadron, under Major Tooth,
in position on the left. Immediately opposite
El Haud, and several hundred yards from
the initial foothill lay an expanse of thick
scrub, and from this point of deployment the in-
fantry advanced on the foothills at two o’clock on
the following morning. A Squadron remained
behind In the scrub wfith orders to push on when
day broke and make good as much ground as
possible astride the Wadis Arseniyet and Abu
Tullul.
Patrols were sent out at dawn in the direction of
these objectives, but coming under heavy machine
gun fire were unable to proceed further than 100
yards from the scrub. Meantime the advance of
the infantry had been held up; its forward troops
had reached within 300 yards of the summit of El
Haud, but when daylight came the position was
precarious in the extreme, harassed as they were
by heavy fire from either flank, and by artillery
fire directed at supports and communications in
the rear.
In order to ease pressure, Major Tooth sent one
troop, mounted, under Lieut. N. Dickson, to
occupy the first line of foothills on the south side of
the Wadi Arseniyet. This ground was gained
with the loss of one horse only, and it had the effect


of forcing the enemy to withdraw his most ad-
vanced machine guns from the left. The enemy,
by means of fire directed down the wadi, still made
the crossing of the Arseniyet impossible. During
the day the position remained unchanged, except
that the squadron horses had been located and
shelled, resulting in the loss of one man and two
horses wounded. The whole squadron then took
cover at the gallop under the first foothills. An
outpost line was formed in conjunction with the
infantry and after an intense bombardment, last-
ing an hour, a general advance took place at mid-
night. A little ground was gained, and A Squad-
ron was enabled to cross the Wadi Arseniyet, the
enemy withdrawing his machine guns which had
been commanding that wadi and the Abu Tullul.
I he nature of the country; rugged, stony hills
and broken wadis, made extensive mounted opera-
tions impossible, and the physical efforts required
by attackers on foot enormous. During the day
two companies of Patiala Infantry were attached
to A Squadron, and at 3 p.m. a general attack with
El Haud as its objective w r as launched. Major
Tooth had, in the meatime, got into touch with a
mountain battery and by directing its fire caused
the withdrawal of a machine gun operating from
a vital point. Two troops under Lieuts. N. Dick-
son and Sharpley were despatched up the Wadi
Abu Tullul to secure all high ground possible, and
reconnoitre the position for the advance. A few
Turkish patrols were easily driven in, and the
high ground N.W. of El Haud secured. Never


theless, by means of isolated machine guns and our
lack of artillery to deal with them, the enemy pre-
vented any effective flanking movement on our
part.
The two troops in the advanced position posted
a chain of outposts in the best positions available,
and from those spots the w r hole of the Turkish
right flank was visible. Artillery support was ap-
plied for, but none was available.
At 3.30 p.m. the Patiala Infantry passed through
the outpost lines, moving almost due east in its
attempt to take El Haud from the right rear. The
enemy had only one gun—a small 77 M.M. —on
this flank. His ammunition was practically ex-
hausted, pressure from Es Salt was affecting his
morale, and the goal appeared in sight. The
Patialas, exhausted by forced march in the heat of
the day from Ghoraniyeh and from lack of
water, were forced to withdraw by sundown.
During the night A Squadron still held its out-
post line, and an advance made by the Patialas up
the Wadi Arseniyet was driven back with severe
losses.
On the following day after a cavalry reconnais-
sance which was dispersed with loss by our Hotch-
kiss and rifle fire, the Turks launched a determined
counter-attack against the Patialas, who were then
holding the high ground in the vicinity of the
Arseniyet. The Patialas were forced to with-
draw, although our artillery dispersed the main
enemy drive, which was directed down the slopes
of the Wadi El Haud. The retirement of the


Patialas left a deep salient in the line, with A
Squadron still holding the extreme left. During
a lull of two hours between enemy attacks, A
Squadron had fortified its position by building a
series of stone sangars several hundred yards in
rear of the front outpost line. The enemy ad-
vanced in open formation, preceded by a fringe of
automatic rifles and grenade throwers. Lieut.
Dickson, who had charge of the firing line, as
soon as the enemy attack was launched, had the
horses removed to the rear of the first foothills.
Without artillery support it was impossible to
maintain the advanced positions, so under covering
fire from the reserve troops, the front line was
withdrawn to the prepared positions in the rear.
From this point—the highest In the vicinity—the
enemy’s attack was easily held up while daylight
lasted, but with nothing to cover the left—the
whole of the force which had been at Es
Salt having withdrawn—Major Tooth com-
manded a further withdrawal at dusk to a line
commanding approaches down the Wadi Abu
Tullul; the Patialas covering the Arseniyet and
other wadis on the right of A Squadron.
A general withdrawal took place during the
night, A Squadron forming the rearguard to
the whole force. After the withdrawal had
well started the enemy commenced a general ad-
vance down the Nimrin-Es Salt Road and the
slopes of El Haud, but stopped at the foothills,
our forces then being w r ell on the road to the
Jordan River. A Squadron bivouacked on the


Nimrln near Ghoraniyeh, and in the early morn-
ing withdrew to the banks of the Jordan below the
bridgehead, where both men and horses were
given a day’s rest, rejoining the Regiment on the
morning of the sth of May. During the whole of
the operations, the difficulties of keeping up water
and forage were very great. Horses had to be led
three miles to water, and everything required on
the frontal lines had be packed from near the
Ghoraniyeh bridgehead.


CHAPTER VII
THE JORDAN VALLEY
ON the 11th inst. we moved again to the
Wadi Aujah, camping in the Wadi
Obeideh a short distance from the water.
. Till the first week in June the Regiment was
kept busy. Outpost by night, day patrols to Tell
El Truny—a point where the Aujah leaves the
western foothills—digging and roadmaking, be-
sides ordinary regimental duties and stables, be-
gan to tell on the personnel of the Regiment. The
weather now became intensely hot. The men’s
bivvies and horse-lines had necessarily to be be-
tween steep ridges, the air became almost stagnant,
and the fly and mosquito, alternately by day and
night, spoilt any chance of rest the men did get.
One thing stuck to them well: the canteen system
was excellent ajid run on the lines of issue to units
on payment. The result was a vast improvement in
the daily ration, without which continuous work
in the Jordan Valley would have been impossible.
Beyond occasional shelling and sniping at the
Truny patrol, the enemy remained inactive.
Towards the end of the month Lieuts. Allman
and Stevens reported to the Training Regiment at
Moascar, and Lieut. Berrie to the Officers’
General Course, School of Instruction at Zeitoun.
On the evening of the sth of June, the Regi-
N


merit marched out en route for Solomon’s Pools,
arriving about midnight at Talaat ed Dumm,
where we bivouacked and remained during the
following day. Moving on again the same even-
ing, we passed through Jerusalem at 2 a.m., finally
reaching our bivouac site beyond Solomon’s Pools
by 5 o’clock. The relief from the heat, exhaust-
ing work, and insect pests of the Valley, was
almost overwhelming, but the brief fortnight’s
rest ended all too soon, and on the 21st the Regi-
ment moved back through Jerusalem, bivouacked
a day at Talaat ed Dumm, and by the 23rd had
taken over a section of the front line on the east
bank of the Wadi Mellahah.
The horses, under the command of Lieut.
Hardy, were sent back into the Wadi Aujah. The
line of defences along the Mellahah consisted of
a series of redoubts on either side. Continuous
work of improvement and consolidation was
carried on. Generally speaking, the enemy was
inactive; a half-hearted raid was made on Tea
Post, but the raiders retired after throwing a few
hand grenades and firing a few rounds. At the
same time a battery threw shrapnel into Tool Post
without doing any damage, and searched at inter-
vals, heavily, the back area towards the Aujah.
The end of June found us still holding our Mella-
hah positions, any further enemy activity being
directed towards Musallabeh and Maskerah.
The great heat still continued in all its intensity.
The Mellahah position will long be remembered
as one of the worst the Regiment ever occupied.


Watering Horses at the Mellahah-Aujah Junction.




Water was supplied by carts from the Aujah
Junction, but the supply never equalled the de-
mand, accentuated as it was by the never-ending
heat and the clouds of white dust caused by the
lightest breath of air.
On the 3rd of July, the Regiment was relieved
by the 7th and returned to the Aujah as reserve
unit to the Brigade.
As Reserve Regiment we found the duties more
arduous than when holding the line in the Mella-
hah, but the unlimited supply of water obtainable
more than compensated for the difference. Dig-
ging and wiring parties had to be found every
night, and outpost for artillery protection, and the
famous Gap Patrol in addition.
The Gap Patrol Involved the protection, first
by patrol, and then Cossack post, of a couple of
miles of flat country, scrubby and swampy in
places, between El Maskerah and the forward
positions on the Mellahah. After patrolling the
whole distance and dropping Cossack posts at cer-
tain intervals, the remainder of the troop took up
a support position with a Hotchkiss gun in rear of
the line, and everyone endured, as best he could,
the incessant mosquito attacks till the withdrawal
at daylight. In the water areas under our control
the mosquito had been practically exterminated.
No Man’s Land could not be touched, and despite
mosquito netting, a large number of the men who
contracted malaria became infected during some
night In the Gap.


During the first week of July, 2nd Lieuts.
Capel, Halloran and Macansh reported back from
the Cadet Course, Zeitoun, Lieut. H. G. Lomax
from leave ex hospital, and Lieut. Berrie from the
Officers’ Course at Zeitoun. Major H. D. White,
temporarily attached to the Instructional Staff,
and Lieut. Macansh reported to a School at
Richon; Lieut. Crane returning from an Officer’s
Course there.
Lieut. Holt Hardy had a few days previously
reported to Moascar for duty, and his subsequent
admission to hospital was his first break from con-
tinuous service since the formation of the Regi-
ment. Invalided soon afterwards to Australia, he
left a gap in C Squadron, and no less in the whole
Regiment, which was practically unfillable, and the
news of his Captaincy and Military Cross was
received with extreme pleasure by all ranks.
On the 13th Inst, the enemy began shelling
Musallabeh at 5 o’clock; the firing being very
heavy just before dark. During the night the long-
distance gun, concealed somewhere In the reaches
of the Nimrin, shelled the Jericho plain inter-
mittently. At 2.30 next morning the whole of the
line was subjected to an intense artillery bombard-
ment and a strong attack launched against
Musallabeh and the posts held by the 3rd Regi-
ment. We stood to, ready to be called out at day-
light, but the attack proved a total failure, so our
assistance was not required. Major D. G. Cross
reported back that afternoon from the Rest Camp,
Port Said.


On the following day the enemy artillery shelled
our back areas a good deal, several shells falling
close to also to the dump and the Wadi
Obeideh crossing, causing several casualties. A
heavy bombardment of Musallabeh and the
Aujah back areas followed, lasting for half-an-
hour.
On the 16th the bombardment was continued.
Two transport drivers were wounded near the
dump, and half a dozen shells fell in A Squadron
lines, fortunately doing no damage. The same
day the Regiment’s tour of duty as reserve to the
Brigade ended, and we returned to our old
positions on the Mellahah line, A and C Squad-
rons occupying the posts known as Salt, Safe, Star,
Shell and Scrap, with B Squadron in reserve.
Again the weary round of day observation and
night outpost, digging and wiring parties con-
tinued; heat, thirst and dust by day, and mos-
quitoes by night making the life of the Askari un-
bearable to the breaking-point.
Relief came on the 29th inst., when the
position was taken over by a Yeomanry Brigade.
The Regiment bivouacked a day at the Auja-
Mellahah Junction, marching out again that even-
ing, and arriving at Talaat ed Dumm early the
following morning. We remained at Talaat ed
Dumm for nine days, and then moved on through
Jerusalem and Bethlehem to a bivouac site at
Beit Ammar, several miles south of Solomon’s
Pools. The difference in climate between Solo-
mon’s Pools and the Valley was almost unimagin-


able. Horses had to be rugged, and instead of
sleepless and sweltering nights, extra blankets and
overcoats were needed. Supplies of vegetables,
tomatoes and grapes were available, and for
another precious fortnight all ranks breathed
again.
Descending into Hell
The Bushman had been on duty in Jerusalem.
For two days he had been replacing the dead dust
in his lungs with the sweet clear air of the Judean
mountains. The monotony of the front line fare
had been varied by the delicious grapes and
tomatoes of the upper world, and the absence of
that poisonous heat from his veins almost in-
duced a shiver.
But the job was over, and he stood on the hotel
corner waiting for the first of the endless line of
motor-lorries which started at an early hour every
morning for Jericho. He hopped on to the first
one that came along, one got none of the dust
which came to the middle or tail of the transport
column. Through the city, past Gethsemane and
round the Mount of Olives they sped, and a turn
of the road brought Into full view the table-land
of Moab and bitter memories of what had
happened there. Past Bethany and down the steep
slopes, round the abrupt curves, the long line of
lorries moved slowly downwards. The hillsides
grew browner, the scanty dry vegetation dis-
appeared altogether and the wilderness, clothed In
its barren array of precipitous cliffs and loose rock,
settled heavily on the Bushman’s soul.


Looking back as his lorry started the descent,
near Talaat ed Dumm, he felt thankful he had
caught the first one. A whitish ribbon, miles long,
marked what he could see of the winding road.
There was not a breath of wind. The dust merely
rose and hung over the narrow track, shrouding
out of sight the long line of transport following
closely behind.
The Regiment was still camped in the Mella-
hah, several hours’ ride from Jericho, and the
Bushman expected a horseholder to meet him at
the dump. He wondered If anything special had
happened during his four days absence, probably
nothing but more malaria. Anyway, they were
four days closer to a move somewhere—anywhere
but the Mellahah. Fellows often speculated as
to what was the original cause of such formations,
the 50-feet deep cliffs of soil and the cup-like dead
ends. In his present frame of mind he preferred
his own theory, that the original bottomless pit
was directly under the Mellahah, and that at one
time when the inhabitants had tried to dig out, the
earth had slid into the pit like the sand in an
hour-glass, until the holes had been blocked.
He’d get back an hour or so before sundown,
and he could hear the sergeant warning him for
the Gap Patrol that night, before he had tied his
horse up on the lines. Well, he’d been out of it
for four days, and no one could do many Gap
Patrols without getting malaria, so one way or
another he didn’t give himself long. Would the
cursed war never end?


Midday came. The clear air of the up-lands
had completely gone. The heat became more
stifling with every mile of the descent, and its
sudden upward rush at quick intervals made body
and brain shudder. At last the lorry turned a
sharp curve and ran down the final slope of the
foothills.
Unrelieved, save by two touches of colour, the
green which enveloped the hideous squalor of
Jericho, and the distant lifeless blue of the Dead
Sea, the Jordan Valley, steeped in the breathless
heat of the forenoon, lay in all its dreadful reality.
The vast expanse of white dust extended from
foothill to foothill. At Intervals a shaded line
marked the precipitous fall of some wadi, and
midway a dip in the ground, surmounted by a
vista of white cliffs, betokened the course of the
river. As if In mockery of the morning stillness,
dust rose in funnel-like whirlwinds into the very
heavens, and on every side desolation, disease and
death reigned supreme.
* * * ** *
Moving on to the front line we went into camp
at the Aujah-Mellahah Junction as Reserve Regi-
ment and remained there till the end of the month.
On the Ist of September we moved to a new
camp site east of the Jordan River, just beyond the
Ghoraniyeh Bridgehead, taking over part of the
patrol and outpost line then held by the 11th
Cavalry Brigade. Work, both by day and night
here, proved very severe. Malaria in all its in-


Dust Scene, Jordan Valley.




Dust Scene, Jordan Valley.




tensity had stricken every unit in the Valley,
numbers of men were evacuated daily, few rein-
forcements were forthcoming, and the burden be-
came very heavy on the remaining handful. A
daily patrol traversed the country for several miles
parallel with the river, and as far east as
occasional ambushes by the enemy in patches of
thick scrub would allow. One troop of B Squadron
was machine-gunned one morning, resulting in
one man wounded and missing and two horses
wounded. Otherwise the daily and nightly round
of dufy continued. Occasional Turkish deserters
surrendered to the outpost line, and the enemy’s
long-range gun at intervals shelled the Jericho
flats and the Ghoraniyeh Bridgehead.
On the 19th inst., the Regiment received orders
to be ready to move at short notice, to take its
part in the final destruction of the Turkish Army.
Patrols and reconnaissances were specially active.
On the 20th of September, Major Tooth took a
strong party along the Arseniyet Road to a point
opposite the mouth of the Abuturra Wadi,
coming under heavy machine gun and rifle fire.
Moving south towards the Nlmrin the patrol drew
heavy shrapnel fire.
C Squadron, sent out to get Into touch with the
enemy south of the Nlmrin, also came under
artillery and machine gun fire, and was followed
by shrapnel practically the whole way back to
camp. Four horses were killed, and one man,
badly wounded, died on his way to the Field
Ambulance.


Special patrols were found nightly to a point
near the Ghubba Graves to listen for enemy trans-
port moving from Um esh Shert.
For two days the situation remained unchanged,
but on the 22nd inst. it became apparent that the
enemy was withdrawing. A patrol in the direc-
tion of El Haud discovered a deserted cavalry
camp In the foothills about a mile and a half north
of El Haud.
Proceeding south, and skirting the foothills, the
patrol saw no signs of the enemy until Deccan
House was sighted, where considerable movement
was taking place. Withdrawing the picket post
without being fired on, the enemy movement was
reported to B.H.Q. and the Regiment received
orders to be ready to move at the shortest notice.
At a quarter past 5 on the morning of the 23rd
inst., we moved out and proceeded to Khabr
Mujahid, reaching there by 7 a.m., and finding the
locality clear of the enemy.
Two troops, under Lieuts. Hedley and Lomax,
were despatched respectively to Ain Hebussie and
Helale. Reporting all clear on these positions,
the Helale patrol, supported by another troop,
moved to the bridge on the Es Salt-Nimrin Road
at Howeij. The Regiment had previously had
orders to follow on to Howeij, pick up the patrol
there, and then advance by the main road to Es
Salt.
The route from Mujahid to Howeij proving
impracticable for pack transport, fresh orders
were given to advance by the No. 4 Road to Ain


Village of Ain-Es-Sir.
o




Jericho Jane.




Es Sir, with the exception of C Squadron, which,
under Major Close, did advanced guard for the
20th Infantry Brigade up the Shunet-Nimrin-Es
Salt Road. The remainder of the Regiment
reached the village of Sir by 7 o’clock; the No. 4
Road, though still very rough, had been much im-
proved by the enemy since the initial ascent made
by us in March. Enemy dumps and freshly-
deserted camps on the way up showed that the
retiring forces were not far ahead.
The screen, provided by B Squadron, under
Major Tooth, passed through Ain Es Sir by 11
o’clock, and on reaching the Cross Roads, drew
fire from an enemy 77 M.M. gun from the direc-
tion of Sueifiye, one or two shells dropping into
Ain Es Sir. After watering horses there, the
whole column moved forward, Brigade Head-
quarters established itself at Ain Eemar, and the
rest of the Brigade took up an outpost line from
that village to Ain Es Sir, the Regiment’s position
extending from Ain Es Sir to the ruins on the
Naaur-Hemar Road.
On the morning of the 25th, the Brigade moved
forward to attack Amman, the Regiment being
Brigade Reserve, took up a strong position near
Semmak. Very little opposition was encountered,
the enemy freely surrendering everywhere.
Major Close had meanwhile reported back
with his Squadron. During their advanced guard
move up the main Es Salt Road, C Squadron dis-
covered the last resting place of “Jericho Jane,”
the long-distance gun which made life vivid at


times on the West Jordan flats. The enemy had
attempted to save the gun, but had abandoned it
several miles up the road, overturning it off its
carriage down a steep grade into the Wadi Nim-
rin. The advance on Amman continued steadily
until within a mile of the village, where it became
held up by machine gun fire. The enemy were
using no artillery, except one small gun, but iso-
lated machine guns in prepared positions proved
very difficult to silence until about 4 p.m. when the
enemy in front of the sth Regiment suddenly
surrendered. B Squadron, under Major Tooth,
then advanced down the Ain Es Sir-Amman Road
to within half a mile of the entrance of the town,
and drew heavy machine gun fire from an old ruin
on a high ridge north of the town, one man being
killed and two others and several horses wounded.
The machine gun position was Immediately rushed
by a detachment from the N.Z. Mounted Rifles,
saving B Squadron from very heavy casualties.
Scattered firing still continued to the north and
north-west, but all opposition to the sth Regiment
had ceased; its screen, followed by a Squadron, ad-
vanced through and established itself in the town.
Everywhere could be found signs of the enemy’s
complete demoralization. Small parties of Turks
and Germans were wandering aimlessly about,
surrendering to the first comers; the hospitals were
full of wounded and sick, and filth and Insanita-
tion everywhere reigned supreme. After watering
in the main Wadi, the Regiment, less B Squadron,
bivouacked In the centre of the town, opposite the


remains of the ancient Roman Arena. B Squad-
ron was despatched to take up an outpost line
towards Ain Es Sir.
On the 26th and 27th the Regiment, having
moved to a cleaner camp site a little distance out
of the town, got a little rest, which was badly re-
quired after the strenuous exertions of the pre-
vious few days, capping as they did, the end of the
long period of tribulation In the Jordan Valley.
The weather, fortunately, was perfect, but the
country presented a very different spectacle from
the one which met the eye In the early summer,
the rank growth of grass and herbage having
practically disappeared. Forage now began to get
very scarce, patrols were despatched to Naaur and
Suweilah on the double task of reconnaissance and
foraging, but nothing, except tibbin was obtain-
able. Two troops of A Squadron, under Lieuts.
Britten and Hedley, remained to garrison Ain Es
Sir, and on the 28th B Squadron was despatched
to reconnoitre the country to Leban, a siding on
the Hedjaz Railway, 12 miles south of Amman.
Both Leban and El Kastal were found to be un-
occupied. Information was obtained from Arabs
that a large force of the enemy held Aziza, about
four miles from El Kastal, and the Squadron
returned to camp via the village of Yadudie.
On the afternoon of the 29th, the Regiment
received orders to proceed at once to Aziza, where
the entire Turkish force had surrendered to two
Squadrons of the sth Regiment, and assistance
was required to prevent strong parties of Arab


marauders from looting the Turkish camp. The
Regiment made a forced march and reached
Aziza before dark. Night dispositions were made
in conjunction with the 7th Regiment and the
Turkish remnants, and the bizarre spectacle of a
Turco-Australian outpost line became an accom-
plished fact.
The Turks were in mortal dread of the Arabs,
their outposts continually firing and sending up
flares during the night. No serious attempts at
raiding took place and at dawn the work of collect-
ing and disarming the prisoners took place. By
10 o’clock the first batch of 4000 was marched
out, still carrying their arms, to preclude any possi-
bility of a general massacre by Arabs, who were
very numerous, well-armed, and furious at being
baulked of a harvest of blood and loot.
As at Amman, the Turkish positions at Aziza
were in an unspeakably filthy condition, and over-
crowded hospitals were full and sick and wounded.
Considerable enemy war material was collected
and loaded on to a captured train during the day
by the Regiment, and in the evening, having been
relieved by the N.Z. Brigade, we left for Amman,
arriving there at 10 o’clock.
On the Ist of October we received the welcome
news that the Brigade was to move back, en route
for Jerusalem. Moving out from Amman on the
morning of the 2nd, the Regiment proceeded by
Ain Es Sir and the No. 4 Road to Hadjla, cross-
the river there and going into bivouac near the
monastery two days later.


Aziza Railway Siding.




Regiment Camped near Jerusalem after Final Operations.




On the 7th inst. the Regiment continued its
move for Jerusalem; bivouacking on the old site
at l alaat ed Durnm for a night, we reached the
camp, near the Mount of Olives, on the afternoon
of the Bth inst.
During the long ascent from the Jordan Valley
many a man cast a backward glance, and many a
shuddering recollection of all that it stood for was
followed by a feeling of unutterable relief that at
last it was all over. Few, very few, of those who
went down with the Regiment in March, returned
with it in October, and of those few, an
infinitesimal number, had defied death and sick-
ness and remained continuously on the ration
strength. The reaction proved too great for
nearly all. The dread malaria, which many had
resolutely fought, proved too much now that the
upper air of the Judean Hills had been reached,
and numbers collapsed and were evacuated.
The journey back was continued after several
days spell at Jerusalem.
On the 12th inst. we left for Wadi Hanein, by
Enab and Latron, and after bivouacking a night
at the latter place reached our destination the
following day.
News of the signing of the Armistice, and the
final capitulation of Germany being expected in the
near future, nothing was left now but to wait as
patiently as possible for the final stage of de-
mobilization, A syllabus of training was formu-
lated, including drill—mounted and dismounted—
preliminary musketry, Hotchkiss practice, bayonet


fighting and physical exercises. Race-meetings,
starting with Squadron, and ending with a
Divisional, Meeting, proved popular sources of
amusements. Occasional swimming parades took
place, and football, In conjunction with other
sports, helped the time to pass quickly.
November brought a touch of wintry weather,
and on the 7th one officer (Captain F. Marks)
and 43 other ranks proceeded by train to Moascar
to await embarkation to Australia on 1914 leave.
The departure of these 43 other ranks made a big
gap In the personnel of the Regiment. A large
majority were tried N.C.O.’s, who had borne for
years the brunt of strenuous and continuous ser-
vice. The feelings of the remainder, glad to see
such service meet its reward, long delayed though
it had been, and sorry to lose such comrades, found
vent in the vigorous blanketing of all those de-
parting; officers being treated as impartially as
anyone else.
On the 11th news was received that Der Tag
had arrived, Germany having signed the Armis-
tice. Beyond the firing of flares and going
slightly into liquidation, no special celebrations
took place. Lieut. E. S. Halloran was granted
special 1914 leave to Australia and left for i\loas-
car, and on the 15th Lieut. Hanton and five other
ranks also departed on similar leave to England.
For the remainder of the month sport and training
continued, marred only by a considerable amount
of rain and cold weather.


The Regiment moving out from Jerusalem for Wadi Hanein.




The Zig-Zag near Enab.
p




CHAPTER VIII
THE LAST LAP
DECEMBER opened with an inspection by
the Corps Commander, the strength of the
Regiment at this stage being 14 officers
and 432 other ranks. Training, as in the preced-
ing month, was carried on with. On the sth inst.
Lieut. M. L. Crane departed on 1914 leave to
Australia, and a few days later Lieut. Berrie re-
ported back for duty from leave ex hospital.
On the night of the 10th a disturbance took
place in the village of Surafend, close to the camp.
At a quarter past ten the Regiment stood to, and
despatched a mounted patrol to prevent any mem-
bers of the 2nd Brigade from joining in the dis-
turbance.
The Divisional Race Meeting took place on the
14th inst., and proved a great success, marred only
slightly by threatening weather. Lieut.-Colonel
Fuller now assumed command of the Brigade, and
Major H. D. White, of the Regiment.
The relinquishing by Colonel Fuller of the
actual command of the Regiment was received by
all ranks with feelings of very genuine regret. Save
during his brief furlough in the end of 1917, he
had led us since November, 1915, and no leader
ever had more thoroughly at heart the Interests and
welfare of his officers and men. He was always


approachable, and always the essence of a sport;
no man ever left the orderly room without a fair
deal. And the features of his long command of
the Regiment in the field, were the unerring
accuracy of his always rapid decisions, no less than
his actual personal leadership.
Due also to the same leadership was the fact
that the Regimental Officers’ Mess was, through-
out, a happy family. Cllquism was never allowed
to raise its head, with the result that no officer of
the Regiment was ever as happy as when in his
own mess. And right to the end the Colonel’s
interest in his old Regiment brought him fre-
quently to the lines an always welcome visitor.
On the 17th the Regiment received orders for
its final mounted trek to Rafa, and preparatory
to the move, conveyed most of its heavy gear to
Bir Salem Railway Siding. Heavy rain fell
during the afternoon and night of the 17th and
during the following morning, right up to the
actual moment of moving off. Fortunately the
weather fined up then and remained so during the
five days’ march to Rafa. Major Tooth now
assumed temporary command of the Regiment,
vice Major White evacuated sick. The march be-
gan at 9.15, and via Yebnah, where we made the
midday halt, we proceeded to our night bivouac
area at Sukirier. The rain had made the black
soil portions of the road very heavy, and the trans-
port had considerable difficulty in negotiating
them.
On the nights of the 19th, 20th and 21st, we


Lieut. -Col. Fuller on “Illawarra.”
“The Mascot.”




bivouacked respectively at Mejdel, Gaza and
Belah, the latter being the final bivouac camp on
mounted trek.
Rafa was reached on the 22nd, a camp laid out
and established, but proving too cramped and
small an area, a move to a better site a few
hundred yards away was made a few days later.
On the following day Major D, G. Cross
returned from hospital, resuming command of the
Regiment, and the old year finally drew to a close,
the new one being well ushered in with fireworks,
flares and fizz.
Major H. D. White, whose health for a con-
siderable time had been unsatisfactory, was, very
shortly after reaching hospital, boarded for Aus-
tralia. One of the strongest personalities who
ever left his mark on a unit, Major White demon-
strated most emphatically, during his leadership
of the Regiment in the Beersheba operations, his
fitness for an even higher command. Given the
opportunity, he might have risen to any military
height; his leadership of a Brigade would un-
doubtedly have inscribed another name on a
brilliant roll.
The Regiment now entered on a difficult phase
of its career, waiting for the final stages of de-
mobilization. The great majority of the oldest
and best N.C.O.’s, and a number of senior officers
and subalterns had departed on 1914 leave to Aus-
tralia and England, making the duties of the newly
promoted N.C.O.’s a necessary combination of
tact and firmness. A syllabus for training was laid


down and a Divisional Committee appointed to
control all sport, subject to the advice of various
sub-committees for each branch. In view of the
proposed Military Athletic Gathering in Britain,
competitions in football, boxing and pedestrian
events were taken in hand. Football in particular,
was largely taken up, and a very strenuous com-
petition was Inaugurated. None of the Regi-
mental teams competing approached the strength
of previous years, the toll of battlefield and 1914
leave affected seriously the old fifteens that played
at Hill 70, Hassaniya, Masaid, Abbassan and
Wadi Hanein.
The Regimental football had always been at a
very high standard. On several occasions we had
met New Zealand teams on equal terms, and no
other Australian fifteen had ever seriously chal-
lenged our claim to possess the best Australian
Rugby Union team east of the Canal. But
the loss of such players as Hardy, Hedley,
Capel, Farquhar and Weir, the two O’Briens,
Fenner, Mears, Baird and “Snowy” Lester, made
a big difference to any chances we had of winning
the Divisional Competition. A few old players
still remained, Neil Ross, “Joe” Nevitt, Sedgwick,
Reynolds, “Juja” Rock, Fred Walker, “Possum”
Gilmour and “Trig” Farquhar, and round this
nucleus sufficient newer players rallied still to up-
hold our previous claim to possess the best Aus-
tralian team on the front.
The New Zealand Brigade, as usual, put strong
and winning teams into the field, the defeat of


A Squadron (Wadi Hanein).




Farewelling a “1914 Leave” Man.




Wellington by Auckland deciding the Competition
in favour of the latter team.
Horseracing again came into much prominence.
A good course was selected, and each unit in turns
did Its share towards the necessary appointments.
The Regimental horses, when tried out, furnished
some startling surprises. Two in particular,
‘‘Sandy” and “Cobar,” both in B Troop, B Squad-
ron, deserve immortalization. Both were troopers’
horses since the crossing of the Canal, and
neither had missed a single stunt, drawn an extra
ounce of feed, or carried an ounce less than the
usual trooper’s swag from Serapeum to Amman.
In one of the New Zealand Brigade Meetings,
“Sandy,” in the Open Mile Handicap, beat the
cracks of the Division, Including such horses as
“Illawarra,” “Dipso,” and the New Zealanders’
“Grey Gown,” “Hamaran,” “Rototawai,” and
“Open Slather,” all officers’ horses, which in
comparison with “Sandy” had had a time much in
the same ratio to that of their owners.
At a Military Race Meeting, in Cairo, the
Regiment was represented by Lieut.-Colonel
Fuller’s “Illawarra,” Major Tooth’s “Dipso,”
Sergeant Macarthy’s “Mazar,” and Trooper
Hambly’s “Cobar.” “Illawarra” won the two-
mile race easily; “Mazar” and “Cobar” fought
to a finish the seven furlong Other Ranks event,
the former just winning, but the rest of the field
hopelessly out of it, and “Dipso” ran a good third
in the mile and a half.
A large number of men attended various classes


and lectures delivered under the demobilization
scheme of education.
During the month the strength of officers in the
Regiment was reinforced by 2nd Lieuts. Busby,
Nevitt and Ross, and the following decorations
were awarded: —Major S. A. Tooth, the D. 5.0.,
and Sergeant-Major Sheridan, the D.C.M., two
of the most popular awards ever granted to the
Regiment. Major Tooth’s record is worth more
than a passing mention. Leaving Australia as a
Sergeant in 1914, and gradually rising throughout
the various stages of promotion, the name of
Stuart Tooth became synonymous with sterling
work in the field and camp and devotion to duty.
During the whole of the Gallipoli Campaign he
was absent on a fortnight’s guard at Imbros only,
and he had the high honour of being the subaltern
chosen to command the final Regimental twelve on
the night of the evacuation. During the whole of
Desert Campaign, from the Canal to Amman,
through the Sinai Desert, the Gaza Front, the
Jordan Valley, and the Moab Mountains, his re-
cord was the same, first as troop and then as squad-
ron leader he stuck to his job throughout, and
although a malaria subject for the final six months,
he refused the 1914 leave, preferring to return
with the unit he embarked wfith.
March opened with warmer weather, the con-
tinuance of the training and educational syllabus,
and a Brigade Race-meeting.
Khamseen weather soon arrived, and for several
days wind, dust and finally showers made con-


“Dipso.”




“ Cobar.”
Q




ditions of life very disagreeable, and several
parades had to be cancelled.
Leave to the United Kingdom had been
granted, and 40 other ranks left on the sth inst.
for Moascar as the Regiment’s quota of the 10
per cent. A.I.F. personnel.
Rumours of our speedy departure for home be-
came very Insistent, and the departure of part of
the Ist Brigade for embarkation pointed to the
early dawning of “the day” that by now had ex-
cluded everything else from one’s thoughts.
Horses, saddlery, Hotchkiss rifles, and a large
quantity of gear were handed In to various depots,
and, save for a few officers’ mounts, the camp
might have been an infantry one.
The passing of the last of the Regiment’s
horses might almost be said to be the passing of
the Regiment. A small number had been des-
troyed for reasons of age or debility, but the care-
ful selection in the first instance, and admirable
handling by squadron and troop leaders through-
out the different campaigns, resulted In a body of
horses never excelled and seldom equalled. A
considerable number of original 1914 horses saw
the campaign through. In the great majority of
cases they ran to a certain type, the big “little”
horse showing a considerable strain of blood, com-
pact in build, inclined to be nuggety.
Two superstitions our Light Horse campaigns
exploded thoroughly. One, the often alleged
necessity of a big horse to carry a big man, and the
other the unsuitability of a heavy man for mounted


work. The latter was disproved many times. It
was often noteworthy that during the worst sore-
back period—that of Romani and Et Maler—
many of the heaviest men left their horses backs
untouched. And again, frequently, the big horse
caved in under the terrific strain of waterless and
foodless periods, and the never-ending desert
patrol.
The general efficiency of the Regiment’s
horse-flesh was largely due to the untiring
efforts of the farriers. One and all took
their jobs with the utmost seriousness, and the
names of such men as Joe Watts, Bill King-
horn, Joe McGuinness, Charlie Widstall,
Herb. Dew, Frank McCann, Nat Henderson,
George Jones and Frank McCormack will always
loom large as the Dei ex machina behind many a
difficult stunt. It is difficult to single out individual
horses, as men, but the excellence of our steeds
generally was undoubtedly embodied In the
Mascot—a thirteen-hand pony. He was presented
to the Regiment In 1914, and for a long time re-
mained unattached to the ration strength. But
eventually he won his right to be regarded as a
horse, and throughout the whole of the campaigns
carried an average weight man and a full weight
of gear. Never did he knock up or cave in, and
his fiery disposition was as unquenched when we
handed him in in June, 1919, as it was when he em-
barked in December, 1914.
It really seemed now that our future movements
would be on foot.


“The Mascot.”




But the Regiment was shortly to undergo a dis-
appointment difficult to bear. The riots and
general disturbances in Egypt made it imperative
to retain all Australian mounted troops available,
so almost on the day on which we had hoped to
sail, we marched out from Rafa and entrained
for Kantara. Camping there for two days we re-
equipped. The horses we had handed in—the
pick of our best, and our best had never been
equalled by any other unit —had been passed on
to other Brigades. We had to content ourselves
with a mixture of draughts, culls and mules,
leavened here and there with a lucky find —by
moonlight. Again we moved off, and entraining
at Kantara, proceeded to Damanhour, between
Cairo and Alexandria. A mile or two outside
Damanhour we camped in knee-high berseem, and
on every side regrets were expressed that we had
not our old horses to let loose In such an equine
paradise. For several days we remained In this
camp, and then, on the last day of March, en-
trained again for Quesna, a few miles north of
Benra Junction.
During the month the strength of officers was
Increased by the arrival of 2nd Lieuts. F. C. Lowe
and N. S. Reynolds from the Officers’ Training
Course, Zeitoun.
Our camp at Quesna was in many respects
reminiscent of the desert. Several hundred acres
of higher sandy ground, as bare as any part of
Sinai, formed a marked contrast to the fertile
miles of delta country which surrounded it. Regi-


mental Headquarters was established in the house
of an Armenian Loyalist, which stood in an irri-
gated area of fruit and eucalyptus trees; one green
patch in the sandy waste. Tents, bivvies and
horse lines were soon erected and again we settled
down to the wearied task of waiting.
Matters had quietened down considerably in
the delta country. In Cairo and Upper Egypt,
unrest prevailed, but in the districts we were called
on to patrol, everything was peaceful and everyone
friendly—to the outward eye at any rate.
One officer and 50 other ranks were detached
for duty at Quesna Station, where they did police
duty and railway patrols. Two Squadrons, under
Major Tooth, patrolled a number of villages to
the east of Quesna, and on the 10th April B and
C Squadrons left for the villages of Tala and
Ashmun respectively. The duties of these detach-
ments were to visit all villages in the locality,,
accompanied by a Political Officer, ascertaining
whether proclamations which had been issued and
posted up had been interfered with, and warning
all Sheikhs and Omdahs of their personal responsi-
bility for any damage or disturbance. At both
villages the Squadrons were hospitably received by
the Mam ours (district governors) and during a
week’s continuous patrolling, nothing but peace
and agricultural prosperity was encountered.
Both Squadrons returned to Quesna on the 17th
April.
The Wellington Regiment had meanwhile
arrived at Quesna and camped close to us.


Although shorn of most of their glory in the way
of racehorses, it was soon decided to give the
latest equine recruits a chance to prove themselves,
and on the 19th was held the first of a series of
race-meetings which did much to alleviate the now
almost unbearable feeling of restlessness en-
gendered by the delay in embarkation.
Summer was now fast coming on, but fortu-
nately it proved to be remarkable for lower
temperatures than usual. The ration issue at this
period was very poor, and had to be constantly
supplemented out of Regimental funds. Mrs.
Chisholm also donated a very acceptable supply
of necessaries and provided still another occasion
for the grateful thanks of Australian soldiers in
Egypt.
Cricket now began to assist in passing away the
spare hours. With a good deal of difficulty a
mud and matting wicket was provided and troop
and squadron matches finally culminated in a
victory over the Wellington Regiment, and the
despatching of a Regimental team to Cairo.
Towards the end of April Captain Mackenzie,
who had been Adjutant to the Regiment since
June, 1917, left for embarkation to Australia on
special 1914 leave. Receiving his commission on
Gallipoli, he steadily established his reputation as
a troop leader, and during the Sinai and Palestine
campaigns his efficient conducting of screen work
became the feature of many a night ride into
enemy country. In this respect his work during
the dash on Bir Salmana was particularly note-
worthy.


The country towards Salmana on the route
taken by the Regiment was quite unknown. The
night was particularly unfavourable, but Lieut.
Mackenzie’s work with map, compass and star
brought the column to the exact point laid down
in the operation orders at the exact time, a feat
which was probably unequalled in the history of
the Regiment’s night marches. His work as Adju-
tant bore the same marks of his unassuming
efficiency, and all ranks, no less than his brother
officers, said good-bye to “Mac” with genuine
regret. His place as Adjutant was taken by Lieut.
N. C. Nevitt. '
The month of May found the Regiment still at
Quesna. All chance of our speedy departure
seemed to be receding further from us as the weeks
went by. Duties went on as usual. Occasional
patrols, town pickets, and ordinary Regimental
duties varied slightly the monotony of camp life.
During May the Fellaheen were paid for grain
and forage requisitioned at different periods of
the war, and It became a daily job for an officer
and section to accompany Egyptian pay officials to
different villages in the district. The hospitality
shown by the village Omdahs on these occasions
took the form of a prodigious lunch to the soldiers,
and this glimpse into the life and customs of rural
Egypt provided at least one interesting feature of
our post-war “campaign.”
Early in May Lieuts. Ross and Reynolds left
on leave for the United Kingdom, Lieut. Gurney
reported back from detached duty In Cairo, and


Lieut. MacGillivray was absorbed from the
Divisional Train.
Towards the end of May everyone was
heartened by the definite news of an early move
to Kantara to await embarkation. This finally
eventuated on the Ist and 2nd of June. The
Regiment arrived at Kantarajn two batches, and
after immediately handing in all horses to the Re-
mount Depot, less a few transport and officers’
chaigers, proceeded to Mrs. Chisholm’s canteen,
where a meal had been provided.
The new (and last) camp was stationed a mile
acioss the Canal. Ample tent accommodation
was available; duties were few, and sports were
well catered for by cricket grounds and tennis
courts. A cinema and beer canteen, in addition to
the delights of the salt water, helped to pass the
last lap with a minimum of discontent among the
men.
The cricket competition finally closed leaving
the 7th Regiment the winner but the final match
between them and the 6th was drawn, after a
very strenuous game. The batting of Artie Rey-
nolds and “Trig” Farguhar, against the bowling
of Hooker and Middleton, was worthy of a first-
grade contest, and both bowlers showed an equally
high pitch of excellence.
The month crept slowly away. We even knew
now the name of our transport. Rifles, saddlery,
and all gear had been handed in and It seemed
impossible to slip this time. Nevertheless we did
slip a day after tents had been struck and handed


in, and the desert emphasized its tinge in our sys-
tems as we lay for the last time on the red sand
and under the scanty shade of a bivvy sheet.
But It all ended at last. On the 28th of June
we cleaned up a camp for the final time, and made
our way independently to the Canal. The Madras
came in sight from Port Said about 2 p.m. The
whole of the Brigade, with the exception of the
Field Ambulance, embarked in quick time, and by
6 o’clock we were moving slowly southward.
Two days which we had often despaired of ever
seeing arrived in one. Often we had wondered
how we would feel when they arrived; most of
us, by now, had become impervious to any real
thrills, and our embarkation for home and the
signing of peace left the majority of men to all
appearances less moved than by the one-time pros-
pect of a week’s leave to Cairo.
The strength of the Regiment as it embarked
was 15 officers and 391 other ranks. Major D.
G. Cross, who had temporarily commanded the
Regiment since Lt.-Col. Fuller took charge of the
Brigade, remained our 0.C., and achieved the
rather unique record of being the only officer in the
Regiment who left with It and returned with it.
But compared with his record and reputation in
the field, such an achievement is of only casual im-
portance. Probably the Regiment never possessed
another squadron leader with the all-round attain-
ments of “Roarer” Cross. In every department
of military work, in a peace camp, on points of
training, in placing an outpost line, or in actual


Major D. G. Cross, who commanded the Regiment from
December, 1918, to August, 1919.




action, Major Cross was essentially both sound
and brilliant, and as second in command during
the Beersheba operations, his able assistance to his
C.O. (Temp. Lt.-Col. H. D. White) went far
towards the success of the Regimental share in the
big drive from Beersheba to Jaffa. That such an
officer should return undecorated, after nearly
five years active service will ever remain one of
the Regimental anomalies, and an illustration of
subtle unfairness somewhere.
The disposition of the remainder of the officers
on the journey home was as follows:
Headquarters—Major S. A. Tooth, D. 5.0.,
2nd in Command; Lieut. N. C. Nevitt, Adjutant;
Captain Hanton, Quartermaster; Lieut. Gurney,
Pay Duties; Educational Officer, Lieut. E. H.
Moll.
A Squadron—Captain Menzies, Captain N.
Dickson and Lieut. Lowe.
B. Squadron—Captain H. Dickson, M.C.,
Lieuts. Campbell and Berrie.
C Squadron—Major Close and Lieuts. Evans
and Macansh, D.C.M.
With the exception of Major Cross, every
returning officer left Australia in the ranks, and
all but four in the original regiment. Of the
rank and file, one original man, Driver J. P.
McCormack returned with it.
The homeward voyage of the Madras was not
particularly noteworthy. The weather through
the Red Sea and for several days after passing
Aden was Intensely hot. All the deck accommoda


tion, with the exception of portion of the star-
board saloon deck, was available for other ranks,
and occupied by them day and night. The sea
was, generally speaking, moderate throughout. A
few boisterous days were experienced between
Aden and Colombo. Sports and concerts were
arranged, and a full day’s excursion to Kandy
gave nearly half the personnel of the Regiment
the experience of the tropical scenery and natural
beauties of Ceylon. But everything faded into
insignificance beside the one outstanding fact:
every turn of the screw was bringing us closer
home.
Medical regulations prevented shore leave at
Fremantle, and an inspection resulted in some 50
men from the Brigade being landed and placed in
quarantine. We stayed In Fremantle Harbour 24
hours, and then, with Melbourne as our next stop,
rounded the Leeuwin and entered the rolling
waters of the Bight. The monotony of the re-
mainder of the voyage was broken only by a few
hours shore leave at Melbourne, and on the 3rd
of August the Regiment arrived home.


Sixth Light Horse Regiment
Casualties —Gallipoli
KILLED IN ACTION
32 Tpr. Murray, V.
188 Sgt. Parkes, S.
646 Tpr. Jeffrey, N. S.
375 Tpr. Brown, H. S.
Lieut. H. Robson,
452 Tpr. Ronald, K. M.
508 L/Sgt. Ellis, F.
443 Tpr. O’Brien, W. H.
495 Tpr. Kidman, W.
195 Sgt. Tresillian, F.
255 Tpr. Flanagan, C.
502 Tpr. Stewart, F.
Capt. W. Lang
643 Tpr. Dalzell, D. P.
594 Tpr. McCay, D. R.
Lieut. A. F. Buskin
Capt. R. Richardson
153 Tpr. Matthews, F. W.
184 Tpr. Young, J. H.
725 Tpr. Ingram, W. B.
882 Tpr. O’Neill, L. H.
520 Tpr. Stevens, E. B.
1095 Tpr. Lawrence, J. W.
DIED OF WOUNDS
748 Tpr. Pattrick, E.
726 Tpr. Bonnar, W.
231 Tpr. Bellinger, P. J.
392 L/Cpl. Creer, E. J.
122 Tpr. Gibson, M. R.
411 Tpr. Farrar, A. F.
361 Sgt. Lamborne, G.
291 Tpr. Morris, G.
809 Tpr. O’Dell, S.
39 Tpr. Gatenby, G. L.
787 Tpr. Harris, W. J.
828 Tpr. Wilson, R.
139 Tpr. Halloran, C. R.
857 Tpr. Carter, J. O.
1112 Tpr. Raynor, W. T.
877 Tpr. Manion, F.
300 Cpl. McDonald, J. W.
DIED OF ILLNESS
710 Tpr. Dunn, G.
169 Tpr. Robertson, W.
Capt. A. Verge
571 Tpr. Bacon. C.
WOUNDED
Lieut.-Col. Cox
595 Tpr. Strickland, S.
391 L/Cpl. Cornish, W.
184 Tpr. Young, J. H.
374 Tpr. Bergelin, R. W.
494 L/Cpl. Hudson, S.
Capt. M. F. Bruxner
102 Tpr. Chisholm, H. B.
933 Tpr. Cornish, H. J.
125 Tpr. Gibbons, H. A.
266 Tpr. Gurner, N. C.
139 Tpr. Halloran, C. R.
723 Tpr. Hill, C. E.
141 Tpr. Jaques, L. W.
R


Lieut. A. R. Hordern
748 Tpr. Pattrick, E. V.
536 Tpr. Almond, P.
39 Tpr. Ga.tenby, G. L,
374 Tpr. Isted, F. J.
668 Tpr. Young, W.
114 Tpr. Fryer, D.
638 Tpr. Casey, J.
307 Cpl. Cheater, J. H.
183 Tpr. Yeomans, G. H.
43 Sgt. Moffatt, H.
351 Tpr. Woods, F. M.
863 Tpr. Drady, H. R.
500 Tpr. Sherwin, C. R.
88 Cpl. Baldie, D. W.
58 Cpl. Quintal, F. E.
738 Tpr. Hill, F.
567 Tpr. Culley, J. S.
313 Tpr. Stevens, H. E.
837 Tpr. Woods, J. T.
133 Tpr. Gibson, M. R.
838 Tpr. Wilson, R.
333 Tpr. Tindall, S.
791 Tpr. Kinnane, W.
736 Tpr. Bonnar, W.
339 Tpr. Waters, G. R.
339 Sgt. Collins, E. R.
361 Cpl. Lamborne, G.
331 Tpr. Bellinger, P. J.
536 Tpr. Thompson, J. R.
535 Tpr. Allen, A.
94 Tpr. Came, A. N.
319 Tpr. Sherwin, N. D.
138 Tpr. Hole, J. F.
730 Tpr. Miller, W.
178 Tpr. Vernon, G.
399 Tpr. McEwan. W.
533 Tpr. Scott, C. S.
453 L/Cpl. Ronald, R. B.
669 Tpr. Wrigley, L.
153 Tpr. Muffett, R. F.
387 Tpr. McMahon. S.
590 Tpr. Weston, R. H.
337 Sgt. Menzies. S. M.
107 Tpr. Ewin, F.
393 Tpr. McDougall. H. E.
830 Tpr. Ray. A.
47 Sgt. Smith, S.
286 Tpr. Marsden, H. F.
807 Tpr. Naesmith, J.
655 Tpr. Penrose, W.
Capt. W. Lang
819 Tpr. Rathbone, A. R.
706 Tpr. Spinney, R. W.
325 Tpr. Woods, J.
381 Tpr. Walker, C. J.
477 Tpr. Warby, W.
560 Tpr. Wilson, H.
629 Tpr. Whitby, J. W.
826 Tpr. Wiggins, W. H.
828 Tpr. Wilson, R. 2nd
Occasion
80 Tpr. Burgess, W. R.
87 Tpr. Brown, W. H.
627 Tpr. Booker, C. E.
488 Tpr. Cousins, W. M.
489 Tpr. Cornet, F. S.
666 Tpr. Crockett, T. E.
248 Tpr. Dally, S. M.
250 Tpr. Elliott, W. A.
260 Tpr. Fender, W. M.
509 Tpr. Frizell, F. G.
649 Tpr. Foote, W. J.
568 Tpr. Holloway, B. L.
439 Tpr. Morton, E.
506 Tpr. O’Neill, W. J.
305 L/Cpl. Pickering, H.
G.
818 Tpr. Rowling, H. G.
883 Tpr. Rose, E.
370 Tpr. Gill, C. R. D.
731 Tpr. McKenzie, W. M.
414 Tpr. Gee, A.
Lieut. D. Drummond
117 Tpr. Gurney, A. B.
206 Tpr. Watts, H. W.
280 Tpr. Lawson, O.
388 Tpr. Callaway, B. F.
399 Tpr. Collins, F. J.
553 Tpr. Blake. G. E.
892 Tpr. Snowden, F.
640 Tpr. Mulholland, E.
799 Tpr. Morris, W. J.
800 Tpr. Maloney, J. R-
-819 Tpr. Rathbone. A. R.
2nd Occasion


629 Tpr. Whitty, J. W.
79 L/Cpl. Blackmore,
L. G.
610 Tpr. Body, G. C.
612 Tpr. Body, T. C.
518 Tpr. Capel, C. R.
519 Tpr. Capel, K. C.
566 Tpr. Chauncey, E. L.
792 Tpr. Daly, R. A.
411 Tpr. Farrar, A. F.
422 Tpr. Humpheries, H.;
E.
361 L/Sgt. Lamborne, G.
2nd Occasion
291 Tpr. Morris, G.
878 Tpr. Mulroney, N.
44 Tpr. McKeown, G. R.
615 Tpr. McCarthy, H.
441 Tpr. Norden, C.
809 Tpr. Odell, S.
448 Tpr. Paul, C. S.
31 Tpr. Reed, E. T.
168 Tpr. Robinson, A. N.:
451 Tpr. Rodd, R. J.
735 Tpr. Reid, A. S.
213 Tpr. Stevens, H. E.
2nd Occasion
743 Tpr. Walker, O. B.
857 Tpr. Carter, J. O.
888 Tpr. St. Leger, A. R.
715 Tpr. Bloomfield, J. R.
854 Tpr. Brennan, J. T.
87 Tpr. Brown, W. H.
1001 Tpr. Arundale, A.
1112 Tpr. Raynor, W. T.
877 Tpr. Manion, F.
981 Tpr. Smith, F.
1016 Tpr. Foley, J.
1106 Tpr. Plackett, T. W.
551 Tpr. Brazel, P.
966 Tpr. Smith, D. A.
i 300 Cpl. McDonald, J. W.
278 T/Cpl. Kelly, H. J.
531 T/Cpl. Waygood, A.
E.
962 Tpr. Smith, L. F.
1118 Tpr. Waters. E.
926 Sgt. Doyle, P. J. ,
193 Sgt. Fisher, A.
1084 Tpr. Dwyer, J. J.
1078 Tpr. Broadfoot, W. S.
939 Tpr. Digby, N.
1064 Tpr. Booth, N. J.
399 Tpr. Collins. F. J.
i 2nd Occasion
Casualties —Sinai and Palestine
KILLED IN ACTION
Capt. N. M. Pearce .. .. .. .. 29/7/16
2241 Tpr. Wilson, H. N. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
219 Tpr. Ritchie, J. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
930 Tpr. Crozier, R. W. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
1489 Tpr. Kelleher, J. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
1049 Tpr. Wright, E. A. M. .. .. .. 4/8/16
780 Tpr. Davis, D. 4/8/16
836 Tpr. Drady, H. R. 5/8/16
1526 Tpr. Ussher, L. A. F. .. .. .. 17/4/17
Capt. A. C. Thompson .. .. .. 2/11/17
1416 Tpr. Warren, G. H. .. .. .. .. 3/11/17
1108 Tpr. Prendergast, A. J. .. .. .. 3/11/17
229 Sgt. Barrow, F. G. .. .. .. .. 8/11/17
1210 Tpr. Bloodworth, R. J. .. .. .. 29/11/17
r 2


1065 Tpr. Christie, H. J 29/11/17
Lieut. O. W. Tooth .. .. .. .. 3/12/17
588 Tpr. Barton, B. T. .. .. .. .. 3/12/17
1121 Cpl. White, F. A. F. 27/3/18
1209 Tpr. Hawkey, R. J 27/3/18
740 Sgt. Loveband, L. W 27/3/18
399 L/Cpl. Collins, F. J. 27/3/18
2420 Tpr. Riley, K. C 27/3/18
1322 Tpr. Makeig, W. C 27/3/18
2569 Tpr. Boyle, E. 28/3/18
1058 Tpr. Galbraith, F. R. .. .. .. 28/3/18
3539 Tpr. Presland, T. .. .. .. .. 25/9/18
1932 Tpr. Pryor, L. A 28/3/18
1487 Tpr. Johnston, L. J. .. .. .. 28/3/18
2330 Tpr. Gallaher, L. N. .. .. .. .. 28/3/18
232 Sgt. Burlace, W. H 28/3/18
Lieut. F. L. Ridgway .. .. .. 28/3/18
2377 Sgt. Sharpe, W. L 28/3/18
1642 Tpr. Maybury, R. C. .. .. .. 28/3/18
1692 Tpr. Wilkins, C. . . .. .. •• 28/3/18
531 Tpr. Waygood, A. E. .. .. .. 28/3/18
226 Tpr. Bradshaw, A. .. .. .. .. 28/3/18
DIED OF WOUNDS
639 Sgt. Johnson, M. .. .. .. .. 18/8/16
939 Tpr. Digby, N. .. .. .. .. 6/8/16
Lieut. R. Black 17/8/17
410 Sgt. Foster, R. J. (M.M.) .. .. .. 6/11/17
306 Sgt. Potter, W. W 3/12/17
1492 Tpr. Kniepp, N. .. .. .. .. 19/12/17
825 Tpr. Vance, T. H. .. .. .. .. 27/3/18
3534 Tpr. Gear, G. C 29/3/18
2942 Tpr. Baker, E. J. .. .. .. •• 29/3/18
1425 Tpr. O’Brien, A. J 29/3/18
343 Tpr. Tebbutt, H. V. .. .. .. •• 20/9/18
1492 a Tpr. Donnisson, G. F. .. .. .. 29/3/18
319 Tpr. Sherwin, N. D. .. .. .. 29/3/18
759 Tpr. Crozier, S. J. .. •• •• •• 29/3/18
DIED OF DISEASE
1376 Tpr. Anderson, H. H. .. .. •• 4/2/17
1203 Tpr. Maslen, J. A. .. .. .. •• 8/10/17
2935 Tpr. Sholefield, G. D. .. .. .. 23/12/17
86 Tpr. Bult. A 15/2/18
2333 a Tpr. Gummow, C. G. J. . • •• •• 11/8/18
412 Tpr. Gill, G. R 19/9/18
3021 Tpr. Johnson, N. M. .. .. .. 16/10/18


3306 Tpr. Petersen, A. O. .. .. .. 28/10/18
3711 Tpr. Chase, L. J 11/n/18
875 Tpr. McCarthy, R. C. 23/2/19
REPATRIATED PRISONERS OF WAR
1386 Tpr. Gannon, F. A.
948 L/Cpl. Hewitson, A. R.
2382 Tpr. Spencer, C. L.
2346 Tpr. Lambert, L.
3048 Tpr. Clarke, R.
257 Tpr. Farley, H. C.
619 Sgt. King, W. J.
1233 Tpr. MacPherson, J. D.
1129 L/Cpl. Moll, W.
858 Tpr. Crockett, A.
DIED OF DISEASE WHILE PRISONERS OF WAR
3027 Tpr. Smith, C.
1111 Cpl. Redman, C. T.
DIED AFTER RETURNING TO AUSTRALIA
Sgt. R. Thorne
Q.M.S. J. Cheater
Sgt. R. Strachan
Cpl. J. Brady
WOUNDED
459 Tpr. Smith, R. R. B. .. .. .. 28/7/16
399 Tpr. Collins, F. J. .. .. 3rd Occas. 28/7/16
Lieut.-Col. C. D. Fuller (D. 5.0.) .. 6/8/16
1553 Tpr. Johnson, W. .. .. .. .. 20/7/16
318 Tpr. Semmens, H. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
1568 Tpr. Siddons, A. J. R 5/8/16
208 Cpl. Suffolk, J. W. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
1448 Tpr. Bright, J. H. R. .. .. .. 4/8/16
1174 Tpr. Meares, C. L. D. .. .. .. 4/8/16
454 Tpr. Rock, W. F. .. .. .. .. 5/8/16
1184 Tpr. Rogers, F. E. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
339 Sgt. Collins, E. A. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
705 Tpr. Carter, A. J. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
199 Tpr. Keast, R. M. ~ .. .. .. 4/8/16
1701 Tpr. Stratford, S. W. 4/8/16
1151 Tpr. Arnott, F. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
500 Tpr. Sherwin, C. R. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
1476 Tpr. Hargreaves, J. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
1354 Tpr. Suttor, P. L 4/8/16
1543 Tpr. Fraser, P. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
55 Tpr. Perry, T. F. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16


702 Cpl. Boorman, H. J. .. .. .. 4/8/16
1173 Tpr. May, R 4/8/16
1087 Tpr. Frogley, O. R. .. .. .. 4/8/16
354 S.M. Weir, W. J. A. 4/8/16
448 Cpl. Paul, C. S. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
1156 Tpr. Dowling, N. R. .. .. .. 4/8/16
470 Tpr. Sweeney, C. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
1548 Tpr. Hayes, S. G. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
2232 Tpr. Saunders, J. M. .. .. .. 4/8/16
381 Tpr. Burns, W. .. .. .. .. 4/8/16
1044 Tpr. Shoemark, C. R. .. .. .. 4/8/16
2204 Tpr. Murphy, H. C .. .. .. 4/8/16
564 Sgt. Collins, H. G. .. .. .. .. 5/8/16
1301 Tpr. Anderson, C. P. .. .. .. 5/8/16
1276 Tpr. O’Sullivan, D. M. .. .. .. 5/8/16
1197 Tpr. Wilson, P. A. .. .. .. .. 5/8/16
814 Tpr. Price, W. H 5/8/16
1421 Tpr. Williams, E. A. .. .. .. 5/8/16
28 Tpr. Little, P. C 5/8/16
2885 Tpr. Mountain, W. C 5/8/16
1108 Tpr. Prendergast, A. J. .. .. .. 5/8/16
410 Sgt. Foster, R. J. (M.M.) .. .. 5/8/16
928 Tpr. Brown, W. H. .. .. .. .. 5/8/16
499 Tpr. McCullogh, D. .. .. .. 5/8/16
402 L/Cpl. Deveson, E. .. .. .. . • 5/8/16
159 Tpr. McDonald, H. T. .. .. .. 10/8/16
1055 Tpr. Rohrick, J. H. .. .. . • •• 12/8/16
746 Cpl. Ridgway, F. L. Accidentally 15/8/16
250 Tpr. Elliott, W. A 17/4/17
258 Tpr. Fisk, S. N 19/4/17
442 Tpr. Nash, G. B. .. .. .. •• 19/4/17
1572 Tpr. Wallace, G. A 19/4/17
1093 Tpr. Kerchert, D. A. .. • • •• 20/4/17
1778 Tpr. Harmer, W. H. 8 , z l7
965 Tpr. Shearer, J. .. .. •• •• 8/7/17
335 R.S.M. Hanton, J. Accidentally Injd. 19/7/17
2655 Tpr. Porritt, J. N. .. .. •• •• 19/7/17
1490 Tpr. Kennewell, G. F. .. •• •• 19/7/17
Lieut. R. Black (M.C.) 16/8/17
Lieut. H. Dickson (M.C.) .. • • •• 2/11/17
208 Cpl. Suffolk, J. W z/ii/ir
1417 Tpr. Warren, R. W. . ■ • • • • 3/11/17
1259 Tpr. Day, C. H. .. • • •• 3/11/17
307 Cpl. Strachan, R. .. •• •• •• 31/^lO/^ 17
2868 Tpr. Beacom, W. H. .. •• •• 9/11/17
Lieut. H. Dickson (M.C.) 2nd Occas. 10/11/17
1708 Tpr. Lavender, V. M. .. .. •• 8/1 /il
2423 Tpr. Danvers, J. F. .. .. . • • • 10/11/17


1030 Tpr. McNamee, O. H. .. .. .. 10/11/17
233 Sgt. Burlace, W. H *’ io/11/l7
702 Sgt. Boorman, H. J. 2nd Occ., Rem on duty
lO/11/17
1050 Tpr. Webster, C. .. .. .. .. 8/11/17
3243 Ipr. Hodge, J. Rem. on duty 10/11/17
2322 Tpr. Eldershaw, E. .. .. 19/11/17
1686 Tpr. Watt, E. .. .. .. 22/11/17
Lieut. R. B. Ronald .. .. .. .. 29/11/17
1064 Tpr. Booth, W. T 29/11/17
115- Tpr. Farrell, T. ~ .. .. .. 29/11/17
1326 Tpr. McCormack, T. F. .. .. .. 29/11/17
3231 Tpr. Best, R. .. .. .. .. .. 29/11/17
2484 Tpr. Heckenberg, J. Rem. on duty 29/11/17
527 Sgt. Baird, D. M. .. .. .. .. 3/12/17
Lieut. N. Dickson .. .. .. .. 3/12/17
377 Sgt. Bargh, J. M 3/12/17
812 Sgt. Reynolds, N. S. .. .. .. 3/12/17
1114 Cpl. Saunders, H. G. .. .. .. 3/12/17
2990 Tpr. Chitty, T. .. .. .. 3/12/17
2461 Tpr. Dill, C. D. .. .. .. .. 3/12/17
2333 Tpr. Holdsworth, N. .. .. .. 3/12/17
1310 Tpr. Lowe, H. D. G. .. .. .. 3/12/17
721 a Tpr. McMicking, Q. G. .. .. 3/12/17
2366 Tpr. O’Keefe, T. .. .. .. .. 3/12/17
1104 Tpr. Perry, W. .. .. .. .. 3/12/17
1575 Tpr. Winter, M. H. J. .. .. .. 3/12/17
1324 Tpr. Meldrum, G. .. .. .. .. 3/12/17
469 Cpl. Smith, C. .. .. .. .. 3/12/17
517 Cpl. Busby, E. A. Rem. on duty 3/12/17
571 Tpr. Ausburn, H. J. Rem. on duty 3/12/17
794 Tpr. Kerwick, N. P. .. .. .. 3/12/17
518 Cpl. Capel, C. R. .. .. .. .. 3/12/17
2952 Tpr. Allen, E. B. .. .. .. .. 3/12/17
569 Tpr. Stibbard, D. C. .. .. .*. 3/12/17
434 Tpr. Minahan, M. .. .. .. .. 3/12/17
85 Tpr. Bush, G. E 10/12/17
1208 Tpr. West, A. S 27/3/18
1447 Tpr. Brind, S.. E 27/3/18
3648 Tpr. Barton. D. H 27/3/18
3673 Tpr. Snell, J. T 27/3/18
3238 Tpr. Gleeson, W. J 27/3/18
1132 L/Cpl. Ekin, W. H. 27/3/18
1053 L/Cpl. Yates, C. B 27/3/18
2232 Tpr. Saunders, J. M. 2nd Occas. 27/3/18
866 Cpl. Gillham, C. H 27/3/18
1768 L/Cpl. Warden, A. M 27/3/18


2260 Tpr. Johnston, W. G. .. .. .. 27/3/18
2400 Tpr. Weate, K. D. .. .. .. .. 27/3/18
1687 Tpr. Weir, G. A. .. .. .. .. 27/3/18
1464 Tpr. Dunbar, A. .. .. .. .. 27/3/18
Lieut. G. V. Evans .. .. .. .. 27/3/18
2224 Tpr. Scurrah, G. L. .. .. .. .. 27/3/13
961 Tpr. Schmierer, A. S. .. .. .. 27/3/18
307 Tpr. Strachan, R. F. Rem. on duty 27/3/18
3369 Tpr. Rathbone, A. R. .. .. .. 28/3/18
1180 Tpr. Newlands, E. S. .. .. .. 28/3/18
232 Tpr. Burbank, E. .. .. .. .. 28/3/18
3351 Tpr. Colgan, T. D. .. .. .. .. 28/3/18
461 Tpr. Stougie, S. .. .. .. .. 28/3/18
744 Tpr. Fitzgerald, T. .. .. .. .. 28/3/18
3236 Tpr. Finlayson, S. B. .. .. .. 28/3/18
2307 Tpr. Bassett, W. P. (M.M.) .. .. 28/3/18
1130 Cpl. Cochrane, A. .. .. .. .. 28/3/18
1207 Cpl. McCann, W 28/3/18
1288 Tpr. Ferris, A. G. .. .. .. . • 28/3/18
T/Major H. S. Ryrie 28/3/18
3058 Tpr. Lockwood, B. A. .. .. .. 28/3/18
1402 Tpr. Orr, L 28/3/18
1608 Tpr. Davis, H. W. .. .. .. .. 28/3/18
2988 Tpr. Beach, W 28/3/18
5261 a Tpr. Pierce, F. T. .. .. .. .. 28/3/18
1189 Tpr. Smith, R. .. .. .. .. 28/3/18
Lieut. A. B. Campbell .. .. .. 28/3/18
1763 Tpr. Latimore, A. J. .. .. .. 28/3/18
2148 Tpr. Barnes, E. .. .. .. .. 28/3/18
Lieut. H. G. Lomax 28/3/18
Major D. G. Cross .. .. t. .. 28/3/18
1347 Tpr. Williams, A. T 28/3/18
649 Tpr. Foote, W. J. .. .. . • •• 28/3/18
Lieut. H. Dickson (M.C.) Rem. on duty,
. 3rd Occas. 28/3/18
1010 Tpr. Bell, J. Rem. on duty 28/3/18
1346 Tpr. Webb, B 29/3/18
3349 Tpr. Blake, G. C. 31/3/19
541 Cpl. Single, S. •• 1/4/19
1156 Cpl. Dowling, N. R. Accid. Inj. in Action 27/3/18
3302 Tpr. McAlister, W. Shell Shock 28/3/18
3363 Tpr. Lloyd, J. R 13/4/18
191 Sgt. Brown, R. .. .. .. 19/4/18
801 Tpr. Mayes, E. C. .. .. .. •• 19/4/18
1465 Tpr. Farley, B. .. .. .. . • 19/4/18
3675 Tpr. West, J. C. D 3/5/18
1571 Tpr. Thoroughgood, R. .. .. •• 30/4/18


2018 Tpr. Chinnock, A. E. .. .. q n /wia
1482 Tpr. Hindmarsh, S. R. .. ” 4/4/18
Snn T pr ‘ & r \ e r nt u ee ’ J A Self 20/6/18
3300 Tpr. McMahon. E Ifi / 7 / 18
2237 Tpr. Taylor, W. J J
I T Pr ' rf a ’ \'a W ' t Rem - ° n duty 16/7/18
1538 Tpr. Donaldson, T. H. .. 25/q/ir
2426 Tpr. Saunders, C. W. .. .. . . 25/9/1 s
2658 Tpr. Richards, R. F. T. 25/9/18
2617 Tpr. Whiles, J. L 11/g/ll


W. C. Penfold & Co. I,td , 83 Pitt Street, Sydney.




