

Unfair and Illogical
Amusement Tax
<s»-®
Proprietors on Position : Fallacious Ideas on
Theatrical Finance
REPRINTED FROM THE SUNDAY TIMES
A week ago some of the chief objections to conditions, but they have not followed the
the Amusements Tax as proposed were frankly example of other traders and put up the nrice
stated. The position is very simple. The of their goods to the public. Any business man
Sunda y Times urges that the tax, as fore- who, at this time of stress and disturbance
shadowed, i s unreasonable, inequitable, and maintains prices at anything like the peace-’
grossly undemocratic. If the tax were paid level, renders high patriotic service in that fact
na il 7 M* Ple ° n , wh r lt be ”° mi - alonL But tbe patriotic services rendered by
nally levied—the people who pay for admis- the theatrical firms of Australia have been nosi-
sion to theatres, picture halls, and other places tive. From the outset these firms have taken
hi e tha e rt ln , m f e . nt -: he obj , ectl °? against . it would uctive and untiring part in all patriotic move-
left untouched and untaxed a very ments to raise money. They have freely given
large number of citizens who are proper subjects their companies and their theatres to that end
for taxation. The objection here would be to They have cordially and unselfishly used their
f a r a s^r'fi entaill H g r ClaSB - hardS t hiP . and n ° gCne - exce ' ,ent SVstems of orga“on for propa-
ral sacrifice, and taxation of that sort was sanda work tLa™ *• propa ,
never less warrantable or more objectionable fh roue h their inZi*™?’ ‘TV™ 1
than it is now The war is a matter that in- £, ,° u ? h . elr , indlvld ual directors and share-
timately concerns everybody Hi s essentiaUy They^Lve^L&a^v'b T,? ney t t 0 tke funds ;
our war, as much Ausctralia’s as it is Poland’s Jfforts" raisLT other U h.’r^ y *!! n s P® clal
or Belgium’s; as surely and as intimately the fndef a H/ahlv s.mnArJa u They have
affair of Jones of Newtown, and Smith of desnite fhe Lct Zt rfnt nf recru t lt,ng effor ‘ s ’
Surry Hills, a s it is the affair of King George '? that ? ut of every ten ,™ en who
V. or of Nicholas, Tsar of All the Russias leave for the front nine represent a direct and
But the tax is also undesirable because it will
not be a tax solely on the people it is overtly d 80 the tale might go on. It might, for
■designed to tax, but rather a special form of * nstance > be pointed out that while all sorts of
handicap or prejudice operating against a vastly business people at this time are seeking exemp-
smaller class still, the class of citizens actually !‘° n , / the ‘ r employees, no Australian thea-
engaged in theatrical enterprise and the various ‘ hrm has ao . u g ht a ,ny exemption. Some
ramifications of what i s known as the show tdeatres a ! e working under new conditions of
business. It i s useless quite for Federal Minis- th .® ™ ost extraordinary difficulty because of the
ters to pretend that this is to be a tax on people withdrawal of skilled men who have enlisted or
who pay for amusements, and on them only. been ca led U P* but the voice of no theatrical
taxing theatres i s unthinkable. In England, and ™ an , ager has been beard in complaint so far.
Any scheme that shall tax theatregoers without To-day, with a host of grave anxieties crowd-
in ’"'fher countries where modified forms of lng ln u P° n tbem, the theatrical firms would rot
amusements tax are in force, the amusement ° b i ect to any additional tax on their profits
enterprises have been prejudicially affected to an for P ur P° s es of maintaining our part in the
extraordinary degree. war. They do object to a tax on gross re-
The question really is, then, “Should the cei P ts - a tax that must be in effect a tax in
people who pay for amusements be taxed es- a ggravation of their losses,
pecialljr at this time?” but, rather, “At this time
should a crushing weight of new and special KILKAKDS,
taxation be imposed on theatrical enterprise ?” Mr. Hugh D. Mclntosh puts the matter con-
Let us go into that. cisely as he sees it. “The amusement-firms do
FACT AND FAT.T.ACV ?. ot ob i ect t 0 lost taxation, however heavily
~ bALLACYic it may fall upon them. Their only demand
me ordinary man, even the ordinary theatre- 18 that whatever taxation they pay shall be
goer, has many fallacious ideas about the huge apportioned to a general taxation scheme. They
sums made in the theatrical business. There feel . as I. understand it, that all schemes of
is a sort of theory that if a speculative person war taxation should be general. Indignation
desires to make a few thousand pounds safely as to the proposed Amusements Tax would be
Mu quickljr he only needs to open a theatre, tar deeper and more widespread were it not
Nothing could be very well farther from the that the public suffers from certain chronic
truth. Theatrical enterprise can only be made and characteristic delusions as to theatrical
profitable by unfailing patience, ceaseless in- enterprise. People have a way of thinking
dustry, and unfaltering soundness of judgment; easily that the theatrical enterprise is a matter
and even then the odds are about twenty to one huge and easy profits all the way over,
against success. To one enterprise that sue- Well, I tell you this: there is a huge amount of
ceeds, one show that stays on and makes money, capital invested in what we will call payable
at least a dozen go down and out. Nor is that theatrical enterprise in Australasia, and that
all. A theatrical enterprise, to have any hope capital does not return a gross revenue of
ot success, must operate in a wide field. It 6 P er cent - 1 mean by that that the nett
cannot be confined to one or two cities. The revenue of the theatres that are not working
entrepreneur must cater not only for Sydney and at a loss is not more than 6 per cent., year
Melbourne, but also for the capricious capitals in and year odt-
of the smaller States, for the little twopenny “And when it comes to the taxation of in-
towns that are the bugbear of theatrical comes - see how unfortunately the theatrical
management in this Commonwealth, and so on fin ? is s! . tuated - If it is to do good work
to the small outlying communities in West Aus- and keep lts bold on tbe P ay i n g public, it must
tralia and New Zealand. And although each work on an extended circuit. Let us put the
entrepreneur’s business is one business he will case roughly I I am not pledging myself to
pay taxation on his profits in every ’separate actual figures. The only permanently paying
State without consideration or deduction al- towns l n .Australasia are Sydney and
lowed for any general loss Melbourne. It is on them that the theatrical
Still, the theatrical firms are not now ob- firm must i ely what { wil ‘ call > ts sta Plc
jecting to any taxation of profits. They say income - But it has to hazard much capital
that although their profits are already taxed ? n WOT } °u tslda those two cities because it is
until at times they bid fair to be taxed out ‘ m ® ractlcab e “nder modern conditions to work
of existence thev arc not ' lxea ■ , Sydney and Melbourne only. In addition to
that just now. More, they point out that They the profitable thea trcs in Melbourne and Syd-
have never shrunk from the duty of patriotic ney ’„ we bave , to face D * be upke A ep , other
sacrifice The hoc 0,.t ,i y Si P. Vl ancillary theatres in Brisbane, Adelaide and
roots Of M shrewdly *° the Perth. As a lesult, we come out somewhat
other h,,shte== b nT ■ Newspapers and some in this way. We make a profit of, say,
of h Ml I Pr ° fi *. £l °.° oo a y ear in Sydney and £lO,OOO a year
of all great upheavals of the public mind, all ; n Melbourne; but we lose £2OOO a year in each
disturbances of the even flow of public life, of the other cities—Brisbane. Adelaide and
make a profit out of national catastrophies even; Perth—and the less is, in actual fact, prob-
Dut all such ebullitions and divergencies from ably much greater than that. Now, the State
the normal order spell loss to the theatres. of Victoria taxes us on the £lO,OOO made in
Australian theatrical firms have seen their Melbourne, and the State of New South Wales
working expenses swell enormously under war taxes us on the £lO,OOO made in Sydney. There I
straightway, before we take into account any taxation that goes to help the Empire win the
other taxation, you will see that we pay taxes war, so long as the taxation is fairly distri-
on £20,000, when our actual profit is only buted and comes reasonably within the ability
£14,000, and probably much less. of the people who pay. This Amusements Tax
“On cop of all these taxes comes the pro- Proposal is bad because it must fail as a form of
posal tor the Amusement Tax, which is not to general taxation, and it i s bad because the
be an additional tax on profits or actual in- amount or percentage of taxation proposed is
come, but a sort of super-tax on gross takings, grossly excessive. Whatever part of this tax
It is to be paid on all gross takings, including the theatrical firms have to pay must be a sinis-
those gross takings on which we make £6OOO ter handicap on their business, since it will be
less as a minimum. If we take, say, £2OOO in a tax on gross turnover. We are willing, as we
any two weeks, and on that two weeks' busi- always have been willing, to do anything’in our
ness make an absolute loss of £lOOO (a thing power to help on the war. We do not want
which may easily happen), the Amusements to evade any responsibility. We know that
Tax will work against us by taking 16 2-3 per special taxation and heavy taxation is needed;
cent. Obviously, in such case, the total loss al l we ask is that it shall be equitable, and not
will amount to over 44 per cent. And that is press with calculated harshness on any one
how it will and must tell all the way through, elass.”
It is not only mischievous, it is incalculably Mr. John Fuller, junior, is characteristic: “To
mischievous. me the Amusements Tax seems a very unfair
“I am carefully under-stating our losses and tax-ijust as unfair as the tax on newspaper ad-
risks. I could take into the account, were vertisements is to newspapers in Germany. To
it otherwise, the extremely hazardous field of m y mmd, the only fair method of taxation is to
New Zealand. But all losses made in New tax incomes; if you want to go further than
Zealand, in Queensland, in South Australia, or that, let incomes be classified, and the tax
anywhere else, cut away the profits made in graduated according to every man’s ability to
Sydney and Melbourne; although in each State P ay - Direct taxation on the gross, with no
we are made to pay taxation on those profits regard to expenditure or loss, is economically
as if they were absolute. We must be taxed unsound, and must tend to cause shrinkage of
as though we were solely a State concern, employment. Taxation on gross takings, with-
though in practice it is impossible to confine out consideration of any modifying circum-
our operations to any one or two States. We stances, i s brutal taxation, alien to British ideas
have to conduct a widely-extended homoge- , honesty and fair play. When a man dies and
neous business, which is constantly subjected to waves large estates, let the Commissioner step-
the stress and strain of arbitrary local ampu- ! n a J} d cu * U P the large assets to the State’s
tationg of profit made irrespective of the benefit, as large estates in New Zealand are cut
general effect or state of our business. And on P p , *° r settlement, due provision being made for
top of this comes the Amusement Tax. “ elr . s > assigns, and executors. Let me give you
The tax is iniquitous, however it is re- f/ 1 msta nce that will show my own feeling i#t
garded. By modification it can be made y? e , matter - Recently in South Australia there
less iniquitous, and that is what we S- a poot ! fellow who was worth £1,650,070.
must look for now. I don’t want to force any ' tlI J e ? tate , m Victoria was valued at £149,430,
point unduly, lam most anxious not to ?ia nzn P a ' d to tbe State on that was
misrepresent anything. If there were a soli- rin’nn* tbe . sum paid in dut V had been
tary word to be said in favor of this tax, I .■i,’T’i <lr anything up to £lOO,OOO, there would
would say it. I have never shrunk from any stlJ have been plenty left for the heirs and
sacrifice necessitated by the war. I think that poor ex ?cutors. If the Government raised such
in righteousness and honesty every man can be reasona " le sums on such estates, it would not
called upon to make sacrifices. And I am to bother about making unjust levies by
confident that that is the feeling of my fellow- dT e ,p umbrous machinery of an Amusements
managers. All we urge is that the call of lax-
sacrifice should be equalised. The Amusements PICTURES.
Tax as proposed is so inequitable that it be- Mr. Barrington Miller, who may be accepted
comes a form of barbarity.” as a genuinely representative pkture-man!?s at
WILLIAMSON on ®. w f th the theatrical managers in patriotic
' enthusiasm and willingness to meet all equit-
Mr. Harold Ashton, associate director of J. a “w taxation demands. But he objects to the
C. Williamson, Ltd., said he had little to add. Proposed Amusements Tax, first on the general
! fee that it is grossly and rather hatefully ground that it is a class tax and inequitable
unfair that at a time like this, regard being had Then :
to the history of the recent past, any class tax “Because, while nominally a tax on the
going directly to the prejudice of theatrical people who pay admission to places of
business should be devised. Im not going to amusements, it will be reall v a new and
cite haphazard any figures that may prove, grievous burden on amusement enterprises
however, slightly inaccurate on a closer scru- which are already greatly harassed by in-
tiny. But lam ready to say this : that there evitably increased expenses during the war
is no form of business that returns as much period.
money immediately and directly to the contri- - . .
buting public as the theatrical business does. excessive Ld in?olerable P ' S ““ y
Of every million sterling taken at the doors of .<t>.
the theatres in Australia, at least £950 000 goes ® ? no tax on gross receipts, as dis-
straight back to the public. That is anart * , fr ° m Profits, , s in accord with British
altogether from any V P «£ Pr f“ dent and democ / atic . Principle,
amount of labor the theatres and their asso- “ eca y? e ; as to th ® Picture business, the
ciated interests employ. The theatres pay tax w [° uld be on an educational influence and
enormous amounts in salaries and wages. That ° ne the most wholesome form of simple plea-
sum alone, in known cases, goes up to £2OO 000 sur e now enjoyed by the masses of the
a year, and more than that. ’ people.
“Then consider the enormous amount of • *? r ' strongly emphasises his view that
work and money that goes from the theatres to El^„, re sbo ]T s ar f ln no sense a luxury. He
people in every class of trade—dealers, drapers P ° ir J, out that tb ' re are thousands of people,
ironmongers, printers, milliners, dressmakers’ subscribe to magazines or to buy
newspapers, proprietors of hoardings, oil-and- ■•j books, who get their only actual
color-men ; scarcely a branch of trade or busi- Hr VlV i d g .? < : e or , conception of the reality
ness that we do not expend large moneys on Dt War by VlSltlng the Picture shows.
Then consider what I may call the appurten- STTMMAWV
ances of the theatrical business. Surround- „ . b U MMAKY.
ing every theatre is a cluster of retail shops that • ® ve T y theatrical firm and management inter-
live and thrive on the theatre itself—tobacco- vlewed * n regard to this matter emphatically
msts, candy shops, soft-drink shops, and so states view that there is no objection to
forth. Then there is the enormous incidental reasonable and equitable taxation. Mr Ed
revenue that theatres bring to the dressmakers ~? yell ’.deputy-governing director of the Harry
and associated trades. The constant demand , ck ? rds Tivoli Theatres, Ltd., puts the matter
for evening frocks and all sort of dainty ap- clearly : We hav e let nothing stand in the
parel : it is the theatres that maintain it. Add way of our hearty co-operation in all oatriotic
to that the amount of traffic caused by the moverne ”? s or anything of that sort. We have
theatres, the revenue accruing to trains and trams never objected to any scheme or proposal of
and ferries, the sums spent with the cab f ene y al tax ation to meet the costs of the war
and the taxi-drivers. Every system of trans- I ‘ , w ® are at one with every reputable
portation benefits tremendously and regularly tneatrlca l firm and manager in Australia But
from the theatregoer. Theatres are great feeders ' to me the Amusements Tax, as now proposed
of industry. The theatrical firms have taken I ? eem f *.° be as a bsurd as it is unscrupulous. It
up the white man’s burden as to this war and 1 18 admirabl y calculated to kill the struggling
they have not flinched from it in any particular ( mana Ser and the poor man. Nothing but an
They object o the Amusements Tax because it 1 exceptional and consistent success can stand
is a bad and undemocratic tax; because it aims, I the strain of such an impost. But the little
not at biting into their profits, but at cutting I m ? n at the suburban hall, the hard-working
away the very source from which the possibility ! ! Tlinor manager, who ekes out a precarious ex-
of profit springs.” istence in the wayback town, these, and a host
FULLER of such men as are working hard for a foot-
,, , . hold, will be positively knocked out by a tax
Mr. Will Douglas, speaking for Mr. Ben J. of 16£ per cent, on gross takings. It is not a
Hullpr iH • \A/#» Hnn’f nhioet f I _ ...
Mr. Will Douglas, speaking for Mr. Ben J. I of 16£ per cent, on gross
Fuller, said: “We don’t object to any form of | business proposition.”
Printed by the Sunday Times Newspaper Co.. Ltd., 136- 138 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.
