

UNGRAMMACTICAL
STATESMEN
AN
EXPOSURE OF THE BAD ENGLISH
—CONTAINED IN THE —
Australian Federal Constitution.
‘ You will see, my dear Son, that we are not to judge of the talents of
men by the dresses these men wear, by the offices they fill , or by the power
they possess.' — Cobbett's “English Grammar.'
PEICE THBEEPENCE.
Sydney:
Published by the Author, 342 Parramatta Ed.* Petersham.
1900.
By S. A. ROSA,
Author of “Tlie Federal Bill
Analyzed.”




Ungrammatical Statesmen.
“ These he thy gods, 0 Israel.”—Exodus xxxii, 4.
“ Less ” Instead of Fewer.
During the public discussion, in 1899, of what was then the
Federal Bill, and is now about to become the Federal Constitu-
tion, Mr. James A. Hogue and I met at Araluen : he was there
to speak in unreserved advocacy of the Bill; and I, to urge the
necessity of amending it. AVe spoke in the local Oddfellows’
Hall, on the same night; and Mr. Hogue, who delivered the
first address, lauded not merely the political merits of.
the Bill, but also its alleged uniformly pure and clear English.
At the conclusion of his speech, I, in the course of my
address, ventured to point out the existence of at least one
grammatical error in the Bill; namely, the use of “ less,”
instead of “ fewer.” in the phrase “not less than two.” Mr.
Hogue made, very properly, no reply to this at the moment;
but, as he and I were, with the audience, leaving the hall, he
informed me, in the hearing of some of the persons surrounding
us, that the phrase was “perfectly good English.” Now as Mr.
Hogue was, then, the Minister of Public Instruction, and had
been the editor of an important Sydney daily newspaper (the
Evening News), his statement had great weight with those that
heard it. i r et, as I shall proceed to show, he was wrong ; and
I was right.
The full sentence (see Section 71 of the Constitution) is:
“ The High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice, and so many
other justices, not less than two, as the Parliament
prescribes.” It will at once be seen, by any one familiar
with the grammar of our mother tongue, that the sentence is
elliptical; the word “ less ” being an adjective limiting justices
understood. The following similar sentence is, with its
correction, thus given on page 183 of Davidson and Alcock’s
“ Complete Manual of Parsing ”:—


“Till ' • ,'i ’efineci
logic is employed than in grammar. It is apt to be slighted b;
superficial thinkers as belonging to the rudiments of knowledge
which were inculcated upon us in our earliest youth. But
what was then inculcated before we could comprehend ifc
principles, would abundantly repay our study in maturei
years.”—Dr. Hugh Blair, “ Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles
Lettres.”
LIST OF WORKS REFERRED TO IN
THIS PAMPHLET.
Abbott, Edwin A., D.D., “ How to Parse, 1896.” “ How to Tel!
the Parts of Speech, 1896.
Angus, Joseph, M. A., D.D., “ Handbook of the English Tongue.’
Bain, Alex., LL.D.. “ A Higher English Grammar, 1896.”
“ Companion to the Higher English Grammar, 1877.”
Booth, D., “ Principles of English Grammar.”
Brown, Goold, “A Grammar of English Grammars.”
Churchill, T. 0., “ A New Grammar of the English Language,
1823.”
Cobbett, Wm., “A Grammar of the English Language, 1872.”
Cornwell, James, P H. D , “ English Grammar.”
Davidson, Wm., 8.A., and Alcock, J. C., “English Grammar
and Analysis, 1897.” “ Complete Manual of Parsing.”
Latham, R. G., M.A., M.D., “ An Elementary English Grammar,
1885.”
Lennie, Wm., “ The Principles of English Grammar, 1899.”
Maetzuer, Professor, “ An English Grammar, 1874,” 3 vols.
Marsh, George P., “The Student’s Manual of the English
Language, 1891.”
Mason, C. P., 8.A., E.C P., “ English 1897.” “A
Shorter English Grammar, 1897.”
Murray, Lindley, “ An English Grammar, 1853,” 2 vole.
Smith, Hamblin, M.A., “ English Grammar, 1882.”
Smith, Sir Wm., D.C.L., LL.D., and Hall, T. D., M.A., “A
• Manual of English Grammar, 1894.”
Sullivan, Robert, LL.D., T.C.D., “An Attempt to Simplify
English Grammar, 1898.”




“ ‘There are no less than twenty dipthongs in the English
language.’ ‘ Less ’ qualifies dipthongs understood. ‘ Less ’is
wrongly used for ‘ fewer.’ ”
Dr. Bobert Sullivan, in his “ English Grammar,” page 139,
gives the following sentence as erroneous : “ Not less than three
books were written on the subject.” He corrects this seutence
by substituting “fewer” for “less.” A similarly incorrect
sentence is given, and corrected in the same way, on page 140
of Lennie’s “ English Grammar.”
The sentence I have quoted from Section 71 of the
Constitution, is not the only one containing the impropriety
referred to; for we are informed i*n Section 7 that: “No
Original State shall have less than six Senators.” The gross
absurdity of this error becomes apparent when it is remembered
than “less” is “an adjective of quantity in bulk or mass” and
may be used to “qualify nouns in the singular number” only.
Are we, then, to understand that the Senators are to be “men
of weight” in a double sense? And that the Constitution
proclaims that no Original State shall have less than six (say)
tons of Senatorial avoirdupois ? Or did the Convention intend
this as a new and subtle insult to the much abused “fat man ?”
While “ less” is, as I have said, one of the adjectives of quan-
tity in bulk;' “ fewer ” is one of the adjectives of quantity in number :
the rules relating to these two classes of adjectives can be found
on pages 40 and 153 of Davidson and Alcock’s “ English
Grammar and Analysis ; ” page 297 of Dr. Angus’s “Handbook
of the English Tongue ;” page 52 of Professor Bain’s “ Higher
English Grammar;” and page 544 of Goold Brown’s “Grammar
of English Grammars.”
“So ... AS ” FOR “ As . . . AS.”
The sentence endorsed by Mr. Hogue as correct, actually
contains no fewer than four grammatical errors. By printing
in small capital letters the erroneous words in the section, I
have drawn attention to those errors. The first mistake is the
use of “so ” instead of “as”: it is improper to use “so” with
“as” to refer to a comparison of equality; “as many other
justices ... as” is the correct form. The form “so . . . as”
is not correctly used except when it either expresses inequality
of degree, or is followed by an infinitive to express a conse-
quence. When it expresses inequality of degree it is preceded
by a negative; therefore “so ... as ” not preceded by a negative


is ungrammatical—except in certain constructions quite
different from that of the sentence under consideration.
Professor Bain gives, on page 333 of his “ Higher English
Grammar,” the following example of this error and its correc-
tion : “ I will answer the letter so soon as I receive it.— As. It
is correct to say “ I did not receive the letter so soon as I
expected it.” The same authority gives, on page 2&8 of his
■“ Higher Grammar,” these additional instances of the correct
use of “as . . . as ” and “so . . . as: ” “ He does not write so
well as you”: “I would as soon die as suffer that.” These
seem almost like prophetic references, doubtless ironical in the
first sentence, to the framers of the Constitution! Similar
•examples are given by Mr. Lennie (English Grammar, page 92)
and by Dr. Sullivan (English Grammar, page 129).
For rules on this subject see Bindley Murray’s “ English
Grammar,” vol. I, pages 311, 312 ; Booth’s “ Principles of
English Grammar,” page 80; Goold Browu’s “Grammar of
English Grammars,” page 679; Dr. Cornwell’s “English
Grammar,” paragraph 388; and Dr. Angus’s “ Handbook of
the English Tongue,” pages 320, 321.
“Not” used for “No.”
The second error, in this polished product of the “ finest
intellects in Australia,” is the use of “not” where the sense
requires “no.” When qualifying a comparative, our best idio-
matic writers have made it the rule to prefer the adverb of degree
•“ no ”to the adverb of negation “ not.” This rule is violated in
the Convention’s phrase “ not less than two” : it is not a serious
error ; but, as educated men, the members of the Convention
•should have known better, and have done better.
Sir William Smith’s comment on the following sentence,
quoted by him from Paley, # is primarily a correction of the
misplacement of “ not; ” but also evidently suggests the pro-
priety of its being deleted and “no ” inserted : “The laws of
this country are . . . not contained in fewer than fifty folio
volumes:” Sir William comments: “Better—‘are contained
in not [no] fewer than . . ” On page 84 of Sir William
Smith’s “ English Grammar,” the distinction between “ not ”
and “ no ” is explained.
*See Sir William Smith’s “ Manual of English Grammar,” page 138.


There are occasions when it is allowable to use, with a com-
parative, the adverb of negation “ not,” instead of the adverb of
degree “ no.” The following sentence is an example : “If with
jour inferiors speak no more coarsely than is usual; if with
your superiors no more finely.” As “no more” sometimes
signifies “never again,” “not” may be used here to prevent the
faint suggestion of ambiguity that might result from the double
meaning of “no more ; ” but that there would be no real am-
biguiiy is shown by substituting “never again” for “no more;”
and we then see that “ speak never again coarsely than is usual”
is meaningless. However, it is, perhaps, better to use “ not
more,” in such a sentence, than to have even the faintest
suspicion of ambiguity.
The following excerpts are examples of the correct use
of “no” as an adverb of degree:—“But how compels he?
doubtless no otherwise than he draws, without which no man
can come to him.” —Milton, “ Civil Power.”
“No sooner met, but they looked; no sooner looked, but
they loved ; no sooner sighed, but they asked one another the
reason.” —Shakespere, “As you like it,” v. 2, 36.
The Third Error.
The third error, in the endorsed sentence, is the use of
“ less ” for “ fewer.” This mistake I have already dealt with at
sufficient length.
The Fourth Error.
The word “ prescribes ” is one of the forms of the indicative
mood ; to use it to refer to a future contingency is, therefore,
erroneous: either the simple subjunctive “prescribe” or the
compound “ may prescribe ” should be used. The Convention
hewever preferred “ prescribes ” to these forms, and thus again
demonstrated that its members were either ignorant of, or care-
less about, one of the fundamental laws of the language.
Further on I shall deal at some length with the Convention’s
persistent misuse of both the indicative and the subjunctive.
Very “ Sick ” Pensions.
Ambiguity* is something that should be carefully guard«d
against in an act of even a mere local legislature ; and still mor«
*“ Ambiguity. Doubtfulness or uncertainty of signification ; double
meaning.”—The Student’s English Dictionary, by John Ogilvie, LL.D.;
new edition, edited by Charles Annandale, M.A., L L.D.


care should have been taken in drawing up the document
intended to aid permanently in the governing of the whole of
Australia. This necessity for preciseness and oneness of mean-
ing has, however, been grossly neglected bv the framers of the
Constitution. Section 51 states that the Parliament shall have
power to make laws with respect to—among other thiugs—
“lnvalid and Old-Age Pensions.” This appears to mean
“ pensions to persons that are both aged and invalids.” but if so
should read: “ Pensions to Aged Invalids:” it, however, more
probably means “ pensions for invalid persons and for aged
persons,” and, therefore, should have been worded : “ Pensions
to Invalids and to Aged Persons.” The Convention’s phrase,
“ Invalid Pensions,” is an absurd one, and an example of the
gross misuse of adjectives by some writers. The only adjectival
meanings of “invalid” are thus given in the “Imperial
Dictionary: ”
1. Not valid: (a) of no force, weight or cogency; weak.
2. Ill; infirm ; weak ; sick.
3. In law, having no force, effect or efficacy ; void; null.
So that according to these definitions, the pensions would be
either “not valid,” or —ridiculous phrase ! —“sick pensions.”*
Perhaps, however, it was the intention of the Convention to
delicately hint that the only pensions the aged would be likely
to get under the ConstitutiQn should be so attenuated by finan-
cial weakness as to have, in the words of the first definition, “ no
weight.”
It is barely possible that the Eepresentatives were thinking
of the noun invalid; but even that does not excuse them, for
the well-known adjectival meanings of “invalid” render the
noun unsuitable for the formation from it of an additional ad-
jective to qualify such a word as “pensions.” The phrase
“ invalid pensions ” is decidedly ambiguous ; and one of the
most elementary rules of composition is to avoid ambiguity.
The Sin of Which craft.
Dr. Abbott, on page 307 of “ How to Parse,” describes the
use of “ which ” for “ that ”as a “ most serious blot.” We find
this very “ blot ” in section 53 of the Constitution in the follow-
ing clause: —“The Senate may at any time return to the House
# I need scarcely remind the reflective reader that there is a consider-
able difference in sense, as well as in sound, between “ sick pensions ” and
“ s«c£-peusions.” See Professor Bain’s Higher English Grammar, page 257


of Representatives any proposed law which the Senate may not
amend requesting” the omission of items. This use of “ which”'
is wrong unless it mean that the Senate may not amend any
proposed law; a careful study of the whole section shows,
however, that the Senate is forbidden to amend only some laws;
and, therefore, as the relative pronoun is used to mark off these
laws from those that the Senate may amend, the restrictive rela-
tive pronoun “ that ” should have been used, instead of the co-
ordinating relative pronoun “which.”
This distinction between “that” and “which” is clearly
explained in even so elementary a work as Dr. Abbott’s “ How
to Tell The Parts of Speech”; and as there are many persons be-
sides Conventionists, guilty of occasionally confusing “ which ”
and “ that ” I may be pardoned if I give the rule ; the reader will
observe that it applies to “ who ”as well as to “ which
“ That is used as the relative pronoun, except when you can
make a pause between the relative pronoun [in the Convention’s
clause “ which ”] and the antecedent [in the Convention’s
clause “ law ”]. “ When you can make a pause, who or which
is used instead of that. For example :
1. I heard it from the boy that takes round the beer.
2. I heard it from the landlord, who heard it from the
policeman.
In (1) you cannot pause between ‘ boy ’ and ‘ that ’; in (2)
you can pause between ‘ landlord ’ and * who.’
Another difference is that who is put for ‘ and he,’ ‘ now he,’
etc., that is, for the antecedent and some conjunction. That
cannot be replaced by two words in this way.” —“ How to Tell
the Parts of Speech,” page 130.
The definition above given is of course a distinctly elemen-
tary one; but the following from Professor Bain is more
definitive:
“ ‘ That’ is the peopee eesteictivk, explicative, limit-
ing, oe defining eelative. . . . The use of ‘ that ’ solely
as restrictive, with ‘who’ and ‘which’ solely as co-ordinating, also
avoids ambiguities that often attend the indiscriminate use of
‘who’ and ‘which’ for co-ordinate and restrictive clauses.
Thus when we say ‘ the next winter ivhich you will spend in
town will give you opportunities of making a more prudent
choice,’ this may mean either ‘ you will spend next winter in
town’ (‘which’ being co-ordinating) or ‘ the next of the winters
when you are to live in town, let that come when it may.’ In


the former case ‘ which ’ is the proper relative ; in the latter
Case the meaniug is restrictive or defining and would be best
brought out by ‘ that ’; ‘ the next winter that you will spend in
town.’” —Higher English Grammar,” pages 3G, 37.
The reasoning contained in the excerpt above, makes it clear
that in section 53 of the Constitution, “ any proposed law w r hich
the Senate may not amend ” means that “ the Senate may not
amend any proposed law.” The Convention may not have
meant this, but its (bad) language does. If the limiting, defining
“ that ” had been used the meaning would be : “ Some laws the
Senate may not amend, but any of these laws the Senate may.
return to the Representatives ” and request Lhe omission of any
items therein.
Davidson and Alcock say: “In the restrictive use of the
relative the practice of the best idiomatic writers is to prefer
that to who or which." —Euglish Grammar, page IGI. Sir
William Smith says :—“ That is preferred to who or which when
the antecedent is incomplete, requiring to be defined by the
relative clause.” To illustrate his meaning he gives the follow-
ing among other examples of the correct use of “that”: —.
“. . . the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to.” (Hamlet, iii, 1.)
“ France had no infantry that dared to face the English bows
and bills.”—(Macaulay’s History of England,” i. 19).
“ .... he will never follow anything
that other men begin. —(Julius Csesar).
“ That face is thine ; thine own sweet face I see
The same that oft in childhood solaced me.” —(Cowper).
“ I dare do all that may become a man. —(Macbeth i, 7.”*
I might follow these with quotations illustrative of the
correct use of “which,” but will forbear. Let us hope that the
framers of the Constitution will never again be guilty of the sin
of whithcra.it. “ Which you are right, my dear,” says Mrs.
Harris.
“ In respect of ” instead of “ In respect to.”
In that same section occurs the error of using, the some-
what uncommon and inelegant phrase, “in respect of ” to mean
“in respect to.” The framers of the Constitution were appar-
ently fond of the phrase, for they used it very often. This
• dee 3ir William Smith’s Manual of English Grammar, pages 115-117.


might be tolerated as a legal idiotism if they had invariably
meant by it “by reason of ” or “on account of,” but as they
generally meant “ with reference to,” one is compelled to regard
their use of the phrase as another instance of their weakness for
bad English. “With regard to,” “in regard to,” “ with respect
to,” “in respect to,” “ with reference to ” are all correct, and
easier to understand than the stiff, strange and improper “in
respect of,” but the Convention apparently preferred this ugly
child of ignorance and affectation to those comely offspring of
propriety and purity.
• Professor Marsh says: —
“The expression ‘in or with respect’ is an idotism, a
phraseological construction of an adverbial character, and in its
ordinary modern use it is the equivalent of relatively. Old
writers sometimes say ‘ respectively to.’ This is now discon-
tinued, but relatively to is by no means unirequent, and ‘in
respect of ’ used in this sense is just as gross a violation of
English Grammar as to write ‘ relatively of’ or ‘ in respect of.'
The mere violation of a grammatical rule would be a compara-
tively small evil ; but . . the writers .... drug it in ... in
constructions that leave it difficult to determine whether they
mean relatively to or by reason of or “in point of”; and the
vague use of the phrase, of course, tends to embarrass the
reader bv confounding in expression things logically very dis-
tinct.”—Erom page 469 of Professor Marsh’s “Manual of the
English Language,” edited by Sir William Smith, D.C.L.,
LL D., Classical Examiner at the University of London.
Professor Marsh also states that even in the dialect of the
law, the expression can be tolerated only when it means “by
reason of.” Here is a passage from Section 53. The reader can be
certain of only one thing about this passage : that is, that “in
respect of,” therein, does not mean “by reason of:” “The
Senate shall have equal power with the Representatives in
respect of all proposed laws.” Suppose we substitute “by
reason of” for “in respect of ” in this choice specimen of dog-
English. It then reads: “The Senate shall have equal power
with the Representatives by eeason of all proposed laws ! ” Can
it be that it is by reason of “the proposed laws” that the
Senate is to have equal power? Or is it not, as a matter of
fact, by reason of the Constitution that the Senate is to have
this power? Probably the reader will, like me, regard the
problem as insoluble and will “ give it up.”


The Contention Quarrels with Father Time.
Such a phrase as the “first five years” (this phrase occurs in
Section 93) is condemned as illogical by most grammarians.
Mason, on page 183 of his English Grammar and Analysis,
ridicules the phrase “ the first three verses,” on the ground that
it implies that the verses are in “ sets of three of which sets the
first is taken.” Objections to the phrase the “ three first verses
of the chapter ”he regards as hypercritical. Similar conclusions
are arrived at by Davidson and Alcock (Complete Manual of
Parsiug, page 118) and by Professor Sullivan (Attempt to
Simplify English Grammar, page 167).
If the “ first five years ” referred to, formed the first of
several periods of five years, the phrase would then be correct;
but as it is the only period of five years mentioned, it is
incorrect. Can it be that the Convention proposed establishing
a new and revolutionary method of reckoning time ? That Mr.
Barton purposed following in the footsteps of the “ sea-green ”
Robespierre? That the strictly conservative Sir John Downer
had suddenly become a South Australian Danten ? Or that
Mr. O’Connor intended to exchange the elevating principles of
British justice for the innovating maxims of St. Just? How
dreadful ! At such thoughts, one shudders!
Unless the Convention actually did intend to reckon time
by quinquennia, the phrase “ the first five years ” was unjusti-
fiable : “ five first years ” would have been far less objectionable.
It is worthy of note that the illustrious Gibbon carefully
maintains, throughout the whole of h’s great and voluminous
work, “ The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,” the
distinction between the two forms: at the very beginning he
speaks of the “ seven first centuries,” not “ the first seven
centuries.” I do not however assert that “five first years”
would be applicable to the period spoken of in Section 93 of the
Constitution ; but one would think that a similar phrase to the
following extract from Section 96 would be better: “During a
period of ten years after the establishment of the Common-
wealth .. .” This clause is not however sufficiently definite;
but the following is definite, applicable and grammatical:
“ During a period of five years commencing immediately on the
imposition of uniform duties of customs . . .
A Section in Disorder.
In this Constitution—the masterpiece produced by a Con-
vention of “all the talents ” —there are many glaring instances


of what grammarians term “ faulty collocation ” (bad arrange-
ment) of words. One of these instances is in Section 100.
There was much disputation and controversy, last year, as to
the exact meaning of the word “reasonable” in that section;
but the obscurity resulting, therein, from the violation of one of
the principles of grammatical order was not commented upon.
Here is the section :
100. “ The Commonwealth shall not, bv any law or regula-
tion of trade or commerce, abridge the right of a
State or of the residents therein to the reasonable
use of the waters of biters for conservation or
IRRIGATION.”
I have indicated by the use of small capital letters the
faulty arrangement. This section tells us that certain rivers
are “ rivers for conservation or irrigation;” but facts tell us
that some of these rivers are also navigable. Are the provisions
of the Constitution not to apply to “ rivers for conservation or
irrigation ” that are also for navigation ? It tells us that the
Commonwealth shall not abridge the right of certain persons to
the reasonable use of the waters of those rivers ; but does not
tell us for what purpose or purposes those persons may use them
—the very thing that, we may suppose, the Convention intended
the section to tell us! This difficulty could be overcome
by transposing a few words; and the section would then read,
correctly, as follows: —
“The Commonwealth shall not, by any law or regulation of
trade or commerce, abridge the right of a State or the
residents therein to the reasonable use, for conservation
or irrigation, of the waters of rivers.”
As for “ reasonable; ” would not “equitable” be a better
word ? As there would certainly be litigation as to the meaning
of either word, the latter would have the advantage of suggest-
ing “equity,” which is defined as, “in law , a system of
supplemental law founded upon precedents and established
principles, and liberally interpreted by the judges.”—(“Student’s
Dictionary.”)
The following extract from Dr. Angus’s “ Handbook of the
English Tongue,” page 384, should be taken to heart by ex-
members of the Convention : “ The chief attention, however, of
a writer who studies clearness needs to be given to the colioca-


tion of his words. Their position generally indicates in
English the connection and the sense. It is therefore of the-
ast importance.”
Another of the Convention’s Blunders.
Section 114 says : “ A State shall not without the consent
of the Parliament of the Commonwealth, raise or maintain any
naval or military force, or impose any tax on property of any
kind belonging to the Commonwealth.”
“Or ” is often used to connect words that are simply
different names for the same thing; and there is, in this
section, nothing to tell us that the expression “ military force ”
is not merely another term for the “ naval force ” mentioned.
A force of armed Blue-jackets is a naval force; but it is also
just as much a military force as if its members had never seen
a ship. A military force is simply a body of soldiers, that is to
say, of men paid to fight, and armed for war; and this definition of
soldiers is exactly applicable to man-of-war’s men. It is clear
that Blue-jackets are just as much soldiers —usually employed in
ships,—as the “gentlemen inkharki” are soldiers—usually
employed on land. Therefore the expression “ naval force ” is,,
if applied to man-of-war’s men, simply another term for
“ military force,” and the section is correct as it stands. If,
however, by “ military force ” the Convention meant, as it
almost certainly did mean, any military force usually employed
on land, the word “either” should have been inserted between
“ any ” and “ naval.” This is in accordance with the following
rule from Dr. Angus’s “ Handbook of the English Tongue
“ ‘ Or ’ is often used to connect different things, and some-
times merely different names of the same thing.
Where two things are meant, and there is danger of
supposing that they are one, insert ‘either’ before the
first, or the article before each, or change ‘or ’ into
‘and.’”
See, also, Professor Bain’s “ Companion to the Higher
Grammar,” pages 144, .145; and Dr. Latham’s “English
Grammar,” page 192.
The Convention Spurns “ Idle Consistency.”
Among the “ linking words,” as Hamblin Smith terms
them, that should be very cautiously used, are “neither . . .
nor” and “either .. . or.” Churchill is emphatically of
opinion that it is ungrammatical to use “ nor,” in prose, unless


it be preceded by “ neither ” Great care in the use of either of,
or both, these pairs of conjunctions is stated, by Professor Bain,
as well as by Churchill, to be necessary. The Convention has
not, however, taken the advice of these eminent grammarians—
probably few, if any, of its members ever even heard of them.
In the section I have just referred to, Section 114, “ not” and
“ or ” are used correlatively as follows : “ A State shall not . . .
maintain any naval or military force, or impose any tax on
property . . .” This is a very inelegant and infelicitous con-
struction. Writing of such sentences Professor Bain says:
“‘Or’is an awkward and unmanageable word; it supposes a
preceding ‘either,’ and does not tally well with a previous ‘not.’ ”
(“ Companion to the Higher Grammar,” page 328.”) It would
have been much better had the Convention either repeated the
“ shall not ” in place of the “ or,” or substituted “ neither ” and
“ nor ” for “not” and “or.” The section would then read,
either : “ A State shall not . . . maintain any . . . force . . .
and shall not impose any tax ...” or: “A State shall
neither . . . maintain any . . . force, nor impose any tax . .
Both forms are strictly grammatical, and there is the additional
advantage that the removal of “or” diminishes the confusion
resulting from so many “ ors ” having been recklessly thrown
into the section. The first form is preferable, as the repetition
of “ not” increases the emphasis ; while the slight infelicity of
sound that would result from a juxtaposition of “ either ” and
“ neither ” is avoided.
The Convention was without the merit even of consistency
in its blundering, for, in the next section, in a similar construc-
tion, “nor” is used where, in the previous section, “or” is
used. Here is the section:—“lls. A State shall not coin
money nor make anything but gold and silver coin a legal
tender in payment of debts.”
Why did the Convention use “ nor ” in this section ? It
does not improve it. If “ or” were correct in the previous sec-
tion, why should it be incorrect in this? “ Nor ”is a compound
of the negative particle “ne ” and “or;” it means “or not.”
When used with “neither” it forms the nearest approach to a
grammatical double negative we have in the language; but when
used without its being preceded'in the first clause by “neither” it
is, according to Churchill, simply ungrammatical. This eminent
grammarian says : “ When not is used in the first clause nor is
improper in the second ; since it would involve the impropriety


of understanding not before a compound of not (or ne) with
or .” — T. O. Churchill’s “New Grammar,” page 330.
Churchill’s meaning can be made clearer by substituting “or
not” for “nor ”in the section. We then have: “A State shall
not coin money, or not make anything but gold and silver coin
a legal tender in payment of debts,” that is to say : “ A State
shall not not make anything but gold and silver coin a legal
tender.” Why ! Here are actually the two negatives that make
an affirmative ! So a State shall “ make anything but gold and
silver coin a legal tender?” Well, well! who would have
thought it ?
What is a “Gold and Silver Coin?”
If the reader will glance again at Section 115, he will find
therein a mandate as to a State’s power to make (or not make)
“ gold and silver coin” a legal tender. Unless the coin referred
to be some special coin compounded of gold and silver, the ex-
pression is ungrammatical and ambiguous. If the Convention
meant gold coin and silver coin, that body should have said so.
The ambiguity is increased by the use of “a” before “legal
tender;” the reader being thus impressed with the idea that
nnly some special kind of coin is referred to. With reference
to a similar sentence Professor Bain says : “ It is not correct to
say —‘ town and country orders attended to,’ if there are two
distinct classes of orders . . . repeat the noun, ‘ town orders
and country orders.’ ” —“ Companion to the Higher Grammar,”
page 30G. This section would be better English if it were
worded as follows :
“ A State shall neither aoin money, nor make anything but
gold coin and silver coin a legal tender in payment of
debts.”
The following would be equally good, and more emphatic :
“ A State shall not coin money, and shall not make any-
thing but gold coin and silver coin a legal tender in
payment of debts.”
The Scorning of the Subjunctive Mood.
When we speak of matters of actual, definite fact, we use
©ne or more of certain grammatical forms called the Indicative
l£*od : when, on the other hand, we speak of matters of mer«
mental conception we use one or more of the forms called the
Subjunctive Mood. This mood is most often used in sentences
dealing with suppositions ; and it generally implies doubt, pur-


pose, or denial. As an example: If I say, “if I were you” 1
imply that I am not you : “if I was you ” would be not merely
ungrammatical, but absurd as well; for it would imply that as
ah actual matter of fact I was you. The first form (“ were ”)
belongs to the Subjunctive Mood : the second (“was”) to the
Indicative Mood. The Subjunctive Mood has, in prose, seven
distinct uses (see Mason’s Grammar, page 179); and all
grammarians agree that one of the most important of these uses
is to state suppositions relating to the future.
The Convention has used, in the Constitution, both the
Indicative Mood and the Subjunctive Mood ; but where fhe
latter is needed the Convention has used the former, and where
there is an excuse for the use of the Indicative the Convention
has used the Subjunctive. In some sentences the Convention has
•confusedly thrown together both moods. The following excerpt
from Section 105 is an instance of the ungrammatical use of the
Indicative Mood: —
“ The interest payable in respect of the debts shall be
deducted and retained from the portions of the surplus
revenue of the Commonwealth payable to the several
States, or if such surplus rs insufficient, or if there is
no surplus, then the deficiency or the whole amount
shall be paid by the several States.”
In each case where “is” appears in the sentence above,
** be,” the Subjunctive form, should have been used, because the
Indicative form “ is ” is here used to state a supposition as to
the future; and, as Lennie says (English Grammar, page 91) :
“ Sentences that imply contingency and futurity require the
Subjunctive Mood.” Moreover the Indicative Mood points to
matters of fact, and surely the Convention did not intend to
assert that as a matter of fact there would never be any surplus!
Davidson and Alcock (English Grammar, page 57) give the
following rule for the use of these moods : —“ When the words
x as may be the case” can be inserted after the conjunction the
verb is in the Subjunctive Mood. When the words ‘as is the
case ’ can be inserted after the conjunction the verb is in the
Indicative Mood.” Let us test by this rule the following
excerpt from Section 80: “The trial on indictment of any
offence against any law of the Commonwealth .... shall be
held in the State where the offence was committed, and if the
offence was not committed w’ithin any State the trial shall be
held at such place or places as The Parliament prescribes.”


How can we, correctly, say, “if (as is the case ) the offence teas
not committed within any State,” when we are dealing entirely
with a supposition as to what may happen in the
future ? The clause would be better English if it were worded
as follows: “. . . and if the offence be not committed within
any State the trial shall be held at such place or places as The
Parliament may prescribe.” The use of “ was ” in the Con-
vention’s sentence is doubly wrong, first because it is Indicative,
secondly because it is a past Indicative.
By the use of the Indicative in the following excerpt from
Section 15 the Convention has said the exact opposite of what
it intended to say: “ 15. If the place of a Senator becomes
vacant before the expiration of his term of office” the Parlia-
ment of his State shall choose a person to take bis place: that is
to say: “If (as is the case) the place of a Senator becomes
vacant before his term of office ‘the State Parliament shall
choose a person to take his place.’”* So that all Senators are
to be superseded by others before the expiration of their term of
office? Poor Senators! Of course the error in this section is
in using the Indicative “ becomes ” instead of either “ become”
or “should become.”
Sir William Smith says: “The use of the Indicative and the
Subjunctive Mood, in the same sentence, and in the same con-
nection, though either of them might separately be right, is not
to be justified.” —(English Grammar, page 127). What would
Sir William think of the following specimen of grammatical
confusion ?
“ 97. Until the Parliament otherwise provides [lndicative]
the laws in force in any colony .... shall apply
[lmperative] to the receipt of revenue ... as if the
Commonwealth, or the Government, or an officer of the
Commonwealth were [Subjunctive] mentioned when-
ever the colony, or the government, or an officer of the
colony is [lndicative] mentioned.”
“ Provides ” in this section should certainly be altered to
the Subjunctive form. The Indicative “is” might be here de-
fended because the section refers to provisions of laws that
actually do exist; but as “is ” refers to ‘ colony, government or
*lt should be borne in mind that in Indicative sentences, with the
conditional form, “if” means one of the following: “ as,” “ since,” “ seeing
that,” “in as much as.” See Professor Bain’s “ Companion to the Higher
Grammar,” page 199.


officer,’ and as there is no certa : ntv as to each of these nomina-
tives’being actually mentioned in the '‘laws in force in any
colony,” it would he better to use “ may be.” This section is
not the worst instance of confusion of the moods : Section 81 is
a still more “shocking example.”
Mr. C. P. Mason, in his “.Shorter English Grammar,” says,
when speaking of the partial disuse of the Subjunctive Mood by
some writers: “Itisto be hoped that their example will not be.
widely imitated. The point to be observed is that all this is not
simply the disuse of a superfluous set of forms. It is a partial
disregard of a certain delicate distinction between two types of
predication and the consequent disuse of the varieties of form
by which this distinction is marked.” The disregard of this dis-
tinction is the very fault I have proved the framers of the
Constitution to be boldly and glaringly guilty of.
The Subjunctive Mood is dealt with at considerable length
by the following authorities: —Mr. C. P. Mason (“English
Grammar” and “Shorter English Grammar”); Professor
Maetzner (“An English Grammar”); Professor Bain ( ‘ Higher
English Grammar ” and “Companion to the Higher Gram-
mar ”) ; and Dr. Abbott (“ How to Parse ”).
In Conclusion.
I trust that it will not be thought that I have picked out
the only errors to be found in the Constitution ; there are very
many more. I have plucked only a few of these flowers ; the
student can find, in the same field, an abundance of them.
The members of the Convention were elected not because
•f any definite political opinions expressed by them; but be-
cause of the supposed great natural ability of those gentlemen;
and, in particular, because of their supposed superior culture.
Yet, as I have shown, they have been guilty of surprising
blunders in the use of their own language; blunders highly
censurable when perpetrated by statesmen and eminent lawyers,
though those blunders would be pardonable if [made by men
that have not been so fortunate. When will Australians under-
stand that a man may be puffed by certain newspapers, and
helped, by cliques and societies, into lucrative positions, and yet
be a pompous ignoramus, a shallow self-seeker, or a tricky
intriguer partially concealing, under the
education, a vulgarian’s contempt for ev€a^upd^%mT^£c<Jwsfew
the golden calf ?




BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
Oliver Spence,
—THE AUSTRALIAN CAESAR.—
A Romance of the Twentieth Century. Price 6d, post free 7d
The Federal Bill Analyzed.
(Written for the. Colonists’ Anti-Convention Bill League.)
Price, 6d ; post free, 7d.
An Exposure of the Federal
Conspiracy.
Price, 3d ; post free, 4d.
, (In the Pbess.)
The Federal Constitution; A Critical
Analysis.
Price, 6d ; post free, 7d.
Published by the Author, 342 Parramatta Eoad,
Petersham.
T. E. Colebrook, Printer, 187 Parramatta Eoad, Leichhardt.
