

Unguarded
AUSTRALIA
I I
A Plea for
Immigration
By H. S. GULLETT.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




Unguarded
Australia
A Plea for Immigration.
I' MM—aMMM i— rim I> IT -11 1 1 yII
H. S. GULLETT.
Printed by the Rosebery Press, Ltd., 19 Rosebery Avenue, E.C. 1.




BY H. S. GULLETT.
AUSTRALIA belongs to (he five million people
who now inhabit it, and to their children,
only if they are strong enough to maintain
their hold upon it. Despite all the pleasant
words of the distinguished gentlemen now talking in
Paris, the world does not and will not recognise moral
right to territory. France belongs to the French
to-day, and Belgium to the Belgians, because when
the brutal German challenge came, force chanced to
fall in on the side of the historical occupants. Might
and men saved those countries. Might and men alone
will save Australia for us.
When the pressure came in the old Australian
farming districts, the children of the early agri-
cultural pioneers rose in the dominant might of their
numbers and votes, and entered arbitrarily upon the
undeveloped, unpeopled domains of the squatters. The
squatters' title deeds were sound : the law was on their
side. But the teeming small-holders, by the sheer
weight of their political might, laughed at the law,
declared it obsolete, altered it, and triumphed.
FACE PLAIN FACTS.
Let us not blindly put our faith in the League of
Nations and settle down in a fool's paradise. Let us
face plain fact and take human nature and national
ambitions as they have been since the world began,
and not, as some people believe, as they have been
and will be since Mr. Wilson began. Australia is
ours only so long as we can fight strongly enough to
hold it. The League may give us peace for one or
two generations. Without the League we may get
the temporary peace that comes from exhaustion.
But the League is not yet convincing, and while
some of the Great Powers are exhausted, others have
never been so strong and able to fight as they are
to-day.
Australia, with its three million square miles of
territory and its garrison of five million souls, is, in
the eyes ol over-crowded Europe and Asia, a wide,
rich, undeveloped squattage. Compared with the old
world, it is as yet virgin soil. It appears to
Europeans and Asiatics as the pastoral estates on the
wheat-belt of New South Wales appeared fifteen or
twenty years ago to the overcrowded farmers of South
Australia and Victoria. I he roughest of the pioneer-
ing has been done ; the forest has been ring-barked ;
the soil sweetened ; roads have been defined ; the
skeleton of a railway system has been laid down ;
water has been developed. But the harvest has still
to be taken. I he bold pioneers of the century have
by their daring and sweat made the continent ready
for the profitable pursuits of the multitude. The
prize awaits the victor. And the world never offered
a prize so vast and tempting.
GERMANY KNEW: ASIA KNOV/S.
I he crowded countries of the North are no longer
ignorant about the possibilities of Australia as the
home of a great prosperous population. Shortly
before the war a powerful syndicate was formed
between a few Australian and German industrialists
and financiers for a big industrial enterprise in the
Commonwealth. Some four or five millions sterling
were required. An attempt was made to raise this
money in London, but without getting the least
Unguarded Australia
jl 'Plea for Immigration.


response. A representative of the Australians in the
syndicate then went to Berlin, and the scheme was
laid before the directors of one of the great semi-
State industrial German Banks, which, after investi-
gation, promised the money upon terms which had
been flatly refused in London. And in the course of
the negotiations, which by the way occupied only a few
hours, the Managing Director of the Bank remarked:
" We look upon Australia as a young country which
is assured of great and rapid development." What
Germany knew, Asia knows.
THE MORAL SIDE.
Then there is the moral side of it. The Old World
is overcrowded, and its population is increasing.
Social reform holds the floor ; each individual is
demanding more space and fuller opportunity. Educa-
tion is every day advancing. Europe can read ; Asia
is learning its alphabet. Communications and trans-
port quicken and multiply. Each year the world
knows itself better. Distance no longer means
mystery and isolation. The citizen of the crowded
countries, rebelling at his narrow confines, turns
instinctively to the happier, virgin lands overseas.
And following the thoughts and ambitions of the
restricted individual go the thoughts and ambitions
of the restricted nations. There is loose in the world
to-day a broad international demand for justice for
all. And is it just to Europe and Asia that their
peoples should be overcrowded and stultified, whilst
down in the sunshine of the South Pacific there is a
land the size and richness of Europe or the United
States, occupied by five million people ?
The world needs more food and cheaper food ;
likewise more raw material. Australia is to-day an
idle, lazy land. The plain ultimatum of the world to
Australia is the ultimatum of the Australian small-
holder during the past twenty years to our squatters.
" You are greedy, selfish monopolists. If you desire
to remain in possession of your vast, rich estate you
must people it and make it bear fruit. Australia
must bear its share of population, and carry out its
destined task of production. You handful of Austra-
lians have no sacred right in perpetuity to the
continent which you call yours. \ou have but a brief
option upon it, and you must make that option good,
or the world will step in."
LUST FOR LAND.
To those who think that we have done with
wars and international coveteousness, it might be
mentioned that these notes have been written in
Paris, and that they have been prompted by the Peace
Conference. The main lesson of the Conference to a
citizen of an unpeopled country is the necessity of
obtaining at the earliest possible date a population
adequate for defence. Lust of territory, and the
increase of power which conquered territory promised,
brought this war upon us, and lust of territory has
been the sinister and dominant note of the proceed-
ings in Paris. Almost without exception the Powers,
great and small, have come forward in their turn, and
sought to extend their boundaries at the expense of
somebody else. All wanted more land. And as long
as the world endures, it will be the same: nations
which are rich and strong and congested will prey
upon those which are weak in men and rich in
territory.
THE SHORTAGE.
Australia has live millions of people. Of those fully
half live in cities and towns. About five-sixths of the
population live on the southern half of the continent.
The magnificent fertile North is empty, ungarrisoned.
And in Asia and Europe there are hundreds of millions
of people starving for land and lack of elbow-room.
In the war nearly sixty thousand young working
Australians have been killed. It can safely be said
that, with those who have been incapacitated, the war
has robbed the Commonwealth of one hundred
thousand workers. In addition to that the war will
have been responsible for stopping all immigration
into Australia for at least six years. In those six
years we should at a modest estimate have gained
150,000 workers from overseas. So that in 1920,
when, as we hope, the war will be behind us, and we
recommence our normal life, we shall be short of
250,000 producers, whom we should have had but for
the mad violence of Germany.
Di stance and the difficulties of transport prevented
Australia from engaging in purely war industries.
We made neither arms nor shells. In some direc-
tions, as in clothing and equipment for troops, and in
certain foodstuffs, our manufacturers had during the
war a busy and profitable time. But the increased
industrial activities caused by the war were along
normal, permanent lines. If we missed war profits
on the scale on which they were enjoyed in many other
combatant countries, we shall now avoid the difficult
and dangerous transition from purely war industries
back to normal industries. Australia is faced with
no industrial crisis as an aftermath of the great
] struggle. The way is immediately clear for
| development and employment on a greater scale than
ever before. Our industries never called for labour
as they do now : never did we need immigrants so
urgently, or offer them rewards so sure and generous
for their labours.


OUR SAFETY.
But the industrial need is secondary to the broad
national need. Australia must have more rifles for
her defence. It is true that there is no excuse for
immediate alarm. All military history teaches us
that our geographical position gives us a degree of
safety far beyond the fighting powers of our small
population. The American War of Independence, the
South African War, the Russo-Japanese struggle, all
warn military leaders of the dangers of campaigning
at a great distance from their base. Overwhelming
superiority in men of fighting age, and money and
the machinery of war, dissipate and vanish when
tried by long assailable lines of communications. And
the defensive strength of Australia is not as it was
before the landing on Gallipoli, and the fighting in
France and Palestine. Our heritage, always dear to
us, has become incomparably more sacred because of
the great fighting qualities and noble sacrifice of our
volunteer soldiers. Our future paths are illumined
and our patriotism quickened and exalted by the
shining splendour of their deeds. II there was before
the war any Power which had made estimates of the
strength necessary for the conquest of Australia, it is
certain that those estimates would now be doubled
and re-doubled, as a direct consequence of the quality
of the Australian fighting man as he showed in the
struggle against Germany and her Allies. .It has
been made clear that an invasion of Australia cannot
now be lightly undertaken by a first-rate world
Power, even though it should enjoy, if such a thing is
conceivable, full control of the seas.
MUNITIONS.
Nevertheless, the stark fact remains, that we are a
mere handful of people in possession of a whole
continent. And our men have been able to fight so
magnificently and effectively in this war only because
they had behind them the manufacturing genius, the
vast industrial power, and the boundless wealth of
Britain. Australia must, if she is to be safe from
invasion, be prepared to fight alone. Before Aus-
tralia is safe, we must have within the country
manufacturing machinery capable of supplying our
armies during a prolonged war with all the arms
and munitions used in modern fighting. We have
never had in Australia munitions enough to keep a
quarter of a million men fighting a modern battle
for half an hour. She must not be dependent during
war upon an uninterrupted flow of munitions from
overseas. We do not necessarily need great standing
arsenals. But we do need huge manufacturing
plants capable of quick adaptation for war purposes.
And we shall not have these plants until we have, as
a stimulus to our manufacturers, great local markets,
or, in other words, a population, many times larger
than that which we have now.
-We must get more people. Nobody desires to see
Australia as crowded as Europe or Asia. Nobody
desires to see our farmers reduced to the lot of the
overcrowded, struggling peasants of Northern France
or Belgium. But there is a wide margin between
overcrowding and the present boundary-riding popu-
lation of Australia. Our immediate safety, and our
future as a nation, demands that we shall at the
earliest possible date build up our numbers to fifteen
or twenty millions.
PEOPLE MEAN PEACE.
That would give us in time of crisis a force of two
million fighting men ; it would ensure great national
manufactories, capable after adaptation of turning
out all the machinery necessary for such an army in
the field ; it would enormously increase our produc-
tion, and would give us a reasonable chance of
bearing the terrible burden of between 400 and 500
millions sterling incurred by us during this war.
And fifteen or twenty million people could live in
Australia and enjoy greater individual prosperity and
comfort than the five millions know to-day. If we
had four people where we now have one, wages
would be higher, our public services would be
cheaper ; the relative loneliness and hardship which
are inseparable from the widely-scattered population
would be diminished. As a nation we should be
richer and happier. Above all, we should be safe.
As a people of five millions we shall live constantly
under the shadow of warT Only by constant
vigilance and heavy expenditure in money and in the
time of our workers can we live in any degree of
safety. With fifteen or twenty millions of people war
would be but a remote possibility. Only if we
continue weak will war come to us.
IMMIGRATION IS DEFENCE.
Immigration means defence, and if the Australian
people have so far shown no appreciation of the
importance of immigration, they have shown a very
keen appreciation indeed of the importance of defence.
In the twelve years before the war no nation was
more alert to the necessity for military readiness.
Although we have never had a war upon our terri-
tory, and although in our brief national life we have
been absolutely innocent of an}' of those acts which
incite war, our electors voted almost as one man for
the compulsory military training of our youth, and
entered with enthusiasm and pride upon the building
ol an Australian Navy. Greatly increased naval and
military expenditure was cheerfully accepted. Every
voter in the Commonwealth understood the pre-
cariousness of our position. Sound defence became
a national policy, independent of party, in the same
way as a White Australia and Protection for our
young industries.


This was sane and promising ; it aimed to keep
Australia white, and to make it self-supporting. But
it was only going half-way ; it armed a child with a
man's rifle and demanded that, when the time came,
he should go out, without munitions, and fight
against men. A great and vigorous policy of immi-
gration should have been added to the other national
non-party measures devised for our development and
security. It must be added now, unless we are to
court disaster.
AUSTRALIA MUST CARRY 100,000,000 PEOPLE.
It is no longer necessary to urge Australia's
capacity to support a great population. Sufficient to
say that the Commonwealth has upwards ol one
million square miles of territory favoured by a rain-
fall adequate for the practices ol farming—or, in
other words, suitable for close settlement and the
homing of people on small areas. I his tract includes
of course much country that is mountainous, or lor
other reasons unsuitable for agricultural industries.
But as a set-off to that, there remains a further two
million square miles of country of a lighter rainfall,
but still capable of carrying a big aggregate popu-
lation. If you take any million square miles in
Europe you will find there from one hundred to two
hundred millions of people. Ihe individual American
has never been as prosperous as he is now, when
one hundred million souls live in the United
States. Australia is about the same size as the
United States, and must one day support an equal
population.
IMMIGRATION BEFORE THE WAR.
It is true that immigration was not altogether
neglected in the years immediately before the war.
Between 1906 and 1914 big and successful work was
done in inducing people to go from the United
Kingdom to Australia. The movement was interest-
ing as an instruction for the luture. Between 1895
and 1905 the average gain made by Australia in
excess of people arriving over those departing was
only 500 a year. About 1906 the New South Wales
Government led the way in a big revival ol the old
early Colonial system of assisting a few selected
classes of British workers to pay their passages to
Australia, with the promise that on their arrival they
would be found work by the State. Other States
followed, and later the Federal authorities took an
active hand in publicity in the United Kingdom, and
helped substantially to swelL the gathering stream.
In 1906 Australia actually lost 5,000 people by excess
of departures over arrivals. Then the work in
London began to bear fruit, and the gains for the
next seven years were: —
1907 5,000
1908 5,500
1909 21,000
1910 30,000
1911 69,000
1912 84,000
1913 54,000
Total tor seven years ... 268,500
A GOOD RALLY.
It was a fine little rally as far as it went, and it
was heartening because it established that British
people of the best colonising kind would still go to
Australia if proper inducement was offered—although
on that point there was never any sound doubt.
Australia had long before 1907 broken all records in
the attraction of British emigrants. There are in
the Commonwealth more people of British descent
than in Canada or in any other British Dominion.
To have built up in a single century, at a distance
of 12,000 miles from England, a population of five
million strong, of which 97 per cent, are of British
descent, is an achievement without parallel. It
establishes to the world that Australia is a great
homing land, rich in all the essentials for the service
of man. It demonstrates that there is no question
about Australia's capacity to attract and prosper
British emigrants and emigrants of the right kind
from the Continent of Europe. Such people are to
be had in their millions. It is for us to say whether
we desire them, and whether we will do those things
which will ensure to hard-working men and women
a sound, sure living immediately upon their arrival.
We have the land for them ; we need them as a great,
young, ambitious country never needed people before ;
they are anxious to come. Do we really desire them ?
Will we extend to them a national non-party invita-
tion and see about their reception and well-being
when they reach our shores?
A DISCREDITED POLICY.
We did well between 1906 and 1914, but not nearly
well enough. The policy adopted, if such a crude,
extravagant, half-hearted affair could be described
as a policy, was little short of a disgrace to the
country which fathered and tolerated it. It was
never in any sense national: it was the plaything of
politics and politicians; it was spasmodic; it was
reduced almost to a farce by State working against
State and the Commonwealth clumsily interfering.
It ran for a week and halted for a month. It was
threatened with death at every change of Govern-
ment, both State and Federal. There was scarcely


a politician in Australia who was not afraid to
advocate immigration before his electors ; there was
never a Government or a Minister really interested
in it. It is scarcely an exaggeration to say that
there was not in all Australia a single leading public
man who thought it of sufficient importance to
master it as a subject.
DEEP-ROOTED ANTAGONISM.
And the reason for this tragic fumbling with a
work of supreme national significance was always
easy to discover. The wonder is that the movement
achieved the results it did, and it should be said
that the success gained was almost entirely due to
the enthusiasm and devotion with which the Civil
Servants, both State and Federal, entrusted with the
work in London applied themselves to their task.
No Government officials ever worked against greater
and more vexatious obstacles, or carried to their
labour a more resolute purpose than these, lhe
trouble was in Australia, and was deep-rooted.
Although some millions of pounds were expended
during these years, there never was in the Common-
wealth a majority of electors in favour of the new
immigration. At times there was a strong majority
openly hostile, and this hostility sprang from selfish-
ness and ignorance.
ATTITUDE OF THE EMPLOYER.
Two classes were particularly interested in the
immigrants—the employer and the Australian
worker —and from both the stranger received
unsympathetic handling. But there was this differ-
ence. The employer professed to be an enthusiast
about immigration, and up to a point he was, but
his enthusiasm seldom led him as far as a display
of any practical sympathy in the treatment of the
new workers. He was always complaining about
the slowness of the man from England, and impatient
about the time it took to hustle him up to the
Australian rate of movement. It was a legitimate
complaint, but a futile one. For the British worker
of almost any class, struggling hard from boyhood,
ill-paid and ill-housed, is rarely upon his arrival in
Australia the equal of the more richly-nurtured native
Australian engaged in the same industries. And so
it is inevitable that if he is to be paid the same wage,
as the local trades unionists quite properly insist, he
will for a time prove uneconomical. In the great
majority of cases, however, the stranger soon speeds
up under the impulse of high wages, improved lood and
incomparably brighter future. He responds to his
environment, takes new hope into his heart, and
works as he never worked in England.
TRADES UNION HOSTILITY.
But the charge against the employer, while it is
of sufficient importance to insist upon, is slight as
compared with the charge against the trades union-
ists. Our organised workers were always frankly
hostile to immigration. They would have none of
it. The " Pommy," as the immigrant was scoffingly
called, was, according to the Australian trades
unionist, merely a capitalist's device for flooding the
labour market, and destroying the tolerable condi-
tions prevailing in the country. And a British
" Pommy " was almost as objectionable as a foreign
"Pommy." But this hostility had the merit of
being honestly , and openly expressed, and it was so
effectively exercised that between 1907 and 1914 no
industry in which the workers were organised into
a union received more than a handful of recruits by
assisted immigration. During those years no candi-
date for a Labour constituency ventured to advocate
a general policy of immigration.
TWO CLASSES ONLY.
This led to assisted immigration being confined to
two classes, neither of which at that time was solidly
organised into a union in Australia—agriculturists
and domestic servants. Had our farm workers and
domestics been in a position to make organised
protests to Parliament, and to back up those protests
with concerted action at the ballot boxes, it is highly
improbable that we should have had any important
immigration movement at alii Of the immigration
of settlers with capital it is proposed to deal later.
Nor has the attitude of the Australian public as a
whole towards the immigrants been a creditable one.
Those who hold the immigrant so cheap might be
reminded that our forefathers, too, were " Pommies."
They who landed on Gallipoli and won the admira-
tion of all the world in France and Palestine, were
" Pommies " of the second and third generation.
What Australia has done for us it will do for the
" Pommies " of to-day and their children.
Since 1914 there has been, 1 understand, consider-
able organising among the domestics and farm
workers, which means that the outlook for immigra-
tion is blacker now even than it was before the war.
And the result of this development must be squarely
faced. We have frankly to recognise that we cannot
run a big immigration policy for Australia against
the opposition of the workers. We can only give the
movement the strong impetus it so urgently needs by
the discovery of a plan which will be adopted by the
Australian nation as a whole, just as Defence, a
White Australia, and Protection have been adopted.
The purpose of this little pamphlet is to suggest a
possible plan.
OUR SOLDIERS FIRST.
At the outset, however, one point must be empha-
sised. Australia should not spend a single shilling
upon assisting immigrants, British or foreign, to


reach the Commonwealth until every man in the
A.I.F. who is now overseas has been sent home and
given a generous opportunity of re-establishing him-
self in civil life. This is so obvious that it need not
be laboured. And because of this simple justice to
the men who have added so immeasurably to Aus-
tralia's prestige in the world, we must resign our-
selves to the partial loss of the greatest opportunity
ever offered to the young peoples overseas. There
are in Great Britain at this moment hundreds of
thousands of men who have fought in the war, and
who are at least thinking strongly about emigration.
But Australia is not in a position to make them an
immediate offer, and by the time We are ready, if
we ever are, to appeal to them, the greater
part of them will probably have settled down
again in their own old land, or made new
homes in countries other than Australia. To miss
such an opportunity is unfortunate, but we need
not be depressed about it. Australia can always get
from the United Kingdom as many people as the
shipping available will carry, provided we as a
nation desire them, and haVe a sound policy for
handling them. Nor need we be alarmed about the
rise of wages in England. Wages will also rise in
Australia, and keep our end of the world more
attractive ; while, as the cost of living falls in
Europe, as it assuredly will, prospective emigrants
will have more money towards their fares and the
making of a home overseas. The people are avail-
able. If we do not get them, the fault will be with
us.
Some may contend that, as we can have no
immigration policy "until our soldiers are repatriated,
we should wait till then before troubling about
the matter. But before we can have any immigra-
tion policy of a useful kind, we must educate public
opinion and break down prejudices, and that will
take at least a year or two ; while after we decided
upon a policy much further time will be needed to
put it into operation. We must begin on the subject
now.
SATISFY THE TRADES UNIONIST.
We must not think of active immigration until our
soldiers are all returned and settled. That is the first
point. The second is that if we are ever to make
immigration a popular national policy, we must lay
it down that no Australian worker will be displaced
or have his wages or working conditions adversely
affected by the introduction of men from overseas.
We must draw our scheme in such a way that it is
entirely free from the suspicion that it will favour
the employing classes. The position of the Austra-
lian trades unionist, who has by his capacity for
organisation and long-sustained endeavour raised
labour conditions to their present level, must be
respected. In other words, the immigrants we are
to introduce must be introduced only to supply
■demands for labour which cannot be satisfied by the
workers already in Australia. There must be no
suggestion of Hooding the country with cheap
workers. Any scheme to have a chance must be
drawn up in consultation with the trades union
leaders, and it must have their full confidence and
support. Otherwise it will never come into being.
Immigration on a great scale is impossible without
the co-operation of our workers.
Remembering the open hostility of the workers to
immigration in the past, the question at once arises
whether it is- possible to win their approval in the
future. I he task is a difficult one, but it we attack
it boldly and with a proper sense of its great and
vital importance, it is not insuperable.
NOT ON THE OLD LINES.
But before outlining a proposal, it might be profit-
able to forecast what will happen if we allow the
subject to drift, with a view to resuming after the
war the same hopeless scheme which was in opera-
tion down to 1914. The position then was this. The
immigration which was* taking place was due almost
entirely to State effort. There were a few public-
spirited bodies showing independent activity in the
work, and a few far-seeing men like Dr. Arthur, in
Sydney, have given it much earnest thought and
practical assistance. But probably quite 90 per cent,
of the people who went to Australia between 1906
and 1914 went as the result of Government propa-
ganda or Government financial help. And as has
been said, the great majority of them were agricul-
tural labourers and their families and domestic
servants. At times other classes received some little
encouragement. Queensland took a number of
unskilled labourers, and Victoria some artisans,
while in 1913 and 1914 many thousands of lads
between the ages of 16 and 20 years were induced
to proceed to Victoria, New South Wales and South
Australia for employment on farms. Already before
the war came down on us, we had great difficulty in
maintaining the stream which had been set in motion.
In 1913 and 1914 our Government representatives in
London found the supply of agricultural labourers
drying up, and domestic servants increasingly difficult
to obtain. That led to the necessity of recruiting
growing lads, many thousand of whom were sent
to Victoria as the best alternative for experienced
agricultural labourers. The Victorian Government
had made contracts for about 12,000 berths a year
with the shipping companies, and but for accepting
boys, thousands of these passages must have been
forfeited. It was a sign of the times, and a warning
for the future of immigration along narrow lines.
TERMS TO IMMIGRANTS.
The terms upon which the assisted immigrants
were taken to Australia were very generous. Nearly


all the people travelled third class, and the State
Governments, by making contracts with the shipping
companies, secured berths which ordinarily cost <£l6
and £lB, at from £l2 to £l4. These berths were
then made available to agricultural labourers, domes-
tics, and lads, at from £1 to £8 each. As a further
inducement, the immigrants, if they needed it, were
given credit for most of the small amount they were
called upon to pay. But despite these rosy terms,
and the wide difference between wages in Australia
and the United Kingdom, the stream of actual
workers was steadily but surely declining. That the
total numbers gained from 1907 to 1913 was so large
is due to the fact that each year as the assisted
movement grew older, Australia received under the
" nominated " system more and more of the wives
and children and friends of the men who had been
assisted in the years immediately before. Migration
once on the move is the very king of snowballs.
SUPPLY OF FARM WORKERS.
With the improved organisation and consequent
growth of political influence among our farm
workers and domestics, the assisted immigration of
these two classes after the war may easily become
impossible. But even if it were possible, the prospect of
getting such people is indifferent. Take first the case
of the British agricultural labourer. Shining through
the chaos of the present condition and the hazardous
future of industrial England, is the unprecedented
prosperity of the British farmer. The yeoman has
made big money during the war, and is assured of
large profits for many years to come. The agricul-
tural labourer never had so rich an outlook. He has
achieved almost a miracle already in the improve-
ment of his working conditions. Before the war he
did not enjoy a minimum wage, and the average pay
of farm workers throughout England and Scotland
was about 15s. or 16s. a week, out of which the
labourer paid rent and supported himself and his
family.
Even under those pre-war conditions Australia
could not get anything like the number of farm
immigrants we needed. To-day the minimum wage
for the farm labourer in England is about 355. a
week, and the average paid is actually higher,
and often up to £2. And these farm workers, with
their little plots of land, on which they can grow
vegetables and keep poultry, and often with free
milk from the farmers, are not affected by the great
increase in the cost of living in Britain to anything
like the extent suffered by the industrial workers of
the cities. So that unless Australian farm wages are
to be doubled, we can put away the idea that we can
after the war bring about a large flow of agricul-
tural labourers. We must look elsewhere for the
reinforcements so urgently needed by our population.
HOUSES FOR FARM LABOURERS.
While on this point one might mention a great
weakness in the existing conditions of our farm
labourers, and that is in the matter of housing. In
migrating farm labourers from the British Islands
to Australia, we have never been able to give them
any assurance about homes for their wives and
families in our country districts. The so-much-a-
week-and-keep system has become a bad one. It
served its purpose well enough in the pioneering days
of Australia, but it has now outlived its usefulness,
and is a serious obstacle to an adequate supply of
good country labour. Our State Governments might
profitably try the experiment of making advances to
farmers for the building of cottages for farm workers,
in the same way as in the past they have made
advances for silos and other improvements. Govern-
ment architects might supply plans for a few standard
types, and most farmers would be glad to.grant the
occupant the use of an acre or two of land for
gardening and poultry-raising, and the keeping of
a few pigs. Farms which had cottages for married
workers, and which paid their men a straight-out
sum for their labour, instead of " keeping " them,
would gain many advantages from the change.
They would at once greatly lighten the labour of
their own wives and families, who have now in
thousands of cases the heavy work of feeding the
farm hands ; they would introduce a more temperate
and reliable type of farm worker, who would enjoy
home life, and not be compelled to drift to the
township for companionship. Moreover, they would
have growing up on their farms a constant supply
of lads for employment, and girls who would take up
domestic service. The experiment is worth the
attention of any State Government which has the
interests of land settlement at heart.
DOMESTIC SERVANTS.
The prospect in regard to domestic service is more
promising. The war brought into various kinds of
active occupation in England hundreds of thousands
of girls who formerly were not obliged to work
for their living. But most of these young women
are now losing their war jobs, and it is safe
to say that great numbers of them will not settle
down again without a struggle into the old unprofit-
able, relatively uninteresting idleness of their home
lives. Scores of thousands of them, both married
and single, have been robbed by the tragedy of war
of the men who were formerly their support. Then
there are also great numbers who, although workers
before the war, have, while upon war service, been
made restless by high wages and occupations of a
more interesting nature than they knew formerly.
So that it is not improbable that very many of these


young women would be glad to emigrate to well-
paid domestic service overseas, and will, if oppor-
tunity offers, choose Australia.
But does Australia want large numbers of women
for the years immediately ahead? What is true of
the women ol Western Europe is in a less degree true
of the women of Australia. While there will probably
be a sound demand for domestics in the Common-
wealth, an active policy oi immigration of this class
will be open to the challenge that it is not wise to
spend Government money on a scheme which
threatens to add an excessive proportion of women to
men in our young population. And Australia will
get no more domestic immigrants at all unless we
conform to the house holders in England and substan-
tially increase the wages now paid. Before the war
in England you could get ordinary domestics for
from =£lß to s£2B a year, and good cooks at from
=£3o to <£4o. To-day you cannot get them for an
advance of 50 per cent, on those figures.
LADS FOR FARMS.
Then there are the growing lads. There is no
more promising class of immigrant for Australia
than the youngster between 16 and 20 years of age,
who will, before he leaves England, pledge himself
to work upon an Australian farm. Of the many
thousands sent to Victoria, and those received by
New South Wales under the Dreadnought scheme,
the percentage of success was high. It is inevitable
when such boys are recruited from the towns, as
of necessity they must be if we are to receive large
numbers, that many of them will drift into the cities
ol Australia, owing either to disinclination or unfit-
ness for the land. But, provided in their selection
special attention is paid to character and health, they
become as a whole a great national asset to the
country fortunate enough to secure them. At best,
however, they are a limited class. In 1913 and 1914
Victoria needed several thousands of them, and they
were granted fully-paid steamship passages lor =£3,
of which =£2 could remain on loan, and be paid to
the Government out of their wages in Australia.
And even under those conditions, it was only by heavy
advertising, amounting to an average of about =£l a
head, the payment of another <£l a head to emigra-
tion agents, and the keenest work by the Government
officials, that the necessary numbers were obtained.
It would not be safe to make a forecast about the
supply of lads of this age after the war. Their
prospects in England will depend, like everything
else British, upon the recuperative powers of
British industry, and the capacity of the British
traders to regain their old position in overseas
markets. But it can safely be said that if our
Australian immigration were to depend upon this
class, it would be a very limited and inadequate
movement.
NO BRITISH FARMERS.
Many amateurs in immigration have great faith in
the attraction of British farmers and other men with
capital, who are prepared to become settlers in
Australia. Ihe prospect here is a pleasing one, but
very disappointing in practice. If we were to wait
until a supply of British farmers from England and
Scotland, and the labour they would employ, brought
about any appreciable gain to Australia's population
or production, we should wait for ever. In the years
before the war, when migration to Australia was in
a mild sense popular, not one man in five hundred
who came to us from Britain had been a farmer.
Every effort was made to interest men of this class,
and the result was almost utter failure. The British
farmer was assailed in the general British Press, in
the rural newspapers, in the special agricultural and
stock-raising journals, by lectures by experts (some
ol whom were successful Australian farmers), by
hundreds of thousands of sound letters addressed to
individuals, setting out what we have to offer, by
lantern slides and moving pictures, by exhibitions of
our produce at country shows, by travelling exhibi-
tions from village to village, and by evei/y other
means which could be suggested and put into practice.
And he took—not to labour the matter—not the least
notice. This may have been due to his natural
suspicion ; it may have been his high level of existing
prosperity ; it may have been his love of home-made
cider or good brown ale, or fondness for the comfort-
able old farmhouse in which he and his fathers were
born. But, whatever the reason, he would have
nothing to do with us and our Australian country-
side. We could not attract the British farmer before
the war, and with rural profits in England as they
are now, and probably will be for the next decade,
our chance ol success in the future is poor indeed.
YOUNG MEN WITH CAPITAL.
1 here is one more class with whom we have dealt,
or, rather, attempted to deal, in the past. We have
endeavoured to interest the young Englishman of a
good class, possessed of capital and seeking a country
life overseas. We had with him, perhaps, slightly
more success than with the stolid British farmer.
But our effort as a whole must be counted a sorry
failure. The truth is that Australia does not appeal
to this class of man. He almost invariably has an
exaggerated idea of our labour troubles, and, what
influences him still more against us, is that Australia
offers a prospect so indifferent to the man who wishes
sport with gun and rifle. If we had not as com-
petitors for these men such countries as East Africa,
Rhodesia, British Columbia, and the plantations of
the East Indies, we might do well with him. But
when he finds that in, say, East Africa he can make
as much money as he can in Australia, and at the


same time enjoy an unlimited supply of cheap native
labour, and plenty of big game to shoot in the slack
seasons, he will have none of the Commonwealth.
In British Columbia he gets no cheap labour, but
he does find shooting. There are, of course, excep-
tions. Tasmania has attracted many men of this
class for her apple country. Our only argument for
these men is that Australia, with its all-British popu-
lation, is a country in which a new may at once
feel pride in his citizenship, and know real patriotism.
But most young men with means and opportunity
prefer life in countries in which money-making may
be broken by occasional adventure. The spirit which
moves them is the old call of the wild, which drew
our fathers to Australia in the picturesque days of
Cobb and Co.
At the same time, it should be pointed out that the
number of young British men with capital and a
disposition to migration has probably been greatly
increased by the war. All Australians on service
have met many young officers and men in the British
Army, possessing capital, who have asked questions
about the prospect of settlement in our country.
Our soldiers have been the best of immigration
agents. They have talked about their country, and,
what is more important, they have, in their fine
physique, and their capacity to spend money, told the
outside world that Australia is a land which builds
big, athletic children and yields generous wages.
IMMIGRATE THE WORKING MAN.
We may get many young men of this class, and
they- are ideal immigrants. But our need is far
greater than they can supply. The prime fact we
have to recognise in any consideration of immigra-
tion is that Australia has only one source to draw
upon. We must immigrate the working man. Get
as many capitalists, great and small, that we can,
by all means ; all the agricultural labourers and
domestics we can ; all the growing British lads we
can for service on our farms. But if we are to pull
in men and women and children by scores of
thousands each year, as we must do if we are to be
safe, we must difci w from the labouring classes, first
of Britain, and afterwards, if it is deemed wise, from
selected labouring classes on the Continent. There
is nothing new about such a policy. One cannot
get exact figures on the point, but it would be safe
to say that our population of five millions has had
its origin to the extent of fully 80 per cent, in
immigrants who, when they reached Australia, did
not possess =£so a-piece. What is true of the move-
ment in the past will,be true of it in the future.
There lies our great pull over lands such as South
Africa, East Africa and Rhodesia, which beats us
in the immigration of young settlers with capital.
Countries which have coloured labour can make no
appeal to the ambitious white worker, as they cannot
pay him a living wage. The working man of the
United Kingdom who desires to go overseas must
turn to an all-white land like the Commonwealth.
If we can devise a policy which will draw to us large
numbers of working men of a good class, we need
not worry about the immigration of the man with
capital. The industrious working man, no matter
if he is penniless on arrival, begins from the hour
when he takes his first job to produce wealth far
beyond his wages. He instantly becomes a profit to
his employer, and his employer is the Australian
nation.
CAPITAL IS NOT ESSENTIAL.
But, it may be asked, who is to settle our Austra-
lian lands, if we do not introduce more men with
money? It is the old question, and it can be given
a sound reply. Draw in enough working men, and
the proportion of them who will within a few years of
their arrival prove thrifty and industrious, will be
sufficient to take up all the country we shall have
awaiting them. Start our emigrants as labourers,
and allow them to make good.
This will give us a steady supply of experienced
men of character, who will make land settlers of the
first quality. There is no madder folly than settling
a lot of men with capital but without experience,
whether they are immigrants or Australians, upon
farms. The ex-working man will succeed with a few
hundred pounds if he has had a few years' experience
in Australia upon Australian farms, where the " new
chum," even if he is an English farmer, will often
fail with a capital two or three times greater. These
working men graduates, whether immigrants or
native born, while saving a few hundred pounds
necessary for their start on the land, have learned
land and stock values, and a sound knowledge of the
practices and economics of our agriculture. Admitted
such a policy is to some extent a reversal of the
programme attempted by the New South Wales and
Victorian Government in regard to the irrigated
lands in recent years. But it is the policy which has
settled the great bulk of Australia's farming lands
down to the present time, and it is advocated here
after close practical experience with the almost total
failure of trying to induce British and American
farmers and young, inexperienced men with capital
to emigrate to Australia and take up land. It is a
slow method, but a sure one. Our policy in the
future must be to make work for the ordinary British
and other approved labourers ; to pay them a good
wage, and then, when they prove themselves, give
them land on easy terms with financial assistance to
enable them to commence farming, not as unskilled
strangers, but as acclimatised Australians.
THE LESSON OF THE GOLD-RUSHES.
A good precedent for a policy of this kind is to be
found in the experience of our early gold-rushes.


Between 1851 and 1857 half a million people flooded
into Australia. Possibly one per cent, of them made
fortunes ; another five or ten per cent., perhaps, found
permanent occupation in the mining industry as it
developed. The rest were absorbed into our indus-
trial life as a whole, and out of this disappointed
majority came most of the men who were responsible
for the first true and great farm settlement move-
ment in Australia. The gold-fields accomplished two
purposes: they made markets for agricultural pro-
duce and supplied the men who raised most of that
produce. What the gold-rushes did sixty or seventy
years ago, we must now endeavour to do by other,
artificial means. Those of us who have had experi-
ence of Australian immigration, and who have
practical knowledge of the quality and extent of
Australia's undeveloped land, and who have also been
privileged to compare those lands with the Canadian
North-West and the new States of Western America,
and the old lands of England and the Continent, have
often sighed for another great gold-rush. If we
could discover in the Northern Territory, or in any
other part of Australia, a patch of alluvial so rich
that it would draw to us, as it easily might, a couple
of million men in, say, five years, those two millions,
or 90 per cent, of them, would remain in Australia
and earn good livings, even though the new gold-
fields fizzled out immediately after they arrived, and
did not give a fortune to one digger in a hundred.
And although such a flood as that might temporarily
embarrass our Government and disturb industry, one
is safe in saying that, before ten years were over,
Australia would be incomparably richer by the immi-
gration of those two millions, and their advent would
probably have led to an increase in wages and
general improvement in conditions of labour.
FOR THE FUTURE.
In attempting tcPoutline any scheme for the future,
we must put out of our minds any idea that we shall
do anything substantial in immigration if we merely
restore the programme on which we worked before
the war. We must discover a policy which will
make Australia an attractive and lucrative place to
any young British and approved foreign worker who
is willing to accept unskilled or, as far as practicable,
skilled labour. We must make Australia one of the
best markets in the World for hard, honest work. At
the same time, we must induce thrift into these
immigrants as we do in our own working classes.
We must have available for the sober, industrious
man living areas of land on the easiest possible terms,
and we must lend him money to help him build his
home, make the necessary improvements and acquire
land and live-stock.
BE BOLD.
Now for the scheme. Obviously, if we are to
accomplish anything so ambitious as has been out-
lined, we must be bold. We must have, first, infinite
faith in our young country. Second, we must have
a considerable amount of money. Third, we must
have confidence in our Federal and State Govern-
ments and in our public services. Given enough faith
in our country, we shall find the necessary money,
and, given resolution of the proper kind at the ballot-
boxes, we should be able to get the right kind of
public man and civil servant to conduct the scheme
cleanly and efficiently. Australia will be great and
safe in our time only if those who control her affairs
are far-sighted and bold. We claim that we have a
wide, rich continent. That continent is carrying
only five millions of people. Ireland carries four
millions, Scotland five millions, Belgium eight
millions. The plain truth is that Australia will and
must, in its destined duty to the world, one day carry
100 millions or even 200 millions. It is for us in
this generation to decide whether the great race which
is to inhabit this continent are to be the children of
the original stock, or of the same race as the original
stock.
If we desire Australia for ourselves, and our issue,
we must get on with our job. We must have
courage. We must be ready to spend our own money
in our own country, and for our country's good. We
must trust its capacity to pay us dividends on all the
money we can lend it. We must put back temporarily
into the national soil as much as possible of that
wealth she has so generously given us. We must
follow in the farming of our nation the same
practices that our successful settlers employ upon
their holdings. We must plough deep and fertilise.
We have evolved out of the early, careless colonial
days, when we lived isolated in an unknown, distant
land. If we would keep our country we must trust
it and give it of our best. In the fight that is ahead
of us Australia must go "all in."
MAKE WORK.
We must make more work in Australia —more
work and still more work. We don't want a multi-
tude of immigrants shifting sand on the " Govern-
ment stroke." Our task must be to embark upon
a great constructive policy of reproductive public
works. We must create far more labour than can
now be done by our trades unionists, and the rest of
the workers already in the Commonwealth, and we
must all the time maintain wages at such a rate that
this work will attract selected immigrants naturally
and easily from the British Islands and other
approved countries. By that means and that only—
| unless we get another gold-rush—shall we bring
about a sure stream of immigration to Australia.


FEDERAL AND STATE ENTERPRISE.
What, it will be asked, is to be the nature of such
work ? The answer is obvious to every Australian
who has travelled beyond his own boundary fences.
The difficulty will be not in finding fields for repro-
ductive work, but in stimulating enough confidence
in our people to tolerate even the suggestion of such
a policy. It is not proposed to go here into details
of public works which would give a sure and early
return to the taxpayer for the money expended. They
fall into two classes. First, there is the completion
of a thorough system of national strategic railways.
The Commonwealth could at once, if the money was
available, commence the North to South line, and by
arrangement with Western Australia and Queensland
link up the Northern Territory with the railways ol
those two States. Those fines must be built in the
very near future, for without them the North could
not be held against a resolute force of invaders. Let
us, provided the money can be found, begin to build
them now. Other Federal activities suggest them-
selves, but let us turn to the States. Tens of millions
of pounds could profitably be spent by the States in
the duplication, completion and extension of existing
fines of railways, and one has little hesitation in
saying that you could add many thousands of miles
to our railway systems, and run no risk about the
new fines paying, provided at the same time you
speeded up immigration.
Then there is irrigation. It is true that to prac-
tical men irrigation presents far more difficulty than
is evident to the general public. Irrigation is the
most complicated and intricate form of agriculture.
Our percentage of initial failures upon watered areas
will be far higher than upon country with a good
natural rainfall. But, thanks to the Murrambidgee
and Northern Victoria schemes, we should now be
nearly past the worst of our pioneering difficulties in
this direction, and future schemes may confidently be
expected to come sooner into profitable bearing and
to pay dividends more promptly to the States which
take them in hand. The field for extension here is
infinite, provided we have the men ready to take up
the land.
EXPENDITURE AND IMMIGRATION.
Then there are our roads, and the public services
of our cities and our rapidly growing towns. To
spend money in these directions is to increase taxes,
and to increase taxes without adding to the popula-
tion by immigration would be economic suicide. But
if expenditure is on such a scale that it will draw
into Australia, say, 200,000 additional people each
year, it would be a thousand times justified. With a
heavy expenditure of public money and a great inflow
of new people, every class in Australia would benefit.
Take them in turn. Increased population will mean
cheaper public services; a larger and therefore
i cheaper output in our factories and workshops and
retail shops. The cost of living would tend to go
down. Our trades unionists would benefit. Our
business and professional classes would be substantial
gainers. Our trading, industrial and financial
classes would be richer by the arrival of each
immigrant.
THE OBJECTIONS.
Now for the objections. At once we are up against
the trades unionist, and at first sight his antagonism
seems justifiable. The trades unionist says :" I have
by my organisation and self-sacrificing strikes and
sustained vigilance vastly improved working condi-
tions in Australia. The simple principle of supply
and demand tells me that if I permit the country to
be swamped with cheap labour, my position will be
undermined, and I shall be in danger of lower wages
and longer hours." It is an obvious attitude, but it
is sound only if we depart from the first principle,
that no man shall come into Australia under any
immigration scheme if there is already in the country
a man who is able and willing to do the work for
which the immigrant is suitable. Such an assurance
may be given, but will it remove, the trades unionist's
suspicions? He argues: "That is a plausible
promise, but I know quite well what will happen.
Once you get a flow of immigrants started, the
pledge will be forgotten, and the capitalist will exploit
the new arrival to my disadvantage."
SAFETY OF THE UNIONISTS.
Such a contention is based, if one may speak
plainly, upon a total ignorance of the immigration
movement. First there is the power of the trades
unionist to put an absolute end to any assisted
immigration movement at any time he becomes
hostile to it—a power which he exercised so con-
vincingly in limiting the immigration policy between
1906 and 1914 to farm labourers and domestics. The
simple, practical test of it is to picture what would
happen if 1,000 men were landed one day at Sydney
or Melbourne under an assisted scheme, and found
no work awaiting them. Any Government which
was responsible for such a blunder would be instantly
discredited and doomed in the country. We shall
never get from Europe a useful stream of immigrants
unless we give them generous Government assistance
towards steamship passages, and conduct a big
policy of publicity abroad. There lies the safety of
the Australian worker against excessive immigration.
He controls the ballot boxes, and his representatives
in the House control each year's estimates. He can,
in other ways which need not be emphasised, stop
immigration at any time. Moreover, the general
taxpayer would not consent to the expenditure of
money upon assisting to Australia people who are to
become unemployed and a burden to the State.


THE IMMIGRANT'S ATTITUDE.
There is also another reliable safeguard, and that
is in the immigrants themselves. Among Australian
critics of immigration methods one commonly meets
people who believe that the British working, man
and woman are in their thousands eagerly awaiting
migration to Australia. Emigrants are imagined
in endless queues of young people of most desirable
quality outside the offices of the High Commissioner
and Agents-General in London.
Ihe actual position is quite different. The desir-
able British emigrant has always been a very shy
bird indeed. His suspicion is almost incredible, and
he is peculiarly hard-headed. Migration overseas is
the great crisis of his life, and he approaches it very
cautiously and seriously. He is not lightly caught
with fair words at a meeting, or carried away by a
bright advertisement. He weighs the question for
months, and often years, and has the advice of family
councils, the local clergy, and anybody else in his
district who might have any knowledge upon the
subject. And when he goes, he goes only because {
he is convinced that when he has done a week's work
in Australia and paid his bills, he will have a sub-
stantially larger margin than he ever had in England
or Scotland.
A SENSITIVE, NERVOUS MOVEMENT.
Australia built up and maintained the stream which
was flowing before the war, partly by a generous j
subsidy to passage money, as we have seen, but
chiefly because the immigrants had a definite
guarantee from the Australian State concerned, of
work at a specified wage immediately upon arrival.
Without that guarantee there would have been no
immigration worth mentioning, and even with it the
stream was difficult to start, and harder still to ,
maintain. The wage promised was in all cases the
wage paid to workers already in Australia. It was
extraordinary to observe how sensitive that move-
ment of assisted people was to adverse conditions in
the Commonwealth. If immigrants ran into a bad
season and news of the drought appeared, as it always
did, by cable in the British Press, there was an
immediate and heavy falling off in the number
of applicants. Australian trades unionists more
than once cabled to affiliated trades unionists
in England, warning them against immigration to
Australia. These warnings were widely distributed
in the British Press, and it would have been quite
hopeless to attempt to secure immigrants from the |
workers concerned. Likewise the Australian repre-
sentatives in London were constantly asked to explain
away unfavourable letters received from assisted
emigrants who had not found Australia to their
liking. The British emigrant is far too cautious
about his own interests, and far too well informed,
ever to become a part)' to. any scheme for bringing
about a reduction of wages' in Australia.
UPON TRADES UNIONIST TERMS.
Let the trades unionists consider the subject upon
their own terms. Let them discuss it frankly, with
the reservation that they will endeavour in every way
in their power to destroy any scheme which could
possibly be a menace to the conditions now enjoyed
by the Australian working man. If they will do
that, and if they will at the same time pledge them-
selves to support a scheme, if it can be found, in
which they can discover no fault, all will be plain
sailing. But don't let them continue to condemn
immigration on the narrow, biassed ground that it
means cheap labour for Australia.
THE TAXPAYER.
Next there is to be expected the opposition of the
general public to any scheme which proposes by the
expenditure of large sums of money to increase
taxation. Here one must appeal to each "man and
woman's breadth of view and confidence in Australia
and its immediate future. It is true that if we could
in the interests of immigration launch to-morrow into
the expenditure of an additional twenty million pounds
a year on public works of a reproductive "kind, we
should be faced for a time with an increased interest
bill. 1 hat is inevitable and must be fully admitted.
But there is compensation of the most important
kind. If we spend 20 millions a year on public works
over and above our normal public works expenditure,
we could probably absorb into Australia, including
wives and families, about 250,000 immigrants a year,
hach four years we should add a million souls to our
population, which with the natural increase should
give us a strength of about fifteen millions inside
twenty years. Fifteen millions would mean absolute
national safety, and wonderful prosperity to Australia.
Every class would gain, and at the outset the circula-
tion of twenty million sterling a year would result
in phenomenal buoyancy to every branch of business
and enterprise.
There is the objection that we should be indulging
in an orgy of our own money, and that the interest
bill would have to be paid. For a few years, as we
have admitted, this expenditure would be unrepro-
ductive. But only for a few years, and even over
that period Australia would be a great gainer. If we
assume that of our quarter million immigrants each
year 80,000 were workers and producers, we should
have our national earnings increased by many
millions sterling. Further, it would be found that
the workers among the immigrants would bring in
on an average at least <£lo a head, which would
yield another <£Boo,ooo a year. Then each year we
should have 250,000 additional people contributing to


our taxes, and assisting to bear the crushing burden
of the war. As our population doubled and redoubled
that burden would diminish until we could carry it
without difficulty. Immigration is the golden road
not only to safety, but to national wealth.
FINANCE.
It is not proposed in this little statement to set
down a definite scheme. Exact estimates are impos-
sible: one can only suggest a policy. The purpose
here is to advance in the light of extended experience
on the subject as it affects Australia, and personal
knowledge gained on the spot of the American and
Canadian immigration movements, some of its
aspects and difficulties, and to urge its supreme
importance upon thoughtful Australians of every j
calling. Obviously finance is the outstanding diffi-
culty, and especially at this time. Those who know
best the financial possibilities of Australia may
dismiss as wildly impracticable a scheme which
depends for its operation upon the additional expendi-
ture of twenty millions sterling each year. But the
matter is so vital, not only to our distant future, but
to our very existence in the years immediately ahead,
that it should not be considered as matters affecting
public expenditure are usually considered. A great
stream of immigration to Australia is as essential
to the safety of the Commonwealth as the Navy was
to England and the Army was to France before this
war. And as the Navy saved England and the Army-
saved France, so it may easily come about that
immigration and immigration alone will save j
Australia.
REPRODUCTIVE.
Over the period of the war and the six months
following, Australia raised nearly 200 millions sterling
in local loans. The strain was a heavy one, and the
limit of our local borrowing must one day be reached.
But every nation must and does make great sacrifices
for defence, and immigration is defence. Money j
which has been spent upon defence in the past has
as a rule been unreproductive in a financial way.
But money -spent upon immigration is financially
reproductive in the highest degree. If the matter is
put clearly to the Australian people, and they are
brought to appreciate its true significance, we would
get the necessary money. It could be raised by the
Commonwealth, and spent in part, as has been
suggested, upon Federal and part upon State works.
The Commonwealth would lend the State money for
expenditure along approved lines, and the States in
turn would make special grants to municipalities
above those ordinarily made.
THE NECESSARY MACHINE.
We should need, of course, an efficient machine.
The whole question of immigration control would
have to be reconsidered. The present system will in
any case have to be altered, as we cannot continue to
be the laughing-stock in any country in which we
endeavour to attract people. The States would
probably resist any proposal that they should hand
over all immigration to the Commonwealth, and in
view of the fact that the States own the land and
are responsible for finding immigrants employment,
it is necessary that they should have control of the
selection. Well, there need be no trouble about
control. Let the Commonwealth do all the publicity
and also arrange the shipping. The States could
select the people, and handle them upon their arrival
in Australia. We need not quarrel about details.
If we can make immigration a big, live national
policy, we shall have no difficulty in constructing the
necessary machinery. Let us make a beginning and
soon. Let us test the possibility of gaining the
support of the two classes in Australia who have in
their hands the failure or success of the movement—-
the capitalists and the trades unionists.
APPOINT A COMMISSION.
It cannot be too often urged that immigration has
not been fairly considered in Australia, and the first
thing now is to awaken interest and discussion. A
good start might be made in this direction by calling
a conference representing all classes of labour and
capital to discuss the question from a broad national
standpoint. Or, as an alternative, it might be better
to proceed by a Royal Commission, presided over by
a High Court or Supreme Court Judge, and made
up of representatives of capital and labour.
Such a commission would take expert advice upon
every phase of the subject—upon the minimum
population necessary to raise the army requisite for
Australia's defence under any possible set of adverse
circumstances ; upon the local manufacture of arms
and munitions needed by such a force over a pro-
longed war; upon our undeveloped lands and the
railways and other public works needed to bring
them into production ; upon desirable public works
of every kind ; upon the effect of a big immigration
scheme on wages and labour conditions, and the
community generally; upon the effect immigration
would have in increasing or lightening our load of
war taxes ; upon the class of immigrants desired and
the best places in which to seek them ; upon the best
scheme of co-operation between the Commonwealth
and the States in carrying a big scheme into effect.
We cannot have such a commission or conference
too soon. Report of its proceedings published all
over Australia would be a stimulus to thought and
discussion upon the subject. At the same time much
might be done throughout Australia by the Press
and public men giving the matter their earnest con-
sideration, and educating people upon it.


CONCLUSION.
The main points to keep in mind at the moment
are :
1. Australia is a large, highly-favoured, empty
land, set in a small, over-crowded world.
2. The world will not tolerate us holding a
continent empty and unreproductive.
3. Crowded nations have always been prepared to
fight for expansion.
4. Consider the attitude and demands of Japan at
the Peace Conference.
5. Reflect upon England's present exhausted con-
dition, financially and industrially, and her uncertain
future.
6. Are we safe in the assumption that America
would support Australia if war came in the Pacific?
7. We have never had in Australia an hour's
supply of ammunition for a quarter of a million men
engaged in modern fighting.
8. To-day our safety, if attacked by a strong
Power, would depend almost wholly upon the British
Navy, or other external forces, which would ensure
us a great and sustained supply of ammunition.
9. Immigration would make us independent of
outside help in time of trouble.
10. Immigration must be.made a national policy,
with the support of all classes, and especially the
trades unionists behind it.
11. We must have confidence in our capacity to
grow rapidly ; we must be bold in national labour-
giving works.
12. We must approach the matter with an open
mind and not with selfish bias. Something should
be done at once, as in the appointment of a body to
collect evidence and make proposals.
Paris,
March, 1919.




