

UNION OF
THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
EASTERN AUSTRALIA
WITH THB
SYNOD OF AUSTRALIA
IN CONNEXION WITH THE
ESTABLISHED CHURCH OF SCOTLAND
IN EBECTINO
A PRESBYTERIAN COLLEGE
WITHIN THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
BY THE REV. WILLIAM M'INTYRE, AM.
« I*T THEM RETURN UNTO THEE; BUT RETURN NOT THOU UNTO THEM.” —
Jer. XV, 19.
PUBLISHED AND SOLD BY MR. JAMES WAUGH, STATIONER, SYDNEY,
MR. JAMES HAMILTON, BOOKSELLER, EAST MAITLAND; AND
MR. H. THOMAS, PRINTER &c , WEST MAITLAND.


THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT,
MATTHEW V.—VII.,
In which it is attempted to unfold and present our Lord's delineation and
enforcement of personal righteousness in that discourse.
BY THE REV. WILLIAM M'INTYRE, A.M.
“ This work is one of very decided merit in every point of view.’’—
British and Foreign Evangelical Review.
“ This is a book to be carefully studied, rather than simply perused.
It abounds in close, discriminating thought, and the discussion is con-
ducted in a critical as well as logical spirit, while the author’s investi-
gations are invariably applied to objects of practical usefulness. This
work of Mr M'lntyre is a good specimen of the solid theology for which
Scottish authorship was at one time remarkable, as contrasted with the
rhetorical superficialism of the modern school, and we like it all the
better that it compels us to think, as well as to enjoy the flow of arti-
ficially constructed periods. Our author has profoundly analysed the
the philosophy of righteousness in its various acceptations, addressing
himself to the ‘ religious consciousness,’ after the understandings of his
readers have been informed. The book is one of substantial excellence,
and we commend it to all our readers who, deeming religion a ‘ reason-
able service,’ are anxious to weigh its grounds and principles, as well as
to own its subjective power.’’ — Banner of Ulster.
“ The literature of the ‘ Sermon on the Mount’ is already pretty full.
Yet we hesitate not to say that this volume will assert a place for
itself, and be welcome to all students of the Word. It is not so
elaborately learned as the great work of Tholuck, nor so thoroughly
practical as the Exposition of Dr. Brewster, but it is nevertheless both
highly critical and highly practical. It aims at an exhibition of the
internal structure of the discourse, and accomplishes it in a fuller
and more satisfactory manner than is reached by either Olshausen
or Tholuck or Neander. The apthor not only marks out the great
lines and divisions, but he traces these out to all their ramifications,
and through all their inter-relations, and exhibits the discourse as a com-
plete unity, logically connected in all its parts. Its criticism is not only
thorough and judicious, but highly reverential. Its doctrine is sound
and scriptural, and its style is clear and classic. We can assure our
readers that though their shelves already support much of the literature
of the Sermon on the Mount, this volume will be to them a welcome
addition ; and if they possess no separate exposition they should possess
themselves of this, for they may thus find that they have precluded the
necessity for another.” — English Presbyterian Messenger.
SOLD BY MR JAMES WAUGH, BOOKSELLER, SYDNEY MR. JAMES
HAMILTON, BOOKSELLER, EAST MAITLAND ; AND MR. HENRY
THOMAS, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, HIGH-STREET, WEST MAITLAND.


UNION OF THE
sre.3fcgtedan CTfnircf) of iEagtern
WITH THE
SYNOD OF AUSTRALIA & c., &c.
With the view of determining the bearing of the Union of the Presby-
terian Church of Eastern Australia with the Synod of Australia
in connection with the Established Church of Scotland in erecting
a College within the University of Sydney on the testimony of the
former body, and forming a just estimate of it otherwise, —and
this it is the object of therfollowing pages to do, —it is necessary to
consider, (1) the testimony of the Church, —its office and impor-
tance; (2) the state of the testimony of the Established Church of
Scotland since the disruption ; (3) the identity of the testimony
of the Synod of Australia in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland with that of the Established Church of Scot-
land ; (4) the bearing of the Union of the Presbyterian Church of
Eastern Australia with the Synod of Australia in connection with
the Established Church of Scotland in erecting a College within
the University of Sydney on the testimony of the former body;
and (5) the practical value of the proposed College to the Presby-
terian Church of Eastern Australia.
1. The Testimony of the Church,—its Office and Importance.
For the efficacy of its operations the Church is entirely dependent on
the divine blessing or the gracious exertion of the divine power in
connection with them; for,in every direction and particularly as re-
gards the accomplishment of the distinctive objects of the Church’s-
labours, “ Power belongeth unto God" alone. —Ps. Ixii. n. Whoever
“ may plant and water” —whatsover operations the Church may conduct
and by whatsoever agency—it is “ God that giveth the increase.” (1 Cor.
in, 7.)
And, in imparting efficacy to the operations of the Church, the di-
vine power is exerted in connection with the maintenance, proclama-
tion, and carrying out of its testimony in its operations, and in its atti-
tude and proceedings throughout. Its commission is —“ all power is
given unto me in heaven, and in earth ; go ye therefore and teach all
nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you; and, 10, lam with you alway, even unto the end
of the world.”—(Mat. xxviii, 18-20.) Here Christ, as its Head, commits


In wh
British
It abou
ducted
gations
work o:
Seottis'
rhetoric
better t
ficially
the phil
himself
readers
and we
able ser
“ The literature of the ‘ Sermon on the Mount’ is already pretty full.
Yet we hesitate not to say that this volume will assert a place for
itself, and be welcome to all students of the Word. It is not so
elaborately learned as the great work of Tholuck, nor so thoroughly
practical as the Exposition of Dr. Brewster, but it is nevertheless both
highly critical and highly practical. It aims at an exhibition of the
internal structure of the discourse, and accomplishes it in a fuller
and more satisfactory manner than is reached by either Olshausen
or Tholuck or Neander. The author not only marks out the great
lines and divisions, but he traces these out to all their ramifications,
and through all their inter-relations, and exhibits the discourse as a com-
plete unity, logically connected in all its parts. Its criticism is not only
thorough and judicious, but highly reverential. Its doctrine is sound
and scriptural, and its style is clear and classic. We can assure our
readers that though their shelves already support much of the literature
of the Sermon on the Mount, this volume will be to them a welcome
addition ; and if they possess no separate exposition they should possess
themselves of this, for they may thus find that they have precluded the
necessity for another.” —English Presbyterian Messenger.
SOLD BY MR JAMES WAUGH, BOOKSELLER, SYDNEY MR. JAMES
HAMILTON, BOOKSELLER, EAST MAITLAND ; AND MR. HENRY
THOMAS, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, HIGH-STREET, WEST MAITLAND.


UNION OF THE
sresfcgtedan ®j)urcf) of iSasrtern Australia
WITH THE
SYNOD OF AUSTRALIA &c.,&c.
With the view of determining the bearing of the Union of the Presby-
terian Church of Eastern Australia with the Synod of Australia
in connection with the Established Church of Scotland in erecting
a College within the University of Sydney on the testimony of the
former body, and forming a just estimate of it otherwise, —and
this it is the object of therfollowing pages to do, —it is necessary to
consider, (1) the testimony of the Church, —its office and impor-
tance; (2) the state of the testimony of the Established Church of
Scotland since the disruption ; (3) the identity of the testimony
of the Synod of Australia in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland with that of the Established Church of Scot-
land ; (4) the bearing of the Union of the Presbyterian Church of
Eastern Australia with the Synod ol Australia in connection with
the Established Church of Scotland in erecting a College within
the University of Sydney on the testimony of the former body;
and (5) the practical value of the proposed College to the Presby-
terian Church of Eastern Australia.
1. The Testimony of the Church,—its Office and Importance.
For the efficacy of its operations the Church is entirely dependent on
the divine blessing or the gracious exertion of the divine power in
connection with them; for,in every direction and particularly as re-
gards the accomplishment of the distinctive objects of the Church’s-
labours, “ Power belongeth unto God” alone.—Ps. Ixii. n. Whoever
“may plant and water” —whatsover operations the Church may conduct
and by whatsoever agency—it is “ God that giveth the increase.” (1 Cor.
hi, 7.)
And, in imparting efficacy to the operations of the Church, the di-
vine power is exerted in connection with the maintenance, proclama-
tion, and carrying out of its testimony in its operations, and in its atti-
tude and proceedings throughout. Its commission is—“ all power is
given unto me in heaven, and in earth; go ye therefore and teach all
nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you; and, 10, lam with you alway, even unto the“end
of the world.”—(Mat, xxviii, 18-20.) Here Christ, as its Head, commits


a testimony to it, —the testimony which he himself, as “ the faithful and
true witness,” bears with respect to sin and salvation, and with respect
to his own claims and requirements ; this testimony he commands it to
proclaim in every land, labouring to secure from all the cordial and
practical reception of it, and, at the same time, on its own part, faithfully
adhering to it and proceeding upon it under all circumstances and in
the face of all temptations to surrender or compromise it; and then he
promises to it, that, in connection with its devoted performance of this
great duty, but in this connection only, “ he will be with it alway,’,
blessing it, and, as regards the point with which we are at present im-
mediately concerned, imparting efficacy to its labours and making it a
blessing.
From the place thus occupied by the testimony of the Church, and the
connection which obtains between the bearing of it and the communica-
tion of the divine blessing both to the Church itself and by means of it,
it is evident that the true prosperity of a church and the efficacy ol its
labours depend greatly, and, indeed, as regards the conditions of them
on the Church's own part, depend entirely on the fulness and purity ot
its testimony and its zeal and faithfulness in bearing it. Hence, to
whatever extent a church’s testimony is unscriptural, and to whatever
extent a church fails to be imbued with the spirit ol its testimony so far
as it is scriptural, and fails therefore to bear it in faith and with de-
votedness and fidelity, to a corresponding extent its spiritual prosperity
and the success of its labours as regards spiritual results must be ob-
structed. And, in the case with which we have now to do, it claims
special attention, that when a church has declined from previous attain-
ments, or, with the view of obtaining or preserving outward advantages,
or any advantag.es, has more or less compromised or bartered away its
principles, the consequent defects or corruptions of its testimony, as
having had such an origin, will affect its interests and its efforts far
more banefully than they would otherwise have done.
11, State of the Testimony of the Established Church of
Scotland since the Disruption.
The Church of Scotland, from the earliest period of its history, was
led, in the providence of God, to maintain the supreme and exclusive
authority of Christ in and over his Church as its sole King and Head,
and, as flowing from the authority thus belonging to him and rightfully
exercised by him, the spiritual-independence of the Church and of its
courts and office-bearers, and the spiritual liberties of its members.
Its testimony on these points, indeed, audits sacrifices, and sufferings,
and steadfastness in maintaining it, impart to its history its most
marked and distinctive peculiarity, and form, may it not be added? its
greatest glory. This testimony the Established Church of Scotland
basely surrendered, by submitting to the encroachments of the State on
its province as a church, which issued in idle disruption of it in 1843,
The State (to mention some instances of those encroachments) assumed
the power of “ coercing the courts of the Church in the exercise ot their
spiritual functions, and in particular in the admission to the office of the
holy ministry, and the constitution of the pastoral relation, and of com-
pelling them to intrude ministers on reclaiming congregations in oppo-


sition to the fundamental principles of the Church, and their views of
the word of God, and to the liberties of Christ’s people”; of “ interfering
with and interdicting the preaching of the gospel and administration of
ordinances, as authorised and enjoined by the Church courts”; of
“ suspending spiritual censures pronounced by the Church courts
against ministers and probationers of the Church, and interdicting their
execution as to spiritual effects, functions, and privileges;” and of “ pro-
hibiting the communicants of the Church from intimating their dissent
from a call proposed to be given to a candidate for the ministry to be-
come their pastor.” To the encroachments on the part of the State,
which these instances exemplify, the Established Church of Scotland
submitted, and, by submitting to them, surrendered and practically-
denied the sole and supreme Headship of Christ, the spiritual indepen-
dence of his Church, and the spiritual rights and liberties of its mem-
bers. And the position it thus assumed it still occupies; its testimony
as thus grievously vitiated is the testimony it still bears.
In estimating the effect on the communication of the divine blessing
in connection with the labours of the Established Church of Scotland,
that we must apprehend the erastian character thus impressed on its tes-
timony will produce, we must not only bear in mind that that character
was impressed upon it by grievous defection, but also that what forms
the fundamental vitiation of its testimony,—the surrender and practical
denial of Christ’s Headship,—touches and must fearfully derange its re-
lations to the source from which the divine blessing is communicated in
connection with a Church’s labours. The divine blessing, when thus
communicated, is bestowed by Christ as the Head of the Church, and
is it not to be apprehended, that, when a particular church practically
denies his Headship, he will not bestow it in connection with that
Church’s labours ?
111. Identity of the Testimony of the Synod of Austra-
lia IN CONNECTION WITH THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH OF SCOT-
LAND WITH THAT OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
That the testimony of the Synod of Australia in connection with the
Established Church of Scotland is identical with that of the Established
Church of Scotland, is proclaimed by the very designation of the
former body. Its designation describes it as “in connexion with
the Established Church of Scotland,” and thus represents it as adhering-
to that Church and associated with it as closely as its local distance
from it permits. And, whatever else such adherence and association
imply, they clearly imply,—and here local distance presents no obstruc-
tion, —entire concurrence and oneness with it in respect of testimony.
By having assumed and by retaining such a designation, it declares that
it prefers the Established Church of Scotland to all other churches, and
more especially to the Free Church ; and, of course, it prelers it to them,
for the peculiarities by which it is distinguished from them. Now the pecu-
liarity by which it is distinguished from the Free Church is the eras-
tianism of its testimony, and therefore, the Synod of Australia in con-
nection with the Established Church of Scotland, in prefering it to the
Free Church, prefers it for this peculiarity. The ground of its prefer-
ence for the church it prefers must be the distinctive testimony of that


Church; and the distinctive testimony of the Established Church of
Scotland, as compared with the Free Church, is just erastianism. And
what is thus the obvious import is quite in accordance with the design
of the declaration of“ connection with the Established Church of Scot-
land”; for it is a matter of fact, that that declaration was embodied in
the designation of the Synod for the very purpose of announcing and
guaranteeing the identity of its testimony with that of the Established
Church of Scotland.
In accordance with the announcement thus deliberately and perma-
nently issued by means of the designation of the Synod of Australia in
connection with the Established Church of Scotland, that Synod, in
answering the protest of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia,
proceeded upon the identity of its own testimony with that of the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland. Thus, in repelling the charge of erastianism,
preferred against it in that protest* on the ground of the identity of its
testimony with that of the Established Church of Scotland, it does not
deny the alleged identity, but, on the contrary, sets up a defence which
admits it, the defence, namely, that the testimony of the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland is not erastian, and therefore thatt't* own tes-
timony is not erastian, but is rather non-erastian, from being identical
with it. Its language is—“ the Church of Scotland has not given away
her spiritual independence, involved in the doctrine that Christ is the
sole king and head of his church, and as the rights of the Christian peo-
ple are fully recognised and protected by her, this Synod, in resolving
to remain in connection with that Church, has in no sense placed itself
in a position at variance with the word of God, as alleged in the pro-
Here it is clearly admitted that if the testimony of the Estab-
lished Church oi' Scotland were erastian, as the protesters represent it,
the testimony of the Synod of Australia in connexion with the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland would also, undeniably, be erastian.
The Synod of Australia in connection with the Established Church
of Scotland has, indeed, bound itself, in the bond of union entered into
by the ministers and elders who formed that Synod, and of which the
provisions are recited in the protest of the Presbyterian Church of
Eastern Australia referred to above, to hold the testimony and conform
to the laws of the Established Church of Scotland.
IV. The Bearing of the Union of the Presbyterian Church
of Eastern Australia with the Synod of Australia in
connection with the Established Church of Scotland, in
Erecting and Conducting a Presbyterian College within
the University of Sydney, on the testimony of the former
body.
The Synod of Eastern Australia resolved, at its recent pro re nata
meeting, that the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia shall unite
with the Synod of Australia in connection with the Established Church
of Scotland in erecting a Presbyterian College within the University of
Sydney, in supplying such college with principal and professors and in
* See appendix, B.
t The protest is given in appendix B. “ Protests” are spoken of, the Protest of
Messrs. Hamilton and Mowbray being also referred to.


regulating its operations.* This resolution affects the testimony of the
former body against the endowment of religious error, and its t esti-
mony against erastianism.
1. Testimony against the Endowment of Religious Error.
First of all the question arises, whether the Presbyterian Church of
Eastern Australia can, consistently with its merited condemnation of
the principle of indiscrimnate endowment for religious purposes, take
advantage of the provisions of an act which proceeds upon that principle
and applies it, as the Colleges’ Act does. An attempt was made in the
Synod, and, with some want of fairness, as the arguments on the oppo-
site side were not given, repeated in the report of the proceedings sup-
plied to the daily papers, to shew that the Free Church of Scotland, by
availing itself of the Government scheme of education, has furnished a
precedent for the course the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia
has resolved to pursue in this matter. The case alleged, however, even
though precedent, and a precedent furnished by another church, were a
legitimate source of argument in dealing with a question of principle, is
not in point. The arrangement with" which, in that case, the Free
Church of Scotland has to do is a temporary arrangement, and in taking
advantage of it that Church does not at all aquiesce in it as a final solu-
tion of the education questionf ; but the arrangement with which, in this
case, the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia has to do is a per-
manent arrangement, and in taking advantage of it, that Church does
acquiesce in it as a final solution of the question of College and Univer-
sity education for the colony. This makes a great difference. And,
further, the Free Church of Scotland, in taking advantage of the Go-
vernment Scheme of Education, is careful to “protest against the sup-
port and endowment of religious error” which that scheme involves
but the Synod of Eastern Australia has resolved to avail itself of the
Colleges’ Act, without in any way indicating in the resolution its disap-
proval of or a purpose to protest against the provision made in that Act
for the “ support and endowment of religious error ” This again makes
a great difference, and a difference no less fatal than the one formerly
indicated to the argument from precedent. But, while the silence with
respect to a protest is disastrous to the Church’s testimony against the
endowment of religions error, it was not uncalled for. The Presbyterian
Church of Eastern Australia is to unite with the Synod of Australia In
connection with the Established Church of Scotland in taking advan-
tage of the Colleges’ Act; and the two bodies, thus united, will form the
party dealing with the Government in the case, and the party, therefore,
that must lodge any protest to be lodged in so dealing with it; but the
Synod of Australia in connection with the Established Church of Scot-
land, from its relation to indiscriminate religious endowment under Sir
Richard Bourke’s Church Act, cannot well protest against such endow-
ment under the Colleges’ Act, and therefore the body dealing with the
Government in the matter cannot protest against it.
» See appendix, A., 1.
t See appendix, A., 2.
J See appendix, A., 2.


2. Testimony against Erastianism.
We proceed now to examine the bearing of the resolution under con-
sideration on the testimony of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Aus-
tralia against erastianism. And here it is to be borne in mind, that it
was for the special purpose of bearing and carrying out a full and un-
equivocal testimony against erastianism, and particularly against the
erastianism of the Synod of Australia in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland, that the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia
assumed the position of a separate Church. The office-bearers, who, on
the 10th October, 1846, withdrew from the Synod of Australia in con-
nection with the Established Church of Scotland, and founded the Pres-
byterian Church of Eastern Australia, took both those steps, under the
character of protesters against the erastianism of the former body. They
found themselves under the necessity of either acquiescing and partici-
pating in its erastianism, or of protesting against it and giving practical
effect to their protest and maintaining it practically by taking for that
purpose the steps just indicated; and they chose, as they ought to have
chosen, the latter alternative. Thus the position of the Presbyterian
Church of Eastern Australia is that of a body, which originated in the
necessity o* - recording a solemn protest, and which still protests, against
the erastianism of the Synod of Australia in connection with the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland. It protests* “that the Synod [of Australia
in connection with the Established Church of Scotland,] by its concur-
rence in the renunciation of the doctrine of Christ’s Headship [by the
Established Church of Scotland,] has placed itself in a position at va-
riance with the word of God, and with the standards of the Church of
Scotland in their true and original import, and incompatible with the
discharge of its great duty as a witness to Christand that thus “ the
constitution of the Synod has been so changed, that the Government of
the Church cannot be conducted in accordance with it, without violating
the laws of God, dishonoring the great King and Head of the Church,
and invading the rights of the Christian people” ; and it is the fact, that it
has recorded and that it maintains this protest, that imparts to its posi-
tion as a separate Church its distinctive character.
Now is it consistent with the protest, which it thus maintains, to unite,
in the erection and working of a Presbyterian College and theological
institution, with the very body against which it maintains it ? If the Synod
of Australia in connection with the Established Church of Scotland
really occupies, as in the protest it is charged with occupying, “ a posi-
tion at variance with the word of God, and with the standards of the
Church of Scotland in their true and original import, and incompatible
with the discharge of its duty as a witness to Christ,” how can it unite
with it in an undertaking of such a nature and of such importance ? how
can it unite with it as a church in any undertaking? By uniting with it
does it not contradict and virtually retract its own protest, and abandon
its distinctive testimony? The Synod of Australia in connection with the
Established Church of Scotland is erastian, —just as erastian as the Es-
tablished Church of Scotland itself is, for, as I have already shewn, it is
identical with that church in respect of testimony. This is its own view
of its testimony, and it is the view of it in which the existence of the
* See appendix, B,


Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia as a separate body originated',
and by which it is justified. And, when, notwithstanding, the Presbyte-
rian Church of Eastern Australia unites with it in providing for the
training of a native ministry, to confine our attention to this single object
of the proposed college, does it not, by doing so, abandon its testimony
against erastianisin and in favour of the opposite doctrine of Christ’*
Headship and the doctrines that immediately flow from it ?
If it is to be apprehended that the virtual denial of Christ’s Headship
will prevent the divine blessing from being commanded upon the labour*
of a church by which it is denied, what infatuation to unite in educating
candidates for the ministry, a work on which the divine blessing is so
much needed, with a church chargeable with such denial! By such union
with such a church does not the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia
declare that it does not entertain any such apprehension ? And to de-
clare this is clearly to abandon its testimony for Christ’s Headship.
Under the arrangement which the Synod of Eastern Australia has pro-
posed, the principal of the College and all the professors, if there shall
be professors,—for the Act provides only that there shall be a principal,
—may be chosen from the Established Church of Scotland, and on their
arrival in the colony and thereafter be members of the body* of which
the Synod of Australia in connection with the Established Church of
Scotland is the Supreme Court, that is, they may be chosen from a church
beyond seas that has practically denied Christ’s Headship, and they may
be members here of a church that practically concurs in that denial.
Now does not the proposal and will not the carrying out of such an ar-
rangement by the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia imply, that
that church does not apprehend that the practical denial of Christ’s
Headship by those who make the proposed provision for educating can-
didates for the ministry, and by those who, as professors, are immediately
engaged in educating them, will in any way prevent or obstruct the com-
munication of the divine blessing on this important work, and in con-
nection with it? And if it does not entertain this apprehension and de-
clares by the course it pursues that it does not entertain it, is not this a
practical abandonment of its testimony for Christ’s Headship? Is is not
a practical denial of Christ’s Headship to say practically that it matters
nothing, as regards the success of one of the most important works in
which a church can engage, whether the church that engages in it
and the agents it employs maintain practically Christ’s Headship or
not ? If it is not I know not what can be. It may be replied that of two
churches, that propose to unite in prosecuting the work in question, - it
is only one, at the worst, that practically denies Christ’s Headship ; but
if the practical denial of it by one-half of the proposed united body will
be attended with no disadvantage, it would seem that there is nothing in
the practical denial of it from which disadvantages is to be apprehended,
and that it may therefore with safety be practically denied by the whole,
This is a vile belief to which we are very prone ; and I cannot but fear
that, unconscious as parties may have been of its operation, it has had
not a little to do with the resolution on which I am now animadverting.
And closely allied to this belief is the exaltation of man and his powers,
which under various forms has given rise and imparted virulence to so
• The body itself has no name.


many errors. Has there been none of it in the present case f Has (here
not been a feeling that certain peculiarities of our testimony stand in the
way of an otherwise practicable extension of our agency and our opera-
tions, —indeed, of our body, and of its capabilities and resources ; and
has there not arisen a consequent disposition, unconscious as parties
may have been of its true character, to get rid of this obstruction by
getting rid of the peculiarities of testimony that create it, or by modify-
ing them, or explaining them away, or treating them as inapplicable to
Our circumstances ? He that is tempted to pursue this course, —and a
church in the position of ours is sure to be thus tempted,—would do
well to reflect, that, by pursuing it, he will forfeit the approbation and
countenance of God, and that for the loss thus incurred the co-opera-
tion of man, to whatever extent secured, will be a miserable compensa-
tion.
V. The Practical Value of the Proposed College to the
Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia.
1. The proposed College is not necessary to give to the yonng men of
our Church access to the teaching of the University. Persons who
neither reside nor are students in any affiliated College, are admissible
as students in the University and may “ attend the lectures and classes
of the same.”*
2. The proposed College is not necessary to give to the young men of
our Church access to the degrees granted by the University. Persons
who have not been students in any affiliated College “ shall be admitted
as candidates for such degrees. ”f
3. The boarding-house accommodation that the College will afford is
not necessary. Students from Sydney and the immediate neighbour-
hood may reside with “ their parents or guardians,” and those from a
distance may reside with “ relations or friends,” or in licensed boarding
houses.*
4. Let, however, (1) the possession, in conjunction with the Synod of
Australia in connection with the Established Church of Scotland, of
boarding-house accommodation for such students as may choose to
avail themselves of it, be reckoned as an advantage,—and let (2) the
possession, still in conjunction with the Synod of Australia in
connection with the Established Church of Scotland, of suitable
class-rooms be reckoned as another. Let (3) the provision that
the principal, who, be it remembered, may have been a minister
before his appointment of the' Established Church of Scotland, and
may be a member here of the Synod of Australia in connection with the
Established Church of Scotland, shall communicate “ systematic religious
instruction” to the Students resident in the College and exercise “ do-
mestic supervision over them,J” pe reckoned as a third advantage ; and
then as (4) a fourth and the only remaining advantage, the further provi-
sion that “ efficient assistance in preparing for the University Lectures
and shall be given to such students, by the principal of
♦ University Act, Sec. XVIII. See Appendix, D,
t University Act, Sec. XVIII. See Appendix D., and Colleges’ Act, Sec. IX. See
Appendix, C.
| Colleges’ Act, Preamble. See Appendix, C.


course, for the Act provides no other officer—it includes no provision for
professors or tutors. These are all the advantages that our Church will
derive from a college erected and equipped according to the provisions
of the Act; and, members of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Aus-
tralia, are they not great advantages! How highly you ought to prize
them for your sons, particularly the third of them! What sacrifices
ought you not to make, —and the sacrifice of one’s principles is not a
small one, —that you may secure for them the “ religious instruction”
of one whose testimony, on most fundamental and vital points, as ascer-
tained by his ecclesiastical antecedents and his present ecclesiastical con-
nection, is in direct contradiction to your own, and who according to
your testimony is chargeable with a virtual denial of Christ’s Headship !
The arrangement that places them under such instruction and influence
and your adoption of it are eminently fitted to impress them with deep
respect for principle, and for the sincerity of those who profess it, for
they cannot but see that in this case the principles you profess are con-
sistently maintained ! I must confess my amazement at the infatua-
tion that has befallen us, when, for results so paltry in amount and worse
than equivocal in character, we propose to pursue such a course,—a
course which involves the practical contradiction and virtual surrender
of our vitally important distinctive testimony, and which, therefore, if it
be not abandoned, must inevitably and speedily result in the
tion of our body, for there are some among us who will maintain our tes-
timony, as they ought to maintain it, even at the expense of a disrup-
tion, But, surely, those who are so eager for union, that they labour to
amalgamate the incongruous materials of two churches of which one has
been laid under the necessity of testifying against the erastianism of the
other, will not pursue so contradictory and unreasonable a course as to
create division to secure it—and to secure it under a form so objection-
able and deceptive. Without any of the compromise of our position or
the surrender of our principles involved in this course, we couid erect for
ourselves ample buildings for an institution far more efficient than a
college equipped according to the provisions of the Act, and provide
an endowment of at least j£soo, the amount to be given by the
Government to each of the affiliated Colleges. Such an institution,
authorised by the University, in terms of the University Act*, to issue
the prescribed certificates to candidates for degrees, would occupy a
more independent position in relation to the University, without any
curtailment of privileges, than the affiliated Colleges shall occupy ; and
its teaching would be conducted by men holding our own testimony
and in whom we had confidence, — a matter, surely, of fundamental
importance, notwithstanding that the present policy requires we should
form a different estimate of it.
* Sec. XI. See Appendix, D


APPENDIX.
1. Proceedings of a pro re nata meeting of the Synod of A ustralia, held
in August last, with respect to union with the Synod of Australia in
connection with the Established Church of Scotland in erecting a
Presbyterian College within the University of Sydney.
The following motion was submitted by the Rev. A. Salmon :
“ That whereas this Synod has already condemned and petitioned
against indiscriminate religious endowments as unseriptural and irra-
tional; and whereas the same vitiating principle is contained in the
Colleges’ Act, and that in an aggravated form, the Synod does not feel
at liberty to take advantage of its provisions, and all the less, consid-
ering that under the provisions of the Act in question, the college would
be comparatively useless as a Presbyterian College.”
This motion was seconded by the Rev. William MTntyre.
The Rev. J. Cameron then submitted the following counter motion :
“ That in the opinion of the Synod, their availing themselves of the
aid offered by the Government of this colony for the erection and en-
dowment of a Presbyterian College, to be affiliated to the University of
Sydney, involves no violation of sound principle whatever, and is in full
harmony with the principles and practice of the Free Church of Scot-
land ; and that their declining to avail themselves of the invaluable
privileges Connected with National University education in the land,
would be unjust to the people under their charge, and in every way pre-
judicial to the interests of Free Church Presbyterianism in this colony.”
This motion was seconded by the Rev. H. M‘Kail.
After discussion the Synod divided, when three voted for Mr. Salmon’s
motion; the Revs. A. Salmon, William M'lntyre, and Alexander
M’lntyre ; and seven for Mr. Cameron’s motion ; the Revs. G. Mackie,
W. Lmmsdaine, J, Cameron, and H. M’Kail, ministers, and Messrs.
Moon, Bowman, and Wilson, elders. The latter motion was therefore
carried.
For the purpose of giving effect to this decision, the following motion
was submitted by the Rev. James Cameron :
“ That this Synod, in terms of its decision at last sederunt, resolves to
co-operate with such of the other Presbyterian bodies in this colony as
may engage in the undertaking of having a Presbyterian College erected,
in terms of the Colleges’ Act; and that a committee of this Synod be
appointed to carry out their decision, and that the following be special
instructions to said committee, viz,:
Ist. “That the Synod of Eastern Australia be equally represented in
any joint committee carrying out the Colleges’ Act, with the Synod of
Australia.
2nd. “ That no minister, nowin the Australian colonies, be appointed,
either principal or professor, in the Presbyterian College, in the first
appointment to be made.
3rd. “ That any principal or professor of theology appointed, shall,
ipso facto, cease to have any ecclesiastical connection with, or be in any


way subject to the jurisdiction of, any church beyond the bounds of this
colony; and,
4th. “That any principal or professor appointed to the said College
shall, before entering upon office, sign the Westminister Confession of
Faith, and take the oath defiieli of his prelections being always in full
accordance with the same, and with the several other standards usually
denominated the Westminister Standards,”
This motion was seconded by the Rev. George Mackie.
The Rev. William MTntyre moved the following amendment, which
was seconded by the Rev. James M‘Cullough.
“ That this Church is constrained to abstain from associating itself with
the Synod of Australia in connection with the Established Church of
Scotland, in erecting a Presbyterian College within the University of
Sydney, under the provisions of the Act 18 Victoria, No. 37, in supply-
ing in such college ‘ systematic religious instruction’ as that Act re-
quires, and in training a native ministry,—on the ground that by such
association it would compromise the distinctive testimony for the main-
tenance of which it assumed the position of a separate body, and homo-
logate the acquiescence of the Synod of Australia in connection with the
Established Church of Scotland in tlje testimony of that Church, as
vitiated by its submission to the encroachments, on the part of the civil
power, which issued in the disruption.”
The Synod, after discussion, divided, with the following result:—For
Mr. Cameron’s motion, Revs. George Mackie, William Lumsdaine, H.
M'Kail, J. Cameron, ministers ; and Messrs. Bowman and J. Moon,
ciders, For Mr. MTntyre’s motion, Revs. Alexander Salmon, W.
Arlntyre, A. MTntyre, and James M‘Culloeh.
Mr. Cameron’s motion was accordingly carried. From this decision
of the Synod the Rev. Win. MTntyre dissented, in his own name and in
that of those who should adhere to him, for reasons to be afterwards
given in.
It is proper that the reader should have before him in connection with
the preceeding deliverance the following resolutions, adopted by the
Synod at its ordinary meeting in November last.
The report of the Committee on Union with the Synod of Anstralia
in connection with the Established Church of Scotland having been
given in, the Rev. Wm. MTntvre moved that the deliverance of the
Court be in the following terms : “ Approve of the diligence of the
committee; disapprove of the basis of union submitted by the com-
mittee on Union of the Synod of Australia in connexion with the
Established Church of Scotland; re-appoint the committee, instructing
it to take special care that it do not agree to any basis of union that does
not contain a full and explicit enunciation of our distinctive principles,
and provide for the maintenance of them, not only in the administration
of the internal affairs of the United Church, but also in its intercourse
with other churches.” This motion was seconded by the Rev. Mr.
Salmon. Rev. Mr. Lumsdaine moved an amendment, which was
seconded by the Rev. Mr. M‘Kail; but the motion was carried by a
majority of 8 to 4.
The report of the committee on correspondence with sister churches
having been given in, the Rev. Wm. MTntyre moved as follovVs:—
“ Approve of the report, with the exception of the following statement,


viz.: ‘ Our friends of the other Synod in this colony go heartily with us
in upholding and maintaining the whole foundational standards of the
Church of Scotland in their full integrity’, in which this Synod does not
concur.” This was seconded by the Rev. Mr. M‘Culloch It was then
moved by the Rev. Mr. Mackie, that the report be adopted in its in-
tegrity, which was seconded by the Rev. Mr. M‘K.ail. Afte t discussion
the Synod divided, when the motion of Mr. M'lntyre was carried by a
majority of 11 to 3.
2. Extracts from deliverances of the General Assembly of the Free
Church of Scotland on the Government Scheme of Education.
“In reference, however, to the present proposal of the Government,
the Assembly are constrained to record their disapproval of those pro-
visions in the scheme, which, while requiring religious instruction to
be communicated, and religious qualifications to be attested in all the
schools, aided by public grants, do not appear to discriminate suffi-
ciently between truth and error. And, without determining how far in
the embarrassments which the religious divisions, especially in other
narts of the empire, occasion, the Government might not be warranted
in acting upon the plan of giving aid to all schools which profess to fur-
nish the secular branches acquired, to the satisfaction of the Govern-
ment inspectors, without taking any cognizance at all of anything be-
yond these branches, excepting only in the exercise of its undoubted
right to see that nothing contrary to social order be anywhere incul-
cated, the Assembly cannot but consider as unsound and latitudinarian
such a plan as implies that the Government make themselves responsible
for the schools aided by them being religious, without discriminating
between the evangelical faith of the Protestant churches, and the many
vital errors which'pass under the name of religion.
“ That if the Government continue to carry out the plan upon its
present footing without adapting it to Scotland, or modifying its terms
in such a manner as the Church can approve of, it shall be the primary
duty of the committee to make it clear and unequivocal to the Govern-
ment and all others, that the co-operation in this matter between the
Government on the one hand, and parties connected with the Church on
the other; and the assistance from the public funds which the Govern-
ment, in the full knowledge of the Church’s views, may be willing to
afford, and said parties may consider it consistent with her duty to ac-
cept, ’shall not preclude this Church from adhering to her protest
against the support and endowment of religious error, as that protest
is embodied in the resolutions, and persevering in her endeavours to
have the objectionable feature, which this Assembly conceives to be in-
volved in the Government plan, amended and removed.”
PROTEST.
“We the undersigned ministers and elders, members of the Synod of
Australia in connection with the Established Church of Scotland ;
“ Considering that the Synod, having resolved to remain in its pre-
sent connection with the Established Church of Scotland, and to retain
its present designation unchanged, does thereby declare its approval of
the submission of the said Church to the encroachments of the Civil


power, on her spiritual independence and the liberties of her constitution,
and thus concurs in the renunciation of the doctrine of Christ’s sole and
sovereign Headship, which that submission involves ;
“And Further, Considering that, in virtue of the connection
with the Established Church of Scotland which the Synod has resolved
to mantain, —asserted as that connection is, not only in the designation
of the Synod, but also by the bond of Union entered into by the ministers
and elders who united in forming the said Synod, wherein it is set forth,
that they engaged, in every part of their future conduct towards each
other to act in strict conformity to the laws of Christ, and of the Scottish
Church, declared anew their adherence to the doctrines of the Confession
of Faith, and promised that in the exercise of discipline they should fol-
low the laws of that Church, so far as applicable in this colony,—the nn-
scriptural principles on which the government of the Established Church
of Scotland is now administered, according to which the civil courts are
invested with power to coerce the judicatories and individual members of
that church in the exercise of their spiritual functions and duties, and
otherwise to interfere authoritatively in spiritual matters, and Presbyteries
are authorised and empowered to disregard and overbear the voice of the
people in the formation of tjje pastoral relation, are virtually adopted
by the Synod ; and the government and discipline of the Colonial Pres-
byterian Church under its superintendence are liable to be subjected to
the operation of those principles.
“We, therefore, the ministers and elders aforesaid, do protest,
that the Synod, by jts concurrence in the,renunciation of the doctrine of
Christ’s Headship as aforesaid, has placed itself in a position at variance
with the word of God, and with the standards ol the Church of Scotland
in their true and original import, and incompatible with the discharge
of its great duty as a witness to Christ..*
“ And we Protest further, that, by the adoption of the princi-
ples aforesaid, the constitution of the Synod has been so changed, that
the government of the church cannot be conducted in accordance with
it, without violating the laws of God, dishonoring the Great King and
Head of the Church, and invading the rights of the Christian people.
“And Finally, while we reserve any right, we, or any of us, or of
such as may adhere to us, possess to the whole, or, any portion of the
property, held in behalf of the Synod of Australia in connexion
with the Established Church of Scotland, we Protest that,_ the
Synod occupying such a position, and having adopted such princi-
ples, it is, and shall be lawful for us, and such other ministers ami
elders as may concur with us, to withdraw from the Synod, and take
such steps as may be competent to us and necessary for dispensing the
ordinances of the Gospel, and administering the affairs of the Church in
this land, agreeably to the mind of Christ, and to the standards and con-
stitution of our Church; and we do now withdraw accordingly.”
An Act to Provide for the Establishment and Endowment
of Colleges within the University of Sydney. (18 Vic., 37.)
Preamfle. —Whereas it is expedient to encourage and assist the es-
tablishment of Colleges, within the University ol Sydney,' in which


‘Colleges systematic religious instruction, and domestic supervision,
■with efficient assistance in preparing for the University lectures and ex-
aminations, shall be provided fo. students of the University: Be it
therefore enacted, by his Excellency the Governor of New South Wales,
with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council thereof, as
follows ; „ ,
Section IX. And whereas it has been resolved by the Senate of the
University of Sydney that Honors and Degrees shall not be given to
any student who shall not produce testimonials of competent religious
attainments, and it is expedient to give legal permanency to such reso-
lution : Be it therefore enacted, that no Honor or Degree shall be con-
ferred by the University on any ■ udent who shall not produce from the
Principal of his College or (if not belonging to a college) from some re-
ligious teacher, or other responsible person accredited by the University,
a certificate that he is of competent religious attainments.
An Act to Incorporate and Endow the University of Sydney.
Section XI. And whereas it is expedient to extend the benefits of col-
leges and educational establishments already instituted, or which may be
hereafter instituted, for the promotion of literature, science, and art,
whether incorporated or not incorporated, by connecting them, for such
purposes, with the said University; Be it enacted, That all persons
shall be admitted as candidates f r the respective degrees of Bachelor of
Arts, Master of Arts, Bachelor of Laws, or Doctor of Laws, to be con-
ferred by the said University of Sydney, on presenting to the said
Senate a certificate from any such colleges or educational establishments,
or from the head master thereo', u> the effect that such candidate has
completed the course of instruction which the said Senate, by regula-
tion in that behalf, shall determine : Provided, that no such certificate
shall be received from any educational establishment, unless the said
University shall authorize it to ..sue such certificate.
Section XVIII. And for the better government of the students in
the said University: Be it enacted; That no Student shall be allowed to
attend the lectures or classes of the same, unless he shall dwell with his
parent or guardian, or with s» me near relative or friend selected by
his parent or guradian, and approved by the Provost or Vice-Provost, or
in some collegiate or other edj ■ itional establishment, or with a tutor
or master of a boarding-house licensed by the Provost or Vice-Provost
as hereinafter mentioned.
HENRT THOMAS, PRINTER, HIOH-STREET, WEST MAITLAND.
