

UNITY, CREDIBILITY, AND AUTHORITY 0
THE BIBLE.
A SEUMON
DELIYEEED BY THE
BBT. IB OT ID IVH‘C-A.12% A. 33.,
IN THE
MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE, OASTLEMAINE.
JULY 17th, 1870.
“ All Scripture is given by inspiration of God.”
—II. Timothy, hi., 16.
fHE Bible is a book composed of sixty-six different portions, written
by at least forty human authors, and extending in its composition
_ over a period of sixteen hundred years, and yet One Voice speaks
throughout its pages, One Form is ever growing more manifest,.One God
is revealed in increasingly clearer light. Such a unity pervading any
body of literature is wholly unparalleled. Neither ancient nor modern
philosophy —no product of human reason —can present a similar pheno-
menon, and the only rational explanation is, that in very truth, “ Holy
men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.” The recent
attempts of Universalism to destroy this unity are therefore intelligible.
Such a miracle evincing a higher inspiration than that of reason
could not be passed over in silence. The futility of opposition, however,
is evidenced by the violence which the naturalistic hypothesis puts upon
the sacred book. A lock is easily opened by its own key ; the wrong key
will either fail to open it, or break the lock, or itself break. A principle
of interpretation is such a key to the Bible, and a true hypothesis will do
no violence to particular passages, whereas a false one undoubtedly will.
Take then the principle by which Universalism would explain the
religious history of our race, and observe whether it will open or break
the lock. Apply it to the opening chapters of Genesis. We have here,
it is said, indications merely of an advance from Fetishism, or the “ worship
of God through His works,” to a more direct contemplation of the
Almighty Himself. I appeal to the plain understandings of plain men to
determine, on the reading of the first three chapters of (Scripture, whether


this meaning is found in the primeval history, or forced upon it. There
never was a purer fiction than the Universalist . sketch of the
religious ideas perceptible in the Bible. The traces of serpent-worship
to be found in Scripture have no connection whatever with the story of
the Temptation. An idolatrous abuse was indeed made of the brazen
serpent which was the instrument of miraculous healing in the wilderness ;
but it was firmly corrected ; the serpent itself, when elevated into an
idol, was cast aside contemptuously, as “ Nehushtan”—a bit of brass! —
and the worship of the one Jehovah appeared then as it uniformly did in
unrelenting antagonism to idolatry. The Bible tells us of a fall from
loyalty to the Supreme God; not of an ascent from the worship of His
works to the worship of Himself. “ The two developments of the idea of
God ” indicated by the names “ Jehovah” and “ Elohim” are, according to
the documents themselves, harmonious, though different, sides of one
truth. There may, possibly enough, have been —I believe there were —
the records of an earlier revelation of God as Elohim in the hands of a later
editor of the Pentateuch, who knew him as Jehovah. But you will
observe this is only a question relating to the manner in which it pleased
God to give us His Word in its present form, having nothing to do with
the other more practical and important question,—whether, as the result
of whatever methods, were employed, we now possess God’s Word
written. Our concern at present is not with the mode of composition,
but with the Book as it exists. The Divine appearances to Abraham, to
Moses, to the elders of Israel, really indicate so many stages
of revelation. The worl4 is threatened, even after the Deluge,
with being again overflowed by idolatry, and Abraham is called
ot God, and constituted a witness for Him, against the errors
and follies of idol-worship—and not before a real necessity for
the Divine interposition had arisen. Again, a fuller and more public
revelation of Himself, became necessary and natural, when God delivered
Israel from Egypt and made —not a family, but —a Nation his witnesses
to the world. The allegations of Universalism regarding the personifica-
tion of an attribute of God —say, His wisdom —at a later period, and its
appropriation by John for the mythical deification of Jesus, are equally
distortions of the Scripture history. The Alexandrine Jews were fond
enough of Platonizing, but they dealt with ideas only, whereas the
Prophets and Apostles spoke and wrote of persons and facts. The one
method created a philosophy—a human speculation about God; —the
other was the expression of a revelation of God. The “Word” of
the Evangelist John, was not a mere attribute or a personification,—“The
Word was God.” His manifestation also was not ideal but personal
and historical: “the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and we
beheld his glorg.” I am sorry to have had to detain you by these elementary
considerations. But it was unavoidable, if we were to point out the
fallacy that underlies Universalism. Its principle is simply not the key
that unlocks the meaning of Scripture. Every passage to which it is
applied is subjected to violence before it yields the desired sense. This is not
interpreting the word of God but wresting it, —to the destruction of
its genuine meaning—and the result is not Scripture, but a perversion
and corruption of Scripture. This Book exhibits no such example of God-
making as Universalism speaks of. It condemns God-making of all
sorts as the veriest folly and grossest sin. From first to last, it is a
revelation of the one living God. Christ himself is but the completion
and crown of the old Testament manifestations of the Jehovah-Angel—
God manifest in the flesh —and that up to the end, when the eternal


song is raised to Him that sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb for
ever. .The whole Bible further reveals one only way of salvation. When
TJniversalism places Jewish and Heathen sacrifices on the same platfonp,
and stigmatizes all as barbarous, it merely betrays its prejudice against
the truth. Is it not known that the spiritual worshipper under
Judaism was taught to look for a more availing sacrifice than his system
provided, and that the heathen reliance on the blood of bulls and goats
was a departure from the true use of the sacrificial rites, which were
meant to be only the shadows of good things to come P The history of David,
whom TJniversalism commends, is enough to refute its interpretation; for
David offered these “ barbarous” sacrifices, while he knew well, at the same
time, that they could not, by any virtue of their own, propitiate God and
expiate sin. Our doctrine is no unauthorized gloss of Paul’s, as Univer-
salism alleges; for Jesus Himself taught the atoning value of His death,
when He said, —“ The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give His life, a ransom for many' ; and again,—“ This is
is my body, broken for you,” “ this cup is the new testament in my blood
which is shed for you.” The Bible also teaches, from first to last, the
one mode of becoming interested in the one salvation. Head the eleventh
chapter of Hebrews for an inspired commentary on the Old Testament
doctrine regarding faith. Do not be misled by the pretence of a dis-
agreement between Paul and James. They both followed our Lord, and
taught by His authority. Jesus said, when He commissioned His
disciples to preach the Gospel to every creature, —“ He that helieveth and
is baptized shall be saved ; he that believeth not shall be damned.” What
presumption, then, is it to denounce faith as a mere “ metaphysical pro-
cess!” It at least involves two substantial virtues which Universalism
does not inculcate, —the abnegation of self-righteousness in the presence
of our Judge, and the acknowledgment of our dependence as creatures
on a .Reason higher than our own, —a real submission to the righteousness
of God, and a just estimate of the limitations of the human intellect.
In this attitude the soul embraces God’s revealed mercy, and we think no
other can be pleasing to the Creator, or becoming a sinner. The supposed
contradiction between Paul and James has been explained so frequently
that it looks like a waste of time to refer tg it. That James did not intend
to run counter to the other Apostle, or to his Lord’s own teaching, may
surely be taken for granted. A glance at his Epistle will only confirm
such an expectation. In chapter i. verse 16, he says, —“ let him ask in
faith, nothing wavering”; chapter n. verse 1, —“have not the faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with respect of persons”; and verse 23, in the
heart of the discussion about word's, —“ The Scripture was fulfilled which
saith Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness.”
He could not then have designed to disparage a living faith. In fact, he
himself tells us, that he speaks of a faith which, “ being without works
is dead.” We are ourselves sufficiently familiar with the twofold use of
the term, “ faith,” to understand that the only difference between the
Apostles is one of words. A faith about God is one thing ; faith in God
is another. The first may be and is the faith of devils, as James declares;
the other is active and saving, and, as both James and Paul have taught
—it is “ a faith that worketh by love.” The present will be a convenient
time for noticing the alleged historical discrepancy between Luke and Paul,
The Apostle in Gal. i. 18. says “after three years (from the date of his
conversion), “ I went up to Jerusalem.” The Evangelist, in Acts ix., is
imagined to narrate that Paul went up immediately or very shortly after his
conversion, A less cautious mid im-lufi :»«■<!


stumbled on this difficulty. You will observe tbat Luke s statement is
“after many days were fulfilled,” (verse 23) events occurred which led to
this particular journey. A reference to I Kings n. 38, 39, will satisfy
you that this expression amply covers the three years—" And Shimei,
dwelt in Jerusalem many days , and it came to pass at the end ot three
years &c.” Both historic statements are true, and as Paley has pointed
out, we have have here one of many undesigned coincidences, confirming
the truth of Scripture, and proving the absence of all collusion among the
witnesses. The writer in the Acts, omits the journey into Arabia, which
he would not have done, if he had borrowed from the Epistle, and the
writer of the Epistle could not have inserted it, if he had been copying
from the Acts. I might easily go through similiar petty attacks on the
Scriptures seriatim , did I not fear to weary you. Be assured from this
example, that they are neither new nor formidable. Critics who descend
to them have been fitly compared to so many mice gnawing at an Arch-
angel’s wing. It may be necessary occasionally to drive them away ; but
we need never feel serious alarm. I pass on to the general question of
the credibility of the Bible as a whole. We have so far defended its
unity as an irrefragable proof that it must be the product of inspiration
an emanation from the Divine Intelligence itself. As might be expected
G-od has attested His own Word by prophecy and miracles. The
supernatural evidence is of unspeakable importance to such an end; and
if it stands, the Universalist denial of the special and exclusive inspiration
of the written Word is overthrown. Hence the animosity against both
prophecy and miracles ! We cannot, of course, enter fully into the
great arguments for the authority of the Bible; but it may be useful
to present you in outline a single proof of the historic truthfulness of
Scripture. The Pentateuch records majestic miracles, and relates the
manner in which Israel was induced to submit to the authority of the Hod
who revealed Himself to them as their Lawgiver and their King. The
Grospels also narrate (and the Epistles abundantly confirm them)
that Jesus supported the authority which He claimed, by miracles;
and the author of the Acts, in harmony with the
declarations of the promises of Christ, relates “ the signs of an Apostle”
which ordinarily accompanied and authenticated the message of the
Grospel, on its first deliverance to man. Modern unbelief denies miracles,
explains some by natural laws, explains away others as myths. Notwith-
standing, we still think the belief of miracles a reasonable one. Confine
your attention to the Pentateuch. There are, as Leslie pointed out so
long ago as 1697, four marks of truth meeting together to confirm the
Old Testament miracles, which unitedly preclude the possibility of false-
hood or Imposture:—l. The miracles wrought were palpable facts,
appealing to the senses of the spectators. 2. They were wrought
publicly, in the face of the world. 3. Acts were performed, and monu-
ments erected, to commemorate these great events. 4. These acts began to
be performed, and the monuments were erected, at the time when the
events occurred. We may gather from the Bibie itself that these were the
positions which it assumed in relation to those over whom it claimed
authority, under the Jewish dispensation. And a little thought will con-
vince you that no falsehood could have stood the test of these four marks
united. They must, however, co-exist, to furnish an infallible guard
against religious delusion. The Jewish nation unquestionably believed
their Scriptures to contain only genuine and unadulterated history,
embodying a pure Divine revelation. It would plainly have been im-
.■nnsiMi'hlp fnnffiss it were tmed to nersuade 600,000 men, or their children,


that they themselves, or their fathers, had been miraculously delivered
from the power of Pharoah, —that God had, by a miracle, divided the .Red
Sea for them, —fed them with manna from heaven for many years, and made
other miraculous provisions for their preservation. Was it theri afterwards
that the Pentateuch was first received as a thoroughly truthful history ? It
has been suggested that an effort was made by Josiah to impose a
fictitious book as a true authority upon the nation. Remember, that the
great majority of the people had apostatized from the service of Jehovah,
and determine for yourselves whether it was likely that if there was the
least suspicion of a fraud, they Avould have submitted so quickly to a
reforming minority. Is that human nature ? They must have known
that a code of laws existed by which they were bound, —the great wonders
of the past must have indelibly impressed themselves, and been still fresh
upon the memory and heart of the nation. It was a reformation, not the
construction of a new religion, which the age of Josiah witnessed, and it
was occasioned, like the Protestant Reformation, not by tbe introduction
of a new Bible, but by the restoration of the old one. Was it then between
the time of Josiah and the era of Moses, that the imposture was accom-
plished ; for the Pentateuch must have been received, in its present form,
at some definite point of time ? Whensoever it was, the Jews must have
been convinced of these two things (utterly incredible unless they were
true!) that, in harmony with our third mark of truth, they were them-
selves observing the laws of Moses, dedicating the first-born to Jehovah,
observing the Sabbath, offering sacrifices, yearly expiations, keeping
feasts and fasts, and that a whole tribe was set apart for the service of
religion ; and they must, in addition, have been persuaded, in accordance
with our fourth mark of truth, that these things had heen so done among
them from the days of Moses ! The Pentateuch itself affirmed that these
things were so. If these declarations were falsehoods, how came they to
be believed? Precisely the same 'marks of truth can be directly
applied to the fundamental facts of the Gospels. They have been
received as part of the Christian Verity by the Church through-
out the world. If the Gospels are mythical impostures, and
the Acts and Epistles unreliable, wherever they relate or refer
to supernatural events, when and how were they received as true ?
By the first two marks of truth'in religion, the possibility of their
introduction in the age of primitive Christianity is precluded, unless on the
assumption of their truthfulness. We have historical evidence that they
were received, and we might therefore here close our case. But, we
desire to give you such a statement as will give you a yet more unassailable
guarantee that you are not in this matter in danger of delusion. Christi-
anity, like Judaism, has institutions commemorating its great introductory
miracles —especially .the resurrection of our Lord—Baptism and the
Lord’s Supper which are associated with Him not only as the Dying but
the Risen One. Christianity has also a ministry of the Word, and officers
invested with authority to administer Christ’s laws in his own house.
Our sacred books declare that t ;ese things exist, and that they have existed
since the days of Christ and the Apostles. At whatever time they were
received as true, the Christian communities must have been persuaded
of the existence of these institutions, and of the order of ministers and rulers
from the date of the miraculous events which they record. The
application of the third and fourth marks of truth secured the Church
at every era from the possibility of error. In the earlier periods, detection
of imposture would be the, easier; while in later times, no sane
man could have attempted it all. The New Testament* aaJnnlxms-thn-


Old, contains within itself the elements of its own refutation if false or
mythical; for it declares that the miraculous dispensation whose
introduction it records has been, from its first appearance, associated
with commemorative institutions: and how at any point of time could
great multitudes of men be convinced that they and their ancestors had
been observing such institutions and submitting to the precepts
of the Gospel—unless it were true —unless the books were
indeed received when the memory of the miraculous events were
fresh and strong, and their declaration regarding sacramental
observances indubitably true. Thus God, in both dispensations,
has His two sufficient witnesses —a Church and a 800k —a Church receiv-
ing and authenticating the Book, and a Book guiding and controlling the
Church—both Church and Book created by the breath of the one
inspiring Spirit. It is idle to talk of a scientific or an unscientific age!
What human science can raise the dead or calm the raging sea? Even
Universalism seems to stand in doubt of itself before the Eisen Lord.
Let it tell us what became of the Body that hung upon the tree, and
lay in the sepulchre, if it did not rise again, and we will weigh the
objections to the possibility or the use of miracles. And when it indulges
in random talk about Christian missionaries meeting in heathen lands
with accounts of miracles “ apparently attested as strongly as those of
the Gospel,” we challenge it to the proof, well assured that its boast is
mere noise and idle wind, signifying nothing. We have surely sufficient
evidence to justify the conclusion, that all important and essential facts
must have been as the Bible declared at the time when it was first
received. For us, who live in a later age, it is useful to put the further
question,—whether we can safely rely on the purity of the text in the
originals, and on the fidelity of our translation. As regards the Old
Testament, we know with what jealousy Jews and Samaritans would
guard their respective versions of the Pentateuch, with what care the
Jews, in particular numbered the words and even the letters of their
sacred books. We know that Christ never charged the Jews with
corrupting the oracles of God, and that He and the Apostles
uniformly appealed to the Jewish Scriptures as the Word of
God. Have they, then, been mutilated or corrupted since
the time of Christ ? Hr. Kennicott, under the patronage
of seven crowned heads, with the assistance of many learned men,
and at a cost of £IO,OOO, devoted ten years to the investigation of the
Hebrew text, and after collecting numerous MSS. and registering
many various readings, he announced as the result of all his labours,
that “no controversy of importance between Jews and Christians was
affected by them.” The books comprising the New Testament were
early collected and universally read—commentaries were written upon
them—they were quoted by opposing sects —appealed to by heretics;
but no charge of corruption had ever been made and proved. For the
decision of the genuine text, when various readings exist, there are
abundant materials. Tischendorf, whose English New Testament,
showing in notes the variations of the principle MSS., can now for a
small sum be obtained by all, states in his preface, that “ no single work of
ancient Greek classical literature can command three such original
witnesses as the Sinaitic, Vatican, and Alexandrine manuscripts, to the
integrity and accuracy of its text. That they are available in the case
of a book which is at once the most sacred and the most important in the
world is surely matter for the deepest thankfulness to God. ” Of the
various readings themselves, “ almost all are of as much practical impor-


tance as the question in English of spelling the word honour with or
without a u and “of the remainder some change the sense of particu-
lar passages or expressions, or omit particular words or phrases, or insert
them ; but not one doctrine of religion is changed, not one precept is taken
away, not one important fact is altered, by the whole of the various
readings collectively taken.” Eor English readers, between whom and
the originals, a Translation is necessarily interposed, it will be satisfactery
to know on competent authority that the translation transmits the light
of revelation without serious diminution or sensible refraction. Our
present English version was executed by fifty-four of the most learned
men of the age, chiefly professors from the Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge. Their work was, in their own language, making “ out of
Original Sacred Tongues, together with comparing of the labours, both
in our own, and other foreign languages, of many worthy men who went
before us, one more exact translation of the Holy Scriptures into the
English Tongue and on its appearance it was “ agreed to be the best
of any translation in the world. ” Bishop Walton remarks that “this
judgment was given, when the nation had more eminent skill in lan-
guage than ever heretofore. r ’ Dr. Geddes, an eminent Eoman Catholic
divine, who died at the beginning of the present century —a man of
great erudition—a Rationalist in theology—and therefore free from the
suspicion of prejudice —declared regarding our version that “every
sentence, every word, every syllable seems to have been weighed with
the nicest exactitude and expressed either in the text or margin with the
greatest precision. Pagninus himself is hardly more literal, and it was
well remarked by Eobertson above a hundred years ago that it may serve
for a lexicon of the Hebrew language as well as for a translation. ”
Dr. _ Adam Clarke, after having himself translated every word from the
original, and after a constant study of the subject for more than’half a
century, testified that “ the translators have seized the very spirit and
soul of the original, and expressed this almost everywhere with spirit and
energy, * * * The original from which it was taken is alone
superior to the Bible which was translated by the authority of King
James. This is an opinion in which my heart, my judgment, and my
conscience coincide.” Imperfections may doubtless be pointed out, but
these testimonies ought to calm any undue alarm that may have been
created by vague and sweeping charges against the competency and
honesty of our translators. You have, in your English Bibles substan-
tially, the very Word of God, —Tuns saith the Lord is the authority
with which it addresses you, “ Where the word of a King is, there is
power. ” It stamps with the Divine Sanction those truths of religion
which are discoverable by reason, and it reveals God’s mercy in Christ
which otherwise man could not have known at all. It meets a genuine
human need. Plato, that prince of reasoners, more modest than some of
his modern admirers, and ignorant of the value of his God-given reason!
longed for “ one, be he a god or inspired man, to take away the darkness
from our eyes. ” It is the glory of the Bible that it fulfils this desire of
humanity. If the sacred writers have deceived us in this one point,
they are unworthy of credit in all besides; but if they were not “gracious
deceivers”—“beneficent liars ” who have nevertheless “gifted us with
the sacred love of truth,” if the Bible be not from first to last a fabric
resting upon a falsehood which deprives it for me of all value, —then it is
not a mere product of human reason or a history of human opinion, but
God’s infallible word given by special inspiration of the Holy Ghost, to
which bo soon as it is recognized all creature reason ought to bow. It is


the Voice of the Eighteous Father to his erring child—the utterance of
the same God who speaks to us in the book of nature. TJniversalism
falsely declares that men have blotted and disfigured the one book of
God. We say that the interpreters of nature have as truly “ obscured
God’s natural truth”, as those of the Scripture have “tarnished his
revealed.” But the Book of Creation and the Book of Revelation alike
outspread for your own inspection their bright and uncorrupted pages —
appealing to every generation with undiminished power. And these two
books of God are not contradictory but complementary. The heavens
declare his glory, and the earth showeth his handiwork. But in the school
of Christ Nature is taught to speak a sweeter language than her own,
when her rivers tell of the Water of Life, clear as crystal proceeding from
beneath the Throne, and the dews and rains of these visible heavens
symbolize the more gracious influences of God’s blessed Spirit, and the sun
that lights our skies with noon-tide glory, shadows forth all too dimly that
better and more glorious Sun of Righteousness that has risen on the
world of souls with healing in His rays.
W. n. NEWLANDS, PEINTEE ANU PUBLISIIEE, CASTLEMAINE,
