

UNITED
RETURNED SOLDIERS’
FUND
The work it is doing
In times of ‘Peace
give thought to those who suffer as a result
of the Qreat War
LUXTON & HOOPER, Printers, (late A.1.P.), 18 Margaret 'll.,
Offices of the Fund:
309 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY
PHONE: 8W6583


United Returned Soldiers’ Fund
THE United Returned Soldiers’ Fund which consists of
the Limbless Soldiers’ Association, the T.B. (Consump-
tive) Soldiers’ Association, and the Returned Sailors and
and Soldiers’ Imperial League of Australia (N.S.W. Branch), is
associated for the purpose of affording relief and assistance to the
many thousands of returned men who fought for Australia during
the Great European War of 1914/1918, and who are from time
to time in distress and in need of care and attention. The officers
of the Fund are as follows: —
PATRONS; Sir Hugh Denison, K.8.E., Sir William Vicars,
K.8.E., Sir Henry Braddon,, K.8.E., Sir Arthur
Rickard, K.8.E., and Sir Albert Gould, K. 8., V.D.
PRESIDENT: Lt.-Col. A. W. Hyman (R.S. & 5.1.L.A.).
HON. TREASURER: H. Collins, Esq (T.B. Soldiers'
Association).
MEMBERS: W. J. Stagg, Esq., and F. Davison, Esq., of the
R.S. & 5.1.L.A.; R. M. Mazengarb, Esq., W. H. J.
Brown, Esq., and H. S. de Q. Robin, Esq., of the Limb-
less Soldiers’ Association; A. E. Edmondstone, Esq.,
and W. Cridland, Esq., of the T.B. Soldiers’ Association.
ORGANISING SECRETARY: A. B. Owen ( Limbless
Soldiers’ Association).
With regard to the above gentlemen, the Patrons are so well
known that further reference is unnecessary. The President,
Lt.-Col. A. W. Hyman, who is well known in his capacity as
President of the Returned Sailors and Soldiers’ Imperial League
of Australia (N.S.W. Branch) is also an eminent member of our
legal profession. The other officers are also well known and
respected for their great work on behalf of returned soldiers.
The main source from which the Fund derives its revenue is per
medium of the power conferred upon it by the State Government
and various public bodies in granting permission to conduct
carnivals and street sales of various articles in the City of Sydney
and other parts of the State.
The distress amongst returned men and their dependents is very
real to-day. The cases of suffering amongst those who are our
care do not, unfortunately, diminish as the years slip by—on
the contrary, the disabled man finds the difficulties of maintaining
himself and his dependents greater every year, while his respon-
sibilities and incidentally ours, are in no wise lightened, but call
for urgent attention.
The T.B. (Consumptive) Soldiers and Sailors’ Association of
N.S.W., which was inaugurated in 1919 for the purpose of caring
for the T.B. Men and their Dependents, and particularly to afford
prompt alleviation in cases of distress, finds that the legitimate
demands on its resources are in no wise lightened as time drifts
on, leaving the Great War but a distant memory, and faint at
that, to so many who have not the same cause to remember it as
have those who are still suffering by reason of their own, or
perhaps their bread-winners’ response when the call to duty came.
The T.B. Association is confronted with difficulties which, while


making the work it is doing hard, emphasises the necessity for
that work, and that every possible effoft should be made to
maintain and develop the present systems of relief in cases of
need—a great number of sufferers are assisted by the Association
who are not recognised as eligible for Government assistance by
reason of the fact that they have developed the disease subsequent
to their discharge, but who undoubtedly are suffering as a result
of gas poisoning or exposure, or both, and who, by reason of
their disability have become incapable of supporting themselves
and their dependents. There are very many such cases, unfor-
tunately, and the Association during the past three years has
disbursed a sum considerably in excess of £7,000 in alleviation,
as far as possible, of those making the greatest demands on its
resources.
The lot of the Returned Soldier who is suffering from T.B. is
perhaps the hardest of all. In all probability he finds himself
denied any Pension Rights because the disease had not developed
within the period covered by his Military Service. His is none
the less a disability due to War Service. His disability confines
the field of possible employment for him within very narrow
limits, and frequently precludes him from undertaking regular
employment at all. Employers are loath to knowingly employ
T.B. men, and fellow employees do not want them in their midst.
Such are the care of the Association, and the work that is being
done must be maintained and developed in order to honour the
promises which were so freely made to these unfortunate sufferers
and their mates when they joined up for Active Service in re-
sponse to their Country’s Call. While there is one T.B. sufferer
who is short of the necessary comforts and nourishment to enable
him to have a chance to shake off the dread disease, or while
there is one dependent of a T.B. man in any want, those promises
of the past which were so loudly and freely voiced cannot be
said to have been redeemed.
The T.B. Association points the way to the redemption of those
promises, and is doing the utmost with the means at its disposal.
There is far more to be done than is being done. The Association
needs more assistance. Funds are urgently needed. The present
Appeal is urgently commended to all as being especially worthy
of support.
The Limbless Soldiers are catered for by the Limbless Soldiers’
Association, which endeavours to obtain for these badly disabled
men their just dues, and explores all avenues so as to make their
lives bright and happy.
There are over 1000 returned men in New South Wales with
limbs amputated, including nearly 70 who have lost two limbs or
more, so it is evident the cause is great and the reason for asking
assistance from the public well founded.
Besides the Limbless, the membership of the Association includes
many who have lost the sight of an eye, together with others
paralysed and badly disabled.
The assistance of members unfortunately in need is one of the
Association’s main objects, and throughout the past years many
were relieved in this manner. Each application was thoroughly
investigated as to its bona fides, every precaution being taken to
see that the help given was justified.
To those not congenially employed or out of employment, the


placing of them in a class of work suitable to their disabilities
is of. the greatest importance, and in this connection there is an
Employment Bureau at B.M.A. Buildings, 3 2 Elizabeth Street,
controlled by Mr. A. C. Barry, who is eminently qualified to deal
with this subject, which requires special consideration and tactful
handling. The Red Cross Society up till recently paid the
expenses of the Bureau, but now an arrangement has been made
for the costs to be divided between the Society and the Limbless
Soldiers’ Association.
There is also our kiosk scheme whereby those who would find it
extremely difficult to hold down an ordinary job are put m the
way of earning a decent competency.
The disabled returned men must be helped along by means such
as are mentioned, and it is for these purposes that the public is
approached from time to time.
Like appeals are made throughout the Commonwealth, causing
the public to readily respond, thus reflecting the Australian
character of which we are all so proud.
The Returned Sailors and Soldiers’ Imperial League of Australia
(N.S.W. Branch) was formed in 1915. Its function is to care
for all Returned Soldiers, Sailors, their dependents, and the
dependents of deceased Soldiers. It has many problems to deal
with, and its work covers a very wide area.
For the year 1926 letters dealing with Pensions, Repatriation
matters, Land Settlement, and many other subjects numbering
12623 were despatched. There is a continual stream of Returned
Soldiers at the League Offices with their complaints and .other
matters to be rectified, and it has been estimated that the attend-
ance for 1926 was 5000. The number of positions found foi t iat
year was 1508, and new registrations for positions totalled 1855.
739 were waiting to be placed in employment at the end o t e
year 3616 applications for assistance were granted, involving
the sum ,£3,824, and orders totalling 4075 for food, clothing
and shelter were issued.
The League maintains a Women’s Clinic, supervised in an Hono-
rary capacity by a lady doctor, free medical advice and medicine,
is given to the women and children of Returned Soldieis and
widows of deceased Soldiers, who cannot afford to pay for such
advice and medicine or spare the time to wait in long queues at
Public Hospitals. For the year 1324 people were dealt with by
the Clinic.
A regular system of visits has inaugurated between the. Hospitals
and the Asylums throughout the State by the League’s Executive
and 1600 books and 6000 periodicals of all kinds were supp ic
to the patients of these Hospitals and other Institutions dunng
the year.
The League tries to do all it can to help those who have suffered
resulting on their war service and of the aftermath of War. At
the present moment it is pressing the Federal Government for a
grant of £40,000 to provide motor-cars for men who have lost
the use of both legs. There are 200 of these men in Australia
All monies subscribed and donated to the League for relief
purposes are administered free of charge, the charge for adminis-
tering same being borne by the General Fund of the League.
