

Uniting a profession
The Australian
Institute of
Librarians
1937-1949
Jean P Whyte
David J Jones




Uniting a profession




Uniting a profession
The
Australian
Institute
of Librarians
1937-1949
Jean P Whyte
David J Jones


This book is copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or study, criticism or
review, as permitted under the Copyright Act, no part may be reproduced by any process without written
permission of the publisher.
National Library of Australia Cataloguing in Publication Data
Whyte, Jean E (Jean Primrose).
Uniting a profession : the Australian Institute of
Librarians 1937-1949.
ISBN 9780868045658 (pbk.).
1. Australian Library and Information Association - History
- 1939-1945. 2. Library science - Australia - Societies,
etc. 3. Library science - Australia - History 4.
Librarians - Australia - History. 5. Libraries - Australia
- History I. Jones, David J. (David John), 1946- . 11,
Title.
027.94
Designed by Ivan Trundle
Index by Sherrey Quinn
Edited by Karen McVicker
Cover design by Di Kuschert
Typeset by Emma Davis
Printed and bound by Union Offset Printers, Canberra
© 2007 Australian Library and Information Association Ltd
Published by the Australian Library and Information Association Ltd
PO Box 6335, Kingston ACT 2604, Australia
http://alia.org.au


Contents
List of illustrations vi
List of abbreviations vii
Preface vqi^
1 By way of explanation 1
2 Forerunners 2
3 Stirrings 29
4 Foundation 57
5 Branches 27
6 Education 93
7 Committees H 2
8 Conferences 135
9 War 155
10 Transition 165
11 Achievements 191
Biographical notes 213
Appendixes
1 Foundation Members 224
2 Office-holders and committee members 229
3 Honorary Members 236
4 Archivists 237
5 Dates of principal meetings and conferences 238
6 Membership statistics, 1937-1949 239
7 Analysis of membership, 1943 240
8 Number and percentage of student associates 1943-1949 241
9 Membership by category 1937-1949 242
10 Library Association of Australia membership, May 31 1951 242
11 Income and expenditure 1937-1949 243
Sources and bibliography 244
Index 261
V
Uniting a profession


List of illustrations
Illustrations 1-12 are placed between pages 86 and 87
Illustrations 13-24 are placed between pages 182 and 183
1 The inaugural gathering of the Australian Institute of Librarians outside the Albert Hall,
Canberra, 21 August 1937
2 The first conference: Sydney 1938
3 The second conference: Melbourne 1939
4 The third conference: Adelaide 1940
5 Delegates inside the Adelaide conference venue
6 The fourth conference: Canberra 1941
7 The fifth conference: Hobart 1946
8 William Herbert Ifould
9 The Carnegie surveyors come to Perth
10 Ralph Munn
11 H Rutherford Purnell
12 Henry Green
13 Kenneth Binns
14 John Wallace Metcalfe
15 Ida Leeson
16 George Henry Pitt
17 Wilma Radford
18 Geoffrey Remington
19 EV Steel
20 CH Bertie
21 Phyllis Mander-Jones
22 Ellinor Archer
23 HE White
24 Malvina E Wood
Sources are noted in captions for each picture. Items from the Mitchell Library may not be
used in any way without permission from the Library Council of the State Library of New
South Wales. Any inquiries should be directed to the Mitchell Library, State Library of New
South Wales, Macquarie Street, Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia.


Abbreviations
ACER Australian Council for Educational Research
AIL Australian Institute of Librarians
ALIA Australian Library and Information Association
ASLIS Association of Special Libraries and Information Services
CCNY Carnegie Corporation of New York
CNL Commonwealth National Library
CSIR Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (later Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation)
CSIRO Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
FLM Free Library Movement
IFLA International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions
LAA Library Association of Australia
ML Mitchell Library, State Library of New South Wales
NEE New Education Fellowship
NLA National Library of Australia
PLNSW Public Library of New South Wales
PLY Public Library of Victoria
SLNSW State Library of New South Wales
SLSA State Library of South Australia
SLY State Library of Victoria
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation
VASLIS Victorian Association of Special Libraries and Information Services
VII
Uniting a profession


Preface
For about twenty years Jean Primrose Whyte researched and wrote about the Austral-
ian Institute of Librarians (AIL). She had been among the first candidates to sit for
its examinations in 1944 and for half a century she was active in the AIL and its
successors, the Library Association of Australia and the Australian Library and Information
Association. She was fascinated by the origins of professional library associations in Aus-
tralia and intrigued by the actions and motives of the people who created them. As a library
educator, she was curious about the genesis of the Institute’s system of library training and
examinations. As a participant, she was interested in the workings of Branches and Com-
mittees, their achievements and their failures. As a frequent delegate, she hoped to provide
an assessment of the significance of the Institute’s conferences. Perhaps most of all, as a keen
observer of people in action, Jean found the study of the leading figures in the Institute and
their relationships with each other—the core of any association —especially absorbing. The
fact that she had met or corresponded with many of the foundation members gave an added
dimension to any historical study which she would undertake. Little wonder, then, that she
was stimulated to delve into the diverse and scattered records of the Institute and, indeed,
found it hard to stop delving and to start writing.
Jean worked her way methodically through AIL documents in a number of libraries and
archives, making copies of the most relevant items or sitting in a reading room or at a bor-
rowed desk in the Association’s old Ultimo building whispering notes into a tape recorder
for later transcription. From time-to-time she provided insights into her progress with a
conference paper or an article to coincide with a notable anniversary. As she tells us in the
first chapter of this book, her research was a lengthy process—she was for most of this
period running a demanding department at Monash University and had, of course, many
other calls on her time.
By about 1990 Jean believed that she had at last gathered enough material to make a
start on writing, and over the next few years she prepared a number of draft chapters, some
chronological, others thematic, covering the AILs antecedents, its foundation, Branches,
Committees and conferences, and its transition to the Library Association of Australia. She
mastered one computer and word processing program and then another, carefully backing
up copies of her drafts, gradually becoming aware that she might run out of time and that
someone might have to take over the project from her.
No-one could be as well equipped as Jean —a contemporary observer and a rigorous
scholar to tackle the history of the Institute, but the paper and electronic trails which she
left were enough to encourage me to accept Dr Brian McMullin’s invitation to complete the
task, I found that Jean’s files, drafts and rough outlines presented me with enough material
and, what was equally important, enough of an inkling of the direction in which she wanted
the history to proceed to give me confidence to complete the work.
Jean saw this history as in part repaying a debt which she believed she owed to the pro-
fession. I see completion of this work rather as a part repayment of the much larger debt
which I, in common with other library and information professionals in Australia, owe to
Jean Whyte.
VIII
Uniting a profession


Acknowledgements
Thanks are due to successive officers and staff of the Library Association of Australia and
more recently of the Australian Library and Information Association for their assistance in
providing access to key records relating to the Institute. The staff of many libraries have also
been very helpful to the authors, notably the National Library of Australia, the State Library
of New South Wales, the State Library of Queensland, the State Library of South Australia, the
State Library of Tasmania, the State Library of Victoria, the State Library of Western Australia
and the library and archives of the Australian Council for Educational Research.
It is now impossible to identify all those individuals who provided assistance during
the preparation of this work. It is hoped that they recognise the present work as sufficient
acknowledgement of the part which they played in its creation.
A final draft of this history was read by Harrison Bryan, John Levett, Brian McMullin, Neil
Radford and Wilma Radford and their comments and suggestions have greatly improved
the final product. Responsibility for any errors of omission or commission, however, rests
firmly on my shoulders.
David J Jones
Sydney, August 2003
Uniting a profession




1
By way of explanation
It was not only
the intellectual challenge
which appealed to me,
hut also the way in which
I could in part
repay a debt to my profession. 1


I have been interested in the history and development of library associations for a very long
time and have actually been involved in them in one way or another for half a century. I
was too young to attend the birth of the Australian Institute of Librarians (AIL) in 1937,
even if I had been aware of it at the time—in fact I was still at school. But in 1944 I was in
the first batch of candidates to sit the Preliminary Examination of the AIL. 2
Not long afterwards I was one of a group of four young library assistants at the Public
Library of South Australia who went to see GH Pitt, the State Archivist and future Chief
Librarian, to complain. 3 We told him that we thought that the local Branch of the AIL did
not have really serious meetings and asked him: ‘Wouldn’t it be a good idea for us to form
a new “professional” association?’
As I recall it, our definition of serious at that time revolved mostly around classification
and cataloguing. They held meetings about ‘my trip’ or went on library visits. We wanted to
talk about subject headings, Colon Classification and perhaps the library’s mission. 4
I can still see GH Pitt’s face, 3 He looked solemn and said that he understood our point of
view—but had we thought of taking over the local Branch ourselves? After all, he and his
generation had been working for it since 1937 and they might well be tired. We took up his
challenge. It took about six years for me to be elected President of the South Australian Branch
of the AIL and for the other three to fill executive positions. 6 1 think we did still visit librar-
ies and report on overseas trips, but we also had a Colon Classification study group and we
debated, fiercely and at length, book selection, censorship and what librarians were for.
So from the 1940 s I regularly attended Institute and, later, Library Association of Australia
(LAA) meetings as a participant or as an onlooker. 7 I was also fortunate enough to serve
in some of the most interesting jobs, as a member of the LAA Board of Examiners (later
the Board of Education) for a total of eighteen years and as Editor of the Australian Library
Journal for twelve years. 8 1 have seen, heard and read the writings of almost all the leaders
of the AIL and LAA and knew most of them. For over twenty years I corresponded, talked
and argued with John Metcalfe. Most contacts with fellow librarians were in the context of
our professional association. Virtually no-one who was regarded as a professional librarian
was not a member of first the AIL and later the Library Association of Australia (LAA). The
Institute and the Association became very important to us.
Professional associations are of course important to different people for many different
reasons. For me, membership has enabled my life-long participation in professional discourse.
This has been the single most important factor in making and keeping me a professional
librarian. So when I resolved to explore the history of the Institute and to commit its story
to print it was not only the intellectual challenge which appealed to me, but also the way
in which I could in part repay a debt to my profession. Of course just saying that is to walk
right into one of the traps about which the historians warn us: celebratory histories are not
good histories, and if we write to praise heroes and achievements we shall not create an
enduring work.
So I have thought about my fitness for this task—as I believe anyone who decides to
write anything that is not purely creative should. I think that my strengths and weaknesses
(I am not going to distinguish between them) include a keen interest in the subject. I am
very much an insider, but what do I have to offer to counterbalance the perception of being
too close to my subject?


Well, I am not a historian by training, and my first degree was in English and Australian
Literature, although 1 studied at a time and at a university where these things were seen
historically, and I do actually have some academic background in Australian and economic
history. 9 Library history has certainly been among my academic interests since 1 started to
teach librarianship in 1948.
Over the years my main interest in the history of Australian librarianship began to focus on
the part played by the professional associations of librarians. More particularly 1 concentrated
on the place of the AIL and its successor, the LAA. 1 became interested in the achievements
and failures of these associations, and especially in the role of individuals in their history.
While 1 do not see myself as belonging to any particular school of history, 1 have always been
very interested in the part played by the individual upon the stage of history.
So much for my broad interest in the subject and the intellectual tools, such as they are,
that 1 can bring to the task of the history of an association of practitioners. There was in addi-
tion a stimulus of some significance—the lack of any thorough analysis by a dispassionate
observer of the origins and early development of our Association. 1 also sensed that I would
be wading through pools which were not as limpid as they might at first appear, but had
snags, hidden obstacles and occasional unplumbed depths, and this appealed to me too.
For even the origins of the AIL, 1 have found, hold their mysteries and their myths. The
chronology—the ‘when?’—is not difficult, but when we start to ask the more interesting
questions of ‘why?’ and ‘who?’ and ‘how?’ the answers are not so readily found. Those which
are readily found are not always convincing.
Partly it is a failure of records. Even librarians, who should have a respect for the record,
have often failed to keep it. In the excitement of creation and action the documentation is
too mundane a task to bother with, and to the young it always seems as though there will
be time enough later to fix up the records.
Partly our lack of knowledge of the AILs origins and progress is because what accounts
exist are not entirely impartial, many having been written by the survivors and the victors.
There is also the recurring thread of an accepted view which has been perpetuated, whether
with justification or not remains to be seen, by John Metcalfe and other commentators.
It is customary, for example, for Australian librarians to begin the story of their professional
association in 1935, and to see this year as the beginning of the modem era of librarianship
in Australia. This was the year in which the report on Australian libraries by Ralph Munn and
ER Pitt was published. 10 1 have no intention of denying the importance of that report, but it
is a little too simple to see events as; ‘Australian librarianship was plunged in night. Tate said
“Let Munn-Pitt be!” and all was light’. Munn and Pitt advocated, inter alia, a national library
association, and this advocacy led by simple cause and effect, so the conventional view goes,
to the establishment of the Library Group as an advisory body to the Carnegie Corporation
of New York. In this way the door to funding was opened, making it possible to establish
the Australian Institute of Librarians. 11 There are, however, other factors which challenge
the simplicity of the accepted view. There were library associations before Munn-Pitt. There
were serious ideas about new associations before Munn-Pitt. So there must be a little of the
history of the earlier associations before we can start to understand the AIL.
Unlike me, John Metcalfe was a graduate in history, and at the beginning of the 1930 s he
certainly had a strong sense of history—strong enough to support his application to become
the Mitchell Librarian. 12 In later life he argued about the origins and early years of the AIL,


but by then apparently believed that if he stated the case as he remembered it that would
be proof enough. He should have known better. His view, as we shall see in later chapters,
was contradicted from time to time. Personal reminiscence is useful evidence, but the con-
temporary record must back it up. Unfortunately in the case of the AIL the contemporary
record is sometimes elusive, frequently scattered and at worst missing. In the beginning those
who founded the Institute did not perceive the activity to be any different from their official
duties, so the letters and drafts are part of the records of the major libraries of Australia. It was
not until some time after the Institute’s foundation that the importance of its own archives
was recognised and an honorary archivist appointed. So there are many gaps, and —most
unfortunately of all—many of Metcalfe’s papers have not survived.
Nevertheless, there is enough evidence to make it possible to answer a good many ques-
tions, and to raise several quite intriguing ones, which must be answered with some convic-
tion and real evidence if this work is to be worthwhile. All of these questions start with the
word ‘why?’. There may be answers at several levels, or perhaps no definitive answers at all.
It would be possible to assemble evidence to support several answers and to leave it to the
reader, as a kind of‘choose your own history’. This is temptingly novel and whimsical, but
I didn’t think I would finally go down that path. Of course I do realise that if my answers to
‘why?’ are definite, then I certainly run the risk of being challenged and leave a great oppor-
tunity for successors to contradict me and come to different conclusions.
Well, why not? That is, I think, what historical scholarship is all about. I don’t think that
uncommitted history is worth doing, and perhaps it is not really possible either. Nor do I
think that any historical interpretation, except for relatively trivial and factual matters, is
definitive, and I certainly would not claim it for my own work.
Let me tell you the methods I have used to find out why the AIL acted as it did. The most
obvious way of doing this was to ask who made the decisions and whether that person has
left any evidence as to motives, or whether any contemporaries left such evidence. This took
me back to the views and the roles of individuals. Their plans, plots, beliefs and motives are
important, and some of this could be gleaned from their correspondence. Thank goodness
many of them wrote a lot. Even in the 1920 s and 1930 s they do not seem to have used the
telephone very often, even between the Public Library of New South Wales and the University
of Sydney, let alone for trunk calls between States. 13
But finding out who was behind certain actions and decisions is not the final answer. One
can then ask why that individual acted in that way. And the answer to that question has to
do with many things: political, social and cultural beliefs; alliances, friendships and enmit-
ies; and State rivalries and career considerations. Personalities and clashes of personality
are all grist to the mill, and, having encountered many of the personalities involved, I have
some idea of the extent of that grist.
Another important consideration when asking ‘why?’—one which many people would
put first—is to look at the contemporary scene and ask what else was happening that might
influence developments. What was happening in education? What were the economic con-
ditions? What was the political climate in the States and in Canberra, and how significant
were inter-governmental rivalries? What was the state of library services? Were there signs in
the libraries themselves that the time lor a national association was ripe? How much contact
was there between the libraries? Was librarianship becoming more a distinct and separate
calling? How many Australians had undertaken formal training in librarianship? Had the
Australian libraries reached a critical mass which called for more professional and managerial


skills? What models existed in other countries? How insular were the library practitioners,
and did anyone know much about overseas developments? And did Australian nationalism
have anything to do with the establishment of national associations?
When we are finding answers to the question ‘why?’ we can fill in the ‘how?’, the ways in
which the Institute achieved what it did. This is fairly easy in theory, using the published and
the manuscript record, identifying what was achieved through organisation, money, publicity,
lobbying, political influence, by being useful or by sheer dedication and hard work.
More difficult are the final questions —and these are the reasons for studying and writing
this history in the first place—What were the Albs effects? What were its achievements? And
what were its failures? Of course, by my very choice of possible achievements and failures 1
shall reveal my own biases and interests. This can be partly countered by looking at the things
which others have said about the Institute; and conference proceedings, like the Australian
Library Journal since 1951, contain many articles and comments on the organisation itself.
There are many ways in which I could have tackled this assignment, and at various times I
considered several. At first I thought that I would write a more or less chronological account
of what happened, mostly culled from the archives of the Institute. It sounds easy, but in
reality it isn’t. It also sounds simple, and it sounds dull. I decided that this approach would
not work well for some of the themes which I wished to explore, such as the influence of
Branches and Committees and the significance of conferences, and these have their own
chapters. On the other hand a certain chronology is necessary in dealing with events leading
up to the foundation and its immediate consequences and when exploring the transition
from AIL to LAA. These form bookends, as it were, for the thematic chapters.
A complicating factor was that, once embarked upon, this history did not advance as
quickly as I had hoped, partly because 1 had so many other demands on my time, partly
because the sources that I needed to consult were scattered in every State in Australia in
public, private and institutional hies, and partly because of the volume of source materials
and official publications. The last reason which 1 offer as a prime cause of the inordinate
time that I have taken is that it has been hard.
Something which I needed to establish firmly in my own mind was when to stop —when
to stop exploring the interesting byways of side-issues and to start writing. As soon as you
start digging and find gold —or silver —the lode goes deeper and deeper. 1937 to 1949, the
years of the AIL, did reveal a very rich lode and proved more productive than I could ever
have anticipated, whereas the time available to me was much more limited. So in this book
I have focused on these early years of the profession in Australia and hope that others will
be inspired to venture into more recent times.
Jean P Whyte
Chapter 1 Endnotes
1 This chapter is expanded and adapted from two documents by Jean P Whyte. The first is headed To-
wards a history of the Australian Institute of Librarians’, which from internal evidence was written in
1985. The second is an unpublished preamble to a paper which she presented to the Second Forum
on Australian Library History in 1985. The abbreviated paper was published in the proceedings as
‘From ALA to LAA—the Australian Institute of Librarians’, in Australian Library History: Papers from


the Second Forum on Australian Library History, Canberra, 19-20 July 1985, edited by Peter Biskup and
Maxine K Rochester, Canberra, Canberra College of Advanced Education, 1985, pp!22-133. Copies
of both documents are now in the possession of David J Jones.
Forty-nine candidates sat for the first examinations of the AIL in June 1944. Two passed the Qualify-
ing Examination. Twenty-eight, of whom eight, including Jean P Whyte, were from South Australia,
passed the Preliminary Examination. AIL, Minutes of Council meeting, 14 September 1944, National
Library of Australia (NLA), Australian Library and Information Association (ALIA) records, MS 7446,
Box 40.
Brief biographical notes on most people mentioned are provided on page 217 of this work. The Pub-
lic Library of South Australia has been known as the State Library of South Australia (SLSA) since
1967.
4 Colon Classification is a faceted classification scheme devised by the Indian librarian SR Ranganathan.
It uses colons to separate parts of class numbers.
15 In this history, GH Pitt is always referred to complete with his initials, so as not to confuse him with
the co-author of the Munn-Pitt Report, ER (Ernest Roland) Pitt. The two were not related.
6 Jean P Whyte was President of the SA Branch in 1948-1949.
The Australian Institute of Librarians (AIL) became the Library Association of Australia (LAA) in 1949,
as described later in this history. The LAA in turn became the Australian Library and Information
Association (ALIA) on 31 December 1988.
8 The Board of Examination and Certification of the AIL was established in 1941 and became the Board
of Examiners of the LAA. This in turn became the Board of Education in 1977, but ceased to exist
in 2000, with some of its functions at the time being assumed by the ALIA Board of Directors. The
Australian Library Journal was first published in 1951, and Jean P Whyte was its editor from 1959 to
1970.
9 Bachelor of Arts (Honours), University of Adelaide, 1950.
10 Ralph Munn, director of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, and ER Pitt surveyed Australian library
conditions in 1934, producing the report Australian libraries: a survey of conditions and suggestions for
their improvement, Melbourne, Australian Council for Educational Research, 1935.
11 The Carnegie Corporation of New York (CCNY) was established by the industrialist and philan-
thropist Andrew Carnegie in 1911 and at various times provided grants for library buildings, library
education, collections, demonstration projects, travel grants and library surveys in the United States,
United Kingdom and some countries in the British Commonwealth of Nations, including Australia.
The Carnegie Corporation funded the Munn-Pitt survey and supported the Australian Council for
Educational Research financially. Later funds were made available on the advice of an advisory panel
of senior Australian librarians, known as the Library Group.
12 DJ Jones. “A dormant commission”: Ifould and the rise of John Metcalfe at the Public Library of New
South Wales’, in Libraries and life in a changing world: the Metcalfe years 1920-1970: papers from Australian
Library History Forum V, edited by W Boyd Rayward, Sydney, University of New South Wales, School
of Information, Library and Archive Studies, 1993, pp 47-73.
15 The Public Library of New South Wales was renamed the Library of New South Wales in 1969 and
was given its present name, the State Library of New South Wales (SLNSW), in 1975.


2
Forerunners
They felt that they had
professional standards to maintain. 14


When they created it in 1937, the founders of the Australian Institute of Librar-
ians (AIL) did not append its name to a clean sheet. The names of several other
organisations were already there. Some were defunct and one was most charitably
described as being in a state of suspended animation, but others were apparently thriving.
In trying to come to some understanding of the origins of the Institute and to measure the
significance of its creation, we can no more ignore these forerunners and contemporaries
than could the librarians of the time. After all, many of them had been or were still active
members of other associations of librarians. Some of the more senior of the Foundation
Members of the Institute had fond memories of the earliest library association in Australia,
which had been established in the previous century when the states were still colonies.
The Library Association of Australasia
Credit for the first step in forming an association of librarians in Australia, indeed in Australia-
sia, is due to a group of laymen, the Trustees of the Public Library of Victoria, who in 1894,
on the motion of Dr Alexander Leeper, resolved “That, in view of the great advantages likely
to accrue to the Public Libraries of Victoria, it is desirable that the trustees take steps towards
the foundation of a Library Association of Australasia on lines generally similar to those of
the Library Association of the United Kingdom and the American Library Association.’
The two overseas associations had by then been in existence for almost twenty years. The
American Library Association dated from a three-day conference held at the Pennsylvania
Historical Society in Philadelphia in October 1876, initiated by the young librarian of Am-
herst College, Melvil Dewey, not yet a household name. The Association was formed ‘for
the purpose of promoting the library interests of the country, and increasing reciprocity
of intelligence and good will among librarians and all interested in library economy and
bibliographical studies’.
In 1877, almost a year to the day, at the first international conference of librarians held
in London, the Library Association of the United Kingdom was established. 16 Dewey and a
group of American librarians attended the conference, and in the early years of both associ-
ations there was close co-operation between them: Library Journal was their joint official
organ until 1882. One delegate to the conference had come even further than the Americans,
Sir Redmond Barry, President of the Trustees of the Public Library of Victoria since 1856,
participated freely in the conference and was later described as one of the founders of the
British association. It is tempting to speculate about a link between his presence in London
and the later suggestion from among his own board of a similar Australasian association.
Tempting but inconclusive; when Leeper made his suggestion Barry had been dead for
fourteen years, and no evidence has been found to link him with the Library Association
of Australasia. 17
By the mid-1890s at least some of the librarians in the major State and university libraries
in Australia had an idea of the utility and achievements of the American and British associ-
ations, mainly through their publications. 18 By 1894, for example, the Library Association
had begun publishing its own regular journal, had issued cataloguing rules, had successfully
lobbied for changes to public library legislation, had in place an examination system for
library assistants and had attracted a membership of about five hundred.
Overseas precedents were certainly in mind and a spirit of hopeful emulation was abroad
when, in April 1896, eighty participants from all States of Australia and from New Zealand
accepted an invitation from the Trustees of the Public Library of Victoria to attend a library


conference. Those who gathered under vice-regal patronage at the Melbourne Town Hall all
professed some connection with libraries, or at least an interest in them. Among the delegates
were several heads of governing bodies of the State libraries then in existence and their chief
librarians, as well as academics, prominent citizens and people involved in mechanics’ insti
tutes and schools of arts. Over four days they heard thirteen papers on issues as diverse
as the merits of the Dewey Classification and the legal position of mechanics’ institutes in-
Victoria. 19 They approved a constitution, based on a draft which Teeper had prepared, for
an association of Australian librarians ‘to unite all persons engaged or interested in library
work, in order to obtain their co-operation in all matters connected with library manage-
ment, legislation and improvement’. 20 Thus was the Library Association of Australasia born,
within two decades of the founding of sister associations in the United Kingdom and the
United States.
A Sydney conference followed in October 1898, with more papers and a larger exhibi-
tion than at the Melbourne conference, together with a display of library equipment from
overseas. 21 The biennial pattern continued with an Adelaide conference in October 1900
and what would prove to be a final conference in Melbourne in 1902. Here, despite a suc-
cessful social program, a loan exhibition and as many papers as there had been in Adelaide,
doubts about the future of the Association were expressed throughout its business meeting.
Membership, which at its peak had numbered about 280, had dwindled. 22 No venues or
dates were set for further meetings, and the fate of the Association was left in the hands of
a standing committee. If this committee actually met, it covered its tracks so well that re-
searchers have found no mention of it. Although there were desultory discussions of possible
meetings in country New South Wales as late as 1904, the Association went into a state of
suspended animation and by 1928 was ‘in a comatose condition, if not actually defunct’. 23
It was never formally wound up, and its remaining funds were held in trust by the Public
Library of Victoria in the hope of a resurrection. 24
This first Association did have a measure of success. Its four conferences and their pub-
lished proceedings enabled an exchange of ideas and news of innovation in other libraries.
The accompanying exhibitions stimulated public interest in libraries and books. These
activities had inspired many members of the new generation of career librarians, including
WH Ifould, who became Principal Librarian in South Australia and later in New South Wales.
His membership of the Association exposed him to the ideas of a range of experienced librar-
ians and provided a forum where his germinating ideas on librarianship could be subjected
to informed criticism by colleagues. Some of those attending the Association’s conferences
had first-hand experience of overseas libraries, and one of them—Margaret Windeyer of the
Public Library of New South Wales—had been trained at Melvil Dewey’s library school at
Albany. The leaders of the Australian library world—almost exclusively from the State and
the university libraries of the day—presented significant papers on professional issues and
contributed to the lively but short-lived journal, The Library Record of Australasia. 25
The late appearance and short life of this journal gives us an insight into some of the
reasons for the demise of the Association itself. FE Meleng of the Port Adelaide Institute and
Secretary of the Institutes Association of South Australia had asked the principal librarians in
Adelaide, Melbourne and Sydney—Adams, Armstrong and Anderson respectively—if they
would care to co-operate with him in producing a journal, seeing that their efforts to launch
their own journal had so far failed. 26 Anderson’s reaction was characteristically acerbic: he
told Adams, ‘1 consider it altogether too ridiculous to imagine that I would act as second
Uniting a profession


fiddle to any small library in such a project. If there was [sic] any chance of success it must
be undertaken by the best institutions in the country’. 27
For once Anderson was completely wrong. The South Australian Institutes’Journal was first
published in August 1900—beating The Library Record of Australasia to the draw and outlast-
ing it by over sixty years. 28 The journal over which the Library Association of Australasia
had agonised for years first saw the light of day in 1901. It tackled issues which were to the
forefront of debate in the major libraries of the world, but small libraries saw little relevance
in the great debates about which classification to use. It attracted few paying subscriptions
and was almost entirely underwritten throughout its life by the Public Library of Victoria.
It expired in 1902 after only six issues. 29
Andersons perception of the lowly status of the institutes and those who ran them was
shared by his university and State library colleagues. ‘lt is pitiful to see men who read and
write with difficulty, and who cannot spell words of four or five letters, placed in charge of
an institution that should be the intellectual centre of a district. It is pitiful, but, alas, it is
not so very rare’, wrote Armstrong in the final issue of The Library Record of Australasia™
Armstrong and his colleagues were committed to a reference collection of scholarly works,
free to all comers and with a thoroughly trained staff. They saw the educational role of their
libraries as paramount. The libraries in the institutes, on the other hand, though assisted
by government subsidy, were generally accessible only to subscribers. With some notable
exceptions, their collections reflected their users’ overwhelming demand for recreational
literature. The institutes custodians were in some cases just as energetic and enterprising
as their librarian counterparts, but reference service was rare, and technical processes were
basic—indeed the size of most of their collections did not warrant elaborate methods. 31 After
all, at the turn of the twentieth century Victoria had only sixteen libraries with over 5000
volumes, and South Australia only five. 32
There was thus a wide gulf between the ‘professional’ librarians and the ‘amateurs’ in the
institute libraries. In South Australia the Board of Governors of the Public Library itself had
split into two distinct camps: the ‘academic strain’, headed by Sir Samuel Way, Chief Justice
and bibliophile, and the supporters of the institutes, led by William Sowden, newspaper
proprietor and businessman. The resulting antagonism, undermining the Library Associ-
ation of Australasia, would persist for almost half a century and, as we shall see, would drive
a sizeable nail into the coffin of a later association.
In this first Association there was too wide a variation in expectations and too little com-
mon ground between the academic and research libraries on the one hand and the institutes
on the other. The chief librarians of the State and university libraries saw little return in it
for themselves. They already had informal contact with each other and exchanged ideas
on issues of a similar magnitude. They also drew on their reading of British and American
library journals for inspiration, or wrote to the British Museum, to the Bodleian or to Melvil
Dewey himself for advice. The models for their libraries were across the water, as indeed
had been the models for their Association.
Those running most of the institute libraries saw little benefit in an Association which
did not directly address their practical needs. They felt excluded and criticised. They did
not see the advantages of united action, although they would have benefited most. 34 The
time and cost involved in active membership too, despite subsidised rail fares for those
fortunate enough to live within reach of the Sydney—Melbourne and Melbourne—Adelaide
10
Forerunners


lines, was a factor even for the State and university libraries, and most institute libraries
had minuscule budgets.
The small number of people active in the Association at the local level too stunted its
growth. Some of them did participate in Branch meetings and put much effort into it—lfould
once stayed up all night finishing a paper on cataloguing. 35 There would be a biennial stir
during conferences and regular dragooning of authors to contribute to The Library Record
during its brief life, but the active members were only a small core of librarians in Melbourne,
Sydney and Adelaide.
The Association would certainly have found it difficult to demonstrate its relevance to
all its members and potential members, such was their heterogeneity: librarians, trustees,
academics, booksellers, collectors, prominent citizens and ‘a range of general well-wish-
ers’. 36 They represented widely varying viewpoints and needed something—a central issue,
a cause —to weld them together. In reality, major groups of constituents were at loggerheads
in at least two States by the early years of the twentieth century.
Even within the confines of technical issues there was inertia and a lack of clarity about
its role and objectives. A proposal to produce an index of Australian journals and news-
papers, along the lines of Poole’s index to periodical literature, for example, was considered
exhaustively at numerous meetings and in a flurry of correspondence over four years, but
it came to nothing. Successful associations needed to be able to show results; the Library
Association of Australasia had debates but did not translate these into policies and did not
further these through action. 37
The Association might perhaps have worked had its leading lights steered a middle
course, appealing to all parts of the library spectrum and fostering support in the broader
community. Perhaps ‘cultivated men’ could have been exploited to support the Association
financially and to help promote the library cause. 38 The Institutes Association of South Aus-
tralia, which is noticed next, managed to appeal to its constituency by addressing practical
needs, by saving money and by exploiting a political power base, but it did have a more
homogeneous constituency.
The Library Association of Australasia did have some enduring effects however, both
positive and negative. Some of those who attended its conferences or read the published
proceedings, including Ifould, a man not noted for rose-tinted retrospection, later professed
to have been greatly stimulated and inspired by the Association. 39 Ifould also believed that
the Association had led to closer co-operation between the larger Australian libraries. On
the debit side memories of the Association’s failure to flourish and of the uneasy relationship
between the major libraries and the institutes would inhibit future moves towards an Aus-
tralia-wide organisation. As Metcalfe later put it, ‘After 1903 nothing remained save fading
memories, the printed proceedings, the journal, ceased publication, [sic] and private letters
of despondency’. 40 Ghosts from the days of the Library Association of Australasia would not
be laid for at least another three decades.
The Institutes Association of South Australia
The institutes movement, born in Britain and nowhere transplanted so successfully as in
transportation-free South Australia, was originally intended to provide a means of educating
skilled workers, or ‘mechanics’ as they were known. As they evolved, mechanics’ institutes,
sometimes known as schools of arts or more grandly as athenaeums or literary institutions,
would typically contain a lending library, a reading room with works of reference, periodicals


and newspapers, rooms for lectures and evening or day classes, and perhaps a games room
and a hall for magic lantern shows and performances. Only subscribers were able to borrow
books, but any citizen was usually permitted to use the books free of charge in the library
itself. Institutes were supported by member subscriptions, benefactions and in many cases
subsidies from local and State governments.
In South Australia institutes had received government funding since 1857. When the
Public Library, Museum and Art Gallery of South Australia was established in 1884, its
Board was also given responsibility for assistance to the 112 institutes which became affili-
ated with it. By the late 1890 s there was dissatisfaction among the institutes at the Public
Library’s treatment of them. They felt that they were being neglected, and in 1899 sixty
institutes, about a third of those then active in South Australia, resolved to form an associ-
ation to represent their interests. By the time of the first general meeting of the Institutes
Association of South Australia on 1 March that year the number of member institutes had
risen to seventy. In a little over a year there were over a hundred. 41 Nothing had been left to
chance: the groundwork for the new organisation had been much more carefully laid than
had been the case with the Library Association of Australasia, which at this time had only
sixty-five institute members in the whole of Australia. 42 The promoters of the Institutes As-
sociation had sounded out members of a parliamentary institutes committee to ensure their
support and had circulated detailed proposals for the Association’s operations to all institutes
in the itate. These overtures were followed by a personal visit to about fifty institutes by
FE Meleng, the new Association’s General Secretary. 43 In addition Meleng was librarian of the
Port Adelaide Institute and held the position of General Secretary of the Association until
1930. He would prove to be a very practical and energetic man throughout his remarkably
long term in office and began as he would continue. 44 He foreshadowed a number of practi-
cal measures to assist members, including the distribution of spare magazines and books
to smaller institutes and co-operative purchasing at reduced rates. Of course the institutes
offered more than just libraries, and the arrangement of lectures, concerts and exhibitions
was also promised. Meleng also visited institutes to give advice. This practical and personal
approach appealed to member institutes: they could see immediately how they could save
money by co-operation, and they received advice from one of their own, who knew how to
run a busy and successful institute library.
The Institutes Association of South Australia became incorporated by act of Parliament
in 1909 and was given the statutory duty of distributing government aid to institute librar-
ies. 43 As the years passed it continued to perform its duties, circulating boxes of fiction and
children’s books to member institutes for a fee and non-fiction free of charge. Later the
Association circulated boxes of pictures, selected from a central collection. The Association
also placed overseas orders for books and magazines on behalf of individual institutes. Its
official journal, The South Australian Institutes’ Journal, first appeared on 18 August 1900.
It was a powerful tool for the Association, and until the Library Journal was started by the
Library Association of Victoria in 1937 it was the only Australian journal containing news
of libraries the six issues of The Library Record oj Australasia included some news items
but concentrated on serious articles. By the 1930 s the circulation of Meleng’s journal was a
healthy 1500 per issue, and it survived until 1964, supported by its paid advertising.
The Association had real clout. It had a parliamentary lobby group, giving the institutes
the ear of Cabinet. Members of Parliament who belonged to country institutes were always
teady to defend and promote them. The Association also had influence in the bureaucracy,


for the 1909 Act also gave it statutory representation on the Board of the Public Library,
Museum and Art Gallery of South Australia. Its representatives consistently showed that
their sympathies were primarily with the institutes. Ifould roundly criticised the structure
of this Board as ‘cumbrous’ in a parting shot after his appointment to the Public Library of
New South Wales in 1912: it was ‘likely to have constant disagreements among its members’,
a view which would be shared by Munn and Pitt twenty years later, but the arrangement
helped preserve the power and influence of the Association 46
By the mid 1920 s the Institutes Association was brimming with confidence and invited
interstate representatives to a conference of institute officers in Adelaide with a view to national
co-operation. Sir William Sowden, who became President of the Council of the Institutes
Association in 1926, has been credited with the idea of this conference, although he later
acknowledged Meleng as a prime mover. 47 Ambitious and interested in the promotion of
libraries, Sowden was also a member of the Board of the Public Library, Museum and Art
Gallery of South Australia and had succeeded Sir Samuel Way as its President in 1908. The
conference took place in October 1926 and drew delegates from all States except Queens-
land. It was notable because of a motion passed which approved in principle the formation
of a national association. A further conference was set down for Melbourne in 1928, and a
committee was set to work to draft a constitution for a national body.
In fact the Institutes Association of South Australia would outlast its short-lived progeny
by more than half a century, surviving the Great Depression, the criticism in the Munn-Pitt
Report and subsequent efforts to establish free public library services in South Australia,
until its winding up in 1989. By June of that year all of the surviving institutes had been
dissolved and a uniquely South Australian phenomenon had come to an end.
The first Library Association of Victoria
Victoria has the distinction of being the cradle of two state-wide library associations. At a
public meeting at Prahran Town Hall in May 1912 the first Library Association of Victoria
was established, the prime movers being AE McMicken and E Morris Miller. 48 McMicken was
then ten years into his thirty-eight-year stint as librarian of Prahran Public Library, which,
like the other local ‘free’ or ‘public’ libraries in Victoria at the time, was a subscription library.
It was ‘free’ only to the extent that, in return for a grant from the Victorian government, it
allowed members of the public to use its reading room. Miller was at this time working at
the Public Library of Victoria but would shortly begin a distinguished academic career at the
University of Tasmania, where he maintained an active role in the library world.
Miller and McMicken’s apparent alliance of State library and subscription library interests
was a far cry from the hostility which existed between the two camps in New South Wales
and South Australia. The municipalities and institute librarians supported the new Associ-
ation warmly. Despite appearances, support within the Public Library of Victoria was limited,
Miller later acknowledged, to himself and AW Brazier. 49 Drawing on his reading and recent
observations of overseas library systems, Miller suggested a network of truly free libraries,
overseen by a State library board, anticipating developments in Victoria by over thirty years. 50
In the meantime the immediate objectives of the fledgling Association were more modest
but could serve the interests of both the Slate library and the institute libraries. Miller was
appointed the first chairman of the Association, and McMicken its Honorary Secretary. At
its second annual meeting, in Geelong in 1914, McMicken encapsulated the objects of the
Association in the statement ‘That an effort be made to increase and maintain government


grants for public libraries; that the allocation of grants be reviewed; that the association
urge for better training of librarians, and also better remuneration for their services; that an
advisory committee assist free libraries and institutions in book selection’. 51
The main cause for concern was the state of subscription libraries, and so links were
fostered with the institutes in South Australia. Meleng, Secretary of the Institutes Associ-
ation of South Australia, attended a meeting of the Victorian Association in January 1915
and outlined the work of his Association, also suggesting the creation of a federal union of
institutes associations. 52 Co-operation between the two Associations progressed to the point
at which the South Australian Association agreed to make space in its journal for reports
and booklists from Victorian libraries.
Despite these promising beginnings, and perhaps because of preoccupation with the
war, there was no further activity by this Library Association of Victoria after 1915. A more
durable descendant, or perhaps we should say resuscitation, would emerge in the follow-
ing decade.
The second Library Association of Victoria
In 1927 a second Library Association of Victoria came into being, with McMicken once more
its originator. Writing thirty years later Morris Miller saw the second Association as essentially
a continuation of the first, with McMicken carrying on ‘the organisation which, despite its
vicissitudes, has existed down to the present day’. 53 The members of the new Association
were mainly representatives of individual institutes and libraries, with a sprinkling of per-
sonal members. This Association spent many years endeavouring to become the Victorian
equivalent of the Institutes Association of South Australia and, like it, sought some kind of
formal recognition. It was never incorporated, although in 1928 it had a Memorandum and
Articles of Association drawn up by solicitors in order to establish it as a limited company.
It was a lengthy and detailed document, which would later become a sample which those
formulating the constitution of the Australian Institute of Librarians would be able to study.
Its objects illustrate the earnestness of the founders of the Association and the breadth of
their intended activities;
1. To bring together public bodies, institutions and persons, interested in libraries, by
means ol conferences and interchange of ideas on questions affecting libraries, and
also to awaken the enthusiasm and support of the public in the cause of libraries.
2. To elevate the status of librarianship and to bring about the improvement of libraries
generally as educational institutions.
3. To promote the establishment and proper maintenance of libraries in cities, towns
and country districts.
4. To promote the establishment of children’s libraries and to assist in promoting neces-
sary reforms.
5. To consider carefully all legislation affecting libraries and to assist in the development
of school libraries.
6. To urge co-operation among the libraries of the Commonwealth.
7. To promote the establishment of a State Archives Department. 54
Of the many ideas which flowed from the Association’s meetings and conferences, one
was destined to change the face of Australian libraries for ever. It was Leigh Scott, librarian of
14
Forerunners


the University of Melbourne, who suggested to the Association’s 1929 meeting that Carnegie
funding be sought for a survey of Australian libraries. 55 Frank Tate, President of the Associa-
tion, resolved to follow up Scott’s suggestion, leading in due course to the Carnegie Corpora-
tion-sponsored survey of Australian libraries by Ralph Munn and ER Pitt and the resulting
watershed Munn-Pitt Report. The Association proudly recorded ‘lt is satisfactory to note that
the suggestion for this important library feature [that is, the Munn-Pitt survey] emanated
originally from the Victorian Library Association [sic] when Mr Frank Tate was president’. 56
Members of the Association were far from parochial and were not afraid to confront the big
issues, for the implications of an Australia-wide survey of libraries were enormous.
At the local level, the Association met with some early successes too: it managed to ob-
tain some small grants from the Victorian government, which it disbursed to local libraries.
In 1931 it published a short but important document on public libraries, the report of a
committee chaired by Pitt. Entitled The essential features of a good public library, this ten-page
publication covers building planning, finance, qualifications of librarians, cataloguing and
classification systems, book selection and the importance of libraries as sources of informa-
tion. 57
The Association was also very active in organising meetings and conferences, with
McMicken the prime mover in all of them. It also managed to remain solvent, which the
Library Association of Australasia had found difficult. By 1934, for example, the Library
Association of Victoria balance sheet showed receipts of £474 Is Id. Even if we discount
the £250 of government subsidy in this amount, the fact remains that it was to take the
Australian Institute of Librarians about six years to achieve as much from an Australia-wide
membership, even with Carnegie assistance.
The leading lights of the Association were often vigorous and determined in pursuing
their goals, though their efforts were not always crowned with success, as the Temple of
Youth project illustrates. In 1934 Sir Macpherson Robertson, a confectionery manufacturer
and philanthropist, offered £l5 000 to found a Temple of Youth as a gesture to celebrate
Victoria’s centenary. This idea was seized upon by the librarians and turned into a plan for
a central children’s library for Melbourne. The Temple was to be a substantial Georgian
building, with four hundred seats and a collection of about ten thousand volumes, arranged
by a simplified Dewey classification so that the children could get used to the system and
catalogued using modified American Library Association cataloguing rules. 58 There would
be a staff of three.
Unfortunately the Victorian Government seems to have taken fright at the probable
running costs, and the Temple was doomed before it even reached the drawing board. Sir
Macpherson Robertson’s gift, which grew to £lOO 000, provided instead a new building
(including a library) lor the herbarium in the Melbourne Botanic Gardens, a high school
for girls and a bridge across the Yarra.
The organisers of Library Association of Victoria conferences were never reluctant to take
the bull by the horns. One conference tackled one of the most contentious issues: free librar-
ies supported from council rates. This 1935 conference, held in the wake of the Munn-Pitt
Report, brought the Library Association of Victoria face to face with local councils, some
of which were vehemently opposed to rate-supported libraries. Equally courageous was a
round-table conference held in December 1937 which sought to unite all the organisations
which were trying to lead public opinion on library policy in Victoria. McMicken convened
the conference, which drew together representatives of the Library Association of Victoria,


the Trustees of the Public Library of Victoria, the University of Melbourne, the Victorian
Education Department, the Free Library Movement and the Municipal Association of Victoria.
They discussed the not inconsiderable problems of achieving the goal of free rate-supported
public library services. Obstacles included the numerous commercial lending libraries, which
felt their livelihoods threatened. 59
Complementing the meetings of Association members was the Library Journal, which the
Association published from April 1937 until June 1949. This journal carried reports on local
libraries, including the Public Library of Victoria, and kept Victorian librarians in touch with
happenings in other States by publishing reports from the Institutes Association of South
Australia and the Australian Institute of Librarians. Occasionally articles on overseas libraries
appeared, and lists of books recommended to local public libraries were a regular feature.
Contributions to the Library Journal illustrate vividly how open the Association was to new
ideas and views, whatever their origin. Thus the Library Journal welcomed the establishment
of the Free Library Movement in New South Wales and was happy to publish Metcalfe’s
article on The library scene in New South Wales’, which reported on the establishment of
the Libraries Advisory Committee. 60
No-one who reads the Library Journal and the scant records of the Library Association of
Victoria can fail to be impressed with the part played by McMicken. He recreated the Library
Association of Victoria and imbued it with a belief in the importance of libraries and a spirit
of co-operation which transcended pettiness, rivalry and jealousy. As we shall see, when the
Australian Institute of Librarians was established there was not the least animosity shown by
the Library Association of Victoria. It greeted the new organisation with enthusiasm in the
pages of the Library Journal. AB Foxcroft’s account of the inaugural meeting of the Australian
Institute of Librarians in Canberra ended with these words: ‘I feel confident that the Institute
will set out on its career with the sympathy and best wishes of every member of the Library
Association of Victoria’. 61 Such attitudes marked the history of this Association and helped
create an environment of co-operation in which Victoria would in due course establish a
successful system of public library provision.
The Victorian Association may have seemed a trifle conservative to the eager founders
of the Australian Institute of Librarians in New South Wales, who would brook no contact
with schools of arts libraries, or to the embattled South Australians, who could not break
the hold which the Institutes Association had on the government and the library system.
Nevertheless, the Library Association of Victoria played an important part in Victoria’s trans-
ition to professional librarianship and a free library system. There was obvious concern for
public library development expressed by librarians who were outside the public library
sphere, including two influential figures during critical years, Leigh Scott and Eric Frazer,
the Victorian Parliamentary Librarian. It is typical of the Victorian situation that Scott and
ER Pitt, although chief librarians of the university library and of the Public Library of Vic-
toria, were quite ready to leave their ivory towers and advise local libraries on planning or
book selection. Foxcroft, one of Pitt’s staff, even spent his holidays cataloguing books for
mechanics’ institutes. 62
Time would show that the Library Association of Victoria would work very hard to achieve
free public libraries in the State. There was not only the potential divide between kinds of
libraries to be bridged, but also legislators, the general public and local councillors and officers
to be convinced. McMicken’s frequent response to claims that local councils were not willing
to provide money was to ask whether the council had actually been approached and told


about the importance of the library. In this library evangelism the Association co-operated
with the fledgling Australian Institute of Librarians and the Free Library Movement—there
were many members in common—and its members rejoiced when the Free Library Service
Board was established in Victoria in 1947. 63 It was surely fitting that one of the statutory
members of the Board was to be nominated by the Library Association of Victoria and that
the first person to be so nominated was AE McMicken.
With the establishment of the Free Library Service Board, some members of the Library
Association of Victoria thought that the time had come to wind up the Association. In
June 1947 a motion to this effect was debated but after spirited discussion defeated, with
a subcommittee being appointed to report on the future of the Association. The committee
recommended that the existing objectives should be extended to include giving support to
the Free Library Service Board and engaging in propaganda to encourage municipalities and
shires to provide free libraries. 64
The Association went on with its work and continued to publish its Library Journal until
1949—it would be another two years before the profession had a national journal, with the
first issue of the Australian Library Journal from the Library Association of Australia. The
Victorians later issued a newsletter, the News Gazette , the last issue of which appeared in
1962. The Association continued to exist, at least formally, until the 19905, although its
activities had progressively been taken over by the Victorian Branch of the Library Associ-
ation of Australia (LAA).
There seems to have been little tension between the two Associations, and the leaders of
the profession belonged to both. Its strength lay first in its Secretary, McMicken; second in
its personal membership, which, though small, included the leading librarians in Melbourne;
third in its journal; and fourth in its cultivation of powerful friends. Even if they did not
come to its meetings at least their names in the list of apologies lent a little prestige.
The Australian Library Association
The idea of a new federal library association, first mooted in South Australia and discussed
at the 1926 meeting of the Institutes Association of South Australia, quickly began to crystal-
lise. 65 There seemed to be wide support, with many university, parliamentary, municipal,
public and institute libraries represented. They had resolved to pursue the idea of a federal
association (perhaps thinking of it in terms of a resuscitation of the Library Association of
Australasia) and had formed a provisional committee to draft a constitution. 66
It is significant that the only people from New South Wales to attend the 1926 meeting
had been WW Bradford from the Newcastle School of Arts and David Gumming from the
New South Wales Railway and Tramway Institute. 67 The conspicuous absence of any rep-
resentative from the Public Library of New South Wales indicates a certain lack of interest
on the part of that institution. That the idea of a federal association originated among the
amateurs in institutes may explain the reluctance of the ‘professional’ librarians in New South
Wales to become involved. It is also true that interstate travel was not embarked upon lightly.
Had Ifould requested permission of his Trustees and Minister to attend it is likely that they
would have questioned the value of such a meeting to New South Wales—the Trustees were
responsible only for the Public Library, not for institutes in New South Wales.
The main reason why Ifould declined to attend the conference was a deep-seated an-
tipathy to the proposal for an association in which institute office-holders and ‘librarians’
would mingle with the ‘professionals’. He made this very clear to his Sydney colleagues. On


27 October 1926 he met JJ Quinn, the Parliamentary Librarian, CH Bertie, chief of Sydney
Municipal Library, and HM Green, librarian of the University of Sydney, to consider the
suggestion for an association which had been forwarded by the Institutes Association of
South Australia. Ifould immediately declared that he was against any association composed
mainly of institute secretaries and people connected in an honorary way with mechanics’
institutes and schools of arts. Quinn and Green agreed with him. Such an association could
not do any serious work, and it would be a waste of time supporting or simply belonging
to it. Ifould suggested resuscitating the old Library Association of Australasia, but with a
constitution limiting membership to professional librarians —that is, ‘to people who are
making a living solely in the library profession’. 68 Bertie did not entirely agree with Ifould,
because he thought the inclusion of the institute people would lead to a bigger and therefore
a stronger organisation.
The four Sydney librarians met again for lunch a week later and resolved unanimously
to have nothing at all to do with any library association which would include full members
who were not professional librarians. Bertie proposed, however, that they should support
or assist in the formation of a library association or a resuscitation of the moribund Library
Association of Australasia provided that the members were all professional librarians, al-
though he was prepared to allow associate or honorary membership for people involved
in libraries who were not actually professional librarians. Green doubted the value of any
association at all, believing that libraries had little in common and that their methods and
interests were too diverse. 69
The South Australians pressed on undaunted. By March 1927 the provisional committee
of the ‘Proposed Library Federation of Australia and New Zealand’ had its own letterhead and
a printed draft constitution. All its committee were South Australians: Sir William Sowden
‘President pro tern’, Meleng ‘Secretary pro tern’, FW Bampfield of the Adelaide Circulating
Library, RJM Clucas of the university library, HR Purnell of the Public Library, WC Quinton of
the Parliamentary Library, Mahoney of the Postal Institute, Gillman of the Railways Institute
and Talbot Smith of the Institutes Association. The draft constitution allowed membership
to ‘any library open to the public, or the library of any public institution or department
in Australia or New Zealand, and library officers’. Anyone else with an interest in libraries
could join but would not be entitled to vote. 70
Some seven weeks after Meleng had written to him enclosing a copy of the draft constitu-
tion, Ifould responded, telling him that he had delayed his reply in order to discuss the
proposals in Melbourne with Boys and Purnell (who had happened to be in Melbourne
at Easter) and in Sydney once more with Bertie, Quinn and Green. The New South Wales
librarians, he said, all shared his view that no federation would be useful to them unless it
included only professional librarians and clerical officers of libraries and dealt with technical
library issues. There was already in existence the Library Association of Australasia (Ifould
misnames it Library Association of Australia), and Ifould proposed calling a meeting to
discuss its resuscitation. 71
South Australia and Victoria, which had the two strongest associations of librarians in
Australia at that time, were much more enthusiastic. The Victorians demonstrated their com-
mitment by holding a major library conference (with, not surprisingly, McMicken doing much
of the organising). Held over three days in August 1928 at the University of Melbourne, it
attracted good representation from all Australian States. It was a lavish affair, with the official
opening by the Chief Secretary of Victoria broadcast on the Melbourne radio station 3LO,
Forerunners


a luncheon at the Hotel Australia broadcast by 3AR and an evening of music and recitation
at Anzac House, one of the performers being Miss Lilian McMicken. 72
It is illuminating to look at the people who attended the conference. The leading Australian
librarians of the time were all there: four of the State Librarians (New South Wales, South
Australia, Tasmania and Victoria) and four University Librarians (Sydney, Melbourne, Tas-
mania and Western Australia), as well as Kenneth Binns from the Commonwealth National
Library, Ellinor Archer from the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR, later
the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, CSIRO), and EL Frazer
from the Victorian Parliamentary Library. 73 ER Pitt, who had recently been seconded from
the Public Library of Victoria to edit the CSIR Union catalogue of scientific and technical per-
odicals in Australia, was with them. Also in attendance were some of those who ran the best
local public library services, whether free or not. These included Bertie from Sydney Mu-
nicipal Library, Bampheld from the Adelaide Circulating Library, Meleng representing the
Institutes Association of South Australia, several local councillors from municipalities with
libraries and of course McMicken himself. The lay representation was prestigious, including
Sir William Sowden, Sydney Talbot Smith, President of the Board of the Public Library of
South Australia, Professor Douglas Copland, a brilliant young economist, and the Reverend
C Irving Benson, a prominent Methodist minister who had developed what would become
a lifelong passion for libraries.
About half the delegates came from Victoria, followed by those from South Australia
and New South Wales. There was only one representative from Western Australia, Malvina
Wood, the University Librarian, and none from Queensland (although GM Wallace from the
Victorian Education Department is listed as also representing the Brisbane School of Arts).
So the beginnings of the conference were auspicious, and the proposed Australian Library
Association does seem to have been well founded. There is nothing in the list of delegates to
the conference to suggest that the Association would be dominated by people from mechan-
ics’ institutes: only a dozen of the forty-two attendees were from such libraries. 74 Nor is there
anything to suggest that New South Wales was not going to join the Association.
Although they were not among the speakers at the conference proper, the university
librarians who attended had an agenda of their own. They met for a university librarians’
conference on two afternoons of the general conference. This meeting was arranged by Leigh
Scott from the University of Melbourne, and he was joined by Green and Wood. Miller was
also present wearing several hats, as ‘honorary librarian’ of the University of Tasmania, as
well as representing the Tasmanian Library Association and the Board of Trustees of the
Tasmanian Public Library. Also in attendance were two senior academics; Professor Robert
Chapman from the University of Adelaide and Professor Henry Alcock from the University of
Queensland. This meeting of university librarians passed a number of resolutions, including
one which urged university libraries to become members of the State library associations
and of the Australian Library Association. 75
The papers given at the conference were presented by some of Australia’s leading librar-
ians and were on serious professional issues. Some speakers tackled issues later examined
in the Munn-Pitt Report (the idea of a survey by an overseas expert was only a year away).
Bertie and TF Cooke discussed the problems and achievements of free lending libraries. 76
Pitt examined international and interstate library co-operation, and Wallace was concerned
with building state-wide library systems. 77
Uniting a profession


Ifould’s and Miller’s papers were similarly broad in their vision. Miller suggested a scheme
for co-operation between States and municipalities to produce a common library service
for the whole metropolitan area on the one hand, and the country and rural districts on
the other. This scheme required more financial assistance, links with special libraries and
greatly increased support for technological, commercial, educational and other divisions of
public libraries. 78
Ifould’s paper, while strongly descriptive of the work of his own library, the Public
Library of New South Wales, advocated improvements in the supply and availability of
information and better ways of training the public to use such information. He stressed the
importance of getting books into schools and described the country lending work of his
library, in particular the provision of boxes of books to schools. Like several other speakers
Ifould saw the need for more co-operation between public libraries and school libraries
and suggested that the State libraries should make a special effort to meet the study needs
of country school teachers, 79
There was also interest in overseas patterns and experiences of library services. Speak-
ers at the conference were aware of library developments in the United Kingdom and the
United States. Two of them, Talbot Smith and Armstrong, the former Chief Librarian of the
Public Library of Victoria, had recently returned from the conference celebrating the fiftieth
anniversary of the Library Association of the United Kingdom, and Talbot Smith gave his
impressions of current developments. The general feeling left in the mind of a visitor to the
libraries of Britain’, he said, ‘was one of envy and almost bewilderment’. 80 Only the previous
year the landmark Kenyon Report on public library services in England and Wales had been
published, highlighting the role of public libraries in education and recreation. 81 In his paper
on the Report Purnell constantly compared its findings with the situation in Australia and
emphasized the importance of training for librarianship and of a national library service.
He finished by stating: ‘I think that the whole report can be used as an object lesson to us
in Australia’, 82
It was against this stimulating and co-operative backdrop that the delegates formally
adopted a constitution for a new association, to be known as the Australian Library Associ-
ation. Its stated objects were simply ‘to promote library service and librarianship’. 83 The As-
sociation was intended to function through separate State library associations and a central
council consisting of a president, secretary and treasurer, three delegates appointed by each
State association, and up to five other delegates, who could be co-opted by the council. This
central council was to meet at least once every two years (although in the event five years
would go by without a meeting).
The first officers of the Australian Library Association were then elected. It was a South
Australian trifecta, with Sowden as President, Meleng as Secretary and Purnell as Treasurer.
Despite its geographical concentration, this first executive certainly represented both insti-
tutes and State libraries and was headed by a distinguished layman. When we consider the
positions and characteristics of the delegates attending, the seriousness and quality of the
papers given, and the constitution which was accepted, the signs for a successful national
association were all there.
The moves which were taking place in most states to establish associations intended to
become affiliated with the new federal body also augured well for the Association and for
the libraries which it sought to support. Indeed the conference had been held in Victoria,
the State with the most developed local association, and the Library Association of Victoria


was surely the model which the framers of the constitution had in mind in establishing the
national Association. By the time of the conference separate state associations had already
been formed in three states. The Library Association of Victoria had been in existence since
1927. The Tasmanian Library Association was founded in February 1928. The Library Associ-
ation of South Australia, also founded in 1928, was completely separate from the Institutes
Association of South Australia, which had originally suggested the Australia-wide body. This
was because the Institutes Association constitution precluded it from joining the Australian
Library Association, an ironic twist which has not gone unremarked. 84
There were at the time associations of institutes in Queensland and New South Wales.
The Queensland School of Arts Association was formed in 1927 and was mainly concerned
with the bulk purchase of books from overseas, although it also ran a central library of
non-fiction. It was disbanded in 1971. In New South Wales the schools of arts and liter-
ary institutes had formed the Literary Institutes’ Association in 1914. 85 This Association
was still in existence at the time of the Munn-Pitt survey, and its secretary was shown the
courtesy of an invitation to a welcome luncheon for Ralph Munn, together with the profes-
sional heavyweights of Sydney, and was encouraged to make submissions to the Libraries
Advisory Committee a few years later. He took up the offer of lunch, but not of making a
submission, and his Association subsequently petered out. 86 A Western Australian Institutes
Association had been formed in f 904. Emulating its South Australian counterpart, it issued
one number of the West Australian Librarians’ And Institutes’ Journal in November that year,
but ceased to exist shortly thereafter.
At the time of the Melbourne conference in 1928 no associations in New South Wales,
Queensland or Western Australia had moved to join the new national Association, but there
was no indication that this would not occur in due course. In any event it was sufficient if
three State associations ratified the constitution for the federal Association to come into be-
ing. With such an apparent degree of cohesion at its birth the Australian Library Association
should have succeeded. Why it did not is part of Australian librarianship’s folklore.
The failure of New South Wales to form an association stands out and has usually been
seen as the real cause of the demise of the Australian Library Association. The reason usu-
ally given for the New South Wales failure to establish an affiliate is that the new federal
Association was dominated by librarians from institute libraries. These men were regarded
as uneducated or uninterested in education, and therefore, the librarians from the State,
university and special libraries could not accept them as colleagues. These sentiments were
ascribed in particular to the chief librarians in New South Wales.
The antagonism was mutual. Speaking a decade later, Metcalfe felt this was the dominant
factor in the failure of New South Wales to form an association. The State libraries ‘were held
to be taking too great a proportion of the available government support for too academic or
highbrow purposes’, and there was hostility towards their librarians, who were ‘trained, or
at least educated, and according to some, over-educated’, 87 Some institute representatives
were also motivated, Metcalfe thought, by self-interest, either in keeping their jobs or in
maintaining the prestige of leadership positions. 88
Notwithstanding the antagonism, a Library Association of New South Wales and the Fed-
eral Capital Territory was almost established, and a constitution for such an association was
drawn up. Ifould sent a preliminary draft to Green in September 1928, only a month after
the Melbourne conference. 89 Ifould did not give it a high priority, however, and by October
the following year freely admitted that he had made little progress despite knowing that


‘everybody is waiting for me to fix the thing up’. He had an excuse for his inactivity—the
construction of the Dixson Wing of the Public Library of New South Wales was taking up a
good deal of his time—and he wondered if the federal Association would mind waiting until
he had a little more time. Alternatively he was prepared to ask Bertie to do the organising.
It was most uncharacteristic of Ifould to hand the initiative for anything which he regarded
as important to someone outside his own institution, revealing just how reluctant he was
to constitute a State association. 90
By early f 930 a revised draft, prepared by Bertie, was ready and was circulated to the
senior Sydney librarians and to Binns in Canberra. The proposed association had the same
objects as the Australian Library Association, namely To promote library service and lib-
rarianship’. The constitution also stated that ‘the association shall affiliate with the Library
Association of Australia [sic] and delegates to that association shall be elected at each annual
meeting’. In his covering letter Ifould wrote: ‘As soon as I hear from Binns I will arrange
to call an inaugural meeting’. 91 Clearly in 1930 New South Wales was planning to affiliate
with the Australian Library Association, but there was a subtle but deadly proviso relating
to eligibility for full membership.
The membership clause of the proposed New South Wales association reads: ‘The asso-
ciation shall consist of members and associate members. Any person resident in the Federal
Capital Territory or New South Wales wholly employed in library work shall be eligible for
election as a member. Any person interested in the objects of the association shall be eligi-
ble for election as an associate member. Associate members shall not be entitled to vote at
meetings of the association or to hold any office except that of president. For the purpose
of membership of the Australian Library Association both members and associate members
shall be regarded as members of this Association’. 92
The attitudes towards ‘non-professionals’ expressed at the 1926 meetings of the Sydney
librarians had not softened one iota. They were determined to establish a ‘professional’ group
of members, protecting the status of librarians within their State association and at the same
time making it possible for all their members to belong to the national Association. As we
shall see, this would prove to be an insuperable hurdle, for if New South Wales did not form
an affiliate the federal body could not succeed.
Ifould was well aware of this groundswell of opinion, particularly among his own staff,
against joining the Australian Library Association and probably exploited it. 93 He called a
meeting of his senior officers, at which strong opposition to the proposed association was
voiced. Writing forty years later, when most of the protagonists, Ifould included, were no
longer around to confirm or dispute his recollections, Metcalfe recalled: As I remember Ifould
outlined the Association proposals. Miss Leeson, later Mitchell Librarian, and leader of the
female graduate officers, attacked them as being from people mainly hostile to free libraries,
in particular the State libraries, to professional librarians, who in New South Wales were
being required to take Public Service Board Examinations in lib rarianship, and inferentially
at least hostile to women since they had none, or no more than one or two, in their libraries.
As far as I remember there were no formalities, no resolutions, or votes, the meeting simply
adjourned. Ifould was bitterly criticised [later by the Australian Library Association] as hav-
ing broken an undertaking; this was partly result of belief that he so ran the state library in
NSW that whatever he wanted came to pass; if it didn’t he didn’t want it. This was wrong;
he was a very shrewd farseeing man, seeing round corners, and when he sensed defeat ahead
he simply shut up, because he would touch nothing he could not adorn’. 94


As Ifould put it, rather more sedately, ‘lt was felt that at this stage no real good could
come of a library association constituted to include an overwhelming proportion of repre-
sentatives of subscription libraries who had no professional knowledge ... [who] would be
likely to express opinions and pass resolutions with which the professional minority could
not possibly agree’. 9,5
The objection to the influence of the institutes has often been stated, but just how influ-
ential were they on the national stage? Not one institute librarian or secretary had actually
spoken at the 1928 conference, and in 1933 papers and discussions would again be dominated
by librarians from State and university libraries. The institutes’ role in the first executive,
however, would have been particularly unpalatable to Ifould. He was the key to develop-
ments in New South Wales, and it was no secret that he detested Sowden, sponsor and now
Foundation President of the Australian Library Association, He and Sowden had crossed
swords in Adelaide years before, when Ifould was at the Public Library of South Australia,
and the bitterness lingered. 96 Certainly the fact that the Australian Library Association was
first suggested at a meeting of the Institutes Association of South Australia was a powerful
disincentive to the support of librarians in New South Wales, where little love was lost be-
tween the librarians of the Public Library and the university on the one side, and those who
ran the schools of arts on the other. In Victoria, where the Library Association of Victoria
embraced all kinds of libraries and librarians, it was a different matter. In South Australia
Purnell and his Public Library colleagues were obliged to include the institutes in all their
plans. After all, they lived cheek by jowl and had some board members in common.
Ifould also thought that the senior women in his library did not want to join an associ-
ation which was male-dominated. 97 This may seem a curious objection in a profession then
generally dominated by men, but the New South Wales situation was different. At the Public
Library of New South Wales many of the senior positions were occupied by women. In 1932
Ida Leeson was appointed Mitchell Librarian and was thereby within an ace of becoming
Ifould’s heir apparent, only to be thwarted by Metcalfe’s appointment to the newly created
position of Deputy Principal Librarian. Despite this setback, Leeson’s colleagues, unlike
their sisters in other State libraries, were sufficient in number and status to rise through the
ranks. It was probably not the issue of male dominance to which Leeson and her colleagues
objected, but what they saw as the prevailing attitudes towards women in the workplace.
Many years later Ifould declared, in a private letter to KS Cunningham of the Australian
Council for Educational Research: ‘I was entirely responsible for the refusal to ratify the
constitution and the formation of a New South Wales Branch and I never hesitated, publicly
and privately, to express the view that the whole subscription system should be wiped out.
My New South Wales colleagues almost entirely agreed with me. 1 had no doubt that the
main object of the South Australian Country Institutes Association [lnstitutes Association
of South Australia] and its dominating and untrustworthy president WJ Sowden, was to get
more prestige for the Institutes’ secretaries and greater state financial support for them’, 98 In
depicting himself as ‘entirely responsible’ Ifould was gilding the lily somewhat: the influence
of his feminised professional staff was a not inconsiderable factor. 99
The Australian Library Association failed to cater for a category of membership giving a
higher status to ‘professional’ librarians among the members of its affiliated associations. This
failure revealed a lack of a commitment to the training and education of librarians, despite
the discussion of this very issue at Australian Library Association conferences. For the New
South Wales librarians professionalism and training went hand-in-hand: at the Public Library


of New South Wales the training initiated by Anderson in the 1890 s had been formalised
and extended under ffould to meet Public Service Board conditions for promotion and were
wide-ranging and rigorous. At the time that pressure was being applied to New South Wales
to form an affiliated association the librarians at the Public Library of New South Wales were
the only ones in Australia required to study and pass examinations in librarianship; ‘they
felt they had professional standards to maintain’. 100
It must have been abundantly clear to ffould and to Metcalfe that New South Wales would
be a lone voice. There was consequently an informal view, Metcalfe later claimed, that New
South Wales would do better to ‘go it alone’. This independent attitude was another reason
to allow the Australian Library Association to fail, and it was a view which lingered in New
South Wales long after the establishment of the Australian Institute of Librarians. 101
The draft constitution for a New South Wales association remained just a draft, and New
South Wales remained outside the fold. Attention was effectively diverted by a grim global
catastrophe: just a year after the 1928 conference the hopes of many of its speakers were
effectively dashed. The Great Depression set in, and by 1930 there was absolutely no chance
that there would be money for any of the dreams and schemes of 1928 to be realised. In the
seemingly endless spiral of declining economic and social conditions the preoccupation of
the professional and amateur librarians alike was not library associations. It was survival.
Chapter 2 Endnotes
14 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947, and other papers, Sydney, Australian Institute of Librarians (AIL),
1949, p5O.
15 Library Association of Australasia, Account of the Proceedings of the first Australasian Library Conference
held at Melbourne on the 21st, 22nd, 23rd and 24th April, 1896, Melbourne, Government Printer, 1896,
p 9. The Public Library of Victoria adopted its current name, the State Library of Victoria (SLV), in
1961.
16 It became simply The Library Association in 1896. In 2002, it joined with the Institute of Information
Scientists to form the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP).
17 MR Talbot, The Library Association of Australasia, 1896-1902, PhD thesis, Monash University, 1985,
p3B, footnote 19.
18 State libraries were then known as Public Libraries, for example, the Public Library of New South
Wales, now the State Library of New South Wales.
19 Dewey’s Classification was then in its sth edition: Decimal classification and relativ [sic] index for ar-
ranging, cataloging and indexing public and private libraries, and for pamphlets, clippings, notes, scraps etc,
Boston, Library Bureau, 1894.
Library Association of Australasia, Constitution’, in Account of the Proceedings of the first Australasian
Library Conference held at Melbourne on the 21st, 22nd, 23rd and 24th April, 1896, Melbourne, Govern-
ment Printer, 1896, ppl2-13. These proceedings were reprinted in facsimile as Occasional Papers in
Librarianship, no 7, Adelaide, Libraries Board of South Australia, 1969,
21 MR Talbot, Library Association of Australasia, pp 267—268.
22 ibid., pi.
23 GM Prendergast, Address to library conference’, Proceedings of the Australian Library Conference held at
the University of Melbourne, August, 1928, Melbourne, Government Printer, 1928, p 5.
24 MR Talbot, Library Association of Australasia, p 333.


25 The Library Record of Australasia, quarterly, vol Ino 1, April 1901 to vol 2no 2, June 1902.
26 The Institutes Association of South Australia is discussed later in this chapter.
27 HCL Anderson to JRG Adams, 6 February 1900, South Australian Archives, GRG 19, Series 24a, 1900,
quoted in Talbot, Library Association of Australasia, plo2.
28 The South Australian Institutes’ Journal, vol Inol, 18 August 1900 to vol 34 no 7, 31 May 1964,
29 MR Talbot, Library Association of Australasia, plo9.
30 ELa T Armstrong. ‘The Library Record’, The Library Record of Australasia, vol. 2no 2, June 1902,
p 44.
31 MR Talbot, A chance to read: a history of the institutes movement in South Australia, Adelaide, Libraries
Board of South Australia, 1992, passim: BR Howes, Public library services in South Australia: the story
to 1976, Wagga Wagga, School of Library and Information Science, Riverina College of Advanced
Education, 1982, ppls-22.
32 P Biskup, Libraries in Australia, Wagga Wagga, Centre for Information Studies, 1995, p 384.
33 C Bridge, A trunk full of books: history of the State Library of South Australia and its forerunners, Netley, SA,
Wakefield Press in association with the State Library of South Australia, 1986, pp 69, 85; MR Talbot,
A chance to read, plo3.
34 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p 47.
35 He was too busy even to see his fiancee, whom he consoled by sending a Souvenir de Malmaison rose
with a note inscribed on a catalogue card, (David J Jones, WH Ifould and the development of library
services in New South Wales, 1912-1942, PhD thesis, University of New South Wales, 1993, p3l).
36 MR Talbot, Library Association of Australasia, p 2.
37 ibid., PP I39-150.
38 ibid., pp34l-342.
39 WH Ifould, ‘Presidential Address: the future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceed-
ings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior
and Anderson, 1939, ppl2-14.
40 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p 47.
41 BR Howes, Public library services in South Australia: the story to 1976, Wagga Wagga, School of Library
and Information Science, Riverina College of Advanced Education, 1982, p 1.6.
42 MR Talbot, A chance to read, p 99.
43 ibid., ppBB, 91.
44 FE Meleng was succeeded by HJ Emslie, who served even longer, from 1930 to 1968. (MR Talbot, A
chance to read, p 157.)
45 Public Library, Museum and Art Gallery and Institutes Act [South Australia], no 936, of 1909.
46 Adelaide Public Library: “A cumbrous board”, ex-librarian’s comments’, Advertiser [Adelaide], 29 July
1912, pl 2. Reprinted as Adelaide Public Library: a cumbrous hoard, Adelaide, np, 1912,
47 MR Talbot, A chance to read, pplso-152,
48 For an account of the Library Association of Victoria see Lynette Redmond, Alfred Ernest McMicken,
1872-1964: innovator and pioneer in library development, MA thesis, Monash University, 1988,
chapter 2.
49 E Morris Miller, ‘Comment rounded off’, Australian Library Journal, vol 6no 1, January 1957, p 35.
50 These and other ideas are set out in E Morris Miller, Libraries and Education, Melbourne, George Rob-
ertson, 1912.


51 Library Association of Victoria: Annual Meeting at Geelong [22 April 1914], Melbourne. Library Associ-
ation of Victoria, 1914. pi (reprinted from Geelong Advertiser).
52 AE McMicken to EA Petherick, 15 January and 23 June 1915, [circular letters], NLA, Petherick Col-
lection, MS76O, series 9, items 36 and 41.
53 E Morris Miller, ‘Comment rounded off’, p 35.
54 Memorandum and Articles of Association of the Library Association of Victoria [prepared by Spencer,
Martin and Goode, 440 Little Collins Street, Melbourne. C.l], Australian Council for Educational
Research (ACER) Archives, Series 49, item 229.
35 Cunningham’s evidence that Scott was the originator of the idea of a Carnegie-sponsored survey
seems conclusive (KS Cunningham, The Australian Council for Educational Research and library services
in Australia, Melbourne, ACER, 1961, pplO-11). In an obituary of Ralph Munn in 1975, however,
Metcalfe is tentative about Scott’s role, saying that the survey ‘seems to have been suggested possibly
by Leigh Scott’ (JW Metcalfe, ‘Ralph Munn and Australia’, Australian Library Journal, vol 24 no 4. May
1975, pl 38).
56 Library Association of Victoria. Annual report, 1934, p 2, ACER Archives, Series 49, item 229.
57 Library Association of Victoria, Special Committee, The essential features of a good public library, Mel-
bourne, Library Association of Victoria, 1931.
38 American Library Association, Catalog rules, author and title entries, Chicago. American Library As-
sociation, 1908.
59 Library Journal [Melbourne], no 4. January 1938, p 3; no 5, April 1938, PP 2-3. The Free Library Move-
ment was founded in New South Wales in 1935 in the wake of the Munn-Pitt Report to lobby for
the development of free libraries. Its foundation and activities are discussed in Chapter 3, The Free
Library Movement, Victoria, was launched by Frank Tate in 1937. For information on commercial
circulating libraries in Victoria see Denise M Marshall, Competition and complementarity: a study of
collections in circulating libraries for the public, 1928-1948, with particular reference to 1935, MLib thesis,
Monash University, 1989. See also John Arnold. The circulating library phenomenon’, in A history of
the book in Australia, 1891-1945: a national culture in a colonised market, edited by Martyn Lyons and
John Arnold, St Lucia, Queensland, University of Queensland Press, 2001, ppl9o-208; John Arnold,
‘Choose your author as you would choose a friend: circulating libraries in Melbourne 1930-1960’,
La Trobe Library Journal, vol 10 no 40, Spring 1987, pp 77-96 (a condensed and revised version of this
article appeared as ‘Cultivating the armchair reader: the circulating library movement in Melbourne,
1930-1960’, Australian Cultural History, no 11. 1992, pp 67-79).
60 JW Metcalfe, ‘The library scene in New South Wales’, Library Journal [Melbourne] vol Ino 2, July 1937,
pp 9-12. In New South Wales, the Libraries Advisory Committee, chaired by WH Ifould, recommended
a system of rate-supported free public libraries, assisted by a government subsidy, and prepared a
draft Library Bill. New South Wales, Libraries Advisory Committee, Public library services: report of
the Libraries Advisory Committee to the Honourable DH Drummond, MLA. (Minister for Education in New
South Wales), Sydney, Government Printer, 1939; reprinted 1940.
61 AB Foxcroft, The Australian Institute of Librarians’, Library Journal [Melbourne], vol Ino 3, October
1937, pl 2.
62 K Davison, The Ballarat Mechanics’ Institute and its relations with hbrarianship 1920-1951’, in
Peopling a profession: papers from the Fourth Forum on Australian Library History, Monash University, 25
and 26 September 1989, edited by Frank Upward and Jean P Whyte, Melbourne, Ancora Press, 1991,
pp16~17. See also K Davison, The Ballarat Mechanics’ Institute 1859-1951 and the influence of Henry Cole
Batten 1911-1951, MLib thesis, Monash University, 1993.
63 The Free Library Service Board was appointed in May 1947 to encourage the establishment of free
libraries and to administer State subsidies to public libraries and institutes.
64 ‘Library Association of Victoria’, Library Journal [Melbourne], December 1947, pp 2-3.
63 N Horrocks, The Carnegie Corporation of New York and its impact on library development in Australia, PhD
thesis, University of Pittsburgh. 1971, p 204.
Forerunners


66 ibid., p 205.
67 The New South Wales Railway and Tramway Institute was founded in 1891 and included sports and
recreation facilities, educational programs and a lending library. The mam institute was in Sydney,
with branches in the main rail centres.
68 WH Ifould to HM Green, 4 November 1926, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
69 ibid.
70 Library Federation of Australia and New Zealand [draft Constitution], c 1927, enclosed with FE Meleng
to WH Ifould. 1 March 1927, ALIA records, NLA. M 57446, box 109.
71 WH Ifould to FE Meleng, 22 April 1927, State Library of New South Wales (SLNSW) archives, box
NPL 37, out-letters January-June 1927. Another copy in ALIA records, NLA M 57446, box 109.
72 Australian Library Conference, 21-23 August 1928 [Programme], [Melbourne, 1928?].
73 The Commonwealth National Library, formerly known as the Commonwealth Parliamentary Library,
was both a national and a parliamentary library. It was divided into the National Library of Australia
and the Commonwealth Parliamentary Library in 1960. The Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research (CSIR) was established in 1926. It became the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organization (later Organisation) (CSIRO) in 1949.
74 Proceedings of the Australian Library Conference held at the University of Uelboume, August 1 928, Melbourne,
Government Printer, 1928, p 3.
75 The sustained contact between university librarians has been described in Jean P Whyte, ‘Professional
discourse among university librarians in Australia 1926-1937’, in Innovation no stranger: essays in Aus-
tralian librarianship in honour of Ira Raymond , edited by Margy Burn and Christobel Palmer, Adelaide,
Investigator Press for the Barr Smith Library, 1982, pp 69-82.
76 CH Bertie, ‘The organization of a lending library’, Proceedings of the Australian Library Conference,
ppls-22. T Fleming Cooke, ‘The Public Lending Library of Victoria’, Proceedings of the Australian
Library Conference , pp4l-47.
77 ER Pitt, ‘Co-operation in library work’, Proceedings of the Australian Library Conference, pp4B-56.
GM Wallace, ‘School libraries, the true foundation of a national public library’, Proceedings of the
Australian Library Conference, pp 36-40.
78 E Morris Miller, ‘The relation of state and municipal libraries: a question of policy’, Proceedings of the
Australian Library Conference, pp 33-35.
79 WH Ifould, Australia requires a better library service’, Proceedings of the Australian Library Conference,
ppB-14.
80 S Talbot Smith, ‘Libraries seen abroad’, Proceedings of the Australian Library Conference, p5B.
81 Great Britain. Board of Education. Public Libraries Committee, Report on public libraries in England and
Wales: presented by the President of the Board of Education to Parliament by Command of His Majesty, May
1927, (Kenyon Report; Cmd. 2868), London, HMSO, 1927. Reprinted, [London], University Microfilms
for the College of Librarianship, Wales, 1970. The committee was chaired by Sir Frederic Kenyon
(1863-1952), scholar and administrator, director of the British Museum 1909-1930.
82 H Rutherford Purnell, ‘Report on public libraries in England and Wales’, Proceedings of the Australian
Library Conference, p 32.
83 DB Copland, ‘Foreword’, Proceedings of the Australian Library Conference, p 3.
84 P Biskup, Libraries in Australia, p 386. N Horrocks, The Carnegie Corporation, p2OB.
85 N Horrocks, The Carnegie Corporation, p 203.
86 DJ Jones, WH Ifould and the development of library services in New South Wales, pp23o, 273.
87 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p4B.
88 ibid., p 49.


89 WH Ifould to HM Green, 18 September 1928, SLNSW archives, NPL4O.
90 WH Ifould to FE Meleng, 9 October 1929, SLNSW archives, NPL4I.
91 Letter and draft constitution, WH Ifould to HM Green, 29 April 1930, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 109; WH Ifould to K Binns, 17 March 1930, SLNSW archives, NPL43; WH Ifould to FE Meleng,
24 March 1930, SLNSW archives, NPL43; WH Ifould to K Binns, 11 April 1930, SLNSW archives,
NPL43. The libraries which would be represented at the inaugural meeting were the Public Library,
Fisher Library, the Sydney Municipal Library, the New South Wales Parliamentary Library, the Com-
monwealth National Library and the Schools of Arts in Sydney and Newcastle (WH Ifould to K Binns,
29 April 1930, SLNSW archives, NPL43).
92 Letter and draft constitution, WH Ifould to HM Green, 29 April 1930, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 109.
93 AL Johnson and RF Doust, ‘The Library Association of Australia: statement of history, objects, activ-
ities and achievements’, Australian Library Journal , vol 14, no 1, March 1965, p 2.
94 JW Metcalfe, Public library service in and from Brisbane: a report together with a new introduction, Brisbane,
Library Board of Queensland, 1974, pp viii—ix. This is a reprint of a report which Metcalfe submitted
to the Library Board of Queensland in 1945.
93 WH Ifould, ‘Presidential Address: the future of the Institute’, p!2.
96 DJ Jones, WH Ifould and the development of library services in New South Wales, pp 37, 50-62.
97 Letter and draft constitution. WH Ifould to HM Green, 29 April 1930, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 109.
98 WH Ifould to KS Cunningham, [late 1960/early 1961], ACER archives, Series 49, item 189.
99 See WH Ifould’s marginal note on page 14 of his copy of KS Cunningham, The Australian Council for
Educational Research and library services in Australia, Melbourne, ACER, 1961, SLNSW, Mitchell Library,
MLMSS 1878.
100 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p5O.
101 In conversations with Jean P Whyte in the 1950 s Metcalfe suggested that the standards of librarian-
ship, education and even intelligence in the Premier State were higher than in the rest of the country.
This, he told her, could be clearly seen in the correspondence columns of the local newspapers and
in the answers of candidates for the Association’s examinations.


3
Stirrings
If we have a conference,
we don’t want it to he a dud. 102


Five years elapsed before the optimism of the f 928 meeting of the Australian Library As-
sociation could be revisited at a full conference. There were pressing global reasons for this
delay, as the intervening years encompassed the darkest days of the Great Depression, In
some libraries money for acquisitions dried up completely. In others it was drastically reduced,
a situation exacerbated by the decline in the purchasing power of the Australian pound. Salaries
were cut. Staff vacancies remained unfilled. In New South Wales the remaining subsidies to
schools of arts libraries were discontinued . Non-essential activities were curtailed, and associ-
ations of librarians were not a high priority.
A conference is proposed
In November 1931 the Institutes Association of South Australia wrote to Ifould asking when
a branch would be formed in New South Wales and when a conference could be organised
in Sydney, ‘as promised at the Melbourne Conference in August 1928’. 103 The economic crisis
gave Ifould a good reason not to act, although as far as he was concerned he had broken no
promises; at the 1928 conference, he later declared, he had undertaken merely ‘to discuss the
matter with the New South Wales librarians’. 104
Binns reluctantly agreed with Ifould and Green that the time was not right for the formation
of an association in New South Wales and the Federal Capital Territory. Binns wrote: ‘While
strongly favouring the formation of an Association, I quite agree that it is out of the question
to attempt to do so at the present time. The expense connected with the holding of a confer-
ence—as well as the labour involved—could not be justified under existing conditions’. 103 And
so the matter was left in abeyance, and the federal alliance remained unconsummated.
It was not until the faint rosy hue of a new dawn and a ‘New Deaf appeared on the eastern
horizon in the form of the landslide victory of Franklin Delano Roosevelt in the American
Presidential election of November 1932 that hopes, though not yet actual conditions, began
to lift. Thoughts of the Australian Library Association leaders turned once again to a national
conference, and the spotlight naturally fell on Sydney.
The 1933 conference
When they had dispersed after the 1928 meeting, the affiliates of the Australian Library Asso-
ciation in other States had assumed that an association would be formed in New South Wales
without undue delay. They now expected the first conference of a fully fledged federal association
to be held in Sydney. To their dismay, Ifould, head of the largest library and the most substantial
body of trained librarians in New South Wales, who should have been most closely involved in
any conference in Sydney, was still equivocal. He told Binns that everything depended upon his
Trustees at the Public Library of New South Wales finding the funds: ‘lf we have a conference,
we don’t want it to be a dud’. 106 When Ifould put his mind to something, it usually happened
sooner or later. He was clearly not minded to host a conference at which institute keepers and
Sir William Sowden, his old antagonist from South Australia, would have equal status with his
highly trained, professional staff, and —even more unpalatably —with himself. His staff had
made their opposition to the Australian Library Association crystal clear on the one occasion
he had raised it with them. The expected Sydney conference did not eventuate, but the idea of
a formal gathering did not die completely.
When they noted their northern neighbour’s inertia, the Victorian library community set
about organising the Association’s second conference themselves, and it was duly held on 23
and 24 November 1933 at the Public Library of Victoria. 107 Sowden, the Association’s President


since 1928, was in the chair. Purnell, the Treasurer, read a report of the executive covering the
previous five years. In moving adoption of this report, Sowden was at pains to correct a misap-
prehension which he believed had affected the attitude of some professional librarians. The
Association, he maintained, was not primarily a group of amateurs: professionals would not lose
status by mixing with people from the institutes. He had the New South Wales contingent in his
audience very much in mind. Morris Miller broached this subject more directly, regretting the
failure of New South Wales to follow the other States which had taken the plunge but adding
that he felt sure that it would eventually form an affiliated association.
Resentment towards New South Wales injected a sour note into an otherwise harmonious
gathering. Behind the scenes there were bitter mutterings and ‘criticism of Ifould as having
broken a promise’. 108 As Metcalfe later humorously put it, ‘with the ratlike cunning which is
our most noted characteristic’, New South Wales librarians left the Australian Library Associ-
ation to sink: ‘in fact, except for our captain who came hastily ashore, we did not embark on
the ill-fated ship’. 109
The focus of the delegates’ resentment did not actually attend the conference. The Association
had asked Ifould’s Trustees to appoint a delegate, but they declined to do so. On this occasion
Ifould, who more often than not got his own way with his Trustees, had not pressed them. 110 He
therefore avoided facing the inevitable recriminations about his inaction. Instead John Metcalfe,
his newly appointed deputy, went ‘on his own initiative’, giving the gathering the appearance at
least of representation across all library sectors and States ol the Commonwealth, an impression
which the conference organisers had very good reason to wish to present. 111
In fact Metcalfe’s keen observation of the conference participants, and in particular of the
leading lights of the Australian Library Association, would steel his resolve and that of his New
South Wales colleagues to have nothing at all to do with an association which put institute
‘librarians’ on a par with library professionals. Compared with ‘real’ librarians like Scott and
Frazer and the imposing figure of Frank Tate, the others ‘had to be seen and heard to be believed;
Institute or School of Arts secretary-librarian-billiard markers, illdressed, poorly shaven, never
well paid and with the bitter wind of the depression blowing on them, one I remember, nail
biting, teeth grinding; the state libraries got too big a share of State money the shark’s share,
keeping down institute libraries’. 112 Metcalfe was disconcerted to find at the conference that the
institutes and their prejudices were still dominant; the Association was riven by irreconcilable
schools of thought. 113 He acknowledged the shrewdness of the views of Ida Leeson, who was
then Mitchell Librarian at the Public Library of New South Wales and a leading voice among
the women librarians in Sydney. In earlier discussions with Ifould she had expressed her belief
that there was opposition within the provisional Australian Library Association to free and
State libraries, to professional librarians and to women. After his first-hand experience in 1933
Metcalfe commented: ‘All Miss Leeson had said was still true’. 114
An impressive debut
This conference marked Metcalfe’s debut on the national stage, and the thirty-two year-old was
for the first time mixing with the elder statesmen of the profession. His self-confidence was
tempered by a degree of respect for his elders: ‘I was a mixture of brash young man, something
of an academic intellectual introvert, and a child among them taking notes’. 1 ' 5 He immediately
gained attention as a rising star of the profession, revealing the dominant side of his character
which would later become familiar to his colleagues. He read an excellent and controversial
paper and crossed swords with Miller about the functions of State libraries, the encouragement


of local authors and the training of librarians. His confidence, which made him a most persuas-
ive speaker, had not developed overnight. As a young man he had been Introspective, very
well able to talk amongst boon companions but not able to address a meeting’, 11 ' 1 By now he
was showing some of the evidence of the grooming to which Ifould had been subjecting him,
including the benefits of elocution lessons." 7
Metcalfe’s paper on public libraries in Australia was sufficiently important for an expanded
version to be published in Library Association Record in the United Kingdom in the following
year. 118 The paper focused upon New South Wales with some information about Victoria and
South Australia, but it had little to say about the other States. Its main interest for us lies in the
opinions expressed under the heading ‘Professional librarianship’.
In this part of the published version, which Metcalfe may not actually have delivered at
the conference, he explains that although the other States had joined the Australian Library
Association ‘New South Wales has been a notable abstainer. It may be divined that there is an
undercurrent of opposition, and a possibility of competition, between the institute ‘amateurs’
and the State Library ‘professionals’; the latter feel themselves in the position of a minority which
has a sacred flame to tend, and standards to maintain not always understood by an enthusiastic
but less discriminating majority ... There is every reason for co-operation, and therefore as-
sociation between the institutes which are weakened by excessive decentralisation; whilst the
professional librarians might find their solution of the problem in a purely professional body,
to which institute officers could be admitted on a personal basis when they attained a defined
degree of experience and competence in librarianship’. 119
So we see that as early as 1933 Metcalfe could conceive of a purely professional association,
with some method of governing entry to its ranks by assessing experience and competence.
This was but a short step from an exclusively professional association with some means of cer-
tification to separate the sheep from the goats at the entry point. It was also a refinement of the
membership provisions of the stillborn Library Association of New South Wales and the Federal
Capital Territory, which Ifould, Green, Binns and Bertie had considered in 1930. 120 This had
embraced full members, who were wholly employed in library work, and associate members,
who simply had an interest in libraries.
In his paper Metcalfe was tolerant of the institute library system, though not of institute
‘librarians’. He also suggested that ‘when classes exist that cannot afford books it is one solu-
tion to give them books free, out of revenue .., But when personal income is sufficient for the
hire of books there seems no reason why it should not be levied on ... There seems no reason,
therefore, why a public library system should not include libraries, institute or municipal, mak-
ing a charge for their services’. 121
Here we see a young Metcalfe, not yet having to pay much attention to the politics and
practicalities of implementing a public library system, examining the purposes and the social
justice issues of library services. He would quickly learn the importance of practicalities in this
far-from-benign environment: the correspondence between the leaders in New South Wales
from 1935 to 1937, for example, is liberally laced with politics and spiced with intrigue.
Issues of the day
The other papers presented were on professional problems and provoked a lively debate. Miller
spoke on the ‘Encouragement of Australian writers’, stimulating considerable discussion, with
Metcalfe asking whether it was the library’s business to support the literature of any country
and Purnell saying that what should be encouraged was bibliography and bibliographical


research. McMicken asked Miller to explain what an Australian writer was, and Miller admitted
the difficulty of definition. 122
McMicken’s paper on school and children’s libraries provoked discussion by Wallace, Pur-
nell, Miller, Metcalfe and Sowden. Purnell’s paper on imperial and international co-operation
in libraries resulted in a resolution that Purnell should investigate the subject when he was in
England in 1934. 123
A discussion on training lor librarianship (Miller had not had the time to write a paper on
the topic) was opened by Purnell, who thought that classes in librarianship should be organised.
Pitt supported this suggestion, and the conference delegates resolved That it be an instruction
to the Executive of the Australian Library Association that they take steps to urge the initiation
of training courses in librarianship’. 124
Professionalism was also at issue in another motion, which addressed the contentious ap-
pointment of a non-librarian to a senior library post: That in future in all appointments to senior
positions in public, university and similar libraries in the Commonwealth, library experience
should be considered an essential factor’. 123
Appointments of non-librarians had been a running sore in Australian librarianship for years.
The State librarians had been appalled by the appointment of a journalist, JDA Collier, to head
the Public Library in Hobart in 1923, and by Green’s appointment at the University of Sydney
in 1921. 126 Too many positions are being filled by men without adequate qualifications’, Miller
had told Ifould a decade before, and the position was no better in the 19305, particularly in
academic libraries. 127 A letter signed by ‘library officers’ throughout Australia and New Zealand
had been circulated, protesting against Collier’s and Green’s appointments, but to no avail. Ifould
too had taken strong objection to Collier’s appointment but thought that a protest was futile:
he preferred to make the best of a bad job, as he had done with Green, and had arranged for
Collier to undergo a period of training in Sydney. 128
In 1933 the latest outrage centred on WA Cowan, a young scholar with no knowledge
of library administration whatever, who had been appointed librarian of the University of
Adelaide. The Association’s concern at his appointment would later be shared by Munn and
Pitt, although in the event Cowan accepted the challenge of his position, gained a tertiary
professional qualification at the University of Michigan, and remained University Librarian in
Adelaide for thirty-one years. 129
A survey is requested
The most significant and almost immediate consequence of the 1933 conference, however, and
to Metcalfe the principal reason for holding the conference in the first place, was the decision
to endorse a formal request to the Carnegie Corporation of New York for a survey of Austral-
ian library services. 130 Seventy years later the resulting report is still attracting the attention of
library commentators. 131
When Scott had first floated the idea of a Camegie-sponsored survey at a meeting of the
Library Association of Victoria in 1929 its President, Frank Tate, had undertaken to follow up
the suggestion. Tate, the retired Director of Education in Victoria, was already known to the
Carnegie Corporation of New York. He was Foundation Chairman of the Australian Council for
Educational Research, which was established in 1929 with Carnegie support to study aspects
of education and to promote educational advancement in Australia. The Corporation also had
some idea of the state of libraries in Australia. There had been several Carnegie-sponsored visits
to Australia by educationists, which facilitated the exchange of ideas and alerted the Corporation
Uniting a profession


to areas in which its support might prove fruitful. James E Russell, Dean Emeritus of the Teach-
ers’ College, Columbia University, had visited Australia in 1928. Lotus D Coffman, President
of the University of Minnesota, and COG Douie, Secretary of the University of London, made
separate visits in 1932. Although these observers had a broader focus, all commented on the
general paucity of library resources in Australia, 132
When he had made his initial approach in writing to the Corporation, followed by a visit to
the United States in 1932, Tate believed that he had the support of all the Australian librarians
who mattered: those in the university and State libraries, the Library Association of Victoria
and the Australian Library Association. Ihe Corporations response was encouraging, although
it sought an assurance that there was also widespread support for such a survey on the part of
Australian library authorities, the boards of trustees of the various State libraries.
After Tate had reported on these preliminary negotiations to conference delegates in 1933,
ER Pitt read a paper on the proposed survey before moving ‘that the Australian Library Asso-
ciation approves very cordially of the suggestion that a survey of Australian libraries should be
undertaken by the Carnegie Corporation of New York’. 134 The groundwork for this motion had
been carefully laid by the Library Association of Victoria months before the conference. The
Victorians had been in touch with other State associations (including the Institutes Association
of South Australia) and had been able to report to Tate that all were in favour of the Carnegie
survey. Pitt had also written on behalf of his own Board at the Public Library of Victoria to the
other State libraries asking their Trustees to co-operate with such a survey.
As they had been reluctant to form an association, it was believed that the New South Wales
librarians, and Ifould in particular, might prove difficult about the proposed survey. Surprisingly
there were no special measures to mollify or to lobby Ifould. He first found out about a firm
proposal for a survey and the request for co-operation when he received Pitts letter addressed
to his Trustees. This letter came out of the blue and provided no background information, but
Ifould’s Trustees resolved nonetheless to co-operate fully with the survey. 135
Pitt’s motion at the conference therefore passed without difficulty—in fact it was carried
unanimously. The conference also appointed a committee to be involved in the proposed survey,
with representatives from all states. 13(1 In the event, this committee was never formally consulted,
and a further resolution to make the Australian Library Association the official channel for com-
munication with the Carnegie Corporation of New York was also ignored. In the meantime,
having received favourable responses from State library boards and being able to report that
all states had been represented at the conference —Metcalfe being the de facto representative
of the Public Library of New South Wales —Tate duly made a formal request to the Carnegie
Corporation for the survey to take place. 137
Although the 1933 conference was not such a large and enthusiastic gathering as that of
1928 understandable in the light of the economic crisis through which the participants were
still living—both conferences had been successful. Australian librarians had shown that they
were interested in important professional issues and were willing to look to overseas expertise
to supplement their own experience and abilities. The Australian Library Association itself ap-
peared to be alive and fairly well, at least in Victoria, and looked as though it could indeed grow
as a national association. Except for nagging doubts about the failure of New South Wales to
form an affiliate there was certainly no suggestion that it was doomed.
An incoming executive was elected, this time Melbourne-based, with ER Pitt the President,
McMicken the Secretary and Boys the Treasurer. Ihe final paper of the conterence was
Stirrings


Wallace’s The future of the Association’, in which he outlined plans for future activities and ways
in which the Association could increase its usefulness. 138 No-one could have known then that
this would be the final paper at its final conference. The Association may have had no future,
but it did have an immediate and enduring legacy; the Carnegie survey.
The Carnegie survey
A leading American librarian, Ralph Munn, director of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, was
selected by the Corporation to carry out the survey. As was the Corporations practice, a local
associate was then sought to assist and accompany the principal surveyor. There has been
much speculation surrounding the choice of Munn’s Australian associate. John Russell of the
Corporation contacted Andrew Osborn, an Australian then working at the New York Public
Library, and asked him for his ideas on who might partner Munn. The Carnegie files record that
his response was to the effect that Ifould was the senior librarian in Australia. Osborn’s recollec-
tion of the incident, over half a century later, was different. He believed he suggested Binns, as
Binns was remote from interstate rivalries, but Russell then told him that the Corporation had
already decided to use ER Pitt, 139 Given the fact that New South Wales had not affiliated with
the Australian Library Association, that the Library Association of Victoria had first suggested
the survey and that Pitt was its President in 1934, as well as President of the Australian Library
Association, the choice of Pitt seems to have been inevitable. It is interesting to note, however,
as Horrocks has remarked, that Pitt’s appointment as co-surveyor was regarded as personal,
rather than as representative of the Australian Library Association. 140
Ifould had no illusions about why he could not be selected as Munn’s partner He knew
that he would not have been acceptable as a co-surveyor within Australia and would in any
case have refused an invitation to become one. He privately recorded, ‘[l] would have refused
because 1 was publicly committed to strong opposition to the existing subscription library
system a priori’. 141 He believed that both Tate and Munn were aware of his attitude, but just
how much Tate actually knew about Ifould at this stage is open to speculation. At the 1933
conference, Metcalfe later recalled, ‘1 remember Tate telling me that all he could learn about
Ifould was that he was impossible to get on with, though he was clearly the ablest Australian
librarian at the time’. 142
According to Cunningham , director of the Australian Council for Educational Research, it was
Munn who had nominated Pitt, because of his ‘work in the held of librarianship’, and Austral-
ian library politics and personalities did not enter into it. 143 As Metcalfe later noted, Ifould and
Binns were both senior to Pitt in length of service as a senior librarian (so for that matter was
Battye of the Public Library of Western Australia, who had been a chief librarian since 1894,
but Metcalfe did not mention him). 144
The only other person who might been considered to have sufficient qualifications for the
job would have been Purnell, a Fellow of the Library Association of the United Kingdom, whose
British background might well have been an advantage to Munn but whose State was the heart-
land of the institutes movement and whose Board might not have released him for the survey.
In any case, Munn needed a co-author who knew the Australian scene, and who understood
the ways that Australian bureaucracies worked. Surely no-one could complain about the choice
of ER Pitt, the Chief Librarian of the Public Library of Victoria.
It is unclear how sensitive the Corporation really was to interstate and Commonwealth/State
rivalries, and whether, as Metcalfe has suggested, they also took into account Ifould’s failure
to press for the formation of a New South Wales branch of the Australian Library Association.
35
Uniting a profession


Despite the Public Library of New South Wales Trustees’ agreement to co-operate fully with
the survey there were lingering doubts about Ifould’s attitude. Metcalfe recalled that Munn and
Tate told him that they believed that Ifould would be ‘quite unco-operative’. 145 There had even
been suggestions that New South Wales should be excluded from the survey. 146
Munn and Tate need not have been concerned. Ifould wrote to Pitt: ‘You may be sure I
shall do everything possible to assist’ and was as good as his word. 147 He would in fact assist
the Carnegie surveyors most willingly, and in subsequent dealings both Tate and Cunningham
found him very co-operative. As Cunningham later recalled, ‘indeed we had much admiration
for him’. They had more difficulty with Pitt, who in later years procrastinated and was difficult
to deal with. 148
When Ralph Munn and his wife arrived in Sydney on 21 May 1934 aboard the Mariposa,
Ifould, having experienced American hospitality on more than one occasion himself, made sure
that they felt welcome. Flowers from his garden brightened their hotel room. He arranged a
welcome luncheon in a private dining room at the recently refurbished Hotel Metropole, where
they met Pitt and Tate, as well as the leading librarians of Sydney, and DH Drummond, the New
South Wales Minister for Education, thus underlining the importance which the government
ascribed to the issue of library services. 149
Pitt carried out his part in the survey with great thoroughness, sending a questionnaire to
all of the 1500 known libraries in Australia, co-ordinating Munn’s appointments and activ-
ities and providing background information and local knowledge. It was a good combination,
Ifould thought: the dynamic and straight-shooting Munn and the ‘gradualist’ Pitt. 150 During
two months in 1934 Munn and Pitt inspected over one hundred libraries around Australia and
drafted and redrafted their report.
The report is published
The publication of the report by the Australian Council for Educational Research was deliberately
delayed until January 1935 in the hope that it would gain additional coverage during the news-
paper ‘silly season’. 151 This careful planning, combined with the simple, but colourful language of
Ralph Munn, meant that the report did command attention. It was all that progressive Australian
librarians could have wished for. Much of the attention paid to the report naturally focused upon
the criticism of the backward state of Australia’s libraries. Those unaware of the abysmal state
of affairs were shocked out of their complacency by Munn’s uncompromising phrases. Those
with an inkling of good library services who had written or spoken out on the need for a better
library system in Australia were delighted that the issue was at last being heeded.
For many were aware of the shortcomings of Australian libraries. Some Australian librarians
had visited Europe and the United States and had returned with eyes opened. Several, includ-
ing Miller, Purnell, ER Pitt, Metcalfe, McMicken and Ifould, had already written critically on
the lack of good public libraries in Australia, Unfortunately a succession of insightful books,
articles and papers had been consistently ignored , beginning with Miller’s Libraries and education,
which had been published as long ago as 1912. Papers at the Australian library conferences of
1928 and 1933 had taken up the public library issue, as had ER Pitt’s The essential features of a
good public library and Metcalfe’s paper on Australian library services in the Library Association
Record. However, none of these publications had managed to stir any of the politically powerful
to compare Australia’s poor library services with those across the Pacific or in the Old Country. 07
It needed an outside expert to do that, and Australia was lucky to find such an effective cham-
pion as Ralph Munn. The Munn-Pitt Report was powerful propaganda for the proponents of a
Stirrings


free public library system. 153 As Remington and Metcalfe later put it, ‘We required the prophet
from abroad, and fortunately he came’. 154
Many people were unhappy with the report: the Institutes Association of South Australia
repudiated it, and institutes elsewhere were shocked by it. The State librarians and Binns, on the
other hand, issued a statement endorsing the report, but, to protect Purnell from unnecessary
recriminations, they did not describe the statement as ‘unanimous’. Because of the harsh words
about institutes in the statement, Purnell’s Trustees at the Public Library of South Australia did not
approve his signing it. ‘What an extraordinarily little-minded crowd they are!’ Binns exclaimed
to Ifould, ‘Poor Purnell! Fancy having to serve under a crowd like that!’ 155
‘1 have a pack of ravening wolves on my trail headed by a mutual “friend”’, Purnell told Ifould.
The ‘friend’ was Sowden, with whom Ifould had fallen out a quarter of a century before. 156 Had
Sowden still been the President of the Australian Library Association, rather than Pitt, who
knows what sparks would have flown in the aftermath of the Munn-Pitt Report. As it was, the
Association did not even meet to consider it.
In many ways the report’s success lay in its shock value and its trenchant criticism, rather
than in the reforms actually proposed. In fact Tate’s introduction to the report was a stronger
statement on free libraries than the report itself, containing the rallying-call: ‘lt now remains for
those who believe in the necessity for an adequate library system to see to it that the results of
this survey are kept prominently before the Australian people. A great amount of enthusiastic
formative work must be forthcoming before public opinion is sufficiently aroused to make a
compelling demand for a new library policy’. 157
Library associations
The report did contain a recommendation for a strong national association of librarians, devoting
a whole chapter to ‘Library Associations’. After a brief outline of the history of library associations
in Australia, the report suggested the sort of association that was needed and commented briefly
on those which then existed in the various States. The significance of the Library Association
of Victoria was acknowledged, but the authors did not mince words about the folly of allow-
ing it to disburse government funds; ‘The real danger in allowing the library association to act
as a government agent in dealing with libraries lies in the threat of its becoming a strong and
permanent force in opposition to the Public (state) Library. This is what has occurred in South
Australia where the Public (state) Library and the Institutes Association are both recognised as
government agencies and between whom there is jealousy, fear, and entire lack of co-operation
The Library Association of Victoria should be regarded as an important ally, and it should
be called upon officially for information and advice’. 158 The report therefore recommended that
the distribution of government subsidy to local libraries should be vested in the Public Library
of Victoria. This criticism did not seem to have antagonised the Library Association of Victoria
in the least: unlike the Institutes Association of South Australia it welcomed the report and later
lobbied for and held meetings to advocate free rate-supported public libraries.
The surveyors urged that the reasons for the past failure to establish a national association
should be frankly examined. They then stated what they saw as some of the problems: the
trained librarians were ‘apt to consider that their interests lie solely in the discussion of “aca-
demic” questions regarding library technique’ and had ‘failed to realise their responsibility for
the general library development of the state, and have not been particularly interested in the
problems of small libraries’. This attitude had been fostered by ‘the general aloofness of their
trustees from other than their own immediate interests’. 159


The report canvassed something close to the existing Australian Library Association and its
affiliate, the Library Association of Victoria: ‘lt is essential for the success of any association that
it should consist, at any rate at present, of a large and even preponderant majority of untrained
librarians and laymen’, 160 In the next breath, however, it lent support to the New South Wales
position: ‘lt is just as essential, however, that the distinction [between trained and untrained
librarians] should be explicitly recognised, as an association without trained librarians would
meet with indifferent success’. 161
The report therefore advocated that the following principles be observed in the formation
of a national association: ‘(1) The president should be a man of such outstanding educational
qualifications, that professional librarians would be glad to acknowledge him as their leader, even
though he lacked acquaintance with library technique. (2) Trained librarians should be given
a higher status than their confreres and should be given larger representation on the governing
body in proportion to their numbers’. 162
The report goes on to discuss the problems of defining trained librarians and suggests ways
of allowing older members in, while setting up a training system for younger ones. It then notes
that the Australian Library Association had been recognised as the successor to the first national
body, the Library Association of Australasia, by the formal handing over to it of the balance of
the funds of the earlier Association. The report notes that the Australian Library Association
had been active, holding two conferences at which professional papers were read, protesting
against the appointment of untrained librarians and instructing its executive to take steps for
the initiation of courses of training for librarians.
The suggestions made in the report do not seem to preclude the reform of the Australian
Library Association. As for its presidency, there had already been one lay president, Sir William
Sowden, so that the suggestion of a distinguished president from outside the ranks of librarians
might well have found favour, although that particular president would have been anathema to
Ifould. Munn too had a dim view of Sowden —in a private note to the President of the Carnegie
Corporation, Dr Frederick Keppel, he wrote: ‘From the report you learned of the warfare between
the Public Library [of South Australia] and the Institutes Association. A funeral service over
Sir William Sowden the founder and czar of the Institutes Association must come before there
is any chance of peace’. 163 Munn would certainly not have wanted to give that old war horse a
new lease of life. When he and Pitt wrote of a distinguished president with ‘such outstanding
educational qualifications, that professional librarians would be glad to acknowledge him as
their leader’, it is very likely that they had Frank Tate in mind to bring librarians and others
together in a remodelled association.
Munn and Pitt were making a clear attempt to steer a safe course through the conflicting
views of Australia’s librarians, professional and otherwise. When Munn later came to tackle New
Zealand libraries in association with local librarian John Barr he was able to be much more direct
in his recommendations for the Libraries Association of New Zealand. That Association is urged
to get on with realising its objects, to mount a campaign to educate the public on libraries, to
improve legislation, to improve the professional education of librarians, to set up a professional
library on librarianship and to publish a library journal. 164
Immediate consequences of the report
After the publication of the Munn-Pitt Report a number of things began to happen quite quickly,
stimulated mainly by indications that the Carnegie Corporation was ready to help implement
the report by providing financial support. To do so it would need advice from informed locals


or risk an avalanche of unco-ordinated requests for financial assistance which it would be in
no position to evaluate properly. The Corporation was well aware, from the report and from
Munn’s private comments when he returned to the United States, that there was no professional
association to consult in Australia when the Corporation needed advice on grants for study tours
for up-and-coming Australian librarians or on how generally to further the recommendations
of the report. Keppel was able to gauge the impotence of the Australian Library Association for
himself when he visited Australia soon after the publication of the report. As Tate delicately
phrased it in a letter to Binns, Ifould and Purnell in April 1935, ‘lf it were proposed to bring
into existence some body representative of all the library interests there would probably be
difficulties as to personnel and clashing interests’. 165
The Library Group
Instead Keppel suggested that a ‘small advisory committee consisting of professional librarians,
together with a representation from the Australian Council for Educational Research (ACER)
might advise the Corporation from time to time’. 166 For the time being Tate proposed that such
a committee would consist of ER Pitt, Ifould, Binns and Purnell, together with Cunningham
and Tate himself. Thus began the Library Group, which met in Melbourne for the first time in
April 1935, with TF Cooke deputising for Pitt, who was overseas on a Carnegie-sponsored study
visit. 167 The Group, whose expenses were paid by the Carnegie Corporation, would meet on
twenty-one occasions between 1935 and February 1948. Although created as a substitute for a
formal association of professionals, the Library Group was so useful to the Corporation that it
would survive the creation of the AIL and actually ran in parallel with it for eleven years.
Almost simultaneously other possible roles for the Australian Library Association were being
assumed by another body, this one also closely associated in its infancy with Frank Tate and
the ACER. In early 1935 Tate had handed to Geoffrey Remington a copy ol the newly printed
Munn-Pitt Report with words to the effect: ‘So you want to help poor suffering humanity, do
you? Well get your teeth into this’. 168 Remington was a well-known Sydney figure, a solicitor
and businessman who involved himself in a range of organisations, including the Australian
Institute of Political Science (of which he was a founder member) and the Constitutional Associ-
ation of New South Wales. 169 He became fascinated by the opportunities for social improvement
through free public libraries and helped organise a meeting at Chatswood-Willoughby School
of Arts on 26 June 1935 at which the future of library services was discussed. Ifould addressed
forty representatives of parents and citizens’ and progress associations on free public libraries,
emphasising the need for a demonstration of unity in order to attract government support. At
this meeting an organisation ‘to be known as the Free Library Movement, having in general the
objects outlined by Mr. WH Ifould’ was formed. 170
The Free Library Movement
As Ifould later described his relationship with the Movement, ‘1 am careful not even to be a
member of it much less an executive officer, but for all that I have taken care that the policy of
the Free Library Movement should be our [that is, the Library’s] policy’. 1/1 One of the Move-
ment’s great strengths, as Metcalfe later pointed out, was that it was essentially a laymens
movement’. 172 It was not directly associated with a profession guarding its own interests but a
grass-roots movement, working through branches and associated with organisations which en-
joyed widespread community support. Its office-bearers were such prominent figures as former
Prime Minister Billy Hughes, businessman and former Minister for Commerce Sir Frederick
Stewart and Country Women’s Association co-founder Ruth Fairfax, who had married into the
family which owned the Sydney Morning Herald. Behind the scenes there were close links with


the librarians: Metcalfe was destined to play a leading role in the Movement’s activities as its
‘informal adviser’ and attended all its executive and council meetings. Metcalfe’s wife Thelma
was an early member of the Movement’s executive committee. Ifould attended the Movement’s
council meetings. 173
The Movement’s objects were simply expressed: To advocate and work for the establishment
of Free Libraries. To create and foster public opinion on the value of Free Libraries’. 174 The con-
stitution was endorsed on 25 November 1935, the centenary of the birth of Andrew Carnegie,
and the Movement was formally launched at a well-reported meeting at the Public Library of
New South Wales. Delegates were urged to return to their districts and set up branches of the
Movement, involving local members of parliament, representatives of progress associations,
chambers of commerce, municipal and shire councils, parents and citizens’ associations and
similar bodies. 175
Remington became the leading light of the Free Library Movement from its inception. It was
largely because of his infectious energy, enthusiasm and valuable connections that the Move-
ment had such a firm foundation and made such early progress in New South Wales and, soon
after, in some other States. 176
The Australian Library Association isolated
The creation of the Free Library Movement had the effect of pegging out some of the territory
which might have been occupied by the Australian Library Association, especially in New South
Wales. The Movement’s emphasis was on library promotion and lobbying, with membership
open to a wide range of people interested in libraries but not necessarily working in them as
professionals. To encourage membership, fees were kept to a minimum: one shilling per year
for individuals and five shillings per year for organisations. 177 Given its links with the library
leadership, the Movement would dovetail very neatly with any association made up purely of
professional librarians.
The Australian Library Association at this time had gone into suspended animation, ‘shocked
out of existence’, as Metcalfe later put it. 178 ‘lt left the port of its 1933 Conference intending to
come to port again in 1935 or 1936, but it struck a mine in the shape of the Munn-Pitt Report,
for which it itself had asked, and wasn’t sighted again.’ 179 The Munn-Pitt Report’s judgement on
the institutes and public library provision in Australia had been devastating for the Association,
all the more so because the Association itself had encouraged the Carnegie survey and its own
President had been one of the surveyors. The members of the Association expected the survey
to help them, not annihilate them. Even in the carefully phrased introduction which Tate wrote
to the report there is no acknowledgement of the Australian Library Association, although he
mentions that the survey was supported by the library associations of South Australia and Vic-
toria. Tate had seen the writing on the wall, and Pitt himself seems to have given up hope for
the Association of which he was President. Had he not been convinced of the hopelessness of
the position of the Australian Library Association, Pitt was in a better position than anyone else
to rescue it, but he did not call members together for a meeting. It was probably just as well that
he did not, as it might have been an occasion for recrimination, with splits and antagonisms
which would have done more harm than good. 180
Pitt and his Victorian colleagues did initially hesitate to go along with suggestions for a different
association, but they did not really fight for the one they had. This was despite evidence in the
report that the Carnegie surveyors thought the Association could be reformed and strengthened
to make it an effective national body. But the librarians in New South Wales had already failed


to form an affiliate of the Australian Library Association because it allowed the ‘librarians’ of
mechanics’ institutes to join. In order to succeed, any alternative association needed to be clearly
seen as having members with a defined expertise not possessed by the people who ran institute
libraries. Any hopes for a rejuvenated Australian Library Association assumed a greater degree
of compromise and accommodation than was ever likely to occur.
Thoughts on a new association
But the call in the Munn-Pitt Report for the formation of a strong national association did not
go unheeded. Surprisingly the first move did not come from the Library Group. Even before
the Library Group had met for the first time Ifould and at least Purnell were thinking about a
library association. On 29 May 1935 Purnell wrote to Ifould about a new association, stressing
the need to define membership carefully, obviously to avoid being swamped by the institutes.
Ifould agreed, later sharing his thoughts with Miller: ‘Most librarians in Australia agree with me
that the [Australian] Library Association, which must contain an overwhelming number of people
who are associated only with the libraries and are not librarians or library assistants, and include
all those associated with the various country institutes or schools of arts throughout the Com-
monwealth, cannot be a satisfactory organisation’. 18 ' Ifould asked Metcalfe and Leeson, his two
most senior officers, to start work drafting a constitution for a more satisfactory alternative. 182
This was just the kind of challenge for which Metcalfe was prepared, and it was in fact he
who did the lion’s share of the work on this first draft. 183 The focus was on an association in
which professional librarians would be in control, and there was no better strategy than to
regulate entry into the profession by examination and qualification. Such a strategy was beyond
the powers and inclinations of the Australian Library Association, but the body which Met-
calfe proposed would not challenge the existing Association head-on. It would be outflanked
by restricting membership of the new body to genuinely experienced or qualified librarians.
In this respect the association Metcalfe had in mind was similar to the Library Association of
New South Wales and the Federal Capital Territory, a draft constitution for which Ifould had
circulated in 1930. 184
Since that time Metcalfe had quite deliberately gained first-hand experience of the two major
overseas library associations. During his visit to the United States and the United Kingdom in
1934-35 Metcalfe had paid special attention to the American Library Association and the Library
Association, ‘in view of the situation which has developed in the Australian Library Associ-
ation’. 185 He had talked with their presidents and secretaries, as well as with many prominent
librarians, and reported back to Ifould upon his return.
Metcalfe gave library education and training particularly close attention, finding that the
Library Association was interested in status and remuneration, conducted examinations, kept a
register of professional librarians and had a Fellowship. Training in the United Kingdom, Met-
calfe thought, was mainly through cadetship, experience and textbooks. The library school at
the University of London was ‘looked on with suspicion and some jealousy by many municipal
librarians, and its certificate is not as yet recognised by the Library Association’. 186
The American Library Association, by contrast, left training to the university schools, left
salaries to individuals and concentrated on ‘a more altruistic fostering of the library move-
ment’. 187 In the United States most people entered the profession via a university library school,
the pre-requisite being a degree in an approved faculty. Metcalfe attended some lectures and
was favourably impressed. He thought that the products of the American library schools, with
a little experience, were on average superior to those in the United Kingdom.


He believed that products of the internal training at the Public Library of New South Wales
could hold their own against American or British librarians with similar experience. He noted,
for example, that Andrew Osborn, who had trained at the Commonwealth National Library,
was doing well at the New York Public Library But the general Australian situation left much
to be desired: ‘We cannot, however, regard the present position of professional librarianship in
Australia as a whole with any complacency’. 188
He concluded that for Australia a library school was the ideal but that until there were more
libraries to absorb their output it would be necessary to follow the British system of examina-
tion and certification, with which he became intimately acquainted. He began studying for
the Library Association examinations himself and in 1936 would gain its Diploma, the first
Australian practitioner to do so. He was subsequently elected a Fellow of the Library Associ-
ation (FLA). 189
Binns and Purnell too had recently visited the United Kingdom and had explored the pos-
sibility of setting up an Australian branch of the British association. This approach had been
taken by the medical profession and the British Medical Association had established branches
in the Australian colonies as early as 1879. But Binns, Purnell and Metcalfe now agreed that
it would be far better for Australia to set up its own association and seek recognition from the
Library Association later if its success warranted it. 190
Metcalfe’s suggestions
In his report to Ifould, which was widely circulated among his colleagues, Metcalfe wrote; 1
su gg est th e formation of an ‘Australian Library Institute” concerning itself solely with their
professional interests’. It would have examinations, establishing an external standard. There
would need to be some assistance to students, and in the case of New South Wales Metcalfe
suggested that the Public Library of New South Wales could co-operate with the proposed
Institute by running classes. Its existing syllabus could be modified to make it more generally
applicable, and people from outside the Public Library could attend. Metcalfe noted that the
University of Toronto library school started in a public library and that the school at Columbia
University had its origins in an amalgamation of the schools at the State Library at Albany and
the New York Public Library. 191
Metcalfe certainly had plenty of ideas to inject into a constitution, and it did not take him
long to prepare a draft. On 19 June 1935 it was ready to be circulated. Headed ‘Notes for a
proposed constitution for an Association of Australian Librarians’, its distribution was limited
to a select group of senior librarians in Sydney, Canberra, Adelaide, Melbourne and Hobart. 192
Ifould sent the draft to Purnell with a request for him to discuss it with GH Pitt. Another copy
went to Cooke at the Public Library of Victoria, who was acting for HR Pitt during the latter’s
overseas travels. Sydney recipients were Bertie and Green, who was asked to discuss it with his
deputy, EV Steel. Miller was to show the draft to Collier, and Binns would discuss it with his
deputy, HL White. Ifould undertook to talk over the document with Metcalfe, Leeson, Green
an d JJ Quinn, the New South Wales Parliamentary Librarian. 193
The new body, with the names Institute of Australian Librarians (lAL) and Australian Institute
of Librarians (AIL) offered as suggestions, would have nine objects:
L To unite persons engaged in library work.
2. To promote the better administration of libraries.


3. To promote whatever may tend to the improvement of the position and the qualifica-
tions of librarians.
4. To promote the establishment of general reference and lending libraries and of special
libraries.
5. To watch any legislation affecting libraries and to assist in the promotion of such legisla-
tion as may be considered necessary for the regulation, management and extension of
libraries.
6. To promote, carry out and encourage bibliographical study and research.
7. To collect, collate and publish in the form of transactions, journal or otherwise, informa-
tion of service or interest to libraries or librarians.
8. To offer instruction, to hold examinations and issue certificates of efficiency in librarian-
ship and in studies cognate with and of use in librarianship; to co-operate and affiliate
with bodies or institutions with similar objects.
9. To do all such things as are incidental or conducive to the attainments of the above
objects.
Membership would be open to anyone who, in the view of the Council of the Institute, was
a ‘qualified librarian by reason of service, experience, employment or examination’. There was
provision for honorary membership. There would be an elected executive Council, provision
for Branches in States and Territories. Annual subscriptions would be five shillings, of which
Branches would retain half for their expenses.
The principle of the Institute was that it would be ‘a professional body interested in main-
taining and improving professional standards, and in advancing the interest it serves’. There
would initially be one category of members, who would have to be librarians, ‘using that term to
include assistants and cadets, and to exclude all those who may be engaged in libraries, but not
in duties essential to a library’. When examinations had been organised the passing of elementary
examinations might be made a condition of membership. In the meantime election of members
by nomination —relying on the discretion of nominating members and the Counci l—would avoid
difficulties in trying to grade applicants. The object was to bring as many people as possible into
the group who were suitable, ‘without any invidious distinction difficult of application, whilst
those can be excluded who are not wanted. No-one can demand admission’. 194
It is clear that the preliminary work on the constitution of a new association was carried out
with the full knowledge of many of the leading Australian librarians, although Ifould did not
circulate this first draft to Tate and Cunningham , nor for that matter to Battye or Malvina Wood
in Perth or to anyone in Queensland. He had, however, kept the Library Group informed, and
after the initial Group meeting in Melbourne in August 1935 Ifould returned to Sydney with
the task of drafting ‘a brief for organisations and persons anxious to help in creating public
opinion’. 195 This would complement the objects of the proposed library association and is evi-
dence that the library leaders were contemplating separate bodies for library promotion and for
professional interests. As we have seen, in June the first of these organisations, the Free Library
Movement in New South Wales, had already been established.
Metcalfe’s draft stimulated much correspondence and discussion later that year. AB Foxcroft
of the Public Library of Victoria visited Sydney in November 1935 and told Ifould that Pitt was
anxious for a round-table discussion on the issue. Ifould had gained the impression from Cooke
that the Victorian librarians were lukewarm about a new association, but Foxcroft assured him
Uniting a profession


that this was not the case. Librarians in Victoria were ‘convinced that the existing Library As-
sociation could not adequately represent the profession’. 196
The opportunity to take the draft a stage further occurred in January 1936. Ifould had
been trying to arrange a meeting of the Library Group to discuss the proposed Institute and
thought that he could kill two birds with one stone. He, Metcalfe and Leeson were all due to
be in Canberra for the Summer School of the Australian Institute of Political Science during
the Anniversary Day long weekend. 197 Ifould had been asked to give an address, and several
other libranans would be attending. Purnell was in Sydney at the time and would be able to
attend, and Binns and other Commonwealth National Library officers would be in Canberra.
Ifould hoped that Pitt could be persuaded to attend so that ‘we may have a better lead on the
attitude of the Melbourne librarians. From what Foxcroft told me when he was here I think
their attitude is very much more favourable’. 198
In the event the proposed meeting of the Library Group did not take place, but Leeson,
Metcalfe, Ifould, Binns, White and Courtenay Key met informally It proved to be a very im-
portant meeting, because at it ‘it was left to Mr White, Mr Metcalfe and Mr Foxcroft ... to be
an informal committee to redraft a constitution and submit a new draft to the librarians of the
various States. Mr White was to be the convenor’. 199
Proposals are discussed
The official second meeting of the Library Group occurred in March 1936. By then Ifould had
left on a six-month Carnegie-sponsored visit to the United States and the United Kingdom, and
Metcalfe was left to show his mettle as Acting Principal Librarian. 200 It was therefore Metcalfe who
went to Melbourne for the meeting and to brief Tate, Binns, Pitt, Purnell and Cunningham on
the proposed institute, which would be limited to professional librarians. The group discussed
how this new organisation would coexist with existing State associations and eventually resolved
That in the opinion of this group it is desirable to establish an Institute of Librarians whose
functions should be to erect standards for the training and certification of librarians, and that
the State Branch of such an Institute should be affiliated to any State Library Association’. 201
The Library Group then formally asked Metcalfe, White and Foxcroft to continue their work
on the draft constitution. This request suited the three deputy librarians very well, because they
had seen the need to involve the Library Group in order to ‘have some sponsorship by the elder
statesmen’, as Metcalfe later put it. 202
There was an air of expectancy when Metcalfe accompanied Ifould to the third meeting of
the Library Group on 5 and 6 October 1936, specifically to discuss the ideas for the institute
which had been circulating. Metcalfe reported that ‘discussions had not proceeded far because
of a number of difficulties raised in a letter from Mr Foxcroft’. 203 These difficulties related mainly
to the Australian Library Association and the part of the Group’s March resolution on the rela-
tionship with State associations. The difference in views was fundamental. Metcalfe (and those
who thought like him) firmly believed that the only way forward was to define the profession
through education and training—‘to create the librarian and the standards of librarianship for
libraries which did not yet exist at all, but which, amidst almost universal scepticism, I expected
the Free Library Movement to bring into being within a few years’. 204
On the other hand there were those who favoured a ‘policy of gradualness, with existing librar-
ies as stepping stones to higher things’. 205 ER Pitt—‘gradualist’ Pitt as Ifould called him—would
certainly have favoured this approach, as would the all-embracing Australian Library Association
and the hospitable Library Association of Victoria. 206
44
Stirrings


The Library Group talked about the proposal for an institute and its relationships with exist-
ing associations at great length. It was perfectly understandable that the Victorians in particular
would have had doubts about the need for a new association —we have seen how welcoming
the Library Association of Victoria had been to the whole range of libraries and ‘librarians’, and
the Australian Library Association was very much in the same mould. The Victorian influence
should have been decisive, but in New South Wales a core of professionals, aggressive, progres-
sive and articulate, were more determined than their Victorian colleagues. They may have been
stirred to action by the choice of Pitt as Munn’s co-surveyor and the leading part played by
Frank Tate and the Australian Council for Educational Research, They certainly did not want
New South Wales to play second fiddle to Victoria.
In the face of a thriving Library Association of Victoria and an extant Australian Library
Association, Metcalfe and Ifould would have argued that there could be no conflict of interest
between the proposed body and the existing associations. The new ‘institute’ would not snatch
bodies from other associations. It would be something which qualified people would be invited
to join. Its coverage would be clearly defined: the untrained institute people would be left out
of its membership altogether. It would be interested primarily in examinations and not a threat
to other associations. This was a clever solution to the problem which had dogged Australian
librarians since the 1928 conference, and it had sprung largely from the fertile mind of Metcalfe,
who had suggested such a demarcation in the report of his 1934-35 study tour. Once this was
explained to the Library Group it was virtually assured of success.
In the Library Group itself Ifould and Binns, heads of libraries with strongly professional
traditions, would have supported the proposed Institute. Tate was in favour of the Free Library
Movement as a lay lobby group, and an association purely for librarians would neatly comple-
ment such a body. Battye was hardly ever able to attend Library Group meetings, and although
he did correspond with his colleagues he was unlikely to support Pitt. Purnell too would favour
the Institute proposal, as he wanted professional training and free public libraries (although
bowing to the reality of the situation in his own State he thought it best to work through the
institutes, as have all those who have reported on South Australia’s public library system from
Munn and Pitt to Crawford). 207 Once the remaining member of the Library Group, ER Pitt, had
been rolled, cajoled or converted by his colleagues the way was open for the establishment of
the Australian Institute of Librarians.
Drafting of Constitution resumes
Tantalisingly the minutes do not reveal how the Victorians were won over, or indeed whether
they were won over at all at this stage. In the neutral tone of the minutes, after WC Baud and
Foxcroft had been asked to join the meeting there was ‘full discussion’, and it was ‘eventually
agreed’ that the drafting committee would resume its work. The committee was to have the
results ready for the Group to consider ‘within a month or two’. 208
The ‘general opinion’ expressed at that Library Group meeting was that the Australian Library
Association could still do much useful work in educating public opinion on library matters. 209
This might have resulted in taking on some of the tasks which were being so energetically per-
formed in New South Wales by the Free Library Movement, although this was not expressed
in the minutes.
Metcalfe later praised the generosity of the Victorians in accepting the concept of a new body,
in view of the way that New South Wales had repudiated and attacked the Australian Library
Association, to which the Victorians had given so much support. 210 In fact Metcalfe had expected


the Australian Library Association to meet and discuss the Munn-Pitt Report and accept its
recommendations, even if this had to be with some qualifications. He believed that the Associ-
ation did not do so because of the intransigence of the South Australian institutes, who were
not prepared to abandon the subscription principle. Even so, if Pitt had shown more dynamism
he could have overcome the South Australian hurdle in some way, Metcalfe believed, enabling
the Australian Library Association to continue, ‘and neither Ifould nor Leeson even if they had
wanted to, would have been able to prevent this’. But Pitt did nothing—‘as you know, he was
an incurable procrastinator’. 211
So the task of drawing up the constitution of the new Institute recommenced with renewed
vigour, with Foxcroft working in the evenings and on weekends, giving copies of preliminary
versions to Pitt and Baud for comment and sending the reworked draft to Metcalfe and White
in October 1936. This draft was for an ‘Australian Institute of Professional Librarians’, with an
underlying vision of an institution ‘like that of the Civil Engineers, admission to which should
be something of an attainment as setting an official seal upon the applicant’s status’. 212
A statement of objects and criteria for membership proved to be the most troublesome parts
of the constitution. The drafters condensed the succession of objects in the 1935 draft into one:
The object of the Institute shall be the improvement of the status of librarianship in Australia.
In furtherance of this object the Institute shall establish standards of training and certification
of librarians’, 213
There would be only two categories of membership: member and honorary member. The
latter category would be reserved for people who had made a noteworthy contribution to
librarianship or were likely to further the Institute’s objects. Honorary members would need
to be proposed by three members and receive a unanimous vote by the Institute’s governing
body, the Council. An ordinary member would require only two members as sponsors and
was required to be ‘in employment or be qualified for employment as a professional librarian,
and shall furnish evidence that he is qualified for membership either by reason of professional
experience and sendee or by examination’. 214
There was no definition of‘professional or any indication of the length of experience required,
nor indeed of the type of institution in which the experience might have been gained, the onus
being firmly placed on the Council to make up its own mind on candidates and to vote them
in or out, a three-fourths majority being required for entry. Insofar as it did specify professional
experience, however, it was not following the line suggested by the Munn-Pitt Report, which
left the way open for institute ‘librarian’ participation. But as we shall see, there would be a
further hardening of the line as the draft passed through the hands of Foxcroft’s fellow com-
mittee members and their senior officers. This draft was also silent on how to determine who
should become Foundation Members. These individuals were to be listed in an appendix to
the constitution and recorded on a register of members.
In other essentials, however, this draft was very specific. It allowed for an Executive of
president, vice-president, general treasurer and general secretary to be elected at the Institute’s
annual meeting. There would be Branches in each State and Territory, each with a constitution
not incompatible with the Institute’s. Each Branch would be entitled to one or two councillors,
depending on the size of the Branch, who, with the Executive, would comprise the Council of
the Institute. There would be a scale of subscriptions based on salary.
The Foxcroft draft contained an olive branch for the State associations then in existence:
Branches would be permitted, subject to the approval of Council, to affiliate ‘with any Library


Association in its own State or Territory, or with any other body in such State or Territory aim-
ing at the improvement of the status of the profession of librarianship’. 215 If any of the State
associations had actually attempted to affiliate, there would have been a major battle. The New
South Wales librarians would never have conceded that such other associations as then existed
could ever be entirely relevant to ‘the profession of librarianship’.
Foxcroft’s draft was amended by Metcalfe and White, who wished to delete the word ‘pro-
fessional’ from the title of the Institute and to return to some of the original objects, including
promoting bibliographical study and research. Foxcroft disagreed with them, and his objection
is worth quoting at length: ‘Now from my original draft the word “Professional” was —I admit
rightly—removed from the name of the Institute, because as the “Comments” say “We assume
librarianship is a profession, and a 11... will be professionals”. And yet in the “Objects” the original
is amended to include “bibliographical amateurs”. We admit that these amateurs might form
a valuable class of honorary members, but so would distinguished authors and many others.
Why should amateur bibliographers be able to add to their names “Hon. member of the Aust.
Inst, of Libns”? Take Mr P Serle, whose bibliography of poetry is well known. I cannot admit
that he has a claim to consider himself a professional librarian ... Let us, if necessary, launch a
Bibliographical Society with outsiders as members, but let us keep the Australian Institute of
Librarians for librarians’, 216
Metcalfe told Foxcroft that the addition of the promotion of bibliographical study and research
was suggested by Binns, but since the Canberra librarians had now agreed to its exclusion he
and Ifould also agreed to delete it from the draft. Metcalfe added that he had not thought of
anyone wanting to use such a title as ‘Hon. member of the Aust. Inst, of Libns’. ‘Surely’, he said,
‘the Council would not elect anyone so petty or lacking in other dignities as to want to exploit
honorary membership in that way’. 217
Further refinement of the draft continued during 1936 and early 1937, with Metcalfe, White
and Foxcroft corresponding with each other and also discussing the draft with colleagues in
their own institutions. Metcalfe took advantage of a visit to Canberra over the Anniversary Day
weekend in January 1937 to meet White, and they firmed up their ideas on criteria for mem-
bership, the election of members and the objects of the new Institute.
In the final draft constitution the whole object of the new Institute was encapsulated in one
sentence; ‘to unite persons engaged in library work, and to improve the standards of librarian-
ship and the status of the library profession in Australia’. The draft then followed broadly its
predecessors, setting out the proposed structure of the body, with a federal executive and coun-
cillors elected by the State Branches, provision for committees on specific issues and a president
authorised to speak for the profession on matters affecting library services and librarians.
Membership categories
It was at this stage that the words ‘qualified by special training and experience’ came into the
criteria for membership. The suitability of this training and experience would be determined
by a three-fourths majority of Council. 218 There was no provision for library ‘cadets’—those
in training but without the requisite experience—to be members. 219 There was, however, rec-
ognition that the range of qualifications and experience, and of categories of staff within the
large libraries, would be wide and that at some stage in the future there might be a case for a
differentiation between them. After his meeting with White, Metcalfe did some thinking aloud
in a response to Foxcroft, saying that the senior group might be called professional and the


junior group subprofessional, but that the nomenclature would be troublesome and in any case
at that stage they needn’t make such a distinction. 220
The draft constitution did provide some latitude for admission, especially with Foundation
Members, few of whom would have undergone training in a formal library school or taken the
examinations of the Library Association, as had Metcalfe. Were there not this discretion the
proposed Institute would have been minuscule. But the need to provide a critical mass for initial
membership had to be balanced, and the line had to be drawn somewhere: Metcalfe was most
insistent about this. He did not want to open a back door for institute custodians or managers
of commercial circulating libraries, but he did want to involve special librarians who were worth
their salt and outstanding school librarians. Some of them were worthy of Foundation Member-
ship, and he singled out Fairlie Taylor of the Presbyterian Ladies’ College in Melbourne: ‘She
is only beginning to apply proper methods of cataloguing and classification to her library, but
in its use for teaching purposes, and in the application of visual education in the library she is
a pioneer. Binns too wanted to ensure a balanced representation, with a reasonable number
of women and university librarians in the membership. 222
Metcalfe also suggested to his fellow deputies on the drafting committee that anyone who
had introduced decimal classification into a special library and who was engaged in indexing or
abstracting technical papers should be considered for membership. He wanted to ensure that
Institute membership did not merely reflect current practice but anticipated developments in
the wider profession: ‘I suggest that we should be very careful not to limit our conception of
librarianship to what it happens to mean at the moment in the state and university libraries.
If we do we will find that the really vital and forward movements in librarianship will go on
outside and beyond our Institute’. 223
This fragmentation was what had occurred in the United Kingdom, where ‘a large and im-
portant association of special librarians has been formed independently, and will not now come
into the Library Association, which is too closely identified with the public [that is, municipal]
libraries. This independent association was ASLIB, which, despite early overtures from the Lib-
rary Association, has remained separate ever since. 224 Metcalfe believed that special librarians
would form ‘an increasingly important group in the Institute, and should not be neglected. A
point should also be strained as to qualifications to get them in’, 225 As we shall see, this was not
achieved in all States, and within a few years of its creation the Australian Institute of Librarians
would have a Melbourne-based rival.
Foundation Membership
Once agreement had been reached on membership criteria the Library Group began to address
the potentially thorny issue of Foundation Membership. Binns suggested that the drafting sub-
committee—Foxcroft, White and Metcalfe—draw up a list of possible Foundation Members.
He recognised that this was likely to be a controversial issue and thought it would be best not
to release the list of Foundation Members until the inaugural meeting of the Institute was under
way, 220 Foxcroft had at one stage suggested including the qualifications for Foundation Member-
ship in the Constitution, but Metcalfe and Ifould did not favour this either. They thought that
the qualifications for Foundation Membership could be written into the minutes of the Institute’s
first meeting. 227 Their caution was repaid, and although Foundation Membership generated a
good deal of correspondence there was surprisingly little heat.
The proposed basis of qualification for Foundation Membership was experience in profes-
sional work in a library certified by the principal librarian of the respective State or Territory as
48
Stirrings


employing modern methods and having adequate facilities for training. Five years such experi-
ence would be required for non-graduates and three years for graduates. The minimum educa-
tional qualifications required were at least a certificate of matriculation or general education, or
a certificate of sufficient education from the principal librarian of the State or Territory, As Ifould
explained to WH Brown, his opposite number in Queensland, ‘We have made the qualification
for Foundation Membership a relatively low one, with the object of joining together as many
Australian librarians as possible who can have any pretensions at all to a professional status’. 228
There was no desire to be too accommodating however: they would not accept so-called librar-
ians in government departments which did not use modem library methods. These libraries
should at least be using Dewey or another recognised classification scheme, have an adequate
catalogue, provide training and employ at least one librarian of ‘undoubted qualifications’, 229
The Library Group would have overall control of the quality of nominees for Foundation
Membership, and lists of nominees were to be sent to Cunningham and then circulated. 230
The likely numbers from Queensland and Tasmania were very small, so although the names
of Foundation Members were requested from Brown and Collier it was felt that the endorse-
ment of a senior librarian from a larger library service was needed. Ifould agreed to check the
Queensland nominations, and Pitt would vet those from Tasmania. The other States and the
Federal Capital Territory would provide their own nominations and certification by their re-
spective State librarians. 231
The floodgates were certainly closed against the institute ‘librarians’. This was evident in
New South Wales, with only two school of arts librarians suggested. 232 In Victoria there were
even fewer. When Pitt, Foxcroft, Baud, Scott and Frazer generated their list of Foundation
Members there was only one institute librarian on it: Henry Cole Batten of the Ballarat Mechan-
ics’ Institute. 233
A number of retired librarians appeared in the lists of proposed Foundation Members, but
Metcalfe, Foxcroft and White did not want to go overboard and invite anyone who had ever
been a professional librarian but who might have either resigned to enter another profession
or married and left the profession. Such people might ‘unduly weight the membership of the
Branch or even of the Institute’ whilst not actually being in the profession any longer. RD Boys,
E La T Armstrong and Hugh Wright—all of whom had been members of the Library Associ-
ation of Australasia over thirty years earlier —were a different kettle of fish. They were ‘other-
wise eligible’, having been librarians all their lives, retiring in the fullness of time and not being
eligible for honorary membership. 234
Revised draft circulated
The revised draft was then forwarded to Cunningham, who had offered to duplicate it for circula-
tion to the major libraries so that it could be discussed with their staff and with other librarians
in their area. Comments and proposed amendments flowed in thick and fast. Binns took the
precaution of having the draft examined by the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor’s Office. 235
Victorian reaction to the draft was generally favourable, although there was a feeling that the
objects should be widened to include the words ‘watch over the interests of librarians generally
and to do all such things as shall improve their status’. 236
When the senior New South Wales librarians met to discuss the draft for a final time they
were divided on the issue of including ‘status’ in the objects. Some felt the concept might imply
present inferiority and could be criticised as self-seeking. They believed that ‘watching over their
interests’ was sufficiently implicit in the general objects of a professional association. 237 Ifould was


firmly against the ‘status’ clause; 1 still feel very strongly that we should avoid all references to
the question of status in our objects. It is perfectly obvious that a professional institute will look
after the status of the profession and it is infinitely better that the matter should not be referred
to publicly in the objects, otherwise outside people, and especially the Library Association
people, will regard it as merely another organisation to look after the interests of the members
of the profession without regard to the larger issues involved’. 238 Ifould’s view prevailed at this
meeting of senior librarians, by a vote of six to three. 239 In Canberra, White and Binns did not
favour including status either, because for them it smacked too much of trade unionism. 240
One omission which the New South Wales librarians picked up and which would have a
significant impact on the Institute was the question of‘associate membership’. ‘lt was their opinion
that some provision should be made for the attachment of cadet librarians to the Institute, so
that they could attend meetings and be imbued with its objects, without having the privileges
of full members. They have in mind those working in approved libraries, but unable to comply
with the requirements for Foundation Members, or those which the Council may from time to
time lay down for full members’. 241 The category of student associates was adopted: this would
prove to be one of the most significant segments of the future membership of the Institute, whose
subscriptions and examination fees would underpin the viability of the whole venture. 242
As for the exclusion of undesirables from membership, this was subtly covered by the phrase
‘qualified by special training and experience for the profession of librarianship’. It would thus
be left to a majority of the Council to decide what was acceptable or not, and based on the
qualifications and experience of the Foundation Members there was little chance that maverick
Council members would ever have the numbers to devalue the concept of professionalism.
Although there was much common ground, and most responses were positive, the inclu-
sion of ‘status’ in the Institute’s objects proved to be a major stumbling block. There was con-
sequently no neat, cut-and-dried draft constitution to present to an inaugural meeting to be
debated cursorily and voted on against a backdrop of universal approval. That was what the
prime movers had fervently hoped for. 243 They wanted to avoid a clause-by-clause dissection of
the constitution at an inaugural meeting and thought that firm chairmanship would solve that
particular problem. Subsequent events would show they had underestimated the democratic
sentiment of the future Foundation Members. No-one would want to buy a pig in a poke, and
there was, moreover, sufficient mistrust of the senior librarians, and mutual mistrust among
several of them, to make for an interesting debate when the first convenient opportunity to
launch the new Institute arose. They would not have long to wait.
Chapter 3 Endnotes
102 WH Ifould to K Binns, 29 April 1930, State Library of New South Wales (SLNSW) archives, NPL43.
102 HJ Emslie to WH Ifould, 3 November 1931, enclosed with WH Ifould to HM Green, 5 November 1931,
ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
104 WH Ifould, ‘Presidential Address: the future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings:
First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior and
Anderson, 1939, pl 2.
105 K Binns to WH Ifould [with a copy to HM Green], 13 November 1931, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box
84.
106 WH Ifould to K Binns, 29 April 1930, SLNSW archives, NPL43.
Stirrings


107 No full publication of the proceedings of this conference exists but typescript minutes were distributed to
the major libraries: ‘Minutes-of conference of the Australian Library Association held at the Public Library,
Melbourne, on 23rd and 24th November, 1933’, Adelaide, Australian Library Association, 1933.
10,7 JW Metcalfe, review of KS Cunningham, The Australian Council for Educational Research and library services
in Australia, in Australian Library Journal, vol 11 no 2, April 1962, p9B.
109 JW Metcalfe, ‘Laymen and Libraries’, in Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney,
October 1947, Sydney, AIL, 1949, p9l.
110 Public Library of New South Wales (PLNSW), Trustees’ Minute Books, 16 October 1933, SLNSW ar-
chives.
111 JW Metcalfe, review of The Australian Council for Educational Research, p 97.
112 JW Metcalfe, Public library service in and from Brisbane: a report together with a new introduction, Brisbane,
Library Board of Queensland, 1974, p ix.
11 3 JW Metcalfe, review of The Australian Council for Educational Research, p 97.
1 14 JW Metcalfe, ‘Ralph Munn and Australia’, Australian Library Journal, Vol 24, no 4, May 1975, p 139.
113 JW Metcalfe, Public library service in and from Brisbane, p ix.
1 16 JW Metcalfe, interview with Hazel de Berg, 29 April 1974, National Library of Australia, Deß 764-766,
p 9893.
1 17 ibid., p 9906. For the early career of Metcalfe at the PLNSW and Ifould’s championing of him see Jones,
A dormant commission’.
118 JW Metcalfe, ‘Public library systems in Australia’, Library Association Record, Series 4 vol 1, September
1934, pp3l4-321; October 1934, pp 367-374.
1 19 JW Metcalfe, ‘Public library systems in Australia’, p 368.
' 2O WH Ifould to HM Green, 29 April 1930, letter enclosing draft constitution, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 109.
121 JW Metcalfe, ‘Public library systems in Australia’, p 368.
122 ‘Minutes of conference of the Australian Library Association held at the Public Library, Melbourne, on
23rd and 24th November, 1933’, Adelaide, Australian Library Association, 1933.
123 ibid.
124 ibid.
125 ibid.
12(1 The Tasmanian Public Library, established in 1870, was succeeded by the State Library of Tasmania in
1944.
12/ E Morris Miller to WH Ifould, 17 January 1922, SLNSW archives, NPL9O.
128 PLNSW, Trustees’ Minute Books, 19 June 1922, SLNSW archives. WH Ifould to E Morris Miller, 2 Febru-
ary 1922, SLNSW archives, NPL3I.
12 ' P Biskup, Libraries in Australia, Wagga Wagga, Centre for Information Studies, 1995, p 228.
130 JW Metcalfe, Public library service in and from Brisbane, p ix.
131 See, for example, Larry Amey, ‘When libraries made headlines’, Australian Library Journal, vol 50 no 3,
August 2001, pp 229-234; Alan Bundy, ‘How far they have come—how far they must go: Australian
public libraries at century’s end’, paper presented at the National Public Library Conference, Perth, 14-17
November 1999 (http://www.library.unisa.edu.au/papers/howfar.htm, accessed 7 December 2001).
1 32 N Horrocks, The Carnegie Corporation of New York and its impact on library development in Australia, PhD
thesis, University of Pittsburgh, 1971, pps7-68, 110. JE Russell, Australia notes’, 1928, [typescript],
Carnegie Corporation of New York (CCNY) archives. Dr Lotus D Coffman, ‘Report of Dr Lotus D Coffman


on Australia’, 1932, [typescript], CCNY archives. COG Douie, Report on adult education in the Dominion of
New Zealand, the Commonwealth of Australia and the Union of South Africa, New York, 1933, [not formally
published], CCNY archives.
133 JW Metcalfe, review of The Australian Council for Educational Research, p 97. RJW Selleck, Frank Tate: a
biography, Carlton, Victoria, Melbourne University Press, 1982, p 276. KS Cunningham, Tire Australian
Council for Educational Research, pplO-11.
134 ‘Minutes of conference of the Australian Library Association held at the Public Library, Melbourne, on
23rd and 24th November, 1933’.
135 PLNSW, Trustees’ Minute Books, 17 July, 21 August 1933, SLNSW archives. WH Ifould to K Binns, 3 July
1933, SLNSW archives, NPL4B.
136 The committee members were ER Pitt, AE McMicken, RD Boys (all of Victoria), HW Ifould (New South
Wales), HR Purnell (South Australia), AB Copeman (a teacher from Queensland), JS Battye (Western
Australia), E Morris Miller (Tasmania) and K Binns (Federal Capital Territory).
137 JW Metcalfe, ‘Ralph Munn and Australia’, p 139, KS Cunningham, The Australian Council for Educational
Research, pp 11-12. RJW Selleck, Frank Tate, p 276.
138 ‘Minutes of conference of the Australian Library Association held at the Public Library, Melbourne, on
23rd and 24th November, 1933’.
139 N Horrocks, The Carnegie Corporation, pplB7—lBB. Andrew Delbridge Osborn, interviewed by Da-
vid J Jones, 19 October 1989, Roseville, New South Wales.
140 N Horrocks, The Carnegie Corporation, p 216.
141 Note in WH Ifould’s hand on the cover of his copy of KS Cunningham, The Australian Council for Educational
Research and library services in Australia, SLNSW, Mitchell Library, MLMSS 1878.
142 JW Metcalfe, Public library service in and from Brisbane, p ix.
143 KS Cunningham, The Australian Council for Educational Research, ppl4-15.
144 JW Metcalfe, review of The Australian Council for Educational Research, p 97. The Public Library of Western
Australia was renamed the State Library of Western Australia in 1955. It was later known as the State
Reference Library of Western Australia and later still as the Library and Information Service of Western
Australia, It is currently known as the State Library of Western Australia.
145 ibid., p9B.
146 ibid., p9B. JW Metcalfe, ‘From the record, for the record’, Australian Library Journal, vol Ino 1, July 1951,
p 5. Selleck, Frank Tate, p 97.
147 WH Ifould to ER Pitt, 27 February 1934, Papers relating to the Munn—Pitt Report, SLV, La Trobe Library,
MS 9596, box 2 (MSB 58).
148 KS Cunningham to JW Metcalfe, 10 January 1960, ACER archives, series 49, item 189.
149 WH Ifould to ER Pitt, 3 May 1934, and WH Ifould to CH Bertie, 14 May 1934, SLV, La Trobe Library,
Papers relating to the Munn-Pitt Report, MS 9596, Box 2 (MSB 58). WH Ifould to ER Pitt, 14 May 1934,
and WH Ifould to Mr Gomme, Metropole Hotel, 19 May 1934, SLNSW archives, NPL49. Also at the
luncheon were Metcalfe and Leeson (PLNSW), Green and Steel (Fisher Library), Quinn and O’Brien (Par-
liamentary Library), Flannery (Sydney Municipal Library), Alexander Mackie (Sydney Teachers’ College),
Marjorie Barnard (Sydney Technical College), CH Currey (Teachers’ Federation), HJ Bayliss (President of
the Literary Institutes Association) and P Logan (Sydney School of Arts).
150 Note in WH Ifould’s hand on page 15 ofhiscopy of KS Cunningham, The Australian Council for Educational
Research and library services in Australia, SLNSW, Mitchell Library, MLMSS 1878.
151 R Munn and ER Pitt, Australian libraries: a survey of conditions and suggestions for their improvement, Mel-
bourne, Australian Council for Educational Research, 1935. RJW Selleck, Frank Tate, p 277.
152 E Morris Miller, Libraries and education. Library Association of Victoria, Special Committee, The essential
features of a good public library. J W Metcalfe, ‘Public library systems in Australia’.


153 D Whitehead, ‘AM and PM; The Munn—Pitt Report in context’, Australian Library Journal vol 30 no 1,
February 1981, p 7.
154 GC Remington and JW Metcalfe, The Free Library Movement, 1935-19T5, Sydney, New Century Press,
1945, p 4. (First published as ‘The Free Library Movement, 1935-1945’, Australian Quarterly, vol 17, June
1945, ppB7-97).
153 K Binns to WH Ifould, 4 March 1935, SLNSW archives, unnumbered box, labelled ‘Libraries Advisory
Committee (a) Munn-Pitt Report (b) Drummond Report’.
156 HR Purnell to WH Ifould, 14 January 1935, SLNSW archives unnumbered box, labelled ‘Libraries Advisory
Committee (a) Munn-Pitt Report (b) Drummond Report’.
1 57 R Munn and ER Pitt, Australian libraries, p2O.
158 ibid., p6O.
159 ibid., pi 16.
160 ibid., pi 16.
161 ibid., pi 16.
lf> " ibid., pll7.
163 RMunn, Australia’, [1936?], CCNY archives. This is an unsigned, undated typed report by Munn, prepared
for Keppel, containing notes on people in the library field whom Keppel would meet on his visit to Aus-
tralia. The assistance of Norman Horrocks in drawing our attention to this document is acknowledged.
164 R Munn and J Barr, New Zealand libraries: a survey of conditions and suggestions for their improvement, Christ-
church, NZ, Libraries Association of New Zealand, 1934, pp 67-68.
165 F Tate to K Binns, WH Ifould and H R Purnell, April 1935, quoted in Cunningham, The Australian Council
for Educational Research, pl 7.
166 ibid.
167 KS Cunningham, ‘The history, status and functions of the Library Group’. There are many copies of this
statement, which occupies one foolscap typescript page. It was written in 1941 by Cunningham probably
to refute some of the attacks which librarians were making on the Group. ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 106.
168 RJW Selleck, Frank Tate, p 278. KS Cunningham, The Australian Council for Educational Research, p 23.
JW Metcalfe, ‘Public Library of New South Wales’, [notes for a speech on resigning from the PLNSW],
27 January 1959, SLNSW, Mitchell Library, Remington Papers, box 40A (Uncat Mss 808). (Published in
JW Metcalfe, Developing a library profession in Australia: travel diaries and other papers ofJohn Wallace Metcalfe,
edited by W Boyd Rayward, Lanham, Md, Scarecrow Press, 1995, pp2o2-213. Also published Canberra,
ALIA Press, 1996).
169 I Vincent, ‘Why bother with library history?’, Australian library history: papers from the Second Forum on
Australian Library History, Canberra, 19-20 July 1985, edited by Peter Biskup and Maxine K Rochester,
Canberra, Canberra College of Advanced Education, 1985, p 9.
170 Free Library Movement, Constitution of the Free Library Movement with an introductory note, Sydney, Free
Library Movement, 1935, p 4. ‘lnaugural meeting of Delegates from public and quasi-public bodies,
convened by the Middle Harbour Progress Association and held in the School of Arts, Victoria Avenue,
Chatswood’, 1935, SLNSW archives, unnumbered box, labelled ‘Free Library Movement’. For an account
of the activities of the Free Library Movement in New South Wales see Rodney P Snibson, The free library
movement in New South Wales, 1935-19 H, MA thesis, Monash University, 1987, and Rodney P Snibson,
‘The Free library movement campaign for public library legislation in New South Wales’, Australian library
history in context: papers from the third forum on Australian library history, University of New South Wales, 17
and 18 July 1987, edited by W Boyd Rayward, Sydney, School of Librarianship, University of New South
Wales, 1988, ppl2l-128.
171 WH Ifould to JDA Collier, 7 May 1941, SLNSW archives, NPL64.


1/2 Metcalfe, interview with Hazel de Berg, p 9887.
173 Snibson, The free library movement in New South Wales, 1935-1944, MA thesis, pl2l. Metcalfe, ‘Ralph Munn
and Australia’, p!4l. GC Remington to John Russell, Assistant to the President, CCNY, 16 February 1937,
SLNSW archives, box ‘Libraries Advisory Committee (contd),’ file ‘Free Library Movement’.
174 Free Library Movement, Constitution, p 2.
KS Cunningham, The Australian Council for Educational Research , p 24. Free Library Movement, Constitution,
pps, 6.
I Vincent, ‘Why bother with library history?’, ppl-15. Free Library Movements were formed in Queensland
on 21 April 1937, Victoria on 3 May 1937 and Tasmania on 1 December 1938. A provisional committee of
the Free Library Movement was formed in Western Australia in December 1944 and a South Australian
Free Library Movement was formed on 5 July 1949, but neither flourished.
177 Free Library Movement, Constitution, p 7, WH Ifould to KS Cunningham, 23 February 1937, SLNSW
archives, box Libraries Advisory Committee (contd)’, folder ‘Free Library Movement’.
178 JW Metcalfe, review of The Australian Council for Educational Research, p9B.
179 JW Metcalfe, ‘Laymen and libraries’, p9l.
180 JW Metcalfe, Public library service in and from Brisbane, p xi.
181 WH Ifould to E Morris Miller, 17 June 1935, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
18 ‘ HR Purnell to WH Ifould, SLNSW archives, box ‘Libraries Advisory Committee (a) Munn-Pitt Report
(b) Drummond Report’, file ‘Munn—Pitt Report: Correspondence on publication of report’.
183 This is acknowledged in the Introduction, written by ER Pitt, to Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceed-
ings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior
and Anderson. 1939, p 9. This recognition was not unprompted. When he saw a draft of the introduction
Ifould wrote to Pitt, ‘You say “A Constitution in outline was drawn up and was considered at a meeting
held in October 1936”. Metcalfe had a lot of trouble framing this and I think he might be given credit for
it. His, you remember, was the original draft’. WH Ifould to ER Pitt, 13 December 1938, ALIA records,
NLA, M 57446, box 28.
184 WH Ifould to HM Green, 29 April 1930, letter enclosing draft constitution.
183 JW Metcalfe, Developing a library profession in Australia, p 33.
186 ibid., p 34.
187 ibid., p 34.
188 ibid., p 36.
JW Metcalfe to Public Service Board, 28 June 1937, Department of Education, Subject Files, Public Lib-
rary, 1937—38, State Records New South Wales, 20/13010. JW Metcalfe to Undersecretary, Department
of Education, 1 May 1942, PLNSW Confidential Papers, SLNSW archives.
190 JW Metcalfe, Developing a library profession in Australia, p 36.
191 ibid., p 37.
1 92 ‘Notes for a proposed constitution for an Association of Australian Librarians’, [Roneoed typescript, 1935],
ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
WH Ifould to K Binns, 19 June 1935, SLNSW archives, box NPL 51. Similar letters were sent to Green,
Bertie, Miller, Purnell and Cooke.
194 ibid.
193 KS Cunningham, The Australian Council for Educational Research, plB.
196 WH Ifould to K Binns 21 November 1935, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.


197 Anniversary Day, now known as Australia Day, falls on 26 January. It was not until 1946 that the Com-
monwealth Government, the States and the Territories agreed on a common day, to be known as Australia
Day, to commemorate the establishment of white settlement in Australia.
198 WH Ifould to HM Green, 13 January 1936, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
199 WH Ifould to HM Green, 13 February 1936, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
20° pLNgyv Trustees’ Minute Books, 21 October 1935, SLNSW archives. KS Cunningham, The Australian
Council for Educational Research, plB.
201 ‘Notes on meeting of Library Group’, 5-6 March 1936, ACER archives, vol 86.
202 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p 52.
203 ‘Notes on meeting of librarians’, 5-6 October 1936, [Library Group meeting], ACER archives, vol 86.
204 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 6th
Conference, Sydney, October 1947, and other papers, Sydney, Australian Institute of Librarians (AIL), 1949,
p 53.
205 ibid.
209 Note in WH Ifould’s hand on page 15 ofhiscopy of KS Cunningham, The Australian Council for Educational
Research and library services in Australia, SLNSW, Mitchell Library, MLMSS 1878.
207 The report of the South Australian Library Services Planning Committee, chaired by James A Crawford,
was Library development in South Australia, Adelaide, Premier’s Department, 1978.
208 ‘Notes on meeting of librarians’, 5-6 October 1936.
209 ibid. See also N Horrocks, The Carnegie Corporation, p 254.
210 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p 52.
211 JW Metcalfe to KS Cunningham, 19 December 1960, ACER archives, series 49, item 189.
212 AB Foxcroft toJW Metcalfe, 21 October 1936, enclosing‘Constitution of the Australian Institute of Profes-
sional Librarians’ [Roneoed typescript], ACER archives, series 49, item 197.
213 ‘Constitution of the Australian Institute of Professional Librarians’ [Roneoed typescript], pi. ACER archives,
series 49, item 197.
214 ibid., p 2.
213 ibid., p 7.
216 AB Foxcroft to HL White, 18 December 1936 [with copy to Metcalfe], ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box
1.
217 JW Metcalfe to AB Foxcroft, 3 February 1937, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
218 ibid.
219 ibid.
220 ibid.
221 ibid,
222 K Binns to ER Pitt, 21 June 1937, ACER Archives, vol 86.
223 JW Metcalfe to AB Foxcroft, 3 February 1937, NLA, ALIA records, M 57446, box 1.
224 ibid. The Association of Special Libraries and Information Bureaux, now known as Aslib, the Association
for Information Management, is a British-based not-for-profit organisation registered in 1924 and incor-
porated in 1927 whose members are private and public-sector companies and organisations throughout
the world concerned with managing information resources efficiently.
223 JW Metcalfe to AB Foxcroft. 3 February 1937, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.


226 K Binns to WH Ifould, 29 October 1936, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
227 HL White to AB Foxcroft, 25 June 1937, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
228 WH Brown was librarian of the Public Library of Queensland, known since 1971 as the State Library of
Queensland.
229 JW Metcalfe to WH Brown, 20 May 1937, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
230 KS Cunningham to WH Ifould, 9 June 1937, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
231 JW Metcalfe to HL White, 20 May 1937. ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
232 Australian Institute of Librarians, proposed constitution’ typescript, from c. 21 April 1937, with cover-
ing letter, JW Metcalfe to KS Cunningham, 21 April 1937, ACER archives, series 49, item 199. A copy of
the proposed Constitution without a covering letter is in ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1. The two
institute librarians from New South Wales were Ronald Jacob McDonald from the Newcastle School of
Arts and P McL Logan from the Sydney Mechanics’ School of Arts. In the event only McDonald became
a Foundation Member.
233 ER Pitt to KS Cunningham, 24 March 1937, copy forwarded by Cunningham to Ifould, 1 April 1937, ALIA
records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
234 JW Metcalfe to AB Foxcroft, 19 July 1937, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
235 K Binns to WH Ifould, 3 August 1937, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
236 ‘Minutes of meeting to inaugurate the Australian Institute of Librarians...’, 20-21 August 1937, p 3. ALIA
records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
237 Australian Institute of Librarians, proposed constitution’. Those involved in the discussions in Sydney were
WH Ifould, JW Metcalfe and IE Leeson (PLNSW); CH Bertie andJV Flannery (Sydney Municipal Library);
JJ Quinn and JJ O’Brien (Parliamentary Library); HM Green and EV Steel (University of Sydney). In his
letter to KS Cunningham, JW Metcalfe relays comments by the New South Wales Branch and includes a
list of proposed NSW Foundation Members. The copy of the draft Constitution in ALIA records, NLA,
M 57446, box 1, is Metcalfe’s copy. In the margin Metcalfe has written ‘Status out 6 to 3’, indicating that
this group of New South Wales Foundation Members was far from unanimous on the exclusion of status
from the Institute’s objects. Metcalfe does not indicate how individuals voted.
238 WH Ifould to HR Purnell, 19 July 1937, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
239 ‘Australian Institute of Librarians, proposed constitution’.
240 K Binns to ER Pitt, 9 April 1937, ACER Archives, vol 86.
241 Australian Institute of Librarians, proposed constitution’.
242 ibid.
243 This can be gleaned from the proposed program for the Canberra meeting, which devoted very little time
to the Constitution. As we shall see in the following chapter, this program was departed from, and an
unscheduled lively and lengthy debate took place on the second day.


4
Foundation
There was the Institute, with a fine start;
not more than half a dozen of those
who could he considered librarians
qualified by experience in libraries
with good standard practices
had refused to j0in. 244


By mid-1937 it seemed that the efforts of the professional librarians, the committee of
deputies who drafted the constitution, the Library Group and the Carnegie Corpora-
tion would at last be rewarded. The creation of an association had been tantalisingly
close before, but this time its proponents were determined that nothing should be left to
chance. They needed to involve the right people and to have them utter words of unifica-
tion. They also needed the right occasion to boost the significance of what they were doing
and to deliver just the right amount of gravitas to the new Institute.
The New Education Fellowship
The ideal opportunity came with the holding in Australia of a prestigious international
educational gathering, with speakers from Britain, Europe, the United States, Canada, Japan
and South Africa. This was the 1937 conference of the New Education Fellowship (NET), an
international organisation founded in the United Kingdom in 1921 dedicated to the ideals of
progressive education and to the promotion of international understanding through educa-
tion. 24,5 Once more librarians had the Australian Council for Educational Research to thank
for this initiative. Cunningham had addressed the New Education Fellowship conference in
South Africa in 1934 and on behalf of the Australian Council for Educational Research had
offered to host the Fellowships next regional meeting. This invitation had been accepted,
but due to prior commitments, the visit to Australia did not actually occur until 1937. 246
The well-established Fellowship and the new Institute had some things in common: both
were active within the field of education, and both owed much to the Carnegie Corporation
of New York. The largest grant for the NEE Conference in Australia came from the Corpo-
ration. Funds to support the Australian Institute of Librarians would come from the same
source via the Library Group. 247
Planning for the series of meetings in Australian capital cities was co-ordinated by the
Australian Council for Educational Research and came up for discussion at meetings of the
Library Group, which was convened by Tate, with Cunningham as secretary. Binns had be-
come involved in planning the Canberra leg of the event and suggested that libraries could be
discussed at one of the NEF meetings. The other Library Group members were enthusiastic
and agreed ‘that if it were possible to arrange for a meeting of representative librarians at the
time of the Canberra conference it would be a suitable time and place for the inauguration
of the proposed Library Institute. Ihe launching of the movement in Canberra would serve
to emphasise its national character’. 248 Canberra was not only the national capital: it was also
neutral territory, and a launch of the new Institute there would avoid any Sydney-Melbourne
rivalry over its birthplace. 249
The Library Group began to think about suitable speakers to present an authoritative view
of the role and importance of libraries in education. Ifould was in the United Kingdom in 1936
and was asked to discuss possible speakers with Ernest Salter Davies, director of education
in Kent. Salter Davies had been President of the Library Association the previous year and
was also a member of the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust. Salter Davies told Ifould that he
intended to come to Australia for the conference, and so the Library Group needed look no
further for a keynote speaker. In October 1936 they endorsed Binns’s recommendation to
invite Salter Davies to speak on ‘Libraries and the State’ and confirmed that ‘the occasion
might be used for launching the proposed Library Institute’. 250
The NEF Conference began in Brisbane in August 1937, and twenty-one eminent speakers
addressed professional educators and interested citizens there and later in all capital cities


across Australia. As well as Salter Davies the delegates included Dr IL Kandel, professor of
education at the Teachers’ College, Columbia University and Sir Percy Meadon, director of
education for Lancashire. By the time the NEF reached Canberra the unprecedented publi-
city which it had attracted promised a perfect piggyback opportunity for the new Australian
Institute of Librarians.
So it was under the umbrella of the NEF that the librarians planned to gather with their
distinguished visitors at the Albert Hall in Canberra on 20 and 21 August 1937. It was to
be a very formal occasion, with every move planned well beforehand so that all the leaders
of the profession would have at least a small part to play and, therefore, a more binding
commitment to make. There was a detailed ‘Outline of procedure’ for the meeting which
expanded the bare bones of the agenda, stipulating who would speak, the order in which
they would speak, the motions they would put and who would second them. 2 " 1 The major
participants would know exactly why they were there and what was expected of them. From
the draft constitution which Metcalfe, White and Foxcroft had prepared and circulated to
the principal libraries they would also know the objects of the proposed Institute, who could
belong, who couldn’t and how it would operate.
The Canberra meeting
On Friday 20 August 1937, according to plan, the select group of Foundation Members of
the new Institute converged on Canberra. Attendance had been encouraged in a practical way
by subsidised travel costs to Canberra, thanks to the Library Group’s allocation of Carnegie
funds for the purpose. The first contingent to arrive came by the Melbourne train. With
the Victorian librarians —the second largest group to attend —were delegates from South
Australia, Western Australia and Tasmania, who travelled to Canberra via Melbourne. On
the leisurely train journey to the federal capital they therefore had many opportunities to
socialise. Some were old acquaintances and several had corresponded with each other from
time to time, but many had never met their interstate colleagues. Thus for these delegates
the vital ingredient of ‘association’ began even before they set foot in Canberra and would
continue on the twopenny bus ride from the railway station to the Hotel Civic, where all
the library delegates were staying, and during luncheon. The New South Wales contingent,
by far the largest, arrived on the 2:2opm train, in time for afternoon tea —there were no
Queensland colleagues on the train, so that they had only themselves with whom to fraternise.
At 3:3opm fifty-five of the 150 or so eligible Foundation Members gathered expectantly in
the Albert Hall for the inauguration. 252
In his opening remarks the chairman for the afternoon, Frank Tate, President of the
Australian Council for Educational Research, warned of the long and hilly road to be tra-
versed before the goal of a library service worthy of a democratic community was reached.
He pointed to the British example, to the contribution of Andrew Carnegie and to recent
landmarks in Australian librarianship. The Munn-Pitt Report had aroused interest in the
provision of an efficient library service in Australia, and the Free Library Movement had
already been launched in three States. 253 He also referred to the decision, based on discus-
sions with Dr Keppel of the Carnegie Corporation, to establish the Library Group under the
auspices of the Australian Council for Educational Research. 254
Money was an inescapable issue, and Tate made it clear that the Library Group’s only
source of funds was the Carnegie Corporation. The Group had suggested that it would be
best to channel all Corporation funds to Australian libraries through the Group. The course


favoured by the Group was to direct money towards educating public opinion on libraries.
As a result the Corporation had sent US$25 000 (£6000) to the Group for ‘fostering a Free
Library Movement and other movements likely to benefit the library position in Australia’. 255
Tate did not reveal the details, but US$5OOO (about £1250) had been set aside and invested
for the Australian Institute of Librarians.
He emphasised the importance of improving the quality of librarianship, which he saw
as the first object of the new Association: ‘I do not know what other objects you will insist
on putting into the constitution; but I do know that if you take as your sole objective the
improvement of the quality of librarianship, everything else will follow’. 236
After the chairman’s introduction came messages of congratulation from other library
organisations and from a number of prominent librarians who had been unable to attend.
Fraternal greetings came from the American Library Association, the New Zealand Library
Association and the Library Association of Victoria. Good wishes came from Edmund La
Touche Armstrong, Foundation Member and the former Chief Librarian of the Public Library
of Victoria, who had been Secretary of the Library Association of Australasia forty years be-
fore. Collier and Cooke were also unable to attend, but sent their best wishes. Queensland
was not represented at all, but Brown, librarian of the Public Library of Queensland, and
Nora Holdsworth, librarian of the Brisbane School of Arts, both sent messages of congratu-
lation. Holdsworth was a rare bird: an institute librarian who was a Fellow of the Library
Association.
Green’s absence was not due to lack of support for the new Institute. He was still bitter
about the critical comments made about Fisher Library in the Munn-Pitt Report and told
Scott, his counterpart in Melbourne, ‘I don’t want to be personally associated with Pitt in
anything. I might say more than might be advisable, and it would be a mistake to start a
row’. 257 The sour relations between Pitt and Green would persist for many years, despite
the efforts of peacemakers. In 1938 Baud would urge Green to bury the hatchet, but to no
avail. At the 1939 conference in Melbourne it would be Purnell’s turn to try to bring the
antagonists together, but Green would again refuse to make peace with Pitt.
Another notable absentee was Malvina Wood. She had not been sent notice of the meet-
ing and had only heard about it through the grapevine. By the time she had received a reply
to her letter asking for further information it was too late to attend. In Perth, as elsewhere,
communication between the State librarians and their university colleagues was not always
as effective as it might have been. 258
Ernest Salter Davies brought the new Institute a message of congratulation from the Carn-
egie United Kingdom Trust and the Library Association, of which he was a past President.
Metcalfe had suggested this gesture ‘to help pave the way towards co-operation between the
two, which otherwise might not be thought of by either’. 259 Salter Davies sounded a warning
against too much concentration on the salaries paid to librarians, preferring instead to urge
the group to ‘fix your eyes upon the greater objective of improving the standard of libraries
in this great Dominion’. 260
A motion is put
After these messages had been received the real business of the meeting got under way.
ER Pitt expressed his gratitude for being given the honour of moving the motion, ‘that the
Australian Institute of Librarians be founded and the persons named in the draft constitution
as Foundation Members be the members constituting the Institute’. 261


The moving of this most important motion and the speeches which followed had been
carefully orchestrated. Pitt had to be given a prominent role. He was co-author of the
Munn-Pitt Report, head of the Public Library of Victoria, member of the Library Group and
former President of the Australian Library Association. He was a leading librarian in the
only State with a lively association of librarians, the Library Association of Victoria, many of
whose members paradoxically would find themselves ineligible for membership of the new
Institute. Pitt, taking his line from Metcalfe’s earlier arguments, emphasised the wisdom of
having an Institute rather than an Association, The Institute intended to be exclusive and
had chosen its Foundation Members carefully, with a firm eye on their qualifications. He
acknowledged that there had been other associations in Australia, that there was another
body in Victoria which had been in existence for eleven years (in other words the Library
Association of Victoria) and that there were free library movements, though all had different
objectives from those of the new Institute. 262
Following Pitt there were supporting speeches from Binns, who seconded the motion,
Battye and Ifould. Thus the four elder statesmen of the Australian profession were success-
fully brought into the events of the day, showing a united front and stressing the importance
of the Institute in establishing professional standards for librarians.
Whilst acknowledging the importance of standards and training, Binns reminded the audi-
ence that the Institute could also stand for the recognition and promotion of ideals and the
building up of traditions. Librarianship, he said, was not merely a job, it was a calling, 263
Battye was welcomed by Ifould as Australia’s senior librarian: he was by then in the
fourth of his six decades at the helm of the Public Library of Western Australia. He was
rather more detached from the pressing problems of professionalism and thought that ‘the
crying need in Australia today, much as we who are professional librarians would hesitate
to admit it perhaps, is the creation of a library atmosphere and a library spirit amongst the
people of Australia’. 264 For this Battye believed that librarians needed cultural and technical
training. He also rejoiced that there were so many ladies among the audience, because his
experience had led him to think that ladies were ‘equally expert with men in any phase of
librarianship’. 265 One of these ladies, Ida Leeson, was to have spoken ‘on behalf of women
librarians’, but the draft program was not followed and she did not have the opportunity
to speak at this point. 266
Ifould’s remarks explained the importance of professional training and instanced the
difficulty of convincing even his own Board of Trustees that they should take seriously the
need for training in librarianship. He recounted how his predecessor at the Public Library of
New South Wales, HCL Anderson, had persuaded the Board to sit for a cataloguing examina-
tion. Even the university professors amongst them had made a mess of the job. T hope that
we shall constantly bear in mind’, Ifould concluded, ‘that the Institute is formed in order
to improve the quality of library service, to improve you and me and the others who come
after us, in this great profession to which we are proud to belong’. 267
After some congratulatory words from Sir Percy Meadon the motion to found the Institute
was carried unanimously. There was then an opportunity for other senior librarians at the
meeting to play their allotted part: one by one they replied to the congratulatory messages
that had been received. Purnell, himself a Fellow of the Library Association, thanked that
Association for the message conveyed by Salter Davies. He was seconded by Miller, who
mentioned his own debt to British and Continental librarianship and his involvement with
the first Library Association of Victoria thirty years before. Miller was by now finding less


and less time to spend on library activities because of his administrative duties at the Uni-
versity of Tasmania and his own bibliographical research and would before long bow out
of the Institute completely. 268
Metcalfe moved to acknowledge the message from the American Library Association.
He included Canada in his message, hoping that Australia could contribute to international
librarianship and also that the Australian Institute of Librarians could produce some publica-
tions which would be acceptable overseas. The motion was seconded by Frazer, the Victorian
Parliamentary Librarian. Quinton, Frazer’s opposite number in South Australia, moved to
acknowledge the message from the New Zealand Library Association and was seconded by
Marian Hulme of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research.
The constitution is discussed
After these pleasant and uncontroversial formalities the meeting turned to the serious busi-
ness of considering the draft constitution which had been prepared by Metcalfe, White and
Foxcroft. By the time of the meeting it had become clear to the organisers that there would
need to be more than a token debate on the constitution —initially they had thought it could
be over and done with in twenty minutes. Additional time had to be allowed for discussion,
so that instead of debating the constitution and voting on the Friday the major issues were
merely introduced. Debate would be adjourned until the Saturday. Those unfamiliar with the
draft would therefore be able to burn the midnight oil preparing for the morrow’s detailed
discussion. As secretary to the drafting committee, White was called upon to introduce the
draft. He made it clear that they had in mind ‘a professional as opposed to a lay body —an
organisation which would link together library workers who are interested in improving the
standard of the work which they do as the best contribution that we, as librarians, can make
to an adequate and effective library service’. 269 He told them that the drafters had looked for
a model but that this proved difficult because both the American Library Association and the
Library Association combined ‘their objects and activities to include not only the raising of
the standard of librarianship ... but also the whole conception of free library service’. 270
This first afternoon’s business concluded with further motions of thanks. Key, seconded
by Flannery, moved to thank the drafting committee, commenting that Metcalfe had written
the first draft and had looked at library associations while abroad some two years before with
a view to starting ‘some such institution in Australia after his return’. 271
Binns moved a vote of thanks to the Trustees of the Carnegie Corporation of New York
and to Tate and Cunningham of the Australian Council for Educational Research. ‘You will
realise that it was very fortunate that in 1934 there was raised up in Australia such a leader
as Mr Tate,’ Binns told delegates, ‘such a wonderful lieutenant as Dr Cunningham and such
a fairy godmother as the Carnegie Corporation’. 272
Binns expatiated upon this theme in Biblical terms: ‘We must realise that in this pilgrimage
from the bondage of the old time into the promised land which we hope to see, this Cor-
poration is providing the manna to sustain us on our way’. 273 Binns’s motion was seconded
by Baud from the Public Library of Victoria. Tate responded by urging Australia to help
itself establish good libraries: the Carnegie Corporation wisely would help with training in
librarianship and overseas visits for those who should be leaders, he added, but Australia
was a rich country which could afford great football fields, stadiums and race-courses, so
that if they wanted libraries badly enough they would get them.


At 5:25pm, with Tate’s words ringing in their ears, the first meeting of the Australian
Institute of Librarians adjourned until the next morning. But there were still formalities that
evening: after a break for dinner and a little time to spruce up—not to don evening dress,
which had been decided against because many of the NET delegates had travelled light to
Canberra they were back at the Albert Hall at B:lspm for Salter Davies’s address, followed
by a conversazione lasting until 11:00pm.
When they reconvened at 9:45 the next morning the main business was the constitution
of the new Institute. Here too they diverged from the draft program: it had been planned
for the chairman of a provisional Council of the Institute to take the chair at this point, and
this, had everything gone to plan, would have been Ifould. Ihis Council did not yet exist
formally, and so Battye was given the chair, nominated by Ifould and seconded by Bums.
Since there had been so much earlier comment on the draft constitution, one would now
have expected relatively little disagreement. One potential bone of contention the promo-
tion of bibliography —had been excised much earlier on the grounds that it might open up
the Institute to an influx of amateur bibliographers. There was, however, lively debate on
Clause 2, the objects of the Institute, with amendments to the draft proposed by the Victo-
rians, the Australian Capital Territory librarians and the Tasmanians. The speakers included
not only Purnell, Miller, Metcalfe, Key, Binns, Frazer and Ifould, but also three prominent
women members: Edith Sims, Ida Leeson and Jean Arnot. There was no argument about
the object of improving the standard of librarianship, but a Tasmanian suggestion which
would have extended this object to improving the standard of libraries and librarianship was
not accepted. The founders were being very careful to emphasise that the purpose of the
Institute was the professional development of librarians. The libraries were, for the present,
being left to the Free Library Movement.
Unfortunately no verbatim report of the debate on the constitution exists to throw light
on what proved to be the most divisive issue discussed during the whole two days. This was
the suggested addition of the words ‘status of the library profession’ to the objects of the
Institute, an issue which had emerged during the weeks leading up to the Canberra meeting.
This amendment was proposed by librarians in the Australian Capital Territory and Victoria.
It had been among the objects of the Australian Library Association, but there were many who
thought it inappropriate for this Institute. A lively debate ensued, with vigorous opposition
to the amendment, notably from Metcalfe, as he later reported in Library Association Record;
‘Some preferred to leave out any mention of status. They thought it was an admission of
present inferiority, that it made a selfish motive too implicit; that the word status had some
implication of class distinction; that status could, in fact, only be secured by improving the
standard of librarianship, and properly in no other way; that mere mention in a constitution
could effect nothing’. 274 Metcalfe’s consistent view was that they should not be concerned
with ‘building up the status of any existing group of librarians, but simply in extending,
fortifying, improving that group as a means to an end, which was better library seivices, as
a social, cultural, and economic necessity’, 275 But this was one amendment which Metcalfe
could not persuade enough people to oppose: it was agreed to by 30 votes to 16. The final
wording therefore read: ‘The objects of the institute shall be to unite persons engaged in library
work, and to improve the standard of librarianship and the status of the library profession in
Australia’. 276 On status there would be an abiding difference of opinion. Opposing attitudes
to professionalism and industrial issues would be reflected in the work of the Institute and
its successor, the Library Association of Australia, for the next half century.
63
Uniting a profession


Although the debate on the constitution lasted for about three hours, the amendment
to the objects clause was the only change of real substance. The critical issue of eligibility
for membership was approved. The delegates cemented the firm foundation of the Institute
as an association of professional librarians, and the qualifications required for Foundation
Members were confirmed as ‘a degree of an approved university, or a certificate of university
matriculation, or a certificate of an equivalent general education, or a certificate of sufficient
education from the principal librarian of the State or Territory together with five years experi-
ence in the case of non-graduates, and three years in the case of graduates, in professional
work in a library approved by the principal librarian of his State or Territory, as employing
modern methods, and providing adequate facilities for training’. 277
Further members would be admitted if, in the opinion of a three-fourths majority of the
Institute Council, they were ‘qualified by special training and experience for the profession
of librarianship’ and were proposed by two financial members of the Institute. 278 The differ-
ence between this qualification ‘by special training and experience’ and the very precisely-
defined criteria for Foundation Members would emerge as a contentious issue as early at
the first meeting of the Institute’s Executive, but for the moment the delegates appeared to
have no qualms about it.
The category of Student Associate would be open to those who, again in the opinion of
a three-fourths majority of the Council, were ‘in training for the profession of librarianship
in a library or a library school approved by the Council’. Student Associates too needed to
be proposed by two financial members. 279 This category of membership would be a nursery
for future full members once a training or examination system had been established, subject
to the acceptable safeguard of certification by the chief librarians to prevent an influx of
undesirables.
The final category, Honorary Membership, was for those who were not otherwise eligible
for membership but who had given ‘noteworthy service in promoting the objects of the
Institute’. Honorary Membership required a unanimous vote on the part of the Institute
Council. 280
When all the amendments had been discussed and their fate decided, Binns moved that
the draft constitution as amended be adopted. He was seconded by Foxcroft, and the motion
was agreed to. The Institute then drew its first formal breath, with Pitt moving and Quinn
seconding a motion to establish a provisional executive, as provided for under Section 9(ii)
of the constitution. This was intended to carry out the business of the Institute until the
election of the first Executive. The meeting agreed that the provisional executive should
be chaired by Ifould, with the three begetters of the constitution —Foxcroft, Metcalfe and
White—as the other members. 281
Leigh Scott then had another of his bright ideas, suggesting that the first annual meeting
of the Institute be held in Sydney the following year to coincide with the celebration of the
sesquicentenary of European settlement. This proposal was discussed, but no firm conclu-
sion was reached at this meeting, although it would in fact come to pass. 282
The meeting closed at 1:10pm, and delegates donned their overcoats for a group photo-
graph on the sunny side of the Albert Hall. After lunch a sixpenny bus tour of Canberra had
been arranged, with visits to Parliament House and the Commonwealth National Library.
Then the New South Wales contingent was deposited at the railway station in time for their


4:lspm train. The other interstate librarians returned to the Hotel Civic for dinner, as they
would have to wait until B:3opm for the train to Melbourne, 283
By any standard the foundation meeting in Canberra had been remarkably successful.
It had been free of rancour, despite the strong personalities and the historical antagon-
isms Green had probably assisted by staying away. There had been a real opportunity for
librarians to get to know distant colleagues. The elders of the profession had all committed
themselves to the Institute and displayed a front of solidarity. An international perspective
had been provided by the link with the New Education Fellowship conference and, more
particularly, with the overseas library associations. There had been no softening of the line
against institute librarians. No-one had broken ranks, taken their bat and gone home. The
pressure was now on the provisional executive to organise the first ballot for the office-bear-
ers and ensure that each Branch elected its councillors.
The provisional Executive
It was a foregone conclusion who would be the first President. Ifould chaired the interim
Executive from the time of the Canberra meeting and in any vote would have a distinct
advantage, coming from the State with the greatest number of Foundation Members, many
from his own library. But a vote might be divisive, and at this time what seemed essential to
many observers was a united body of librarians in line behind an undisputed leader. There
seemed little reason to cloud the issue with further nominations for President.
The same could be said of the vice-presidency, but with the added complication of a percep-
tion of succession to the presidency. There were therefore strenuous efforts in 1937 to limit
the nomination for the position of Vice-President. ER Pitt intended to nominate, but news
reached Ifould’s ears, through Metcalfe, who had heard it from White, that Binns intended
to nominate Battye. Ifould was horrified at the prospect of an election for Vice-President. He
knew that Battye had made a good impression in Canberra when he had chaired proceedings
on the second day and might put up a good showing, although the six Foundation Members
from his own State, including himself, represented a very small power base.
Ifould did not want there to be any chance that Pitt would lose. If Binns insisted on
nominating Battye, Ifould thought that Pitt should not stand that year but should wait for
nomination the following year as President. Rationalising, Ifould thought that maybe it was
not such a bad idea for a librarian from one of the smaller States to be Vice-President. ~ 84
Pitt was indignant. Ifould’s idea of the Vice-President being from a smaller State had not
been discussed and seemed a very long shot to him. He thought that it was clear to every-
body that the path of succession to the presidency was through the vice-presidency and he
therefore intended to stand, come what may. 285
Ifould changed his tune but said he was ‘naturally anxious, for the sake of our new In-
stitute, to avoid any awkward contretemps’, telling Pitt that he had taken steps to prevent
Battye being nominated by Binns. Moreover, if Binns did not nominate Pitt as Vice-President,
the New South Wales librarians would. 286 The electoral manoeuvrings took another twist
when Malvina Wood wrote to Ifould telling him that she intended to nominate Battye for
the position of President. Ifould informed her that he understood that he himself would be
nominated and that there were good reasons for the presidency to come to Sydney: the first
conference of the new Institute was planned for Sydney, the centre of the 1938 Sesquicenten-
nial celebrations, and so it would be convenient for the Foundation President and Secretary
65
Uniting a profession


at least to be from Sydney. ‘Were it not for this’, Ifould told Wood rather disingenuously, ‘I
should gladly withdraw the nomination for myself’. 287
The Executive elected
He said the same to Foxcroft, who wrote to inform him officially in November 1937 that
he had won the presidency. In a demonstration of interstate fraternity, as promised, Ifould
and Leeson had nominated ER Pitt as Vice-President. 288 The first elected Executive consisted
of Ifould, President; Pitt, Vice-President; White, General Treasurer; and Metcalfe, General
Secretary.
It was actually seven months before an elected Executive met for the first time, but a good
deal of business and discussion had taken place by correspondence and telephone, and the
first election for Branch councillors had been held. The councillors elected were all well-
known figures: Binns (Australian Capital Territory), Green and Leeson (New South Wales),
Brown (Queensland), Cowan and Purnell (South Australia), Collier (Tasmania), Foxcroft
and Scott (Victoria) and Wood (Western Australia).
The Executive met for the first time on 10 March 1938 at the Windsor Hotel in Mel-
bourne. The minutes of this meeting are short, and the decisions were clearly based on
much information not revealed in them. 289 There were a number of routine matters relating
to the opening of a bank account and the paying of bills, the duplication and distribution
of the constitution, the purchase of letterhead paper, the names of the newly elected Branch
councillors and the appointment of auditors.
The most controversial matter to come before this meeting was one which would feature
in Institute debates for many years. It was eligibility for membership. The meeting decided
to recommend to Council that persons who held the same qualifications as the Foundation
Members should be eligible for membership of the Institute. Council duly approved this
temporary measure, and these conditions were circulated, together with application forms.
By the end of the first reporting period, June 1938, seven new members had been elected
under this provision and five applications were still being considered. Twenty student as-
sociates were elected, and twenty-five applications were being considered. 290
Other issues addressed during the first months of the Institute’s existence were monitoring
of job advertisements and appointments (one of which had necessitated a protest from the
President), relations with overseas associations (mainly advising them of the new Institute’s
existence) and keeping in touch with the Branches which were being created. 291
The Institute made good progress. The fact that at least 143 Foundation Members had
been enrolled was a considerable achievement in the first place. Within less than ten months
of the inauguration, Branches were established in all States and the Federal Capital Terri-
tory, at least to the point of electing councillors to the governing body. The Executive had
also decided to recommend to Council that the first annual meeting and conference be
held in Sydney. Taking up Scott’s suggestion of a link with Sesquicentennial celebrations,
the Executive nominated the King’s Birthday holiday weekend in June 1938. There was a
clear determination to maintain the momentum. Perhaps because of the experience of ear-
lier Australian library associations, which had talked about conferences, postponed them,
held them infrequently and then —unable to sustain professional fellowship —had quietly
died. Professional fellowship was clearly very important to members, and meetings of the
Institute at a Branch or at a national level gave many young members in particular their first
opportunity to enjoy this fellowship.
Foundation


There were clouds on the horizon, however. Inadequate finances and difficulties in com-
munication brought about by the sheer distance between centres were specifically identified.
Tardiness in responding to letters and in collecting and remitting subscriptions made life
difficult for the General Secretary and the General Treasurer in particular. By the end of
May 1938 the cupboard, although not entirely bare, was not exactly groaning. Even with
some funds provided by the Carnegie Corporation and with office assistance courtesy of the
Public Library of New South Wales there was only £25 in the kitty. This was precious little
for ‘activities which the Institute should very soon enter on’, which would include printing.
These activities were not elaborated on in the annual report but included the publication of
proceedings and expenditure associated with examination and certification.
The 1938 Sydney conference
The fact that the first conference was in Sydney, and during the year of the Sesquicentenary
gave it extra vigour. As we have seen, the main thrust for an Institute had come from Sydney,
and more than half of the Foundation Members were from New South Wales. A conference
of librarians had not been held there for forty years, and the composition of the new Institute
meant that this was now a game whose rules had at last been drafted to the satisfaction of
the New South Wales librarians: the ball had been thrown to them and, unlike the kicking
Victorians, they were going to run with it.
The Institute’s first Council met in the Mitchell Library on 11 June, The four members of
the Executive and all ten Branch councillors were in attendance, and they approved Branch
constitutions submitted by the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales, Victoria,
South Australia and Tasmania. 293 After some routine matters the Council adjourned until
the Monday, when it would invite those elected to Council for the following year to attend.
The annual meeting of the Institute proper was on the Saturday morning, with over a hun-
dred members from every State and the Australian Capital Territory in attendance. This was
by far the largest gathering of librarians in Australia up to that time. There was naturally a
good turn-out from New South Wales, but interstate delegates were also numerous: travel
assistance had been provided for them by the Carnegie Corporation. All were welcomed
by Charles Bertie, the librarian of the Sydney Municipal Library, who was President of the
New South Wales Branch. Three-quarters of an hour was then allocated for the first annual
report and other announcements.
At midday it was a mellow Ifould who gave the Presidential Address. He had initially
entitled his paper ‘The purpose of the Institute’, but on the day he changed it to The future
of the Institute’, beginning a trend of future-gazing which has been a feature of Australian
library conferences ever since. His address had undertones of a patriarchal valediction, intent
on salving old wounds and uniting a heterogeneous group. As he said to a well-wisher just
after the conference. The main thing is for all of us to work together for a common end and
not allow sectional interests or pettiness to influence or discourage us’. 294
In his paper Ifould looked not only at the Institute’s predecessors and at the current bod-
ies with which it would have to associate—notably the Library Group and the Free Library
Movement, He also outlined some of the activities of the two major overseas associations;
the Library Association in the United Kingdom and the American Library Association. In the
field of education for librarianship Ifould expressed a preference for the American model,
the accreditation of library training schools attached to universities, teachers’ colleges and
‘public’ libraries (by which he meant State libraries). He did not favour the British pattern
67
Uniting a profession


of an association with its own system of examinations, correspondence courses and summer
schools, with only one university-based school. 295 Ifould was clearly thinking about what
he believed should happen in his own State: only a month earlier the draft report of the
Libraries Advisory Committee, which he chaired, had recommended that a library school
be established at the Public Library of New South Wales, affiliated with the University of
Sydney. 296 This would be just one of the options which the Institute would have to consider
when it shortly turned its attention to training, examination and certification.
For Ifould this would have to be one of the main tasks of the Institute, particularly as
the development of New South Wales public libraries advocated by the Libraries Advisory
Committee could only hope to succeed if there were an adequate number of trained staff.
‘I consider, then, that one of the most urgent subjects for decision by this Institute’, he told
the conference, ‘is the setting of a general standard for library training in Australia, with
special consideration for the needs of small municipal libraries’. 297 He ended his address
by expressing the hope that the Institute would achieve a number of objectives, which are
really paraphrases of its objects: improving technical efficiency, adding to the prestige of
their calling and bringing them closer together to save them from inertia and pettiness. That,
he said, would help improve library service in Australia and ‘above all, give us pride and
satisfaction in our opportunities to serve our generation and community’. 298
Delegates had time to digest Ifould’s address during the luncheon which followed, and
there was half an hour’s discussion afterwards, led by Metcalfe. No reports of discussions at
the early conferences were published, although this was suggested from time to time, so that
in print Presidential Addresses tend to take on the flavour of unassailable truth.
Standards and training
After Ifould’s address it is no surprise that the most serious business of the conference, with
two and a half hours allotted to it, was a ‘Symposium on standards of librarianship and library
training’. This ‘Symposium’ was probably a misnomer, because all the participants produced
formal papers, which fill some twenty-seven pages of the Proceedings. The participants were
not the only ones who had been thinking hard about the topic: Metcalfe had undertaken a
considerable amount of preliminary work on library training and had even prepared a draft
syllabus for circulation among the Library Group. 299
In choosing speakers for this segment the organisers had attempted to cover the whole
range of library types, with ER Pitt dealing with reference libraries, Malvina Wood university
libraries, Binns parliamentary libraries, BB Levick of the Colonial Sugar Refining Company
special libraries and JV Flannery of the Sydney Municipal Library lending libraries.
Pitt’s sixteen-page contribution was the longest delivered at this conference. It was a very
detailed review of training in librarianship in the United States and the United Kingdom,
owing much to his Carnegie-sponsored travels. He believed that the way forward was through
training courses run by the larger State libraries, at least in New South Wales and Victoria,
with short differently structured courses for suburban librarians and those from country
areas. For the latter there could be supplementary correspondence courses. 300
Malvina Wood gave a much more succinct paper. She regarded academic training as
essential for a university librarian, and ideally some form of postgraduate study, the better
to relate to fellow academics and to understand the needs of the students. Technical training
in librarianship was also highly desirable, and there was no longer a reason for untrained
people to be appointed as university librarians. A working knowledge of a number of


languages was useful. I here was a place for non-graduates as trainee librarians who could
take their degree part-time, ft was a sensible, no-nonsense paper. 301
Binns dealt with desirable training for parliamentary library staff, using as his basis the
draft syllabus which Metcalfe had submitted to the Library Group earlier that year and pro-
viding constructive comments. Like Wood he believed a university degree essential, but most
significant are his acceptance of the syllabus headings which Metcalfe had identified and his
final comment that the training and standards for parliamentary librarians should be kept as
similar as possible to those which the Institute might set for librarians in the State libraries.
It was only a question of placing more or less emphasis on certain subjects. 302
Flannery hoped public libraries would be able to retain graduates more successfully once
the number of libraries began to expand. He also spoke in support of a compulsory scheme
of training and examinations for all those who wished to enter the profession. 303
When Levick rose to speak on special libraries he was less dogmatic about the absolute
necessity of preliminary library training for staff in some special libraries, particularly those
which were small and highly focused. Subject knowledge and familiarity with the way
the parent organisation operated were critical. He stressed that he could not speak for all
special libraries, such was their diversity. In fact many Australian special librarians would
have agreed with him wholeheartedly. 304 Training for special librarians would prove to be a
stumbling block throughout the life of the Institute and beyond, just as it had been in the
United Kingdom. As we shall see later, education for special librarianship required, but did
not always receive, deft footwork on the part of the Executive, and in particular the larger
Branches.
Following afternoon tea the delegates were officially welcomed by DH Drummond, the
New South Wales Minister for Education, who was proving to be an important ally for the
library cause. After this interlude, the symposium on standards of librarianship and library
training was discussed at length, with Metcalfe given half an hour to sum up. Again these
discussions and Metcalfe’s summary were not formally recorded, but it is clear that library
training was being marked out as Metcalfe’s ‘baby’.
The conference then paused for dinner, resuming at 7:3opm with a tour of the Mitchell
Library, the glass-floored Dixson stacks beneath the galleries where the conference was being
held and the Country Circulation Department. At 8:00pm the stamina of the delegates was
lurther tested by a number of parallel round table discussions, precursors of the sectional
streams of later conferences. There were sessions on reference libraries, university librar-
ies, parliamentary libraries and lending libraries. Those interested were also able to join in
discussions of archives and public records or cataloguing and classification which began
after the other sessions had finished. Distinguished librarians chaired each session, among
them Purnell, Green, Quinn, Bertie, White and GH Pitt.
It was a long first day for the first conference of the new Institute, winding up at 10:00pm,
and although there were no formal proceedings on the Sunday there was little chance to sleep
in. There was intensive socialising to do, and transport was laid on for ‘members and their
wives’ [sic] to travel to Palm Beach. On the way they stopped at Elanora Country Club for
morning tea as guests of ffould and his wife. At Palm Beach a picnic luncheon and afternoon
tea were provided by the New South Wales Branch, and the guests were driven back to town
at around s:3opm, They then had a free evening. Much thought had gone into the social
program during this conference, and there were plenty of opportunities on that Sunday to


get to know colleagues from other libraries who had hitherto been only signatures on letters
or known only by name.
On the Monday there was a change of venue, and the conference moved to the With-
drawing Room of the University of Sydney Union. At 9:ooam the Council alone reconvened
with its newly elected membership. As it turned out there were only four new faces—Ellinor
Archer (General Treasurer), WC Baud (General Secretary), Jean Arnot (councillor for New
South Wales) and HJ Keyes (councillor for South Australia). The new Council dealt with
routine business relating to the admission of new members and student associates, the ap-
pointment of auditors and the transfer of bank accounts, but also appointed the Institute’s
first standing committees, some of which would have a lasting influence on the profession.
The committees appointed were on Reference and Research, Cataloguing and Classifica-
tion, Classification of Australiana, and Library Training and Standards. In their composition
there was again a real attempt at geographical coverage as well as representation of women
members and of different kinds of libraries. 301 The Council also resolved unanimously to
elect Frank Tate as the first honorary member of the Institute ‘for his outstanding services
to the library movement in Australia’. 306
The full conference reconvened at 11:00am, and Geoffrey Remington, chairman of the
Executive Committee of the Free Library Movement and member of the Libraries Advisory
Committee in New South Wales, addressed them on ‘Librarians and the public’ —like Ifould’s
earlier address, touching on a theme that can be traced through many conferences right up to
the present. 307 Here it was something of a novelty in that the views were being expressed by
a layman, albeit a remarkably well-informed one well-up on recent library literature, thanks
partly to the Free Library Movement’s technical adviser, John Metcalfe. The discussion which
followed was led by McMicken, one of the liveliest of the Victorians in promoting libraries
and a frequenter of library conferences.
Luncheon, courtesy of the Vice-Chancellor, was followed by the announcement of the
election of officers for the following year. The new Executive held few surprises, with the
mantle passing to Melbourne as far as President, General Secretary and General Treasurer
were concerned. This was the beginning of a convention to elect a President and General
Secretary from the city where the next conference was intended to be held. Pitt, who had
been Vice-President, became President, and Baud the General Secretary. Ellinor Archer
became General Treasurer, thereby combining representation of two minorities who, it was
recognised, would need to be carefully looked after: women and special libraries. Ifould,
Foundation President, automatically became the first Immediate Past President and therefore
still had a voice in the Executive.
Purnell became Vice-President and ‘heir presumptive’ to the presidency, there still being
the possibility that someone might stand against him in the following year. In fact behind
the scenes the same care was being given to nominations to office as had been given to the
carefully choreographed foundation of the Institute the year before. From time to time it
would not be a shoo-in for the kingmakers’ selections, but there was rather more certainty
about it than picking Melbourne Cup winners.
Displays and demonstrations of library equipment also formed part of the Sydney
conference. These had been a popular feature of the Library Association of Australasia
conferences, but advances in technology were now evident: KW Burrow gave a demonstra-
tion of an apparatus for the reproduction of books, manuscripts and catalogue cards at
Fisher Library. The formal conference then ended, being followed by meetings of the new
Foundation


standing committees and library visits for the remaining delegates, who inspected a collec-
tion of recent library literature in the board room of the Public Library of New South Wales
and also the Model School Library which had been assembled as a demonstration collection
for teacher-librarians. It was also planned to fit out a large mobile library so that the model
library could tour rural areas in New South Wales. 303
So far, so good
The first conference had been a notable success, rounding off a short but very lull first year
of the Institute, spanning the time from its foundation in August 1937 to the first Annual
Meeting in June 1938. In organisational terms the Institute was off to a good start. The seven
Branches created by the constitution had all elected councillors and five had adopted writ-
ten constitutions of their own. The New South Wales Branch reported that it had held two
meetings and that others were planned, and papers presented at two of its meetings were
published with the conference proceedings.
Some moves had also been made to further the object of improving the status of the
profession. The Institute had made itself known to employers: the President had protested
at intervals on the Institute’s behalf against the appointment of an untrained person to a posi-
tion designated ‘librarian . When Ifould was President he wrote to Sydney County Council,
the electricity supplier in Greater Sydney, complaining that it had advertised lor a librarian,
insisting on a science degree but stipulating that library experience was only ‘preferred’, ‘1
feel it my duty, as President of the Australian Institute of Librarians’, he told the general
manager, ‘to endeavour to see that librarians appointed to all classes of libraries shall have
an adequate library training’. 309 This was just one of a series of exhortations and protests to
employers. On some occasions it would prove to be very hard work to dispel the persistent
image of billiard marker/librarians. One instance occurred in 1939, when the Miscellaneous
Workers’ Union applied for a variation of conditions of eligibility for membership. 1 he long
list of occupations which they covered included asbestos makers, carbon paper makers, dental
mechanics, gardeners and greenkeepers, gatekeepers, ice cream makers and librarians (not
principally engaged at clerical duties—in Queensland only)’. This was a clear reference to
the caretakers and keepers of schools of arts, and Purnell, who was President of the Institute
at the time, wrote to the Industrial Registrar asking for a revision of the words. Because of a
legal technicality, however, the offending words were not proposed for amendment on this
occasion and had to stand. 310
Keeping a watching brief on status inevitably took the Institute into contentious industrial
matters, an area fraught with difficulty, because there might be a perceived conflict of interest
for Institute office-bearers who were also senior librarians as well as employer representat-
ives. In 1938, not long after the conference, when Ifould was Immediate Past President, he
was asked, in his capacity as senior librarian in New South Wales and one of the shrewdest
managers,’ to offer his opinion on an appointment to the library of the Standards Associ-
ation. The best candidate, in Ifould’s opinion, was neither an Institute member nor already
employed in a library. But Nita May Dobbie was rather special, and Ifould recognised her
not inconsiderable potential; she had undertaken studies from the International Correspond-
ence School in London and in the previous year had completed a certificate in freelance
journalism. She also happened to be the niece of Nita Kibble, who had been on the staff
of the Public Library of New South Wales since 1899 and was one of Ifould’s most trusted
and reliable officers. Two of the disappointed candidates were from Fisher Library, and a
number of New South Wales Branch members, including Green, were critical of Ifoulds
71
Uniting a profession


role, not because Dobbie was related to Kibble but because he had not given preference to
an Institute member. 311
At this early stage there was no large pool of qualified librarians to fill every position, and
it was impractical to expect employers to accept a ‘closed shop’ of Institute members. An
Institute appointments committee was suggested by some members, including Green; such
a committee would have advised employers on the merits of candidates, but this idea was
equally unrealistic, as Ifould explained to Green; The position of a standing committee of
the Institute might easily cause serious controversy in the body itself. I know of no profes-
sional institute which has ever undertaken such a duty. Moreover the very appointment of
three assessors of this kind will not be made easily’. 312
Metcalfe and Ifould had anticipated this kind of problem and had therefore strongly op-
posed the inclusion of ‘status’ in the Institute’s objects. Metcalfe believed that the most they
could now do, until a certification system for qualifications was in place, was to set out the
qualifications for particular jobs and provide a statement on the qualifications of particular
candidates. As he explained to Munn, who remained for many years a sounding-board for
Australian library development, ‘I think ultimately we will have some system of certification
and a sufficient body of trained and qualified people to choose from. We will then be able to
say to an employing authority that the profession can provide a suitable candidate, but that
the onus should be on the employing authority to make a choice amongst those suitable’. 313
This was not the last time that the issue of potential conflict of interest raised it head in the
Institute: a decade later some members would criticise Metcalfe for recommending the ap-
pointment of an unqualified person, exactly the criticism levelled against Ifould. 314
Internationally the Institute had made its existence known to other library associations,
and several of its members, on the strength of recommendations by the Library Group,
had received Carnegie Grants for travel to the United States. Australian librarianship was
beginning to have an international profile. The Institute had also got off to a good start with
its presidents. Ifould had been succeeded by Pitt, and over the next decade the office of
President was a roll-call of the most prominent and distinguished librarians in the country:
Purnell, Binns, Green, Scott, Collier, Metcalfe and Archer. There were no rank outsiders
here: these were all chief librarians in positions of power, accustomed to getting results, with
staff to command and sure of their status among their peers, and their positions helped the
Institute to gain recognition.
Teething problems
There were still a number of teething problems for the young Institute, mainly born out of
the mutual distrust among librarians who had not yet really got to know each other par-
ticularly well, or in some cases believed that they knew each other only too well. Nowhere
was this distrust more acute than in the relationship between some of the university librar-
ians and the State librarians. In the early years of the Institute some university librarians
considered that the Executive had been slanted too much towards the State libraries, to the
detriment of university libraries and special libraries, Cowan wrote privately of the Institute
as ‘a public librarians’ benefit association and forum’. Green agreed with him, telling Scott:
‘there is a tendency among the Public Library people to sort of assume as a matter of course
the conduct of the Institute’. 315 Green thought that after Ifould and Pitt it was time for the
university librarians to have their ‘show’, by which he simply meant a fair deal: Green was
still nursing a grudge against Pitt and was wary of Ifould. He thought that Binns and Purnell


would be fair as Presidents but wondered what would happen when the presidency returned
to Sydney or Melbourne. As early as 1939 Green, despite ill-health and the demands of his
job, was thinking of standing for the presidency.
The smaller States too had their problems with the Institute. They were wary of the ap-
parent domination of the Institute by New South Wales, Victoria and the Australian Capital
Territory. The Western Australians in particular were suspicious of the Eastern Staters. In
1938 Ifould wrote to Battye asking if he would accept nomination as Vice-President, but
Battye rather ungraciously refused, saying, ‘the Institute of Librarians is going to be control-
led entirely by the Eastern States and is not likely to be of much value to the smaller States
of the Commonwealth’. 316 He was proved wrong, as we shall see when we turn to Branch
and Committee activities; a Western Australian like Malvina Wood did exert a considerable
influence on the national stage, but it is true that no Western Australian ever acceded to the
presidency of the Australian Institute of Librarians. It would be 1969, twenty years after the
Institute had become the Library Association of Australia, that FA Sharr became the first
President from Western Australia.
Communication between members of the Executive, members of Council and members at
large was often difficult. Branch meetings certainly facilitated communication at a local level,
at least within metropolitan areas, but even the Executive of the Institute was unable to meet
as often as its members would have wished, resulting in a reliance upon correspondence and
consequential delays. Council meetings involved greater numbers and higher expenses, and
so in the early years they were held in whatever free time there was during the conference
(which was usually in June) and then again in December, when some of the members might
be in Melbourne for a Library Group meeting. Council meetings often proved very rushed,
and dealing with matters by correspondence was not suitable except for very straightfor-
ward or routine issues. At an early meeting of the Council Green raised his concern at the
lack of time available to respond to such issues as conference programs and the printing of
proceedings. He was concerned that the Executive appeared, deliberately or otherwise, to
be limiting the influence of the Council. 317
There really had to be more face-to-face discussion when decisions were required on
intricate issues or when differences of opinion had to be thrashed out. In 1940 Purnell
called together the Council on the day before the conference to clear up outstanding matters.
This was a successful initiative, but it still meant that it was the outgoing Council which
met before the conference. It was proposed that the incoming Council meet immediately
after the conference, when new members and continuing members could share views and
become acquainted with each other. This arrangement worked well and provided a measure
of continuity in the Council’s decision-making processes. 318
These were some of the teething problems of the new Institute, but there were no fatal
flaws to shorten its life or serious shortcomings to make its existence precarious. It had al-
ready established enduring assets and instruments which would help it further its objects,
a healthy Branch structure and the first Standing Committees. The following thematic
chapters tell their stories.
73


Chapter 4 Endnotes
44 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947, and other papers, Sydney, Australian Institute of Librarians (AIL),
1949, p 53.
245 The New Education Fellowship was renamed the World Education Fellowship (WEE) in 1966.
246 N Horrocks, The Carnegie Corporation of New York and its impact on library development in Australia, PhD
thesis, University of Pittsburgh, 1971, pp 259-260.
247 ibid., pp 260—261.
248 ‘Notes on meeting of librarians’, 5-6 October 1936, [Library Group meeting], Australian Council of
Educational Research (ACER) archives, vol 86.
249 N Elorrocks, The Carnegie Corporation, p 263.
250 ‘Notes on meeting of librarians’, 5-6 October 1936. Binns had initially made his suggestion in a let-
ter to KS Cunningham dated 30 September 1936 (ACER Archives, vol 86). See also N Horrocks, The
Carnegie Corporation, p 262.
241 ‘Meeting to inaugurate Australian Institute of Librarians ... Outline of procedure’, ALIA records,
National Library of Australia (NLA), M 57446, box 109.
242 ‘Proposed program for librarians visiting Canberra for the Inauguration of the AIL’, ALIA records,
NLA, M 57446, box 1. The total number of Foundation Members has been stated variously as 143,
150 and 151. The number listed in the appendix to the constitution printed in 1938 is 143. A table of
Foundation Members forms an appendix to the present publication and indicates the fifty-five who
attended the inauguration, according to the minutes of the meeting.
258 New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria.
244 Transcript of inauguration, p 4-5 [no pages 1-3], ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
254 ibid., p 6.
256 ibid.
247 HM Green to L Scott, 13 April 1937, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
248 ME Wood to HM Green, 19 April 1938, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
249 JW Metcalfe to E Salter Davies, 18 April 1937, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
260 Transcript of inauguration, p 9.
261 ibid., p 9.
262 ibid., p 9-12.
263 ibid., pl 2-14.
264 ibid, pl 4.
264 ibid, P l 5.
266 ‘Meeting to inaugurate Australian Institute of Librarians ... Outline of procedure’.
267 Transcript of inauguration, pl 7.
268 In 1938 Miller told Green that he was not taking an active part in the AIL because T have so much
else to do’ (E Morris Miller to HM Green, 4 June 1938, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84). Miller’s
resignation from the Institute was announced in 1943 (AIL, Annual report, no 6, September 1943).
269 Transcript of inauguration, p 22.
270 ibid, p 22.
271 ibid, p 25.
74
Foundation


272 ibid., p 26.
273 ibid.
274 JW Metcalfe, ‘The Australian Institute of Librarians’, Library Association Record, series 4, vol 4, December
1937, p 640.
273 iw Metcalfe ‘Past present and future of the Institute’, p 52. He also recalled his opposition to profes-
sional status’ as an object in his Presidential Address ‘The standards of librarianship and the status
of the library profession’ at the 1959 conference of the Library Association of Australia, published in
Australian Library Journal, vol 8 no 4, October 1959, ppl7l-180.
276 Australian Institute of Librarians Constitution adopted at a meeting of Foundation Members of the
Institute at Canberra, August 21, 1937’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual
Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior and Anderson,
1939 pp6s-66 (The constitution was also published separately as Australian Institute of Librarians
Constitution adopted at a meeting of Foundation Members of the Institute, at Canberra, August 21, 1937,
Sydney, AIL, 1938).
277 Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th
to 13th, 1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior and Anderson, 1939, p 9. Emphasis added.
278 Australian Institute of Librarians Constitution adopted at a meeting of Foundation Members,
pp6s-66.
279 ibid., p 66.
280 ibid., p 66.
281 Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney June
nth to 13th, 1938, p 9. ‘Minutes of meeting to inaugurate the Australian Institute ol Librarians, 20
August 1937, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
282 Minutes of meeting to inaugurate the Australian Institute of Librarians’. Transcript of inauguration.
283 ‘Proposed programme for librarians visiting Canberra.
284 WH Ifould to ER Pitt, 23 September 1937, ‘Confidential’, State Library of New South Wales (SLNSW)
archives, box NPL 55. Another copy in ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
285 ER Pitt to WH Ifould. 28 September 1937, ‘Confidential’. ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
286 WH Ifould to ER Pitt, 30 September 1937, ‘Confidential’. ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
287 WH Ifould to Malvina Wood, 28 October 1937, SLNSW archives, box NPLSS.
288 WH Ifould to AB Foxcroft, 25 November 1937, SLNSW archives, box NPLSS; WH Ifould to ER Pitt,
7 October 1937, SLNSW archives, box NPLSS.
289 AIL, Executive, Minutes of the Ist meeting, 10 March 1938, ALIA Records, NLA, M 57446, Box 45.
290 AIL, Annual report, no 1, August 1937-13 June 1938.
291 ibid.
292 ibid.
293 The Federal Capital Territory was renamed the Australian Capital Territory in 1938.
294 WH Ifould to Miss EEA Wells [that is. EAW Wells], Neutral Bay, 20 June 1938, SLNSW archives, box
NPLS6.
293 WH Ifould. ‘Presidential Address; the future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceed-
ings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June l ith to 13th, 1938, ppll-24.
298 Libraries Advisory Committee, Draft report [May 1938], SLNSW archives, box ‘Libraries Advisory
Committee (contd)’.
297 WH Ifould, ‘Presidential Address; the future of the Institute’, pl 9.
75


298 ibid., p 24.
299 JW Metcalfe, ‘Australian Institute of Librarians: Tentative proposals for a syllabus of studies by can-
didates for a final certificate or diploma in librarianship’, undated, three page typescript. SLNSW
archives, box 1452. This document was written prior to 25 March 1938, because it is referred to in
JW Metcalfe to HM Green, 25 March 1938, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84. K Binns’s paper was
‘Standards of training and qualifications for parliamentary librarians’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, pp46—so.
300 ER Pitt, ‘Standards of librarianship and library training with special reference to reference libraries’,
Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th
to 13th, 1938, pp2s—4l.
301 ME Wood, ‘Training for librarianship from the university standpoint’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, pp 42-45.
302 This is discussed in Chapter 6. K Binns, ‘Standards of training and qualifications for parliamentary
librarians’, pp 46-50.
303 JV Flannery, ‘Standards and training in the lending library’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceed-
ings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, ppsl-53.
304 BB Levick, ‘Standards of librarianship and library training from the special library viewpoint’, Aus-
tralian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to
13th, 1938, pps4-56.
305 Reference and Research: BB Levick (convenor), Nita Kibble, Edith Sims, Edith AW Wells and KW
Burrow. Cataloguing and Classification: Leigh Scott (3), Ellinor Archer, Mary Barrington, AB Foxcroft,
HJ Keyes, EV Steel, HL White. Classification of Australiana: LF Fitzhardinge (convenor), Ida Leeson,
Malvina Wood, JDA Collier, TF Cooke, AB Foxcroft, HM Green and HR Purnell. Library Training
and Standards: JW Metcalfe (convenor), Jean F Arnot, K Binns, WH Brown, WA Cowan, JV Flannery,
EL Frazer, AE McMicken, ER Pitt.
306 Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th
to 13th, 1938, plO.
307 GC Remington, ‘Librarians and the public’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual
Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, pps7-64.
308 Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th
to 13th, 1938, pp7l-72.
309 WH Ifould to HR Forbes Mackay, general manager, Sydney County Council, 18 February 1938, ALIA
records, NLA, M 57446, box 104.
310 K Binns to HR Purnell, 13 October 1939; HR Purnell to Industrial Registrar, 28 October 1939;
HR Purnell to K Binns, 30 October 1939; Industrial Registrar to HR Purnell, 22 November 1939. All
in ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 104.
311 WH Ifould to HM Green, 2 December 1938, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 28.
312 HM Green to WH Ifould, 1 December 1938; Ifould to Green 14 December 1938. ALIA records, NLA,
M 57446, box 28.
313 JW Metcalfe to R Munn, 8 December 1938, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 28.
314 In 1948 RM McGreal a former school teacher, was appointed Secretary of the Library Board of New
South Wales. Reaction to his appointment is described in Chapter 6.
313 HM Green to L Scott, 11 May 1939, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
316 JS Battye to WH Ifould, 11 May 1938, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
317 AIL, Council, Minutes of 2nd meeting, June 1939, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40.
318 AIL, Annual report, no 4, May 1941.


5
Branches
The Members of the Institute in each
State and Territory shall constitute
a Branch of the Institute. Each such
Branch shall have power to make its
own constitution and by-laws subject to
the approval of the Council , shall elect
its own officers, and shall conduct its
affairs in a manner compatible with
the Constitution and By-laws of the
Institute. 319


One of the most significant failures of earlier associations of librarians in Aus-
tralia had been their inability to stimulate the grass-roots. Both the Library
Association of Australasia and the Australian Library Association had remained
predominantly national associations in which the most important members of the pro-
fession talked to each other at infrequent meetings. Even though the Australian Library
Association had some State affiliates these had been constituted as a mechanism to get
the national Association up and running and were not branches in the true sense of the
word. In both Associations the rank and file had made little impact on policy and had
had no real reason for meeting in professional fellowship. The Australian Institute of
Librarians was different. Section 25 of its Constitution provided for the establishment
of Branches in each State or Territory, consisting exclusively of Institute members, each
Branch with its own constitution, officers and by-laws, all operating within the frame-
work of the Institute’s Constitution. 320
These Branches were expected to spring into existence very quickly after the inaugural
meeting of the Institute in August 1937. No problems were likely in getting a Branch
going and keeping it on track in Victoria; it had an active library association (which
had welcomed the new Institute) and was the only State with a habit of association and
a tradition of meetings. New South Wales, as the leader in establishing the Institute,
could also be counted on to put in a strong performance. States with smaller numbers
of Foundation Members could not be expected to match the vibrancy and variety of
activities of the larger library centres of Sydney and Melbourne, but there proved to be
a remarkable degree of commitment even in minuscule Branches like Queensland.
By the first annual meeting and conference in Sydney in June 1938 all States and the
Australian Capital Territory had established Branches, held meetings, elected councillors
and appointed secretaries. Branches in the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales,
South Australia, Tasmania and Victoria had adopted written constitutions which had
been approved by Council. It was a promising start, and hopes were high that Branches
would initiate action and become centres of professional fellowship. Healthy Branches,
conferences and an examination system would not only realise the aim of raising the
standards of librarianship but would also encourage people to join and remain members
of the new association.
Victoria
The Victorian Branch’s familiarity with meetings, committees and reports was much in
evidence from the beginning. Most of the Victorian founding members of the Institute
also belonged to the Library Association of Victoria. They could have made life difficult
for the new Institute, but on the contrary they had played a very important part in its
foundation, and the two organisations co-existed perfectly happily for many years, with
many members in common.
The Victorian Branch held its first meeting on 8 December 1937, with twenty members
in attendance. The first Branch officers were elected, a Branch constitution was adopted,
and ER Pitt delivered the first Presidential Address. Scott was elected Vice-President,
Foxcroft Secretary and Hulme Treasurer. Foxcroft and Scott were named the federal
councillors, and a number of Branch councillors were elected, including McMicken,
The Branch quickly instituted a pattern of regular quarterly meetings. From its earliest
days the Branch demonstrated a great interest in free libraries, and in February 1939
Branches


held a symposium on a library policy for Victoria. In the following year a Branch meet-
ing heard talks on the Free Library Movement by Cunningham, on the Library Group
by Pitt and on the Library Service Board by Baud.
The Victorian Branch Council was very concerned to attract more members, and at
one stage resolved to ask the Federal Council to broaden the criteria for membership.
The Victorians were not as single-minded about professional exclusiveness in their new
Institute as were their colleagues in New South Wales. Many significant public figures
who were not librarians were members of the Library Association of Victoria and proved
valuable allies and advocates for libraries in the community. The urge to extend the
membership criteria persisted, particularly in Victoria, fuelled by groups of would-be
members, including information officers. The widening of the membership and aims of
the Institute would have posed far fewer ideological problems for the Victorian Branch
than for any other, but, as we shall see, it would be some time before a majority in the
Institute shared the Victorians’ view.
Many attempts were made to reach out to groups which might have felt they were out
of the mainstream of professional activity. Special librarians and school librarians were
given particular attention. Following the successful overtures made to special librarians
in New South Wales the Branch was urged to organise night courses for this group.
These were arranged very quickly, and by 1944-45 the Victorian Branch had held ten
lectures for special librarians. 321
Assistance was also offered to school librarians. Fairlie Taylor was one of the Founda-
tion Members from Victoria, and her 1939 address to the Branch on the library at Pres-
byterian Ladies’ College quickly brought school libraries into the professional conscious-
ness. Another Branch member, Frank Kirby, librarian of Scotch College in Melbourne,
was authorised to make a survey of school libraries in Victoria, and his report was
later forwarded to the Victorian Cabinet and published. 322 The Branch also held vaca-
tion courses for teacher-librarians; one course attracted eighty participants. By 1948
the Library Training School was well established at the Public Library of Victoria, but
teacher-librarians were still not being specifically catered for. Kirby and ALG McDonald
organised a further teacher-librarians’ course, but on this occasion attendance was poor.
As with the special librarians before them, however, the thoughts of teacher-librarians
in Victoria were turning to an association of their own. On 28 September 1949 they
formed an Association of Teacher-Librarians—the predecessor of the Australian School
Library Association.
Victorian Branch members were also interested in industrial matters, and in 1946 a
committee was appointed to consider a model salary scale for librarians. By this time
the Victorian Public Service Board had agreed to recognise the Institute’s qualifications
for professional positions in the Public Library of Victoria.
The Branch participated in many other initiatives but was the originator of very few.
In 1949 it was well represented at a Victorian conference on municipal libraries held in
South Melbourne and at a Children’s Library Conference held in Prahran, but both of
these were actually organised by the Library Association of Victoria. 323 This Association
also upstaged the Institute on the Free Library Service Board: the Association had a
designated representative on the Board, It was only by good fortune that four of the five
initial members of the Board were also Australian Institute of Librarians members. 324
79
Uniting a profession


Anyone browsing the records of the Victorian Branch and of the Library Association
of Victoria will soon become aware of differences between Victorian and New South
Wales styles, which strongly matched the personalities of the leading librarians in each
State. Disharmony, argument and a determination to make every post a winner were the
norm in the library world in Sydney. The New South Wales Branch seized every chance
to be seen to be running things. By contrast the Victorian Branch happily shared the
limelight with the Library Association of Victoria and saw nothing untoward in dual
membership. With its gentler and more accommodating style the Branch achieved much,
albeit less ostentatiously than its northern neighbour.
New South Wales
The main thrust for the establishment of the Australian Institute of Librarians had come
from New South Wales, and it could muster more members than any other State. The
vigour which this Branch exhibited, right from its inception, was therefore only to be
expected. When the Institute was inaugurated the Branch had sixty-seven Foundation
Members. By June 1939 Branch membership had risen to a healthy ninety-four. Ten
general meetings of the Branch and six Branch Council meetings had been held. A provi-
sional executive had been elected at the first meeting, the first Branch Council had
been elected soon after, and a Branch constitution had been submitted, amended and
adopted by the Federal Council. New South Wales was the first Branch to hold meetings
at which papers were read, the honour of pioneer in this activity going to Frank Bell of
the Sydney Municipal Library. Bell’s paper was based on his experiences in the United
States whilst overseas on a Carnegie-sponsored visit and dealt with the status, qualifica-
tions and conditions of professional librarians. His parting words to his audience, after
talking about training and salaries, would resonate with the more progressive members
of the Branch: Tf we are looking for a model on which to base the future organisation
of our profession we must look across the Pacific to our American cousins’. 125
This and most other papers which were given were practical and descriptive, pro-
viding observations on developments in librarianship at home and abroad either from
first-hand experience or gleaned from the latest literature. Admittedly only the best are
immortalised in print, but if they are anything to go by, the overall standard must have
been high. Some papers challenged traditional or conservative views; a good example
was WGK Duncan’s view of the librarian as an activist in the community. 326
From the earliest days, however, there were signs of tension among Branch members
and disagreement with the stance taken on various issues by the Federal Executive,
which was initially presided over by their own State librarian, WH Ifould, The Branch
had the distinction of including some of the most strong-willed and individualistic
members of the entire Institute. Ifould, who had a reputation for iron rule at the Public
Library of New South Wales, was the Institute’s first President, then its first Immediate
Past President, an influential member of the Library Group and a savvy political op-
erator. Ifould was brimming with confidence, bolstered by private means which made
him the antithesis of the timorous public servant. Metcalfe was his deputy—clever,
energetic, articulate and persuasive to the point of being overbearing. Across town there
was another live-wire much given to independent thought, Henry Green, who still fdt
badly done by after the Munn-Pitt Report and believed that university libraries aid
women librarians were getting a raw deal in the Institute. Midway between was Charbs
Bertie at the Sydney Municipal Library in the Queen Victoria Building, who had sone
Bran d es


sympathy for the struggling institute librarians and doubts about the value of the Insti-
tute for municipal librarians.
On their staffs, particularly at the Public Library of New South Wales and Fisher
Library, they had a formidable array of highly educated, dedicated and capable women.
Among them were Ida Leeson, the Mitchell Librarian, brilliant, politically aware and
something of a rallying-point for nascent feminism, and Jean Arnot, bright, loyal, yet
independent-minded and assertive of women’s rights in the workplace.
Ordinary members may have been especially watchful of their rights because of
Ifould’s reputation for high-handedness. Ifould had already put himself offside with
his women staff by grooming Metcalfe as his successor and engineering the sidelining
of Leeson. 327 There were concerns about being left in the dark, and in 1939 the Branch
authorised the New South Wales councillors, Arnot and Green, to protest ‘about the
failure of the executive to send personal notices to all members asking for nominations
for next year’s [that is, f 939-40] officers of the federal body and for failing to give the
New South Wales Branch sufficient notice to enable it to undertake the task . They also
deplored more generally ‘the failure to consult the New South Wales representatives on
the Council on important matters decided during the year’. 328 The Executive listened,
and later Presidents did make a real effort to consult more widely with their constituents
and not to take their local Branches for granted.
Like its Victorian counterpart, the New South Wales Branch sought representation
on the governing body for public library development in its State. Under its legislation
the Library Board of New South Wales, which was to come into full operation in 1944,
had only one librarian as a member; the Principal Librarian of the Public Library. The
Branch considered that, as questions of standards and of training were to be dealt with,
two members nominated by the Branch should be added. In the event the Branch was
successful in gaining a nominee on the Board, and EV Steel represented the Branch on
the Board for a number of years. 329
The Branch was especially prominent in the Institute’s voluntary efforts to provide
books for the troops during World War 11, and an account of this massive operation is
provided in a later chapter. On a smaller scale was one of the more unusual activities
of the Branch; the drama group. This was not a social club which arranged visits to the
commercial theatre but a group of interested Branch members who gave play readings and
from time to time put on full-scale productions. In the early years of the war the drama
group performed in public at the Teachers’ Federation Hall, with proceeds going to the
war effort. 330 With the pressure of other commitments (such as air raid precautions and
study) and short-staffing, the drama group went into hibernation. A triumphant revival
was planned for December 1945, but the performance had to be cancelled because of
the coal strike. The group flickered briefly, but the play reading in March the following
year must have been an anticlimax, and the group’s activities petered out. 331
The Branch paid particular attention to special libraries, which would be a significant
and growing sector in the 19405, stimulated in part by the war-time information needs
of research organisations, government departments and manufacturers. By 1944 the New
South Wales Branch had a subcommittee on special libraries convened by Constance
McKay. In 1946 there were thirteen New South Wales Government departmental librar-
ies, all then staffed by the Public Library of New South Wales, and thirty-eight other
special libraries. All eligible Public Library staff were strongly encouraged to join the
81
Uniting a profession


Institute, and did as they were bid. Coverage in the private special libraries was not so
complete, and only fifteen librarians were members or associates of the Institute. But
thirty-two were in contact with the Special Libraries Committee and benefiting from
the experience. 332
Special librarians were certainly made to feel welcome, with publications and activi-
ties to retain their interest and to help them in their daily work. Evening courses were
arranged for special librarians in Sydney. A catalogue of the complete holdings of periodi-
cals in commercial libraries in Sydney was prepared by the Committee, as these libraries
were not entirely covered in Pitt’s Catalogue. 333 The Committee also issued a series of
leaflets —by 1947 twenty in number—under the capable editorship of Marjorie Barnard.
These included a directory of special libraries in Sydney, notes on layouts for special
libraries and information on organisations which collected and disseminated scientific
and technical reports on industries in former enemy territories. This investment in time
and effort by leading members of the Branch was repaid by growing membership and
very harmonious relations between the major libraries and the specials; this contrasted
vividly with the situation in Victoria, where a rival association for special librarians and
information officers had been established by the mid-19405.
School librarians also made their presence felt at Branch level in New South Wales from
the earliest years. In 1940 Norman Gould, an Armidale teacher, spoke to the Branch on
school libraries. 334 This was the first of many addresses on school and children’s librar-
ies, with topics ranging from educational theory to Library Week. The attention paid to
school librarians was again facilitated by the larger number of members and potential
members. A School Libraries Committee was appointed in February 1946 to monitor the
development of these libraries and to bring their librarians in contact with each other
and with the Institute. 333 Within a year the Committee was regularly attracting over forty
librarians to its meetings. The bulletin which it issued was being gratefully received by
school librarians, and selections from it were being published in the New South Wales
Education Gazette, the Australian Teacher, Education and Australasian Book News. 336
Nor were the growing numbers of public librarians neglected. In the immediate post-
war years more and more local authorities in New South Wales adopted the Library Act,
which had become fully operational in 1944, and established free public libraries. The
Branch responded by setting up the Municipal and Shire Librarians’ Group, an informal
forum designed to assist the newly appointed librarians. 337
By responding to the special needs of the various groupings within the Branch a
broad appeal was maintained. The growing number of new librarians was reflected in
increased Institute membership: by the end of 1948 New South Wales had almost four
hundred members and student associates. This was a large group on which to draw for
Branch activities, and numbers at Branch functions grew steadily.
Observers in other States may well have shared the feeling of inhabitants of the far-
flung parts of the Roman Empire when they thought of Rome. Sydney was the hub of
the Institute, and ordinary members did not make too fine a distinction between the
headquarters of the Institute at the Public Library of New South Wales and the New
South Wales Branch. As the years passed, however, the mantle of the old guard —Ifould,
Bertie and Green—passed to younger members, although the towering figure of Metcalfe
still dominated the Branch, as indeed it did the Institute at large. The former perception
of Public Library of New South Wales hegemony also began to dissipate, and Branch
Branches


executives were by no means limited to the senior staff of the Public Library and Fisher
Library. The office bearers for 1949-50, for example, comprised a special librarian as
President, a State library officer as Vice-President and a municipal librarian as Past Pres-
ident, with a Parliamentary Library staff member as Secretary and a further municipal
librarian as Treasurer. 338 Diversity prevailed, and the Branch flourished as one big happy,
healthily argumentative family.
South Australia
Within a few weeks of the inauguration of the Institute in Canberra, the South Australians
had begun the process of establishing their Branch. At its first meeting on 8 October 1937
a Branch Constitution was discussed, amended and adopted by the ten people present.
At the same meeting, office bearers were confirmed, and Purnell, as Branch President,
gave an address in which he exhorted members to concentrate on the highest aims of the
library profession. A further meeting was held on 7 December, and Cowan and Purnell
were elected as councillors. The following year Cowan became Branch President. It was
not a large Branch —there were only seventeen South Australian Foundation Members
of the Institute —and some of the early meetings were held in Cowan’s home. It was
there that they met on 27 July 1938 to hear a report on the Sydney conference, and this
was the first South Australian Branch meeting attended by women—Eileen Rogers and
Margaret Sorrell from the Barr Smith Library at the University of Adelaide.
It is easy to explain the reasons for the quick success of the Branches in Sydney and
Melbourne, but Adelaide is another matter. It can probably be explained by the presence
of two professionally qualified chief librarians in Purnell and Cowan, by the professional
standards of their libraries, and by their common hete noire —the Institutes Association
of South Australia. The professional South Australians therefore had to get off to a good
start, in which they were helped by being an already fairly close-knit group. They mainly
worked in two institutions, the Public Library of South Australia and the University of
Adelaide, only two hundred metres apart on North Terrace. 339
Whilst Cowan shared with his fellow university librarians the general suspicion
that the Institute seemed too much in the hands of the State libraries, the tension and
suspicion which marked the relationship between Green and Ifould in Sydney did not
exist between Cowan and Purnell. Cowan was a quiet scholarly man who had been a
lecturer in Classics and who continued to give lectures on Latin literature after he was
appointed University Librarian. His appointment had been strongly criticised by the
Munn-Pitt Report: the University’s response had been to send him to take a degree in
librarianship at the University of Michigan. His prominence in the Branch probably
reflected a sense of duty and a belief in his profession. He therefore had much in com-
mon with Purnell, who had been an ‘association man’ all his life. Purnell had played a
prominent part in the Association of Assistant Librarians in the United Kingdom, was
a leading member of the Australian Library Association and was deeply involved in
library politics. Saddled with a very difficult administration and continually frustrated
by his board, Purnell needed the support of the Australian Institute of Librarians and
relished professional fellowship.
The professionalism of the South Australian Branch is revealed by its insistence on
holding the 1940 conference. The New South Wales Branch had proposed the aban-
donment of this conference because of the war. The South Australians declared that


the conference was no mere jaunt, but a constructive effort to increase their efficiency
as librarians. Unless it could be shown that the absence of the delegates from their
homes for a few days would retard Australia’s war effort they believed it was their duty
to carry on as cheerfully and as normally as possible, however grave the international
situation might be. This was a very British response, characteristic of Purnell, who had
been in the trenches in World War I and, while his health held out, worked to the point
of exhaustion on intelligence matters at Keswick Barracks on most afternoons during
World War 11.
Talks, debates and tours were also a feature of South Australian Branch activities.
Issues tackled included censorship, the Dewey versus the Library of Congress Classi-
fications, dictionary versus classed catalogues, accounts of overseas libraries, current
library literature and the image of librarians. 340 There were several meetings about spe-
cial libraries in its programs. The subjects included the York Gate Library of the Royal
Geographical Society of South Australia, the South Australian Supreme Court Library,
the library of the Advertiser newspaper and the library of Waite Institute, the agricultural
research centre of the University of Adelaide.
South Australia had had a Children’s Library since 1915 and so it is not surprising
that the South Australian Branch showed an early interest in library services for chil-
dren. In the early years of the Branch Dr H Penny, principal of the Adelaide Teachers’
College, spoke on education and libraries, and Cynthia Paltridge, later a prominent
children’s librarian, spoke about the Country Children’s Box Service, through which
country schools received children’s books from the Public Library of South Australia.
From 1945 the Branch organised successful Book Weeks each year. 341
The South Australian Branch had the distinction of achieving something which eluded
other Branches: it produced its own newsletter. The Quarterly Bulletin first appeared in
September 1944 and survived for eleven issues, the last appearing in 1949. 342 It was a
modest publication, edited, roneoed and issued from the Public Library of South Aus-
tralia. Its first editor was John McLellan, later to become South Australian Archivist. The
Quarterly Bulletin gives us a glimpse of life in the South Australian Branch, but it gave
equal coverage to the activities of other Branches, as well as to items on librarianship in
general. Topics included filing in a library, non-book materials, censorship, cataloguing,
the Universal Decimal Classification, book selection, fiction, professional responsibili-
ties and binding. While the production was cheap and the articles short and sometimes
somewhat naive, the whole tone of the publication was cheerful and enthusiastic. It
did provide a useful means of communication and was something to which even the
youngest members of the Branch could contribute. It also contained reports back from
Institute Council meetings and did much to make South Australians think nationally
about their profession.
While the eager young members might from time to time regard some of their elders
as rather conservative, the senior librarians were tolerant and supportive: they encour-
aged their juniors, and when the Institute examinations began, gave up their spare time
to teach and coach the candidates. The South Australian Branch remained a remarkably
cohesive group of librarians, with no factions but a common enthusiasm for the whole
field of librarianship, from incunabula to Hollerith machines.
Branches


Tasmania
Tasmania had only seven Foundation Members of the Institute. It is understandable
that they had great difficulty in getting activities going, and a Branch was not prop-
erly organised until 1940. One person who might have been expected to be a leading
light was Professor Morris Miller, at that time on the Board of the Public Library and
Vice-Chancellor of the University of Tasmania. Miller had started his career as a library
assistant in the State Library of Victoria and had helped McMicken found the first
Library Association of Victoria. As honorary University Librarian, Miller had, almost
single-handedly, provided a library for the University of Tasmania, but although he
had played a part in the inaugural meeting of the Institute, Miller now found that his
academic responsibilities and his writing left little time for him to be an active member
of the Institute —he finally resigned in 1943. 343
In the early war years the energies of most Branch members were absorbed in the
Free Library Movement in Tasmania, the politics surrounding the establishment of the
Rural Libraries Advisory Board, and the survey of Tasmanian libraries conducted by
Kenneth Binns in 194 3. 344 These times were so fraught with argument, political crises
and the prospect of progress that librarians scarcely had time for the Institute. Once the
Tasmanian Library Act became law in 1944 Branch activities took even more of a back
seat because of the pressure of work brought about by quickening library development
in Tasmania.
It was all the more remarkable, therefore, that a handful of Tasmanian librarians were
able to mount such a successful and memorable conference in 1946, the Institute’s first
conference since 1941. From that moment on the Tasmanian Branch grew steadily, with
an influx of energetic professionals such as EH Clark from Victoria, who became the first
full-time university librarian in November 1945. By 1947 the number of Tasmanian full
members of the Institute had jumped to seventeen.
Tasmania had a special interest in children’s libraries, because in 1945 the State decided
to set up a state-wide children’s library system in memory of Lady Clark, the wife of
Sir Ernest Clark, the Governor of Tasmania. This interest was reflected in a number
of talks to the Branch and a short intensive course on library practice for school and
children’s librarians, held in January 1946.
Despite numerical disadvantages the Branch was vociferous when necessary: in 1942
it passed a resolution protesting against the proposal of the trustees of the Tasmanian
Public Library to use volunteers in their library 345 The Branch was reasonably active and
gave a number of members the opportunity to experience office in the Institute: between
1938 and 1946, when, because of its limited membership, Tasmania was entitled to only
one general councillor, five different people had been the Tasmanian councillor.
Western Australia
The Western Australian Branch too was minuscule, with only six Foundation Members,
Their natural leader was Australia’s longest serving State Librarian. At the time of the
Institute’s inauguration in 1937 Dr James Sykes Battye had been librarian of the Public
Library of Western Australia for forty-three years and still had many more years to go. He
had an active life outside his work, was a historian, had edited the Cyclopedia of Western
Australia, was Chancellor of the University of Western Australia and held high office as
a Freemason. Despite the relish with which he chaired a session at the inauguration he


was openly sceptical about the usefulness of the Institute to Western Australians, was
rarely able to attend meetings in the eastern states and had little inclination to dabble
in local Branch activities.
Even without Battye’s participation the Branch was surprisingly active. What they
lacked in numbers they made up in energy and enthusiasm, partly because their re-
moteness and their limited resources had always led them to co-operate. One of their
number stands out: Malvina Wood, the Librarian of the University of Western Australia,
who was active throughout the life of the Institute and beyond. So varied and extensive
were her activities that one sometimes has the impression that she constituted the en-
tire Western Australian Branch. She broadcast addresses on libraries on the Australian
Broadcasting Commission’s Women’s Session’, spoke to women’s groups on children’s
libraries, set up training classes when the Institute examinations began and gave a major
paper on Australasian library services to the Free Library Movement which was later
distributed to other Branches. 346 She co-ordinated Western Australian contributions to
the proposed new edition of Pitt’s Catalogue. With others she participated in the Free
Library Movement in Western Australia from 1944 and was later co-opted onto a gov-
ernment committee to determine grants to, and to monitor government expenditure
on, free country libraries. 347
The Branch met regularly, and many papers were read. The Branch was enthusiastic
about Children’s Book Week in Western Australia, which was observed for the first time
in 1945. There was good publicity in the newspapers and on the radio, and Branch
members visited bookshops and encouraged them to put on special displays. 348 They
repeated their performance in 1946, but by 1947 a Children’s Book Council had taken
over Children’s Book Week. It was this Council, which included a representative of the
Western Australian Branch of the Institute, which prepared a booklet for the guidance
of voluntary bodies conducting children’s libraries, 349
In 1945-46 the Branch organised a summer school for teacher-librarians under the
auspices of the Adult Education Board. Wood, the principal lecturer for the course, was
pleased with the attendance of twenty students, and the course was repeated in the fol-
lowing year. 350 By 1949 the Teachers’ College had a full-time librarian and the Education
Department of Western Australia had appointed an inspector-in-charge of school libraries
and had started to pay subsidies to schools to build reference collections.
The Western Australian Branch was rather too small and remote to have much influ-
ence nationally, although Battye had the stature and Wood the innate ability to have
been effective leaders of the profession. Western Australia might have been expected
to have more presence in the affairs of the Australian Institute of Librarians, but apart
from Battye’s occasional letters, Wood’s was the only voice heard in the Council of the
Institute, and that not often, although she attended most meetings. It would not be until
the 1950 s and the remarkable growth in public library services under FA Sharr that the
Western Australia Branch would come into its own on the national stage, although in
the meantime members had done much good work locally.
Queensland
If the Western Australian Branch was minuscule, the Queensland one was microscopic,
with only two Foundation Members, and one of those retired. It was in no position to
hold meaningful meetings, but by the time of the first annual meeting and conference


The inaugural gathering of the Australian Institute of Librarians
outside the Albert Hall, Canberra,
21 August 1937.
From the left, front row; JJ Quinn, K Binns, ER Pitt, Sir Percival Meadon,
IL Kandel, Frank Tate, E Salter Davies, JS Battye, EM Miller, WH Ifould, HR Purnell.
Second row: IE Leeson, LF Fitzhardinge, WC Quinton, EE Small, EA Sims, OM Flynn,
KA Lodewycks, ELM Gallagher, IA Mair, HL White, AB Foxcroft, JW Metcalfe.
Third row: EL Frazer, HE Mackay, MM Thompson, MU O’Connor, N Armstrong,
El Cuthbert, NG Booker, JF Arnot, KW Burrow, EM Clapham.
Fourth row: LM Foley, L Scott, EM Flower, MI Hulme, IAM Fraser, ES Hall, BB Levick,
NA Fraser, J Hunter, BP Wines, JJ O’Brien, E Stanley, ALG McDonald, DJ Whitelaw.
Back row: CK Irvine, JV Flannery, M Barrington, NHE Robb, ZE Bertles, P Mander-Jones,
LE Key, AM Turkington, MM Lafferty, EM Lambert, WC Baud, JM Begg, NS Lynravn.
Courtesy of the Mitchell Library, State Library of NSW


The first conference Sydney 1938
Courtesy of the Mitchell Library, State Library of NSW
The third conference: Adelaide 1940


The fifth conference: Hobart 1946
Jean P Whyte is at the far right of the second row from the front
The Carnegie surveyors come to Perth; ER Pitt (left) and Ralph Munn
(centre) meet Dr JS Battye on 6 July 1934
Courtesy of the Battye Library


Delegates inside the Adelaide conference venue.
In the front row, from the left, are FTS Bell, CT Whiting, ER Pitt,
HR Purnell, Jean F Arnot and GH Pitt
The fourth conference; Canberra 1941
The Prime Minister, John Curtin, is second from the right, front row
The second conference: Melbourne 1939


William Herbert Ifould,
Principal Librarian of the Public
Library of New South Wales and
first President of the AIL.
Courtesy of the Monloch Library
‘Dynamic and straight-shooting’;
Ralph Munn, Director of the
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh
Courtesy of the Australian National
Library
‘One who resisted the domina-
tion of the “Old Men of the Public
Libraries’”: Henry Green, Librar-
ian of the University of Sydney and
AIL President 1941-1943
Courtesy of the University of Sydney
Library
‘An Association man all his life’:
H Rutherford Purnell, Principal
Librarian of the State Library of
South Australia and President of
the AIL 1939-1940
Courtesy of the Mortlock Library


in Sydney it, like all the other Branches, sent its councillor. For years Queensland’s
councillor, and seemingly sole representative, was WH Brown, the State Librarian.
By 1943, there were still only eight members in Queensland, five of whom worked
at the University. Despite having a majority of members m the Branch, the University
of Queensland Library showed no leadership. Norman Gould had spent two years there
as librarian but was inactive in the Branch. He was succeeded by Richard Pennington, a
British librarian of whom great things were expected, but he too showed no enthusiasm
for the Institute or for professional fellowship and soon left Australia.
During the war the Branch was unable to undertake many extra-curricular activities.
As the Honorary Secretary confessed in 1944, ‘This Branch has very little to report, ex-
cept that all its members have had a very busy year, as they are all engaged in working
in libraries which are short staffed. The enquiries received from the Allied Intelligence
Sections of the forces have been constant. The usual meetings of the Branch have been
held from time to time’. 351
By the late 19405, however, new life was being breathed into the Branch, partly because
of a growth in the number of libraries and partly because senior librarians from other
States had taken up appointments in Queensland. JL Stapleton from the Public Library
of South Australia was appointed State Librarian in Queensland. DV Ryan from the Par-
liamentary Library in New South Wales became Parliamentary Librarian in Queensland.
Merle Clarke, formerly of the Public Library of New South Wales, joined the Public
Library of Queensland and was made Secretary of the Queensland Branch,
In 1947, the Branch organised public meetings to try to stimulate interest in the library
movement’ They took advantage of the visit to the State of Helen Wessells and Isabella
Jinnette American librarians working in Australia, who were able to talk about modem
libraries and services for children. 352 In June 1948 John Metcalfe, recently returned from
the second general conference of UNESCO, gave a public address in the Lady Mayoress’s
Reception Rooms at the Town Hall on libraries at home and abroad. 53
In the following year there were six new librarians appointed to the Public Library
of Queensland, three of them being graduates of the 1948 class of the Public Library of
New South Wales Library School. Stapleton was organising classes for the Institutes ex-
aminations at his library. Classes were also held at the South Brisbane Municipal Library.
There was also some vigorous library promotion going on: more than forty people came
to a Branch screening of library films in late 1948, and a little later Stapleton showed
films during his tour of the north and north-west of the State. 354
The Branch’s share of the national limelight, however, still lay in the future, when
Harrison Bryan and Barry Scott were to appear on the scene, but by then the Institute
had become the Library Association of Australia.
Australian Capital Territory
Despite its relatively small membership base—it had mustered only eight Foundation
Members—the Australian Capital Territory Branch maintained a lively program of meet-
ings, at which formal papers were frequently presented. These generally reflect a pre-
occupation with the more meaty technical aspects of librarianship, reflecting the nature
of some of the work carried out in particular at the Commonwealth National Library.
Elizabeth Hall’s paper on the Prussian Instructions and the Anglo-American Code, for


example, sprang from her experience cataloguing major collections—she was at the time
cataloguing the Mathews Ornithological Collection.
Like their colleagues in New South Wales, the Australian Capital Territory Branch
paid much attention to the needs of special librarians as Government departments grew
in number and size in the young federal capital. By 1944, special librarians had their
own subcommittee in the Branch, convened by Marjorie Harry. 356
During the war this Branch, like that in New South Wales, made a major commit-
ment to the supply of books for the troops, an account of which is provided in a later
chapter.
Branch achievements
Between 1937 and 1949, whatever the size of the pool of librarians in its State or Territ-
ory, each Branch succeeded to some degree in advancing the objects of the Institute. Each
Branch in its own way stimulated members’ awareness of professional issues, helped
them keep abreast of developments, facilitated professional education and, last but not
least, promoted fellowship among Branch members.
Branch meetings were concerned with a whole range of professional issues and no
aspect of librarianship was completely neglected. The record shows just how profes-
sionally aware Australian librarians had become, even before the Institutes examination
system had been established. It is one of the paradoxes of Australian librarianship that,
on the one hand, the strictures of the Munn-Pitt Report on the state of Australian lib-
raries were perfectly justified, but that on the other hand, there is irrefutable evidence
of professional awareness and technical competence among Australian librarians at the
time. Once the best practitioners could meet in an organisation specifically founded
to promote and improve that awareness professionalism could quickly flower and bear
fruit. A branch structure, with regular meetings at the local level, facilitated this pro-
cess enormously.
Keeping abreast of technical and other professional issues and promoting interaction
between members were at the heart of most Branch meetings. A speaker would ad-
dress a topic in librarianship or a related held, and this would then lead to discussion.
Speakers from other Branches and occasionally from overseas leavened the proceedings
and provided a wider perspective. It became the practice for librarians who had been
overseas, whether on Carnegie-sponsored visits or private ones, to report back to their
own Branch and sometimes to other Branches, A succession of articulate librarians
shared their experiences of American and European libraries and librarianship with
their colleagues.
Some meetings included tours of neighbouring libraries, particularly valuable when
new techniques had been employed. In this way librarians became familiar, for exam-
ple, with Fisher Library’s new open access scheme, microphotographic techniques for
libraries, catalogue card duplication and punched card systems. These issues were being
discussed in the literature of the time, indicating that Australian librarians were keep-
ing up with the overseas developments. Some Branches made a point of discussing the
current professional literature, and book reviews were regularly presented at Branch
meetings in South Australia and sometimes in New South Wales.
With the coming of the Institute’s examination system in 1944, all the Branches
found an additional role. They began to prepare their student associate members for
Branches


these examinations. In the smaller Branches a lot of the energy and time of the senior
members of the Branch went into tutoring, but it proved to be a valuable exercise, with
an entire new generation of young librarians benefiting from contact with many of the
most senior and most capable members of the profession.
This contact, the fellowship between Branch members, flourished because it was
encouraged by the leading members of the Institute. They were convinced that to have
a healthy Institute they needed active Branches. From time to time there were exhorta-
tions to Branches to keep up their activities, and the smaller and less active Branches
were encouraged to do more. The point was well made that, however valuable the
annual meeting and conference of the Institute might be, there would always be many
members who would be unable to attend, particularly the juniors. It would be only at
a Branch level that they would have the opportunity to ‘obtain the benefit of frequent
contact with their confreres, and to receive that stimulation of professional interest and
enthusiasm which it must be the task of the Institute to foster to the utmost degree’.” 7
In the days before the Australian Library Journal Branch meetings were vitally important
for the education and continuing education of members. The enthusiastic accounts of
meetings, as well as the attendance figures, show that professional fellowship, the pri-
mary object of the Institute, was alive and well.
In setting their own priorities and agendas, Branches were able to cater for regional
variations in emphasis and different priorities. When there were sufficient numbers,
Branches could support special interest groups; in New South Wales, for example,
special librarians and school librarians gathered from time to time to share experiences
and later to run training classes in their respective fields.
At a local level Branches could also co-operate more effectively with state or regional
organisations than could an exclusively federal body. Sometimes Branches would liaise
with a government body, as did New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory
when they worked with the authorities to make a success of the military library services.
Where an active Free Library Movement existed the Branch of the Institute co-operated
closely in promoting the cause of free public libraries.
Local initiative at a Branch level left its mark in publishing too. Although a national
library journal was mentioned very early in the life of the Institute, the closest which the
Institute came to it was an Executive Newsletter, which did not appear until 1948. Vari-
ous Branches had been responsible for seeing conference proceedings and some Branch
papers through the press. The South Australian Branch had produced eleven issues of its
Quarterly Bulletin. The New South Wales Branch had produced leaflets on special librar-
ies and a bulletin for school librarians, which were useful tools. The Victorian Branch
had been instrumental in having Frank Kirby’s report on school libraries published. In
Victoria, of course, the Library Association of Victoria was still publishing its Library
Journal, and the Institutes Association of South Australia still issued its journal. The
Branch contributions to professional publishing, as well as the conference proceedings,
showed that there was plenty to write about and enough talent to write it.
One of the keys to the success of the Branches was their partial financial independ-
ence, The Constitution of the Institute gave them access to funds for their expenses,
allowing Branches to keep one third of the membership fees which they collected. For
an assiduous Branch executive this was an incentive to retain old members and to drum
up new ones, particularly juniors in their own libraries who, once the examination
Uniting a profession


system was in place, could be encouraged to join the Institute as student associates in
large numbers. Money spent on refreshments before and after a meeting was money well
spent. It was as important to the functioning of a Branch as postage, stationery and the
increasingly frequent trunk telephone calls.
Inevitably there was variation in the level of activity in Branches, small numbers of
members and remoteness being two critical factors. Some Branches were more successful
in some fields than others. It was easier for the New South Wales and Victorian Branches
to thrive because of the size of the library profession in those States. Numerically New
South Wales was always by far the largest Branch. By 1946 over half the Institute members
were in New South Wales, and another quarter were in Victoria. Despite their smaller
numbers South Australia and the Australian Capital Territory were fortunate in their
leadership and benefited from the close-knit relationship between their members. In
Tasmania the Free Library Movement and the debate about the best way to provide the
State with free libraries helped to weld a small group of people into an effective Branch.
In Western Australia and Queensland, despite the lack of members and the difficulty of
attending meetings in the south-eastern States, at least the permanent councillors did
attend Federal meetings. In both those States the Branch helped to publicise the impor-
tance of free library services and did its bit to enhance the status of the profession.
The health and progress of the Branches were to prove key indicators of the success
of the Institute. Another litmus test would be the establishment of an examination
system designed to raise the standards of librarianship in all kinds of library across the
whole of Australia. The alchemy of examination and certification is the subject of the
next chapter.
Chapter 5 Endnotes
319 ‘Australian Institute of Librarians Constitution adopted at a meeting of Foundation Members’,
section 25.
320 ibid.
321 Australian Institute of Librarians (AIL), Victorian Branch, Talks on library organisation and
management’, [1945], duplicated typescript, ALIA records, National Library of Australia (NLA),
M 57446, box 108, Scott was the convenor of these courses.
322 FG Kirby, Libraries in Ssecondary Schools: a report on the libraries of secondary schools in Victoria,
with suggestions for a post-war plan for school libraries prepared for the Australian Institute of Librarians
(Victorian Branch), Carlton, Victoria, Melbourne University Press, 1945.
323 Library Journal [Melbourne], June 1949, p 3. AIL, Annual report, no 12, November 1949, p!O6.
324 AIL, Annual report, no 7, September 1944.
323 The paper was one of the Branch papers published with the proceedings of the first AIL Confer-
ence; FLS Bell, The professional librarian in the United States: his status, qualifications and
conditions’, in AIL, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference
held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, ppB2—B6.
326 WGK Duncan, The librarian’s contribution to adult education’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings, Second Annual Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne, June 10th to 12th, 1939, Adelaide,
AIL, 1940, pp 86-88.
327 DJ Jones, ‘Please destroy all my letters on this subject’, Australian Library Journal vol 39 no 2, May
1990,pp101-115.
Branches


328 EV Steel to HM Green, 2 June 1939, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109. Internal evidence
suggests it is from Steel to Green. A copy also went to CH Bertie.
329 AIL, New South Wales Branch, Annual report, 1938-39.
330 AIL, Annual report, no 3, 1940.
331 AIL, New South Wales Branch, Annual report, 1945-1946; AIL. Annual report, no 9. October
1946.
332 JW Metcalfe, ‘Library development in New South Wales, 1943-1946,’ Australian Institute of Librar-
ians: Proceedings, sth Conference, Hobart, April 1946, Melbourne, AIL, 1947, pps9-69.
333 AIL, Annual report, no 11, October 1948.
334 N Gould, The library in the secondary stage of education’ given to the New South Wales Branch
appears in Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, Second Annual Meeting and Conference,
PP B9-91.
333 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
336 AIL, Annual report, no 11, October 1948.
337 ibid.
338 AIL, Newsletter, no 2. January-March 1949.
339 The only two Foundation Members not from the Public Library of South Australia or the Barr
Smith Library were WC Quinton of the Parliamentary Library and Robert Young of the Advertiser
newspaper,
340 AIL, Annual report, no 4, 31 May 1941.
341 AIL, Annual report, no 11, October 1948.
342 AIL, South Australian Branch, Quarterly Bulletin, no 1, September 1944 to no 11, September
1949.
343 The Library Association of Australia made him an Honorary Member in 1959.
344 Kenneth Binns was commissioned by the Tasmanian Government to inquire into libraries in
Tasmania and recommended the amalgamation of the Rural Libraries Advisory Board and the
Tasmanian Public Library to form the Tasmanian Library Board, of which the State Library of
Tasmania was to be a component. Legislation broadly in line with Binns’s recommendations was
passed in 1943 and came into force in January 1944. K Binns, Library services in Tasmania, Hobart,
Government Printer, 1943.
345 Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide,
June 15th-17th, 1940, Canberra, June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September
19th-20th, 1942, Canberra, AIL, 1944, p 35.
346 ME Wood, ‘Australasian library services’, duplicated typescript, January 1945, ALIA records,
NLA. M 57446, box 108. AIL, Annual report, no 8, September 1945.
347 This Free Country Lending Libraries Committee, which was separate from the Public Library of
Western Australia, continued until the Library Board of Western Australia Act of 1951.
348 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
349 AIL, Annual report, no 12, November 1949.
350 AIL, Annual report, no 8, September 1945.
351 AIL, Annual report, no 7, September 1944.
352 Wessells became very prominent when she returned to the United States, editing Library Journal
in the 1950 s and subsequently having a lengthy career as a library consultant.
353 AIL, Annual report, no 11, October 1948.


354 AIL, Newsletter, no 2, January-March 1949.
355 Elizabeth Hall, ‘The Prussian Instructions and the Anglo-American Code’, Australian Institute?f
Librarians: Proceedings, Second Annual Meeting and Conference, pplo4-112.
536 AIL, Annual report, no 7, September 1944.
357 AIL, Annual report, no 4, 31 May 1941.
358 There were three issues of the newsletter. The first was entitled Australian Institute of Librarias
Federal Executive Newsletter and was dated September-December 1948. The second and thid
were simply entitled Australian Institute of Librarians Newsletter and were dated January—Marh
and April-June 1949.
Branch,


Education
An ounce of practice
is worth a ton of textbook.
Still, training there must be,
and it takes a lot of it
to make a good librarian. 359


By the time of the foundation of the Australian Institute of Librarians, leading Australian
librarians had been concerned about defining librarianship and the training and educa-
tion needs of librarians for over forty years. This had begun with papers on the content
and purposes of librarianship at conferences of the Library Association of Australasia. At the
first conference in 1896 HCL Anderson had suggested an intercolonial system of examina-
tions, with a nationally recognised diploma in librarianship as significant as those offered in
American library schools. 360
Such a system did not eventuate, but as early as 1905 Anderson’s library, the Public Library
of New South Wales, required library assistants to pass examinations in librarianship, and by
1916 it had established special examinations in bibliography, cataloguing, classification and
administration. These had to be passed in order to gain promotion and were intended for the
Library’s own staff, but occasionally staff from other libraries were allowed to attend.
At the Australian Library Association Conference in Melbourne in 1928 Purnell spoke on
the British Kenyon Report, which had emphasised the importance of education for librarian-
ship. 361 At the same conference Miller and Wallace suggested that the training and certification
of librarians be the responsibility of the library authorities in each State, ER Pitt too had his
plan for training librarians, based on a certain level of experience in State and regional libraries.
The issue had not been neglected in the booklet issued by the Library Association of Victoria
in 1931, The essential features of a good public library, which stressed the importance of training
in the various branches of library economy and suggested that such training be carried out at
the Commonwealth National Library 362
At the 1933 conference of the Australian Library Association there was a lively discussion,
led by Purnell, on training in the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada. A resolution
was passed instructing the executive of the Australian Library Association to take steps to urge
the introduction of training courses in librarianship, but this plea went unheeded. 363
In the Munn-Pitt Report, training and personnel rated their own chapter, with the sugges-
tion of grade examinations and certificates which would be recognised throughout Australia,
assuming that there would be co-operation between the various State library authorities. 364
Shortly thereafter the Free Library Movement had emphasised the absolute necessity of pro-
fessional training for the librarians who would be required to staff the free public libraries for
which it was energetically lobbying.
Classes for teacher-librarians began at the Public Library of New South Wales in 1938, and
in the following year the formal Library School began operation. Apart from a one-year break
during the war, it would operate continuously until 1964. The Public Library of Victoria began
courses o {'lectures by a senior member of staff in 1936 and held a short course for teacher-lib-
rarians in 1939, with over a hundred teachers attending, but a formal library school was still
a decade away, 363 At the Commonwealth National Library classes began in 1938 with Harold
White lecturing to library assistants from a number of Canberra libraries. It would be eight
years before more formal arrangements were made and a full-time instructor appointed. There
was thus recognition of the need to start some form of library training, but initially it was being
tackled in a piecemeal way, depending on the local demand and the skills and enthusiasm of
senior librarians in the main libraries.
Not everyone was convinced that examination systems and library schools were necessarily
the best way to train librarians. Green had serious doubts which would linger for many years, ‘1
am not so interested in library schools as you are, and as Metcalfe seems to be’, he told Ifould.


1 have had so much to do both with setting and correcting examination papers that 1 have a
mistrust of them ... Also lam convinced that an ounce of practice is worth a ton of textbook.
Still, training there must be, and it takes a lot of it to make a good librarian’. 366
Metcalfe’s tentative syllabus
Not long after the inauguration of the Institute, Metcalfe, as General Secretary, had prepared
a very tentative syllabus for a certificate or diploma in librarianship. This was shown to the
Executive when it met in Melbourne in March 1938 and was also tabled at a meeting of the
Library Group. 367 It outlined the basic academic standards for entry to the profession, not going
so far as to require a degree. It then delved into the substance of the proposed examinations.
The subject groupings were cataloguing, classification, reference work and book selection,
library service and library government, library administration and routine, the history of the
book, book production, cataloguing of rariora and subjects for special libraries.
The Executive recommended that Metcalfe’s draft be expanded and then distributed to the
Branches for comment, but members of the Council did not all concur. Green in particular
felt that a syllabus should not be left to one person, however brilliant , to devise and wanted to
see a subcommittee formed which would include representatives from a number of different
types of library. This suggestion made a lot of sense and was taken up at the Sydney confer-
ence in June 1938 by Ifould, the Foundation President. He was then chairing the New South
Wales Libraries Advisory Committee, which had recognised the impossibility of establishing a
workable system of free municipal libraries without some means of providing adequate train-
ing. 368 ‘One of the most urgent subjects for decision by this Institute’, Ifould declared in his
Presidential Address, ‘is the setting of a general standard for library training in Australia, with
special consideration for the needs of small municipal libraries’. 369 He therefore endorsed the
suggestion that a committee be established to examine the issue of training, stimulate discus-
sion within the Branches and prepare a report in time for the next conference. 370
The Committee on Library Training and Standards
The first committee which the Institute Council appointed during the Sydney conference in
1938 was the Committee on Library Training and Standards. It was a large Committee of nine
heavyweights in the profession, thus underlining the significance which was attached to the
issues it would have to address, Metcalfe was convenor, and his fellow members were Arnot,
Binns, Brown, Cowan, Flannery, Frazer, McMicken and ER Pitt.
Some attempt had been made to represent the various kinds of library and to cover all States
and Territories, although the two more remote States, Western Australia and Tasmania, were
not represented. Metcalfe and Arnot were both from the Public Library of New South Wales,
which had a long tradition of formal library training, Metcalfe would remain the convenor
of this committee throughout its life and would write all of its reports, but the committee
was by no means in his pocket. Arnot was independent of mind and fiercely dedicated to
the professionalisation of librarianship and the advancement of women in it. She was the
only woman on this committee, but she was no token female. Binns, the head of the Com-
monwealth National Library, represented the Australian Capital Territory WH Brown, Chief
Librarian of the Public Library of Queensland, was the only possible representative of the tiny
membership in that State. WA Cowan was librarian of the University of Adelaide and a recent
graduate from the School of Librarianship at the University of Michigan , whose background
in Classics made him an excellent drafter of motions and reports. He was also intended to be
an effective advocate for the university libraries. JV Flannery was from the Sydney Municipal


Library, one of the two rate-supported free public libraries in New South Wales at that time.
Eric Frazer was the Victorian Parliamentary Librarian and an active member of the Library
Association of Victoria, as was McMicken. ER Pitt was Chief Librarian of the Public Library of
Victoria, co-author of the Munn-Pitt Report and one of the people who had spoken publicly
about education for librarianship. 771
It seems to have been a foregone conclusion that Metcalfe would convene the committee.
He was the obvious choice, having already invested time in preparing a tentative syllabus,
of which Binns had thought sufficiently well to use it as the basis for his contribution to the
symposium on standards of librarianship and library training at the conference. 372 As a success-
ful candidate, Metcalfe also had first-hand knowledge of the Library Association examination
system, and he had observed library education and spoken with association representatives
during his visit to the United States and the United Kingdom a few years earlier.
The new committee met on the afternoon of the final day of the Sydney conference but,
with members scattered in five cities across Australia, was unable to meet again. The members
had to rely on correspondence, a slow and laborious process with a criss-crossing of drafts,
comments on drafts and comments on comments.
Divergent opinions
At the first meeting and in subsequent correspondence the committee considered many dif-
ferent approaches to professional education and canvassed alternative systems. They realised
that they were far behind the library education systems in the United States and the United
Kingdom and did not regard themselves as pioneers: they were simply trying to catch up, and
the two overseas systems were closely examined.
The American and the British models were very different in character, and at first sight neither
perfectly suited the Australian situation. The mainstay of the British model was the Library
Association examination system, which held sway particularly in the municipal libraries. Ihere
had been a school of librarianship at the University of London since 1919, but its worth was
not universally recognised, especially among the senior municipal librarians, many of whom
were not university-educated. In the United States the American Library Association recognised
library schools which provided the means of entry into the profession—by 1937 there were
twenty-six accredited schools. Was it better to lean towards the American or the British system?
What should be the level of entry into the profession? How much emphasis should be given
to general academic qualifications, and what should be the proportion of technical library
subjects? Should there be specialisation for employment in different types of library? And how
would they reconcile future standards of entry with the varying levels of formal education and
qualifications of the existing workforce, including their own Foundation Members?
Whilst Metcalfe as convenor was certainly their leader he was no dictator, and there was a
lively exchange of views. Binns thought that subjects of a less technical kind deserved more
attention. Frazer wanted the syllabus to give some emphasis to the writing up of research on
queries and the summarising of information in books, reflecting some of the reference work
which his officers conducted in the Victorian Parliamentary Library. Flannery looked forward
to the next generation of librarians in free public libraries and wanted a higher standard of
general education than matriculation to be required for entrance to the examinations. Metcalfe
agreed that matriculation was too low a standard but said that at that particular time it was the
only practical course to take. Later he explained to Flannery that the examinations would be
only a stop-gap, because ‘the majority of people entering librarianship, except perhaps at the
Education


University, your library and ours, will come from library schools and will be graduates’. 37 s lt
would take nearly thirty years for this prediction to come true.
Metcalfe himself had no great attachment to the British system of external examination
but saw it as the only way to establish a uniform standard across Australia. He realised that
had the Institute decided to opt for a system based on recognition or accreditation of library
schools there would have been pressure to recognise library schools in all States which chose
to establish them, whether or not they were viable. An independent system of Institute ex-
aminations would avoid both the risk of establishing schools which were not viable and the
pressure to endorse substandard ones.
Cowan had serious reservations about the level at which the Institute’s examinations would
be pitched. He went so far as to say that if the Institute attempted to make its examinations
pre-requisites for appointment to librarian positions, the University of Adelaide for one would
not agree. It would insist that its library staff had studied ‘cultural subjects’ as well as techni-
cal ones. 374 His view was shared by other university librarians, including fellow committee-
member Green. The lack of academic content which they perceived in the proposed syllabus
confirmed their suspicion that the examinations were aimed too much at public libraries and
non-graduates.
After many months of discussion, mainly by correspondence, it was obvious that the com-
mittee would not reach unanimity on all aspects of the proposed syllabus. Debate within the
Institute had to begin at some stage, however, and so, without claiming that it was definitive
or that they were speaking with one voice, the committee presented its report to Council in
June 1939, together with draft by-laws and a draft syllabus. 375
A report and by-laws
In the report the committee set out how library education in Australia would be conducted,
with a prescribed syllabus, lists of recommended reading and external examinations set and
marked by examiners appointed and supervised by the Institute through a Board of Exami-
nation. They proposed a specialised Board of between three and five members, rather than
relying upon an unwieldy and perhaps insufficiently qualified Council to examine and certify
librarians. Metcalfe felt strongly about the composition of the Board and told Binns quite
frankly; The Council, at least as it is at present constituted is too large, too difficult to consult
and on the average not sufficiently qualified to carry out the duties of examining and certifying
professional librarians’. 376
The new Board would prepare a syllabus of studies, regulations for admission to (or exemp-
tion from) tests or examinations, and rules for the issue of certificates. Once the syllabus and
regulations had been approved by the Council, the Board would be empowered to conduct
examinations and recommend the issue of certificates by the Council. The Board could provide
assistance to students and fix fees and was required to report to Council at least as frequently
as it held examinations. 377
The report acknowledged the benefits of recognising in whole or in part examinations other
than those set by the Institute itself. Metcalfe and his colleagues recommended ‘the utmost
flexibility in reciprocity’, as this might relieve the Institute of some of the burden of setting
examinations. It would also help students who had already started the Library Association’s
examinations. Achieving reciprocity with sister associations would prove a slow process. It
would be almost ten years before any form of reciprocal recognition was finalised between
the Institute and the two associations with which its examination and certification system


had most in common: the Library Association in the United Kingdom and the New Zealand
Library Association. 378
The report suggested that there might also be some accommodation for those who had at-
tended Australian library schools, as and when they were established, although the committee
did not advocate accrediting any institutions. 379 In fact library schools in Australia were never
recognised by the Institute, and none of their students was ever granted exemption from any
of the Institute’s examinations.
Of rather more immediate impact were the committee’s views on minimum qualifications
for membership. As the Institute had been established to ‘unite librarians, irrespective of degrees
of professional attainment or standing’, different levels of examination were proposed rather
than different grades of membership. 380 So there would be an entrance certificate examina-
tion, a qualifying certificate examination, and a diploma for those who wanted to take their
studies further. There was some uncertainty about the membership status of candidates for
the entrance certificate, as they would not be technically members until they had passed the
examination. There was, however, a general desire to encourage ‘student associates’ prior to
their becoming full members. 381
There was less hesitation about the pre-requisite for the entrance examination ; this would
be the leaving certificate or matriculation. In turn the entrance examination or a university
degree or its equivalent would be the pre-requisite for the qualifying examination. Suitable
working experience would also be required. The significance of the new examination system
was underlined by the stipulation that no present members of the Institute would be granted
either certificate without sitting for an examination. Individuals could decide whether or not
they wanted to sit for examinations, having regard to their present standing in the profession.
It would be open to employers to decide what examinations they might require, and it was
noted that the Institute would not be in a position to dictate conditions of employment to
employers but could merely encourage and persuade.
As for the general education of librarians the committee recommended that the Institute
should accept the general level of education offered by schools and universities, although they
acknowledged that some would argue that such education might not be well rounded enough.
The committee also recognised that librarians needed certain personal qualities, such as ad-
ministrative ability, which could not be examined. They did not insist on a university degree
at that stage, although they believed that it was highly desirable for librarians. Trends in the
United States and the United Kingdom led them to believe that in due course the majority
of people who found work in the profession would have gone through a library school, and
these schools would be likely to require graduate qualifications. For the present in Australia,
however, there were major constraints. Libraries established in the country and in the suburbs
would initially have only small staff numbers and it would be difficult to allow staff time off
to attend lectures. Junior library staff might not be able to afford library school fees and in any
case many of them would live too far away from a university. In the meantime the Institute’s
examinations would be accessible and affordable. Nonetheless the Institute should stress to
employers and librarians the value of a university degree as an extra qualification, if relevant
to the specific field of work.
The committee was somewhat divided on the issue of non-technical subjects and tech-
nical subjects, the latter being defined as those involving library processes. Some committee
members, among them the university librarians, had argued that some non-technical subjects,
such as languages and literature, should be compulsory. The committee wondered whether the


Institute should examine in such areas, or whether the English literature papers in the Library
Association examinations could be included. Metcalfe did not think so: he maintained that
what was needed was a core, completely technical, library qualification.
There was agreement that specialised certificates should not be offered, as the Institute
should encourage mobility between library sectors, following the American pattern. There
could, however, be optional papers in the Institute’s examinations which would relate to
specialisations. There was agreement too on traditional written examinations. The committee
favoured a thesis only for the Diploma, believing that for the lesser qualifications the thesis
format was open to abuse.
It was acknowledged that the Institute would not be in a position to run a library school
of its own but that it would be able to assist candidates for its examinations in other ways. It
could make textbooks available and might organise summer or vacation courses or even some
form of correspondence course.
It was a very practical report, with attainable objectives, adapting what seemed to the com-
mittee to be the most suitable aspects of the British examination system to Australian conditions.
It was by no means groundbreaking in international terms but essentially a catch-up. It made
concessions to the varying levels of formal education of existing librarians and of entrants to
the profession but kept options open so that long-term aspirations, such as graduate entry
to the profession and the establishment of schools of librarianship, could still be achieved,
although these would in fact take several decades to occur. 382 It did not favour particular States
by advocating recognition of library schools. It also successfully trod the fine line between
those who demanded a general qualification and those who lobbied for specialist qualifica-
tions, opting for high standards in purely technical qualifications but offering the opportunity
for partial specialisation in its qualifying and diploma examinations.
Hopes of an early start
By the time the report was received by the Council of the Institute, Metcalfe was champing
at the bit. He had an intensely personal interest in the reception of the report, having written
most of it himself and feeling privately that his fellow committee members had been of little
material assistance. He was keen to get the scheme up and running as quickly as possible and
wanted Council to approve the report and appoint a Board of Examination and Certification to
implement it. The committee had drafted a proposed by-law to set up the Board byjune 1940,
but some members, Binns included, did not believe in precipitate action. 1 hey considered that
the matter warranted much fuller discussion among members before they could be expected
to vote intelligently on it. Any other course would be undemocratic. 383
The extent of discussion, even discord, about the report at the Melbourne conference in
June 1939 reinforced Binns’s view. Green expressed his disapproval of parts of the report
Very largely on the ground that they were unfair to university and special librarians’, refer-
ring mainly to the lack of hon-technical’ subjects in the syllabus and the limited scope for
specialisation. 384 When the conference ended some members of the committee had an extra
evening in Melbourne —Green was not able to stay but left his notes with Scott and asked him
to put his case to the committee. After much debate the remainder of the committee agreed to
further informal discussions between Green and the three New South Wales members of the
committee, Metcalfe, Flannery and Arnot. At their two subsequent meetings it became clear
that there was substantial agreement on the graduate entry issue. The four believed that ‘a
degree ought to be demanded of all trained librarians’, as appeared to be the situation all over
Uniting a profession


the library world. It was only ‘owing to the special circumstances that we were not at present
demanding a degree here’. 385
On other issues the position was less clear-cut. Green reaffirmed his belief that library edu-
cation should be more than just technical training and should include ‘language and science
as library tools’. 386 He also thought that the proposed scheme did not allow sufficiently for the
variety of library work in different types of library. He wanted optional subjects which were
more appropriate to university and special libraries, specifically an elementary knowledge of
one or more languages—‘not for their cultural value, but as tools of the trade’ —an elementary
knowledge of one or more sciences, and world history or Australian history, or any other subject
which the examiners might approve. 387
Green soon realised that he was not likely to win over the rest of the committee on this
issue and finally agreed to the regulations and syllabus as presented in the report. ‘lt is very
hard to reach any compromise with Metcalfe’, Cowan commiserated with Green. ‘He has done
a tremendous amount of work in drawing up the scheme, but I think he was determined to
over-rule objections’. 388
Green did believe that he had won a small concession, however, which was that candidates
for the Diploma would be required to show evidence of ‘sufficient attainments in some cultural
subject acceptable to the Council’, by which he hoped to give an advantage to candidates who
had taken or were taking a degree. 389
The cautious democratic view prevailed, and copies of the report were sent to Branch sec-
retaries for them to prepare the ground for a vote. A lively debate ensued, canvassing many of
the issues which the committee had tried to thrash out. To help clarify the proposals Purnell,
who was then President, wrote to each member in February 1940 explaining the proposed
system. Purnell himself was very enthusiastic about professional education and devoted two
meetings of his own Branch to the report, which resolved to accept the recommended scheme
of examinations and certification and expressed appreciation of the thorough and constructive
work of the Committee. 390
In his letter to members Purnell urged them to support the by-law, so that the Board of
Examination and Certification could be established without undue delay. 391 His letter reveals
some of the issues which had provoked debate in the Branches. Not only was there the ques-
tion of graduate qualification which Green and other university librarians had raised but
the status of existing members of the Institute had also caused considerable anxiety. Purnell
assured members that ‘no examination or tests would be imposed on present members of
the Institute, whose professional qualifications have already been recognised by admission
to membership. The object of the scheme is to safeguard present standards and the status
of members in admitting new members’. 392 Current members would in fact be advantaged
if they decided to take any of the proposed examinations: the only preliminary requirement
for them would be their membership. And to allay fears that everyone would be expected to
aspire to the Diploma Purnell noted that this was intended only for people who wanted to
take an ‘advanced’ or ‘honours’ course. 393
Purnell reiterated the benefits of a small Board to deal with examination and certification,
rather than the full Council, which changed yearly. He was at pains to point out that ultimate
power would remain with the Council—‘this directly representative body’—in case any
members feared that a small Board, dominated by a powerful minority, one State or perhaps
a forceful individual, could change syllabus and regulations willy-nilly. 394
Education


Appointment of the Board
Purnell’s letter reached its mark, and the by-law was approved at the Annual Meeting in Adelaide
in June 1940. It was agreed to appoint the first Board of Examination and Certification for one
year, dating from 1 January 1941. 395 The selection of members of the Board was not done at
the Annual Meeting, but was left to the Council . Not only had the fitness and qualifications
of individuals to serve on the Board to be considered but also the willingness of employing
libraries to allow members of their staff to join the Board. Representation of States, library
types and gender also had to be taken into account. This would take some time; it was too
important a committee to be allowed to go off half-cocked.
In the meantime the Institute received the reassuring news that library education in Australia
would receive financial support from the Carnegie Corporation of New York. The Australian
Council for Educational Research informed the Institute that the Corporation had approved
making available, through the Library Group, the sum of £3078 to help students to attend
‘approved’ library courses or training institutions. 396 Making recommendations for assistance
might have seemed a suitable role for the new Board of Examination and Certification, but in
fact the Institute would have no direct influence on the scheme, which was handled by the
Library Group, Although the librarians in the Library Group were all senior members of the
Institute their role would become a major bone of contention on two grounds: first, the Library
Group did not represent all States and represented only the federal and State libraries; second,
to many Institute members it was as plain as a pikestaff that the body administering a library
training assistance scheme ought to be the Australian Institute of Librarians.
For the lime being, however, all attention was on the composition of the first Board of
Examination and Certification. Binns and Key, the incoming President and General Secretary,
believed that to make the Board as strong as possible the maximum number of members—
five —should be appointed. Key asked Green what he would think of a Board with Metcalfe,
Cowan, Baud, Levick and White as members. Such a membership would give representation
to four different Branches —New South Wales, South Australia, Victoria and the Australian
Capital Territory. Its members would be from four distinct types of library —state, national,
special and university. Key admitted that there were no women on this list, and that Ellinor
Archer of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research had been considered in lieu of
Levick, ‘but we do not think that this is a consideration of the first importance’. 397 One can
only imagine the reaction of the well-qualified women members of the profession, including
those in Key’s own library, and even more so those at the Public Library of New South Wales,
who were still smarting over the promotion of Metcalfe, rather than Ida Leeson, to the position
of Deputy Principal Librarian in 1932.
Green disagreed with Key, declaring that to have no women on the Board was unaccept-
able, as ‘the majority of the members of the Institute are women’. He suggested that Archer
would be a better choice than Levick. He would also have liked Arnot to be included, but
acknowledged that to do so would have displaced Baud. 398 She was also a non-graduate, and,
as we shall see presently, the need for Board members to have academic qualifications weighed
heavily though nowhere was it explicitly mentioned.
The correspondence between Green and Cowan at this time is illuminating and reveals the
lingering mistrust between the staffs of the State libraries and university libraries. One of the
reasons why Green did not favour Levick, he confided to Cowan, was that Levick was ‘a bit
Ifouldian’, by which he meant that Levick had more affinities with the State libraries than with
the university libraries. 399 Cowan confided in return that he would be happy for Scott to be


on the Board, ‘were it not for the fact of his long Public Library training’ 400 Scott had by then
been University Librarian in Melbourne for fourteen years but was still tarred with the brush
of his previous eighteen years at the Public Library of Victoria. At this time all the university
librarians were losing patience with the Library Group, on which they had no representation
but which, as Cowan put it, still claimed ‘to represent Australian librarianship in dealings
with the Carnegie Corporation’, and some of this exasperation welled over into their relations
with the Institute 401
On one issue there seemed to be no disagreement within the Council. No-one suggested that
the convenor of the Board should be anyone other than John Metcalfe, but it was realised that
he might be a bit of a handful for fellow Board members. Key and Binns thought that it might
be useful to have LF Fitzhardinge, their colleague at the Commonwealth National Library, as
a foil to Metcalfe. Fitzhardinge had ‘a great capacity to argue his points forcibly and clearly’,
Key told Green, and that would be useful with Metcalfe in the chair. 402 Key also believed
that Fitzhardinge, who had taken an MA and a BLitt at Oxford, rated the British methods of
library training highly. Metcalfe and White, another contender for a seat on the Board, how-
ever, ‘incline to the American standards and ideals in training’. Key and Binns thought that a
Fitzhardinge/Metcalfe combination might bring the best of both worlds, 404 Green agreed with
them: he had a distinct preference for ‘English methods and standards’. 404
Correspondence between members of the Executive continued for several weeks, but they
could not agree on hve names, and so Key and Binns decided to submit eight names and leave
the decision to the Council 404 In submitting the list on behalf of the Executive, they expressed
the hope that the Council would select people with the experience in Australia or abroad which
would allow them to make a significant contribution. A variety of library types should be repre-
sented. State representation should be regarded as a secondary issue. Members of the Council
were also invited to make further nominations if they wished. The names on the Executive’s
list were Archer, Arnot, Baud, Cowan, Fitzhardinge, Metcalfe, Scott and White. 400
Green for one had no doubts about his first three preferences: he gave his first to Metcalfe,
his second to fellow university librarian Cowan and his third to Arnot. He chewed over his
fourth and fifth preferences, finally choosing Archer and Fitzhardinge in that order. White,
Scott and Baud were the backmarkers in his held. 407 He was particularly anxious to have not
only a university librarian on the Board but also two women. 408
Green was not far out: in the final placings Arnot, a non-graduate, missed out to White, who
had an MA. The members of the first Board were JW Metcalfe, BA, FLA (convenor); Ellinor
Archer, MSc, Chief Librarian of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research; WA Cowan,
MA, ABLS, Librarian of the University of Adelaide; LF Fitzhardinge, MA, BLitt, from the
Commonwealth National Library; and HL White, MA, who was then Deputy Librarian of the
same institution. As the Executive had suggested, geographic coverage and the representation
of kinds of library took second place to academic and professional qualifications. It was no
coincidence that these people were among the few members of the Institute who held higher
academic qualifications.
The first task of the Board was to prepare and submit to Council ‘a syllabus of studies and
practice in librarianship and regulations for the conduct of examinations and the issue of cer-
tificates in librarianship’. Establishing a system of examinations was ‘of the utmost importance
to the future of the Institute and to the library profession in Australia’. 409


The Board reports
The Council hoped that at least a part of the examination system would be in place by 1942,
but it was to take much longer than expected 410 In June 1941, just before the third conterence
and Annual Meeting in Canberra, the Board reported its progress. It suggested amending the
by-law under which it operated and a number of constitutional amendments which it said
would be necessary if examination and certification were to be a condition of membership.
Council agreed and appointed a committee to draft amendments. This committee was con-
vened by Metcalfe, with Green, Arnot and JJ O’Brien of the New South Wales Parliamentary
Library as members. O’Brien’s sudden death shortly thereafter robbed the committee of valu-
able input, as he had a law degree and had been secretary of the New South Wales Branch
since its inception, but the committee pressed on, whilst the Board continued its work on the
examination scheme.
They were making heavy weather of it, and by the end of 1941 the system was still not
finalised. Metcalfe was being urged to get a move on. Technically the Board’s term expired on
31 December 1941, but the Executive and Council had forgotten this and later had to reappoint
the Board until the end of 1942, 411 It was not until 10 September 1942, a little over a week
before the Annual Meeting, that Metcalfe submitted proposed amendments to the Constitution,
draft regulations and two sections of the draft syllabus to Green, who was then President. In the
meantime the Board was still working on the remainder of the syllabus and reading lists and
trying to resolve a number of details—such as whether the Diploma should have two or three
papers as well as a thesis or bibliography—before the Annual Meeting got under way. 412
The proposed amendments to the Constitution included the addition of a specific reference
to the Board of Examination and Certification and making certification a condition of member-
ship, whilst not affecting in any way the status of.existing members. The Council would issue
membership certificates on the recommendation of the Board. The requirement for nomination
of prospective members by two existing members would be abolished, as in effect the Board
would be ‘nominating’ individuals for membership. Student associates who were no longer
in training and members no longer in library employment who became unhnancial would be
deemed to have resigned. There would be a nominal fee for retired members. In order to avoid
unnecessary delay another amendment would allow for by-laws to be made by a three-fourths
majority of the Council. 413
Metcalfe and the rest of the Board had been very thorough, and their report had been
worth the wait. Their proposed examination system would consist of two examinations the
Preliminary and the Qualifying—with a Diploma for those who wished to venture still higher.
On the face of it, the scheme owed much to the British model, in which the Library Associ-
ation prescribed a syllabus, set examinations and admitted successful candidates as Associates
and Fellows when they had fulfilled all the conditions of membership. There were, however,
important differences between the two systems.
First, the Institute’s examinations would be in librarianship alone; there would be no at-
tempt to test general or special education by requiring students to pass papers in such subjects
as English literature, history or chemistry as there was in the British examinations. Second,
those who passed the Institute’s examinations would not be entitled to place letters after their
names: British librarians who had passed their examinations and been elected to Associateship
or Fellowship were entitled to use the letters ALA and FLA as long as they remained members
of the Library Association.
103
Uniting a profession


Both the British and the Australian schemes included an experience requirement. For the
Library Association this meant working under the direction of an Associate or Fellow in other
words a qualified member of the profession. In Australia the Board would need to be satisfied
that the experience offered was really a learning one. This would enable the Board to refuse to
recognise work in such places as the Melbourne Athenaeum and the staff library of the Myer
department store in Melbourne as appropriate experience.
Preliminary and Qualifying Examinations
The proposed scheme specified requirements for each stage of membership. To become eli-
gible for the Preliminary Certificate, Student Associates would have to pass the Preliminary
Examination and would require one year of employment, training or experience in an approved
library or library school. By the time of this report the Library School had been established at
the Public Library of New South Wales and other schools were mooted.
The next stage would be the Qualifying Examination, Student Associates who were already
graduates would not be required to pass the Preliminary Examination first but would proceed
immediately to the Qualifying Examination. On passing this, non-graduate candidates with at
least four years employment, training and experience in librarianship, or one year in a library
school plus three years employment in a library would be eligible for the Qualifying Certificate
and would become fully fledged members of the profession. For graduates the employment,
training or experience requirement was reduced to two years.
By specifying Matriculation as the basic pre-requisite for entry to the professional ex-
aminations the Institute could take advantage of a well-established system and avoid endless
arguments, especially between the States, about equivalences, ft would also serve notice that
librarianship in Australia would one day be a graduate profession by ensuring that those who
sat for the professional examinations were qualified to undertake university degrees.
Some prominent librarians, like Green, had been insistent that a degree should be a com-
pulsory requirement, and indeed most members of the Board, Metcalfe included, would have
preferred this. They had to accept that it would not be possible immediately, but they fully
intended that it would occur at some future date. 414 Accelerated qualification for graduates was
therefore proposed, a rule clearly designed to encourage graduates to enrol in library schools in
the hope that they could pass all the professional examinations after about a year of full-time
study. They could then look forward to becoming professional librarians within about two
years of their university graduation. The library schools’ examinations would not of course be
recognised by the Institute, but their courses would certainly prepare candidates well for the
Institute’s own examinations. There were also parallels between the Boards proposals and the
syllabus of the first library school, at the Public Library of New South Wales.
Subjects coveted
There is nothing particularly remarkable or sinister about the similarities between the Board’s
proposals and the Public Library of New South Wales syllabus. The Boards professional syllabus
included basic subjects which had for years been part of the tried and tested New South Wales
Public Service Board examinations for librarians. These examinations had in turn influenced
Metcalfe and Ifould when they were framing the syllabus for the Library School at their library.
The syllabus was an informed attempt to cover all the basic requirements for a professional
qualification and to allow for a moderate degree of specialisation.
Education


There were to be ten papers in all, nine of them compulsory. All four papers in the Prelim-
inary Examination were compulsory, as were five of the six in the Qualifying Examination.
The sixth would be an elective, to be chosen from the nine offered.
The Preliminary Examination papers, which had to be taken at one sitting, would be:
Paper 1: The catalogue, shelf-list and accession record, elementary cataloguing, excluding
subject cataloguing.
Paper 2: Elementary shelf classification, subject cataloguing and book numbers.
Paper 3: Elementary library organisation and routine, order work, reference work, circula-
tion.
Paper 4: The book, the library and the reader.
The Qualifying Examination was to be in two sections, which could be taken at one or two
sittings. The four compulsory papers in cataloguing and classification in section one would
have to be taken at the first sitting. Section one would consist of:
Papers 5 and 6: Advanced cataloguing, excluding subject cataloguing (one theoretical and
one practical paper).
Papers 7 and 8: Classification and subject cataloguing (one theoretical and one practical
paper).
Section two would consist of one compulsory paper and one elective. The compulsory paper
would be Paper 9, and the elective would have to be chosen from Papers 10 to 19.
Paper 9: Book selection, reference work, relations with readers, readers advising.
Paper 10: The organisation of knowledge and aids to research.
Paper 11: Library organisation, order work, serials, care of stock, charging systems, plan-
ning, publicity.
Paper 12: Provision of library service, library government and co-operation.
Paper 13: Book production and distribution.
Paper M: Historical and descriptive bibliography; general.
Paper 15: Historical and descriptive bibliography: with reference to a special field.
Paper 16: University libraries.
Paper 17: Special libraries.
Paper 18: Historical and archival collections.
Paper 19: School and children’s libraries.
For the Diploma a candidate would be required to complete two or three of the elective
papers and to present a bibliography of a subject or a thesis on a subject of library interest, as
approved by the Board.
Of the nine compulsory papers, six would be on cataloguing and classification, reflect-
ing Metcalfe’s consistent view of the centrality of these subjects in the theory and practice
of librarianship. The proposed electives included many which had been suggested by other
members of the Board.


Approval of syllabus
The syllabus which was finally submitted to the Council varied only a little from the draft,
and these variations had been foreshadowed by Metcalfe in his report. Paper 15, ‘Historical
and descriptive bibliography with reference to a special field’ was omitted, and the number of
additional papers to be sat by Diploma candidates was set at two. There was no disputing that
the syllabus and the draft regulations had been very thoroughly prepared by Metcalfe and his
Board, and the Council adopted them without amendment on 20 September 1942. Metcalfe
and the other members of the Board were re-appointed and asked to prepare a handbook
explaining the examination system.
The constitutional changes needed to set up the scheme required ratification by the members,
and seven amendments were put in a postal ballot arranged for November 1942. The result
was announced at a special meeting in Sydney on 1 December. 415 Of the seveny-eight votes
counted—about a third of the membership—all but a handful were in favour 416 But the year
had run away, and with it hopes of a 1943 start for the examinations. 1 January 1944 became
the target date for the examination scheme to come into operation. By that time the Board
would be required to finalise the syllabus, complete the reading lists and publish a handbook
so that candidates could begin to prepare for the long-awaited examinations.
Reading lists
The Board tackled the preparation of reading lists with characteristic vigour. Though their
examination system was British in structure, the syllabus showed a distinct American influ-
ence. This influence emerged even more clearly in the first prescribed reading lists, which
were published in 1943. These covered Papers 1 to 8 and were preceded by a statement that
‘the periodical literature of librarianship, such as the Library Association Record, Library Journal
and the Library Quarterly, should be read currently by Qualifying and Diploma examination
students in addition to books’. 417 One would have expected the first two titles as reporting
on the practice of librarianship in the United Kingdom and the United States, but the listing
of the Library Quarterly also shows a commitment to the theoretical and scholarly aspects of
librarianship.
An analysis of the reading lists reveals that American publications outnumbered British ones
overall, with the proportion of American titles highest in the papers which tested knowledge
of cataloguing, classification and library organisation. Only in the more historical papers and
those dealing with reference methods and sources did British titles predominate. The propor-
tions of titles from the United Kingdom and the United States reflected the relative influence of
the two countries on Australian library practice as much as on the predilections of the Board.
The British syllabus and reading lists, which the Board had been able to consult, emphasised
classified catalogues and indexing, whereas the Australians tended rather towards American
practice by concentrating more on subject cataloguing and dictionary catalogues. Australian
students were required to know more about American libraries, including their history, than
were their British counterparts, who in turn were required to be more aware of the European
library scene.
The scope of the reading lists is very broad, with no aspect of British or American theory
and practice of librarianship neglected. All major figures were included, extending beyond the
Anglo-American traditions to the influential Indian theorist, SR Ranganathan. 418 The number
of Australian titles was very small, being limited to manuals and lecture notes published by
the Public Library of New South Wales for its staff and for students of its library school, but


these titles were disproportionately influential. Not only did they deal directly with Australian
library practice but several were largely written by a key examiner: John Metcalle.
Metcalfe had been the principal author of A general introduction to library practice, intended
as a basic manual for all types of library, the first edition of which was published in 1940 by the
Public Library of New South Wales. A new edition, published in 1943 in time to be included
in the Institute’s reading lists, contained supplements on special and school libraries. Notes
on cataloguing, classification and bibliography had also been issued, mainly for the benefit
of staff and Library School students, and candidates of the Institute examinations were well
advised to pay particular attention to them. Later candidates were able to read Metcalfe’s 1946
Lecture notes on classification and subject cataloguing 419 Duplicated from stencils mostly cut by
the author himself, full of typing mistakes which have simply been crossed out and corrected,
and evidently written in great haste, this work was not easy to read. Yet it paid candidates to
be even more familiar with Metcalfe, Board Chairman and chief examiner in cataloguing, than
with Mann, Akers, Sayers, Savage, Duff Brown, Ranganathan and Cutter. Metcalfes modest
production became one of the most important influences on Australian cataloguing for more
than twenty years.
Examinations begin
As required by the Council, the Board prepared and distributed their first handbook explaining
the new examination system and were warmly thanked for their work, 420 Showing confidence
in Metcalfe’s performance, the Council reappointed him as Chairman for a further three years.
June 1944 was announced as the date for the first examinations, and the critical process of
organising the examinations themselves began 422
The smooth running of an examination system with candidates sitting for the same paper at
the same hour on the same day in locations throughout Australia was a major task for a small
organisation like the Institute. It placed heavy responsibilities on the Board members, who were
assisted by a series of very efficient qualified librarians serving as secretaries to the Board. The
first Secretary to the Board was an excellent choice: Wilma Radford was then in charge of the
Library School at the Public Library of New South Wales and was later to become Australia’s
first Professor of Librarianship. This fledgling secretariat was located at the Public Library of
New South Wales, where Metcalfe had succeeded Ifould as Principal Librarian in 1942.
Forty-nine candidates sat the first examinations in 1944. Two of them completed all the
requirements of the Qualitying Examination to become fully fledged librarians, and twenty-eight
passed the Preliminary Examination. 423 The number of candidates more than doubled in the
following year and continued to rise each year thereafter. 424 The examination scheme was an
instant success, filling a void for professional education Australia-wide and strengthening the
profession by the surge of new members into the Institute. By 1947 Student Associates would
outnumber other members. Even alter the widening of eligibility for membership when the
Institute became the Library Association of Australia in 1949, with the consequent doubling
of membership, Student Associates were still by far the largest group 425 The growing number
of candidates paying fees to sit examinations as well as membership subscriptions had an
appreciable effect on the financial health of the Institute. In the very first year income from
examination fees was £lls 11s Od, or roughly half the Institute’s total income for 1944-45. 420
The Board did incur expenses, but these were generally more than offset by examination income
and Student Associate subscriptions.
107
Uniting a profession


That candidates were being attracted to the Institute’s examinations in greater numbers
each year reflects the increase in job opportunities for librarians in the post-war years. New
South Wales had led the way in public library development, with a stream of free libraries
being established under the Library Act , 1939, which came into full effect in 1944, but there
was movement in other States as well. University libraries were expanding to meet the needs
of growing student numbers, and increasing awareness of the importance of libraries in sec-
ondary education was leading to more opportunities for teacher-librarians. In the commercial
and industrial sector too there was a growing need for people with information skills to help
companies refocus on peacetime activities, and special librarians were much in demand. Very
quickly the Institute’s qualifications were being recognised by prospective employers as a true
measure of professional competence. The New South Wales Public Service Board, for example,
exempted Certificate holders from sections of its own examinations for librarians. The Institute
was also greatly assisted by the support of the State libraries, which were major employers of
librarians and influential in making appointments to other libraries in their locality.
Not all Student Associates would end up as librarians, even if they successfully negotiated
the hurdle of the Preliminary Examination. Wastage from their ranks was rather high, which
is not surprising, since most were young women who had just left school at matriculation
standard. Many subsequently married and left the workforce temporarily or permanently.
Others commenced university studies and entered different professions. A few were saving
up for their trip overseas, and the Preliminary Examination was an entree to junior positions
in British libraries during a working holiday.
Within the profession itself there was not quite the universal acceptance of the qualification
which the Institute had hoped for. Some practitioners, notably in special libraries, continued
to express their dissatisfaction with the limited degree of specialisation afforded by the ex-
aminations. They were not content with the elective subjects in the Qualifying and Diploma
examinations for special, school, university and children’s librarians and for archivists. This
discontent was mainly a Victorian phenomenon, and, as we shall see later, it would lead to the
establishment of a rival association for special librarians and information officers, 427 In New
South Wales special librarians were generally happy with the system, and Metcalfe and his New
South Wales colleagues spent a good deal of time cultivating them. In fact most New South
Wales government libraries were progressively being staffed by the Public Library of New South
Wales, and the special librarians appreciated the portability of a generalist qualification.
Assistance for candidates
Candidates for the Institute’s examinations were not given the syllabus and reading lists and
then left to fend for themselves. Although the Institute did not have the resources to offer
correspondence courses or to create its own formal training schools much was done at a local
level to get candidates off to a good start. In some capital cities there were night classes for
candidates, sometimes under the auspices of the local Branch of the Institute, conducted by
librarians who had full-time jobs and did not expect or receive any remuneration. During the
first few years these volunteers were drawn from the senior staff of the main libraries. A little
later the voluntary teachers were frequently products, sometimes lecturing staff, of the Public
Library of New South Wales Library School.
The Special Libraries Committee of the New South Wales Branch conducted evening classes
over several months in 1947 to prepare candidates for the Preliminary Examination. In October
1949 the same Branch held a weekend school on library work with children. The Victorian


Branch arranged classes for students for the Preliminary Examination in 1947, and by 1949 as
many as seventy-seven students were enrolled. In Western Australia, Malvina Wood organised
classes for both the Preliminary and Qualifying Examinations. Regular tuition in librarianship
was conducted at the Public Library of Queensland from 1948. 428
Throughout this period Metcalfe was the dominant figure in the Institute’s examination
system: with other members of his Library’s staff he taught, wrote textbooks and set papers
for his own Library School and for the Institute. But his influence was also passed on through
students who had attended the Library School in Sydney, many of whom in turn tutored
candidates for the Institute’s examinations. These teachers included Phyllis Robinson, chief
cataloguer of the Public Library of Queensland, Harrison Bryan of the University of Queensland
and Elizabeth Hall of the Library School in Canberra.
Reciprocal recognition
International recognition of Institute examinations took rather longer and was not achieved
without considerable diplomatic effort. Once the examination system had been set up, the
Board was keen to arrange recognition of its qualifications by the Library Association in the
United Kingdom. In return Library Association qualifications would be recognised in Australia.
This arrangement was desirable on practical grounds as well as for reasons of status. Many
Australian librarians were travelling to the United Kingdom in the post-war period on what
became popularly known in the 1950 s and 1960 s as ‘working holidays’. Many worked in British
libraries, but they were unable to fill professional positions. In the meantime there were Brit-
ish librarians who wished to work in Australia, so that reciprocal recognition of qualifications
would bring benefits to members of both associations.
Progress with the Library Association was very slow, and there seemed little interest on
their part in accommodating the Institute. During Metcalfe’s visit to London in 1948 he met
PSJ Welsford, Secretary of the Library Association, and Lionel McColvin, its Honorary Secretary,
and initially found them unhelpful. 429 They do not appear inclined towards any reciprocity of
qualifications at present between Britain and Australia’, Metcalfe recorded. ‘McColvin talks of a
common examining body and a common general field of examination with differences added to
meet local differences, as in library legislation, and [with] even a choice of techniques’. 430 The
Library Association was not prepared to give Australians who wanted to qualify and work in
Britain any credit for the Institute’s Preliminary Examination. Metcalfe met someone with first-
hand experience of this policy: an Australian working at Australia House who had completed
the Preliminary Examination and section 1 of the Qualifying Examination told him that she
had had to start from scratch with the Library Association’s examinations. 431
When he met McColvin later during this visit, however, Metcalfe found that McColvin’s
position had softened. He told Metcalfe that he thought that there could be recognition of
the Institute’s Qualifying Examination as equivalent to the Library Association’s associateship.
Metcalfe suspected that McColvin’s change of mind was because the Association was ‘fee
hungry’ and wanted to widen the scope of Association membership. The British association
would effectively accept anyone with the Institute’s qualification —not just those who were
going to the United Kingdom on a working holiday. 432 Elsewhere Metcalfe claimed that his
own lobbying of other British librarians had forced McColvin’s hand. 433 Whatever prompted
McColvin’s change of heart, firm agreement was finally reached between the two associations
in 1948. They would recognise the Australian Preliminary Examination as equivalent to the
British Entrance Examination, and the Qualifying Examination as equivalent to the Registration


Examination. Institute members would thus be able from that point on to apply for registra-
tion as Associates of the Library Association, and Associates of the Library Association might
be admitted to the Institute as Members. 434
The Board also looked across the Tasman, but the recognition of New Zealand qualifications
was not at all straightforward and did not happen in Australia until 1948-49, and then only
partially. The New Zealand system was not exactly comparable, and the recognition of a New
Zealand training school by the Institute might well have raised the question of recognition of
library schools which were being established in Australia.
It could have been pointed out, for example, that the courses taught at the Library School
in Sydney were of an equivalent standard to the Institute’s examinations—most of them were
indeed written, taught and examined by the same people. It could easily have been argued that
the course should have been recognised as equivalent and its graduates admitted to membership
of the Institute without further examination. But such recognition would have led to requests
for similar recognition from schools in other Australian States and Territories. It would have
been difficult to judge these courses fairly without either offending the people concerned or
lowering the standards of professional education generally. The simple solution was to accept
no Australian courses in lieu of the Institute’s examinations. To recognise the New Zealand
courses would have been to rank them above any of the Australian schools, and that was not
something that any Australian librarian was ever likely to accept.
The library schools
By 1949 there were three library schools, located, as one would expect, in the major library
centres—Sydney, Melbourne and Canberra, The Public Library of New South Wales Library
School had then been operating for ten years. The Public Library of Victoria Library Training
School had been established in 1948 and that of the Commonwealth National Library had
been operating intermittently since 1946. These were the only formal training schools then
in existence. In Tasmania the 1943 Libraries Act authorised the Library Board to establish a
library school but this had not occurred. 435
Although similar subjects were covered and entry requirements were as stringent, the syl-
labuses of the library schools did not exactly correspond to those of the Institute. 436 Although
the library schools became a training ground for candidates for the Institute’s examinations
they did not seek —nor were they offered —recognition. Nor were the schools competitors, as
it was the Institute’s qualification which achieved recognition by employers and offered the
portability across library sectors and States, Territories and even internationally, something
which no library school could offer.
Encouragement to graduates
The groundwork laid by the Board in setting high standards of entry to the Preliminary Exami-
nation had a lasting impact on the profession and eased the transition of librarianship into a
graduate profession. By 1949 there were a large number of graduate members, who had been
able to sit for the Qualifying Examination immediately and who required shorter periods of
approved employment. Perhaps more important was the fact that, by insisting on matriculation
as an entry requirement to the professional examinations, the Institute had put an officer’s baton
into the kit of every private soldier. Very many of those who had joined library staffs on leaving
school and then passed the professional examinations went on to take university degrees.


Lack of appeal of the Diploma
The fact that no employer required the Institute’s Diploma for appointment to senior posi-
tions proved to be a most powerful disincentive. Many potential candidates would also have
regarded a university degree or higher qualification as more desirable. So what was intended
to be the Institute’s most prestigious qualification failed dismally. The Diploma was based to
some extent on the British Fellowship of the Library Association, for which Metcalfe had been
the first successful Australian candidate by examination. The Institute Diploma was open to
those who held a degree or diploma approved by the Board and who also had the Qualify-
ing Certificate. It required a thesis or bibliography, and a high-level pass in two Qualifying
Examination elective papers not previously attempted by the candidate. There were many
people who were qualified to attempt the Diploma, but only a handful tackled it and none
completed it during the lifetime of the Institute. Only two people—Harrison Bryan and John
Kaplan —ever managed to gain the Diploma, and this was during the Library Association of
Australia years. 437 Looking back in his 1959 Presidential Address Metcalfe was candid about
the Diploma, describing it as ‘in one rude syllable, a flop’. 438
Failure to complete
As Metcalfe also acknowledged publicly, many members had gained the Preliminary Certificate
and then rested from their labours. The Preliminary Examination was intended to be just that,
the first step towards the profession, but not into it. It was not intended to be a qualification
for sub-professional assistants, but many seemed content to remain as such. There were people
in small special, public and school libraries who had only the Preliminary, and that was unfor-
tunately deemed by some employers to be adequate. Worse still, there were older librarians
about in 1959 who had never even sat for an examination. They had stayed put in the same
organisation for years and had never felt the pressure to graft formal qualifications onto their
lengthy library experience. 439
To this extent —and largely because of employment practices and the lack of mobility of
some library staff—the work of the Board was incomplete and imperfect. Not until phrases
like ‘eligible for professional membership of the Library Association of Australia’ began to creep
into industrial awards and job advertisements would the problem of library staff who did not
complete a full qualification be resolved. Only then would the objective of all relevant positions
being filled by people with full library qualifications be even remotely achievable.
Divided loyalties
From time to time the fact that the Principal Librarian of an institution like the Public Library
of New South Wales also chaired the Board of Examination and Certification and might also
hold other offices in the Institute led to some disquiet. Ifould had been in this situation when
he was President, and later it was Metcalfe who found himself in the hot seat. In November
1949 the New South Wales Branch Council met to discuss a motion regretting that Metcalfe,
whilst chair of the Board of Examination and Certification, had in another capacity ‘made an
appointment of an unqualified person in a library where evidence of professional training has
been required over a long period’. The appointee on this occasion was Ronald McGreal, who
had been acting Secretary of the Library Board from 1944 to 1948. He was a member of the
Institute but had not taken any examinations. In 1948, with the unanimous support of the
Library Board, Metcalfe, as Principal Librarian, recommended that McGreal’s appointment be
confirmed. Eleven senior officers appealed against the appointment, but a tribunal headed


by a Supreme Court judge upheld the appointment on the grounds that McGreal had special
fitness.
It seemed to several members in the Branch, including Wilma Radford, that whilst people
without qualifications might in some cases be as good as people with them, the Institute was
committed to the principle of linking examinations with suitability for membership. In the
Branch Council the motion—they were careful not to label it a motion of censure, but simply
of regret —was lost by five votes to four, with Metcalfe absenting himself during the discus-
sion and the vote. The four had made their point and the business of the Institute and of the
Board went on as before. 440
The Board’s achievements
The effect of the introduction of the examination system was spectacular, and certainly it was
and would remain the single most important achievement of both the Australian Institute of
Librarians and its successor, the Library Association of Australia. From 1944 until 1980, when
the last examinations for what was then known as the Registration Examination were held,
the Board of Examination and Certification and its successors were responsible for running
the entire examination system. At its height this was an enormous undertaking each year, in-
volving up to twenty different papers, hundreds of candidates sitting examinations in centres
throughout Australia and overseas and scores of examiners.
Once established the examination scheme required continuous monitoring and occasional
fine-tuning, and the Board met regularly to discuss progress and hold post mortems on the
year’s examinations. There was also regular revision of the syllabus, and much work was done
by the Board at its six meetings between 1944 and 1949 and by members between meetings.
This process included submitting examination questions to semantic analysis to avoid ambi-
guities and sending copies of examiners’ reports to the major libraries and the library schools
to alert candidates to the ways in which the examiners were thinking and to the pitfalls into
which previous candidates had tumbled.
The membership of the Board remained remarkably constant during the life of the Institute.
Metcalfe, Archer, Scott and White were members for the whole of this period. Fitzhardinge
bowed out early —he left the Commonwealth National Library to become a lecturer in
Classics at the University of Sydney in 1945. He was replaced by Leigh Scott, who took an
active part in the Board from 1946 onwards. There was continuity too in the important role of
Secretary to the Board: when Wilma Radford left for the United States to study librarianship
at Columbia University her place was taken by Phyllis Corner, a colleague from the Public
Library of New South Wales. In retrospect the decision to keep the Board small had been a
wise one: they communicated well with each other, worked effectively as a team and just got
on with their task. 441
Establishing the examination system was a considerable achievement for the Board, and
in particular for its convenor. It was arguably the single most important achievement of Met-
calfe’s career, although many other successes lay ahead in a long and active life in professional
affairs. Without his vision, energy, determination and ability to grasp the possible rather than
await the perfect, the Australian Institute of Librarians might have continued as previous
associations had done —discussing and affirming the need for professional training without
actually doing anything about it.
The final meeting of the Board of Examination and Certification of the Australian Insti-
tute of Librarians was held at the Public Library of Victoria on 25 November 1949. Its next


meeting would be in 1950, by which time it would have become the Board of Examination,
Certification and Registration of Librarians of the Library Association of Australia. Its work
would not be greatly altered by the constitutional change in 1949. More significant changes
would occur when the Association was granted a Royal Charter in 1963. By then the first
school of librarianship had been established at the University of New South Wales, the first
of many throughout Australia. By 1980, schools of librarianship were so firmly established in
academic institutions that the Association could go through with abolition of its Registration
Examination, thirty-six years after the first candidates had sat for the Institute’s Preliminary
and Qualifying Examinations.
The Board had enabled the Institute to justify the reasons for its foundation. Australian
librarianship needed professional education, and once a system was offered the response was
overwhelming. At last the Institute seemed to be well on its way to financial security, but more
importantly, the pool of students guaranteed that new members with different ideas and youth-
ful enthusiasm were constantly joining the ranks of the profession in Australia.
Chapter 6 Endnotes
359 HM Green to WH Ifould, 20 June 1935, ALIA records, National Library of Australia (NLA), M 57446,
box 109.
360 This was recalled by WH Ifould in ‘Presidential Address; the future of the Institute’, Australian Institute
of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938 , pl 3.
361 Great Britain, Board of Education, Public Libraries Committee, Report on public libraries in England and
Wales.
362 Library Association of Victoria, Special Committee, The essential features of a good public library, Melbourne,
Library Association of Victoria, 1931.
363 ‘Minutes of conference of the Australian Library Association held at the Public Library, Melbourne, on
23rd and 24th November, 1933’, [typescript], Adelaide, Australian Library Association, 1933.
364 R Munn and ER Pitt, Australian libraries: a survey of conditions and suggestions for their improvement, Mel-
bourne, Australian Council for Educational Research, 1935, ppll2-115.
365 ER Pitt, ‘State aid to libraries: principles and practice, with special application to Victoria’, Australian
Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, Second Annual Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne, June 10th to
12th, 1939, Adelaide, AIL, 1940, p 23. The Library School at the Public Library of New South Wales was
established in 1939. The Commonwealth National Library established its library school in 1946, and the
Public Library of Victoria followed in 1948. Other State libraries conducted formal and informal training
courses, some geared to the Institute’s examinations, but none opened a library school as such.
366 HM Green to WH Ifould, 20 June 1935, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
367 JW Metcalfe to HM Green, 25 March 1938, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84. K Binns, ‘Standards of
training and qualifications for parliamentary librarians’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First
Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938: First Annual Meeting and Conference,
pp 46-50.
368 WH Ifould, ‘Presidential Address: the future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings:
First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, pl 7.
369 ibid., pl 9.
370 ibid., p2O.
371 At the 1928 Australian Library Association conference Pitt had included training in his paper, ‘Co-
operation in library work’, Proceedings of the Australian Library Conference held at the University of Melbourne,


August, 1928, Melbourne, Government Printer. 1928, pp4B-56. At the 1933 conference he supported a
motion urging the Australian Library Association to seek the establishment of training courses. (‘Minutes
of conference of the Australian Library Association held at the Public Library, Melbourne, on 23rd and
24th November, 1933’, [typescript], Adelaide, Australian Library Association, 1933).
372 K Binns, ‘Standards of training and qualifications for parliamentary librarians’, Australian Institute of Librar-
ians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, pp 46-50,
373 JW Metcalfe to JV Flannery, 9 December 1938, State Library of New South Wales (SLNSW) archives,
box 1452.
374 WA Cowan to HM Green, 2 October 1939, ALIA records, NLA. M 57446, box 84.
375 AIL, Committee on Standards and Training, Report to Council, June 1939. This duplicated typescript was
widely circulated. See copies for example in SLNSW, Mitchell Library, ML Doc 1399 and Q020.7/A.
376 JW Metcalfe to K Binns, 5 December 1939, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 28.
377 ‘By-Law I; Examination and Certification’, Australian Institute of Librarians handbook, Sydney, AIL, 1943,
pp 43-44.
378 There were two holders of the Library Association Registration Examination admitted as members in
1948-1949 as well as one Fellow of the Library Association. One holder of the New Zealand Library
Association General Certificate was admitted as a student associate. AIL, Annual report, no 12, November
1949.
379 AIL. Committee on Standards and Training, Report to Council, June 1939.
380 ibid.
381 ibid.
382 In 1961 the LAA resolved that, at a date to be specified, entrants to the profession would have to be
graduates. This policy was finally implemented in 1976. The first batch of students entered the School of
Librarianship at the University of New South Wales in 1960, under the directorship of John Metcalfe.
383 K Binns to JW Metcalfe. 4 December 1939, copy enclosed with K Binns to HM Green, 5 December 1939,
ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
384 HM Green to L Scott, WA Cowan, R Pennington, EM Miller and ME Wood, 27 September 1939, ALIA
records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
385 HM Green to JW Metcalfe 25 September 1939 ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
386 HM Green to L Scott, WA Cowan, R Pennington, EM Miller and ME Wood, 27 September 1939, ALIA
records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
387 HM Green to JW Metcalfe 25 September 1939 ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
388 WA Cowan to HM Green, 2 October 1939, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
389 HM Green to L Scott, WA Cowan, R Pennington, EM Miller and ME Wood, 27 September 1939; HM Green
to JW Metcalfe 25 September 1939 ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
39° HR p urne li t 0 AIL members, circular letter, 19 February 1940, copies in ALIA records, NLA. M 57446,
boxes 104 and 109.
391 ibid.
392 ibid.
393 ibid.
394 ibid.
395 AIL, Annual report, no 4, 31 May 1941.
396 ibid.
397 LC St A Key to HM Green, 6 September 1940, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.


398 HM Green to LCSt A Key, 9 September 1940, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
399 HM Green to WA Cowan, 9 September 1940, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
400 WA Cowan to HM Green, 16 September 1940, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
401 ibid.
402 LC St A Key to HM Green 11 October 1940, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
403 ibid.
404 HM Green to LC St A Key, 22 October 1940, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
405 LC St A Key to HM Green, [covering letter], 31 October 1940, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
406 LC St A Key to HM Green, [similar letters to other Council members], 31 October 1940, ALIA records,
NLA, M 57446, box 84.
407 HM Green to LC St A Key, 4 November 1940, together with annotated letter from Key to Green. 31
October 1940, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
408 HM Green to K Binns, 6 December 1940, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
409 AIL, Annual report, no 4, 31 May 1941.
410 ibid.
411 K Binns to JF Arnot, 22 January 1942, ALIA records. NLA, M 57446, box 84.
412 They settled for two. Australian Institute of Librarians handbook, 1943, p 4.
413 JW Metcalfe to HM Green, 10 September 1942, [duplicated typescript], ALIA records. NLA, M 57446,
box 109.
414 JW Metcalfe to K Binns, 5 December 1939, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 28.
415 Jean F Arnot to AIL members, 1 November 1942, attaching ballot paper for constitutional amendments,
ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
416 AIL, Annual report, no 6, September 1943, pl 3.
417 Australian Institute of Librarians handbook, 1943, p 27.
418 SR Ranganathan, Theory of library catalogue, Madras, Madras Library Association, 1938.
419 JW Metcalfe, Lecture notes on classification and subject cataloguing, Sydney, Public Library of New South
Wales (PLNSW), Library School, 1946. A second edition was published as Lecture notes on subject cata-
loguing, classification and indexing, Sydney, PLNSW, Library School, 1958.
420 Australian Institute of Librarians handbook, Sydney, AIL, 1943. AIL, Annual report, no 6, September 1943,
p 4.
421 AIL, Minutes of Council, 24-25 September 1943, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40.
422 ‘The first examinations of the AIL were held in 1944. I remember them well because 1 was one of the
South Australian candidates and, like my peers in the Public Library of South Australia, 1 had a very
severe attack of library mania which seems to have lasted all my life. We were overjoyed to be in a
profession that was to establish itself through examinations. By 1946 we had passed all those examina-
tions and by 1948,1 was teaching for them after work and without pay’. (Jean P Whyte at the Alumni
Seminar, Monash University, Department of Librarianship, Archives and Records, 27 July 1991. Copy
in possession of David J Jones.) Jean P Whyte completed the Qualifying Certificate in 1946 ‘thus being
among the very first Australian librarians to secure recognised professional qualifications in their own
country’. (Harrison Bryan, ‘Jean Primrose Whyte AM BA AM FLAA: summing up a career’, Australian
Library Journal, vol 38, no 1, February 1989, p 7).
423 AIL, Minutes of Council, 14 September 1944, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40.
424 ‘lntroductory note’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, 3th Conference, Hobart, April 19T6, Mel-
bourne, AIL, 1947, p 7.


425 See Appendix 8.
426 AIL, Annual report, no 8, September 1945.
427 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 6th
Conference, Sydney, October 1947, and other papers, Sydney, AIL, 1949, p 54.
428 ‘Librarianship in Australia: Report 1949, to the Joint Committee of IFLAand FID on the Professional Status
and Training of Librarians and Documentalists’, duplicated typescript, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 35. This document was prepared by Phyllis Mander-Jones, who acknowledged the assistance of John
Metcalfe, Wilma Radford and Olive Lane, fellow officers at the Public Library of New South Wales.
429 McColvin’s Australian visit and report are discussed in Chapter 10.
430 JW Metcalfe, Developing a library profession in Australia: travel diaries and other papers of John Wallace
Metcalfe, edited by W Boyd Rayward, Lanham, Md, Scarecrow Press, 1995. (Also published Canberra,
ALIA Press, 1996), pl4B.
431 ibid., p 152.
432 ibid., plB9.
433 JW Metcalfe to KS Cunningham, 19 December 1960, ACER archives, series 49, item 189.
434 AIL, Federal Executive Newsletter, no 1, September-December 1948, pi.
435 ‘Librarianship in Australia: Report 1949, to the Joint Committee of IFLA and FID’.
436 ibid.
437 Diplomas were awarded to Bryan in 1960 and Kaplan in 1963. Harrison Bryan, No gray profession: remi-
niscences of a career in Australian libraries, Adelaide, Auslib Press, 1994, pl9o, footnote 12.
438 John Metcalfe, ‘The standards of librarianship and the status of the library profession’, Presidential
Address at the 1959 Conference of the Library Association of Australia, published in Australian Library
Journal, vol 8, no 4, October 1959, p 172.
439 ibid.
440 Wilma Radford, ‘Notes on Mr Metcalfe’s Statement’, 23 November 1949; JW Metcalfe, ‘Statement by the
Chairman’, 22 November 1949. Copies in the possession of David J Jones.
441 The annual meetings of the Board were as follows. First, 14 September 1944, University of Melbourne;
present were Metcalfe, White, Archer, Cowan, with apology from Fizhardinge. Second, 12-13 September
1945, Public Library of Victoria (PLV); present Metcalfe, White, Archer, Cowan, Radford (secretary).
Third, 8-9 October 1946, PLV; present Metcalfe, White, Archer, Cowan, Scott, Radford (secretary).
Fourth, 10 October 1947, PLNSW; present Metcalfe, White, Archer, Corner (secretary), with apologies
from Cowan, Scott. Fifth, 9 September 1948, PLV; present Metcalfe, White, Archer, Cowan, Scott, Corner
(secretary). Sixth, 25 November 1949, PLV; Metcalfe, Archer, Scott, Corner (secretary), with apologies
from Cowan, White.


7
Committees
A Committee for everything:
was there anything which a Committee
of the Institute could not achieve?


Of the four committees established at the first Council meeting of the Institute in
June 1938 the Committee on Library Training and Standards was the largest and
rather overshadowed the others. As has been seen in the previous chapter, it and the
Board of Examination and Certification which succeeded it had an enduring and profound
impact on the Institute and on the library profession in Australia. It had gone to the heart
of the objects of the Institute to ‘unite persons engaged in library work, and to improve the
standard of librarianship and the status of the library profession in Australia’.
The three other committees created on the same day covered major technical aspects
of librarianship, namely cataloguing and classification, reference and research, and clas-
sification of Australiana. All of these had the potential to influence and mould practice and
therefore the training of practitioners. None of these committees had library promotion or
advocacy within its ambit, the demarcation between the Australian Institute of Librarians
and the Free Library Movement being crystal clear.
As time passed the Institute found the committee system a practical way of addressing
issues in an increasingly large, diverse and always geographically dispersed membership.
There was no paid secretariat to perform even mundane tasks, and the Institute was especially
reliant upon the generosity of the institutions to which its Executive, Council and Committee
members belonged, as well as upon the dedication of the officers and Committee members
themselves. During the life of the Institute a score of committees were appointed, sometimes
for specific tasks, but sometimes with more general objectives. Some of the highlights in
the lives of the Institute’s ‘other Committees’ are described in this chapter.
Classification of Australiana
The Classification of Australiana Committee, established in 1938, was born of a nascent
nationalist spirit which preferred ‘bushfires’ to ‘forest fires’ and ‘wharf labourers’ to ‘long-
shoremen’. Representation on this Committee was concentrated in the national, state and
university libraries, whose sometimes very large Australiana collections cried out for more
specific classification than Dewey then afforded. This Committee was first convened by
Fitzhardinge, with Leeson, Wood, Collier, Cooke, Foxcroft, Green and Purnell.
Foxcroft’s role was potentially a valuable one, as he would sit on two classification Com-
mittees and could be a conduit between them. Unfortunately his term of office was cut
short by his untimely death returning from a Carnegie-sponsored study tour in December
1938.
Very early in the life of this Committee, Fitzhardinge began to prepare a draft extension
of Dewey’s classification for Australia, starting with 994, the history of Australia. The work
of the Committee was entirely by correspondence, and by December 1938 Fitzhardinge had
received only a few replies to a document which he had circulated. Identifying meaning-
ful chronological subdivisions for Australia proved more time-consuming than expected,
and he prepared an interim report to Council in time for the 1939 Melbourne conference,
attaching draft schedules. 442 Council reappointed the Committee and it set about refining
its draft.
In the meantime the draft chronological subdivisions had progressed far enough for
White to take a copy with him when he went to the United States in 1939. He was able
to discuss the document with the editors of the Dewey Decimal Classification, who were
complimentary about the work of the Committee and expressed a willingness to include
extended subdivisions in a future edition of Dewey. 443


The Classification Committee persisted, producing a further report in time for the
Adelaide conference in 1940. 444 In the following year there was enough confidence in
their proposals to send an extended schedule to the classification 994 to the Dewey editors.
Because of space limitations the editors were unable to include it in the next edition, but
they did agree to expand their framework based on the Committee’s schedule. The Dewey
editors were also happy to allow the Institute to circulate the full schedule, which was
done in early 1941. 445 From then on editions of Dewey provided sufficient detail of the
divisions in Australian history to meet the needs of larger Australiana collections. During
its brief life this Committee had done useful work, but it was not reappointed after 1942
and its role was assumed by the Cataloguing and Classification Committee.
Cataloguing and Classification
Also established during the Sydney conference, the Cataloguing and Classification Commit-
tee initially represented a cross-section of library types. Scott, its convenor, was a university
librarian, and its other members were Ellinor Archer from a special library, Mary Barrington
from the Public Library of New South Wales, AB Foxcroft from the Public Library of Vic-
toria, HJ Keyes from the Public Library of South Australia, EV Steel from the University
of Sydney and HL White from the Commonwealth National Library. This Committee too
was initially overwhelmed by the scope of it’s task, which was to advance the standard of
what we now call technical or collection services.
It was some time before the Committee developed a strategy. It too resorted to a ques-
tionnaire to help establish the prevailing situation, circulating it to university, public and
special libraries in each State in 1943. The questions now strike one as rather mundane, but
the questionnaire illustrates the lack of knowledge about library practices across Australia,
as well as the diversity of those practices. Did the library have a card catalogue and if not,
what kind of catalogue did it have? Were standard-sized cards used? Did they subscribe
to a cataloguing service? Which cataloguing code, subject headings list and classification
system were used? 446 The Committee hoped that the information gathered would help the
Board of Examination and Certification in framing its syllabus. It would also help identify
issues on which concerted or co-operative action might prove useful.
The first such issue was the quest in 1944—45 for a suitable cataloguing code for Aus-
tralian use. Here there were not the imperatives ol vocabulary or historical or geographical
detail to direct them to Australian variants of overseas practices, unlike the experience of
the Cataloguing of Australiana Committee. ‘lt was unlikely’, the Committee on Cataloguing
and Classification concluded, ‘that there would be any peculiarities in the Australian cata-
loguing field which would make an Australian code necessary , 4t7 The most likely candidate
as an acceptable code would be the joint rules which had been under development by the
American Library Association and the Library Association. This revision was intended to
replace the 1908 rules, which the two associations had published and which were required
reading for the Institute’s examinations. The Committee members had examined a copy of
the preliminary American edition of 1941 and believed it to be suitable, but they could not
recommend anything until a final work was actually published. Publication would not in
fact occur for over twenty years, but the Committee’s assessment was realistic: developing
some basis of common practice using an international code would be much better than
the unnecessary work of developing its own, 448
119


The Cataloguing and Classification Committee then tackled issues which the Classi-
fication of Australiana Committee had earlier begun to address. There was dissatislaction,
particularly in the libraries with larger collections of Australian books, with the Dewey
notation for Australian literature: 828.9994 was far too cumbersome, requiring a minimum
of seven digits even before any chronological subdivision. The Committee suggested that a
letter prefix be added to the lorm number of the parent literature, such as the letter ‘A for
Australian. They also noted that Australian cataloguers would be likely to prefer the time
subdivisions provided under 994 rather than those prescribed for English literature. 449
Reference and Research
The Reference and Research Committee was another of the first four committees, initially
convened by Bernard Levick, a Sydney special librarian. Its membership included Nita
Kibble, doyenne of research librarians, who had headed the Public Library of New South
Wales Research Department since its creation just after World War I. Its other members were
Edith Sims, a long-standing colleague of Kibble’s, Edith Wells of Sydney Technical College
and KW Burrow of the University of Sydney, a pioneer of microfilming in libraries. Levick
later left the Colonial Sugar Refining Company to take up a position with the Ministry of
Munitions, at which point Burrow became convenor.
The Committee began with a survey of libraries which conducted literature searches for
their users. How were the results of these searches recorded and how could this information
be made more widely available to other libraries? The Committee surveyed thirty-eight
libraries in New South Wales and suggested setting up a central bureau to keep records
of literature searches and circulate lists of the topics. This activity was very much in line
with the work of Kibble’s Research Department, which maintained a card catalogue of its
literature searches. The proposal was not implemented, although it would have been a
practical way of sharing information with smaller special libraries. 450
So from its earliest days this Committee took to heart Metcalfe’s conviction that special
librarians should not be neglected by the Institute. They began an ambitious project to
record information about all the special libraries in Australia, sending a questionnaire to
a large number of them. This assignment succumbed to a common failing of early com-
mittees—they had neither the time nor the resources to bring such projects to a speedy
resolution. By mid-1941 they had still not been able to analyse the questionnaire responses,
and their hoped-for report did not materialise. 451 Nonetheless they had made valuable initial
contacts with many special and research libraries around the country. In September 1942
the Committee was reconstituted as the Special Libraries Committee, thereby demonstrating
more clearly the Institute’s commitment to special libraries and their librarians.
Special Libraries Committee
It was a conscious decision of the Institute Council to create a new Committee with which
special librarians could identify: ‘Reference and Research’ clearly smacked of the State librar-
ies, whereas ‘Special Libraries’ was an unambiguous term embracing libraries of government
departments, companies and learned societies. A primary purpose of the Committee was
to address the status of special librarians. It was the view of some employers that running
a special library involved little more than office filing, for which the person in charge did
not need any particular qualifications. By linking special librarians and involving them
in Branch meetings, library visits and, of course, the Institute’s examination system, their
technical abilities and their self-confidence would be enhanced.


The Committee was also intended to reach out to a group of special library workers
who did not see the immediate relevance of the Institute to their own careers. There were
special librarians with academic qualifications who were valued by their employers and who
believed that their trade was sufficiently distinct from the mainstream of library work to
require different training and certification. They thought that their academic particularly
scientific —qualifications were of more obvious utility than technical library training. This
breed of special librarian was relatively new. At the time of the foundation of the Institute
there had been few special librarians who could meet the Foundation Membership criteria,
but World War II had stimulated an upsurge in information work in private industry and
government establishments.
There had been pressure on the Board of Examination and Certification to provide special
certification for special librarians. The view which had prevailed in the Institute, however,
was that the differences between various branches of librarianship were ‘superficial rather
than fundamental’, that research and information work were carried out in the large state
libraries as well as in special libraries and that special librarians were not the only ones
who did not make direct use of every skerrick of fundamental knowledge gained during
library training. Metcalfe also believed that specialisation would reduce mobility: if special
librarians lacked generalist qualifications their career opportunities would be limited4 52
Initially the Special Libraries Committee confined its activities to New South Wales,
and its first tasks were to ascertain the number and the standard of special libraries in the
Sydney region and to attempt to develop a spirit of co-operation among them. Edith Sims,
who had been librarian of the New South Wales Department of Public Health for four
years and in 1942 became the librarian of Sydney Technical College, was convenor, with
Constance McKay and Miss JM Murphy as members. 453 The New South Wales sub-group
of the Committee remained very active, starting up a monthly newsletter for special librar-
ians in July 1944 under the expert editorship of librarian/author Marjorie Barnard. It was
produced on a shoestring, with paper and duplicating facilities provided by the Council
for Scientific and Industrial Research. By the end of 1945 its New South Wales sub-group
was in touch with forty-five special libraries in Sydney. 454 The sub-group reported that there
was a marked spirit of co-operation among the special librarians. There had been visits to
the more important libraries and talks by local and overseas librarians. Mary Townes, a
librarian with the United States Information Library, for example, spoke about American
special libraries. Ronald McGreal reported on library developments in New South Wales,
and Edith Sims dealt with book selection and accessioning. In all States there were classes
aimed at students, including staff in special libraries, who intended to sit for the Institute
examinations.
Once the movement to embrace the special librarians had gained momentum in New
South Wales the Special Libraries Committee redirected its attention to Victoria. In Sep-
tember 1943 it was reconstituted with a Victorian membership, Leigh Scott becoming
convenor, with Ellinor Archer, Miss IH Robertson, Tom Fleming Cooke and RW Crabtree
as members. The pattern of activities established in New South Wales was replicated with,
it was reported, satisfactory results: a subcommittee of the Victorian Branch was formed
for special librarians and the Branch organised a well-attended series of lectures for spe-
cial librarians in 1944-45. 455 In reality relations between the special librarians and their
colleagues were not rosy in Victoria, where a vocal group of special librarians objected to
the Institute’s syllabus on the grounds that it favoured Dewey rather than the Universal


Decimal Classification. They also wanted to substitute papers on special subject knowledge
for some of those dealing with library techniques. They were reported to be considering
forming their own special libraries association, 456
The Committee did not manage to convince the special librarians in Victoria that the
syllabus of the Institute’s examinations was relevant to their needs or that portability of
qualifications would be valuable. The Committee still cherished the hope that there would
be some way of accommodating special categories of member. 457 They suggested that people
who had passed the Leaving Certificate and who were actively involved in ‘professional’
library work should be admitted to associate membership. They were not alone: the South
Australian Branch had suggested a new category for members of boards or committees and
for others who were untrained.
The Board of Examination and Certification discussed such proposals but were not in
favour of lowering the status of the Institute membership in any way, although there wasno
unanimity on the issue. When the Council met in 1944 Archer, convenor of the Committee
and member of the Board of Examination and Certification, put the view that a lower grade
of membership should be created for people in charge of small special libraries. Metcalfe
and White, also members of the Board, believed that student associateship already catered
for them. Metcalfe wondered aloud what the problem really was in Victoria. In New South
Wales they had managed to persuade a large number of the special library staff to take the
Preliminary Examination, and the Branch had encouraged and assisted these candidates. 458
‘Mr Metcalfe pointed out that in England the library world had been dominated by mu-
nicipal librarians who did set examinations that were useless to the special librarians. But
the Board had not committed the same mistake here’. 459 The Institute’s syllabus did cater
to a certain extent for special libraries. The dissidents could perhaps show Metcalfe what
changes they would like and what they would propose omitting. The Board did not have a
closed mind, he said, and would be glad to consider proposals, but ‘if it were merely that
they were not interested enough to acquire the little basic knowledge of the fundamentals
of their own profession that was required of them for the Preliminary Examination, then
the Board could do nothing for them, for if it lowered its standards it would be harming
the interests of Institute members’. 460 It might jeopardise salaries and would certainly put
the Institute in an anomalous position before boards and tribunals.
As we have seen, however, a majority within the Board of Examination and Certifica-
tion was very firm in its convictions, and the Institute was at one with its Board, so that
there was little likelihood that the requirements for qualification would be modified. There
was therefore a very real prospect that Victorian special librarians in particular might ally
themselves with information officers and research officers to form their own association,
as had occurred in the United Kingdom. Had the Victorian special librarians proved more
tractable, or the Victorian Committee members perhaps more persuasive, the outcome
might have been less divisive. As we shall see later, this issue would come to a head during
the re-examination of the Institute’s constitution and membership.
Committee on Services, Standards and Status of Librarians in
Australia
In September 1944 Scott told the incoming Council that he had received many enquiries
from people who wanted to employ a librarian and who needed advice on what salary to
offer. He thought a committee should be established to recommend salaries for different


types and levels of library work. White agreed, suggesting that the Institute draw up a
report on post-war standards for libraries similar to those which had been issued by the
American Library Association and the Library Association. The Council agreed to establish
a committee to report and make recommendations on the services, standards and status
of librarians in Australia, appointing Metcalfe as convenor, with White, Baud and Sims as
members. The Committee began gathering information on salaries and the relative position
of librarians in Australia, but it proved a slow process, partly because of other commitments
of the first members. 461
Within a few years there had been a complete change in membership, with individuals
like Arnot, active in her union, taking a leading part in the Committee. Like other Com-
mittees, it resorted to a questionnaire to assess the current situation. It was 1948 before
the Committee was in a position to report back, but its findings had enough credibility to
form the basis of a 1949 submission to a joint committee which the International Federa-
tion of Library Associations (IFLA) and the International Federation for Documentation
(FID) had established to study the professional status and training of librarians and docu-
mentalists. 462
The submission reported that in Australia, librarianship was now often compared with
the teaching profession, although the salaries of librarians were still slightly lower. Ihere
was, however, growing recognition that the profession required high educational, as well
as personal, qualifications. In special libraries there were indications that special librarians
had the status of technical workers, if not of research workers. The Committee believed that
the Institute’s system of examinations and certificates had been responsible for this progress
and had raised the status of librarians. More young people were also being attracted into
the profession, with the post-war growth in job opportunities in library services.
By 1949, however, the Institute Council was preoccupied with the question of transi-
tion to a wider association and decided that discussion of the Committee’s report would
be futile, referring it to the new Association. 463
Committee on Inter-Library Loans and Transport
The Committee on Inter-Library Loans and Transport was established in 1945, initially
to inquire into interstate and intrastate transport of books and to obtain reports from all
Branches on rail transport within their States. It was hoped that the Institute would then
be able to approach authorities, Including the Postmaster General, to secure reduced rates
for transporting library books, something which they had decided not to pursue during
the war in the interests of the national economy. 464 The Committee was also to collect and
disseminate details of inter-library loan policies and procedures and to report on how to
facilitate inter-library lending.
This Committee too was unable to meet because of its geographical spread, working
by correspondence and sending a questionnaire to twenty-nine representative public,
university, parliamentary, museum and Royal Society libraries. The Committee found
significant variations in practice, although there was considerable goodwill and evidence
of co-operation: they found a readiness to lend items and to pay at least one-way freight.
Larger libraries with suitable equipment were prepared to supply copies whenever possible.
There was a good case for more standardised lending practices, and the Committee drafted
an Inter-Library Loan Code.
123
Uniting a profession


It proved surprisingly difficult to reach consensus on the conditions contained in ths
Code. At the October 1946 Council meeting the Committee presented a supplemental
report and an amended Code, noting that it was a compromise. 465 This Code was very tho - -
ough, dealing with the duties and responsibilities of borrowing and lending libraries, tie
type of material which might be requested, the preference for copying rather than sendirg
items (subject to copyright) and the responsibility for meeting costs. A significant omissicn
from the revision was the requirement for the borrowing library to identify the ‘name ard
status’ of the person for whom the item was requested. Hitherto it had not been unusud
for State libraries to ask for details of borrowers before lending valuable items, although
absolute client confidentiality was no novelty—it had been a feature of the Public Libraiy
of New South Wales Research Department since 1919. 466
The Council accepted the report without going so far as to adopt it and sent copies
to a number of libraries, who could adopt it or not, depending on their inclination ard
liberality. Nothing further would happen to the code for another six years, when it was
reconsidered by what was then the General Council of the Library Association of Australia.
The code was published in the Australian Library Journal in October 1953 and comments
were invited, with Archer resurrecting the issue at the 1955 Conference. 467 But there were
still major differences, particularly between the major lenders and the major borrowers,
and something like consensus would not be reached until the mid-19605, and then under
the auspices of a different national body. 468
Publications Committee
The Committee on AIL Proceedings was a short-lived Committee, with an enormous
membership designed to keep all the States happy. Its members were CA Burmester (con-
venor), Binns, White and Fitzhardinge, all of the Commonwealth National Library, Collier
from Tasmania, Scott from Victoria, Steel from New South Wales, CT Whiting from South
Australia, and Wood from Western Australia, It was responsible for gathering the papers
presented at the Canberra conference in 1940 and any suitable Branch papers and arrang-
ing for their publication and distribution.
During the later years of World War 11, conferences—and therefore the publication of
proceedings—were suspended, and it was not until 1945-46 that a Publications Committee
re-appeared. This Committee reported on the viability of an Institute journal or bulletin.
The Council was enthusiastic and asked the Committee to begin by obtaining suitable
material from the Board of Examination and Certification and to suggest a suitable name
for the new journal. 469
There was considerable uncertainly about the Institute’s ability to support a journal
financially, although both the Institutes Association of South Australia and the Library
Association of Victoria had journals which were still active, partly supported by advertis-
ing. In the event the Institute managed to produce three issues of a newsletter, circulated
initially to councillors and Branch Secretaries so that it could be read at meetings or, if
there was something more pressing to discuss, circulated to all members. The first issue
covered activities during the last quarter of 1948, and what turned out to be the third and
final issue covered activities during the second quarter of 1949. 470 This was far from the
scholarly journal which some members would have hoped for. Such a journal would not
appear until the second year of the Association into which the Institute was transformed,


and even then proved possible only through the generosity of the Institute’s long-standing
benefactor, the Carnegie Corporation of New York.
Committee to Assist Damaged Libraries Overseas
It was through an indirect approach by an international organisation that the Institute
became involved in moves to help restock some of the libraries in allied countries dam-
aged or looted during World War 11. Whilst the war was still at its height the International
Federation of University Women put out a call for assistance, and its Australian affiliate, the
Australian Federation of University Women, in turn approached the Institute, suggesting
co-operative action. In September 1944 the Committee to Assist Damaged Libraries Over-
seas was established, headed by Binns, with three other Commonwealth National Library
officers as members; Lillian Foley, Harold White and Cyril Drake. It was intended that each
Branch would appoint its own subcommittee and convenor and that their work would be
co-ordinated by the federal group, which would negotiate with the Federation of University
Women and the Department of External Affairs in planning its activities.
Although there was no lack of sympathy for the many libraries which had suffered major
losses through enemy action, the Committee was sensitive to the general feeling among
Australian librarians that the needs of Australian libraries should come first. They were
by no means rich in library resources and would in any case be expanding markedly after
the war. The Institute Council therefore resolved that duplicates should not be distributed
overseas until the needs of existing and potential libraries in Australia had been taken into
account. Binns suggested that individual libraries could nominate surplus items, lists could
be circulated and items not required by any library could then be sent to a depot, probably
the State library in each State. 471
Binns’s idea came to nothing. In 1946 Bell, who had taken over as convenor, concluded
that the Institute was not in a position to give any real assistance to war-damaged libraries.
He believed that the Inter-Allied Book Centre in London was already helping libraries in
Britain and Europe and that the American Book Centre (War Devastated Libraries) was
well-funded and assisting libraries in the Philippines and elsewhere in the Pacific. Bell
recommended that the Committee be allowed to lapse. 472
Bell’s conclusion matched popular sentiment, but the Council was receiving conflicting
information. The Inter-Allied Book Centre advised that the United Kingdom and the United
States were concentrating on European libraries and that Australian help might indeed be
needed in the Pacific area. The Committee was re-activated and asked to contact the United
Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration to see what could be done, but it was not
a live issue and the Committee vanished from the official record. 473
Periodicals in Australian Libraries Committee
The Institute was eager to increase the usefulness of the Catalogue of the scientific and technical
periodicals in the libraries of Australia which ER Pitt had edited for the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research in 1930, and there had been talk for some time of a new edition
or additional supplements. 474 There had also been suggestions that periodicals in the social
sciences and humanities should be covered. Such compilations would rely considerably on
the goodwill of libraries in compiling returns of their holdings, and the Institute believed
it could and should offer its support. The Periodicals in Australian Libraries Committee
was appointed in 1941 to do just that.


It was a Melbourne-based Committee, which made sense because that was where the
publisher and compilers of the previous edition and supplements were located. It was
convened by Scott, with Archer and CA McCallum as members. McCallura had helped
compile the two previous supplements. These three librarians would remain members of
the Committee throughout the life of the Institute, assisted by subcommittees in each State.
The Committee lobbied very hard to have the union list brought up to date as quickly as
possible —the latest supplement had been issued in 1937. In the early years of the war it
proved impossible to convince the federal government that this publication was a priority,
despite the heightened demand for technical and scientific information.
So great was the need for up-to-date information on holdings during the war years
that some libraries and Branches had resorted to annotating copies of the original ‘Pitt’s
Catalogue’ with new holdings, and others had been producing local finding lists of their
own. In 1942 the South Australian Branch compiled a list of periodicals held in that State
but not listed by Pitt, and the Public Library of South Australia was maintaining a list of
additions and corrections. In the following year the University of Queensland was reported
to be compiling a complete finding list of periodicals held by Brisbane special libraries, the
Public Library of Queensland and the University of Queensland. Around the same time, a
list of medical journals had been compiled in New South Wales, and a union list of technical
periodicals in the Sydney area was being proposed. In Melbourne a union list of medical
periodicals was being prepared, and the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research was
maintaining a list of alterations to the first edition and supplements.
The Committee thought that more could be done and that the Institute should take
the initiative, using whatever outside financial assistance it could obtain. There was con-
sideration of a central bureau to prepare the new edition, but it was recognised that it
would be difficult to get this established in wartime. The Committee persisted, and once
the tide of war began to turn a speedy response came from the Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research. In 1944 Pitt, who had retired from the Public Library of Victoria, was
commissioned to edit a second edition of his work, and this duly appeared—not quite so
speedily—in 1951. 475
Agreement on responsibility for compiling and publishing a union list of periodicals in
the generalities, social sciences and humanities was also reached during the war years. \.t
one stage it had been suggested that the Carnegie Corporation might support this ventue,
but Metcalfe and others firmly believed that such a union list should be a Gommonwealh
responsibility, just like its scientific and technical counterpart. In 1943 the Institute Coun il
had moved to urge the Commonwealth Government to fund both projects. 476 In 1944 it
was announced that the Commonwealth had agreed to finance a union list of periodicals n
the social sciences and had referred its production to the Commonwealth National Libray.
By 1945 the task was well in hand, with the assistance of a Post-War Reconstruction grait,
but it would be 1963 before the first edition of Serials in Australian libraries: social sciencs
and humanities was published. 477
Committee on Central Cataloguing and Book Purchase
One of the most ambitious schemes ever proposed for the Institute popped suddenly oil
of the Tasmanian Branch in 1947. Fresh from its success hosting the 1946 conference n
Hobart , the Branch asked the Institute Council to consider requesting funds from British >r
American sources to finance an experimental co-operative book purchasing and cataloguiig


centre. Their concept was that the Institute would run a commercial bookshop in Sydney
or Melbourne, profits from which would finance co-operative cataloguing and the supply
of unit cards to libraries buying books from the centre. The building could also house the
Institute secretariat and an exchange depot for duplicates. The centre might also expand
into library equipment, stationery and publishing. If overseas finance were not forthcoming
the Branch suggested requesting government assistance. 4 ™
The Institute Council appointed a Committee on Central Cataloguing in October 1947
to investigate the proposal further. The Committee, all Tasmanians but with the power
to co-opt other members, was convened by Ernest Clark, librarian of the University of
Tasmania, with Collier and Mildred Wilson of the Public Library of Tasmania as members.
The same Council meeting resolved not to reconstitute the Committee on Cataloguing
and Classification but to refer issues of centralised acquisition and cataloguing to the new
Committee.
Clark and his colleagues set to with a will and expanded their ideas in a paper which
was circulated in June the following year. They pointed out that there was a shortage of
trained staff for the growing numbers of libraries and that cataloguing was being affected.
They noted the cost of cataloguing and the duplication of effort around the world, which
had been recognised by librarians for decades. The printed card services available from the
Library of Congress and the H W Wilson Company and others were not really practical for
Australian libraries because of the delay in supply, the unsuitability of American spelling and
subject headings and the poor coverage of Australian publications. The Committee pointed
out that the idea of centralised cataloguing had been endorsed in both the Munn-Pitt and
the McColvin Reports. 479
In their paper the Committee described the proposed ‘Library Centre’ in considerable
detail. It would need to be a large building in Sydney or Melbourne, with a well-stocked
bookshop on the ground floor, the new books arranged by Dewey, and a secondhand
department on the first floor. Each section of the shop would have staff with subject
knowledge. Prices would be normal Australian retail prices, and the profits would pay
for a central cataloguing department which would use Library of Congress cataloguing
whenever possible and produce catalogue cards for the Australian library market. If co-
operating libraries agreed on cataloguing principles, cards could include printed headings
as well as classification numbers, using Dewey, the Universal Decimal Classification and
Library of Congress Classification. If books were supplied to libraries through the Centre
the classification numbers could be added to the spines, ‘saving all the present footling
with paper labels and white ink’. 480
There would be a printing department for the cards, with the potential to expand into
other business, such as the publication of an Institute journal and professional books. A
book selection and order department would not only respond to orders from libraries but
would also try to anticipate demand by scanning new publication notices, saving time for
client libraries. The Committee thought such a scheme would have considerable appeal,
especially to librarians in the 'west and north of the Commonwealth’. The Centre could
also keep a record of items ordered; by adding the names of holding libraries, a union cata-
logue could be created as ‘a sort of by-product’. 481 Other features of the Centre might be
a periodicals department, a library equipment department and the Institute headquarters,
including administration, conference rooms and a professional library.


The Committee canvassed how the proposed Centre would fit into the existing pat-
tern of library services. They noted that the Commonwealth National Library was alreeady
producing cards for many Australian books and acquired most Australian publicatioms by
legal deposit. This scheme could continue, and perhaps the Centre would print the caards.
It was acknowledged that there would have to be widespread support from libraries for
this scheme to succeed.
The objections to the Centre which might be raised were examined and discoumted
one by one. The book trade ought not to object because the Centre would be a registeered
bookseller. Nor should librarians be afraid that the Centre would cause unemploymemt in
libraries, as there was a chronic shortage of skilled workers, particularly good cataloguiers.
Existing catalogues would need to be brought into line with the new standards set by/ the
Centre’s cataloguing, but this could only be a good thing. In due course the bulk of acces-
sions in any library would not require cataloguing at all. It was acknowledged that special
libraries might not benefit as much from the central cataloguing but would certainly make
use of the union catalogue. The biggest potential stumbling block was sidestepped: the
cost of setting up the Centre was not gone into at this stage but was left until the scope and
nature of the service had been further explored.
There was actually something of a parallel for this proposal in the Swedish Bibliotekens
Forsaljningscentral (the libraries’ sales centre), which had been founded by Sveriges
Allmanna Biblioteksforening (the general library association of Sweden) in 1936. At the
time of the Tasmanian brainwave it had not developed into the major library conglomerate
which it later became. As Bibliotekstjanst (BTJ), and most recently as the Scandinavia-wide
BTJ Group, this organisation became very successful in book distribution, library equip-
ment supply, cataloguing and processing services and the creation of library management
software.
In the United Kingdom or the United States, however, nothing on such an ambitious
scale had ever been attempted. There had been centralised purchasing ventures, notably
the Central Purchasing Office established by the Carnegie Corporation which operated
between 1931 and 1943, although this office did not offer cataloguing services. 482 The
Committee believed that Australia could be a trailblazer. ‘We have bowed before British
and American precedents long enough’, they declared. ‘Let us seize our opportunity before
it is too late and, by building our libraries around a co-operative institution like the one
herein proposed, make Australian librarianship a service which the rest of the world will
emulate and admire.’ 483
Metcalfe, who was President at the time, thought the Committee had some good ideas
and was in fact already applying some of the principles on a much more modest scale in
the central purchasing and processing office which the Library Board of New South Wales
had established in 1944. Within three years this office had purchased 56 000 books and
provided duplicated catalogue cards for local public libraries. 484 The Library Board initia-
tive lasted thirty years, but Metcalfe did not believe that the much more ambitious Centre
proposed by the Committee could ever be viable. How would they raise capital for such
a major venture, or who would underwrite them? They would be unlikely to get any
co-operation from the publishers, as they would be competing with the rest of the book
trade —Metcalfe had been involved with committees on publishing and was on sure ground
here. Cataloguing for nothing or at low cost would be like giving a discount, and he could
not see how the Centre could generate enough profits to keep going. 485


The Committee pressed on regardless, sending two questionnaires to 114 libraries, but
the response was lukewarm. Only sixty-one libraries replied, and many responses were
negative, Metcalfe opposed the scheme on principle, and for once Battye in Western Aus-
tralia saw eye-to-eye with his Eastern States colleague. 486 An expanded report was presented
to the Council on 10 September 1948, and, despite Metcalfe’s reservations, approval in
principle was given to a centralised co-operative cataloguing and purchasing scheme for
Australia. The Committee was asked to complete its survey of Australian cataloguing and
to make enquiries about financing the scheme. They were then to examine its feasibility
more closely and report back. A number of libraries, including the Public Library of New
South Wales, which had not returned the questionnaires earlier, now did so. 487 When the
Committee came back to Council, a year later, the figures presented were daunting. The
Centre would have to be run as a limited company with a capital of around £IOO 000.
When fully operational it would cost £37 000 a year to run. 488
Despite the Committee’s confidence that bookselling in Australia was profitable, these
were astronomical figures for the Institute to be contemplating. In November 1949 the
Institute had under eight hundred members, almost three-quarters of whom were student
associates, unlikely to become big investors in the proposed Library Centre. The Institute
itself had barely £9OO to its name. By then Clark, who had been infectiously enthusiastic
about the scheme, was no longer University Librarian in Tasmania but was in London
representing the Australian National University. Within the Institute the major preoccupa-
tion was the impending transition into a wider association and the financial uncertainties
which lay ahead. What financial support there might be for the Institute from an overseas
benefactor would have to be channelled into a new association, not sunk in some risky
venture with no real precedent in the English-speaking world.
The report was then effectively buried by Council. A portion of it which summarised cur-
rent cataloguing practices was circulated more widely, but the rest was deemed confidential.
The proposal to set up an operation which would take business from local booksellers, as
well as from library agents in the United Kingdom and the United States, would have un-
dermined relations with suppliers-—and risked discounts —for many of the major libraries
in Australia. The Committee was not reappointed, and the project slid into oblivion. 489
A committee for everything
During its twelve year existence the Institute established almost twenty committees on
critical and contentious issues, as well as on more mundane matters. Those which had a
long-term impact or covered new ground have been described above, but there were also
several committees which tackled issues which were regarded as significant at the time.
Their scope was surprisingly wide.
The Finance and Administration Committee was established in 1944, initially to consider
if administrative arrangements for the Institute could be improved—for example by ap-
pointing a more permanent secretary and perhaps paying an honorarium. The Committee
subsequently kept a watching brief on Institute finances, but it was not reappointed after
1946-47. By that time the revision of the Institute’s constitution was in the air, and over
the next few years the Committee on Constitutional Revision would cover all of the ground
of the old Committee, and more besides.
The Commonwealth Year Book Committee was established in 1943-44 to prepare
information on libraries to supplement the statistical information which the Common


wealth Statistician collected on libraries for the Official year hook of the Commonwealth of
Australia , 490
The Standing Committee on Bibliography came into existence in 1944-45 and was
convened by Phyllis Mander-Jones of the Public Library of New South Wales. The Com-
mittee spent some time collating information about Australian periodicals which dealt with
bibliography and librarianship. They found just how little there was, and the Committee
joined those who advocated the publication of a journal by the Institute. 491 In some years
the Committee was largely inactive, and in 1947 they took the unusual step of asking the
Council what they should do. 492 The Council seemed content for them to keep a watching
brief, and from then on their very concise reports alerted members to new publications
and indexing services, essentially updating the list they had prepared in 1945. For much
of the later period of its existence Mander-Jones was overseas and the Committee was just
marking time.
The Committee on Children’s Libraries and Children’s Reading in Australia was estab-
lished in 1945 at the suggestion of Jean Arnot. Its creation was prompted by an approach
to the Institute by the organisers of Children’s Book Week in the United States suggesting
the co-ordination of book weeks in the two countries. There is little evidence that the Ex-
ecutive of the time was particularly interested in children’s services, which they regarded
as a matter for individual libraries. The Committee was nonetheless given a considerably
broader mandate and had the rather ambitious objects of considering the relationship be-
tween children’s libraries and library services as a whole in Australia and surveying book
publishing for children in Australia. The Committee reported briefly to the Council in April
1946, but much work remained undone, and the Committee was split into two, with one
group to look at children’s publishing and the other to concentrate on children’s library
services. Unfortunately it proved difficult to find suitable convenors, and neither group of
the Committee is listed in the Institute’s proceedings after 1947. 493 As we have seen, there
was some valuable work with children’s services done by the Institute at a Branch level. As
was the case with special libraries, however, it would not be until the advent of the Library
Association of Australia and the possibility of national sections that Australia-wide activities
became effective for those involved or interested in children’s services. 494
The Committee on Standards and Documentation was first appointed in 1946-47 to
liaise with the International Standards Organisation (ISO) on standards for documenta-
tion and to monitor the progress of revisions to the Universal Decimal Classification. The
Institute was invited to participate in the work of the ISO if it felt that it could make a
definite contribution. Even if it did not participate the Institute would have the opportu-
nity to comment on any draft standards for documentation and consider their adoption
by Australia. In view of other priorities —the Committee’s convenor, Archer was Institute
Vice-President from 1946 to 1948 and President in 1948—49—the Committee contented
itself with keeping abreast of developments and relevant documents through the Standards
Association of Australia. 495
The UNESCO Committee was appointed in 1947-48 with the heavyweight membership
of Metcalfe (convenor), Archer, Scott and Remington. Its role was to liaise with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) National Co-operat-
ing Body for Libraries, which had been established in Australia by the Federal Office of
Education as part of Australia’s commitment to UNESCO. The Commonwealth Government
had invited the Institute, represented by its President, to join the National Co-operating


Body. Other members nominated by the Institute for membership of the Body represented
types of library and lay people interested in libraries. In 1947 these other members were
WJ Weeden of the New South Wales Department of Education as chair, Binns, White,
Steel, Bell and Remington. It was this Body which recommended that Metcalfe should be
a delegate to the second General Conference of UNESCO in Mexico City in 1947. Met-
calfe’s successful participation in the conference —he was chairman of its Libraries
Working Party —reinforced the view in Australia that UNESCO could play an increas-
ingly significant role in library services internationally. Arrangements were made for the
Commonwealth National Library and the State libraries to receive complete sets of UNESCO
publications, and the Institute expressed its willingness to participate in UNESCO-related
programs. These included fellowships which the Commonwealth Government was offering
to students from East Asia to enable them to study in Australia —the Institute hoped library
studies might be included in this scheme. In due course the National Co-operating Body
gave way to an Australian UNESCO Committee for Libraries, but the link with the Institute
and its successor, the Library Association of Australia, was never severed, and UNESCO’s
influence was felt from time to time. It was a resolution of the UNESCO Conference on
Bibliographical Services in Paris in 1950 which led indirectly to the creation six years later
of an Australian body on bibliographical services. The Australian Advisory Committee
(later Council) on Bibliographical Services (AACOBS) would have a profound influence
on Australian libraries for over thirty years. 496
Committees in transition
The Committee system had proved its worth to the Institute and would do the same when
the Institute transformed into the Library Association of Australia. During the transition all
existing Committees were to remain in existence pending the election of the Association’s
new governing body.
At the first meeting of the General Council, in August 1950, only five Committees
would actually be created, but they were to cover much of the ground of their predeces-
sors. The Services, Standards and Status of Librarians Committee and the Commonwealth
Year Book Committee would continue the work of Institute Committees of the same name
with substantially the same members. The Committee on Constitutional Revision would
be a slimmed-down version of the Committee which had mapped out the transition from
Institute to Association. The Committee on Cataloguing, Classification and Bibliography
would combine the work of previous overlapping Committees.
Prominent among members of the new Committees would be Remington, the driving
force behind the Free Library Movement, Honorary Member of the Institute and subse-
quently Honorary Member of the Library Association of Australia. This consummate lobbyist
would be appointed to the Committee on Promotion, the only Committee which would
venture into territory untrodden by the Institute.
We have seen how the Committees evolved, ebbing and flowing with trends in the
profession, winding up when their task was completed or when circumstances had made
them redundant, or continuing to play a role throughout the life of the Institute. Some
were more visible, more productive and, it must be said, much more successful than
others, but all provided to some extent a forum for the interchange of ideas, the analysis
of a situation or problem and the exploration of professional issues to an extent hitherto
unheard of in Australia.
Uniting a profession


Chapter 7 Endnotes
442 AIL, Committee on the Classification of Australiana, Interim report, 24 May 1939, State Library of
New South Wales (SLNSW), State Reference Library, NQ025.46994/1. Copy also in ALIA records,
National Library of Australia (NLA), M 57446, box 87.
443 AIL, Committee on the Classification of Australiana, Report, 4 December 1940, ALIA records, NLA,
M 57446, box 28.
444 AIL, Committee on the Classification of Australiana, Report, 18 May 1940, SLNSW, State Reference
Library, NQ025.46994/1. Copy also in ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 87.
443 LC St A Key to HM Green, 6 June 1941, ALIA records, NLA, MS 7446, box 84. Similar letters were
sent to other major libraries. AIL, Annual report, no 4, 31 May 1941. Many copies of the duplicated
typescript of the schedules exist: see for example SLNSW, State Reference Library, NQ025.46994/1,
which contains an undated circular letter from the AIL General Secretary (Key), together with the
schedules and the 1939 and 1940 reports of the Committee. Copies of the schedules are also in ALIA
records, NLA, M 57446, box 87.
446 AIL, Committee on Cataloguing and Classification, [report for 1942-43], ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 87.
447 AIL, Annual report, no 8, September 1945.
448 The first joint rules were Catalog rules, author and title entries compiled by committees of the American
Library Association and the Library Association, Chicago, American Library Association, 1908, also pub-
lished as Cataloguing rules, London, Library Association, 1908. These were followed by the American
Library Association Catalog Code Revision Committee, A.L.A. catalog rides, preliminary American
2nd edition, Chicago, American Library Association, 1941. A complete revision of the joint rules
did not emerge until the Anglo-American Cataloguing Rules, published in British and North American
editions in 1967-68.
449 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
430 AIL, Reference and Research Committee, Report, 1938-39, 29 March 1939, copies in ALIA records,
NLA, M 57446, boxes 28, 88 and 109.
451 AIL, Annual report, no 4, 31 May 1941.
432 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedngs,
6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947, and other papers, Sydney, AIL, 1949, p 54.
433 AIL, Annual report, no 6, September 1943.
454 AIL, Annual report, no 8, September 1945.
455 ibid.
436 AIL, Minutes of Council, 24-25 September 1943, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40.
437 AIL, Annual report, no 7, September 1944.
438 AIL, Minutes of Council, 14 September 1945, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40.
439 AIL, Minutes of Council, 15 September 1944, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40.
460 ibid.
461 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
462 AIL, Committee on Services, Standards and Status of Librarians in Australia, Report, [presentel to
Council] November 1949, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 35. ‘Librarianship in Australia: Rejort
1949, to the Joint Committee of IFLA and FID on the Professional Status and Training of Librarans
and Documentalists’, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 35.
463 AIL, Minutes of Council, 24-25 November 1949, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40.
132
COMMITEES


464 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
465 ibid.
466 AIL, Committee on Inter-library Loans and Transport, Report, April 1946, and Supplementary Report,
October 1946, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 28.
467 Ellinor Archer, ‘lnter-library loans: ethics and mechanics’. Proceedings, Bth Conference, Sydney, LAA,
1956, ppB9-94. Australian Library Journal, vol 2 no 4, October 1953, ppl24-125.
468 Co-operation between Australian libraries was one of the objects of the Australian Advisory Council
on Bibliographical Services (AACOBS), established in 1956. After a 1964 report on inter-library lend-
ing AACOBS issued its own Inter-Library Loan Code in 1966 which gained wide acceptance. This
was a direct ancestor of today’s Australian Inter-library Resource Sharing Code, which is endorsed
by the Australian Library and Information Association, the National Library of Australia, the Council
of Australian State Libraries and the Council of Australian University Librarians.
469 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
470 AIL, Federal Executive Newsletter, [Melbourne], no 1, September-December 1948 —no 3, April-June
1949. Nos 2-3 were simply entitled Newsletter.
471 ‘Report on assistance to war-damaged libraries in England, Europe and the Far East’, [main report and
supplementary report by Kenneth Binns, 1946], enclosed with FLS Bell to MM Wilson, 15 August
1946, ALIA records. NLA, M 57446, box 28.
477 FLS Bell to MM Wilson, 15 August 1946, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 28.
473 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
474 ER Pitt, Catalogue of the scientific and technical periodicals in the libraries of Australia, Melbourne, Council
for Scientific and Industrial Research, 1930. A supplement by CA McCallum and DWI Cannam ap-
peared in 1934 and a further supplement edited by CA McCallum in 1937. A second edition edited
by Pitt appeared in 1951 under the title Union catalogue of the scientific and technical periodicals in the
libraries of Australia.
475 AIL, Annual report, no 8, September 1945.
476 AIL, Minutes of Council, 24-25 September 1943, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40.
477 AIL, Annual report, no 8, September 1945. Serials in Australian libraries: social sciences and humanities:
a union list, Canberra, National Library of Australia, 1963.
478 JE Boniwell, secretary, Tasmanian Branch, to JW Metcalfe, 13 June 1947. Copy in the possession of
David J Jones.
479 R Munn and HR Pitt, Australian libraries: a survey of conditions and suggestions for their improvement,
Melbourne, Australian Council for Educational Research, 1935, p 123. LR McColvin, Public libraries
in Australia: present conditions and future possibilities, Melbourne, Melbourne University Press for the
Australian Council for Educational Research, 1947, ppBl—B2. The McColvin Report is dealt with in
Chapter 10.
480 AIL, Committee on Central Cataloguing, ‘Centralized Purchasing and Cataloguing for Australian
Libraries’, 25 June 1948, p 4, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 27.
481 ibid.
482 NA Radford, The Carnegie Corporation and the development of American college libraries, 1928-19T1,
Chicago, American Library Association. 1984, chapter 7.
483 AIL Committee on Central Cataloguing, ‘Centralized Purchasing and Cataloguing for Australian
Libraries’.
484 AIL, New South Wales Branch, ‘Summary of report by Mr EV Steel on the activities of the Library
Board of NSW’, 10 March 1947, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 108. Known as the Book Purchas-
ing Scheme, and later administered by the Book Acquisitions Department of the Public Library of
New South Wales, the Library Board scheme survived until the 19705, by which time most local
Uniting a profession


public libraries preferred to buy their own materials and do their own cataloguing, even if it meant
purchasing the cataloguing data. See Library Board of New South Wales, Annual report, for the years
1944-1973.
485 JW Metcalfe to EH Clark, 28 July 1948, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 27.
486 AIL, Committee on Central Cataloguing, Report, September 1948, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 27.
487 JW Metcalfe to EH Clark, 19 November 1948, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 27.
488 AIL, Committee on Central Cataloguing, Report, September 1949, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 27.
489 AIL, Annual report, no 12, November 1949.
490 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
491 AIL, Annual report, no 8, September 1945.
492 AIL, Annual report, no 10, October 1947.
493 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
494 A Section for Library Work with Children and Young People (later Children’s Libraries Section) was
established by the Library Association of Australia in 1952.
495 AIL, Annual report, no 11, October 1948.
496 For a brief account of AACOBS see Peter Biskup, Libraries in Australia, Wagga Wagga, Centre for
Information Studies, 1994, pp42B-434.
134
Committees


Conferences
It is much easier to send out an SOS to
a fellow librarian when you can address
him as, ‘Dear Bill’, at the same time
calling to mind a pleasant time spent
in each others company at a recent
interstate conference. 497


The first conference of the Institute was, as we have seen, an outstanding success, held
during the excitement of the Sesquicentennial celebrations in Sydney. A standard had
been set for future conferences to live up to, and expectations were high. Organisers
knew that they needed to choose the right theme, find stirring keynote speakers, introduce a
good mix of subjects, ensure that as many States and kinds of libraries as possible were repre-
sented by the speakers, select a good and economical venue and invite a prominent figure for
the official opening. Out of conference hours they had to arrange a social program to facilitate
the fellowship which had begun so well during the inauguration and continued through the
excursions, picnics and luncheons of the Sydney conference.
Melbourne 1939
In 1939 it was Melbourne’s turn to host the annual meeting and conference. The organisers
followed the pattern of the Sydney conference, with a program spread over the three days of the
King’s Birthday Holiday weekend between Saturday 10 and Monday 12 June. The Council met
on the Saturday morning, and after lunch at the Hotel Federal in Collins Street, the sixty-eight
delegates gathered in the Radio Theatre of Melbourne Technical College, across La Trobe Street
from the Public Library of Victoria, for the annual meeting. They were then regaled with ER Pitt’s
Presidential Address, ‘State aid to libraries: principles and practice with special application to
Victoria’. Pitt ran true to form, taking up forty-one pages—about a third —of the published
proceedings, although he probably did not read out all twelve pages of appendices.
Pitt’s paper is a combination of observations on the American and British systems of public
library provision and his views on the desirable pattern of library development for Victoria. This
was presumably a solo performance, as he did not acknowledge the contribution of colleagues.
He had certainly had the benefit of seeing what the Libraries Advisory Committee had recom-
mended in New South Wales. 499 Like that Committee he wanted to establish a new pattern of
public library services, spurred into action by the strictures of the Munn-Pitt Report. Unlike
his northern neighbours, however, he had not been assisted by the lobbying of the Free Library
Movement or the fortunate coincidence of a Minister for Education who was library-conscious
and prepared to accept the recommendations of the Libraries Advisory Committee report.
Stirring his own State into action was Pitt’s motive for this lengthy exposition of the way
forward. He set out a model for library development in his own State, based loosely on that of
the State of New York. He described a Library Extension Division, with wide powers to subsi-
dise and set standards, and changes to the functions of the Public Library of Victoria’s Lending
Library. He provided details of staffing implications and funding models and outlined a plan to
sow the library seed in even the most infertile and impoverished areas by a joint system of free
and ‘pay’ collections of popular items. He believed his plan could breathe new life into schools
of arts and mechanics’ institutes so that they could gradually be transformed into fully rate and
State-supported free public libraries, rather than de novo municipal libraries, as was proposed
in New South Wales. 500
This scheme would have confirmed many of the misgivings which the New South Wales
librarians in particular had about Pitt’s vision and determination. Ifould for one regarded him as
too cautious and had no sympathy for his gradualist approach. Now here was Pitt, presumably
with the approval of his Board of Trustees, advocating a life raft for the country institutes which
he and his co-author had so roundly condemned in their Report barely four years previously.
The discussion, if Pitt left time for any, was not recorded. Participants would have had every
reason for gloomy thoughts, for, as the State reports would show later that afternoon and on


the following Monday, Victoria’s position seemed to be in vivid contrast to the progress being
made by its northern neighbour.
Time would give some credence to Pitt’s ideas, however, and in 1940 the Victorian Govern-
ment appointed a Library Service Board, chaired by Pitt, to investigate free library services in
Victoria and to recommend how they might be improved. The Board was appointed on the
niggardly condition that the Government would pay for nothing more than the cost of printing
its report. Happily the Library Group came to the rescue with a £IOO grant from the Carnegie
Corporation. 501
Following refreshments in the Public Library of Victoria tea rooms, the remainder of Saturday
afternoon and the early evening was devoted to reports on library development in each State
of Australia, and these were to become a feature of conferences and annual reports throughout
the life of the Institute. Such reports had a marked influence on participants by widening hori-
zons and providing a platform for a variety of interests which had emerged at Branch level. In
1939 the papers were given by Wood (Western Australia), Purnell (South Australia), McMicken
(Victoria), Ifould (New South Wales), Binns (Australian Capital Territory), Brown (Queensland)
and Collier (Tasmania).
Wood, who had by then become an Associate of the Library Association, reported on
Carnegie assistance to the University of Western Australia. USS2O 000 was being given over
four years to help strengthen the university library, and US$lO 000 had been offered to the
University’s Adult Education Department. She noted that library progress was likely to be slow,
for outside the University and the Public Library of Western Australia there was no recognition
of the need for trained librarians. She and her colleagues would be watching initiatives in the
Eastern States with great interest, hoping that these developments would stimulate activity in
Western Australia. 502
Purnell reported on the mixed reception which the Grenfell Price Report had received, the
progress of a Library Bill and the establishment of a Country Lending Service. 503 The Grenfell
Price Report had been commissioned by the South Australian Government in 1936 and had
recommended as the ultimate aim a State-wide system of free public libraries subsidised or
maintained by the Government and overseen by a State Libraries Board. In the interim it advo-
cated continued financial assistance to the institutes, subject to inspections by the State Libraries
Board, and encouragement to local councils to establish their own free libraries. The influence
of the institutes would continue to be felt for many years, however, and the development of
free public libraries in South Australia was commensurately slow. 504
There had not yet been equivalent enquiries or legislation in Queensland, but Brown’s
report included a brief account of the Queensland Free Library Movement, of which he had
high hopes. 505
Ifould was able to report a roll-call of successes. The Library School at the Public Library of
New South Wales had opened. Even before that his Library had arranged training for school
librarians and had set up a Model School Library as a demonstration project and teaching aid.
Now the Library was planning to microfilm archives relating to Australia in overseas repositor-
ies. He also reported on the placing of government department librarians on the establishment
of the Public Library and progress with his new building. He gave credit to the Free Library
Movement, to his Minister, DH Drummond, for taking a personal interest in libraries and
establishing the Libraries Advisory Committee, and to Cabinet for adopting the report of the
Committee in principle. A Library Bill had been drafted and was expected to be introduced into


the Parliament soon. This Bill would establish a Library Board on which the Australian Institute
of Librarians was likely to be represented. Then the process of establishing free public libraries
across New South Wales would begin. 506
Binns reported on the establishment of the Carnegie Library Service for outlying Common-
wealth Territories, serving Central Australia, the Northern Territory, Papua, New Guinea, Norfolk
Island and Nauru. He also spoke of the National Historical Film and Speaking Record Section of
the Commonwealth National Library, established in 1937, the training of librarians from other
libraries at his library and the relatively new Annual catalogue of Australian publications , 507
McMicken was given the task of outlining library development in Victoria, as Pitt had already
held the stage with his Presidential Address. McMicken did not fail to mention the Library As-
sociation of Victoria, which was still going strong and publishing its Library Journal He gave
it some of the credit for the restoration of grants to country institutes. This Association and
the Free Library Movement in Victoria, he said, were lobbying for a new Library Act and were
determined to increase public awareness of libraries. He made no direct reference to the ideas
which Pitt had set out in his address, although he did mention that consideration was being
given presumably by the Library Association of Victoria—to asking the Government to appoint
a committee similar to the Libraries Advisory Committee in New South Wales. 508
Collier rounded off the reports, noting the successful launch of the Free Library Movement
in Tasmania the previous year and describing improvements in school libraries. He detected in
Tasmania some early ‘echoes of development’ in the mainland States. 509
Most of the delegates were then free to dine where they wished and spend a night on the
town according to their own inclinations. Committee members, however, would be back after
dinner for their meetings. Sunday was given over to tourism and socialising. Delegates gath-
ered in Flinders Street at 10:15am and were taken on a full-day coach excursion as guests of
newspaper magnate Sir Keith Murdoch and Lady Murdoch. Sir Keith had been a member of the
Board of Trustees of the Public Library, Museums and National Gallery of Victoria since 1933
and was then its President. They drove to the Dandenong Ranges, lunched at Belgrave and spent
some time admiring the gardens at ‘Burnham Beeches’, which had been established by Alfred
Nicholas, the Aspro’ millionaire. On the way back into the city the party took afternoon tea at
‘Heathfield’, the Murdoch residence in Toorak. 510
On the Monday morning the Council for 1939-40 met, with two women among its new
members: Margaret Sorrell from South Australia and Ellinor Archer from Victoria. Other delegates
toured the Public Library building before returning to the Radio Theatre for the remainder of
the annual meeting. After lunch the reports on library development in Australia continued,
followed by unrecorded discussion. The proceedings published in the following year did,
however, include several papers delivered at Branch meetings. One of these was HA Gregory’s
Libraries in Soviet Russia’, probably the first Australian publication on librarianship outside
the Anglo-American tradition. 511
In hindsight the 1939 Annual Meeting and Conference was something of a missed opportunity,
considering that library development was its theme and state aid the topic of its Presidential
Address, There might so easily have been resolutions passed urging action on a number of
fronts, endorsing a call for a library committee in Victoria, or indeed in other States as well,
following the evident success in New South Wales. A more self-confident Institute might have
ventured down that path, led perhaps by a less ‘gradualist’ President, and without the dichotomy,
incomprehensible to outsiders, of a Branch of the Institute and a State Association not only


co-existing but sharing membership. But conferences were still taking their direction and tone
from the host Branch, and in 1939 the Victorian approach prevailed.
Adelaide 1940
As will be seen in the next chapter, the war which was declared in September 1939 would have
a marked effect on the operation of libraries and on the activities of the Institute, but in the early
months of the ‘phoney war its impact was not at all apparent. In early 1940, however, the news
from Europe was dismal: April saw the fall of Denmark and Norway, and May the invasion of
the Netherlands, Belgium and France and the encircling of the British Expeditionary Force at
Dunkirk. The New South Wales Branch suggested that the conference planned for Adelaide that
year be postponed or abandoned because of the seriousness of the situation. Binns disagreed and
wrote to Purnell, the Institute President, urging him to continue planning for the conference.
Binns had consulted some of his Canberra colleagues and shared their view that to abandon
the conference on the grounds given savours of panic policy, and to postpone it a few months
is merely illogical ... if our libraries are still carrying on why should not our Institute?’ 512 He
suggested a number of themes which would resonate harmoniously at a wartime conference:
preservation of war archives, libraries in military camps, the impact of war on library budgets,
what to do about German scientific and technical publications during the war, and making the
most of scarce American dollars when obtaining materials from the United States. 513
Purnell, who knew much about war, having served in World War I and undertaking spare
time duties for the Army during World War 11, took a characteristically British view: that not
to go about one’s normal business was somehow to concede a point to the enemy. He also
objected fiercely to any suggestion that a conference was a junket: to him a conference was
work. The fellowship of his peers, which he prized, was the nearest he ever came to a junket.
He continued making arrangements for the conference, and it was held in Adelaide as planned
on 15-17 June 1940. On this occasion only fifty-four members attended, fewer than at the
1939 conference, but this was understandable because of the war situation and the smaller size
of the host Branch. For the first time the Council met outside the conference proper, on the
Friday before the long weekend. As usual the conference occupied the Saturday and Monday,
with delegates taken for a drive through the Mount Lofty Ranges on the Sunday as guests of
the South Australian Branch.
The conference was held in several different locations: the Public Library of South Australia,
the Royal Society Library in the Institute Building, the Barr Smith Library at the University, and
the Parliamentary Library, Time was allowed for delegates to inspect these libraries, which were
all conveniently located on North Terrace. The conference program returned to the model of the
1938 conference, with a specific professional issue as a theme. In Sydney this had been library
education and training. In Adelaide it was archives in Australia.
White’s paper on trends in archival administration was based upon British and American
practice and was comprehensive in its coverage of the topic, from definitions to estrays, from
lamination to microphotography, and from the librarian’s responsibility for historical manu-
scripts to the recruitment and training of archivists. 514 Apart from Kenneth Binns’s report on
the publication of Historical records of Australia and the brief account of the South Australian
archives by GH Pitt (the only speaker at this conference to bear the title of Archivist, having
been so designated since 1919), the State reports on archives were by no means encouraging.
Collier needed only a page to cover the care of archives in Tasmania. HR Pitt contributed an
unusually brief single page, although he believed, accurately, that the Trustees of the Public


Library of Victoria would soon press for the appointment of an archivist, although it would in
fact be eight years before such a position was filled. 515
Ihe patchy coverage bears out Harold White’s remark that ‘we in Australia have always had
an imperfect appreciation of the importance of our records and their place in the national life’. 516
This conference did much to rectify that situation. It raised the consciousness of librarians and
library boards about archives and historical records, and legislation was enacted in some States
in the years following. South Australia already had provisions relating to archives in its library
legislation." 7 By 1943, Tasmania and Queensland had archives legislation in one form or an-
other, and appointment of an archivist was provided for in a Victorian Act in 1944. 518 Other
States were slower to formalise the position of archives, but the State libraries were increasingly
recognising their role in the preservation of public documents. Ten years or so later Metcalfe
could write with some justification that ‘the present Australian movement for the preservation
of archives distinct from other historical materials dated from that conference’. 519
Although archives was the conference theme, the war was firmly on the agenda. Instead of
general reports on library development in each State, there were reports on library services for
the armed forces, as well as a discussion of the effects of war on library services, taking up some
of the suggestions which Binns had made. The reports on the Camp Library Service show that
the New South Wales Branch was the most active in organising library services for the armed
forces. 520 Steel, O’Brien and McGreal furnished by far the most lengthy report to the confer-
ence, in the main an account of their activities, but providing enough detail of their methods
for others to follow if they wished. 521
Purnell began his Presidential Address with a reference to the war, stressing why it was im-
portant for the Institute to meet despite the circumstances. ‘ln this time of war’, he told delegates,
‘it may seem futile, when the very foundations of our life are being shaken, to discuss library
matters as if nothing were happening ... But our object here is not to discuss library matters as if
nothing were happening, but rather to discuss them because so much is happening, and because
we believe that libraiy service is important enough to warrant our most earnest attention’. 522
In a mild way the rest of Purnell’s address was his own declaration of war. He had tried very
hard to work with the Institutes Association of South Australia and had a governing board which
included powerful friends of the Institutes, but he had never made a secret of his belief in free
public library services. He took this opportunity to re-affirm his opposition to subsidising insti-
tutes. Such subsidies are recognised as being wrong in principle, because the institutes do not
serve the people at large, and it has been found that the great majority of subscribers to them
want only fiction, and that of an ephemeral kind. They give no opportunity to the people to be
acquainted with the vast range of knowledge and sources of inspiration that are to be found in
books Flushed with the success of his latest innovation, the Public Library of South Australia
Country Lending Service, he advocated a system of regional libraries for his State, financed by
a separate libraries tax, as in the West Riding of Yorkshire.
Those who had pressed for the conference to proceed had been vindicated. Important pro-
fessional issues, in particular the treatment of archives, had been brought to the attention of
librarians at a national level for the first time, and the contribution of the Institute to the war
effort had been highlighted. The young Institute was making its presence felt on the national
scene, a presence emphasised by its unanimous resolution: That in this crisis in the history of the
Empire, the Australian Institute of Librarians pledges itself to give the federal government all the
assistance in its power, and that this resolution be conveyed to the Federal Government’. 524
140
Conferences


Canberra 1941
After the doubts about holding the Adelaide conference in 1940 it seems remarkable that another
was held in Canberra a year later, when Allied prospects in the war seemed even bleaker. But
sixty-nine members and student associates, and four visitors attended this conference, which
was held on 14-16 June, mainly in the reading room of the Library at Parliament House. 525
This conference too had a dominant theme, library co-operation, a theme which had been
suggested by Jean Amot for the 1940 conference, though in the event the organisers had run
with archives instead. 526
Welcoming delegates, the President, Kenneth Binns, set the scene with his comprehensive
address on library co-operation. He believed that his own library would be a key to effective
co-operation: ‘lt is my considered opinion’, he told his audience, ‘that no comprehensive body
of Australian library co-operation is possible that does not have as its heart our Commonwealth
National Library’. This co-operation could include inter-library loans—especially international
ones —union catalogues and bibliography. In these areas it was ‘appropriate that the Com-
monwealth Government should bear the expense of what is fundamentally a national and not
a State service’. 527
After lunch there began a symposium on library co-operation, with six papers on the Satur-
day and a further four on the Monday The speakers had been chosen to represent a variety of
library types and viewpoints, with prominent librarians nominated to lead discussion. White’s
paper on international library co-operation was a historical account of the various attempts at
co-operation in bibliographical and library matters from the nineteenth century onwards. 528
Part of White’s paper dealt with bilateral co-operation, and he discussed the ways in which the
American library associations and librarians had assisted libraries, librarians and library move-
ments in the United Kingdom, Europe, Latin America, the Pacific and Australia. Characteristically
White ended his paper with a lesson for the future: ‘lf we wish to make Australia nationally ht
for co-operation with other countries, we can yet do so at comparatively little cost to ourselves,
either in money or in readjustment of our library policies. We have always had an impelling
reason to do so in our own interests. Intellectual isolation of the kind we have known could
only be overcome by effective co-operation with other countries’. 529
Remington’s paper was entitled ‘Co-operation in library matters between State and local
governing bodies’, an account of his own methods of persuading local authorities and ratepay-
ers in New South Wales to support libraries, to adopt the Library Act and to establish local
libraries. His remarks on the importance of finding the true leaders in any community are
still sound advice. Of the town clerk he said, ‘you must decide in your own mind, and decide
correctly, whether he runs the council or the council runs him’. 530 When you met the mayor,
you might have to alter your original opinion—it might actually be the mayor who dominates
the town clerk. In some cases neither town clerk nor mayor might be the key people, ‘and you
must then start a little judicious questioning to find out who really runs the municipality’. 531
There are not many papers like Remington’s in the literature of Australian librarianship, and
few with sounder advice.
Metcalfe’s paper on co-operation between State libraries and government departments
discussed the difficulty of staffing the special libraries in government departments. There were
few professionals to staff them, career opportunities were limited, and the few staff that there
were needed wider experience. The solution in New South Wales was for the Public Library to
staff these libraries, which meant that the special librarians received in-house training in library
techniques and theory, enabling them to provide better service to the government departments


and giving them wider career prospects. This paper is important because we seldom hear
Metcalfe as a library manager, and here he reveals his grasp of the pitfalls which administrators
must try to avoid. 532
Scott dealt with co-operation within the one large institution —the relations among university
libraries, departments and faculties. The discussion leader was Green, whose university library,
like Scott’s, had collections and staff scattered across many departments. Scott was hopeful that
libraries in departments would be increasingly regarded as branches of the main library and not
the property of the departments. 533 The situation in Sydney was worse, with many departments
having unofficial collections of material borrowed by powerful professors and never returned
to the main library.
One of the most important papers was given by Bell, who had succeeded Bertie as City
Librarian of Sydney in 1939. 534 Bell was young, had a good academic record (a Master’s degree
in anthropology from the University of Sydney) and had visited the United States and Europe
on a Carnegie grant. His paper was essentially a discourse on the importance of marketing the
library: defining the objectives of the service, finding out about the users, recognising their
groupings and directing a program of publicity at those groups. This had to be done without
losing sight of the needs of individual library users. He saw the librarian’s task as interpreting
the library for its public and making them aware of the services that were offered.
Previous conferences had heard papers by Wood and Leeson, but this conference was nota-
ble for its papers by three other leading women in the profession. Jocelyn McCallum, librarian
of Prahran Children’s Library spoke on co-operation between the library and the school in a
paper which compared New South Wales and Victorian practice. 535 She regretted that because
the Public Library of Victoria was not under the control of the Education Department it did not
provide the assistance to schools that was available in some other States. McCallum’s descrip-
tion of the co-operation between schools and her own library—one of the oldest and best free
libraries in Victoria —was detailed and proud, and she acknowledged the importance of helpful
teachers. Nevertheless, in her eyes, co-operation would not be needed if the school libraries
themselves were adequate.
The paper, ‘Co-operation between the librarian and the reader’, was vintage Arnot, full of
personal observations and acute comments. She believed that libraries and librarians should be
visible, asked why they did not advertise more and gave examples of librarians going out into
the field to meet readers, as was occurring when library services were being planned for military
camps. Echoing Bell’s earlier remarks, she also stressed the importance of listening to readers
and getting to know their special requirements, as the New South Wales Branch had succeeded
in doing when it held a joint meeting with the Australian Chemical Institute. 536
Archer’s paper on co-operation in special libraries was largely concerned with the libraries
of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and their use of and contributions
to union lists, catalogues and inter-library loans, 537 The most interesting section of her paper is
the account of ‘film reproduction’ in the CSIR libraries, which involved photographing journals
and sending microfilm to requesting libraries rather than lending the bound volumes. Her paper
ended with a plea for the development of the special library movement and ‘a better under-
standing by those controlling the destinies of special libraries of the services they can render if
properly organised and adequately staffed’. 538
Baud gave a historical account of co-operative technical services under the alliterative title
‘Co-operation in cataloguing and classification including central and co-operative catalogues


and bibliographical indexes’. He concluded that ‘the problem of co-operative and centralised
cataloguing is above all an economic one, and unless the various governments or other edu-
cational bodies are prepared to subsidise any such schemes there is little chance of their being
put into operation’. 539 This issue would continue to be discussed by the Institute for many years
and, as we have seen, was on the agenda of several of its Committees.
Apart from the round table discussions on public, special and university libraries late on the
Sunday evening, the conference theme of co-operation monopolised the formal papers, which
were spread over two days. Time had been allowed for discussion, with a discussion leader for
each paper. Once again reports of discussions were not included in the published proceedings,
mainly, one suspects, because of lack of space dictated by the wartime economy measures. In
fact the proceedings of the 1940 and 1941 conferences and notes on the 1942 annual meeting
did not appear in print until 1944 and did not include any Branch papers either.
Time was found for social activities, including a social hour and supper in the Members’
Dining Room of Parliament House on the Saturday evening. This followed the viewing of two
American library films: The newcomers visit the library from Wichita, Kansas, and Portrait of a
library, about the Montclair Public Library in New Jersey 540 On the following morning the
Australian Capital Territory Branch took their visitors to the Cotter River, returning them to
Canberra for lunch before the afternoon and evening conference sessions. This was the first
time that conference sessions had been scheduled for a Sunday.
Monday was devoted to the annual meeting, the annual report, a report on the Camp Library
Service by Steel, a resolution of the trustees of the Public Library of Victoria on library co-opera-
tion, elections, amendments to the constitution and general business. 541
The fourth conference revealed a very high standard of professionalism among Australian
librarians. Most of the papers were carefully researched, thoughtful and realistic. They also dealt
with library co-operation, a subject which continues to dominate Australian librarians’ thinking
sixty years later. The solution to problems discussed here was the main objective of so many
co-operative ventures and projects which were subsequently developed. These included the
establishment of the Australian Advisory Council on Bibliographical Services and bodies which
succeeded it, national union catalogues, bibliographies, indexes, databases and the exploration
of resource-sharing networks and document delivery systems. From 1941 onwards, no confer-
ence of Australian librarians would fail to consider library co-operation.
War was never far from the thoughts of delegates, and they resolved to send greetings to
Institute members who were serving overseas in the forces. 542 They also recorded their ‘gratifi-
cation at the increased use which is being made of libraries in connection with the war effort,
and [the Institute’s] desire to undertake on behalf of governmental and other bodies any further
duties and responsibilities which circumstances may demand’, 543
With the holding of the 1941 conference the three Branches which had supplied the major
impetus for the formation of the Australian Institute of Librarians —New South Wales, Victoria
and the Australian Capital Territory —had each hosted a conference. South Australia, which had
quickly become an enthusiastic participant in the Institute, had also had its turn. Circumstances
would conspire to deny the other States the opportunity to put on a show for quite some time,
as world events took a turn for the worse.
1942
After Japan entered the war, Australia’s involvement became even more intense, and the war
dominated everything. Green was now President, and it was Sydney’s turn for the conference,


but apprehension —including fears that Sydney might be bombed —overshadowed any thoughts
of a conference in the spring of f 942.
So there was no conference that year, only an annual meeting, as required by the constitu-
tion.' 544 This was held in the Board Room of the newly completed Public Library of New South
Wales building in Sydney on Saturday 19 September 1942, with forty-six members and student
associates present. It was preceded by a meeting of the Council, which reconvened on the fol-
lowing day. There was no Presidential Address, and in the main only routine reports from Com-
mittees and consideration of the Institute’s finances. One matter of extraordinary importance was
discussed, however: the draft regulations and syllabus submitted by the Board of Examination
and Certification. The significance of this document in the process of establishing professional
training has been described in an earlier chapter, but it is salutary to note here that in this dark
year —which saw the fall of Singapore, the bombing of Darwin and other northern ports, the
shelling of cities on the eastern seaboard and a midget submarine attack in Sydney Harbour
itself —the ordinary business of the Institute was continuing, Committees were still active and
priority was being given to the education of future librarians and the destiny of the Institute.
1943
A conference was still out of the question the following year, a realisation which must have been
a great disappointment for Green. His time as Vice-President had been marred by ill health and
now, although he would serve as President for some twenty-seven months, he would not have
the satisfaction of presiding over a conference in his home town. He had to content himself with
a Presidential Address to the seventy-two members who gathered in the Lecture Room of the
Public Library of New South Wales on Saturday 25 September 1943 for the annual meeting. His
address reflected some of his concern that the lack of conferences might jeopardise the life of the
Institute: ‘Gatherings of which this is the absolutely necessary minimum not only stimulate us
as individual members of the Institute’, he told members, ‘but help to make us conscious of its
corporate life. Without full consciousness of that the Institute could not continue to exist’. 545
Nonetheless Green believed that the flame of fellowship which had been kindled in Canberra
in 1937 was still ablaze: ‘ln spite of war’s enforced separations, in spite of the lack of our usual
conferences and inter-library visits, this Institute has now gone a long way towards attaining
one of its principal objects: the development of a consciousness of unity, of a feeling of mutual
fellowship between Australian librarians. Before the Institute was founded, and even perhaps
two years ago, many of us regarded ourselves as members of a particular library, or at least of a
particular group of libraries, and occasionally some of us may even have regarded other groups
as foreign; more or less. I think I may say that such a feeling has almost disappeared now, and
if that had been our only achievement, it would have been well worthwhile’. 546
This was praise indeed from someone who had been sceptical about the benefits of the In-
stitute for anyone other than staff of the State libraries, but less surprising when one remembers
how hard he had worked to encourage the Institute to maintain a broad appeal.
1944
The Executive had badly wanted a conference in 1944, but travel restrictions imposed by the
Land Transport Board made this impossible —during the war a special permit was required for
interstate train travel. So again there was only an annual meeting, and only forty-eight members
and student associates turned up at the Lecture Hall of the Public Library of Victoria on 16 Sep-
tember. Scott was President, and his address was about the Institute, its achievements and how


it had been affected by the war. He saw a silver lining, because the war had made people more
aware of some of the important functions which libraries performed. 547
His chief message, however, was not one which might have been expected from this usually
quiet, courteous man; he blamed librarians for the apparent failure of the Free Library Move-
ment in Victoria. The movement had the popular approval that is often easily aroused, but
achieves little without the driving force of private and individual faith’, he told his colleagues.
This is where the librarians should have appeared on the scene; we should have been ready
and militant —almost aggressive’. 548
He pointed to the example of the United States, where librarians did sally forth to talk about
their libraries, and emphasised the importance of fresh ideas and the potential benefits of staff
exchanges with overseas libraries. He then invited Helen Wessells of the United States Informa-
tion Library in Melbourne, a widely respected and highly competent American librarian who
was stationed in Australia for a number of years, to say a few words. She supported his plea
for a more aggressive attitude on the part of librarians. She compared the position of librarians
in the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia and urged the Institute to work for
higher salaries for librarians. 549 Scott’s and Wessells’s addresses were an early manifestation of
the view that Institute members should widen their horizons, and implicit in this view was a
widened role for the Institute. This theme would be taken up at the next annual meeting in
the same venue.
The meeting concluded with congratulations to the New South Wales and Tasmanian
Governments for giving effect to their Library Acts and to the Commonwealth Government
for establishing an Australian Library of Information in London. By way of contrast with the
progress to the north and south of Victoria, the meeting could only express hope that the Vic-
torian Government would soon issue the report of the Library Service Board, which had then
been in existence for four years. 550
1945
Again there was no conference in 1945, but the annual meeting took place on 15 September, and
Collier gave his Presidential Address to a group of thirty-eight members and student associates
in the Lecture Hall of the Public Library of Victoria. His address, The cash value of a library’,
took up the theme of Scott’s and Wessells’s addresses the previous year. 551 Collier spoke of the
library’s value to society both as a guarantor of the free flow of information and as a check on
propaganda. He referred to its value in monetary terms in providing information to keep the
wheels of industry turning, helping people to make money. He emphasised the importance of
educating and mobilising public opinion through talks, films and lectures on radio or as part
of adult education. Institute members must take advantage of the jolt that the war had given
people: libraries had played a part in winning the war, and now they must help to win the peace.
He urged librarians to ‘adopt all means of publicity consonant with dignity’ to achieve the goal
of increasing community interest in and support for the library. 552
Hobart 1946
There was an intense feeling of optimism at the fifth conference, held in the Tasmanian Parlia-
mentary Library in Hobart from 16 to 19 April 1946. Delegates were welcomed by the Premier
of Tasmania, Robert Cosgrove, the Chairman of the Tasmanian Library Board, Sir John Morris,
and the Institute President, JDA Collier. Fifty-eight delegates attended, of whom thirty-seven
had made their way from the mainland by sea or air. 553 The sunny autumn weather enhanced


the beauty of Australia’s smallest State capital, and the hospitality of the local Branch was lavish,
rationing notwithstanding. 554 The social program included a luncheon at Parliament House for
members of Council and the Tasmanian Library Board. There was an evening reception at the
Morris residence, ‘Winmarleigh’, a morning reception hosted by the Hobart City Council and
a dinner in the Lord Mayor’s Reception Rooms, hosted by the Tasmanian Library Board. On the
final day there was a trip to Mount Wellington as guests of the Tasmanian Branch, with afternoon
tea at Collier’s house in Sandy Bay. It was a conference of cheerful reunions: many delegates had
not seen each other since the 1941 conference in Canberra, and all had lived through much in
the meantime. It was also a conference full of papers about libraries in a post-war world, with
the theme The library —today and tomorrow’.
It was the first conference to be held on working days—-most others had taken place on Sat-
urdays and public holidays. The Council met on Tuesday 16 April, with the conference proper
beginning on the following day, when delegates heard reports on library development from each
State. During the war only brief accounts had been published and there was much catching up
to do. The Commonwealth National Library and the Public Library of New South Wales had
begun to co-operate in a program to microfilm documents in the United Kingdom relating to
Australia in what later came to be known as the Australian Joint Copying Project. The first free
lending library in South Australia had been opened by its Library Board. The Commonwealth
National Library was making progress with its collection of Australian films. Mollie Lukis had
been appointed as the first archivist in Western Australia, and a Free Library Movement had
been formed in the same State. New library legislation had been passed in Queensland. Dozens
of new public libraries were being established in New South Wales following the proclamation
of the Library Act in 1944. The Library Service Board had finally reported on library services
in Victoria.
The report from the host State was perhaps the most significant, because Tasmania’s road
to the establishment of free public library services had not been easy and had necessitated the
appointment of Kenneth Binns to survey Tasmanian libraries. Now, in April 1946, CC McShane,
Collier’s deputy, was able to report a good deal of library development in the State, and those
delegates who stayed on after the conference and visited the tiny book stations and the libraries
in larger towns could only be impressed by the enthusiasm with which a free library service
was being used.
The last session of the first day was a paper on library techniques by Scott which dealt mainly
with the purposes of cataloguing, including comments on Andrew Osborn’s article The crisis
in cataloging’. 555 The remainder of the conference was devoted, sometimes a little tenuously,
to the future of library services, although only one of the four speakers used that word in the
title of the paper. Constance McKay, a leading special librarian from New South Wales, gave a
paper on ‘industrial libraries’ which covered the ‘specialness’ of a special library its role as an
industrial information bureau, the value of union catalogues, the scope of the collection and
its users and the training of technical librarians. 556 It was because of the hard work by McKay
and her colleagues in New South Wales that special librarians had been generally kept within
the fold of the Institute.
Cunningham spoke on The school, the library and the child’, dealing with the educational
reasons for establishing school libraries, the ways in which various educational theories affect
the reading of books and the overwhelming importance of books. It was an excellent paper
written by an educator who did not make the mistake of telling librarians how to run a school
library but cast light on the theory on which school libraries must be based. 557
Conferences


McGreal was not at the conference, and his paper on The library of the future: what the public
will expect of libraries in the post-war world’ was read by Metcalfe: 558 This paper emphasised
the importance of the public library as an information bureau and the special need for library
services for farmers. McGreal was by this time Secretary of the Library Board of New South Wales
and was therefore much concerned with public libraries. Because he had been the organiser of
the library service to the armed forces based at the Public Library of New South Wales he paid
special attention to the effect which returned servicemen might have had on the demand for
library services. Interviews which he had recorded were used to illustrate his point that in the
post-war world more would be expected of the librarian, who would have to publicise services
and get books to the people, wherever they might be.
White’s ‘Documentary films and other new materials in library service’ revealed his enthusiasm
for this medium and the development of the Commonweal th National Library’s him collection.
He saw him as an ally of books—and in some cases a substitute for them. On the day it was
delivered in 1946 White’s paper opened up a whole new world of service to many who heard
it. His conviction that all libraries serving the public should use hlms when most appropriate
was particularly convincing. 559
After the hiatus of the war, expectations of this conference were very high, but many of the
papers did not live up to the delegates’ hopes. They were able to make candid comments after
the conference because, for the hrst time, there was some kind of post mortem. It was not that
the conference was regarded as a failure but that some delegates believed that it could have
been much more successful. The Victorian councillors who had attended, Archer and Frazer,
subsequently put their comments and criticisms in writing. In particular they criticised the lack
of time for adequate discussion of the papers presented, due to excessively long papers, poor
chairing or, in one case, they said, a chairperson virtually delivering her own paper. On the other
hand some of the papers on library developments around Australia were not comprehensive
enough, being ‘a panegyric on the accomplishments in one particular held or library’. They
were not smitten with McGreal’s paper either, which had been illustrated with gramophone
recordings of two precocious school children, a returned serviceman, and an agriculturist on
their reactions to a library’. They conceded that it might have been interesting ‘from the point
of view of library propaganda to the uninitiated’. Circulation of papers prior to the conference
was suggested, as well as proper briefing of discussion leaders, better timekeeping and better
planning of conference topics or themes. They also suggested that there needed to be a change
of attitude on the part of the senior librarians present: some of the younger people who spoke
to the Victorian councillors felt that the seniors had taken up too much time themselves instead
of encouraging younger members to participate in debate. 560
The introduction to the published proceedings indicated that this criticism had been taken
on board. Although no discussion was published, it was promised that in future a precis of
discussions might be included when costs permitted. It was acknowledged that ‘discussion, to
which all members of the Institute have the opportunity of contributing, is, or should be, an
important feature of all conferences’. 561
The annual report went a little further, saying that ‘the program of meetings was well bal-
anced and should have proved interesting and profitable to all those attending. Unfortunately,
however, owing largely to the lack of factual material in various papers, to their length, and
to the lack of opportunity for general discussion, these hopes were not fully realised’. 562 The
stmcture and program of future conferences was discussed at the Council meeting in October
that year. The Institute had received an infusion of new members, and there was also growing


confidence among those members who, though senior, had nonetheless played second fiddle to
the patriarchs at earlier conferences. 1 he Institute was maturing as an organisation, willing to take
on board criticism, intent to act on it where justified and striving to improve its performance, ft
was a sign of a willingness to adapt and change. This would be put to the test in no small way
during the next three years and would prove to be the keynote of the next conference.
Sydney 1947
For its sixth conference the Institute returned to Sydney and to the familiar pattern spanning
a weekend. It was held at the Public Library of New South Wales from Friday 10 October to
Monday 13 October. Phis did not include extensive entertainment and library visits and was a
very work-oriented conference and was very well attended. Even the annual meeting—sand-
wiched between a buffet tea and cocktail party at the Library and a talk by Remington—attracted
about 150 members and student associates. The Council meeting was on the Friday and the
conference itself was scheduled from 10:00am until at least 10:00pm on the Saturday and from
9:lsam to 1:00pm on the Monday No sessions were scheduled for the Sunday.
Interstate guests included Sir John Morris, members of the Victorian Free Library Service
Board and representatives of the Board of the Public Library of South Australia and of the Instit
utes Association of South Australia, A warm goodwill message was sent by Sir John Latham,
Chief Justice of the High Court of Australia, who was the first President of the Free Library
Movement in Victoria and who would later figure even more prominently in Australia’s library
organisations.
On the Saturday morning delegates inspected the Public Library of New South Wales
building—many interstate visitors would not have been to Sydney since the completion of the
building in 1942. There was also an exhibition of some of the Library’s treasures, including
the Kelmscott Chaucer, the First Folio of Shakespeare and a leaf from the Gutenberg Bible, all
now returned from safe-keeping in the country during the war. At 11:15am the conference
was officially opened by the Governor of New South Wales, Lieutenant General (later Sir) John
Northcott. This was something of a coup for the Institute and followed a personal visit which
Metcalfe and Remington had made to the Governor, In his address Northcott spoke of some
of the library developments which he had witnessed in his visits across the State. As a former
serving soldier he also spoke at first hand of the work of the Camp Library Service and the Army
Education Service. ‘Service men and women had learnt the value of libraries’, he was reported
as saying, and now as citizens in peace they looked for them and were ready to make use of
them’. 561 After delivering his remarks, Northcott stayed on to listen to Metcalfe’s Presidential
Address, The Governor sat in a chair which had once belonged to his distinguished predecessor,
Lachlan Macquarie, a neat historical touch which would have pleased him.
Vice-regal tradition and a nod to history notwithstanding, there was a feeling of change in the
air at this conference, reflected in Metcalfe’s address. It was one of the most significant he was
ever to make. Entitled ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’ (echoing Ifould’s The future of
the Institute’ at the first conference nine years before), it was a long paper which took him about
an hour to deliver. The address went to the heart of an idea which had been bubbling away in
the background for some time: widening the objects of the Institute and in the process widen-
ing its membership. It was a subject which needed to be addressed at length, and discussed. So
after delegates had lunched at the Trocadero in George Street they returned to the Library and
had a further hour to discuss the ideas which Metcalfe had put forward. 564


As we shall see in a later chapter, the issue of a widened membership had been canvassed
with increasing seriousness for some years. It had recently been given added impetus by the
observations of a British librarian, Lionel McColvin, who had been invited to perform a kind of
follow-up survey to the Munn-Pitt Report. This conference was in fact devoted to McColvin’s
report, but the part of it which excited Metcalfe’s interest most strongly was a recommendation
to widen membership of the Institute —or perhaps more accurately to form a different kind of
association—which could take over from the Institute.
Metcalfe acknowledged that a motive of the founders of the Australian Institute of Librarians
ten years before had been deliberate exclusivity. Should they now be ‘mixing as players with
gentlemen, as professionals with amateurs, in one team’? 565 For reasons which will later become
clearer, Metcalfe certainly thought so, and he was given not entirely unexpected support in the
only other lengthy paper at the conference, which was presented by Remington, his partner in
free library evangelism.
At this time acting Chairman of the Library Board of New South Wales and honorary member
of the Institute, Remington chose as his topic ‘Laymen and libraries’. He wanted to convince
his audience of the value of lay people, like himself, as trustees, councillors and propagandists
for libraries. They could make a major contribution to an association which welcomed them
as members. 566 There was no mistaking where Metcalfe and Remington stood on the issue of
wider membership, and this conference provided a valuable opportunity to get their message
across on their home ground to a large, wide and generally sympathetic audience. As we shall
see, Metcalfe’s and Remington’s addresses represented the initiation of most members into a
debate which would dominate the life of the Institute for the next two years.
The rest of the conference consisted of group meetings on the Saturday afternoon and a
symposium on the Monday morning, all on aspects of the McColvin report. 567 The discussions
were not recorded, but the symposium papers were published in the proceedings. 568 All were
fairly short and focused on library promotion and provision, but from a number of different
viewpoints. White responded to McColvin’s suggestions on the role of the federal government
by saying that he viewed McColvin’s idea of federal support for libraries as a necessary evil
but that it was important that the federal government did not control library services. He also
agreed that the Government should support a school for advanced studies in librarianship in
due course but thought it best to leave the Commonwealth National Library to develop its own
library school for the present.
Arnot spoke about McColvin’s recommendations on the role of State governments in public
library provision and promotion, generally with approval, because the Report did support the
New South Wales system of State and local funding. She believed that the State would have to
play the dominant role for a long time, however, and stressed the need to supply books to distant
and isolated places, to develop regional services and to emphasise provision for children. 569
Frank Perry, formerly librarian of South Melbourne Public Library and then working at the
Public Library of Victoria, spoke on the role of local government, stressing the importance of
promoting libraries to local authorities, mostly through the example of good library service. 570
Nancy Booker, librarian of the Teachers’ College in Sydney, whose well-stocked, attractive and
friendly library was a place of pilgrimage for visitors from other States, discussed the machinery
which federal, state and local governments might use to administer their library services, 571
She pointed out the differences between English and Australian administrative patterns of


education and libraries, maintaining that state government in Australia was more important
than McColvin might have assumed.
Finally RB Young, librarian of the Advertiser newspaper in Adelaide, spoke on The function
of institutions, societies and firms in public library provision and promotion’. 572 He emphasised
co-operation for all libraries, including special ones, and the importance and the cost of the
union catalogues which McColvin had advocated. Young also suggested the creation of a national
plan for book resources to ensure that at least one copy of a useful title would be available in
Australia. Time has shown that Young’s ideas were well-conceived—it is salutary to reflect that
the Tauber and Burmester reports were still almost twenty years into the future. 573
Intermission
The 1947 Sydney conference proved to be the last conference of the Australian Institute of
Librarians. For the next two years the Institute was preparing for a metamorphosis. There was
an annual meeting at the Public Library of Victoria on 10 September 1948, with about thirty-
five members and student associates present, but there had been no pressure for a conference,
such was the preoccupation of the Executive, the Council, Branches and some members with
constitutional change. The 1948 annual meeting was over in three-quarters of an hour,
Nor was there a conference in 1949, only the obligatory annual meeting, with Archer, the
new President, looking back on the Institute and its predecessors. In its twelve years of existence
the Institute had managed six conferences, and, as Archer said, had it not been for the war there
would have been even more. The published proceedings of these conferences, together with the
selection of papers given at Branch meetings in the various States, attest to the professionalism
of Australian librarianship. Archer thought that Institute members would not claim that the
papers had ‘outstanding merit’, but they probably represented ‘a fair average sample of papers
read at similar conferences anywhere’. 574
But the conferences were much more than a succession of papers, good, bad or indifferent,
and more than a series of discussions and debates, whether or not they were recorded for pos-
terity and absent colleagues. They were an opportunity for colleagues from the four corners of
the country to gather, exchange ideas and, what is more important, to get to know one another.
Conferences undermined isolationism and helped to promote local, interstate and national
co-operation. As Archer told the 1949 annual meeting, ‘Librarianship is so essentially a profes-
sion in which we need to help each other, and it is much easier to send out an SOS to a fellow
librarian when you can address him as, “Dear Bill”, at the same time calling to mind a pleasant
time spent in each other’s company at a recent interstate conference’. 575
When a conference came to one of the fortunate capital cities, it also provided an opportunity
for junior staff to hear the ideas of a wider group of professionals than was available in their
own institution, or indeed within their own Branch. After the introduction of the examination
system conferences gave student associates a chance to hear the words, if not always the wis-
dom, of the professionals whom they aspired to join, and to associate with their future peers.
Each conference invigorated the host Branch, obliging members to work together to organise
the formal and the social occasions so that the Branch would show its best face to its interstate
counterparts. Four State capitals and the national capital had now hosted the conference, with
the privilege and the responsibility spread as fairly as possible across those Branches most able
to undertake the task. 576
Each conference exposed the Institute to the gaze of the public, and by judicious selection of
dignitaries to officiate, gave the Institute something of a profile in the Establishment. The New


South Wales Branch had managed to attract its Minister for Education to the first conference,
the New South Wales Governor to the last, and the Chief Justice of the High Court had sent
them his best wishes. The Tasmanian Premier had welcomed conference delegates to Hobart,
and in Melbourne they had been guests of the rich and powerful. This was no mean feat for a
fledgling and impecunious organisation, which had run its conferences on a shoestring and was
dependent on the Carnegie Corporation for subsidising the travel costs of interstate delegates
and helping to pay for the proceedings to be printed.
And last, but by no means least, regular conferences and the annual meetings which ac-
companied them provided a wider forum for ideas which had been floated at Branch level, in
the Executive or in the Council. In this way issues affecting the Institute could be discussed in
a national setting with something like a representative group of the membership at large, who
could then disseminate some of the flavour and substance of the debate when they returned
to their Branches. One might well imagine, then, that a conference would have been an ideal
mechanism to employ when the sensitive issue of amending the constitution and widening
the membership was on the Institute’s agenda. As we shall see, however, not everything in the
Institute occurred in exactly the way one might imagine.
Chapter 8 Endnotes
497 MEL Archer, ‘Presidential Address 1949: The Institute looks back’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Pro-
ceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney, October 1917, Sydney, AIL, 1949, pi 13.
498 ERPitt, ‘State aid to libraries: principles and practice, with special application to Victoria’, Australian
Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, Second Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th,
1938, pp 7-47.
499 The significance of this report was not lost on Institute members interstate, as it had been widely circu-
lated and was later summarised in the papers published with the Proceedings of the 1939 conference:
JW Metcalfe, ‘New South Wales Libraries Advisory Committee Report’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings, Second Animal Meeting and Conference, pp 99-103.
500 ER Pitt, ‘State aid to libraries’, p 47.
501 ‘Library development in Australia, 1940-1941’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th
Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th-17th, 1940, Canberra, June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth
Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th-20th, 1942, Canberra, AIL, 1944, p 33.
xli ME Wood, ‘Library development in Western Australia’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, Second
Annual Meeting and Conference, pp4B-52.
50 ' HR Purnell, ‘Library development in South Australia’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, Second
Annual Meeting and Conference, pps3-56.
404 A Grenfell Price, Libraries in South Australia: Report of an Inquiry commissioned by the South Australian Gov-
ernment into the system of management of libraries maintained or assisted by the State, Adelaide, Government
Printer, 1937.
505 WH Brown, ‘Library development in Queensland’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, Second
Annual Meeting and Conference, pps7—6o.
40(1 WH Ifould, ‘Library development in New South Wales’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, Second
Annual Meeting and Conference, pp6l-70.
507 K Binns, ‘Library development in the Australian Capital Territory’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceed-
ings, Second Annual Meeting and Conference, pp7l-75. The Annual catalogue of Australian publications was
first published by the Commonwealth National Library in 1937 and ceased in 1960. It was succeeded by
the more comprehensive Australian national bibliography, which first appeared in 1961.


AE McMicken, Library development in Victoria, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, Second Annual
Meeting and Conference, pp 76-80.
JDA Collier, Library development in Tasmania’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, Second Annual
Meeting and Conference, 1940, ppBl-85.
510 Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, Second Annual Meeting and Conference, p 4.
511 HA Gregory, ‘Libraries in Soviet Russia’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, Second Annual Meeting
and Conference, 1940, pi 18.
512 K Binns to HR Purnell, 24 May 1940, ALIA records, National Library of Australia (NLA) M 57446 box
84.
513 ibid.
514 HL White, Trends in archival administration’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th
Annual Meetings and Conferences, pp 46-60.
K Binns, Publication of Historical Records of Australia’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and
4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, pp6l-67; GH Pitt, The position in South Australia’, ibid., pp 72-74.
Other papers were Ida E Leeson, ‘Archives in New South Wales’, ibid., pp6B-70; JDA Collier, ‘Care of
archives in Tasmania’, ibid., p 75; and ER Pitt, Archives in the Public Library of Victoria’, ibid., p 76. The
first archivist was appointed to the Public Library of Victoria in 1948.
Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences , p6O.
Part 111 of the Libraries and Institutes Act, 1939 (South Australia) deals with archives.
518 Tasmania Public Records Act, 1943 ; Queensland Libraries Act, 1943, Part IV, although this Part was not
proclaimed until 1958; Victoria Public Library, National Gallery and Museums Act 1944 made provision for
the appointment of an archivist at the Public Library of Victoria.
519 ‘Conference and Annual Meeting’, Australian Library Journal, vol Ino 1, July 1951, pls.
520 The Camp Library Service and other initiatives during World War II are described in Chapter 9.
EV Steel, JJ O Brien and R McGreal, Camp Library Service in New South Wales’, Australian Institute of
Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, ppBl-87.
522 HR Purnell. ‘Presidential Address: country library provision’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, p 37.
923 Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, pp 42-43.
524 AIL, Annual report, no 4, 31 May 1941.
525 AIL, Annual report, no 5, September 1942.
926 WH Ifould to HR Purnell, 7 February 1940, State Library of New South Wales (SLNSW) archives box
NPL6O.
927 K Binns, The need for library co-operation’. Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual
Meetings and Conferences, pp9l—lo3.
328 HL White, ‘lnternational library co-operation’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th
Annual Meetings and Conferences, pplo4-114,
529 ibid., pi 14.
GC Remington, Co-operation in library matters between State and local governing bodies’, Australian
Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, pi 16.
531 ibid., pi 17.
532 JW Metcalfe, ‘Co-operation between State Libraries and Government Departments’, Australian Institute of
Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, p 123.


533 L Scott, ‘Co-operation between the University Library and Subject Departments,’ Australian Institute of
Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, pi 29.
534 FLS Bell, ‘The library and the community’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual
Meetings and Conferences, ppl3o-134.
533 J McCallum, ‘Co-operation between the library and the school’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, ppl3s-138.
33(1 JF Arnot, ‘Co-operation between the librarian and the reader’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, ppl4s-149.
337 E Archer, ‘Co-operation in special libraries’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual
Meetings and Conferences, pplso-156.
538 ibid., p 156.
339 WC Baud, ‘Co-operation in cataloguing and classification including central and co-operative catalogues
and bibliographical indexes,’ Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and
Conferences, p 144.
340 The film screening was reported in Kansas Library Bulletin, March-June 1941, reprinted in Kansas Libraries,
April 2000 (http://skyways.lib.ks.us/KSL/admin/KLlßo4oo.pdf, accessed 21 April 2003). LC Key, Letter
to members, 14 May 1941, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
341 EV Steel, ‘Military library service’, Australian Institute of Librarians,Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings
and Conferences, p 157.
342 AIL, Annual report, no 5, September 1942.
543 ibid.
344 Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, plsB.
545 HM Green, ‘Presidential Address, 1943’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference, Hobart,
April 1946, Melbourne, AIL, 1947, pl 9.
346 ibid., pp30~31.
347 L Scott, ‘Presidential Address, 1944’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference, p 32,
548 ibid., p 33.
549 AIL, Annual report, no 8, September 1945.
330 ibid. Scott did not have long to wait—the report appeared later that year: Libraries in Victoria / report of
the Library Service Board appointed by His Excellency the Governor, to inquire into and make recommendations
regarding the adequacy of library service in Victoria, Melbourne, Government Printer, 1944.
331 JDA Collier, ‘Presidential Address, 1945: the cash value of the library’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings, sth Conference, pp3s-40.
552 ibid., p 35.
333 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
334 JP Whyte attended this conference and read GH Pitt’s report ‘Library development in South Australia’,
Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference, ppsl-55.
333 L Scott, ‘Library techniques’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference, ppBB-92.
AD Osborn, ‘The crisis in cataloging’, Library Quarterly, vol 11 no 4, October 1941, pp 393-411.
33(1 CB McKay, ‘lndustrial libraries’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference, pp 93-98.
337 KS Cunningham, ‘The school, the library and the child’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth
Conference, pp 99-105.
338 RM McGreal, ‘The library of the future: what the public will expect of libraries in the post-war world’,
Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference, pplll-115.


HL White, Documentary films and other new materials in library service’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings, sth Conference , ppll6-122.
AIL, Hobart conference: Comments and criticisms by Victorian councillors present at the conference’,
[1946], ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
1 Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference, p [7].
562 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
Address by His Excellency Lt.-General John Northcott, Governor of New South Wales’, Australian Institute
of Librarians, Proceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney, October 1917, and other papers, Sydney, AIL, 1949, p 43.
JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 6th
Conference, pp 46-58.
Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p 46.
156(1 GC Remington, ‘Laymen and libraries’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings 6th Conference
pps9-65. ' o ’ j
167 Group meetings were gatherings of people according to their library interest—for example, special, public,
university or cataloguers, archivists—and were the precursors of the LAA’s Sections, the McColvin Report
is discussed in Chapter 10.
168 The fifth and last volume of the proceedings of the Institute was not published until 1949. Originally it
was intended to cover the Sydney conference and activities in years 1946-1947 but, because publication
was delayed, it was decided to include material up to the annual meeting in November 1949.
5W J Arnot, The function of the State Government in public library provision and promotion’. Australian
Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, 6th Conference, pp 67-71.
FJ Perry. ‘Local government function in library promotion and provision’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings, 6th Conference, pp 72—75.
N Booker, Authorities and the institutions’ function in library promotion and provision’, Australian Institute
of Librarians: Proceedings, 6th Conference, pp 76—79.
RB Young, The function of institutions, societies and firms in public library provision and promotion’,
Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, 6th Conference, ppBo-82.
777 MF Tauber (1908-1980), Melvil Dewey Professor of Library Service at Columbia University, visited
Australia in 1961 to survey library resources. He produced a preliminary report in 1961 and a summary
report in 1963 for the Australian Advisory Council on Bibliographical Services (AACOBS). (MF Tauber,
Resources of Australian libraries: preliminary unedited draft, Canberra. AACOBS, 1961; Resources of Australian
libraries: summary report of a survey conducted in 1961, Canberra, AACOBS, 1963). The ‘Burmester Report’
was the 1965 report of the AACOBS National Book Resources Committee, chaired by CA Burmester,
Canberra, AACOBS, 1963.
774 Archer, ‘Presidential Address 1949’, pll2,
577 ibid., pi 13.
7/6 Brisbane hosted its first Library Association of Australia conference in 1955. Perth had to champ at the
bit until 1973. Darwin was last of all in 1986, five years after the 21st conference went overseas, to a joint
conference with the New Zealand Library Association (now the Library and Information Association of
New Zealand Aotearoa, LIANZA) in Christchurch.


9
War
Any soldier reading
Pride and Prejudice
should be home with his mother. 577


One might well have expected the outbreak of war in September 1939 to signal a
period of suspended animation for the young Institute, but its leaders took events
in their stride, for the time being at least. These professionals had lived through
one war, and many had fought in it. Others, like Metcalfe, had been too young to fight
then and were now too old to be called up. They had seen the old country and the Empire
prevail once before and expected it would be no different on this occasion. So first feelings
in the Institute were of ‘business as usual’, although as the Allied position deteriorated dur-
ing the early months of 1940 there was growing unease, reflected in questions about what
the Institute and its members could and should be doing. As we have seen, when the time
approached for the first war-time conference, planned for Adelaide in June 1940, question-
ing of the wisdom of holding a conference in war-time was met with fierce argument. Not
to hold a conference was at worst defeatist and at best a denial that librarians could make
a significant contribution to the war effort and to the maintenance of the social fabric. So
the Adelaide conference did take place, albeit with diminished numbers of delegates, and
in the following year the Institute met in Canberra for what turned out to be its final war-
time conference.
Ensuring continuity
After the Canberra conference in 1941 there were simply annual meetings with annual reports
and balance sheets, complying with the requirements of the constitution. Elections were still
held for office-bearers, with just as much interest in the presidency as hitherto: even during
the war there was considerable manoeuvring to ensure a suitable succession.
In 1940, Ifould told Binns that he would nominate him as President for 1940-41. Binns
was delighted, although less enthusiastic about Ifould’s proposal that Metcalfe run as Vice-
President, which would prepare him for the presidency in 1941-42. Ifould thought that
the presidency would help boost Metcalfe’s status when he came to take up the position of
Principal Librarian on Ifould’s retirement. Binns knew that Green would be nominating as
Vice-President and believed that it was in the best interests of the Institute for a university
librarian to have a turn in the senior office. Binns reasoned that Metcalfe would have his
hands full anyway, as Principal Librarian and Secretary to the new Library Board, in addition
to the work which he was doing for the Board of Examination and Certification. ‘I think in
Metcalfe’s interests it would be best to let him have a few years to settle in, before seeking to
have him take over the direction of the Institute’, Binns told Ifould. ‘He is young, and will
have his chance in a few years, and I am sure that in the meantime the Institute will have
all his support and help’. 578
In the event both Metcalfe and Green stood for the vice-presidency with Green winning
by seventy-four votes to forty. ‘I am almost sorry that the majority was as big as it was’,
Steel wrote to his colleague Cowan, ‘because I like the other man, and admire him for his
enthusiasm and for all the work he has done for the Institute, but his turn will come later,
and I should say that when it does come he is not likely to be opposed by anybody in the
State’. 579
A single agendum
The divisiveness of the 1940 Institute election quickly faded as preoccupations other than
aspiration to high office began to prevail. No-one could pretend that life would continue
normally after the Japanese entry into the war, the fall of Singapore and the bombing of
Darwin and northern Australia. Periodic shelling of targets on the seaboard and the midget
War


submarine attack on Sydney Harbour had put Australia in the front line. Many ‘normal’
activities were curtailed by rationing, travel restrictions, blackouts or brownouts of strategic
cities and tightening of the Treasury purse strings for anything other than the war effort.
Paradoxically, the Institute and its members were busier than ever. For although the war
had for the time being put paid to the expansion of free public library services—the financial
provisions of the trail-blazing library legislation in New South Wales were suspended—the
Institute had an unparalleled opportunity to demonstrate the value of libraries and the
skills of professional librarians to the war-time authorities. Individually and in concert,
many Institute members devoted most of their waking hours to the war effort. More than
one in ten members of the Institute were on active service, many of them overseas. As the
war progressed, the number of those lost, missing in action or reported to be prisoners of
war steadily increased.
By 1943 there were over thirty members on active service. That year one of the Foundation
Members of the Institute, Duncan Cannam of the Public Library of Victoria, was killed in New
Guinea. Gordon Richardson of the Public Library of New South Wales was missing in action
but was then reported to be a prisoner of war in Changi, Singapore. 580 By 1944 there were
twenty-eight Institute members on active service, and in the following year thirty-three. 581
Others who had not enlisted were called up for compulsory military training, for weeks or
months at a time. The absence of the youngest and fittest members of the Institute inevitably
subdued the activities of the smaller Branches in particular, for those who were left in the
short-staffed libraries were working harder than ever, responding to increased demand during
the day, being air raid wardens at night or assisting the authorities in other ways.
In Adelaide Purnell put in a solid day’s work at his library and then worked with Army
Intelligence well into the evening. With a knowledge of foreign languages, Mander-Jones
became a part-time assistant to the Censor in Sydney. Librarians from the Public Library of
New South Wales were borrowed to provide research and information services for new war-
time departments in Melbourne. Leeson volunteered for war work and served as a research
officer in the Directorate of Research and Civil Affairs, a think-tank known familiarly as
‘Alf Conlon’s Circus’. 582 Graduates of the Library School at the Public Library of New South
Wales were appointed to libraries of departments and organisations directly involved in the
war effort, among them the Home Security Department, the Munitions Supply Laboratory
and the Metal Trades Employers’ Federation. 583
Ifould, who had hoped to retire from his library and become the chairman of the new
Library Board, found himself instead heading the New South Wales branch of the Department
of War Organization ol Industry, a Commonwealth body trying to streamline everything to
facilitate the war effort, from designing austerity clothing to rationalising milk runs in order
to conserve petrol. Another senior recruit to this Department was Remington: in desperate
times national responsibilities took precedence over the Free Library Movement. Ifould later
recalled that his own appointment had been criticised by an Opposition Senator who had
said ‘I know Mr Ifould personally, and whilst 1 believe he’s a good judge of fiction, he knows
absolutely nothing about industry. He’s only a librarian’. 584
Only a librarian! In all kinds of fields where analytical information skills and organisational
ability were required librarians were making a real contribution to the war effort, and Ifould
proved to be but one shining example among many.


Library services for the military
The most dazzling demonstration of the efficacy of library services and the efficiency of
librarians as organisers, however, was in library services for the military. Indeed the first
suggestion for libraries for the armed services came from the Institute. 585 The Camp Library
Service was inaugurated by the New South Wales Branch on 20 September 1939, a little
over a fortnight after the declaration of war. The Branch resolved to undertake the work as
a voluntary war effort, establishing a provisional committee to liaise with the Lord Mayor’s
Patriotic and War Fund, the Young Men’s Christian Association, the Young Women’s Chris-
tian Association, the Salvation Army, the Women’s Public Service War Unit and other bodies
engaged in war welfare work. 586 The Branch soon launched a public appeal for books and
magazines as recreational reading for the troops. The Public Library of New South Wales
became the main sorting centre for the resulting mass of donations, which were processed by
members of the Branch and Library School students. Within two months they had received
and distributed 18 000 books and magazines. The scale of operations accelerated rapidly. By
March f 941 the clearing house, still mainly staffed by volunteers, had sorted and despatched
about 190 000 items of recreational reading to New South Wales and overseas camps, Royal
Australian Navy ships and troop transports.
The first Book Week Appeal, organised by the New South Wales Branch, was held over
five days in March 1942. Collection stalls and depots were set up at strategic points in the
city of Sydney, manned by over two hundred volunteers. There were posters and cards
advertising the appeal in shop windows. The Australian Comforts Fund co-operated in
country areas and in the suburbs. Children in public and private schools were enlisted to
gather items from their homes, Scouts collected from house to house, newspapers and the
radio ran stories on the campaign, and publicity slides were screened at all major cinemas. 587
Donations were supplemented by new items purchased at generous discounts from local
suppliers. When it came to funds for purchases every little helped: proceeds from the per-
formances of the Drama Group of the New South Wales Branch went to the work of the
Camp Library Service. 588
The New South Wales Branch suggested to the Executive that similar services be set up
in other States, and some followed suit, but not, it must be admitted, with the same vigour
as in the place where the scheme was conceived: more items were processed at the Public
Library of New South Wales than in all the other States combined. 589
The motives for supplying books to army camps and setting up library services for the
armed services even in distant lands were several. Some leaders of the profession, like Purnell
and Steel, had personal experience of war and probably believed that they were familiar
with the needs of the troops. For Binns it was an opportunity for the Commonwealth Na-
tional Library to serve a national cause. For Metcalfe and Ifould it was an opportunity to
demonstrate the importance and capabilities of library services and to raise the profile of
the Australian Institute of Librarians.
In Victoria the response was different. The Branch did not want to seek any dominance
among the other organisations which were providing books for the troops but were content
to work alongside them, with JA Feely, a returned soldier, heavily involved. When they saw
what was already being done by other bodies, the Branch concluded that no good purpose
would be served by engaging in a similar activity. 590 In South Australia, the Branch was too
small to take on a major role, quite apart from the fact that Purnell was quickly diverted to
intelligence work whenever he could be spared from his normal job. The South Australian
War


Branch initially set up a service similar to that in New South Wales in association with the
Fighting Forces Comforts Fund but at the end of 1940 handed over completely to its part-
ner, which had more suitable premises and a steady supply of volunteers. 591 In Tasmania a
camp library service was independently organised by the Free Library Movement, and the
Institute co-operated with this.
So it was in New South Wales that the most significant and visible contribution was made
by librarians supplying books to the troops. By 1943 the former Public Library of New South
Wales building—the Library having moved across the road to its newly completed build-
ing the year before—was effectively the headquarters for Army education library services
throughout the Commonwealth of Australia. Four soldiers were attached to the Library to
carry out this work, under the immediate direction of McGreal. Other libraries helped: Fisher
Library staff covered thousands of magazines, and staff at the Sydney Municipal Library did
book repairs. 592 The New South Wales Railway and Tramway Institute withdrew 9000 items
from its shelves to help meet a sudden demand when there was a major overseas deploy-
ment. The New South Wales Branch of the Australian Booksellers and Publishers’ Association
donated £7OO worth of new books. The Master Carriers’ Association and the Government
railways provided free transport for Camp Library Service collections. 593
There was early recognition that more could and should be done: the Institute believed
that a library scheme as part of a well-organised educational system would assist the post-
war rehabilitation of servicemen and women and used this argument when putting the case
to the military authorities. There was an opportunity for defence force personnel who had
been called up for home service to continue their education in camp, assisted by a series
of foundation libraries , at least in the major camps, backed up by the lending services in
the State libraries. 594
In December 1939, on the initiative of the Council of the Institute, Binns and Steel, who
were appointed as the Library Advisory Committee of the Australian Military Education
Council, prepared a proposal to extend the Camp Library Service into a broader library
service of vocational and subject reading matter. The intention was not only to maintain
morale but also to prepare people in the services for their return to civilian life after the
war. In February 1940 Pitt chaired a conference with Army authorities in Melbourne, and
he, Purnell and Steel presented the Institute’s plan. 595 It was no coincidence that the two
librarians chosen to accompany him were veterans of World War I. The proposal they put
forward was to set up a library in each permanent military camp, with a soldier in charge
who had been given a short course of training at the State library in each State. 596
Military reaction to the ambitious proposals was lukewarm, reflecting resistance to civil-
ian librarians being given any form of authority within camps, as well as opposition to
anything which would divert the minds of troops from their immediate task. As General
Sir Thomas Blarney, then commanding Australian troops in the Middle East, expressed it:
‘The whole of the time of the men recruited for the AIF [Australian Imperial Force] must be
devoted to training for war. This training will be intensive and will not permit of entering
on any scheme as suggested’. 597 Negotiations on army library services were protracted and
seemed to be getting nowhere until the appointment of Percy Spender as Minister for the
Army in October 1940. Ifould helped to nudge the proposal along by writing to Spender,
whom he knew personally, asking if he would see Binns for an overview of the proposals.
Once the benefits of the scheme had been explained to him Spender was supportive, and
in December Prime Minister Menzies asked the State Premiers if their library authorities


could prepare reports on the organisation of recreational and educational reading facilities
for the troops. 598
The New South Wales report was used as a model for other States. It proposed a library
and a librarian at all main camps, with a standard collection of recommended books and an
emphasis on non-fiction. Librarians would be trained at the Public Library in Sydney. De-
spite the earlier reservations of the military authorities the report was accepted by the Army
and the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF). 59Q The Camp Library Service, as it had become
known, was very ambitious, and the numbers involved were enormous: in New South Wales
alone 280 000 volumes would need to be distributed to 115 major Army camps and RAAF
bases. Commonwealth funds were provided for the scheme, and there were high hopes in
the Institute that these libraries would have a lasting effect, not just in enabling troops to
continue their studies but in encouraging the reading and study habit and in forming the
nucleus of future public libraries. 600
Members of the Institute remained influential in the planning and organisation of military
library services. The Institute was represented on the Library Sub-Committee of the Services
Education Council—at various times Binns was chairman and Steel and Metcalfe members.
Metcalfe and Binns also became members of the Services Education Council itself. 601
Binns and Ifould were responsible for co-ordinating the selection of titles for the camp
libraries, which proved to be a slow process. Ifould thought that priority should be given to
general interest materials: ‘We don’t want the soldiers to get the idea that the camp library
service is purely a highbrow stunt’. 602 There were other delicate issues to address, requir-
ing not only knowledge of the tone and content of suggested titles but also some idea of
what would be best for troops from a variety of backgrounds and with a range of academic
attainments. Ifould thought Pride and prejudice was one novel which should be excluded:
‘any soldier reading Pride and prejudice should be home with his mother’, he told Binns. 603
Ifould suggested Seaforth Mackenzie’s The young desire it, but Binns differed: ‘Although a
clever book, it has homosexual suggestions which make it entirely unsuitable’. 604 Their
work would not come to early fruition: it would be 1944 before the ‘Standard Reference
Libraries’ were distributed. 605
The Camp Library Service ceased operations on 31 December 1945, having distributed
420 840 books and 590 610 magazines. 606 By anyone’s standards this impressive record
was a major achievement, but its public relations value for the Institute had been limited,
partly because the armed services had not accepted civilian control and partly because the
military brass thought that library services would divert attention from other, more impor-
tant, priorities. 607
Early hopes that these libraries would form the nucleus of public libraries after the war
were not fulfilled—as McGreal commented: ‘All the efforts we made to try and salvage some
of the reference libraries, so that they could be used to help start public library services,
failed completely’. 608 Some new materials which the Army had purchased were offered to
universities and to the book trade, but not at the advantageous rates at which the United
States Army had offered material to American libraries. The Institute wrote to the Com-
monwealth Board of Education asking for the needs of public libraries to be taken into
consideration when surplus materials from the Army Education Service were being disposed
of, but nothing eventuated, 609
War


The Camp Library Service and other military-related projects did have benefits for the
librarians who were directly involved. They gained invaluable experience with the military
establishment as well as the educational bureaucracy. This experience would stand some of
them in very good stead. McGreal, for example, a school teacher with an interest, but no
qualifications, in librarianship, cut his teeth on the Camp Library Service and went on to
spearhead negotiations with local authorities in the post-war development of public libraries
in New South Wales as Secretary of the Library Board. Metcalfe too was initiated into inter-
governmental and interdepartmental committees, much broader experience than he had
gained under the shadow of his chief, WLf ffould. This experience would arm him for the
councils of the Institute and later the Library Association of Australia, as well as the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation conference in Mexico a few years
later and, in due course, the even more challenging environment of university professorial
boards. Insofar as these experiences helped individual members they also helped the Institute
and reflected well on the qualities of its membership.
Other war-time initiatives
Libiary services for the armed forces rather overshadowed a host of other initiatives which
the Institute took during the war. These were the mark of an organisation steadily becom-
ing more confident of its role and its right to speak up for and represent the interests of
its members and the library cause in Australia. The paper salvage campaign was one such
instance. During the early years of the war the Commonwealth and all State Governments
encouraged the public to bundle up waste paper for salvage. When the Institute became
aware of the salvage drive members were concerned that some important papers might be
thrown out as scrap and pulped. Other items, such as magazines and books which could have
been used for the Camp Library Service, might be thrown out too. The Institute contacted
the Controller of Salvage and arranged for readable materials to be separated and kept at
depots for local librarians to inspect. 610
At various times during the war, Institute members raised money to send gifts to needy
librarians in Britain and Europe. On one occasion, £2 15s 6d, wool and knitting needles
were sent to the staff of the International Institute of Documentation at The Hague. Food
and soap were sent to the Secretary of the Library Association in London. 611 Regular food
parcels were sent by the Australian Capital Territory Branch to Islington Public Library, and
other Branches and individual libraries also sent parcels to the home country from time
to time. 612 Australian librarians visiting the United Kingdom long after the war was over
frequently encountered local librarians who remembered the food parcels from Australia
with considerable gratitude.
During the war causes had to be selected carefully, and lobbying sometimes needed to
be restrained for the greater good. When, for example, the Tasmanian Branch suggested
that the Institute approach the Postmaster-General to provide reduced postage for library
books, especially those lent to country borrowers, the Institute Council was unmoved they
sympathised with the difficult financial position of the Commonwealth during the war and
let the matter rest. 613
Comrades in arms
After the outbreak of war in the Pacific there was a massive build-up of American military
personnel in Australia and a degree of co-operation between the United States and Australia
which had never been witnessed before. As part of this closer relationship, two valuable
Uniting a profession


resource centres were set up by the United States Office of War Information, one in Mel-
bourne, the other in Sydney. Known as the United States Information Libraries, they—and
in particular their professional American librarians-—had an enormous impact on the library
profession. From the time they opened in 1943 until the early post-war period their librar-
ians took a very active part in the Institute, addressing Branches on professional issues from
a fresh and American viewpoint. Contact with the American librarians was the next best
thing to a visit to an American library, such visits during the war being of course impossible,
owing to the suspension of Carnegie travel grants and general restrictions on non-essential
activity. The American librarian whose name stands out among the capable staff of the United
States Information Libraries was Helen Wessells, who was in charge of the Melbourne library
from 1943 to 1947. Regarded with considerable respect and affection by all who met her,
she was a stalwart professional ally, ‘At a critical stage in the post-war development of the
free library movement’, the Institute later recorded, ‘she was tireless in addressing public
meetings and meetings of municipal councils in Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania and
New South Wales, always to good effect’. 614
Delays and diversions
The declaration of war in September 1939 had diverted attention from domestic issues, and
in one way or another the subsequent conflict absorbed the energies of all Australian librar-
ians. Enlistments reduced professional staff numbers at a time of increasing workloads, with
librarians very much in demand to support the war effort. War overshadowed the early years
of the Institute and delayed many of its plans. It was fortunate, however, that members of
the Board of Examination and Certification had the energy to maintain momentum, invest-
ing enormous time and effort in the examination system in order to create the professional
librarians needed to meet war-time demand and to prepare for the upsurge in library activity
which must surely come once the war was over. A weaker body might well have gone into
hibernation for the duration, but the Institute remained active, held two conferences, main-
tained its schedule of annual meetings and Presidential Addresses and threw itself into the war
effort and into library services for the military with great distinction. Although the war also
delayed the establishment of public libraries, it did provide librarians with the opportunity
to demonstrate their skills and the value of libraries. The war also obliged them to co-operate
more than ever before, exposed them to new experiences and issues and left the leaders of
the profession more skilled and focused. All in all, the Institute had ‘a good war’.
Chapter 9 Endnotes
577 WH Ifould, Memorandum, May 1941, State Library of New South Wales (SLNSW) archives, ‘Old Files’,
box 8. file ‘Camp Library Service (Educational)’.
178 K Binns to WH Ifould, 17 April 1940, copy sent with covering letter to JW Metcalfe, 20 June 1940,
ALIA records, National Library of Australia (NLA), M 57446, box 84.
579 EV Steel to WA Cowan, 25 June 1940. Copy in the possession of David J Jones.
580 In 1943 those also serving were CA Burmester, NS Lynravn, Miss PA Tillyard, Miss MA Whitehead
(all from the Australian Capital Territory); J Atkinson, Frank LS Bell, Miss S Connochie, E Edwards,
John Desmond Fernon, EHP Ford, Miss WJ Gooch, Marjorie I Harris, Miss SJ Ross, Desmond V Ryan,
T Brian Southwell, RN Walker (New South Wales); RN Dennis, Stuart G Gunthorpe, MHL Triggs
(South Australia); Miss RR Kirby (Tasmania); Harry O Bell, Howard A Gregory, Thomas A Kealy,
War


K Axel Lodewyckx, ALG McDonald. IJ McDonald. Frank J Perry, Martin B Ryan. G Stewart, Noel
Stockdale (Victoria); and A Bolas (Western Australia). AIL, Annual report, no 6, September 1943.
581 Australian Institute of Librarians (AIL), Annual report, no 7, September 1944, and no 8, September
1945.
' B2 Baiba Berzins, ‘lda Leeson’. in Australian library history: papers from the Second Forum on Australian
Library History, Canberra, 19-20 July 1985, Canberra, Canberra College of Advanced Education. 1985,
pploo-104. Baiba Berzins, ‘Leeson, Ida Emily’, in Australian Dictionary of Biography, vol 10, ppsB-59.
JJM Thompson, Alfred Conlon, 1908-1961: a memorial by some of his friends, Sydney, Benevolent Society
of New South Wales, 1963,
583 JV Flannery, The war service of NSW libraries’, 2 November 1942 [read to New South Wales Branch],
copies in ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, boxes 106 and 109.
W 4 WHlfould to HL White, [draft letter, from context c. 1967], SLNSW, Mitchell Library, MLMSS
1878.
JV Flannery, ‘The war service of NSW libraries’. See also JT Cleary. Books for the troops: the role of librar-
ies and librarians in World War 11, MLib thesis, Monash University, 1986, andJT Cleary, ‘Books for the
troops, the role of libraries and librarians in World War IT, in Australian library history: papers from the
Second Forum on Australian Library History, Canberra, 19-20 July 1985, Canberra. Canberra College of
Advanced Education, 1985, pp 29-49.
The Lord Mayor s Patriotic and War Fund later became the New South Wales Branch of the Australian
Comforts Fund.
' HS7 AIL, New South Wales Branch. Annual report, year ending 31 March 1942.
388 AIL, New South Wales Branch, Annual report, year ending 31 March 1941.
789 JT Cleary, ‘Books for the troops: the role of libraries and librarians in World War IF, in Australian
library history, pp 29, 31.
890 AIL, Annual report, no 4, 31 May 1941.
591 ibid.
9 AIL, New South Wales Branch, Annual report, year ending 31 March 1946.
593 AIL, New South Wales Branch, Annual report, year ending 31 March 1940.
PLNSW, Annual repoit, 1940, pps, 6. WH Ifould to Undersecretary, New South Wales Department of
Education, 6 March 1941, SLNSW archives, ‘Old Files’, box 8, file ‘Camp Libraries’.
AIL , Annual report, no 3, 15 June 1940.
56 AIL, New South Wales Branch, Annual report, year ending 31 March 1941.
597 Blarney’s comment was reported at a meeting between military authorities and Drummond, Ifould
and Remington on 20 August 1940. (SLNSW archives, ‘Old Files’, box 8. file ‘Camp Library Service
(Educational)’).
998 RG Menzies to Alexander Mair, 18 December 1940, SLNSW archives, ‘Old Files’, box 8, file ‘Camp
Library Service (Educational)’.
909 WH Ifould to Undersecretary, New South Wales Department of Education, 6 March 1941, SLNSW
archives, ‘Old Files’, box 8, file ‘Camp Libraries’. WH Ifould to WS Howard, Secretary, State War Effort
Co-ordination Committee. New South Wales Premier’s Department, 15 July 1941 SLNSW archives
NPL64.
900 Camp Library Service to Major AR Thorne, No. 103, Australian General Hospital, Concord, 25 July
1941, SLNSW archives NPL64. PLNSW Trustees’ Minute Books, 23 June 1941, SLNSW archives.
601 AIL, New South Wales Branch, Annual report, year ending 31 March 1943.
602 WH Ifould memorandum. May 1941, SLNSW archives, ‘Old Files’ box 8, file ‘Camp Library Service
(Educational)’.


603 ibid.
604 K Binns to WH Ifould, 21 July 1941, SLNSW archives, ‘Old Files’, box 8, file ‘Camp Library Service
(Educational)’.
JT Cleary, ‘Books for the troops: the role of libraries and librarians in World War IF, in Australian
library history, p 36.
fi0(1 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
607 JT Cleary, ‘Books for the troops: the role of libraries and librarians in World War IT, in Australian
library history.
608 RM McGreal, ‘Ron McGreal Remembers’, Australian Library Journal, vol 30 no 1, February 1981
plB.
609 AIL, Minutes of Council, April 1946, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40.
610 HR Waterman, Local Agent, NSW Controller of Salvage for National Purposes to K Binns, 18 July
1940, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
611 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
612 AIL, Annual report, no 12, November 1949.
613 AIL, Annual report, no 4, 31 May 1941.
614 AIL, Annual report, no 10, October 1947, These libraries continued after the war under the Department
of State, before their resources were placed on loan with the state libraries in Sydney and Melbourne,
where their operations continued for a while with some Carnegie funding.
War


10
Transition
By being professionally exclusive
we can he, to put it quite crudely,
big f r °gs in our own little pond. 615


During its first decade the Australian Institute of Librarians had achieved a great deal,
its most notable successes being the system of examination and the cultivation of
fellowship among professional librarians. Thanks to these achievements technical
standards ol librarianship had improved, and Committees and Branches had supported this
process. It may therefore seem paradoxical that thoughts should turn so soon to fundamental
changes to the Institute’s constitution, which on the face of it was functioning perfectly
satisfactorily There was, however, a critical issue to be addressed: the future membership of
the Institute and the ways in which it could be broadened, something which the founders
of the Institute could not and would not have countenanced at the time of foundation.
Winds of change
There were many reasons for this change of heart. It was partly due to the fate of the Aus-
tralian Library Association, which had quietly faded away in the wake of the Munn-Pitt
Report. It was in suspended animation until 1946, when it was finally put out of its misery.
In that year, after about two years of discussion, McMicken handed the balance of funds
belonging to the Association —all £l5 2s 6d of it —to the Australian Institute of Librarians.
The Australian Library Association had now clearly ceased to exist, and Metcalfe’s promise
that the Australian Institute of Librarians would not take over its role was academic. There
was now a clear distinction between professional librarians and the ‘others’.
It was increasingly recognised, however, that these ‘others’ might include people who
could make a genuine contribution to the library cause. More attention was being directed
towards influential lay people, who were not of course eligible for Institute membership. 616
Remington spoke on this subject at the sixth conference, in 1947, and Metcalfe had given
an address with the same title to the Victorian Branch earlier in the same year. 617
There was also an acknowledgement that whilst the Free Library Movement had done
good work in promoting public libraries, much remained to be done to raise the standard of
library services, including other types of libraries. Remington now saw the work of the Free
Library Movement as substantially complete and believed the future of library development
lay in the hands of the Australian Institute of Librarians and the library boards of the various
States. 618 What was needed was certainly not beyond the capabilities of librarians with the
right skills, and Remington’s paper on how to win friends and influence people had long
ago given them some good pointers on techniques which he had found successful. 619
There had also been a major change in the face of Institute leadership. Indeed there had
been something of a generational change among the country’s senior librarians: Bertie had
retired in 1939, Ifould in 1942, ER Pitt in 1943, Green in 1946, and Binns in 1947. Purnell
had died in 1944. Miller had become so busy with his academic duties at the University of
Tasmania that he was no longer active in the Institute. Scott was still at the University of
Melbourne, and Battye would occupy the top job at the Public Library of Western Australia
until 1954, but the bulk of the old guard had gone. Metcalfe later argued that many of
these elders had the interests of their own institutions much more at heart than those of
the Institute, fie thought that those who were left at the end of the war were out of step
with the younger people in the Institute and the Free Library Movement. 620
A wider range of people was certainly becoming involved in library affairs, partly through
Institute activities and partly through exposure to developments in other centres and over-
seas. Since the war a significant number of Australian librarians had travelled, many with
Carnegie assistance. By the end of 1948, for example, the following librarians had been on


Carnegie-assisted visits to the United States: Metcalfe, Arnot, Radford, Mander-Jones (all of
the Public Library of New South Wales), Sims (Technical College, Sydney), Booker (Teachers’
College, Sydney), Barbara Johnston (CSIRO Division of Food Preservation, Sydney), Scott
(University of Melbourne), Hall (Commonwealth National Library) and GH Pitt (Public
Library of South Australia). Radford had attended the Columbia University Library School
and had spent fifteen months overseas. Whilst abroad most of these librarians corresponded
regularly with colleagues, and when they returned they shared their experiences informally
and at Branch meetings; all were good networkers and communicators. 621
there is a sense that changes to the constitution, provided that the examination system
was not compromised, might be countenanced by these younger librarians. Ten years
earlier the prospect of a change of membership qualifications and the threat of swamping
by institute librarians would have sent paroxysms of rage through the elders of the pro-
fession. As early as 1944 Scott had expressed the view that the Institute should broaden
its membership, even if it meant amending its constitution, although they would have to
maintain standards to ensure respect for the profession. 622
Metcalfe, still in his forties, was now one of the new elders of the profession, but an elder
with a different national and even international outlook. Not only was he taking a leading
part in the Institute’s most important committee, the Board of Examination and Certifica-
tion, but his abilities were even achieving international recognition. When, in 1947, he
was one of Australia’s delegates to the Second General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation in Mexico City, chairing the Libraries
Working Party, he was clearly identified as Australia’s most prominent librarian. This may
have given him added confidence in expressing his views about desirable developments in
the Institute, both philosophical and practical.
Money troubles
A very practical reason to broaden membership was the precariousness of the Institute’s
finances. As early as 1941 its officers were aware of the small revenue base which mem-
bership alone provided. The low general standard of salaries obtaining for librarians in
Australia is a good reason lor believing this to be the case’, General Secretary Key told his
colleagues. Funds were needed for stationery, postage and the telephone, as well as to pay
to bring the Council together at least once a year in addition to meeting at the time of
the conference. 623 Key’s judgement was borne out by the balance sheets: in 1940-41, for
example, almost £l6O was spent on conference travel and printing the proceedings (both
subsidised by the Carnegie Corporation), but in the same year less than £32 came from
subscription income. 624
The situation which Key described had not changed substantially in 1943, when Jean
Arnot and Marjorie Thompson, who had then been General Secretary and General Treas-
urer for over two years, reported to the Council on ways of increasing revenue. Options
included increasing subscription rates, which would require a change to the constitution,
or imposing levies, which were permitted by the constitution. Printing proceedings more
cheaply and selling, rather than giving, copies to delegates were suggested. The Institute
might appeal for assistance to the Carnegie Corporation or other bodies, such as the Walter
and Eliza Hall 3 rust. 6 ~ 3 Institutional membership was also canvassed—Eß Pitt had suggested
inviting organisations to join the Institute at £4 or £5 per annum. 626 This way of increasing


the membership base did have some support: in 1943 two Branches indicated that they
would agree to institutional membership, although another two were against it. 627
Administrative shortcomings
There was also a growing realisation that the way in which the Institute was operating was
inefficient and unprofessional when compared with overseas associations, although these
certainly had much larger memberships. By the late 1940 s many Australian librarians had
travelled to the United States and the United Kingdom and had seen at first hand how
their library associations operated, with permanent offices and paid staff. Other Australian
librarians were able to gauge the health of various national associations at international
gatherings: in 1948, for example, Mander-Jones, Johnston and Radford attended the Inter-
national Federation of Library Associations conference in London. Later in the same year
Mander-Jones and Johnston were at the annual conference of the University and Research
Section of the Library Association. What they witnessed, or gleaned from discussions with
fellow delegates, confirmed their view that to become a fully fledged, more professional
organisation able to take a proper part in international librarianship, the Institute needed
a journal, less reliance on voluntary officers and a significantly higher revenue base. As
Mander-Jones later reported, ‘lt seems essential that every association should have a central
secretariat and funds available for publishing a bulletin or journal’. 628
The Institute had no journal, and its secretariat was peripatetic, with documents follow-
ing elected general secretaries from state to state, from one space made available by an
employing institution to another. The Institute could not function without the voluntary
efforts of dedicated members. The workload of the General Secretary and the Secretary of
the Board of Examination and Certification in particular was onerous, and in recognition of
this they received a small honorarium from 1946-47. 629 Even keeping track of members was
difficult, as membership records were held by Branches. When members moved from one
state to another or resigned, it was time-consuming to determine their status and frustrating
if Branch secretaries were dilatory. 630 ‘Unless branch secretaries, councillors and convenors
of committees will be more business-like’, declared one annual report in exasperation, ‘no
secretary will be able to carry out the work efficiently’. 631
The workload of honorary officers may have been a factor in deterring younger mem-
bers from taking an active part in Branch activities. After the war the Executive noted that,
despite the growth in membership, there was a distinct reluctance to get involved, and this
was worrying. Active Branches and members willing to serve in an honorary capacity were
particularly vital now that there was such growth in the profession. 632
Splinter groups
There was growth in the numbers not only of libraries and librarians but also in information
officers and research workers in the many industries which had grown strongly during the
war and which would burgeon during the post-war period. An increasing number of people
who regarded themselves as special librarians were beginning to question the credentials of
a generalist examination system and to doubt the value of Institute membership. In New
South Wales the rebellious stirrings of this group of library and information workers had
been stilled by careful cultivation and by enfolding many government special librarians
into the arms of the Public Library of New South Wales. Others were kept involved in the
Institute in New South Wales by specially focused meetings and activities, but the situation
in Victoria got out of hand.


On 19 February 1946 a number of special librarians and information officers formed their
own organisation, under the provisional title of Victorian Association of Special Libraries
and Information Services (VASLIS). Its draft constitution recorded its aims as ‘to unite and
assist all those engaged in the collection and dissemination of information and so benefit
the individuals and the bodies they serve’. 633 Its name was later changed to the Associa-
tion of Special Libraries and Information Services (ASLIS), with the implication that it had
national coverage. Its members were interested in special training for special librarians and
were therefore diametrically opposed to the Institute. 634 The Institute believed that special
librarians were first and foremost librarians and therefore needed a firm grounding in li-
brarianship the Preliminary Examination provided that. There was no real disagreement
with the idea of special training for special librarians once the Preliminary Examination
had been passed, but there was a fear that standards would be lowered if ASLIS had its
own examinations and thereby created ‘special librarians and information officers’. 635 The
last thing which a new library organisation wanted was a rival group styling its members as
librarians, so that any move to broaden membership to include defectors or those deflected
from ASLIS would be beneficial to the Institute.
The difficulty in responding to the needs of special librarians, and other sections of
the library workforce, was exacerbated by the lack of national sectional groups within
the Institute. There was provision for sectional subcommittees at a Branch level only, and
these had no constitutional legitimacy. Such subcommittees subsisted on whatever funds
they could obtain from the local Branch or by fundraising. The growing numbers of these
library and information workers had not been anticipated by the Institute’s founders, who
were also preoccupied with maintaining strict standards of entry to the classification of
‘librarian’. Their needs could now be properly addressed only by providing for Sections,
with a distinct identity within a national association. 636
Benefits of wider membership
It was generally accepted that a wider membership base might enable the Institute to play
a stronger and more visible part in the achievement of better library services. It might
become natural for authorities to turn to the Institute for inquiries and investigations of
library matters and when making appointments to councils, boards and committees. As it
was, there was still confusion about which body actually spoke for libraries in Australia;
the Institute, the Library Group, the Australian Council for Educational Research (ACER),
the Library Association of Victoria or the Free Library Movement. In various contexts, of
course, all of these bodies had played a role to date, and in many of their activities there
was some overlap.
The relationship with the Library Group and the ACER was not only confusing for out-
siders but also a source of disquiet to people within the Institute. Ever since the Munn-Pitt
Report, Carnegie funds had been channelled through the ACER, which acted on the advice
of the Library Group. There was a growing feeling that these intermediaries were no longer
necessary and that the Institute should be recognised once and for all as the peak library
association.
This had been the view of several prominent members of the Institute for some time.
As early as 1940 Cowan, the University Librarian in Adelaide, told his Sydney colleague
Green that he thought that it was inappropriate for the ACER to be the conduit for Car-
negie funds. It should be the Institute. The Institute is an institute of librarians and noth


ing pertaining to librarians should be alien to it’, Cowan wrote. 637 Green had taken up this
issue at the Council meeting during the 1941 conference, suggesting that the Carnegie
Corporation be asked to accept advisers nominated by the Institute. When he found that
the American Library Association did not mind the Carnegie Corporation seeking advice
horn other organisations—indeed they preferred it, as they thought it would have been
invidious for the Association to make recommendations for grants to one library and not
to another—Green decided not to take the matter any further, although he still believed
that it was unacceptable for the Corporation to take advice from the Library Group, which
he regarded as unrepresentative. 638
Within the Institute itself the members of the Library Group were of course influential,
to the detriment, Green thought, of younger members, women and libraries other than the
state libraries. ‘Until that sort of thing is wiped out’, he wrote confidentially to Cowan, ‘we
shall still be under the domination of the “Old Men of the Public Libraries’”. 639
The McColvin affair
This feeling of insecurity was fuelled by the tangled web woven, probably not to deceive,
to bring about the visit to Australia of a distinguished public librarian to review progress
since the Munn—Pitt Report. It was hoped that this visit would give further momentum
to the library movement. The visitor was Lionel McColvin, Librarian of Westminster City
Libraries, author of a report on British libraries and long-serving Honorary Secretary of
the Library Association, and he arrived in Australia in November 1946. Controversy had
preceded him and was simmering, especially in Sydney, long before he set foot on the
wharf of the Rose Bay flying-boat base. In fact, the controversy surrounding his invitation
almost blew the Institute apart.
The decision to invite this distinguished librarian had come about by a convoluted chain
of events, but without any reference whatsoever to the Institute. Baud had died suddenly, and
his obvious successor as Principal Librarian of the Public Library of Victoria —in what Munn
had memorably (but privately) dubbed the Public Library ‘goose-step’—Colin McCallum,
was reluctant to take on the job. 640 The Trustees thought that a visiting librarian from the
United States could fill in while some local librarian was being groomed to take over. They
asked Cunningham, who now chaired the Library Group, to make some inquiries. Binns
was about to visit the United States and the United Kingdom, and Cunningham asked him
to sound out the Carnegie Corporation on supplying a visiting librarian. Binns found that
the Corporation did not wish to get involved, but he spoke to Munn. Between them Munn
and Binns decided that it would be better on this occasion for a British librarian to visit
Australia to help the Trustees of the Public Library of Victoria out of their predicament, as
well as to visit other States.
The Australian Broadcasting Commission had also asked Binns to do them a favour
when he was in the United States. The broadcaster was looking for a distinguished overseas
guest to give a series of talks on national radio. Binns made no progress with this search
in the United States: the person he had in mind, Archibald MacLeish, poet and former
Librarian of Congress, was not available. But when Binns was in the United Kingdom he
heard that McColvin had frequently given talks for the British Broadcasting Corporation
and immediately thought that he could kill two birds with one stone. He sounded out
the British Council on sponsoring a visit to Australia by McColvin, but only in a tentative


fashion—such visits needed the approval of an inter-departmental committee which the
Australian Prime Minister, Ben Chilley, had established. 641
The British Council was enthusiastic and told Binns that they would make arrangements
to send McColvin, but could Australia meet his expenses while in Australia? Binns had not
expected this request but asked around, with some success. Although both the Australian
Broadcasting Commission and the federal Office of Education were unable to help, the
Public Library of Victoria Trustees offered £2OO if McColvin would undertake a survey of
Victorian libraries. They no longer needed help with a principal librarian, as McCallum
had changed his mind and decided to take the job after all. The University of Melbourne
offered to chip in with £lOO if McColvin would deliver some lectures. Informally Sir John
Morris, a personal friend of Binns, promised to ask his Board of Trustees at the Tasmanian
Public Library for £lOO. Cunningham offered £5O on behalf of the ACER, After a personal
approach by Binns the Prime Minister agreed to provide £lOO, on the condition that the
Commonwealth was not involved in actually organising the visit. Binns suggested that the
ACER could make all the arrangements, as had been the case with the Munn-Pitt survey,
and Chifley concurred.
Binns then went back to Cunningham, who agreed to take over the running of the
project, suggesting that McColvin should survey libraries in all States. Cunningham un-
dertook to contact all of the library authorities around the country. A full-scale survey was
more ambitious than Binns had originally envisaged. He had merely thought McColvin’s
visit could include a few broadcasts on subjects on which the Englishman was knowledge-
able music and drama, as well as public libraries —together with a survey in Victoria and
perhaps visits to other States. He thought that Australian librarians could take advantage
of McColvin’s visit to ask his advice on pressing library issues. He would ask the Institute
if they would organise a lecture tour for McColvin, he told Cunningham, 642 Unfortunately
Binns had not actually made contact with the Institute, even informally. Nor did he mention
the proposed visit to anyone else at the conference in Hobart in April 1946, as he did not
want to embarrass the British Council by a premature announcement, 643
It was August before the Institute got wind of the proposal. Cunningham wrote to all
library authorities and ‘interested bodies’—which included secretaries of the Australian
Institute of Librarians Branches—alerting them to the impending visit. He told them that
‘arrangements have now been practically completed for a three months’ visit’ and hoped
that McColvin would be able to meet as many members of the Institute as possible. Cun-
ningham noted that the involvement of the ACER in making all the financial and other
arrangements for the visit was at the request of the Prime Minister. It was very timely to
have a follow-up to the Munn—Pitt Report after twelve years, Cunningham wrote, adding:
‘the assessment by a competent observer of progress made since that report was printed
can serve an extremely useful purpose. It will help to consolidate and extend the definite
gains which have been made in some States’. In other areas the visit might prove a stimulus
to free library development in that McColvin would be able to advise and comment on
planning in various States where progress had not been so extensive. 644 The letter included
a memorandum on how the McColvin visit would be supported financially, revealing that
funding had already been promised by the Commonwealth, Victorian and Tasmanian
governments, the University ol Melbourne, the Trustees of the Public Library of Victoria
and the ACER. 645


Metcalfe’s outrage
This letter, received in mid-August, was the first inkling which Institute officials had about
the proposed visit. It came like a bombshell to the New South Wales librarians, who were
normally in the thick of planning professional initiatives. To add insult to injury the letter
to the librarian of the University of Sydney began ‘Dear Mr Green’, although Green had
retired and Steel was now the librarian. A similar letter went to Metcalfe, who was furious 646
Many other New South Wales librarians could not understand why they had been left out
of the plans and decision-making. Metcalfe saw it as an example of an unacceptable trend:
the ACER, which already chaired the Library Group, interfering with Institute matters.
A motion was drafted within the New South Wales Branch, welcoming the McColvin
visit but expressing concern at the lack of consultation with the Institute. The motion
directed the President Collier—to write to the Prime Minister asking for the Institute
to be consulted on issues related to libraries and to the ACER expressing concern over its
handling of the affair. The lengthy motion noted that there had been much more extensive
consultation before Munns visit and that the proper body for consultation was now the
Australian Institute of Librarians. 647
The motion was circulated to other Branches, and when Binns heard of it he responded
with a detailed statement on his lengthy involvement. 648 Cunningham also replied at length
to an anxious enquiry from Steel, regretting any errors of judgement in the way the matter
had been handled and hoping that the feelings aroused would not interfere with the suc-
cess of the visit. 649 Feelings were still running very high when the Institute Council met in
Melbourne on 10 October and considered the motion from the New South Wales Branch,
an amendment from the Victorian Branch and the statement which Binns had circulated.
‘A long and sometimes heated discussion took place’, a South Australian reported from
the sidelines. 650
The Victorians maintained that circumstances had been exceptional, that the ACER had
not intended to slight the Institute, that the visit should be welcomed. No good purpose
would be served by approving and implementing the New South Wales motion.
Metcalfe spoke to the motion, saying that this incident was the latest in a series of events
which were undermining the Institute. The Institute was being used as a tool and then
forgotten: the Camp Library Service had been an Institute initiative, and then the Com-
monwealth had appointed one of its own officers to chair the governing committee. The
Institute had been working towards a union list of serials and then that project too had
been taken over by the Commonwealth, without reference to the Institute. The time had
come to take a firm stand and to support the prestige of the Institute. Metcalfe asked for
it to be placed on record that he regretted that neither Binns nor Cunningham had seen
fit to consult the Library Group on the McColvin visit. There had been no reference to the
State librarians, nor to the Institute.
There should have been the kind of consultation that there was prior to the Munn-Pitt
survey especially with the Institute of Librarians as a commonwealth body and the succes-
sor to the Australian Library Association’, Metcalfe declared many years later, when Cun-
ningham was preparing a booklet on the ACER and library services in Australia. Metcalfe
was particularly bitter that the matter had been secretly discussed by some members at the
Hobart conference. 651 He had been embarrassed by his lack of knowledge of the visit, and
the New South Wales view was that it was imperative for the Library Group to be wound up
172
Transition


and for the machinery of communication with the Carnegie Corporation to be reviewed. 552
Metcalfe clearly believed that the Corporation should deal direct with the Institute. 653
On the eve of the McColvin visit, however, most of the Council did not want to pick
a fight with the ACER. They agreed that the matter could have been handled much more
satisfactorily but that it was water under the bridge. They nonetheless resolved to direct
Collier, the President, to write to the Prime Minister thanking him for his Government’s
support for the visit, but ‘respectfully pointing out that the Institute has, since 1937,
been the recognised representative body of experienced, trained and qualified librarians
throughout Australia, that it has functioning branches in all States and the Capital Terri-
tory, that it holds annual conferences and publishes proceedings, that it is an examining
and certifying body, recognised as such throughout Australia, and asking that in all matters
likely to effect [sic] the interests of its members and the development of library services
in the several States the Institute be given an opportunity of expressing an opinion before
decisive action is taken’. 654
A warm welcome
The Council had set the record straight as best it could, and on the following day, at its
annual meeting, the Institute turned its public countenance upon the matter. The meet-
ing resolved to offer a wholehearted welcome to McColvin and to express the Institute’s
appreciation of the contribution of the British Council. Phis resolution was moved by
Metcalfe, the incoming President, who had no personal animosity towards McColvin, and
seconded by McMicken, who happened to have met McColvin in the United States ten
years earlier. When McColvin arrived in Sydney on 2 November 1946 and checked into
the University Club, where he was staying, he was handed an official letter of welcome
from Metcalfe, 655
Cunningham was at a loss to understand what all the fuss was about and later wrote
that ‘the only serious perturbation about the origin and sponsorship of the McColvin sur-
vey was in the mind of Mr Metcalfe himself. Metcalfe had presented the whole affair as a
slight to the Institute, but, Cunningham continued, ‘Mr Binns, with whom the McColvin
plan originated, and the librarians in the other States saw nothing wrong with the idea
that the ACER should be asked to sponsor the survey’. 656 Metcalfe actually did not object
to this idea, but to the failure of both Cunningham and Binns to take the Council of the
Institute, the Free Library Movement or the library authorities in other States into their
confidence soon enough. Metcalfe was not alone—the Queensland Government and their
Library Board declined to receive McColvin officially—and the New South Wales Premier,
William J Me Kell, took the issue up with Prime Minister Chifley. 657
Ten years later there would still be rancour over the McColvin visit, and in particular
over Binnss actions and the role of Cunningham and the ACER. The bitterness surfaced
in correspondence in the Australian Library Journal in 1957. Metcalfe, who was then once
again President of the Library Association of Australia (LAA), wrote that the actions of
Binns and Cunningham were a major reason why he urged that changes be made to the
Institute’s constitution. It was ‘the shock and humiliation of the by-passing of the Free
Library Movement, the AIL and the [Library] Group by two honoured members of the
last two that convinced me that the AIL should be turned into the LAA, and the Carnegie
Corporation be pressed to deal directly with the LAA on library matters’. 658 Metcalfe said
he had kept his peace on the McColvin visit at the time only for the sake of appearances


and unanimity. By the time McColvin arrived tempers had cooled, and Australian librarians
welcomed him wherever he went. Metcalfe would soon realise that the visit could be used
to advance the cause of the Institute.
McColvin meets the Council
It was 27 January 1947 when McColvin finally attended a Council meeting and discussed
changes to the Institute. He was then almost at the end of his visit and was due to leave for
New Zealand on 3 February. It was an opportunity for the Council to gain an idea of what
McColvin might say about the Institute in his report, and he spoke to them very frankly.
An issue raised at this meeting was why they needed both a Free Library Movement and an
Australian Institute of Librarians, instead of one body which could promote and improve
libraries and librarianship as well as safeguard professional standards.
McColvin came out very strongly in favour of a radical change to the objects and mem-
bership of the Institute. He saw the need in Australia for a library organisation to meet
three kinds of demand. First of all, information needed to be made available about librar-
ies and librarianship, including status, standards and salaries. Providing such information
would require a staff and an office. Second, there was the need for better library services,
especially public libraries, and an organisation was needed to promote the establishment of
public libraries and to encourage the passing of library legislation. Third, an organisation
was needed to stimulate recognition of the profession. These were the three functions of the
Library Association of the United Kingdom, and they were relevant also in the Australian
situation. Whatever the Institute did would require more money Income could be increased
by widening membership and broadening the appeal of the Institute so that it was not
identified as being interested only in the standards and status of librarians.
McColvin’s ideas chimed with moves which were already taking place in the Institute.
Corporate membership as a means of widening appeal and generating additional income
was already being considered by the Board of Examination and Certification as a ‘com-
mittee on constitutional amendments’. When the Council met McColvin they also had
before them a paper from Metcalfe with draft amendments allowing for this new category
of membership. 659 McColvin ended by ‘stressing his opinion that the Institute was the key
to library development in Australia’. 660
Metcalfe seizes the initiative
The minutes of the meeting with McColvin were duplicated and circulated to Branch
secretaries not long afterwards by Metcalfe as an appendix to a long statement of his own.
Mr McColvin’s comments had all the value of an outside opinion by a great authority, whose
vigorous commonsense and ability to go to the heart of a library matter appealed to all those
who met him during his all too brief period in Australia’, Metcalfe wrote, ‘and his comments
clarified and crystallised the problems which confront librarianship in Australia to-day, even
if the solutions he proposed do not finally commend themselves to all of us’. 661
In fact Metcalfe was reasonably comfortable with many of McColvin’s views on the
professional association, but in the statement Metcalfe was careful to present an analysis
of the pros and cons of a constitutional change. He discussed the need to widen the ob-
jects and the membership of the Institute, the advantages and disadvantages of admitting
unqualified members, the need to safeguard the profession against the claims of scholars,
174
Transition


bibliographers and technologists and the advantages of corporate membership. He summed
up the situation as he saw it in 1947 in the following way:
1. The Australian Library Association is dissolved,
2. There is little and ever decreasing, opposition to the Free Library idea.
3. The Free Library Movement confined in its interest to the promotion of the ‘public’
or popular library has achieved its objects and is dormant in most States.
4. There is a need to replace the Free Library Movement, but with something with
wider objects because
(a) there is a wide field of library promotion even after libraries are established,
(b) the field of promotion extends to other libraries besides the free libraries and
includes the promotion of co-ordination and co-operation of all kinds of
library,
(c) there is a need for a public voluntary body alongside the library boards which
are statutory and official bodies.
5 The Institute is the logical body to promote another general library movement in
succession to the Free Library Movement because
(a) such a movement, even if it is not amalgamated with the Institute, should be
in line with it,
(b) the Institute embraces practically all the people capable of giving technical
advice to such a movement,
(c) it is established practically without opposition in its own field and in every
State.
6. It becomes increasingly apparent that the Institute needs such an ally or wing be-
cause so long as it is or appears to be no more than a trade union body
(a) its claims to be representative of libraries as well as librarians, and to be rep-
resented on such bodies as the proposed National Commission for UNESCO
may be resisted on what must be considered as good grounds unless we take
a syndicalist view, 662
(b) some body may come into existence without the co-operation or concurrence
of the Institute,
(c) such general education bodies as the ACER may continue to claim to embrace
the library field and to take unilateral action in library matters in relation to
governments and such bodies as the Carnegie Corporation and the British
Council. 663
The circumstances surrounding the McColvin visit were certainly in Metcalfe’s mind when
he framed the final point, but he quickly moved on to what he saw as the key issues. These
boiled down to two principal questions. Should the Institute remain as it was, exclusively a
body of librarians, or should it embrace library authorities or even individuals interested in
libraries? How should the Institute find funds to carry out its objects adequately, whether
or not these objects were extended?
Librarians and libraries, Metcalfe claimed, were likely to be strengthened if they could
speak with one voice. Such an outcome had not been possible when the Institute was
Uniting a profession


founded because there were signs that some of the members of the Australian Library
Association were unsympathetic to professional librarians and to free libraries. Now the
situation was different, Metcalfe believed, and ‘extension of membership of the Institute to
library authorities would do more than anything else to change the scope and character,
extend the influence and increase the revenues of the Institute’. 664 The membership should
not just note McColvin’s comments but should debate the issues concerned and decide
whether the constitution should be amended. Metcalfe concluded with a request to each
Branch to indicate its attitude on the following issues:
1. Revision of the objects of the Institute and their extension to include promotion of
libraries and library development.
2. Inclusion of non-qualified librarians either as associates or full voting members.
3. Inclusion of non-librarian members.
4. Inclusion of corporate members with the right to send one or two delegates to all
meetings and to exercise one or two votes.
5. A change of name, for example to Australian Library Association or Association of
Libraries and Librarians of Australia.
6. Approaches to such bodies as the Victorian Library Association [sic] and the South
Australian Institutes Association [sic] , 665
Another Carnegie visitor
Metcalfe then sat back and waited for the debate to kindle in the Branches and for McColvin
to finalise his report. In the meantime there was another important overseas visitor, not on
this occasion conducting a formal survey but assessing progress and needs in Australian
libraries nonetheless. This visitor was Whitney H Shepardson from the Carnegie Corpora-
tion of New York. As Executive Director, British Dominions and Commonwealth he was
on a two-month visit to assess the post-war role for the Corporation in Australia.
This would be a good opportunity for the Institute to seek additional funding, Metcalfe
thought, in order to help it change from an association of librarians into one which not only
represented the profession but also engaged in library promotion. He wrote to Shepardson,
putting the case that a grant to a more widely based association would do far more than
any demonstration project. He suggested that a grant from the Corporation could help
set up a secretariat and start a professional journal, which in time could be paid for from
subscriptions. Other Corporation funds could be applied to training, giving librarians the
opportunity to train and gain experience in other States or overseas, bringing overseas ex-
perts to Australia to advise on specific issues and preparing publications promoting libraries
and raising standards. The Institute would then stand on its own feet, independent of the
ACER and any other bodies. 666
Metcalfe circulated copies of this letter to fellow Executive and Council members, which
rather disconcerted Shepardson. The letter contained detailed suggestions for Carnegie
assistance, and the two had not even met. The letter also canvassed the appointment of an
Australian group of‘trustees’ to replace the Library Group, which the Carnegie Trustees might
consider would tread on their authority. When they eventually met, however, Shepardson
and Metcalfe got on very well. By then the American had found that the letter had helped
stimulate discussion when he travelled around the country talking to senior librarians,
Shepardson told Metcalfe that the Carnegie Trustees would probably not want to devolve


any of their own authority to any Australian group of ‘trustees’, if that was what he had really
meant. If it were simply an advisory group of trustworthy people, that might be different.
He also believed that the sum of money Metcalfe had mentioned was more than he would
be likely to recommend because of all the other demands on Carnegie funds. 667
On 17 June, Shepardson met the executive of the Victorian Branch and discussed the
future °f the Institute. He told them that the Corporation did not wish to suggest solu-
tions—that was up to Australia to work out. The Victorian executive told him that they
hoped there would be a conference to discuss any recommendations McColvin might make,
plus suggestions which Metcalfe had made. Shepardson suggested that if the Institute were
considering widening its scope it might be worthwhile to ask some of the groups who
might join a new Institute to participate in a conference. He would recommend Carnegie
assistance for any such conference.
The New South Wales Branch did not agree that a conference with other parties was
necessary or urgent. The Institute should sort out a new constitution itself before involv-
ing other parties. They did not believe that any approaches should be made to the Library
Association of Victoria or the Institutes Association of South Australia. They resolved that
a conference with outside bodies would be of no benefit. 668 The Branch also favoured the
name Library Association of Australia for the new organisation, rejecting the name Austral-
ian Library Association because that had been the name of the earlier organisation, which
they had declined to support. 669
Asserting independence
The real stumbling block was the belief—especially keenly felt by Metcalfe—that the Aus-
tralian Institute of Librarians should be the master of its own destiny. The Institute should
be able to negotiate on its own behalf with bodies such as the Carnegie Corporation and
the British Council, without appearing to be subservient to the ACER. The earlier assistance
from Tate and Cunningham was warmly acknowledged, but ‘out of this administrative and
propaganda assistance in the early days of the present library development in Australia,
assistance which will always be gratefully acknowledged and recorded, has grown a legend!
that the ACER has been guardian and fairy godmother to library development throughout
Australia and up to date’. 670
In a five-page letter to Feely and a four-page letter to Frazer, Metcalfe made much of
this issue. By the time correspondence had been exchanged there was insufficient time
to call a Council meeting before the conference (planned for October 1947 in Sydney).
Somewhat exasperated, Feely and Frazer had had enough of Metcalfe’s recital of the roles
of the ACER, the Library Group, the Free Library Movement and the Institute. ‘As far as
the ACER is concerned, frankly, we are not interested in past history’, Feely told him. ‘lt
appears to us that this is the time to make a fresh start, with the help of the ACER if such
help would be advantageous to the Institute. Whether such help is necessary is a matter
for the full Council to decide’. 671
Past history could not be eradicated so easily, however. The Carnegie Corporation (and
to a lesser extent the British Council) played too important a role in professional matters
for the Institute not to be concerned about a direct relationship with them. Metcalfe was
buoyed by the decision of the British Council in 1947 to ask the Institute to make recom-
mendations on travel assistance for Australian librarians going to the United Kingdom. 672
Uniting a profession


The position with the Carnegie Corporation, however, was never as clear-cut as Metcalfe
would have liked.
Metcalfe had raised the question of recommendations for Carnegie travelling assistance
with Shepardson during his 1947 Australian visit, and the two men discussed the issue
again when Metcalfe was in the United States later that year. The procedure the Carnegie
Corporation preferred at this time was for individuals to apply direct to the Corporation,
which would then make enquiries using its own network of contacts. The Corporation
was dealing not only with librarians but with a range of other professionals who applied as
individuals, not as nominees of particular organisations. Nonetheless the Corporation did
value the advice it received from the Institute’s officers: ‘When I look at your letterhead’,
Shepardson told Archer, ‘I am cheered to think that we can probably count on such help
from all the officers whose names appear there; but we would prefer to consult them as
knowledgeable individuals rather than in their capacity as officers’. 673
Metcalfe was not entirely convinced that this was the last word from the Corporation
on the issue and the following year suggested to his colleagues on the Institute Executive
that they send the Corporation a list of candidates for travelling scholarships in merit or-
der. Archer, who was then President, and all the other members of the Executive disagreed
with Metcalfe and felt obliged to follow the wishes of the Corporation. In a very carefully
worded letter to Metcalfe, a draft of which she had sent to her Executive colleagues Scott,
Perry and McCallum, Archer wrote: ‘I reiterate my regret that we disagree on this vital issue
especially as all librarians in the Commonwealth willingly and openly acknowledge their
great debt of gratitude to you for putting the Institute on the map. The public positions
that you hold have increased enormously the prestige of the Institute because it is identified
with you and your associations with so many aspects of public life’. 674 Metcalfe let it go at
that; he had made his point. His colleagues may have been unconvinced, but he was sure
that the Corporation would still look to the Institute for advice.
On 29 July 1947 Metcalfe ventured into hostile territory to attend the annual meeting
of the Victorian Branch. He spoke on laymen and libraries and drew attention to the debt
which the Institute and Australian libraries owed to non-librarians and the benefits of
bringing them into the fold of a new association. Metcalfe noted the success of a confer-
ence which had been held in the Riverina in May that year. It had not been an Institute
initiative but had been organised by a local committee of non-librarians interested in library
development, supported by the Library Board of New South Wales. 675 The conference had
led some of the librarians present to realise the value of the lay contribution, Metcalfe told
the Victorians, and to reconsider their opposition to broader membership of the Institute.
He expressed the hope that the Institute would be reconstituted and embrace a wider
membership, ‘that it will have some of the character of the original Library Association
[of Australasia], joining laymen and librarians together under nearly the same name, the
Library Association of Australia’. 676
McColvin report published
Metcalfe’s view, it soon emerged, very much coincided with that of McColvin when his report,
entitled Public libraries in Australia: present conditions and future possibilities, appeared later
that year. While giving credit to the achievements of the Australian Institute of Librarians
in uniting librarians, providing for their education and promoting their interests, McColvin
went on to say: The profession of librarianship in Australia has, however, another important


task to accomplish; that of stimulating and assisting the development of library services
throughout the country. It will not accomplish this alone; it needs to enlist the help of all
who are and can be made to be interested’. McColvin suggested that Australia follow the
example of the Library Association in the United Kingdom and the American Library As-
sociation and open up membership to those others who could help promote and stimulate
the development of library services. 0 ' 7 He believed that the Australian Institute of Librarians
needed their ideas and their money. In return it would be able to offer practitioners better
opportunities and rewards. It could provide information and inspiration to institutions and
library authorities. It could make available the fruits of research and the benefits of plan-
ning and professional qualifications to the national and state agencies. McColvin had five
distinct groups of potential members in mind. First there would be the practitioners—all
those engaged in library work, whether qualified or still a student, in an approved library.
This limitation would exclude all libraries run for profit, such as commercial rental libraries
and institutes. Second there would be representatives of the governing bodies of approved
libraries. Third would be the representatives of national and State ministries and departments
concerned with library development and education. Fourth would be the representatives
of organisations in related fields, including education, youth and technical and agricultural
development. Fifth there would be an opportunity to include individual members of the
public who were actively interested in library development.
McColvin claimed that the strength of the British and American associations came from
the fact that they spoke not only for librarians but also for libraries and all those who
provided them: They have been able to achieve more because they have drawn not only
ideas, ideals and personal service, but also financial aid from a much wider circle than that
of the actual practitioners, and they have been able to do things as members of a library-
promoting organisation that they could not have attempted had their membership been
restricted’. 678
After the McColvin Report had been published the debate on widened membership of
the Institute continued with redoubled vigour and was the underlying theme of the 1947
conference in Sydney, By this time there had been something of a rapprochement between
the Library Group and the Institute. The July 1947 meeting of the Group had agreed, sub-
ject to discussion with Binns, who was not at the meeting, and notification of the Carnegie
Corporation, Ghat the funds held at present in trust for the Institute of Librarians should
be transferred to the Institute’. 679 After the Corporation had given its assent, £459 12s 6d
was duly handed over to the Institute in October that year.
Most significantly for the future of the Institute, however, was the Library Group’s
resolution to remain as a trust body for the Carnegie ‘General Fund’ only until such a time
as the Institute was ‘considered by the Group suitably constituted to take over the trustee-
ship of such funds’, 680 This General Fund was for library promotion and development and
had been the main source of funding for the Free Library Movement. A change to the
Institute’s constitution would be required to take advantage of this funding, but there was
a considerable incentive to change.
A timely address
Metcalfe was President at the time of the 1947 conference, and his address was an oppor-
tunity to canvass the widening of the Institute’s membership and changes to its objects. He
might be able to anticipate possible objections and allay fears. Why was it now safe to open
Uniting a profession


the Institute’s door more widely, when only ten years before a stamp of exclusivity had been
firmly applied and had relentlessly been reaffirmed ever since? Could the professional aims
of the Institute be achieved by remaining exclusive? Could the standards of librarianship
and the status of librarians, maintained by examination and certification and nurtured by
conferences and publications, be improved as effectively if they were in a group which
included, for example, the employing bodies?
Metcalfe posed himself such questions and proceeded to answer them, one by one. Yes,
they had been deliberately exclusive in 1937, but now was a time for examining whether
‘there were good reasons for our consorting restrictions, for withdrawing into the fortification
of a closed professional circle’. 681 If outsiders were in the same organisation, the librarians
would have the opportunity to influence them, rather than being perceived as being op-
posed to them. Metcalfe acknowledged that a lot had been achieved for them by the Free
Library Movement, in persuading employers of the need for qualified people-—much more
effectively than the Institute had been able to do. And this recognition led him to the is-
sue of library promotion and the role of the Free Library Movement —it was only because
of the close relationships between the librarians and the Free Library Movement leaders
that progress had been mutually advantageous. These relationships might not always be
as cordial. 682 If they did not widen their ambit other bodies might take over the extended
role. The Australian Institute of Librarians might be by-passed if there were some more
broadly based organisation in which they might not have a voice. 683
They might also be ignored when appointments were made to library boards and
committees: the Free Library Service Board of Victoria was a case in point. The Library
Association of Victoria had two representatives on the Board, but ‘we were left lamenting’,
Metcalfe told the delegates, ‘with only a concession that one, any one member of the Board
other than the chief librarian of the Public Library of Victoria, should be a member of the
Institute’. 684 The other reason for exclusivity might be to pursue industrial recognition, by
forming a union, A national union of librarians was not practicable, however, as there was
already coverage of many members by State and Commonwealth public service unions
and municipal trade unions. 685
Metcalfe left no-one in any doubt where he stood on the question. ‘By being profes-
sionally exclusive we can be, to put it quite crudely, big frogs in our own little pond’. 686
Naturally they must still have control over entry to the profession: he likened it to library
professionals having a room of their own in a new family home. 687 The Institute was not,
Metcalfe concluded, an end in itself. Rather it was the Institute’s objectives which were
important: ‘The really worthwhile future of our Institute is, 1 suggest, not in itself, but in
the ends it can best be made to serve’. 688
Significantly the annual meeting in 1947 resolved that the current Executive should re-
main in place for a further year, in view of the discussions about impending changes to the
constitution. 689 This was certainly a vote of confidence in Metcalfe and could be interpreted
as a groundswell of opinion in favour of what Metcalfe was advocating. A lively debate
continued after the conference, but there had been enough general agreement expressed to
warrant the Council undertaking to present a draft new constitution to members.
Constitutional revision begins
Two subcommittees of the Board of Examination and Certification, one based in Sydney, the
other in Melbourne, began work on a revised constitution. It was just as slow and painful


a process as ten years earlier, when the Institute was being founded. It was therefore Sep-
tember 1948 before the Committee which had been established to examine constitutional
amendments actually presented its draft to the Council. It was debated clause by clause,
but while there was agreement in principle it was decided that the Committee had not been
sufficiently representative. A new Committee on Constitutional Revision was appointed,
with representatives from each state. This new Committee was instructed to incorporate
all the amendments already agreed to and to submit a final draft to the Executive as soon
as possible for submission to a vote of members. The new Drafting Committee consisted
of Metcalfe (New South Wales, convenor), Frazer (Victoria), White (Australian Capital Ter-
ritory), Wood (Western Australia), HC Brideson (South Australia), Collier (Tasmania) and
DV Ryan (Queensland). 690 This Committee did not rush headlong into its task, reflecting the
cautious approach of many members to such a fundamental change. Even those who were
most in favour of a transition urged a measure of caution. As Jean P Whyte put it a little
later, in a presidential message in the South Australian Branch Quarterly Bulletin: We must
be careful, however, lest in our eagerness to embrace all librarians, libraries and interested
bodies, we lower our standards or weaken our professional representation’. 691
Successive drafts were circulated and commented upon, and something approaching a
final draft appeared in December 1948, only to be followed by further suggestions in March
1949. In June 1949 Metcalfe circulated yet another draft, incorporating all the additions
and alterations so far agreed to and some further suggested amendments. By now Metcalfe
believed there had been enough work on fine-tuning and wanted the whole constitution to
be put to the membership and either accepted or rejected. Metcalfe had asked Remington,
whom he described as ‘honorary solicitor to the Institute’, to look at the draft.
Archer was now President of the Institute. In her comments on the draft she told Metcalfe
that she thought the whole document too long-winded. Metcalfe responded that ‘there’s
no escape from the fact that complicated situations require complicated instruments, and
the situation of a Commonwealth-wide body which has to provide for both geographical
branches and vocational sections is a complicated one, as other bodies have found’. 692 Met-
calfe had also prepared an eight-page letter to members to go with the draft constitution.
Archer thought that was too long-winded as well and that people would not bother to read
it. Metcalfe agreed that this might be so but that the information ought to be provided at
least for the record.
The final draft constitution would establish a body to be known as the ‘Library As-
sociation of Australia (formerly the Australian Institute of Librarians 1937)’. There would
be four classes of membership: professional, corporate, affiliate and student. The objects
of the Library Association of Australia would be an expansion of those of the Australian
Institute of Librarians:
‘(1) To promote, establish and improve libraries and library services;
(2) To improve the standard of librarianship and the status of the library profession'
(3) To promote the association for the foregoing objects of persons, societies, institu-
tions and corporate bodies engaged or interested in libraries and library services’.
The first object would be the new one, enabling the Library Association of Australia to
continue the library promotion work of the Free Library Movement and the Library Group.
Widened objects and broader membership would bring the constitution substantially into
Uniting a profession


line with those of the library associations in the United Kingdom, the United States, New
Zealand, South Africa and Canada. 693
Now that there was substantial agreement on the draft within the Council, the timing
for a vote on the constitution was a major concern. Metcalfe thought a vote could be held
at an annual meeting; if that were to be done, the resolution and ballot paper would need
to be in the hands of members at least a month before the meeting. October f 949 therefore
seemed to be the earliest possible date for the annual meeting. After a vote at the annual
meeting the Council would have a clear view of members’ wishes and could act appropri-
ately. 614 Earlier consultations could be by correspondence—Metcalfe was concerned about
the expense of additional meetings, a cost which could be better applied to the work of
the new Association.
Metcalfe’s draft letter reiterated many of the things he had said in his f 947 Presidential
Address. The Institute was seen only as a professional body and needed to broaden its
scope to maintain its influence. Ihe Institute had needed to exclude non-librarians in
f 937 because the Australian Library Association did not recognise the need for trained
librarians and the claims of a profession of librarianship. The latter had been achieved by
the Institute through its examination and certification system, and the profession now had
status: ‘A battle has been won, and the Institute’s part on the winning side was its uniting
of librarians and the setting up of a system of professional examination, qualification and
certification, which has to be carried on’.
Metcalfe repeated that there was a danger that a rival organisation might come into
being which represented library governing bodies, but without the involvement of profes-
sional librarians. To counter such a danger there had to be a broad-based association, with
librarians, library authorities and persons interested in libraries all members, as was the
case in other English-speaking countries. Professional librarians were well established in
those countries and were the leading partners in such associations. Metcalfe believed that
such would now be the case in Australia.
He also drew attention to the precarious financial situation of the Institute. Much of its
work, especially in the Board of Examination and Certification, was actually being done by
volunteers, using the resources of the libraries in which they worked. Widened member-
ship would increase the Institute’s revenue, and a professional journal might also generate
income. He pointed out that the Carnegie Corporation would be more likely to assist a
library association with wider interests than a purely professional institute.
Metcalfe was at pains to point out that it would not just be a widening of membership
but also a remedying of perceived weaknesses in the old constitution, and that by-laws
would be added to spell out secretarial and financial procedures. In summary, Metcalfe
said the new constitution would allow for a number of new features:
• corporate or institutional membership
• lay membership, called affiliate membership
• student membership (instead of student associateship)
• student members of more than three years standing to be able to vote and hold
office
• direct election of councillors by members in Branches and Sections
• Sections for members in different types of libraries


‘Had we thought of taking over
the local Branch’; George Henry
Pitt, Principal Librarian of the
Public Library of South Australia
1948-1955.
Courtesy of the Mortlock Library
‘A golden thread throughout the
lile of the Institute’: John Wallace
Metcalfe, Deputy and later Princi-
pal Librarian of the Public Library
of New South Wales, AIL President
1946-1948.
Courtesy of the Mitchell Library, Slate
Library of NSW
‘Brilliant, politically aware and
a rallying-point for nascent
feminism’: Ida Leeson, Mitchell
Librarian at the Public Library of
New South Wales, 1932-1946.
Courtesy of the Mitchell Library, State
Library of NSW
‘An excellent choice’: Wilma
Radford of the Public Library of
New South Wales, first Secretary
to the Board of Examination and
Certification, with a long career in
library education ahead of her
Courtesy of the Mitchell Library, State
Library of NSW


‘Unrivalled access to the corridors of power’; Kenneth Binns,
Librarian of the Commonwealth National Library and AIL President
1940-1941
Courtesy of the National Library of Australia (cropped image)
Specialist in Australiana and AIL Committee member, Phyllis Mander-
Jones, Mitchell Librarian at the Public Library of New South Wales
1946-1957.
Courtesy of the Mitchell Library, State Library of NSW


‘lnfectious energy, enthusiasm
and valuable connections’:
Geoffrey Remington,
honorary member of the AIL
and driving force behind the
Lree Library Movement.
Courtesy of the Mitchell Library
State Library of NSW
EV Steel, Librarian of the
University of Sydney
1946-1958.
Courtesy of the University of Sydney
Library
1. Influential librarian of the
Sydney Municipal Library,
1909-1939: CH Bertie.
Courtesy of the Archives of the City
of Sydney


Another key figure in the AIL:
HL White, who succeeded Binns
as head of the Commonwealth
National Library in 1947.
Courtesy of the National Library of
Australia
‘She exerted a considerable
influence on the national stage’:
Malvina E Wood, Librarian of the
University of Western Australia
1927-1959
Detail of portrait (ALIAS Vol 3 Q — Z).
The AILs last President: Ellinor Archer
of the CSIRO in later life


• Regional Branches, as well as the current State and Territorial Branches
• Branch and regional sections as well as Australia-wide sections, where the numbers
justified it.
The structure of the proposed association seemed complex, as indeed it proved to be,
with its federal structure, its State Branches and its Sections—archives, children’s librar-
ies, public libraries, special libraries and university libraries —and its regional groups. But
it was a necessary complexity, given geographical considerations and the diversity of the
membership. Only time would tell if the new association would prove sufficiently robust,
as well as flexible, but Metcalfe firmly believed that it would have broad appeal. 695
There would be an important safeguard to ensure that professional librarians were mas-
ters of their own destiny: only professional members would be able to vote as councillors
or members on any issues relating to the Board of Examination or on the registration or
admission of librarians, students or professional members. And, to ensure a less cumber-
some path to constitutional amendment, such matters could be brought before members
if proposed by resolution of the Council or a Branch or by a request of one fifth of the
members-at-large.
Attached to Metcalfe’s draft statement and the draft constitution was a ballot paper for
a postal vote on a resolution which was intended to be moved at an annual meeting in late
1949, A simple ‘yes’ or ‘no’ was required, as the Executive wished members to be presented
with a clear-cut choice. For procedural reasons the vote was to be on an amendment to the
constitution, but in fact the constitution had been completely rewritten.
The ballot paper read: ‘ln favour of the resolution to be moved at the Annual Meeting
of the Australian Institute of Librarians on October [blank] 1949 for the amendment of
the Constitution of the Australian Institute of Librarians so as to widen its membership
and objects and to change its name by the substitution of the Constitution for a Library
Association of Australia, formerly the Australian Institute of Librarians, founded 1937, sub-
mitted by the President and Honorary General Secretary in accordance with the resolution
of Council October 1948’. 696 A two-thirds majority would be needed for the amendment
to be passed.
Although the Metcalfe document set October as the month for the annual meeting, this
was later revised to November, but there was nothing untoward in this delay. In fact by
then there was complete unanimity on the part of the Council, Archer wrote to Branch
secretaries in October 1949 with an undisguised plea for a solid ‘yes’ vote. ‘I do not think
I need to emphasise to you that the Federal Council is hoping that members will agree to
the proposed change in the Constitution,’ she wrote. ‘We all know that, if an Association as
is now suggested is not formed, bodies in which we, as trained librarians, have very little
say will be formed to undertake the promotion of libraries and the other functions which
we cannot include under our present Constitution. These bodies will be larger and more
influential than a purely professional organisation can ever hope to be and are likely on
occasions to vote in opposition to us on matters of importance to librarians. It has therefore
seemed to us that it would be much better to widen our membership, our aims and objects,
and by so doing endeavour to work hand in hand with all those in any way concerned
with library interests. We have more chance of persuading the non-librarian to our point of
view when he is a fellow-member of an Association with us than if we belonged to entirely
separate bodies’. 697 Soon after this letter to Branch officials Archer followed up with a letter


to the membership at large, using considerably fewer words than Metcalfe had in his draft
covering letter but covering the same ground. 698
The final annual meeting
The twelfth annual meeting of the Institute was duly held at the Public Library of Victoria
on 24 November 1949. Ellinor Archer, as President, was in the chair, and also in attendance
were Metcalfe as Past President, Scott as General Treasurer and Perry as General Secretary.
About 120 members and student associates were present, and there were councillors from
all States.
‘We are here tonight’, Archer began, ‘for the 12th Annual Meeting of the Australian
Institute of Librarians and, if the majority vote of the members is in agreement with the
su gg est ions of your council, it will be the last annual meeting of our purely professional
body. She again left no-one in doubt as to where she stood on the issue of widened
membership and objects, ending her Presidential Address with the words T feel confident
that, with the wider representation and greater numbers that the new Association will have
at its command, it will not only energetically carry on all the work the Institute has been
doing, but will also undertake various of the problems which we have wistfully discussed
but decided were beyond us’. 700
Nor was there any doubt in Archers mind who should be President of the new Associa-
tion. T feel that the right person to steer us through the difficult transition year is yourself’,
she had told Metcalfe a month before the meeting. Once things had settled down in a year’s
time, they could decide whether to have a figurehead as President for the first full year. 701
Metcalfe had agreed and had then been nominated by Scott and Archer. There were no
other nominations for President, but there were several aspirants for the position of General
Secretary. The resulting ballot would be good for the new body, Metcalfe thought: ‘Some
people here are very keen on elections as a sign of life and as doing away with any idea
that everything is always arranged’. 702
The annual meeting proceeded just like a normal annual meeting, and the officers who
were elected for the following year had a distinct Sydney flavour. Three of the Executive
were elected unopposed: Metcalfe as President, Arnot as Vice-President and Beatrice Wines
from the University of Sydney as General Treasurer. The ballot for the position of General
Secretary was won by Bell from Sydney Municipal Library,
This final annual meeting of the Institute closed at B:sopm on 24 November 1949, Ten
minutes later the Australian Institute of Librarians held a special meeting, the sole function
of which was to receive the vote of members on the proposed changes to the constitution.
Phis vote had been conducted by post, and 127 replies had been received.
There were 108 votes in favour of the amended constitution and a mere nineteen
against. It was a massive show of support for change. Metcalfe then declared that the new
constitution was adopted, and the incoming officers of the Institute became the officers
of the Library Association of Australia, pending an election to be held within six months.
Thus John Metcalfe, who had a strong appreciation of history, became the last President
of the Australian Institute of Librarians and the first President of the Library Association
of Australia.
The special meeting lasted barely thirty minutes, and the Institute was effectively no
more, although its officials were careful to point out that the Institute did not end its work
but was transformed into a wider association and that its name was carried forward in the
184
Transition


somewhat long-winded full name of the new body: the Library Association of Australia
(formerly the Australian Institute of Librarians founded 1937).
Arnot’s election as Vice-President was a great compliment to this very capable librarian:
holders of this office could usually expect to be elected unopposed to the presidency in
the following year. For reasons which were not made public at the time Arnot resigned
from this office on the following day. Those who knew her could not conceive that she had
accepted nomination in the heat of the moment and had then repented of it overnight. It
is now clear from correspondence between Metcalfe and Archer that Arnot’s election was a
device to keep an opening available for a future President of the Association who was not
yet among them. The identity of this invisible heir to the throne would become apparent
before too long. In the meantime the lack of a Vice-President presented no practical or
constitutional difficulties, with Metcalfe steering the new Association through a period of
transition and adjustment. 703
Metcalfe’s successor turned out to be the Chief Justice of the High Court, Sir John Latham.
Elected President in 1950, Latham was exactly the kind of eminent non-librarian who, the
Munn-Pitt Report had suggested fifteen years earlier, might lead a new library association,
Latham would in fact hold this post for three years, thus entailing the first alteration to
the new constitution, which originally provided that no person should hold the office of
President for more than two consecutive terms. 704 This role for Latham had been foreshad-
owed as early as 1947, when he sent a goodwill message to the Sydney conference which
was significant enough to be published in full in the proceedings. 705
The promise that further Carnegie assistance would be forthcoming for a wider As-
sociation was swiftly kept. The Association was entitled to the remainder of the General
Fund which had been set aside to help the Free Library Movement, because its objects
now included library promotion. 706 In June 1950 the Executive of the ACER resolved to
transfer the balance of Carnegie funds to the Association, and in August that year Profes-
sor H Tasman Lovell, Vice-President of ACER, handed £1125 2s 7d to Sir John Latham,
President of the LAA. 707 In the same year the Corporation demonstrated its confidence in
the new body and its continued commitment to Australian libraries to an even greater ex-
tent by granting the substantial sum of US$35 000 to the LAA, primarily to help establish
a permanent office and staff and to finance publications. 708
The sense of continuity was emphasised by the continuation of existing Committees and
the handing over of unfinished business to the new Association. Among the unfinished
business was a submission on government aid to libraries which Metcalfe had presented to
the Institute Council. This submission was handed to the incoming executive to forward
to the federal and State authorities. The submission noted that the high standards of Com-
monwealth libraries contrasted with lower standards in some of the State libraries and
amounted to a criticism of the Commonwealth Government for supporting its own librar-
ies at the expense of the State libraries. It was an astute observation but, like the Horton
Report a quarter century later, was not destined to send the Commonwealth delving into
its pockets to provide direct assistance to State and public libraries. 709
And so the 219 members, two Honorary Members and 572 student members looked for-
ward to a new year, new challenges and new opportunities as members of a new Association.
Challenges there would be aplenty; could they successfully establish their own headquarters,
with a paid staff? Would the promised influx of institutional members materialise? Would
the Association be financially viable? Would a rival organisation cut the ground from under


their feet? Would their system of examination and certification survive, or would it be cir-
cumvented by employer bodies or rapidly superseded by schools of librarianship? Would
the new organisation really be able to pick up where the Free Library Movement had left
off in some states? Would distinguished non-librarians contribute significantly to the new
Association: Would John Metcalfe, who in many senses was the rock on which the Institute
and now the Association were founded, continue to play a role in the new body, or would
some other career opportunity snatch him from the profession? Would new leaders of the
profession emerge, with the same level of commitment as the previous generation? These
were questions which may have entered some minds amid the euphoria which followed
that overwhelming vote for change at the annual meeting.
Others may well have pondered just how far the Institute, and with it the profession, had
come in the past twelve years. With the benefit of more than a half century of hindsight,
that is exactly the question we attempt to answer in our next, and final, chapter.
Chapter 10 Endnotes
JW Metcalfe, Past, present and future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
6th Conference, Sydney, October 1917, and other papers, Sydney, Australian Institute of Librarians (AIL)
1949, p5B.
616 The exceptional cases were the Honorary Members, Frank Tate (awarded 1938), Geoffrey Remington
(1940) and Kenneth Cunningham (1941). There were no further Honorary Memberships awarded
by the Institute. The first Library Association of Australia awards of Honorary Membership were to
Sir John Ferguson and Morris Miller, both in 1958.
617 GC Remington, ‘Laymen and libraries’. JW Metcalfe, ‘Laymen and libraries’, Australian Institute of
Librarians. Proceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney October 1917, and other papers, Sydney, Australian In-
stitute of Librarians, 1949, ppB3-93.
fll ‘ s JW Metcalfe to JA Feely, 30June 1947, Australian Council for Educational Research (ACER) archives,
Series 49, item 189.
Remington, Co-operation in library matters between State and local governing bodies’.
620 John Metcalfe, ‘ACER and LAA’, Australian Library Journal, vol 6 no 2, April 1957, pp 74-76.
621 AIL, Federal Executive Newsletter, no 1, September-December 1948.
L Scott, Presidential Address, 1944’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference,
Hobart, April 1946, Melbourne, AIL, 1947, p 32.
623 LC Key to K Binns, 3 June 1941, ACER archives, Series 49, vol. 88.
624 AIL, Annual report, no 4, 31 May 1941.
AIL, Minutes of Council, 19-20 September 1942, ALIA records, National Library of Australia (NLA),
M 57446, box 40.
626 ibid.
627 JF Arnot and MM Thompson, ‘AlL—Statement on Finance’, [1943 from context], ACER archives,
Series 49, vol 88. Another copy in ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
62H AIL, Newsletter, no 2, January to March, 1949, Appendix 1, p 7, and Appendix 2.
629 Each received an honorarium of £25 from 1946-47. AIL, Annual report, no 10, October 1947 and no
11, October 1948.
630 AIL , Minutes of Council, 14 September 1945, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40.


631 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
632 ibid.
VASLIS circular letter, 30 January 1946, enclosed with May Dobbie, Librarian, Standards Association
of Australia, to JW Metcalfe, 10 February 1946, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 106.
E Archer to JW Metcalfe, 1 November 1948, ALIA records. NLA, M 57446, box 106. This duplicated
letter was sent to all members of the AIL Council.
635 GD Richardson to E Archer, 16 December 1948, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 106.
E Archer, The Special Libraries Section’, Australian Library Journal . vol 1 no 3, January 1952,
pp 64-67.
WA Cowan to HM Green, 21 June 1940. Copy in the possession of David J Jones.
638 HM Green to JF Arnot, 9 December 1941, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
639 HM Green to WA Cowan, 16 August 1940, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
640 Munn was critical of staff selection procedures at the Public Library of Victoria, believing that too
much reliance was placed on seniority (Munn and Pitt, Australian libraries: a survey of conditions and
suggestions for their improvement, Melbourne, Australian Council for Educational Research. 1935,
p 52). His ‘goose-step’ comment was in a note to Keppel (Ralph Munn. Australia’, [1936?], Carnegie
Corporation of New York (CCNY) archives).
K Binns to KS Cunningham, 28 December 1960, ACER archives, Series 49, item 189
K Binns to KS Cunningham, 23 February 1946, ACER archives, Series 49, item 88.
643 K Binns t 0 secretary, NSW Branch, 27 September 1946, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 106.
644 KS Cunningham to JL Stapleton, Secretary, AIL SA Branch, 13 August 1946, ALIA records, NLA,
M 57446, box 88. Similar letters were sent to all Branches.
<V44 KS Cunningham to the Librarian. University of Sydney. 13 August 1946, ALIA records NLA M 57446
box 106.
646 ibid.
847 Draft of resolution for submission by the NSW Branch Council to the Council of AIL, 23 September
1946, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 106.
K Binns to secretary, NSW Branch, 27 September 1946, ALIA records. NLA, M 57446, box 106.
649 KS Cunningham to EV Steel. 2 September 1946, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 106,
650 AIL. SA Branch, Quarterly Bulletin . no 9, December 1946, p 2.
JW Metcalfe to KS Cunningham, 19 December 1960, ACER archives, Series 49, item 189
Typescript note, c. 15 February 1947, ACER archives, Series 49, vol 88.
Metcalfe was not the first to feel that the AIL should not be by-passed. Green had moved a motion to
that effect in the AIL Council in 1941, but without success, although a Carnegie Grants Committee
came into existence in the following year. This was a committee of the New South Wales Branch
Council, established to assess conditions under which employing authorities released their staff
to enable them to take up offers of travel grants and, more contentiously, to find out how previous
grantees had been selected in order to make representations to the Corporation ‘or its Australian
representatives’ on a uniform selection method. They had found that Munn and Keppel had been
the principal selection agents, without any formal applications. The grantees had all been senior
librarians, and the subcommittee hoped that post-war grantees would include junior staff. The 1942
report had been endorsed by the New South Wales Branch and referred to the Federal Council, but
consideration was deferred because of the war. When the matter re-emerged in 1945 some additions
were made to the 1942 report, in particular a recommendation to establish a federal committee to
make submissions to the Carnegie Corporation on travel grants for Australian librarians, a program
of expert visitors from the United States, and for grantees to include principal and deputy librarians.


executive officers of large libraries and promising juniors. The report was received but not formally
acted upon, Council adopting a wait-and-see policy. Keppel had recently died, and some refocusing of
Carnegie activities and priorities under new leadership and in a post-war climate was to be expected.
In fact travel grants did begin again in 1947 and would continue until 1968, with several librarians
benefiting, but not, it must be said, a host of promising juniors. AIL, Minutes of Council, 13-15 June
1941, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40. Horrocks, The Carnegie Corporation of New York and its
impact on library development in Australia, PhD thesis, University of Pittsburgh, 1971, pp 295-297.
AIL, Minutes of Council, 10 October 1946, pp 7-14, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40. JDA Collier
to JB Chifley, 11 October 1946, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 106.
JW Metcalfe to LR McColvin, 31 October 1946, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 106.
KS Cunningham, Comment squared’, Australian Library Journal, vol 6, no 1. January 1957, p 34.
657 JW Metcalfe, ACER and LAA, pp 74-76.
658 ibid., p 75.
JW Metcalfe, letter to branch secretaries [from context February or March 1947] ALIA records, NLA,
M 57446, box 88. Metcalfe reported on the Council meeting with McColvin, and included an extract
from the Council Minutes, 27 January f 947, and his minute to Council on corporate membership.
Metcalfe believed that a corporate subscription of £2 per year, which would entitle the member to a
journal costing not more than 10 shillings, might raise as much as £l5O to £2OO in New South Wales
alone.
660 ibid.
661 ibid.
The Australian National Commission for UNESCO, which is still in existence, was established in 1947
to carry out UNESCO programs in Australia and to provide advice to the Government on Australia’s
involvement in UNESCO.
663 J w Metcalfe, letter to branch secretaries [from context February or March 1947],
664 ibid.
ibid., pl 3. The correct names of the other associations were the Library Association of Victoria and
the Institutes Association of South Australia.
JW Metcalfe to WH Shepardson, 29 May 1947, [circulated to Branch secretaries, 3 June 1947] AIIA
records, NLA, M 57446, box 28.
067 WH Shepardson to JW Metcalfe, 26 July 1947, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 28.
JW Metcalfe to JA Feely, 30 June 1947, ACER archives, Series 49, item 189. JW Metcalfe to KS Cun-
ningham, 1 July 1947, ACER archives, Series 49, item 189.
E Leslie, secretary, NSW Branch, to Members, [undated but from context probably late May early
June 1947], ALIA records, NLA, MS 7446, box 108, folder ‘Private papers of EV Steel’.
670 JW Metcalfe to EL Frazer, 1 July 1947, ACER archives, Series 49, item 189.
671 JA Feely to JW Metcalfe, 16 July 1947, ACER archives, Series 49, item 189.
Charles Wilmot to JW Metcalfe, 24 July 1947, ALIA records, NLA. M 57446. box 28. Wilmot was the
British Council Representative in Australia.
WH Shepardson to E Archer, 9 November 1948, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 28.
E Archer, draft letter to JW Metcalfe, 9 December 1948, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 28
Proceedings, with Library service in New South Wales: a statement of progress and problems / Riverina
Regional Library Conference, convened by the Wade Shire Public Library Committee, May 9 to 11, 1947,
Griffith, NSW, Riverina Library Region Standing Committee, 1947.
676 JW Metcalfe, ‘Laymen and libraries’, p 93.
188
T RANSITION


LR McColvin, Public libraries in Australia: present conditions and future possibilities, Melbourne, Mel-
bourne University Press for the Australian Council for Educational Research, 1947, p9B.
678 ibid.
679 Library Group, minutes of meeting, 30 July 1947, ACER archives, vol 86.
680 ibid.
681 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p 46.
682 ibid., pps6-57.
683 ibid., p 57.
584 ibid.
ibid., p5B. In New South Wales in 1947 there had been a move on the part of some municipal librar-
ians to form an independent association which could be registered as a trade union. A New South
Wales Branch Committee had addressed the issue, approaching the Industrial Registrar and obtaining
a legal opinion from counsel. The conclusion was that it would be impractical to have a trade union
for librarians covering the whole of Australia: there were too many jurisdictions, other unions had
coverage and would challenge a new union, and even if there were a union its labours would be
Herculean because librarians were spread across so many employers, JW Metcalfe to JA Feely, 30
June 1947, ACER archives. Series 49, item 189.
686 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p5B.
687 ibid.
688 ibid.
Minutesofthe 10th Annual Meeting, 11 October 1947,in Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings,
6th Conference, ppl3-14.
690 AIL . Federal Executive Newsletter, no 1, September-December 1948, pp 2-3.
691 AIL, SA Branch, Quarterly Bulletin, no 10, Winter 1949.
(,g2 JW Metcalfe to E Archer, 5 August 1949. JW Metcalfe to AIL Members, [draft letter, mid-1949].
Copies in the possession of David J Jones.
693 LAA, Handbook, Sydney, LAA, 1952, p 5.
694 JW Metcalfe to E Archer, 5 August 1949. JW Metcalfe to AIL Members, [draft letter, mid-1949].
Copies in the possession of David J Jones.
AL Johnson and RF Doust, The Library Association of Australia: statement of history, objects, activi-
ties and achievements’, Australian Library Journal, vol 14 no 1, March 1965, ppl-11.
(m JW Metcalfe to AIL Members, [draft letter, mid-1949]. Copy in the possession of David J Jones,
697 E Archer to Branch secretaries, 13 October 1949, LAA NSW Branch papers, State Library of New
South Wales (SLNSW), Mitchell Library, MLMSS 1882, carton 1,
698 E Archer to members of the Institute, 17 October 1949, LAA NSW Branch papers, SLNSW, Mitchell
Library, MLMSS 1882, carton 1.
699 E Archer, ‘Presidential Address, 1949: The Institute looks back’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947, Sydney, Australian Institute of Librarians 1949
plo9.
700 ibid., pi 14.
E Archer to JW Metcalfe, 12 August 1949. Copy in the possession of David J Jones.
702 JW Metcalfe to E Archer, 13 October 1949. Copy in the possession of David J Jones.
703 AIL, Minutes of Council, 24-25 November 1949, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40.


704 For a time the LAA elected lay and professional presidents alternately. The other lay presidents were
Sir John Morns, Professor WGK Duncan and Sir Peter Crisp.
705 ‘Message to the conference from the Rt. Hon Sir John Latham, GCMG, MA, LLM, KC, Chief Justice,
High Court of Australia’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, 6th Conference, p 45.
706 The balance of the special fund from which Carnegie grants had been made to the Institute, amounting
to £459 12s 6d, had been handed over to the Institute by the ACER in October 1947. This transfer
had been approved by Shepardson, who had said that the ACER and the Library Group should be
free to decide on the timing of this move and the winding up of the Library Group. The remaining
trust funds were handed over in 1950 in recognition of the LAA’s widened objects. KS Cunningham,
The Australian Council for Educational Research and library services in Australia, Melbourne, Ausstralian
Council for Educational Research, 1961, pplO, 29-30.
707 Statement by Professor HT Lovell, Vice-President, ACER, 5 August 1950, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 106.
708 NA Radford, ‘Carnegie Corporation’, in ALIAS: Australia’s library, information and archive services on
encyclopaedia of practice and practitioners, vol 1, Sydney, LAA, 1988, p 134.
709 JP Whyte, ‘John Metcalfe and the Library Association of Australia’, Australian Library Journal, vol 20,
no 4, May 1971, p 7. The Horton Report followed a Commonwealth-appointed enquiry into public
libraries chaired by Allan Horton, librarian of the University of New South Wales. Initiated by the
Whitlam Labor government, the report was effectively ignored by the Liberal government of Malcolm
Fraser. Public Libraries in Australia: Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Public Libraries, Canberra,
Australian Government Publishing Service, 1976.
Transition


11
Achievements
We laboured, hut also the winds of
doctrine and the tides of the times were
going our way. Ancestral voices even in
our midst kept saying, the time is not yet
ripe, for the things we did. But the time
was ripe, and the fruit grew on the tree. 710


With the transition of the Australian Institute of Librarians to the Library Associa-
tion of Australia there was no intention to abandon objects, but to widen them.
Proponents for change were careful to ensure that even the name of the Institute
was preserved in that of the new Association. For twelve years the Institute had pursued
these three objects: to unite persons engaged in library work, to improve the standard of
librarianship and to improve the status of the library profession in Australia, It had done so,
as far as most members were concerned, more or less unconsciously Successive Executives,
Councils, Branches and annual meetings did not constantly refer back to these objects when
initiating actions or making decisions. Nonetheless almost everything which the Institute
undertook can be related to these objects, and they are a convenient yardstick against which
to summarise the Institute’s achievements up to the time of its metamorphosis. What can we
say were its real achievements during twelve years pursuing these objects? With the benefit
of distance and dispassion, what can we say helped and hindered the Institute? What did
the Institute leave undone or only partly done? And finally what (or who) really made the
Institute move beyond its original objects and embrace change?
‘To unite persons engaged in library work’
This first-mentioned object was something with which the Institute’s various predecessors
had had only mediocre success, and at the outset there were sceptics even within the Insti-
tute’s own ranks. The most vociferous of them was Green, who believed that the Institute
would be too much dominated by the state libraries, and more particularly by Ifould. Within
a few years of the Institute’s foundation, however, even Green had modified his view. The
Institute has succeeded in one of its main purposes, the breaking down of group barriers’,
he told Scott, a fellow university librarian and former fellow sceptic. 711 By 1944 both Scott
and Green had had the distinction of being elected President, and in its final year a special
librarian, Archer, was President, compelling evidence that the Institute was committed to
represent more than one type of library.
The initial scepticism was largely due to the poor communication between libraries of
different types in the early years of the twentieth century. It is difficult for us to imagine just
how isolated many libraries were—and just how isolationist their librarians remained —even
within the same city. Binns once recalled that in his early years in Fisher Library at the Uni-
versity of Sydney, where he worked from 1900 to 1911, there was virtually no communication
with other university libraries. There was ‘self-centred isolation’, and during his Fisher days
he had ‘never met collectively the librarians even of Sydney’, which in retrospect he regarded
as appalling. The Institute’s conferences and Branch meetings had counteracted isolationism
and had brought about ‘excellent fellowship’, which for Binns was the key to the Institute’s
success. 712
At a Branch level activities brought together younger members or student associates
who usually did not have the means to travel to another State for a conference. At a Branch
meeting they could meet, listen to and possibly engage in debate with the older and senior
members of the profession. Branch meetings served as a training ground for future confer-
ence speakers and Institute office-bearers, as well as an opportunity to identify with fellow
professionals in a wider circle than in one’s own library. 713
At a local and national level members increasingly saw themselves as part of a fellowship of
librarians, rather than as having exclusive loyalty to a particular institution or state. Working
together on Committees and in co-operative ventures such as union catalogues or books for


the troops heightened their sense of unity. This feeling was reinforced when there was some
tangible result—such as the acknowledgement of the Institute’s work on the classification of
Australiana by the editors of Dewey, Binns believed the advent of the Institute had facilitated
co-operation between library authorities. Before the war they would simply have gone their
merry way, as had almost been the case with the rival microfilming programs planned by the
Public Library of New South Wales and the Commonwealth National Library. 714 After about
1940, despite the well-known and persistent rivalry between New South Wales and Canberra,
it was very unlikely that any major library would attempt a major initiative without having
some regard to its possible effects on the national library situation.
The system of examination and certification, discussed below with reference to the In-
stitute’s second object, was also a unifying factor from 1944, It brought together under one
qualification system a diversity of library workers from different states and types of institution.
In pursuing their qualifications they affiliated with a corps of library workers who comprised
virtually the whole profession in Australia, from the most junior to the most senior. When
the Institute was founded only a handful of those eligible to become Foundation Members
declined to do so: Metcalfe believed that ‘not more than half a dozen of those who could be
considered librarians qualified by experience in libraries with good standard practices had
refused to join’. 71,5 Membership remained very high—in 1947 Metcalfe estimated that over
ninety-five per cent of eligible librarians had joined. 716 Most members would remain in the
Institute, and later the Association, for the whole of their professional lives. Those who resigned
were mainly student associates who left library work or women who left the workforce upon
marriage or for other ‘domestic reasons’. 717
So the Institute succeeded not only in bringing librarians together but also in keeping
them together, with a lively Branch structure, stimulating conferences, a common qualifica-
tion and the opportunity to participate in committee work. There was a broad appeal across
different library types, although it is true that some groups remained of their own volition
outside the Institutes ambit. Ihe school of arts and institute ‘librarians’, especially in South
Australia, and many information officers or special librarians, particularly in Victoria, were
outside the Institute, but even they would be welcomed into the fold if they were intent
upon joining the profession and undertaking the Institute’s examinations. Unity among
professionals was an object, but standards had to be maintained.
The standard of librarianship
The major contribution of the Institute to the improvement in the standard of librarianship
was without a doubt the national system of examination and certification. This was also
arguably Metcalfe’s greatest achievement. He was convenor of the Committee on Library
Training and Standards, which created the system, chaired the Board of Examination and
Certification when it was established in 1941 and continued in this role throughout the life
of the Institute and beyond. The examination system worked, and it survived as the Reg-
istration Examination of the Library Association of Australia, even after the establishment
of schools of librarianship in higher educational institutions. The forty-nine candidates in
1944 had grown to 1470 in 1970, sitting examinations in Australia, in New Guinea and in
seveial other countries. The syllabus was rigorous and comprehensive, was reviewed and
revised regularly and was intended to provide a thorough grounding for librarians in all
types of library.
Uniting a profession


Its limitations, noticeable from the earliest days, arose from the fact that it was an external
examination, taken by people who were usually working full-time in libraries and often
with inadequate study and teaching. 718 Those who persisted and succeeded were exposed
to the most detailed study of international library theory and practice ever experienced in
Australia. This knowledge could be applied or adapted by the newly qualified librarians to
their own workplace and carried to new workplaces, as the qualification they had gained
was portable. Even those who rested from their labours after the Preliminary Examination
were much better equipped for library work than any previous generation of library work-
ers in Australia.
Apart from the formal training for librarianship which the Institute facilitated, there
was the opportunity for members to widen their knowledge and improve the standard of
librarianship in their own institutions. They could do so by reading the Institute’s confer-
ence proceedings (which were free of charge to members), by attending Branch activities at
which papers would be read or other libraries visited, or by taking part in committee work
for the Institute. Several committees had an immediate impact on the standard of librarian-
ship: one committee, for example, had put together the framework for the examination and
certification system, and another had prepared extensions to the Dewey Classification for
Australiana. Yet as we have seen, the record of committees was not entirely successful, with
instances of labouring long and hard to present a report which the Council noted and then
allowed to gather dust. 719
The status of the library profession
The object of improving the status of the library profession, to which Metcalfe had initially
taken exception as appearing sell-serving, was steadily pursued at a local, national and even
international level. Every successful step which the Institute took to make itself known to
employers and authorities was a step towards recognition for its members and their profes-
sional skills, amply demonstrated by the rigorous system of examination and certification
which members had to undergo.
Conferences of librarians were hardly page-one news, but they did attract some local pub-
licity in the host city and were the mark of a successful association. It was certainly a good
record to have held six conferences in twelve years, even with the interruption of war-time
conditions. Not only had conferences been held, but their proceedings had been published,
together with all of the Institute’s annual reports and balance sheets. There was a growing
sense of awareness among members that they were part of a properly organised professional
association and engaged in a range of appropriate activities for such an association. 720
At a local and a national level there were innumerable instances when the Institute ‘bought
into’ issues and received acknowledgement or recognition. During the war the most notable
success was the work of the Camp Library Service, which raised the profile of the Institute.
Less visible but equally significant was a directive from the Commonwealth to safeguard official
war records, a direct outcome of the Adelaide conference, which had focused on archives. 721
By the end of the war it was natural that the Institute would be consulted on such matters
as the protection of the Australian publishing industry and on currency restrictions which
limited the importation of publications from the United States. So it was that Metcalfe and
White presented the Institute’s views to the Tariff Board in 1945—Metcalfe believed that the
Institute’s views had been critical in the subsequent decision not to impose a tax on books.
Two years later the Institute made successful representations to the Prime Minister to ease


restrictions on book imports from non-sterling areas. It is of course difficult to separate the
weight given to the views of senior public servants, such as Metcalfe and White, from the
profile of their institutions and the status of the Institute and its members, but it is clear that
the views of librarians were being listened to. 722
Nor was recognition of the Institute always ad hoc: there was legislative recognition
and membership of library authorities in New South Wales and Victoria. 723 In f 943 the
Institute was invited to nominate a member of the Provisional Committee on the Social Sci-
ences of the Australian National Research Council,™ After the establishment of the United
Nations, the Commonwealth Government recognised the Institute as a representative body
in its international relations with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation (UNESCO).
Links had been forged with overseas bodies long before the international acknowledge-
ment which the Institute received from UNESCO and Metcalfe’s role in its second general
conference. The good wishes which were sent to the infant Institute in 1937 were a prelude
to years of friendly relations with the American Library Association, the New Zealand Li-
brary Association and the Library Association in the United Kingdom, and from time to time
Institute members had attended overseas conferences. By 1949 a degree of reciprocity of
recognition of qualifications had been achieved with the Library Association. 725 The editors
of Dewey had welcomed the Institute’s input into the classification of Australiana. Before the
outbreak of war, links had been forged with the International Federation of Library Associ-
ations (IFLA), and these were renewed following Key’s attendance at the 13th IFLA conference
m Oslo in May 1947. He urged Very strongly the desirability of our Institute strengthening
its contacts with organised librarianship abroad as well as with individuals’, believing that
Australia could make a significant contribution to world librarianship. 726 Whenever inde-
pendent or sponsored travel or study coincided with IFLA conferences Institute members
made a special effort to attend. 727 Even during the war major overseas libraries and library
schools were acquiring the proceedings of the Institute’s conferences. 728
The Institute had also received a measure of recognition from two overseas sponsoring
bodies: the government-funded British Council and the privately endowed Carnegie Cor-
poration of New York, though in the latter case the relationship was not formalised to the
degree which Metcalfe, Green and others would have wished. Nonetheless both bodies, with
the Carnegie Corporation making by far the greater contribution to library development
and to the Institute, looked to Institute members for advice when assistance to Australian
librarianship was being considered.
It was therefore with some justification that Metcalfe could tell fellow members: ‘No other
library body in Australia can claim anything like an equal embrace in any direction’. 729 The
Institute had achieved status among its international counterparts and recognition in various
ways nationally It is effectively impossible to distinguish between the status of the Institute
and the status of the profession: with its overwhelming membership among professionals
the Institute was the profession.
Successful ingredients
What successes the Institute achieved—and survival and growth during difficult times na-
tionally and internationally were considerable achievements in their own right were due
to a fortunate combination of favourable circumstances, focused personalities, motivated
members and sympathetic bodies outside the profession. One can point to a succession of
Uniting a profession


people, events and attitudes which facilitated the Institute’s creation, establishment, progress
and ultimate metamorphosis. The ingredients were many and varied, home-grown and
imported.
Responsiveness
Unlike its predecessors as would-be national associations of librarians, the Institute squarely
faced the challenges with which it was presented. Successive Executives did not dodge issues,
although they would sometimes skirt round them. The activism of members of the Institute
contrasted starkly with the inertia of the Australian Library Association when it faced its most
critical challenge, the Munn—Pitt Report. This document was a potential rallying-point for
a profession and, as the Free Library Movement demonstrated, the report would eventually
launch a thousand libraries. When over a decade later the McColvin survey was under way,
however, the Institute seized upon it to further its own agenda. The bitterness and recrimina-
tions which had emerged on the eve of McColvin’s visit were frankly expressed, confronted,
dealt with and put aside. A united profession met McColvin with the warmest hospitality,
and McColvin left a united profession in his wake. When it was still hot off the press the
Report was the theme of an entire conference. It was a sign of a maturing organisation but
also an instance of seizing opportunities and turning them to advantage.
Within two years of its foundation the Institute’s characteristic responsiveness was al-
ready well established. The remarkable response to the needs of servicemen and women for
library services has been outlined earlier. It was all the more remarkable because the war
had placed so many more stresses and strains on the profession. Budgets were shrinking
whilst workloads were growing with increased demand and reduced manpower because
of the call-up, but nonetheless here was a professional group contributing in a major way
to the war effort.
The war years actually brought about an expansion in the work opportunities for librarians,
whose skills were required to support the transition of industries to war-time production.
Ifould ‘retired’ from the Public Library of New South Wales to head the local division of the
Department of War Organization of Industry. Many librarians were seconded to war-time
departments, some with language skills worked as censors and others worked on various
‘hush-hush’ assignments. Their work demonstrated the value of libraries and the skills of
librarians and reflected well on their professional association.
The general public too became more library conscious, as Scott pointed out in his 1944
Presidential Address: The war does appear to have made people book conscious and if that
book consciousness continues after the war, it should lead, if librarians play their part properly
to a consciousness of the importance of libraries’. 730 Scott’s insight, as was so frequently the
case, proved correct, and the war, although hindering the development of free public libraries,
created an environment in which they and with them the Institute, would flourish.
Viability
The Institute began with a viable membership, large enough to create an impact, particu-
larly in the larger Branches, and sufficiently cohesive to remain focused and united. Only a
handful of people who might have been Foundation Members declined to participate, and
the proportion of non-members remained very small throughout the life of the Institute.
When the Institute’s examination system began there was an explosion in associate or student
membership, sustained for over three decades.
196
Achievements


e Institute also had a wide appeal across library sectors, enfolding special, school and
university librarians as well as the numerically dominant staff of state and national libraries.
ter the end of the war, Institute membership increased still further with the growth in
numbers of free public libraries, particularly in New South Wales and Tasmania. What had
initially been just a viable membership was becoming a flourishing body of professionals.
Momentum
Ihe speed with which the Institute established itself, agreed on its constitution, set up
Branches and organised conferences was another factor in its success. A workable structure
was put m place very quickly and a pattern of activities set which gave the Institute a defi-
nite momentum, which it was able to maintain even during the years when the war made
a con erence impossible. This momentum was born of a determination to succeed and not
to go the way of previous associations.
The Carnegie Corporation
The direct impact of the Carnegie Corporation of New York on the success of the Institute
and on the early days of the Library Association of Australia, must not be underestimated’
Even m his most assertive statements on the history of the Institute Metcalfe did not deny
the importance of the Corporation’s generosity The Munn-Pitt Report, which supported the
concept ol a national association, was Carnegie-funded, and there was Carnegie commit-
ment to help implement such aspects of the report as received local approval. The Institute
was a direct beneficiary, with financial assistance disbursed via the Library Group, including
grants to assist delegates to attend its conferences, and funds for operating expenses and for
publishing proceedings. Even with the assistance of the Corporation the Institute’s finances
were precarious, especially before the examination system began to swell membership
numbers after 1944. 1
Nor can we discount the indirect benefits which the Institute derived from the other ways
in which the Corporation assisted the development of Australian libraries, including travel
grants to both senior and promising librarians, funds to strengthen university libraries in
Pert and Adelaide, assistance to hold a conference of university librarians and grants to
the Free Library Movement. Everything which contributed to the increased effectiveness of
ibranes and the professional development of librarians reinforced the work of the Institute
in achieving its objects.
Munn—Pitt Report
The Munn-Pitt Report certainly made Australian librarians think about the kind of assoc-
ation they wanted, although what eventuated in the Institute was probably not exactly what
t e authors ol the report had in mind. The Australian Library Association was nearer to
their model and might well have been reformed to take account of the need for professional
examinations and membership. But the flexibility of the Victorian library leadership and the
inflexibility of those in New South Wales drove the profession into an exclusive organisation
It can be said that the Munn-Pitt Report shocked the non-professionals into inaction, leaving
the way clear for the Institute to germinate. But it also stirred many others to action There
was something in the report for many people with various motivations to nail to their masts:
m ividuals imbued with public-spiritedness like Remington, politicians seeking to make
an impact like Drummond and Grenfell Price, educators like Tate and Cunningham and
academics like Copland and Duncan. These people were powerful allies in the movement
to improve library services, and we can credit the Munn-Pitt Report with the stimulation of
Uniting a profession


library-mindedness, helping to create an environment in which various movements —the
Free Library Movement and the Institute among them —could flourish.
Lack of opposition
Despite the rancour which had followed the refusal of New South Wales librarians to affiliate
with the Australian Library Association there was remarkable support across the country for
the new Institute. ER Pitt was after all still the President of the Australian Library Association
when the Institute was first mooted, but the Victorian librarians did nothing to thwart the
Institute. Even though they retained their parallel state organisation, the Library Association
of Victoria, throughout the life of the Institute, they were allies, not antagonists. The Institutes
Association of South Australia was a horse of another colour, and scarcely sympathetic, but
it had its own constituency outside the scope of the Institute.
True, an Australian Country Library Association was established during the life of the
Institute. This originated at the Kyancutta Institute in South Australia and sought to promote
the establishment and improvement of libraries in country and provincial towns outside a
radius of twenty-five miles of the General Post Office in the nearest State or federal capital
city. It drew up a draft constitution in 1939, with membership open to persons interested
or engaged in country libraries and educational institutions, but it was short-lived. 731 More
persistent was the mainly Victorian group of special librarians and information officers, many
of whom defied sustained attempts to bring them into the Institute’s fold, but they were by
no means a threat to the viability of the Institute.
Generational change
Part of the appeal of the Institute to its members lay in its embrace of new ideas and ini-
tiatives and the major role which younger members of the profession were able to take in
the Institute’s activities, nationally and locally. It is significant that those who drew up its
Constitution—Foxcroft, Metcalfe and White—were deputy librarians. These individuals and
their juniors were generally more open to new ideas and less steeped in interstate rivalry
than their seniors, who were not really comfortable with each other and had little experience
of working together. As many of the elder statesmen left the profession in the early 1940 s
younger, more active and more questioning members of the profession took their places
and began to assert themselves in the Institute. By then many had had their eyes opened by
travel to progressive library nations like the United Kingdom and the United States or had
heard accounts given by the visitors when they returned to Australia. Others had conversed
with one or more of the American librarians attached to the United States Information Li-
braries in Australia during the war. Yet others were corresponding with former colleagues
who were now working in libraries overseas. Members of the Institute were becoming bet-
ter informed, as well as better educated, once the examination and certification system was
under way. The generational change is evident both at a Branch level, where young librarians
like Jean P Whyte assumed office, and at a national level. There was a growing questioning
of assumptions —the frank post mortem after the 1946 conference in Hobart was an early
manifestation of this change of mood.
Symbolic of the past generation was the Library Group, which included no women, no
university librarians, no special librarians and no public librarians. It failed to represent
some States, was dominated by elder statesmen and, when acting as a conduit between the
profession and its Carnegie benefactor, presumed to speak for the whole profession. The
Institute, by contrast, was refreshingly democratic and far more representative: it would


count university and special librarians—and a woman—among its Presidents, although it
is true that President and Vice-President were often elected unopposed after manoeuvrings
to ensure suitable nominations.
So younger librarians and would-be librarians joined and remained members, many
aspiring to office at a Branch or national level but in turn yielding, during the Library As-
sociation of Australia years, to younger blood at the appropriate time.
Executive support
Nonetheless the support of the leaders of the profession and the institutions which they
headed was vital to the establishment and development of the Institute. Its leaders were senior
librarians, who encouraged their staff to join, facilitated their attendance at conferences, made
meeting space available for Branch meetings, provided accommodation for office-bearers,
threw themselves into arrangements for conferences and frequently paid for some of the
social gatherings which accompanied conferences out of their own pockets. 732
Ihe personal qualities of the leadership were important: Executive and Council members
were all people in authority who were used to getting things done. They came from libraries
in which ‘librarianship’ had some substance and where there was some kind of training. It
is no coincidence that the first four Presidents of the Institute represented the four foremost
Australian libraries, were all members of the Library Group and had over 150 years of library
experience between them.
Behind these elder statesmen was the next generation of potential leaders: Archer, Arnot,
Metcalfe, Radford and White, to name just a few. They were even more committed to a national
association, with their career aspirations and visions for the profession still stretching ahead
of them. These were people with ideas to match their forceful personalities. With undiluted
commitment to the profession, they were prepared to devote hour after hour and day after
day of their own time to the Institute. As professionals they shared in its success.
Powerful allies
Ihe Institute’s leading members also had powerful allies in the bureaucracy and in several
Parliaments. Binns, as National and Parliamentary Librarian combined, had unrivalled access
to the corridors of power in what was then a much more intimate federal Parliament House.
In New South Wales the close association between Ifould and Drummond, his Minister
of many years standing, is now well documented. 733 But Ifould was not the only Sydney
librarian able to exert political pressure and Drummond not the only ally in Parliament, as
was well illustrated when Institute representation on the Library Board of New South Wales
was being considered.
In 1939 the New South Wales Branch made representations to Drummond for an Institute
member to be appointed to the Library Board, which would be established once the legisla-
tion had been passed. Before they could interview Drummond, the Bill was introduced into
the Parliament without the necessary clause. There was a flurry of lobbying, and Green, who
was then a member of the Institute Council, asked Tom Mutch, a former Labor minister and
long-serving member of the Public Library of New South Wales board of trustees, to propose
an amendment to the Libtary Bill giving a seat on the new Library Board to a representative
of iho Institute. Clive Evatt, the shadow Minister, was not believed to be sympathetic—on
the grounds that it was bad enough to have Ifould, without giving him someone else to help
him. Nonetheless Mutch proposed the amendment, which was accepted, so that Section 3
Uniting a profession


subsection 3 of the new Act stated: ‘that of the appointed members one shall be a representa-
tive of the New South Wales Branch of the Australian Institute of Librarians’. 734
Demonstrated success
As we have seen, not all of the Institute’s ventures were crowned with instant success. The
examination system took seven years to get up and running but was then a runaway winner.
Earlier achievements included the regular conferences and proceedings and the acknowledge-
ment of the Institute’s contribution to the classification of Australiana. Later came recogni-
tion of the Institute’s part in library services for the troops. Such landmarks did not perhaps
cut most ice with ordinary members. They were more affected by Branch activities and the
sense of fellowship and common cause which these engendered. We must remember that
most members were unable to attend conferences in other States, for Carnegie assistance
subsidised, but did not wholly cover their travelling expenses. The Institute would have
meant little had it not been for its success in attracting and maintaining members’ interest
at a local level. Most Branches were vigorous: had the Institute relied totally on national
meetings and postal communications it would have quickly withered, just as the Library
Association of Australasia had done.
Australian Council for Educational Research
Much heat has been generated over the part played by the Australian Council for Educa-
tional Research (ACER) in the foundation of the Institute and the development of library
services in Australia. As early as 1941, Cunningham wrote that ‘the immediate origin of the
present Institute is probably to be sought in the discussions which took place at meetings
of the [Library] Group sitting under a non-librarian Chairman [Tate]. Indeed one of the first
formal motions passed at a Group meeting advocated and supported the formation of an
Australia-wide professional association of librarians. The Australian Council for Educational
Research on its own behalf lent further support by linking the Canberra session of the New
Education Fellowship Conference with the inaugural meeting of the Institute and by bringing
Mr Salter Davies from England as one of the speakers at the conference’. 735
Certainly the linking of the New Education Fellowship Conference with the foundation
of the Institute was facilitated by the ACER. Financial support for the Institute was indeed
channelled through the ACER, but the money was actually from the Carnegie Corporation.
Nonetheless there has been a persistent view that the Institute only managed to survive
financially because of the generosity of the ACER, a perception which Metcalfe had tried to
counter, occasionally rather ungraciously, in the 19405. The perception was still alive in the
19505, and was given new impetus by Barry Scott in a paper read before the Queensland
Branch and later published in the Australian Library Journal: Scott referred to the Institute as
having lived ‘for years on the generosity of the ACER and indirectly the Carnegie Corpora-
tion’. 736 Metcalfe bridled at this assertion in relation to the ACER. Whilst acknowledging
the financial contribution of the Carnegie Corporation and the various forms of assistance
provided by the Public Library of New South Wales, he took issue with the idea of the
ACER’S ‘generosity’ in a lengthy response to Scott’s paper. 737 Metcalfe covered similar ground
in 1962 when he reviewed Cunningham’s The Australian Council for Educational Research
and library services in Australia. 738
Metcalfe was consistent, to say the least. As early as 1943 he had wanted it made perfectly
clear that financial assistance was actually coming from the Carnegie Corporation. As the
Council minutes of the time recorded: ‘ln order to avoid any misunderstanding should the


accounts be read later on as historical records, Mr Metcalfe moved, seconded by Mr Purnell
and carried that the words “from the ACER” be deleted wherever they occurred and that the
words “Carnegie Corporation through the Library Group” be used wherever necessary, and
that it is indicated in footnotes that the payments were made through the ACER’. 739
The help which the ACER gave the profession and the Institute was perhaps most ac-
curately—and tactfully—described by its Vice-President at the handing-over of the balance
of Carnegie funds to the new Library Association of Australia in 1950: ‘Our Council, in
lending its services to library promotion in the early stages, acted as an informed and willing
instrument rather than as an active agent’. 740
The impetus for change
By 1949 the Institute was ripe for change, or rather for transition to a more broad-based as-
sociation. 4 he Institute and the profession had established their credentials, with widespread
recognition, a solid membership which included many new members, an educational and
training standard for members and a changing of the guard with the passing or retirement
of many of the elder statesmen of the Institute. The fear of a horde of unqualified custodians
of mechanics’ institutes over-running a professional body had vanished. The Free Library
Movement had virtually wound up, leaving ground which the Institute was constitutionally
unable to cover: the promotion of libraries. A new prophet from abroad, Lionel McColvin,
had confirmed in timely fashion what Metcalfe and others had been saying for some time:
that the Institute should broaden its focus and widen its membership base, thus stepping
into line with library associations in other English-speaking countries.
The climate was right, and Metcalfe had further ammunition to hurl at waverers. First
there was the spectre of some other body speaking for Australian libraries and librarians,
and Metcalfe made no secret of his sensitivity to the role of the ACER. If library authorities
and employing bodies joined together outside the Institute it would set professional or-
ganisation back two decades. How much better it would be to bring all the parties together
into an expanded Institute and to attract allies and advocates with an interest in the library
cause as full members.
Second there was the precarious nature of Institute funding without a broadened mem-
bership base. Grace and favour arrangements and voluntary efforts were unsustainable. A
head office and a permanent secretariat, marks of an established professional organisation,
were required. A professional journal had long been hoped for. What is more the Carnegie
Corporation promised that a widened association would benefit from the substantial funding
which had previously been directed to library promotion. These were powerful motivations
and convincing arguments, and they fell upon overwhelmingly receptive ears, as a new chapter
opened in the history of professional organisations among Australian librarians.
Unfinished business
Although the achievements of the Institute were considerable, in November 1949 there was
much left undone which would require the new Association’s attention. Some issues had
fallen outside the Institute’s objects and were understandably neglected. Others had been
hampered by lack of infrastructure. Some of what at first sight appeared to be resounding
successes had stings in their tails and would remain what are euphemistically known as
‘challenges’ for a considerable time. It says much for the openness of the Institute and the
new Library Association of Australia that such matters were tackled frankly and spiritedly
and that solutions were flagged and steadily pursued during the following years.


Library promotion
McColvin’s suggestions for widening the membership and emphasising the promotion of li-
brary services indicate that he believed that the Australian Institute of Librarians had not taken
a lead in stressing the importance of libraries. Indeed there had been little formal attention
given by the Institute to library promotion, and it was not amongst its objects. Nonetheless
many Branch activities had brought libraries into the public and official eye. In some cases
Institute members were directly assisting the Free Library Movement—Metcalfe, for ex-
ample, was its technical adviser in New South Wales, and this was no sinecure. Inevitably any
success in raising the standard of librarianship and the status of librarians generally rubbed
off on libraries at large and helped the cause. Moreover for many years library promotion
and lobbying, particularly for free public libraries, had been enthusiastically taken up by
the various Free Library Movements. But there was much unfinished business to which the
new Association could direct attention in succeeding decades.
A professional journal
The Institute had a good record of conferences and conference proceedings. It had lately
issued some stencilled newsletters, and all its annual reports and accounts were available in
print form, but it had not managed to start its own journal. Even the conference proceed-
ings could be criticised for not recording discussion of papers presented; so there was not
the full flow of communication which one might expect from a fully fledged professional
organisation. It was not lack of material but a shortage of funds which had prevented a
journal coming into being. The Association’s General Council moved very quickly and in
1950 resolved to publish a journal. The first issue, free to members of the Association, ap-
peared in July 1951.
Industrial issues
From the very start the Institute had monitored advertisements for library staff, contacting
errant employers to stress the need for professional qualifications, or, if the field of applicants
was likely to be very limited, to suggest training for appointees in a suitable library. 741 The
major employers—the state and university libraries—were co-operative, as one would expect,
with so many of their senior staff prominent in the Institute. In the larger libraries appoint-
ments to senior positions in particular were generally to the Institute’s satisfaction—Metcalfe
in 1959 could not remember a single appointment to a major position of someone who was
not qualified at least by significant experience. This, he noted, was a better record than in
the Linked Kingdom and the United States, where from time to time people with neither
library qualifications nor experience were still being appointed to senior positions.
The State and Commonwealth public service boards were quick to recognise the Institute’s
examination system. In 1946, for example, Metcalfe was able to report that the New South
Wales Public Service Board had accepted the Institute’s examinations in place of its own,
except for two papers—one on library administration in New South Wales, which required
a knowledge of the Library Act, and a general knowledge paper, although a university degree
was acceptable in lieu of the latter. 742 The Institute’s examinations were also recognised by the
Library Board of New South Wales as approved qualifications for librarians, and there was
growing recognition in other States also. 743 In the same year it was reported that professional
library officers were accepted for membership of the Professional Officers’ Association, and
membership of the Institute was accepted as a necessary requirement for librarians in the
Commonwealth Public Service. A few years later the Commonwealth Public Service Board


was receiving advice from the Institute’s Council on salary rates for librarians in departmental
libraries. 744
These were major achievements for a professional association which had not consciously
set out to make its presence felt industrially, although in many ways this was a consequence
of the progress the Institute made with the standards of librarianship and the status of
librarians. 745
The situation in special libraries was a little different, and progress was still to be made
to convince some government departments and instrumentalities that their special libraries
needed someone with library qualifications, rather than a subject specialist or information
officer. This lack of progress was despite two developments which greatly strengthened the
Institute’s case: the system of examination and certification, which gave credibility to the
Institute’s arguments, and the prominent role which librarians played in government depart-
ments and research institutes during the war. By 1949 there was still no universal acceptance
of library qualifications as essential in smaller libraries.
To this extent the groundwork laid by the Institute in examination and certification was
incomplete and imperfect. The persuasiveness of office bearers, who at one time or another
included the most senior and influential of the state and university librarians, had not been
enough. It is sobering to note in the very first annual report of the new Association that
‘conditions are still such that libraries are still established and “librarians” appointed with
both employer and employee unaware of the professional status of librarianship and even
of the existence of the Association’. 746 There would be no instant hx. Not until phrases
like ‘eligible for professional membership of the Library Association of Australia’ began to
creep into industrial awards and job advertisements would the problem of unqualified or
underqualified staff filling library positions in some institutions be fully resolved. By the
late 19505, possession of LAA qualifications was being specified by a substantial majority
of Australian libraries in job advertisements and position descriptions. Only then could it
really be said that the professional organisation was ‘the principal guardian of standards in
Australian librarianship’ in all its senses. 747
Examination system
The examination system had been conceived as providing a progression from a preliminary
qualification to a full qualification entitling the holder to be regarded as a full member of
the profession, with an advanced Diploma available to those who wished to demonstrate
that they had furthered their professional knowledge.
Most obviously, the Diploma had proved to be a fizzer. No-one gained the Diploma during
the life of the Institute, and only two people would ever receive it during the years it was
offered by the LAA. Looking back in his Presidential Address in 1959, Metcalfe was candid,
labelling the Diploma ‘in one rude syllable, a flop’. 748 He noted that by 1959 there were
many people who were qualified to attempt the Diploma, but only a handful had ever done
so. There was little motivation, except intellectual curiosity or ego, to pursue a Diploma,
and certainly no monetary reward for holding it. Neither the Institute nor the Association
could claim it as a success, although two successful candidates were certainly an advance on
none. It was also true that from the late 1940 s many of those who wished to seek a higher
qualification did so at overseas institutions.
Progression from Preliminary to Qualifying Examinations one would have thought a
much more travelled path, but there were still alarming numbers of members who had not


gone beyond the Preliminary Certificate. By 1949 only seventy-seven candidates had com-
pleted the Qualifying Examination, whereas 746 had managed the Preliminary. This large
group had taken a first step towards the profession, but not actually into it. The Preliminary
Examination was not intended as a qualification for sub-professional assistants, but many
seemed content to remain as such. Even in 1959 Metcalfe noted that there were people
in some small special, public and school libraries who had passed only the Preliminary
Examination. There were still some older librarians in employment who had never passed
any examinations. 749 It would require close contact with employing bodies to ensure that
‘librarians’ were appointed who were fully qualified: in due course this would be reflected
in industrial awards and agreements.
Graduate profession
There was little argument among the founders of the Institute against the proposition that
it was desirable for members of the profession to be graduates, but they recognised that
for an interim period it would not be possible to insist upon this. Such a move would have
antagonised the large number of practitioners without degrees. There was also the niggling
fear that the profession might not yet be sufficiently attractive to graduates—or at least to a
balance of male and female graduates. So in the meantime graduates would be given accel-
erated progression through the examination and certification procedures. In the event this
interim arrangement outlasted the Institute. When in 1959 Metcalfe concluded that ‘we will
not raise or maintain the status of librarianship and all that goes with status, without both
general and technical studies at the tertiary or university level’, he cannot have anticipated
that an exclusively graduate entry to the profession was still many years away. 750 This un-
finished business of the Institute was on the agenda of the Library Association of Australia
until the final sittings for its Registration Examination in 1980.
Insistence upon graduate entry was always likely to be problematic, not just because of
the qualifications (or lack of them) of practitioners at the time the Institute was founded but
also because there was some work in libraries which could be performed by library assist-
ants who did not have the same professional and academic qualifications as librarians. Any
comprehensive system of education for library work would need to allow for appropriate
categories of membership for para-professionals. Instead the Institute included a large number
of half-fledged library workers who had passed only the Preliminary Examination. Perhaps
it was best that way, for an interim period at least, for to increase the number of categories
of membership would have served to fragment the professional body still further, as well as
to dilute the strength of the argument for recognition as a profession.
Library schools
With the wisdom of hindsight we can understand that not only entrance standards but also
the mode in which library training was offered were, by 1949, still far from the ideal which
the Institute’s founders may have wished. The combination of on-the-job learning, set read-
ing lists, private study and, if one were fortunate, access to a library school in Canberra,
Sydney or Melbourne, or to lectures given by volunteers in their spare time, was imperfect.
By the early 1950 s this method was beginning to lack credibility, and pre-employment
qualification was beginning to find proponents, ‘lf we insist that our juniors do the best they
can with makeshift evening courses or private study for external examinations’, Metcalfe
would tell the 1959 conference, ‘then again we will be denying and preventing the very
professional status we are claiming’. 751 By then the long-awaited university-based school
of librarianship was being established by Metcalfe himself at the University of New South


Wales. Its postgraduate diploma in librarianship would be the first pre-employment library
qualification in Australia.
Why did it take so long to establish a university-based school of librarianship? They were
certainly no novelty around the world. There had been such schools in the United States since
1887, in the United Kingdom since 1919, in Canada since 1928 and in South Africa since
1939. The British example is enlightening, as the first library school, established in 1919 at
the University of London, was still the only one in 1959. The main reason why there had not
been further British schools of librarianship, Metcalfe believed, was because of the attitude
of the Library Association. Like the Australian Institute of Librarians, the Library Association
did not at that time require a graduate qualification for its professional membership or for
the right to sit its examinations. 7,52 If the Institute did not insist upon graduate entry how
could it effectively lobby for the establishment of a post-graduate qualification? Clearly the
time was not ripe in the 1940 s for such a university course in Australia, but in the 1950 s the
expansion of higher education would make it possible. As early as 1952 there was a proposal
by the Australian National University to establish a library school in Canberra. For reasons
which are still not entirely clear, this proposal was discouraged by Metcalfe, who was then
Honorary General Secretary of the LAA and chair of its Board of Examiners. Within a few
years, however, Metcalfe was planning his own school of librarianship at the University of
New South Wales, and this school opened, with Metcalfe as Director, in 1960. 753 In succeeding
decades schools would multiply, and the accreditation of university schools of librarianship
by the professional association, along the lines of the American system, which Metcalfe had
favoured all along, would become a reality.
Status
There was a greater degree of public recognition of the librarian as a species in 1949 than
there had been when the Institute was founded. There was some official recognition in le-
gislation and awards: the New South Wales Library Act, for example, provided that librarians
in charge of public libraries had to be certified, giving members of the profession the same
level of protection as that enjoyed by the town clerk, the municipal health inspector or the
shire engineer. 754 There was much progress still to be made: when Metcalfe reviewed the
situation in 1947 he acknowledged that in the public eye librarians did not have the status
of doctors, lawyers, engineers or pharmacists. He believed at that time that librarians had at
least as much recognition as accountants or architects. There had been no progress in trying
to give the term ‘librarian’ some kind of legal protection, for example by designating profes-
sional members of the Institute as ‘chartered librarians’ akin to chartered accountants and
chartered architects. Librarians had not secured, and in fact would never secure, exclusive
use of the terms ‘librarian’ or ‘library’—anyone with a collection of books to rent out could
call it a library and themselves a librarian.
Over the coming decades, however, librarians would creep up the professional league
table, passing through what Henry Mayer called the ‘grey-blur professional’ stage to a greater
degree of recognition. This progress was helped in no small measure by increasing num-
bers of graduate entrants, the establishment of postgraduate schools of librarianship, the
growth of library services, the rapid adoption of innovative technology and the hard-won
Royal Charter. Granted to the Library Association of Australia in 1963, the Royal Charter
was seen as a necessary safeguard for professional standards and status and as protection
of the Association’s position, expertise and authority to speak for libraries and librarians


throughout the land; it soon added postnominals and with them a certain sense of arrival
and added legitimacy. 75,5
Membership base
On the face of it the membership in f 949 represented a healthy advance on the 151 members
at the time of foundation. When the Institute became the Library Association of Australia it
had 793 members. It is true that three-quarters of these were still only student associates and
that the number of full members had advanced only to 219, but nonetheless the incidence
of membership of the Institute in the workplace was remarkably high. It had more or less
dominated the library workforce and had achieved all it could within its constitution as far
as total membership was concerned. Expansion depended on diversification into corporate
membership and membership by those with an interest in the organisation’s objects in one
way or another, but without devaluing professional membership in any way.
The Association’s success in reaching into categories of membership which the early
Institute had avoided would soon be clear in increased numbers and in its improved finan-
cial position. By 1960 the Library Association of Australia had a total of 3293 members, of
whom a creditable 475 had completed all the requirements of professional membership, 375
were corporate members and the remaining 2443 were ordinary members. Over a third of
these ordinary members were currently sitting the Association’s examinations at thirty-six
Australian and nine overseas centres.
Sectional interests
The leaders of the Institute had tried to bring into the fold librarians from as many kinds
of library as possible, in order to neutralise concerns that the organisation would be domi-
nated by the state libraries. By 1949 university, public and special librarians had long been
prominent in national and Branch executives and some committees, and many activities,
including sessions at conferences, had been geared towards special and school librarians.
Some Branches had been more successful with special librarians and school librarians than
others, mainly because of their size but also of the enthusiasm of their members. New South
Wales stands out as the most successful, assisted by the strong links between the Public
Library of New South Wales and the government department libraries and by the fact that
the Library was part of the Education portfolio. Nonetheless the means to unite groups
with shared interests across the Institute were limited; there were no national sections or
special interest groups. Indeed, to have foreshadowed them in 1937, when the emphasis
was on uniting a small body of diverse librarians so that they spoke with one voice, might
have seemed ludicrous. With growing membership, however, sections and even Branch and
regional sections had become viable as well as desirable and were specifically authorised by
the constitution of the new Association.
Summing up
Authoritative judgement of the success of the Institute’s metamorphosis should be possible
when there has been a detailed study of the early years of the Library Association of Australia.
Did the expected influx of corporate members occur? Did the new Association get its teeth
into issues which its predecessor had only been able to eye wistfully? Was it finally able to
stand on its own feet without financial transfusions from the Carnegie Corporation? Was
the Association able to maintain professional standards while attracting non-professionals
into its membership? Did the new Association forestall the establishment of, or obviate the
necessity for, rival organisations in the field of library and information work?


Superficially the answer to all of these questions must be ‘yes’, for the Association has
endured. Whilst other bodies have come and gone—including the Australian Advisory
Council on Bibliographical Services, the Australian Libraries and Information Council and the
Australian Library Promotion Council—over half a century later the Institute’s direct lineal
descendant is still thriving, having itself changed from the Library Association of Australia
into the Australian Library and Information Association and subsequently absorbing the
Australian Council of Libraries and Information Services.
Membership did indeed prove to be something of a slumbering leviathan which the
transition to Association immediately roused most effectively. Within a year, even with
little active recruitment, membership had grown by almost sixty per cent. Within a short
time the ranks of affiliate members included many of the influential community and gov-
ernment leaders whom the Institute had wanted to engage. Corporate membership grew
markedly after a slow start. Even a number of companies which had a policy of not joining
associations—including the Broken Hill Proprietary Limited, John Fairfax and Sons and the
Goodyear Tyre and Rubber Company—were sufficiently interested to make a donation to
the new Association. 756
Increased membership could not be immediately translated into healthier finances. After
one year of existence the Association reported a balance of £1033 18s 6d, plus £6OO invested
in Commonwealth Bonds. This looks less healthy when one considers that around £IOOO
had already been in the Institute’s coffers (including the £6OO in Commonwealth Bonds) at
the time of transition, and over £IOOO had been transferred from the ACER, being the bal-
ance of funds granted by the Carnegie Corporation of New York. One can see how grateful
the new Association was for donations from some non-member businesses and other ben-
efactors. For the Association was now paying for clerical assistance and was liable for such
incidentals as workers’ compensation insurance. A future infusion of US$35 000 from the
Carnegie Corporation of New York awaited them, although they could not yet count that
particular chicken. 7 ’ 7 Nonetheless they still had a journal to launch and aspired to graduate
from grace-and-favour accommodation to an office of their own.
None of this would have been possible without the firm foundation provided by the
Institute. The Institute can be seen as a deliberate turning inward of Australian librarians
in order to define a library profession in Australia. In this its greatest achievement was the
establishment of professional qualifications for librarians. Education for librarianship, to-
gether with the passing of legislation establishing free public libraries in New South Wales,
Victoria and Tasmania (aided by the Free Library Movement), represented the great advances
in librarianship in Australia between 1937 and 1949. Once firmly established it was time
to rejoin the wider community and enlist allies in the cause of library promotion. In this
decision the example of other library associations, the promise of more Carnegie money and
the fear of another organisation usurping the Institute’s role played a significant part.
M cCallum’s view
In 1948 CA McCallum presented a paper at the annual meeting of the Victorian Branch.
He noted that in 1937 the Institute had been regarded ‘more as a body of very important
people in its library world than the democratic organisation it is today’. 758 On the status and
standards of librarianship he thought that progress was satisfactory, due to the Institute’s
system of examination and certification. In public library development five of the six States
had established a state library board of some description, while Western Australia was
in the process of drafting a bill. For McCallum the successful ingredients in the very real


progress since 1937 included not only the Institute but also the Munn-Pitt Report, Tate,
the McColvin Report, Remington and the Free Library Movement, as well as the Library
Association of Victoria.
Archer’s view
Ellinor Archer provided a contemporary view of the successes of the Institute in her Presi-
dential Address to its last meeting in 1949. She believed that progress in the technical aspects
of librarianship in Australia had largely been due to the efforts of the Institute. Citing her
own career —with no experience at all in library work, she had been placed in charge of
a library simply because she was available —she said that until comparatively recently the
only libraries where there was any concept of professional library work were—with a few
exceptions—the state, national and university libraries, 759 As for status she felt that it was
difficult to assign credit —there had been a worldwide rise in the profile of the librarian,
Archer said. But she instanced Metcalfe’s attendance at the UNESCO 2nd General Confer-
ence and his chairmanship of the Libraries Working Committee as an indication of the way
in which the Institute had added to the profession’s prestige locally. 760
Metcalfe’s view
John Metcalfe’s view of the achievements of the Australian Institute of Librarians was ex-
pressed on a number of occasions, most succinctly perhaps when he introduced the first
issue of the Australian Library Journal in July 1951. He excused the failure to get a journal
off the ground during the Institute years but commented that ‘we went from strength to
strength in other ways’.
‘None of the kinds of libraries and librarians, and none of the States, has stood apart from
us under our old or our new constitution’, he continued. ‘Our membership steadily rose in
peace and war and in peace again, and not only rose in numbers but in standards and the
status of the library profession which we joined together in the first place to improve. We
established examinations and certificates and got them recognised and sought after, as no
other library association had done before ours. The Free Library Movement which worked
with us got public library development on what at last appears to be firm foundations. The
Carnegie Corporation of New York has given us generous support. We laboured, but also
the winds of doctrine and the tides of the times were going our way. Ancestral voices even
in our midst kept saying, the time is not yet ripe, for the things we did. But the time was
ripe, and the fruit grew on the tree’. 761
Scott’s view
Writing in 1956, Barry Scott maintained that the system of examination and certification
was the great success story of the Institute, as it had raised the standard of librarianship im-
measurably and fairly uniformly across the nation: ‘I think it can be said without reservation
that this was the most successful venture of the Institute and remains the most successful
function of the present Association’. 762
Whyte’s judgement
Jean P Whyte too believed that the most important achievement of the Institute was the
establishment of a system of education for librarianship. In fact the need to establish such
a system was the most important reason for the replacement of the Australian Library As-
sociation by the Australian Institute of Librarians in 1937. 763


The South Australian Branch Quarterly Bulletin in Winter 1949 carried a message from
Whyte, who was then Branch president. It began: ‘lt is eleven years since the Australian
Institute ol Librarians was formed. The objects of the Institute are “to unite persons engaged
in library work, and to improve the standard of librarianship and the status of the library
profession in Australia”. The greatest single factor contributing towards the realisation of
these objects is the appointment of a Board of Examination and Certification. Although in
the past the shortage of trained people and the ignorance or lethargy of employers has led
to many positions being filled by unqualified people, it is certain that the growing power of
the AIL will soon make this practice impossible’. 764
Half a century later, with the benefit of her extensive forays into the Institute’s archives,
research into its publications, discussion with members and colleagues and many years of
writing and concentrated thought, that was still her considered view when she embarked
on the writing of the Institute’s history.
Chapter 11: Endnotes
710 JW Metcalfe, ‘Over to us !’Australian Library Journal, vol 1 no 1, July 1951, p 3.
711 HM Green to L Scott, 3 August 1943, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84,
717 K Binns, The need for library co-operation’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, 3rd and 4th
Annual Meetings and Conference, Adelaide, June 15th-17th, 1940, Canberra, June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth
Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th-20th, 1942 , Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, p9l.
As Whyte has shown, communication among Australian university librarians improved considerably
during the 1920 s and 19305. See her ‘Professional discourse among university librarians in Australia,
1926-1937’, in Innovation no stranger: essays in Australian librarianship in honour of Ira Raymond, edited
by Margy Burn and Christobel Palmer, Adelaide, Investigator Press for the Barr Smith Library, 1982,
pp 69-82.
713 E Archer, ‘Presidential Address. 1949: The Institute looks back’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Pro-
ceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947, Sydney, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1949, pll3.
714 K Binns, ‘The need for library co-operation’, p 93. Before World War II the Public Library of New South
Wales (PLNSW) and the Commonwealth National Library (CNL) both planned microfilming ventures
in the United Kingdom, When filming could actually begin after the war, it was a co-operative program
later known as the Australian Joint Copying Project.
715 J w Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947, and other papers, Sydney, Australian Institute of Librarians (AIL),
1949, p 53. Compare Barry Scott, Library associations in Australia: past and present’, Australian Library
Journal, vol 5 no 3, July 1956, pl 06: ‘lt [the AIL] was fairly successful in uniting the profession—only
about half a dozen well qualified librarians remaining outside it’.
716 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p 54.
717 In September 1944, for example, there were 282 members. During the preceding year twenty-two
members had resigned. Eleven were women who had given up work on marriage or for domestic
reasons, and eleven were student associates who had decided not to pursue library work. AIL, Annual
report, no 7, September 1944.
718 J Whyte, ‘John Metcalfe and the Library Association of Australia’, Australian Library Journal vol 20
no 4, May 1971, pll.
719 E Archer, ‘Presidential Address, 1949’, pll4.
720 K Binns, ‘The need for library co-operation’, p9l.
721 ibid., p 92.


722 In 1945 the Tariff Board investigated assistance to the Australian publishing industry. The Institute’s
view was that nothing should impede the free flow of information and publications, and Metcalfe made
a written submission on these lines to the Tariff Board on 22 November 1945 (Australian Institute
of Librarians, Minutes of Council, April 1946, ALIA records. National Library of Australia (NLA),
M 57446, box 40). After World War II there were currency restrictions which strictly limited imports
from the United States. In 1947 it was believed that these restrictions would inhibit the importation of
scientific and technical journals and books from the United States. At the annual meeting of the AIL
in 1947 it was resolved to ‘express anxiety at any possible reduction of the importation of books of a
scientific, informative or educational nature, and to urge the Commonwealth Government to facilitate
the flow of books as are essential to the industrial, economic and cultural life of the community’. The
AIL wrote to the Prime Minister on 27 October 1947 with partial success: the Prime Minister’s De-
partment replied on 19 November 1947 that licences would be issued to established book importers
to procure from dollar areas text books other than fiction prescribed by educational authorities for
the following year (ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 104).
723 Under the NSW Library Act 1939 the AIL was given a place on the Library Board of NSW. The first
Institute representative was EV Steel. In Victoria the Library Association of Victoria actually secured
two representatives on the Free Library Service Board, whereas only one member of the Board needed
to be a member of the Institute. In fact there was commonality of membership, but the legislative
distinction remained. Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p 57.
724 The nominee was HL White. AIL, Minutes of Council, 24-25 September 1943, ALIA records, NLA,
M 57446, box 40.
725 E Archer, ‘Presidential Address, 1949’, pi 12.
726 LC St A Key to Mavis Palmer, General Secretary, AIL, 9 June 1947, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 106.
727 As early as 1939 White had attended the conference of the Library Association at Liverpool in the UK
and the 12th session of the International Library Committee of IFLA at The Plague and Amsterdam,
where he presented a paper on Australian library development. AIL, Annual report , no 3, 15 June
1940. In September 1948 the Institute was represented at the IFLA Conference in London by Phyllis
Mander-Jones, Wilma Radford and Barbara Johnston. AIL, Federal Executive Newsletter , no 1, Septem-
ber-December 1948, p 4.
728 Among many institutions requesting copies of the proceedings in 1943 were the Chicago Public Library,
the Soviet Academy and Manchester Public Library. AIL, Minutes of Council, 24—25 September 1943,
ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 40.
729 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p 54-55.
730 L Scott, ‘Presidential Address, 1944’, p 32.
731 Joan Bedford, Honorary Secretary, Australian Country Library Association, to KS Cunningham, 16
February 1940, Australian Council for Educational Research (ACER) archives, Series 49, item 208.
This Association published the first and only issue of Country libraries in 1940 before petering out.
Michael Talbot (A chance to read: a history of the institutes movement in South Australia, Adelaide, Libraries
Board of South Australia, 1992, pl 80) attributes its failure to the isolation of its founder and the lack
of allies to lobby for it.
732 E Archer, ‘Presidential Address, 1949’, pll3.
733 DJ Jones, ‘WH Ifould and the development of library services in New South Wales, 1912-1942’, PhD
thesis, University of New South Wales, 1993.
734 Green told Mutch that the Institute was not synonymous with the PLNSW: the members whom the
Institute recommends are not likely, if some of us can help it, to back Ifould by any means unreserv-
edly’. HM Green to TD Mutch, 25 October 1939, [confidential], ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84.
The Institute had initially asked for two representatives. When the Board was formally reconstituted
in 1944, EV Steel was appointed as the Institute representative. There were actually three members
of the Institute on the Library Board: Remington, vice-chairman, Metcalfe, the executive member,
and Steel.
210
Achievements


737 KS Cunningham, The history, status and functions of the Library Group’.
7,6 Barry Scott, ‘Library associations in Australia: past and present’, p!O7.
,37 JW Metcalfe, ‘A comment on our history’, Australian Library Journal, vol 5 no 4, October 1956,
ppl42-144. See also Cunningham’s response, ‘Comment squared’, Australian Library Journal, vol 6 no
1, January 1957, pp 34-35; and Metcalfe’s further letter, ACER and LAA’, Australian Library Journal,
vol 6 no 2, April 1957, pp 74-76.
738 JW Metcalfe, review of KS Cunningham, The Australian Council for Educational Research in the Australian
Library Journal, vol 11, no 2, April 1962.
739 Minutes of the 9th meeting of Council, 24-25 September 1943, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 40.
740 Statement by Professor HI Lovell, Vice-President, ACER, 5 August 1950, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 106.
741 K Binns, ‘The need for library co-operation’, p 92.
742 JW Metcalfe, ‘Library development in New South Wales, 1943-1946’, Australian Institute of Librar-
ians: Proceedings, sth Conference, Hobart, April 1946, Melbourne, Australian Institute of Librarians,
1947,p67.
743 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p 54.
744 AIL, Minutes of Council, 24-25 November 1949, ALIA records, M 57446, box 40.
743 AIL, Annual report, no 9, October 1946.
Library Association of Australia, ‘Report for the year 1950’, Proceedings 7th Conference and 13th Annual
Meeting held at Melbourne, July 2nd to 4th, 1951, Sydney, LAA, 1952, p 97.
74/ LAA, Statement of history, objects, activities and achievements, 1961, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 109.
74,8 J W Metcalfe, ‘The standards of librarianship and the status of the library profession’, Australian Library
Journal, vol 8, no 4, October 1959, p 172.
749 ibid.
750 ibid,, p 175.
751 ibid., p 176.
732 By 1959 the Library Association in the United Kingdom was having to rethink its position because,
Metcalfe believed, members who wished to travel and obtain senior positions in other Commonwealth
countries were finding their non-graduate qualification a handicap, just as some Australians travel-
ling had found. JW Metcalfe, The standards of librarianship and the status of the library profession’,
p 179.
W Boyd Rayward, 'Library education’, in ALIAS: Australia’s library, information and archives services — an
encyclopaedia of practice arid practitioners, edited by Harrison Bryan, vol 3, Sydney, ALIA Press, 1989,
pB6. The reasons given by Metcalfe did have some validity: he wrote of the remoteness of Canberra
from major population centres—which would mean that most students would have had to live away
from home the lack of a variety of libraries to observe and the small number of qualified instructors
available. See J Whyte, ‘John Metcalfe and the Library Association of Australia’, pl 2.
754 JW Metcalfe, ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, p 56.
755 AL Johnson, The Royal Charter and its implications’, Australian Library Journal, vol 12 no 4, December
1963,pp182-186.
73(1 In November 1949 the Institute membership was 793. By December .1950 this had grown to 1260,
an increase of almost sixty per cent. The new categories of membership, affiliate and corporate, ac-
counted for sixty-three and forty-nine respectively. Of the sixty-three affiliate members forty-seven
were persons actively interested in the objects of the new Association, including about ten members


of boards of trustees and committees. Corporate membership included two universities, nine local
government authorities, thirty-seven manufacturers or businesses, companies, associations or other
bodies.
757 In 1951 the Carnegie Corporation of New York (CCNY) presented the LAA with US$35 000 for
administrative expenses. Florence Anderson, Carnegie Corporation Library Program, 1911—1961 , New
York, Carnegie Corporation of New York, 1963, plo2.
758 CA McCallum, ‘Survey of library development’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, 6th Confer-
ence, Sydney, October 1947, Sydney, AIL, 1949, p 35.
739 E Archer, ‘Presidential Address, 1949’, pplll—ll2.
760 ibid., pll2.
761 JW Metcalfe, ‘Over to us!’ p 3.
762 B Scott, ‘Library associations in Australia; past and present’, Australian Library Journal, vol 5, no 3,
July 1956, plo7.
763 Jean P Whyte, ‘From ALA to LAA—the Australian Institute of Librarians’ Australian Library History:
papers from the Second Forum on Australian Library History, Canberra, 19-20 July 1985, edited by Peter
Biskup and Maxine K Rochester, Canberra, Canberra College of Advanced Education, ppl22-133.
764 AIL, SA Branch, Quarterly Bulletin, no 10, Winter 1949, p [3],


Biographical notes
ADAMS, Joseph Robert George (1859-1919) joined the staff of the Public Library, Museum
and Art Gallery of South Australia on its foundation in 1884, was Librarian 1896-1904,
and General Secretary of the entire institution 1904-1919.
ALCOCK, Henry (1886-1948) was Professor of History and Economic Science at the Uni-
versity of Queensland, 1922-1948.
ANDERSON, Henry Charles Lennox (1853-1924) was Principal Librarian of the Public
Library of New South Wales, 1893-1905.
ARMSTRONG, Edmund La Touche (1864-1946) joined the Public Library of Victoria in
1881 and was Chief Librarian and Secretary of the Public Library, Museum and National
Gallery of Victoria, 1896-1925.
ARCHER, Mary Ellinor Lucy (1893-1979) was the first woman scientist at and from 1923 to
1954 the first Chief Librarian of what is now the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation (CSIRO) (formerly the Advisory Council of Science and Industry
and Council for Scientific and Industrial Research). She was a Foundation Member of
the AIL and President in 1948-1949.
ARNOT, Jean Fleming (1903-1993) joined the Public Library of New South Wales in 1921,
and was its head cataloguer when she retired in 1968.
BAMPFIELD, Frederick William (1867-1941) was librarian of the Adelaide Circulating
Library for fifty-seven years.
BARNARD, Marjorie Faith (1897-1987), writer under her own name and with Flora Elder-
shaw as ‘M Barnard Eldershaw’, worked at the Public Library of New South Wales from
1923 and was subsequently appointed to Sydney Teachers’ College and Sydney Technical
College. From 1942 to 1950 she worked in a Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation special library.
BARR, John (1887-1971) had worked in the Mitchell Library, Glasgow, as a teenager and
was a cataloguer at Fisher Library, University of Sydney, 1911—1913. He was appointed
librarian of the Auckland Public Library in 1913, retiring in 1952.
BARRY, Sir Redmond (1813-1880), judge of the Victorian Supreme Court, first Chancellor
of the University of Melbourne and first President of the Trustees of the Public Library
of Victoria 1853-1880.
BAITEN, Henry Cole (1884-1980) was librarian of Ballarat Mechanics’ Institute 1911-
1951.
BATTYE, James Sykes (1871-1954), historian and librarian, worked at the Public Library
of Victoria from 1889 to 1894. He was appointed Chief Librarian of the Victoria Public
Library (later styled the Public Library of Western Australia, subsequently the Library
and Information Service of Western Australia and now the State Library of Western
Australia) in f 894 and held this position until his death.
BAUD, William Charles (1890-1945) joined the Public Library of Victoria in 1912 and was
its Chief Librarian from November 1944 until his death in October 1945.


BELL, Frank Lancelot Sutherland (1904-1963) joined the Sydney Municipal Library in 1922
and was City Librarian of Sydney 1939-1963.
BENSON, Sir Clarence Irving (1897-1980), Methodist minister and library supporter, was
a Trustee of the Public Library of Victoria from 1942 and its chairman from 1946. He
chaired the Free Library Service Board 1946—1955 and was Vice-President of the Library
Council of Victoria 1966-1969. He was knighted in 1963.
BERTIE, Charles Henry (1875-1952), librarian and historian, was Chief Librarian of the
Sydney Municipal Library, 1909-1939.
BINNS, Kenneth (1882-1969) joined the University of Sydney Library in 1900. In 1911 he
was appointed to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Library as cataloguer and became
assistant librarian in 1918. He was in charge of the Australian Section, later known as
the Commonwealth National Library (now the National Library of Australia), from 1919.
He became Librarian in 1928 and retired in 1947.
BLAMEY, General Sir Thomas Albert (1884-1951) was deputy commander-in-chief, Middle
East, in the Australian Military Forces in 1940, at the time more extensive library services
for the troops were being proposed by the AIL. He later became commander-in-chief,
retiring from the army in 1945. He was promoted field-marshal in 1950.
BOOKER, Nancy Gwendoline (b. 1906) worked at Sydney Teachers’ College 1925-1939,
Armidale Teachers’ College 1940-1942, was librarian of Sydney Teachers’ College
1942-1953 and lecturer in school library practice, 1954-1958. In 1959 she joined the
University of Sydney Library, retiring in 1966. After her retirement she was a library
consultant.
BOYS, Robert Douglass (1866-1942) was head of the Lending Library at the Public Library
of Victoria from 1898, Deputy Librarian 1913-1925 and Chief Librarian 1925-1931.
BRAZIER, Amos William (1862-1929) joined the Public Library of Victoria in 1881. He
was Sub (Deputy) Librarian 1900-1910 and was in charge of the Lending Library of the
Public Library of Victoria 1910-1922.
BRIDESON, Hedley Cyril (1910-2003) joined the Public Library of South Australia as a
cadet in 1927, became Principal Librarian in 1955 and retired in 1970.
BROWN, William Henry, librarian of the Public Library of Queensland 1905-1949. When
he retired in 1949 his position was amalgamated with that of State Librarian, which had
been occupied by JL Stapleton since 1947.
BRYAN, Harrison (born 1923) was librarian of the University of Queensland 1950-1963,
librarian of the University of Sydney 1963—1980, and Director-General of the National
Library of Australia, 1980-1985.
BURMESTER, Clifford Amandus (1910-1991) joined the Commonwealth National Library
in 1935. He became Assistant National Librarian in 1967, retiring in 1971.
BURROW, Kenney William (died 1954) joined the staff of Fisher Library, University of Sydney
in 1914. He was knowledgeable about wireless and microfilming techniques.
CHAPMAN, Sir Robert William (1866-1942) was Professor of Engineering at the University
of Adelaide, 1907-1937. He was knighted in 1937.
CHIFLEY, Joseph Benedict (1885-1951) was Prime Minister of Australia, 1945-1949,
Biographicai Notes


CLARK, Ernest Hayden (1918-1971) worked at the University of Melbourne Library 1936-
1946, was librarian of the University of Tasmania 1946-1949, represented the Australian
National University in the United Kingdom 1949-1952 and was at the University of
Malaya 1952-1960. He became first librarian of Monash University in 1960.
CLARKE, Merle Constance (born 1923) worked at the Public Library of New South Wales
1942—1943, Sydney Technical College 1944—1946, Public Library of Queensland
1947-1948, Brisbane Municipal Library 1949-1953. From 1964 she was pathology
librarian at the Royal Brisbane Hospital.
CLUCAS, Robert John Miller (1871-1930) was the first full-time librarian at the University
of Adelaide, 1900-1930.
COFFMAN, Lotus Delta (1875-1938) was President of the University of Minnesota, 1920-
1938. He dealt in passing with Australian libraries in his 1932 report to the Carnegie
Corporation of New York, following a study visit to Australia.
COLLIER, James Douglas Archer (1893-1970), librarian of the Tasmanian Public Library,
1923-1943; State Librarian, State Library of Tasmania, 1943-1954.
COOKE, Thomas Fleming (1879-1955) joined the Public Library of Victoria in 1900 and
was Chief Librarian, 1944-1947.
COPLAND, Sir Douglas Berry (1894-1971), economist, diplomat and administrator, was
Professor of Commerce at the University of Melbourne and President of the Library As-
sociation of Victoria, He was later the first Vice-Chancellor of the Australian National
University (1948—1953) and Principal of the Australian Administrative Staff College
(1956-1959). He was knighted in 1950.
CORNER, Phyllis Margaret (born 1919) worked at the Public Library of New South Wales
1936-1954. She completed the Qualifying Examination in 1945 and was Honorary
Registrar and Secretary to the Board of Examination and Certification 1946-1950 (later
the LAA Board of Examination, Certification and Registration of Librarians).
COSGROVE, Sir Robert (1884-1969) was Premier of Tasmania 1939-1947, 1948-1958.
He was knighted in 1959.
COWAN, William Albert (1908-1984) was librarian of the University of Adelaide, 1933-
1964.
CRISP, Sir (Malcolm) Peter (1912-1984) was a judge of the Supreme Court of Tasmania
1952-1971 and chaired the Tasmanian Library Board 1956-1977. He was Library As-
sociation of Australia President 1964-1966. He was a member of the Council of the
National Library of Australia 1960-1972 (chairman 1971-1972).
CUNNINGHAM, Kenneth Stewart (1890—1976) educationist and promoter of libraries, was
executive officer and later director of the Australian Council for Educational Research
1930-1954.
DEWEY, Melvil (Melville Louis Kossuth Dewey) (1851-1931), American librarian and
educator, creator of the decimal classification system, a founder of the American Library
Association and of Library Journal, of which he was also editor. In 1883 Dewey became
the librarian of Columbia College (now Columbia University) in New York City, where he
founded the first ever library school in 1887, In December 1889 he became the director
of the New York State Library at Albany, retiring from that position in f 906.


BOBBIE, Nita May (1904-1992) was raised by her aunt, librarian Nita Kibble, after her
mother’s death. She was librarian and research officer at the Standards Association for
thirty-three years.
DOUIE, Charles Oswald G (1896-1953) was Secretary of the University of London. He
recommended substantial Carnegie support for Australian libraries in his 1933 report
on adult education in Australia and South Africa.
DRAKE, Cyril Lewis (born 1907) joined the Commonwealth National Library in 1936,
was appointed to the Public Library of Western Australia in 1946, and retired as chief
cataloguer of the Library Board of Western Australia in 1971.
DRUMMOND, David Herbert (1890-1965) Member of the New South Wales Legislative
Assembly 1920-1949, and Member of the House of Representatives 1949-1963. He was
Minister for Education in New South Wales, 1927-1930 and 1932-1941. During the
latter period he encouraged the Lree Library Movement, established the Libraries Advis-
ory Committee in New South Wales and, following its recommendations, introduced
the bill which became the Library Act, 1939.
DUNCAN, Walter George Keith (born 1903) academic, adult educator and library activist,
was Professor of History and Political Science at the University of Adelaide 1951-1968,
and President of the Library Association of Australia in 1960 and 1961.
EVATT, Clive Raleigh (1900-1984) barrister and politician, held a number of shadow port-
folios and ministries during his time in the NSW Parliament, 1939—1959.
FAIRFAX, Ruth (Mrs Hubert Fairfax) (1878-1948) was a Vice-President of the Free Library
Movement in New South Wales and became a Trustee of the Public Library of New
South Wales in 1937.
FEELY, John Andrew (1902-1965) joined the Public Library of Victoria in 1937 and became
Principal Librarian in 1960.
FERGUSON, Sir John Alexander (1881-1969), became a judge of the New South Wales
Industrial Commission in 1936. A keen collector of Australiana, he compiled the monu-
mental Bibliography of Australia (7 volumes, Sydney: Angus and Robertson, 1941-1969).
He was a Trustee of the Public Library of New South Wales, 1935-67. He was knighted
in 1961. His collection is now in the National Library of Australia.
FITZHARDINGE, Laurence Frederic (1908-1993) worked at the Commonwealth National
Library 1934-1944, lectured in Classics at the University of Sydney 1945-1950 and
became Reader in Australian History at the Australian National University in 1950.
FOLEY, Lillian Mary (died 1955) joined the Commonwealth National Library in 1927. She
was its liaison librarian in the United States and in charge of the Australian reference
library in the Australian Consulate-General in New York 1945-1954.
FOXCROFT, Albert Broadbent (1884-1938), rare book librarian, bibliographer and his-
torian of printing, worked at the Public Library of Victoria 1902-1938, where he was
responsible for the publication of a number of descriptive catalogues and became an
Australian authority on incunabula. He died returning from a Carnegie-sponsored study
tour in 1938 and was buried at sea.
FRAZER, Eric Lindsay (1892-1965) joined the Public Library of Victoria in 1912, where
he remained, apart from a period of military service during World War I, until his


appointment to the Victorian Parliamentary Library in 1923. He became Parliamentary
Librarian in 1929 and retired in 1957.
GILLMAN, Benjamin Hill (born 1870) was a railway executive.
GOULD, Norman, trained as a school teacher in New South Wales. He was a teacher-
librarian at North Sydney Boys’ High School and Armidale Boys’ High School. He was
librarian of the University of Queensland in 1947-1948.
GREEN, Henry Mackenzie (1881-1962), literary scholar, author and journalist, was librar-
ian, Fisher Library, University of Sydney 1921-1946.
GREGORY, Howard Aylwin (1900-1975) worked at Prahran Municipal Library where he
became City Librarian in 1940. In 1942 he took leave to work for the Library Section
of the Army Education Service, returning to Prahran in 1945. He was appointed City
Librarian of Coburg in 1952, retiring in 1965. He was then librarian at Northcote High
School and developed the new library for De La Salle College, Malvern, retiring again
in 1970.
HALL, Elizabeth Susie (1906-1994) was appointed cadet cataloguer at the Commonwealth
National Library in 1928 and was a cataloguer until 1943. From 1943 to 1945 she was
a Commonwealth National Library liaison officer in Melbourne providing reference as-
sistance to war-time departments. From 1946-1947, she instructed in cataloguing and
classification at the training school at the Commonwealth National Library, becoming
acting director of the Library School in 1948.
HARRY, Marjorie Ethel (born 1912) was librarian of the Statistical Bureau in Canberra,
1939-1944, and was subsequently chief cataloguer at the Commonwealth National
Library and editor of the Union list of serials 1947-1960.
HUGHES, William Morris (1862-1952), Prime Minister of Australia 1915-1923, was a
Vice-President of the Free Library Movement.
HULME, Marian Isabel (born 1898) was librarian of the Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research (later Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation) Division
of Forest Products, retiring in 1961.
IFOULD, William Herbert (1877-1969) joined the Public Library, Museum and Art Gal-
lery of South Australia in 1892 and in 1905 was appointed Principal Librarian. He
was Principal Librarian of the Public Library of New South Wales 1912-1942. He was
Foundation President of the AIL.
KANDEL, Isaac Leon (1881-1965) had an international reputation as an educationalist and
author. He attended the New Education Fellowship meetings in Australia and was awarded
the honorary degree of Doctor of Letters at the University of Melbourne in 1937.
KAPLAN, John (born 1911) gained the Diploma in 1955. He was appointed special collec-
tions librarian at the Public Library of New South Wales in 1963, the year in which he
gained the LAA Diploma, only the second person to be so awarded.
KEPPEL, Frederick Paul (1875-1943), was President of the Carnegie Corporation of New
York, 1923-1941.
KEY, Lionel Courtenay St Aubyn (1902-1982) joined the Commonwealth National Library
in 1925, and was its deputy until 1960. He retired as Commonwealth Parliamentary
Librarian in 1967.


KEYES, Herbert John (died 1952) worked at the Public Library of South Australia 1899-
1952.
KIBBLE, Nita Bernice (1879-1962) was the first woman appointed to the Public Library of
New South Wales. In 1899 she became a junior library assistant. She headed the Research
Department from its inception in 1919 and was principal research officer at the time ol
her retirement in 1943.
KIRBY, Frank Gordon (1885-1963) joined the Public Library of Victoria in 1912 and became
a teacher and librarian at Scotch College, Melbourne, in 1920,
LATHAM, Sir John Greig (1877-1964) was chief justice of the High Court of Australia
1935_1952. In 1937 he was first President of the Free Library Movement of Victoria,
and was President of the Library Association of Australia 1950-1953,
LEEPER, Alexander (1848-1934), a Classical scholar, was the first principal (later warden)
of Trinity College, University of Melbourne. He was a member of the Board of Trustees
of the Public Library of Victoria for 47 years, retiring from the presidency in 1928.
LEESON, Ida Emily (1885-1964) was appointed to the Public Library of New South Wales
in 1906, became Mitchell Librarian in 1932 and resigned in 1946. She then became
archivist/librarian for the School of Civil Affairs (later the Australian School of Public
Administration). From 1949 to 1950 she was librarian of the South Pacific Commission in
Noumea and from 1950 to 1956 worked for the South Pacific Commission in Sydney.
LESLIE, Esther Elizabeth Austin (born 1917) worked at the Public Library of New South
Wales 1937-1942, Newcastle Technical College 1942-1944, returned to the Public Lib-
rary of New South Wales 1944-1945 and worked at the NSW Department of Technical
Education 1945-1962. She was librarian of Sydney Teachers’ College 1962-1964 and
from 1964 headed TATE Library Services in NSW
LEVICK, Bernard Blaxland was librarian of the Colonial Sugar Refining Company in
Sydney
LUKIS, Meroula Frances Fellowes (Mollie) (born 1911) was appointed archivist at the Public
Library of Western Australia in 1945. When the archives were absorbed into the Battye
Library in 1956, she became the first Battye Librarian, retiring in 1971.
MCCALLUM, Colin Alexander (1895-1981) joined the Public Library of Victoria in 1919
and became Chief Librarian in 1946, retiring in 1960.
MCCOLVIN, Lionel Roy (1896-1976) was librarian at Ipswich (UK) (1924-1931), Hamp-
stead (1931-1938) and Westminster (1938-1961). He was Honorary Secretary of the
Library Association 1934-1951. He reported on British public libraries in The public
library system of Great Britain: a report on its present condition with proposals for post-war
reorganization (London, Library Association, 1942). He is best known in Australia for
his report on Australian libraries ( Public libraries in Australia: present conditions and future
possibilities, Melbourne, Melbourne University Press for the ACER, 1947).
MCDONALD, Arthur Leopold Gladstone (1898-1981) began his career at the Public Library
of Victoria, then moved to the University of Melbourne. He was appointed first librarian
of The Australian National University in 1948 and retired in 1960.
MCGREAL, Ronald Mervyn (1906-1992) trained as a school teacher before becoming in-
volved in library services for the armed forces in New South Wales during World War 11.


He became the first Secretary of the Library Board of New South Wales in 1945 and was
Deputy Principal Librarian of the Public Library of New South Wales 1959-1971.
MCKAY, Constance Beryl (1900-1981) began her library career in 1921 at the Public Library
of New South Wales, resigning when she married in 1932. She worked for the Com-
monwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation in 1940, and was librarian
of Commonwealth Industrial Gases 1941-1967.
MCKELL, Sir William John (1891-1985) was Premier of New South Wales, 1941-1947,
and Governor-General of Australia, 1947-1953. He was knighted in 1951.
MCLELLAN, John (1900-1966) joined the administrative staff of the Public Library, Museum
and Art Gallery of South Australia in 1915. He was appointed to the archives department
in 1936, becoming archivist in 1948. He retired in 1960.
MCMICKEN, Alfred Ernest (1872-1964) began his library career with South Melbourne
Mechanics’ Institute in 1886. He was librarian of Prahran Public Library 1902-1940.
He was a Trustee of the Public Library of Victoria 1928-1964.
MAIR, Alexander (1899-1969) was Premier of New South Wales, 1939-1941.
MANDER-JONES, Phyllis (1896-1984) joined the Public Library of New South Wales in
1925, and was Mitchell Librarian 1946-1957. She compiled the guide Manuscripts in
the British Isles relating to Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific, Canberra, Australian
National University Press, 1972.
MEADON, Sir Percival Edward (1878—1959) was a career educational administrator in
Britain.
MELENG, Frederick Edward (1866-1930) was librarian of the Port Adelaide Institute and
Secretary of the Institutes Association of South Australia, 1899-1930.
MENZIES, Sir Robert Gordon (1894-1978) was Prime Minister of Australia from April 1939
to August 1941 and again from December 1949 to January 1966. He was knighted in
1963.
METCALFE, John Wallace (1901—1982) was appointed to the State Taxation Department in
New South Wales in 1916, but left to take up an appointment at Fisher Library, University
of Sydney, in 1917. He joined the staff of the Public Library of New South Wales (now
the State Library of New South Wales) in 1923. He became Deputy Principal Librarian
in 1932, and was Principal Librarian 1942-1958. He was librarian of the University of
New South Wales 1959-1966 and Foundation Director of the School of Librarianship
at the University of New South Wales.
METCALFE, Thelma Constance (nee Vagg) married John Metcalfe in 1934 and was prominent
in a number of organisations, including the British Drama League, the Lyceum Club, the
Free Library Movement and the National Council of Women.
MILLER, Edmund Morris (1881—1964) joined the staff ol the Public Library of Victoria in
1900. In 1913 he became lecturer in philosophy and economics at the University of
Tasmania, becoming associate professor in 1925, professor in 1928 and vice-chancellor
1933-1945. For more than thirty years he was also ‘honorary librarian’ of the Univer-
sity. He was a Trustee of the Tasmanian Public Library Board 1915-1943 (Chairman
1923-1943).


MORRIS, Sir John Demetrius (1902-1956) Chief Justice of Tasmania, was for several years
chairman of the Tasmanian Library Board. He became President of the Library Associ-
ation of Australia in 1954 and died in office.
MUNN, Ralph (1894-1975) was director of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, and with
ER Pitt surveyed Australian library conditions in 1934, producing the Report Australian
libraries: a survey of conditions and suggestions for their improvement (Melbourne, Australian
Council for Educational Research, 1935).
MUTCH, Thomas Davies (1885-1958) was a Labor politician and Trustee of the Public
Library of New South Wales from 1916, Minister for Education from 1920-1922 and
1925-1927, as well as a historical researcher and genealogist.
NORTHCOTT, Sir John (1890-1966), soldier, was Governor of New South Wales 1946-1957.
He was knighted in 1950.
O’BRIEN, John Joseph (1891-1942) worked at the Public Library of New South Wales from
1907, transferred to the NSW Attorney-General’s Department in 1920 and later joined
the NSW Parliamentary Library.
OSBORN, Andrew Delbridge (1902-1997) worked in the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Library 1919-1926. He went to the United States in 1927, working at the New York Public
Library and Harvard University Library. He was University Librarian at the University of
Sydney 1958-1962, and completed his library career as an educator at the University of
Pittsburgh and as Dean of the School of Library and Information Science at the University
of Western Ontario, Canada. In later life he was an antiquarian bookseller in Sydney.
PALTRIDGE, Cynthia (bom 1922) joined the State Library of South Australia in 1942, and
was initially responsible for services to country children. In 1950 she was appointed
Children’s Librarian. From 1954 to 1958 she headed the Lady Clark Memorial Library
Service in Tasmania. She became City Librarian of Altona, Victoria, in 1968 and retired
in 1985.
PENNINGTON, Richard (born 1904) had been an assistant at the University of London
Library, then librarian of the Gladstone Club, London. He was a Fellow of the Library
Association, He was appointed librarian of the University of Queensland in 1939. He
left to become librarian at McGill University, Canada, in 1947, retiring in 1964. He was
later librarian of the National Liberal Club in London.
PERRY, Francis Jacob (Frank) (1907-f 965) joined the Public Library of Victoria in f 925.
He became City Librarian in South Melbourne in f 939. After military service in World
War II he rejoined the Public Library of Victoria and was in charge of the Library Train-
ing School. He became Victorian Parliamentary Librarian in f 962.
PETHERICK, Edward Augustus (1847-1917), bookseller, bibliographer and book collector,
whose collection of 17 000 items was acquired by the Commonwealth in 1909 and is
now in the National Library of Australia. Petherick was living in Melbourne, tending his
collection on behalf of the Commonwealth, at the time of the first Library Association
of Victoria (1912-1915) and was one of its Vice-Presidents.
PITT, Ernest Roland (1877-1957) joined the Public Library of Victoria (now the State Lib-
rary of Victoria) in 1900 and became its Chief Librarian in 1931, retiring in 1943. He
edited the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research Catalogue of the scientific and
technical periodicals in the libraries of Australia, (Melbourne, Government Printer, 1930),


which is often known as ‘Pitt’s Catalogue’. He and Ralph Munn surveyed Australian
library conditions in 1934, producing the Report Australian libraries: a survey of condi-
tions and suggestions for their improvement (Melbourne, Australian Council for Educational
Research, 1935).
PITT, George Henry (1891-1972) joined the stalf of the Public Library of South Aus-
tralia in 1906 as a cadet, was appointed Archivist in 1919 and was Principal Librarian,
1948-1955.
PRICE, Sir (Archibald) Grenfell (1892-1977) geographer and historian, whose inquiry into
South Australian libraries was published as Libraries in South Australia: Report of an Inquiry
commissioned by the South Australian Government into the system of management of libraries
maintained or assisted by the State, Adelaide, Government Printer, 1937. He later became
the first chairman of the Council of the National Library of Australia, 1960-1971. He
was knighted in 1963.
PURNELL, Herbert Rutherford (1883—1944) spent his early career at the Bodleian Library
in Oxford and at the public library in Croydon, and was a Fellow of the Library Asso-
ciation. He was Principal Librarian of the Public Library of South Australia from 1913
until his death in 1944.
QUINN, John Joseph (1879-1954) was on the staff of the Public Library of New South Wales
1899-1909, when he joined the New South Wales Parliamentary Library. He became
Parliamentary Librarian in 1924 and retired in 1944.
QUINTON, William Charles (1878—1954) was South Australian Parliamentary Librarian
from 1926.
RADFORD, Wilma (born 1912-2005) held various positions at the Public Library of New
South Wales from 1932. In 1962 she became lecturer in the School of Librarianship at the
University of New South Wales, and became Professor in 1968. She retired in 1973.
REMINGTON, Geoffrey Cochrane (1897-1968) Sydney solicitor and businessman, founder
of the Free Library Movement and an eloquent and energetic advocate for library services.
He was a Trustee of the Public Library of New South Wales, 1937-1968, and member of
the Library Board of New South Wales from its inception in 1944 until 1968.
ROBERTSON, Sir Macpherson (1860-1945) founded the confectionery firm of Macßobert-
son’s. His philanthropic activities included sponsoring Antarctic exploration (Macßob-
ertson Land is named in his honour) and major charitable donations.
RUSSELL, James Earl (1864-1945) was Dean of the Teachers’ College, Columbia University,
1897-1927, He touched upon Australian libraries in his 1928 report to the Carnegie
Corporation of New York, following a visit to Australia.
RYAN, Desmond Victor (born 1908) worked at the New South Wales Parliamentary Library
1927-1947. He became Queensland Parliamentary Librarian in 1947. In 1952 he became
Chief Librarian of Randwick Municipal Library, retiring in 1973.
SALTER DAVIES, Ernest (1872-1955) was Director of Education in Kent, 1918-1938, Presid-
ent of the Library Association in 1935, a life trustee of the Carnegie United Kingdom
Trust and chairman of its Library Committee.
SCOTT, David Barry (1930-1970) began his library career at the University of Queensland,
where he became Deputy Librarian and later acting University Librarian. In 1965 he


was appointed Foundation Librarian of Macquarie University, a position he held until
his death.
SCOTT, Leigh (1888-1963) joined the Public Library of Victoria in 1908 and was Librar-
ian of the University of Melbourne 1926—1954. He played a leading part in the Library
Association of Victoria and the AIL, of which he was President in 1943-1944.
SERLE, Percival (1871-1951) author and editor, best known for his Bibliography of Australa-
sian poetry and verse (Melbourne, Melbourne University Press, 1925) and his two-volume
Dictionary of Australian biography (Sydney, Angus and Robertson, 1949).
SHARK, Francis Aubie ‘Alf (1914-2002) worked in senior positions in a number of British
libraries before his appointment as executive officer of the Library Board of Western
Australia in 1953, He was appointed State Librarian in Western Australia in 1955, retir-
ing in 1976.
SHEPARDSON, Whitney Hart (1890-1966) diplomat and businessman, was director of
the British Dominions and Colonies Fund of the Carnegie Corporation of New York,
1946-1953.
SIMS, Edith Alice (1903-1988) joined the staff of the Public Library of New South Wales
in f 922, She transferred to the New South Wales Department of Technical Education in
1942, acted as librarian of the University of Technology (later the University of New South
Wales), and headed the Department of Technical Education library service until 1963.
SMITH, Sydney Talbot (1861-1948) was a lawyer, leader-writer and art and drama critic. He
was a Foundation Member of the Institutes Association of South Australia Council and
was President of the Board of the Public Library of South Australia from 1926.
SOWDEN, Sir Williamjohn (1858-1943), editor and part proprietor of the Adelaide Register,
1899-1922, was President of the Board of the Public Library, Museum and Art Gallery
of South Australia 1908-1926. He was knighted in 1918. He was active in the Institutes
Association of South Australia, was its President 1926-1937 and was also involved with
the Australian Library Association.
SPENDER, Sir Percy Claude (1897-1985) jurist, politician and diplomat, was Commonwealth
Treasurer 1940 and Minister for the Army, 1940-1941. He was knighted in 1952.
STAPLETON, James Lawrence (born 1904) was State Librarian of Queensland 1947-
1970.
STEEL, Edward Victor (1894-1962) joined the University of Sydney Library in 1911. He
became University Librarian in 1946, retiring in 1958.
STEWART, Sir Frederick (1884-1961) businessman, politician and philanthropist, was federal
Minister for Commerce, 1932-1934, and was prominent in the United Australia Party.
He became President of the Free Library Movement in New South Wales.
TATE, Frank (1864—1939) was director-general of Education in Victoria 1902—1928. He was
involved with the Library Association of Victoria and took a leading role in the formation
of the Australian Council for Educational Research, of which he was chairman until his
death. He was the first Honorary Member of the AIL, elected in 1938.
TAYLOR, Fairlie (1887-1983) pioneer school librarian, was librarian at Presbyterian Ladies’
College, Melbourne from 1933 and Methodist Ladies’ College, Melbourne from 1944
until her retirement in 1952.


THOMPSON, Marjorie Monaro (died 1971) was on the staff of the Public Library of New
South Wales before joining the University of Sydney library in 1924. She became keeper
of rare books in 1963 and retired in 1965.
WALLACE, Gilbert Murray (1869-c, 1939) was a Victorian teacher and author with an
interest in children’s libraries.
WAY, Sir Samuel (1836-1916) Chief Justice of South Australia, 1876-1915, was President
of the Board of Governors of the Public Library, Museum and Art Gallery of South
Australia 1893-1908.
WEEDEN, William John (1905-1996) a former teacher and vocational guidance officer
in NSW, joined the Commonwealth Office of Education in 1946 and was its director
1953-1967. He was later responsible for Review of public library services in New South
Wales (Sydney, Government Printer, 1972).
WESSELLS, Helen Elizabeth (nee Pierson, later Hettinger) (1903-1990) worked at the New
York Public Library 1926-1942, was with the United State Information Services in Aus-
tralia 1943-1947, and in the United States 1949-1950, She edited the American Library
Journal 1951-1957 and was then a library consultant until her retirement in 1978.
WHITE, Sir Harold Leslie (1905-1992) joined the Commonwealth Parliamentary Library
(later Commonwealth National Library) in 1923 as a cadet, became Deputy Librarian
in 1928, was appointed Parliamentary Librarian in 1947, and was both Parliamentary
Librarian and National Librarian from 1960. He was designated National Librarian in
1968 when the two positions were separated. He was knighted and retired in 1970.
WHITING, Clyde Taylor (1895-1967) joined the Public Library of South Australia as a cadet
in 1910 and worked his way through the ranks. He was Assistant Principal Librarian
when he retired in 1960.
WINDEYER, Margaret (1866-1939) trained at the New York State Library School in 1897-
1899 and was appointed to the Public Library of New South Wales as a cataloguer in
1901, retiring in 1926.
WINES, Beatrice Pilcher (1903—1972) joined the library of the University of Sydney in 1924.
She became Associate Llibrarian in 1960 and retired in 1968.
WOOD, Malvina Evalyn (1893-1976) is often overlooked among pioneer senior women
librarians. She joined the Museum and Art Gallery of Western Australia in 1910 as typ-
ist and librarian. She was appointed Librarian of the University of Western Australia in
1927 and held that position until her retirement in 1959.
WRIGHT, Hugh (1868-1957) joined the Free Public Library, Sydney (later the Public
Library of New South Wales) in 1885, became the first Mitchell Librarian in 1909 and
retired in 1932,


Name
Institution
State |
I Archer, Mary Ellinor Lucy !
Council for Scientific and Industrial j
Research
Vic
| Armstrong, Edmund La Touche
Retired, formerly Public Library of Victoria I
Vic
: Armstrong, Narelle
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW |
| Arnot,Jean Fleming
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW
1 Astley Harold Selwyn
Public Library of Victoria
Vic j
j Bailey, Eileen Brooke
Tasmanian Public Library
Tas
i Barrington, Mary
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW
\ Batten, Henry Cole
Ballarat Mechanics’ Institute
Vic
I Battye, James Sykes
Public Library of Western Australia
\\ A |
| Baud, William Charles
Public Library of Victoria
Vic
I Begg, Jean Margaret
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW
\ Bell, Francis Lancelot Sutherland
Sydney Municipal Library
NSW
Bell, Harry Oswald
Parliamentary Library, Victoria
Vic |
| Bennett, John Loftus
Sydney Municipal Library
NSW
| Bertie, Charles Henry
Sydney Municipal Library
NSW
i Beetles, Zoe Emma
Public Library of New South Wales
| NSW
| Binns, Kenneth
Commonwealth National Library
ACT
I Blacket, Kenneth Bernard
Public Library of South Australia
SA
1 Booker, Nancy Gwendoline
Teachers’ College, Sydney
NSW |
1 Boys, Robert Douglass
Retired, formerly Public Library of Victoria
Vic |
| Brennan, Flora Theresa
Parliamentary Library, Victoria
Vic |
i Brideson, Hedley Cyril
Public Library of South Australia
SA
! Brown, William Henry
Public Library of Queensland
Qld |
i Burrow, Kenney William
1 University of Sydney
NSW
I Cannam, Duncan William Inkersole
Public Library of Victoria
Vic |
| Child, Edith Marian
University of Western Australia
WA |
1 Clapham, Edith Muriel
I Public Library of New South Wales
I NSW
Appendix 1
Foundation Members
Taken from the Appendix to the AIL Constitution (Sydney, AIL, 1938), which is arranged
by State or Territory and then by institution. There is an alphabetical list of Foundation
Members in ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 104.
Foundation Members who attended the Inauguration are shown in italic.


i Name
i Institution
1 State
i Cocks, Margaret Elspeth Joyce
I Public Library of New South Whies
Ns\V
| Collier, James Douglas Archer
1 Tasmanian Public Library
! Tas
i Collins, Nora Macdonald
| (duplicate entry —also listed under
| ‘Holdsworth’)
1 Retired, formerly Geological Survey
| Qld
I Cooke, Thomas Fleming
1 Public Library of Victoria
1 Vic
| Cowan, William Albert
| University of Adelaide
! SA
| Cuthbert, Eleonora Isabel
Public Library of New South Wales
1 NSW
i Deegan, Mary Elizabeth
i University of Adelaide
j SA
| Dinley Eileen Mary
i University of Sydney
1 NSW i
| Doyle, Brian Thomas
Public Library of New South Whies
NSW
| Edmiston, Helen Kathleen
University of Western Australia
WA
j Fitzhardinge, Laurence Frederic
Commonwealth National Library
ACT
\ Flannery,John Vincent
Sydney Municipal Library
NSW
i Flower, Emily Monica
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW
Flynn, Olive Mary
Sydney Municipal Library
NSW
Foley, Lillian Mary
Commonwealth National Library
ACT
| Foote, William James
University of Melbourne
Vic
i Forward, Joseph Reginald
Launceston Public Library
Tas
Foxcroft, Albert Broadbent
Public Library of Victoria
Vic
\ Fraser, Isabel Agnes Mary
Public Library of Victoria
Vic
| Fraser, Nona Alexandra
Australian Gaslight Company
NSW
\ Frazer, Eric Lindsay
Parliamentary Library, Victoria
Vic
Fulton, Maisie Elizabeth
Tasmanian Public Library
Tas i
| Gallagher, Edna Linden May
Teachers’ College, Sydney
NSW
i Garrett, Philip Virgilius Lake
Public Library of Victoria
Vic
| Green, Henry Mackenzie 1
University of Sydney 1
NSW I
1 Gregory, Howard Aylwin
Prahran Public Library
Vic i
| Gunthorpe, Stuart Godfrey I
Public Library of South Australia
SA I
I Hall, Elizabeth Susie
Commonwealth National Library
]
ACT !
i Hancock, Marjorie
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW
1 Hannaford, Cyril Harry
Public Library of South Australia
SA
i Harris, Marjorie Isabel
Teachers’ College. Sydney
NSW
| Hewitt, Mary Cotgrave
University of Sydney
NSW
| Holdsworth, Nora Macdonald
i (duplicate entry —also listed under |
I ‘Collins’)
Brisbane School of Arts i
Qld
225
Uniting a profession


i Name
Institution
State I
I Hulme, Marian Isabel
Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research |
Vic I
Ifould, William Herbert
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW j
\ Ingamells, Frank Horace
Prahran Public Library
Vic i
; Irvine, Constance Kathleen
Public Library of New South Wales j
NSW
\ John, Eric Bevan
Tasmanian Public Library
Tas |
i Jopling, Mildred Hilda ;
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW |
1 Kealy, Thomas Arthur
Public Library of Victoria
Vic
| Kent, Adelaide Lillian |
Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research
Vic 1
1 Key, Lionel Courtenay StAubyn
Commonwealth National Library |
ACT
j Keyes, Herbert John
Public Library of South Australia |
SA
I Kibble, Nita Bernice
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW :
| Lajferty, Mary Monica
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW I
: Lambert, Evelyn May
Sydney Municipal Library
NSW |
i Lane, Olive Millicent
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW
1 Lanyon, Eric Wilfred
Public Library of South Australia
SA |
1 L eeson, Ida
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW
\ Levick, Bernard Blaxland
Colonial Sugar Refining Company
NSW |
I Lewis, Vivian Leslie
University of Sydney
| NSW i
i L odewyckx, Karel Axel
i Public Library of Victoria
Vic
\ Lyall, Norah
i Sydney Municipal Library
I nsw i
Lynravn, Norman Soren (surname
| misspelt ‘Lyng’ in Appendix to
i printed Constitution, Sydney, 1938)
i Commonwealth National Library
1 ACT I
; Lyons, John F
I Sydney Municipal Library
! NSW i
: McCallum, Colin Alexander
; Public Library of Victoria
Vic
: McCallum, Jocelyn
| Prahran Public Library
: Vic
i McDonald, Arthur Leopold Gladstone
j University of Melbourne
| Vic |
: McDonald, Ian James
| Parliamentary Library, Victoria
Vic
McDonald, Ronald Jacob
i Newcastle School of Arts
NSW
1 McGlade, Winifreda Margaret
| Public Library of Victoria
Vic |
i M ackay, Helen Elizabeth
I Public Library of New South Wales
NSW
| McMicken, Alfred Ernest
; Prahran Public Library
1 Vic ;
1 Muir, Ian Alan
i Public Library of Victoria
Vic
i Mander-Jones, Phyllis
1 Public Library of New South Wales
: nsw !
i Masters, Thelma Florence
| Launceston Public Library
Tas
226
Appendixes


| Name
i Institution
| State
Melville, Delma Olive
I Public Library of New South Wales
\s\\
I Metcalfe, John Wallace
; Public Library of New South Wales
NSW
; Miles, Alfred
1 Public Library of South Australia
1 SA 1
: Miller, Edmund Morris
; University of Tasmania
Tas
| O’Brien, John Joseph
Parliamentary Library, NSW
NSW i
O’Connor, Mary Ursula
| Public Library of Victoria
Vic I
i Palmer, Mavis Noble
I Public Library of New South Wales
NSW
1 Parsons, Ida Marquies
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW |
Peacock, Herbert Knox
i Defence Department
Vic !
1 Pentelow, Samuel Thomas Olho
i Public Library of New South Wales
1 NSW |
i Perry, Ethel Burden
; Retired, formerly Public Library of Victoria
Vic :
; Perry, Francis Jacob
i Public Library of Victoria
| Vic
| Pitt, Ernest Roland
Public Library of Victoria
Vic 1
i Pitt, George Henry
Public Library of South Australia
SA
| Price, Edward Rex
i Public Library of Western Australia
WA
Propsting, Marjorie Gertrude Ellena
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW
Purnell, Hubert Rutherford
Public Library of South Australia
SA
1 Quinn, John Joseph
Parliamentary Library NSW
NSW ;
1 Quinton, William Charles
Parliamentary Library, South Australia
SA 1
: Radford, Wilma
Technical College, Sydney
NSW i
| Rainbow, William Alfred
Australian Museum, Sydney
NSW i
i Ramsden, Barbara Mary
University of Melbourne i
Vic i
I Robb, Nellie Hilda Elizabeth
Statisticians Department, NSW
NSW i
Rogers, Eileen Constance i
University of Adelaide
SA I
1 Ryan, Desmond Victor
Parliamentary Library, NSW
NSW 1
; Ryan, Martin Benedict
Public Library of Victoria
Vic
1 Scott, Leigh
University of Melbourne
Vic i
\ Sherrie, Heather Hunter
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW |
i Sims, Edith Alice
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW
i Small, Ethel Ella i
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW |
i Sorrell, Margaret Walter
University of Adelaide |
SA |
| Stanley, Elizabeth
University of Sydney
NSW
| Stapleton, James Lawrence
Public Library of South Australia
SA |
: Steel, Edward Victor
University of Sydney
NSW
i Taylor, Alfred Vernon
University of Sydney
NSW |
: Taylor, Fairlie
Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Melbourne
Vic 1
227
Uniting a profession


i Name
Institution
State j
1 Thom, Daphne Elsie
Sydney Municipal Library
NSW I
| Thompson, Marjorie Monaro
University of Sydney
NSW
1 Turkington, Agnes May
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW |
i Weeks, John Henry i
Sydney Municipal Library |
NSW
| Wells, Edith Amie Wilmot
Technical College, Sydney
NSW
I White, Albert John
Parliamentary Library, NSW
NSW j
| White, Harold Leslie
Commonwealth National Library
ACT
i Whitelaw, Dora Joyce (Mrs DJ Pike)
Commonwealth Bureau of Census and
Statistics
ACT
i Whiting, Clyde Taylor
Public Library of South Australia
SA
i Whyte, Jean Helena
Public Library of New South Wales
NSW
! Willis, Frieda Cherry
| Wines, Beatrice Pilcher
Public Library of New South Wales
University of Sydney
NSW
NSW
i Wood, Malvina Evalyn
| University of Western Australia
i WA
| Wright, Hugh
i Retired (formerly Public Library of New
South Wales)
I NSW ]
1 Wright, Ronald Percy
1 Public Library of Western Australia
| WA
j Young, Robert Burns
1 Advertiser newspaper, Adelaide
i SA j
228
Appendixes


Appendix 2
Office-holders and committee members
1937-
President: WH Ifould, OBE
Vice-President: ER Pitt, BA
General Treasurer: HE White, MA
General Secretary: JW Metcalfe, BA FLA
Council
K Binns (ACT); HM Green, BA LLB (NSW); I Leeson, BA (NSW); WH Brown (Qld);
WA Cowan, MA (SA); HR Purnell, FLA (SA); JDA Collier (Tas); AB Foxcroft, MA
(Vic); L Scott, MA (Vic); ME Wood, BA (WA)
1938-
President: ER Pitt, BA
Immediate Past President: WH Ifould, OBE
Vice-President: HR Purnell, FLA
General Treasurer: E Archer, MSc
General Secretary: WC Baud, BA
Council
K Binns (ACT); JF Arnot (NSW); HM Green, BA LLB (NSW); WH Brown (Qld);
WA Cowan, MA (SA); HJ Keyes (SA); JDA Collier (Tas); TF Cooke, BA (Vic) [elected
f 9 December 1938]; AB Foxcroft, MA (Vic) [died 10 December 1938]; L Scott, MA
(Vic); ME Wood, BA (WA)
Committees
Reference and Research: BB Levick (convenor), NB Kibble, EA Sims, EAW Wells,
KW Burrow
Cataloguing and Classification: L Scott (convenor), E Archer, M Barrington, AB Foxcroft,
HJ Keyes, EV Steel, HL White
Classification of Australiana: LF Fitzhardinge (convenor), I Leeson, ME Wood, JDA Collier,
TF Cooke, AB Foxcroft, HM Green, HR Purnell
Library Training and Standards: JW Metcalfe (convenor), JF Arnot, K Binns, WH Brown,
WA Cowan, JV Flannery, EL Frazer, AE McMicken, ER Pitt
1939-
President: HR Purnell, FLA
Immediate Past President: ER Pitt, BA FLA
Vice-President: K Binns, FLA
General Treasurer: WC Quinton
General Secretary: CT Whiting, BA


Council
HL White, MA (ACT); JF Arnot (NSW); HM Green, BA LLB (NSW); WH Brown (Qld);
GH Pitt, BA (SA); M W Sorrell, BA (SA); JDA Collier (Tas); E Archer, MSc (Vic);
WC Baud, BA (Vic); ME Wood, BA ALA (WA)
Committees
Reference and Research: BB Levick (convenor), NB Kibble, EA Sims, EAW Wells,
K Burrow.
Cataloguing and Classification: L Scott, (convenor), E Archer, M Barrington, WC Baud,
HJ Keyes, EV Steel, HL White
Classification of Australiana: LF Fitzhardinge (convenor), I Leeson, ME Wood, JDA Collier,
TF Cooke, HM Green, HR Purnell
Library Training and Standards: JW Metcalfe, (convenor), JF Arnot, K Binns, WH Brown,
WA Cowan, JV Flannery, EL Frazer, AE McMicken, ER Pitt
1940-
President: K Binns, FLA
Immediate Past President: HR Purnell, FLA
Vice-President; HM Green, BA LLB
General Treasurer: ES Hall, BA [resigned due to ill-health, succeeded by CA Burmester,
BA]
General Secretary: LC Key, BA
Council
HL White, MA (ACT); Jean F Arnot (NSW); JW Metcalfe, BA FLA (NSW); WH Brown
(Qld); WC Quinton (SA); RB Young (SA); JR Forward (Tas); ER Pitt, BA FLA (Vic);
L Scott, MA (Vic); ME Wood, BA ALA (WA)
Committees
Reference and Research: BB Levick (convenor, to July 1940), NB Kibble, EA Sims,
EAW Wells, K Burrow (convenor, from July 1940), EM Brown
Classification of Australiana: LF Fitzhardinge (convenor), JDA Collier, TF Cooke,
WC Baud, HM Green, HR Purnell
Board of Examination and Certification: JW Metcalfe (convenor), E Archer, WA Cowan,
LF Fitzhardinge, HL White
Publication of Institute Proceedings: CA Burmester (convenor), K Binns, JDA Collier,
LF Fitzhardinge, L Scott, EV Steel, HL White, CT Whiting, ME Wood
1941-
President: HM Green, BA LLB
Immediate Past President: K Binns, FLA
Vice-President; L Scott, MA
General Treasurer: MM Thompson, BEc
General Secretary: JF Arnot
Appendixes


Council
LF Fitzhardinge, MA BLitt (ACT); FA Sims (NSW); JW Metcalfe, BA FLA (NSW);
WH Brown (Qld); WA Cowan, MA ABLS (SA); HR Purnell, FLA (SA); JR Forward
(Tas); ER Pitt, BA FLA (Vic); WC Baud, BA (Vic); ME Wood, BA ALA (WA)
Committees
Research: LA Sims (convenor), CB McKay, JM Murphy
Cataloguing and Classification: L Scott (convenor), E Archer, M Barrington, HJ Keyes,
EV Steel, HL White
Classification of Australiana: LF Fitzhardinge (convenor), JDA Collier, TF Cooke,
HM Green, HR Purnell
Board of Examination and Certification: JW Metcalfe (chairman), E Archer, WA Cowan,
LF Fitzhardinge, HL White
Distribution of Institute Proceedings: LC St A Key (convenor), K Binns, HL White
Editorial Committee: LC St A Key (convenor), K Binns, HL White
Periodicals in Australian Libraries Committee: L Scott (convenor), E Archer,
CA McCallum
Constitutional Drafting Committee: HM Green (convenor), JW Metcalfe, JF Arnot,
JJ O’Brien
Recommendations Committee, f 942 Conference and Annual Meeting: HM Green
(convenor), WC Baud, HL White
1942-1943
President: HM Green, BA LLB
Immediate Past President: K Binns, FLA
Vice-President: L Scott, MA
General Treasurer: MM Thompson, BEc
General Secretary: JF Arnot
Council
LF Fitzhardinge, MA, BLitt (ACT); LM Foley, MA (ACT); EA Sims (NSW); JW Metcalfe,
BA, FLA (NSW); WH Brown (Qld); WA Cowan, MA ABLS (SA); HR Purnell, FLA
(SA); JR Forward, FLA (Tas); ER Pitt, BA, FLA (Vic); WC Baud, BA (Vic); ME Wood,
MA ALA (WA)
Committees
Special Libraries Committee (reconstituted from Reference and Research Committee):
EA Sims (convenor), CB McKay, JM Murphy.
Cataloguing and Classification: L Scott (convenor), E Archer, M Barrington, HJ Keyes,
EV Steel, HL White.
Board of Examination and Certification: JW Metcalfe (chairman), E Archer, WA Cowan,
LF Fitzhardinge, HL White
Periodicals in Australian Libraries Committee: L Scott (convenor), E Archer,
CA McCallum


1943-
President; Leigh Scott, MA
Immediate Past President: HM Green, BA LLB
Vice-President; WA Cowan, MA ABLS
General Treasurer: CA McCallum, BA
General Secretary: EH Clark, BA
Councillors
Lillian M Foley, MA (ACT); LS Lake, BA (ACT); JW Metcalfe, BA FLA (NSW); EA Sims
(NSW); WH Brown (Qld); HR Purnell, FLA (SA); CT Whiting, BA (SA); MM Wilson,
MA (Tas); E Archer, MSc (Vic); TF Cooke, BA (Vic); ME Wood, MA ALA (WA)
Committees
Special Libraries Committee: L Scott (convenor), E Archer, IH Robertson, TF Cooke,
RW Crabtree
Cataloguing and Classification; JV Flannery (convenor), JF Arnot, EV Steel, W Radford,
CB McKay
Board of Examination and Certification: JW Metcalfe (chairman), E Archer, WA Cowan,
LF Fitzhardinge, HL White
Periodicals in Australian Libraries Committee: L Scott (convenor), E Archer,
CA McCallum
Commonwealth Year Book Committee: K Binns (convenor), LC St A Key (succeeded by
M Harry), CL Drake
1944-
President: JDA Collier
Immediate Past President: L Scott, MA
Vice-President: WA Cowan, MA ABLS
General Treasurer: C Needham
General Secretary: MM Wilson, MA
Councillors
HL White, MA (ACT); HEL Jones, BA (ACT); JF Arnot (NSW); EA Sims (NSW); WH Brown
(Qld); HJ Keyes (SA); CT Whiting, BA (SA); CC McShane, MA DipEd (Tas); E Archer,
MSc (Vic); WC Baud, BA (Vic); ME Wood, MA ALA (WA)
Committees
Finances and Administration Committee: WA Cowan (convenor), L Scott, EH Clark,
JW Metcalfe, ES Hall
Cataloguing and Classification: JF Arnot (convenor), EV Steel, W Radford, CB McKay,
N Booker
Committee on Assistance to Damaged Libraries Overseas: K Binns (convenor), LM Foley,
HL White, CL Drake
Commonwealth Year Book Committee; K Binns (convenor), M Harry, CL Drake


Periodicals in Australian Libraries Committee: L Scott (convenor), E Archer,
CA McCallum
Special Libraries Committee: L Scott (convenor), E Archer, IH Robertson, IF Cooke,
RW Crabtree
Standing Committee on Bibliography: P Mander-jones, HEL Jones
Board of Examination and Certification: JW Metcalfe (chairman), E Archer, WA Cowan,
LF Fitzhardinge, HL White
Services, Standards and Status of Librarians Committee: JW Metcalfe (convenor),
HL White, WC Baud, EA Sims
1945-1946
President; JDA Collier
Immediate Past President: L Scott, MA
Vice-President: WA Cowan, MA ABES
General Treasurer: C Needham [to April 1946]; EM Tattersall [April 1946 to October
1946]
General Secretary: MM Wilson, MA
Council
HL White, MA (ACT); M Harry, BA (ACT); JW Metcalfe, BA FLA (NSW); MM Thompson
(NSW); WH Brown (Qld); HJ Keyes (SA); CH Hannaford (SA); CC McShane, MA
DipEd (Tas); EH Clark, BA (Tas); E Archer, MSc (Vic); EL Frazer, BA (Vic); ME
Wood, MA ALA (WA)
Committees
Cataloguing and Classification: HJ Keyes (convenor), CH Hannaford, CT Whiting,
GH Pitt
Committee on Children’s Libraries and Children’s Reading in Australia: M Townes
(convenor, but returned to the United States before convening the committee and
was succeeded by Miss Bond), EA Morley J McCallum, BM Thomas, CC McShane
Committee on Inter-Library Loans and Transport: CA McCallum (convenor), EM Tattersall,
ES Hall, HC Brideson
Commonwealth Year Book Committee; K Binns (convenor), M Harry.
Finances and Administration Committee: JW Metcalfe (convenor), W Radford,
MM Wilson
Periodicals in Australian Libraries Committee: L Scott (convenor), E Archer,
CA McCallum
Publications Committee (appointed September 1945): L Scott (convenor), J McLellan,
MF Barnard
Standing Committee on Bibliography: P Mander-jones, HEL Jones, CL Drake
Services, Standards and Status of Librarians Committee: JW Metcalfe (convenor),
WC Baud, EA Sims, ELS Bell, MA Hunter


Board of Examination and Certification: JW Metcalfe (chairman), E Archer, WA Cowan,
LF Fitzhardinge, HL White
1946-
President: JW Metcalfe, BA FLA
Immediate Past President: JDA Collier
Vice-President: E Archer, MSc
General Treasurer: BP Wines, BA
General Secretary; NM Wood, BA (October 1946 to December 1946), MN Palmer, BA
(January to October 1947)
Council
Marjorie Harry (ACT); K Binns, FLA (ACT); JF Arnot (NSW); BE Johnston, BSc (NSW);
WH Brown (Qld); RB Young (SA); WG Buick (SA); MM Wilson, MA (Tas); EH Clark,
BA (Tas); EL Frazer, BA (Vic); CA McCallum, BA (Vic); ME Wood, MA, AOV (WA)
Committees
Commonwealth Year Book Committee: K Binns (convenor), M Harry
Periodicals in Australian Libraries Committee: L Scott (convenor), CA McCallum,
E Archer,
Cataloguing and Classification Committee: MF Barnard (convenor), HM Green, P Mander-
Jones, E Hill.
Services, Standards and Status of Librarians Committee: JW Metcalfe (convenor), EA Sims,
ELS Bell, MA Hunter.
Publications Committee; L Scott (convenor), J McLellan, RB Young.
Finances and Administration Committee: JW Metcalfe (convenor), MM Wilson,
W Radford, NM Wood.
Standards and Documentation Committee: E Archer (convenor), HL White, D Garrett.
Standing Committee on Bibliography; P Mander-Jones, HEL Jones, CL Drake
Board of Examination and Certification: JW Metcalfe (chairman), E Archer, WA Cowan,
L Scott, HL White
Committee on Assistance to Damaged Libraries Overseas: FLS Bell (convenor),
FG Gibbons
Committee on the Publication of Children’s Books in Australia: HEL Jones (convenor),
Mrs McCulloch, Miss Blanchard, Mrs Riddle
1947-
President: JW Metcalfe, BA FLA
Immediate Past President: JDA Collier
Vice-President: E Archer, MSc
General Treasurer; BP Wines, BA
General Secretary: MN Palmer, BA


Council
HL White, MA (ACT); K Binns, FLA (ACT); JF Arnot (NSW, October 1947 to March
1948); MM Thompson, BA BEc (NSW, March 1948 to September 1948); ELS Bell,
MA (NSW); WH Brown (Qld); GH Pitt, BA (SA, October 1947 to March 1948);
CT Whiting, BA (SA, March 1948 to September 1948); HC Brideson, BA (SA);
M Squire, MA (Tas); EH Clark, BA (Tas); AEG McDonald, BA (Vic); CA McCallum,
BA (Vic); ME Wood, MA ALA (WA)
Committees
Commonwealth Year Book Committee; M Harry (convenor), LS Lake.
Periodicals in Australian Libraries Committee: L Scott (convenor), E Archer,
CA McCallum
Services, Standards and Status of Librarians Committee: FLS Bell (convenor), JF Arnot,
J Collins, D Penfold, BE Johnston, MM Thompson
Publications Committee: RM McGreal (convenor), STO Pentelow, KW Burrow
Committee on Standards and Documentation: E Archer (convenor), HL White,
D Garrett
Standing Committee on Bibliography: P Mander-Jones (convenor), HEL Jones,
SE Warde.
UNESCO Committee: JW Metcalfe (convenor), E Archer, L Scott, GC Remington
Committee on Central Cataloguing and Book Purchase: EH Clark (convenor), M Squire,
JDA Collier
Committee on Constitutional Revision: JW Metcalfe (convenor), EL Frazer, HL White,
ME Wood, HC Brideson, JDA Collier, DV Ryan
Board of Examination and Certification: JW Metcalfe (chairman), E Archer, WA Cowan,
L Scott, HL White
1948-1949
President: E Archer, MSc
Immediate Past President: JW Metcalfe, BA FLA
Vice-President: CA McCallum, BA
General Treasurer: L Scott, MA
General Secretary: FJ Perry, BA
Council
LC St A Key, MA (ACT); N Lynravn, BA (ACT); MM Thompson, BEc (NSW); GD
Richardson, BA (NSW); WH Brown (Qld); CT Whiting, BA (SA); EW Lanyon, BA
(SA); JDA Collier (Tas); EH Clark, BA (Tas); JA Feely, BSc (Vic); EG Kirby, MA (Vic);
ME Wood, MA FLA (WA)
Committees
Commonwealth Year Book Committee: M Harry (convenor), LS Lake
Periodicals in Australian Libraries Committee: L Scott (convenor), CA McCallum,
E Archer
Uniting a profession


Committee on Services, Standards and Status of Librarians: ELS Bell (convenor) JF Arnot,
J Collins, D Penfold, BE Johnston, MM Thompson
Publications Committee: RM McGreal (convenor), STO Pentelow
Committee on Standards and Documentation: E Archer (convenor), TIL White, D
Garrett
Standing Committee on Bibliography: P Mander-Jones (convenor), HER Jones,
SE Warde
UNESCO Committee: JW Metcalfe (convenor), E Archer, L Scott, GC Remington
Committee on Central Cataloguing and Book Purchase: EH Clark (convenor), M Squire,
JDA Collier
Committee on Constitutional Revision: JW Metcalfe, (convenor), EL Frazer, HL White,
ME Wood, HC Brideson, JDA Collier, DV Ryan
Board of Examination and Certification: JW Metcalfe (chairman), E Archer, WA Cowan,
L Scott, HL White
Appendix 3
Honorary Members
F Tate, CMG ISO MA (elected 1938)
GC Remington, CMG (elected 1940)
KS Cunningham, MA DipEd PhD FACE FBPsS HonFAIM (elected 1941)


Appendix 4
Archivists
1 November 1941 to 31 May 1946: CL Drake
1 June 1946 to 30 September 1948: NS Lynravn
1 October 1948 to 24 November 1949; FLS Bell
Records of the AIL were initially entrusted to the General Secretary and the Canberra
Branch, but the arrangement proved unsatisfactory—general secretaries changed at regular
intervals and there was a need for someone to have overall responsibility and for the archives
to be kept in one place.
In November 1941 Cyril Lewis Drake of the Commonwealth National Library was made
archivist. He was also made responsible for the sale and exchange of AIL publications and
for retaining file copies.
In 1946 Drake was succeeded by Norman Lynravn, also of the Commonwealth National
Library. In 1948 the archives were placed in the custody of Frank Bell, the City Librar-
ian in Sydney, By that time the archives were still not voluminous—there were multiple
copies of the Institute’s own publications and a miscellaneous collection of donations and
exchanges, but the extent of manuscript materials was small, there was not a single news
clipping about the Institute. It is clear that many more records existed at a Branch level and
in the institutions to which presidents and general secretaries had belonged. This situation
persisted even after the Library Association of Australia came into being and established its
own office, and indeed many Branch records have remained in State collections, separate
from the very large collection of AIL/LAA/ALIA records now held by the National Library
of Australia. Notes on the whereabouts of documents cited in this history are provided in
‘Sources and bibliography’.


Year
Dates
Location
Venue
1937
20-21 August
Canberra
Albert Hall
1938 1 si Conference
11-13 June
Sydney :
Publie Library of New South
Wales, University of Sydney
1939 2nd Conference
10-12 June
Melbourne
Public Library of Victoria
1940 .3rd Conference
13-17 June
Adelaide
Public Library of South :
Australia, University of
Adelaide, Parliamentary
library Royal Geographical 7;
Society ■
1941 4th Conference
14-16 June
Canberra
Commonwealth National
Library
1942 Annua! meeting
19 September
Sydney
Public Library of New South
Wales:
1943 Annual meeting
25 September
Sydney
Public Library of New South
Wales
1944 Annual meeting;
16 September c
Melbourne
Public Library of Victoria
1945 Annual meeting
15 September
Melbourne
Public Library of Victoria
194(1 5th Conference ;
17-19 April
Hobart
Parliamentary Library:
1947 6th Conference
10-13 October
Sydney
Public Library of New South
Wales
1948 Annual meeting
10 September
Melbourne
Public Library of Victoria
1949 Annual meeting
24 November
Melbourne
Public Library of Victoria
Appendix 5
Dates of principal meetings and conferences


Date
No
August 1937
144
June 1938
Or
May 1939
205
May 1940
222
May 1941
208
September 1942
235
September 1943
272
September 1944
282 :
September 1945
320
October 1946
399
October J947
501
October 1948
641
November 1949
793
Appendix 6
Membership statistics 1937—1949
Taken from AIL Annual report, no l,June 1938 to no 12, November 1949.
239
Uniting a profession


Employing library
ACT
NSW
Qld
SA
Tas
Vic
WA
Total
Government special
1 1
JO
1
1
-
15
-
38
Private sector special
0
B
-
T
o
1
1
1 1
Municipal
-
16
1
-
3
6
-
26
National and State
1 3
81
1
24
07 ;
021 ;
4
151
University
-
21
5
8
4
14
4
56
School
_
-
-
; —1
-
2
2
Parliamentary
-
5
-
1
-
5
-
11
TOTAL
24
141
B
35 ;
14
64
0
2Q5
Foundation Members
8
67
2
17
7
37
6
144
Elected members
8
20
0 5
: : 3
2
16
2
55
Student associates
7
52
-
16
4
12
2
93
Honorary Members
—
-
-
0 -
: ■ 3 :
Appendix 7
Analysis of membership, 1943
Based on figures in AIL Handbook 1943. Of the 295 members, 179 were women. Twenty-
seven members were on active service. Eighteen of the Foundation Members and five other
members listed had retired.
Appendixes


Branch
1943-44
1944-45
1945-46
1946-47
1947-48
1948-49
ACT
24
20
21
24
34
29
Student associates : :
30%
15%
30%
37%
60%
53% %
NSW
141
158
206
256
340
377
Student associates
37%
40%
52%
6055
: : 70%
73%
QLD
8
5
6
10
12
18
Student associates
Nil
Nil
. 17%
: 30% ;
2 60% '
1 : ,0%
SA
35
38
44
44
52
55
Student associates
46%
37% V:
41%
40%
50%
50% :
TAS
14
16
26
33
35
36
Student associates
30% ;
30% :
35% ;
50%
43%
41%
VIC
64
75
83
120
149
260
Student associates
20% :
30%
: : 39%;
55%
: 70% J
: 83%
WA
9
8
13
14
19
18
Student associates
20% .
ail
30% :
36%
50%
50%
TOTAL
295
320
399
501
793
Appendix 8
Number and percentage of Student Associates 1943-1949
Taken from AIL Annual reports.


Year
Honorary
Members
Members
Student
associates
Total
Foundation, 1937
0
144
0
144
11 June 1938
0
151
20
171
10 June 1939
1
na
na
205
15 June 1940
0
na
na
222
31 May 1941
1
156
51
208
30 September 1 942 '
2
169
64
235
30 September 1943
2
172
98
272
30 September 1944
2
197
83
282
30 September 1945
2
208
110
320
October 1946
2
221.
176
399
October 1947
2
228
271
501
October 1948
2
218
421
641
November 1949
2
219
572
703
na = number not available
Professional
Affiliate
Corporate
Student
associate
Total
ACT
28
0
1
44
73
NSW
119
26
62
399
606 ;
QLD
16
8
4
47
75
SA :
27
1 '
I
57
86
TAS
17
7
4
31
59
VIC
64
31
15
338
448
WA
10
1
1
15
27
Totals
281
74
88
931
1374
Appendix 9
Membership by category 1937—1949
Appendix 10
Library Association of Australia membership, 31 May 1951


Report period
Income
Expenditure
Carried
forward
21 August 1937 to 30 May 1938
£52 3s 4d
£10 2s 8d
£42 0s 8d
31 May 1938 to 31 May 1939
£57 13s 4d
£25 10s Od
£74 4s Od
31 May 1939 to 31 May 1940
£288 8s 4d
£168 10s 5d
£194 Is lid
31 May 1940 to 31 May 1941 ,
£63 8s Od
£172 13s 9d
£84 16s 2d
1 June 1941 to 30 September 1942
£176 15s 6d
£105 Is lid
£156 9s 9d
1 October 1942 to 24 September 1943 7
£86 6s 8d
£32 1 5s 4d
£21.0 Is Id
1 July 1943 to 30 June 1944
£170 I7s9d
£79 7s 11 d
£301 5s lid
1 July 1944 to 30 June 1945
£238 19s lOd
£256 9s 5d
£283 16s 4d
1 July 1945 to 30 June 1946
£365 18s 5d
£146 3s 4d
£503 11s 5d
1 July 1946 to 30 June 1947
£489 16s 6d
£567 3s 3d
£426 4s 8d
1 July 1947 to 30 June 1948
£604 0s 2d
£413 15s Od
£616 9s lOd
4 July 1948 to 28 August 1948
£125 4s 6d
£2 17 s 4d
£739 -17s Od
29 August 1948 to 18 November 1949
£528 10s 8d
£347 1 Is 6d
£920 16s 2d
Appendix 11
Income and expenditure 1937—1949
Taken from AIL Annual reports


Sources and bibliography
Note on ‘ALIA records’
By far the largest collection of AIL, LAA and ALIA records —by mid-2003 numbering over
260 boxes —is held at the National Library of Australia in Canberra, These records were
transferred to the NLA in instalments in 1988 and 1996. They are held in the Manuscripts
Collection at M 57446 and are known collectively as the ‘Australian Library and Informa-
tion Association Records’. A finding aid to the collection is available at http://www.nla.gov.
au/ms/findaids/7446.htm1. Access to the collection itself is restricted, and permission to view
items must be sought from the executive director of ALIA.
Parts of this collection were accessed by Jean P Whyte during the 1980 s before their
transfer to the NLA. She made photocopies of documents of particular interest and was
also authorised to retain for her own use some items of which there were multiple copies.
Between the time that she accessed the records and their transfer some sorting, culling and
reboxing took place. The original box numbering was not retained and no table of old and
new box numbers has been found. An attempt has been made to identify the new locations
of all of the documents which Whyte collected and which are cited in the present work. In
a very small number of cases it has not been possible to trace the present whereabouts of a
particular document. Where the current location is unknown this is indicated in the endnote
and bibliography as appropriate, with the note that a copy of the document is now in the
possession of the co-author, David J Jones.
Sources and bibliography
‘Adelaide Public Library: “A cumbrous board”, ex-librarian’s comments’, Advertiser [Ad-
elaide], 29 July 1912, p!2. Reprinted as Adelaide Public Library: a cumbrous board,
Adelaide, np, 1912.
‘AIL, Hobart Conference: Comments and criticisms by Victorian councillors present at
the Conference’ [1946], ALIA records, National Library of Australia (NLA), M 57446,
box 84.
American Library Association. Catalog rules, author and title entries, Chicago, American
Library Association, 1908.
American Library Association, Catalog Code Revision Committee. A.L.A. catalog rules,
preliminary American 2nd edition, Chicago, American Library Association, 1941.
Amey, L. When libraries made headlines’, Australian Library Journal, vol 50 no 3, August
2001,pp229-234.
Anderson, E Carnegie Corporation Library Program, 1911-1961, New York, Carnegie
Corporation of New York, 1963.
Annual catalogue of Australian publications. Canberra, Commonwealth National Library,
1937-1960.
Archer, E. ‘Co-operation in special libraries’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th-17th, 1940, Canberra,
Appendixes


June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th-20th, 1942,
Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, pp] 50-156.
Archer, E. ‘lnter-library loans: ethics and mechanics’, Library Association of Australia: Pro-
ceedings, Bth Conference, Sydney, Library Association of Australia, 1956, ppB9-94.
Archer, E. ‘Presidential Address 1949: The Institute looks back’, Australian Institute of Lib-
rarians: Proceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947, Sydney, Australian Institute
of Librarians, 1949, plo9-114.
Archer, E. The Special Libraries Section’, Australian Library Journal, vol 1 no 3, January
1952, pp 64-67.
Armstrong, E La T. The Library Record’, The Library Record of Australasia, vol 2 no 2,
June 1902, pp 43-44.
Arnold, J. ‘Choose your author as you would choose a friend; circulating libraries in Mel-
bourne 1930-1960’, La Probe Library Journal, vol 10 no 40, Spring 1987, pp 77-96,
a condensed and revised version of this article appeared as ‘Cultivating the armchair
reader: the circulating library movement in Melbourne, 1930-1960’, Australian
Cultural History, no 11, 1992, pp 67-79.
Arnold, J, The circulating library phenomenon’, A history of the book in Australia, 1891-
1945: a national culture in a colonised market, edited by Martyn Lyons and John Arnold,
St Lucia, Qld, University of Queensland Press, 2001, ppl9o-208.
ArnotJE ‘Co-operation between the librarian and the reader’, Australian Institute of Librar-
ians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 13th-l 7th,
1940, Canberra, June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September
19th-20th, 1942, Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, ppl4s-149.
ArnotJE The function of the State Government in public library provision and promotion’,
Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947, and
other papers, Sydney, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1949, pp 67-71.
ArnotJE, and MM Thompson. ‘AlL—Statement on Finance’, [1943 from context], ACER
archives, Series 49, vol 88. Another copy in ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box
109,
Australian Institute of Librarians. Annual report, no 1 (21 August 1937-13 June 1938) to
no 12 (October 1948 to November 1949). An index to the annual reports is listed
under ‘Hine, JD.’ Annual reports were normally duplicated for presentation at the
annual meetings of the Institute. Additional information was frequently added and the
enlarged report was then confirmed. Reports were then published either separately
or in the next volume of the Institute’s conference proceedings, as follows:
no 1, 21 August 1937-13 June 1938 . Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd
and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th-17th, 1940, Canberra,
June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th-20th, 1942,
Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, pp 9-10.
no 2, year ending 10 June 1939. ibid., ppll-14.
no 3, year ending 15 June 1940. ibid., ppls-19,
no 4, year ending 31 May 1941. ibid., pp2o-27.
no 5, June 1941 to September 1942. ibid., pp2B-3T


no 6, September 1942 to September 1943. Australian Institute of Librarians; Pro-
ceedings, sth Conference, Hobart, April 1946, Melbourne, Australian Institute of
Librarians, 1947, ppl 1-15.
no 7, September 1943 to September 1944. Published separately. Melbourne, Mel-
bourne University Press, 1944.
no 8, September 1944 to September 1945. Published separately. Melbourne, Mel-
bourne University Press, 1946.
no 9, September 1945 to October 1946. Published separately. Melbourne, Melbourne
University Press, 1947.
no 10, October 1946 to October 1947. Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings,
6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947, Sydney, Australian Institute of Librarians,
1949, ppls-24
no 11, October 1947 to September 1948. ibid,, pp 96-102.
no 12, October 1948 to November 1949. ibid., pplo4-108.
Australian Institute of Librarians, Conference Proceedings.
An index to the conference proceedings is listed under ‘Hine, Janet D’. Proceedings of
conferences were generally the responsibility ot the incoming Executive, so that the
eventual publication was usually published in a different city from that in which
the conference was held. The published volumes of proceedings from time to time
included papers which had been presented at Branch meetings. Annual reports and
minutes of meetings were also published in some volumes. Individual papers cited
in the present publication are included in this bibliography.
Full citations of the conference proceedings are as follows:
Ist: Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference
held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior and Anderson,
1939. Also contains the AIL Constitution (pp6s-70), conference program
(pp7l—72) and three papers from the NSW Branch.
2nd: Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: Second Annual Meeting and Confer-
ence held at Melbourne, June 10th to 12th, 1939, Adelaide, Australian Institute of
Librarians, 1940. Also contains conference program (p[4]) and seven Branch
papers (four from New South Wales, two from the Australian Capital Territory,
one from Victoria),
3rd and 4th: Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings
and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th—17th, 1940, Canberra, June 14th—16th, 1941
and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th—20th, 1942, Canberra, Austral-
ian Institute of Librarians, 1944. Also contains conference programs (3rd, p 36;
4th, ppB9-90), the Ist to sth Annual reports (pp 9-31), overviews of library
development in Australia (pp 32-35) and a report of the sth Annual Meeting
in 1942 (pplsB-159).
sth: Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference, Hobart, April 1946,
Melbourne, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1947. Also contains the 6th An-
nual report (ppl 1-15) and the 1943, 1944 and 1945 Presidential Addresses
(pp 19-40).
Appendixes


6th: Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947,
and other papers, Sydney, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1949. Also contains
minutes of Annual Meetings 1946-1949 (9th, ppll—l2; 10th, ppl3-14; 11th,
pp 94-95; and 12th, pl 03), minutes of Special Meeting 1949 (pplo3-104), An-
nual reports (10th, ppls-24; 11th, pp 96-102; 12th, pp 104-108), John Metcalfe’s
address to the Victorian Branch (‘Laymen and libraries’, ppB3-93) and Ellinor
Archer’s 1949 Presidential Address (pplo9-114).
Australian Institute of Librarians. ‘Constitution adopted at a meeting of Foundation Mem-
bers of the Institute, at Canberra, August 21, 1937’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11 th to 13th, 1938,
Melbourne, Brown, Prior and Anderson, 1939, pp6s-66. Also published separately
as Australian Institute of Librarians Constitution adopted at a meeting of Foundation
Members of the Institute, at Canberra, August 21, 1937, Sydney, Australian Institute of
Librarians, 1938.
Australian Institute of Librarians. Federal Executive Newsletter. [Melbourne], no 1,
September-December 1948—n0 3, April-June 1949. The second and third were
entitled Australian Institute of Librarians Newsletter and were dated January-March
and April—June 1949.
Australian Institute of Librarians, Committee on Cataloguing and Classification. Report
for 1942-43, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 87.
Australian Institute of Librarians, Committee on Central Cataloguing. ‘Centralized Pur-
chasing and Cataloguing for Australian Libraries’, 25 June 1948, ALIA records, NLA,
M 57446, box 27.
Australian Institute of Librarians, Committee on Central Cataloguing. Report, September
1948, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 27,
Australian Institute of Librarians, Committee on Central Cataloguing, Report, September
1949, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 27.
Australian Institute of Librarians, Committee on Inter-library Loans and Transport. Re-
port, April 1946, and Supplementary Report, October 1946, ALIA records, NLA,
M 57446, box 28.
Australian Institute of Librarians, Committee on Services, Standards and Status of Lib-
rarians in Australia. Report, [presented to Council] November 1949, duplicated
typescript, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 35,
Australian Institute of Librarians, Committee on Standards and Training. Report to Council,
June 1939. This duplicated typescript was widely circulated. See for example copies at
State Library of New South Wales, Mitchell Library, ML Doc 1399 and Q020.7/A.
Australian Institute of Librarians, Committee on the Classification of Australiana. In-
terim report, 24 May 1939, duplicated typescript, SLNSW, State Reference Library,
NQ025.46994/1. Copy also in ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 87.
Australian Institute of Librarians, Committee on the Classification of Australiana. Re-
port, 18 May 1940, State Library of New South Wales, State Reference Library,
NQ025.46994/1. Copy also in ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 87.
Australian Institute of Librarians, Committee on the Classification of Australiana, Report,
4 December 1940, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 28.


Australian Institute of Librarians, Council. Minutes of Council meetings, 1938-1949,
NLA, ALIA records, MS 7446, Box 40.
Australian Institute of Librarians, New South Wales Branch. Annual report, 1938-39,
1945-1946.
Australian Institute of Librarians, New South Wales Branch. ‘Summary of report by
Mr EV Steel on the activities of the Library Board of NSW’, 10 March 1947, ALIA
records, NLA, M 57446, box 108.
Australian Institute of Librarians, Reference and Research Committee. Report, 1938-39,
29 March 1939, copies in ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, boxes 28, 88 and 109.
Australian Institute of Librarians, South Australian Branch. Quarterly Bulletin, no 1, Sep-
tember 1944 to no 11, September 1949.
Australian Institute of Librarians, Victorian Branch. Talks on library organisation and Man-
agement’, [1945], duplicated typescript, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 108.
Australian Institute of Librarians handbook, Sydney, Australian Institute of Librarians,
1943.
Australian Library Conference, 21-23 August 1928. [Programme], [Melbourne, 1928?].
Baud, WC. ‘Co-operation in cataloguing and classification including central and co-
operative catalogues and bibliographical indexes,’ Australian Institute of Librarians,
Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th—17th, 1940,
Canberra, June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th-20th,
1942, Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, pp 139-144.
Bell, FLS. ‘The library and the community’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th—17th, 1940, Canberra,
June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th-20th, 1942,
Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, pp. 130-134.
Bell, FLS. ‘The professional librarian in the United States: his status, qualifications and
conditions,’ Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and
Conference held at Sydney, June 11 th to 13 th , 1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior and An-
derson, 1939, ppB2-86.
Bertie, CH. ‘The organization of a lending library’, Proceedings of the Australian Library
Conference held at the University of Melbourne, August 1928, Melbourne, Government
Printer, 1928, pp 15-22.
Berzins, B. ‘lda Leeson’, Australian library history: papers from the Second Forum on Australian
Library History, Canberra, 19-20 July 1985, Canberra, Canberra College of Advanced
Education, f 985, pploo-104.
Berzins, B. ‘Leeson, Ida Emily’, Australian Dictionary of Biography, vol 10, ppsB-59.
Binns, K. ‘Library development in the Australian Capital Territory’, Australian Institute of
Librarians: Proceedings: Second Annual Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne, June
10th to 12th, 1939, Adelaide, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1940, pp7l-75.
Binns, K. Library services in Tasmania, Hobart, Government Printer, 1943.
Binns, K. ‘The need for library co-operation’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th-17th, 1940, Canberra,


June 14th—16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th—20th, 1942,
Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, pp9l-103.
Binns, K. ‘Publication of historical records of Australia’, Australian Institute of Librarians,
Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 13th-l 7th, 1940,
Canberra, June 14th—16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th—20th,
1942, Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, pp6l-67.
Binns, K. ‘Report on assistance to war-damaged libraries in England, Europe and the
Far East’, [main report and supplementary report, 1946], enclosed with ELS Bell to
MM Wilson, 15 August 1946, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 28,
Binns, K. ‘Standards of training and qualifications for parliamentary librarians’, Australian
Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney,
June 11 th to 13 th , 1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior and Anderson, 1939, pp 46-50.
Biskup, E Libraries in Australia, Wagga Wagga, Centre for Information Studies, 1995.
Booker, N. ‘Authorities and the institutions’ function in library promotion and provision’,
Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947, and
other papers, Sydney, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1949, pp 76-79.
Bridge, C. A trunk full of books: history of the State Library of South Australia and its fore-
runners, Netley, SA, Wakefield Press in association with the State Library of South
Australia, 1986.
Brown, WH. ‘Library development in Queensland’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Pro-
ceedings: Second Annual Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne, June 10th to 12th,
1939, Adelaide, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1940, pps7-60.
Bryan, H. ‘Jean Primrose Whyte AM BA AM FLAA: summing up a career’, Australian
Library Journal, vol 38 no 1, February 1989, pps-14.
Bryan, H. No gray profession: reminiscences of a career in Australian libraries, Adelaide,
Auslib Press, 1994.
Bundy, A. ‘How far they have come—how far they must go: Australian public libraries at
century’s end’, National Public Library Conference, Perth, 14-17 November 1999,
http://www.library.unisa.edu.au/papers/howfar.htm (accessed 7 December 2001).
Catalog rules, author and title entries compiled by committees of the American Library Associ-
ation and the Library Association. Chicago, American Library Association, 1908. Also
published as Cataloguing rules, London, Library Association, 1908.
Cleary, JT. Books for the troops: the role of libraries and librarians in World War 11, MLib thesis.
Monash University, 1986.
Cleary, JT. ‘Books for the troops: the role of libraries and librarians in World War IF,
Australian library history: papers from the Second Forum on Australian Library History,
Canberra, 19-20 July 1985, Canberra, Canberra College of Advanced Education,
1985, pp 29-49.
Coffman, LD. ‘Report of Dr Lotus D Coffman on Australia’, 1932, [typescript], Carnegie
Corporation of New York archives.
Collier, JDA. ‘Care of archives in Tasmania’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th-l 7th, 1940, Canberra,


June 14th— 16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th—20th, 1942,
Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, p 75.
Collier, JDA. ‘Library development in Tasmania ’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceed-
ings: Second Annual Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne, June 10th to 12th, 1939,
Adelaide, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1940, ppBl-85.
Collier, JDA, ‘Presidential Address, 1945: the cash value of the library’, Australian Institute
of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference, Hobart, April 1946, Melbourne, Australian
Institute of Librarians, 1947, pp3s-40.
‘Conference and Annual Meeting’. Australian Library Journal, vol 1 no 1, July 1951,
ppls-16.
‘Constitution of The Australian Institute of Professional Librarians’. [Roneoed typescript],
ACER archives, series 49, item 197.
Cooke, TE ‘The Public Lending Library of Victoria’, Proceedings of the Australian Library
Conference held at the University of Melbourne, August 1928, Melbourne, Government
Printer, 1928, pp4l-47.
Copland, DB. ‘Foreword’, Proceedings of the Australian Library Conference held at the Uni-
versity of Melbourne, August 1928, Melbourne, Government Printer, 1928, pp 3—4.— 4.
Cunningham, KS. The Australian Council for Educational Research and library services in
Australia, Melbourne, Australian Council for Educational Research, 1961.
Cunningham, KS. ‘Comment squared’, Australian Library Journal, vol 6 no 1, January
1957, pp 34-35.
Cunningham, KS, ‘The history, status and functions of the Library Group’. There are many
copies of this statement, which occupies one foolscap typescript page. It was written
in 1941 by Cunningham probably to refute some of the attacks which librarians were
making on the Group. ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 106.
Cunningham, KS. ‘The school, the library and the child’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings, sth Conference, Hobart, April 1946, Melbourne, Australian Institute of
Librarians, 1947, pp 99-105.
Davison, K. ‘The Ballarat Mechanics’ Institute and its relations with librarianship
1920-1951’, Peopling a profession: papers from the Fourth Forum on Australian Library
History, Monash University, 25 and 26 September 1989, edited by Frank Upward and
Jean P Whyte, Melbourne, Ancora Press, 1991, pp 15-20.
Davison, K. The Ballarat Mechanics’ Institute 1859-1951 and the influence of Henry Cole
Batten 1911-1951, MLib thesis, Monash University, 1993.
Douie, COG. Report on adult education in the Dominion of New Zealand, the Commonwealth
of Australia and the Union of South Africa, New York, 1933, [not formally published],
Carnegie Corporation of New York archives.
Duncan, WGK. ‘The librarian’s contribution to adult education’, Australian Institute of
Librarians: Proceedings: Second Annual Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne, June
10th to 12th, 1939, Adelaide, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1940, ppB6-88.
Flannery, JV ‘Standards and training in the lending library’, Australian Institute of Librar-
ians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11 th to 13th,
1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior and Anderson, 1939, ppsl—s3.


Flannery, JV. The war service of NSW libraries’, 2 November 1942, paper read to New
South Wales Branch, copies in ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, boxes 106 and 109.
Foxcroft, AB. The Australian Institute of Librarians’, Library Journal [Melbourne], vol 1
no 3, October 1937, pl 2.
Free Library Movement. Constitution of the Free Library Movement with an introductory note,
Sydney, Free Library Movement, 1935, p 4.
Gould, N. The library in the secondary stage of education’, Australian Institute of Librar-
ians: Proceedings: Second Annual Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne, June 10th to
12th, 1939, Adelaide, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1940, ppB9-91.
Great Britain, Board of Education, Public Libraries Committee, Report on public libraries in
England and Wales: presented by the President of the Board of Education to Parliament by
Command of His Majesty, May 1927, (Kenyon Report: Cmd. 2868), London, HMSO,
1927. Reprinted, [London], University Microfilms for the College of Librarianship,
Wales, 1970.
Green, HM. ‘Presidential address, 1943’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth
Conference, Hobart, April 1946, Melbourne, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1947,
p 19-31.
Gregory, HA. ‘Libraries in Soviet Russia’, Australian Institute oj Librarians: Proceedings: Second
Annual Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne, June 10th to 12th, 1939, Adelaide,
Australian Institute of Librarians, 1940, pi 18.
Hall, E. The Prussian Instructions and the Anglo-American Code’, Australian Institute of
Librarians: Proceedings: Second Annual Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne, June
10th to 12th, 1939, Adelaide, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1940, pplo4-112.
Hine, JD. Index to conference proceedings 1938 to 1971 of the Australian Institute of Librar-
ians and its successor the Library Association of Australia including their Annual Reports
1937/38 to 1953. Sydney, Library Association of Australia, 1975.
Horrocks, N. The Carnegie Corporation of New York and its impact on library development in
Australia, PhD thesis, University of Pittsburgh, 1971.
Howes, BR. Public library services in South Australia: the story to 1976, Wagga Wagga,
School of Library and Information Science, Riverina College of Advanced Educa-
tion, 1982.
Ifould, WH. ‘Australia requires a better library service’, Proceedings of the Australian Library
Conference held at the University of Melbourne, August 1928, Melbourne, Government
Printer, 1928, ppB-14.
Ifould, WH. ‘Library development in New South Wales’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings: Second Annual Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne, June 10th to 12th,
1939, Adelaide, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1940, pp6l-70.
Ifould, WH. ‘Presidential address: the future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librar-
ians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th,
1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior and Anderson, 1939, ppl2-14.
Johnson, AL. The Royal Charter and its implications’, Australian Library Journal, vol 12
no 4, December 1963, pplB2-186.


Johnson AL, and RF Doust. The Library Association of Australia: statement of history,
objects, activities and achievements’, Australian Library Journal, vol 14 no 1, March
1965, ppl-11.
Jones, DJ. ‘“A dormant commission”: liould and the rise of John Metcalfe at the Public
Library of New South Wales’, Libraries and life in a changing world; the Metcalfe years
1920-1970: papers from Australian Library History Forum V, edited by W Boyd Ray-
ward, Sydney, University of New South Wales, School of Information, Library and
Archive Studies, 1993, pp 47-73.
Jones, DJ. ‘Please destroy all my letters on this subject’, Australian Library Journal, vol 39
no 2, May 1990, pplOl-115.
Jones, DJ. WH Ifould and the development of library services in New South Wales, 1912-1 942,
PhD thesis, University of New South Wales, 1993.
Kirby, FG. Libraries in secondary schools: a report on the libraries of secondary schools in
Victoria, with suggestions for a post-war plan for school libraries prepared for the Austral-
ian Institute of Librarians (Victorian Branch), Carlton, Victoria, Melbourne University
Press, 1945.
Latham, Sir J. ‘Message to the conference from the Rt. Hon Sir John Latham, GCMG, MA,
LLM, KG, Chief Justice, High Court of Australia’, Australian Institute of Librarians,
Proceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney, October 1997, and other papers, Sydney, Australian
Institute of Librarians, 1949, p 45.
Leeson, lE. ‘Archives in New South Wales’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th-l 7th, 1940, Canberra,
June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th-20th, 1942,
Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, pp6B—7o.
Levick, 88. ‘Standards of librarianship and library training from the special library view-
point’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Confer-
ence held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior and Anderson,
1939, pps4-56.
Library Association of Australasia. Account of the Proceedings of the First Australasian Library
Conference held at Melbourne on the 21st, 22nd, 23rd and 24th April, 1896, Melbourne
Government Printer, 1896. Reprinted in facsimile as ‘Occasional papers in librarian-
ship’, no 7, Adelaide, Libraries Board of South Australia, 1969.
Library Association of Australia. Handbook, Sydney, Library Association of Australia,
1952.
Library Association of Australia, ‘Report for the year 1950’, Proceedings 7th Conference and
13th Annual Meeting held at Melbourne, July 2nd to 4th, 1951, Sydney, Library Associa-
tion of Australia, 1952, pp 94-101.
Library Association of Australia. ‘Statement of history, objects, activities and achievements’,
1961, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
Library Association of Victoria: Annual Meeting at Geelong [22 April 1914], Melbourne,
Library Association of Victoria, 1914. Reprinted from Geelong Advertiser.
Library Association of Victoria. Annual report, 1934, p 2, ACER Archives, Series 49, item
229.


‘Library Association of Victoria’. Library Journal [Melbourne], December 1947, pp 2-3.
Library Association of Victoria, Special Committee. The essential features of a good public
library, Melbourne, Library Association of Victoria, 1931.
Library Board of New South Wales. Annual report, Sydney, Government Printer, 1944-
1973.
Library Federation of Australia and New Zealand. [Printed draft Constitution, c. 1927],
enclosed with FE Meleng to WH Ifould, 1 March 1927, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 109.
Library Group. ‘Notes on meeting of librarians’, 5—6 October 1936, ACER archives,
vol 86.
Library Journal [Melbourne, Library Association of Victoria], April 1937 to June 1949
[numbering and frequency irregular].
The Library Record of Australasia, quarterly, vol 1 no 1, April 1901 to vol 2 no 2, June
1902.
Lovell, HT. Statement by Professor HT Lovell, Vice-President, ACER, 5 August 1950,
ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 106.
Mander-Jones, P ‘Librarianship in Australia: Report 1949, to the Joint Committee of IFLA
and FID on the Professional Status and Training of Librarians and Documentalists,’
duplicated typescript, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 35.
Marshall, DM, Competition and complementarity: a study of collections in circulating librar-
ies for the public, 1928-1948, with particular reference to 1935, MLib thesis, Monash
University, 1989.
McCallum, CA. ‘Survey of library development’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceed-
ings, 6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947, Sydney, AIL, 1949, pp3s-38.
McCallum, J. ‘Co-operation between the library and the school’, Australian Institute of
Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June
15th—17th, 1940, Canberra, June 14th—16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney,
September 19th-20th, 1942, Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944,
pp!3s-138.
McColvin, LR. Public libraries in Australia: present conditions and future possibilities, Mel-
bourne, Melbourne University Press for the Australian Council for Educational
Research, 1947 (The McColvin report).
McGreal, RM. ‘The library of the future: what the public will expect of libraries in the
post-war world’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference, Hobart,
April 1946, Melbourne, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1947, pplll-115.
McGreal, RM. ‘Ron McGreal remembers’, Australian Library Journal, vol 30 no 1, Febru-
ary 1981, ppl6-20.
McKay, CB. ‘lndustrial libraries’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference,
Hobart, April 1946, Melbourne, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1947, pp 93-98.
McMicken, AE. ‘Library development in Victoria’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceed-
ings: Second Annual Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne, June 10th to 12th, 1939,
Adelaide, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1940, pp 76-80.


‘Meeting to inaugurate Australian Institute of Librarians ... Outline of procedure’, ALIA
records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
‘Memorandum and Articles of Association of the Library Association of Victoria’, [prepared
by Spencer, Martin and Goode, 440 Little Collins Street, Melbourne, C, I], Australian
Council for Educational Research Archives, series 49, item 229.
Metcalfe, JW ‘ACER and LAA, Australian Library Journal, vol 6 no 2, April 1957,
pp 74-76.
Metcalfe, JW ‘The Australian Institute of Librarians’, Library Association Record, series 4,
vol 4, December 1937, pp64o-641.
Metcalfe, JW ‘Australian Institute of Librarians: tentative proposals for a syllabus of stud-
ies by candidates for a final certificate or diploma in librarianshlp’, undated, three
page typescript. State Library of New South Wales archives, box 1452. (This docu-
ment was written prior to 25 March 1938, because it is referred to in JW Metcalfe
to HM Green, 25 March 1938, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 84).
Metcalfe, JW ‘A comment on our history’, Australian Library Journal, vol 5 no 4, October
1956, ppl42-144.
Metcalfe, JW ‘Co-operation between State Libraries and Government Departments’, Aus-
tralian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences,
Adelaide, June 15th—1 7th, 1940, Canberra, June 14th- 16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meet-
ing, Sydney, September 19th-20th, 1942, Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians,
1944, ppll9-123.
Metcalfe, JW Developing a library profession in Australia: travel diaries and other papers of
John Wallace Metcalfe, edited by W Boyd Rayward, Lanham, Md, Scarecrow Press,
1995. Also published Canberra, ALIA Press, 1996.
Metcalfe, JW ‘From the record, for the record’, Australian Library Journal, vol 1 no 1, July
1951, pp 4-6.
Metcalfe, JW Interview by Hazel de Berg, 29 April 1974, National Library of Australia,
Deß 764-766. Transcript.
Metcalfe, JW ‘Laymen and libraries’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, 6th
Conference, Sydney, October 1947, Sydney, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1949,
ppB3-93.
Metcalfe, JW Lecture notes on classification and subject cataloguing, Sydney, Public Library
of New South Wales, Library School, 1946.
Metcalfe, JW Lecture notes on subject cataloguing, classification and indexing, Sydney, Public
Library of New South Wales, Library School, 1958. Second edition of Lecture notes
on classification and subject cataloguing.
Metcalfe, JW ‘Library development in New South Wales, 1943-1946’, Australian Institute
oj Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference, Hobart, April 1946, Melbourne, Australian
Institute of Librarians, 1947, pps9-69.
Metcalfe, JW ‘The library scene in New South Wales’, Library Journal [Melbourne], vol 1
no 2, July 1937, pp 9-12.


Metcalfe, JW ‘New South Wales Libraries Advisory Committee report’, Australian Institute
of Librarians: Proceedings: Second Annua! Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne June
10th to 12th, 1939, Adelaide, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1940, pp 99-103.
Metcalfe, JW ‘Over to us!’ Australian Library Journal, vol 1 no 1, July 1951, p 3.
Metcalfe, JW ‘Past, present and future of the Institute’, Australian Institute of Librarians,
Proceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947, and other papers, Sydney, Australian
Institute of Librarians, 1949, pp 46-58.
Metcalfe, JW Public library service in and from Brisbane: a report together with a new intro-
duction, Brisbane, Library Board of Queensland, 1974, pp viii—ix. Reprint of a report
which Metcalfe submitted to the Library Board of Queensland in 1945.
Metcalfe, JW ‘Public library systems in Australia’, Library Association Record, series 4 vol 1,
September 1934, pp3l4-321; October 1934, pp 357-374.
Metcalfe, JW ‘Ralph Munn and Australia’, Australian Library Journal, vol 24 no 4, May
1975, ppl3B-143.
Metcalfe, JW Review of KS Cunningham, The Australian Council for Educational Research,
Australian Library Journal, vol 11 no 2, April 1962, pp 96-102,
Metcalfe, JW The standards of librarianship and the status of the library profession’, Aus-
tralian Library Journal, vol 8 no 4, October 1959, ppl7l-180. (Presidential address
at the 1959 conference of the Library Association of Australia.)
Metcalfe, JW ‘Statement by the chairman’, 22 November 1949. Copy in the possession
of David J Jones.
Miller, EM. ‘Comment rounded off’, Australian Library Journal, vol 6 no 1, January 1957,
p 35.
Miller, EM. Libraries and education, Melbourne, George Robertson, 1912.
Miller, EM. The relation of state and municipal libraries: a question of policy’, Proceedings
of the Australian Library Conference held at the University of Melbourne, August 1928,
Melbourne, Government Printer, 1928, pp 33-35.
‘Minutes of conference of the Australian Library Association held at the Public Library,
Melbourne, on 23rd and 24th November, 1933’. Typescript. Adelaide, Australian
Library Association, 1933.
‘Minutes of meeting to inaugurate the Australian Institute of Librarians’. 20-21 August
1937, ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 109.
Munn, R. Australia’, [1936?], (typescript), Carnegie Corporation of New York archives.
Munn, R and ER Pitt. Australian libraries: a survey of conditions and suggestions for their
improvement, Melbourne, Australian Council for Educational Research, 1935,
Munn, R and J Barr. New Zealand libraries: a survey of conditions and suggestions for their
improvement, Christchurch, NZ, Libraries Association of New Zealand, 1934.
New South Wales, Libraries Advisory Committee. Draft report [May 1938], State Library
of New South Wales archives, box ‘Libraries Advisory Committee (contd)’.
New South Wales, Libraries Advisory Committee. Public library services: report of the Librar-
ies Advisory Committee to the Honourable DH Drummond, MLA (Minister for Education
in New South Wales), Sydney, Government Printer, 1939; reprinted 1940.


Northcott, J. ‘Address by His Excellency Lt.-General John Northcott, Governor of New
South Wales’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney,
October 1947, and other papers, Sydney, AIL, 1949, p 43.
Osborn, AD. The crisis in cataloging’, Library Quarterly, vol II no 4, October 1941,
pp 393-411.
Osborn, AD. Interview by David J Jones, 19 October 1989, Roseville, New South
Wales.
Perry, FJ. ‘Local government function in library promotion and provision’, Australian
Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney, October 1947, and other
papers, Sydney, AIL, 1949, pp 72-75.
Pitt, ER. ‘Archives in the Public Library of Victoria’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Pro-
ceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th-l 7th, 1940,
Canberra, June 14th—16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th—20th,
1942, Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, p 76.
Pitt, ER. Catalogue of the scientific and technical periodicals in the libraries of Australia,
Melbourne, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, 1930. A supplement
by CA McCallum and DWI Cannam appeared in 1934 and a further supplement
edited by CA McCallum in 1937. A second edition edited by Pitt appeared in 1951
under the title Union catalogue of the scientific and technical periodicals in the libraries
of Australia. The work was commonly known as ‘Pitt’s Catalogue’.
Pitt, ER. ‘Co-operation in library work’. Proceedings of the Australian Library Conference
held at the University of Melbourne, August, 1928 , Melbourne, Government Printer,
1928, pp4B-56.
Pitt, ER. ‘lntroduction’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting
and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior and
Anderson, 1939, pp 9-10.
Pitt, ER. ‘Standards of librarianship and library training with special reference to refer-
ence libraries’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting
and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13th, 1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior and
Anderson, 1939, pp2s-41.
Pitt, ER. ‘State aid to libraries: principles and practice, with special application to Victoria’,
Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings: Second Annual Meeting and Conference
held at Melbourne, June 10th to 12th, 1939, Adelaide, Australian Institute of Librar-
ians, 1940, pp 7-47.
Pitt, GH, ‘Library development in South Australia’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings, sth Conference, Hobart, April 1946, Melbourne, Australian Institute of
Librarians, 1947, ppsl-55.
Pitt, GH. ‘The position in South Australia’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd
and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th-17th, 1940, Canberra,
June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th-20th, 1942,
Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, pp 72-74.
Prendergast, GM. ‘Address to library conference’, Proceedings of the Australian Library
Conference held at the University of Melbourne, August, 1928, Melbourne, Government
Printer, 1928, pps-7.
Appendixes


Price, AG. Libraries in South Australia; Report of an Inquiry commissioned by the South Aus-
tralian Government into the system of management of libraries maintained or assisted by
the State, Adelaide, Government Printer, 1937.
Proceedings of the Australian Library Conference held at the University of Melbourne, August
1928, Melbourne, Government Printer, 1928.
‘Proposed constitution’. Typescript, c. 21 April 1937, with covering letter, JW Metcalfe to
KS Cunningham, 21 April 1937, ACER archives, series 49, item 199. A copy of the
proposed Constitution without a covering letter is in ALIA records, NLA, M 57446,
box 1.
‘Proposed programme for librarians visiting Canberra for the Inauguration of the AIL,
ALIA records, NLA, M 57446, box 1.
Public Library of New South Wales. Annual report, Sydney, Government Printer, 1940.
Purnell, HR, ‘Library development in South Australia’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings: Second Annual Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne, June 10th to 12th,
1939, Adelaide, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1940, pps3-56.
Purnell, HR. ‘Presidential Address: country library provision’, Australian Institute of Librar-
ians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th-l 7th,
1940, Canberra, June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September
19th-20th, 1942, Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, pp 37-45.
Purnell, HR, ‘Report on public libraries in England and Wales’, Proceedings of the Austral-
ian Library Conference held at the University of Melbourne, August 1928, Melbourne,
Government Printer, 1928, pp 23-32.
Radford, NA. ‘Carnegie Corporation’, in ALMS: Australia’s library information and archive
services—an encyclopaedia ojpractice and practitioners, edited by Harrison Bryan, vol f,
Sydney, Library Association of Australia, 1988, ppl34-135.
Radford, NA. The Carnegie Corporation and the development of American college libraries,
1928-1941, Chicago, American Library Association, 1984.
Radford, W ‘Notes on Mr Metcalfe’s Statement’, 23 November 1949. Copy in the pos-
session of David J Jones.
Rayward, WB. ‘Library education’, in ALIAS: Australia’s library, information and archives
services—an encyclopaedia of practice and practitioners, edited by Harrison Bryan, vol 3,
Sydney, ALIA Press, 1989, ppB4-86, 88-89,
Redmond, L. Alfred Ernest McMicken, 1872-1964: innovator and pioneer in library develop-
ment, MA Thesis, Monash University, 1988.
Remington, GC. ‘Co-operation in library matters between State and local governing
bodies’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and
Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th-17th, 1940, Canberra, June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth
Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th-20th, 1942, Canberra, Australian Institute of
Librarians, 1944, ppl 15-118.
Remington, GC. ‘Laymen and libraries’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 6th
Conference, Sydney, October 1947, and other papers, Sydney, AIL, 1949, pps9-65.


Remington, GC. ‘Librarians and the public’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings:
First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th to 13 th, 1938, Melbourne,
Brown, Prior and Anderson, 1939, pps7-64.
Remington, GC. and JW Metcalfe. The Free Library Movement, 1935-1945, Sydney, New
Century Press, 1945, p 4. First published as ‘The Free Library Movement, 1935-1945’,
Australian Quarterly, vol 17, June 1945, ppB7-97.
Riverina Regional Library Conference. Proceedings: with Library service in New South Wales:
a statement of progress and problems: Riverina Regional Library Conference, convened by
the Wade Shire Public Library Committee, May 9 to 11,1947, Griffith, New South Wales,
Riverina Library Region Standing Committee, 1947.
Russell, JE. ‘Australia notes’, 1928, [typescript], Carnegie Corporation of New York
archives.
Scott, B. ‘Library associations in Australia, past and present’, Australian Library Journal,
vol 5 no 3, July 1956, pplo2-108.
Scott, L. ‘Co-operation between the university library and subject departments’, Austral-
ian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences,
Adelaide, June 15th-17th, 1940, Canberra, June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meet-
ing, Sydney, September 19th-20th, 1942, Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians,
1944, ppl24-129.
Scott, L. ‘Library techniques’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference,
Hobart, April 1946, Melbourne, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1947, ppBB-92.
Scott, L. ‘Presidential address, 1944’, Australian Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth
Conference, Hobart, April 1946, Melbourne, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1947,
pp 32-34.
Selleck, RJW Frank Tate: a biography, Carlton, Victoria, Melbourne University Press,
1982.
Serials in Australian libraries: social sciences and humanities: a union list, Canberra, National
Library of Australia, 1963.
Smith, ST. ‘Libraries seen abroad’, Proceedings of the Australian Library Conference held
at the University of Melbourne, August 1928, Melbourne, Government Printer, 1928,
pps7-58.
Snibson, RR The Free Library Movement campaign for public library legislation in New
South Wales’, Australian library history in context: papers from the Third Forum on
Australian Library History, University of New South Whies, 17 and 18 July 1987, edited
by W Boyd Rayward, Sydney, School of Librarianship, University of New South
Wales, 1988, ppl2l-128
Snibson, RE The Free Library Movement in New South Wales, 1935-1944, MA thesis, Monash
University, 1987.
The South Australian Institutes’ Journal, vol 1 no 1, 18 August 1900 to vol 34 no 7, 31
May 1964.
Steel, EV ‘Military library service’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and
4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th—17th, 1940, Canberra, June


lith-16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th—20th, 1942, Canberra,
Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, pis 7.
Steel, EV, JJ O’Brien and R McGreal. ‘Camp Library Service in New South Wales’, Austral-
ian Institute oj Librarians, Proceedings, 3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences,
Adelaide, June 15th-l 7th, 1940, Canberra, June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fijth Annual Meet-
ing, Sydney, September 19th-20th, 1942, Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians,
1944, ppBl-87.
Talbot, MR. A chance to read: a history of the institutes movement in South Australia, Adelaide,
Libraries Board of South Australia, 1992.
Talbot, MR. The Library Association of Australasia, 1896-1902, PhD thesis, Monash Uni-
versity, 1985.
Thompson, JJM. Alfred Conlon, 1908—1961: a memorial by some of his friends, Sydney,
Benevolent Society of New South Wales, 1963.
Transcript of Inauguration [of the Australian Institute of Librarians], ALIA records, NLA,
M 57446, box 109,
Victoria, Library Service Board. Libraries in Victoria: report of the Library Service Board
appointed by His Excellency the Governor, to inquire into and make recommendations
regarding the adequacy of library service in Victoria, Melbourne, Government Printer,
1944.
Vincent, I. ‘Why bother with library history?’, Australian library history: papers from the
Second Forum on Australian Library History, Canberra, 19-20 July 1985, edited by
Peter Biskup and Maxine K Rochester, Canberra, Canberra College of Advanced
Education, 1985, ppl-15.
Wallace, GM. ‘School libraries, the true foundation of a national public library’, Proceedings
of the Australian Library Conference held at the University of Melbourne, August 1928,
Melbourne, Government Printer, 1928, pp 36-40.
White, HL. ‘Documentary films and other new materials in library service’, Australian
Institute of Librarians: Proceedings, sth Conference, Hobart, April 1946, Melbourne, AIL,
1947, ppl 16-122,
White, HL. ‘lnternational library co-operation’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th-l 7th, 1940, Canberra,
June 14th-16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th-20th, 1942,
Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, f 944, pplo4-114.
White, HL. ‘Trends in archival administration’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings,
3rd and 4th Annual Meetings and Conferences, Adelaide, June 15th—17th, 1940, Canberra,
June 14th—16th, 1941 and Fifth Annual Meeting, Sydney, September 19th—20th, 1942,
Canberra, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1944, pp 46-60,
Whitehead, D. ‘AM and PM: The Munn-Pitt Report in context’, Australian Library Journal,
vol 30 no 1, February 1981, pp 4-10.
Whyte, JR Address to Alumni Seminar, Monash University, Department of Librarianship,
Archives and Records, 27 July 199 f. Copy in possession of David J Jones.


Whyte, JE ‘Australian Institute of Librarians’, in ALIAS: Australia’s library, information and
archive services—an encyclopaedia of practice and practitioners, edited by Harrison
Bryan, vol 1, Sydney, LAA, 1988, pp 73-76.
Whyte, JE Education for librarianship in the United States and Australia: a comparison, AM
thesis, University of Chicago, Graduate Library School, 1956.
Whyte, JP. ‘From ALA to LAA —the Australian Institute of Librarians’, Australian Library
History: papers from the Second Forum on Australian Library History, Canberra, 19-20
July 1985, edited by Peter Biskup and Maxine K Rochester, Canberra, Canberra Col-
lege of Advanced Education, 1985, ppl22-133.
Whyte, JP. ‘John Metcalfe and the Library Association of Australia’, Australian Library
Journal, vol 20 no 4, May 1971, pps-13.
Whyte, JP ‘Library Association of Australia’, in ALIAS: Australia’s library, information and
archive services—an encyclopaedia of practice and practitioners, edited by Harrison
Bryan, vol 2, Sydney, ALIA Press, 1989, ppBo-83.
Whyte, JE ‘Library Association of Victoria’, in ALIAS: Australia’s library, information and
archive services—an encyclopaedia of practice and practitioners, edited by Harrison
Bryan, vol 2, Sydney, ALIA Press, 1989, ppB3-84.
Whyte, JE ‘Professional discourse among university librarians in Australia 1926-1937’,
in Innovation no stranger: essays in Australian librarianship in honour of Ira Raymond,
edited by Margy Burn and Christobel Palmer, Adelaide, Investigator Press for the
Barr Smith Library, 1982, pp 69-82.
Whyte, JE To unite persons engaged in library work: the Australian Institute of Librarians’,
Australian Library Journal, vol 36 no 4, November 1987, pp 193-207.
Whyte, JP. ‘Towards a history of the Australian Institute of Librarians’, [1985?], Copy in
the possession of David J Jones.
Wood, ME. ‘Australasian library services’, duplicated typescript, January 1945, ALIA
records, NLA, M 57446, box 108,
Wood, ME. ‘Library development in Western Australia’, Australian Institute of Librarians:
Proceedings: Second Annual Meeting and Conference held at Melbourne, June 10th to 12th,
1939, Adelaide, Australian Institute of Librarians, 1940, pp4B-52.
Wood, ME. Training for librarianship from the university standpoint’, Australian Institute
of Librarians: Proceedings: First Annual Meeting and Conference held at Sydney, June 11th
to 13th, 1938, Melbourne, Brown, Prior and Anderson, 1939, pp 42-45.
Young, RB. The function of institutions, societies and firms in public library provision
and promotion’, Australian Institute of Librarians, Proceedings, 6th Conference, Sydney,
October 1947, and other papers, Sydney, AIL, 1949, ppBo-82.


Index
Note: Names beginning with Mac and Me are interfiled. Photographs are indicated in bold with locators in the format: fB6,
indicating in this example that the photograph follows page 86. Notes are indicated thus: 6nB, meaning page 6, note 8. The
following abbreviations are used in addition to those listed on page vii:
ALA Australian Library Association
LA Library Association (UK)
LAV Library Association of Victoria
A
AACOBS see Australian Advisory Council on
Bibliographical Services
abstracting and indexing 48
ACER see Australian Council for Educational Research
achievements see Branches: achievements
ACLIS see Australian Council of Libraries and
Information Services
ACT see Australian Capital Territory
Adams. JRG 9,213
advocacy 169-170 see also library promotion
ALA see Australian Library Association
Albert Hall. Canberra 59, 63, 64
Alcock, Henry 19, 213
‘Alf Conlon’s Circus’ 157
American Book Centre (War Devastated Libraries) 125
American Library Association 8, 60, 62, 179, 195
and education for librarianship see education for
librarianship: overseas models
Anderson, HCL 9-10,61,94,213
Annual catalogue of Australian publications 138
annual meetings
1937 (foundation meeting) 59-65
1938 67-71
1939 136-139
1940 139-140
1941 141-143
1942 143-144
1943 144
1944 144-145
1945 145
1946 145-148
1947 148-150,180
1948 150
1949 (final) 150, 184-185
dates and places held 238
appointment of non-librarians 33, 71-72, 202
Archer, Ellinor 19, 101, flB6
assessment of AIL 208
biographical note 213
chairs final annual meeting of AIL 184
criticism of 1946 conference 147
Foundaiion Membership 224
on library co-operalion 142
and membership criteria for special librarians 122
offices held 70, 72, 102, 112, 119, 121, 126, 130,
138, 178, 181, 184, 192, 229-236
Presidential Address 1949 150, 208
supports amended Constitution 183-184
archives
of AIL 4, 237, 244
as conference theme (1940) 139-140
legislation 140
relating to Australia 137, 146, 194
as topic for study and discussion 69, 105, 108,
139-140
armed forces
AIL members in 156, 157, 162
library services 81, 88. 140, 158-161 see also Camp
Library Service
Armstrong, E La T 9, 10, 20, 60
biographical note 213
Foundation Membership 49, 224
Armstrong, Narelle, Foundation Membership 224
Army Education Service 148, 160
Arnot, Jean F
biographical note 213
character 81
Foundation Membership 224
on library co-operation 142
on McColvin Report 149
offices held 70. 81, 95, 123, 184-185, 229-232,
234-236
proposed as member of first Board of Examination
and Certification 101
reports on finances 167
resigns as LAA Vice-President 185
role at inauguration 63
suggests committee on children’s libraries 130
travel grant 167
Aslib 48
ASUS see Association of Special Libraries and Information
Services
261
Uniting a profession


associate membership 50
Association of Special Libraries and Information Bureaux
(Aslib) 48
Association of Special Libraries and Information Services
169
Association of Teacher-Librarians 79
Astley, ITS, Foundation Membership 224
athenaeums see institute libraries; institutes movement
Australian Advisory Committee on Bibliographical
Services 131
Australian Advisory Council on Bibliographical Services
131, 143, 207
Australian Booksellers and Publishers Association 159
Australian Broadcasting Commission 170-171
Australian Capital Territory
AIL Branch 87-88
special libraries in 88 see also government
department libraries
Australian Comforts Fund 158
Australian Council for Educational Research 39, 169,
200-201
and AIL/LAA 171-174, 177, 185, 200-201
and CCNY 33. 101, 169-170, 200
and Library Group see Library Group
publishes Munn-Pitt Report 36
sponsors McColvin survey 171-174
sponsors NEF conference 58, 59
Australian Council of Libraries and Information
Services 207
Australian Country Library Association 198
Australian Federation of University Women 125
Australian government see federal government
Australian Institute of Librarians
achievements 166, 192-209
administrative shortcomings 168
annual meetings see annual meetings
appeal of 193, 197, 198
archives and archivists of 4. 237
attitudes of smaller States 73
Board of Examination and Certification see Board of
Examination and Certification (AIL)
Committees see names of specific committees, i.e.
Committee 0n...
conferences see conferences
Constitution see Constitution (AIL)
co-operation with LAV 16—17, 60, 78, 80, 198
established 59-67
examinations see examinations
Executive 65-67
final annual meeting 184-186
finances 58. 59-60, 67. 107, 129, 167, 174, 207
Foundation Members 59, 60, 66, 224-228
Foundation Membership criteria 46, 48-49, 61, 64
generational change 166,198-199
inaugural meeting, Canberra 1937 59-65, fB6
international recognition 195
leaders of 198-199
meetings see annual meetings
membership see membership (AIL)
objects 60, 63-64, 68, 174-176, 192-195
official recognition of 194-195
political support 199-200
Presidential election (1940) 136
proposed 42-43
reciprocal recognition of qualifications 97, 109-110
records of 237
relations with ACER 171—174
relations with CCNY 169-170, 173, 176-178, 195
see also Carnegie Corporation of New York
relations with Library Group 45, 169-170, 176, 179
see also Library Group
responsiveness of 196
rival organisations 168-169, 180, 198
structure 169
transition to LAA 177, 178-186, 192, 201
unfinished business, for LAA attention 201-206
voice of Australian libraries and librarians 169-170,
195, 201
wartime activities see World War II
Australian Institute of Professional Librarians (proposed)
46 see also Australian Institute of Librarians
Australian Joint Copying Project 146
Australian Libraries and Information Council 207
Australian Library and Information Association 207
Board of Education 6nB
Australian Library Association 17-24, 197
conference, Melbourne, 1928 18-20, 36, 94
conference. Melbourne, 1933 30-35, 36
conference, Sydney 1931/32 (proposed) 30
constitution and membership 20-21
failure of NSW to form branch 30-31,40-41
funds handed to AIL 166
and Munn-Pitt Report 37, 38-41, 196
and proposed Institute 44-46, 198
reasons for failure 21,23-24
structure 78
support for Carnegie survey 33-34
winding-up 166
Australian Library Conference see Australian Library
Association: conference
Australian Library Institute (proposed) see Australian
Institute of Librarians
Australian Library Journal 2, 6nB, 202, 208
Australian Library of Information (London) 145
Australian Library Promotion Council 207
Australian Military Education Council 159
Australian National University library school
(proposed) 205
Australian School Library Association 79
Australian UNESCO Committee for Libraries 131
Australiana, classification of see Committee on the
Classification of Australiana
262
Uniting a profession


B
Bailey, Eileen B, Foundation Membership 224
Ballarat Mechanics Institute 49
Bampfield, FW 18, 19. 213
Barnard, Marjorie 82
biographical note 213
offices held 121,233-234
Barr, John 38,213 see also Munn-Barr Report
Barrington, Mary
Foundation Membership 224
offices held 119,229-231
Barry, Sir Redmond 8, 213
Batten, HC
biographical note 213
Foundation Membership 49, 224
Battye.JS 35, 45, 129, 166, fB6
attitude to AIL 85-86
biographical note 213
Foundation Membership 224
role at inauguration 61,63
and vice-presidency 65, 73
Baud. WC 45. 49, 60, 65
biographical note 213
Foundation Membership 224
on library co-operation 142-143
offices held 70. 123, 229-233
role at inauguration 62
Begg, Jean M, Foundation Membership 224
Bell, FLS 80
AIL archivist 237
biographical note 214
Foundation Membership 224
on library co-operation 142
offices held 125, 131, 184, 233-236
Bell, HO, Foundation Membership 224
Bennett, JL, Foundation Membership 224
Benson, C Irving 19, 214
Bertie. CH 18, 19, 22, 42, flB2
at 1938 conference 69
attitude to AIL 80
biographical note 214
Foundation Membership 224
offices held 67
retires 166
Bertles, Zoe E, Foundation Membership 224
Bibliotekens Fbrsaljningscentral 128
Bibliotekstjanst (BTJ) 128
Binns. K 19. 22, 35. 37. 42. 65, 101, flB2
and ALA branch 30
on archives 139
biographical note 214
and draft constitution of AIL 49, 50
and education for librarianship 61, 68, 69, 99
favours 1940 conference 139
Foundation Membership 224
on library co-operation 141
and Library Group 39, 44. 49
on military library committee 159, 160
and NEF conference 58
offices held 66, 72, 95, 124, 125, 131, 229-235
political connections 199
Presidential Address 1941 141
regrets isolation 192
report on Tasmanian libraries 85
report to 1939 conference 138
retires 166
role at inauguration 61, 62, 63, 64
role in McColvin visit 170-173
view on AIL membership 48
wartime activities 158,160
work on Camp Libraries 159-160
Binns Report 85. 146
biographical notes 213-223
Blackel, KB, Foundation Membership 224
Blarney, Sir Thomas A 159, 214
Blanchard. Miss 234
Board of Education (LAA/ALIA) 6nB
Board of Examination and Certification (AIL) 6nB,
99—113, 118, 122, 144 see also Committee on Library
Training and Standards
achievements 112-113, 162, 209
Chair’s divided loyalties 111
composition 97. 100, 101-102, 112
considers constitutional revision 174, 180-181
meetings 116n441
role and responsibilities 97
Board of Examination, Certification and Registration of
Librarians (LAA) 113
Board of Examiners (LAA) 6nB
Bond, Miss 233
Book Week. 84, 86, 158
Booker, Nancy G
biographical note 214
Foundation Membership 224
on McColvin Report 149
offices held 232
travel grant 167
books, imports of and taxes on 194-195
bookshop (proposed) 127-129
Boys. RD 18
biographical note 214
Foundation Membership 49, 224
role in ALA 34
Bradford, WW 17
Branches 73. 78-90
achievements 88-90, 192-193, 200, 206
constitutions 71,78
contrasting styles (Vic and NSW) 79, 80
established 66
finances 89-90
publications 89
subcommittees 169
263
Uniting a profession


Slates:
ACT 87-88
NSW 71. 80-83, 108, 140, 158-159
Queensland 86-87
South Australia 83-84, 158-159
Tasmania 85, 126, 159
Victoria 78-80, 85-86, 108-109, 158
Western Australia 85-86, 109
Brazier, AW 13,214
Brennan. Flora T, Foundation Membership 224
Brideson, HC
biographical note 214
Foundation Membership 224
offices held 181, 233, 235-236
Brisbane School of Arts 60
British Council 170-171, 173, 177, 195
British libraries see United Kingdom: librarianship in
Brown, Elspeth M 230
Brown. WH 49, 60
biographical note 214
Foundation Membership 224
offices held 66, 87, 95, 229-235
report to 1939 conference 137
Bryan. Harrison 87, 109, 111, 214
BTJ Group 128
Buick.WG 234
bulletins see journals and newsletters
Burmester, CA
biographical note 214
offices held 124, 230
Burrow, KW 70
biographical note 214
Foundation Membership 224
offices held 120, 229, 230, 235
c
cadet librarians see student associates
Camp Library Service 140, 143, 148, 158-161, 194
sec also armed forces: library services
Cannam, DWI 157
Foundation Membership 224
Carnegie Corporation of New York 6nl 1, 33-34, 138,
197
and ACER 101, 169-170, 200
advised by Library Group see Library Group
assists Library Service Board (Vic) 137
assists University of WA 137
funding of AIL 58. 59-60, 67. 167, 179, 200-201
funding of central purchasing 128
funding of FLM 179
funding of LAA 185,201,207
funding of library education 101
funding of NEF conference 58
implementation of Munn-Pitt recommendations
38-39 see also Munn-Pitt Report
relations with AIL 169-170, 173, 176-178, 195
survey of Australian libraries 15, 33-37
travel grams 67, 72. 80. 151, 166-167, 178, 200
Carnegie Library Service for outlying Commonwealth
Territories 138
Carnegie United Kingdom Trust 58, 60
catalogue card services 127-128
Catalogue of the scientific and technical periodicals in the
libraries of Australia (Pitt) 19, 82, 125-126
catalogues 19, 82. 125-126
cataloguing 106-107, 146 see also classification
cataloguing codes 119
co-operative cataloguing 126-129, 142-143
Metcalfe’s view 105
Cataloguing and Book Purchase Committee see
Committee on Central Cataloguing and Book Purchase
Cataloguing and Classification Committee see Committee
on Cataloguing and Classification
CCNY see Carnegie Corporation of New York
Central Cataloguing and Book Purchase see Committee
on Central Cataloguing and Book Purchase
Central Purchasing Office (in US) 128
certificate (Qualifying Certificate) see Qualifying
Examination
Chapman. Sir Robert W 19. 214
ChifleyJß 171,214
Child. Edith M, Foundation Membership 224
Children’s Book Council (WA) 86
Children’s Book Week see Book Week
children’s libraries 87
AIL initiatives 84, 130
conferences 79
and institute libraries 12
Tasmania 85
Temple of Youth project 15
WA 86
Children’s Library Conference 79
Clapham, Edith M, Foundation Membership 224
Clark. EH 85, 129
biographical note 215
offices held 127, 232-236
Clark, Sir Ernest and Lady Clark 85
Clarke. Merle C 87,215
classification 106-107 see also cataloguing; Committee
on Cataloguing and Classification; Committee on the
Classification of Australiana
Metcalfe’s view 105
classification schemes 48,49,130
client confidentiality 124
Clucas, RJM 18,215
CNL see Commonwealth National Library
Cocks. Margaret EJ, Foundation Membership 225
Coffman, Lotus D 34, 215
Collier. JDA 33,42,60
on archives 139
biographical note 215
Foundation Membership 225
264
Uniting a profession


offices held 66, 72. 118, 124, 127, 145, 181,
229-236
Presidential Address 1945 145
report to 1939 conference 138
writes to PM on McColvin visit 172, 173
Collins. J. offices held 235-236
Collins, Nora M, Foundation Membership 225
commercial libraries see special libraries; subscription
libraries
Committee on AIL Proceedings 124
Committee on Bibliography see Standing Committee
on Bibliography
Committee on Cataloguing and Classification 70.
119-120,127,229-234
Committee on Central Cataloguing and Book Purchase
126-129, 235-236
Committee on Children’s Libraries and Children’s
Reading in Australia 130, 233, 234
Committee on Constitutional Revision 129, 181,
235, 236
Committee on Finance and Administration see Finance
and Administration Committee
Committee on Inter-Library Loans and Transport
123-124, 233
Committee on Library Training and Standards 70.
95—96, 118, 193, 229-230 see also Board of
Examination and Certification (AIL)
Committee on Periodicals in Australian Libraries see
Periodicals in Australian Libraries Committee
Committee on Promotion (LAA) 131
Committee on Publications see Publications Committee
Committee on Reference and Research 70, 120, 229-230
Committee on Services, Standards and Status of
Librarians in Australia 122-123, 233-236
Committee on Special Libraries see Special Libraries
Committee
Committee on Standards and Documentation 130,
234-236
Committee on the Classification of Australiana 70,
118-119,229-231
Committee on the Commonwealth Year Book see
Commonwealth Year Book Committee
Committee on UNESCO see UNESCO Committee
Committee to Assist Damaged Libraries Overseas 125,
232, 234
committees 70, 118-131, 229-236 see also the names
of specific Committees, e.g. Board of Examination
and Certification (AIL), Committee on ...
continuation and changes under LAA 131,185
membership of 229-236
success of 192-193
Commonwealth government see federal government
Commonwealth National Library 19. 27n73, 141, 146
catalogue card service 128
National Historical Film and Speaking Record
Section 138
training at 94. 110
union list of periodicals 126
Commonwealth Public Service Board 202
Commonwealth Year Book Committee 129-130,
232-235
communication difficulties 67, 73
conferences
AIL see conferences of AIL
first international conference of librarians 8
Institutes Association of SA, concerning national
co-operation (1926) 13, 17
LA Australasia 8-9
LAV 15-16, 18-20, 79
NEF 1937 58-59, 65, 200
of university librarians 19
conferences of AIL 136-151, 238 see also annual
meetings
Ist, Sydney 1938 66, 67-71, fB6
2nd. Melbourne 1939 136-139, fB6
3rd, Adelaide 1940 83-84, 139-140, 156, f86(2)
4th, Canberra 1941 141-143, 156, fB6
sth, Hobart 1946 85, 145-148, fB6
6th, Sydney 1947 148-150
post-conference criticism (1946) 147
State reports to conferences 137, 146
suspended during war 143-145
value of 144, 150-151
Conlon, Alfred 157
Constitution (AIL)
amendments (1942) 103,106
Branch constitutions 71,78
changes sought (1947) 174-176
discussion at inauguration 62-65
drafting of 42-50
revision (1947) 180-184
Constitution (LAA) 181-184
Cooke. IF 19,42,43,60
biographical note 215
Foundation Membership 225
offices held 118, 121, 229-233
co-operation between libraries 126-129, 150 see also
Australian Joint Copying Project; Inter-Library Loan
Code; Inter-Library Loans and Transport Committee;
union catalogues
discussed at 1941 conference 141-143
discussed at LAV conference 1928 19-20
facilitated by AIL 193
during World War II 159
co-operative purchasing and cataloguing 126-129
Copland, Sir Douglas B 19. 197, 215
Corner. Phyllis M 112, 215
corporate membership 167-168, 174-176, 207
Cosgrove, Sir Robert 145,215
Council see also Executive
appoints first standing committees 70
first elected 66
meeting arrangements 73
265
Uniting a profession


Council for Scientific and Industrial Research 19, 27n73,
125, 126, 142
country areas, library services for 84, 86. 137, 140, 198
see also institute libraries
country areas, services for 20
Country Lending Service (SA) 137
Cowan, WA 33,72
on AIL advising CCNY 169
attitude to AIL 83
biographical note 215
character 83
Foundation Membership 225
offices held 66, 83, 95. 102, 229-236
views on education for librarianship 97
Crabtree, RW, offices held 121, 232-233
Crisp, Sir Peter 215
CSIR see Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
Cumming, D 17
Cunningham. KS 23, 35, 36
assistance acknowledged by Metcalfe 177
biographical note 215
and draft constitution of AIL 49
Honorary Membership 236
and Library Group 39, 44,49
motivation 197
and NEF 58
on origins of AIL 200
role in McColvin visit 170—173
on school libraries 146
Cuthbert, E Isabel, Foundation Membership 225
D
Davies, E Salter see Salter Davies, Ernest
Deegan, Mary E, Foundation Membership 225
Defence forces see armed forces
Department of War Organization of Industry 157, 196
Dewey Decimal Classification 49, 120
extension of, for Australiana 118-119, 193
Dewey, Melvil 8,9, 10, 215
Dinley, Eileen M, Foundation Membership 225
Diploma 94, 99—100, 103, 105, 111, 203 see also
examinations
Dobbie, Nita May 71,216
Douie, COG 34, 216
Doyle, BT, Foundation Membership 225
Drake, CL
AIL archivist 237
biographical note 216
offices held 125, 232-234
Drama Group (NSW Branch) 81, 158
Drummond. DH 36. 69, 137, 197, 199, 216
Duncan, WGK 80, 197,216
E
economic crisis of 1930 s 24, 30
Edmiston, Helen K, Foundation Membership 225
education for librarianship 67-69, 94-113, 204-205
see also Board of Examination and Certification (AIL);
Committee on Library Training and Standards;
graduate profession
AIL achievements 193-194, 208-209
Binnsand 61,68,69,99
Carnegie funding 101
examinations see examinations
Flannery and 68, 69
Ifould on 61, 67
Levick and 68, 69
and Libraries Advisory Committee report 68
library schools 79, 94, 98-99, 104, 106-110, 137,
204-205
limitations of AIL system 194
Metcalfe and 41, 68. 69. 95, 97, 99. 109, 122
Munn-Pitt Report and 38, 94
overseas models 41-42, 67-68, 96-97, 99, 102,
103-104.204-205
Pitt (ER) on 68. 94. 96
at Public Library of NSW 23—24, 42, 68
resolution at 1933 conference 33
Scott (B) on 208
syllabus 68, 69, 95-97, 103, 104-107, 112, 144
Whyte (JP) on 208-209
Wood and 68-69
educational role of libraries 10
for armed forces see armed forces; library services
for children see children’s libraries; school libraries
for the community see institute libraries; public
libraries
eligibility for AIL membership see membership (AIL);
qualifications
employment issues see industrial issues
equipment see library equipment exhibitions
The essential features of a good public library 15, 36, 94
Evatt, Clive R 199, 216
examinations 94-99, 193-194, 202-204 see also Board
of Examination and Certification (AIL); Diploma;
education for librarianship; qualifications; syllabus
assistance for candidates 108-109
candidates 6n2, 107-108, 203-204
differences from British scheme 103-104
impact on finances 107
implementation 107-109
Preliminary Examination 103—105, 109,203—204
Qualifying Examination 103-105, 109, 203-204
recognition of, by employers 79, 98, 108, 202
Registration Examination (LAA) 112, 113, 204
scheme proposed 103-107
shortcomings 111, 194
special librarians and 108
successof 112, 193, 208
266
Uniting a profession


Executive 70, 72, 199 see also leadership
first meeting 66
generational change 166,198-199
manoeuvrings concerning office-bearers 65-66, 70,
156
newsletter 89, 92n358
provisional 64-65
relations with NSW Branch members 80-81
exhibitions, at conferences see library equipment
exhibitions
expenditure see finances
F
Fairfax, Ruth 39,216
Federal Capital Territory see Australian Capital Territory;
Library Association of New South Wales and the
Federal Capital Territory (proposed)
Federal Executive see Executive
Federal Executive newsletter 89, 92n358
federal government 126
Booker’s view on role 149-150
White’s view on role 149
Feely.JA 158,177,216,235
female librarians see women
Ferguson, Sir John A 216
fiction see recreational role of libraries
FID see International Federation for Documentation
Fighting Forces Comforts Fund 159
films
about libraries 143
Australian 146
White on film collections 147
Finance and Administration Committee 129, 232-234
finances
of Branches 89-90
CCNY contribution 58, 60, 167, 179, 185, 195,
197, 200-201, 207
donations to LAA 207
impact of examinations on 107
precariousness 67, 129, 167-168, 174, 182, 197,
201
table of 243
financial assistance from Carnegie Corporation see
Carnegie Corporation of New York
Fitzhardinge, LF 102
biographical note 216
and classification of Australiana 118
Foundation Membership 225
offices held 102, 112, 118, 124, 229-234
Flannery, JV
and education for librarianship 68, 69
Foundation Membership 225
offices held 95, 229-230, 232
role at inauguration 62
FLM see Free Library Movement
Flower, E Monica, Foundation Membership 225
Flynn, Olive M, Foundation Membership 225
Foley, Lillian M
biographical note 216
Foundation Membership 225
offices held 125, 231-232
food parcels and gifts 161
Foote, WJ, Foundation Membership 225
Forward, JR
Foundation Membership 225
offices held 230-231
Foundation Members 59, 60, 66. 224-228
Foundation Membership 46, 48-49, 61,64 see also
membership (AIL)
Foxcrofl, AB 16,43
biographical note 216
drafts constitution 44-49, 62, 198
Foundation Membership 225
offices held 64. 66. 78. 118, 119, 229
role at inauguration 64
Fraser, Isabel AM, Foundation Membership 225
Fraser. Nona A, Foundation Membership 225
Frazer, EL 16, 19, 177
biographical note 216-217
criticism of 1946 conference 147
Foundation Membership 225
offices held 95, 96, 181, 229-230, 233-236
role at inauguration 62. 63
Free Library Movement 17, 54n176, 59
education for librarianship and 94
foundation 39-40
funding 60. 179
Metcalfe and 40, 44, 70. 180, 202
need for successor 166, 175
role 40. 63, 118, 138, 202, 269
Stales:
NSW 16, 40, 44. 45. 70. 137, 202
Queensland 54n176, 137
South Australia 54n176
Tasmania 54n176, 85, 89, 138, 159
Victoria 16, 138, 145, 148
Western Australia 54n176, 86. 146
Free Library Service Board (Victoria) 17, 79, 180
free (rate-supported) libraries see public libraries
‘free’ (subscription) libraries see subscription libraries
Fulton, Maisie E. Foundation Membership 225
funding see Carnegie Corporation of New York;
finances; government funding
G
Gallagher, Edna LM, Foundation Membership 225
Garrett, D. offices held 234-236
Garrett, PVL, Foundation Membership 225
A general introduction to library practice (Metcalfe) 107
generational change 166, 198-199
Gibbons, Faith G, offices held 234
Gil I man, BH 18,217
267
Uniting a profession


Gould, Norman 82,87,217
government department libraries 49, 81, 88, 137,
141-142, 157, 203 see also special libraries
government funding see also federal government; local
government; State government
for institute libraries in SA 12
for local libraries in Victoria 15
graduate profession 99, 104, 110, 204-205
‘grass roots’ activities see Branches
Great Britain see United Kingdom
Great Depression of 1930 s 24,30
Green, HM 18, 19. 21, 33. 42, 71-73, 101-102, flB2
at 1938 conference 69
absence from AIL inauguration 60, 65
on AIL advising CCNY 169-170
altitude to AIL 80, 192
attitude to ER Pitt 60, 72
attitude to library education and training 94-95,
99-100
biographical note 217
bitterness over Munn-Pitt Report 60
doubts about association 18. 30
Foundation Membership 225
on Library Group 170
lobbies on Library Board membership 199-200
offices held 66. 72. 81. 118, 143-144, 156,
229-232,234
preference for graduate profession 104
Presidential Address 1943 144
retirement 166, 172
supports women in AIL committees 101
on value of conferences 144
views on syllabus 95
Gregory, HA 138
biographical note 217
Foundation Membership 225
Grenfell Price Report 137 see also Price,
Sir Archibald Grenfell
Gunthorpe, SG, Foundation Membership 225
H
Hall, Elizabeth S 87-88, 109
biographical note 217
Foundation Membership 225
offices held 230, 232-233
travel grant 167
Hancock, Marjorie, Foundation Membership 225
Hannaford, CH
Foundation Membership 225
offices held 233
Harris, Marjorie I, Foundation Membership 225
Harry, Marjorie E
biographical note 217
offices held 88.232-235
Hewitt, Mary C, Foundation Membership 225
Hill, E, offices held 234
historical records see archives
Historical records of Australia (report on) 139
Holdsworth, Nora M 60
Foundation Membership 225
Honorary Membership 64, 70, 236
Horrocks, Norman D 35
Hughes, WM 39, 217
Hulme, Marian I
biographical note 217
Foundation Membership 226
offices held 78
role at inauguration 62
Hunter, MA, offices held 233,234
HW Wilson Company, printed card service 127
I
IFLA see International Federation of Library Associations
Ifould, WH fB6
at 1928 LAV conference 20
at 1938 conference 69
at 1939 conference 137
attitude to ALA 22-24, 30
attitude to Sowden 23, 30
attitudes to institute librarians 13, 17-18, 21-24, 33
biographical note 217
and Carnegie survey 35-36
character 80
criticism of 31,81
on education for librarianship 68. 71, 95
fails to attend 1933 conference 31
Foundation Membership 226
at foundation of FLM 39
influence of 80, 192
and Library Group 39
manoeuvrings over presidency and vice-presidency
65-66,156
and NEF conference 58
and new national association (AIL) 41,42, 43-44,
50
offices held 64. 65. 66, 70. 95. 229
opposes ‘status of profession’ as AIL object 72
political connections 199
President of AIL 65, 67-68, 71
and proposed NSW and ACT association 21-23, 30
retires 166, 196
role at inauguration 61, 63
significance of Library Association of Australasia for
9, 11
Tate on 35
wartime activities 157, 158, 160
income and expenditures see finances
indexing and abstracting 48,106-107 see also
cataloguing; classification
index of Australian journals (proposed) 11
industrial issues 71-72, 79, 111-112, 123, 202-203,
204
268
Uniting a profession


Ingamells, FH, Foundation Membership 226
institute libraries 9-11, 16. 140 see also schools of
arts libraries
academic and research librarians’ attitudes to 9-10,
17-18,21-24,31
and Foundation Membership 49
Metcalfe on institute librarians 31
national influence of 23
responses to Munn-Pitt Report 37
in South Australia 11-13
in Victoria 13-14, 138
Institute of Australian Librarians (proposed) see
Australian Institute of Librarians
Institute of Librarians (proposed) see Australian
Institute of Librarians
Institutes Association of South Australia 9-13, 21. 83,
140, 198
appeal of 11
attitude to Munn-Pitt Report 37
co-operation with LAV 14
journal 124
presses Ifould to form branch 30
suggests national association 13, 17-18,23
support for Carnegie survey 34
institutes movement 11-13 see also institute libraries
institutional membership see corporate membership
Inter-Allied Book Centre 125
Inter-Library Loan Code 123-124 see also co-operation
between libraries
Inter-Library Loans and Transport Committee see
Committee on Inter-Library Loans and Transport
international conferences see conferences
International Federation for Documentation 123
International Federation of Library Associations 123, 195
International Federation of University Women 125
international library co-operation see library co-operation
International Standards Organisation 130
Irvine, Constance K, Foundation Membership 226
ISO see International Standards Organisation
J
Jinnette, Isabella 87
John, EB. Foundation Membership 226
Johnston, Barbara E
attends overseas conference 168
offices held 234-236
travel grant 167
Jones, HEL, offices held 232-236
Jones. Phyllis Mander- see Mander-Jones, Phyllis
Jopling, Mildred H, Foundation Membership 226
journals and newsletters 121, 124 see also Australian
Library Journal; Library Journal; Library Record of
Australasia; Periodicals in Australian Libraries
Committee; South Australian Institutes’ Journal
AIL journal (lack of) 168,202
AIL journal (proposed ) 124
AIL newsletter 124
of Branches 84, 89
index of Australian journals (proposed) 11
LAAjournal 202
LAV (second) 12, 16, 17
K
Kandel, IL 59,217
Kaplan,] 111,217
Kealy, TA, Foundation Membership 226
Kent, Adelaide L, Foundation Membership 226
Kenyon Report 20, 94
Keppel, FP 38,39,59,217
Key, LCSt A 44, 101-102
biographical note 217
on contribution to international librarianship 195
on finances 167
Foundation Membership 226
offices held 101,230-232,235
role at inauguration 62, 63
Keyes, HJ
biographical note 218
Foundation Membership 226
offices held 70. 119, 229-233
Kibble, Nitaß 71
biographical note 218
Foundation Membership 226
offices held 120,229-230
Kirby, FG 79.218,235
Kyancutta Institute, SA 198
L
Lafferty, Mary M, Foundation Membership 226
Lake, LS. offices held 232,235
Lambert. Evelyn M, Foundation Membership 226
Lane. Olive M, Foundation Membership 227
Lanyon, EW
Foundation Membership 226
offices held 235
Latham, Sir John G 148, 185, 218
LAV see Library Association of Victoria
leadership 72, 198-199
office-holders and committee members 229-236
Lecture notes on subject cataloguing (Metcalfe) 107
Leeper, Alexander 8,9, 218
Leeson, Ida E 23, flB2
attitude to institutes and ALA 22, 31
biographical note 218
character and influence of 81
Foundation Membership 226
and new national association 41, 42, 44
offices held 66, 118, 229-230
role at inauguration 61, 63
wartime activities 157
legislation 43. 174
concerning archives 140


NSW 81. 82, 108, 137-138, 141, 145, 146, 195,
199-200, 202, 205, 207, 210n723
Queensland 137,146
South Australia 13, 25n45, 140
Tasmania 85, 91n344, 110, 145, 207
Victoria 14, 138, 195, 207
Leslie, Esther EA 218
Levick, BB 101,120
biographical note 218
on education for librarianship 68. 69
Foundation Membership 226
offices held 229-230
Lewis. VL, Foundation Membership 226
librarianship see also education for librarianship; special
librarians; Slate librarians; teacher-librarians;
university librarians
graduate profession 99, 104, 110, 204—205
male dominance of 23
qualifications see qualifications
quality of (as an object) 60. 63
standards see standards of libraries and librarianship
status of librarians see professional status of
librarians
women in 22, 23, 31, 61, 70, 80—81, 83, 86, 95.
101, 108, 193
libraries see also children’s libraries; institute libraries;
public libraries; school libraries; special libraries;
subscription libraries; university libraries
for armed forces see armed forces
and economic conditions 24, 30
number of, in Australia 36
role of 10, 11
surveys and reports see Binns Report; Carnegie
Corporation of New York; Grenfell Price Report;
Kenyon Report; McColvin Report; Munn-Barr
Report; Munn-Pitt Report
value of 145
Libraries Act (Tasmania) 85,110
Libraries Advisory Committee (NSW) 16, 68, 70, 95,
36. 137
Libraries and education (Miller) 36
Libraries Association of New Zealand 38 see also
New Zealand Library Association
Libraries Working Party (UNESCO) 167
Library Act (NSW) 82, 108, 137-138, 141, 146, 202,
205, 210n723 see also Library Board of New South
Wales
Library Advisory Committee (Australian Military
Education Council) 159
Library Association (UK) 8, 179, 195
50th anniversary conference 20
and education for librarianship 41-42, 67-68, 95.
205
examination system 96-99
reciprocal recognition of qualifications 97, 109—110
role and functions 62, 174
welcomes AIL inauguration 60
Library Association of Australasia 8-11,12. 18, 38, 78
Library Association of Australia
achievements 206-207
Board of Examiners/Board of Education 6nB
considers interlibrary loan code 124
Constitution 181-184
continues work of AIL 177, 185-186, 192
finances 185,201,207
membership categories 182-183
name changed to ALIA 207
opportunities 201-206
Presidential election (1949) 184-185
structure 182-183
Victorian Branch 17
Library Association of New South Wales and the Federal
Capital Territory (proposed) 21-24, 30, 32, 41
Library Association of South Australia 21
Library Association of Victoria (first) 13-14, 85
Library Association of Victoria (second) 14-17, 61, 169,
180
conferences 15-16, 18-20, 79
contentious issues addressed 15-16
co-operation with AIL 16-17, 60, 78, 80, 198
The essential features of a good public library 15,
36, 94
journals and newsletters 12,16,17, 124, 138
membership 17, 79
and Munn-Pitt Report 37-38
objects 13, 14
shared membership with AIL 78, 80
success of 138
support for Carnegie survey 15, 33, 34
Library Association record 32, 36, 63, 106
Library Board of New South Wales 161
AIL representation on 199
centralised purchasing by 128
membership 81
recognises AIL examinations 202
library cadets see student associates
Library Centre (proposed) 127-129
library co-operation see co-operation between libraries
library education see education for librarianship
library equipment exhibitions 9,70
Library Federation of Australia and New Zealand
(proposed) 18 see also Australian Library Association
Library Group 41. 43, 197, 200
and ACER 59. 101, 169
AIL dissatisfaction with 169-170
assists Victorian Library Service Board 137
attitude to AIL 45
and Carnegie Corporation funds 58, 59—60, 101
see also Carnegie Corporation of New York
discusses Institute constitution 44-49
establishment 3, 39
and NEE conference 58-59
and nominees for Foundation Membership 48-49
perceived shortcomings 169-170
270
Uniting a profession


replacement for, proposed by Metcalfe 176
shortcomings 198
transfers CCNY funds to AIL 179
Library Journal (American Library Association/Library
Association of UK) 8,106
Library Journal (LAV) 12. 16, 17, 89
library legislation see legislation
Library of Congress, printed card service 127
Library of New South Wales see Public Library of
New South Wales
library promotion 40, 142
advocated by Scott 145
funding for 179
lack of AIL attention to 201, 202
role of FLM 40. 118,202
role of LAA 181
Library Quarterly 106
Library Record of Australasia 9, 10, 12
Library School, Public Library of New South Wales 94,
104, 106-107, 108, 109, 110, 137
library schools 79,94,98-99, 104, 106-110, 137,
204-205 see also education for librarianship
Library Service Board, Victoria 137, 146
library statistics see statistics
library technology see library equipment exhibitions
Library Training School, Public Library of Victoria 79
no
Literary Institutes’ Association (NSW) 21
literary institutions see institute libraries; institutes
movement
literature searches 120
loans see Inter-Library Loan Code
lobbying 40
local government 141
Booker’s view on role 149
Perry’s view on role 149
Lodewyckx, KA. Foundation Membership 226
Lord Mayor’s Patriotic and War Fund 158
Lukis, Mollie 146,218
Lyall, Norah, Foundation Membership 226
Lynravn, NS
AIL archivist 237
Foundation Membership 226
offices held 235
Lyons, JF, Foundation Membership 226
M
Me Call um, CA 170, 171
assessment of AIL 207-208
biographical note 218
Foundation Membership 226
offices held 126,178,231-235
McCallum, Jocelyn
Foundation Membership 226
on library co-operation 142
offices held 233
McColvin, LR 109, 170-176
attitude to reciprocal membership 109
biographical note 218
controversy concerning visit 170-174, 196
funding for visit 171
suggests changes to AIL 174-176
McColvin Report 196
discussed at 1947 conference 149-150
suggests changes to AIL 174-176, 178-179, 201
McCulloch, Mrs, offices held 234
McDonald, ALG 79
biographical note 218
Foundation Membership 226
offices held 235
McDonald. IJ, Foundation Membership 226
McDonald, RJ, Foundation Membership 226
McGlade, Winifreda M, Foundation Membership 226
McGreal, RM 111,121
and armed forces libraries 140, 160-161
biographical note 218-219
on the future of libraries 147
offices held 161,235-236
paper at 1946 conference 147
McKay. Constance B 81
biographical note 219
offices held 231-232
on special libraries 146
McKay, Constance, offices held 121
Mackay, HE, Foundation Membership 226
McKell, Sir William 219
MacLeish, Archibald 170
McLellan.J 84,219,233-234
McMicken, AE
at 1933 conference 33
at 1938 conference 70
biographical note 219
and end of ALA 166
Foundation Membership 226
nominated to Free Library Service Board 17
offices held 34, 78. 95. 96. 229-230
report to 1939 conference 138
role in ALA 34
role in LAV 13-18
welcomes McColvin visit 173
McShane, CC
offices held 232-233
reports to 1946 conference 146
Mair, Alexander 219
Mair, lan A. Foundation Membership 226
male dominance, of library profession 23 see also
women: in librarianship
Mander-Jones, Phyllis flB2
attends overseas conferences 168
biographical note 219
Foundation Membership 226
offices held 130, 233-236
travel grant 167
271
Uniting a profession


wartime activities 157
marketing 142
Master Carriers’ Association 159
Masters, Thelma F, Foundation Membership 226
matriculation, prerequisite for examinations 104
Meadon, Sir Percy 59,61,219
mechanics’ institutes see institute libraries; institutes
movement
Meleng, FE 9, 12, 13. 14. 18, 19, 20, 219
Melville, Delma O, Foundation Membership 227
membership (AIL) 192-193, 196-197, 206 see also
Branches; membership criteria (AIL)
associate membership 50
benefits of wider membership 79, 148-149,
166-167, 169-170, 175-176, 179-180,
182-183,201
corporate membership 167-168, 174-176
Foundation Members 59, 60, 66, 224-228
Foundation Membership criteria 46, 48-49, 61, 64
Honorary Membership 64, 70, 236
McColvin view on widening membership 149, 179
Metcalfe view on widening membership 148-149,
179-180, 182-183
NSW Branch 82
Queensland 87
recordkeeping 168
statistics 239-242
student associates 0241
Tasmania 85
membership (LAA) 206, 207, 242
membership categories (AIL)
approved at inaugural AIL meeting 64
in draft AIL constitution 43, 44-50
proposed by McColvin 179
membership categories (LAA) 182—183, 206
membership criteria (AIL) 61, 64, 66, 79, 98, 103, 122,
148-149
membership criteria (LAA) 107
Menzies, Sir Robert 159-160,219
Metcalfe. JW 35. fB6
at 1933 conference 31-33
at 1938 conference 68, 69
achievements 112, 193
acknowledges role of CCNY 187, 200-201
addresses Queensland Branch 87
advocates new constitution 178
on ALA 21. 24, 31
antagonism towards ACER 177, 200-201
armed forces libraries 160
asserts AIL independence 172,177
assessment of AIL 195, 208
attitude to graduate profession 104
attitude to institute librarians 31. 32
biographical note 219
on cataloguing and classification 105
and central purchasing and processing 128-129
character 80, 100
concept of professional association 32, 44
and constitution of AIL 41-44, 47-49, 62, 198
and constitutional amendments (1942) 103, 106
on constitutional change (1947) 174-176, 178
contests vice-presidency (1940) 156
convenes committees 95-96, 102-103,111-112,
123, 181
criticism of, re appointments 72, 111—112
deplores handling of McColvin visit 172-174
dominance of views on AIL history 3-4
and draft syllabus see syllabus
and education for librarianship 41, 68, 69, 95, 97,
99. 109, 122, 203, 204-205
on ER Pitt 46
on Fairlie Taylor 48
Fellow of LA (UK) 111
and FLM 40. 180, 202
Foundation Membership 227
on lay contribution to libraries 166, 178
on Library Association of Australasia 11
on library co-operation 141-142
on objects of AIL and widening membership
148-149,179-180, 182-183
offices held 64. 66. 72, 95, 96. 102, 111-112, 123,
179, 184, 205, 229-236
on‘old guard’ 166
opposes ‘status of profession’ as AIL object 63, 72
Presidential Address 1947 (AIL) 148, 179-180
President (elected first LAA president 1949) 184
puts case for CCNY funding 176-177
on qualifications 72
role at inauguration 62,63
role in FLM 70
role in NSW Branch 82
role in setting standards 193
significance of 167
on standards of librarianship in NSW 28nl01
on status of AIL 172, 177, 195
studies for LA examinations 42
succeeds Ifould at PLNSW 107
supports McColvin proposals on AIL 174-176,
178-180
travel grants 167
and UNESCO 130-131, 167
and UNSW library school 204-205
wartime activities 158,160-161
welcomes McColvin visit 172,173
Whyte’s contact with 2
writings 16, 36, 63, 107, 109
Metcalfe, Thelma C 40,219
Miles, A, Foundation Membership 227
military services see armed forces; Camp Library Service;
World War II
Miller, E Morris 19. 20, 42
at 1933 conference 32-33
biographical note 219
and education for librarianship 94
272
Uniting a profession


Foundation Membership 111
and LAV 13-14
Libraries and education 36
no longer active in AIL 166
regrets NSW inaction 31
role at inauguration 61-62, 63
role in AIL 85
Miscellaneous Workers’Union 71
Model School Library 71
Morley, EA, offices held 233
Morris. Sir John 145-146, 148, 171, 220
Municipal and Shire Librarians’ Group (NSW Branch) 82
municipal libraries see public libraries
Munn-Barr Report 38
Munn-Pitt Report 3, 15, 21, 36-41
impact on ALA 38-41, 46. 166, 196
impact on Australian libraries 59, 196, 197-198
recommends national library association 37-38,
185, 197
suggestions on training 94
Munn, Ralph 3. 35-36, 72. 170, f86(2) see also
Munn-Barr Report; Munn-Pitt Report
biographical note 220
and NZ libraries 38
on Sowden 38
Murdoch, Sir Keith 138
Murphy, JM, offices held 121,231
Mutch, ID 199,220
N
National Library see Commonwealth National Library
Needham, C, offices held 232-233
New Education Fellowship Conference, 1937 58-59,
65, 200
New South Wales
AIL Branch 71, 80-83, 108, 140, 158-159
failure to form branch of ALA 21-24, 30-31
Free Library Movement 16, 40, 44, 45, 70, 137, 202
legislation 81, 82. 108, 137-138, 141, 145, 146,
195, 199-200, 202. 205, 207, 210n723
Libraries Advisory Committee 16, 68, 70, 95. 136,
137
Library Board see Library Board of New South Wales
public libraries 81, 82
Public Library see Public Library of New South
Wales
University see University of New South Wales
New South Wales Government Railways 159
New South Wales Public Service Board 104, 108, 202
New South Wales Railway and Tramway Institute 17,
27n67,159
New Zealand libraries 38
New Zealand Library Association 60, 98, 195 see
also Libraries Association of New Zealand
New Zealand qualifications 110
Newcastle School of Arts 17
News Gazette (LAV) 17
newsletters see journals and newsletters
newspapers, proposed index of 11
Northcott, Sir John 148,220
o
O’Brien. JJ 103, 140, 220, 227, 231
O’Connor. Mary U, Foundation Membership 227
office-holders and committee members see also
leadership
list of 229-236
nominations and manoeuvrings 65-66, 70, 156
Official year book of the Commonwealth of Australia
129-139
Osborn, AD 35,42, 146,220
P
Palmer. Mavis N
Foundation Membership 227
offices held 234
Paltridge, Cynthia 84, 220
paper salvage campaign 161
parliamentary library staff, education and training of 69
Parsons, Ida M, Foundation Membership 227
Peacock, HK. Foundation Membership 227
Penfold. Dulcie, offices held 235—236
Pennington, R 87, 220
Penny. H 84
Pentelow, STO
Foundation Membership 227
offices held 235-236
Periodicals in Australian Libraries Committee 125-126,
231-235
Perry, Ethel B. Foundation Membership 227
Perry, FJ
biographical note 220
Foundation Membership 227
on local government and McColvin Report 149
offices held 178, 235
Petherick, FA 220
Pike, Dora J see Whilelaw, Dora J
Pitt, ER 3, 15. 16, 19, 96, fB6 see also Munn-Pitt
Report
at 1933 conference 33, 34
on archives 139-140
and ALA 34,40, 198
biographical note 220-221
and Carnegie survey 34, 35-36
Catalogue of the scientific and technical periodicals
in the libraries of Australia 19, 82. 125-126
chairs Library Service Board 137
character 44, 46, 136
discusses libraries with military 159
on education for librarianship 68, 94, 96
The essential features of a good public library 15, 36
Foundation Membership 227
273
Uniting a profession


Green’s altitude to 60
and Library Group 39, 44, 45
offices held 65-66, 70. 78. 95. 229-231
Presidential Address 1939 136-137
retires 166
role at inauguration of AIL 60-61, 64
suggests institutional membership 167
Pitt, GH 2, 42, fIB2
at 1938 conference 69
on archives 139
biographical note 221
Foundation Membership 227
offices held 230, 233, 235
travel grant 167
PLNSW see Public Library of New South Wales
PLQ see Public Library of Queensland
PLSA see Public Library of South Australia
PLV see Public Library of Victoria
Port Adelaide Institute 9, 12
postnominals 47, 103, 206
Prahran Public Library 13
Preliminary Certificate see Preliminary Examination
Preliminary Examination 103-105, 109
Presbyterian Ladies’ College (Melbourne) 48, 79
Price, ER. Foundation Membership 227
Price, Sir Archibald Grenfell 137, 197, 221
Proceedings see Committee on AIL Proceedings
professional issues and meetings 88-89 see also
conferences
Professional Officers’ Association 202
professional standards 43, 44 see also education for
librarlanship
professional status of librarians 33, 38, 46-47, 49, 50.
71, 205 see also graduate profession
‘professional’ vs ‘amateur’ librarians
attitudes of academic and research librarians 9-10,
17-18,21-24,31
attitudes of Ifould and NSW librarians 17-18,
21-24, 31
Metcalfe on 32
promotion see library promotion
Propsting. Marjorie GE, Foundation Membership 227
public libraries 36. 141 see also Free Library Movement;
McColvin Report; Munn-Pitl Report
co-operation with schools (Victoria) 142
Kenyon Report (England and Wales) 20, 94
in post-war world 147
staff education and training 69
NSW 81. 82. 108 see also Library Act (NSW)
Queensland 137
South Australia 137, 140, 146
Tasmania 146
Victoria 15-17, 19. 79, 136-137, 142
Public libraries in Australia; present conditions and future
possibilities see McColvin Report
Public Library, Museum and Art Gallery and Institutes Act
(South Australia) 13, 25n45
Public Library, Museum and Art Gallery of South
Australia 12, 13 see also Public Library of South
Australia
Public Library of New South Wales 6n13 see also Ifould,
WH; Metcalfe, JW
co-operative projects 146
and failure of NSW to affiliate with ALA 21-24
female staff 80-81
and government department libraries 81,137,
141-142, 157
Library School 94, 104, 106-107, 108, 109, 110,
137
and library services for armed forces 158, 159
Model School Library 137
not represented at formation of ALA 17-18
and professional training 23-24, 94
role in AIL 82
Public Library of Queensland 60, 109
Public Library of South Australia
Country Lending Service 137, 140
institutes and 12-13
Public Library of Victoria
Lending Library 136
Library Extension Division (proposed) 136
qualifications for professional positions 79
training at 79. 94, 110
Trustees’ role in formation of Library Association of
Australasia 8-9
underwrites Library Record of Australasia 10
Public Library of Western Australia 61 see also Battye, JS
Public Service Board (Commonwealth) 202
Public Service Board (NSW) 104, 108, 202
Public Service Board (Victoria) 79
publications see also journals and newsletters
Australian 106-107
of Branches 89
syllabus reading lists 106-107
Publications Committee 124-125, 230, 231, 233,
235-236
Purnell. HR 18. 23. 35, 37, 60. 71, fB6
at 1933 conference 31, 33
at 1938 conference 69
at 1939 conference 137
advocates professional education 100
biographical note 221
character 83-84
discusses libraries with military 159
favours 1940 conference 139
Foundation Membership 227
on Kenyon Report 20
and Library Group 39
and new national association 42
offices held 66. 70. 72. 83, 118. 229-232
Presidential Address 1940 140
role at AIL inauguration 61. 63
274
Uniting a profession


support for free public libraries 140
Treasurer of ALA 20,31
wartime activities 157,158
Q
qualifications 72 see also education for librarianship;
examinations
and eligibility for AIL membership 61, 64, 66
reciprocal recognition 97, 109-110, 195
recognition of, by employers 79, 98, 108, 110, 111,
121, 202-203
Qualifying Examination 103-105, 109, 203-204
Quarterly bulletin (SA Branch) 84, 89
Queensland
AIL Branch 86-87
Free Library Movement 54n176, 137
legislation 137, 146
public libraries 137
Public Library see Public Library of Queensland
Queensland School of Arts Association 21
Quinn, JJ 18,42
at 1938 conference 69
biographical note 221
Foundation Membership 227
role at inauguration 64
Quinton, WC 18
biographical note 221
Foundation Membership 227
offices held 229, 230
role at inauguration 62
R
Radford, Wilma 112, flB2
attends overseas conferences 168
biographical note 221
Foundation Membership 227
offices held 232-234
secretary of Board of Examination and Certification
107
travel grant 167
Rainbow, WA. Foundation Membership 227
Ramsden, Barbara M, Foundation Membership 227
Ranganathan, SR 106
reading lists, for examinations 106-107
reciprocal recognition see qualifications; reciprocal
recognition
records see archives
recreational role of libraries 10, 12, 158 see also armed
forces: library services; institute libraries; public
libraries
Reference and Research Committee see Committee on
Reference and Research
Registration Examination (LAA) 112, 113, 193, 204
Remington, GC 39-40, 197, f!B2
at 1938 conference 70
biographical note 221
Honorary Membership 236
on lay contribution to libraries 149, 166
on library co-operation 141
offices held 130, 131, 235-236
regards FLM work complete 166
reviews 1949 draft constitution 181
wartime activities 157
on widening membership 149
research and reference see Reference and Research
Committee
retired librarians 49, 103
Richardson, GD 157, 235
Riddle, Mrs, offices held 234
Robb, Nellie HE, Foundation Membership 227
Robertson, IH, offices held 121, 232-233
Robertson, Sir Macpherson 15, 221
Robinson, Phyllis 109
Rogers, Eileen C 83
Foundation Membership 227
Royal Charter 205
Royal Charier (LAA) 113
Rural Libraries Advisory Board (Tasmania) 85
Russell, James E 34,221
Russell,John 35
Russian libraries (paper on) 138
Ryan, DV 87
biographical note 221
Foundation Membership 227
offices held 181,236
Ryan, MB, Foundation Membership 227
s
salaries 41.60. 79, 122-123, 145, 167, 174, 203
Salter Davies, Ernest 58, 60, 200, 221
Salvation Army 158
school librarians 48
membership encouraged 79, 82
and NSW Branch 82
school libraries 20, 142 see also children’s libraries
Cunningham on 146
in Victoria 79
WA 86
School Libraries Committee (NSW Branch) 82
schools of arts libraries 9, 11, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23
28n91,49, 60 see also institute libraries
Scotch College (Melbourne) 79
Scott, Barry 87
on ACER role 200
assessment of AIL 208
biographical note 221-222
Scott, Leigh 16, 19, 166
on advocacy by librarians 145
advocates broader membership 167
on apparent failure of FLM 144
biographical note 222
Foundation Membership 227
275
Uniting a profession


on library co-operation 142
on library techniques 146
offices held 66. 72. 78. 112, 119, 121, 124, 126,
130, 144, 178, 192, 229-236
Presidential Address 1944 144
suggests AIL Sydney conference 64
suggests Carnegie survey 14-15
travel grant 167
view of impact of War 196
Sections
in LAA 183,206
lack of in AIL 169
serials see journals and newsletters; Periodicals in
Australian Libraries Committee
Serials in Australian libraries: social sciences and
humanities 126
Serle, P 47, 222
Services Education Council. Library Sub-Committee 160
Services, Standards and Status Committee see
Committee on Services, Standards and Status of
Librarians in Australia
Sharr, FA (Ali) 73, 86. 222
Shepardson, Whitney H 176-177, 178, 222
Sherrie, Heather H. Foundation Membership 227
Sims, Edith A 121
biographical note 222
Foundation Membership 227
offices held 120, 123, 229-234
role at inauguration 63
travel grant 167
Small, Ethel E, Foundation Membership 227
Smith. S Talbot 18,19,20,222
Sorrell, Margaret W 83
Foundation Membership 227
offices held 138, 230
South Australia
AIL Branch 83-84, 158-159
Free Library Movement 54n176
Institutes Association see Institutes Association
of South Australia
legislation 13, 25n45, 140
public libraries 137, 140, 146
Public Library see Public Library of South Australia
Stale Libraries Board (proposed) 137
South Australian Institutes’Journal 10, 12, 14 see also
Institutes Association of South Australia
Sowden, Sir William J 10, 13, 19, 37
on ALA 31
biographical note 222
chairs ALA 18,20,23,30-31
Ifould’s attitude to 23, 30
Munn on 38
special librarians 202-203
AIL membership encouraged 79, 81, 120-121, 168
attitude to AIL examinations 108
demand for 108
education and training 69, 79, 82, 121-122, 141,
169
organisations for 48, 79, 168-169
role in AIL 48,49,192
status of 123
special libraries see also government department libraries
co-operation between libraries 142
McKay on 146
survey of 120
ACT 88
NSW 81-82, 121, 141-142
Victoria 82, 121-122, 169
Special Libraries Committee 120-122, 231-233
Special Libraries Committee (NSW Branch) 81-82, 108
Spender, Sir Percy 159, 222
Squire, M, offices held 235-236
Standard Reference Libraries, for camp libraries 160
Standards and Documentation Committee, see
Committee on Standards and Documentation
Standards Association of Australia 71, 130
standards of libraries and librarianship 28nl01, 68-69,
95-96, 123, 130, 193-194, 208 see also Committee on
Services, Standards and Status of Librarians in Australia;
education for librarianship; qualifications
Standing Committee on Bibliography 130, 233-236
Stanley, Elizabeth, Foundation Membership 227
Stapleton, JL 87
biographical note 222
Foundation Membership 227
State branches see Branches
State government role
Arnot’s view 149 see also Libraries Act (Tasmania);
Library Act (NSW); State librarians
Booker’s view 149-150
State librarians
certification of nominees for Foundation
Membership 48-49
endorsement of Munn—Pitt Report 37
relations with university librarians 60, 72, 83,
101-102,192
support for Carnegie survey 34
State Libraries Board, SA (proposed) 137
State Library of New South Wales see Public Library of
New South Wales
State Library of South Australia see Public Library of
South Australia
State Library of Victoria see Public Library of Victoria
Slate reports to conferences 137-138, 146-147 see also
Branches
statistics
collection of 129-130
membership of AIL 239-242
student associates 107, 129, 240-242
status of library profession 122-123, 194-195,205,
206-207, 208 see also Committee on Services,
Standards and Status of Librarians in Australia;
276
Uniting a profession


professional status of librarians
attempts to improve 71
discussed at inauguration 63
inclusion in objects of AIL 49-50, 63, 72
Steel. EV 42, flB2
and armed forces libraries 140, 143, 159, 160
biographical note 222
Foundation Membership 227
Library Board of NSW member 81
offices held 119, 124, 131, 229-232
succeeds Green 172
war service 158
Stewart, Sir Frederick 39. 222
student associates 47, 50, 64, 66, 98, 103, 122, 150
dropping out, from librarianship 108, 193
and examinations 89, 104
statistics 107, 129, 240-242
subscription libraries 13 see also institute libraries
surveys of Australian libraries see Binns Report; Carnegie
Corporation of New York; Munn-Pitt Report
Sveriges Allmanna Biblioteksforening 128
Sydney County Council 71
syllabus 103, 104-107, 112, 121-122
draft 68. 69, 95-97, 106, 144
reading lists 106-107
symposia 79
Symposium on library co-operation (1941) 141-143
Symposium on standards of librarianship and library
training 68-69
T
Tariff Board 194
Tasmania
AIL Branch 85, 126, 159
children’s libraries 85
Free Library Movement 54n176, 85, 89, 138, 159
legislation 85, 91n344, 110, 145, 207
library survey 85
public libraries 146
Rural Libraries Advisory Board 85
Tasmanian Library Association 19, 21
Tate, Frank 15. 36, 37, 38. 197, 200
assistance acknowledged by Metcalfe 177
biographical note 222
chairs AIL inauguration 59, 62
Honorary Membership 70,236
on Ifould 35
and Library Group 39
and Remington 39
requests Carnegie survey 33-34
Tattersall, Edith M. offices held 233
tax. on books 194
Taylor, AV, Foundation Membership 227
Taylor, Fairlie 48, 79
biographical note 222
Foundation Membership 227
teacher-librarians 108
courses for 79, 86. 94
technical services see cataloguing; classification
technology see library equipment exhibitions
Temple of Youth project 15
Thom, Daphne E, Foundation Membership 228
Thomas, Bess M, offices held 233
Thompson, Marjorie M
biographical note 223
Foundation Membership 228
offices held 230-231.233.235-236
reports on finances 167
Townes, Mary 121,233
trainee librarians see student associates
training see education for librarianship
transport see Committee on Inter-Library Loans and
Transport
travel grants 72, 166-167, 177, 178
troops see armed forces
Turkington, Agnes M, Foundation Membership 228
u
UNESCO 130-131, 195
UNESCO Committee 130-131, 235, 236
UNESCO Conference on Bibliographical Services, Paris
1950 131
UNESCO General Conference, 2nd 1947 167
UNESCO National Co-operating Body for Libraries 130
union catalogues 19, 82. 125-126, 127-128 see also
co-operation between libraries
United Kingdom see also Aslib; British Council; Carnegie
United Kingdom Trust; Library Association (UK)
Australian librarians’ working holidays in 108, 109
documents relating to Australia 146
Kenyon Report 20. 94
librarianship in 20. 41-42, 67-68, 96, 98, 106, 168,
179, 198
library education see education for librarianship:
overseas models
wartime support from Australia 161
United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural
Organisation see UNESCO
United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration
125
United Slates see also American Library Association;
Carnegie Corporation of New York
Carnegie-sponsored travel to 68. 72. 80, 167
education for librarianship see education for
librarianship: overseas models
import of books from 194-195, 210n722
librarianship in 41-42, 67-68. 80, 96, 98, 106, 145,
168, 179, 198
United States Information Libraries 121, 145, 162
Universal Decimal Classification 130
university librarians
277
Uniting a profession


and AIL 48,72,80-81, 192
education and training 68-69
meetings of 19
relations with state librarians 60, 72, 83, 101-102,
192
university libraries 108,142
University of New South Wales School of Librarianship
205
University of Western Australia, Carnegie assistance to
137
UNRRA see United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation
Administration
V
value
of conferences 144,150-151
of libraries 145
VASLIS see Victorian Association of Special Libraries and
Information Services
Victoria
AIL Branch 78-80, 85-86, 108-109, 158
Free Library Movement 16, 138, 145, 148
Free Library Service Board 17, 79, 180
legislation 14, 138,195, 207
Library Service Board 137,146
public libraries 15-17, 19, 79, 136-137, 142
Public Library see Public Library of Victoria
Public Service Board 79
school libraries 79
special libraries 82. 121-122, 169
subscription libraries 13
Victorian Association of Special Libraries and Information
Services 169
w
Wallace. GM 19,33,34-35,94,223
Walter and Eliza Hall Trust 167
war damage see Committee to Assist Damaged
Libraries Overseas
Warde, SE, offices held 235-236
wartime activities see World War II
waste paper see paper salvage campaign
Way, Sir Samuel 10. 13, 223
Weeden, WJ 131,223
Weeks, JH. Foundation Membership 228
Wells, Edith AW
Foundation Membership 228
offices held 120, 229-230
Welsford, PSJ 109
Wessells, Helen E 87, 145, 162, 223
West Australian Librarians’ and Institutes’ Journal 21
Western Australia
AIL Branch 85-86, 109
Free Library Movement 54n176, 86, 146
Public Library see also Public Library of Western
Australia
University see University of Western Australia
Western Australian Institutes Association 21
White, AJ, Foundation Membership 228
White, HL 42, 44. 94, flB2
at 1938 conference 69
on archives 139,140
biographical note 223
and draft constitution 44, 47, 48-49, 50, 62, 198
on Film collections 147
Foundation Membership 228
on library co-operation 141
on McColvin report 149
meets Dewey editors 118
offices held 64, 66, 102, 112, 119, 123, 124, 125,
131. 181, 229-236
Whitelaw, Dora J, Foundation Membership 228
Whiting, CT
biographical note 223
Foundation Membership 228
offices held 124, 229-230, 232-233. 235
Whyte, Jean H, Foundation Membership 228
Whyte, Jean P 198
approach to this history 2—5
assessment of AIL 208-209
on Metcalfe 2,3-4
offices held 2, 6n6, 6nB
sits AIL Preliminary Examination 2,155n422
view on constitutional changes 181
Willis, Frieda C, Foundation Membership 228
Wilson, Mildred M, offices held 127, 232-234
Windeyer, Margaret 9, 223
Wines, Beatrice P
biographical note 223
Foundation Membership 228
offices held 184, 234
women
and Board of Examination and Certification
membership 101
in librarianship 22, 23, 31, 61, 70, 80-81, 83, 86,
95. 101, 108, 193
membership of AIL 48, 193
Women’s Public Service War Unit 158
Wood, Malvina E 19, 65, FlB2
biographical note 223
and education for librarianship 68-69, 109
Foundation Membership 228
importance of 73. 86
misses AIL inauguration 60
offices held 66, 118, 124, 181, 229-236
report to 1939 conference 137
Wood, Nancy M, offices held 234


World War II
AIL activilies 81. 139-140, 143. 156-162, 196
effect on AIL 139,162
effect on libraries 143, 162
Wright, H
biographical note 223
Foundation Membership 49, 228
Wright, RP, Foundation Membership 228
Y
Young Men’s Christian Association 158
Young, RB
Foundation Membership 228
on McColvin Report 150
offices held 230, 234
Young Women’s Christian Association 158


jean P Whyte may have become a librarian by accident, but thus began an extraordinarily dis-
tinguished career. She was an inspiring educator and a giant intellect within the profession.
For many years she researched the history of the professional association - founded in 1937
as the Australian Institute of Librarians - amassing a huge collection of primary material. By
the early 1990 s it was becoming clear to her that she might not be able to complete the his-
tory and she made arrangements to encourage someone to take over. She backed up her com-
puter files, left some rough notes on the structure of the history and reworked drafts of some
chapters before her health declined to such an extent that further work on the project became
impossible.
David J Jones, another eminent librarian, took up the challenge of completing the history.
This book is a skilful blend of Jean’s writing, David’s rewriting and new material drawn from
Jean’s files and from David’s own research. Read consecutively it is a fascinating analysis of
the successes and failures of an Australian professional association and of the dynamic
leaders of the library profession of the time. Jean knew all of the main characters and
witnessed most of the events described, and this work casts new light on libraries and
librarians during twelve critical years of library progress and development in Australia. It
meticulously chronicles events, provides pen portraits of the key figures, and is a corporate
biography of an association which began modestly but increased its membership fivefold in
only twelve years and led to an association which, seventy years later, has international
stature.
Australian
Library and
Information
Association
