

[?]
UNITED AUSTRALIA
AND
IMPERIAL FEDERATION.
BY
ROBERT CHRISTISON.
[Reprinted from the WESTMINSTER REVIEW september 1888. ]
LONDON:
PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE, HANSON & CO.
TAVISTOCK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
Price Sixpence.




UNITED AUSTRALIA
AND
IMPERIAL FEDERATION.
flt 4
WJt to ojuJU&J
BY
ROBERT CHRISTISON.
[Reprinted from the Westminster Review, September 1888.]
LONDON:
FEINTED BY BALLANTYNE, HANSON &, CO.
TAVISTOCK STREET, COVENT GARDEN,


UNITED AUSTRALIA
AND
IMPERIAL FEDERATION.
Introduction. — lt is generally admitted, both in Great Britain and
in her possessions beyond the seas, that the consolidation of
the Empire by some form of Imperial Federation is advisable.
Allowing this to be so, I shall endeavour eventually to point out
the advantages I think would accrue, but first to inquire how far
the late and present policy of the Imperial Government satisfies or
fails to satisfy those British dependencies which are rapidly develop-
ing into nationalities themselves. The subject lam endeavouring to
treat is of such vast importance, and surrounded by difficulties so
many though not insuperable, that I shall now only deal with the
most remote but not the least of England’s possessions—the colonies
within the continent of Australia.
These colonies have been prominently brought into notice of late
years by the appointment of accredited Agents-General in London, by
the twenty years’ work of the Royal Colonial Institute, by the formation
of the Imperial Federation League, by the Colonial and Indian Exhibi-
tion, by the late Colonial Conference, and by the action taken by men
of mark who have visited these lands, and have on their return added
their testimony to their growing importance.
The Exhibition now being held at Melbourne will be the
means of disseminating much information, and it is opportune for
me to suggest to its visitors the reflection that fifty-three years ago
the only Europeans in the present colony of Victoria were the Henty


Brothers, who were engaged in whaling and squatting in Portland
Bay; and John Batman, who ascended the Yarra, moored his thirty-
ton schooner to a gum-tree, and pitched his tent where now stands
the city of Melbourne.
What Victoria has become during this period may well make
us reflect, What will the future of Australia be ? Its greatness was
predicted by Sir Henry Parkes at the celebration of the Australian
centenary, lately held at Sydney, and his predictions are well justi-
fied by the character of the inhabitants. Since the discovery of
Australia by Captain Cook and its earliest settlement, those who
are conversant with its rise and progress find that the British
race transplanted to the southern hemisphere have lost none of the
qualities that have made the British nation great. In the many
explorers and pioneers who founded that great country, we find
strongly marked the same love of adventure, research, and enterprise
that distinguished Englishmen in the days of Queen Elizabeth. As
settlement and civilization advance, important measures require treat-
ment, and prompt action is rendered necessary; and herein we find
displayed the same grit and backbone by which our forefathers
earned glory for themselves and for their country. When Sir
Edward Strickland suggested that a contingent be sent to Suakin,
and Mr. Dailey responded by prompt action, they were guided by
the same influences which led Gordon to the Soudan. When Sir
Thomas Mcllwraith sent a police, magistrate and a constable to take
possession of New Guinea in the name of the Queen, colonists were
reminded of the traditional exploits of Drake and Raleigh. Further-
more, late events have proved beyond doubt the loyalty and sym-
pathy of the Australians towards the mother country, .and this has
been displayed by many further expressions of attachment.
We have endeavoured to show that the colonists are embued with
energy, self-reliance, and loyalty. Keeping these characteristics
before us, we may be better able to judge whether the policy of the
Plome Government is likely to strengthen and maintain the bonds of
sympathy with the colonists, and eventually to pave the way for the
consolidation of the Empire ; and we feel prepared to criticize
England’s policy towards her Australian colonies, and to adduce
sufficient evidence in support of every proposition we advance.
Deportation of French Criminals to the South Pacific. —Several
years ago the colonists grew alarmed when it became known that
the French Government began the deportation of recidivistes to the
South Pacific. Petitions and requests were sent, urgently requesting
the Home Government to use their good offices in remonstrating
against the continuance of so great an evil. We know that repre-
sentations were made to the French Government, but they seem to
have had no effect, since quite recently shipments of convicts were
sent to New Caledonia. Thereupon the Federal Council sitting at


Hobart sent a petition to the Queen, from which I quote the
following:—
“We admit the undoubted sovereign right of any country to use its own
territory as it pleases, subject, however; to the qualifications equally good
in private and international law, that it does not constitute a menace and
evil to its neighbours. We believe that if the shores of England were
subjected to similar danger and contamination the Imperial Government
would make representations that it would not be possible for any foreign
Power year after year to disregard. We would humbly submit to your
Majesty that if the representations of your Australian colonies remain
without effect, measures for self-defence will be necessarily forced upon
them, which they regret to have to direct against any Power in friendship
with your Majesty, but which they have no doubt, in the exceptional cir-
cumstances set forth, would receive your Majesty’s ready sanction.”
The French convicts sent to the South Pacific are of the very
worst type, and they had barely reached their new penal home when
Australia (but Queensland particularly, from her geographical position)
began to feel the effect?, of the dreadful scourge of their presence. Her
expenditure was increased, as she had to watch her shores, to inter-
cept and secure the boatloads which were continually landing. If so
many have reached that colony, how many more may have landed on
those islands whose inhabitants are aboriginals only. Colonists think
that under such special circumstances the Home Government, by
making a strong remonstrance, could have induced the French
Government to discontinue sending its worst criminals to the South
Pacific.
New Guinea. —Again, we are under the impression that a great
blunder has been committed with reference to New Guinea, for sub-
sequent events leave us not free from humiliation. The Premier of
the colony of Queensland, for obvious reasons, took formal possession
of unoccupied land in New Guinea in the name of the Queen, subject,
however, to ratification by her Majesty’s Government. We think he
was justified in doing so, if for no other reasons than the bitter
experiences gained from the use the French nation have made of
their possessions which are but too close to Queensland. Colonists
watched with anxiety what steps the Imperial Government would
take under these circumstances. They naturally thought that such
a bold stroke of far-sighted policy would at least have been appre-
ciated. But, when the Under-Secretary announced in the House of
Commons that the Queensland Government had taken possession of
New Guinea in the name of the Queen, pending the decision of the
Home Government, many members in the House were greatly
annoyed, and put pressure upon the Government to induce it to
repudiate the annexation, or, in other words, to haul down the flag of
England. They naturally thought that the “ many members ” who
swayed the Government in this case constituted a majority represen-
tative of the feeling of the country, and that England’s policy was


to acquire no more territory, showing rather an indifference to pro-
tect what she already possessed. Had the Imperial Government
absolutely declined to endorse the action of Queensland, there the
matter would at least have rested. But their vacillating policy en-
couraged another Power to step in and take possession of nearly
one-half of what was, or should have been, British territory. 1 The
Rev. James Chalmers, in a paper read at the Royal Colonial Institute,
described the continent of New Guinea to be in shape like a drome-
dary. I think an emu is a better illustration. However, by looking
at the map of New Guinea we find the Dutch possess the head,
neck, and breast; the Germans appropriate the back and loins;
while the British lion tardily accepts what is left, the abdomen and
tail.
Englishmen abroad seem to realize more keenly how much Britain’s
safety in the past depended upon her natural ocean boundary, and
Australians feel its importance in their island home. The partition
of New Guinea into three, leaves boundary lines whose indistinctness
may at any time lead to dispute, and no importance seems to have
been attached to their demarcation, although past experiences, in all
parts of the world, prove that our greatest troubles have arisen from
imaginary frontier lines not defined by natural boundaries. This is
apparent by our dubious settlement upon our Indian frontier, and in
our Cape colonies. Moreover, I consider that the greatest calamity
that can befall a native race is to have more than one European
Power to govern it.
North Queensland. —Passing on from the unpalatable topic of New
Guinea, I now enter upon a subject fraught with the greatest import-
ance. It also concerns the scheme I am venturing to suggest for
Australian confederation, without which Imperial unity is not likely
to be established, at least so far as British possessions in the South
Pacific are concerned. I allude to a petition for the division of the
colony of Queensland, which was presented to her Majesty, through the
Colonial Office, signed by 10,000 of the male adults residing in the
northern portion of that colony. The Separation League of North
Queensland sent delegates to plead their cause at the Colonial Office.
Their petition was refused, and no encouragement was given to them
unless they complied with two conditions, one of which was an
impossibility, and the other couched in such ambiguous terms that
it might mean anything. This petition came from the majority of
the male adults of what is known as North Queensland, from men
who have developed its resources, created its trade, and brought it to
such importance that it is absolutely necessary for its beneficial
administration that they should be allowed to frame its laws.
I therefore think the petition should have received more con-
1 The imminence of this danger has been repeatedly pressed upon H.M. Government
by the Council of the Koyal Colonial Institute since the year 1875.


sideration. The Secretary of State, replying to the Separation
delegates, said that while the Home Government had the power
to create a new colony, that power was latent, and it was unadvisable
to exercise it, unless a motion approving of separation were passed by
the Queensland Legislature, or an overwhelming case made out to
justify such interference. That the Legislature of Queensland, as it
now is, would pass a motion for the division of the colony is absurd :
“ for we have no instance on record where a Colonial Parliament has
voluntarily surrendered a part of its territory. The separation of
Victoria and Queensland from New South Wales was opposed most
bitterly to the end by its Governor and Legislature.” 1 Colonists think
the petitioners proved that theirs was ‘ •' an overwhelming case,” by show-
ing the grounds on which separation was most desirable, supporting
their arguments by statistical returns. “In doing so,” continues Mr.
Coote, “they were only asking for the fulfilment of promises held out
and sanctioned by Imperial law. The question was not one on which they
would have to rely on the present Brisbane Government, as to whether
they would permit a division of the colony, but one that called for
adjustment by the Home Government in an equitable manner. In
presenting their petition, their faith and reliance were supported by
provisions specially made by an Imperial Act of Parliament, which
provided for further separation, and for division of the great continent
of Australia as it became populated and of sufficient importance.”
The late Duke of Newcastle, considered one of the ablest Secre-
taries of State for the Colonies who ever sat in the Colonial Office,
in writing, August 18, 1859, to Sir W. Denison, Governor-General
of the Australian Colonies, after the issue of the letters patent to the
new colony, remarks: “It will be advisable that the Crown should
possess the power of subdividing further the territory now created
into the colony of Queensland, by detaching from it such northern
portions as may hereafter be found fit to be erected into separate
colonies.”
His Grace was convinced that further divisions would be necessary,
for he warned Sir George Bowen, on the 14th December 1861, with
reference to the annexation of some acquired territory to Queens-
land.
I think that the petitioners justified their action by showing
that the land over which they asked permission to legislate has
an area of 280,000 square miles, with a seaboard of 1500 miles,
containing a population of 80,000, with an accumulative trade of
£3,800,000 per annum, importing guods to the value of £2,000,000,
and exporting products to the value of £1,800,000, annually. Its
progress is extraordinary, for barely twenty-six years ago this
portion of Australia was unknown. In our Colonial policy we
should be very much guided by the past results of separation—
1 Mr. W. Coote on Separation.


for instance, that of Victoria and Queensland from New South Wales,
so far attended with the best of results. As it has been truly ob-
served, no statesman in our day can afford to overlook experiences
which are matters of history.
In refusing to accede to the petition presented, the Secretary of
State was probably influenced by the presence of Queensland’s Pre-
mier, Sir S. W. Griffiths, who no doubt personally renewed his promise
which appeared in the Governor’s speech, delivered on the prorogation
of Parliament :— t! That the (Queensland) Ministry would during
the recess prepare measures to remove as far as practicable the
evils of undue centralization in the administration of the govern-
ment, and to provide for the speedy and economical expenditure in
the several divisions of the colony, of the revenue raised within
them If to this be added an extension of the existing powers
of local government,” it was believed that the evils of which the north
complained would be “ effectually removed.”
The panacea to satisfy the north has been proposed in a decen-
tralization scheme. So far it has been an utter failure; it was
obnoxious to the south, ignored by the north, and it led to the
resignation of Sir S. W. Griffiths’ ablest colleague, the Hon. the
Colonial Treasurer, who, when the Bill was brought before the
House, said: “ The details of that measure are obnoxious to me,
and to those whom I consider even more competent judges
I would prefer giving my vote for territorial separation, than for the
passage of the proposed measure.”
There is no doubt separation must eventually take place ; the
country is ripe for it, the inhabitants demand it, and mean to have
it. We hope that the Imperial Government will graciously consider
the claim when renewed, and grant it, as being not only politic but
just—politic, as regards the Empire ; just, because the freedom asked
is merited.
I endorse the petition from the people of North Queensland for
territorial separation. The immense territory of Queensland needs
division into two colonies, for, having the confederation of the whole
of Australia in view, it is all-important to endeavour to place each
colony on as equal a footing as possible. Australian history forces
one to believe that smaller areas than now exist are more favourable
to a high social development. The separation cause is slumbering
now, but will awake with renewed vigour, and it is to be hoped that
the question will be settled before rancour and ill-feeling grow
between those who are now upon good terms.
The northerners urge, and with great justice, that the present
colony of Queensland is too large to be judiciously governed from a
remote comer of the south; that, since from geographical and other
influences the majority of the community dwell in the south, the
voice of the north in all legislative measures will remain unheeded ;


that under the present regime there are many laws suitable for the
southern portion of Queensland which are unfitted for the northern.
They are alarmed at the increasing magnitude of the national debt,
principally expended in unnecessary unproductive works in the
south, the price paid for favour and power. Moreover, they say,
“we came and formed our homes here, where we found a waste; by
our patience and work we have improved our condition; we have
developed the country’s resources, until Northern Queensland has
attained a position, and is at the present time superior to Port
Philip, now Victoria, or to Moreton Bay, now Queensland, at the
time when the British Government granted a request similar to the
one we now make.”
Their petition will be renewed, and well may they urge: '“We
have by practice gained experience; we have served our apprentice-
ship ; we have attained our majority; and as men we have asked
the mother country to treat us as men.”
Defence. —A very important question at the present time is the
defence of our colonies, I treat here the defences of Australia only.
There is no doubt that each colony will pay its fair share, but
Australians think the British Government shrink from their respon-
sibility. 1 The British taxpayers cannot object to protect their own
property. In 1882 a conference, at which all the colonies were
represented, met in Sydney, and resolved that the land defences of
the country ought to be undertaken by themselves, and the naval
defence by Great Britain. “It must not be forgotten that whilst
the colonies are defending their respective territories they are protect-
ing British interests, whose property to the extent of £300,000,000 is
owned by people residing in Great Britain, and who from the peculiar
colonial taxation do not contribute to that defence; and although
the colonies are paying their tribute for the use of this capital by
way of interest amounting to £14,000,000 annually, when it reaches
England it is subject to the usual income-tax.” Moreover, “90 per
cent, of the shipping trading in those seas belong to British owners,
the vessels of the P. & O. Co., the Orient Co., the British‘lndia Co.,
the A.U.S.N. Co., and others. If the same British shipping was
on the coast of any country in the world, not connected at all with
Great Britain, except in trade, she would have a fleet in the neigh-
bourhood for its protection.” 2
Colonists are particularly alive to the importance of maintaining
the efficiency of the British fleet; they feel that England’s safety
and their own depends upon our maintaining the sovereignty of the
seas. If the British fleet in time of war could not protect and keep
1 Since writing the above I notice with great satisfaction that the Imperial and
Colonial Governments, with the exception of Queensland, have jointly agreed to
strengthen the fleet on the Australian station.
2 Sir Thomas Mollwraith’s Manifesto, 1888.


up her food supply, what a dire calamity would follow—famine, worse
than invasion for her, and defeucelessness for her colonies !
I have so far endeavoured to show that grounds for complaint on
the part of Australia do exist. I am forced to bring forward one
more instance in which England has not met colonial advances in a
spirit of friendliness, or even of respect for the traditional qualities of
the British character.
Antarctic Exploration. —The following request was lately made to
the Imperial Government: Sir Graham Berry, acting on behalf of the
Australian colonies, represented to the Home Government the desir-
ability of a preliminary expedition to cruise round the fringe of the
Antarctic Seas, with a view to pave the way for a more thorough
research later on. The colonies offered to subscribe £SOOO
towards the expedition, if the Home Government would con-
tribute a similar sum. The modest request was strongly supported
by the Colonial Office, as well as by the Royal Colonial Institute
(which first took action amongst the learned societies of London), the
Royal and the Royal Geographical Societies. The Treasury, however,
refused to place any such sum upon the estimates. Presumably,
British taxpayers would object to such a sum being granted unless
they could first hear the jingle of coin, returnable with interest
added. The colonists take a different view of this national economy.
They think the estimates might be clipped, but not at the loss of
national honour, and that no discouragement should be given at home
or abroad to damp that old sea spirit which made England great—
England whose ships are said to bear four-fifths of the carrying trade
of the world. Would £SOOO have been ill spent, if only to uphold
the noble traditions of our nation ? Such a refusal rings too much
of national worldliness. It is to be hoped that Australia unaided will
send an expedition to the Polar Sea, for she w r ould think it humiliat-
ing if other nations made discoveries, while her own race had not
attempted to keep up its prestige upon its native element. 1
State Emigration. —We might well have expected joint action in
this instance, and still more desirable for both parties would it be if
Britain would join with Australia in a matter of greater importance
—namely, emigration under State auspices.
I quote an extract from a speech by the Bishop of Manchester, at
a meeting in that city upon State Colonization:—
“Here was a country (Australia) that had abundant resources unde-
veloped and wanted labourers. Over the sea here was another country full
of capital that could not find profitable investment, full of labourers who
could barely get bread—resources on one side, and labourers on another,
were obliged to continue separated. They could not bring the labourers to
the resources. Was there ever a more absurd, was there ever a more cruel,
1 A German Antarctic expedition is about to bo despatched to do the work which
Englishmen would have undertaken had their Government been alive to their
opportunities.


position than that 1 Why was this ? Because there was no intermediary
whose business it was to bring the people where the resources were.”
His Lordship suggested a remedy :
“ To have the two Governments agree upon a plan whereby the capital
and the labour of the mother country could develop the natural resources
of the colonies, to the mutual benefit of both.”
It can be shown that such a scheme would well repay Britain, if
that is all she would require to induce her to join therein.
The total number of paupers in the old country, in September
1885, was 688,000; in the corresponding period of the following year,
1886, they increased to 700,000, who cost the country at the rate
of ten pounds per head, for we find that for one year £7,000,000
was paid for their support. It is appalling to find that in twelve
months they increased by 12,000 ; in addition to these, the number
of the poor who subsist on the barest necessaries of life must be great
indeed, nor must we forget how many are kept from starvation by
private charity. It is true that the colonies would only receive
youthful, healthy people, but the mother country could thin those
nursery fields, from which her paupers are recruited, and thereby
gradually lessen the heavy burden she is now groaning under. The
space allotted will not permit me to deal further with this subject,
but I think that, as we see around us so much squalid poverty and
misery, it is the duty of those who have the knowledge, power, and
influence to ameliorate the condition of these suffering people, whose
destinies are in their hands. While it is wicked to neglect such a
remedy as extensive emigration for the overcrowded population of
Great Britain, it is wicked also to allow millions of square miles_ in
the South Pacific to lie fallow for want of cultivators.
Consolidation of the Empire. —lt is easy to condemn and find fault
with men, their policies and measures. I have done so unsparingly,
for I have given vent to my profoundest convictions, formulated after
many years of experience and careful thought. I do not wish to
leave this subject as I found it, but will offer a few suggestions,
which, if acted upon, may help towards the consolidation of the
British Empire.
I think that these grievances will always be liable to occur until
a closer union is effected between Great Britain and a confederation
of the several colonies in Australia. I shall not attempt to deal
with any definite legislative measures upon the subject; they will
follow in due time. My aim is rather to encourage good feeling, to
maintain the loyalty, and to strengthen the bond of sympathy—more
powerful than any constitutional acts. I think that the time for
Imperial Federation has arrived, but its achievement depends very
much upon what policy be now pursued by the people of Great
Britain.


Australian Confederation. —Each of the Australian colonies, with the
exception of West Australia, has a Government which is responsible
for the internal administration. I think that a necessary preliminary
to that Imperial unity at which we ultimately aim, is a confedera-
tion of these several colonies themselves. To such a confederation
there are, under existing circumstances, great obstacles. I will
shortly endeavour to point out how these obstacles may best be
removed, but in the meantime I think that the Imperial Government
could expedite matters by settling and defining in no ambiguous
terms the action they intend to pursue in the future, when demands
are made from those territories, which, unless divided, are too un-
wieldy for beneficial government. In granting letters patent for
the division of any such territories, conditions should be included
similar to those which the Duke of Newcastle thought necessary
when separation was granted to Queensland. If such a line of
policy were adopted, it would doubtless ensure a union of the
colonies. For in the confederation which they were binding them-
selves to maintain, they would know what the exact limits of the
respective colonies were to be, leaving no cause for dissension in our
future General Federal Council, since the lines upon which further
separation should be deemed advisable would have been laid down
and thoroughly defined by the Colonial Office in England.
The area of Australasia, including New Zealand and Tasmania,
is 3,075,030 square miles, being 080,972 square miles less than that
of all Europe, but 47,439 square miles more than that of the United
States. As lam treating of the continent of Australia only, by
deducting the areas of New Zealand and Tasmania, we find that
there remain 2,942,802 square miles. This immense area I propose
to divide into manageable and suitable territories, to simplify the
confederation of the whole, with the ultimate view of forming
Imperial Federation. If my readers will glance at the appended
map of Australia, they will follow the scheme without difficulty.
The present colonies of New South Wales and Victoria may be left
as they are; the remaining colonies in the continent require consider-
able readjustment to save complications in the future.
The colony of Queensland should be divided by a line from east
to west, starting from Cape Palmerston, as was requested in the
recent petition for separation.
Thus two colonies would be formed equal in importance to the
first two in our group, the southern portion retaining the name of
Queensland, while the northern new colony might well assume that
of Kingsland.
Taking next the colony of South Australia and its northern
territory, a very large area running through the continent from the
south to the north coast; I would suggest that the northern boun-
daxy of South Australia should be defined along the 20th degree of


latitude; while it should be clearly understood that all the territory
north of that line, known as the northern territory of South Australia,
together with the portion of West Australia also lying to the north
of the said 20th degree of latitude, be destined in the future for a
separate colony, though at present remaining under the jurisdiction
of South and West Australia respectively, until the number of its
inhabitants and its increasing importance announce that the time
for territorial separation has arrived.
This new colony will ultimately become one of the most impor-
tant in the Australian group, through its proximity to India, Java,
Singapore, and China. It is possible that in the future it will be
advisable even to subdivide this territory ; therefore the line, start-
ing from a point on the 20th degree of latitude, running north to
the sea between Queen’s Channel and Cambridge Gulf, now the
boundary line between the northern territory of South Australia and
West Australia, should not be lost sight of, as it may serve us in
the event of further separation. There still remains a very large
area—namely, West Australia—whose coast-line will now extend from
the 20th degree of latitude to where it touches the south-west
boundary of South Australia, in the Great Australian Bight. This
part of the continent being less fertile and having much unavailable
country, I would propose dividing it in equal parts by a west and
east line. I would, however, for the present, grant to West Australia
a responsible Government over the whole territory, subject, however,
to the condition that when circumstances arise demanding territorial
separation, it should be granted.
Such is an outline of the plan I propose. Great deviations in
detail may well be rendered desirable; I only wish to indicate the
guiding principles of the policy which should, I think, be pursued.
If the people of Britain desire Imperial Federation, the Colonial
Office can do much in arranging with those colonies a well-defined
policy of territorial adjustment.
Thus we create eight important colonies, 1 leaving to each a mean
area of 347,850 square miles, none being without a seaboard of
greater or less extent. Having due regard to the geographical
positions and climatic influences of each, I think that, as individual
colonies, their progress will be surer and more rapid, and that they
will doubtless expand, and develop their resources to their own satis-
faction, and to the general welfare of the whole. If some such
course as I have suggested were followed, the difficulties of forming
an Australian Confederation would disappear.
The Colonial Office in London must first leave no doubt in
the minds of the colonists that in the future there will be
no complications about territorial boundaries. There were great
1 Tasmania would make the ninth, as she would doubtless join the Confedera-
tion.


issues at stake lately, when a petition was made for a division of
Queensland; an important measure is now awaiting solution with
regard to West Australia. If a satisfactory settlement herein he
arrived at, the hands of the colonists are left more free for the
development of their own confederation, now in embryo. The
advantages of such a confederation in itself are obvious enough,
for it would not only vastly facilitate the internal administration of
Australia, but also simplify her dealings with the mother country;
since the Colonial Office in Downing Street would then have to
treat with the General Federal Council only, instead of with the
Governments of separate colonies. An instance is before us:
very serious complications may arise owing to the action of any
one colony upon the Chinese question; but if this subject had to
be treated by a General Federal Council, embodying the collective
wisdom of the entire continent, the Imperial Government might rest
assured that British treaties and international law would be fully
considered.
Consolidation of the Empire. —l promised to point out the
advantages which a consolidation of the scattered Empire would
give. We find in Australia an immense territory, as large as
Europe ; yet the whole population at the present time is less than
that of London. Statistics show that in 1886 there was not one
individual to COO acres. In that great land we have various
climates; it will abundantly furnish all tropical products, from the
most luscious fruits to the common necessaries of life, such as rice,
maize, sugar, coffee, tea, beef and mutton, cotton, wool and cereals;
also gold, silver, copper, opal, tin, and other valuable ores ; finally,
it possesses inexhaustible fields of coal. Nature has been bountiful
and prolific, for there abounds all that can make men happy—that
can make a nation great —material to build up a mighty empire
within the sea-girt shores. In this continent, which is about the
three-eighth part of the whole British dominions, we can see a source
of strength and of wealth of such vast importance, that it seems
to be imperative to retain it as part of the Empire.
Supposing that a great European war broke out, there is no
certainty that the Suez Canal would remain open, while complications
might arise in India, China, or in South Africa. If occasion re-
quired, Australia could now send in a very short time men and horses,
supplies and coal, and soon she hopes to be able to manufacture guns
and ammunition.
With Albany, Thursday Island, 1 and Port Darwin fortified,
Australia could help the mother country, and harass the common
enemy by keeping our naval and mercantile marine well supplied
with coal and stores, and keeping hostile Powers without them.
1 Or rather Goode Island, the sentinel which commands the gate to the South
Pacific.


In this continent, surrounded by the sea, we have no rival Powers
to share its advantages with us, as in America, Asia, Africa, and in
New Guinea. If for no other feature but this, Australia is the most
valuable of Britain’s possessions.
The population is British. Australians are intensely English; we
wish them to remain so, because it is thought that the British Isles
will require in the future additional strength from without, props with
sure foundations to lean upon. To ensure England’s safety, and to
make progress towards a higher development, the time has arrived
when a consolidation of the Empire, already begun by a few, should
receive the due consideration of the many —when endeavours should
be made to find vent for surplus capital at home, by developing
her resources abroad, “ by sending labourers where they are crowded
to where there are none,” by relieving the distressed, hungry, and
unclad, by some State colonization scheme.
This is England’s duty, and this it should be her aim to
achieve.
Concluding Remarks. —Before closing this paper, I wish to draw
attention to a most important matter. We frequently hear
from supporters of Imperial Federation that there is no need to
push it on. But although it would be most injudicious to force
it, every encouragement should be given, and for the following
reason among others; —
I have said that patriotism and loyalty are the marked character-
istics of the Australians, most of whom are either British or born of
British parents, the pioneers and founders of Australia. It will be
much easier for Great Britain to take steps now for the consolidation
of her Empire with those who although Australians are intensely
British, than when a new generation holds the reins of power, who
having but few or no associations with Britain, will consider Australia
as their mother country. They will doubtless endeavour to create
Australia into a distinct nationality, and being of British descent they
will be prepared to pass through any ordeal to attain their end.
I therefore consider that the basis upon which the constitution
could rest should be framed now, and that the foundations should be
laid, upon which to construct a United Empire.
Both in Britain and in her Colonial possessions, we have the
material, we hold the power, we possess the machinery, and men
who by united action are able to heat the iron, to weld the many
slender parts into a strong, solid, compact, well-tempered whole.
But Britain must be prepared to treat her offspring abroad as she
does those at home. She must in some form grant to them repre-
sentation in the Legislature, and not deal with them in the future as
in the past, so graphically described by Mr. Froude in Oceana:
“ They were as birds hatched in a nest, whose parents would be
charged with them only till they could provide for themselves, and the


sooner they were ready for complete independence the better the
mother country would be pleased.”
Truly the birds have been hatched under parental care; they now
roost upon the topmost boughs, and are ready for flight, either farther
from or closer to the maternal home.
I think the final direction may be indicated if we pursue a certain
course which I have endeavoured to define.
Assuming that Imperial Federation is accomplished, further
progress along the same path must follow. May we not even now
aspire to nobler ends, when, as other nations of the earth follow our
example, we may see arising the dawn of a great reformation, tending
towards a Universal Unity—the Federation of Man ?
