

ELAIDE,
'
v, fv' ?-. T >v:/??'???.?:,? ;?>
V 1 , ; ? if..* *'
-w--,
? 1
rk \
m. \
M.
, . ?, -
UNITARIAN VIEWS
CHRISTIAN FAITH & DUTY
TWO DISCOURSES,
DELIVERED IN THE UNITARIAN CHRISTIAN CHURCH, ADELAIDE,
SEPTEMBER 20th, 1863.
THE REV. J. CRAWFORD WOODS, B.A.
ADELAIDE
PRINTED BY J. H. SHEERING, CORNER OF KING WILLIAM AND CURRIB
STREETS.
1863.


?
-
V '
'
.
-
0
%
**
.
'
t
\
-


UNITARIAN VIEWS
5 Ccy')^S
CHRISTIAN FAITH & DUTY.
TWO DISCOURSES,
DELIVERED IN THE UNITARIAN CHRISTIAN CHURCH, ADELAIDE,
SEPTEMBER 20th, 1863.
THE REV. J. CRAWFORD WOODS, B.A.
ADELAIDE:
PRINTED BY J, H, SHEERING, CORNER OF KING -WILLIAM AND CURRIE
STREETS.
1863.




FIR S T DISCOTJRS E.
1 Corinthians viii. 4-6.
i( There is none other God hut one: for though there he that art,
called Gods, whether in heaven or in earth ?(as there he gods many
and lords many)?hut to us [there is hut ] One God the Father,of
whom are all things , and we in him ; and one Lord Jesus Christ ,
hy whom are all things , and we by him.? 9
As this day is about the time for the celebration of the eighth
anniversary of the public preaching of Christian in
this Colony, I intend to deliver two Sermons on the occasion, taking
for my subject the Unitarian position in relation to divine worship
and human duty. It would not tend to edification, and it would be
wearisome for me to engage the attention of this Congregation
frequently in statements of our peculiar opinions and our reasons for
holding them. But I have heard it remarked by some who attend this
Church that they are not Unitarians?that they join in our services
because they are pleased with the tone of the worship and with the sen-
timents of the Sermons. Now, I should wish to point out to them that
the reason why they sympathise in our prayers is because they are
Unitarian prayers, and that they agree with the views of religion
inculcated in discourses delivered here because those views are only
various aspects of the Christian faith and duty which Unitarianism
presents. I ask the patient attention of those I have referred to, as
well as that of the younger members of the congregation; and if 1
seem to some others to be merely rehearsing the alphabet of our
principles, I feel that it is so much their duty to sympathise with
me in what 1 am doing, that I refrain from asking their indulgence.
1. The reasons then why we worship only one God the Father are
shortly these. We find no intimations of a plurality of persons iu
the Godhead in nature, and all our observations would lead us to
the worship of One Great First Cause. From reading the Old
Testament Scriptures, we learn that, according to them, Moses began
his instructions to the Israelites with these most emphatic and
significant words ?? Hear, 0 Israel! The Lord our God is one Lord,
[Deuteronomy vi. 4], and that the doctrine of the strict Divine Unity


was the leading principle of the older dispensation, being stated
and insisted on in passages so well known and so familiar to all that
it is unnecessary to quote them. No one indeed could find anything
in the Old Testament which would seem to teach independently the
doctrine of three persons in the deity. From the beginning to the
end of that collection of books, the word Trinity is not to be seen.
There is no limitation put upon the meaning of the phrase one
when applied to God. Now, it is acknowledged by Professor Stuart
of Andover, one of the ablest and most candid writers in support of
the Trinity, that ? it is the light which the New Testament casts
upon the various passages of the Old, and that only, which enables
us (that is, himself and his party) to bring the Old Testament to
bear upon this (the Trinitarian) doctrine.? And the way in which
this doctrine is supposed to be thus elicited from the Old Testament
is to us so inconclusive as to produce no impression upon our minds,
except that it is not to be found there at all. It is stated, for
example, that the names applied to the deity in the original lan-
guage of the Old Testament are frequently in the plural number,,
and that there is thus an intimation of a plurality of persons.
Were this argument of any weight, we think it would prove too
much, a plurality of Gods rather than a plurality of persons, poly-
theism rather than a trinity. But upon examination we discover
that the word [Elohim] in the Hebrew which might be translated
gods, is used in reference to Moses in such a way as to show, what
indeed every one at all acquainted with oriental literature knows,
that the plural termination merely implies that the person referred to
is of exalted rank. Thus we read in Exodus vii. 1, that Jehovah said
to Moses ? See I have made thee a God [Elohim or literally ] gods unto
Pharaoh.? Other examples of a similar kind could be given. Now,
no one supposes that there was a plurality of persons in Moses, and
therefore the inference drawn from the application of this word to
the One Jehovah, that He is more than one person, is seen to be
invalid. A most significant fact is that the Hebrews, for whose
especial benefit the Older Scriptures were written, found no trinity
taught in them. The Jews did not worship three persons in one
God. Josephus, who lived about forty years after the death of
Christ, bears distinct testimony to the accuracy of this statement as
to the belief of his countrymen in his own day. Dr. Eaphall, a
most able, learned, and candid preacher among the Hebrews of our
present times, has declared in a discourse which has been published,
that his countrymen never held the trinitarian doctrine, audit is well
known that all the Jews around us are worshippers of one God in
one person. Professor Stuart may again be appealed to, as I con-
sider a concession from an opponent of such a character as his, very
valuable. In his a Critical History and Defence of the Old Tes-
tament Canon ? (page 406) he thus expresses himself?? Were the
Jews Trinitarians before the coming of Christ? I know of no
satisfactory evidence of this fact. All efforts to prove it have
ended in mere appeals to the cahalizing Jews, who lived long after
the New Testament was written.? Now, it is admitted by all
Christians that the grand object of the Mission of Moses was to make
known to the Children of Israel the true God, and to save them


from idolatry and its immoral tendencies; and is it possible to believe
that he utterly failed in effecting his purpose ?that while the true
God is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, equal in power and glory, each
independently God, he only impressed upon their minds that there
is one Jehovah, ?that whereas he should have made them
Trinitarians, the result was that they became universally Unitarians?
Is this credible ? We think not, and so we learn to worship one
God and one alone from the Old Testament.
We come next to the instructions of Jesus Christ, and we learn from
our great master, in reference to the divine unity and to the object
of religious worship, the same doctrine as that taught by Moses.
Thus we read in the Gospel (Mark xii) that ? one of the Scribes
came, and having heard them reasoning together, and perceiving that
he had answered them well, asked him (Jesus) ? Which is the first
commandment of all?? And Jesus answered him ? The first of all
the commandments is, Hear O Israel! The Lord our God is One
Lord ; and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength ! This is the first commandment. And the second is like,
namely this, thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. There is
none other commandment greater than these.? ? We find then that
Christ, without any modification, stated in unqualified terms the
great doctrine of the strict undivided unity of God, quoting the very
language in which it had been enunciated by Moses. The Jewish
Scribe at once assented to Christ?s assertion. Jesus uniformly spoke
of the Father as the only God, and we are, as we think, acting in
accordance both with the example and the precepts of him who
prayed to the Father himself, when he said ?Father, I thank thee
that thou hast heard me,? (John xi. 41) and who declared ? When
ye pray, say, Our Father who art in heaven, ? (Matt vi. 13) and
again ? The true worshippers shall worship the Father .? (John iv.
23). In reading the history of the Acts of the Apostles, and their
epistles, we nowhere find prayer addressed by them to any being
but the One God ?the Father. It is indeed sometimes stated in
our English authorised version of the New Testament that Jesus
was worshipped , while on earth ; but you scarcely require to be
told that the term worship as used in the New Testament signifies
not only adoration of the deity, but the highest personal respect
which can be paid to a human being. Thus we read in the Gospel
of Matthew (xviii. 26) that Christ represents in a parable that the
Servant who owed his Master ten thousand talents, and who ? had
not to pay,? ? fell down and worshipped him.? Such worship or
reverential entreaty as this is distinguished from adoration of God
by being presented to a visible being. Homage to the Supreme God
is offered to an invisible being. We are told that ?no man hath
seen God at any timeand it therefore follows, we think, that no
one that man has seen can be God. In the marriage service of the
Church of England may be found an illustration of the lower sense
in which the term worship was sometimes used ?? With my body I
thee worship.? With this evidence before him, Dr. Wardlaw says
in his Discourses on the Sociuian Controversy (page 119) that with
reference to the cases where tvorship is said to be paid to Jesus on


earth, u nothing can with certainty be inferred,? ?that ? the kind
and degree of the intended homage cannot, with certainty, be
ascertained.? We are of opinion that if it had been intended to
teach in the New Testament that Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost
were to be adored as God, the injunction would have been unmis-
takably given, and that in the history of the first disciples there would
be instances of such adoration. No one could be iu doubt as to the
command to worship one God the Father, or as to the fact that
Jesus Christ and his Apostles prayed to Him. There can be no
difference of opinion as to the trinitarianism of the Athanasian
creed, or of the Westminster Confession of Faith, or of the Catechism
of either the Church of England or that of Scotland. The authors
or compilers of these works intended them to inculcate trinitarian
opinions, and they effected their purpose in such a manner as to
put the doctrinal bearing of these productions beyond a question.
And yet in all ages of the Church of Christ there have been intelli-
gent, earnest, and learned men, who have prayerfully searched the
Scriptures, and have come to the conclusion that the strict divine
unity,?One God in one person, ? is inculcated from the beginning
of Genesis to the end of Revelation. We urge that if Jesus Christ,
who came to be a witness to the truth, and his inspired Apostles
had intended to teach, by precept and example, the worship of a
triune God, they would have done so in a way that could not have
been misunderstood. The doctrine would not have been left to be
one of inference, when such inference had to be drawn by many
bad reasoners. Is it not an unintentional, though real, stigma cast
upon Christ and his Apostles, that while the author of what is
called the Athanasian creed, and the divines at Westminster succeeded
in doing what they meant to do, putting their opinions beyond a
doubt or question, the special messengers of God, upon this theory,
have been unsuccessful in effecting a great purpose of their mission ?
The last reason I shall state which leads us to worship one God
the Father, is, that upon inquiry and investigation, we find that
Unitarianism was the faith of the Primitive Church, and that the
Trinitarian theory in its present form was not generally adopted for
hundreds of years after the death of Christ. I think that no
Unitarian can conscientiously join in trinitarian worship; but in
making this assertion, I do not wish to be understood as insinuating
anything disrespectful towards trinitarians. I do not dispute their
general honesty and sincerity, though I doubt whether it is
possible for the human mind to address in prayer such a complex,
incomprehensible object as the Trinity of the Athanasian creed or of the
shorter Catechism ; and I am inclined to believe that most professing
trinitarians do in reality worship one God in one person, whether
at the time He be called Father, Son, or Holy Ghost. Indeed, in
conversation with intelligent trinitarians I have generally found
that the three persons of the Godhead are considered, not each
independently God, but three manifestations of the deity, and this
is the representation of the doctrine which is given whenever any
illustration of it is offered, as the three angles of a triangle ; but
this view was pronounced by the Church a heresy called Sabellianism,
and it has been not inappropriately styled ? Unitarianism in a mist.


As Unitarians we believe, not merely in three, but in multiform
manifestations of the deity. If each angle of a triangle were
independently a triangle of itself, and yet if the whole three only
made one triangle when combined, that would be an illustration o
the Trinity of the creeds. But while Unitarians cannot join in the
adoration of a triune God, it is pleasing to feel assured that
trinitarians may unite in our devotional services without any com
promise of principle or any scruples of conscience, because even in
their own Churches they offer Unitarian worship, whenever they
pronounce the Lord?s prayer. All trinitarians believe in God the
Father, to whom we pray, and therefore, when He is adored, they
can consent to His praises. We believe that there is not a senti-
ment expressed in the devotional part of our public services to which
any Christian of any denomination would object, and we esteem
this fact to be important, both as manifesting the catholicity of our
principles and of the spirit of our religion, and as a pledge and
assurance that the views now entertained by a small denomination
will be ultimately, in God?s good time, those held by the Church
universal. . .
We value our faith in One God, because it gives a distinct-
ness to our ideas in prayer. ?We know what we worship.
Being finite creatures, with mental powers so limited as ours are,
of course we cannot comprehend all the majesty and perfection ot
the infinite Creator ; but that is no reason why we should not have
scriptural, just, reasonable, intelligible, and uncontradictory ap-
prehensions as to His nature and attributes. We should feel in
trinitarian worship, either that we had no idea at all of that which
is so incomprehensible, or that our conceptions were so confused and
confusing as to perplex us in our devotions and to prevent entirely
the child-like simplicity with which we are now able to approach
and address the Father. We value our faith in one God the h ather,
because of the merciful, compassionate, and unspeakably kind
character which the name implies. It is a vain and useless thing
for men to call God Father , unless they ascribe to Him fatherly
attributes. All His works prove His goodness; and the more we
?know of them, the further we advance in an acquaintance with the
wonderful facts which science brings to light, the stronger is the
impression on our minds, the warmer will the sentiment become in
our hearts, that ? God is love.? This grand and consolatory truth
is indeed written in brilliant characters in the heavens, and mani-
fested to us in the order of the universe, in the arrangements which
are so kindly made for human happiness or human improve-
ment : but perhaps it becomes more impressive to us when it is
discovered in the kind adaptations of small things, so minute as to
attract the notice only of the thoughtful and devout student.
Believing in God?s goodness and fatherly love, we can walk by faith
and in filial trust, when we cannot understand the reason or purpose
of His dispensations. Thus it is that the existence of moral and
physical evil in the world does not cast any permanent shade oyer
our belief in the divine perfections. Hid we hear of an action
apparently unjust or unkind performed by a human being, in the
honesty of whose principles and in the generosity of whose disposition


we had reason to confide, ?of the genuineness of which we had been
made certain in our own experience by promises kept and benefits
conferred, ?we should at once infer that there must be circumstances
connected with the case, which, if fully known to us, would reconcile
an inconsistency, not real, but apparent. In like manner when we
contemplate the vast preponderance of acknowledged, understood,
and undeniable good in the universe, when we call to mind the
many, countless blessings we have received from God, wo are assured
that the omnipotent author of so much mercy would not create
misery purely as such?as an end in itself. We believe that for a
being like man, in a state of probation on earth and of preparation
for a higher condition of existence, pain is necessary. The Captain
of our salvation was made perfect through suffering, and it seems
that without its occasional influence our moral culture and spiritual
advancement could not be effected. The question may indeed be asked,
u could not an all-powerful and benevolent deity have brought about
the same results, without means sometimes so disagreeable and
distressing?? Our answer is that we do not presume to give an
opinion. We find by the facts that an infinitely wise and perfectly
good Being has judged it right to allow sorrow to constitute an
element in our education here \ and when we cannot thank Him for
joyous experiences, we submit with reverence and resignation to
His discipline, and acknowledge His fatherly hand, alike when He
gives and when He takes away. This paternal character we find
ascribed to the Almighty frequently in the Old Testament,
universally in the New. I may repeat in your hearing the familiar
and memorable words of David <{ The Lord is merciful and gracious,
slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy.? ?Like as a father pitieth
his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.? (Psalm ciii.)
And in the book of the prophecies of Isaiah we read words of even
more tender import describing God?s love for His people as greater
than that of a mother for her helpless infant. ? But Zion said, the
Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me. Can a
woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion
on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not
forget thee.? (Isaiah xlix.) In the New Testament the love of
God is represented as full, free, impartial. In the parable of the
prodigal son, Christ has drawn a picture of fatherly pity unmatched
in beauty, simplicity and pathos?a description which reaches the
heart of every generous reader of the Bible, and which, if truly
appreciated, would not only increase our filial confidence in our
Creator, but banish from the world many unworthy opinions regard-
ing His attributes. The Apostle Peter in his address to Cornelius
and his friends lays down in emphatic and unmistakable terms the
grand and cheering principle of God?s equal love to all the children
whom He has made, who strive according to their light to praise
Him and serve Him. ?Of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons : but in every nation he that feareth him, and
worketh righteousness, is accepted with him.? (Acts x).
There are two priceless advantages and grand first principles which
we derive from our faith in the perfect goodness of our heavenly
Father. The first is the confidence which wc arc enabled to place


in Him in all circumstances of our earthly lot, in weal or woe, in
life and at death, and the filial trust with which we can draw near
to Him, take His hallowed name upon our lips, and place before
Him our praises, our expressions of gratitude, our wants and our
sorrows. The infinite Majesty of the Creator must be so felt by
every well-regulated mind as to prevent us from forgetting God?s
greatness when most impressed with a sense of His goodness, and
from manifesting any irreverence towards Him in our filial com-
munion. It is not found that the love for an earthly parent, who
is judiciously kind, causes any want of respect; it rather increases
it; while nothing so soon diminishes a child?s veneration for
those in authority over him as a sense of unjust or ungenerous
treatment. Thus while the perfect love, which God?s character as
believed in by us inspires, casteth out fear, it does not remove
that solemn awe with which we must approach Him in whom we
?live and move and have our being.? We could not have these
feelings towards our Creator if we considered Him to be a stern
relentless despot, loving a few of His children, hating the rest
adopting some as personal favourites, branding others His per-
sonal foes ?fore-ordaining some to everlasting life, dooming others
before they are born, to eternal misery?making the salvation of
myriads to depend upon the knowledge of and the belief in a certain
theory, of the existence of which it was absolutely impossible that
some of them could ever hear?unwilling to forgive a penitent
prodigal and only remitting a penalty when the full price was
paiij?one whose attribute called justice was such that He would
punish the innocent in the place of the guilty. We feel unspeak-
ably thankful that our religion does not lead us to think thus of
the Almighty, and that our prayers are not elicited by slavish fear,
but that they are the homage of our hearts?hearts filled with
gratitude and admiration, reverence and love. The second grand
principle which we derive from our belief in the perfect goodness
of God is a test by which to try doctrines and duties which may
be supposed deducible from certain of the more obscure portions of
Holy Writ. Owing to their antiquity,and to our want of acquaintance
with circumstances alluded to by the writers* there are* in some of
the books of the Bible, passages and texts, from which have
been deduced opinions and the sanction for practices which are in-
consistent with the Divine benevolence and opposed to the progress
of man. Especially may this be said in reference to the epistles
of St. Paul, owing to the peculiar style of the author, which rendered
some things he expressed hard to be understood by a fellow apostle
and by his contemporaries, and naturally much more so by us.
Unthinking and unlearned men, instead of seeking instruction
from the other portions of Scripture, the injunctions of which are
so intelligible that all who read may understand, have, with a
strange infatuation, been ever most willing to base their theological
views and religious observances on texts which the most profound
scholars cannot exactly explain, and about which the most eminent
commentators differ. Many of the doctrines thus deduced
represent the conduct of the deity as unworthy of a perfectly good
being, and describe Him as taking delight in services which seem


worse than frivolous to the reason of man. In opposition to, and
in condemnation of all such opinions and practices, we place the
undeniable doctrine of the Gospel, ? God is love ;? and where an
obscure passage of any of the sacred writers is capable of bearing
two interpretations, one of which is in conformity with this prin-
ciple and the other opposed to it, we adopt the former without
hesitation and with the utmost confidence. We hold this to be
an axiom permanent as truth, that nothing which would be unjust,
unkind, unmerciful in a good man, can without glaring inconsistency
and lamentable error be imputed to a perfect God.
2. We are not only Unitarians, we are Christian Unitarians ;
we not only worship One God the Father, we worship Him in the
name and as the disciples of Jesus Christ. In sincere gratitude
for the mission of the Saviour, in true reverence for him, in a desire
to obey his commandments, in appreciation of the majesty, beauty,
and divine heroism of his character, we will yield to no men or
body of men. We regard Jesus Christ as the Son of God, but not
as God the Son. We accept as true every claim to reverence and
obedience which is made by him or for him in the New Testament.
In religious matters he is to us ? the way, the truth and the life.?
We do not worship him as God, among other reasons because he
has told us to adore the One Supreme, and has distinctly declared
u My Father is greater than I.? (John xiv. 28.) We look up to
him as formed in the image of the divine perfections, and we
believe that one great object of his mission was to give us an
exhibition in a human form of the tender mercy of the deity,?
that he came not to save us from the vindictive wrath of One whose
brightest and best name is ? love,? but to ?show us the Father,? and
to lead us to the Father. We believe that he came to save us from
our sins, not to offer a salvation which might be attained without
the relinquishment of them. We regard his example as the great
model for the Christian life, a model applicable to every phase of
our being, faultless, glorious, sublime. And not to enter into
particulars, we are led by the whole tone of his teaching and
tenor of his life, as well as by his resurrection from the dead, to
look to him as the author and finisher of our faith, ? who brought
light and immortality to light.? We call Jesus Christ our Master ,
and claim to be, therefore, Christian disciples. All the doctrines
of other churches which we reject, we discard because, after careful
and devout examination, we consider them either as not taught by
him and his Apostles, or as directly opposed to their instructions.
Now I am aware that there are some well-meaning, perhaps, but
illiberal and narrow-minded men, who dispute or deny our right to
the name of Christians. Did I deem it necessary, I might quote
from the writings of men of eminence in the English Church and
others to show that our title to that appellation was acknowledged
by them. I might refer to the statements of such men as Bishop
Watson, or Dr. Arnold; but the injustice and presumption of
those who say we are not Christians, only requires to be plainly
set forth, to appear palpable to every candid mind. Ido not refer
to those men who claim for their Church infallibility, and brand
all who differ from them as heretics. Their position, if not tenable,


is at least consistent. But there are many who, while denying
the claim of any denomination to infallibility, act and speak
as if they thought that they themselves must always be in tho
right. It is clear that if one body of men may pronounce
those who differ from their peculiar doctrines to be no Christians,
so may another, and the worst names will be called by those who
have the least charity. As far as belief is concerned, we consider
every man a Christian who takes up the New Testament, reads it
carefully, with intelligence and in a pious spirit, and accepts what
he thinks to be the religion taught in it. Now, I would not sup-
port my opinions merely by the authority of great names j but I
will refer to a few for the purpose of showing the audacity of
bigotry. John Milton was a man whose character will not be im-
peached, whose grasp of intellect will not be denied. He was an
earnest and most painstaking student of the Bible, as several of his
prose works testify. Hie perusal of the New Testament led to his
becoming a Unitarian Christian. The same thing may be said of
Sir Isaac Newton. Is it not absurdly bold in men of little learning
or of very limited natural capacities to assert that these great men
were not Christians, because their judgments about the instructions
of the text-book of Christianity differed from their own ? Is it not
also an evidence of want of modesty for them to bring a similar
charge against a number of their neighbours who are at least as
intelligent and honest as themselves, who have studied the Bible
fully as attentively, and have supplicated the divine blessing as
frequently ? If I were asked to name the two writers who have
most ably defended the historical evidences of Christianity, I should
mention Nathaniel Lardner of England and Andrews Norton of
America, both Unitarians ; and its internal evidences, its beauty
and truth, its adaptation to all the moral and spiritual wants of man
have never been so powerfully set forth as by Dr. Channing. In
these days of investigation indeed we find sometimes that
Unitarian Ministers are more conservative than either Bishop
Colenso or Dean Milman; and there are not a few among us,
myself among the number, who care little for hard names which
we may be called in association with the most learned, enlightened
and truly religious men of our times. But on behalf of our more
sensitive friends I protest against a charge which they feel to be
untrue and offensive. I trust we all make it our endeavour to
show that we are in the best sense disciples of Jesus Christ by our
practice as well as by our principles, by our spirit as well as by
our profession. I trust that while we are all sufficiently impressed
with the importance of speculative truth, the mere advocacy of
opinions is not that which chiefly unites us together as members
of a church. I trust we have interests deeper and purer than the
mere propositions of a creed or of a theology, drawing us and bind-
ing us together. I trust that this Church, in which many of us
have worshipped together since it was opened, is rendered sacred
in our memories and in our hearts by holy associations. I trust
we have found it, and shall continue to find it, a temple for uniting
in high praise of Him who is the majesty of heaven and earth, and
in expressions of gratitude to Him who has bestowed upon us so


many earthly blessings, and has given us so many spiritual
privileges. I trust it is consecrated to the most devout aspiration
of our souls, to personal communion with a personal God, to the holy
converse of human spirits with the great Creator Spirit. I trust
it has been and will continue to be a place where we search together
honestly for religious truth, and endeavour to understand better,
and to obey more faithfully from week to week, God?s laws, ?to
appreciate more fully, and to follow more implicitly the spirit and
example of Jesus Christ, and to cultivate and cherish charitable
feelings. May this place of worship be a centre whence may pro-
ceed the good fruits of benevolence to those of all creeds around
us. Here may we learn such lessons, and strive to gain such
moral and spiritual strength, as may give us power to withstand
temptation, to bear with meekness the trials of life and perform with
energy its duties. Here may we obtain such trust in God and
such self-reliance, that our lives may be ennobled, our dispositions
purified, and our faith confirmed, that we may have the fullest
enjoyment of God?s temporal blessings, while striving to imitate
His perfections, His impartial and unceasing kindness, that we
may be consoled by all the comforting influences of religion in our
sorrows and bereavements, that we may be sustained by hope in
death, and prepared by heavenly-mindedness for Heaven. Amen.
SECOND DISCOURSE.
Matthew vii. 21.
t( Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven ; hut he that doeth the will of my Father which
is in heaven .?
In the sermon preached this morning I explained in a cursory and
general manner the opinions held by Christian Unitarians with
regard to the object of religious worship and the character of God.
I now propose to point out in a similar way our views as to the
nature of man and his obligations in relation to his Creator and his
fellow-creatures. The words of the text emphatically declare the
necessity of moral obedience to the divine commandments, and the
inefficiency of a profession of religion or Christianity without this.
Christian Unitarians therefore consider duty a necessary con-
sequence of devotion, and believe that any doctrine which would
lead to an evasion of duty must be opposed to the will of God, to
the distinct assertions of Jesus Christ, and to the best interests of


society in this world, as well as being a delusion with respect to the
happiness of the life to come. Mere belief, without the practice of
righteousness, is considered by us barren, dead, being alone; and
we think that no matter how correct a man?s creed may be on
abstract questions of theology, if his character be bad, he must be
far from the kingdom of heaven, far from being a true disciple of
Jesus Christ. We think that it is not enough for a professor of
religion and a candidate for the divine favor here and hereafter to
have a good and correct set of articles of theology, but that he must
in addition be a good man and manifest a correct conduct. Christian
Unitarianism therefore insists upon the indispensable importance of
morality, but is not mere morality. The opinions men hold as to
abstract questions concerning the deity, fate, free will, or similar
subjects, we call theology : the relation man bears to his Maker as a
child of God, his communication with his Father in prayer, his filial
faith, trust, confidence in Him, his love to Ood ?we call religion.
The outward manifestation of this love of God is obedience to Him;
the discharge of a man?s duty to himself and his neighbour, this we
call morality.
From a principle of worldly policy or expediency, from natural
amiability of disposition,or from selfishness, men may be led to a certain
degree of attention to the obligations of duty; but the morality which
springs from the source of pure religion is nobler, steadier, more dis-
interested, self-sacrificing, and heroic. Christian morality is the love
of man connected with the love of God ?the practical recognition of the
deity as the Father of all, and of every human being as a brother.
In support of this proposition, we refer to the whole tenor of the
teachings of Christ and his Apostles. We read the Sermon on the
Mount, and we find the inculcation of pure, peaceful, and amiable
dispositions, and good living as a proof of them, from the beginning
to the end of it. Instead of finding there any scheme by which
man may escape from self-culture and labor for the good of others,
we learn a lesson of personal responsibility in every paragraph.
The same doctrine was preached by Peter and by Paul ?by the
former when three thousand converts were added to the Church,
and when he delivered that truly Christian catholic address to
Cornelius and his friends: and neither in those discourses, nor in any
others of the same inspired preacher, can there be found one word as
to a man being good in himself or pleasing to God, on account of the
merits of any other being?any intimation of the idea of proxy-
righteousness, a thing which from the very nature of right and
wrong we might know to be a moral impossibility. For what is
goodness in a human being, in so far as so imperfect a creature as
man can be said to possess the quality at all ? It is the benevolent
feeling of his own heart and the beneficient deed of his own hand.
That which another does, except as it acts as an example, can add
nothing to his merit or demerit. That a man can be blamed for a
sin he never committed, or that he can be rendered better by a
virtue he never possessed, or a benefit he never bestowed, is an idea
not to be found in the sermon of Peter. Can anything be plainer
on this point than the discourses of Paul? For example, when
Felix hoard him concerning the faith in Christ, we are told that


? he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come?
(Acts xxiv. 25); and at Athens the necessity of repentance and
the assurance of a just retribution were enunciated in terms equally
clear and emphatic. Can we possibly suppose that if Paul had
himself thought the salvation of his hearers, on either of those
occasions referred to, had depended on their belief in a vicarious
atonement, he would not, as an honest and a benevolent man,
have stated this in a way not to be misunderstood ? Such a
supposition charges the Apostle with a cruelty we would not impute to
the worst of the species.
Let any one read the Sermon on the Mount, and the dis-
courses of Peter and Paul, when declaring what were the
leading doctrines of the Gospel to those who heard it preached
for the first time, and then ask himself if a believer in the modern
popular systems of theology would be satisfied to follow their example.
It is indeed said that the exclusive terms of salvation, which the
preachers of what they call Orthodoxy in modern times offer, may
be elicited from the epistles of Paul. It should bo remembered,
however, that it was by the sermons of Paul that his converts were
made Christian believers, and that the essentials of the gospel must
have been contained in them. The epistles were addressed to those
who were Christians already, and who required advice, consolation,
warning, or reproof, but not to be convinced of the truth of the
gospel, or to be taught its first principles. There are allusions in
some parts of the epistles which men of the present day cannot
always clearly explain, and from which the unreasonable doctrine
of salvation by mere belief is taken. We think that Paul?s real
opinions should be derived from those passages of his writings about
the import of which there can be no difficulty and no dispute, and
that we should conclude, when we find a sentence hard to be under-
stood, that if we could explain it, it would perfectly harmonize with
his more intelligible statements. Thus with regard to the absolute
importance of personal moral and spiritual culture he writes
(if he were the author of the letter to the Hebrews,) ? without
holiness no man shall see the Lordand although he is quoted as
the champion of the doctrine of salvation by faith independently
of good works, in the thirteenth chapter of his first epistle to the
Corinthians we find him placing faith, hope, and love? i.e. the
being amiable and the doing good?together, and declaring that the
? greatest of these is charity.? If men would remember that
when Paul speaks disparagingly of works he refers to the observances
of the Jewish ceremonial law and not to the great duties of morality,
and that when he passes encomiums on faith, he means a faith which
worketh by love ?the faith of the heart with which man believeth
unto righteousness ?they would possess a key to many of his sayings
now to them apparently dark, and they would thus be saved from
much doubt and gross delusion. It is evident that such a preacher
and writer as Paul, must be considered as consistent with himself
and with the tenor of the instructions of the Captain of our salvation.
Christian Unitarians then believe that obedience to the will of
God and to the precepts of Christ is the best proof of the reality and
sincerity of their religion, and they are confirmed in this faith by


such statements as that of the text, or as the following ?? Wherefore,
whosoever hcareth these sayings of mine and doeth them, I will
liken him unto a wise man who built his house on a rock : and the
rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded on a rock;?
(Mat. vii.) or as this description of Christianity, given by James in
his General Epistle, ? Pure religion and undefiled before God and
the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself (one?s self) unspotted from the world.?
(James i. 27). We think that to be a true Christian it is necessary
to be ChristliJce ?to be devout in soul, pure in heart, self-sacrificing,
and energetic in doing good. According to our view he is the best
Christian who worships God with most filial love, gratitude, and
reverence, who is the kindest relative and friend, the best neighbour
and the most trustworthy citizen. We think that no one who
regards the deity as a personification of wrath and vengeance,
whose soul is only connected with God by that fear which casteth
out love, who is in bis disposition bigoted and uncharitable, whose
honesty is not to be depended on, whose word is not as good as his
bond, ? ca n be a worthy disciple of Jesus. It is a maxim with us
that no bad man, though he had faith so that he could remove
mountains, could possibly be a good Christian, and that that form of
Christianity which most directly tends to make men like the Saviour
is the purest and best.
It is customary with some to disparage morality?to say
that it has nothing to do with gaining the divine approbation,
and that salvation is to be obtained by mere belief, by an
act of the intellect rather than a conversion of the will. We
believe that this idea, in every phase of it, tends to immorality;
and we ask how can men in general be expected to be of good
character when they are told that their eternal salvation depends
upon their creed and not upon their conduct? Preachers who
call morality ? filthy rags,? and apply to it other opprobious
epithets, need not wonder that their hearers are so wicked. Now
one great advantage in and recommendation of that form of
Christianity, which we as Unitarians profess, is that it makes a
devout and benevolent character the grand criterion of Christian
discipleship?the means of acceptance hereafter by a merciful God.
We believe that there are many pious and good men in all churches,
but we think there would be more such if holy living were as much
insisted on as supposed true believing. As far as this world is con-
cerned, the beneficial tendency of Christian Unitarianism is acknow-
ledged by all who know anything of its principles; and whilst it
becomes its professors with humbleness to confess how far short
they come of that which it ought to make them, it is generally
conceded even by our most bitter opponents, that if our religion
does not make us, according to their idea, good Christians, it renders
us as a general rule good, honest, upright, fair-dealing, and kindly-
disposed citizens. There is, in the ? Life of Blanco White,? once
a Roman Catholic Priest and afterwards a Unitarian, a letter
addressed to him by one of the ablest and most pure-minded states-
men that England ever produced ?I mean Lord Vassall Holland


in which a striking and valuable testimony is borne to the moral
efficacy of our faith. Lord Holland says ? u I have little doubt that an
unbiassed critic (if in such matters there were such a phenomenon to
be found) would pronounce the Unitarian system more reconcileable
with the language of the scriptures, as well as more consonant with
reason, than any that has been built on the philosophy of those books.
It is yet clearer that it is in its consequences less liable to abuse,
less productive of fanaticism and superstition, and more conducive
to the morality of mankind and the well-being of society, than any
other. As a politician I should not hesitate to prefer it to any
shape that Judaism, Paganism, Hindooism, Mahometanism, or
Christianity has hitherto assumed.? (Blanco White?s Life, voL iL
page 180.)
The opinions which Christian Unitarians hold in reference
to human merit in the sight of God have been much mis-
understood and consequently misrepresented. Because we do not
believe in a vicarious atonement, and because we maintain that he
that doeth the will of God according to the best of his ability is
most pleasing to Him, it is supposed that we imagine we can claim
an entrance into heaven as a matter of right. We do indeed feel
assured that even if a man of bad disposition and depraved taste
were admitted to the society of saints, it would afford him no happi-
ness, and that some degree of heavenly-mindedness is requisite to
the enjoyment of citizenship above; but that any frail and imperfect
human beings, such as the best of us are, should proclaim them-
selves entitled to a celestial inheritance, is an idea foreign to our
thoughts and diametrically opposed to our doctrines. For eternal
life we rely on the unpurchased and unpurchasable mercy of a God
of Love. We believe that there always was, and is now, forgiveness
with God to the penitent and reformed. We regard God as a
Father, and therefore we do not think that He was unwilling to
pardon sin without a substitute dying in the stead of sinners; for
we read that s( God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should have everlast-
ing life.? By this we consider it is meant that we should believe
and obey, not believe and tremble, as we are told the devils do.
Salvation then is not the recognition of merit on the part of man,
for to obtain it self-renunciation in the form of penitence is essen-
tial; it is not a boon bought for us by another from a personi-
fication of vengeance ; " it is the gift of God.?
We are aware that it is taught in the creeds of churches around us
that unless a man believe in the vicarious atonement, no matter how
pure his disposition or holy his life, he will be doomed to eternal
misery ; and we regret to know that there are individuals sufficiently
narrow-minded and hard-hearted to believe this monstrous im-
peachment of the justice and goodness of our Heavenly Father.
But we can scarcely think that the more enlightened and charitable
of our fellow-christians of the various denominations around us can
harbour in their bosoms such a sentiment. Their hearts must
rebel against their intellectual convictions. Can they seriously
and earnestly entertain the opinion that the Almighty and
Benignant Father, ? who is good unto all, and whose tender mercies


are over-all his works,?? would sentence to interminable tortures
such a man for example as Dr. Channing, who was an earnest
lover of truth and a diligent searcher after Christian truth, and whose
life was as faithful a copy of the Gospel Model as can be found
described in human biography, because, according to their views,
he made mistakes of the understanding in his theological investiga-
tions 1 If the doctrine of exclusive salvation depending on the
belief in a vicarious atonement be true, Channing is now amongst
the eternally doomed. One exception would overturn the doc-
trine. Such is the result of a plan of redemption which makes
the criterion of the qualifications for eternal happiness to consist
in a condition of the intellect rather than of the will, in supposed
right believing rather than certain good feeling, in dogma rather
than duty. We are convinced, whatever may be asserted in
articles, confessions and creeds, that enlightened men of all churches
do not doubt as to the eternal salvation of good men of all churches,
and virtually think with Peter that ? in every nation he that feareth
him (God) and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him.?
Christian Unitarians, while firmly believing and unflinchingly
asserting the conviction that their own form of the religion of
Jesus is superior to every other in its moral and spiritual tendency,
delight to regard Christian discipleship and the communion of
Saints as transcending the bounds of their own denomination. We
venerate the memories of the Roman Catholic Fenelon, the
Episcopalian Jeremy Taylor, the Independent John Howe, the
Baptist Robert Hall, the Methodist John Wesley, the Presbyterian
Thomas Chalmers, and all such men in their own or any other
churches. We can only pity the narrow exclusiveness which shuts
out noble souls and saintly hearts of our own denomination from
the respect we know to be their due in this world, and which
pronounces on them, as far as human uncharitableness can, the
sentence of eternal condemnation. We would rather be the objects
of such bigoted and, to us, unchristian sentiments, than entertain
them.
Having stated that Christian Unitarians insist emphatically
on the importance of good character, it is necessary to point out
the mode in which we consider it must be formed. Now our view
of human nature is diametrically opposed to the ideas of total
depravity and original blameworthiness. We do not think that
any child is born under the ? wrath and curse ? of God, or that a
sin committed nearly six thousand years ago by Adam is imputed
to the infant of to-day. We believe that the blessing of the
Benignant Father is bestowed on every creature that begins to live,
and that every one must ?bear his own burden,? but that alone.
We look upon man, not as actually sinful, but as naturally liable
to sin, as Adam was from the beginning or he would not have fallen.
God has given him an animal, intellectual, moral and spiritual
nature. His passions, when unguided by reason, conscience, and
religious faith, will lead him into sin, but when governed aright
have all beneficial tendencies. The animal, carnal, or fleshly
nature is first developed, and is often the victim of strong tempta-
tion. Thus we are told that our first parents fell vanquished by


appetite. Christian Unitarians conceive that in order to become a
true child of God, there is not required a fundamental change of
man?s nature, but a development of the higher elements of it ?that
sense must be subdued by reason, the passions be swayed by the
will, that conscience and religiousness must reign supreme. Thus
we are accustomed to compare man?s moral and spiritual capacities
to the wings of the caterpillar which at first are folded up, ?hidden,
?and when nothing but a chrysalis appears, the warmth of the
sun causes that unsightly insect which formerly crawled upon the
earth to become a beautiful inhabitant of the air. In the same
way, by culture, and especially by the influences of the sun of
righteousness, do we believe that men may grow in grace and good-
ness more and more unto a likeness of the divine image of Christ and
God. We conceive that this development of the powers which the
Creator has originally bestowed upon him is the great duty of every
man, and that to enable him to achieve it effectually was the grand
object of Christ?s mission. In his progress towards the full stature
of the perfect man in Christ Jesus, man?s intellectual faculties
must be cultivated, and thus Christian Unitarians exercise their
reason in pursuit of religious truth, in so far as the Gospel
addresses itself to the human understanding. Of the capability of
the rational powers of man to judge of theological propositions
placed before them, and of the duty of exercising them in matters
pertaining to religion, we have clear statements in the New Testa-
ment. Thus Christ says ? Yea, and why even of yourselves judge
ye not what is right ?? (Luke xii. 63). Paul thus exhorts the
Corinthians," Brethren, be not children in understanding : howbeit,
in malice be ye children, but in understanding he men ,? (1 Cor.
xiv. 20), and John gives the warning, " Beloved, believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God.? ? (1 John iv. 1.)
Christian Unitarians are of opinion that the very circumstance
that their Great Master offered proof or evidence of his divine
mission, is not only a warrant to but a demand upon all to
exercise the only faculties by which such evidence could be judged
of. In point of fact all men exercise reason to a certain extent in
religious matters. Even those who decide that they should give
up their judgments to be swayed by others are obliged, by the very
nature of things, to go through a process of reasoning in order to
arrive at the conclusion that they ought to do so. The right of
private judgment is the first principle of Protestantism, in itself,
in our estimation, a great and good principle, but liable to per-
version and abuse. Many use the liberty of judging without
having performed the duty of investigation, pronounce a sentence
without a knowledge of evidence, give a verdict without hearing
more than one side of the question. We regard it as a most
binding obligation to search the Scriptures devoutly and dili-
gently, and to avail ourselves of every kind of information
which may throw light upon them. We do not therefore
place reason in antagonism to revelation, but, in obedience
to apostolic admonition, endeavour to ascertain the meaning
of propositions by that faculty bestowed by our Creator for
the purpose. Our whole philosophy on this point is so ad-


mirably stated by Hallam, in a paragraph of bis ''lntroduc-
tion to the Literature of Europe,?? that I shall read it to you.
Referring to Chillingworth?s position that the Bible only is the
religion of Protestants, and that each man?s own reason is to be its
interpreter, he says " This must always be understood with the
condition that the reason itself shall be competently enlightened.
The case is parallel in jurisprudence, medicine, mechanics, and
every human science: any one man, primd facie, may be a com-
petent judge, but all men are not so. It is hard to prove that
there is any different rule for theology ; but parties will always
contend for extremes ?for the rights of bigots to think for others,
and the rights of fools to think for themselves.? (vol. iii. p. 99).
Although Christian Unitarians maintain the right, and strive to
render themselves competent to the discharge of the duty, of private
judgment in religious subjects, they arc not rationalists. They
consider that the Gospel does not address the intellect alone ; but
that it is an appeal to the heart, that it tends to enlighten and
purify the conscience, to render faith in God more firm, and to
make the soul more devout. They believe that this world is, as
it were, a great school, in which, by intellectual, moral, and spiritual
culture, man?s higher nature may be prepared for a participation
in the happiness of heaven ; and that in the Bible, by precepts,
examples, warnings, encouragements and consolations, God has
provided the means of this holy education. Christian Unitarians
therefore do not deny the Bible as it is sometimes said, but think
that they show the truest reverence for it by perusing it with
discrimination ; and they have no doubt but that every necessary
spiritual assistance will be given to the prayerful reader by a God
of Love. The Holy Ghost is regarded by them as a phrase some-
times used as a name of God the Father, as in such a passage as
this ? For what man knoweth the things of a man save the spirit
of man which is in him ? Even so the things of God knoweth no
man, but the Spirit of God,? (1 Cor. ii. II); and sometimes as
an attribute or influence of the Father, as when Christ makes use of
this expression ?? If Iby the Spirit of God cast out devils,?
(Matt. xii. 28), for in the corresponding passage by Luke we read
"If I by the finger of God cast out devils ? ?the power of the
Almighty being meant in both cases, Christian Unitarians are
confirmed in this view by reading, in the Book of the Acts of the
Apostles, of Paul finding certain disciples and saying unto them
? Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? And they
said unto him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any
Holy Ghost? (xix. 2). But the influence of the divine Spirit of
God is regarded by us as bestowed on all faithful souls who com-
mune with Him in prayer, who are one with Him in purpose, who
are fellow-workers with Him in doing good. Christian Unitarians
believe in that immortality which was brought to light by Jesus
Christ, -and in a future righteous retribution in a happiness
bestowed on the friends of God such as man cannot now comprehend,
and in the infliction of a punishment on the impenitent such
as is consistent with the nature of sin and compatible with
the attributes of Him who " will not always chide, neither will
he keep his anger for ever.?


It will be perceived by this general sketch of our opinions
that on many points we differ from our fellow Christians.
That we deem them in error, and that we consider our pe-
culiar principles of great importance, is proved by the fact
that we have separated from them not only for the public
worship of One God the Father, but for the inculcation and dis-
semination of such views of doctrine and duty as we regard most
conducive to man?s welfare on earth, best fitted to prepare him for
heaven. But it is a source of great thankfulness to us that we do
not believe that any of our earnest and sincere opponents are in
damnable error; and while we think that in many of the popular
forms of Christianity there are some mistakes most pernicious in
their tendency, and that therefore we are engaged in the most
noble of labours in endeavouring to weed them out, yet we have
such faith in the moral and spiritual efficacy of the lessons of the
New Testament?we have such confidence in the purifying influences
of the life and death of Jesus Christ ?that we are convinced that
however men may go astray on abstract questions of theology, they
cannot consider carefully, and contemplate with a desire for im-
provement, the Christian precepts and the great Christian Model,
without being made better, and without being in some degree con-
formed to the image of the divine perfections. Thus while we
have every motive which should influence benevolent minds to
contend earnestly for ? the faith once delivered to the saints,? our
zeal need not be promoted at' the expense of our charity. We
pronounce no maledictions on our fellow Christians or on our
fellow men. The denunciatory spirit of the Athanasian creed is
as displeasing to the feelings of our hearts as its propositions are
unintelligible to our understandings. We are sometimes unjustly
accused of pride of reason; but we should consider it a most blame-
worthy presumption to attempt to define the opinions necessary to
be believed in, in order to escape the penalty of without doubt
perishing everlastingly.
Holding these opinions, we have every motive to be cheerfully
devout, intellectually active, morally pure, and socially useful.
We think that a practical religion, such as ours, is what the
churches need, and the world needs : and while endeavouring to
live in conformity with Christ?s Sermon on the Mount, we have
the assurance of Jesus himself that ? He that doeth these things
is like a man that builds his house upon a rock.? In these times
of free discussion on subjects of every kind I have no fear for the
essential principles of our faith ; and shall hail with pleasure any
new light which criticism or science can throw on the Bible or the
works of God. I earnestly pray that while we are interested in
mental improvement and the results of intellectual researches, we
may not be unmindful of the more important duties of moral
culture and religious communion. Amen.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
.S/R , />9 9^/ V


3 1508
01570767


*
I V
, v \
9 ,
m m
