

svo
AND
VOTE BY BALLOT
HOW FAR IS THE PRESENT DEPRESSED CONDITION OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES GENERALLY, AND OF THE COLONY
OF VICTORIA PARTICULARLY, TO BE ATTRIBUTED TO
THE ADOPTION OF
Universal Suflrajg* and Hints h\) ballot;
AND HOW CAN THOSE COLONIES BE MOST READILY RESTORED
TO A STATE OF SOUND PROSPERITY.
AN INQUIRY
ADDRESSED TO THE
RIGHT HONOURABLE THE EARL OE DERBY, K.G.
BY AN OLD COLONIST.
“ There is nothing so secret hut time and truth will reveal it."
“ Still it moves."
LONDON:
P. S. KING, 34, PARLIAMENT STREET-
MANCHESTER ; JOHN HEYWOOD.
PRICE SIXPENCE
(J. j CJUs&yr~4 \J O^^Msto
UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE j H -*


3 1508 00874749 0


UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE.
My Lord,
* On two previous occasions, i.e., in November, 1863, and
September, 186-1, I ventured to address you on the subject of the
condition of the Colony of Victoria, with a view to raise the question
as to whether the promotion of emigration from the manufacturing
districts thereto was at that time calculated to benefit either the parties
emigrating or the Colony; and also to direct attention to the local
mis-government of the Colony, and its effect on all classes of the
community.
It is my intention in this letter—Firstly, to recapitulate a portion
of the facts, statistics, and opinions I formerly urged to illustrate
what the condition of the Colony then was, with some others to show
what it note is. Secondly, to point out how far the existing depres-
sion is to be attributed to the adoption of UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE
AND VOTE 11 V BALLOT, and—Thirdly, to endeavour to indicate
how this Colony, as well as the Australian Colonies generally, can be
speedily restored to a state of sound prosperity.*
THE DEPRESSION
In my previous letters I pointed out the following facts, inter
alia :—
1. That the yield of gold in the Colony had diminished from
3,G88,6130z. ISdwts., of the value of £14,561,206, in 1855, to
1,598,4810 z. 17dwts., of the value of £6,395,697, in 1862, (as per
Melbourne Age of December 24th, 1862) ; that the yield in 1863 was
125,9640 z., of the value of £503,856 less than in 1862 (on the
authority of Mr. Wm. Westgarth’s valuable work on Victoria)| and
%
* I wish it be understood that the following remarks only partially apply to
South Australia or Adelaide, as that Colony stands in a different position to the
rest of the Australian settlements. It is still in a state of prosperity, and this is
in no small degree owing to the wisdom and moderation of its former rulers,
more especially Governors Young and Sir Richard Mc.Donuell.
Neither do these remarks apply to the New Zealand settlements, as their
capabilities arc now for the first time being fairly tested, and it will probably be
found that they are such as will at no distant date place them far in advance of
any part of the Australian continent, and in an exceptional position.
f Published by Sampson, Low, Son, & Marston.


that the yield up to the date of the then last received advices, was
still persistently and steadily decreasing. I also quoted the Mel-
bourne! Age, of July 25th, 18G4, which says :— The gold fields are
becoming gradually exhausted, and occupation must be found for the
people who can no longer obtain a livelihood by gold digging. I then
asserted that the nett average earnings of the diggers was under 20s.
per week per man, and this statement is fully confirmed in the columns
of the 11 Times,'’ of July 19 th, 1866,where the Melbourne correspondent’s
letter says, “ the average of men's earnings in mining pursuits is less
than that of any other form of mechanical industry, being not so much
as a pound sterling a iveeh for each man and this is the admission of
a gentleman who takes a sanguine view of the position and prospects
of the Colony. In the “Melbourne Argus" of December 27th, 1866, it
is stated that the export of Victorian gold up to that date for that
year was 1,462,1130 z., of the value of £5,848,452, and for the year
1865, up to the corresponding date, 1,551,5640 z., of the value
of £6,206,256, “ which statement agrees with that in the “Times" of
February 13th, 1867 thus showing that the decline in the yield has
been steady and continuous, notwithstanding that during each succes-
sive year more capital has been sunk and machinery employed in its
production.*
2. I next drew attention to the unprecedented decrease in the
worth of all real property throughout the Colony, and showed from
various authorities, therein cited,f that the value of household pro-
perty and real estate had decreased to less than one-fifth| of its cost
or value in 1853, and that the decrease in value had been variously
estimated at from 20 to 40 millions sterling. The last advices abun-
dantly show that there has not been any recovery from this depre-
and, if further confirmation be necessary, a comparison of the
advertisements and share lists in the Colonial papers, of the years
1853 to 1856, with those of 1863 to 1866, will conclusively establish
the fact.
3. I next asserted, that of the six railways in the Colony constructed
or partly constructed by private companies— one still pays a dividend;
* The yield of gold in the Colony of New South Wales, for the year 1866,
was nearly 36,0000 z. less than that of 1865.
The “ Times' ” City Article of Jan. Bth, 1867, contains important information
respecting Australian gold.
f Mr. Wm. Westgarth, formerly Chairman of the Chamber of Commerce, as
reported by the Daily Telegraph of July 13th, 1863, and others.
J Melbourne Age Leading Article of July 25th, 1864.
§ Melbourne Age (ministerial paper) of Nov. 27th, 1866, which says, speak-
ing of the value of property, past and present—“ The serious depreciation of
property which then began, and has ever since continued”: and the general advices
received by the December mail, both from Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria,
and Van Dieman’s Land, state, “ That the stagnation of trade continues, and the
depression is general.


a second never arrived at completion, but was purchased by the
Government; a third was completed and afterwards purchased by the
Government; a fourth having arrived at a state of irapecuniosity, had
been sold by auction, “ those customary victims of modern enterprise,
“the original shareholders ” not receiving a farthing;” a fifth was in
the Insolvent Court; and of the sixth it was sufficient to say that it
had never paid a farthing of a dividend, and that its shares were
unsaleable; and that the latter line was closed on July Ist, 1864, as
per notice in the Melbourne Age of June 25th, 1864.
These facts remain unchallenged and uncontroverted; but two of
the insolvent lines have been since amalgamated with the one solvent
one, on terms that it would be advantageous for the railway interest
in this country to study.—Vide "Times" City Article of February 4th,
1867.
4. I next asserted of the Government lines of Railway :—lf we
turn to the Government lines cf railway, 196 miles in length, con-
structed with capital chiefly borrowed in England, we shall not only
find no healthier condition of affairs, but rather a state of things with-
out a parallel, in fact, the greatest financial failure in the whole history
of railway construction. The real cost of these undertakings has
been most carefully concealed, after the most approved manner of ma-
Icing things pleasant ,* but in addition to the money raised in England
(under two Loan Acts passed by the Colonial Legislature,) amounting
to nearly ,£8,000,000, some hundreds of thousands of pounds have
been annually voted and expended on them from the general revenue,
and several hundreds of thousands of pounds have been raised by loan
in the colony and appropriated to the same purpose ; the total cost of
these lines up to the present time has, in round numbers, amounted
to £10,000,000 ; and owing to the decline in the rate of wages, &c.,
they could now be constructed for £4,000,000, or £20,000 per mile ;
the traffic receipts do not amount to one-fourth of what it was esti-
mated they would be, and it is at length admitted in the Colony, that
they are not only not self-supporting, but are not likely to become so.
A reference to the financial statement of the treasurer of the Colony,
as reported in the Melbourne Argus of Nov. 27th, 1862, will shew
that even at that late date the Government were under the delusion
that they would receive a gross revenue of £520,000 per annum from
these lines ; but a reference to the « Times ' of September 28th, 1863,
will shew that the total receipts for the current year up to June 25th
were only £2i8,736 : this would give a gross revenue of say £440,000
per annum supposing that the present rates of carriage could be main-
tained, which they cannot; deduct from this gross revenue 70 per cent,
for working expenses, (a low estimate for colonial railways, for accord-
iugJothe "Times" of August 28th, 1863, the working expenses of the
Grand Trunk Railway of Canada amounted to 83 per cent, of the
gross receipts,) and there only remains £132,000 for the payment of


interest, (on £10,000,000 at 6 per cent.) sinking fund for liquidation
of the loans and provision for compensation for accidents, &c., and
replacement of rails, &c., and this in the face of an otherwise decreas-
ing revenue. On this subject also see the “ Times' ’ of Feb. loth, 1863,
“Melbourne Correspondent’s Letter.” And again in my second letter ;
The lines of railway made by the Government at a fabulous cost have
also been, as stated by me in my last letter, utter failures in every-
thing, excepting that they have afforded fruitful fields for corruption,
jobbery, and knavery; but the financial difficulties of the colony
having accumulated to an almost overwhelming extent, it is now pro-
posed to lease these railways to English capitalists, and with this end
in view an official report has been recently issued, in which report, “ as
the Government dare not acknowledge how or in what manner the
money disbursed has been expended,'’ it is attempted to be shewn that
the cost of construction has been less than is asserted by me in my
first letter. It is my intention to deal with this report in detail when
the tenders for the leasing of the lines are issued; but I content my-
self at present with stating that it is a garbled report got up for
England, that all the money expended has not been accounted for,
and that I adhere to the statements contained in my first letter with
regard to the position and cost of these lines.
On the X4th day of September last, (1866), the Melbourne Govern-
ment Gazette published a statement or report of the alleged revenue of
and expenditure on the Victorian Railways for the half-year ending 30th
June, 1866, a portion of which statement has been extensively circu-
lated in England. Among the conclusions intended to he impressed
or conveyed by this extraordinary document, are the following, viz:—
That these railways pay a nett dividend of about 4| per cent. ; that the
receipts are largely increasing ,* and that it is anticipated that in three
years they ivill pay a clear dividend of 6 per cent, over and above
working expenses. The statements contained in that portion of the
report which was circulated in England, from Avgust to November ,
1866, were at first confounding, and in the absence of the entire
official document they did not admit of contradiction, and your Lord-
ship will particularly note , as the matter will probably hereafter be
prominently brought before the public, that the official report in its
entirety (and its refutation), only reached England late in November
last, (1866). The Melbourne correspondent of the “ Times” who it
is well known, had peculiar means of obtaining information, and who
appears to have been supplied with that portion of the report which
was circulated in England, nearly three months before it was issued to
the Victorian Public, wrote from Melbourne on June 28th, 1866, as fol-
lows ; “ Our Government Railways are now paying a nett dividend
of 4-1 per cent. * * * we have only to raise the PROFITS from
our lines a further 1£ per cent., to make them entirely self supporting.
Their construction cost nearly nine millions of money, and it is said


that similar works could now be completed for six, &c., &c., &c.
(Vide “ Times'" of August 20th, 1866.) *
Now if this latter allegation were correct, i.e. if they had only cost
£9,000,000, then £382,500 would be sufficient to pay 4| per cent,
and as the report states that for the half-year ending June 30th,
1866, the revenue from the railways as a whole was £276,646 2s. 3d,
and the expenditure £126,135 10s, 6d, leaving an excess of revenue
over expenditure of £150,510 lls. 9d,, or a proportion of per
cent of the gross receipts for working expenses, (a result by the way
equivalent to that obtained on the best English lines) the position of
these lines, if this report were correct and the accounts fairly made out,
would not appear so desperate as it does appear to those who know the
facts.
But, my Lord, let as turn from the official report to the leading
article of the Melbourne Argus of September 19th, 1866, which says
of this “ extraordinary document ” inter alia,
“ The information contained in these tables is late in making its
appearance and fails to satisfy public curiosity on the most important
point of all, namely, as to the money loss accruing through our raihvay
system. THE COST OF CONSTRUCTION DOES NOT APPEAR
in the statement, nor the AMOUNTS PAID AS INTEREST ON
THE RAILWAY LOAN, and consequently they do not’in them-
selves FURNISH THE DATA on which an opinion could hejormed
as to the extent of our direct pecuniary loss on raihvay account during
the period involved
******
To be worth having as an investment, the Williamstown line (one
of the government lines) should have been made for nothing, now
that it is new and little in need of repair or expensive maintenance,
its expense is within less than SEVEN PER CENT ON ITS
REVENUE, and the interest of the money spent on the construction
is therefore lost to the country. And the poor results which the
Williamstown line has to show are PROBABLY NO WORSE than
those of railway expenditure in other directions, but the tables do not
disclose whether that is so or not f
******
The extravagance which has erected costly and substantial station pre-
mises on vast unpeopled plains, and in the heart of uninhabited
forests, and keeps several officials at each station doing nothing.
* *■ * * * *
* It is generally understood that this gentleman was that respectable member
of the ministry who has since seceded from it, who, however able he may Lc in
other respects, is essentially innocent of any knowledge of financial affairs, and in
this matter doubtless was imposed upon and misled.
The Italics are my own.
f The Australian and New Zealand Gazette of December Ist, 1866, drew the
attention of the public to this refutation.


Future returns of a similar nature will be greatly increased in
value if they supply data on which the public could arrive at safe
-conclusions on this subject.*
Again, my Lord, if we compare the statement contained in the
Victorian railway report, with those of the South Australian Statis-
tical Register (Adelaide), as quoted in the Times of Dec. 6tb, 1866,
we shall find that whereas the working expenses on the Victorian lines
are officially stated as 45|- per cent, of the receipts, in Adelaide they
are honestly given as 86 per cent.f Now the Adelaide railways have
been well constructed—at a cheap rate—through a comparatively
inexpensive country, and the receipts are actually £197 per mile per
annum more than the receipts on the Victorian Government lines.
The questions therefore naturally arise, to what extent has a People’s
ministry , elected by Universal Suffrage and Vote by Ballot , coolcecl the
accounts in Victoria , and who has audited them ? The complaisance of the
Commissioners of Audit , according to the “ Melbourne Argus ” of
Avgust 2(Hh, 1865, violated the law in seconding the action of the
Government in the celebrated illegal loan matter; has it done so again ?i
In the face of the disclosed facts which are doubtless at this very
moment engrossing the attention of the Melbourne Public, I adhere to
my former statement, in the knowledge that when the full truth is
made to,appear, I shall be fully vindicated.
The gross income of these Railways is of course more than in
1864, because there is now a greater mileage open § but the nett re-
sults are in no respect more favourable, and as regards the assertion
that the receipts are largely increasing, and that it is anticipated that
in three years they will pay a nett dividend of 6 per cent over and
* It will be specially borne in mind that this is practically the same minittry
which has directly or indirectly accused its predecessors, and their chief agents and
officers, of jobbery, suppression, falsification, and general malversation, &c. The
Age of Feb. 15th, 1866, adds forgery. And it will also be specially borne in mind
that by the circulation of portions of the railway report in England, and the
suppression or non-issuing of the official statement until the 14th day of September,
1866, some of the most respectable and influential capitalists and bankers in Lon-
don have been misled.
The Melbourne Argus of September 27th, 1866, asserts that the ministry
acted in a similar manner with regard to other important papers and despatches.
f Or a gross income of £133,000, and an expenditure of £114,469.
t The Victorian Government railways are now 254 miles in length. Con-
sequently, assuming the report to be correct, there would be a gross income
of £lOB9 per mile for the first half-year of 1866, or say £2178 per mile per
annum, or £197 per mile per annum less than the receipts on the ADELAIDE
RAILWAYS, and the working expenses for the half-year would be £496 11s.
per mile, or say £993 per mile per annum, or £lO5l per mile per annum less
than the working expenses of the ADELAIDE RAILWAYS. A manifest
absurdity.
§ There are now 254 miles open as against 196 at the former date, but that
portion opened since 1864 has been very cheaply constructed, and the Plant was
purchased previous to the date of my last letter.


above working expenses, a reference to the Melbourne Argus of Nov.
6th, 1866, will show that the receipts for 44 weeks of 1866 stood as
£472,149 4s. 4d. against £478,111 15s. 4d.| for the correspond-
ing period of 1865, a substantial DECREASE. * The Argus of
Dec. 27th, 1866, simply gives the receipts for 1866 up to Dec. 13th,
without any allusion to the receipts for the corresponding period of
1865.
The Melbourne Age (ministerial paper) of Dec. 27th, 1867, re-
iterates the statement previously exposed by the Argus , relative to the
income derived from the Government Railways, but as I previously
hinted, it is probable that the public outcry in Victoria, and specially
from the districts not supplied with Railways, is at this very moment
compelling the Government to produce FULL ACCOUNTS relative
to the Victorian Railway expenditure, certain it is, that when the
mail for December, 1866, left Melbourne, it was rumoured that the
Commissioner of Railways was about to retire from the Ministry.
5. I next drew attention in my first letter to the financial condition
of the Colony, and showedfiow seriously the income had decreased; and
in my second letter I went on to say ; but perhaps there has been no
instance either during that period or since the days of the South Sea
Scheme or Tulipomania, where the misplaced confidence of the people
of this or any other country has been more strikingly exemplified than
in the blind and unhesitating reliance which has been given to the so-
called financial statements of Victorian (Australian) speculators and
Victorian politicians ; and the fact that numbers of persons of other-
wise good business knowledge have been misled by the appalling mis-
statements of these parties, must ever be regarded as one of the most
singular anomalies of modern times. There is no doubt that the
colony of Victoria is frightfully in debt, both publicly and privately;
and although it may be said this is true, but the resources of the
Colony arc great and manifold, and its prospective resources are still
greater, such an answer is true only to a certain extent. Doubtless
its resources, as a great sheep grazing and wool producing country,
are large, and with a proper encouragement and fostering of this
naturally great interest, some of the financial difficulties, “ both
present and impending,” might to some extent be ameliorated and
softened.
It is, however, too much to hope that a finance minister will shortly
be found with sufficient firmness and honesty to grapple with the sub-
ject and boldly expose the real condition of affairs, for any Treasurer
who may be courageous enough to do so runs the risk of politically
extinguishing himself. It is not a little remarkable that no person
either in the Colony or out of it, appears to be able to state what is
the exact amount of the public debt, and the difficulty of stating what
* From this it will be seen that it is absurd to suppsoe that these lines will
nett 6 per cent within three years.


the Colony really owes is constantly rendered more difficult by the fact
that every year more money is borrowed, and borrowed in such a man-
ner as to invest the subject with additional complexity. * Every year ,
too, there is a real and increasing deficit, though this deficit has hitherto
been to a great extent concealed by the method ofTceeping accounts adopted
in the public departments; but there can be no question that the colony is
getting deeper and deeper in difficulties every year, and is by its
constant borrowing incessantly increasing those difficulties. It is not,
however, so much the amount of the debt contracted that is alarming,
“ for possibly the Colony is even now able to pay interest on a still
larger public debt;” but it is the constantly recurring and chronic
practice of going on the money market to raise money with which to
pay interest and dividends, instead of manfully meeting the liabilities
incurred and imposing that amount of taxation which is absolutely
necessary, &c. With regard to the difficulties connected with the
public loan, however, each successive Treasurer avoids the odium
inseparable from the levying of increased taxation, and goes upon the
principle that just one more little loan is required ; and considering
that, in the ordinary course of events, his tenure of office will not
exceed twelve months, reasons that “ this one more loan” will tide
him over his difficulties, and that he may leave to his successor the
enhanced embarrassments of the position. The sale of Crown lands
has so seriously diminished that this resource can no longer be relied
on. On the introduction of additional British capital, or the non-
introduction thereof, alone depends the time when the final catastrophe
will take place.
The Melbourne Argus boldly asserts in several recent numbers,
that the government accounts are, “ colonially speaking,” squared—in
English parlance, cooked.” In its leading article of September 19th,
1866, the manner in which the Victorian railway accounts are made
pleasant is exposed. The leading article of October 11th, 1866, says
“ Matters are not mending,’’f and notwithstanding the assertion of the
collector of customs, that the trade of Melbourne has increased and is
increasing—it states “ that the everyday experience of men of business
gives the statement a contradiction. It goes on to say—the revenue
does not improve, and the quarterly returns of revenue and expenditure
continue to ivear an unpromising aspect. It further goes on to state
as follows—
“ Latterly, however, the Minister of Lands has come to the rescue of
his colleague of the customs. There was something to do to make up
a probable deficiency of £lOO,OOO in the main, source of the permanent
revenue of the country, and the excitement which has been occasioned
* Various English papers have given the amount of Victorian Indebtedness
at widely different amounts, from £10,400,000 downwards.—Vide Manchester
Examiner and Times, of October 27th, 1866, &c.
t See also the “ Standard” of September 18th, 1866.


by the recent proceedings of the department in offering reserved lands,
portions of streets, market sites, &c., under the hammer of the
auctioneer, is sufficient proof of the energy with which the Lands
department rushed to the rescue of that of the Customs, &c.,” and
again “ the Treasurer has only been able to square his accounts, by
the aid which he has received from the Lands department, through
the operation of a land system which the more successfully it works,
the more rapidly it alienates the public estate, and takes away the power
of the colony in after years to meet a deficient revenue . All this is con-
firmation strong of what I wrote more than three years ago.
The Daily Telegraph of August 16th, has the following sound
remarks, which, at the present time cannot be too generally considered:
For the purpose of providing for the defences of the colony a loan
of £lO,OOO will in the first instance be raised, part of the £30,000
previously spoken of. Another loan of £250,000 has been authorized
for the completion of the Government railways, and a further loan of
£1,000,000 will be negotiated, for the purpose of supplying water
throughout the Colony. Of this sum only the half ivill in the first
instance be asked for. In connection with the subject of loans, the
financial condition of the neighbouring Colony of New South Wales
is one calling for most serious apprehensions. Practically our neigh-
bours are insolvent, inasmuch as no remittances have been forwarded
to meet the engagements falling due in London. Certainly the
Sydney Government have sent home a lot of debentures, on which
money is to be raised for meeting the deficit, but it would be well were
English capitalists to pause ere committing themselves any further.
To throw good money after bad will not be a wise procedure. The
New South Wales Government contemplate the raising of a loan of
£BOO,OOO. This amount is sought for no works of public importance,
hut simply to cover the deficit in the revenue of the colony during the
last two years—a deficit caused through the extravagance of the Go-
vernment, and the unwillingness of the people to pay for their current
* The Melbourne Argus of Nov. 7th, 1866, asserts that the Ministry of New
South Wales have in this instance followed the example of the Victorians, it says,
“ The national estate in the adjoining colony is being dissipated like ours, under
our present paternal government, at a rate which will leave future Treasurers at a
loss how to balance their accounts.
The Times of Dec. 14th, 1860, has the following from Sydney; “ The Treasurer
(in his financial statement) made himself very unpopular by an exceedingly inju-
dicious attack he made upon the banks in his speech. He contrasted their coin
with their liabilities, and represented them all as insolvent, if pressed to meet their
liabilities. He condemned the inflation of credit, and declared that the government
would be forced to establish a National Bank, if only to control the dangerous
action of the Banks, and save the country from recurring crises.”
The treasurer of New South Wales in making this statement appears to
have been in utter ignorance of the magnitude and soundness of the securities
held by the old established and respectable banks of the colony, as well as of the
right to compensation from the Home Government for depreciation of some of
the securities held.


expenditure. So long as English Capitalists are willing to aid in the
support of this course of infatuation and extravagance, so long will
affairs continue to he carried on pleasantly. The leading Journal of
New South Wales, the Sydney Morning Herald , speaks thus of
the crisis in their affairs; l ‘A species of bribery corrupts the public
morals, and every constituency has its price. The administration of the
public lands and the grants for public works, added to the general patron-
age in places,present enormous opportunities of gratifying friends. Public
opinion, which would be healthy enough if it were disinterested,
becomes warped by a selfish expediency. Actions that would be con-
demned if judged by their merits are condoned or even defended when
done by a Cabinet from which some good things are expected, and
which it is necessary to Tceep in power. A perverting and distorting
influence is thus brought to bear upon politics, which no amount of
nioi’al exhortation can correct. It is idle to talk about what is right
and what is wrong, of what is a good precedent and what is a bad
precedent, ivhat is honourable and what is disgraceful,, when those to
whom the appeal is made are already biassed by considerations of self-
interest, and pronounce an acquittal or a condemnation in the light of
their own expectations.”
The people of New South Wales are unwilling to be taxed, and the
system will continue so long as affairs can be carried on by borrowing.
The attention of English capitalists cannot be too strongly drawn to
the position of affairs as now existing; explanations should be de-
manded, and some guarantee as to future proceedings be exacted. The
question is one which intimately concerns the ivhole of the Australian
Colonies , and should not be lost sight of.
6. I next drew attention to the question of the disposal of the
Crown lands of the Colony, and I here venture to reprint a portion of
the remarks then made by me. “ The question of the disposal of the
Crown lands of the Colony has always been a sore subject in the
Colony, and one which fairly admits of a great variety of opinions;
but it appears to me that the whole legislation on this subject since
1859 has been a practical repudiation of engagements entered into
with previous purchasers; and hundreds of persons who bought laud
prior to 18G0 direct from the Crown have been ruined through the
introduction of the system of deferred payments and selection, instead
of sale by auction, which has practically reduced the price of land
purchased previously to a fraction of what was paid for it; and as
this land was purchased by money borrowed from the banks, and as
the borrowers are in too many instances unable to recoup, it follows
that their names must in due course appear in the list of insolvents
(already a numerous class); in short, there is little doubt that the
calamitous state of things prevalent in New South Wales or Sydney
in 1842-1843 is now about to be repeated in Victoria and Melbourne,
only on a larger scale. The effect, in fact, of the present Colonial
land bills is certain to be that, as a person on purchasing land on
selection is only required to pay a portion of the purchase money


down, an ultrademocratic government will never collect the balance.
All experience shows that a payment postponed as between a govern-
ment and a people, payment abandoned ; besides, the system of
deferred payments has been tried in the United States and has failed.
It has also been tried with respect to the quit-rents in New South
Wales, the collection of which is now totally impossible; but, as those
parties who purchased land previous to the late so-called amendments
of the Land Sales’ Acts bought on the faith that they would always
be protected by the Imperial Government —in fact, under the guarantee
more or less direct of the Crown itself; and as moreover in addition
to the protection of those vested interests, the subscribers in England
to the Victorian loans are interested in their securities not being
deteriorated in value, I respectfully submit the opinion , that no governor
is justified in giving the sartttion of Her Majesty to any measure
calculated to reduce that security, and that that sanction should have
been refused to all the land acts passed by the Colonial Legislature
since 1859. For parties who built houses as a speculation with wages
at 30s. per day, I cannot entertain much sympathy; but those who
have been ruined by their misplaced confidence in the Government,
are surely entitled to something more than sympathy. Be that,
however, as it may, the fact remains, that the value of all landed
property throughout the colony has been deteriorated to the extent of
some millions of money. How far indeed this deterioration has ex-
tended it is difficult to say, as there is scarcely any land in the hands
of private parties that is saleable at any price, the private individual
being unable to compete with the Crown.” Everything which has
occurred since the date when these remarks were penned has only
confirmed the truth of those remarks. Though Mr. Cardwell
in his speech of March 20th, 1866* stated that he cautioned the
House of Commons against constituting itself a Court of Appeal from
the Colonial Legislatures, it will doubtless be found in the year 1870,
if not before, that the British Parliament will be asked, and with
reason, to award an amount of compensation to the injured purchasers
of stations and crown lands, little if at all less in the aggregate than
that awarded to the West India planters on the abolition of the Slave-
trade; and that the claim will be a bona fide and just one, will, I think,
be evident, when the following facts are considered.f In the year
* Vide Hansard. —Lord Robert Montagu and Mr. Marsh, on the same date,
took and expressed a very correct and sound view of the state of affairs in Aus-
tralia, and the latter spoke with the knowledge and advantages accruing from a
long residence in New South Wales and a recent visit thereto.
f The Melbourne Age of September 27th, 1860 (the ministerial paper, be it
remembered) speaks of Mr. Cardwell as “ The discarded minister who ignorantly
and insolently lectured the people of Victoria on their internal affairs—forgetting
the responsibility (daily increasing) of British taxpayers—through British gover-
nors having inadvertently stultified the guarantee of the Crown and the British
Parliament.”
The Melbourne Argus of Dec. 27th, 1866, states “that the ministry are
about to bring in a new land bill,” but it goes on to say, “ It is not to be supposed


1843, the minimum price of the Crown lands was fixed by the Act of
the Imperial Parliament, sth and 6th of Vic., chap. 36, at one pound
sterling per acre. In 1847 the celebrated Orders in Council were
issued, which conferred on the pastoral tenants of the Crown 14 years
leases, renewable until the land should be bought for twenty shillings
per acre.* Now, by a LEGAL QUIBBLE on the part of a People's
Ministry , elected by UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE AND VOTE BY
BALLOT, the latter proviso has been practically evaded, and the
Queen’s representatives have unfortunately given the Royal assent to
a series of land acts (t.e., those passed since 1859) which are tanta-
mount to acts of confiscation and repudiation. And as the minority ,
i.e., the landed proprietors, the squatters, the bankers, and the mer-
chants, have been powerless to prevent the passing of these acts ;f
and as they have been passed in their despite, I respectfully submit
that it must be conceded, “ that if when as a matter of policy and
humanity , the slave-trade, fyc., was abolished, compensation was given to
those parties pecuniarily injured—those persons who have been injured ,
way RUINED by the passing of these Australian land acts, have an
undoubted claim on the Imperial Parliament; and though I may be a
little premature in drawing attention to this matter, there can be no
question that at the proper time the claim will be made, and it will
probably be found that the UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE AND VOTE
BY BALLOT EXPERIMENT in Australia will have saddled the
British nation with a charge of many millions sterling. J
7. I next drew attention to the state of the Colonial Assembly,
and the condition of the Civil Service, and quoted largely from the
works of Messrs. Jessop and Heywood on the Colonies.§ I particularly
drew attention to Mr. Jessop’s statement therein quoted, where
he says of the members of the Colonial Assemblies;—“ These
that a bill which will bring the pastoral tenants of the Crown to the brink of ruin
will be acquiesced in by the two Houses without a struggle. The mere announce-
ment has sufficed to make station property in Victoria almost unsaleable. “As this
bill is to be another attempt to injure squatting property, without granting com-
pensation, it is to be hoped that Her Majesty’s representative will veto it if
necessary.”
* On the faith of this guarantee most of the present holders of stations
purchased, and on the faith of this guarantee mortgages were entered into, and
advances made on the stations leased and lands purchased from the Government,
and a vast proportion of the capital of the Colony invested.
f In the Times of Dec. 19th, 1865, it is stated, “ that the general conviction
among the propertied, professional, and educated classes is, that relief from the
illegalities being practised in the Colony could only come from Her Majesty.”
{ It must be borne in mind, that with universal suffrage the political power
of the educated and propertied classes decreases as the population increases.
§ The works alluded to are— c ‘ Flindersland and Sturtland ;or the Inside
and Outside of Australia,” by William R. H. Jessop, M.A., Cambridge, published
by Richard Bentley, New Burlington-street, London ; and “ A Vacation Tour at
the Antipodes,” by B. A. Heywood, M.A., Trinity College, Cambridge, published
by Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green, London,


men have the keys of the treasury, they induce a man of talent to
■visitthem; they set him to work and they pay him. All that they
know of the man and the work is that they pay him. And because
they pay him, they badger him, they insult him, they worry him to
despair. Because they pay him, he, a man of refined education, is to
endure this contumely from men, to associate with whom would do
him no honour ; from men so ignorant that they cannot appreciate his
duties, nor the faculties required to discharge them; from men so
penniless that they subsist by contribution, who are ever finding fault
with his salary, yet would take any place under him. Because .they
pay him, they envy him, they hate him, they expel him their coasts,
and so they serve all, from the judge on the bench to the clerk on the
railway. To those men respectability is a crime, and refinement a
great crime. As a consequence, those men who in England would
adorn society, quit this Colony as soon as they can; they quit it in
disgust and leave a curse behind them. As a consequence the very
men who would reflect honour on society here—bestow dignity on
public offices, and circulate healthy blood through the great body
politic—-these refrain from enterprise, they stand aloof from such
association; they form circles of their own into which a man can only
penetrate under the appearance at least of a gentleman. Such circles
are silent witnesses against the coarseness, the corruption, the ignor-
ance, the heartlessness, the shamelessness of men, who against all
reason, claim all the right of representing the people, of legislating
for the people, and of ruining the people. A government more base,
more rapacious, more impudent, more unjust and injurious could
scarcely be collected.” * * * * My conclusion is the same, it
is over and over again the same, that the Colony is rapidly sinking
under the shameless mismanagement of ignorant and violent, and
needy men.
All Mr. Jessop’s statements, and particularly those referred to by
me, taken from pages 27-198-213 of his work, as also the statements
of Mr. Heywood therein quoted, have since been most abundantly
confirmed. The “ Times ”of November 23rd, 1865, justly pointed
out the fact that “ The taxpayers of Victoria had been plainly told,
that if they dared to resist a claim by their Government manifestly
illegal , if they chose to avail themselves of the opportunity which the
law of the Colony gave them, to protect themselves against laws assumed
to be made by one branch of the legislation, to the exclusion of the rights of
the Upper Chamber and of the Queen, the Government would in the first
place employ against them at the public expense, all the arts by which
a just claim may be delayed , and made by expense ruinous to the
person ivho prefers it, and would also, whenever legal authority could
be obtained, punish by a retrospective Act those who preferred such
claims by the payment of costs.
We also hear, says the Times of the same date, something about
the Judges being after all only officers of the Attorney General’s de-


partment, and of the necessity of removing them should they fail to
be sufficiently pliable.
It is unnecessary, my Lord, to enumerate at great length the various
instances in which the Colonial Ministers and Members of Assembly
have gone to the very vergo of rebellion; how they have stigmatized
eminent living British Statesmen as asses and Downing street pups;
how they have accused almost every person who has been employed
for them, or under them, in any position of great trust, of defrauding
them or conniving at frauds: for these are matters of history com-
mencing as a chronological fact within a few weeks of the inaugura-
tion of UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE, &c.,in 1859, as recorded in
the various Colonial Blue Books, and Hansard, since that date, and
continued down to the present time, as per last advices , * but it is an
undeniable fact, that the decadence of the Australian Colonies dates
from the inauguration of ultra democratic institutions. Never previously
did Ministers of the Crown in Australia stigmatize each other as
FELONS, yet, ray Lord, we have recently seen a Minister of Victoria
stretching his legs under the same mahogany with those whom he had so
designated. Well, my Lord, a great railway job was to be manipu-
lated, that speedy conversion which money can always effect, took
place, and so it fell out that he forgot all those declared good resolutions
and moral teachings which had almost turned him from the error
of his ways. A good synoptical history of the more recent Victorian
parliamentary absurdities may be gathered from the monthly letters
of the “ Standard's ” Melbourne correspondent, commencing with the
letter inserted in the Standard of June 15th, 1866; but, my Lord, I
have never yet seen it recorded in any English paper how immediately
after the adoption of [UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE, a number of
those politicians who theretofore had been looked upon as radicals, were
rejected by the improved constituencies, as too conservative , and were
left “out in the cold” like a flock of Sterne’s Starlings, pathetically
lamenting their inability to get in ; nor how the very FATHER OF
THE MEASURE himself was placed in the position of the unhappy
being of whom Moore sung,
“ One morn a Peri at the gate
Of Eden stood disconsolate.”
yet, my Lord, it is historical that the author of the measure was one
of the first candidates rejected.
Another of the first results of the adoption of this pernicious
measure, was, that the constitution was sold to the trades unions.
Almost all parties touted for their support. Some men who had
previously maintained the character of consistent politicians, struggled
between their sense of duty and their desire for power, place, and
revenge on their political opponents, and sacrificed almost everything
and everybody to the desire.
“A little still they strove and much repented.
And whispering they would not consent, consented.”


and the usual consenting has in this case been followed by more than
the average amount of repentance, as I believe it. may be asserted
with truth, that there is at the present time an almost universal feeling
of bitter regret on their part that they ever consented to become mere
delegates of the trades unions, which is the position occupied by most
of the Members of the Australian Assemblies. It is also worthy of
note, that certain of the Colonial papers which a few years ago were
foremost in denouncing the then conservative parliament, now assert
with bitterness, “ that it is difficult for respectable men to obtain seats
in the Legislative Assembly;” but these are as the vain regrets and
unreasonable complaints of disqualified virgins lamenting their inabi-
lity to obtain admittance within the hallowed precincts of a Magdalen.
The Sydney Empire of June 19th, 1866, asserts after an attack
on Mr. Lowe and Mr, Marsh, that neither of these gentlemen would
have the slightest chance of being returned for the Legislative Assem-
bly of New South Wales, and the Sydney Morning Herald of the
24th of November, 1866, in graphic language describes a scene in
the assembly aforesaid. I give the report. “ Parliamentary dis-
cussion in New South Wales.—The members of the House of
Assembly of New South Wales, who are elected by ballot and universal
suffrage, were recently discussing the question of a pie me given to
its supporters by the government, for which it was alleged that free
railway tickets were illegally issued, and at which much drunkenness
was said to have prevailed. The Sydney Morning Herald of , the 24th
of November, 1866, contains the following in its report of the debate: —
“Mr. Cowper (leader of the opposition) : Was it because members
were implicated in a dishonest transaction that the public were to be
robbed in this way ?—Mr. De Salis : If anyone charged him with
drunkenness (which nobody had ), he would say it was a lie.
—Mr. Dignam described the picnic :‘ I travel up the river 12 miles
in a boat. God knows my shirt was wringing wet. Igo in for a
feed, and then I slip off. We had saddles of mutton and what d’ye
call it, and everything that’s nice. There was no mistake about it,
It was a flummocker (whatever that is), &c.—Mr. Macpherson
charged Mr. Martin, Attorney General and Premier, with 1 a miserable
and despicable dodge.’ —Mr. Martin : It is false.—Mr. Macpherson :
He has uttered the greatest lie that he has uttered since he swore a
lie.—Mr. Martin, Premier : If the honourable member accused him
of resorting to a dodge, it was false as hell, ; . If he (Mr, Martin)
held any other position than he now held, such language would be
followed by personal violence. —Mr. JBuchannan: The Botany Bay
aristocrats were the most unraannered dogs he had ever seen. If the
language had been used to me I would have gone and wrung the
honourable member’s head off, &c.” No such discussion as the above
ever took place when Mr. Lowe and Mr. Marsh were members of
the New South Wales Parliament.
8. I next drew attention to the fact that notwithstanding the
laws specially passed at the instigation of the trades’ unions or


operative classes, and apparently for their benefit and at the expense
of the rest of the community, all these attempts to create a fictitious
prosperity had failed, and had simply resulted in driving capital out
of the colony, and consequently re-acted on the workmen themselves,
by diminishing the capability of the colony to afford remunerative
employment either to artizans or labourers.
I shewed by Colonial admissions and quotations from the Melbourne
Herald, January 6th, 1863, “leading article,” and the Melbourne
Age, July 25th, 1864, “ leading article,’’ that this was then the nett
result.
Things have gone on in this respect from bad to worse. The
“ Times ” of July 19th, 1866, writes : That whereas 1,628 persons
received in-door relief from the Emigrants’ Aid Society in 1860,
in 1865 the recipients numbered 4,999; while the numbers of those
who received out-door relief were, respectively, 1,084 in 1860, and
16,375 in 1865 ; and he says as regards the poor, “ The cry is, still
they come.”
Nor is this state of affairs confined to Melbourne. The Sydney
Morning Herald of October 23rd, 1866, alleges that there is a good
deal of pauperism in that colony, and large numbers of unemployed
in Sydney ; and the same respectable and trustworthy paper says that
there is a general depression throughout the Australian Colonies ,
Advices from Queensland state that the unemployed had mot in
large numbers and broken out in riotous proceedings, and that the
government had sent orders to their London Agent to stop all
government emigration to the colony. And very recent papers from
New South Wales* state that large numbers of men had petitioned
the American Consul to assist them in obtaining passages to
AMERICA, not to any prosperous adjoining Colony.
The Brisbane (Queensland) Courier of November 20th, 1866,
says;—Large numbers of men are engaged in clearing, forming, and
repairing roads at the rate of 15 s.per iveek.
The same paper enlarges on the depressed condition and financial
collapse of that Colony.
The Manchester Examiner and Times of January 23rd, Jan-
uary 25th, January 29th and February 2nd, 1867 ; the Morning Star
of Jauuary Ist 1867, and generally the London papers of the same
date, as well as Jthe Times of January 28th, 1867, corroborate
these statements.
9. I next drew attention to the expressed opinions of disinterested
and impartial observers, on the demoralized condition of the people,
and ventured to give my own views regaining the Victorian Parlia-
ment, as follows : —“The colony is a great colony and in spite of mis-go-
*There cannot be any doubt that the statement of the Amalgamated Society of
Carpenters and Joiners ol Sydney, published in the “ Times” o t January 28th,
1867, was also correct.
fSec also the Standard of January 30th, 1867, and the Morning Herald and
Standard of February sth, 1867.


vernment and everything that can be done in the Legislative Assembly
to damage it, it must become a great country: hut before it can enter
again on a career of prosper ity , the present abnormal condition of things
must pass away, and that new era of prosperity will he more quickly
inaugurated hy men of capital in this country as well as the operative
classes , understanding what the real condition of the colony is ; and it
will probably be found that within the colony itself the maligned Upper
House or Legislative Council has been the one great bulwark against
absolute anarchy and the pastoral or squatting interest the one sound
and hona fide producing interest.” How completely my prediction has
been confirmed is patent to the whole country.
10. I referred to the invaluable services of the first governors of
Victoria as follows :—“ I would here briefly refer, as a matter of justice,
to the efforts of the former governors of Victoria, Mr. La Trobo and
Bir Charles Hotham, to prevent the Colony even for a brief period
declining to its present condition. The former gentleman, in a well-
known despatch to the Home Government, ably and earnestly pointed
out the now established fact, that the Colony was not ripe for self-
government, for which lie was most scandalously and villainously
maligned in the local journals, and his office made a burden to him.
The latter endeavoured to put a stop to the insane and prodigal ex-
penditure of the Colony, and his reward was that a series of forged
letters tending to bring him into contempt were inserted in one or
two of the local journals, which were copied into the leading journals
of England, and it is generally understood brought down upon him
the animadversion of Royalty itself. The former gentleman has
never had his great services recognised, and the latter died at his post
overcome by the personal annoyances heaped upon him.”
There has not been any governor of Victoria who has given
general satisfaction during the full tenure of his office, and it is per-
fectly clear that it is impossible for any man to hold a very high
official position in the Colony without being exposed to the almost
absolute certainty of ruin. As a matter of fact, the very last mails
contain advices showing that the most gross attacks are even now
being made on gentlemen holding high professional appointments. As
a matter of fact, similar attacks have been constantly made in
Australia from 1859 to the present time ; and as a matter of fact, I
have in my own possession printed records showing that such attacks
have been made on above a dozen gentlemen of high position, and on
a multitude in minor positions. I have no wish to outrage their
feelings by more particularly directing attention to this fact, but it is
worthy of note that in a large number of instances the reputations of
these gentlemen have been assailed without any opportunity of defence
being afforded them ! In their absence!! And before packed juries !I!
Having now, my Lord, established the fact, as I submit, most
conclusively, “that the Australian Colonies generally arc in a


DEPRESSED CONDITION,” I proceed to enquire how far this
depression is to be attributed to the adoption of UNIVERSAL
SUFFRAGE AND VOTE BY BALLOT.
THE CAUSE.
1. Although the chief present reason for the great decline in the
yield of gold is, “ That the gold instead of being now found near the
surface of the ground, as in the early years of gold mining, is almost
entirely obtained from deep sinking and quartz reefs, and that it
cannot be so obtained without the employmtnt of considerable capital
and machinery,” there are other and very serious reasons for the
great decline which has taken place, and the chief of these is, that all
the laws framed for the purpose of regulating mining on the gold fields
have been passed “IN TERROREM ”of the operative miners. There
is not any law by which an association of wealthy individuals who
could afford to expend, say a quarter or half a million of money, can
obtain a secure title to a sufficiently large area of land for mining
purposes, to enable them with reasonable certainty or prospect of ade-
quate return, to embark their capital. On the contrary, the leasing
of the auriferous ground is restricted to lettings of small patches.
Were this not the case, there is not any earthly reason why gold
mining should not be carried on with as much certainty as coal mining
in this country, and on the same scientific principles. With one or
two shafts (instead of a vast number) sunk on an area of, say one
square mile, gold mining could be followed at a profit, where it cannot
now be carried on except at a loss—but the PEOPLE, i.e, the ope-
rative classes, will not allow any facilities to be given for such a legiti-
mate expenditure of capital. Nay, more ; at their instigation laws
were passed for the levying of a capitation tax of £lO per head on
each Chinaman arriving in the Colony (a practical exclusion of that
thrifty race), and as the whole of the Chinese, who formerly arrived,
devoted themselves to mining pursuits, this exclusion has seriously
affected the yield of gold.*
It is true that in individual mining and unassociated enterprize,
large profits can no longer be made, but with reasonable protection to
capitalists the yield would again increase.
2. The unprecedented decrease in the value of all real property has
been mainly owing to the political influence of the trades unions, which
* From recent advices it appears the Chinese are leaving Australia in
large numbers.
There is at least one other method by which the yield cf gold might be
largely increased ; but that method would involve the expenditure of large capital,
and there is not any adequate security or protection for property or capital in the
Colony of Victoria the one idea being PROTECTION to NATIVE
INDUSTRY.


in days gone by created and maintained for some time an exceptional
and fictitious state of prosperity, with operatives’ wages at 355. to
20s. per day, and labourers’ in proportion, which unnatural state of
things it is clear could not be maintained, notwithstanding the squan-
dering of the public money on extravagant works by the PEOPLE’S
GOVERNMENTS, merely to keep up the rate of wages, and the
INCESSANT BORROWING of money by the state, to create em-
ployment.
To the class legislation consequent upon UNIVERSAL
SUFFRAGE AND VOTE BY BALLOT, must the evil results
attending upon this course be attributed, for as the leading article of
the Melbourne Argus of October 10th, 18G6, justly observes, “ People
are afraid, and very reasonably, to put their fortunes in the power of
time-serving and ignorant politicians, by embarking in manufactures
which legislative action could at any time destroy.”
UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE AND VOTE BY BALLOT
are destroying the monied interest, and it is the old story of the starv-
ing of the belly and the paralyzing of the limbs.
3. The ruin brought on five out of the six railways in the colony,
constructed, or partly constructed, by private enterprise, must bo
greatly attributed to the paralyzing of legitimate business and enter-
prise through class legislation.
4. The statements I formerly made regarding the Government
railways having been shewn to be correct, I simply draw attention to
the fact that these linos were constructed in an extravagant manner,
and at an unsuitable period, for obvious reas ns.
5. My statements with regard to the financial condition of the
colony, have been so abundantly confirmed by the authorities I have
cited, that I think it unnecessary to further enlarge on the subject.
It is clear that to the present Victorian Government it is
“ No matter where the money’s found,
It is but so much more in debt,
And that they ne’er considered yet."
The one thing needful it appears to the present Victorian Assembly
majority is the means of maintaining favour with the operative classes,
by providing them with work at the expense of the state ; this is a
natural result of the adoption of UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE AND
VOTE BY BALLOT.
6 As regards the disposal of the Crown lands of the Colony, to
which all other questions are of secondary importance, I beg most
respectfully to urge that for the reasons I have already given, all the
Land Acts passed since 1859, are “ if not ultra vires and illegal ” \AQ&g-
ing British taxpayers to an amount for compensation to those injured
of many millions of money, and this is clearly owing to the adoption
of UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE AND VOTE BY BALLOT.
7. The Colonial Assemblies having in various instances shewn
their utter disregard of the laws and the rights of property, all those
persons who can conveniently realize their property are doing so;


quitting the Colony in disgust, and leaving a curse behind them.
This is another result of UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE AND VOTE
BY BALLOT.
8. The trades union combinations made omnipotent by UNIVER-
SAL SUFFRAGE AND VOTE BY BALLOT, have crushed
the great employers of labour or driven them from the Colony ;
have done much to destroy the great pastoral interest, (the one sound
bona fide producing interest of the Colonies,) and now they grumble
when capitalists who are conversant with the facts will no longer
invest their funds where there is not any protection or security.
9. The same influence, but for the determined stand taken by the
Upper House and those united Banks whose action has more than
once saved the Colony, as well as by the Home Government and English
Press generally, would have precipitated the Colony, ere this, into
absolute anarchy.
10. All these evils have arisen through the granting of self-
government, which practically, in the Colonies, means ULiRA
DEMOCRACY, without sufficiently indicating to the Queen’s
Representative, that Her Majesty’s sanction must not, at any time,
be given to any measure of confiscation or repudiation similar to the
land bills passed since 1859.
And now, my Lord, a few words in regard to Vote by Ballot
iu Victoria, the practical working of which does not appear
to me to be understood in this country. In Victoria at an
election the names of all voters on the register are numbered,
and on any person going to the polling booth to vote, he is asked his
name, and on his identification a voting card is given to him with a
number on it corresponding to his number on the register. The card
contains the names of all the candidates, with directions on it that he
is to erase the names of those for whom he does not wish to vote.
At the close of the poll all these cards are examined by the scrutiners
who thus ascertain how each man has voted, and this power of examina-
tion or scrutiny places the government of the day in possession of
information as to the voting of each elector, and vests in it an over-
whelming power for corruption, &c.; in fact, except in the more
respectable constituencies the government holding office can return
any candidate for the Assembly.
With recent, not very scrupulous governments, it is easy to conceive
how a large majority in the Assembly has been secured. The theory
of the ballot with Universal suffrage may be good, the practice of it
in Australia is bad, A return cf the number and names of persons
voting in almost any given constituency would show that a very large
proportion of the more respectable electors, knowing they are power-
less in voting for the Lower House of Assembly, constantly refrain
from voting. Therefore, my Lord, I assert unhesitatingly that to


UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE AND VOTE BY BALLOT* may
mainly be attributed the present depressed condition of the Australian
Colonics generally, and of the Colony of Victoria particularly.
THE CURE.
My Lord, it is gratifying to think that there is a cure, and a
simple one, for the present deplorable condition of affairs, and one
which is to a certain extent already working.
1. The Queen’s representatives have been instructed that the law
must at all hazards be upheld, and that vested interests must bo
respected. This is a great step, and one which is already working a
salutary effect.
2. The Upper House, and the propertied, professional, and edu-
cated classes now understand that the moral and material support of
the British nation, as a nation, is in favour of any legitimate resistance
to a violation of the laws. This is a second great step.
But there is a third, and the greatest, which remains to be taken,
and which, when taken, will restore the Australian Colonies to a state
of sound prosperity, and that step is the following :
Let those associated capitalists who have already done so much
to preserve the Australian Colonies from self-destruction, refuse to
negotiate further loans until the security for those loans is restored to
its original condition, i.e., until the confiscating and repudiating land
acts, passed since 1859, are abrogated, and confidence will be restored,
the relations subsisting between capital and labour will be restored to
a normal state , the check given to private enterprise will be removed,
the capitalist will no longer be stigmatized as a bloated aristocrat
whom it is the interest of every true patriot to ruin ; and there will be
a legitimate and valid security for several times the amount of the
present debts of the Colonies respectively alluded to.
With judicious grants of sufficient areas of auriferous land to in-
duce parties with large capital to work gold mines on scientific princi-
ples, the production of gold may be increased, and similarly the other
vast mineral resources of the Australian Colonies may be developed,
and in these hitherto almost neglected resources will the real wealth of
the Colonics be found. It is simply madness attempting to crush the
great pastoral interest, for Australia is essentially a pastoral and not
an agricultural country, and the pastoral interest ought to be fostered.
It is also simply madness to imagine that immigration to Australia at
present is a benefit to any clsss. The poorer class of immigrants on
landing arc unable to obtain work, and they swell the ranks of the class
who cry out against, and vole against the monied interest. It is further
’•‘There \ are some minor restrictions on the right to vote, such as the
necessity of residence in certain cases, but practically the suffrage is Universal.


simply madness to imagine that any government can long continue to
exist in Australia without some farther restriction of the franchise, and
that restriction will take place when loans can no longer bo nego-
tiated, when the sensible portion of the working classes will realize
their true position. Nor is it sound policy to lend money to the present
governments in Australia, on their depreciated and insufficient revenues,
and securities, and to furnish them with the means of holding office, to
the eventual ruin of all classes of the community. The constant argument
of “ Behold the States of America, ” docs not .apply to Australia.
America with its immense natural advantages, and abundant supplies ot
water, has flourished despite Universal Suffrage ; but it is questionable
whether it would not have enjoyed even greater prosperity without that
Messing, and it is certain that all the Australian Colonies require the
fostering aid of largo capital judiciously expended, to dcvelope their
resources, and this capital must be withheld until there shall be ade-
quate protection to the investor, and the Trades Unions shall no longer
usurp and wield all executive political power.
And lastly, my Lord, to these same Trades Unions I would boldly
assert “ to you is to be attributed much of the distress existing in
Australia, and with you does it rest to assist to remove it,” —and to
Trades Unions in England, as a body, I would venture to point to
Australia, and in I trust no irreverent manner say, “ Regard discretion!
Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth, and thy labours he in the house
of a stranger, and thou mourn
AT THE LAST.”
I have the honour to remain,
Your Lordship’s most obedient servant,
AN OLD COLORIST.
February, 1867.
