

Universal
Go-Masonry
Knight of the
Rose Croix
of Heredom


NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
DR JOHN COOPER
THEOSOPHY
COLLECTION
Donated to the
National Library of
Australia from the
collection of
Dr John Cooper


Complete Ceremony
of
Knight of the Rose Croix
of Heredom
(Christian Rosenkreutz Workings)


Printed by
William McLellan & Co.
240 Hope Street
Glasgow


UNIVERSAL CO-MASONRY
“Le Droit Humain”
Complete Ceremony
of
Knight of the Rose Croix
of Heredom
(Christian Rosenkreutz Workings)
The 18° of the
A. and A.S. Rite
with the
Installation of the Most Wise'Sovereign
and
Addresses to the Officers
and the
Consecration of a Chapter
1927
All Rights Reserved


Issued by Command and Authority of
The Most Puissant Grand Commander
The Very Illustrious Bro.'. ANNIE BESANT,
33°, P.M.W.S., etc.,
Deputy of the Supreme Council,
for the British Federation


Contents
Description of Temples 5
Clothing .. 7
Opening Ceremony 8
business 11
Ceremony of Perfecting 13
Continuation of Ceremonies 37
The Final Ceremony 41
Closing 44
Hymns... 49
Use of Swords ... ... 53
Consecration of a Chapter 56
Installation 64
Investiture of Officers ... ... ... 70
Addresses ... ... 76
Notes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 78






Officers of a Rose Croix Chapter
1. The Most Wise Sovereign.
2. The Wise and Perfect Knight of Eloquence,
Immediate Past M.W.S.
3. The Most Noble PTrst General.
4. The Most Noble Second General.
5. The Excellent and Perfect Recorder.
6. The Excellent and Perfect Treasurer.
7. The Excellent and Perfect Grand Marshal.
8. The Excellent and Perfect Director of
Ceremonies.
9. The Excellent and Perfect ITerald.
10. The Excellent and Perfect Standard Bearer.
11. The Excellent and Perfect Organist.
12. The Excellent and Perfect Knight of Charity,
Almoner.
13. The Excellent and Perfect Captain of the
Guard.
14. The Excellent and Perfect Outer Guard.


Ritual of the
Rose Croix Degree
Description of the Temple
For the working of the eighteenth degree two
rooms are required, one with rose and the other
with violet hangings. If separate chambers
are not available, the one room may be divided
by hanging curtains, coloured rose on the one
side and violet on the other; these should be
divided so as to allow free passage between the
two temples.
The Rose Temple
The Rose Temple should be brilliantly lighted
and made as rich and magnificent as possible.
In the centre of the eastern dais there should be
an Altar bearing a series of eight retables, and
dressed with a white frontal. If possible, this
frontal should be edged with gold, and em-
broidered in the centre with the rose and cross.
Upon the frontal there should also be two
orphreys, heavily worked with gold.
On the retables thirty three lights are arran-
ged; if candles are used they should be of red
wax and the candlesticks of metal or white
china. Between the candlesticks red roses are
placed. On the fourth retable is placed a cubic


stone, and on one above it a brass cross, bear-
ing the design of the rose. The design of the
rose and cross may figure prominently in differ-
ent parts of the chamber.
In the centre of the room should be a pedestal
or table, on which is the “Mystic Cord,” a re-
ceptacle containing incense, and a salver bearing
vessels containing respectively bread, salt, and
(if desired) grape-juice, the whole covered with
a cloth or veil. If preferred, the table, previously
prepared, may be placed in position later in the
ceremony, at the appropriate time (see page 41).
The Throne (and pedestal, if used) of the
Most Wise Sovereign stands on the dais beside
the Altar, facing down the North Valley, at the
end of which is placed the chair (and
pedestal) of the First General. The Knight of
Eloquence and Second General occupy similar
positions in respect to the South Valley. The
Grand Marshal sits midzvay between the
Generals, and the Captain of the Guard corres-
ponds to the Inner Guard of a Craft Lodge. The
Director of Ceremonies has a chair in the North
Valley below the Throne of the M.W.S., and
the Herald sits opposite him in a corresponding
position in the South Valley.
There may be a faldstool, at which the Can-
didate kneels, placed in the centre at a con-
venient distance from the Altar.
In entering the Temple, the Knights pass in
pairs betzveen the chairs of the Generals, up the
centre of the Temple, bow to the Altar, then
separate, and, turning to the left and right,
walk dozen the Valleys from East to West.


The Violet Temple
The relative positions in the Violet Temple
are the same.
Before the M.W.S. and the Generals there may
be tables on which are placed small pillars or
pyramids bearing respectively the letters S., A.
and Vmade of brass; or larger pillars or
pyramids with those letters may stand beside
the Generals. The lighting should be very
subdued.
The Altar in this Temple is hung with violet.
On the frontal is embroidered in silver a down-
ward pointing sword in the centre, and also a
sivord in each corner pointing towards the centre.
There are three retables on the Altar, surmounted
by a cross bearing the rose. Roses are placed
on the retables.
Instead of the retables and cross a transpar-
ency may be used, with central white cross and
rose, a crown of thorns surrounding the rose;
and two smaller white crosses, a skull and cross-
bones at the foot of each. The transparency
stands on the Altar, and is lighted from the back.
Clothing
The Knights wear apron, collar and jewel,
sivord and belt, and a white robe. The robe is
like the Templars’ cloak, having a red Latin
cross over the heart, and a red cross from neck
to hem at the back. The lining is violet ioith
white crosses on back and heart. The collar is
worn over the robe.


The full form of address in this degree is
“Excellent and Perfectbut in practice it is
varied and contracted, as will be seen in the
following ritual.
Ceremony of Opening the Chapter
All lights in the Rose "Temple should be on
except the Altar candles.
The M.W.S., Knight of Eloquence, First and
Second Generals, Grand Marshal, Organist and
Captain of the Guard, take their places in the
Rose Temple. The Knights then enter in pro-
cession, preceded by the Standard Bearer, and
by the Director of Ceremonies carrying the cen-
ser; during this a hymn may be sung.
(Page qg). /Is each Knight enters he gives the
word and sign to the Captain of the Guard.
The Grand Marshal may assist the Captain of
the Guard, in which case the Knights enter in
pairs, pass together up the centre, halt and bow
to the Altar, turn North and South respectively,
and go down the Valleys to their places.
The Officers take their places; the other
Knights are arranged in two lines, one in the
North and the other in the South Valley.
All remain standing during the censing of the
Chapter by the Director of Ceremonies, and are
seated while the Grand Marshal lights the Altar
candles.
M.W.S. (gives one k..., which is answered by
the Generals, Captain of the G., and the
O.G.) —Excellent and Perfect Knights, assist me


to open this Sovereign Chapter, No. _ ,
of Knights of the Rose Croix of Heredom, in
the Valley of . {All stand).
Ist Gen. —Knights of Heredom in the Valley
of the North, I call upon you in the name of the
Most Wise Sovereign to resume the labours of
this Sovereign Chapter.
2nd Gen. —Knights of Heredom in the Valley
of the South, I call upon you in the name of the
Most Wise Sovereign to resume the labours of
this Sovereign Chapter.
Ist Gen. —Most Wise Sovereign, the call has
gone forth.
M.W.S. —Most Noble Second General, what is
your first duty in Chapter?
2nd Gen. —To see that all is secure without,
Most Wise Sovereign.
M.W.S.—Most Noble First General, what is
your duty ?
Ist Gen. —To see that none are present but
Knights of the Rose Croix.
M.W.S. —Most Noble Generals, you will see
that all is secure without and within.
2nd Gen. —Excellent Grand Marshal, is the
Chapter secure without ?
Gr. Mar. (goes to the C. of G. and says) —
Excellent Captain, you will see whether the
Chapter is secure without.
C. of G. ( opens the door, and after seeing that
the O.G. is in his proper place, closes the door
and replies) —Excellent Grand Marshal, the
Chapter is secured.
Gr. Mar. ( returns, and says) — Most Noble
vSecond General, all is secure without.


Ist Gen. —Excellent Marshal, do you certify
that all present are Knights of the Rose Croix ?
Gr. Mar. —I do, Most Noble General.
Ist Gen. —Most Wise Sovereign, we can labour
in safety, all is secure without and within.
(M.1P.5. draws sword and waits at the carry;
•all Knights draw s7vords and raise the sword
hand to the forehead during the invocation, re-
turning to the carry at the end.)
M.W.S. ( raising sword ) —Then to the glory of
the Lord of Love, and for the perfecting of
humanity (makes appropriate signs with the
sword, namely, the circle and cross) by the
Power of the Mystic Rose, and the Secret of
the Cross, I declare the labours of the eighteenth
degree resumed in this Sovereign Chapter,
No of Knights of the Rose Croix of Here-
dom in the Valley of
M.W.S. ( with appropriate 5...) —A H....
Aee (with c... 5...) —D H....
M.W.S. {with c... 5...) D H....
Aee (with s...) —A H....
Heraed. —Knights of Heredom, return swords.
Aee (with appropriate 5...)—H... H... P 1....
M.W.S. (raising sword) —May Truth, Love and
Wisdom guide us in our work.
Aee. —So mote it be.
(The M.W.S. then gives the k...s of the de-
gree, which are answered by the Generals, Cflpt.
of the Guard, and Outer Guard.)
(Opening hymn may be sung.)


Business
M.W.S.—Excellent Recorder, you will read
the circular convening the Chapter.
(Recorder reads circular.)
M.W.S. —You will now read the roll-call, and
apologies for absence.
{This is done.)
M.W.S. —Excellent Recorder, you will read the
graven column of our last labours.
{Recorder reads the minutes.)
M.W.S.—Most Noble Generals, (they rise)
you will ask the Knights of your Valleys if they
have any remarks to make on the whole or any
part of the column of our last labours. {They
are seated.)
Ist Gen. —Knights of Heredom in the Valley
of the North, have you any remarks to make on
the column which has been read ?
2nd Gen. —Knights of Heredom in the Valley
of the South, have you any remarks to make on
the column which has been read ?
{lf no one speaks, or after any corrections have
been made, the ist General says :)
Ist Gen. —Most Wise Sovereign, silence reigns
in both Valleys.
M.W.S.-—Wise and Perfect Knight of Elo-
quence, we await your conclusions.
K. of E.—Most Wise Sovereign, since silence
reigns, I recommend the adoption of the graven
column of our last labours.
M.W.S.—Knights of Heredom, you have heard
the decision of the Wise and Perfect Knight of
Eloquence. If you agree therewith you will
signify the same in the usual manner.


{Approval being given, the M.W.S. signs the
minutes. Any other strictly business matter
should, if possible, be concluded here. This
being done, the M.W.S. gives a k..., which is
answered by the Generals, and all the Knights
rise to order.)
M.W.S.—Most Noble First General, why are
we gathered here ?
Ist Gen.-— Most Wise Sovereign, to shed upon
the darkened world the Light of the Rose and
Cross.
M.W.S.—Most Noble Second General, what is
the Light of the Rose ?
2nd Gen. —Love, Most Wise Sovereign.
M.W.S. —Most Noble First General, what is
the Light of the Cross ?
Ist Gen. — Self-sacrifice, Most Wise Sovereign.
M.W.S. —Most Noble Second General, how
can we spread abroad the Light of Love and of
Self-Sacrifice ?
2nd Gen. — By a life of utter devotion to un-
selfish service, Most Wise Sovereign.
M.W.S.-—Knights of Heredom, let ns cause
that Light to shine.
Aee. —So mote it be.
(Brief meditation, all standing to order. Then
the M.W.S., Kt. of Eloqtience, and the Generals,
descend to the floor. The M.IF.S. stands in
the East, the Kt. of Eloquence in the West, the
First and Second Generals in the North and
South, all facing towards the centre. All other
Knights close in so as to form a circle, and all
recite the Daily Ritual in unison with the
M.W.S., afterwards returning to their places.


*
If there is no Candidate to be perfected, the
ceremony proceeds as on page 37, but without
the explanation therein given to a Neophyte.
Addresses, or the Installation and Investing of
Officers, may then follow.
If, hoivever, there is a Candidate, the cere-
mony proceeds as follows.)
The Ceremony of Perfecting a Knight
of the Rose Croix of Heredom
M.W.S. —Excellent and Perfect Knights, our
work to-day is to perfect Eet us
then pass out into the darkness of the world.
(All reverse their regalia and robes, and, led
by the Generals in procession, enter the Temple
of Darkness, which is hung with violet. The
banner, reversed, immediately precedes the
M.W.S. If there be not two rooms available,
the hangings, banner and regalia are reversed,
and the lights reduced.
When all have taken their places, the M.TP.S.
gives a single k..., ivhich is answered by the
Generals, Capt. of the Guard, and the O.G.
All rise.)
M.W.S.—Excellent and Perfect Knights, by
virtue of the power in me vested, I constitute this
a Bivouac of Knights of the East and West, and
hereby declare it duly open for the business of
Freemasonry in the seventeenth degree.
(Gives the k...s of the degree, which are an-
swered as before by the Generals, the Capt. of
the Guard, and the O.G.
M.W.S. —Excellent and Perfect Knights, be
seated.


The Grand Marshal presents the petition of
the Candidate to the M.W.S.)
M.W.S.—Excellent Guardian of the Treasure-
house, has the Candidate made the customary
contributions ?
TreaS. —Most Wise Sovereign, all is in order.
M.W.S. —Worthy and Excellent Knights of
the East and West, Bro petitions to
be admitted to the Chapter. ( Reads the peti-
tion.) If you are of opinion that he should be
admitted to this Bivouac, you will signify the
same in the usual manner.
(If the Knights give their approval the
M.W.S. says ;)
M.W.S. —Excellent Grand Marshal, you will
retire and receive the Candidate.
(Grand Marshal retires and gives the alarm ,
which consists of the k...s of the Master
Mason’s degree.)
C. of G. —Most Noble Second General, there
is 'an’*alarm.
2nd Gen. —Most Wise Sovereign, there is an
alarm.
M.W.S.—Most Noble Second General, }-ou
will enquire who seeks admission.
2nd Gen.—Excellent Captain, yon will see who
seeks admission.
C- of G. — ( covers the Temple and addresses
the Gr.~ Marshal) —Who comes there ?
Gr. Mar.—Bro , who has been regularly
initiated, passed and raised in the three degrees


of Blue Masonry. He has confided to me a
petition, which has been presented to the Most
Wise Sovereign, and now comes seeking more
light and asking to be admitted to this Sover-
eign Chapter.
C. of G. —Halt, while 1 apprise the Sovereign
Chapter. ( Re-enters, and closes the door.)
C, of Q. —Most Wise Sovereign, there now
stands at the entrance to your Bivouac a worthy
Brother who has presented a petition to you, and
now requests to be admitted.
M.W.S. —This worthy Master is known to us;
let him be admitted.
(The Capt. of the Guard admits the Grand
Marshal and the Candidate, who salutes as a
Master Mason, and is then seated in the West.)
M.W.S.—Before we can admit you to our
sacred Order, it is necessary to review briefly
the stages which lead up to it.
In the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite
there are thirty-three degrees, of which this, in
which we are at present labouring, is the seven-
teenth ; but most bodies of the Rite do not work
all of these. There are a few which stand out
as great landmarks upon the upward path, and
the intermediate degrees are now merely pre-
paratory to them, though each has its own secrets
and ritual, and they are still occasionally
worked.
I will ask the Wise and Perfect Knight of
Eloquence to give you the list of those degrees,
and to explain in a few words those of them
which we work.


Kt. of E. —The order and nomenclature of
these degrees have been varied in different
places and at different times since the Rite was
founded. We arrange them thus :
1. Entered Apprentice.
'2. Fellow Craft.
3. Master Mason.
4. Past Master.
5. Mark Mason.
6. Mark Master,
7. Provost.
8. Tntendant of Buildings.
9. Master Elect of Nine.
10. Master Elect of Fifteen.
11. Sublime Knight Elected.
12. Master Architect.
13. Holy Royal Arch.
14. Grand, Elect, Perfect and Sublime Mason.
15. Knight of the East, or of the Sword.
16. Prince of Jerusalem.
17. Knight of the East and West, this being the
degree in which this Chapter is now
working.
In the degree of Entered Apprentice you
were instructed to smooth and polish the rough
ashlar, to bring your body completely into sub-
jection, and to keep your emotions within due
bounds, repressing the lower and developing
the higher.
As a Fellow Craftsman you learned to control
those emotions absolutely, while you were work-
ing at the gradual unfoldment of the powers of
the mind.


As a Master Mason you were taught to live
up to that sublime title by gaining a complete
mastery over the mind as well as the emotions,
so that presently you could devote yourself to
the development of the intuition necessary for
the work of the Past Master.
After much practice in the tact and adaptabi-
lity which that high office requires, you were
enabled to add to that general growth of char-
acter which is expected of all Masons, the dis-
closure of whatsoever special talent or power
you might happen to possess, in order that your
abilities might thus be at the disposal of your
Brethren, and be used for the benefit of your
Lodge, so that such work as passed through
your hands might bear upon it the mark of your
private characteristic, and thus be recognised
from all others. Thus to exhibit his talent, not
for self-glorification,' but for the good of his
brethren, is the especial duty of the Mark
Mason; while the work of the Mark Master is
to find in those under his charge, talents as yet
unsuspected even by their possessors, and to
draw them out under his kindly and fostering
care.
The degrees from the seventh to the twelfth
are, with us, in abeyance, as they were of local
application only, but in the thirteenth degree,
which is the Chapter of the Ploly Royal Arch,
we arc taught how to recover that word of a
Master Mason which has so long and so un-
happily been lost. For the True Word is the
Name of God, and those who entertain an un-
worth}- conception of the nature and attributes
of God are in ignorance of the True Name.


Happy are they who, in the degree of the Royal
Arch, are led towards the discovery of that lost
word, and so are on the way to obtain a true
comprehension of the greatest of all the facts of
life.
We do not at present work degrees fourteen,
fifteen and sixteen, but we use this seventeenth
degree as a preparation for that which follows.
Although the East has always been the place
of light, whence comes all knowledge, yet, when
the Sacred Word was lost, men journeyed West-
ward in the hope of finding it, and the Chivalry
of the West joined with the Philosophy of the
East in that high quest. Thus we, who seek
to lead men to the rediscovery of that Word, are
Knights both of the East and of the West, and
our symbol is the Star, which long ago led wise
men from the East to the feet of the new-born
King.
★
(The following explanation may be preferred ,
as the list of degrees conforms to the Constitution
of the Order and the present tradition of the
Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.)
K. of E.—The order and nomenclature of these
degrees have been varied in different places and
at different times since the Rite was founded.
We arrange them thus :
1. Entered Apprentice.
2. Fellow Craft.
3. Master Mason.
4. Secret Master.
5. Perfect Master.
6. Intimate Secretary.


7. Provost.
8. Intendant of Buildings.
9. Master Elect of Nine.
10. Master Elect of P'ifteen.
11. Sublime Knight Elected.
12. Master Architect.
13. Royal Arch. (This is the Royal Arch of
Enoch, and its ritual differs from that
of the Holy Royal Arch degree so exten-
sively worked as an addition to Craft
Masonry.)
14. Grand Scottish Knight of the Sacred Vault;
or Grand, Elect, Perfect and Sublime
Mason.
15. Knight of the East, or of the Sword.
16. Prince of Jerusalem.
17. Knight of the East and West; this last
being the degree in which we are now
working.
The only degrees up to this stage worked by
us in addition to the three Craft degrees, are
those of Past Master, Mark Mason (or Mark
Man), Mark Master Mason, and the degree of
the Holy Royal Arch; but these are not included
in the usual series of the Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite. None the less, they form a fit-
ting prelude to the eighteenth degree, preparing
you stage by stage to receive the Wisdom of the
Rose Croix.
In the degree of Entered Apprentice you were
instructed to smooth and polish the rough
ashlar, to bring your body into subjection, and
to keep your emotions within due bounds, re-
pressing the lower and developing the higher.


As a Fellow Craft, the ideal set before you
was to control these emotions absolutely, while
you were working at the gradual unfoldment of
the powers of the mind.
As a Master Mason, you were taught to live
up to that sublime title by gaining a complete
master} 7 over the mind as well as the emotions,
so that presently you could devote yourself to
the development of the intuition necessary for
the work of the Past Master.
After much practice in the tact and adapta-
bility which that high office requires, you were
enabled to add to that general growth of char-
acter which is expected of all Masons, the
disclosure of whatsoever special talent or power
you might happen to possess, in order that your
abilities might thus be at the disposal of your
brethren, and be used for the benefit of your
Lodge; so that such work as passed through
your hands might bear upon it the mark of your
private characteristics, and thus be recognisable
from all others. Thus to exhibit his talent, not
for self-glorification, but for the good of his
brethren, is the especial duty of the Mark
Mason, while the work of the Mark Master is to
find, in those under his charge, talents as yet
unsuspected even by their possessors, and to
draw them out under his kindly and fostering
care.
In the Chapter of the Holy Royal Arch, we
are taught how to recover that word of a Master
Mason, which has so long and so unhappily been
lost. For the True Word is the Name of God,
and those who entertain an unworthy conception


of the nature and attributes of God, are in ignor-
ance of that True Name. Happy are they who,
in the degree of the Royal Arch, are led to-
wards the discovery of that lost word, and so
are on the way to obtain a true comprehension
of the greatest of all the facts of life.
The degrees from the fourth to the sixteenth
are, with us, in abeyance, as they were of local
application onW; but we use this seventeenth
degree as a preparation for that which follows.
Although the East has always been the place
of light, whence conies all knowledge, yet, when
the Sacred Word was lost, men journeyed West-
ward in the hope of finding it, and the Chivalry
of the West joined with the Philosophy of the
East in that high quest. Thus we, who seek to
lead men to the re-discovery of that word, are
Knights both of the East and the West, and
our symbol is the Star, which long ago led wise
men from the East to the feet of the new-born
King.
★
MAV.S.—Bro I shall now proceed
to confer upon you by communication such of
the degrees leading up to the eighteenth as
have not already been bestowed upon you; but
first you must take the appropriate obligation.
Excellent Grand Marshal, you will advance the
Candidate to the Altar.
Herald. —Excellent Knights, draw swords.
{The Candidate is brought before the centre of
the Altar.)
M.W.S.—Bro , you will kneel on your
right knee, raise your right hand towards


Heaven, and repeat after me, substituting your
name for mine.
(All Knights lower their swords to the salute ,
and so remain.)
Obligation of the Seventeenth Degree
I, , in the presence of the All-Perfect
Wisdom, and in the body of this duly constitu-
ted Bivouac of Worthy and Excellent Knights
of the East and West, do hereby pledge my
honour as a Freemason, that I will always hele,
conceal and never wilfully reveal any of the
secrets or mysteries of or belonging to any of
the degrees which shall now be conferred upon
me, unless it be as the Most Wise Sovereign, or
by command of the Most Wise Sovereign of a
duly constituted Sovereign Chapter of the eight-
eenth degree. And I further solemnly promise
that I will do all in my power to promote and
to spread abroad in the world the high Masonic
principles of Brotherly Love, Justice and Truth.
So help me the All-Perfect Wisdom, and keep
me steadfast in this my solemn Obligation, be-
ing that of a Knight of the East and West.
Aw, (chanting) —May the vow be kept.
(Thrice.)
M.W.S. ( raising sword, the Knights still stand-
ing at the salute ) —To the glory of the All-Per-
fect Wisdom, and for the perfecting of humanity,
in the name and under the auspices of the
Supreme Council of Universal Co-Masonry, by
virtue of the power in me vested ( placing sword
on Candidate’s head) I confer upon you such


of the degrees from the fourth to the seventeenth
as you have not previously received, and I
admit you as a Knight of the East and West,
(the knocks of the degree are sounded on a bell.
The M.W.S. relinquishes the sword and takes
up the ribbon and star, continuing) hanging
round your neck the Star which is our symbol
of the degree.
(The Knights bring their swords to the carry.)
M.W.S. —Rise, Worthy and Excellent Knight.
Excellent Grand Marshal, you will conduct
the Worthy and Excellent Knight to the West.
[When they are in the West.)
Herald. —Excellent Knights, return swords.
{This is done.)
M.W.S. —Worthy and Excellent Knights, you
will welcome our newly admitted Brother with
the salute and battery of the degree.
(The Knights give the appropriate battery and
cry “Hail Brother, Brother, Hail.” The M.W.S.
leaves the Throne and goes to the West.)
M.W.S. —In conferring these degrees by com-
munication, some bodies of the Rite do not deem
it necessary to burden the memory of the Can-
didate with the secrets of this seventeenth
degree, but other bodies give them at length.
The one sign w r e use is given by r... t... r...
h. t... t... f... and s g, W... h... 5... h... 5...
i. t... e... w r hich is answered with the words
h... w... t... c... a... A....
It is well that you should at least be acquaint-
ed with the secrets as they are given b} r some
other bodies. I will therefore now explain
them; (or) they will therefore be explained to
vou on some later and more convenient occasion.


(If these secrets are not now communicated
the M.W.S. deputes some Knight to communi-
cate them to the Candidate on some occasion
mutually convenient. They are as follows :)
The word is N...D...A..., pronounced while
looking over the r... 5...; this is answered by
the word N...Z or pronounced while 1...
0... t... 1... 5....
The 5... is given by r... the r... h... to the f....
To prove to another Knight, you
place t... 1... h... w... t... f... 5... in his r... h...,
he c... it with h... 1... h..., both 1... 0... t... r...
5.... With t... 1... h... t... h... 1... 5... he t... y...
r. 5... with h... r... h.... Drop t... h...; t...
h... 1... 5..., he 1... 0... h... r... 5... and says
N...D...A, and vou reply or N... R...
J-,,
'1 he battery is
The 5... are the seven regular 5..., making the
seven sides of a heptagon ; for your instruction
I will go through them, and afterwards you will
copy me.
(The M.W.S. resumes his seat. The new
Knight exchanges the sign and word with the
Grand Marshal, and, if instructed, takes the r...
s. and then returns to his place in the West.)
M.W.S.—Worth}' and Excellent Knight, you
will now cover the Temple for a short time, and
prepare yourself to take a further step towards
the light.
(The Grand Marshal conducts the nerv Knight
into the anteroom, and returns.)
M.W.S. (gives a k... and all rise) —Worthy
and excellent Knights, by virtue of the power
in me vested as Most Wise Sovereign, I declare


this Bivouac ol Knights of the East and West
•closed (gives k...s of the degree, which are an-
swered by the Generals, Captain of the, M Quard
and the 0.G.), and we resume our session as a
Sovereign Chapter of the Rose Croix of Here-
dom {gives k...s of iSth degree, which arc an-
swered as befo/jj,)
M.W.S.—Knights of Heredom, we have now to
initiate into the Wisdom of the Rose Croix the
Worthy and Excellent Knight If you
are of opinion that he should be admitted, yon
will signify your assent in the usual manner.
M.W.S.—Excellent Grand Marshal, you will
‘bring in the Worthy Knight.
(The Grand Marshal covers the Temple, and
gives at the door the k...s of the previous
degree.)
C. of G. —Most Noble Second General, there
is an alarm.
2nd Gen. —Most Wise .Sovereign, there is an
alarm.
M.W.S.—Most Noble Second General, if it be
our Worthy and Excellent Knight, the Candi-
date, who stands outside, let him be admitted
in due course.
2nd Gen. (repeats same words to Captain of the
Guard, who goes out and interview’s the Grand
Marshal.)
C. of G. (re-enters and says :) The Excellent
Grand Marshal has recognised and examined
the Worthy and Excellent Knight, and judges
him worthy to be admitted (opens the door.)
(The Grand Marshal then brings in the Can-
didate, and stands beside him in the TlTsf.)


M.W.S.—Excellent Grand Marshal, what does
our worthy Brother seek from us ?
Gr. Mar.— More light and further instruction,
Most Wise Sovereign.
M.W.S.—Along what line does he desire fur-
ther instruction ?
Gr. Mar.— Most Wise Sovereign, he declares
that the world is full of violence, injustice and
folly, and that life in it is full of confusion and
difficulty. He desires earnestly to help his
fellows to a better condition, and for that pur-
pose he asks the aid of our Masonic art. He
believes that this trouble has fallen upon the
world because the True Word of a Master Mason
has been lost and men no longer know the truth
which would guide them on their way, and so
they wander lost in a morass of hardship and
despair. He has heard a rumour that that long-
lost Word has been recovered, and he presents
himself in the hope that, if he be found worthy,
that Word may be communicated to him, so
that guiding his life by its light, he may truh 7
be of service to the ignorant w 7 ho live in outer
darkness.
M.W.S.—Excellent Grand Marshal, we heartily
approve the Worthy and Excellent Knight’s
desire, and we will aid him in its realisation.
But the Sacred Word can be given only to those
who approach by the traditional path; so, as a
symbol of the work that must be done and the
knowledge that must be gained by one who sets
before him so high a goal, you will lead the
Worthy Knight upon the usual symbolical
journey, and will instruct him how 7 to find that
which is needed for his search.


(The Grand Marshal takes the Candidate three
times round the Temple, bowing each time as
he passes before the M.W.S. and the Altar. On
the first journey he pauses at the pillar of the
Second General, and the Grand Marshal asks
the Candidate :)
Gr. Mar. —What do you see upon this pillar ?
Can.—The letter V.
Gr. Mar. —Let us take it with us on our
journey.
(The Candidate picks tip the letter.
On the next circuit they stop at the pillar of
the First General, and the same words are ex-
changed, except that this time the letter is A.
The third journey is continued until the
pillar of the M.W.S. is reached, and again the
formula is repeated, the letter taken being 5....
The Grand Marshal and Candidate return to
the West.)
Gr. Mar. —Most Wise Sovereign, the symboli-
cal journey is finished.
Art (sing) —All glory to the Lord of Love.
M.W.S.—What has the Candidate found?
Gr. Mar. —These three letters, Most Wise
Sovereign. (Advances and shows the letters to
the M.W.S.)
M.W.S.—Does he know their meaning ?
Gr. Mar.— He does not, Most Wise Sovereign,
but he hopes to learn it from you.
M.W.S. —Their meaning is profound; some
part thereof he will learn hereafter, but this
much of it must be told to him now.
They are the initials of the Latin words Veri-
tas, Amor, Sapientia, meaning Truth, Love, and
Wisdom; and all those qualities are needed by


him who would find the Sacred Word. Preserve
the letters with care, and remember their signi-
fication, for without them you will not be able to
enter upon the later part of the ceremony. But
before we proceed to that, I must ask you to
take the solemn Obligation of this degree.
Herald. — Knights of Ileredom (all rise) draw
swords.
M.W.S. —lixcellent Grand Marshal, you will
advance the Worthy and Excellent Knight to
the Altar.
M.W.S. (to Candidate ) —You will kneel on
both knees, place your right hand on this cross,
repeat your several names at length, and say
after me,
(All szvords are brought to the salute.)
Obligation of the Eighteenth Degree
I, , in the presence of the All-Com-
mander, the Almighty Lord of Love, and in the
body of this Sovereign Chapter of the Rose Croix
of Heredom, do and hereon most solemn-
ly and sincerely swear that I will never reveal
the secrets and mysteries of this eighteenth de-
gree to anyone in the world except to him who
is lawfully entitled thereto.
I pledge my due allegiance to the Supreme
Council of Universal Co-Masonry, and to this
Sovereign Chapter, and my obedience to the
Constitution and Bye-Laws.
And I hereby register my vow that the brother-
hood of this Chapter shall be to me a living
reality; that I will neither speak nor think evil


of a Brother Knight, and that with all my
strength I will endeavour never to misjudge or
misunderstand him, knowing that he also has
taken this solemn Obligation.
I also promise with my whole heart that I
will most earnestly and perseveringly strive to
order my daily life in accordance with the
sublime teachings of the Rose Croix; and that
so far as is possible, without prejudice to the per-
formance of any duties which 1 have already
undertaken, I will devote my life and strength
to the service of humanity in the spirit which
those teachings inculcate.
So help me, Thou great Lord of Love, and keep
me steadfast in this my great and solemn
Obligation, being that of a Knight of the Rose
Croix of Heredom.
.'Vix. —May the vow be kept. (Thrice.)
M.W.S.—You will seal the solemn Obligation
which you have taken, by lifting to your forehead
the rose and the cross, in token of your accept-
ance of the life of love and sacrifice which they
symbolise, and by touching with your lips the
Volume of the Sacred Lore.
(All Knights bring their swords to the carry.)
M.W.S.—Rise Brother. Now that you have
taken the solemn Obligation of a Knight of
Heredom, you have a right, if possessed of the
requisite knowledge, to pass with us from dark-
ness into light, and to be received into our most
holy Brotherhood.
Excellent Grand Marshal, you will take charge
of our Brother, and present him in due course
at the gate of the Temple. (They cover the
Temple.)


Herald. —Knights of Heredom, return swords.
(Done.)
M.W.S.—Ket us put off the robe of darkness
and assume the robe of glory.
{Each Knight obverts his regalia and robe.
The banner is turned. When all are ready the
M.W.S. says :)
M.W.S. —Knights of Heredom, follow me from
darkness into light.
(Walking with the Knight of Eloquence, and
immediately preceded by the banner, he leads
the way into the Rose Temple; the First and
Second Generals and the Captain of the Guard
follow him, and take up their respective posi-
tions. The Knights pass in singly or in pairs,
each giving the 5... of the G... 5... to the Capt.
of the Guard as he enters. All are seated in the
Rose Temple.
When the Knights have left the Violet
Temple, a seven-runged flat ladder is placed
there on a slightly upward-sloping board, end-
ing near the left side of the Altar, and lying
along the line from the entrance. The Candi-
date is brought in and placed at the foot of the
ladder. The Captain of the Guard bars the
voay, placing his sword across the ladder above
the first rung, moving along the side as the
answer is given, and barring similarly each
successive rung.
When the Captain of the Guard demands the
pass-word from him, the Candidate usually gives
that of the seventeenth degree, in which case
the Captain of the Guard replies.)
C. of G. —That word is insufficient here.
What other guarantee have you to offer, to prove


that you have the knowledge required to tread
the seven-runged ladder ?
(Assisted if necessary by the Grand Marshal,
the Candidate produces the three letters V, A
and S.)
C. of G.—Do you know of what all virtues are
forms ?
(The Candidate, prompted by the Grand Mar-
shal, offers the V, and says :)
Can.— Of Veritas, meaning Truth. (He steps
on the first rung.)
C. of G.—From what do all virtues spring ?
Can. (as before, offers the A, and says)—
From Amor, meaning Dove. (He steps on the
second rung.)
C. of G.—By what are all virtues guarded ?
Can. (as before, offers the S, and says) —By
Sapientia, meaning Knowledge. (He steps on
the third rung.)
C. of G. —In what have you washed ?
Can. (prompted as before) —In
(Fourth step.)
C. of G.—Whence have you journeyed ?
Can. (as before)— From (Fifth step.)
C. of G.—Wherewithal are you clothed ?
Can. (as before ) —With ( Sixth step.)
C. of G.—-Whither are you going?
Can. (as before) —To (Seventh step.)
C. of G. (stepping aside) —Pass, friend; all
is well.
Gr. Mar. (enters the Rose Temple and says :)
—Most Wise Sovereign, in obedience to your
command, I have brought this Worthy and Ex-
cellent Knight to the gate of the Temple.


Herald. — Knights of Heredom (all rise ) draw
swords.
M.W.S.—Excellent Grand Marshal, it is well.
You will advance the Worthy and Excellent
Knight to the East.
(The Grand Marshal conducts the Candidate
between the Valleys, and causes him to kneel
in front of the M.W.S. or the Altar. Swords
are then lowered to the salute, and so remain .)
M.W.S. ( raising his sword) —To the glory of
the All-Commander, the Almighty Lord of Love,
and for the perfecting of humanity; in the
name and under the auspices of the Supreme
Council of Universal Co-Masonry, and by vir-
tue of the power in me vested as Most Wise
Sovereign; yea, by the Power of the Mystic
Rose and the Secret of the Cross, I create, re-
ceive and constitute you a Knight of the Rose
Croix of Heredom.
(The knocks of the degree are sounded upon
a bell.
At the words “create, receive and constitute,’'
the M.W.S. uses the sword and the knocks of
the degree, precisely as in Blue Masonry. He
then continues as follows :)
M.W.S. (laying sword on right shoulder of
Neophyte) —May Truth be ever at your right
hand; (on the left shoulder) —May Love ever burn
in your heart; (on the head) —May Wisdom ever
enlighten you.
I place in your hands this sword, emblem of
courage.
I give you this rose, symbol of secrecy.


(The Standard Bearer hands the banner of the
Chapter to the M.W.S., who holds it up before
the Neophyte, saying :)
M.W.S. —In hoc signo vinces, which being in-
terpreted is, In this sign thou shalt conquer.
Rise, Excellent and Perfect Knight of the
Rose Croix of Heredom.
(When this is said to the last Candidate, all
swords are brought to the carry.)
M.W.S. —I now invest you with the robe, the
distinguishing badge, the collar and the jewel
of a Knight of the Rose Croix.
(All these are put upon the Neophyte by the
Grand Marshal, assisted, if necessary, by the
Director of Ceremonies.)
M.W.S.—And I crown you as a Knight of the
Pelican and Eagle, and as a Prince of Jerusa-
lem, which is the Heavenly City, the Vision of
Peace.
(As the M.W.S. says these tvords, he places
on the head of the Neophyte a garland of roses.)
Heraed. — Knights of Heredom, return swords,
and be seated.
M.W.S. —Wise and Perfect Knight of Elo-
quence, you will explain to the Neophyte the
symbolism of this dress.
K. of E. —You will observe, Brother, that our
clothing is reversible. When it is necessary in
the course of our labours that we should enter
the Temple of the Outer Darkness, we clothe
ourselves in a manner appropriate to that outer
work. When we return to the Temple of Light,
by merely reversing our Masonic garb we are
able to assume the robe of glory. That outer


Temple indicates not only the darkness of the
world’s ignorance, but also the limitation im-
posed upon man by his shrouding in the veil
of matter; and the passage into the Temple of
Light symbolises not only our enlightenment by
the wisdom of this degree, but also the glory
of that higher world into which man rises when
he lays aside the robe of the flesh. And as the
white of our apron is the emblem of Purity, so
is the rose of the collar typical of the Love
which must permeate our lives.
The flower of the Rose has the threefold con-
notation of Love, Secrecy and Fragrance, while
the Cross bears also the threefold meaning of
Self-sacrifice, Immortality and Holiness. So
when these two symbols are taken in conjunc-
tion, as they always are in the name Rose
Croix, they signify the Love of Self-sacrifice,
the Secret of Immortality, and the sweet Fra-
grance of a Holy life.
The Serpent represents Eternity; the Double
Triangle, Spirit and Matter; the Pelican is an-
other ancient symbol of Self-sacrifice, as the
Eagle is of Victory.
(The M.TF.S. descends from the dais, and
stands in the South; the newly admitted Knight
faces him.)
M.W.S. —I will now communicate to you the
5... and W... of this degree. You will copy
my example.
The first 5... is called the 5... of A.... It is
given by r... t... e... t... h..., and at the same
time c... the h... w... p... 0... and the f... i...
upon the f..., letting t... d... to the b..., ex-
claiming H....


The second 5... is called the 5... of R.... It
is given by r... t... r... h... with the f... c... e...
t. i... f..., exclaiming A... H.... This is an-
swered by the C... 5..., given in the same man-
ner but p... t.. e..., with the words D... H....
The third 5... is called the 5... of the G... 5...,
and is given by c... t... a... 0... t... b.the 1...
u. It is answered in the same manner. You
approach one another and r... c... your a... a...
h... on each 0... b..., thus forming t... c... s;
then in the ear you interchange the letters of
the 5... W...
The w... of the degree is E , which is an-
swered by the w...s M...V X...P.
The Battery is
The Age is
The Acclamation is TI
The 5... on entrance are precipitate ones, as
though stumbling over obstacles.
The 5... of D... is given by c... t... r... f... be-
hind t... 1... and is answered in the reverse way.
When the Chapter is called to order, or when-
ever addressing the Most Wise Sovereign, all
c... t... a... on their b..., as in the 5... of the
G... S j and this 5... is also used in entering
or leaving the Chapter.
And now, Excellent and Perfect Knight, go
and prove yourself to the Most Noble Generals.
(The Grand Marshal conducts the newly per- ;
fected Knight to the Generals, to whom he :
communicates the 5... and w....)
Ist Gen. —Most Wise Sovereign, the newly
perfected Knight has communicated to me the
5... and w....


2nd Gen. — Most Wise Sovereign, the newly
perfected Knight has communicated to me the
5... and
M.W.S.—Excellent Grand Marshal, you will
place the newly perfected Knight in the West.
(The Grand Marshal conducts him to the
West.)
M.W.S.—Excellent Herald, you will now pro-
claim the newly perfected Knight of the Rose
Croix.
(The Herald, preceded by the Standard
Bearer, who, however, stands behind him with
the Standard during the proclamations, proclaims
the new Knight thrice; first from the East, then
from the head of the Valley of the North, then
from the head of the Valley of the South.)
Herald.—By command of the Most Wise
Sovereign, for the first time and in the East I
proclaim (gives name) a Knight of
the Rose Croix of Heredom, and an active mem-
ber of this Sovereign Chapter, No
in the Valley of (At the end of the
third time adding :) and T invite all the Excel-
lent and Perfect Knights to welcome him with
the Battery and with the Acclamation.
(All give the Battery, and cry “Hail, Brother,
Brother, Hail, 1 ’ followed by the Acclamation.)
M.W.S. —Brother (name of Neophyte),
with all my heart I congratulate you upon your
elevation, and most earnestly do I adjure you
never to forged the position which you hold, and
the responsibilities and duties which it imposes
upon you.
Now that you are thus one of us, we hasten
to share with you the knowledge of the Mystic


Word—the True Word of a Master Mason —long
lost and forgotten amid the pomp and pride, the
toil and stress of the outer world, yet always
known to the few, who are the true spiritual
princes of the people; always kept hidden in
the heart of the world among the secret things
of God.
*
(If there has been no Candidate to be perfected
the ceremony after page 12, proceeds as follows,
but without the explanation given to Neophytes.
The M.tF.S. ascends to the Altar, opens a re-
cess within it, and draws thence a heart-shaped
casket. Opening the casket he takes from it
a heart-shaped locket of gold or silver gilt, upon
the outside of which is enamelled on one side
a rose, and on the other a crimson cross. It
contains a disc, upon which are inlaid the letters
loose and of much larger size.
The M.W.S. raises this disc above his head,
and all the Knights kneel and point to it
with their right hands. He then lowers it,
and they adopt the 5... of the G... 5..., still
kneeling.
The Neophyte is then brought forward by the
Grand Marshal and kneels in front of the
M.W.S. and Altar, holding out his hands palms
upwards, the rigid laid upon the left. The
M.W.S. lays the disc for a moment on the palm
of the Neophyte, saying :)
M.W.S.—This, Brother, is the Mystic Word.
He who knows and understands this has be-
come a strong pillar in the Temple of our God,
and no storm can shake him.


1 call upon you to observe that the letters
upon that disc are the same as these larger
letters which I hold in my hand (showing them
to him in order.)
Nko. —They are the same.
M.W.S. {taking the disc from the hand of the
Neophyte) —Wise and Perfect Knight of Elo-
quence, I will ask you to place these letters
above the Altar, so that all may see them, and
to explain their meaning to our Excellent and
Perfect Brother.
Herald. —Knights of Heredom (all rise) draw
swords.
(The Knights draw swords and lower them to
the salute.
The Knight of Eloquence puts the letters in
their place above the Altar, while the M.W.S.
restores the disc to the locket, closes the latter,
and hangs it in the centre of the cross. While
he is doing this the Knights stand at the salute
facing the cross, and as soon as it is done the
swords are brought to the carry.
The M.W.S. draivs his sword, and with the
appropriate 5... says :)
M.W.S.—A H....
All (<with c... 5...) D H....
M.W.S. (with c... 5...) —D H....
All (with 5...) A H....
Herald. —Knights of Heredom, return swords.
All (together, with S. . of A ) —H P 1...,
PI
M.W.S.—Knights of Heredom, be seated.


(The Knight of Eloquence then explains the
meaning of the Mystic Word, causing the Neo-
phyte to repeat after him such words as may be
necessary.)
K. of E. —Many meanings have been attached
to this Mystic Word. That which is most com-
monly known in the outer world is ‘Tesus
Nazarenus Rex ludaeorum,” which is popularly
supposed to have been the inscription placed by-
Pilate upon the Cross; but as the word long
antedates the Christian Era, we need not discuss
that.
The meaning that we assign to it was given
by the Master Christian Rosenkreutz in the
fourteenth century, and we perpetuate it under
His direction in this Knightly Order. It is as
follows :
* * :i:
sfc#
In nobis regnat Ille—He reigns within us—-
which teaches us that God sits enthroned in every
human heart; that the inmost Spirit of each man
is part of God Himself, a spark of the Divine.
Therefore all men are one in Him, and there is
no height to which man may not aspire. This
is the Elixir of Rife, which saves men from dark-
ness and despair. This is the Philosopher’s
Stone, which turns to gold everything that it
touches. This is the long-lost Word, for want
of which darkness covers the Earth. When
men know this, there is Brotherhood, Peace and
Progress ; when they forget it, Chaos reigns, and
Evil stalks abroad. Therefore we who know
this truth have it as a dutv to trv ever to teach


it to others, to draw men ever closer together
in the bond of loving service.
Therefore we have the Ritual of the Rosy
Cross, which every Knight repeats each morn-
ing and each evening. I will now recite it in
the traditional manner for your instruction, and
you will copy me. It must be recited with firm
conviction, and each act must be performed with
a determined effort of will.
(With 5... of G... 5...) —In nobis regnat Ille.
(With 5... of R...) —From Heaven above.
(With C... 5...) —From Earth beneath, I draw
God’s Power.
{With 5... of F...) —My heart is full of Love
and Rife.
(Draw circle in air) —Through Mystic Rose.
(Draw cross) —Through Holy Cross.
{Throw forward arms) —Ret the Right shine.
{Stretch up arms) —I am the Cup, His Rove
the Wine.
{With 5... of G... 5...) —In nobis regnat Ille.
There is a second Ratin sentence which un-
folds to us yet another layer of the meaning of
this word. Each letter of the sentence, In nobis
regnat Ille, is in turn the initial of another word;
and so we have a most interesting list of the
Divine qualities which are especially needed for
our work as Knights.
Thus :
Tile, Numen, Nobis Observatio, Benevolentia,
Indulgentia, Sapientia, Robur, Efficientia,
Gratia, Nobilitas, Amor, Tranquillitas, Ignis,
Rumen, Raetitia Est.
He, the Divine Majesty, is to us (or rather, in
us), accuracy, goodwill, tenderness, wisdom,


strength, efficiency, thankfulness, nobility, love,
serenity, enthusiasm, light and gladness.
The letters V.A.S., by which you trod the first
three steps of the Ladder of Perfection to this
Temple, make the Latin word Vas, a cup or a
vase, referring to the cup of which we speak in
our Daily Ritual, and bearing the same signifi-
cation as the Cup in Greek Philosophy, or the
Holy Grail in Mystic Tradition. You trod the
remaining four by spelling unconsciously,
prompted by your Guide, the Mystic Word.
M.W.S.—This, Excellent and Perfect Knight,
completes the ceremony of your perfecting. Ex-
cellent Grand Marshal, you will place the new
Knight in the North Valley.
*
(Addresses, or the. Installation and investing of
Officers, should take place at this point.
If the small Altar or table has not stood in the
centre of the Rose Temple during the foregoing
ceremony, it is now placed in position, having
been previously prepared as described on
page 6.)
The Final Ceremony
Au, sing. —The secret of the Lord is with them
that love Him : and He shall show them His
covenant.
Where the word of a King is : there is power.
M.W.S.■ —Most Noble First General, who is
the King ?
Ist Gen.— The Perfect Man, Most Wise
Sovereign.


M.W.S.—Most Noble Second General, where
is His Kingdom ?
2nd Gen. — Most Wise Sovereign, His Kingdom
is the world, and His Throne is the heart of
man.
M.W.S.—Most Noble First General, how shall
we know Him ?
Ist Gen. — We shall know Him as we serve
Him, Most Wise Sovereign, and we shall find
Him when we have learned to serve Him well.
M.W.S.—Knights of Heredom, let us form
the circle of Kove in His Name.
(The M.W.S. comes down from the dais and
stands in the East, and all the Knights arrange
themselves in a circle round the small Altar in the
centre of the Temple, having removed their
gloves. The new Knight stands on the left of
the M.W.S., and the Generals and other Officers
on his right, in order of precedence. The
Knight of Eloquence stands in the West inside
the circle, close to the Altar.
The bearer of the Mystic Cord takes it from
the Altar and brings it to the M.W.S. The
M.W.S. hangs the coil upon one arm of the
bearer, and hands him the loop. The bearer
passes round the inside of the circle uncoiling
the cord, and placing it in the hands of the
Knights, beginning with the new Knight, who
holds the loop. Incense may be used round the
outside of the circle while the cord is taken
round inside.
When the Cord reaches round the circle, all
the Knights holding it with both hands, palms
upward, the other end is given to the M.W.S.;


the bearer passes out of the circle, between the
M.W.S. and the new Knight, and walks round
outside it to his place in it. The M.W.S. then
passes the free end of the Mystic Cord through
the loop in the hands of the new Knight, leav-
ing what is over to lie on the floor.
The Knight of Eloquence, who has remained
alone standing by the central Altar, now uncovers
the salver containing the Bread, Salt, and Grape-
juice (if used), and brings it to the M.W.S. who,
after putting a little salt into the grape-juice,
blesses the elements in the Name of the King.
The M.W.S. then says :)
M.W.S.—Let us break bread in His Name.
(The Knight of Eloquence holds the salver
before the M.W.S., 'who takes tip one of the little
pieces of bread and holds it towards the new
Knight, who breaks off the other end of it. Each
of them dips his piece in the salt (or) grape-
juice and eats it after exchanging the following
words :)
M.W.S.—To the glory of God.
New Kt. (prompted by the Kt. of E.)— And
to the Service of the King.
(The new Knight then takes a piece of bread
and goes through the same ceremony with the
Knight on his left, the Knight of Eloquence so
passing round the entire circle, which should be
kept tmbroken. Each Knight will use the right
hand to take and break the bread, always re-
taining the Mystic Cord in his left. The First
General, who stands on the right of the M.TINS’.,
breaks bread with the Knight of Eloquence, and
the latter with the M.W.S.


The Knight of Eloquence then replaces the
salver on the Altar, covering it with the linen
cloth. The M.W.S. then draws the end of the
Cord back through the loop, thus breaking the
circle, and the bearer, moving round outside,
enters through the gap, takes the loop from the
new Knight, and walks round inside the circle,
coiling up the Cord which he finally hands to
the M.W.S. He returns it to the Knight of
Eloquence, who replaces it upon the central
Altar. A hymn may be sung meanwhile.
If desired, all the Knights may at this point
again recite the Daily Ritual as before {page 12)
but this time, after the words “full of Love and
Life,” all turn right about and face outwards
till the end of the Ritual, when they again
face inwards.
The M.W.S. then says :)
M.W.S.—Knights of Heredoni, return to your
Valleys, blessing the Lord of Love for all that
we have received from Him.
(All return in due order to their places.)
Ceremony of Closing the Chapter
M.W.S. —Excellent Recorder, have you any
communications for the Chapter ?
M.W.S.—Knights of Heredom, have any of
you any proposition to make for the benefit of
the Order in general, or of this Sovereign
Chapter ?
(Salutations, if any, are given.
The Knights of the Chapter rise and salute
the M.W.S., who responds.


The Knight of Charity carries round the Cas-
ket of Benevolence.
The Knight of Eloquence is asked to read from
one of the Volumes of the Sacred Lore. Dur-
ing the reading the Knights stand to order with
the 5... of the G 5
The Knights still standing to order, the
M.W.S. goes up to the Altar, bows before it, and
takes doum the letters of the Word from their
places, and the locket from the centre of the
Cross. He replaces these in the heart-shaped
Casket, and says :)
M.W.S.—Knights of Heredom, with these holy
symbols we lay our hearts upon this Altar as a
sacrifice, in union with the Great Heart of the
World,
All sing. —So mote it be. ( Short meditation,
all standing to order.)
M.W.vS.— Consummatum est.
All. —Deo gratias.
{The M.W.S. returns to his place.)
M.W.S. ( with single knock) —Knights of Here-
dom, assist me to close this Chapter.
Most Noble Second General, what is your con-
stant duty ?
2nd Gen. — To see that the Chapter is secure
without, Most Wise Sovereign.
M.W.S.—Most Noble First General, what is
your duty ?
Ist Gen.— To see that none are present but
Knights of the Rose Croix, Most Wise Sovereign.
M.W.S.—Most Noble Generals, you will see
that all is still secure, both within and without.
2nd Gen.— Excellent Grand Marshal, is the
Chapter still secure without ?


Gk. Mar.— Excellent Captain of the Guard,
you will prove the Chapter secure without.
(The Captain of the Guard gives the knocks
of the degree on the door, and the outer Guard
responds.)
C. of G. —Excellent Grand Marshal, the Chap-
ter is secured.
Gr. Mar. — Most Noble Second General, all is
still secure without.
Ist Gen. —Excellent Grand Marshal, do you
certify that all present are Knights of the Rose
Croix ?
Gr. Mar.— -I do, Most Noble General.
Ist Gen. —Most Wise Sovereign, we have
laboured in safety; all is still secure, both with-
out and within.
M.W.S.—Most Noble First General, what aim
do the Knights of the Rose Croix set before
themselves ?
Ist Gen. —Most Wise Sovereign, to combat
Falsehood, Hate and Ignorance by Truth, Love
and Knowledge, that these may rule the world.
M.W.S.—Most Noble Second General, whence
have we learned this lesson ?
2nd Gen. —From the Most Wise.
M.W.S.—Wise and Perfect Knight of Elo-
quence, why the Most Wise ?
K. of E. —Because the Most Humble.
M.W.S. —Most Noble First General, what is
our peculiar duty as Knights of the Rose Croix ?
Ist Gen. —To shed upon the darkened world
the Light of the Rose and the Cross, Most
Wise Sovereign.
M.W.S. —And after the Chapter is closed,
Most Noble Second General ?


2nd Gen. —(Jur duty is still the same, Most
Wise Sovereign.
M.W.S. —See to it, Knights of Heredom, that
that duty is never neglected; and { raising his
hands) may the blessing of the Lord of Love
rest upon us and upon all true and faithful
Knights throughout the world.
mQte,.itJ>e. .
M.W.S. —Most Noble Generals, you will give
notice that now suspend the labours of
the day, and'close this Spvereign Chapter.
Ist Gen.-^—Excellent aiid Perfect Knights in
the Valley of the North,' we shall now suspend
the labours of the day! /
2nd^GEN.—Excellent and Perfect Knights in
the/Valley of the-South, we shall now suspend
tjre labours of the day.
Herald. —Knights of Heredom, swords.
M.W.S. {raising his sword, the Knights rais-
ing theirs to their foreheads) —ln the Name "of
the AlFCommander, the Almighty Lord of Love,
I declare the labours of the eighteenth degree
suspended in this Sovereign Chapter.
No. , in the Valiev of
M.W.S. ( with the 5..'....)— A H....
Au, {with c 5 ) —D H....
M.W.S. {with c s )—D 11....
Ale {with the s ) —A H....
Herald. —Knights of Heredom, return swords.
ALL.—H H H
{The knocks are given by the M.W.S., and re-
peated by the First and Second Generals, Cap-
tain of the Guard, and Outer Guard successively.


All the Knights are seated while the Altar
lights are extinguished.)
M.W.S. —This Chapter of the Knights of the
Rose Croix of Heredom is now closed; let us
depart in peace.
(The closing hymn is now sung.
The Knights pass up the Valleys, meet in
pairs at the Altar, to which they bozo, and then
pass in pairs down the centre and out of the
Temple.
The M.W.S., Knight of Eloquence, Generals,
Grand Marshal, Organist and Captain of the
Guard remain at their places till all others have
left.)


Hymns
The following are suitable hymns to use, but
are in no way obligatory; any may be omitted,
or other suitable ones substituted.
Introcessional
O King of Kings! Whose reign of old
Hath been from everlasting :
Before Whose throne, their crowns of gold
The white-robed saints are casting :
Within the Temple’s sacred fane
The mystic forms creating,
O stir our hearts, to serve Thee here
With ardour unabating.
Hail, Blessed Light! Hail, Sacred Fire
Upon the Altar glowing,
Enflame our hearts with high desire,
All valiant gifts bestowing.
Be thou our strength to right the wrong,
All pause or respite scorning,
Our beacon through the lonely night,
Till He shall bring the morning.
The Holy Cross again we take,
The knightly weapon bearing,
So press we onward to the fight,
The might of evil daring.
Hail, Mystic Light! Hail, Holy Cup
O Purest Peace, descending!
Vouchsafe, O Lord, continuing Light,
And Life in Thee unending!


Opening
Most High, in Thy Grand Lodge above, the
guardian Angels stand,
And ever to its work of love devote both heart
and hand,
And casting down each golden crown beside the
crystal sea,
With voice and lyre in happy choir, hymn glory,
Lord, to Thee.
And as the rainbow lustre falls athwart their
glowing wings,
While seraph unto seraph calls, and each Thy
Goodness sings,
May we below Thy glory show, as they in realms
above,
And labour still to do Thy will in true Masonic
love.
O Master Builder, Lord renowned, Monarch of
radiant space,
With Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty crowned in
that Thy holy place,
Grand Prince Adept, our work accept, unworthy
though it be;
We lay it there upon the square, our offering to
Thee.
Great Architect, the Angels’ King, teach us to
build aright,
A shining Temple, as we sing, a fane of living
light,
A holy cell where Thou may’st dwell, an altar
and a shrine.
Where Love’s own fire, still mounting higher,
eternally shall shine. C.W.L.


Final Ceremony
Father, we praise Thee, now the day is over,
Active and watchful, stand we now before Thee;
Singing we offer prayer and meditation :
Thus we adore Thee.
Monarch of all things, fit us for Thy service,
Grant us, Preserver, strength for high endeavour;
Show us Thy Wisdom, teaching us to serve Thee
Rightly for ever.
Ruler Omnipotent, Ford of all that liveth,
Through us, Thy servants, send out Thy salvation.
Thine is the glory, gleaming and resounding,
Through all creation.
or
God be with you till we meet again,
By His counsels guide, uphold you,
With His sheep securely fold you;
God be with you till we meet again.
God be with you till we meet again,
Pet no trouble e’er confound you,
Peace and harmony surround you;
God be wnth you till we meet again.
God be with you till we meet again,
May His holy angels guard yotf,
No misfortune e’er retard you;
God be with you till we meet again.


God be with you till we meet again,
May the Mighty All-Commander
Shield you wheresoe’er you wander ;
God be with you till we meet again.
God be with you till we meet again,
Wisdom, Strength and Beauty guide you,
vStand unmoved whate’er betide you ;
God be with you till we meet again.
God be with you till we meet again,
Keep Love’s banner floating o’er you,
Cross and Mystic Rose before you ;
God be with you till -we meet again.
God be with you till we meet again,
God, the goal of our endeavour,
God who reigns in us for ever;
God be with you till we meet again.
Closing
Closed is the solemn hour,
The sacred rites are done :
And lo! the music of Thy power
Thrills through us, every one.
O ! Master, let that harmony
Sing through the lives we lead for Thee !
And now with reverent pace,
Our strength renew’d by Thine,
Devoted guardians of Thy Grace,
Quit we this holy shrine,
And pass into the silent night
To be the bearers of Thv light.
E.A.W.


Use of the Swords
It is strongly recommended that particular
attention be paid to the sword drill, that the
Chapters may gain in correctness and uniformity
c'f use and the ceremonies in impressiveness.
The sword should always be grasped firmly by
the hilt, in the right hand. A Knight should
only draw his sword when standing upright, and
he should sheathe it before being seated. No
bow, to the Altar or otherwise, should be made
while the sword is unsheathed.
The positions and movements in use are :
(1) When about to draw. Standing upright,
throw the right arm across the body, grasp
the hilt cf the sword with the right hand,
the back of the hand being next to the
left side of the body.
(2) Draw the sword smartly, throwing the blade
up, to the full extent of the right arm.
(3) Bring the sword down to the position of
“recover,” the cross hilt level with and
close to the mouth, the blade upright.
(4) Bring the sword to the position of “carry,”
viz., sword upright, right forearm horizon-
tal, elbow close to side.
(5) Salute. Being at “carry,” the sword should
be brought to the “recover” and thence
lowered till the point is near the ground,
to the right of and slightly more forward


than the toe of the right foot ; the right
hand close to the right leg, the thumb on
the junction of the hilt and pointing down
towards the blade of the sword.
(6) During the invocations in the opening and
closing of the Chapter the sword-hand is
held to the forehead, the sword upright.
(7) Arch of Steel. The position (known as en
carte) is used for the reception of digni-
taries, and is too well known to require
description. Only Knights in the front
ranks take part, the others remaining at
the carry, and they should all move at
precisely the same moment, both in form-
ing and breaking the arch.
It should be noted that whenever changing
from one sword-position to another, viz., from
draw T to carry, from carry to salute, from salute
to carry, from carry to return—the movement
should always be made via the intermediate
position of recover. From the carry to positions
6 or 7, and back, however, the movement is
direct.
In returning swords, proceed from carry to
recover, then drop the point to the mouth of the
scabbard, held at the top by the left hand which
may guide the point of the sword. Drive the
sword smartly into the scabbard.
Effort should be made that all movements be
done in unison, and it is convenient if the
Herald, or other Officer, being proficient in the
sword drill, sets the time and all move with him.


Investiture of Officers
On the investiture of a Knight as an Officer of
the Chapter, the following procedure may be
adopted.
On hearing his name called, the Knight will
rise in his place, advance to the floor of the
Temple, and draw his sword, coming to the
carry.
He will be conducted by the Installing Past
Most Wise Sovereign to the foot of the Throne
of the Most Wise Sovereign, where he will halt,
and
1. Turn his sword over {via the left), the point
towards the ground;
2. Grasp the blade, near the hilt, with his left
hand;
3. Move his right hand from the hilt to the
blade, below the left;
4 Drop his left hand; and
5, Kneel on his right knee before the Most Wise
Sovereign, presenting to him the hilt of
his sword resting the blade (near the hilt)
on his left fore-arm raised for that purpose.
The Most Wise Sovereign takes the sword by
the hilt, turns it over, and presents the hilt to
the Knight, who
1. Takes the hilt of the sword with his right
hand;
2. Rises to his feet, bringing his sword to the
carry;


3. Salutes the Most Wise Sovereign with the
sword; and
4. Is conducted by the Installing Past Most
Wise Sovereign to his station in the Chap-
ter, where he returns his sword and takes
his seat.
*
Ceremony of Consecration
of a New Chapter
(In addition to the usual appointments of the
Rose Temple, a table must stand on the floor be-
fore the Altar and at a convenient distance
therefrom. The table bears the vessels of con-
secration which contain respectively Corn, Wine,
Oil and Salt, also a basket or other receptacle
containing red roses, and a box containing in-
cense, the whole to be covered with a fine linen
cloth.
The Consecrating Officer, Knight of Eloquence,
and First and Second Generals, should be
possessed of the rank of Past Most Wise
Sovereign and of the degree of Knight K.H.,
30°.
The Consecrating Officer as Most Wise
Sovereign, assisted by the Grand Officers, opens
an Occasional Chapter.
The Consecrating Officer continues :—)
C.O. —Excellent and Perfect Knights, we are
assembled for the purpose of constituting and
consecrating a new Chapter in accordance with
ancient usage and with solemn dedication of all
our efforts to the service and glory of the
All-Commander.


Wise and Perfect Knight of Eloquence, I call
upon you for the opening prayer.
K. of E. —Almighty Eord of Love, Who dost
from Thy Throne behold all the dwellers upon
earth, prevent us in all our doings with Thy
most gracious favour, and further us with Thy
continual help, that in all our works, begun,
continued and ended in Thee, we may glorify
Thy Holy Name.
All. —So mote it be.
C.O.—A number of Excellent and Perfect
Knights, duly instructed in the Wisdom of the
Rose Croix and who are now assembled, have
made petition to be constituted as a Sovereign
Chapter of the Rose Croix of Heredom; and they
are desirous that their Chapter shall be conse-
crated, and their Officers installed and invested,
according to ancient custom.
After due deliberation, the Supreme Council
has been pleased to grant to the Petitioners a
Charter establishing them in all the rights and
privileges of our Order.
I call upon the Petitioners to stand while the
acting Grand Recorder reads the Petition and
the Charter from the Supreme Council.
(The Petitioners stand round the table, facing
East.
The Grand Recorder reads the Petition and the
Charter. During the reading of the Charter all
stand.)
C. 0.—1 now enquire of the Petitioners if they
approve of the Officers named in the Charter to
preside over them.
(The Petitioners signify their approval.)


C.o. —Then we will proceed to constitute these
Excellent Knights into a regular Chapter, and
to consecrate it according to ancient usage.
Rise, Excellent Knights, to order.
C.O. —Almighty Lord of Love, Maker and
Ruler of all worlds, Thou Who art seated in the
shrine of every heart, assist us with Thy most
gracious favour in all the purposes of our pre-
sent assembly. Grant us, we beseech Thee,
Wisdom in all our plans, the Strength of Thy
Truth in all our difficulties, and the Beauty of
Love and Harmony in all our actions. O Thou
Who art the centre of Light and Life, of Joy and
Love, Thou Heart of the Mystic Rose, permit us
now to erect this Chapter and solemnly to con-
secrate it to the honour and glory of Thy Most
Holy Name.
All. —So mote it be.
(An Oration may here be delivered, followed by
music, after which all rise to order and turn to
the East.)
C.O.—We invoke your aid, O ye Ministers of
the All-Commander, Angels of Truth, Love
and Wisdom; and Thine, O most W. and
V.M.0.T.W., who art the Head of all
true Knights of Heredom throughout the
w orld. We ask your aid in this our undertaking,
and your blessing on the work to w'hich these our
Brethren are setting their hands. May Harmony,
Steadfastness, Love and Justice dwell in their
midst, that they may be to each other as the
petals of one rose, and be strong and resolute
in the carrying out of the Great Work. May
this Chapter become, through their devotion and
earnestness, a centre of Light and Strength for


the helping of humanity. Assist, by your pre-
sence and influence, the endeavours which will
here be made to find the fuller Light, and cast
into the hearts of all who come hither in search
of the Wisdom of the Rose Croix, a portion of
that Spirit which giveth Life.
AtL. —So mote it be.
(The Consecrating Vessels are noiv uncovered.
The petitioning and founding Knights are
arranged round the table, facing East.
The Consecrating Officer, Knight of Eloquence,
and the Generals take their places at the East of
the table, facing East. These four Officers form
together a cross, the Consecrating Officer being
nearest the Altar, the Knight of Eloquence be-
hind him at the West, the First General at the
North, and the Second General at the South.
During the ceremony, whenever standing, they
keep the same order relative to each other and
to the work then being performed.
The Director of Ceremonies hands the vessel
containing Corn to the Consecrating Officer,
Wine io the Knight of Eloquence, Oil to the
First General, and Salt to the Second General.
The order in procession is (1) Director of Cere-
monies; (2) Standard Bearer, with the Standard;
(3) Knight of Eloquence; (4) Second General;
(5) First General; (6) Consecrating Officer. If
space permits, the Generals should walk abreast.
Appropriate music should be played, or there
may be singing, during each procession.
The First Circuit
When the consecrating vessels are in the hands
of the four Officers, an appropriate passage from


one of ihe Volumes of the Sacred Lore is read.
The procession then takes place, the Officers
halting in their former places in the East facing
the Altar. The Consecrating Officer says : —)
C.O. —Upon this Chapter I scatter Corn, sym-
bol of that Holy Bread by which the soul of Man
is nourished and sustained.
{The Consecrating Officer scatters Corn before
the Altar : the four officers then pass round
the Chapter, halting and scattering Corn toivards
the South, West and North, thus indicating the
form of a Cross. This is done at each subse-
quent circuit.
The Consecrating Officer exchanges his vessel
with the Knight of Eloquence, receiving from
him the Wine.)
The Second Circuit
( Reading.
Procession.)
C.O.—Upon this Chapter I potir Wine, symbol
of the Divine Dife and Joy.
(The Wine is poured at the four points as
before.
The Consecrating Officer receives the Oil from
the First General.)
The Third Circuit
{Reading.
Procession.)
C.O.—Upon this Chapter I pour Oil, symbol of
Gentleness and fiery Power; for as Oil is both
a soothing balm and a fuel, so is the Perfect Man
alike a tender comforter of those in sorrow, and
a living flame for the lighting of the world.


(The Oil is poured at the four points.
The Consecrating Officer receives the Salt
from the Second General.)
The Fourth Circuit
( Reading.
Procession.)
C.O.—Upon this Chapter I scatter Salt, symbol
of Fidelity and Friendship.
(The Salt is scattered at the four points.
The Director of Ceremonies replaces all the
consecrating vessels on the table, and hands the
basket of roses to the Consecrating Officer, who
gives some to each of the other three Officers.)
The Fifth Circuit
C.O. —Upon this Chapter I scatter Roses, em-
blems of the Heart of Love and Wisdom. May
they be scattered as before the feet of the All-
Commander, the Almighty Lord of Love.
(The procession takes place as before, but
once only, and the Consecrating Officer and the
other three scatter Roses meanwhile. The pro-
cession passes completely round and halts in
the East. The basket is replaced on the table.
A censer with lighted charcoal is brought to
the Knight of Eloquence, and the Consecrating
Officer places incense therein.)
Herald.— Knights of Heredom, draw swords.
(All draiu except the Knight of Eloquence.
The Consecrating Officer raises his sword
aloft, all others raising theirs to their foreheads.)
C.O.—Thus solemnly we dedicate this Chapter
to the glory of the All-Commander, the Almighty


Lord of Love, and to the service of our Supreme
Head, the Most W. and V.M.0.T.W., who is
the Head of all true Knights of Heredom through-
out the world. May it ever continue faithful in
such service.
All. —So mote it be.
{The swords are brought to the carry.
The Knight of Eloquence passes thrice round
the Chapter sxmnging the censer. Appropriate
music is played meanwhile, or the following may
be sung :
Come, Mighty Lord, our souls inspire,
And lighten with celestial fire.
Thou, the anointing Spirit art.
Who dost Thy sevenfold gifts impart.
The Consecrating Officer and Generals face
West, the former coming forward towards the
founding Knights. The Knight of Eloquence
stands behind him.
The Knights then stand at the salute.)
C. o.—l now constitute this Chapter, denomina-
ted the Sovereign Chapter of Knights
of the Rose Croix of Heredom, Le Droit Humain,
No. on the roll of the Supreme Council of
Universal Co-Masonry, through the blessing of
Divine Providence to the purposes of Freemas-
onry. And in the name of the Supreme Council,
and of the Most Puissant Grand Commander, its
Deputy, I constitute and form you, Excellent and
Perfect Knights, into a Sovereign Chapter of the
Rose Croix of Heredom, and I empower you to
perfect candidates, and to perform all the rites
and ceremonies in conformity wdth the Consti-
tutions of the Order. And may the Almighty


Lord of Love direct and counsel you in all your
proceedings.
All. —So mote it be.
Herald. —Knights of Heredom, carry swords
Return swords.
(The Consecrating and Grand Officers return
to their places. All are seated except the
Founders, who remain in their places.)
C.O. —Excellent Herald, you will now proclaim
this Sovereign Chapter.
(The Herald draws his sword and proceeds to
the East of the floor, before the Altar. He
salutes the Altar, turns towards the West and
proclaims :—)
Herald. —By command of the Illustrious Con-
secrating Officer and Most Wise Sovereign, for
the first time and in the East I proclaim that this
Sovereign Chapter, of Knights of
the Rose Croix of Heredom, Le Droit Humain
No , has been duly constituted and conse-
crated.
(This is repeated at the South, West and
North. After each proclamation the Herald
salutes. The Standard should accompany him.
When the Herald has returned to his place.)
C.O.—Knights of Heredom, rise.
All ( with 5... of 4.)—H. H. H.
C.O. (raising his hands) —The Lord bless you
and keep you.
The Lord make His face shine upon you and
be gracious unto you.
The Lord lift up His Countenance upon you
and give you peace, now and for evermore.
All. —So mote it be.
C.O.—Excellent and Perfect Knights, be seated.


(The Installation of the Most Wise Sovereign
follows.)
*
Ceremony of Installation of the
Most Wise Sovereign
{lf the M.W.S. does not intend to conduct the
ceremony himself, he now places the Installing
P.M.W.S. in the Throne and is seated on his
right.
The M.W.S. Elect may at this point cover the
7 'emple and be received at the door by txvo
P.M.W.S.s. or other distinguished Knights.
Whether he so withdraw or not, he is taken by
these to the West, where standing one on each
side of him, they present him, one saying :)
P.M.W.S. —Most Wise Sovereign, I present to
yon the Excellent and Perfect Knight of
to receive at your hands the benefit of Installa-
tion. He has been duly elected to fill the dis-
tinguished office of Most Wise Sovereign of this
Sovereign Chapter for the ensuing year. He
is well skilled in our sublime mysteries, and I
have no doubt that he will discharge the high
and important duties of that office with zeal and
ability.
M.W.vS.—I fully appreciate your recommenda-
tion, but must first address a few remarks to
the Most Wise Sovereign Elect.
Excellent and Perfect Knight of ,
you have been chosen for the important and
honourable position of Most Wise Sovereign of
this Sovereign Chapter, and I shall with much;


pleasure proceed with the ceremony of your
Installation.
As the Most Wise Sovereign of this Chapter,
you will realise the responsibilities of your
Office, and the new relation in which you will
stand to your Brethren. lam sure you will
conduct the important interests now about to be
entrusted to your care, with honour to yourself
and credit to this Sovereign Chapter.
It is necessary for every Most Wise Sovereign
to submit to the Laws and Regulations of the
Order; I therefore request your attention while
they are read, and to each of them you will
signify your assent by the 5... of the G... 5...,
at the same time bowing your in token of
submission.
Do you solemnly promise on your honour as a
Knight of the Rose Croix of Heredom and as
Most Wise Sovereign Elect :
Laws and Regulations
1. That you will endeavour to the utmost of your
power to promote the general good of the
Order of Universal Co-Masonry, and of
this Sovereign Chapter ?
2. That you will guide the deliberations of this
Sovereign Chapter to the best of your
ability, preserve the solemnity of our cere-
monies, conduct yourself with the most
profound respect and reverence, and rule
the Chapter with firmness, dignity and
courtesy, as an example to your Brethren ?
3. That you will not allow anyone unknown to
you to be received a Knight into your
Chapter, until after the strictest enquiry


and full information as to his life and
character ?
4. That you will not admit into your Chapter
any Visitor unknown to you as a Knight,
without the strictest examination and the
production of proper vouchers of having
been perfected in a regular Chapter ?
5. That you will observe and maintain the Bye-
Law T s of your Chapter, made in conformity
with the Constitution of the Supreme
Council of Universal Co-Masonry, whose
authorit} r you hereby recognise and accept ?
6. That you will pay due respect and obedience
to the Supreme Council of the 33rd and
last degree of the Rite of Universal Co-
Masonry ; to their Deputy for Great
Britain, India and the Dominions, to the
Grand Inspector General of your District,
and resign your Chair to them severally
when they visit your Chapter ?
7. That you will accept the duties of Most Wise
Sovereign of this Chapter ,
No , for the ensuing year, and bind
your successor in office to the observance
of these same rules ?
8. That you will never leave the Order of
Universal Co-Masonry for the purpose of
promoting or assisting in the founding of
Chapters which reject women?
M.W.S. —Do you freely accept all these condi-
tions, and promise as a true and loyal Knight
to observe and practise them faithfully ?
M.W.S. Elect.-I do.
Heraed. —Knights of Heredom {all rise) draw
swords, and form the Arch of Steel. (ThisTls
done.)


M.W.S. —Wise and Perfect Past Most Wise
Sovereigns, you will advance the Most Wise
Sovereign Elect to the Altar.
(The two P.M.W.Ss. advance the M.W.S.
Elect under the Arch of Steel to a convenient
point in front of the Altar. All swords are
brought to the carry.)
M.W.S. —Most Wise Sovereign Elect, you will
now take the Obligation of a Most Wise
Sovereign. You will draw your sword (the
M.W.S. Elect draws, and conies to the carry.)
You will now reverse your sword (he grasps the
blade near the hilt with his left hand, the hilt
being upright) kneel on both knees, holding the
sword aloft in your left hand; place your right
hand on your heart; repeat your names, and say
after me ;
(The Knights stand at the salute.)
Obligation
I, , do solemnly and sincerely pro-
mise on my honour as a Knight of the Rose
Croix, and a Master Mason, that I will, to the
best of my knowledge and ability, faithfully per-
form the duties of Most Wise Sovereign, to
which office I have been elected; that I will
support and maintain the Bye-Laws of this
Sovereign Chapter, , No , and
the Laws and Constitution of the Supreme
Council of Universal Co-Masonry. So help me
the All-Commander, the Almighty Lord of Love,
and keep me faithful in this my solemn Obliga-
tion.
M.W.S.—You will now seal it with your lips
three times on the cross of vour sword.


Rise, duly obligated Most Wise Sovereign.
(All swords are brought to the carry.
The M.W.S. takes both hands and assist his
rising, and moves him round gently to the
South.)
M.W.S. —I now present to you the Charter
which constitutes your Sovereign Chapter, and
gives it the title to labour to the glory of the
Lord of Rove and for the good of Humanity.
In giving it into your care, I trust you will
receive it as a sacred charge, and transmit it,
pure and unsullied as you now receive it, to
your successor, failing whom you will deliver it
to the Supreme Council, or to their Deputy for
Great Britain, India and the Dominions.
I place in your hands the Volumes of the
Sacred Rore, those Great Rights in all degrees
in Masonry. The teachings contained in them
create in us belief in Eternal Truth, leading us
into Rove and Wisdom, wherefrom springs
Justice, the Raw which assigns to each his due
and makes all human beings equal before it; and
Brotherhood which assures us of the certain
coming of Unity.
I present to you the Books of the Constitution
and of the Bye-Raws of your Chapter, which you
are bound to obey and enforce. These you will
have read at least once during your year, in
open Chapter.
I invest you with the Insignia of your Office
(takes collar and jewel of M.W.S. from his own
neck, and places it on that of the M.W.S.) and
may you continue to wear them with dignity and
honour to the Chapter.


And now permit me, Most Wise Sovereign,
to instal you in the Throne of your Chapter,
according to ancient custom, and may the
Almighty Lord of Love endow you in a supreme
degree with those high Masonic qualities,
Charity, Loving-Kindness and Self-Sacrifice.
(The M.W.S. is installed in the Throne; the
Installing P.M.W.S. continues.)
It will be your special duty to dispense Jus-
tice, reward Merit and Ability, encourage research
into our Mysteries, inculcate the sacred duties
of Charity and Hospitality, govern your Chapter
with Kindness and Moderation, and diffuse the
sublime principles of Benevolence in the distri-
bution of alms to the poor; to feed the hungry,
clothe the naked, and bind up the wounds of
the afflicted; and may the bright examples of
all Masters and Illustrious Knights in the past,
whose matchless deeds have shed a brilliant
lustre on the name of Knight of the Rose
Croix, encourage you in the faithful discharge
of your duties.
Proclamation
{The Installing P.M.W.S. draws his sword and
takes up a position in front of the Altar and on
the floor of the Chapter, facing West. The
Standard Bearer stands behind him with the
Standard.)
Instg. P.M.W.S.—Excellent and Perfect
Knights, in virtue of the power vested in me as
Installing Past Most Wise Sovereign (or what-
ever is the title and dignity of the Installing
Knight) I proclaim the Excellent and Perfect
Knight of , the Most Wise Sovereign


of this the Chapter, No , on the
Register of the Supreme Council of Universal
Co-Masonry, for the ensuing twelve months, and
until a successor shall have been duly elected
and installed in his stead; and I call upon you
to salute him. ( All the Knigifts stand at the
salute",“looking towards the Most Wise Sovereign,
wlfo returns the salute. All swords are then
brought to the carry. The Installing P.M.W.S.
continues.) And recollect, Excellent and Perfect
Knights, that the harmony and prosperity of the
Chapter depend as much on your assistance and
obedience as on the and wisdom of your
Most Wise Sovereign.
Herald. —Knights of Heredom, return swords.
[This is done.)
All ( except the M.W.S.) —H... H... H....
(The M.W.S. thanks the Knights and the In-
stalling P.M.W.S.)
Instg. P.M.W.S. —Excellent and Perfect
Knights, be seated.
Most Wise Sovereign, you will now proceed
with the investiture of your Officers.
Investiture of Officers
{The Officers are led up in turn to the M.W.S.
by the Installing P.M.W.S. or an Acting Grand
Marshal. Each Officer will follow the procedure
outlined on page 55 offering his sword to the
M.W.S., who returns it.)
The Knight of Eloquence,
Immediate Past Most Wise Sovereign
M.W.S.—Wise and Perfect Knight of Eloquence
and Immediate Past Most Wise Sovereign, I


invest you with the Collar and Jewel of your
Office. It is an Office which it is not in the
Eower of the Most Wise Sovereign to bestow,
eing yours of right, as having faithfully per-
formed your duty in the Chapter. It is your
duty to deliver a summary of our teaching to
every newly perfected knight, or when required
by the Most Wise Sovereign. You should there-
fore be familiar with the history and philosophy
of the eighteenth degree, and be able to explain
its symbols for the instruction of the Knights,
and to defend and vindicate the claims and the
honour of the Rite.
You are carefully to guard the Constitution,
to give your official conclusions on all matters
submitted for discussion, and see that no work
is done contrary to Masonic principles.
In the closing it will be your duty to read a
portion of Sacred Lore, and, whenever required,
to guide the devotions of the Sovereign Chapter,
Your chair is on the left of the Altar, in the
South-East.
The First and Second Generals
Instg. P.M.W.S.—Most Wise Sovereign, whom
do you appoint your First and Second Generals ?
M.W.S.—The Excellent and Perfect Knight
of , First General; and the Excellent
and Perfect Knight of , Second
General.
(They are conducted together to the Throne
of the M.W.S. by the Installing P.M.W.S., who
returns with them to their places in the Chap-
ter. The same procedure is followed in the case
of all the other Officers )


M.W.S. —Excellent and Perfect Knights, I in-
vest you with the Collars and Jewels of your
Office.
It will be your duty to assist the Most Wise
Sovereign. In his absence. it may become your
duty to summon the Excellent and Perfect
Knights to resume their labours.
Your regular and punctual attendance at our
stated meetings is essentially requisite. We
firmly rely upon your knowledge of the Rose
Croix, and your attachment to the Chapter, for
the faithful discharge of the duties of your
Office.
Your Chair, Most Noble First General, is at
the head of the Valley of the North, and yours,
Most Noble Second General, of the Valley of
the South. May each Valley rival the other in
good works, and in respect for the General who
presides over it.
Recorder and Treasurer
Instg. P.M.W.S.—Most Wise Sovereign, whom
do you appoint your Recorder and your Trea-
surer ?
M.W.S. —The Excellent and Perfect Knight
of , Recorder; and the Excellent and
Perfect Knight of , Treasurer duly
elected by the Chapter.
M.W.S. —Excellent and Perfect Knights I de-
clare you invested.
I need not explain your duties, or enlarge upon
their importance. I desire only to impress upon
both of you the necessity of careful observance
of the Rules of the Chapter relating to your
duties.


Your position, Excellent Recorder, is in the
North East, and yours, Excellent Guardian of
the Treasure House, in the South East.
Grand Marshal
Instg. P.M.W .S.—Most Wise Sovereign, whom
do you appoint your Grand Marshal?
M.W.S.—The Excellent and Perfect Knight
of
M.W.S.—Excellent and Perfect Knight of
of Grand Marshal.
I must impress upon you the great importance
and responsibilities of your Office. The regu-
larity and solemnity of our ceremonies in a
great measure depend upon the manner in
which you perform your duties. I would there-
fore urge upon you the necessity of a diligent
and careful study of all the details of those
several portions of the ceremonies with which
you will have more immediately to do.
It will be your duty to attend on the Most
Wise Sovereign, to assist the Most Noble
Generals in the working of the Chapter, in the
reception of the Candidates in the different de-
grees, and in the immediate practice of our rites.
Your position is in the West, between the
Valleys.
Director of Ceremonies, Herald, and
Standard Bearer
Instg. P.M.W.S. —Most Wise Sovereign, whom
do you appoint your Director of Ceremonies,
your Herald, and your Standard Bearer ?
M.W.S.—The Excellent and Perfect Knights


ot Director of Ceremonies; of
Herald; and of , Stan-
dard Bearer.
M.W.S. —Excellent and Perfect Knight of
Director of Ceremonies; of
Bearer; I declare you invested.
It will be your duty severally to assist in those
portions of the ceremonies where you are re-
quired by the Most Wise Sovereign, to see that
everything be done decently and in order, and
that"there is no confusion or mismanagement.
You, Excellent Director of Ceremonies, will
receive visitors and arrange them in their places
in accordance with their rank, and "will marshal
all processions and demonstrations. Your posi-
tion is in the North Valley, below 7 the Throne of
the Most Wise Sovereign.
Your position, Excellent Herald, is opposite
in the South Valley. You will proclaim all newdy
perfected Knights of the Rose Croix in due
form. It will also fall to your share to lead the
Knights of the Chapter in the ceremonial use of
the swords, for wEich reason you should take
care to be thoroughly proficient therein.
You, Excellent Knight of the Standard, will
lead processions, attend the Herald in his pro-
clamations, and present the Standard to the
Most Wise Sovereign at the consecration of the
Neophyte in the Rose Temple.
Organist and Almoner
Instg. P.M.W.S. —Most Wise Sovereign, whom
do you appoint your Organist and your Almoner ?


M.W.S. —The Excellent and Perfect Knight of
Organist; and the Excellent and
Perfect Knight of Almoner.
M.W.S. —Excellent and Perfect Knights, I
declare you invested in your Offices.
Your duty, Excellent Organist, is to maintain
concord and harmony during the practice of our
rites, as well as to promote goodwill and affec-
tion, not only among the members of the Chapter
but also with Masons of all the grades of our
Order.
Your position is in the West at the Organ.
It will be your duty, Excellent Knight of
Charity, to collect Alms in the Chapter, and
to keep a record of the amounts so collected,
and of those distributed under the direction of
the Most Wise Sovereign.
Your position is on the right of the Excellent
Recorder.
Captain of the Guard
Instg. P.M.W.S. —Most Wise Sovereign, whom
do you appoint your Captain of the Guard?
M.W.S. —The Excellent and Perfect Knight
of
M.W.S.—Excellent and Perfect Knight of
, Captain of the Guard, I declare you
invested.
Your duty is to see that no one is admitted
to the Chapter except those who have the right
of entrance. This calls for great care and firm-
ness, as the safety of the Chapter is in a large
measure in your hands.
Your position is within the entrance of the
Chapter.


Outer Guard
Instg. P.M.W.S.—Most Wise Sovereign, whom
do you appoint your Outer Guard ?
M.W.S.—The Excellent and Perfect Knight
of , duly elected by the Chapter.
M.W.S.—Excellent and Perfect Knight of
, Outer Guard, I declare you invested
with your Office. You have been duly elected,
and I now return to you the Drawn Sword, which
is the emblem of your Office.
It will be your duty to guard the approaches
of the Chapter, and to report to the Captain of
the Guard all who desire to be admitted, so that
the responsibility of either granting or refusing
admission may not rest with yourself alone.
Proceed therefore to your post, and there be
like every true Knight, faithful unto death.
Address to the Most Wise Sovereign
(The M.W.S. stands. The Instg. P.M.W.S.
standing in the West, says : —)
Most Wise Sovereign, your title “Most Wise”
sufficiently indicates that you are now the in-
structor and guide of the Excellent and Perfect
Officers and Knights of your Chapter, and in
accepting it you have pledged yourself faithfully
to. be such.
You are especially to instruct them in this and
the preceding degrees, to explain the profound
mysteries of the Rose and the Cross, and the
paths which lead thereto. Your researches into
the history and philosophy of this degree you
will carefully impart in such ways as you may
deem best.


In the practice of the sublime precepts of our
Order you will guide by example as well as by
precept, and constantly inculcate toleration in all
the affairs of the Chapter in the broadest Masonic
sense.
May you, Most Wise Sovereign, and the mem-
bers of this Sovereign Chapter never cease to
labour successfully for the diffusion of Light and
Knowledge, and the elevation and improvement
of Humanity.
Address to the Knights
(The Instg. P.M.W.S., standing in the East,
instructs the Knights to stand.)
Excellent and Perfect Knights of the Rose
Croix, the Installation of the Most Wise Sovereign
and Officers of j-our Chapter forms another im-
portant event in its history, and will, I doubt
not, continue in your memory with many other
pleasant recollections associated with the
Chapter.
Those who have been appointed to their re-
spective Offices will look to you for assistance
and co-operation in the discharge of their high
and important duties, whilst you may look to
them for counsel, instruction and guidance in the
practice of our solemn and beautiful rite. Per-
fect unity of thought, action and feeling should
characterise our fellowship, and if there should
be a difference, let it only be that of emulation
in the exercise of those exalted precepts of our
Order, which give added dignity, power and
beauty in the greatest as well as in the least.


In our fraternal associations may we ever re-
member that we are children of humility, and
in our lives show to the world the effect of the
teaching of that Master who gave a new com-
mand, to “Love one another.”
Finally, Excellent and Perfect Knights, “This
is the will of God, that with w’ell-doing you put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men; as free,
yet not using your liberty for a cloak of mali-
ciousness, but as the servants of God. Honour
all men. Love the Brotherhood. Fear God.
Honour the King.
Excellent and Perfect Knights, be seated.
This, Most Wise Sovereign, ends the ceremony
of your Installation, and the Chapter is now
under your direction
*
Honours
The Honours for distinguished visitors are :
Foil the Most Puissant Grand Commander,
Officers or Members of the Supreme Council, the
Battery of the degree nine times; for Sovereign
Grand Inspectors General, and members of the
S2nd, 31st and 30th degrees, the Battery seven
times. For Most Wise Sovereigns and Past
Most Wise Sovereigns, five times; and for
Knights three times.
The use and presence of articles of furniture
neculiar to the Craft degrees should be avoided
unless it is impracticable to remove them.
Gavels, however, may be retained for sounding


the knocks, though it is preferable that this be
done with the pommel of the hilt of the drawn
sword.
One candle (or any number) may stand beside
the Throne of the M.W.S. and the chairs of the
Generals, but these should be lighted, without
ceremony, before the Knights enter and extin-
guished after they leave the Temple. A Chap-
ter of Knights of the Rose Croix is presumed
not to be closed, but its labours are suspended
and resumed.
Care should be taken that the colours of cloth-
ing and furnishings are correct, namely a clear
rich rose-crimson and a rich violet. Scarlet
should be avoided. Red roses may be worn by
the Knights.
The Mystic Cord may consist of a rope of
twisted silk crimson cord, into which some metal
threads or tinsel have been woven.
The names or qualities chosen by the Knights
may be in the language in which the ritual is
worked, or in Sanskrit, Greek, Katin or Hebrew.
No two Knights of a Chapter should use the
same name or quality unless in the one case it
is differentiated by the addition of an adjective
or phrase.
The names should be used in Chapter and in
agendas in preference to “Bro ,” the
full style being “The Excellent and Perfect (or
Illustrious) Knight of ’’
