

PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY
SYDNEY:
H. BANCROFT, 155, YORK-STREET, (NEXT THE LYCEUM);
AND SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.




A’~^^ L
UNIVERSAL EDUCATION.
feditn.
DELIVERED BY
R. L. JENKINS, ESQ., M.L.A.,
ON THE 21st NOVEMBER, 1859,
IN THE
LECTURE HALL OF THE MECHANICS’ SCHOOL OF ARTS,
SYDNEY.
“I. On the urgent necessity which, exists for immediate alterations in the arrange*
ment of the Primary Schools of the Colony, especially in the abolition of all School
Fees. 2. On the advantages to the community, particularly to the poorer classes, of
retaining the Tea and Sugar Duties, provided the revenue derived from those sources be
set apart as a distinct fund for the support of Public Education.,
TOGETHER WITH THE
PROCEEDINGS OE THE MEETING
HELD ON THE SAME OCCASION ; AND AN
APPENDIX,
CONTAINING LETTERS EXPRESSING THE OPINIONS OF THEIR HONORS THB
JUDGES, AND OTHER PRINCIPAL INHABITANTS OP THE COLONY, UPON
THE IMPORTANT SUBJECT OPENED UP BY THE LECTURER.
ALSO, COPIES OF SEPARATE PETITIONS NOW IN COURSE OF SIGNATURE.
&c. &o. &c.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY
H. BANCROFT, 155, YORK-STREET, (NEXT THE LYCEUM);
AND SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.


■


3 %55/f ’O'IZU
t , *yT
-<C f * Cf. .{ f
PREFACE.
The publication of anything that may tend to throw a light upon
so important a question as that of Education, hardly demands an
apology ) at the same time it may not perhaps be out of place to
remark, that I have been induced to issue this compilation, for I claim
no further credit for it than this, by the many demands that have been
made for a copy of this Lecture in a somewhat more convenient lorm
for study, than it assumes in the columns of a newspaper. As regards
the speecheshnade on the occasion, I regret that I took down only the
heads of them, not being aware that any desire would be expressed for
their publication in full. They have, however, been somewhat
amplified by myself upon the report published in the S. M. Herald ;
and have also been submitted to the revision of the speakers. The
Appendix was first suggested by the letter of the Hon. Sir Alfred
Stephen, read at the meeting. On applying to Mr. Jenkins for a copy
of that letter, I learnt that several others on the same subject had
been received by him, and as I deemed it important that the public
should know those opinions to which weight was to be attached, from
the intellectual as well as the social position of the gentlemen giving
them, I asked for, and by the courtesy of Mr. Jenkins, obtained copies o U A T x
of all the communications that gentlemen had received. I trusLthat


PEEFACB,
CHAS. DE BOOS.
7-
f- , r
the information—small as it is in comparison with the vast question
opened up—which is contained in this work may serve to lead the
public mind more pointedly towards the subject of Education, and give
an impetus to the feeling that has been of late so strongly evinced, in
favor of providing increased means for its extension.


GENERAL EDUCATION.
A large and influential meeting was held on the evening of Monday,
21st November, 1859, in the Lecture Hall of the Mechanics’ School of
Arts, Pitt Street, Sydney, to hear an address from R. L. Jenkins,
Esq., M. L. A., —
1. On the urgent necessity which exists for immediate alterations
in the arrangement of the primary schools of the colony, especially in
the abolition of all school fees, 2. On the advantages to the commu-
nity, particularly to the poorer classes, of retaining the tea and sugar
duties, provided the revenue derived from those sources be set apart as
a distinct fund for the support of Public Education.
Amongst those assembled were Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart.; tho
Hon. S. Samuel, Colonial Treasurer; Professors Woolley and Smith, of
the Sydney University; the Hon. J. K. Holden, M. L. C.; W. T.
Cape, Esq., M. L. A.; J. Douglass, Esq., M. L. A.; H. Parkes, Esq.,
M. L. A.; J. H. Plunkett, Esq., M. L. A.; J. Wilson, Esq., M. L. A.;
W. A. Duncan, Esq., Collector of Customs; Major Christie, Postmaster-
General ; James Macarthur, Esq., of Camden; G. Wright, E. and C.
Lloyd, Galloway, Hood, I. Aaron, and G. K. Ingelow, Esqs.; the Rev.
W. Walsh, and some other clergymen; and a number of National and
Denominational schoolmasters.
Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart., was called to the chair.
Letters excusing their non-attendance, were received from Sir Alfred


GENERAL EDUCATION*
Stephen, the Eevds. Allwood, Cuthbertson, and McDougall, and Mr. P.
Fawcett.
The Chairman then introduced the Lecturer, R, L, Jenkins, Esq., to
the meeting.
Mr, Jenkins addressed the meeting in the following terms
Gentlemen, —The Educational state of this colony has for some
time engaged my serious attention. Having mentioned a few of my
thoughts on the subject to some friends, whose opinions I much value,
in deference to their wishes I am here this evening to make my ideas
public by means of this Lecture. Although unaccustomed to appear in
the character of a Lecturer (for which reason you will, no doubt, accord
to me every indulgence), I the more readily acquiesced in the requests
of my friends, from feeling then as I feel now, confident, that if the
suggestions which I propose to do myself the honour to offer be adopted
by you, and the country, very many of the obstacles will be removed
which at present act as a bar, preventing several thousands of children
from receiving the many and great advantages of a good Education.
You will admit this is a glorious feeling to possess, and it is stimulated
by that feeling and by the hope that I shall succeed in impressing you
with the same, that I have now almost the requisite amount of nerve
to address this meeting, containing though it does so large a representa-
tion of the intelligence of the country. lam aware of the responsibility
of my position, and am not ignorant of the fact that very many of
the gentlemen present would treat my subject in a far more able manner;
I trust, however, to make up in earnestness for any deficiency in ability.
I shall not offer to you a single opinion or observation but such as I
believe to be true. A few days ago, a friend of mine, who had not
himself paid much attention to public Education, hearing me advocate
my views in perhaps rather an earnest manner, observed he thought
I was mad on the subject. Taking leave to differ from my friend, I, on
the contrary, am more disposed to believe that I have a mission in this
matter—a mission inconceivably gTand—of no less magnitude than to
assist you, fellow colonists, in placing within the reach of every
child an intellectual, moral, an d religious Education. If this is
madness, then my desire is, that not only my friend, but
that all present and all absent, should become equally touched, and
that there should be no sanity in this community until the cause of the
madness is removed ; or, in other words, until we have universal
Education.
Anothej purpose I have in view is, to assist in keeping this question


GENERAL EDtTCATKHT.
of Education —the greatest beyond measure of all questions—before
the public mind; for, although it is true parliamentary rules prevent
the introduction into the Assembly during the present session of another
bill having for its object “ the promotion of public Education,” still it is
most desirable that the subject should be well discussed previous to the
commencement of the next; and it is to be hoped that, by taking it up
in that calm, deliberate, yet earnest, manner due to its importance, we
shall be enabled to agree upon some system of Education which will be
suitable to the circumstances of the colony, and will at the same time
give satisfaction to all parties. If the people do not themselves make
their wishes known on this subject, and that in an unmistakable man-
ner, they are not likely to have an Education Bill passed for many years;
for it is very improbable that any three or four gentlemen who may
■happen to form the Ministry of the day, however talented they may be,
would, without some such demonstration, be enabled to bring forward
such a measure as would have much chance to give satisfaction. To
prevent Education being the repeated cause of Ministerial crises, now
that the question is fairly before the public, it is desirable that it should
remain so until some definite plan is agreed upon.
I do not intend to introduce into my Lecture any of those topics which,
unhappily, are at present the causes of so much difference of opinion.
I wish it to be distinctly understood, that the position I take up as
between the present systems of Education is one of strict neutrality.
The changes I propose to make are applicable to both the present
systems (or any other which is likely to be acceptable to the colony),
and would render all our primary schools much more useful than they
are at present.
But the most pressing question I shall have to bring before your
notice is that involved in the method by which I propose to raise a
fund sufficiently large to meet all our educational requirements, viz., by
the retention of the revenues at present derivable from the duties on
tea and sugar, or, in other words, by giving power to the Government to
levy indirectly, and in the most easy, inoffensive, yet efficient manner,
what would, by the plan suggested, really amount to nothing more than
a small, direct, capitation school tax on every person in the colony. For,
should this proposal (as I believe it will when fully explained) meet your
approval, and that of the public generally, it will then become necessary
that immediate steps be taken, in order that the wishes of the people
may be at once made known to the Legislature. As this matter, however,
belongs more immediately to the second part of my Lecture, 1 will now
respectfully direct your attention to the necessity for a change in the
existing arrangements of the primary schools.


GENERAL EDUCATION.
As to the emergency which exists for increased activity on the part of
our legislators, philanthropists, and indeed of the whole body of the
people, in this matter of Education—for above all other questions this is
one in which the happiness and prosperity of the entire community are
mixed up, X will, in proof, first refer to the statistics of the colony, as
they furnish us with most valuable information on this subject.
The last census shows that our population amounted in 1856 to
266,189 persons, that out of this number, after deducting children of
four years old downwards, there remained no fewer than 55,135 persons
who did not possess as much education as is indicated by being able to
read, however imperfectly. The number of children between the ages
of four and fourteen, throughout the colony, in total ignorance, were
17,582 boys ; 16,532 girls; total, 34,114. The number of persons who
can read but not write, and of those who can do neither well, will
greatly add to the number of uneducated persons.
If any gentleman doubts the accuracy of these returns, let him but
take an excursion through the country districts, or visit the back lanes
and allies of this city, and he will see enough to convince him of their
truthfulness, and will not fail to be impressed with the urgent necessity
for prompt and great changes in our Education arrangements.
In the police district of Sydney there are upwards of 6000 children
between the ages of four and fourteen in total ignorance. These are
some of the unfortunate creatures we see in crowds in our streets, grow-
ing up in filth, idleness, and all kinds of vice. Their only Education is
one of gross immorality, witnesses as they are of all the demoralising
scenes so common in the localities in which they live. Is it, therefore
any wonder that these neglected classes are the most fruitful sources of
the great expense this country is subjected to in the shape of police
expenditure, amounting, as it does, annually to near £3OO 000 ? I n
looking over the Estimates now on the table of the Assembly I fin 1 }
the House is called upon to vote £266,992 to meet the expenses’of our
gaols, police, and other items of expenditure in connection with the
administration of justice. And for the support of charitable institutions
-rendered (for the most part) necessary by the improvidence and mno
ranee of the people-a further large sum, making the total amount
considerably above the enormous amount of £3oo,ooo—a tax of mor
than 355. per head on every person in the colony over fourteen years of
age; or, say, 20s, per head for every man, woman, and child
The close connection of crime with ignorance l s indubitably proved
by tbe statistics of all European states, as well as those of Arnerioa
and tbe results of inquiries into this connection prove that jn “n


GENERAL EDUCATION.
proportion as the people become enlightened, so does crime disappear.
Some carefully compiled tables which appear in the Seventeenth Report
of Inspector of Prisons, forcibly illustrates this great fact. Not to
trouble you with a detailed account, I will simply state the annual
mean for ten years, ending 1841, of the educational state of adult
prisoners in English gaols, and another showing the centesimal propor-
tions of Education of juvenile delinquents for 1850.
Extract from Seventeenth Report of Inspectors of Prisons, published
in 1856, vol. 32 :
Annual mean.
Can neither read nor write 31-18 8,918
Can read only 22-38 6,364
Can read or write, or both imperfectly 36-85 10,011
Can read and write well 9-13 2,370
Superior Education -14 101
State of Education not ascertained -04 27
Annual mean for ten years ending 1841 100-00 27,791
Annexed table shows the centesimal proportions of educational
knowledge of the juvenile prisoners under summary conviction, at the
period of their committals, without distinction of sex, for the year 1860:
Can neither read nor write 48-01
Can read only 20-64
Can read or write, or both imperfectly 29-44
Total with little or no instruction 98-09
Can read and write well 1-56
Superior Education -02
State of Education not ascertained *33
100-00
These facts and figures cannot be too strongly or too often impressed
upon the minds of the people of these colonies, for, when fully alive to
the immense advantages enlightened have over ignorant communities,
the masses themselves will insist on such measures being enacted as
will ensure the proper training of every child in Australia. In this
colony, no educational statistics of the confines in our gaols have been
kept; but it is probable that, for the future, accurate returns will be
annually laid before Parliament. The Assembly, on a resolution I had


GENERAL EDUCATION.
the honor to move a few weeks ago, ordered such returns to be furnished',
not only of all prisoners, but also of all inmates of our charitable
institutions. I have no doubt these investigations will elicit similar
results to those in England. With such accurate information as is
given by the English statistics, it will surely be suicidal conduct on
your part not to bring into more efficient and general use a remedial
agent possessing so much power as Education.
The enormous crime-tax of 355. per head, to which I have already
alluded, cannot but be looked upon as a just retribution on this commu-
nity for leaving so many thousands of its members in total ignorance.
The democratic Governments of North America and Switzerland, as
well as the Governments of Germany, are acting with greater wisdom,
for they take care that every child shall receive a most careful religious*
moral, and intellectual training. Travellers and writers inform us, that
the results of the excellent school laws of Germany are mSst strikingly
remarkable, in the much higher moral and social status of the German
as compared with the English labourer, and still more so in the fact that
the German Governments have so few prisoners that they are able
to dispense altogether with the punishment of transportation.
With your permission I will read a short extract from an excellent
work on the social condition and Education of the people in England and
Europe, by Joseph Kay, Esq., M.A., a brother of Sir James P. Kay
Shuttleworth. Both these gentlemen have devoted themselves to the
promotion of public education, and are acknowledged as good authorities.
Mr. Kay, speaking on the difference of the town life of English and
German children, says :
“I can give a traveller, who is desirous of comprehending at one
short view the workings of the German and Swiss systems of popular
Education, no better advice than to direct him to notice the state of the
streets in any German or Swiss town, which he happens to visit: no matter
where it be, whether on the plains of Prussia or Bavaria, on the banks
of the Ehine, in the small towns of the Black Forest, or in the moun-
tainous cantons of Alpine Switzerland—no matter where—let him only
walk through the streets of such a town in the morning or the afternoon,
and count the number of children to be found there above the age of
four or five—or let him stand in the same streets, when the children are
going to or returning from the schools—and let him examine their
cleanly appearance, the good quality, the excellent condition, and the
cleanliness of their clothing, the condition of the lesson-books they are
carrying, the happiness and cheerfulness, and at the same time polite-
ness and ease of their manners; he will think he sees the children of the


GENERAL EDUCATION.
rich; but let him follow them home, and he will find that many of them
are the offspring of the poorest artisans and labourers of the town. If
that one spectacle does not convince him of the magnitude of the
educational efforts of Germany, and of the happy results which they are
producing—let him go no further, for nothing he can further see will
teach him. Let him then come home, and rejoice in the condition of
our poor; but should he start at this extraordinary spectacle, as I have
seen English travellers do, to whom I have pointed out this sign of
advanced and advancing civilization, let him reflect, that this has been
effected, spite of all the obstacles which impede ourselves.”
We only require to make similar efforts to obtain like results.
In the Transactions of the National Association for the Promotion
of Social Science for 1857, page 36,1 find the following forcible remarks,
in an address on Education, delivered before the Society, at Birming-
ham, by the Right Honorable Sir J. T. Pakington, Bart., M.P.
“There is perhaps nothing of which we Englishmen are apt to be
more proud than our free institutions, and especially our freely-elected
Parliament, and we are always holding ourselves out as a model which
other nations ought to follow. In connection, however, with the great
question of the Education of the people, I will appeal to you dispas-
sionately, whether not only America, but a large proportion of the
countries of Europe, may not say, ‘ You bid us follow your example—
you bid us copy your model, but in respect of Education we have
settled this question long ago; we have brought the means of good
instruction to every man’s door, while we find your boasted Parlia-
ment baffled by phantoms which, we have long since disregarded or
overcome.’ ”
These remarks apply with equal force to this colony, so do the fol-
lowing, which appear in another part of the same address :
“Ifis in vain, it is mischievous, to deny it; we are surrounded by a
portion of the population, both in our towns and rural districts, steeped
in a degree of ignorance, intellectual destitution, vice, and crime, than
which scarcely anything worse would be found in an uncivilised land,
and the blackness and the shame of which are rendered darker and
more shameful by the civilisation which prevails around us.”
These humiliating, but true, objections are made by one of the most
talented members of her Majesty’s late Government.


general education.
Having, I consider, proved the necessity for great reforms, in our
present school systems—shewing, as I have, that, notwithstanding the
good the present primary schools have and are now doing in educating
a portion of the children of the colony, still over 34,000 are left by
them to grow up to manhood in the grossest ignorance of their duties
as responsible beings, or as citizens, and that in a country possessing a
Constitution which, whether for good or evil, confers upon the ignorant
and the vicious as much political power as on the enlightened and
more virtuous portions of the community—l will next proceed to prove
that the abolition of all fees in our primary schools is a change, which
it is absolutely necessary should be made before we can hope to secure
UNIVERSAL EDUCATION.
Visitors to the National Schools in Sydney will be much pleased
with the general appearance of the children; nearly all are well
clothed, all have shoes, while the garments of a portion of them indi-
cate that their parents are in good circumstances. On looking at the
book containing the names of the children, and the calling and trade or
profession of the parents, they will see that a large number of the
parents are of that class which could afford to pay altogether for the
schooling of their children. One thing is apparent —they will find in
these schools the sons of Members of rarliamcnt, professional gentle-
men, and the well-to-do tradesman, but they will look in vain for very
many of the poorest class, for whose benefit they were chiefly
established.
In the Denominational Schools the case is somewhat different. The
general appearance of the children —some without shoes—would lead a
visitor to believe that many of them belonged to a more negligent or
a poorer class of parents. Notwithstanding the rules respecting cloth-
ing in these schools are not apparently strictly enforced, yet there are
upwards of 6000 uneducated children in the police district of Sydney.
On inquiry into the causes of this startling fact I find several
assigned.
One class of parents is too poor to pay the school fees. Clergymen
and ladies who are in the constant habit of visiting the dwellings of the
poor assure me that a very large number of children are not in school
from this cause. This fee system is also found to operate in a similar
manner in England. Mr. Kay says to charge 2d. to 4d. a week abso-
lutely excludes all the children of all paupers, and of all poor persons.
This he ascribes as one of the causes why half the children are not
attending any school; and the number of persons in England and
Wales who cannot read and write amounts nearly to 8,000,000


GENERAL EDUCATION.
of persons. A second class, though not too poor, are too selfish to
make any sacrifices, or too indifferent to give to their children
advantages which they themselves, perhaps totally uneducated, have
never been able to prize.
In some of the schools I find that occasionally a child is received
without payment; but these are exceptional cases, and when this
concession is made, it (the child) is admitted as a pauper. Amongst the
printed rules and regulations for the guidance of masters in one of the
largest Denominational Schools in Sydney, I find the following stands
as Rule 7:—“ln consideration of this salary, masters will be required
to educate gratuitously all children certified to be paupers by a member
of the Local Board.” There are many parents too poor to pay the fees,
and yet too proud to allow their children to enter the schools on these
degrading conditions. Their pride takes offence at the idea of their
children and themselves receiving charitable aid. They fear their
neighbours’ taunts, and object to place it in the power of any person to
cast up to their children that they had received a pauper Education.
This feeling prevails to a much greater extent than is generally
supposed. Some may be disposed to call it false pride, and perhaps to
some extent it is so when allowed to interfere with the mental
development of the children. Still we must admit it to be most
desirable that a feeling of self-respect should be encouraged, calculated
as that feeling is to foster those industrial and prudential habits which
act so powerfully in checking both pauperism and crime. All writers
on the working of the Poor Laws in England agree in saying that they
have had a most demoralising effect, and have greatly contributed to
the pauperism, demoralization, and degradation of the people, by the
encouragement they have given to improvidence. Although it is now
near twenty years since I was in England, I remember well asking
men in receipt of good wages why they did not lay by a portion of their
earnings as a provision for old age, and being told by them in reply,
“ Why should they ?—for the parish would support them, as it had their
parents before them.” The experience, I have little doubt, of many
present can affirm, that this is by no means an unusual answer to such
a question—so utterly deficient in self-respect are thousands of the
peasantry of England that they look without dismay to the Union House
as the home of their old age.
Perhaps it would not be out of place for me here to state, that the
expedient by which I propose to raise a fund in support of elementary
schools, in the place of fees, and to which I shall shortly more
particularly allude, will entirely be free from the pauper character, and
b 13


GENERAL EDUCATION.
yet give all but gratuitous Education. No sucb happy result is possible
under the School Fees’ system. Remember No. 7 —that odious pauper
c l ause —it grates on my ears. Another objection I have to fees is, the
tendency they have to give to the schools much of the character of
private establishments. I will explain myself. A certain minimum
rate of fees is required from the parent of every child, according to a
fixed scale, which is usually Bd. for one child; two children of one
family, 6d. each ; three or more, 4d. each ; —but I see also the following
notice, “ That parents who can afford it are expected to pay larger
fees.” The income of the Teachers is much affected by the amount of
fees received. The usual rate is, in Sydney, to add to their salaries
75 per cent, of the amount of the fees received ; but in the country the
Teachers are allowed to keep whatever they can get. Under this
arrangement, I ask you, is it unnatural to suppose that the Teachers
are induced to pay more attention to the children of those parents
from whom they receive the greatest gain? On the contrary, it does
not require any great amount of imagination to fancy, especially in
districts not often visited by School Inspectors, that the attendance of
the poorer children is rather discouraged than welcomed, for fear they
should become the cause of the removal of the children of those
parents without whose larger contributions the Teachers, with their
present miserable Government allowances, would be unable to support
themselves and families. I have reason to believe that this, to some
extent, is the case even in Sydney. It would be inconsistent, with our
knowledge of human nature, to come to any other conclusion. To my
mind it affords some little explanation of the cause why there
are at least not more of the children belonging to the poorer classes
in the schools. I will speak bolder, and say positively, it is the case.
X am speaking in the presence, no doubt, of many Teachers who know
it is so. I cannot blame them ; it is the fault of the system, not
of the schoolmaster.
These, gentlemen, are some of the objections which induce me to
advocate the discontinuance of school fees; but I will offer another,
and by no means a weak one, viz., “ That the Teachers themselves
complain that the system is lowering to their social status ; and tends
not a little to lessen the efficiency of their teaching.” I am happy to
see several Teachers present, as their experience will, no doubt, confirm
the correctness of a statement made to me a few days ago by two of
their profession. It is this :—“ That a wet Monday considerably
diminishes the amount of fees which should be taken in the same
week.” In the Fort-street School the reduction usually amounts to
£2O less to be distributed amongst them every month. Here we have


GENERAL EDUCATION.
two bad results : not only are many of tlie parents, by a desire to sav&
the fees for the week, induced to keep their children at home —(I am
not, perhaps, correct in saying at home, because it is more probable
they will be running about the streets) —but the incomes of the
Teachers are lessened. Surely such a system must seriously interfere
with the progress of the children, and at the same time degrade the
position of the Teacher.
But the Teachers are further degraded by being obliged to act as
regular hucksters, in making bargains with the parents as to the price
they are to pay for their children’s Education. They are allowed to
keep all, or nearly all, the pence they can get. I need not remind you
that the system of charging different prices for the same kind of
articles to different customers in the same shop always gives dissatis-
faction, and brands the proprietors as impostors. I am informed that
similar results arise from charging, in the primary schools, different
prices for Education, and that unpleasant scenes do, in consequence,
occasionally occur between parents and teachers ; and I may add, that
the Teachers are not raised in the estimation of the children by
receiving the payment from the hands of their pupils. Surely this
huckstering position is not one in which we should place the Teachers
of our children.. Men of ability and education will not be disposed to
enter into, or continue in, so very humiliating and dependent a
position.
Although I believe that the abolition of school fees will be the means
of decreasing the number of uneducated children by some thousands,
I am not so utopian as to imagine that it will give us universal
Education. To bring about that most desirable state of things, it will
be necessary that we follow up that first main step by others, such as
the erection of industrial, reformatory, and other supplementary schools,
and by other methods of encouragement to parents ; to all of which
I will more particularly allude, when speaking of the different
objects, for the promotion of which, I consider, large funds will be
required.
I should hope that, when all these steps have been taken to bring
Education within the reach of every child in the colony, there would
not be found, in New South Wales, a single parent who would refuse to
his child so great a benefit. But if, after all the care and anxiety which
the community will then have shown for the Education of its people,
there should be a large number of negligent and ignorant persons who
would persist in bringing up their offspring as brutes, to the injury of
the children themselves, and to the endangerment of society, thereby
compelling us to keep up a large police expenditure to furnish the
15


GENEBAL EDUCATION.
means of protection against a comparatively small portion of our
number who choose to refuse instruction, then, and not until then, I
think the question will be fairly open for the educated portion of the
colonists to consider whether or not it should be made a legal, as it is a
natural, obligation on parents to educate their children. It is not
within the scope of this Lecture to enter fully into all the arguments
which could be advanced in favor of such a law; but, as it will be both
interesting and instructive, I will, with your permission, briefly refer
to the reasons which other countries—some of them at least
equally as democratic as this colony—have considered a sufficient
justification. The Governments of these countries say,—
“ The happiness and social prosperity of every country require that
all its members should be capable of thinking, intelligent, and above all
religious. He who does not educate his children is an offender against
his country, inasmuch as he lessens the probability of its future
prosperity and happiness; therefore, such a person must be punished,
that other careless citizens may be deterred from following his
example.”
I wish every parent present would commit these words to his memory.
They have a great effect in impressing the mind with the importance of
Education. I will now quote Mr. Kay’s Commentary upon this reason-
ing. He says, ‘ ‘ Induced by such a train of simple reasoning as this, the
Prussian Government, as well as all the Governments of Germany,
Denmark, Switzerland, Sweden, and America, obliges every parent to
educate his children. He may send them to any school he pleases, in any
part of the country ; he may have a private.tutor at home if he pleases;
he may educate them himself; or the mother may perform the office of
teacher. In all this the Government will not interfere. All that is
demanded that is, as the country is immediately and essentially
interested in the right development of the mind of each one of its
citizens, the country should have satisfactory proof that the children of
every parent are being properly educated, in one way or another.
Surely there is nothing so very unreasonable in all this. We interfere
with the parent’s right so far as to say he shall not teach his children
to steal, or to trespass on the property of others, or to blaspheme.
Why, then, should it be so much worse to require that he shall not
allow them to grow up in idleness, filth, and immorality, contemners of
the laws both of God and man, and curses to themselves and to all
their neighbours ?”
1 hese arguments are, in my opinion, quite sufficient to warrant the
16


GENERAL EDUCATION.
imposition of similar laws in any country. In the enactment of such a
law we have the high authority of Blackstone to show that we should
be only obliging parents to do their duty to their children. That great
judge, nearly a century ago, wrote as follows:
“ The last duty of parents to their children is that of giving them an
Education suitable to their station in life, a duty pointed out by reason,
and of the greatest importance of any. For, as Puffendorf well observes,
it is not easy to imagine or allow, that a parent has conferred any
considerable benefit upon his child by bringing him into the world, if he
afterwards entirely neglects his culture and education, and suffers him
to grow up like a mere beast, to lead a life useless to others, and
shameful to himself. Yet the municipal laws of most countries seem to
be defective in this point, by not constraining the parent to bestow a
proper Education upon his children. Perhaps they 1 bought it punish-
ment enough to leave the parent, who neglects the instruction of his
family, to labour under those griefs and inconveniences which his
family, so uninstructed, will be sure to bring upon him. Our laws,
though their defects in this particular cannot be denied, have in one
instance made a wise provision for breeding up the rising generation ;
since the poor and laborious part of the community, when past the age
of nurture, are taken out of the hands of their parents, by the statutes
for apprenticing poor children ; and are placed out by the public in such
a manner, as may render their abilities, in their several stations, of the
greatest advantage to the commonwealth.”
I have been mainly induced to refer to the possible propriety of the
introduction of an obligatory law, as it furnishes me with another
argument, and the last which I intend to offer you, in favor of the
abolition of school fees ; for I hold it would be impossible, or, if possible,
unjust, to make such a law, until every facility has been offered to the
parent for the instruction of his children.
The no-fee system, as well as the other measures to which I have
alluded, must precede an obligatory law. I trust, however, that to
ensure universal Education in this colony, it will be found sufficient to
place the means of instruction within the reach of every child.
But, apart altogether from this last argument, I have shown you—
1. That the system of school fees is the cause of much irregu-
larity in the attendance of the children at the schools, by
inducing hundreds of parents to keep them from school
four days a week, should it happen to rain on the first, in
order to save the week’s fees.


GENERAL EDUCATION.-
2. That a system of making the incomes of the Teachers
dependent in a great measure on the number of pennies
they can obtain from the parents, is degrading to their
social position, and tends to convert the public elementary
into private schools, for the benefit of the richer portion of
the community.
3. That the system is the great cause why thousands of children
are growing up to manhood in total ignorance.
4. That the system absolutely denies Education to those children
whose parents cannot pay, excepting on the degrading
condition of being received as paupers.
I wish to obtain from you an expression of opinion. I will accept
your cheers as a refusal, and I hope they will be unmistakeable. I ask
you, fellow-colonists and citizens, if it is your wish and pleasure that
instruction shall be given to the thousands of uneducated children now
in the colony only under the brand of pauperism ? (Loud and prolonged
cheers.)
It is incumbent on me now to show in what way I propose to meet
the deficiency in the school funds, which would arise on the abolition of
the fee system. It appears to me this may be done in three ways :
1. By an increased annual grant from the consolidated revenue.
2. The imposition of direct school taxes as is the case in North
America, Germany, Switzerland, and other continental
States.
3. By setting apart, as a school fund, the revenues arising from
the tea and sugar duties.
The first method will, no doubt, be objected to on the ground that
it would be placing a largely increased burden on the revenue; and
that at a time when a majority of the Assembly have resolved that it
shall cease to be replenished by the tea and sugar duties. Looking at
the amount the colony is annually called upon to provide to meet the
interest of our fast increasing public debt, which at the present time is
upwards of three-and-a-half millions, and that our present revenue is
not sufficient to carry on public works, without adding to that enormous
debt, it would be difficult for the Government to meet any largely
increased claims on it. I hold, however, that no expenditure would be
more beneficial, or economical, than an increased grant for public
Education and, as a passing remark, I may add, that if, for the
same purpose, it were necessary to make an addition to our loans, I know
no object for which such a debt could be better justified, bearing in
mind the usual reason given for incurring such liabilities, viz.,
“that of benefit to posterity.” Fortunately, our resources are all-


GENERAL EDUCATION*
sufficient to confer on our descendants enlightened parents, the benefit
to which I allude, and which would be the best legacy we could give
them.
The great objection to a direct school tax is the enormous expense
which would be attendant, on its collection in this colony, where the
inhabitants are so scattered, and where the occupations of a large
proportion, require them to be constantly moving from one part to
another. We have here no organisation or appliance for taxing
purposes, excepting in the municipalities. In America and Germany,
the same parties who assess and collect other rates, are also engaged in
collecting the school tax. Many other arguments could be advanced
against this mode ; bqt those I have named appear to me fatal,
especially when we have open to us the expedient proposed in the third
plan, which I think is free from all objections of at least any
weight.
Before alluding more particularly to this plan, it will be convenient
that I should give a short statement to the meeting of the present
position of the Tea and Sugar Question in the Assembly, It is
rather interesting, especially as it has been the cause of a ministerial
crisis.
On Friday, 2nd September, Mr. Parkes moved, “ That in the opinion
of this House, all Customs duties on tea and sugar, which articles are
common necessaries of life to the people of New South Wales, ought to
be forthwith repealed.” This was carried by a majority in a House of
fifty-seven members. The Cowper Ministry, on this defeat, resigned,
but Mr. Murray not succeeding in forming a Ministry, again resumed
their seats; and on the 9th September succeeded in getting the above
resolution rescinded, chiefly on the ground that it was inopportune for
the Assembly to have taken action in the matter until the Colonial
Treasurer had made his Financial Statement. On the 6th October, Mr.
Weekes made this statement, and at the same time gave notice of a
series of resolutions, in which he asked the Assembly to agree to
abolish the tea and sugar duties during the next year (1860).
The question of Education was at this time before the House, and
occupied much of my thoughts; and when revolving in my mind in
what manner a large educational fund could be best raised, the idea
occurred to me (as it may have done to others) that one good way would
be to set aside the revenue, derivable from the tea and sugar duties for
this purpose. On further considering this thought, I felt satisfied, from
reasons, which I will shortly state, that it would be an admirable
method. I therefore gave notice that, contingent to Mr. Weekes
moving his resolutions, I would move as an amendment: —


1854
1855 1856.
Sugar...£35,846 £2347 .
... £45,045
£2902 ... £56,913 £2997
Tea 28,787 1885 ,
21,619
1393 ... 25489 1342
£64,633
£66,664
£82,402
Estimated amount for
1857
1858
1859 and 1860
Sugar...£88,520 £4003 ,,
.. £84,651 £3842 ... £90,000 £95,000
Tea 24,466 1106 ..
. 31,389
1424 ... 40,000 45,000
GEKERAL EDUCATION,
“ That the present duties of Customs, chargeable on tea and sugar,
imported into this Colony be maintained; but that the revenue thus
derived, shall in future, be set apart as a distinct fund, for the purpose
of public Education, especially for the establishment and maintenance
of elementary schools thrcmghout the colony.”
I think it right to say, that the first notice to members of the
Assembly, who usually sat on the same benches as myself, of my
intention to make this amendment was given at the time, I put my
notice of motion on the paper Knowing the then state of political
parties, I designedly abstained from making my purpose known, for
fear the amendment might be considered in the light of a party
movement.
The resignation of the Ministry has, a second time, postponed the
further discussion of the subject; but it is one which must shortly
again be brought forward, as both sides of the House have decided
that the duties shall cease to form a portion of the general revenue.
In the meantime, I am desirous, to get an expression of opinion from
the public, on the proposition contained in my amendment; to the
merits, and demerits, of which I beg now to direct your kind
attention.
In addition to many other commendations in its favor, I beg to
submit to you the following:—
1, That a fund supported by the duties in question will increase
just in proportion to that of the population, and conse-
quently just in proportion to the demands which will
probably be made upon it.
In proof of this statement, I have been favored by the Collector of
Customs with a return of the revenue collected on tea and sugar, and
the cost of its collection in the last five years :—•
£112,986
20
£116,040
£130,000 £140,000


general education*
2. That, although the total amount is large, it is collected at a
trifling cost; not exceeding four per cent. —and the taxes
are but little felt by any portion of the community.
Although most of the members who voted for the abolition of these
duties were of this opinion, still they considered it was an unjust,
because an unequal tax ; as by means of it the poorer classes are called
upon to contribute just as largely to the expenses of carrying on the
Government of the country as the richer, who derive greater advantages,
inasmuch as it gives them protection to their properties in addition to
their lives and liberties. This was the argument which influenced the
minds of many honorable gentlemen; but the proposition in the
amendment makes the whole question assume a very different aspect,
In proposing that the duties should be set apart for the promotion of
public Education, especially in support of elementary schools, I
entirely remove all the objections of any weight urged against its
continuance. For admitting that the poorer classes would be large
contributors to the fund, still it would be greatly increased by the other
portions of the community; whereas the poorer portions would receive
all, or almost all, of the direct advantages from the expenditure.
(Cheers.)
I am happy in being able to say that several of the members who
voted for the abolition out of consideration to the poorer classes, have
informed me that they will now, and for exactly the same reasons,
support their retention as a school fund—believing, with me, that in
doing so they will best consult the interests of those classes. It will
be apparent to all that any members thus acting will not be guilty of
any act of inconsistency, but would be open to that imputation if they
acted otherwise. (Loud Cheers.)
There is one argument, gentlemen, in praise of the proposed method
for raising a school fund, that I am particularly desirous to impress
upon you. It is this: —The whole community being contributors,
every parent, however poor, will be in a position to demand the
admittance of his children to the schools “ as aright, and not as apolitical
concession” —not as an act of charity—without any fear that either
himself or his children will, in consequence, receive for ever afterwards
the brand of pauperism. For, although the contribution to the fund of
himself and his family as consumers of tea and sugar, may not amount
to more than 2Jd. a week for each person, still, in the Education of his
children without further payment, he will be only receiving a return —
an inestimable one though it may be —for his outlay. (Loud Cheers.)
I wish you to mark the good results even in this respect which will
attend this description of tax. The pride of the poor man will receive
c 21


GENERAL EDUCATION.
no wound ; Ids self-esteem will be maintained; lie will take a greater
interest in a school to which he is himself a contributor; and society
will have the satisfaction of knowing, that it is not assisting in the
demoralisation of its poorer members, by withholding Education from
their children, unless they shall be placed on the list Of paupers.
I agree with those gentlemen, who think it desirable that parents
should make some payment, in order to give them an interest in the
schools, and thereby secure a more regular attendance of their children,
—provided the payment is made in such a manner as not to have a
contrary effect, by inducing them to keep their children four days of
the week from school, should it rain on the first, which, as I before said,
on the authority of the Teachers, and, I may add on that of the
Inspectors of Schools, is the frequent result of the present system.
Under the proposed plan no such narrow and selfish motives will have
room to play ; there will be no interference with the progress of the
children, for parents will be paying, whether they send their children to
school or not; and, although the tax is collected indirectly, it will go
directly to the school fund, so that they will know they are paying for
their children’s schooling. Here it will be seen that we are securing all
the good effects likely to follow from the influence of selfish motives.
But admitting, for the sake of argument, that the system of school
fees best secures the interests of the parents, this can only be the
result to a limited extent, and can only apply to the case of such
parents as have the means of providing, or who are ready to make
sacrifices for their children’s Education. It would not secure the
interest of those who Avere too poor or negligent, or who refused to make
any payment. On the contrary, the necessity of paying school fees,
if allowed to continue, will most certainly be the means of preventing
thousands and thousands of children from receiving Education, and of
thus adding to that dangerous portion of the population which obliges
the colony to maintain an immense force to prevent, detect, and punish
crimes.
Some men who may be childless, or having children, would not wish
to send them to the public schools, will, perhaps, deem it unjust to pay
for the children of others; but, looking at this matter in a selfish point
of vieAV, I agree with those who think it is far better that we should
be taxed for the benefit of a school than for the benefit of a workhouse
or prison ; for, whatever is saved by the former will most assuredly,
and by a natural sequence, have to be expended on the latter; and as
this is proved by experience to be a universal result, I repeat it is more
desirable that we should submit to taxation for the building and
maintaining of schools—signs, as they are of a nation’s advancement
22


GEkEfcAL EDUCATION,
in civilisation —than of gaols, the necessity for which cannot hut he
looked upon as degrading to our humanity. (Cheers.) I wish also to
remind any person who objects to he taxed for schools on the grounds
of his not receiving a direct return, that if my proposition is not
assented to he will not escape, hut will, in consequence, be subjected to
a heavier taxation ; for the Legislature, wisely recognising the principle
that it is the bounden duty of the State to promote popular instruction
makes an annual grant of money for that purpose. The sums hitherto
voted have been miserably below the amount required to meet the
Educational wants of the colony; in future, there must be much
larger grants if we are to make any advances towards the Education
of the people. But if this proposition is acceded to, the public revenue
for the future will be relieved from the burden of Educational grants.
To my proposed amendment it has been objected, that it was
inexpedient to set aside any part of the public revenue in support of a
particular object. I hold that this objection has, or at least will have,
no weight after the close of the next year, for a large majority of the
Assembly have determined that the consolidated revenue shall cease to'
be supplied by the duties in question. Practically, the amendment
only says this to the Government, “As it appears from recent
proceedings in the House, that, after the year 1860, you have decided to
discontinue the tea and sugar duties as sources of the general revenue,
and as large funds are required for the Education of the people, it is
most desirable for the promotion of that great object that you continue
to collect the same, and let the proceeds for the future be known and
kept in your books as ‘ The Educational Fund.’ ” The raising of a
fund for specific purposes by taxation on particular objects is at present
a part of our system. The assessment raised under the Act, “To
prevent the spread of disease among sheep,” forms a distinct fund. The
Harbour and Pilot Duties are of the same character, ihe capitation
tax, proposed to be levied on the Chinamen in a bill agreed to last year
by the Assembly, was of a like nature, and as was remarked in the
Herald lately—” Our entire municipal system proceeds upon this prin-
ciple.” lam informed by the Under-Secretary to the Treasury, that no
inconvenience would be felt in keeping a distinct account of the duties
in question. I hold that the weight of any such arguments as inexpe-
diency, impolicy, and that class, when applied to the present case,
would be as the weight of a feather against that of a mountain when
attempted to be balanced with the advantages such a fund would confer
upon society. I may here, in passing, remark that a school fund
raised on articles less in universal use than tea and sugar, would not
carrv out the object in view. The practical effect, for example, of
23


UENEEAL EDUCATION.
abolishing duties on tea and sugar, and substituting silks, carriages,
and such articles, would be to convert the schools into pauper
institutions; for, just in proportion to the support they receive from a
fund to which the parents are not contributors, will they assume an
eleemosynary character.
I have purposely in this Lecture avoided all remarks upon the questions
of systems of Education; and mode of distribution of the funds. Ido
not wish these matters, to be at all mixed up, with the immediate
question before us, which I look upon more as one of ways and means.
The great object at present is to provide the funds which will be
necessary to carry out any system or systems which may hereafter be
agreed upon, and which I hope will be satisfactorily settled in the
course of the ensuing year. But, should the funds from this school-tax
become available before any alterations are made in the present systems,
it will of course, be for the Legislature to determine as to the manner of
its disbursement. But if I may be allowed to make any suggestions on
the matter, I would propose that increased grants should be made, as soon
as possible, to the present Educational Boards, to enable them to do away
with all school fees, and to make any other changes which will render
them more useful to the colony ; and any surplus could at once be
devoted to the building of industrial and other schools.
With your permission, I will briefly refer to a few of the purposes to
the advancement of which the school funds, however ample they may
become (and the larger the better), could, in my opinion, be appro-
priated with advantage to the promotion of Education.
1. In extending the benefit of primary schools to all parts of the
colony ; and, in order to meet the peculiar social position
of our thinly populated districts, to provide that some of
the schools in those distant parts should be boarding as
well as day schools.
Without some such provision, it will be impracticable to bring the
children of parents engaged in pastoral and agricultural pursuits within
the action of Education. I believe the establishment of such schools
would assist in the settlement of the interior with families to the great
relief of the towns, and thus promote the better distribution of the
population. Of course, in these schools, the actual expenses of the
board of the children would fall on the parents, but they would have
nothing to pay for Education. From my long experience of a bush life,
I consider this would be a far better plan than having itinerant
Teachers.
2. In establishing Industrial Schools in three or more of the most
populated parts of the country districts, where destitute
24


GENERAL EDUCATION.
children may receive an industrial as well as a moral and
intellectual Education, and that careful domestic super-
vision which would be their fortune if members of a well
ordered family.
To relieve the city of Sydney and neighbourhood of all the young
vagrants of both sexes, it would be sufficient to enlarge that admirable
institution, the Destitute Children’s Asylum, at Eandwick. The large
extent of ground belonging to the asylum would furnish ample scope
for exercise, as well as for inuring the older boys to agricultural and
other out of-doors pursuits. This training of their habits, as well as
their minds, would, no doubt, make them much sought after as
apprentices by country residents. The usefulness of the asylum would
be much increased, if proper provision were made for giving the boys
an industrial training. The master justly complains, that under the
present system, they are acquiring habits of indolence, and slothful
indulgence, which makes labour very irksome to them on being
apprenticed out at fourteen years of age. He very properly
recommends the appointment of practical men to train the strongest
of the children, so that they may be better fitted to earn their
livelihood by their own exertions. (Cheers.) But all these changes, so
necessary to be made, require an outlay of money.
3. A Reformatory School, in which juvenile delinquents should
pass a probation before being allowed to enter the other
description of schools.
Experience has but too often proved, that the best way to make a
confirmed villain of a young thief, is to sentence him to a common
gaol. Many a young rogue would be restored to society through the
agency of a reformatory school, who would otherwise have had his
evil habits confirmed if allowed to mix with older prisoners in gaol.
It must be apparent that both reformatory and industrial schools are
well adapted to dry up the very sources of crime.
4. In the institution of one, or more, normal colleges, for the
proper training of Teachers in connection with the model
schools.
It appears that very many of the Teachers in the primary schools
have never received any training, and are but indifferently educated ;
some of them having taken to teaching after having been found unfit
for any other employment. I need scarcely say, how important it is
that Teachers should not only be educated men, but that they should
also have received instruction in the art of pedagogy. Only men who
have passed through a regular course of studies, and received a
certificate of competency, should be accepted as Teachers. But to
25


GENERAL EDUCATION.
induce men so qualified to remain in the service, they should be well
paid, and should not he placed in so very humiliating a position, as
that any portion of their salaries should he dependent on the children’s
pence. (Cheers.) I have already said, on the authority of the last
census, that upwards of 34,000 educahle children are not at school.
Supposing it to he possible, that one Teacher could instruct one
hundred pupils, it will be seen that our present educational staff should
be increased by more than three hundred. But allowing that one-half
the children lived sufficiently near to take advantage of the present
schools, still the salaries of a larger number of Teachers than we now
pay, would have to be provided for. Independent, therefore, of largely
increased funds being required to build new schools, and furnish school
materials, a very large sum will be required to meet the item of
expenditure under the head of salaries to schoolmasters.
5. To provide the means for the proper supervision of the
schools.
If it is necessary to have schools and Teachers, it is also indispensable
to the efficient working of any system of instruction, that there should
also be well qualified men, whose duty, in conjunction with local
committees (Mr. Kay says), should be “to advise and counsel the
Teachers, encourage them to persevere when in a right course, and to
check them when pursuing a wrong one ; to prevent a school being
ruined for want of superintendence and surveillance; to stimulate the
Teachers to renewed exertions by reporting all those who deserved
honorable mention, and thus drawing the attention of the public upon
them ; to acquaint Government of those poor districts, wholly without
schools, and destitute of local funds, which require its assistance, and in
these different ways to guard against the possibility of any district
being left to languish without the means of obtaining a sound and
Christian Education.”
6. In the institution of a Nautical School by, perhaps, arranging
with the English Government for one of her Majesty’s
old seventy-fours, and mooring her in one of the bays of
the harbour, or up the Parramatta River.
Such a vessel would furnish ample accommodation, and would be
another method to provide for the half-clad boys now running about the
wharves and streets. It is apparent that such an establishment would
be a most valuable acquisition to the colony, not only by the good
training to which boys would be subjected, but in supplying our
mercantile navy with educated seamen, and giving rise to a marine
which, with England’s assistance, would be the best protection to this
country against foreign aggression. (Loud cheers). 1 find by a report


GENERAL EDUCATION.
from a select committee of the old Legislative Council, dated November
24th, 1854, —Mr. Parkes, chairman, —a strong recommendation in
favour of the establishment of a nautical school. The following
extract is worthy of the attention of the meeting :
“ The advantages that would be derived from the establishment of a
nautical school in the port of Sydney, the whole of the evidence taken
on the subject goes to prove, would be very valuable, especially to the
shipping interest of the colony. And it is contended that, as a means
of social improvement, its agency would be very beneficially felt. It is
stated that large numbers of boys are cast upon the streets of Sydney
by parents who, from indigence or other causes, manifest little concern
for their future safety and welfare ; and that this class of the juvenile
population—the children, in many cases, of seafaring men—would be
gladly placed in a public school, the object of which would be
definitely fixed and assimilated to the ideas which the associations of
their early life, it may be supposed, have awakened in the minds of the
unfortunate children themselves. Hitherto, many of the class of boys
referred to, have eventually taken to the sea, but they have determined
on that step under circumstances so unfavorable, that it has led to an
unsettled and unprofitable course of life, equally detrimental to their
own welfare and to the interests of society. Besides these, it is believed
that many orphans, in circumstances of absolute destitution, might be
received from the various charitable institutions, and thus raised to
an. honorable profession in which their services would be valuable and
their merits would have a fair chance of reward. Whether it be owing
to the absence of all nautical training in our educational establishments
at present, or attributable to causes purely social, the fact appears to be,
beyond all doubt, that few of the youths in the humbler walks of life
in this colony are apprenticed to the sea; and the natural consequence
is seriously felt in the aggravated inconvenience to which the ship-
masters of the colony are subjected at all times in obtaining desirable
crews. This important want in the operations of commerce might be
met, to a considerable extent, by the establishment of a nautical school
in the port of Sydney ; and it is believed that the beneficial influence of
such an institution, after a few years, would be permanently experienced
in the greater fixity and discipline which would mark the life of the
colonial seaman. At the same time, an element of disorder and social
danger would be partially converted into one of strength and utility for
the advancement of commerce and the general purposes of civilization.
Your committee recommend the early adoption of measures to establish
a public school of this description in the port of Sydney. The evidence


GENERAL EDUCATION.
taken does not warrant the belief that voluntary contributions could be
obtained to a sufficient extent for this object, without pecuniary aid
from the Government.”
The failure of this excellent project is only another proof, among
others, of the almost impossibility of carrying out any great object for
want of funds. &s the proposed fund would, in a year or two, supply
the means, I hope to have the support to my scheme of the merchants,
shipowners, and other gentlemen of this city, favourable to the
establishment of a nautical school.
7. In the encouragement of the children, who would, it cannot
be doubted, be prompted to more regular attendance at
the schools, and to greater zeal in their studies, by the
adoption of a prize system, especially in the institution
of scholarships, so as to enable the most promising of the
pupils to complete their education in the grammar schools,
colleges, and university.
The highest educational establishments would thus be open to the
children of the very poorest. The advantages to this country which
would thus result from such a stimulus to Education it is impossible
altogether to foresee; but, as the successful candidates would be the
most talented from amongst thousands, I would respectfully ask you,
Is it not likely that some of them may turn out to be the brightest
geniuses of the day ? I believe such a result is more than probable.
By such a fostering system, Australia may yet be able, and that with
laudable pride, to say—She has given birth to men equal in talent and
genius to the greatest of mankind, (Loud cheers).
There are other objects to which funds could be well applied, as
Mechanics’ Schools of Arts, Free Libraries, &c.; but I will not detain
you by following this subject up at greater length. I have only been
desirous to show that, however ample the funds derived from the
proposed school tax may become, they will not be too large (if sufficient)
to meet all the educational requirements of the colony.
1 wish, before leaving this matter, to make one more observation,
which is this—That if the country is really serious in asking for a
comprehensive and well-devised scheme of Education if the electors
meant anything at the late general election by cheering all those
candidates who told them they were anxious, and would do their
utmost, to place Education within the means of every child in the
community—then they must be prepared to provide large funds; if
the people refuse to do so —if they will reject such an admirable
scheme as the one I have had the honor to propose to you—the


GENERAL EDUCATION.
consequences must vest on their shoulders, and they will prove to the
world that, after all the clamor, the question of Education was only
an electioneering cry, and that the country did not care one jot
about it. (Gheers.)
In conclusion, I ask you to give the important topics, I have had the
honour to introduce to your notice, your kind and serious consideration.
I have endeavoured to place them before you in a plain, practical, and
argumentative manner, appealing to your understandings, rather than to
your passions. The only object I have in view is, to give a helping
hand towards ameliorating the degrading condition, of so many of our
poorer colonists, and, through their moral and intellectual elevation, to
promote the prosperity and happiness of the whole community.
(Cheers.)
But, before sitting down, I desire to address a few words to my
Temperance friends, as they are of course much interested in all
questions where tea and sugar are concerned. The members of the
temperance societies, who are fully alive to the fact that Education is a
very powerful agent in keeping down the drinking habits of the people,
will, I hope, send in a separate Petition in favor of my proposition;
for they will readily see that the great object they have in view will be
promoted to a far greater extent by the support which will be given
to Education, than by any small cheapening of tea and sugar which
may result from the abolition of the duties, I say may, because I find
retailers tell me, they would not make any difference in their prices, if
the taxes were repealed. Without the slightest doubt, I believe that the
continuance of the taxes will not act as any discouragement to the con-
sumption of tea and sugar. The constantly increasing revenue from
the duties on these articles shew, that the consumption keeps pace at
present with that of the population. If these duties are set aside as
proposed, there will undoubtedly be an increase of consumption, as one
of the good results of the enlightenment of the people will certainly be
to promote habits of moderation, and perhaps induce many persons
altogether to abstain from strong drinks, adding, in all probability,
many valuable members to their excellent societies. And I need not
hesitate to say, that our desire to indulge in refreshing, but not
inebriating beverages, will at least receive no check, from our knowledge
of the fact, that the more tea and sugar we consume, the larger will
be the funds for the Education of our children.
I feel, myself, convinced, and trust I have also succeeded in
persuading you, that by abolishing all school fees in our primary
schools, and by raising a fund sufficiently large to furnish the means of
n 29


GENERAL EDUCATION.
giving a good sound English Education, to all the children in the
colony, and that, too, in such a manner, as to enable parents to send
their children to school without any fear of being branded as PAUPERS
—(I will repeat, as a right, and not as a political concession) —a great
impetus will be given to the cause of Education, and the arrival of that
day will be accelerated —that proud day for New South Wales—-when
it will be in the power of her inhabitants to say, as can now be said by
the inhabitants of North America, Switzerland, and most of the
Continental States, “ THAT ALL OUR CHILDREN ARE ATTEND-
ING SCHOOL, AND ARE RECEIVING A CAREFUL RELIGIOUS,
MORAL, AND INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION FROM HIGHLY
EDUCATED AND EFFICIENT TEACHERS.” (Great applause.)
We have a great work before us, a grand object to accomplish. I
have pointed to much of the work to be done, and shown an easy way
of raising an ample and most appropriate fund. Let us only go about
the work with earnestness; all difficulties will then disappear ; success
will crown our efforts; ignorance and its concomitant crime, will gradually
disappear from the country; it will indeed become a pleasant place to
dwell in ; we shall be laying the foundation of society on the broadest
and surest basis; and giving stability to our free constitution, for an
enlightened people will be its strongest and surest support.
At the conclusion of his address, the Lecturer was loudly cheered.
The Chairman (Sir C. Nicholson) hoped that the meeting would not
separate without expressing some opinions upon the important subject
of the Lecture to which they had just listened. He was sure that all
would unite with him in acknowledging the able, effective, and highly
suggestive manner in which it had been handled by the Lecturer. To
Dr. Jenkins the thanks of the whole Community were due for a
suggestion which, if carried out, as he believed it might be, could not
fail to be attended with incalculable advantages to the present as well as to
future generations. For of all questions affecting the present, as well as
the future, welfare of these colonies, that of Education (using the term in
its largest sense) was the most vital.
He agreed with Dr. Jenkins in the broad principle he enumerated as
to the appropriateness of devoting the Tea and Sugar Duties to
30


CENTRAL EDUCATIOtfr
educational purposes. The taxes derived from these articles, without
being oppressive, were contributed by all classes of the community, and
must increase with the progressive increase in the inhabitants of the
colony; so that the requirement for additional schools, consequent upon
the increase of population, would be met by a corresponding increase
in the fund by which they were to be sustained. Agreeing as he did,
however, with the broad views expressed by Dr. Jenkins, viz., the
application of the whole amount of the fund derived from the Tea and
Sugar Duties to educational purposes, he (Sir Charles Nicholson) felt
some hesitation in following him as to some of the details. He doubted
much whether the total abolition of school fees were desirable; or if
desirable, whether it could practically be carried out. For he assumed
that if all school fees were abolished, and the schoolmaster paid entirely
by the State, that the rate of remuneration of the Teacher must be
determined by the average attendance of pupils. It would be absurd
to pay to the Teacher of thirty children, the same salary as to one
having a hundred under his charge. Now it had been found experi-
mentally that such a system of- payment, according to capitation, was most
inconvenient. It was almost impossible to test the accuracy of the returns
upon the evidence by which the schoolmaster’s remuneration was to be
determined. The personal interest of the individual, and his veracity,
were but too often likely to be brought into collision. Moreover, the
entire abolition of fees would, he thought, give the schools the character
of mere charitable foundations. People scarcely ever valued that which
could be got without any personal or pecuniary sacrifice. Rival schools
would be set up, the strength of which would be, that those to which
they were opposed, were merely eleemosynary. In making this
statement, he (Sir Charles Nicholson) was, however, bound to add, that
the opinion of Mr. Wilkins, the Director of the National Schools, was
against him; and he felt constrained to defer to the judgment and
experience of one so thoroughly competent to deal with the question as
Mr. Wilkins, a gentleman to whom this colony was under the deepest
obligations, for his great services to the cause of Education. It was not
necessary on the present occasion to dwell on matters of detail. He for
one embraced most cordially the idea propounded by the Lecturer. The
objections opposed to it were but as dust in the balance when weighed
against its overwhelming advantages; and he tnrsted that the views
propounded by Dr. Jenkins, would be approved by the whole colony,
and speedily ratified by the Legislature.
Mr. Cape (in the midst of a discussion amongst the gentlemen on
the platform, as to which of them should act upon the suggestion of their
31


GENERAL EDUCATION.
respected Chairman, and offer some remarks on the subject of the
Lecture just listened to with so much attention), would avoid
delay, and take upon himself the risk of inviting the audience to
acquiesce in the high claim it presents for public consideration. The
main feature of the plan, that of devoting the amount of taxes raised on
Tea and Sugar to the purposes of Education —taxes which the
Government of the country has been preparing, first to reduce, and
then gradually to withdraw—is to many quite a novelty.
Beyond this, Mr. Cape would not say much at the present time,
feeling it to be his duty as a Member of the Assembly to avoid any
interference with its functions when outside its precints. As to the
subordinate parts of the plan, and the Lecturer’s advocacy of Industrial
Establishments and Reformatory Institutions —what interest must
attach to such considerations! when it is known, that although for many
years past they have formed an ordinary part of Educational Systems,
both in the Home Countries and America, as well as on the Continent
of Europe, in New South Wales they continue even now, merely to be
talked of, as, for instance, the Nautical School.
The urgent necessity of such establishments, more especially in
the vast interior, will doubtless lead to a much extended grant for
General Education ; indeed, the feeling of many Members was strong
on this point.
Mr. Cape was disposed to consider himself one of them, in the course
of future deliberations on the subject. Difficulties as to precedents, in
the particular case before us, might present themselves; but, long ago,
Dr. Paley, in his famous Lectures at the University of Cambridge, had
stated, in relation to such matters, “ Many taxes are annual ; the
produce of others is mortgaged, or appropriated to specific services ; the
expenditure of all of them is accounted for to the House of Commons ;
as computations of the charge of the purpose for which they are wanted,
are previously submitted to the same tribunal.”
Mr. Cape would not omit to mention his approval of the Lecturer’s
remark on the sad need of Reformatory Institutions for our juvenile
criminals. How often were Magistrates obliged to turn them loose on
society again, rather than promote their training for crime amongst the
associates of a prison. Colonists, in their visit to Ancient Rome, may
have observed in a Room of the Hospital San Michele, the inscriptions
which redound so much to the wisdom and philanthropy of Pope
Clement XI; one of them seemed more particularly applicable here, as
it expressed the grand purpose of all civil policy relative to
criminals.


GENERAL EDUCATION.
PARUM EST
COERCEBB IMPBOBOS
PCENA,
NICI PROBOS EFFICIAS
DISCIPLINA.
It is of little advantage
To restrain the Bad
By Punishment,
Unless you render them Good
By Discipline. (Cheers).
Mr. Cape would trespass no further on the time of the audience, as
other gentlemen would submit their suggestions on the subject of
Lecturer’s address.
Mr. Holden thought their first object ought to be, to secure this
large annual sum for expenditure upon Education. When that amount
was available, then they might go into details, and decide upon the
most beneficial manner of applying it. He trusted that the plan now
laid before them would be carried out by the spontaneous assent and
desire of the community. He had been struck by a remark attributed
to Mr. Binney, in some speech made by him at Adelaide, to the effect,
that the inhabitants of these new colonies had far more individual
influence over the destinies of their fellows, and their posterity, than
men lost in the crowds of old countries; and that in all our social
movements we should feel additional responsibility from this considera-
tion—should feel that we were “ making history Such a movement
as the present was, he considered, a worthy occasion of thus “ making
history and he had conjured up in his imagination a paragraph,
which he earnestly hoped might, in consequence of the impulse derived
from that meeting, find a place in the record to be hereafter made by
some Australian Macaulay (now in his infancy, or even unborn), of the
events of the year 1859. Writing in the year of our Lord 1900, happy
would it be, if such an author could admit with truth into a standard
History of New South Wales, such a passage as the following :
“ The year 1859 is memorable for an act of the comparatively small
people inhabiting the New South Wales of that day, which merits the
profound admiration and gratitude of its present teeming millions.
Struggling, as they were, with difficulties inseparable from the working
of their newly-acquired institutions, they were happily pervaded by a
consciousness of the great truth, that popular Education is the precious
and essential life-blood of popular government. Hence, when a repeal
of the tea and sugar duties was on the point of being conceded, the
33


GENERAL EDUCATION*
whole people besought the Government to continue the impost, with a
view to provide ample means for the free Education of their children.
The generous progress of the New World of the South, in all that
dignifies humanity, politically and socially, is to be mainly traced to
this spontaneous act of the people of 1859. It was this, —yet more
than the discovery of gold,—that precipitated New South Wales into a
nation, and laid the foundation of the greatness which it exhibits in
the dawning light of the twentieth century.”
Let us now resolve to make this piece of history, and bequeath its
full development to our posterity, and we shall not have lived in vain.
(Loud cheers.)
Dr. Woolley would not, at that late hour, attempt to enforce the
arguments advanced by the Lecturer and previous speakers. But he
held in his hand a Petition, embodying the general principles of Mr.
Jenkins’ proposal; which he hoped the great majority of those present
would be able and willing to sign. Before sitting down, however, he
would advert to one point which the Lecturer had not put before them ;
and with respect to which misconception might arise. He saw around
him many distinguished supporters of the National Schools; whilst
few friends of the Denominational system appeared to be present. This
question had nothing to do with the controversy between the rival
systems of Education; it was one upon which Nationalist and
Denominationalist might co-operate without sacrifice of principle ; and
he believed he was justified in saying, that many staunch Denomina-
tionalists were quite in favor of the views which had been promulgated
that evening. One other subject he would briefly allude to. In most
of the opinions expressed by the Chairman he entirely concurred. He
could not go with him in his objections to the so-called eleemosynary
character of the schools contemplated by the proposal. The word
eleemosynary was scarcely applicable. Every person who paid the tax
would contribute his quota to the maintenance of the schools, and
would indirectly pay his children’s fees. But what is the bugbear of
this word eleemosynary ? Most persons then present were agreed that
Education was a debt which the State owed to the people. That if the
Government assumed the right of punishing offences, it must acknow-
ledge its obligation to enforce upon the community compliance with
the law upon some better motive than the -policeman’s baton, or the
hangman’s noose.
Now, he believed, that if any one fact was established by experience
it was this—that no good general system of Education could be
maintained upon the voluntary principle—it must be eleemosynary.


GENERAL EDUCATION.
Much attention had lately been bestowed upon the relative merits of
Scotch and English Education. The one superiority of the latter was
found to consist in the splendid endowments which were diffused over
all England, reaching even the wildest glens of the northern counties.
All the English grammar schools were, in fact, charity schools —the
Education was to all pupils partially, to some altogether eleemosynary.
This was the case with their proudest foundations—Eton, Winchester,
Westminster, Charterhouse, and the rest. Even at the Universities,
which were supposed to be so expensive, the nobleman spending his
thousands a-year, owed much of the educational advantages which he
enjoyed to the endowments by which the teaching body were
supported. It had been proved over and over again, that no good
system of Education could be made permanently self-supporting.
All the riches of the English aristocracy would not enable them
to maintain an Oxford or Cambridge. But to very many these
endowments were all in all. Some of the most distinguished literary
and scientific men in England would never have been able to
cultivate the talent with which they -were endowed without the aid
of the Great Grammar Schools, which were as much charity schools
as those to which that name was generally restricted. To a boy of
genius first-class Education in England might be cheaper than
apprenticeship to the meanest trade. He objected only to “ charity
schools” when the term was used distinctively of primary free
schools. Let it be applied to all, high and low, where Education
was wholly or partially gratuitous, and the objection ceased—the
gownsman was a charity-boy, as much as the boy in a flat cap and
yellow stockings.
He could not help making one application of these remarks. Much
had been said about the expensiveness of the Grammar School. An
outcry was made for lower fees, in order that poor men’s sons might
enjoy its advantages. The Trustees of the Grammar School
sympathised in this wish. But it could be effected only on the English
system. If we are to have a first-class school at all, the Teachers must
be adequately paid. It was ridiculous to suppose that men of competent
learning and talent would engage in a proverbially laborious and
thankless occupation at an unremunerating price. Cheap Education,
got by beating down the masters, was a mere delusion. Nor was it
necessary or advisable that all children should go to the Grammar
School. All have a right to Education : but such Education as their
apparent talent and character enabled them to profit by. It was only
to a comparative few, that gratuitous Education at the Grammar School
or University, ought to be offered by the State—those whose future
35


GENERAL EDUCATION.
career would probably repay the community for the outlay. From the
first foundation of the University this object had been kept in view.
The Chairman, Mr. Plunkett (whom he saw present), and the other
members of the Senate, had all along aimed at a scholastic hierarchy;
by means of which boys of real power and application might be found
out in the remotest country schools, and franked, if it appeared desirable,
to the University itself. He was very glad to hear that this scheme
formed part of this prospectus of the Lecturer. It was the only way in
which high-class Education could or ought to be cheapened. To those
who could make the best use of it, let it be, if possible, gratuitous—
others must seek it at their own expense. Many of the brightest names
in Oxford and Cambridge were borne by sons of paupers ; and he hoped
that in New South Wales the poorest boys would come up to college as
their English contemporaries did, —not with a badge or stigma of
inferiority, but bearing a title which centuries had made one of the
proudest in the land—that of scholars. He concluded by reading the
Petition which they were asked to sign. (Cheers). (For copy of Petition
see Appendix).
Mr. Dunlop (schoolmaster,) said : The plan proposed by the Lecturer
would not meet the requirements of the colony ; though the object
was to be effected in a very simple manner, and by a very plain method
which he, at the proper time, would be prepared to point out. It was
too late, that evening, to enter fully into the plan that he would
suggest to meet every difficulty ; but if a public meeting were called,
he would willingly attend and state his views. He differed entirely
from the Lecturer upon the advisability of abolishing the school fees,
as the interest of the master in the extension of his school would thus
be taken away, whilst the interest of the parent in Education would
be destroyed by making it assume a pauper character. The fact was
that the less the Government had to do with the support of Education,
the more the people would prize it, and the more interest they would
take in it; but by throwing the Teacher entirely upon the Government for
support very much of his utility would be destroyed, whilst all public
interest in him would be lost. Giving the schoolmaster a large salary,
entirely independent of the amount of his school fees, would never
answer, and would bring about the old system of trickery and dressed
up returns that they had seen in former days. As to charging different
rates, he could say, speaking from his own experience, that he had
never found any difficulty arise with the parents by reason of his
making different charges for different children in his school. He had
never heard any objection raised to it. His plan for providing funds was


GENERAL EDUCATION.
something assimifating to a capitation tax, without being exactly
one of that character; but in paying the Teacher he would do so in
such a way as to give him an interest in making all the children in his
neighbourhood come to his school, whilst he would take care that the
attendance of the children should be duly certified, so that the Teacher
should not have his salary for nothing.
Mr. McTntyre (Fort-street Model School) said : The Education of the
rising generation was considered, in all civilized countries, to be a
subject of the highest importance, not only to individuals and families,
but to the Commonwealth at large. Accordingly, they found the most
eminent men in all ages engaged therein. Cicero, though a pagan, said,
“ What greater or more excellent gift can we offer to the public, than
to teach the youth carefully ?” If such were the sentiments of a Roman
orator, unassisted by the light of the Gospel, how much more ought
Education to be esteemed and supported by a Christian community?
The children of the present generation were the hope of the age to
come. On them would devolve the responsibility of establishing and
managing institutions of civil life, science, literature, and Christian
freedom. Was it not, then, a question of very great importance, how
they could make the children of the present age—the men and women of
the next generation—wise and good ? Every person who loved his
children, his country, or his Maker, was in duty bound to give the
matter his careful consideration. Great and good men declared that
“ Prevention is better than cure.” People were beginning to see that it
was a wiser and a better course to educate and train the young and
harmless youth to know and do his duty, than to frame laws for his
punishment, when an old and hardened criminal. How different would
it have been for Britain’s sons at home and abroad, had one-tenth of the
nation’s criminal expenditure been employed in the education and
training of their early years ! He was convinced that it was as much
the duty of the State to educate her subjects as to provide them with
protection; because Education in its proper sense was protection, as
had been clearly shown by the Lecturer. He looked upon it not as a
boon to be offered by the State, but a right to be demanded by every
subject. Paley said, “To turn an uneducated child into the world is
injurious to the rest of mankind ; it is little better than to turn out a
mad dog, or a wild beast, into the streets.” From these facts it was clear
that Education claimed their attention, and Dr. Jenkins was certainly
entitled to the thanks of the public, for making an attempt to deal with
this great question in such a comprehensive and charitable spirit.
He admitted there might be .some objections raised against the
E 37


GENERAL EDUCATION.
abolition of school fees, but the meeting must remember, that, strictly
speaking, school fees were not to be abolished; it is only a change in
the mode of paying them that was proposed by Dr. Jenkins. If the new
arrangements were carried into effect, the Collector of Customs would
receive the school fees in the shape of a tax upon tea and sugar. The
first objection that might be raised to this new scheme was, that those
parties who sent no children to these schools might think the tax
unjust, as it would appear that they received no direct benefit for this
contribution to the fund. In answer to this objection, he had to notice,
that all the children of the colony who received a good Education were
not likely to become murderers or thieves ; Education, therefore, made
life and property more secure, and consequently all parties had a right
to pay a fair share of the taxes that provided it. The next objection
was the difficulty of fixing the just amount of pay that each Teacher
ought to receive. In answer to this, he was of opinion that all Teachers
should be paid in accordance with their ability as professional educators,
and upon this ground their promotion to more lucrative situations'should
be based. Under the present educational arrangements of the colony,
the Teacher who happened to be located in a populous district, was
better paid than one who might be situated in a sparsely populated
neighbourhood. He was of opinion that this was unjust. If the
Teachers of both schools were honest working men, and possessed the
same professional talent, and worked for the same number of hours each
day, they ought to be paid the same amount of salary. The Teacher of
the large school might have sixty pupils, and the other only thirty, but
the pupils in the small school would make much better progress than
the scholars of the other, and this would compensate for the small
number taught. He believed the practice of the National Board was to
give the good schools to the good Teachers. He, therefore, concluded
that paying Teachers in proportion to the number of pupils attending
their schools was an objectionable plan, and therefore the abolition of
the mode of augmenting Teachers’ salaries by school pence was not an
objection, but a decided improvement in any system of public Education,
and highly to be recommended, seeing it had the many advantages
pointed out by the Lecturer.
Some parties might again urge, that the higher classes of the com-
munity would not send their children to such schools as were proposed
by Dr. Jenkins. It mattered not, they would surely educate their
children at any cost; and therefore educational legislation was not
required for them. The meeting must bear in mind, that all systems
of Public Education were established to benefit the middle and lower
classes of society, and consequently the force of the objection with


GENERAL EDUCATION.
regard to the higher classes of the community was lost. The abolition
of school fees in the shape of school pence, must bring a good Educa-
tion within the reach of thousands of children who would never go to
any school, or remain at one but a very short time. In England and
Ireland the public schools were chiefly established for the Education of
the poor, yet they were attended largely by the higher grades of society.
The reason was, that a more efficient Education could be obtained in
the public schools, than in private establishments ; owing to the late
improvement in the school management. As the schools proposed to
be established by Dr. Jenkins could not be called either charity or poor
schools, he concluded they would be attended by the great body of the
■children of the colony. The popularity of the schools would in a
great measure depend upon the ability of the Teachers.
It was therefore apparent, that if there were efficient Teachers in a
school, people would send their children to it, whether there were
school fees paid or not. Where there was a good article to be had,
there would customers always resort. This was an invariable practice.
The way to raise the standard of Education, was to pay Teachers well
for their services;—encourage industry, and talent, and then men of
ability would become professional educators, and remain in their
profession as lawyers and physicians did. An eminent writer remarks
that, “ of all dear things on earth, the dearest of all is a cheap school-
master.” The Legislature should see that competent Teachers were
provided, and that such inducements were offered as were sufficient to
secure talented men. Professor Woolley justly remarked, that Teachers
were the worst paid class in the community.
Teachers complained bitterly of the want of adequate remuneration
for their services. The profession was therefore feeble and ineffective :
society did not see nor feel the importance of Education, and therefore
accorded to Teachers little or no respect. Many persons seemed to
think their duty was merely to keep children from mischief until they
were of an age to be useful. Teachers had also great difficulty in
collecting the school pence, and many parents withdrew their children
if the masters asked for their dues. This would not happen if fees
were'abolished. Moreover, he was convinced that many families in
Sydney were deprived of Education from want of means.
The majority of those who could afford it, sent their children to
school. If a general system of Education were established throughout
the country, it would produce many beneficial results. The people
would not linger so much in the towns, if they could get a good
Education in the interior for their children. As the evening was far
spent, there was no time to make -any remarks on the many other


GENERAL EDUCATION.
beneficial results which would arise from the admirable plan proposed
by Dr. Jenkins for extending the blessings of Education. But before
concluding, he would beg to notice a remark made by the Lecturer
regarding the respectable appearance of the children attending the
Fort Street National Schools. The reason they were so clean and tidy
was, because the Teachers insisted upon their being so ; and not as the
Lecturer imagined—because they belonged to the higher classes. He
had only to add that he considered Dr. Jenkins was entitled to the
thanks of every colonist for endeavouring to extend Education in such
a comprehensive and liberal spirit. (Cheers.)
After some conversation, in which it was suggested, and subsequently
agreed upon, that a public meeting should be held to take the whole
question into consideration,
The Chairman thought the Lecturer had well deserved the thanks of
the meeting, and was sure that they would be accorded by acclamation.
The intimation was received with loud cheers.
Mr. Jenkins, in returning thanks said, that although he esteemed
very highly the compliment they had just paid him in so unanimously,
and warmly according to him their thanks, he would rather accept them
as a manifestation of feeling, on their part, that they approved of the
propositions and suggestions contained in his Lecture, (Cheers). He
was sorry that Sir Charles Nicholson could not go altogether with him
in regard to the abolition of school fees. The proposal was no doubt a
novel one in this colony, but the no-fee system prevailed generally in
America, and in all the countries possessing school systems which
embraced the whole population. It will pei’haps be in the recollection
of many present, that in the German Revolution of 1848, one of the
great popular cries was “No school fees and so unmistakeable were
the demands of the masses, that even German Governments were
obliged to yield, and make it a law that they should be abolished in all
the primary schools.
He (Mr. Jenkins) felt sure that, on further enquiry into their
working, he should have the support of his friend Sir Charles. With
great deference to the opinion of a gentleman who had paid so much
attention to the matter of Public Education, he believed that the
objections he offered were not of great weight, and could be easily
removed. He had, in his Lecture, avoided making any reference to
details, but in icply to Sir Charles’s first objection, he begged permission
to say, that the abolition of school fees did not make it necessary that
40


GENERAL EDUCATION.
Teachers should he paid alike. To every Teacher properly trained, and
who had received certificates of competency, he would give fixed salaries.
He would have the Teachers, classified according to their attainments
and skill in teaching, into divisions ; each division should be entitled to
certain fixed salaries ; but to encourage zeal and emulation, and to give
them a direct interest in increasing the number of pupils, he would add
to their incomes, in the shape of a bonus, a sum of money in proportion
to the work performed, say to the numbers and progress of the children,
as certified by the local committee, assisted by one of the staff of Inspectors;
for whose support, ample provision would be made in the proposed fund.
Ho thought some such plan as this would meet the first objection.
With regard to the other, that schools in which fees were charged would
spring up and reduce the public into mere charity schools, he (Mr.
Jenkins) entertained no fear of that kind, as the parents would be
paying for their children’s Education, and it is found in the other
countries to which he had before alluded, that no such results had
followed abolition of the fees. On the contrary, in consequence of the
good manners and cleanly habits of the children of the poorer classes,
the result of their admirable school systems, the wealthier did not
object to have their children educated in the same schools with those of
the peasantry. (Cheers).
Whatever weight may be attached to such objection, he (Mr. Jenkins)
felt that it would be impossible to bring about Universal Education, if
school fees were demanded in elementary schools.
Ho looked to the working classes for support, in endeavouring to
carry out proposals calculated to confer upon them the very highest
benefits. (Much applause).
The meeting separated, after many names had been subscribed to tho
Petition.




GENERAL EDUCATION.
APPENDIX.
being letters conveying the opinions of the writers on the
PROPOSITIONS CONTAINED IN MR. JENKINS* LECTURE.
From His Honor the Chief Justice, Sir Alfred Stephen, to R. L. Jenkins, Esq., M.L.A,
Monday, \ to 7.
Mx dear Sir,
I was on the point of going to ask Sir Charles Nicholson to
take me with him to the meeting this evening, when I was reminded
by the papers on my table that I have two official matters, which must
be attended to without further delay. ■ I therefore am compelled
reluctantly to be absent from your Lecture, and the discussion to which
it may lead. I trust that yon may succeed in inducing the public—and
with them our Legislators—to adopt your very admirable idea —and so
to act on it, that—as, upon the purposed system, there will be no child
not entitled to Education, by the funds set apart for the purpose, so
there shall in fact be not one child without Education—at all events, in
any but the most scantily populated districts. I confess that, at
present, I discover no argument against your proposal; while I see
every consideration strongly recommending its support. If I were a
politician, instead of merely a Judge, 1 should say that—even were the
abolition of the tax on tea and sugar desirable, in the absence of a
specific appropriation beneficial to all classes, but mostly to those by
which it is erroneously supposed to be chiefly payable, it would be
wise to continue it for the sake of the more than counter-balancing
advantages which you propose to secure. But 1 should equally be
prepared to maintain, that there is no tax which presses less heavily on
the labouring classes, than that in question. If it were repealed, the
gain to each adult of the labouring population would, literally, be not
one penny per week. The actual payment may, indeed be twopence


GENERAL EDUCATION.
and a farthing per week. But all experience shows, that the abolition
of a tax of this kind is beneficial, chiefly, to the importer and retailer,
then to the large consumer; last of all to the small purchaser. But,
be the amount a penny or threepence a week, it seems to me an
exchange far beyond calculation in favour of the community,—and
above all to the labouring man having a family,—that, paying so
inappreciable a sum, each parent may command the inestimable
blessings of Education, in return for it.
I am, yours truly,
ALFRED STEPHEN.
From His Honor Mr. Justice Milford, to R. L. Jenkins, Esq., M.L.A.
Hunter Street, Nov. 24< th, 1859,
My Dear Sir,
When we met this morning, and had some conversation on the
subject of your plan for General Education, I expressed myself, as I
felt, to coincide in the general view you took of the matter, but I
declined taking any public part in it, because I conceive that a Judge
ought not to interfere in political affairs.
Your plan included the applying the duties now payable on tea and
sugar, or an equivalent sum from the general revenue, to that purpose.
I see no reason why this tax should be abolished; it falls fairly on all
classes of the community ; or if more heavily on one class than on
another, it is on the squatter, who has to supply his servants with
rations. If it were true, that the tax is felt heavily by what is called
the “ poor man,” (though where he -is, except by his own fault, I cannot
discover,) yet inasmuch as other taxes, local and general, fall more
heavily on the rich man than on him, this is no reason for abandoning
it. The “poor man” is bound to support the Government of the
country, as well as the rich man. The tax appears to me to be good in
itself, collected at a small expence, and equitably spread over the com-
munity. A rich man, with a family, and eight or ten servants, has to
provide tea and sugar for all: a poor man with a family, only for
himself and that family.
However, let it be considered to be right, that the“ poor man” should
have the full benefit of this tax, (which of course he could not by the
mere abolition of it) ; there is no way in which the amount could be


GEneiAl education*.
applied more for his benefit, than by the extension of Education; and
not only for his benefit, but for the benefit of the community.
W e must see that, whether for good or evil, the brand of democracy
is indelibly fixed on this community : a form of government dangerous,
but with advantages. To obviate the danger, ought now to be the aim
of our politicians, and 1 can see nothing which can have this effet t
mdre powerfully than General Education. The mob becomes the
public ; the knowledge that obedience to the laws is essential to the
public prosperity ; that the advantage of the public is the advantage of
the individual; that honesty is the best policy; that morality is of
wordly advantage ; and other principles of sound sense and good conduct
must prevent fraud and violence, which will, if uncontrolled, upset a
government where the poor, the ignorant, and the wicked, have equal
power with the good, the rich, and the educated.
There will be, no doubt, many difficulties met with in carrying out a
plan of General Education, more especially in the thinly populated
districts, where we now almost daily hear of the most frightful and
disgusting acts of profligacy and wickedness being perpetrated; yet if
every individual child cannot be educated, much good may be done.
In towns there is less difficulty ; but still, where the services of boys
and girls of ten years of age receive a high rate of remuneration, or
are of importance to their parents, we must expect that, except upon
compulsion, those parents, themselves uneducated, and therefore
probably selfish, will seek to benefit themselves by the services of their
children, rather than afford them the benefits of Education, even if
offered gratis.
Much may yet be done, and I wish you every success in your
endeavours to effect so desirable an object as that of Universal
Education in the colony.
Believe me, my dear Sir,
Yours truly,
SAML FRED* MILFORD.
From His Honor Mr; Justice Dickinson, to R. L. Jenkins, Esq., M.L.A.
Darlinghursl, Nov. 28, 1869.
My dear Sir,
I have read with great pleasure in the Sydney Morning Herald
of November 23, your interesting Lecture on Education.
The importance of the diffusion of Education is no sow universally
f 45


GENERAL EDUCATION.
acknowledged, that I need say nothing about it. An American gentleman,
resident in Sydney, once informed me that in his opinion, no institution
had contributed so much to the welfare of the people of the United
States, as that of the Common Schools. Mr. Buckle, in his History of
Civilization in England, has declared the general intelligence of its
people to be one of the greatest sources of a nation’s wealth and power.
It appears to me that the facts and figures, detailed in the first colulnn
of the Herald's report of your Lecture, cannot he too strongly impressed
on the minds of the people of these colonies.
If school fees are an impediment to Universal Education, it is obvious
that they oirght to be abolished. The Legislature, in that case, must
devote larger sums to public instruction than it now affords.
It is stated that the Parliament affects to saddle the Consolidated
Revenue with a larger sum for Education than is now charged upon it.
You therefore propose, as I collect, that the tea and sugar duties shall
be retained, and that the produce of them shall be applied to Universal
Education.
Subject, of course, to arguments I may hereafter have to consider,
my impression is, that your plan is a very good scheme. The tax does
not appear to me to press unduly on the majority of the people. If it
were abolished, I suspect that the growers would derive more benefit
from its extinction, than the tea drinker would. When the tax on
leather was diminished in England, I found that boots were no cheaper
than before ; and my bootmaker observed to me, “ What difference can
fourpence make to a gentleman who pays thirty-six shillings for a pair
of boots?” I therefore paid my fourpence, not to my country, but to
my bootmaker. The instance may not apply in all respects, for then
the tax was insignificant in comparison with the whole cost; and I am
not aware what tea costs by the pound weight, or what amount of duty
is imposed on such a quantity.
Be the duties on tea and sugar what they may, every one pays them.
State revenues are more easily raised by collecting pence on Customs
duties from all, than by the direct taxation of the comparatively few.
All people have the benefit of government; —all, therefore, ought to
pay for its support. If the generality of adults ought to possess the
suffrage,—because they are subject to taxation, —it follows that people
will more readily pay taxes now that the suffrage is so nearly universal
among the male portion of our community. By devoting the tea and
sugar duties to the expenses of Universal Education, the poorer tax-
payers will get their children well instructed as a matter of right, and
not as of charity : and the richer tax payers will have the satisfaction
to know, that by tea drinking they help to prevent their less fortunate


GENERAL EDUCATION.
brethren from incurring a tithe of their own heavy expenses for their'
children’s Education.
On the whole, I am of opinion, that your very able and instructive
Lecture is an excellent introduction of the topic of Universal Education
to the people of this colony.
Believe me, ray dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
J. N. DICKINSON.
From His Grace the Most Reverend John Bede Bolding, D.D., 0.5.8., to
R. L. Jenkins, Esq., M.L.A.
St. Mary's Cathedral, Nov. 29th, 1859.
Dear Sib,
I think your proposal of setting aside the light tax on tea and
sugar to form a perpetual fund, devoted to the maintenance of general
Education, an admirable one. The tax known to be applied to such
a purpose exclusively, would, I feel convinced, be cheerfully paid ; it
would furnish an adequate fund, increasing exactly as the necessity for
increase should arise ; it would open to the poorest, and to the most
indifferent, the means of educating their children easily, and without
any depressing sense of dependence on the charity of others. The least
unwelcome of taxes would be felt as appropriated by each payer of the
tax to one of the highest purposes.
I rest confidently on your assurance, that your plan contemplates only
the securing an ample fund, and does not in any way, directly or
indirectly, tend to decide the mode of its distribution.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours very faithfully,
+ J. B. FOLDING SYDNEIEN.
From the Rev. John Dougall, Moderator of the Church of Scotland in New South Wales,
to R. L. Jenkins, Esq., M.L.A.
Sydney, 30 Nov., 1859.
Dear Sir,
In conformity with your desire, that I should give you my
opinion of the scheme for the advancement of Education propounded by


GENERAL EDUCATION.
you in your late Lecture, I have much pleasure in expressing my
admiration of the suggestion which forms the main idea of your Lecture;
as also in testifying to the satisfaction with which I have perused your
statistics, and to my concurrence in the conclusions drawn from them.
As to the necessity for Education, more widely diffused, and more
efficient and comprehensive, there can scarcely he a difference of opinion.
The thoughtful mind will have little hope of sound progress for this
colony, or of stability and secure retention of the blessings bestowed by
God, unless we have the prospect of a true basis of the national
character, in a worthy mental, moral, and religious training. To raise
without great difficulty, or unequal pressure on some particular class,
funds adequate to the magnitude of the work, (and half measures in
matters so vital are always to be deplored,) might have proved an
obstacle to parties dealing with this question, already so beset with
difficulties. Your scheme admirably removes this hindrance.
I should hope that your plan will meet general assent, as it does not
enter upon contested ground, but is simply a suggestion as to the
supply of ways and means for a grand extension of Education.
There may be perfect unanimity as to the desirableness of securing
so large and easily attainable a fund, whatever difference of opinion
may exist as to the peculiar system to be adopted.
The leading idea of your scheme is, I think, a happy one—to secure a
sum, the remission of which would be a scarcely appreciable saving to
each, and to produce from this a vast good.
Certainly, no impost could be more equitably as well as worthily
applied. The general population would receive back, in the shape of a
thorough Education, the money they had indirectly contributed —and
those who paid these duties, but would not be likely to avail themselves
of the privileges of these schools for their children, would gladly, I am
sure, forego the little saving, in consideration of the great results.
Considering, moreover, that the State would increasingly, as time rolls
on, feel the influence of an extended Education, in every element of her
prosperity, a levy much more oppressive and much less fairly distributed,
might be cheerfully submitted to.
I had at first some doubt whether absence of school fees might not
lower the moral tone of the classes availing themselves of this Education,
and whether what is cheaply got might not be lightly esteemed ; but
upon consideration I am convinced, that the universality of the system
as a national institution, and the feeling on the part of the people that
they received back merely their own, will obviate this danger.
Besides, the same might be apprehended from the highest educational
establishments in the colony ; inasmuch as students in the University


GENERAL EDUCATION.
and Grammar School, although the fees are considerable, pay but a
small proportion of what is contributed by the State to afford the high
class Education they receive.
As to the other objection, that what is cheaply obtained would not be
duly valued, I believe on this score less harm is to be apprehended than
from the evil you instance in the present system —of parents detaining
their children, when a day or two is taken from a week, in order to save
the fee.
I would only add, that the defects of the present system alluded to by
you—producing undue dependence on the Teacher, and operating
injuriously on the children—have often occurred to me ; and that in my
experience in schools with which I am connected here, I have seen your
statements fully verified.
Wishing your scheme heartily all success,
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
JOHN DOUGALL,
St. Andrew’s Church, Sydney.
From the Rev. Canon Allwood, 8.A., to R. L. Jenkins, Esq., M.L.A.
St. James’ Parsonage,
Thursday Morning, Isi Dec. 1859.
My dear Db. Jenkins,
I have derived much pleasure and information from the
perusal of your very interesting Lecture. I beg to congratulate jou on
having opened a new mine in the vexed field of Education, one happily
in which we may all work, whether friends of the National or
Denominational Schools, however much we may differ m other
Tam an advocate of the National system, supplemented by the
religious teaching of the different denominations ; and I look upon the
introduction of your proposition as a great step in advance, setting
forth, as it does, in so very simple and practical a manner, one so litt c
burthensome to the community, how the funds may be raised for the
maintenance, and the multiplication as they may be require , o
common schools throughout the country.


GENERAL EDUCATION 1 .
The grand feature in your proposition is, the claim which it establishes
for every child in the community to Education from the State, and this
not as a boon, but as a right,—or rather, a debt due to him for which
he has paid, and is therefore entitled to receive the benefit.
I agree with you fully in regard to the abolition of school fees. I
have long seen the evil resulting from them in the temptation which it
holds out to masters to devote more time and attention to the children
of those parents who pay the larger fees, and in the consequent
discouragement to the children of poorer parents. So long as these
fees are continued, I think it will be vain to look for regular and
general attendance.
I was much struck with the Extract which you read from Mr. Kay’s
work, shewing the mind of the German and Swiss authorities as to the
duty of the State towards her children. I think the passage ought to
be committed to heart by every legislator—or would-be legislator —in
the land.
On the financial part of your proposition, I will not offer an opinion,
but leave it to those who are better qualified to deal with it than myself
• —I mean the representatives of the people in Parliament. I will only
express a hope, that it will meet Avith favor from the liberal and
enlightened gentlemen who administer the government of the country.
Believe me to be,
Yours very faithfully,
ROBERT ALLWOOB.
♦
From W. Wilkins, Esq., Inspector and Superintendent of National Schools, to
R. L. Jenkins, Esq., ALL.A.
Glebe Road, 3rd December, 1859.
Dear Sir,
In accordance with your request, I have noted, as the result of
personal observation, a few particulars on the subject of school fees.
I may premise that my experience as a member of the Education
Commission, appointed, in 1854, to inspect all the schools in the colony,
led me to doubt the expediency of the school-fee system ; and the
information I have since gathered in the course of my visits to National
Schools, has tended to induce the belief that its total abolition is


GENERAL EDUCATION.
exceedingly desirable. This view has received further confirmation
from the examples of the injurious working of the fee system, which
have been forced upon my notice during a recent tour of inspection in
the Illawarra District. Some of these cases are instructive, and as I
conceive actual examples to be more conclusive than arguments as to
abstract principle, I will, with your permission, relate a few of the more
glaring examples. As the Illawarra District is one of the richest in the
colony, it may naturally be supposed that little difficulty could arise
from the subject of school fees. This district may therefore be regarded
as affording a fair field for the operation of the school-fee system.
1 have lately received from one of the Teachers in that district, a
letter, in which ho asks to be removed to another school, stating at the
same time his intention to relinquish his appointment under the Board,
should his request not be granted. His chief reason for desiring a removal,
is the fact, that he has been brought into collision with the people and
local patrons, on account of the smallness and irregularity of the school
payments, and the consequent inadequacy of his income to support his
family in respectability. He cannot recover the trifling sums due to
him without having recourse to legal proceedings—a measure that would
prove fatal to his success as a teacher, inasmuch as many pupils would
be immediately withdrawn, were he to resort to that means of compelling
payment. The petty annoyances to which he is subjected on account
of the school payments, irritate, while they also depress, his mind
beyond endurance.
In another case I found that only one half of the' children of a
suitable age in the neighbourhood, attended the school. On inquiring
the cause, I found that most of the children, not attending the school,
were kept at home on account of the difficulty caused by the necessity
for paying fees. The parents are really poor, but proud. Although
their children might attend the school without payment, these parents
spurn the offer of gratuitous instruction as a bestowal of charity, and as
reducing them to the level of paupers. The payment —Threepence per
week for the lowest class—which can scarcely be fixed at a lower rate to
be worth collecting at all, is yet felt to be a heavy burden by the
struggling settler with a large family, and on this account he is unable
to take advantage of the means of education in his neighbourhood.
Among those parents whose children attend the school, are some who }
to evade payment, will stoop to any meanness. They sometimes offer to
pay the Teacher in kind, demanding an exorbitant price for their
produce, the lowest charge being the Sydney retail rate. Were it not
for the sympathy and support of the minority, whose payments are
prompt and regular, the Teacher, among such neighbours, with a salary


GENERAL EDUCATION.
of £lOB per annum, would be in a truly miserable plight. The Teacher
in question is a man of education, ability, and experience. The effect of
this state of things upon his mind may be easily inferred.
In a third instance, I was consulted by the Local Patrons as to the
propriety of making a reduction in the scale of school fees. In this
case also, the established charge—sixpence per week—was found to
press very unequally upon the various classes of parents, and in certain
circumstances to operate as a prohibition of Education. On the other
hand, such a reduction of the fees as would remedy this evil would
amount to a virtual abolition.
Similar examples could easily be adduced in great numbers. The
foregoing are typical of a very general state of things throughout the
colony. Even in towns, the same spirit is observable. One National
Teacher, out of a school consisting of sixty children, has a list of
twenty gratuitous scholars, preferring to forego payment rather than
haggle with the parents for pennies and twopence's, or have his efforts
for the Education of the young misconstrued or attributed to a selfish
desire to fill his own pockets.
The two great objections to the present school fee system appear to
me to be these :—lst, It causes a large number of children to be
deprived of Education; and, 2ndly, It places the Teacher in a false
position, and renders his remuneration uncertain and dependent upon
other causes than his own ability and industry. Other objections of a
serious character have frequently come under my notice, but as they
chiefly relate to the details of administration, it is unnecessary to
enlarge upon them here.
I am, Sir,
Very truly yours,
W. WILKINS.
REMARKS BY A LAYMAN,
Who has had long official experience of the Working of the Parochial
System of Education.
I am convinced that the principle of remunerating the Teachers of
the schools commonly called <• Primary,” and “ Infant,” wholly, or in
pait, by fees exacted from the parents of the children, is most objection-
able . and I am persuaded, that it has always had, and, so long as
continued, must have the effect of excluding hundreds of children from
such public schools. '


GENERAL EDUCATION.
The Schoolmaster, at the outset, is placed in a false and disadvan-
tageous position—that of having to become a collector or tax-gatherer ;
and the relationship which should subsist between himself and the
parents of the children, and which would greatly magnify and enhance
the value of his office, and enlarge the sphere of his usefulness, can
never be established. On the contrary, instead of the Teacher’s visits
being welcomed in the homes of the children, where his friendly offices
might, and frequently would effect, an amount of social reformation,
rejoicing to the heart of a Missionary, as the pay-day comes round the
Schoolmaster’s expected call to “ dun” for his miserable pence, dis-
concerts many a family, and he who should be received with the
gratulation of a friend, as deservedly as the Minister of the Parish, is
too often shunned with coldness, if not aversion.
I have known instances (and I question if they are uncommon) where
the irritation occasioned by this taxation, has so exasperated the
inconsiderate and selfish parents, that they have visited their irrational
resentment upon their poor innocent “ incumbrances,” as advertisements
style them. Yes! I have seen little children straggling to School,
sobbing over a dry crust —their only breakfast, —because, they said,
“ Mother hadn’t the money for the Teacher,” and they were afraid of
being punished! I have known the luxury of drying such tears more
than once.
Such are among the reasons why I consider the present principle of
remunerating Teachers so objectionable. It is no answer to say, that
indigent persons may obtain free admission for their children “ under
the rules.” Why should virtue be compelled to sue in forma pauperis
for that which is, or should be, a common right ?
Many are the children who have been withdrawn from the Denomina-
tional, and sent to the National Schools, rather than that their names
should be returned to the authorities as “ paupersand where no such
schools have been, many more, for the same reason, have been left
without Education. Such is the practical effect of “ school fees,”
applied to the humbler classes.
Doubtless a large proportion of those who plead inability, are well
able to pay the small pittance required ; but for that very reason, the
paternal interposition of Government is needed. If all parents and
guardians who could do their duty, did do it, there would be little or no
necessity for grants from the public Treasury.
Again, not only is the schoolmaster subjected to the disadvantage
and great discouragement above described, but consider the hardship
it is upon him, of having to sacrifice so much of his leisure to the
distasteful duty of collecting these so-called “fees;” and to the
G 5S


GENERAL EDUCATION.
wearisome task of making up weekly and monthly Returns, (I believe
in duplicate,) which this system imposes.
Any system, therefore, by which the largest number of children
can be educated, and, at the same time, the Teacher be liberally
remunerated, without recourse to the present obnoxious and inequitable
mode of assessment, must be a great improvement upon existin
arrangements.


CrINtEAL SDUCA.TIOS.
THE PETITIONS.
To the Honorable the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales.
THE PETITION
Of the undersigned Citizens of Sydney, &c.
Humblt Sheweth :
1. That your Petitioners are deeply impressed with the importance of
the Education of the children of the colony, and are earnestly desirous of
seeing it so extended and improved as to bring within its action the 17,582
educable boys, and the 16,632 ditto girls, which the last census shows are
growing up in total ignorance.
2. That your Petitioners believing the happiness and social prosperity of
every country to be dependent on the educational state of its inhabitants,
are of opinion, that it is the imperative duty of this community to
take such measures as may be found necessary to secure the moral and
intellectul training of each one of its members.
3. That your Petitioners entertain a strong conviction, that whatever be
decided upon as the systems of instruction or mode of distribution of the
educational funds, large means will be required to place the Government in
a position to offer Education to every child in the colony.
4. That before the community can hope to secure for itself the blessings
of universal Education, your Petitioners consider it will be essential that
means be provided, for extending the benefit of primary schools, in which
no fees are charged, to ail parts of the colony; for industrial schools in
convenient localities ; for a large number of additional teachers, as well as
for increasing the stipends of some of the present schoolmasters; for
additional inspectors of schools, in order to secure proper supervision; and
your Petitioners believe it will be very desirable that means be provided—l,
for one or more normal colleges to secure the proper Education and training
of the teachers ; 2, for the adoption of a prize system, and especially for the
institution of scholarships, in order to open the University Colleges and
Grammar Schools to the most promising of the pupils of the lower schools;
3, for Mechanics’ Institutions, Free Libraries, and a Nautical and a Refor-
matory School, as well as for carrying out any other object in connection
with education your Honorable House in its wisdom may see fit.
6. That, from recent proceedings, your Petitioners are aware that the


GENERAL EDUCATION.
Tea and Sugar duties will shortly cease to be sources of the genera]
revenue ; but they believe your Honorable House would be best consulting
the interests of the poorer classes, as well as of society generally, by
providing that the Government should continue to collect, but to set them
apart as a distinct fund for the promotion of Public Education.
6. That whatever differences of opinion your Petitioners may hold as to
whether the duties are. or are not, felt by the community, they are all agreed
that the advantages from a fund so raised would weigh down all objections.
7. That by such an appropriation of these duties, the general revenue
might be relieved from the burden of educational grants ; and means
provided to carry out most of the measures before alluded to.
8. That your Petitioners are most anxious to draw the attention of your
Honorable House to the following very great advantages which would
result from the raising of a school fund in the manner proposed.
That, as the parents themselves would be contributors—although perhaps
to no greater extent than 2d. for each member of his family,—schools
supported by such a fund would be divested of a pauper character. The
poorest equally with the richest parent would, by virtue of the tea and
sugar he consumed, be in a position to demand entrance into them for his
children, not as an act of charity —not as a political concession—but as a
right.
9. Your Petitioners wish further to observe, that a fund so supported
will increase just in proportion to that of the population, and consequently,
in proportion to the probable educational requirements of the colony ; and
that, although the total amount is large, it is collected at a trifling cost.
10. That large expenditure in the Education of the people is consistent
with the soundest principles of political economy, in as much as the records
of nations show that, just in proportion as the people become enlightened,
so will crime, the concomitant of ignorance, disappear. Whatever is given
to Education is more than saved in police expenditure.
11. Your Petitioners, therefore, pray your Honorable House to take the
premises into your earnest consideration, and to adopt such measures with
reference thereto, as shall tend to the advancement of the intellectual,
moral, and religious welfare of the colony.
And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
To the Honorable Legislative Assembly of New South Wales.
THE PETITION
Of the undersigned Female Inhabitants of New South Wales , residing at
Humbly Sheweth :
1. That vour Petitioners are made acquainted by recent public discus-
sions with the lamentable fact, that thousands of their Fellow Colonists of
both sexes are in a state of deplorable ignorance; and it appears to them,


GENERAL EDUCATION.
that unless urgent and prompt measures are taken to provide more extended
means of Education, for the rising generation, than is now afforded by the
Colony, the fearful amount of ignorance which already exists will he
largely increased.
2. That your Petitioners are aware it is unusual for Females to interfere
in any matters at all partaking of a political character; but satisfied as
they are of the great advantages which would accrue to the Colony, if all
its inhabitants were properly Educated, and knowing that the want of
Education is the cause of most of the crime, and intemperance, and con-
sequent misery, to which so many of the less fortunate of their sex are the
unhappy victims, they (your Petitioners) feel themselves not only justified,
but that they would be guilty of great want of sympathy, if they failed in
urging upon your Honorable House, the great necessity which exists for
taking active measures to secure, as far as it may be possible, the efficient
training of every child in the Community.
3. That to bring about so great a blessing as that which would be con-
ferred upon the Colony by Universal Education, it will in the opinion of
your Petitioners, amongst other steps, be absolutely necessary to abolish
all fees in the Elementary Schools,—as they feel assured many of them,
by practical experience and observation, that this first main step must be
taken, in order to meet the cases of poor or indifferent parents.
4. That your Petitioners believe that the proposal which has recently
been made*to raise a large Educational Fund, by retaining for that purpose
the tea and sugar duties, would be a most appropriate and admirable
method, as by means of a fund so raised, to which all would contribute,
the poorest equally with the richest parents would be placed in a position
to get their children Educated in the public schools without entertaining
any sense of dependence, or the slightest feeling, that they were receiving
PAUPKR INSTRUCTION.
5. That your Petitioners further believe, that if the above duties were
exclusively devoted to defray the cost of Public Education, they would be
cheerfully paid by all classes of the Community,
6. That your Petitioners, aware of the defective condition of Female
Education in this Colony, desire to impress upon your Honorable House,
the extreme desirability of providing, in any scheme of General Education,
for a more extended course of instruction for Females, than that usually
given in Primary Schools, and therefore pray that wherever Grammar
Schools may be hereafter established, Institutions of a corresponding
description may be founded for the better Education of Females.
7. Your Petitioners therefore pray your Honorable House to take the
premises into your earnest consideration, and to adopt such measures with
reference thereto, as shall tend to the advancement of the intellectual f
moral, and religious welfare of the Colony.
And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.




ERRATUM.
Page 9. —For “ I 860,” in the middle of page, read “ 1850.”
Page 11.— For the word “objections,” in the second line from the
bottom, read “ observations.”
Page3o. —For “enumerated,” in the second line from the bottom, read
“ enunciated.”




RETURN in part to
an Address to His Excellency the Governor-General, agreed to 18th October, 1869, on a motion of Mr. Jenkins, by the
Legislative Assembly of New South Wales.—(See pages 9 and 10).
A Numerical Return of the Confines on the Penal Establishment at Cockatoo Island, showing
their Ages and Education, arranged under different classes of offences.
AGE
Under 14 Years.
From 14 to 25 Years.
From 25 to 50 Years.
50 Years
& Upwards.
OFFENCES.
<
H
O
H
O
d
73
a
P5
>->
<v
rd
CD
£
P
£
"d
o
73
eg
05
P
73
d
cS
73
cS
(2
a
p
p<
S
o
73
53
•d
d
0)
2*
$
d’
.2
d
73
W
o
O
Pi
d
m
O
d
73
d •
o p
tf.-g
o £
rd
'p
£
*d
o
d
d
P
«
p
•a£
d
73 &
o3 # d
P
d p
d £
73
aJ
d*
.2
d
o
d
73
w
O
‘£
CD
P<
d
O
t3
3 p
£
A
p
A
’d
o
d
Ph
P
** o
-d £
d|
g fc
d d
*d
d
Ph
d
.2
c3
d
f d
W
.2
p
Pi
d
si
0
d
73
1 p
A ■
>%
'd
o
73
d
o
p
£ g
d £
3 p
p,
1 s
CD
P
-d £3
3 |
73
c8
d
.2
c4
d
73
»-
o
p
Pi
d
in
RECAPITULATION.
16
10
1
2
i
2
f-i
d*
5
2
3
d
P
<3
"3
3
1
2
t3
£
1
i
AGE.
£
73
w
2
i
i
pf *i
dc2
73 33
11
i
2
3
2
2
1
p £
g
O
13
i
I
4
i
3
3
73
r-«
gj
73
M
23
i
1
1
i
4
8
4
8
‘q
<u
CD
Pi
7
1
4
2
P4
CQ
EH
8
1
5
i
1
Larceny ?
22
"i
2
i
9
2
4
2
1
13
I
5
1
4.
1
i
Arson
1
i
TT , , f
15
9
17
51
6
47
I legally on premises
1
i
72
20
36
184
59
5
3
4
4
is
i
12
6
2
2
i
i
14 years and under 25 years
Cattle stealing
10
2
4
1
2
i
1- 1 1 . rn
5
5
2
6
18
1
1
21
1
2
2
1
4
7
i
i
2
i
1
Obtaining goods on false pretences
Obtaining money on false pretences
7
6
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
i
i
i
i
1
The maximum age is 71 years
4
1
3
3
1
2
2
2
6
1
3
- i
i
1
i
1
1
249
15
9
17
6
72
20
51
36
5
5
5
2
6
92
34
70
43
5
249
Penal E stablishment,
Is# Noverrib
Cockatoo Island,
er, 1859.
G0THER
K.
MA
NN






