

UNIVERSAL
OCEAN PENNY POSTAGE.
SPEECH
MR. J, HENNIKER HEATON,
M.P. FOE CANTEEBUEY,
In the House of Commons, March 30, 1886.


UNIVERSAL
OCEAN PENNY POSTAGE.
SPEECH
MR. J. HENNIKER HEATON,
M.P. FOR CANTERBURY,
In the House of Commons, March 30, 1886.


LONDON:
HARRISON AND SONS, PRINTERS IN ORDINARY TO HER MAJESTY,
ST. martin’s lane.


UNIVERSAL
OCEAN PENNY POSTAGE.
HOUSE OF COMMONS.
March 3 Oth, 188 G.
Mr. J. Hennxkjer Heaton said ; Mr. Speaker,
Sir, —I rise to move “ That in the opinion of this
House, the time has arrived for thg Government of
this country to open negotiations with other
Governments, with a view to the establishment of
a universal international penny postage system.
(Cheers.) I presume that it is unnecessary for me,
Sir, in addressing the House on this subject, to say
one word as to the immense advantages which Sir
Rowland Hill’s bold idea has conferred upon this
country. The subject is worthy of eloquence to
which Ido not pretend. But it is obvious to every
mind that by the supply of a cheap, rapid, and
trustworthy method of communication not only
have our people, high and low, enjoyed a means of
continuous intercourse and fellowship with absent
friends, not only have works of charity been
facilitated, sympathies enlarged, and unity of feeling
promoted, but in addition, an incalculable stimulus


has been given to trade and industry of every kind
and degree. (Hear, hear.) Time is money, says
the philosopher, and nobody assents more heartily
to the proposition than the man of business. All
this, I know, will be granted me. (Cheers.) All
this resulted from the introduction of the penny
post into England, Scotland, and Ireland.
Extend the Penny Post,
Now, Sir, in respect of the postal communication
of this country with our colonies and with foreign
nations, there are new and distinct advantages to
be secured, provided always that the service is
cheap, rapid, and trustworthy. I assert that it
is, however, wanting in the first of these qualifi-
cations. (Hear, hear.) And I further assert that
the distinct advantages to which I have referred as
attainable are to a large extent sacrificed. These
are, first, the promotion of cousinly feeling with the
millions of Englishmen dwelling in our colonies—l
will say brotherly feeling—and, secondly, the
creation and fostering of a, feeling of solidarity and
common interest among all the nations of the earth.
Reasons for doing this.
I may pretend to speak with some degree of
knowledge respecting one of the greatest, most
prosperous, and, I may be permitted to add, most


loyal of the British colonies—Australia. (Cheers.)
To that country a large proportion of the more
intelligent and deserving emigrants annually go
from “the old country,” while a much larger pro-
portion goes to a second Continent, also peopled
by men of English lineage, and speaking our mother
tongue. Now it is notorious that the mass of these
exiles are persons in the humblest circumstances,
who work for a daily wage, and calculate every
farthing of expenditure as carefully as do their
equally indigent relatives left behind in England or
Ireland. What is the consequence ? All communi-
cation between (he divided members of the family
is looked upon as an eryaensive indulgence, and
economy too often begins with a practical casting
off of all the ties that bind, or ought to bind, the
emigrant to the land of his fathers. (Hear.) Sir,
in these days of industrial crisis and colonial exten-
sion, when envious glances mark the extent of our
wealthy empire, and keen men of business com-
missioned as consuls rove up every creek with
offers of a protectorate and of protectionist duties,
it is surely no sound policy to set a tax of a deterrent
character upon indulgence in that natural affection
which is so considerable a factor in patriotism.
Surely it were wiser to encourage the wanderer to
retain a lively interest in all that relates to his
native land, his village and his cottage home. (Hear,
hear.)


Advance Chkistianity.
On the difficult question, whether the cheapen-
ing of postal communication with foreign countries
would tend to the averting of those terrible conflicts
which so frequently disgrace humanity in this 19 th
century of Christianity, I am not qualified to speak
with authority. Yet surely, Sir, we may fairly
assume that two peoples, in constant communication
with one another, exchanging daily tens of thousands
of letters, on business, and on social and political
events, must be less ready to quarrel than two which
remain as Nature placed them, in savage isolation.
{Hear, hear.)
Will it Pay ?
I now approach a subject which I suspect is
uppermost in the minds of the opponents of this
motion—that of the cost of transmission. (Hear,
hear.) I will here lay down what may seem to
financiers in this House a somewhat startling pro-
position. I hold that the State has no right to make
a profit out of the post-office. (Cheers.) A large part
of the business of life is now absolutely dependent on
the postal service. Probably half the letters sent
are business letters ; and another very large share
is sent by persons of small means, who have many
stern inducements to take care of their pence. In
other words, one half of your postal revenue is
derived from a tax on the machinery of trade, and
another large share from the poorest class of citizens.
(Cheers.)


A Tax on Commerce.
This is practically a tax on commerce. Whether
the merchant pays the money at the custom-house,
or at the post office, is all the same to him. A
paternal Government allows the foreigner to intro-
duce his goods duty free, to compete with home
products ; but lays a tax, through the post office, on
the British exporter. I can understand the State
charging a tax of 6d. a ton say on coals actually sold,
but I cannot understand a tax of 6d. in the shape of
postage on the communication or letter’s leading to
that business transaction. (H ear, hear.)
Guiding Principles.
The true principle, I maintain, is for the State to
encourage, by a moderate contribution, those opera-
tions of commerce, in the initial stage, which ulti-
mately furnish work to English workers, and thus
benefit the entire community. The State should,
secondly, abstain from discouraging friendly inter-
course between our home-keeping citizens, and their
kinsmen and friends beyond the seas ; or even
between Englishmen and Frenchmen, Germans or
liussians. There can be no objection to the principle
of this “ moderate contribution,” for you have practi-
cally admitted it by paying subsidies to several of
the trans-oceanic mail-lines, and the other day you
voted £380,000 for a West African cable subsidy.
Let us abandon half-measures. (Hear, hear.) Your


subsidies pass unnoticed, for few persons perceive
the ultimate beneficial operation of them. (Hear.)
An Appeal.
But confer a substantial reduction in the cost of
postage as a palpable, immediate benefit on the
community, and you will reap a harvest of universal
gratitude ; not only among Englishmen, but wher-
ever the English tongue is spoken. (Cheers.) But,
it may be urged, in view of the operations of the
Postal Union (of which I would speak with the
utmost gratitude), other nations must have some-
thing to say to this scheme. Granted ; it is for that
very reason that I have cast my resolution in its
present shape. I have no doubt that the inhabitants
of other lands will be as willing as Englishmen to
O o
enjoy a cheap postal service.
A Conference Proposed.
Let Her Majesty’s Government propose a Con-
ference, or an extraordinary meeting of the Postal
Union, or adopt any other procedure which in their
judgment may he best. It will doubtless be neces-
sary to make elaborate calculations as to the amounts
of the initial loss of revenue to be respectively borne
by the several States. But these calculations are
not more difficult than those already completed by
the members of the Union,
Some Statistics.
I shall now ask the indulgence of the House
while I quote some statistics, and read a few brief


extracts from letters received from representative
men. The profit now derived from the Post Office
is almost £3,000,000 sterling per annum, but the
Postmaster-General alleges that this profit is all
made at home, and that there is a loss on foreign
business. Surely this is an argument in favour of
foreign penny postage. Profit made in one direction
should be applied to balance losses in another. {Hear,
hear.) The revenue from the General Post Office in
1375 was £7,418,324, and the net profit, £2,534,306,
The revenue last year had risen to £10,053,457, and
the net profit, £2,932,207, an increase of more than
two and a half millions in revenue, and nearly four
hundred thousand pounds ,profit. I shall now, with
your permission, point out some of the anomalies in
the present system.
In the first place, the price charged for the con-
veyance of letters to Australia is 6d, per letter of
half an ounce in weight, or no less than £1,792 per
ton. There are no post cards to Australia.
In the second place, the cost of the postage of a
newspaper weighing 4oz. to the ends of the earth is
only Id. A letter of the same weight would cost 4s.
We might send eight letters for Id. But we offer
the Government B d. for the eight letters, for it is
only suggested that one letter should be sent for one
penny.
(3.) The cost of carriage by a first-class steamship,
is only ton, or 4f lbs. for one penny to
Australia. The postal authorities might pay the


steamship owners Is. per lb. At a penny per letter
32 letters would cost the public 2s. 8c?. The postal
authorities would then have Is. 8c?. for the cost of
delivery, &c.
(4.) The French Government carries a post-card
from, say Calais, to New Caledonia—l,ooo miles
beyond Australia—for Id.
(5.) The Post Office charges for carrying
a letter from, say, Folkestone to Boulogne —a dis-
tance of about 32 miles by sea; and only Id. for
carrying it to the Orkneys—nearly all the way by
rail —a distance of 750 or 800 miles.
On this subject one of my correspondents says:
—“ If it be worth the while of the French Govern-
ment to take so much trouble, and go to a little
expense for the sake of the few pokey colonies which
it has been left for them to acquire, what shall we
say of the obligations of the English Government,
with whole continents for colonies, and a population
of 300 millions of possible correspondents through
the post?” (Cheers.)
Will the Revenue suffer?
But is it certain that there will be a loss to the
Postal service in consequence of the reduction
which I advocate ? As bearing upon this question
let us take the case of the great reduction of postage
in 1839. In the year 1839 there were carried or
delivered in the United Kingdom in all 82 million
and a half letters. In the year 1840 there were


delivered in the United Kingdom 169 millions; and
there were delivered last year no less than 1,360
millions, or sixteen times as many as in 1839.
Assuming, as I am fairly entitled to do, that the
number of letters now carried at a prohibitive price
by the Post Office for transmission abroad would be
only six times greater than at present, the revenue
would be the same as it is now. (Cheers.) But I
set no such bounds on the communicativeness of the
race. I would appeal to the Right Hon. gentleman,
the First Lord of the Treasury, with confidence, in
view of his most recent experience, whether, given a
penny postal rate, even with a sea to be crossed, and
long railway journeys to maSe, the epistolary tenden-
cies of mankind can be “cribb’d,cabined, andconfined.”
(Cheers.)
Valuable testimony in support.
Among' letters received, the Consul-General of
O 7
Denmark writes Between European countries
near to each other, as for instance England and
France or Germany, the present charge of 2 \d. is
somewhat high and might with great advantage be
reduced. As regards Denmark, she would naturally
follow the lead of the great European countries in
such a matter, and would, I feel sure, take part in
an International Conference, and cordially co-operate
in any practical scheme which would further develop
the great reform of Sir Rowland Hill.” (Cheers.)
An American gentleman writes from New York :
—“ A penny post between England and America


would pay well. It is not more expensive to send a
letter from London to New York than from London
to Scotland.” (Cheers.)
A well-known emigration agent writes :—“ One
advantage of your scheme will be that the friends
of the emigrant, instead of writing quarterly, will
write weekly ; and a great body of persons who
never think at present of buying a costly foreign
postage stamp, will develop a surprising interest in
men and things abroad.” (Cheers.)
A gentleman connected with an Agent-General's
office writes : —“ It will be said that the colonial
postage service will not pay, and that large losses are
already borne. The present results are from bad
management. Last year Australia sent and received
from England 12,000,000 letters, 10,000,000 news-
papers, and 1,500,000 packets, at a cost of £270,000.
With this enormous subsidy, if the colonies and the
mother-country would unite, we could have a first-
class mail service to and from Australia. From one
to three first-class mail steamers now leave Australia
every week for England.”
The manager of the Australian Joint Stock Bank,
one of our largest institutions, writes : —“ lam
entirely in accord with you as to the desirability of
a universal penny post.” (Cheers.)
A WORD PICTURE.
A well-known Australian writes :—“ I wish the
Postmaster-General could, in spirit, transport himself


into some rough, Jog-built shanty on the fringe of a
virgin forest, where a knot of shaggy, brown-faced
men are gathered in a circle to hear a letter from
home read aloud. If he could mark the keen
interest on every face, the rapt attention, the lively
interest displayed in the history, health, and doings
of their comrade’s family circle at home in England,
perliaps even the passing shade of envy at his
happiness., and remember that such happiness would
be returned a thousand fold, when the wanderer’s
reply reached his friends at home, I am not sure
that his official sternness would not for a passing
moment relax, and he might think more favourably
of your motion.” (Loud cheers.)
Further Evidence,
A leading merchant of the city of London writes
to me as follows : —There is no doubt the sympathy
of the whole commercial world will be with you in
your patriotic endeavour of obtaining a uniform and
cheaper international postage, which would greatly
facilitate commercial intercourse and considerably
reduce office expenses, which, especially in these
hard times, form a heavy item.”
It should here be pointed out that a letter can
be conveyed to Australia to-day as cheaply as it
could have been conveyed to many parts of Great
Britain and Ireland during Sir Rowland Hill’s
agitation.
Mr. S. W. Silver, the emigrant’s friend, writes ; —-


“ I believe that nothing is more likely to foster that
regard which exists between the various members
that compose the British Empire than a uniform
penny postage. With such rapid communication as
now exists, all that is required is to neutralise the
expense to the greatest possible degree to render the
union more facile.”
The Portugese Consul-General also writes in
favour of the proposal.
The head of a large Commercial firm in the City
writes : —“ The State should look upon the Post-
Office as a merchant does on an advertisement. The
day has passed when the State could tax advertise-
ments. I calculate that the increase of letter writers
strictly corresponds to the increased number of
children now being educated. Quite an army of
letter writers is now being drilled and taught all
over the country. The increase in our correspon
dence with foreign countries, and with our colonies,
must therefore show a great increase during the
next few years, fully compensating us for the largest
possible expenditure foreseen by the Postmaster-
General.”
The Consul-General of Austria-Hungary writes:—
“ I beg to assure you that I sincerely sympathise
with the object you have in view, and I do not
hesitate to think that the two difficulties you
mention might be easily surmounted by an inter-
national Conference.”
The well known firm of W. and A. Gilbey, whose


commercial transactions extend to every country
in the world, writes ; —“ We unhesitatingly and
emphatically state that not only would such a result
be beneficial to our trade, but it must undoubtedly
tend to the advantage of British commerce generally.
At the same time it would greatly cement that inter-
national good-will, so desirable at all times to culti-
vate, from every point of view. It would also,
without doubt, cause an increased revenue to the
Postal Department in a very short period of time.”
A Significant Fact.
The fact should be borne in mind that at the
present time Australia only sends on average four
letters per head of the population per year to Eng-
land, while among themselves the people of England
exchange forty letters per head. The Australian
Governments say the British Government will not
consent to reduce the cost of letters on the ground
that the British Government would be opposed to
the proposal, but the Australian people are really
anxious for the reduction. (Hear, hear.) I, there-
fore, simply ask for negotiations to be opened up.
A Spirited Be joinder.
Now I approach a portion of my subject on
which imaginative powers of the highest order would
not be wasted. To such powers, as I have before
stated, I make no pretension. But lam somewhat
consoled for the consciousness of my intellectual


poverty in this respect from having observed that,
as a rule, flights of imagination are not followed in
this House with any great exhibition of interest or
appreciation. {H ear, hear.) I may be told by the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, or by some less exalted
authority in connection with our finances, that there
are already very heavy drains upon the public purse,
and that a policy of rigid retrenchment will be re-
quired to set it right. Sir, in view of the intention
attributed to the Government to propose a loan of one
or two hundred millions sterling, in order to round
off' and complete the grand Irish policy of the First
Lord of the Treasury, I shall, in case the Chancellor
of the Exchequer uses the economical argument,
observe with some curiosity the facial control of the
Eight Honourable gentleman. (Laughter, and hear,
hear.) Far be it from me to sneer at the sufferings
of the loyal and unhappy class, the Irish landlords,
for whose relief this vast expenditure is intended.
I trust that they will duly receive this bounty, this
‘ conscience money,” of the First Lord of the
Treasury, and that the loan will be punctually
repaid. (Hear.)
A Word for the Exiles.
But, Sir, these are not the only deserving class
of her Majesty’s subjects. Surely those who are
carrying on the vast business of this country, who
labour to maintain and to increase the wealth on
which we are all, high and low, dependent, the


merchants, artisans, and labourers engaged in com-
mercial undertakings deserve some consideration.
Surely we can spare a moment’s thought, and even,
if need be, a little money, to soften the rigour of
exile to those millions of our countrymen beyond
the sea, who have not this happiness which we
enjoy, of dwelling in the land of their fathers, the
land that still contains those dearest to them
by the ties of nature and affection. (Cheers.)
Sir, I am afraid that the House has perhaps been
too long detained by what I have said from the
consideration of a certain sentimental grievance
affecting a limited but resolute class of her
Majesty’s subjects.* My excuse must be, that
coming into this assembly from the great southern
Island-Continent, which is the largest and among
the most lustrous of the jewels in the Imperial
Crown, I naturally utter grievances of which
Englishmen in that distant latitude are painfully
conscious, but of which only a faint, occasional echo
may have previously reached your ears. (Cheers.)
Doubtless, objections will be raised to the pro-
posal on the score of its boldness, its innovating
nature, its ingratitude, and so on. I make this
appeal, however, not merely to the cold, calculating
economists on the Treasury Bench (laughter), but
to the representatives of the hundreds of millions
who own our gracious Soverign’s sway. I ask them
to make intercourse between their sundered coasts
* A Scotch question was next on the paper.


as easy as speech, as free as air. (Applause.) I
entreat them to tolerate no longer this unworthy
profit on the expression of their fraternal sympathies,
and on the natural development of their trade.
(Cheers.) And I foretell that this reform, when it is
ours—as it soon must be—will confer a wide spread
benefit on commerce, it will bring new happiness
into myriads of English homes here, in this country,
and scattered by the brimming margent or the long
wash of the Australasian seas, over pathless prairies
in America (cheers), over trackless plains in Aus-
tralia (cheers), and along glancing equatorial
streams; and it will form the last and not the
least tenacious of the ties that bind our colonies
to their beloved mother country. (Loud Cheers.)
Sir, I beg to move the resolution standing in my
name. (Cheers.)
A division was taken on the original motion,
which was defeated. 142 members voted for the
motion.
3 1508 02055426 2
Harrison & Sons, Printers in Ordinary to Hei Majesty, St Martin's Lanei
