

UNSECTARIAN SERVICES
FOR USE
In Schools and families, and
Children's Churches
BY CHARLES STRONG
(Minister of the Scots' Church)
MELBOURNE
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST
1881




These Services are intended to supply a want in Family
Worship, the Day and Sunday School, and also in the Children’s
Church. The introduction of such simple forms, it is believed,
would do much to foster reverent and devotional feeling, and to
impress upon young minds the spirit of the Christian Life.
This little book has been specially prepared by the author, in the
first instance, for use in his class for State School children, held
after school hours. For such classes it is hoped that it may be
found suitable.
The words printed in Italics are intended to be said by the
children. Appropriate Hymns may be introduced before and
after each service, and before the repetition of the Lord’s Prayer.
The teacher or parent can introduce a short extemporary prayer
as he sees fit.
C. S.
The Scots’ Church, Melbourne,
December, 1880.


UNSECTARIAN SERVICES
FOR USE IN SCHOOLS AND FAMILIES.
I.
THE hour cometh, and now is, when the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and
in truth : for the Father seeketh such to worship Him.
God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must
worship Him in spirit and in truth. John iv. 23, 24.
Let us pray :
OGOD, our heavenly Father, wlio art not far from
anyone of us, teach us to know Thee, to love Thee,
and to do Thy holy will. May Thy temple be our
hearts, and Thy worship our lives.
Make us Thy sons and daughters, 0 Lord.
Help us to love one another, to be kind and generous
to all, to be honest and truthful, to be simple-minded
and pure, and to hate every evil way.
Create in ms a clean heart, 0 God, and renew a right
spirit xoithin us.
Bless our friends and kindred, O Lord, and may they
know and love Thee. Have mercy on those who love
Thee not, and turn their hearts to Thee. May the hour
soon come, when all the world shall worship the Father
in spirit and in truth.
Amen.
Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed by Thy
name. Thy kingdom come. Thy 'will be done in earth
as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil: For Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory, for ever. Amen.


II
AND when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the
heathen do : for they think that they shall be
heard for their much speaking. Be not ye therefore like
unto them : for your Father knoweth what things ye
have need of, before ye ask Him. Matt. vi. 7, 8.
And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have aught
against any, that your Father, which is in heaven, may
forgive you your trespasses. But if you do not forgive,
neither will your Father, which is in heaven , forgive your
trespasses. Mark xi. 25, 26.
Let us pray :
OGOD, our Heavenly Father, help us to trust in Thee
as Jesus trusted, and to give up our wills to Thy
good and holy will. Deliver us from murmuring and
discontent, from restlessness and fear, from selfishness
and self-will.
May that mind be in us which was also in Christ Jesus.
0 God, whose best name is Love, give us Thy Holy
Spirit. Deliver us from hatred, malice, envy and an
unforgiving temper. Write the new law of love upon
our hearts, and may we shew that we are Thy children
by kindness and humility, by patience and forbearance,
and by doing unto others as we would that they should
do unto us.
Shew me Thy ways, 0 Lord ; teach me Thy paths. Lead
me in Thy truth, and teach me.
Our Father, &c.
111.
AND the son said, Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and in Thy sight, and am no more worthy
to be called Thy son.
But the Father said to His servants, bring forth the
best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his
finger, and shoes on his feet; and bring hither the fatted
calf and kill it; and let us eat, and be merry : For this
My son was dead, and is alive again ; he was lost, and is
found. Luke xv. 21, 24.


If we confess our sins, He is faitliful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteous-
ness. I. John i. 9.
Let us pray :
BLESSED Father, from whom all good things come
down, we thank Thee for our manifold blessings.
We thank Thee for our life, and all its enjoyments. We
thank Thee for teachers and friends. We thank Thee
for any good thing in our hearts,
0 give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon His name.
Father, we bless Thee for Jesus Christ, whom Thou
didst send to deliver men from the bondage of sin, and
to bring back sinners to their home. We thank Thee
that He taught us to believe in Thy love, and in Thy
forgiveness to all who truly repent. Give us honest
hearts, O Lord, to confess when we do wrong. Wash
away the black stains from our souls. Help us to hate
sin more and more, and to love all that is beautiful and
good.
The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit. A broken and
a contrite heart, 0 God, Thou will not despise.
Our Father, &c.
IY.
Jesus said :
BLESSED are- the poor in spirit :
For theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Blessed are they that mourn :
For they shall be comforted.
Blessed are the meek :
For they shall inherit the earth.
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness :
For they shall be filled.
Blessed are the merciful:
For they shall obtain mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart :
For they shall see God.


Blessed are tlie peacemakers :
For they shall be called the children of God.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness
sake :
For theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Matt. v. 1-10.
Let us pray :
OGOD, who didst send Jesus Christ to bring to us
the good news of Thy Kingdom, make us the
children of Thy Kingdom. Be Thou our King, O
Father ; reign Thou upon the throne of our hearts. May
Thy love subdue our wills, and may Thy spirit conquer
our evil thoughts and passions. Write Thy holy laws on
our minds; and help us to serve Thee in holiness and
righteousness all our days.
Make us poor in spirit:
Make us mourn fen' sin.
Make us meek, 0 Lord :
Cause us to love righteousness.
Give us, we beseech Thee, a merciful spirit :
Grant us a pure heart.
Help us to follow after things which make for peace :
Make us willing to suffer for righteousness 1 sake.
May this mind be in us which was also in Christ
Jesus :
A men.
y.
PUTTING away lying, speak every man truth with
his neighbour.
Let him that stole steal no more.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your
mouth.
Let all bitterness, and ivraih, and anger, and clamour,
and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice.
And be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving
one another, even as God in Christ has forgiven you.
Be not drunk with wine, but be filled with the Spirit.


Children, obey your parents in the Lord : For this is
right.
Honour thy father and mother.
Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath; but
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord. Servants, with good will do service, as to the
Lord and not to men. Ephesians iv. v. vi.
Let us pray :
OGIOD, our Heavenly Father, Thou art righteous and
holy. Wickedness is abomination to Thee. Thy
wrath lies on all that is selfish, unjust, and unclean.
Hide Thy face from our sins, and clothe us with the
white robe of Thy righteousness. Help us to keep Thy
holy law, and may we delight to do our Father’s will.
From all lying and dishonesty,
Deliver us, 0 Lord.
From unclean thoughts and words,
Deliver us, 0 Lord.
From unrighteous anger, bitterness, and evil-speaking,
and from malicious feelings,
Deliver us, 0 Lord.
From idleness, drunkenness, and all excesses,
Deliver us, 0 Lord.
Make us hate these things, and love whatsoever is
pure, and beautiful, and true. May our bodies and our
souls be Thy temple, into which no uncleanness shall
enter.
The grace of the Lord Jesus, and the love of God, and
the communion oj the Holy Spirit, be with us all.
Amen.
VI.
Jesus said :
AI/'HOSOEVEIi will be great among you, let him be
W your minister. And whosoever will be chief
among you, let him be your servant: Even as the Son of
Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister,
and to give His life a ransom for many.
Matt. xx. 26, 28.


Remember the words of the Lord Jesus , how He said, It
is more blessed to give than to receive. Acts xx. 35.
Let ns pray :
OGrOI), our Heavenly Father, take away from us all
pride, vainglory, and selfishness, we beseech Thee,
and make us humble and loving. May it be our joy to
serve Thee, and to do good to others. Help us to bear
Christ’s yoke of a meek and lowly heart. May we be
brave and strong in the hour of trial, fearing no danger,
and ready, if need be, to suffer for truth and righteous-
ness’ sake. May we be also tender-hearted and gentle.
Make us mindful of others. Help us to be of some use
in the world, and to make the lives of those around
us brighter and better by our sympathy, forbearance, or
timely aid. Help us to bear one another’s burdens,
And so to fulfil the laiv of Christ.
Lord, bless our parents and friends,
And forgive those who do us wrong.
Have mercy on all prodigal children,
And may they come home repenting.
Make thy ways known upon earth,
And Thy saving health among all nations.
Let the people praise Thee, O God :
Yea, let all the people praise Thee.
Amen.
VII.
A SOFT answer turneth away wrath : but grievous
words stir up anger.
Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled
ox and hatred therewith.
He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty;
and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city.
{Proverbs of Solomon).
If any man among you seem to be religious, and
bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this
man’s religion is vain. James i. 26.


Let us pray :
OGOD, our Heavenly Father, give us a meek and
quiet spirit, which in Thy sight is of great price.
Keep our tongues from evil and our lips that they speak
no guile. Make us ever hold to speak the truth, and
ready, if need be, to fight and die for truth’s sake. Make
us earnest and zealous to oppose all falsehood, meanness,
and selfishness. But grant us grace also to follow the
truth in love and to rule our own spirits.
From angry passions and bitter words,
Save us, 0 Lord.
From a proud and haughty mind, and from all malice
and revenge,
Save us, 0 Lord.
From backbiting and slander, from filthy talking,
blasphemy, and lies,
Save us, 0 Lord, we beseech Thee.
Let Thy Holy Spirit rule our hearts and minds,
And Thy charity direct our lives.
Make us patient and forbearing, as Jesus was, even
towards His enemies.
Help us to take upon us Christ's yoke,
And to be meek and lowly in heart.
So shall we find rest unto our souls.
The grace of the Lord Jesus, and the love of God, and
the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with us all.
Amen.
Our Father, dec.
VIII.
THOU slialt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength : This is the first commandment.
And the second is like, namely, this: Thou shaft love
thy neighbour as thyself.
There is none other commandment greater than these.
♦ Mark xii. 30, 31.


He that loveth not, knoweth not God ; for God is Love.
I. John iv. 8.
He that loveth another hath fulfilled the law. For
this,
Thou shalt not commit adultery.
Thou shalt not kill.
Thou shalt not steal.
Thou shalt not bear false witness.
Thou shalt not covet;
And if there be any other commandment, it is briefly
comprehended in this saying, namely : Thou shalt love
thy neighbour as thyself
Homans xiii. 8, 9.
Let us pray:
OGOD, high and mighty, great and glorious beyond
all that we can think, we bow ourselves with
reverence before Thee.
Heaven and earth are full of the majesty of Thy glory.
For the beauty of the earth, and the splendour of the
sky : For all things great and marvellous :
We praise Thy glorious name.
But most of all do we bless Thee for Thy love in
which Thou hast taught us to put our trust.
We praise Thy glorious name.
Teach us, 0 God, to love Thee. Remove all slavish
fear, and give us the hearts of sons and daughters.
Make us like Jesus Christ.
Teach us to love one another, and to do good to all
as we have opportunity.
Grant us this grace, 0 Lord.
From the love of everything that is contrary to Thy
pure will,
Deliver us, 0 Lord.
From the love of that which is hurtful to our
neighbour,
Deliver us, 0 Lord.
Give us wisdom and understanding,
And fill our hearts with charity.
Our Father, dec.


IX.
MY son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.
Envy thou not the oppressor, and choose none of his
ways. 4
For the froward is abomination to the Lord : but his
secret is with the righteous.
The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked:
but He blesseth the habitation of the just.
Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in
the way of evil men. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn
from it and pass away. (Proverbs of Solomon).
Depart from me, ye evil-doers: for 1 will keep the
commandments of my God.
Hold Thou me up, and 1 shall be safe: and I will
have respect unto Thy statutes continually.
Ps. cxix. 115-117.
Let us pi*ay :
OGOD, who has placed us in a world of temptation,
help us to resist and overcome in the hour of trial.
Help us to fight the good fight of faith,
As good soldiers of Jesus Christ.
However hard our lot and dark our path, may we
still cling to Thee. However sweet the fruit of sin may
seem, may we refuse to taste it. Though all men
forsake us, let us ever walk with Thee. Though perse-
cution arise, or adversity befal us, help us to choose the
better part.
0 Lord, in Thee have I trusted ; let me never be put to
confusion.
Heavenly Father, who knowest how weak we are,
strengthen us by Thy Holy Spirit. Give us the victory
over bad thoughts and unruly tempers. Save us from
youthful lusts and follies. Save us from vanity and the
fear of man. Lead us through all the dangerous paths
of life, and bring us at length to a better country beyond
the grave.
My Father, be Thou the guide of rny youth.
The grace of the Lord Jesus, and the love of God,
and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all.
Amen.


X.
mHOUGH I speak with the tongues of men and of
X angels, and have not charity, I am become as
sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal. And though I
have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries,
and all knowledge ; and though I have all faith, so that
I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the
poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have
not charity, it profiteth me nothing.
Charity suffereth long, and is hind; charity envieth not;
Charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not
behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinketh no evil ;
Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth ;
Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all
things, endureth all things. And now abideth faith,
hope, charity, these three ;
Rut the greatest of these is charity. T
v J a 1. Cor. xm.
Let us pray :
OLOTvD, who hast taught us that all our doings
without charity are nothing worth ; send Thy Holy
Spirit, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift
of charity, the very bond of peace and of all virtues,
without which whosoever liveth is counted dead before
Thee.
Amen.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with us all.
Amen.
Our Father, Ac.


ADDITIONAL PRAYERS.
(!•)
OLORD, our heavenly Father, almighty and ever-
lasting God, who hast safely brought us to the
beginning of this day ; defend us in the same with Thy
mighty power ; and grant that this day we fall into
no sin, neither run into any kind of danger; but that all
our doings may be ordered by Thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in Thy sight; through Jesus
Christ our Lord.
Amen.
(2.)
OGOD, who hast brought us to the close of another
day, bless the work which we have striven to do :
forgive of Thy great mercy all our sins ; help us each
day to love Thee more, and to serve Thee better; and,
when life’s day is ended, take us home to Thyself.
Amen.
(3.)
OGOD, our refuge and our strength, we remember
before Thee the sick and sorrowing, and all such as
are in danger or trouble of any kind. Teach us to bear
trial with a brave heart, and evermore to put our trust
in Thee. Teach us also to bear each other’s burdens of
sin and sadness, and by gentle words and generous deeds
to make the world around us brighter and better. May
that mind be in us which was also in Christ J esus.
Amen.
(4-)
LORD of all power and might, who art the Author and
Giver of all good things ; graft in our hearts the
love of Thy name, increase in us true religion, nourish
us with all goodness, and of Thy great mercy keep us in
the same; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.


(5.)
OLORD, our Heavenly Father, who hatest nothing
but sin, grant us the grace of a hearty sorrow for
all our shortcomings and offences. Let Thy righteous-
ness clothe us, and Thy loving spirit renew our hearts
and wills, that we may be accepted before Thee, and
evermore serve Thee in newness of life.
Amen.
(6.)
OGOD, who art light, and in whom is no darkness at
all, send forth Thy light we beseech Thee into all
the earth, scattering the darkness of sin and sorrow, and
gladdening the hearts of all men with the good news of
Thy love in Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST'




