

UNTIL
THE DAY
DAWN.
Rutherford Waddel
M.A., D.D.




/. V'■ V.S ■
—‘ o* f A <-•
C s * <r"> <:. u /?V r/i v^v-„ v
l/'^V<Wi.vf4
;--v« _ * rt " • '




UNTIL THE
DAY DAWN
A MESSAGE OF COMFORT
FOR WAR TIME.
BY
RUTHERFORD WADDELL, M.A., D.D.
N.Z. BIBLE, TRACT, AND BOOK SOCIETY
48 Princes Street, Dunedin.
And at Wellington and Invercargill.




FOREWORD.
' Y'HE imperative need of the hour is service. It is
binding on all. Some can render it in deed; some
only in thought or word —but these, too, win battles. It
is a time of great and widespread trouble. Hearts are sore
and sad. Healing and help are required. It has been
suggested to me that, as I cannot go to the front, I might
“do my bit” in this way. Hence this booklet. It consists
of two addresses given in the ordinary course of my ministry.
They were prepared with no idea whatever of publication.
They are neither better nor, it is to be hoped, worse than
others delivered in similar circumstances. lam quite con-
scious that there is nothing in them to justify publication,
but their special purpose may, perhaps, excuse it. They
have been selected and are now sent forth to the wider
public, for whom they were never intended, merely because
some who heard them found them helpful. If others have
a similar experience, that may be pleaded as their apologia.
RUTHERFORD WADDELL.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Until the Day Dawn .. .. .. 7
Comfort: Its Source and Duty .. .. 19


We weep because the night is long,
We laugh for day shall rise.
We sing a slow, contented song.
And knock at Paradise.
Weeping we hold Him fast. Who wept
For us —we hold Him fast ;
And will not let Him go except
He bless us first or last.
Weeping we hold Him fast to-night,
We will not let Him go
Till daybreak smite our wearied eyes.
And summer smite the snow
Then figs shall bud, and dove with dove
Shall coo the livelong day ;
And He shall say : "Arise, My love I
My fair one, come away."
CHRISTIAN ROSSETTI.
“ Hush,” he said, ‘‘don’t you get scared at —the thing that’s
cornin’—t’ you. ’Tis nothin’ t’ fear,” he went on, gloriously
confident. “. . . . He just lets us think it is, so He can give
us a lovely surprise when the time comes. , . . ’Tis but like
wakin’ to the sunlight of a new clear day. . . . Then comes an
end to all the dreamin’. He takes our hand. * The day is
broke,’ says He. * Dream no more, but rise, child o' Mine, and
come into the sunshine with Me.’ ’Tis only that that’s cornin’ l’
you —only His gentle touch, an’ the wakin’. . , . Hush, don’t
you get scared. ’Tis a lovely thing that’s cornin’ to you.”
NORMAN DUNCAN IN “ Doctor Luke."


UNTIL THE DAY DAWN.
“ Until the day break and the shadows flee away, I will
get me to the mountains of myrrh, and to the hill of
frankincense.”
—Song of Songs, iv., 6.
* * >!'
“ Golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the
saints.”
—Revelation v., 8.
* * *
“ Let my prayer be set forth as incense before thee.”
—Psalms cxli., 2.
We have the word of prophecy made more sure, where-
unto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a lamp
shining in a dark place, until the day dawn.”
—II. Peter, i m 19.


UNTIL THE DAY DAWN.
JMAY offer an apologetic foreword for the liberty taken
with this text from the Song of Songs. I abstract
it altogether from its context, and read a meaning
into it never foreseen by its writer. Have I a right
to do that ? Surely. When a man buys a farm, how
much of it does he buy ? Is it only the few feet of
soil on the surface ? If below these he discovers a coal mine
or a gold mine are these not included in his purchase ?
Assuredly. And by the same right, we, in these last times,
are entitled to whatever truth the Old Testament will yield,
even though it may never have come within the purview of
the original authors. “ Nothing in Nature,” says Emerson,
“is exhausted in its first use. . . . When a thing has
served an end to the uttermost, it is wholly new for an ulterior
service.” Air is given us to breathe and food to eat, but who
shall blame us if we turn the one into words and the other
into deeds. The New Testament writers, following our
Lord’s example, used Old Testament facts and figures to
illustrate truths of which the original authors had no con-
ception. Types and allegories have their perils, but we
should be vastly impoverished if these scare us from using
their powers. As a recent interpreter of the Song of Songs,
Hugh Falconer, 8.D., very truly says, “ When once the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ reveals itself to a
man, he is constrained to interpret Old Testament Scripture
and everything else by the light of that Sun of the Soul.
Nature, history, and experience become to him, in a measure,
Divine transparencies, significant signs of the highest. Nor
will he suffer any dictum either of tradition, criticism, or
science to limit his perfect law of liberty to recognise hints —
hieroglyphics of the exceeding grace of God, of his redemp-
tion wherever these are clearly discernible by the spirit
within him.” With this apologia for our Liberty of
prophesying ” we may now proceed.


I.
“ Until the day break,” Then it is not day yet. We
do not see things clearly. We are walking amid shadows.
That is a truth that we must not forget. It is day nowhere.
Take science, for instance. There is a popular notion
that it has made everything clear. In reality it has only
widened the circle of darkness. Emerson says, “ Knowledge
is the knowing that we cannot know.” We talk glibly of
gravitation, radium, ether, etc. But what are these? Nobody
can tell. We ride on the electric cars, but what is the mysterious
power that is their dynamic is hidden from us. While we sit
here ten thousand ships are being guided across the trackless
seas by the movement of a little steel needle in the compass box.
That tiny bit of steel has mystic relations with these currents
of energy flowing through space. But how or what these
relations are is a secret, before which science is dumb. As
a matter of fact, we know only the show of things—their
outsides. Their inner substance, essence, reality is hidden
from us. “We live in two worlds, that outer one of matter
and form which bumps up continually against our senses,
which we touch, see, and handle ; and that inner one at our
centre which perceives these things and forms its judgment
on them. How the one gets into the other, how the one
is related to the other has been the everlasting puzzle of
philosophy—a puzzle we are never likely to solve.” In science
and philosophy it is darkness often —twilight everywhere.
And when we pass up to life what is it we know
here ? There is a little vein of light, the rest is all obscure.
In Herbert Spencer’s biography there is a letter from Andrew
Carnegie, The latter writes : “You come to us every day
in thought, the everlasting ‘ why ’ intrudes itself.” And
the great philosopher in the course of his reply says : “ The
why, and the why, and the why are questions which press
ever more and more as the years go on.” They do. What
is life, matter, force ? Are they all one or all different. We
are bom out of sleep, we die into sleep. Are we really
awake between? or do we only wake in some other world?
or is there any such world? Is all we see only a passing


show ? What certainty is there that our senses convey to us
accurate reports of what is without us? May it not all be
some curious trick of our own consciousness, and as the
Brahmin supposes, and our own Shelley sang —
In the world of error, ignorance, and strife
Nothing is, but all things seem.
And we the shadows of the dream.
It is useless to deny that in all the deeper questions of
life and mind we are largely in the dark. It is not day yet.
And the same is true regarding the simpler and more
practical concerns of daily life. There also we walk amid
shadows. Shadows! What multitudes there are of them. How
they crowd about every life ! With some it is the shadow
of duped love and a dismal home. With others it is the
shadow of sickness approaching; the mother seeing it drawing
on and wondering what will become of the children ; or
it is the father growing grey, and unable to stand up to his
work, and nothing between his family and poverty but his
weakening arms. Or may be it is the shadow of oneself,
the shadow cast by conscience, sin, guilt. In that profound
and moving book of Nathaniel Hawthorne s Trans-
formation,” as Miriam in the moonlight leans over the basin
of the Fountain of Trevi, she sees “ three separate shadows,
all so black and heavy that they sink into the water.” One
of these is her own, the other is that of her partner in guilt,
Donatello, and the third was a perplexing “ shapeless mass as
indistinct as the premonition of calamity.” And this
trinity of shadows pursues her wherever she goes, right on
to the bitter end. The lives of multitudes are made miser-
able by this shadow of oneself and the haunting terror it
conjures up.
Then there is the shadow of loss —loss of money, of
reputation, of life. Meredith, in Diana of the Cross-
ways,” writes of one of his characters, She was running
a race with a shadow. She did not know what it was ; it
ran in a shroud.”


Ah ! there is only one shadow that runs like that. It is
“ the shadow feared of man.” What numbers are running
a race with that shadow, and sitting solitary in the gloom
which it creates !
And there is the mysterious Beyond —and that direst
of all shadows —a shadowy God. A God dim, unreal, in-
tangible —a God that cannot be disentangled from the clouds
and fogs, and found as a rock, as a shelter, as a home for the
wayworn soul —a God such as Job describes in words that
have been called the most melancholy in all the Bible : “ Be-
hold, I go forward, but He is not there, and backward, but I
cannot perceive Him ; on the left hand where He doth work,
but I cannot behold Him. He hideth himself on the right
hand, that I cannot see Him.”
When in Shakespeare’s great drama one of his officers
comes in to arouse King Richard for the fatal fight, the latter
tells him of the dreary dreamful night he has passed. The
officer bids him not to be “ afraid of shadows,” and the King
replies —
By the Apostle Paul shadows to-night
Have struck more terror into the soul of Richard
Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers
Armed all in proof and led by shallow Richmond.
It is not yet near day.
No. It is daylight nowhere, and the shadows crowd cowing
and fearsome about us all.
11.
Now what is to be done till the day break and the shadows
flee away ? / will get me to the mountain of Myrrh and the
hill of frankincense. I will get me to the mountain. The
mountain. That is the first thing. Although life is shadowy
and dark there is yet light enough to see some things that
are solid, some things that are high and sure. Well, get hold
of those ; set your feet firmly upon them. You know some
things that are right, some that are wrong, some things that
you ought to do, and some things you ought not to do.


I know that right is right,
That it is not good to He ;
That love is better than spite,
And a neighbour than a spy. . . .
That courage is better than fear,
That faith is truer than doubt.
And fierce though the fiends may fight,
And long though the angels hide,
I know that truth and right
Have the universe on their side.
The year previous to General Booth s death he visited
the village of Calstor, where, half a century before, he
began his ministry. They turned out to a man to wel-
come him. The once unknown, despised, sneered-at preacher,
who came there two and fifty years before, has now become
a world’s hero. But the road thereto had to be travelled amid
the darkness and the shadows. In the course of his address
General Booth said, “ I have tried to serve God according
to the principles of the New Testament. My path has not
been an easy one. The waves have rolled over me, and it
seemed as if I should not survive. Sometimes it seemed as
if Hell would swallow me up. It has been a hard struggle,
but I have held on and gone forward. I want you to hold on
and go forward .” That message will suit us quite as well
as the villagers of Caistor. Let me give it to you, as I
take it to myself, “ hold on and go forward.” Hold on to
the truths you know, and the duty you are sure about, and go
forward. Where? Up the mountains —up to the heights
—the highest that you know. But there are mountains and
mountains. The one specially given us here is the “ Moun-
tain of Myrrh.” Where is that ? When going up a moun-
tain you usually find sheep tracks. These make travel
easier, and help to direct it. And the mountain of Myrrh ?
You find there also “ the footsteps of the flock.” Where
do they lead? The word myrrh suggests it. What is
myrrh? It is a balsamic plant. Long ago its main
purpose was to embalm the dead. Twice it is associated
with our Lord. The Magi offered it as one of their gifts
to the infant Christ. Like Mary with her ointment, they


unconsciously marshalled Him the way He was to go. And
when He hung on the Cross “ they offered Him wine mingled
with myrrh.” And so it comes to be an emblem of His
death. “ Until the day break and the shadows flee away, I
will get me to the mountain of Myrrh.” Hold on, and go
forward to that mountain, and as you do the footsteps of
the flock will guide you to Calvary. It is only there that we
get light enough to enable us to hold on and go forward.
“ Myrrh,” says Spurgeon, may well be chosen as a type of
Jesus on account of its preciousness, its healing, preserving,
disinfecting qualities, and its connection with sacrifice.
Sacrifice —that is the pregnant word. If you look up
“ Myrrh ” in the dictionary, you will find it defined as a
balsamic plant —“ taste bitter and acrid —much used in
gargles and mouth washes —a stimulant to foul and indolent
ulcers, etc.” Yes, and when you go to the mountain of
Myrrh, which is Calvary, is not that what it is too? It is
a stimulant to the foul ulcers of sin that sadden and darken
life. It is an antiseptic to the salt tears that sorrow forces
through the eyes. As Dr. Jowett in his commentary on the
Epistles of Peter points out, men in whose vitals the poison
of the devil is dwelling, and whose spiritual force is ebbing
away, do not tarry at Bethlehem. They make their way to
Gethsemane and Calvary, It is when we are feeling
respectable, or formally correct, like the Jew, that the Cross
seems a stumbling block, or gay and careless like the sunny
Greeks that it looks foolishness. But when the heart is
pierced and life ceases to be a topic for a debating society,
and becomes an urgent question of to be or not to be, then
the shadows of Gethsemane draw us, and we learn to sing
with a new emphasis and power:
The Cross ! it takes our guilt away ;
It holds the fainting spirit up.
It cheers with hope the gloomy day,
And sweetens every bitter cup.
Is not that so ? What is it creates the darkest and longest
shadows? It is the thought of a shadowy God. It is
the thought that somehow we are alone in our sorrow. We


call God Father. We know what an earthly father is and
does. We know how he thinks, cares for, works, sacri-
fices himself for his children. And God? Has He done
that, is He doing that for His children ? Yes. We find it dimly
in Nature, but profoundly, convincingly at the Cross. Here
God says to us in effect, * you are not alone in your sin and
suffering. lam with you there. It is Mine as well as yours,
Mine in a deeper and more poignant sense than ever you can
fathom. lam with you to help you to bear it, to unite my-
self with you and make you strong and pure, with My power
and purity. It cannot be made clear to you just now how
or why. But take it on trust, act and live as if you did.
Believe —hold on, and go forward in hope, and by and
by the day will break and your faith will be justified.’’ Have
those who have thus acted verified that in their experience ?
Yes. They know well that —
The herb that brings forgetfulness,
And makes all wounds grow whole,
And sends God’s peace to soothe and bless
The hopeless travailing soul.
And has immortal power to still
The fiercest wind and tide,
Springs at the foot of that dark hill
Where Christ was crucified.
And so follow you the footsteps of the flock to that
“ dark hill,” and you will find a light there — as a lamp that
shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn and the daystar arise
in your hearts.
111.
But there is another mountain to which we can betake
ourselves till the day break and the shadows flee away. It
is “ the hill of frankincense.” Where is that ? Incense is a
scriptural name for prayer and worship. So in the twilight
times it is good to betake ourselves to the hill of frankin-
cense —the hill of prayer. And it is suggestive to recall
that in the Old Testament ritual the altar of incense stood
next to the altar of burnt offering, and every time the sacri-
fice was offered the censer was swung and the tabernacle


filled with its fragrance. And so in “ The Revelation,
the hill of prayer is close to the mountain of myrrh. The
prayer that is most efficacious will be kindled at Calvary,
inspired by the death of Christ, and made acceptable through
His merits. What multitudes have found escape out of the
dark and shadowy days as they passionately clutched at the
skirts of God in prayer ! To the despairing light has leaped
up, and the warworn waxed valiant again in fight as they
betook themselves to the hill of frankincense. Says
Wordsworth —
I bent before Thy gracious throne,
And asked for peace on suppliant knee ;
And peace was given—nor peace alone,
But faith sublimed to ecstasy.
We remember the impressive lines in Meyer s St. Paul,
in which he tells how the great Apostle advanced upon his
knees. Or if we want a living poet’s testimony, what finer
can we wish than that of Francis Thompson. He knew, if
ever any one did, what it was to do business in deep waters
—the deep waters of sin and sorrow. And what does he tell
us ? He tells us that God is near to us, that we have not to
go here or there to find Him any more than the fish in
the sea to find the ocean, or the eagle plunge to find the air
that God, Christ, the heavenly helpers are at hand.
And (when so sad thou canst not be sadder)
Cry;—and upon thy so sore loss
Shall shine the traffic of Jacob’s ladder,
Pitched betwixt Heaven and Charing Cross.
Yea, in the night, my son, my daughter.
Cry—clinging Heaven by the hems ;
And lo ! Christ walking on the water,
Not of Gennesaret, but Thames !
Oh, there is no end of such testimony. What is the
whole Bible, what is the whole record of religious experience,
but the witness of countless men and women who have verified
the efficacy of prayer ? And so, my brothers, until the day
break let us also follow the footsteps of the flock to the hill of


frankincense, and we shall win through to the morning.
And it occurs to me to say, just here, what perhaps might have
come In better in another place, that it is these twilight hours
—these dusky days, that are, perhaps, the most trying of all.
When the darkness is deep desperation evokes unsuspected
energies. But when life has merely to face the pale procession
of grey monotonous days, stretching away into the future, it
gets dismayed at the prospect. Lecky, the historian of
European morals, says the virtues of the Stoics, which rose
triumphant under adversity, nearly always withered under
degradation.” Just so. It is the same with us all. We can
bear successfully great or violent opposition, but not petty
vexations. We can face death without wincing, but we can-
not stand daily drudgery. We are equal to heroic enter-
prises, but the trials of the drab, commonplace duties break
us down. And that is the condition of life with the large
majority of us. It is not all darkness, any more than it is
all sunshine. It is for the most part a wearisome plodding
on in a dull grey light. Well, what then? “ Grey," writes
Mr. C. K. Chesterton, “ is a colour that always seems on the
eve of changing to some other colour; of brightening into
blue or blanching into white, or bursting into green and
gold. So we may be perpetually reminded of the indefinite
hope that is in doubt itself; and when there is grey weather
on our hills or grey hairs in our heads perhaps, they may
still remind us of the morning.
IV.
And so that introduces us to our next point. Until
the day break. ** Until * —then the day will break. That
is our last thought. It is not going to be always dusk and
shadows and dull grey skies. No. The morning is coming,
the dawn is stepping up the Eastern hills.
Into the dusk of the East,
Grey with the coming of night,
This we may know at least—
After the night comes light!


Over the mariners’ graves.
Grim in the depths below,
Buoyantly breasting the waves
Into the East we go.
Yes, if you are of those who betake yourself to the
mountains of myrrh and the hill of frankincense you may
take that as your final comfort. But, mind you, it is those
only who do this that can claim the assurance. For others I
have at present no revelation. The day is coming. Are you
amid the shadows? The shadows of what? Is it the shadow
of sin—of poverty, of pain, of doubt of God s goodness and
care, of suffering innocence, of hopes defeated or dead ?
No matter what. They are to flee away. Is it the last and
most terrible shadow —•** the Shadow feared of man the
shadow of your own death, or the death of those near and
dear to you. No matter. I declare to you by our Lord Christ
that the day is coming when all these dark things shall be seen
in their true clear light, and you will be able to say He
hath done all things well.”
A father used to go every night into the bedroom to wish
his little daughter good-night. And she usually returned
the kiss, saying, ** Good-night, father dear, I shall see you in
the morning.” After a time the child fell ill, grew worse ;
it was evident the Master had come and was calling for her.
One night her father kissed her as usual, and she said with a
faint smile flickering about her wan lips. Good-night, father,
I shall see you in the morning. But when dawn broke
“ she had another morn than ours. I shall see you in the
morning! Ah, yes —in the great day-break beyond the
tomb, we shall find our loved and lost again ; and so shall
we ever be with the Lord.
There are more lives yet and more worlds waiting.
For the way climbs up to the Eldest Son ;
Where the white ones go to their mystic mating.
And the holy will is done.
I shall find you there where the low life heightens,
And the door of the Wonder again unbars ;
Where the old love lures and the old fires whiten
In the Stars behind the stars.


And let us “ judge nothing before the time.” How
ready we all are to do that. And our judgment is sure
to be wrong, for we have only the merest tithe of the
evidence that would enable us to pronounce a correct verdict.
We see only the veriest speck of life, our own and others.
When Oliver Wendell Holmes was past 80, and death was
beginning to call to him through the gloom he answered with his
invincible optimism. In one of his books he had previously
said that he could write history in the shortest volume that
was ever seen. Taking a blank card, he put something on
it, and handed it round. This was what was on it.
f
7
Two worlds, the higher and the lower, separated by the
thinnest of partitions. Endless doubt, questioning, and
unrest below. Wondering, admiring, adoring certainty
above. And so the morning is coming, and such a morning !
Let us tell it out by Up and life to them who are in the shadows,
that it is only for a little while. Comfort the suffering and
the pain-stricken by the assurance that the day is coming
when everything will be made clear. Sing it into the ears
of the oppressed and heavy laden that the dawn will soon
flush the sky with the light that never was on sea or land.
Bid them that are of a fearful heart be of good courage,
hold on and go forward. Whisper it by the bedsides of the
dying that “though weeping may endure for a night joy cometh
in the morning.” “ Though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death I will fear no evil.” Walk through —aye,
we get through ; and to what ? Into where it is night
never again; into what “eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man the things which
God hath prepared for them that love.”
And so until the day break and the shadows flee away, I
will me into the mountain of myrrh, and the hill of
frankincense.




COMFORT:
ITS SOURCE AND DUTY.


What are the thoughts of the mighty unresting Heart, to whose
vastness and agelessness the whole mass of these flying and glowing
suns are but as a handful of dust that a boy flings upon the air ? He
has set me here a tiny moving atom, yet more sure of my own
minute identity than I am of the vast panorama of things that lie
outside of me. Has He indeed a tender and patient thought of me,
the frail creature whom He has moulded and made? I do not
doubt it. . . . The very thought that rises in my mind and
turns my heart to His, comes from Him. He would make all
plain if He could; He gives what we need ; and when we at last
awake we shall be satisfied.
A. C. Benson, “From a College Window.”
One of the last things, says Henry Drummond, that I read of
Professor Elmslie was " his saying that what people needed most was
comfort. Probably he never knew how much his mission, person-
ally, was to give it. I presume he often preached it, but I think he
must always have been it. For all who knew him will testify that
to be in his presence was to leave care and live where skies are
blue.”
♦ • ♦ ♦
“ God comforted me by the coming of Titus ! ” I would that
we might cultivate this fine discernment, that we might see through
the agent to the real doer, through the ambassador to the King.
How often might we be able to say, “ God comforted me by the
coming of a letter .... by a kindly service .... by a friend
.... by ? ” Fill up the blank for yourself, and recognise
the goodness and mercy of God. "He comforteth us in all our
affliction.”
J. H. Jowett, “The Silver Lining.”


“ In the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts
delight my soul,"
—Psalms xciv., 19.
* * *
“ Are the consolations of God small with thee ?
—Job xv., 11.
* * *
“ Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort; who
comforteth us in all our affliction, that we may be able
to comfort them that are in any affliction, through the
comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God.
—ii. Cor. i., 3, 4.
COMFORT: ITS SOURCE AND DUTY.


TIS address is intended to be a message of comfort.
Most of us need that now. Some of us need it
all the time; all of us sometime.
The writer of this beautiful Psalm was in circum-
stances like ourselves. War was raging about
him —war cruel, dreadful, hideous. The con-
querors were insolent, proud, lustful, slaying the widow,
murdering the fatherless, outraging the innocent. They
were uttering arrogant challenges, declaring that Israel’s
god was a do-nothing god. He neither saw nor cared for
the people of Jacob.
And all these terrible things set the writer’s mind to
work. Whatever did it mean ? A multitude of thoughts
crowded up : perplexed thoughts, sad thoughts, doubting
thoughts, dark thoughts, oppressive thoughts. They came
swaying, elbowing, pushing like a jostling mob, like the
jumbled waves of a storm-vext sea. And yet in the heart
of it all, as in the heart of the tempest, there was a central
calm : “ In the multitude of my thoughts Thy comforts delight
my soul.”
Now I am sure there are many of us, as we talk and think
and read in these war times of ours, who are stirred like the
writer of this Psalm. A multitude of thoughts are in our
mind, confused, harrassing, perplexing. But are we able
to retreat into the quiet place of the psalmist ? Are we able
to say with him “ In the multitude of my thoughts Thy com-
forts delight my soul ? ” It will be the object of this address
to help us to do that in some degree. What were the com-
forts that steadied him in the whirl of his thoughts ? I will
have time to mention only three, and that in as simple a way
as possible.
COMFORT: Its Source and Duty.


I.
There was first of all the comfort of God's existence. That
counts for much. In these modem days, more even than in
earlier ages, we get bewildered amid the rush of Nature’s
forces. The mighty sweep of worlds upon worlds awe us,
confound us. Dickens tells the story of a poor workman
dying in one of the sordid streets where millions of them live,
saying, “ What wi’ the wheels and the trains a hummin’
and a buzzln’, I am clean confounded, confuzzled, and bet.
Many are like that amid the immensities of the universe.
We read the daily papers, and what a witches’ cauldron of
comedy and tragedy they reveal to us. We open the pages
of the past and it is like a vast funeral procession. History
is the burial ground of the generations. It rings incessantly
in our ears the old question, “ Our fathers, where are they,
and the prophets, do they live for ever ? ”
What is to steady us amid this awful sweep of worlds ?
What can comfort us in this endless phantasmagoria of human life
and things? Nothing but the assurance that there is a supreme
omnipotent Creator, who has brought this universe into being,
and is surely guiding it to a predetermined goal. And this
is an assurance easier perhaps now than in earlier times.
For science, turning back the pages of the cosmos, has revealed
thought from atom to suns. And thought implies a thinker.
Schlieman, the explorer, was puzzled to account for some
irregular holes in the facade of a Greek temple. It occurred
to him to trace out the lines between the nail marks, and
lo !he found the Greek word for God. And so in the great
temple of the universe. Investigation is spelling out more
clearly than ever the letters of that sublime name. And
there is great comfort in realising just that God is. It was,
you remember, the watchword given to Moses, when he was
hesitating about interviewing Pharoah in the interests of the
troubled and trampled people —I Am —the Self-existent
—Jehovah. So later on God thus comforts a sorrowful
singer by telling him to “be still and know that lam. Another
of these old Hebrew poets prays, “ Lead me to the rock
that is higher than I.” Yes, we must have something higher


than ourselves, if we are to keep our head, and face life and
its problems with success. And Nature is not that. It is
only things and forces. And we are greater than any collec-
tion of these —any masses of sticks or stones, or gases or fluids.
We must find something higher than these. We hear much
talk about natural law, and the reverence we should show to
it. But we may remind ourselves of Dr. Martineau s wise
words, “ Cease to corrupt the ancient phrases of natural
piety by telling me to reverence natural laws. I am not an
idolater to worship what is below me; the laws cannot
love me, they are blind as a bat, and cannot look into me ;
they do not know if I have found them, and do not care if
I obey them ; they bring me suffering and are not sorry, or
relief and feel no joy; they whirl and grind away, weaving
my fortunes if I am circumspect and sharp; or, if my
heedless cloak should touch their shaft, picking me up and
crushing my every bone. No, these things for their own sake
can be the objects of no solemn love, no moral reliance, but
only of fear, of calculation, of helpless submission.” A
person is higher than a thing, and if there be no Being in
the universe higher than ourselves, then it is we who are
supreme. Ah, but unless he can above himself erect himself,
“ how poor a thing is man ! ”
Lead me to the rock that is higher than I. That was
the prayer of these men of old, floundering amid this welter
and wash of circumstances and the seething calamities of
their time. And it is the prayer of thousands to-day.
Away over yonder in California, where I was not long ago,
there are the famous Yellowstone Park and the Grand Canyon.
The latter is an amazing phenomenon.
For all is rocks at random thrown,
Black caves, bare crags, and banks of stone.
Towering high up over all these is one called Rock View.
“ From this eminence you can look down upon that realm of
gathered mysteries, boiling springs, steaming geysers, strange
beasts, screaming eagles, and roaring floods. ’ Lead me to the
rock that is higher than I. And that Rock is God —the God


manifest in Jesus Christ. If that fails, or fades out of sight, the
keystone goes from the arch of life, and it tumbles into chaos.
The late Professor Clifford speaks pathetically of the com-
fort of those who retain this faith. He abandoned it,
and so he writes, “ We have seen the spring sun shine out of
an empty heaven to light up a soulless earth, and we have
felt with utter loneliness —that the Great Companion was
dead.” Yes, if there is no rock higher than ourselves, the
solitude becomes overwhelming, and the universe turns into
“ a blind cyclops hurling stones of destiny.” A writer tells
us that where the General Post Office in London stands to-
day there was formerly a church. This church had the
right of giving sanctuary to fugitives from broken laws, and
this right covered a square mile of the neighbourhood. But
the changing laws of civilization have swept all that away.
A fugitive from justice, if he sought refuge there to-day,
would be more likely to find speedy arrest. We may get substitutes
for God in many things, but an equivalent nowhere. And so
if we are to be safe, amid the constant whirl and change o f
this taunting world we must resolve with another of these old
Hebrew singers— ■” My soul, wait thou only upon God. The
rock °f m !J strength and my refuge is He.”
Are the consolations of God small with thee? No.
In the multitude of my thoughts the comfort that He is
delights my soul.
11.
But more than that. Before this comfort can be com-
pleted we want to know not merely that God is, but what
He is. We want to know something about His character.
“ The Lord reigneth.” Good, But the Turks and
Mahommedans believe that, and we know the result. The
Lord reigneth ! The Jew believed that, and what then ?
Let the earth rejoice. Why ? Because, “ Though clouds
and darkness are round about Him, righteousness and truth
are the foundations of His throne.” How did they know
that? How do we know it? That is the more important
question. We know it first of all from the witness of history.


Men and nations are like columns, strong only when they are
upright. When they bend from rectitude they collapse.
What is history but the vindication of righteousness.
Though sentence against an evil work may be delayed, dooms-
day surely comes. But out of confusion and overthrow a
better world is born.
I looked ! aside the dust cloud rolled,
The Waster seemed the Builder too,
Up springing from the ruined Old
I saw the New.
“He looked for judgment, says Isaiah, and found
shedding of blood ; for righteousness, and He found a cry ”
—a shriek, as it might be more literally rendered. How
often down the ages that has been so ; and, indeed, does
it not well describe the world to-day—blood and a
shriek ? And what then ? Then, says the prophet, “ the
Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in Judgment—God that is
holy shall be sanctified in Righteousness.” He shall have
His holiness made clear by His righteousness. And so
the nation that thus perverted judgment and wrought evil
is swept away. But God did not abandon his work. He
moved straight on unhasting, unresting, preparing the world
for the supreme proof that righteousness and judgment
are the foundation of His throne. What was that proof ?
It was Christ, and in Christ it was the Cross, Rightly under-
stood Calvary is the culmination of the holiness and the
righteousness of God. Christ began His public ministry
with the memorable statement, “ Thus it becometh us to
fulfil all righteousness,” and He closed it by declaring “ now
is a judgment of this world.” Are the consolations of God
small with thee? Then think of this one that amid the
bewilderments of life, amid the mysteries and tragedies of
death, Righteousness and Judgment are the foundation of
His throne. Shelter yourself under the shadow of this
immovable rock, “ the judge of all the earth shall do right,”


111.
Ah, but perhaps you say “ that’s just my trouble. I
may know that God is, and that He is absolutely holy—is
of purer eyes than to behold iniquity ; but then / am not.
/ was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother con-
ceive me. The sublime purity, the immaculate holiness God,
so far from being a comfort, dismays me. Like Job, the
more I think of it, the more do ‘ I abhor myself.’ ” A country-
man of mine had done some wrong, and was to appear before
the judge. He was in trepidation. His wife sought to
allay his fears by telling him that the judge was a perfectly
upright one. ” Yes, he said, but that s no help. I
want a judge that would lean a bit.” And that is what
we all need in our God. We need a God who does not indeed
swerve from righteousness, but who will temper justice with
mercy —who in fact can find a way to be just and yet the
justifier of the ungodly. And that is precisely the God we
have got. Thus saith the Lord that created thee. Fear
not, for I have redeemed thee. I have called thee by thy
name.” Do you hear that? By thy name. That is the
note struck by the writer of this Psalm. It is his sense of
God’s redeeming care of him —him a mere mite amid the
whirling worlds of the creation. In the multitude of my
thoughts thy comforts delight me. Mark the personalness
of it. Who was the writer of this Psalm, of these words ?
We don’t know. I am glad. Why? because we may take
them to ourselves. Had the name been given we might have
been tempted to think that it was for him only. But it is left
vague so that you may write your own name underneath them
and say they are meant for you. And is it not just here we
need comfort ? The vastness of the cosmos, the millions upon
millions of other beings appal us sometimes. What is this
poor little life of mine amid all these ? See —a breath—and
it is gone. How can God be a God for me, know my indi-
vidual needs and care for them amid these vaster claims? But
it is imagination rather than reason that is at fault here. The
doctrine of the immanence of God which modern thought
has emphasised so much comes with its help. See how.


Here is my body. If I sustain an injury in any part of it
I feel it through the whole. If I prick my little finger or hurt
my smallest toe it is reported Instantly in the brain, and I
am conscious of the pain through all my being. And I am
thus because my life or spirit is omnipresent in my body.
So is it in the great body of humanity. He fulfils and sustains
the body. He must, therefore, feel every pang of its mem-
bers. None of them, not the very least of them, can suffer
without affecting Him. Thus we can perceive how it is
possible that the pain and suffering of even the smallest
member of the great body of humanity are known and felt
by God.
And the discoveries of modern science come in to illum-
inate and enforce this truth. One of its most revolutionary
teachings is the emphasis that it puts on the atom. Long
ago, St. Paul affirmed that the commoner and less notable
parts of the organism had more abundant honour given to
them —that, so far from the weak and feeble members of the
body of Christ being useless, they were the most indis-
pensable of all. And that is exactly what science is confirming
now in the world of matter and of force. It has disclosed to
us the wonder and power of the atom. Every breath of air we
inhale contains sufficient potential energy to drive all the work-
shops of the world. Think of the power lodged in an atom
of radium. Think of the wonder and mathematical accuracy
of all its elements. If God thus paints the lowly grass with
a green sheen that is the despair of the artist and puts into the
tiny cup of the violet tints that mock the purple of kings —
if he gives to a milligram of musk a perfume that lasts for
7,000 years, and fills a speck of radium with mysterious
energies that 77,000 years do not exhaust, what may we not
infer for the lives that can spell out these facts and set them in
their order? This may help to steady and comfort us,
humble and obscure ones in this vast surge of men and
things. “ For if amid billions of entities and movements
each atom is endowed with such tremendous power, each
mote has its mission, each vibration its message, is it not
easy to believe in the high place and calling of the humblest
member —the mere atom of a single human life? If such


is the solicitude of Nature (which is only another name for
God) that she endows motes and atoms with such incal-
culable powers, and never loses sight even of a grain of dust,
or allows a single particle to be lost, can we believe that
the Father of our spirits will allow any of His children to
become the sport of chance or suffer without responding
to their cry ? ”
IV.
Or consider it again from yet another standpoint
suggested by modern science. Its watchword is evolution.
If that be true it gives us a finer and firmer grip on this
thought of God’s care for us all. The old idea of the creative
method made it instantaneous, like the flash of a photograph.
The new idea makes it a slow continuous process, like the
painting of a great picture, moving up from the slime to the
human body, and onwards through the long centuries refining
and refining the soul. Well, if that be so, what then? Then
we know the care of every artist for his work. It becomes dear
and sacred to him —a part of his very self. The more it costs
him, the longer it takes him to produce it, the greater is his
pride in it —just as the mother loves more passionately
the child that is weak, and claims continuous care. I
remember seeing in Paris a bronze figure representing Mer-
cury drawing a thorn from her foot. It is a beautiful work
of art. There is a pathetic story connected with it to this
effect. The sculptor had laboured long upon it. He was
poor and lived in a miserable garret. But into his work he
had entered his very soul. When he had finished the clay
modelling, a keen frost came one night. Fearing the effect
of the cold on his work, as he went to bed he put his own
scanty clothes about it. Still he was not easy in his mind.
He could not sleep, and after a while he got up, stripped the
coverlet from his bed and wrapped it also about his beloved
work. When the grey morning broke he was found half
naked and dead upon his wretched couch. More than life
itself he had loved that which his genius had conjured into
form.


Where are we now? Where does all this lead to? It
leads to Calvary. It conducts us to the Cross. It is a faint,
a very faint suggestion of that sublime sacrifice which the
Supreme Artist of this world has made for the creations of
His genius. He that spared not His own Son, but save Him
up to the death for us all, how shall He not with Him also give
us all things. Here at last we get the full and final answer
to that doubt and fear to which we referred a moment ago.
On the Cross “ mercy and truth are met together, right-
eousness and peace have kissed each other.” The immacu-
late holiness of God is the despair of sinners conscious of
their guilt and defilements —their despair till their eyes are
opened upon the Cross, and all that it manifests of “ a just
God and a Saviour.” Then their burden falls off as it did
from the pilgrim in Bunyan’s immortal allegory, and the
assurance that Christ is nothing for them that He has not
guaranteed to be in them as well, sets their feet to the march
and music of final victory over the power of sin. Principal
Whyte, of Edinburgh, tells this incident. He was visiting
one day, and as he went up and down among the sick beds
and death beds, he had taken with him these words, “He
delighteth in mercy,” as a message for sufferers. They had
kept, he said, his own drowning head above the waters the week
before. After his visiting was done he went to call on Dr.
John Garment, “ one of the ablest lawyers in Edinburgh
at that time and one of the greatest saints,” relative to
some church business. “ After the business was finished,
Dr. Garment pushed aside his parchments and pens and
papers, and looking across the table at me, with burning
eyes, said, ‘ Hae ye ony word for an auld sinner ? Phis
in a lawyer’s office among all the law papers ! I was afraid
almost to speak in his presence, but recollected my message
and said, ‘ He delighteth in mercy,’ and escaped out of his
room.” Next morning came a note from Garment. It
ran thus :
“ Dear Friend, —
“ I was at hell’s gate last night (you know, you youngsters
in salvation, it is only old saints that know what hell’s gate
is. Perhaps among his papers he had come across some


names that had recalled the past)—l was in great darkness
and not a word of God could be more helpful to me than
this : He delighteth in Mercy ; and when I am overcome and
in darkness and distress I will always fight the devil and my
own conscience and God’s accusing law, and say, yes, it is
all true, but He delighteth in mercy.”
And if ever we are in dismay of ourselves, or doubtful
of these words, we have only to hold them up between us
and the Cross and then the light from it will irradiate them
with a steadfast certainty as the light of the rising sun flushes
the westward gloom with the glory of the dawn.
Are the consolations of God small with thee ? Can we
not now answer with the Psalmist, In the multitude of my
disquieting thoughts the comfort that God exists, that
righteousness and judgment are the foundation of His throne,
and that He that spared not His own Son, but gave Him up
to the death for us all, how shall He not with Him freely give
us all things —these glorious comforts delight the soul.
V.
And now, after the doctrine, one closing word as to
duty. We get comfort —what for? Let St. Paul tell:
Blessed be the . . . God of all comfort, who comforteth
us in all our afflictions, that we may be able to comfort them
that are in any affliction by the comfort wherewith we ourselves
are comforted of God. That is our duty. We get to give.
We can only keep as we share. Private joys turn into
corruptions. Selfishness eats sweetness out of life as rust
eats the edge of a sword. It turns those who practise it
into criminals. For we are stewards. We own nothing
absolutely. And when we forget that everything begins to
work against us.
“ All things betray thee who betrayest Me.”
We lose what we do not use. The law of nature is that decay
of faculty follows disuse of function. The love that turns in
upon itself commits suicide. The life that cares only for


its own ease and happiness loses both, and is cursed with
sterility. And so if we would retain our comfort we must
pass it on. And how great the need !
Oh, the world is full of sighs,
Full of sad and weeping eyes.
“ You don’t get much sunshine in here, do you ? ” said
a gentle old lady as she entered the elevator at the back of
the big store. “ Only what folks like you bring in, ma’am,”
replied the elevator man. “ Some folks carry enough sun-
shine round with ’em to light others up a bit.” Let us seek
to be numbered in their ranks. “In the multitude of my
disquieting thoughts thy comforts delight my soul.” Then
share them with others.
Hearts growing a-weary with heavier woe,
Now droop ’mid the darkness —go, comfort them, go!
Go, bury thy sorrow, let others be blest;
Go, give them the sunshine, tell Jesus the rest.


BOOKS by Rev. R. WADDELL, m.a., d.d.
“THE BUILDING OF THE SHIP”
and other addresses, with photo of the
author : : : 1/-; If posted, 1/3.
“OLD CHRISTMASES”
Bound In neat cover, with illustration
in sepia on cover —1 /- ;if posted, 1/2.
Other Books by the same writer, now out
of print, are —
“THE VOYAGE OF LIFE”
“BEHOLD THE LAMB OF GOD”
“AT THE DAWN OF THE YEAR”
N.Z. Bible, Tract, and Book Society,
48 Princes Street, Dunedin.
Also at
71 Willis St, Wellington ; Dee St., Invercargill.


Sy Xi/zfy'/f
' TjA^Xb,X / '&v%~ hy~£s[)
rm 6s, <
X~ &l~~* ■g X/l f, *f' / m trtc ■fct, >4U^%
vaS
* f (• /
Alk.s r y t t4?eX~ /t~ct.XCi f&sdz, O
&4j2£ c^tXfexzzul*
/tr/L. & XXuC4 .
~ k.4< A tsbu. 77h-? %*h/ fri^Xyjf'
&2.vM i■ V //l *o ■ S{y\ s ■
An*-.-.- ~. /
krtXA- 1


fitbru
dks th~*y /t, styitsd.
f t '*^~~' 17
■IJ4 jd6nt Ke. ..
