

i"7 7 C ' i ' v ~ K f wc •
.x a> i t / / 4 •»
llnfo Ihij Deniable the Cfyneiial of the |resbi)(fi;ian Church ofl
Petition of the undersigned Memhers of the Presbytery of Sydney humbly sheweth
1. Tlmt your Petitioners did dissent and protest for leave to complain to the General Assembly against
the decision of the Presbytery of Sydney, on the 6th day of March last, whereby it was resolved to receive
the Pev. Robert Collie as a Minister of this Church without the sanction of your Venerable Court, the said
Rev. Robert Collie having presented a Commission from the Colonial Committee of the Free Church of
Scotland, the said Commission being of an unusual form, inasmuch as it studiously avoids any reference to
the status of the said Rev. Robert Collie, and the said Rev. Robert Collie having no Presbyterial certificate
to shew, and being ipso faclo a Congregational Minister; and that the Presbytery did agree nem con to sist
procedure until the Dissent and Complaint of your Petitioners had been disposed of by your Venerable
Assembly :
2. That at the next meeting of the Presbytery, following the meeting of 6th March, (viz. 3rd April),
it appeared from the Report of the Rev. John Auld, Moderator, in a call at Newtown, that the Congregation
at Newtown was unanimous in choosing the Rev. Robert Collie to be its Pastor, but was agreeable to wait
for his settlement amongst them until the Dissent and Complaint of your Petitioners had been disposed of by
your Venerable Assembly ; and that it was then proposed in the Presbytery to disregard the said Dissent
and Complaint as frivolous and vexatious :
3. That your Petitioners did thereupon raise the point of order, that the motion to disregard the
Dissent and Complaint as frivolous and vexatious was incompetent, inasmuch as the Presbytery had already
received and recorded the said Dissent and Complaint, and agreed nem. con. to sist procedure, and inasmuch
as the reasons of the complainants had been duly given in to the Clerk of the Presbytery ; and that the
Moderator of the Presbytery did then rule that it was competent to move that the Dissent and Complaint be
disregarded :
4. That the Moderator refused to submit his ruling to the judgment of the Court, although requested
to do so in a constitutional manner ; that the Moderator did also refuse to submit to the Court a motion that
was duly made and seconded, to the effect that his ruling be disapproved of; that the Moderator did further
refuse to submit to the Court a motion that was duly made and seconded, to the effect that the Moderator
leave the chair until the motion disapproving of his ruling be submitted to the Court in a constitutional
manner; and that in these circumstances the Presbytery found it impossible to proceed with the business and
adjourned the discussion till next meeting :


5. That at next meeting of Presbytery following the meeting held on the 3rd day of April (viz. Ist
May) the adjourned discussion was resumed and continued, when a motion was made professedly in the
interests of peace, as follows: ‘ ‘ That the Presbytery in sustaining the Commission from the Colonial Committee
of the Free Church of Scotland appointing the Eev. Robert Collie to the Colony, and in admitting him as a
Minister of this Church eligible to a call, resolve that on account of Special Circumstances connected with the
case, this admission shall be subject to the approval of the General Assembly ; that your 1 etitioners objected
to the competency of such a motion, inasmuch as it was agreed at last meeting to adjourn the discussion, and
the question before the Court at its adjournment was a point of order; and it was moved and seconded
accordingly; that it was then moved and seconded that the Presbytery sustain the call to the Rev. Robert
Collie, and proceed with his settlement, notwithstanding the Dissent and complaint of your Petitioners; that
your Petitioners did insist on the sense of the Court being taken in the first place as to the motion of incompetency;
but that the Presbytery did then, in spite of the protestations of your Petitioners, insist in putting the
motion of incompetency against the other motions affecting the merits of the case , that youi 1 etitioneis
declined to vote, believing that if they did vote, they thereby practically allow that such a course was
constitutional; and that when the vote had been taken, the Moderator declared that the motion to sustain
the call and proceed with the settlement of the Rev. Robei’t Collie, was carried nem. con.
6. That in accordance with the above resolution alleged to be carried nem. con, the Iresbytery did on
the 12th day of June last induct the Rev. Robert Collie into the charge at Newtown, the said Rev. Robert
Collie ipso facto having never been received as a Minister of the Church, haying never had the call to Newtown
presented to him, nor having ever seen it or been asked whether he would accept of it or not, but,
having been simply informed that the Presbytery had agreed to sustain the call and proceed with his
settlement; and that the Church was thus precluded from questioning Mr. Collie as to the reason why he
left the Congregational Church, and desired to enter the Presbyterian Church, as to Iris previous history
as a Congregational Minister, or. as to the soundness and adequacy of his views on the Presbyterian System
of doctrine and polity.
Wherefore your petitioners feeling deeply aggrieved by the course which the Presbytery of Sydney
has pursued in this whole case, a course which they sincerely believe to be calculated as a precedent to inflict
grave injury on the constitution and practice of their beloved Church ; being further aggrieved by the
treatment which they have received at the hands of their Presbytery ; and being deprived of the privilege of
bringing their Cause before your Yenerable Assembly in the usual way of Dissent and Complaint, do humbly
crave the the interposition of your Yenerable Assembly to rectify the injustice that has been done, and to
declare:
1. Whether a commission from the Colonial Committee of the Free Church of Scotland, or the
Colonial Committee of any other recognised Home Church supersedes the necessity of an ordained Minister
of the Presbyterian Church producing the usual Presbyterial certificate prior to his reception by a Court of
this Church of lower standing than the Supreme Court t
2. Whether such commission given to a Minister of another Denomination who had never been received
by any Presbyterian Church Court, should be deemed sufficient Warrant for his reception by an inferior
Court of this Church, and his settlement in a charge without the sanction of the General Assembly having
been previously obtained ?


3. Whether the Presbytery of Sydney acted constitutionally in setting aside the appeal of your
Petitioners under the circumstances set forth in this Petition ?
4. That the Moderator {pro tem .) of the Presbytery of Sydney, acted unconstitutionally in refusing to
submit his ruling to the decision of the Court, a constitutional demand to this effect having been duly made.
5. That the constitutional question having been raised in Presbytery, as to the Moderator’s right to make
such refusal, and a motion referring the matter to the decision of the Court having been duly made and seconded
no business could be legally transacted till said decision had been given.
6. Whether the Presbytery of Sydney acted constitutionally inputting the question of the competency
or incompetency of a motion against a motion dealing with the merits of the case under discussion ?
7. Whether the Presbytery of Sydney acted rightly in inducting the Eev. Eobert Collie into the charge
of the Congregation at Newtown, under the peculiar and extraordinary circumstances and surroundings of
the ease as set forth in this Petition ?
And your Petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
(Signed,) PETEE F. MACKENZIE,
W. MOOEE WHITE,
JOHN AULD.
It-W'"P


