

* WA\
*~nm\
yls.
•3W*
» 4








K \ r
UIISr-VBILIIsrG- OS’ THE captaiit cook statue,
HYDE PARK, SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES,
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY, 1879.
U > i
The Unveiling of this Statue is one of the most
pleasing national incidents that has occurred in the
history of the Australian Colonies. Never before
was public enthusiasm roused to so high a pitch,
except on the occasion of the visit to these shores
of His Royal Highness Prince Alfred ; and never
before did the population of the Queen City of the
South respond so willingly and in such multitudes
to a vice-regal invitation to make holiday and
share in a public ceremonial.
The statue is erected in Hyde Park, Sydney, a
few miles only from the place where the great
circumnavigator first landed in Australia —upon a
site commanding a view of the magnificent Harbour
and towering North Head of Port Jackson —and
almost in sight of the historic spot where Captain
Phillip planted the infant settlement which has
since developed into the eight great Colonies of
Australasia. A noble statue of His Royal Highness
the Prince Consort, byTheed, adorns another portion
of the same park, and some of the finest buildings
in Australia are in progress in the neighbourhood.
The movement for the erection of a national
memorial to Captain Cook dates as far back as
1868, and was originated by Captain Watson (an
old Colonist, formerly Harbour Master of Sydney),
and carried on by R. B. Smith, Esq., first as Presi-
dent of the Australian Patriotic Association, and
afterwards as Honorary Secretary of the “Cook
Statue Fund,” to which position he was unanimously
elected at a public meeting of the citizens of Sydney,
held at the Royal Victoria Theatre, in the month of
February, 1869, —His Honor Sir Alfred Stephen,
C. 8., Chief Justice, being in the Chair. Both
Captain Watson and Mr. Smith had the gratification
of crowning their work by taking part in unveiling
the statue. About £1,777 subscribed by the
public for the memorial, and the foundation stone of
the pedestal was laid in 1869 by His Royal Highness
Prince Alfred, who, in reply to an Address presented
to him on the occasion by Sir Alfred Stephen (now
Lieutenant-Governor), spoke as follows :
“ One of the happiest privileges which the mem-
bers of the Royal family enjoy, is that of being able
to do honor to the memory of great men and of noble
deeds, by their presence at such a ceremony as that
which we are met to perform to-day. But when
the man wffiose fame we desire to commemorate has,
by a life of great discoveries and of scientific
researches, increased so materially the territorial
extent of the Empire, and has conferred so great
benefits upon the whole civilized world, by his
valuable additions to geographical knowledge ; and
when, by these noble actions he has shed a lustre
upon the profession to which he belonged, and to
which lam so proud to belong—l mean the mari-
time service of the greatest maritime nation of the
world—then, indeed, J feel that a very high honor
is conferred upon me in having my name associated
with this memorial of his greatness. There is no
one among the names of England’s heroes more
deserving of this recognition on your part, and
none whose career could be held up as a brighter
example to every Englishman, than that of Captain
Cook. Humble as his origin was, he possessed
that true nobility of character which has for its
object—not the aggrandizement of self, but the
welfare of the nation. He is among the chief of
those who, in making Englishmen proud of their
name and of their mother country, have helped to
cement in one powerful brotherhood the subjects of
the British Empire in every part of the world. In
conclusion, I trust that there are many among the
sons of Australia who will emulate his example,
and gild with noble deeds the name of this great
country and the fame of England.”
The connection of His Royal Highness with this
memorial is peculiarly appropriate, and enhances its
value exceedingly in the eyes of the Australian
public.
The funds subscribed having proved insufficient,
Sir Henry Parkes, the present Premier, resorted to
Parliament twice for means to carry on the work,
each time receiving £2,000, which brings up the cost
of the statue to nearly £6,000.
As already mentioned, the day for the unveiling
was proclaimed a public holiday ; and it was indeed
well observed, for probably no other event could
have withdrawn from their avocations so many
thousands of people, or induced them to sacrifice a
day’s pay and undergo the fatigue they did for the
purpose of taking part in a public pageant. But
there they were to the number of about 60,000,
and not less than 12,000 persons joined in the
procession. Another motive which should not
pass unnoticed formed an ingredient in the general
enthusiasm, namely, the presence for the last time
on a public occasion of the eloquent and highly
popular Governor, Sir Hercules Robinson, and of
the much esteemed Lady Robinson, prior to the
departure of Sir Hercules to assume the Governorship
of New Zealand.
The Navy, the Military, and the Volunteers
turned out to their full strength, and the Friendly
Societies vied with each other in doing honor to
the occasion.
The Societies represented were the following :
Oddfellows, Foresters, Royal Foresters, Catholic


Guilds, Protestant Friendly Societies, Shipwrights,
Sons of Temperance, Druids, Rechabites, Marine
Benefit Society, Good Templars, Stonemasons, Plas-
terers, Hibernian Society, and Catholic Mutual Im-
provement Society. The Worshipful the Mayor and
the City Aldermen in their official costumes, and
the Firemen with their steam fire-engines, formed
a prominent feature in the procession. The bands
were about thirty in number, and discoursed excel-
lent music, the banners and insignia of the various
bodies were splendid, and the behaviour of the pro-
cessionists and of the crowds that lined the streets
and filled the Park was all that could be desired.
The procession was marshalled by Mr. Fosberry,
Inspector-General of Police, and not a single accident
or contre-temps of any moment happened for the day.
The arrangements were confided by the Government
to the Statue Committee, under the Hon. Sir Alfred
Stephen, C. 8., K.C.M.G., as Chairman, and Mr.
R. B. Smith, M.P., as Honorary Secretary, and
were so perfect as to elicit general commendation.
Two grand-stands, with seats for several thou-
sands of people, and enclosure, forming together
an oval some three acres in extent, were placed
around the statue, the area being defined by about
70 flag-poles of 50 feet high. The whole structure
was profusely and most tastefully decorated with
festoons and evergreens, zamia and other plants,
and a brilliant display of bunting. In the centre
of the enclosure and fronting the statute was erected
a handsome dais for the vice-regal party, the com-
mittee, and the most distinguished guests. The
details were carried out by Mr. James Barnett (the
Colonial Architect), and Mr. Charles Moore (the
Director of the Botanic Gardens), the contractors
being Messrs. Hudson Brothers and Messrs. David
Jones and Co.
On the platform with his Excellency the Governor
of the Colony Sir Hercules Robinson, and the
Honorable Lady Robinson, were—Captain St. John,
A.D.C., and Mrs. St. John; Miss Robinson and
Master Robinson ; the Hon. H. S. Littleton, Private
Secretary; the Hon. Sir Alfred Stephen, C. 8.,
K.C.M.G., M.L.C., Lieutenant-Governor, and Lady
Stephen; the Hon. Sir Henry Parkes, K.C.M.G.,
M.P., Premier and Colonial Secretary, and Lady
Parkes ; the Hon. Sir John Robertson, K.C.M.G.,
M.L.C, Vice-President of the Executive Council,
and Lady Robertson; the Hon. Sir John Hay,
K.C.M.G., M.L.C., President of the Legislative
Council, and Lady Hay; the Hon. Sir George
Wigram Allen, Knight, Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly, and Lady Allen; His Honor Sir William
Manning, Knight; His Honor Mr. Justice Faucett;
His Grace the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Syd-
ney ; His Worship the Mayor of Sydney, Mr. C. J.
Roberts, and the Mayoress; Commodore Wilson,
A.D.C., and Mrs. Wilson; His Lordship the Bishop
of Sydney, and Mrs. Barker; Mr. R. B. Smith,
M. P.; Mrs. Bruce, Miss Deas-Thomson ; Captain
Villeneuve, of the French Ship of War “Seudre.”
The assemblage on the grand-stands and within
the enclosure was representative of the intelligence
and wealth, the beauty and respectability of the
Colony. The Members of both Houses of the Legis-
lature and of the City Council, and the leading
men of all classes, were conspicuously numerous ;
the ladies were most gaily attired ; and as the sun
shone brilliantly upon the scene, an animated and
charming spectacle was presented such as is only
possible in the bright and prosperous metropolis of
Australia,
The members of the Committee not present upon
the dais, who took part in the proceedings were—
Captain Watson, Mr. W. Day, Mr. Daniel O’Connor,
M.P., Mr. John Alger, Mr. Edmund Fosbery,
Mr. F. Senior, Mr. S. Bayliss, Captain Shorter, Mr.
James Barnet, Mr. Richard Hill, Mr. John Davies,
M.P., Mr. John Williamson, Mr. G. M. Pitt, and
Mr. G. H. Reid.
The proceedings were initiated by Sir Alfred
Stephen introducing Captain Watson to His Excel-
lency. A round of cheering followed ; and a choir
of public school pupils and others, under the direc-
tion of Mr. C. J. Fisher, sung “.Rule Britannia.”
This being done, His Excellency rose, and after
being greeted with hearty cheers; delivered the
following eloquent address -
Ladies and Gentlemen, —I am glad that before the
close of my official connection with New South Wales
the pleasing duty should have devolved upon me
of unveiling to-day the statue of a man of whom, as a
citizen of the Mother Country and a discoverer of this
land, we may all feel justly proud ; I mean Captain
James Cook, R.N. (Cheers.) It is the statue of one
who by his own abilities and industry, raised himself
from a very humble position to the highest reputation.
Celebrated as his name is in every part of the world,
and justly so, he acquired this distinguished reputation
not by any single act of dashing intrepidity, but by
persistent labour, at first in obscurity, and by deep and
life-long devotion to duty. His ambition was rather to
execute thoroughly the work that naturally lay before
him than to make himself a name; the result was
that he accomplished both. He was one of the greatest
navigators and discoverers that ever existed ; and, in
addition to benefiting the whole world by extending the
knowledge of geography, astronomy, navigation, and
natural science, he has left behind him the reputation
of being one of the most kindly and considerate of
men. (Cheers.) It is, I believe, usual on such an
occasion to enlarge at some length upon the life and
services and character of the person whose statue is
about to be unveiled; but as I perceive that the
majority of those present are standing, and that my
words can reach but a small portion of this vast assem-
blage, I shall make my narrative as brief and concise as
I possibly can, having regard to the extent and import-
ance of my subject. James Cook was born in October,
1728, at Marton, a village in Yorkshire. His father
was then a day labourer on a farm, and his mother of
the same rank in life. They resided in one of the mud
cottages common in that neighbourhood, and their
son James was taught his letters by an old woman
who kept the village school. Subsequently the family
removed to Ayton, in the same county, where the
elder Cook had been entrusted with the care of a farm,
and here the lad helped upon the farm, and when he
could be spared, learnt writing and arithmetic at the
parish school. When about sixteen years of age he was
apprenticed to a haberdasher in Staithes, a seaport village
in Yorkshire; but after about eighteen months’ expe-
rience disliking the shop life, and taking a strong fancy to
the sea, he in July, 1746, being then nearly eighteen
years old, articled himself as a common sailor to a
ship-owner engaged in the coal trade at Whitby. He
remained in the merchant service for nearly nine years,
acquiring in that time considerable nautical skill, and
rising by good conduct and efficiency to the rank of
mate. In 1755, when England was at war with France
and good seamen were much needed, Cook found him-
self in danger of being impressed, and took a novel way
of avoiding the risk. He volunteered for the Navy, and,


being then twenty-seven years of age, entered the King’s
service as an able seaman on board the “ Eagle.” In this
capacity he served for about four years, until his captain
—Sir Hugh Palliser —recognizing his merits, obtained
for him an appointment as warrant officer, which trans-
ferred him from the forecastle to the quarter-deck, and
placed him on the first step of the ladder of fame.
During the next eight years we often find him employed
on important special services, and always acquitting
himself creditably. In 1759, whilst a master on board
the“ Mercury,” then with the fleet before Quebec, he was
employed by the captain—Sir Charles Saunders —to
make a complete survey of the channel and river
of St. Lawrence—a difficult and dangerous service,
Which he carried through successfully. In the same
year he was transferred to the “Northumberland”—
the flagship of Lord Colville, who had command of
the North American Squadron; and whilst attached
to that vessel he piloted the boats to the attack of
Montmorency, conducted the embarkation to the
heights of Abraham, and laid buoys for the security
of the large ships in their passage up the river. His
conduct during these operations gained him the warm
esteem of Sir Charles Saunders and Lord Colville, who
continued to befriend him during the rest of their lives
with the greatest zeal and affection. It is worthy of
note here that up to the time Cook entered the King’s
service he knew little or nothing of the theory of navi-
gation, and that it was in the “Northumberland,” during
a hard winter in Canada, that he first read Euclid,
and applied himself to the study of mathematics and
astronomy, without any other assistance than what a few
books and his own industry afforded him. (Hear, hear.)
At the close of the war he was, on the recommendation
of Lord Colville and his old friend Sir Hugh Palliser,
employed in a survey of the Gulf of St. Lawrence and
the coasts of Newfoundland, an employment in which he
continued until the year 1767, when he was selected by
the Admiralty for a special service, in connection with
which his name will ever be remembered. In that
year the Royal Society represented that an accurate
observation of the approaching transit of Venus would
materially serve the cause of science, and that such an
observation could nowhere be made with such advant-
age as in some one of the islands in the South Pacific.
King George 111 at once determined that the wishes of
the Society should not only be carried out, but that
advantage should be taken of the occasion to send an
expedition of discovery, better provided with every
requisite for prosecuting researches than had ever
before been sent forth. It was obvious, however,
that the whole success of the project depended upon
the choice of the man who was to conduct it, and
after much consideration and inquiry Cook was singled
out by the Admiralty for the post, receiving a com-
mission as Lieutenant in the Royal Navy. Could
stronger proof be given of conspicuous merit ? Here
was a man born of poor and humble parents, and self-
educated, who, by the force of his own ability and
character, had won his way from the position of an
apprentice boy in the coal trade to a command in the
Navy as honorable as has ever been entrusted to any
officer. (Cheers.) Thus it came to pass that Cook,
who was then in his 40th year, sailed from Plymouth,
in August, 1768, upon his first voyage of discovery, in
command of H.M.S. “Endeavour,” a small vessel of
only 370 tons. Having rounded Cape Horn he reached
Tahiti, one of the Society Islands, in April, 1769. Here
he remained for three months, to observe the transit of
Venus, and this work being successfully accomplished,
he discovered and visited other islands of the Society
group, and then sailing south-west reached New Zea-
land in October. Here he remained for nearly six
months, exploring the coasts of the two larger islands,
and then again sailed towards the west. On the 19th
April, 1770 —nearly 109 years ago—Cook sighted the
land of New Holland, not far from Cape Howe, and this
is the moment which Mr. Woolner has so happily
seized upon, in the noble statue which we are about
to unveil to-day, to represent the great navigator just
as he has made out the loom of the land and is ex-
ulting at the discovery. (Cheers.) After making New
Holland, Cook sailed along the coast to the northward,
and anchored in Botany Bay on the 28th April, 1770,
giving it that name on account of the great quantity of
plants which Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander, who were
with him, collected in this place. Here a Week was spent
in botanizing and in making excursions into the country,
but nothing could be done towards making friends with
the natives. On the 6th May Cook weighed anchor, and
sailed from Botany Bay northwards along the coast. At
noon on that day the “ Endeavour” was between two and
three miles distant from the land, and abreast of a bay or
harbour in which—Cook states in his journal—there ap-
peared to be good anchorage. This he called Port Jack-
son, after (I believe) Sir George Jackson, who was then
one of the Secretaries of the Admiralty. (Hear,hear.) Other
bays and capes and points were named by him as he
coasted northwards for nearly 2,000 miles along the shore.
At length, after running the greatest risks and encounter-
ing numberless hardships, he reached, in August, i77°>
the extreme northern point of Australia—Cape York—
and before sailing for New Guinea, being confident, as he
says in his journal, that no European had ever seen that
coast before he took formal possession of the whole
eastern coast of New Holland, in right of His Majesty
George 111, by the name of New South Wales. (Cheers.)
Upon leaving Australia, Cook sailed through Torres
Straits, and having thus ascertained for certain, that New
Hollandand New Guinea were two islands instead of one,
he bore away for the latter. From thence, after touching at
Savu and Batavia, he crossed the Indian Ocean, rounded
the Cape of Good Hope, and finally anchored in the
Downs in June, 1771, having sailed round the world from
east to west, and been absent from England nearly three
years. For his services upon this first voyage of discovery
Cook was promoted to be a Commander in the Navy, and
before he had been many months on shore it was proposed
to him that he should go out again to search more
closely for that unknown southern continent of which
people had been dreaming for nearly two centuries.
What Cook had already done had proved that this con-
tinent was not situated exactly where it was supposed to
be, but it was thought that it might still exist some-
where further south than his first voyage round the
world had carried him. The King and Lord Sandwich,
who was then at the head of the Admiralty, accord-
ingly determined upon a fresh expedition of
Two vessels (the “Resolution” and the “ Adventure”)
were selected, and Captain Cook was appointed to the
command. His instructions were to circumnavigate the
whole globe, especially in high southern latitudes,
making such traverses as should finally settle the ques-
tion of the existence of a southern continent. If there
were no continent he was to explore such islands as
might be found in those seas, landing when possible, to
study their inhabitants, and to make such observations
as might be useful either to navigation or commerce, or
tend to the promotion of natural science. The ships left
Plymouth in July, 1772, and sailing this time east
about round the Cape of Good Hope bore away south,
and crossed the Antarctic Circle, advancing until they


found further progress in that direction stopped by a
solid bar of ice. I need not here follow Cook’s course
in detail during this second voyage. It will be suffi-
cient to state that in two winters- passed in the South
Pacific he discovered the Friendly Islands, the New
Hebrides, New Caledonia, and numerous other small
islands and groups, and that in three Antartic summers
passed in high southern latitudes he traversed that
hemisphere in such a manner as not to leave a possi-
bility of the existence of a southern continent, unless
near the Pole and out of the reach of navigation.
Having established this point, he turned homewards,
and anchored at Spithead in July, 1775, having been
absent from England three years and eighteen days,
during which time, although exposed to great extremes
of heat and cold, he lost but four men, and only one of
them through sickness. (Cheers.) Honors and re-
wards were fittingly bestowed on Captain Cook upon
his return from this second voyage. He was raised to the
rank of Post Captain, received a valuable appointment in
Greenwich Hospital, and the Royal Society, electing
him a member, conferred upon him their gold medal.
After this second voyage of Captain Cook the idea of a
southern continent was laid aside, but another question
was raised as to the practicability of a northern passage
to the Pacific Ocean ; Frobisher in 1576, and James and
Fox in 1631, having tried to find such a passage, and
failed. It was resolved that a voyage should be under-
taken to see if such a passage existed ; but the labours
and dangers that Captain Cook had gone through had
been so great, and the benefits that he had conferred on
science and navigation had been so many, that it was
not thought reasonable to ask him to engage in fresh
perils. However, his advice was particularly sought for,
and upon learning of the proposed enterprize, he charac-
teristically volunteered to undertake it—an offer which
was joyfully accepted by the Government. Two ships
were selected for the expedition—the old “ Resolution ”
and the “ Discovery,” the former being once more under
Cook’s immediate command. His instructions were, to
sail for his lately discovered islands in the South Pacific,
finding new ones if he could, and then turning north to
force his way as far as possible between Asia and North
America; when, if open water was found, he was to
steer east, in the hope of coming out in the North
Atlantic. The expedition left England in July, 1776;
and, touching at the Cape, Van Diemen’s Land, New
Zealand, and the Friendly Islands, reached Tahiti in
August of the following year. A few months were
spent amongst the Society Islands, and in December,
17 7 7 > the expedition sailed northward on their voyage of
discovery for the northern passage. In January, 1778,
the Sandwich Islands were discovered, and in March the
north-west coast of America was reached. The ships
continued their course along the coast until the extreme
north-western point was reached, when they crossed
the Straits, which are here only 50 miles wide, and
anchored on the north-east coast of Asia. From thence
they sailed northward, attempting to find open water,
but were soon stopped, as they had been when going
towards the South Pole, by a field of ice that they could
neither penetrate nor flank. Captain Cook accordingly
determined, in October, 1778, to proceed south to
winter at the Sandwich Islands, intending to return in
the following summer to renew his search for the north-
east passage. In making the Sandwich Islands he dis-
covered a new island—Hawaii—the largest of the group,
where he remained to recruit for a couple of months.
The natives were friendly for a time, but afterwards
bad feeling sprang up. On the 4th February, 1779,
the ships sailed away from Hawaii, Captain Cook’s
design being to explore other islands of the group before
starting again for the north; but bad weather coming
on, the vessels were unfortunately compelled to return
to their anchorage at Hawaii on the 10th. The natives,
not liking the return of the ships, became troublesome.
On the 14th February —just 100 years ago—Cook
landed to get King Kariopoo as a hostage. Trouble
ensued, and Captain Cook was killed, aged 51. Thus
fell this daring and resolute Englishman, to whom
might well be applied the description given by Horace of
the man who first tempted the perils of the sea and
defied the fury of the winds :
“ Illi robur et ses triplex
Circa pectus erat.”
(Hear, hear.) What this stout-hearted man did for his
own country, and for the world outside, in the last ten
years of his life was enough for many a lifetime, and
may be briefly summed up as follows : —He sailed three
times round the world. He discovered the Society
Islands, the Sandwich Islands, the Friendly Islands, the
New Hebrides, and almost numberless small islands in
the South Pacific. He added greatly to our knowledge
of New Zealand and Van Diemen’s Land. He disco-
vered and explored the eastern coast of Australia for over
2,000 miles. He resolved the great problem of a south-
ern continent; and though he failed to find a north-east
passage, his explorations contributed greatly to our ac-
quaintance with that part of the world and its inhabit-
ants. In the course of these voyages he discovered and
adopted a system for preserving the health of seamen
during long sojourns at sea, which will transmit his
name to future ages amongst the friends and benefactors
of mankind. (Cheers.) Having thus glanced at Cook’s
life and services, a few remarks as to his general char-
acter will not be out of place. In estimating this we
have, however, no materials to work upon but his public
actions ; for although he was married and had children,
we look in vain for those peeps into the inner domestic
life of the man which would have been so intensely
interesting. His life had been almost entirely spent in
active toil afloat, and of the short intervals passed on
shore with his family while preparing for his several
voyages, no record whatever has been preserved to us.
But his character as illustrated by his public life stands
out clear and bright, and teaches us lessons which all
here may take to heart with advantage. The first feature
that strikes one on reading his life and journal is the in-
tense earnestness and perseverance of the man. His lead-
ing principle through life appears to have been, “ What-
soever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might
for no matter the task upon which he was at any time
engaged, whether trivial or important, pleasant or other-
wise, he appears to have thrown himself into it with his
whole heart and soul; and he had the rare faculty of
concentrating all his energies for the discharge of imme-
diate duties without weakening them by dreaming of
the future. It is to this quality of earnestness, combined
with patient, plodding, persevering industry, that we can
trace Cook’s extraordinary rise through a series of grada-
tions from the position of an untutored apprentice boy
in a collier to that of a naval officer of high rank,
entrusted with important and honorable commands.
(Cheers.) Cook was distinguished also by unaffected
simplicity of manner and unobtrusive modesty. He
was never ashamed of his origin and antecedents, and
always entertained a moderate estimate of his own ability
and merit. How characteristic are his words at the
close of the preface to the narrative of his second voyage,
when he asks his readers to excuse inaccuracies of style
by remembering that the work “ is the production of a
man who had not had the advantage of much school


education, but who had been constantly at sea from his
vouth ; and who, though he had with the assistance of
few good friends passed through all the stations
belonging to a seaman, from an apprentice boy in the
coal trade to a Post Captain in the Royal Navy, had
had no opportunity of cultivating letters.” He adds,
that after this account of himself he hopes the public
will “ consider him as a plain man, zealously exerting
himself in the service of his country, and determined to
give the best account he is able of his proceedings.”
(Hear, hear.) Cook possessed also, in an eminent degree,
other qualifications especially valuable in one entrusted
with the command of expeditions of discovery —such as
courage, fortitude, patience, self-denial, and resource;
whilst in the two great elements of all social virtue—
respect for the rights of others, and sympathy for the
sufferings of others—he has scarcely ever been surpassed.
(Hear, hear.) These latter qualities were especially
observable in his constant solicitude for the health and
comfort and amusement of those under his charge,
and in the considerate humanity invariably shown by
him towards the natives with whom he came in contact.
As illustrating his benevolent watchfulness over the
welfare of his ship’s company, I need only mention
that the system introduced by him for the preservation
of the health of seamen during long voyages proved so
efficacious that in his second voyage round the world,
which occupied over three years, he lost only one man by
illness out of the 113 of which his company consisted.
(Applause.) So, too, with reference to the natives with
whom he came in contact —he always treated them with
the utmost consideration. So great was the confidence
with which he inspired them that on one occasion, when
he complained to a chief of a theft that had been com-
mitted by some of the natives, the chief came on board
Captain Cook’s ship, in spite of the vigorous opposition
of all his own people, and placed himself in Captain
Cook’s power as a pledge that the articles should be re-
turned—which they were. (Hear, hear.) Not only did
Captain Cook pay most scrupulously for every article
that was required for the use of the ships—even water
and every stick that was cut down in their woods—and
ask formal permission to take them, but he insisted also
upon all his people treating the natives with the same
consideration ; andhepunished very severely any instance
of cheating or violence on the part of his own people
towards the natives. On one occasion some of his crew
robbed a native plantation, for which they were duly tied
up and got a dozen lashes. One of the culprits contended
that there was no harm in robbing a native plantation,
though it was very wrong for a native to steal from a
European. But Cook marked his sense of such a view
of reciprocity by giving the propounder of it an extra
half-dozen. (Laughter.) Again, when the savages in New
Guinea forcibly opposed his landing, and the ship’s
officers, provoked at the opposition, endeavoured to per-
suade Cook to send an armed party on shore to cut
down their cocoanut trees for the fruit, Cook replied that
as cocoanuts were not necessaries of life, but only
luxuries, he would not do so cruel and unjust an act.
In short, Cook, throughout all his dealings with the
natives, spread over a period of ten years, invariably
showed himself to be a just, humane, and considerate
man ; and his whole conduct towards them was emi-
nently marked by the one great principle of doing to
others as he would be done by. I hope that Australians
will, in this respect, be careful to follow in the footsteps
of the great discoverer, and that in their intercourse
with inferior races they too will strive to show their
superiority by adopting the same beneficent rule of con-
duct which it is always, I fear, less easy to practise than
to preach. (Applause.) And now, although but little
more than a century has passed away since the great
navigator sailed on an autumn day in May past the
Sydney Heads in the little “ Endeavour,” what a marvel-
lous change has since then taken place ! The condition
of the whole world has in that period been transformed,
mainly through the increased application of science to
social life ; but in no part of tbe globe has this trans-
formation been more complete and striking than it has
in Australia. Cook found this land a desolate waste,
inhabited only by a few naked and hostile savages, and
what is the prospect which meets the eye to-day ? A
country covered with flocks and herds—dotted over with
cornfields and vineyards—with busy cities and peaceful
hamlets —with churches and schools —with railways
and telegraphs; the harbours and coasts alive with
steam-vessels and other craft, and the land the happy
home of over two millions of our own race, who are
in the enjoyment of civil and religious liberty to as full
an extent as any people upon the face of the earth, and
who, under these invigorating influences, have already
so far advanced in all the outward and visible signs of
civilization as to be about to collect this year examples
of the products of labour, art, and wealth, from
every known country in the world into an Interna-
tional Exhibition ! (Cheers.) But great as has been
the progress of Australia in the last hundred years,
it is, I believe, as nothing compared to what we
may look for in the future. The resources of the
country are almost boundless—its capacity for expansion
practically unlimited —and at the next centenary of
Cook’s discovery the population will probably not be less
than forty millions. Such a prospect is almost dazzling,
but at the same time it gives rise to reflections which are
not altogether free from anxiety ; for it is impossible for
any thoughtful mind to contemplate the future of this
land without perceiving that there are difficulties to be
encountered which it will tax all your wisdom and
prudence and fairness to surmount. You have the
problem before you—how to provide for the homestead
settlement of this vast country without giving rise to
class animosities, and without stimulating unduly the
isolation of individual families, which would result in
the deterioration of the rising generation. You will
have to adjust too the relations between capital and labour
with fairness to each, both being essential factors in the
continued development and prosperity of the country.
(Hear, hear.) You will some day, unless one-half of
this great continent is to remain for ever a waste, have
to face the question of the colonization and cultivation of
tropical Australia, which can I believe only be accom-
plished by tropical labour of some kind under European
supervision. You have yet to estabish that par-
liamentary government —a machine of the most exquisite
delicacy—can be made a permanent success with a
Legislature formed upon the strict principles of popular
representation—and that the checks and safeguards of
our mixed and nicely balanced Constitution can with-
stand the predominating influence and encroaching
tendency of universal suffrage. You will have some day,
and I hope before long, to provide for the federation of
the Australian provinces into one Dominion. (Applause.)
And, above all, to arrange eventually for that closer
political association with the Mother Country which will
admit of many millions cf self-governing Anglo-Saxons
at the antipodes advancing in national life, while still
remaining an integral portion of the Empire of which it
is now their pride and privilege to form a part. (Loud
cheers.) These and other problems of a similar character
will have to be worked out in the future ; and I can only
repeat the conviction which I have before expressed, that


the key to their successful solution depends entirely upon
the intellectual clearness and moral worth of the indi-
vidual citizen. One of the greatest of living constitu-
tional authorities has observed that “ it is a great truth,
which cannot be too constantly borne in mind, that the
success of all free Constitutions depends far less on their
particular form than on the spirit and public virtue of
the people to be governed by them. When a strong
sense of public duty, respect for the constituted authori-
ties and for the law, and a high standard of political
right and wrong prevail in a nation, even very defective
institutions will produce the fruits of good government;
while with a people of an opposite character the best
Constitution which the wit of man could devise would
fail to prevent the worst abuses, and to guard against the
ultimate establishment of tyranny in the hands of a
mob, of an oligarchy, or of a single despot.” It becomes,
therefore, of the utmost importance that the rising gene-
ration here should be brought up to admire and imitate
true nobility of character ; and it would, I believe, be im-
possible to set before them as an example a higher
human standard than that of the earnest, modest, brave,
self-denying, just, humane, and God-fearing man to
whose enterprize we owe the discovery of this land, and
to whose memory a statue is this day about to be
unveiled in our midst. (Cheers.) It is, I think, pecu-
liarly fitting, having regard to Cook’s identity with the
masses of the English nation, that the idea of a statue
of the great navigator should have originated not with
the Government or any scientific Society, but with the
people of this Colony themselves. (Hear, hear.) A
monument of the kind cannot in any degree enhance
the reputation of Captain Cook, whose name and fame
will be remembered so long as the English language and
history shall continue in the earth. (Cheers.) But
such a statue is creditable to ourselves, as marking our
admiration of the character and services of the man, and
our gratitude for the benefits which his discoveries have
conferred, not only on Australia but also on the world
at large. It will serve also to bring home to all the
lesson that great deeds and a great reputation can be
achieved by those in the humblest station, and with the
slenderest opportunities. There is scarcely a lad born
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer. —1879
in this country who has not within his reach educational
advantages superior to those which were available to the
poor Yorkshire peasant boy ; and I hope that the history
of his early life may not be thrown away upon the
young, but that many a child in the future will learn at
the foot of this statue how a faithful, patient, cheerful
attention to the details of daily duty, however monoto-
nous and commonplace, will bring its own reward, and
may perchance, as in the case of James Cook, leave
behind a noble and imperishable memory. (Continued
applause.)
Continued applattse succeeded His Excellency’s
speech, and when it had subsided he rose and said :
“ In the name of the people of New South Wales,
I now direct that the statue be unveiled.”
Thereupon the men stationed near the statue for
the purpose of unveiling it—consisting of two
sailors from the Naval Brigade, two Royal marines,
and two seamen of the Royal Navy—pulled a cord
attached to the flag veiling the statue, unfurling it
and running it up to the peak of a neighbouring
flagstaff, thus exposing to the admiring gaze of the
multitude the statue in all its beauty. A volley of
cheers rent the air, the joy-bells of St. Mary’s Roman
Catholic Cathedral close by rung out a merry peal,
and again rounds of cheers were given—in honor of
the event, of Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen,
of His Excellency the Governor, of Lady Robinson,
and of the Lady Mayoress and the ladies of the
Colony. The National Anthem was then rendered
by the united bands and choirs. At its conclusion
the ceremony terminated, the various bodies form-
ing rank and marching away in quick time to the
lively strains of their respective bands, while the
multitude pressed forward to obtain a closer view
of the statue and admire its noble proportions, and
the shades of evening had closed in before the crowd
finally dispersed.
Copies of poems by Henry Halloran, Esq., C.M.G.,
on “The Discovery of Eastern Australia,” and on
“ The Unveiling of the Captain Cook Statue,” were
distributed on the ground.


|1 recession airtr Cemmrag,
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY, 1879,
ORDER OF PROCESSION.
MOUNTED POLICE.
BAND OF H.M.S. “WOLVERENE."
SAILORS AND MARINES FROM SQUADRON.
MILITARY BAND.
N. S. W. ARTILLERY AND VOLUNTEERS.
NAVAL BRIGADE.
INSURANCE COMPANIES’ FIRE BRIGADE.
SYDNEY VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANY, No. 2.
VOLUNTEER FIRE BRIGADE, No. 3.
WOOLLAHRA VOLUNTEER FIRE BRIGADE.
GRAND UNITED ORDER OP ODDFELLOWS.
ANCIENT ORDER OF FORESTERS.
MANCHESTER UNITY INDEPENDENT ORDER OP ODDFELLOWS.
HOLY CATHOLIC GUILD, ST. MARY AND ST. JOSEPH.
PROTESTANT ALLIANCE FRIENDLY SOCIETY.
SHIPWRIGHTS PROVIDENT UNION.
NATIONAL DIVISION SONS OP TEMPERANCE OP AUSTRALIA.
UNITED ANCIENT ORDER OF DRUIDS.
HIBERNIAN AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC BENEFIT SOCIETY.
INDEPENDENT ORDER OF RECHABITES.
SYDNEY MARINE BENEFIT SOCIETY.
LOYAL ORANGE FRIENDLY BENEFIT SOCIETY.
INDEPENDENT ORDER OF ODDFELLOWS.
INDEPENDENT ORDER OF GOOD TEMPLARS.
OPERATIVES STONEMASONS SOCIETY.
UNITED SYDNEY PLASTERERS ASSOCIATION.
CATHOLIC MUTUAL IMPROVEMENT SOCIETY.
PROGRAMME OF PROCEEDINGS,
play “ God save the Queen,’
UNVEILING OF THE COOK STATUE
Tub Friendly Societies and other public bodies taking part in the procession on foot, will assemble at 2-45
p.m., in the open space in the Outer Domain, adjoining the Cricket Ground, from whence the order of
procession will be formed six abreast.
The Societies will march in the order stated above, the route to be by the Avenue leading to Sir
Richard Bourke’s Statue, thence by Macquarie-street North, Bridge, George, and Park Streets, halting at the
Town Hall to accompany the Right Worshipful the Mayor and Aldermen to the ground.
The Friendly Societies and other public bodies will enter Hyde Park by the steps north of Park-street
to the enclosure assigned, where they will take up position as arranged.
No members of public bodies or societies taking part in the procession will be admitted to the reserved
space in Hyde Park unless wearing their society badges.
Except such persons as are officially engaged in the Ceremonial (and Naval or Military Officers in
Uniform), no one will be admitted to the Statue Enclosure without an Admission Card.
Carriages setting down ladies or gentlemen having tickets of admission to the stands, to drive by way
of Col lege-street from the south, setting down at entrance steps to Hyde Park opposite Museum ; then to
drive away by William-street, taking up positions to stand on the north side of that street, horses heads west.
A Guard of Honor will be furnished by the Artillery, and be stationed at the Gate of the Enclosure, to
receive the Governor at 4 - 30.
The Artillery, the Guard of Honor excepted, will, with the Marines, take up position within the semi-
circle behind the Statue. The Volunteers.will be ranged along the fence south of Park-street—; facing the
Statue.
The Military Band, with the Bands of the “ Wolverene” and Naval Brigade, will be placed in front of
the Volunteers, and immediately behind the school children.
The Sailors of the Squadron will be placed in front of Stand B (east of the Statue), and the Naval
Brigade in front of Stand A (west of the Statue).
On the Governor’s reception by the Statue Committee within the Enclosure, the Bands will play
"God save the Queen.” The School Children and Choristers will sing “Rule, Britannia,” accompanied by
the Artillery Band.
His Excellency will then Deliver an Address.
On its conclusion he will direct the unveiling of the Statue, which will be performed by two sailors
and two marines from one of Her Majesty’s Ships, and two members of the Naval Brigade.
Cheers will be given for the Queen, for the Governor, and for the Royal Navy;—after which the School
Children and Choristers, accompanied as before, will sing the National Anthem.
The Ceremonial being thus concluded, the Bands will, on the Governor taking his departure,
and the Assemblage will disperse. von
. R. B. SMITH, Hon. See. aW>


