

Memorial
TO
THE LATE
LT.-COL.
G.F . Braund, V.D., M.L.A.
AND
SERGT.
C.R. Lakin, M.L.A.
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
30TH Nov., 1915.






THE MEMORIAL


UnbetUng
OF .
permanent iWemorial
IN THE
NEW SOUTH WALES
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY CHAMBER,
TO THE LATE
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL
#eorge Jfrebertcfe pratmb, ®.®.,
M.L.A. (Member for Armidale),
AND
SERGEANT
€btoarb JXennix larfetn,
M.L.A. (Member for Willoughby),
Who fell in action at the Dardanelles, May, 1915,
BY
je Speaker
(The Hon. R. D. Meagher)
On TUESDAY, 30th NOVEMBER, 1915,
At 12 Noon




New South Wales.
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
PROCEEDINGS OF THE HOUSE.
TUESDAY, 30 NOVEMBER. 1915.
The House met at 12 noon pursuant to Special Adjournment. Mr.
Speaker took the Chair.
The Hon. W. A. Holman ( Premier) moved, pursuant to Notice,
that Mr. Speaker do unveil the permanent memorial to the late
Lieutenant-Colonel George Frederick Braund, V.D., and Sergeant
Edward Rennix Larkin, which this House, on nth August, 1915,
authorised Mr. Speaker to place within this Chamber.
And the motion having been seconded by Mr. Waddell, on behalf of
Mr. Wade, was put and carried unanimously, the Members and
Officers rising in their places in silence.
Mr. Speaker (The Hon. R. D. Meagher) addressed the House.
Mr. Speaker then left the Chair, and preceded by the Serjeant-at-
Arms, and accompanied by Mr. Holman and Mr. Waddell, proceeded
to the Memorial which he thereupon unveiled, by drawing aside the
Blue Ensigns with which it had been covered.
1 he Band of the National Rifle Club (without the Chamber) rendered
an excerpt from Chopin’s “ March Funebre,” Honorable Members
and Officers still standing.
Mr. Speaker then resumed the Chair.
The Premier moved, That the House do now adjourn until 4 o’clock
in the afternoon.
The Question having been resolved in the affirmative,
The Band rendered the first stanza of the Hymn, “ Onward, Christian
Soldiers.”
The proceedings closed with the National Anthem.
Mr, Speaker thereupon left the Chair and the House stood adjourned.


University Chambers,
Phillip Street,
29th November, 1915.
Dear Mr. Holman,
It is with extreme regret that I find I shall
be unable to be present at the ceremony of unveiling
the memorial to our gallant comrades, Colonel Braund
and Sergeant Larkin, on Tuesday.
I feel that it is an historic occasion
on which every member, if possible,
should, by his presence, pay a tribute
to the memory of these brave men.
Unfortunately, I have an engage-
ment on Tuesday of some standing
which I am absolutely unable to free
myself of; but I will ask Mr. Waddell
with your concurrence, to say a few words in my
stead.
A ceremony like this is the first of its kind in
this State, and I cannot help quoting from the funeral
oration of the Athenian orator Pericles in paying a
tribute to those who had fallen for their country :
“ For the sacrifice which they have made they received
each one for himself a praise which grows not old and
the noblest of all sepulchres—l speak not of that in
which their remains are laid, but of that in which their


glory survives, and is proclaimed always and on every
fitting occasion both in word and deed. For the whole
earth is the sepulchre of famous men ; not only are
they commemorated by columns and inscriptions in
their own country, but in foreign lands there dwells
also an unwritten memorial of them, graven not on
stone but in the hearts of men. Make them your
examples, and, esteeming courage to be freedom, and
freedom to be happiness, do not weigh too nicely the
perils ol war.” Although these words were spoken
431 years beiore the birth of Christ, they still ring true,
and should be a worthy incentive to our young men to
emulate the example of those whose sacrifice we now
commemorate.
Yours faithfully,
C. G. WADE.
Hon. W. A. Holman, M.L.A.,
Premier of New South Wales,
The Treasury, Sydney


Memorial
TO
Lieutenant=Colonel Braund
AND
Sergeant Larkin.
Mr. HOLMAN (Cootamundra), Premier and Colonial
Treasurer [12.1], moved :
That Mr. Speaker do unveil the permanent memorial to the
late Lieutenant-Colonel George Frederick Braund, V.D., and
Sergeant Edward Rennix Larkin, which this House on nth August,
1915, authorised Mr. Speaker to place within this Chamber.
He said : Hon. members generally, I think, will believe me
when I say that I feel to the full this is no ordinary occasion.
This, is an occasion unprecedented in the
history of this Chamber and in the political
history of Australia. We have been spec-
ially summoned by you, sir, to carry a
resolution which will inaugurate in a
material form some indication of the deep
and abiding sorrow which the House felt
and continues to feel since the deaths of
our late lamented comrades, Lieutenant-
Colonel Braund and Sergeant Larkin, were reported to
us. Such an occasion has never before arisen in the


history of our country, and I feel to the full, and I think
hon. members will share that feeling - , its importance, its
solemnity, and the privilege which we all enter into in being
permitted in, however humble a way, to add our testimony
to the memory of the brave and devoted men whose loss we
are to record to-day. These two men, our fallen comrades,
were elected to represent important constituencies in this
State some nine months before the outbreak of the war. Mr.
Braund, as we then knew him, had been chosen to represent
the rich and flourishing district of New England. Mr.
Larkin, as we then knew him, represented a prosperous and
progressive suburb of our metropolis. They entered Parlia-
ment at a moment of profound peace ; they entered Parlia-
ment at a time when our country was almost on the height
of its prosperity, when progress and advancement were
visible, and when nothing, I venture to say, was further from
the mind of any one of us than that the peaceful progress
and advancement which had been the ruling experience for
many years would continue and continue without interruption.
These two gentlemen had for some years been anxious to
obtain the recognition of the confidence of their fellow-citizens.
Lieutenant-Colonel Braund had been a distinguished member
in the community in which he had spent his life. He had
made a great standing for himself in the public life of his own
district. He was a leading figure in its commerce, both
deeply respected and highly admired, and on the untimelv
death of the former representative he was practically unani-
mously chosen by the political body to which he belonged to
be its candidate, and he was afterwards returned as the re-
presentative of the district and took his seat in this House.
In a similar way Mr. Larkin had for many years taken a


leading part in the public life of the district in which he lived,
and he was widely known as an officer, as a secretary, and as
a representative, and he enjoyed the confidence and admira-
tion of vast bodies of men associated not only with his own
district, but with the whole of the metropolitan area. His
energies were directed to matters connected with the world
of athletics and manly sport, to the furtherance of which he
directed his unparalleled energies. Both of these men aimed
at the laudable and praiseworthy ambition of representing
their fellow-citizens in the Parliament of the State. Both of
these men after years of devoted service achieved that ambi-
tion, and entered this Chamber as representatives of the
people. They were at the threshold of their careers, and it
is impossible to foresee what would have been the result
had they remained in public life. There was no position
in the public life of Australia that was not open to either
of them. That was the opinion when the war came upon
us, when the unforeseen catastrophy happened that called
upon them to offer their services to the cause of the Empire
and of civilisation. These two of our comrades were among
the very first to offer their services. They were amongst
the first to volunteer, and amongst the first to enter the
training camp. They were members of the first forces which
left our shores, and they participated in the first battles in
which our Australian soldiers took part. They bore them-
selves with distinguished and devoted courage, which we
rejoice to think has been the characteristic of our troops on
the stricken fields on which they have fought. Unhappily,
they were amongst the first to fall—to offer themselves as
living sacrifices in the great cause to which they were devoted.
They were actually the first public men in Australia to offer


themselves to the cause of the Empire, and they were actually
the first to fall in that same cause. A strange fatality bound
the lives and deaths of these two men so different from each
other in all personal characteristics, and apparently it was
decreed that there should be a strict similarity in the closing
acts of their careers. No two men of high principle, of lofty
character, and devoted courage could be much more unlike
than were our two late comrades. Lieutenant-Colonel Braund,
as we knew him here, was a man of serene and serious, and one
might say almost melancholy disposition, animated more by a
deep sense of public duty and by a readiness for sell-sacrifice for
any cause to which he was devoted than by any other motive.
He went to the war in no spirit of recklessness, but in full re-
cognition of the greatness of the risk he was incurring, and of
the sacrifice he might be called upon to make. He went,
animated by the resolution of his race, and the elevation of
his sincere and deep-seated religious views, to face whatever
fate the path of duty might hold out before him. Sergeant
Larkin, a man of equal religious convictions, was, neverthe-
less, as we all knew him, a man of gay and light-hearted
intrepidity. Nothing daunted him. He thought nothing of
the dangers of his course. He refused to consider the possi-
bilities of evil happening to himself. He laid those considera-
tions behind him, and went forth to the battle in a spirit of
easy determination to face whatever fate had in store, with
the same ready and smiling courage he had previously faced
all the incidents of his life, and in a manner eminently calcu-
lated, I venture to say, to afford an example and stimulus to
those of us who saw him go, and to many others who were
encouraged by that example and stimulus to follow in his
footsteps. Those two men, differing in their religious views,


meeting on the floor of this Chamber, belonging to opposite
political parties, typifying in their personalities such antagon-
istic temperaments, have been united by the sacred bond of
duty. They have been united in their efforts ; they have been
united in their fall, and, I venture to say, they will remain
united n the affectionate and admiring regard which will
always survive for them in the estimation of their fellow-
members in this Chamber. They were beautiful in their lives,
and in their deaths they were not divided.
We are here to-day, sir, to ask you to unveil the memorial
which their fellow-members have authorised you to cause to
be erected to their memory. No memorial is needed for us
who have had the happiness of meeting our departed com-
rades in the flesh upon the floor of this House. We shall
always remember them. We shall always remember the
example they set us here as members, the fraternal spirit in
which they met their brother-members here, their courtesy,
their good nature, the patience and the ease with which they
bore the many crosses of political life. We shall remember,
too, the readiness with which they made the supreme sacrifice
in each case for the good of our common cause. We shall
remember the heroic willingness with which they gave up
their lives in order that we might preserve ours. We remain
behind after they have gone. I can only say that, amongst
the many proud records which the Legislative Assembly ot
New South Wales can look back upon, among the many dis-
tinguished ornaments of which its long history can boast,
there is no prouder record, no more distinguished ornament,
than what we hope it will be your task to unveil in a few
moments —the record of duty heroically done by those who
represented the people.


Mr. WADDELL (Lyndhurst) [12.14] : Before seconding
the motion, I should like to apologise for the absence of the
Leader of the Opposition. That hon. gentle-
man would particularly have liked to be here
to-day, but unfortunately, circumstances have
been such as to make it impossible for him
to be present. I very warmly endorse the
remarks made by the Premier with reference to
our two departed friends. Although they were
among the members whom we might term new
members, we had all known them long enough
to form very high opinions of their many excellent qualities.
Both men had high ideals in connection with the public life
of the country; both men had what, if possible, is better still,
manifest honesty of purpose; and, as the Premier has said,
after this terrible war broke out only a very short time elapsed
before both these gentlemen volunteered their services for the
front. At that time the war had continued long enough
for us all to know that it was going to be one of the most
desperate—probably the most desperate struggle the world
had ever known; one that would be most destructive of life,
and would leave the chances of anyone coming back com-
paratively small as compared with previous wars. It was
under those circumstances that Lieutenant-Colonel Braund
and Sergeant Larkin nobly volunteered to go to the front.
That, in itself, is ample proof of their courage, if such proof
were needed. Both men knowing that they were going to
take part in this terrible struggle, from which they would
have little chance of coming back, never hesitated, but volun-
teered and went away, and in connection with the terrible
ordeal they had to face in their first experience of warfare, so


far as we have been able to learn, both men faced their duties
like heroes. They had to land, as we know, at Gallipoli, and
join with their fellow-countrymen in attacking the enemy in
his stronghold. I suppose that in British history there has
never been any occasion which called forth higher courage
and greater bravery than did the occasion of the landing of
our late comrades and their fellow-countrymen on the shores
of Gallipoli.
Mr. Miller: Or in any other history!
Mr. WADDELL: Or, as the hon. member says, in any
other history. We have read of the charge of Balaclava.
We honor the names of the heroes who took part in that, and
shed lustre upon the names of Britishers all over the world—
we honor them, and will honor them as long as we live. We
also feel that in these two men we have heroes whose memory
commands our greatest respect for all time. I should like to
say how deeply we all sympathise with those near and dear to
them whom they left behind—their widows and families. We
all realise that nothing can be a solace to them in their bereave-
ment, that nothing can make good the irreparable loss they
have sustained in the death of their breadwinners, their
husbands, and their fathers; but, at the same time, I hope
that this ceremony, in connection with which the members of
the Legislature of this country have met here to-day to show
their respect for the memory of those two noble men, will,
to some extent at any rate, be gratifying to the widows and
orphans of Lieutenant-Colonel Braund and Sergeant Larkin.
I have very much pleasure in seconding the resolution.
Question proposed.
Hon. members standing in their places.
The motion was agreed to.


Mr. Speaker : Gentlemen of the Legislative Assembly,—
In accordance with the direction of this honorable House, on
nth August, 1915, I have caused a beautiful
bronze monument to be cast in memory of
our deceased gallant comrades, Lieutenant-
Colonel Braund and Sergeant Larkin. This
task I entrusted to Mr. James Castle, of this
city, who is responsible for the finest bronze
memorials in Australia, and, I venture to
believe, in the present instance has excelled
his previous achievements. While congrat-
ulating that gentleman on his work, I must express my
indebtedness and appreciation for both valuable advice and
assistance rendered by the Colonial Architect, Mr. Geo.
McCrae, and the Government Printer, Mr. W. A. Gullick.
The Hon. the Premier, and the Hon. the Deputy Leader of
the Opposition, the Hon. Thomas Waddell, have so eloquently
and effectively dealt with the subject matter that has drawn
us here to-day that any further attempt at elaboration on my
part is calculated to imperil this excellent effect so worthy of
the occasion. I may, however, be permitted to make a few
observations on the inspiration and beautiful ideals which
actuated our deceased comrades in their magnificent self-
sacrifice and devotion to the cause of Empire. Both deceased
soldiers possessed in a high degree nobility of character and
purity of aim which made their personalities an asset valued
by members of both sides of this House, irrespective of party
lines. This Chamber is the historic birthplace and cradle of re-
sponsible government in these Southern Seas, and is hallowed
by the memories of patriots and grand old pioneers who, sixty
years ago, shaped the destinies of this land. As will be


noted, this is the first permanent memorial to adorn the walls
of this Chamber, and its location seems most appropriate,
supported on the one side by the oil painting of the Father
of our Constitution, William Charles Wentworth, that intel-
lectual Viking who also founded our University, and who was
spared to see the nascent results of many of his labours—so
beautifully expressed by the late Chief Justice, Sir James
Martin, in the unveiling of his statue at the University, when
lie said, “ Here in his green old age, with his mind still un-
clouded, and his faculties still unimpaired, he has been
allowed a foretaste of the posthumous renown that awaits
him,” —whilst it is supported on the other side of the oil
painting of the Nestor of Australian politics, the late Sir
Henry Parkes, who did so much towards crystallising the
ideal of Australian nationality. Whilst some of his work is
open to criticism, I venture to say posterity will recognise
that the weaknesses and the errors of great leaders are an in-
separable part of the elements which affect their fortunes
while living, but when they are dead the sum of their services
to the people is their lasting monument.
In the death of our comrades on foreign soil, we intui-
tively glance at the flight of centuries, and the glorious part
our New Land is playing amidst ancient surroundings in the
cause of Human Freedom. On the Bth September, 1914, in
a few valedictory remarks on behalf of the House, I said,
“We know both Lieutenant-Colonel Braund and Sergeant
Larkin will fight like Australians, and if need be die like
Australians ; but we pray Providence will spare them both to
return to the sunny soil that gave them birth.” Fate decreed
otherwise, and the record of their passing has justified my
prediction.


Both gallant members from this new land completed their
training in the land of the Pharaohs, under the shadow of the
Pyramids—the very spot where, a century before, Napoleon
emphasised its antiquity when, in that memorable address to
his soldiers, he said: “Soldiers of France, forty centuries look-
down upon you.” But Napoleon’s soldiers saw the dream of
Eastern Empire vanish in a sea of blood.
Within a few months both gallant officers are transported
to a still further historic spot, the Gallipoli Peninsula, where
they engage in a death grapple on behalf of human liberty
with hordes of Turks officered by the barbarous Huns; just
as 2,300 years before, within 100 miles of the same spot, the
hordes of Persians under Xerxes were beaten back by the
Greeks in the cause of freedom at the battle of Plataea.
Although written over 2,000 years ago, the epitaph of the
Greek poet, .Simonides, on the heroes who fell in the battle
of Plataea, in that fight against the Persian hordes, is singu-
larly appropriate to our soldier-warriors from this new land of
Australia:
These men, having set a crown of imperishable glory on their
own land, were folded in the dark cloud of death; yet being dead
they have not died, since from on high their excellence raises them
gloriously out of the House of Shades.
From this memorial will stretch the tendrils of grateful remem-
brance and affection to our two dead legislators and their heroic
Australian comrades who sleep beneath the little mounds on
Gallipoli. They have written the name of their country in
letters of living light in the annals of history for all time, and
every enemy bullet in every Australian body has been but


another rivet welding still closer together Old England and
the New.
Our environment in this world cataclysm and maelstrom
of blood and tears is too obscured for us to see in true per-
spective the full value of our dead comrades’ services. With
the ultimate triumph of the Onion Jack and the return of the
halcyon days of peace, time will, I am sure, do full justice to
their memories.
All the darkness and the errors,
All the sorrow and the terrors,
Time has painted in the background
On the canvas of the world.
All the beauty of Life’s story.
He will do in tones of glory,
When these final blots of shadow
From his brushes have been hurled.
In conclusion, let me say, when we have passed away and
other legislators sit in this honorable Chamber controlling
the destinies of millions of happy and liberty-loving citizens,
this bronze memorial will be a record of the fealty and affec-
tion of this far-flung part of the Empire in the dark days of
Britain’s storm and stress; and it also will perpetuate the
memories of the two gallant men whose blood consecrated the
soil that soaked it, who gave all that was nearest and dearest
to them in the cause of human liberty and for the honor of
Australia.
I now unveil this Memorial, and dedicate the possession
thereof to this honorable Chamber for all time.


UNVEILING CEREMONY.


W. C. WENTWORTH.


SIR HENRY PARKES.






5X797 SYDNEY :W. A. GULLIcK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER. IQI6.






IHnimling
OF
Permanent iWemorial
IN THE
New South Wales
Legislative Assembly Chamber,
to tije late
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL
George jFreberttb ikaunb, f.b„
Member for Armidale,
AND
SERGEANT
Cbtoarb Eennix Harbin,
Member for Willoughby,
Who fell in action at the Dardanelles, May, 1915,
BY
Wt)t Speaker
(The Hon, R. D. Meagher),
On Tuesday, 30th November, 1915,
at 12 noon.


“ In time of peace they worthily asserted the
rights of citizenship, in time of war
fearlessly protected them.”


1. Honorable Members having been summoned to take their
places by the ringing of the bells —
at 12 noon Mr. Speaker will take the chair.
2. Mr. Speaker will call upon the Premier to move the
Resolution.
3. The Premier (The Honorable W. A. Holman) will move:
“ That Mr. Speaker do unveil the permanent
Memorial to the late Lieutenant - Colonel
GEORGE FREDERICK BRAUND, V.D., and
Sergeant EDWARD RENNIX LARKIN,
which this House on 11th August, 1915, author-
ised Mr. Speaker to place within this Chamber.”
The Leader of the Opposition (The Hon. C. G. Wade,
K.C.) will second the motion.
4. The Resolution will be put by the Speaker, the Members
rising in their places in silence.
5. Mr. Speaker will address the House and then leave the
Chair and unveil the Memorial.
6. The Memorial having been unveiled the band will play
Chopin’s March Funebre.
7. Mr. Speaker will then return to the Chair and adjourn
the sitting until the afternoon.
8. The band will play the first verse of “Onward Christian
Soldiers,”


