









OAPTAIN COOK STATUE.
paging the anti
planted the infant settlement which has since
Colonies of Australasia. A noble Statue of
Consort, by Theed, adorns another portion of
finest buildings in Australia are in progress in
i»
1 r
jup HE Unveiling of this Statue is one of the most pleasing national
incidents that has occurred in the history of the Australian Colonies.
M Never before was public enthusiasm roused to so high a pitch, except
on the occasion of the visit to these shores of His Royal Highness
f ‘ Prince Alfred; and never before did the population of the Queen City
of the South respond so willingly and in such multitudes to a vice-
regal invitation to make holiday and share in a public ceremonial.
The statue is erected in Hyde Park, Sydney, a few miles only from the
place where the great circumnavigator first landed in Australia —upon a site
commanding a view of the magnificent Harbour and towering North Head of
Port Jackson —and almost in sight of the historic spot where Captain Phillip
developed into the eight great
His Royal Highness the Prince
the same park, and some of the
the neighbourhood.
The movement for the erection of a national memorial to Captain Cook
dates as far back as 1868, and was originated by Captain Watson (an old
Colonist, formerly Harbour Master of Sydney) and carried on by R. Burdett
Smith, Esq., first as President of the Australian Patriotic Association, and
afterwards as Honorary Secretary of the “ Cook Statue Fund,” to which position
he was unanimously elected at a public meeting of the citizens of Sydney, held at
the Royal Victoria Theatre in the month of February, 1869, His Honor Sir
Alfred Stephen, C. 8., Chief Justice, being in the Chair. Both Captain Watson
and Mr. Smith had the gratification of crowning their work by taking part in
unveiling the statue. Nearly ,£2,000 was subscribed by the public for the
memorial. The foundation stone of the pedestal was laid by His Royal
Highness Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, K.G., on the 27th March, 1869,
in the presence of a large and distinguished company, including His Excellency
the Governor the Right Honorable the Earl of Belmore, Members of both
Houses of the Legislature, the Ministers of the Crown, the High Dignitaries of
the Church, Mayor and Aldermen, Foreign Consuls, Commodore and Officers


of H.M. Ships of War, Commander and Officers of H.M.S. “ Galatea,”
H. W. I. Marceau, President and Members of the Australian Patriotic Associa-
tion, and the Citizens of Sydney. The Volunteer Forces formed a distinguished
feature in the ceremony. His Royal Highness Prince Alfred, in reply to an
Address presented to him on the occasion by Sir Alfred Stephen, C.B. (now
Lieutenant-Governor), spoke as follows: —
“ One of the happiest privileges which the members of the Royal family
enjoy is that of being able to do honor to the memory of great men and of
noble deeds, by their presence at such a ceremony as that which we are met to
perform to-day. But when the man whose fame we desire to commemorate has,
by a life of great discoveries and of scientific researches, increased so materially
the territorial extent of the Empire, and has conferred so great benefits upon
the whole civilized world, by his valuable additions to geographical knowledge,
and when, by these noble actions he has shed a lustre upon the profession to
which he belonged, and to which lam so proud to belong —I mean the maritime
service of the greatest maritime nation of the world —then, indeed, I feel that a
very high honor is conferred upon me in having my name associated with this
memorial of his greatness. There is no one among the names of England’s
heroes more deserving of this recognition on your part, and none whose career
could be held up as a brighter example to every Englishman than that of
Captain Cook. Humble as his origin was, he possessed that true nobility of
character which has for its object—not the aggrandisement of self, but the
welfare of the nation. He is among the chief of those who, in making English-
men proud of their name and of their mother country, have helped to cement
in one powerful brotherhood the subjects of the British Empire in every part of
the world. In conclusion, I trust that there are many among the sons of
Australia who will emulate his example, and gild with noble deeds the name of
this great country and the fame of England.”
The trowel and mallet having been presented by Mr. R. B. Smith to His
Royal Highness, the stone was lowered into its receptacle, and was pronounced
by His Royal Highness to be well and truly laid.
Three cheers were given for the Queen, three for the Duke of Edinburgh,
also for the Governor, the Chief Justice, and the Countess of Belmore. The
trowel was of richly burnished silver, having an elegantly mounted ivory
handle. On the blade is the following inscription:—“To H. R. H. Prince
Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, K.G., on laying the foundation-stone of the statue
intended to commemorate the illustrious navigator, Captain Cook. Sydney,
March 27th, 1869.” The mallet was of honeysuckle wood, ornamented with
carvings of the rose, thistle, and shamrock. The handle, too, is of Australian
beech, elaborately carved. The material of both was taken from trees growing
close to the point where Cook landed. The bottle placed in the cavity in the
stone contained copies of the Herald and Empire , cards of the Officers of the


The Foundation Stone
Of this Monument
In honor of the Illustrious Navigator
CAPTAIN COOK,
Was laid on Saturday, the 27th March, a.d. 1869,
By His Royal Highness Prince Alfred Ernest Albert, K.G.,
Second Son of Her most gracious Majesty
Queen Victoria,
In the thirty-second year of Her Reign :
The Right Honorable Somerset, Earl of Belmore,
Being Governor of New South Wales.
Alfred Stephen, Chairman of Committee.
R B. Smith, Honorary Secretary.
W. Day, Honorary Treasurer.
in their official costumes, and the Firemen
a prominent feature in the procession.
Australian Patriotic Association, a facsimile of Captain Cook’s handwriting,
and the following inscription, engrossed in parchment:—
The connection of His Royal Highness with this memorial is peculiarly
appropriate, and enhances its value exceedingly in the eyes of the Australian
public.
The funds subscribed having proved insufficient, Sir Henry Parkes, the
present Premier, resorted to Parliament twice for means to carry on the work,
each time which brings up the cost of the statue to nearly
£6,°00.
As already mentioned, the day for the unveiling was proclaimed a public
holiday; and it was indeed well observed, for probably no other event could
have withdrawn from-their avocations so many thousands of people, or induced
them to sacrifice a day’s pay and undergo the fatigue they did for the purpose
of taking part in a public pageant. But there they were to the number of
about 60,000, and not less than 12,000 persons joined in the procession.
Another motive which should not pass unnoticed formed an ingredient in the
general enthusiasm, namely, the presence for the last time on a public occasion
of the eloquent and highly' popular Governor, Sir Hercules Robinson, and of
the much esteemed Lady Robinson, prior to the departure of Sir Hercules to
assume the Governorship of New Zealand.
The Navy, the Military, and the Volunteers turned out to their full
strength, and the Friendly Societies vied with each other in doing honor to the
occasion.
The Societies represented were the following: Oddfellows, Foresters,
Royal Foresters, Catholic Guilds, Protestant Friendly Societies, Shipwrights,
Sons of Temperance, Druids, Rechabites, Marine Benefit Society, Good
Templars, Stonemasons, Plasterers, Hibernian Society, and Catholic Mutual
Improvement Society. The Worshipful the Mayor and the City Aldermen
with their steam fire-engines, formed
The bands were about thirty in


a
t
number, and discoursed excellent music, the banners and insignia of the
various bodies were splendid, and the behaviour of the processionists and of
the crowds that lined the streets and filled the Park was all that could be
desired. The procession was marshalled by Mr. Fosbery, Inspector-General of
Police, and not a single accident or contre-temps of any moment happened
for the day. The arrangements were confided by the Government to the
Statue Committee, under the Hon. Sir Alfred Stephen, C. 8., K.C.M.G., as
Chairman, and Mr. R. Burdett Smith, M.P., as Honorary Secretary, and were
so perfect as to elicit general commendation.
Two grand-stands, with seats for several thousands of people, and
enclosure, forming together an oval some three acres in extent, were placed
around the statue, the area being defined by about 70 flag-poles of 50 feet high.
The whole structure was profusely and most tastefully decorated with festoons
and evergreens, zamia and other plants, and a brilliant display of bunting. In
the centre of the enclosure and fronting the statue was erected a handsome dais
for the vice-regal party, the committee, and the most distinguished guests. The
details were carried out by Mr. James Barnet (the Colonial Architect), and Mr.
Charles Moore (the Director of the Botanic Gardens), the contractors being
Messrs. Hudson Brothers and Messrs. David Jones and Co.
On the platform, with His Excellency the Governor of the Colony Sir
Hercules Robinson and the Honorable Lady Robinson, were—Captain St. John,
A.D.C., and Mrs. St. John; Miss Robinson and Master Robinson; the Hon.
H. S. Littleton, Private Secretary; the Hon. Sir Alfred Stephen, C. 8.,
K.C.M.G. M.L.C., Lieutenant-Governor, and Lady Stephen; the Hon. Sir
Henry Parkes, K.C.M.G., M.P., Premier and Colonial Secretary, and Lady
Parkes; the Hon. Sir John Robertson, K.C.M.G., M.L.C., Vice-President of
the Executive Council, and Lady Robertson ; the Hon. Sir John Hay, K.C.M.G.,
M.L.C., President of the Legislative Council, and Lady Hay; the Hon. Sir
George Wigram Allen, Knight, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, and Lady
Allen; His Honor Sir William Manning, Knight: His Honor Mr. Justice
Faucett; His Grace the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Sydney; His Worship
the Mayor of Sydney (Mr. C. J. Roberts) and the Mayoress; Commodore
Wilson, A.D.C., and Mrs. Wilson; His Lordship the Bishop of Sydney and
Mrs. Barker; Mr. R. B. Smith, M.P., Mrs. Bruce, Miss Deas-Thomson ;
Captain Villeneuve, of the French Ship of War “ Seudre.”
The assemblage on the grand-stands and within the enclosure was
representative of the intelligence and wealth, the beauty and respectability of
the Colony. The Members of both Houses of the Legislature and of the City
Council, and the leading men of all classes, were conspicuously numerous; the
ladies were most gaily attired; and as the sun shone brilliantly upon the scene,
an animated and charming spectacle was presented such as is only possible in
the bright and prosperous metropolis of Australia.


The Members of the Committee not present upon the dais, who took part
in the proceedings, were —Hon. Alexander Campbell, M.L.C., Hon. Geoffrey
Eagar, Major Richards, Captain Watson, Mr. W. Day, J.P., Mr. Daniel O’Connor,
M.P., Mr. John Alger, Mr. Edmund Fosbery, J.P., Mr. F. Senior, J.P., Mr. S.
Baylis, Captain Shorter, Mr. James Barnet, Mr. Richard Hill, J.P., Mr. John
Davies, M.P., Mr. John Williamson, Mr. G. M. Pitt, J.P., and Mr. G. H. Reid.
The proceedings were initiated by Sir Alfred Stephen introducing Captain
Watson to His Excellency. A round of cheering followed; and a choir of Public
School pupils and others, under the direction of Mr. C. J. Fisher, sung “ Rule
Britannia.”
This being done, His Excellency rose, and after being greeted with
hearty cheers, delivered the following eloquent Address :
“ Ladies and Gentlemen, —I am glad that before the close of my official
connection with New South Wales the pleasing duty should have devolved upon
me of unveiling to-day the statue of a man of whom, as a citizen of the Mother
Country and a discoverer of this land, we may all feel justly proud—l mean
Captain James Cook, R.N. (Cheers.) It is the statue of one who, by his own
abilities and industry, raised himself from a very humble position to the highest
reputation. Celebrated as his name is in every part of the world, and justly so,
he acquired this distinguished reputation, not by any single act of dashing
intrepidity, but by persistent labour, at first in obscurity, and by deep and life-
long devotion to duty. His ambition was rather to execute thoroughly the work
that naturally lay before him than to make himself a name; the result was that
he accomplished both.* He was one of the greatest navigators and discoverers
that ever existed ; and, in addition to benefiting the whole world by extending
the knowledge of geography, astronomy, navigation, and natural science, he has
left behind him the reputation of being one of the most kindly and considerate
of men. (Cheers.) It is, I believe, usual on such an occasion to enlarge at
some length upon the life and services and character of the person whose statue
is about to be unveiled ; but as I perceive that the majority of those present are
standing, and that my words can reach but a small portion of this vast assem-
blage, I shall make my narrative as brief and concise as I possibly can, having
regard to the extent and importance of my subject. James Cook was born in
October, 1728, at Marton, a village in Yorkshire. His father was then a day
labourer on a farm, and his mother of the same rank in life. They resided in
one of the mud cottages common in that neighbourhood, and their son James was
taught his letters by an old woman who kept the village school. Subsequently
the family removed to Ayton, in the same county, where the elder Cook had
been entrusted with the care of a farm ; and here the lad helped upon the farm,
and when he could be spared, learnt writing and arithmetic at the parish school.
When about sixteen years of age he was apprenticed to a haberdasher in Staithes,
a seaport village in Yorkshire; but after about eighteen months’ experience,
disliking the shop life, and taking a strong fancy to the sea, he, in July, 1746,


being then nearly eighteen years old,
articled himself as a common sailor to a
ship-owner engaged in the coal trade at Whitby. He remained in the merchant
service for nearly nine years, acquiring in that time considerable nautical skill,
and rising by good conduct and efficiency to the rank of mate. In 1755, when
England was at war with France, and good seamen were much needed, Cook
found himself in danger of being impressed, and took a novel way of avoiding
the risk. He volunteered for the Navy and being then twenty-seven years of
age, entered the King’s service as an able seaman on board the * Eagle.’ In
this capacity he served for about four years, until his captain (Sir Hugh Palliser)
recognizing his merits, obtained for him an appointment as warrant officer, which
transferred him from the forecastle to the quarter-deck, and placed him on the
first step of the ladder of fame. During the next eight years we often find him
employed on important special services, and always acquitting himself creditably.
In 1759, whilst a master on board the ‘Mercury,’ then with the fleet before
Quebec, he was employed by the captain —Sir Charles Saunders—to make a
complete survey of the channel and river of St. Lawrence—a difficult and
dangerous service, which he carried through successfully. In the same year he
was transferred to the * Northumberland’ —the flagship of Lord Colville, whc
had command of the North American Squadron ; and whilst attached to that
vessel he piloted the boats to the attack of Montmorency, conducted the
embarkation to the heights of Abraham, and laid buoys for the security of the
large ships in their passage up the river. His conduct during these operations
gained him the warm esteem of Sir Charles Saunders and Lord Colville, who
continued to befriend him during the rest of their lives with the greatest zeal
and affection. It is worthy of note here that up to the time Cook entered the
King’s service he knew little or nothing of the theory of navigation, and that it
was in the ‘ Northumberland,’ during a hard winter in Canada, that he first
read Euclid, and applied himself to the study of mathematics and astronomy,
without any other assistance than what a few books and his own industry afforded
him. (Hear, hear.) At the close of the war he was, on the recommendation of
Lord Colville and his old friend Sir Hugh Palliser, employed in a survey of the
Gulf of St. Lawrence and the coasts of Newfoundland, an employment in which
he continued until the year 1767, when he was selected by the Admiralty for a
special service, in connection with which his name will ever be remembered. In
that year the Royal Society represented that an accurate observation of the
approaching transit of Venus would materially serve the cause of science, and
that such an observation could nowhere be made with such advantage as in some
one of the islands in the South Pacific. King George 111 at once determined
that the wishes of the Society should not only be carried out, but that advantage
should be taken of the occasion to send an expedition of discovery, better
provided with every requisite for prosecuting researches than had ever before
been sent forth. It was obvious, however, that the whole success of the project
depended upon the choice of the man who was to conduct it, and after much con-
sideration and inquiry Cook was singled out by the Admiralty for the post, receiving
a commission as Lieutenant in the Royal Navy. Could stronger proof be given of


conspicuous merit ? Here was a man born of poor and humble parents and self-
educated, who, by the force of his own ability and character, had won his way from
the position of an apprentice boy in the coal trade to a command in the Navy as
honorable as has ever been entrusted to any officer. (Cheers.) Thus it came to
pass that Cook, who was then in his 40th year, sailed from Plymouth, in August,
1768, upon his first voyage of discovery, in command of H.M.S ‘ Endeavour,’
a small vessel of only 370 tons. Having rounded Cape Horn he reached
Tahiti, one of the Society Islands, in April, 1769. Here he remained for three
months to observe the transit of Venus; and this work being successfully accom-
plished, he discovered and visited other islands of the Society group, and then
sailing south-west reached New Zealand in October. Here he remained for
nearly six months exploring the coasts of the two larger islands, and then again
sailed towards the west. On the 19th April, 1770 —nearly 109 years ago —Cook
sighted the land of New Holland, not far from Cape Howe, and this is the moment
which Mr. Woolner has so happily seized upon, in the noble statue which we are
about to unveil to-day to represent the great navigator just as he has made out the
loom of the land and is exulting at the discovery. (Cheers.) After making New
Holland, Cook sailed along the coast to the northward, and anchored in Botany
Bay on the 28th April, 1770, giving it that name on account of the great
quantity of plants which Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander, who were with him,
collected in this place. Here a week was spent in botanizing and in making
excursions into the country, but nothing could be done towards making friends
with the natives. On the 6th May Cook weighed anchor, and sailed from
Botany Bay northwards along the coast. At noon on that day the “ Endeavour”
was between two and three miles distant from the land, and abreast of a bay or
harbour in which—Cook states in his journal —there appeared to be good
anchorage. This he called Port Jackson, after (I believe) Sir George Jackson,
who was then one of the Secretaries of the Admiralty. (Hear,- hear.) Other
bays and capes and points were named by him as he coasted northwards for
nearly 2,000 miles along the shore. At length, after running the greatest risks
and encountering numberless hardships, he reached, in August, 1770, the
extreme northern point of Australia —Cape York —and before sailing for New
Guinea, being confident, as he says in his journal, that no European had ever
seen that coast before, he took formal possession of the whole eastern coast of
New Holland, in right of His Majesty George 111, by the name of New South
Wales. (Cheers.) Upon leaving Australia, Cook sailed through Torres Straits,
and having thus ascertained for certain that New Holland and New Guinea were
two islands instead of one, he bore away for the latter. From thence, after
touching at Savu and Batavia, he crossed the Indian Ocean, rounded the Cape
of Good Hope, and finally anchored in the Downs in June, 1771, having sailed
round the world from east to west, and been absent from England nearly three
years. For his services upon this first voyage of discovery Cook was promoted to
be a Commander in the Navy, and before he had been many months on shore it
was proposed to him that he should go out again to search more closely for that
unknown southern continent of which people had been dreaming for nearly two


centuries. What Cook had already done had proved that this continent was not
situated exactly where it was supposed to be, but it was thought that it might still
exist somewhere further south than his first voyage round the world had carried
him. The King and Lord Sandwich, who was then at the head of the Admiralty,
accordingly determined upon a fresh expedition of discovery. Two vessels (the
‘ Resolution’ and the ‘ Adventure’) were selected, and Captain Cook was
appointed to the command. His instructions were to circumnavigate the whole
globe, especially in high southern latitudes, making such traverses as should
finally settle the question of the existence of a southern continent. If there were
no continent he was to explore such islands as might be found in those seas,
landing when possible, to study their inhabitants, and to make such observations
as might be useful either to navigation or commerce, or tend to the promotion
of natural science. The ships left Plymouth in July, 1772, and sailing this time
east about round the Cape of Good Hope bore away south, and crossed the
Antarctic Circle, advancing until they found further progress in that direction
stopped by a solid bar of ice. I need not here follow Cook’s course in
detail during this second voyage. It will be sufficient to state that in two
winters passed in the South Pacific he discovered the Friendly Islands, the New
Hebrides, New Caledonia, and numerous other small islands and groups,
and that in three Antartic summers, passed in high southern latitudes, he
traversed that hemisphere in such a manner as not to leave a possibility of
the existence of a southern continent, unless near the Pole and out of the
reach of navigation. Having established this point, he turned homewards,
and anchored at Spithead in July, 1775, having been absent from England
three years and eighteen days, during which time, although exposed to great
extremes of heat and cold, he lost but four men, and only one of them through
sickness. (Cheers.) Honors and rewards were fittingly bestowed on Captain
Cook upon his'return from this second voyage. He was raised to the rank of
Post Captain, received a valuable appointment in Greenwich Hospital, and the
Royal Society, electing him a member, conferred upon him their gold medal.
After this second voyage of Captain Cook the idea of a southern continent was
laid aside, but another question was raised as to the practicability of a northern
passage to the Pacific Ocean, —Frobisher in 1576, and James and Fox in 1631,
having tried to find such a passage, and failed. It was resolved that a voyage
should be undertaken to see if such a passage existed; but the labours and
dangers that Captain Cook had gone through had been so great, and the benefits
that he had conferred on science and navigation had been so many, that it was
not thought reasonable to ask him to engage in fresh perils. However, his
advice was particularly sought for, and upon learning of the proposed enterprize,
he characteristically volunteered to undertake it —an offer which was joyfully
accepted by the Government. Two ships were selected for the expedition—the
old ‘ Resolution’ and the * Discovery,’ the former being once more under
Cook’s immediate command. His instructions were, to sail for his lately
discovered islands in the South Pacific, finding new ones if he could, and then
turning north to force his way as far as possible between Asia and North


America; when, if open water was found, he was to steer east, in the hope of
coming out in the North Atlantic. The expedition left England in July, 1776;
and, touching at the Cape, Van Diemen’s Land, New Zealand, and the Friendly
Islands, reached Tahiti in August of the following year. A few months were
spent amongst the Society Islands, and in December, 1777, the expedition
sailed northward on their voyage of discovery for the northern passage. In
January, 1778, the Sandwich Islands were discovered, and in March the north-
west coast of America was reached. The ships continued their course along
the coast until the extreme north-western point was reached, when they crossed
the Straits, which are here only 50 miles wide, and anchored on the north-east
coast of Asia. From thence they sailed northward, attempting to find open
water, but were soon stopped, as they had been when going towards the South
Pole, by a field of ice that they could neither penetrate nor flank. Captain
Cook accordingly determined, in October, 1778, to proceed south to winter at
the Sandwich Islands, intending to return in the following summer to renew his
search for the north-east passage. In making the Sandwich Islands he
discovered a new island—Hawaii —the largest of the group, where he remained
to recruit for a couple of months. The natives were friendly for a time, but
afterwards bad feeling sprang up. On the 4th February, 1779, the ships sailed
away from Hawaii, Captain Cook’s design being to explore other islands of the
group before starting again for the north ; but bad weather coming on, the
vessels were unfortunately compelled to return to their anchorage at Hawaii on
the 10th. The natives, not liking the return of the ships, became trouble-
some. On the 14th February—just 100 years ago—Cook landed to get King
Kariopoo as a hostage. Trouble ensued, and Captain Cook was killed, aged
51. Thus fell this daring and resolute Englishman, to whom might well be
applied the description given by Horace of the man who first tempted the perils
of the sea and defied the fury of the winds :
“ Illi robur et aes triplex
Circa pectus erat.”
(Hear, hear.) What this stout-hearted man did for his own country, and for
the world outside, in the last ten years of his life was enough for many a life-
time, and may be briefly summed up as follows : —He sailed three times round
the world. He discovered the Society Islands, the Sandwich Islands, the Friendly
Islands, the New Hebrides, and almost numberless small islands in the South
Pacific. He added greatly to our knowledge of New Zealand and Van Diemen’s
Land. He discovered and explored the eastern coast of Australia for over
2,000 miles. He resolved the great problem of a southern continent; and
though he failed to find a north-east passage, his explorations contributed
greatly to our acquaintance with that part of the world and its inhabitants. In
the course of these voyages he discovered and adopted a system for preserving
the health of seamen during long sojourns at sea, which will transmit his name
to future ages amongst the friends and benefactors of mankind. (Cheers.)
Having thus glanced at Cook’s life and services, a few remarks as to his general
character will not be out of place. In estimating this we have, however, no


world, which occupied over three years, he lost only one man
materials to work upon but his public actions ; for although he was married and
had children, we look in vain for those peeps into the inner domestic life of the
man which would have been so intensely interesting. His life had been almost
entirely spent in active toil afloat, and of the short intervals passed on shore
with his family while preparing for his several voyages, no record whatever has
been preserved to us. But his character as illustrated by his public life stands
out clear and bright, and teaches us lessons which all here may take to heart
with advantage. The first feature that strikes one on reading his life and
journal is the intense earnestness and perseverance of the man. His leading
principle through life appears to have been, ‘ Whatsoever thy hand findeth to
do, do it with thy might ’; for no matter the task upon which he was at any
time engaged, whether trivial or important, pleasant or otherwise, he appears to
have thrown himself into it with his whole heart and soul; and he had the rare
faculty of concentrating all his energies for the discharge of immediate duties
without weakening them by dreaming of the future. It is to this quality of
earnestness, combined with patient, plodding, persevering industry, that we can
trace Cook’s extraordinary rise through a series of gradations from the position
of an untutored apprentice boy in a collier to that of a naval officer of high rank,
entrusted with important and honorable commands. (Cheers.) Cook was dis-
tinguished also by unaffected simplicity of manner and unobtrusive modesty.
He was never ashamed of his origin or antecedents, and always entertained a
moderate estimate of his own ability and merit. How characteristic are his
words at the close of the preface to the narrative of his second voyage, when he
asks his readers to excuse inaccuracies of style by remembering that the work
‘is the production of a man who had not had the advantage of much school
education, but who had been constantly at sea from his youth; and
who though he had with the assistance of a few good friends passed
through all the stations belonging to a seaman, from an apprentice boy in the
coal trade to a Post Captain in the Royal Navy, had had no opportunity
of cultivating letters.’ He adds, that after this account of himself he
hopes the public will * consider him as a plain man, zealously exerting
himself in the service of his country, and determined to give the best account he
is able of his proceedings.’ (Hear, hear.) Cook possessed also, in an eminent
degree, other qualifications especially valuable in one entrusted with the command
of expeditions of discovery—such as courage, fortitude, patience, self-denial, and
resource; whilst in the two great elements of all social virtue —respect for the
rights of others, and sympathy for the sufferings of others—he has scarcely ever
been surpassed. (Hear, hear.) These latter qualities were especially observable
in his constant solicitude for the health and comfort and amusement of those
under his charge, and in the considerate humanity invariably shown by him
towards the natives with whom he came in contact. As illustrating his benevo-
lent watchfulness over the welfare of his ship’s company, I need only mention
that the system introduced by him for the preservation of the health of seamen
during long voyages proved so efficacious that in his second voyage round the
by illness out of


the 113 of which his company consisted. (Applause.) So too, with reference
to the natives with whom he came in contact —he always treated them with the
utmost consideration. So great was the confidence with which he inspired them
that on one occasion, when he complained to a chief of a theft that had been
committed by some of the natives, the chief came on board Captain Cook’s ship,
in spite of the vigorous opposition of all his own people, and placed himself in
Captain Cook’s power as a pledge that the articles should be returned —which
they were. (Hear, hear.) Not only did Captain Cook pay most scrupulously
for every article that was required for the use of the ships—even water and every
stick that was cut down in their woods—and ask formal permission to take them,
but he insisted also upon all his people treating the natives with the same con-
sideration ; and he punished very severely any instance of cheating or violence
on the part of his own people towards the natives. On one occasion some of
his crew robbed a native plantation, for which they were duly tied up and got a
dozen lashes. One of the culprits contended that there was no harm in robbing
a native plantation, though it was very wrong for a native to steal from a
European. But Cook marked his sense of such a view of reciprocity by giving
the propounder of it an extra half-dozen. (Laughter.) Again, when the savages
in New Guinea forcibly opposed his landing, and the ship’s officers, provoked
at the opposition, endeavoured to persuade Cook to send an armed party on
shore to cut down their cocoanut trees for the fruit, Cook replied that as
cocoanuts were not necessaries of life, but only luxuries, he would not do so
cruel and unjust an act. In short, Cook throughout all his dealings with the
natives, spread over a period of ten years, invariably showed himself to be a
just, humane, and considerate man ; and his whole conduct towards them was
eminently marked by the one great principle of doing to others as he would be
done by. I hope that Australians will, in this respect, be careful to follow in
the footsteps of the great discoverer, and that in their intercourse with inferior
races they too will strive to show their superiority by adopting the same
beneficent rule of conduct which it is always, I fear, less easy to practice than
to preach. (Applause.) And now, although but little more than a century
has passed away since the great navigator sailed on an autumn day in May
past the Sydney Heads in the little ‘ Endeavour,’ what a marvellous
change has since then taken place ! The condition of the whole world has
in that period been transformed, mainly through the increased application
of science to social life; but in no part of the globe has this transformation
been more complete and striking than it has in Australia. Cook found
this land a desolate waste, inhabited only by a few naked and hostile savages,
and what is the prospect which meets the eye to-day ? A country covered with
flocks and herds, dotted over with cornfields and vineyards, with busy cities and
peaceful hamlets, with churches and schools, with railways and telegraphs; the
harbours and coasts alive with steam-vessels and other craft, and the land the
happy home of over two millions of our own race, who are in the enjoyment of
civil and religious liberty to as full an extent as any people upon the face of the
earth, and who, under these invigorating influences, have already so far advanced


in all the outward and visible signs of civilization as to be about to collect this
year examples of the products of labour, art, and wealth, from every known
country in the world into an International Exhibition! (Cheers.) But, great as
has been the progress of Australia in the last hundred years, it is, I believe, as
nothing compared to what we may look for in the future. The resources of the
country are almost boundless, its capacity for expansion practically unlimited,
and at the next centenary of Cook’s discovery the population will probably not
be less than forty millions. Such a prospect is almost dazzling, but at the same
time it gives rise to reflections which are not altogether free from anxiety; for
it is impossible for any thoughtful mind to contemplate the future of this land
without perceiving that there are difficulties to be encountered which it will tax
all your wisdom and prudence and fairness to surmount. You have the problem
before you how to provide for the homestead settlement of this vast country
without giving rise to class animosities, and without stimulating unduly the
isolation of individual families, which would result in the deterioration of the
rising generation. You will have to adjust too the relations between capital and
labour with fairness to each, both being essential factors in the continued
development and prosperity of the country. (Hear, hear.) You will some day,
unless one-half of this great continent is to remain for ever a waste, have to face
the question of the colonization and cultivation of tropical Australia, which can
I believe only be accomplished by tropical labour of some kind under European
supervision. You have yet to establish that parliamentary government —a
machine of the most exquisite delicacy—can be made a permanent success with
a Legislature formed upon the strict principles of popular representation—and
that the checks and safeguards of our mixed and nicely balanced Constitution
can withstand the predominating influence and encroaching tendency of universal
suffrage. You will have some day, and I hope before long, to provide for the
federation of the Australian provinces into one Dominion. (Applause.) And,
above all, to arrange eventually for that closer political association with the
Mother Country which will admit of many millions of self-governing Anglo-
Saxons at the antipodes advancing in national life, while still remaining an
integral portion of the Empire of which it is now their pride and privilege to
form a part. (Loud cheers.) These and other problems of a similar character
will have to be worked out in the future; and I can only repeat the conviction
which I have before expressed, that the key to their successful solution depends
entirely upon the intellectual clearness and moral worth of the individual citizen.
One of the greatest of living constitutional authorities has observed that ‘it
is a great truth, which cannot be too constantly borne in mind, that the
success of all free Constitutions depends far less on their particular form
than on the spirit and public virtue of the people to be governed by them.
When a strong sense of public duty, respect for the constituted authorities
and for the law, and a high standard of political right and wrong prevail
in a nation, even very defective institutions will produce the fruits of good
government; while with a people of an opposite character the best Con-
stitution which the wit of man could devise would fail to prevent the worst


abuses, and to guard against the ultimate establishment of tyranny in the
hands of a mob, of an oligarchy, or of a single despot.’ It becomes,
therefore, of the utmost importance that the rising generation here should be
brought up to admire and imitate true nobility of character; and it would, I
believe, be impossible to set before them as an example a higher human standard
than that of the earnest, modest, brave, self-denying, just, humane, and God-
fearing man to whose enterprize we owe the discovery of this land, and to whose
memory a statue is this day about to be unveiled in our midst. (Cheers.) It
is, I think, peculiarly fitting, having regard to Cook’s identity with the masses
of the English nation, that the idea of a statue of the great navigator should
have originated not with the Government or any scientific society but with the
people of this Colony themselves. (Hear, hear.) A monument of the kind
cannot in any degree enhance the reputation of Captain Cook, whose name and
fame will be remembered so long as the English language and history shall con-
tinue in the earth. (Cheers.) But such a statue is creditable to ourselves, as
marking our admiration of the character and services of the man and our grati-
tude for the benefits which his discoveries have conferred, not only on Australia
but also on the world at large. It will serve also to bring home to all the lesson
that great deeds and a great reputation can be achieved by those in the humblest
station, and with the slenderest opportunities. There is scarcely a lad born
in this country who has not within his reach educational advantages superior to
those which were available to the poor Yorkshire peasant boy ; and I hope that
the history of his early life may not be thrown away upon the young, but that
many a child in the future will learn at the foot of this statue how a faithful,
patient, cheerful attention to the details of daily duty, however monotonous and
commonplace, will bring its own reward, and may perchance, as in the case of
James Cook, leave behind a noble and imperishable memory.’ (Continued
applause.)
Continued applause succeeded His Excellency’s speech, and when it had
subsided he rose and said : “In the name of the people of New South Wales, I
now direct that the statue be unveiled.”
Thereupon the men stationed near the statue for the purpose of unveiling
it—consisting of two sailors from the Naval Brigade, two Royal marines, and
two seamen of the Royal Navy—pulled a cord attached to the flag veiling the
statue, unfurling it and running it up to the peak of a neighbouring flagstaff,
thus exposing to the admiring gaze of the multitude the statue in all its beauty.
A volley of cheers rent the air, the joy-bells of St. Mary’s Roman Catholic
Cathedral close by rung out a merry peal, and again rounds of cheers were
given—in honor of the event, of Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen, of His
Excellency the Governor, of Lady Robinson, and of the Lady Mayoress and
the ladies of the Colony. The National Anthem was then rendered by the united
bands and choirs. At its conclusion the ceremony terminated, the various bodies
forming rank and marching away in quick time to the lively strains of their


THE * ENDEAVOUR” LAID UP IN THE ENDEAVOUR RIVER.
[Extract from Lieutenant Cook's Voyage round the World.]
“At 8 o’clock, it being high-water, I hauled her bow close ashore; but kept her stern afloat, because I was afraid of neaping her.”
Sydney: Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lB73
respective bands, while the multitude pressed forward to obtain a closer view of
the statue and admire its noble proportions, and the shades of evening had closed
in before the crowd finally dispersed.
Copies of poems by Henry Halloran, Esq., C.M.G., on “ The Discovery
of Eastern Australia,” and on “The Unveiling of the Captain Cook Statue,”
were distributed on the ground.


i
H r - - —— • —
L
✓
V
.
•
*
»
•
/
%
•
•
'
■




UNVEILING OF THE COOK STATUE.
Procession ant!
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY, 1879.
ORDER OF PROCESSION:
MOUNTED POLICE.
BAND OF H.M.S. “WOLVERENE.”
SAILORS AND MARINES FROM SQUADRON.
MILITARY BAND.
N. S. W. ARTILLERY AND VOLUNTEERS.
NAVAL BRIGADE.
INSURANCE COMPANIES’ FIRE BRIGADE.
SYDNEY VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANY, No. 2.
VOLUNTEER FIRE BRIGADE, No. 3.
WOOLLAHRA VOLUNTEER FIRE BRIGADE.
GRAND UNITED ORDER OF ODDFELLOWS.
ANCIENT ORDER OF FORESTERS.
MANCHESTER UNITY INDEPENDENT ORDER OF ODDFELLOWS.
HOLY CATHOLIC GUILD, ST. MARY AND ST. JOSEPH.
PROTESTANT ALLIANCE FRIENDLY SOCIETY.
SHIPWRIGHTS’ PROVIDENT UNION.
NATION AT. DIVISION SONS OF TEMPERANCE OF AUSTRALIA.
UNITED ANCIENT ORDER OF DRUIDS.
HIBERNIAN AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC BENEFIT SOCIETY.
INDEPENDENT ORDER OF RECHABITES. ,
SYDNEY MARINE BENEFIT SOCIETY.
LOYAL ORANGE FRIENDLY BENEFIT SOCIETY.
INDEPENDENT ORDER OF ODDFELLOWS.
INDEPENDENT ORDER OF GOOD TEMPLARS.
OPERATIVE STONEMASONS’ SOCIETY.
UNITED SYDNEY PLASTERER S’ ASSOCIATION.
CATHOLIC MUTUAL IMPROVEMENT SOCIETY.
PROGRAMME OF PROCEEDINGS.
The Friendly Societies and other public bodies taking part in the Procession on foot, will assemble at 2‘45 p.m. in
the open space in the Outer Domain, adjoining the Cricket Ground, from whence the order of procession will be
formed six abreast.
The Societies will march in the order stated above, the route to be by the Avenue leading to Sir Richard
Bourke’s Statue, thence by Macquarie-street North, Bridge, George, and Park Streets, halting at the Town Hall to
accompany the Right Worshipful the Mayor and Aldermen to the ground.
The Friendly Societies and other public bodies will enter Hyde Park by the steps north of Park-street to the
enclosure assigned, where they will take up position as arranged. »
No members of public bodies or societies taking part in the procession will be admitted to the reserved space
in Hyde Park unless wearing their society badges.
Except such persons as are officially engaged in the Ceremonial (and Naval or Military Officers in uniform), no
one will be admitted to the Statue Enclosure without an Admission Card.
Carriages setting down ladies or gentlemen having tickets of admission to the stands to drive by way of
College-street from the south, setting down at entrance steps to Hyde Park opposite Museum ; then to drive away
by William-street, taking up positions to stand on the north side of that street, horses’ heads west.
A Guard of Honor will be furnished by the Artillery, and be stationed at the gate of the enclosure, to receive
the Governor at 4'30 v _ . .
The Artillery, the Guard of Honor excepted, will, with the Marines, take up position within the semi-circle
behind the Statue. The Volunteers will be ranged along the fence south of Park-street, facing the Statue.
The Military Band, with the Bands of the “Wolverene” and Naval Brigade, will be placed in front of the
Volunteers, and immediately behind the school children.
The Sailors of the Squadron will be placed in front of Stand B (east of the Statue), and the Naval Brigade
in front of Stand A (west of the Statue.) *
On the Governor’s reception by the Statue Committee within the enclosure, the Bands will play God save
the Queen.” The School Children and Choristers will sing “ Rule Britannia,” accompanied by the Artillery Band.
His Excellency will then deliver an Address.
On its conclusion he will direct the unveiling of the Statue, which will be performed by two Sailors and
two Marines from one of Her Majesty’s Ships, and two members of the Naval Brigade.
Cheers will be given for the Queen, for the Governor, and for the Royal Navy ; —after which the School
Children and Choristers, accompanied as before, will sing the National Anthem.
The Ceremonial being thus concluded, the Bands will, on the Governor taking his departure, play “God
save the Queen,” and the assemblage will disperse.
R. B. SMITH, Hon. Sec,
1


