

Roll of [?]nour
PALIAMENT
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES






Unbeiling of Roll of Honor
OF
Members and Staff
OF THE
State Parliament of New South Wales.
Wednesday, 27th February, 1918.


THE PROCEEDINGS.
Wednesday, 27th February, 1918.
1. Hon. Members and the Staff of both Houses assembled
in the Vestibule at 5.45 p.m, in response to an invitation
by the Honorables the President and Speaker.
2. Addresses were delivered by the President (The Hon.
Fred Flowers, M.L.C.), The Speaker (The Hon.
John J. Cohen, M.L.A.), The Premier (The Hon.
W. A. Holman, M.L.A.), The Solicitor-General and
Minister of Justice (The Hon. John Garland, M.L.C.),
and the Leader of the Opposition (John Storey,
Esq., M.L.A.).
3. The President and Speaker, at the invitation of the
Premier, unveiled the Roll of Honor by drawing aside
the Blue Australian Ensigns with which it had been
covered.
4. The Police Band, which was in attendance, rendered the
National Anthem, and the proceedings terminated.


“ tfje gUtar of tfjeir Country's goob tfjey laib
tfje intense of tfjeir fortunes anb tfjeir fibes.”


Unbeiling
OF
Roll of Honor.
The PRESIDENT: Gentlemen, we are here to-day
to take part in a simple ceremony —the unveiling of the
Roll of Honor of a number of men associated with both
Houses of Parliament, and with the officers and staff of
Parliament House itself, who
have served their country at the
front. When you see the flags
drawn aside, I think your im-
pression will be that this board
is a very modest way of showing
our appreciation of the grand
fellows whose names are in-
scribed upon it. I desire to
explain that whilst it is very
modest, it is only a temporary
arrangement, until such time as something of a more
substantial character can be devised to perpetuate the
names of those who have given their services in the
interest of their country. I do not think we need feel
ashamed of the number of those who have gone to the
front, when compared with the Honor Roll of other
Houses of Parliament in the Commonwealth, and even


the Commonwealth Parliament itself. In point of
numbers, I think we take pride of place. Words are
hardly sufficient to express one’s feelings, especially in
view of what we have gone through during the last
four years, the bitterness of feeling some of us have
experienced, and the sadness of some of the results of
this war. I feel personally, when I meet a soldier in
the street who has returned from the front, and when
I read of the men whose names are enrolled upon the
Boards of Honor which are being erected in different
parts of the State, that they have done me a personal
service. I view it as an individual matter. I say to
myself, “ These men have given up the comfort of
their homes ; some of them have left their wives and
children behind at the call of duty.” Gentlemen, that
call of duty is in the blood of men, and if it should
appear from this Honor Roll that we have sent less
men from the Legislative Council than have gone from
the Legislative Assembly, it is not because the spirit,
the determination, or the will are not there, it is because
our age has debarred us from going. There is one
thing in connection with this war for which I am sorry :
It is that, so far as I am concerned, it came twenty
years too late. I say again, I feel that every soldier
who has gone to the front has gone to protect, not
his own interests, but to secure my happiness, freedom,
and liberty to live as I want to live, under a democracy,
and to mould my own political and social destiny as I
desire. And it seems very little, after all. But we feel
we are justified in perpetuating their names as those
of men who have gone to the front with a determina-
tion to uphold that liberty which all true Britishers and


Australians believe is essential for our happiness and our
good. Let me say that, as a Britisher and an Australian,
I would rather die under the British flag than live in
luxury and pleasure under the German flag.
The SPEAKER : Mr. President, Mr. Premier, and
Gentlemen : This commemorative ceremony is an incident
unique in connection with the Parliament of New South
Wales. It is desired to erect an appropriate and artistically
designed temporary memorial,
to be eventually superseded by
a mural tablet, to perpetuate the
names of the members of the
Legislature, and officials of the
various parliamentary depart-
ments, who voluntarily responded
to the call to arms, and enlisted
to fight for the maintenance of
the British Empire. The senti-
ment that must fill our minds
to-day is a deep sense of patriotism —the love and
devotion to one’s country—which must be regarded as
the hall-mark of character in the standard of nationhood.
In that spirit our friends enlisted under the British Hag
to fight for the destiny which it symbolises : the right to
live, to think, to aspire, and to act in an atmosphere of
the greatest freedom and safety, thus ensuring the best
in life, not only for us, but for all other free peoples.
Two members of the Legislative Assembly, very early in
the struggle, suffered the supreme sacrifice on the hills
of Gallipoli, and as a tribute to their memory, their
patriotism, and their gallant services a memorial has


been placed on the walls of our Legislative Assembly
Chamber. That tribute should inspire us all to emulate
their spirit of loyalty, and to do our utmost in helping
the Allies to the final victory, which can be regarded as
the only sure harbinger of a stable and enduring peace.
The Members of the Legislative Council whose names
are also inscribed served with distinction in the Australian
Army Medical Corps, and have now returned, unharmed,
I am glad to say, to resume their legislative duties.
Some of the others have been reported wounded, and
some have suffered in other respects ; but I am pleased
to say that most of them are now able to resume their
official duties. There yet remain several Members of
Parliament and officials who, with their respective units,
are upholding the honor of Australia with characteristic
thoroughness. The parliamentary contingent has shared
in the daring exploits which have made renown for
Australia, both in the eastern and the western theatres of
the war. I think it was Mr. Asquith who said that, in
its firm resolve to see this war through to a successfid
termination, the British Empire had never displayed a
greater and more effective co-operation of all sections of
the community. And it is by their united efforts, and by
their undivided faith, that this strugglewill be persevered
in until final victory is attained, resulting in the enthrone-
ment of the sovereignty of right. When the history of
this great war comes to be written, the part played by the
Australians, who sacrificed everything in obedience to
their country’s call, should instil in the lives of the people
a higher standard of nationality, and the story of their
heroic deeds will form an epic for the inspiration of our
countrymen in this and future generations.


Mr. HOLMAN : Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, and
Gentlemen : I shall add only a very few sentences to the
eloquent remarks which have fallen from the President
and the Speaker. No men in our parliamentary life have
more right to speak than the
President of the Legislative
Council and our Speaker ; no
men have made more readily the
full measure of sacrifice, and I
must confess I feel some pre-
sumption in speaking after Mr.
Flowers and Mr. Cohen. I feel,
too, that my friend the leader of
the Opposition, who is to follow
me, has given proof of his
devotion and patriotism such as no mere words can
ever furnish. 1 feel some diffidence in finding myself
alongside of him in this ceremony. However, I shall
take advantage of the fact to ask this : Does not an
occasion like this appeal to the hearts of all of us on the
question of the necessity for complete national unity?
Should we not remember the terrible emergency with
which we are now confronted, and should we not close
up our ranks ? Ido not say let us forget differences, but
for the time being let us suspend them, and ignore them
in order to unitedly overcome the general foe, and then,
under happier circumstances, resume the discussion of
those differences which divide us to-day. This is not an
occasion for us to express our personal opinion on these
matters. I can only say, in the presence of the leader of
the Opposition, whose presence and co-operation in this
little ceremony is welcomed by all, whose right to be


here is recognised by all, for it is doubly and trebly
earned, that the example set us by those whose names
are inscribed on this tablet will, I believe, act as an
example which will, I hope, be followed by all sections
of the community.
Mr. GARLAND : Mr. President, Mr. Speaker,
Mr. Holman, and Gentlemen : I feel on an occasion like
this that the call for the sinking of every difference, and
the eoncentration of all effort to unite our strength in
doing what we can to support
the cause for which these men,
whose names are there enshrined,
fought, and for which some of
them died, is an overwhelming
call at the present moment.
These men left us, not as pro-
fessional soldiers, not as con-
scripts ; they were men who,
from their age and position,
might reasonably have found an
excuse for not going ; but they went to fight for England
and the Empire, and all it stood for, because England’s
cause was just. Two of them are members of our
Mouse. Many of us are, as the President has pointed
out, by reason of our age, debarred from doing that we
would like to do. But while the members of our House
have not been able to go in large numbers, their sons
have gone in very large numbers, and when I tell you
that eleven sons of members of our House have given
their lives for Empire, I think it will be seen that the
fighting spirit is not dead in the Chamber I represent. I


regard this occasion as a memorable one. Those names
are enshrined in our hearts ; for those who are dead, we
mourn ; all of them we honor, respect, and revere.
Mr. JOHN STOREY : Upon such an occasion as
this words fail me to properly express my feelings ; but
however imperfectly I may do so, I desire to say that 1
join with the gentlemen who have preceded me in all that
they have said. There is very
little that 1 can add, but I may
be permitted to say that a
number of those whose names
are on this Roll of Honor have
for years been friends of mine,
and 1 feel overwhelmed in
making reference to them at the
thought of all they have given
in their desire to help their
country. Mr. led Larkin, if I
may be permitted to particularise, was an old and dear
friend of mine, and I well remember at the time he
enlisted putting a question to him, as to why he was
anxious to go so early. As hon. members know, it was
quite early in the war when Mr. Larkin enlisted. He
said to me, “Storey, I come of a fighting family.
England is at war, and right or wrong I am going to
take my part.” I shall never forget his words. As most
hon. members know, Mr. Larkin was a great sport,
and the sentiment expressed just what we knew of the
man. For that reason, when I speak of him I always
feel intensely sorry. The late Colonel Braund was only
a new member of the House of which I am a member,


but we know what a gentleman and keen fighter he
was, and when he enlisted we well remember how
proud we all were. I speak of these two gentlemen
because they were immediately associated with us as
members of the Legislative Assembly, and were,
perhaps, better known to us personally than some of
the others whose names appear on the Honor Roll.
I would say, in conclusion, that I do not think there
are any of us who do not feel proud that these men
have done their part. Some of us may feel sorry
that we have not done ours. lam not going to say
just how old I am, but I am just a little past the age
which has been fixed for active military service. I feel
that the sentiment expressed by the Solicitor-General is
one that is shared by us all. This country, to me, stands
out above all others, because of the fact that it enables
men like myself to enter Parliament, and occupy, if their
ability is sufficient, some of the highest positions the
country can offer, and a country in which men can do
that ought to be at least as well worth fighting for as a
country such as Germany. Our views may differ widely
on political subjects, but I think we can all join here this
day in perpetuating the memories of men who have
shown that they were willing to give up their lives in
seeking to preserve the liberty of their country.
Mr. HOLMAN : On behalf of all, I will now invite
Mr. President and Mr. Speaker to unveil the memorial.
[The Roll of Honor was then unveiled by the
President and the Speaker.]




“ tfje gltar of tfjeir Country’* goob tfjep laib
tfje intense of tfjeir fortune* anb ttieir


1. ADDRESSES.
The President
(The Hon. Fred. Flowers, M.L.C.)
The Speaker
(The Hon. John J. Cohen, M.L.A.)
The Premier
(The Hon. W. A. Holman, M.L.A.)
The Solicitor-General and Minister of Justice
(The Hon. John Garland, M.L.C.)
The Leader of the Opposition
(Mr. John Storey, M.L.A.)
2. THE UNVEILING.
3. THE NATIONAL ANTHEM.




SYDNEY;
WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
191 8.
2296:
