

EesoseJ l>y
Tlk® Iliateffigeiac® & Tourist IBwemi,
Caim&rr ®ff
Qweeia & Georg® Stiresfts, Brlftlb&i&e.


tH\ r -h


A Woman’s Journey
Through Tropical Queensland
To those charming people—the men and women
of the North.
Hamilton Reach, Brisbane River.
ONE sunny afternoon in June we boarded a nice quiet
ship, and steamed lazily out of the Brisbane River.
In June the trip “ Up North ” begins with the sun,
ends with the sun, and the sun continues throughout.
You will see men dozing in it hour after hour, day
after day, on the steamer’s decks, and women coiled up
contentedly like cats. There’s a look on the invalid’s face
that touches one —it’s the gratitude of a tired human heart
to its Maker for His goodness and His sun.


Weavy-faced and hopeless does the invalid first look
upon that glorious sun; then, as we approach and finally
enter the tropics, one sees an expression of peace and rest
steal over the face, and gradually, as its wonderful warmth
penetrates to the very soul of the invalid, Happiness.
One then reflects how little is necessary to make some
souls happy. For that poor man —Warmth and Sunshine —
which make the tiniest kitten happy. So many require
thousands—tens of thousands —of pounds to bring them
Happiness; whilst others hunger and thirst after public
opinion. If it be in their
favour they are Happy. Some
few would
reach the highest
Cape
Moreton.
happiness did they but own —a heart. Someone else’s. But
these particular searchers after Happiness are but few and
oftentimes very youthful, though it is said of them that they
make the world go round.
Standing on the port side of the ship, we had a glimpse
of the first of many delightful sunsets. This one beckoned
us and our ship to the pleasantest of far beyonds, cautioning
us to leave behind in the old workaday world all the greys


and drabs of life; all tiresome letters, worrying wires, and
chattering people. For ahead of us was a whole six days’
delightful trip on blue waters and under blue sides—and
best of all the lazy drifting of a slumberous mind. And
so we passed on to the Brisbane Heads, and on to the
warmth and gorgeous colouring of the North.
The wonderful, magic North, with its tropical flowers,
its luscious fruits, and delightful people. How is it directly
one passes Cape Capricorn that the calm, wonderful Pacific
deepens the blue of its waters? It’s the same lovely Pacific
that washes the cpuet east coast of Tasmania, the same
smiling Pacific that entices Coogee surf-bathers—but its
“ Up North ” in the tropics that the Pacific is at her loveliest.
Inside the Reef that blue Pacific is like a woman in her
sweetest mood. There she’s a bewitching, fascinating beauty,
and her lovers are the Sons of the North. In some way one
is reminded of Boake’s “ Desiree ”
Will she spring with a blush from the arms of Dawn,
When the sleepy songsters prune their dewy vestments on bush
and thorn,
And the jovial magpie winds his horn
In sweet reveille to the lasy morn,
And the sun comes all too soon.
Will she come with him from the farthest rim, of the blue
Pacific Sea?
But how shall I know my lady? and by what token will she
know me?
A sun—a blue vault—a deck chair, a book of verse, and
there isn’t room to envy even Omar Khayyam. One perfect
day we lay out of Mackay with the little tender loading and


unloading alongside us. Just a few miles away inland is
the town of Mackay, busy and important with its sugar
mills and plantations.
Rest cure.”
But we don’t want to go anywhere where there’s a
semblance of business or bustle. This ocean, this sky, this
sun —are all three responsible for such laziness. Still, that
green island over there, covered with wild breadfruit-trees
and hedged with mangrove, which the chart declares to be
“ Flat Top ” Island, is inviting. The captain, scandalised at
our Southern laziness, lowered a boat and pushed us off to
“ Flat Top.”
More interesting than the island were the island-
dwellers, the keepers of the lighthouse. The man’s wife told
me she’d lived there for thirty years—thirty years out of the
world, think of it—and had reared a family of something
like twelve or thirteen on the island. I looked and marvelled
at these girls who had never been elsewhere save to another


lighthouse island, or across to the ship we came from, or
perhaps even into Mackay for a few days. They were
happy, contented, and healthy; and although our hostess
told me her husband could have many times been moved
nearer civilisation and, in addition, have attained promotion,
still they preferred their orignal island—the home out there
on the Pacific that she had come to as a bride; picturesque
“ Flat Top,” where her first-born first saw the light, and




where in the succeeding years so many little feet had
pattered over the green swarth. In her eyes it was the only
island in the world. Happy woman, happy island-dwellers!
How wise they; how foolish we!
Slowly we wended our way back against the tide. Here
on this island was ample food for reflection. I can still see
that kindly woman waving to us as our boat pulled off; her
sons and daughters grouped about her, their fresh innocent
faces wreathed in smiles. What a red-letter day it was for
them when one of the big ships lying out there sent some
Whiling the time at Sea —Deck Billiards.
passengers across. How they discussed them afterwards,
specially the Southerners, whose homes were in the large
cities of Sydney or Melbourne. Whilst we lunched there
that day on the grass, I saw one girl's eyes rove wondering
and critically round the picknickers’ faces. On some they
lingered, especially on one handsome American’s—on a


woman whose garments whispered Paris they were riveted
quite wistfully. How I did wonder about that girl! She
was young —not more than twenty-one —pretty, exquisite
skin, and fawn-like eyes. I wondered if she too would wed
an island-dweller and continue living there for the rest of
her life, or if some day her own particular ship would come
in, just as ours had, bringing someone who would carry her
off to cities and life. Would he be a bronzed-faced, slender-
limbed Son of the North, or would he be a fashionable
gentleman from the crowded South, or would he come afar
off from over the seas?
And whilst wondering what her life would be, I thought
on what it was then. Did the beautiful blue Pacific and the
wide blue sky, and the breadfruit-trees, the palms and
mangroves, make up all her world, or was there some
mysterious mirage for her over there on the horizon in
which she saw life —or did her mind by any cbance dwell
on Australia’s future, as did the lighthouse keeper’s? I saw
him corner the politician of the party, and, in a long, heated
argument, endeavour to give convincing proofs as to the
necessity for a White Australia. They told us it would
probably be one of the happiest days in the year for our
host. Politics was a hobby with him, and seldom did he
secure a real live politician to discuss them with.
Some days later the steamer threads her way through
the wonderful maze of islands forming the Whitsunday
Passage. The name brings to one’s mind its discoverer,
Captain Cook. What an impression it must have made on
those men who saw it for the first time, and how the soul
of the explorer would delight in every fresh group of palm-






covered islands at every twist and turn of the good ship
“ Endeavour ”! Cook’s voyages are delightful reading, and
never until I did that Northern trip did I enter into the
feeling of them.
Away in there is Bowen, which possesses the most
beautiful natural harbour in the whole of Australia, that is,
of course, after Sydney. But our steamer only allows us
close enough to see through our glasses the palms waving
in the distance.
View on Beach, Bowen.
One morning I awakened early and, looking through
my port, saw what to my sleepy eyes looked like a charming
Mediterranean town. It was Townsville. I know it is the
way of tourists to abuse Townsville as being unfit for white
people. The heat and excessively dusty walk from the ship
gives them that impression, and probably you will accuse me
of being a slave to my rose-coloured spectacles, since I have
likened Townsville to a Mediterranean town. True it is that,


like other tourists, I felt it passing warm the day we landed
in Townsville, and certain it is that I too, like many another
tourist, experienced with much bitterness Dust, wonderful,
amazing Dust; and still withal there are those who will
agree with me that never outside the Mediterranean did they
ever see such blue sky and water. We went to the side of
Castle Hill that bangs so threateningly over Townsville, and


there did our eyes feast. What a view! We all three again
declared it might be the shores of the Mediterranean, if
only the little zinc roofs were red. The Pacific smiled
lazily at us, insinuating
that comparisons were
odious.
-J '
Si
Magnetic Island, at
Townsville’s front door,
so to speak, added to the
picture. Magnetic Island
has a fascination all its
own. Is it because of
what Cook says in his
diary that we fancy
<?v'- :
Magnetic Island
■Motor Launch Landing Jetty.
there’s some mysterious elfish “ Little People ” underneath
who are playing pranks on us humans? One’s fancy sees
them skimming over the decks, Puck-like, and worrying the
very “ soulcases ” out of the compasses.
At Townsville one seems to first realise and understand
the meaning of “The Tropics.” There one sees one’s
countrymen and women with the eyes of the stranger. The
men are slender enough, full-blooded and strong, and
possessed of a vigour one seldom meets with in the
Southerner. Nothing seems to tire them, nothing bores
them. They judge everything from an Australian stand-
point, not from the “ Townsville ” one. To them, Mel-
bourne, Sydney, Hobart, Brisbane, Adelaide, and Perth are
all the same. They distinguish merely between North and
South, East and West —of Australia.




The women are soft and languid, and one has a faint
suspicion they are fanning themselves all day. They suggest
the Sydney woman, just as that wonderful hotel facing the
sea calls to one’s mind the Hotel Australia, but the Towns-
ville Hotel, or rather those who patronise it, simply teem
with interest to the Southerner. Surely “ The Queen’s” is
the most cosmopolitan hotel in Australia. There one meets
many nationalities: Japanese and Chinese from the North,
Englishmen going South, Parisiennes and Italians who have
The Queen’s, Townsville.
come by way of the islands. In the marvellously comfort-
able lounge there is a veritable babel of tongues, and one
hears German and French quite as often as English. There’s
a lovely promenade under palms and beneath trees that look
like huge Moreton Bay figs, though I don’t know what their
tropical name is. Away out there in the distance of blue


water the ship’s course is marked out for her, and when you
ascend Castle Hill, if it's a clear, glorious day, you’ll see that
the topmost peak of Hinchinbrook beckons.
On our way
there we pass the
Palm Islands, and
they are just as
their name signi-
fies : Veritable
bowers of palms,
and no one but
screeching cocka-
toos and parrots to
appreciate them. If
“ Hinchinbrook beckons.”
I were one of those wealthy Australians who are always
tearing off feverishly to India, the South Seas, or other
tropical regions, I’d head my yacht straight for the Palm
Islands. What a perfect six weeks one could put in—what
wonderful, beautiful, absolute rest, far removed from people
and closely allied to Nature.
I’m sure I would learn the call of every bird and could
put my hand on every nesting-place, and count every birdling
on the island. With what zest could one throw oneself into
Nature studies, and what a delightful change it would all be.
All impatient as we were to pass through the glorious,
much-talked-of Hinchinbrook Channel, still it was with
many regrets I saw the ship slip past the Palm Islands, and
many were the surmises as to how Nature would treat us.
We couldn’t see Hinchinbrook in the full tropical sun, for
he had retired behind the hills. We did hope to see it in


the after-glow, but, alas, Nature treated us shabbily, for she
veiled her beauties from us, and we saw her through a mist
—a fog—a drizzle.
Gradually, however,
towards the end of the pas-
sage the veil lifted, and as
the mist ascended to the
hills we had glimses of a
paradise, but, alas, like
Palm Islands, peopled only
by screeching white cocka-
toos. We watched them
flitting from tree to tree,
the while we envied them
Palm Islands,
Hinchinbrook Channel.
their home. Close to the water’s edge were one or two fishers
huts, so lonely-looking, but still enticing. Ever since I have
longed to see Hinchinbrook by the light of the moon; by
this time it has amounted to a craze, and even if I have to
charter a special boat and moon I’ll do it. Full moon, an
indigo sky, a warm tropical night with sweet scents and
Hinchinbrook.
We rushed through Cairns to that paradise of honey-
mooners —“ Kuranda.” Queenslanders talk long and loud
of their Barron Falls. For some reason, I am ashamed to
say, they did not make any marked impression on me. In
various guide and tourists’ books I read what that realistic
writer, Donald McDonald, thought of them, and other less
literary though equally notable Australians, such as Mr.
Austin Chapman, late Minister of Customs; and still, when
they opened out to our view, I was not enormously
impressed. In justice to myself, I must say that the Falls


were not at their fullest. But Kuranda I found delightful.
It is a restful and rather romantic little spot, up there in the
hills of Northern Queensland. In the summer I believe a
fierce sun scorches one all day, but at night comes the
gentlest and most soothing of breezes. Well do I remember
“ Hinchinbrook/’
that night at Kuranda. Though June and the depth of
winter in the rest of Australia, up there the nights were
soft and just sufficiently warm for one to sit outside on the
veranda without coats and in summer frocks. My bedroom
opened on to one of those wonderful broad terrace-like
Queensland verandas that prove the envy and delight of
every Southerner. The French windows were open all night
and through them came that delightful mountain air of
Kuranda. Once in the night I awakened at the wailing,
melancholy note of the curlew, and, unable to resist the
beauty of the night, I crept softly out on to the veranda.
Just at the back of the hills the moon was rising, the air was


like crystal, and involuntarily I shivered. Down below, at
my feet almost, ran the river. Tall mango-trees stood out
challengingly. Here and there a red hibiscus flamed, while
there was the usual mysterious scent of flowers. Tropical
flowers which somehow in the daytime I could never find.
Challenging the curlew now and then was a mopoke, an
unhappy bird that turned my beautiful, joyous night into
melancholy. I was vexed; but surely there is even a sadness
in the most beautiful things, and perhaps the poor old
mopoke ought not to have been blamed.
Kuranda..
In the morning we strolled down to the blacks’
mud camps. There was a brand new pickaninny, quite
unclothed, just as Nature made it, with its little body
shining like a bronze statue. We secured a snapshot of the
older children swimming. On the Sunday we stayed at
Kuranda. There was an excursion from the backblocks
through Kuranda into Cairns. I was particularly struck


with the fine healthy complexions of those babies and
children from up among the hills. Residents of Kuranda
told me that some aboard that train, who came away back
inland, had boarded it at five o’clock in the morning; it was
then seven o’clock in the evening, and many of them had


never seen the sea. Tne station-master told us that in order
to check or collect tickets the train had been pulled up in the
middle of the bush, where there was no escape —or, rather,
so much escape that even a black might be confounded.
Bathing in the Barron.
“ Kamerunga,” on the journey from Kuranda to Cairns;
it is one of the most instructive and interesting places in
Australia. It is a State Nursery, run with the idea of
keeping and encouraging the settler in Northern Queens-
land. There is no tropical plant or fruit one could name
that is not to be seen there. One of the most interesting to
me was the rubber-tree. To the casual observer, it is just an
ordinary tree one might see in any garden. The attendant
makes an incision, sap trickles forth, and after collecting
for a few minutes thickens. Apply it to your hands, and lo!


you have rubber straight away. It was explained to us that
there is some property in the human skin that has such an
effect on the sap of the rubber-tree, and by application of
the sap to a portion of the human body, it is at once trans-


ferred into an elastic substance —rubber. We saw many
wonderful vegetables and fruits. One is termed Monsteria
e
g
s
s*.
g
3
W
£
ft*
CO
V
o
c
s;
e
Si
delicwsa, which the chatelaine of Kamerunga told me pri-
vately quite excelled even its Latin name. She, by the way,


-1 ■)! '■
■KI -"'Am 1
Kfl l ' J
iM iy/frf'h '
J #.r r
Tfc || lit 1
mil * -; h %
*1 !}'■(:'.
in ■ >'
m -if'
M y'"| 4
m| ! P,f':
\ i: / i ’ s
Mf i V ( K;
W>- O \ °
VJ"I:
»< • ,1
V"ir *
J| p ■ i.' < »
Bffv ‘:ji’,/ «,
11 jfcji *
W* ’^7V,’.v< )
iJvk v/' »
■AMR -o' |
*1 ft *
tfJW 'i i .
RBI ;:mV |
.w i




was a charming little lady, who showed me those things
appealing most to a woman. She crumpled a leaf in her
hand, and behold, it was as though she had invited me to
partake of a most appetising curry there and then. Such
perfumed plants as these were in that garden; Sandalwood,
cinnamon, aniseed, &c. We photographed the renowned
avenue of palms, and carried away ready-to-wear rubber
bands as a memento of Kamerunga.
Barron Gorge.
Personally, I carried away the remembrance of a
charming little lady who lives away amongst the palms and
frangipanis—a rather lonely and cheerless existence, since
the director of Kamerunga is a traveller and a busy man;
but, nevertheless, this little lady has achieved contentment.
Cairns at last! to dream in and to laze in, for to me it
was more than ordinarily warm in Cairns. By the way,
never tell anyone in Cairns you feel it very hot, at least in
winter, for they are exceedingly sensitive people, those


Cairns folk, in regard to their winter climate any way, and
such an admission would be the height of clumsiness and
bad form, want of tact, and lots of other things on your part.
I love Cairns. There is a strange Eastern feeling about
it, and somehow, curiously, one thinks of Africa. Not the
Desert Africa Hitchens writes of, but Coastal North Africa.


We stayed there, at the Strand Hotel, which is built right
alongside, almost on to the Esplanade. On one side it looks
out on to gardens of palms and hibiscus. From another
side one gazes right out and across the Pacific again, and
the route the Eastern mail takes.


Our last night at Cairns we spent upon the wide inviting
balcony of the Strand, our faces and lounge chairs turned
seawards, and we talked right into the night. Our chief topic
was, I think, the destiny of Australia, for it was a subject
very dear to most of us there. We wondered would any of
us ever see the day
when this magnifi-
Up there, in the
very far North, is
Thursday Island,
Wharf at Cairns.
the home of a few whites and many brown people.
But withal there would be a certain charm about this little
island of lovely sunsets and with its quaint fleets of pearl
luggers, were it not for the fact that all joy is killed when
one reflects how
unpleasantly near
again. The North
of Queensland
seems so terribly
connected with the Cairns Wharf.
defence problem; perhaps it is for that reason the people of
the North, men and women, are such splendid Australians;
or may be that up there, in that seemingly boundless country,


they have more leisure than we of the South to think and
realise. The women I found just as keenly loyal as the men.
Cairns Saivmills.
Those women up North surprised me, and how sadly do the
women of the South compare mentally with them. I have
heard them discuss great questions of policy and empire up
Copper, Tin, and Merchandise, for Export, Cairns.
there, home policy and foreign policy, whilst a Southern
woman in a similar position would be talking frocks: and


millinery. Not that those Northern women were in the least
unwomanly. Many of them confessed to me how they
missed “ clothes ” in the essentially feminine sense, of course,
by which you will understand they did not go without
clothes. But, if I may dare to say such a thing, they were
nobler women for the want of “ clothes.” Having no hope
of attaining Fashion’s latest, and no occasion for them, if
they did not have them they are perforce compelled to turn
their thoughts to more serious things.
Atherton —A Load of Cedar
One woman I met has a holiday every year down South,
generally in Sydney. Knowing that her husband’s leave was
just a fortnight, I expressed surprise at her travelling so
far for just four or five days. She explained to me that
during those few days they, so she said, “ lived ”; Theatre
parties, music, dinners, suppers, and Clothes. How her eyes
glowed at the bare mention of the word! All the year she
lived for those few days. She laughed unbelievingly when


I suggested that some might, even did, find life, np here
in the North, away from the dinners and suppers and people,
and, yes, even from the “ clothes,” for the time being at any
rate, delightful. Candidly, I am afraid, shamefully afraid,
clothes or rather the want of them would weigh mostly with
me if I had to stay in the wilds for some years. It really is
a ghastly admission to make, but one becomes somewhat
resigned by reading about most town pleasures. Reading
fashion notes only incites a woman in the North to rebellion.
A Train Load of Cedar Logs, Atherton
But to return to the balcony at Cairns. We began to
talk opium. One of the party, a high official, gratified my
woman’s curiosity with the sight of a small tin containing
the magic, a tiny little tin of black sugary-looking stuff, with
a nauseating smell. It is that which holds heaven for the
Celestial. I held a loaf of bread in my hand that had con-
cealed six of those tins, and marvelled at the dexterity and
cunning of the Chow ; and, curiously enough, I had a strange
experience myself with what, at that time, I thought was
opium, I came down by train from Kuranda with two


remarkable-looking persons, a man and a woman. The
woman's face and features bore strong evidence of Eastern
blood, though she was apparently no more than half-caste.
The man was an Englishman, who, from his conversation, I
discovered was straight out from England. To all intents
and purposes these two people were married, and judging
from their injudicious manner but lately married.
For’ard Deck of a Queensland Coaster.
On arrival at Cairns Railway Station they took a cab,
and another lady and I shared it. We were ready to start
when two porters came staggering with a heavy, thickset box.
Thickset best describes it, for it was a peculiar, most
uncommon-looking, box. As the cabbie helped to get it on
to the front of his cab, he remarked that there must be
something precious in it. He threw out various hints, seek-
ing for information, to all of which the Englishman vouch-
safed no reply. I sympathised with the cabbie’s disappoint-
ment. Whilst it was in the act of being hoisted, three






Chinamen came forward to the cab and held a conversation
with the owners of the now mysterious box. They seemed
to know one another intimately. The Chinamen made some
remarks in broken English, as to seeing them at the hotel,
and muttered something about a “ send off.” By this time
my feminine curiosity was thoroughly aroused, and I felt
I must know what was in that box. We went to the same
hotel, and I saw or heard nothing of them or the box until
the next afternoon, when it became quickly known at the
hotel that a private detective had been amongst us all the
Queensland Aboriginals in Camp, Karanda.
morning. I learnt subsequently that, like myself, he too was
curious to know what was in the box, and that he had come
specially to see it. However, he was not sharp enough
for the owners of it. In a moment of abstraction on the
part of the police officer (I believe he was in the bar) the
box was taken off and a ship was on its way South before


anything could be done. All the detective knew was that
the same thickset box had travelled up to Atherton but a
few days previously with the same people. Here
it was left on a veranda all night. It was carried back,
as I could have borne witness, to Cairns, and its weight
had not diminished. The official friend who satisfied my
woman's curiosity concerning opium had a long and interest-
ing chat with me on the subject. He politely ridiculed my
idea of the box containing opium. In the first place, he
A Tree for " two,” Cairns Beach.
argued, it would never have been left on the veranda at
Atherton. In the second place, the mere fact of its weight
would have excited, as it ultimately did, suspicion. It had
been suggested to him that probably the box contained the
bones of various dead Celestials on their way home to China
for interment. Thereupon, the whole romance of the situa-
tion to me was killed.
My friend promised to inform me of any fresh develop-
ments. Every Southern port was telegraphed to for the


detainment of the people with the thickset box of it
must have been bones, for so I conclude, as I heard nothing
further from my friend.
Johnstone River Pilot Station.
Just on the stroke of midnight our ship loosed its
anchor and we glided like a spectre out of Cairns, and into
the night.
Cocoanut Palms.


On our way
back again we
touched at Mou-
rilyan, declared by
the compilers of the
several guide books
one peruses to be
the most perfectly
land-locked harbour
on the east coast of
Australia. We stayed
only long enough,
however, to take on
some passengers. We
saw them coming
along the jetty on a
rough sort of tram-
way; it runs through
the very heart of the
magnificent jungle to
the sugar plantation.
Tourists told us
was a
little heaven, provided the mosquitoes didn t interfere, of
most wonderful scrub and glorious tropical undergrowth.
When we swept through Hinchinbrook again, alas! it
was dark, and the moon failed to put in an appearance.


On to Townsville next, and there it was Race Day. We
all went ashore in cambric gowns of useful order, and felt
distinctly “ out of it ” when we reached “ The Queen’s.”
The lounges and balconies were thronged with smartly-
dressed people of both sexes. I gazed in genuine astonish-
ment at the frocks, some of which screamed Paris, and
others of which murmured Melbourne, and Buckley and


Grandstand, Charters Towers Racecourse.
Flower Beds, Lawn, Charters Towers Racecourse.
Nunn’s. They were to me, I must admit, rather an unex-
pected sight in Townsville. Melba was singing there that
night, and so things were extra joyous.


From Townsville we made a hurried trip to Charters
Towers. How quickly does mining develop a town. They
have a water supply that would do credit to any modern city,
and an up-to-date hospital with the newest surgical appli-
ances that some Southern towns know nothing of. Their
School of Mines is the largest in Australia. I saw there
some delightful specimens of Queensland gems. More and
more did I realise the abounding wealth of Queensland.
At ten o’clock at night we arrived at Keppel Bay, and
a few hours later embarked on the Rockhampton tender. I
must admit that after the luxury and comfort of the large
coastal ship, we felt decidedly uncomfortable. In the
first place, there were not enough berths to go round, and
many of us slept on deck, though the June night was sharp.
The little deck was strewn with mattresses and rugs and
Fitzroy River, Rockhampton.
sleeping passengers, and when at dawn I was able to see
clearly it resembled a battle-field—a field of slain.


But what a glorious dawn it was out there on the
Fitzroy River! Our little boat had stopped dead up against
a fog bank. The stillness of dawn was broken occasionally
by the notes of the wild magpie, and, alas! by the snoring
of some men lying across the decks. Unable to sleep, I
stood aft and watched the coming of dawn. Dull-grey skies
parted into little rosy streaks; here and there, by degrees,
the leaden colour was all broken up into pretty baby pink
and blues; tbe blues faded away again into the far horizon,
the pink, growing bolder, blushed to a deep red, and lo!
the sun god made his morning bow.
View from “ The Hummock,” Bundaberg.
Whilst the face of Nature was thus changing, the mist
fell from Mount Morgan in the distance like a shawl. It
was indeed a delightful run up the Fitzroy River in spite
of many discomforts and drawbacks.
From Rockhampton we went overland to Bundaberg,.
where, from “ The Hummock,” reached after a beautiful


drive, we had a most tempting view of the blue Pacific.
Onward we went by rail back to Brisbane, regretting
that our “ rest cure ” bad come to an end; and
so seized with the fascination of the North and the tropical
beauty of Queensland, that when next year the snow will be
on Mount Wellington, and the winds will he blowing off
Ben Lomond cold and chill, we will hope to go into the
“Wilds of Queensland” —“Out West,” as they say —and
woo her.


Between Brisbane and —
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
Mackay
. . 6
2
6
10
9
6
Bowen
, . 6
7
6
11
4
6
Townsville
. . 6
17
0
11
14
6
Charters Towers
7
7
0
12
11
0
Ravenswood
. . 7
6
6
12
10
0
Hughenden
. . 8
9
6
14
12
0
Richmond
. . 8
15
0
15
2
0
Cloncurry
9
6
0
16
1
6
Winton
, . 8
19
0
15
9
0
Cairns
. . 7
17
6
13
9
6
Kuranda
. . 8
0
0
13
14
0
Mareeba
. . 8
3
0
13
19
0
Atherton
. . 8
5
6
14
3
6
QUEENSLAND RAILWAYS.
Passengers for North Queensland are recommended to travel
as far as Gladstone by the Mail Train, and then embark on a
fine Mail Steamer, which leaves Gladstone at 1.30 p.m. every
Saturday, arriving at Townsville early on Monday morning.
Passengers then take the steamer “ Kuranda ” or “ Mourilyan,"
which leave for Cairns and Cooktown respectively soon aPer
the arrival of the Mail Steamer.
By this means the rough-water passage around Great
Sandy Island is avoid d, and the entire trip is made inside the
Barrier Reef.
FARES :
STATIONS. SINGI.E. RETURN.
Children 3 years of age and under 12 years of age, Half
Fares; Children 12 years of age and over, Full Fares.
The Fares cover First Class Accommodation and Sleeping
Berths on the Railway, and First Saloon on Board the Steamer.
Return Tickets are available for Six Calendar Months.
Tickets may be obtained from the A.U.S.N. Company's
Offices at Brisbane, Mackay, Bowen, Townsville, Cairns, and
Charters Towers, and at the Railway Stations at Brisbane,
Charters Towers, Ravenswood, Hughenden, Richmond, Clon-
curry, Winton, Kuranda, Mareeba, and Atherton.
Single Tickets and the forward portions of Return Tickets
are available for one Calendar Month.
A Second Class Sleeping Car is running on the Rock-
hampton Mail Train. The charge is 2s. 6d. per berth, but no
bedding or attendant is supplied.


QUEENSLAND
“ L The Wonderland of Australia.”
UNRIVALLED IN PASTORAL, AGRICULTURAL,
AND MINERAL RESOURCES.
The Great North-Eastern State, which contains almost
every variety of soil and climate, is every year becoming more
and more recognised as an Ideal Tourist Resort.
During the months April to September no more enjoyable
trip can be taken along the picturesque eastern seaboard of
Australia. The marvellous beauty of the famous Whitsunday
and Hinchinbrook Passages, with their numerous islands, is
unsurpassed in any part of the world. From Cairns a week’s
trip inland reveals a country of unsurpassed grandeur and


QUEENSLAND: “THE WONDERLAND OF AUSTRALIA.”
richness in timbers, minerals, etc. The climate of the Atherton
Tableland (from 2,000 to 3,000 feet above sea-level) is
unequalled in Australia.
The Barron Falls, Stony Creek Falls, Tully Falls, are
noted throughout the Commonwealth for their beauty.
Tourists should land at Rockhampton to view the Central
District of Queensland. That world’s wonder, the Mount
Morgan Gold Mine, which has paid £7,679,167 in dividends, is
within easy reach of Rockhampton.
The railway journey from Rockhampton to Brisbane takes
the Tourist through a most interesting part of the State. The
beautiful scenery of the Blackall Range (between Gympie and
Brisbane) reveals the wonderful richness of this portion of
Queensland.
The famous Darling Downs can be reached by train from
Brisbane in four hours. Toowoomba, the-capital of the Darling
Downs, is one of the most picturesque and important inland
cities of the Commonwealth. Warwick and the Killarney
District are also worthy of the attention of Tourists.
Descriptive pamphlets, and full particulars as to the best
arrangements to make regarding any trip in the State, can be
obtained on personal application, or by letter to
THE DIRECTOR
Intelligence and Tourist Bureau,
Corner Queen and George Streets,
Brisbane.


BY AUTHORITY:
A. J. GUMMING, GOVT. PRINTER,
WILLIAM STREET, BRISBANE.




A. J. GUMMING, GOVT. PRINTER,
BRISBANE.
