

Us THREE OUTBACK
by
RUTH M. HAWKER
Drawings by
NORA YOUNG


~ O-"" /y
N ' /
\ i?mb
> ?


Av)U
US THREE OUTBACK
1 rt>


Ox
Copyright June 1932.
First Edition.


Us THREE OUTBACK
RUTH M. HAWKER
Author of "Us Three."
Drawings by
NORA YOUNG
Booklovers Library
51 Rundle Street, Adelaide


Contents
A Prescription instead of an Introduction.
Page 6 Chapter 1. How Us Three went Outback.
9 Granddaddy's Dos and Don'ts.
11 Chapter 2. Richard Learns Several Things.
14 How Merinos came to Australia.
16 Chapter 3. Emu Mine.
20 Nice Places.
22 Chapter 4. Pete to the Rescue.
26 Recipe for a Good Dog.
27 Chapter 5. The Tale of Tiddley Mouse.
31 Magpie's Morning Song.
32 Chapter 6. Neenie is Lost.
36 Achmet the Afghan.
38 Chapter 7. The Search.
43 The Night Express.
45 Chapter 8. Beyond the Ranges.
50 The Land of Dreams Come True.


A Prescription
instead of
An Introduction
If ever you find you're feeling ill
And after resting are tired still,
When you miss your dinner, leave your tea,
And are as grumpy as you can be;
If ever you hate the streets of town
With tram cars grinding up and down,
Where people are always tramping by
And you can't be quiet if you try;
If ever you lie awake at nights
To turn and twist till the morning lights,
Then what you need is the country air,
And the country ways and country fare.
So open this book and there you'll find
The voice of the town is left behind,
And you can travel far trails and see
The world outback with Pete and Us Three.


1. HOW US THREE WENT OUTBACK.
RICHARD walked through the house, his boots clumping with every step;
while Yolande banged three doors one after the other, and shut Pete's
tail in the last one, so that he yelped loudly. Neenie tripped over a mat,
bumped her head on the verandah, and bellowed like a bull. There was a
great deal of noise where there should have been peace and quiet.
"Hush," said Mummie and Ada together, running from opposite direc-
tions to stop the disturbance.
Uncle-who-was-a-Doctor opened the front door and walked right into
the middle of the hullaballoo.
"You're eight, Richard," he said sternly, "and that's old enough to
remember you mustn't make a noise, because your Daddy is ill.
"I'm sorry," said Richard, "I didn't really forget, only my memory turned
inside out."
"Do big girls of six usually bang doors like that?" Uncle asked Mummie.
Yolande hung her head. Neenie sat up; bumps did hurt her very much,
and though she was nearly four she found it very hard not to cry sometimes.
"Things do keep on happening that should not, however hard we try," ex-
plained Richard.
"I don't know what to do about it," said Mummie, sighing. A
mother can't be in more than two places at once, however hard she tries.
"I do," said Uncle, his eyes twinkling; and he went straight out to the Post
Office, to send a telegram to Granddaddy.
The answer came the next morning. Granddaddy invited Us Three,
and Ada and Pete, to come and stay with him at Kalamanoo. They were
most excited, because Granddaddy lived on a sheep station up country, and
they had not been there before.
Uncle took the three children out for the afternoon so that Ada could
pack in peace, and Pete the dog, who was Neenie's especial friend, stayed at
home too. As Ada didn't offer to pack his luggage he fetched it himself;
it was a nice earthy leg of mutton bone, but she did not seem pleased to find
it among the clean clothes.
Us Three were up almost before it was light the next morning, and


breakfast over, they tiptoed in to say "Good-bye" to Daddy and hug Mummie.
They were all ready waiting on the doorstep when Uncle drove up to take
them to the train.
Pete explained to the porter that no Sealyham ever went in the dog box
when he was left in charge of other peoples' belongings, so the guard let him
sit on Neenie's suitcase, and they became quite good friends over a ham sand-
wich.
The children were lucky in having a carriage to themselves, which meant
a window for everyone, only Ada liked to sit beside Neenie instead of in her
own corner. After a lot of puffing the engine gave a loud hoot, the train
began to move slowly, and they were off.
First lots of little houses flashed past, backyard fences covered with
morning glory just opening its blue flowers; then the houses drew further
apart, and between them were small paddocks, with olive or almond trees
for hedges. Then came stubble paddocks, where sheep and cows picked at
the dry stalks of straw; or bare spaces lying fallow for a rest, and others
green with growing crops.
Presently Ada gave out biscuits, and then the children must have dozed,
for when they woke up she was gathering the parcels together, because it
was time to change.
The new train had a funny little engine, and long narrow carriages with
seats running right down the side, as they do in tram cars. At the end of
each carriage were iron steps leading to the ground because there were no
platforms along this line. There was a waterbag hanging on the end rail,
and the mug chained to it clanged and rattled as the train rumbled along.
The children ate their lunch, Neenie had another sleep, and still the train
went on. The country grew much wilder, nothing but gumtrees, sheoaks and
scrub, or patches of hard red earth, broken now and then by a rocky rise or
a sand drift. Far ahead there was a range of blue mountains, that never
seemed any nearer.
"I wonder what's beyond the ranges," Richard said, over and over again;
but no one knew.
At last, towards evening, when the red dust had got into every fold of
their clothes, and everything they touched felt gritty, they came to a siding
away out in the bush, and saw Granddaddy waiting for them. Then they all
got out, and the train went on, getting smaller and smaller, till it looked like
a tiny black caterpillar, crawling across the endless plain.
When Pete had counted the children and suitcases Granddaddy packed
them all in the car. "When I was a little boy" he said as they drove along,


"it took us three days to reach town, instead of one, because there were no
trains, only horses to drive."
"It must have been rather fun," said Richard.
"When your great grandfather—he was my father—moved here, it took
him three weeks in a bullock waggon, and there wasn t any road at all.
"How did he find his way?" asked Richard.
"The men of the party rode ahead to pick out the best track and camping
places, but they dare not go too far away for fear of blacks."
Richard's hair stood on end. "There aren't any here now, are there?"
he asked.
"No," laughed Granddaddy, "only Tommy Dodd, the bullocky, who lives
in a hut on wheels with his lubra. Now, here's a gate. Hop out."
Richard learnt all about opening gates by the time he reached the home-
stead. There were three with hooks, two with bolts, one fastened with a
loop of wire, and two horrible ones Granddaddy called "blackfellows" gates,
that were just like a piece of fence, and had to be strained into place with a
lever.
Richard was quite glad when he had opened the gate by the house.
There weren't any flower beds or borders here like in town gardens, but pink
oleanders, blue tobacco bushes, high stumps smothered in geraniums, old


fashioned climbing roses, a few clumps of hardy plants, a fig tree at the top
and a row of pepper trees at the bottom.
The house was low and red, with broad verandahs running all round,
and gnarled vines growing up the posts. It was all ups and downs, because
it had started from a one roomed hut, and different people had added another
room when it was needed. There were odd little huts scattered about the
garden, dairy, engine house, woodshed, and meat house; and higher than
everything, the windmill.
Grannie came out to meet them, but as Neenie was fast asleep and
Yolande nodding she took them straight to their rooms so that Ada could put
them to bed. Richard helped unload the car, and then Granddaddy drove off
round the house leaving him alone.
It was very still, but he could hear the voices of sheep, and a mo-poke
calling faintly. Then a wind went rustling through the gum trees, waking
them up, and telling them to look at the stranger.
"I feel as though all sorts of exciting things are going to happen," he
said to Pete, when at last he turned to go in; and the little dog, following him
closely, sniffed the delicious night air, and thought so too.
Granddaddy's Dos and Don'ts
Do keep your wits about you
And try to use your eyes,
Remember other people
May sometimes like a word
There's lots of things worth learning
From birds and beasts and skies;
And yours is not the only
Voice to be ever heard;
Don't be afraid of helping
And don't you ever shirk, —
Do think that dogs and horses
Have feelings just like you,
There's no call to feel shameful
Of any honest work.
And don't come in to dinner
Till they have had theirs too.


l\ Wwkj b >—--
A game that's harm for others
Is no good game to play,
If you've done wrong, admit it,
And right it if you can;
Don't lie, and if you're punished
Well, take it like a man;
So don't go lighting bonfires
Or throw matches away;
It doesn't take a minute
For flames to get about—
And if you give a promise
Let there be no mistake,
If you want folks to trust you
That promise mustn't break.
Think of the loss and danger
Before a bushfire's out.
Where pioneers and settlers
Their first rough holdings made
You have a splendid birthright,
Foundations firmly laid;
They worked and watched and struggled
Proud of Australia's name,
So you who follow after
Should try to do the same.
bP
tcicf
\Vj
Sfc VSfVI H C^>ll it))


2. RICHARD LEARNS SEVERAL THINGS.
BREAKFAST was at half-past six, because country people have so much to
do that they have to start very early.
"You must learn to ride properly," Granddaddy said directly afterwards.
"Why?" asked Richard, who was the only one of the three up in time
that first morning.
"Because you are no use in the bush without a horse. You can't muster
sheep on foot, for you'd be all day before you reached the right paddock; and
as for looking at the fences, or boundary riding, as it is called, well, you'd
never get done at all."
Richard had once been lent a pony for a fortnight, so he could ride a lit-
tle, but he was not prepared for the big horse he found tied up under a tree
outside.
"This is Skipper," said Granddaddy, handing him the reins.
"He's a very high horse, isn't he?" said Richard, so Skipper put down his
head and blew softly through his velvety nostrils.
"Don't be afraid, young 'un," he said, "I may be high, but I aren't
flighty. Up you pop now, and I'll show you."
But there wasn't any popping up about it. Granddaddy led Skipper to
a handy stump, and showed Richard how to mount. This took rather a long
time, because Granddaddy was very particular, and liked everything done
properly, but at last they were ready to start.
The horses only walked while Richard learnt how to manage the reins
and guide Skipper; then they tried trotting. The boy bumped up and down,
till the wise old horse, feeling him rather wobbly in the saddle, slowed down
of his own accord. "Take a spell and get your breath, young 'un," he advised.
Granddaddy knew in which part of the paddock to find sheep, what they
liked best to eat, what to do with them in a wet season, how to look after
them in a drought, what sort of country made them grow the best wool and
what was wrong with them if they didn't. In fact, he knew almost more
about sheep than they did themselves.
He understood all the weather signs and the season signs too. He
pointed out ants swarming before rain, their bodies and wings gleaming like


blue metal against the brown ant heap; a white Christmas bush blooming
early, which meant a dry summer to come; and many other things; till
Richard's head grew wuzzy, trying to remember so much.
When they found the sheep, Larry the clever kelpie, gathered them to-
gether quietly, and sent them jogging towards home.
"Nip along and open the yard gates," said Granddaddy, when they were
nearly back.
"Hang on, young 'un," said Skipper, breaking into a slow canter. When
they reached the woolshed he stopped without any warning, and Richard
shot gently over his head into the dust below.
"Never mind," said Granddaddy, "it takes seven falls to make a rider."
Then they left the horses under the trees and went over to the house for
lunch. When they came back the sheep were cooled and rested and ready
to be dipped.
All the woolshed yards were fenced with posts stuck side by side in the
ground, so that the sheep could not see through, but they seemed to know
where the dip was. When they reached the narrow race leading to it some of
them sat down and refused to move, so Granddaddy sent Richard to chivy
them along.
The boy jumped round them shrieking and making strange noises, but
they wouldn't budge an inch. Then, as he stood panting on the dip edge, one
naughty old ewe put down her head and butted him in.


He fell with a great splash, and all the sheep stood round laughing at
him. The nasty smelly mixture got into his eyes and made them smart, went
up his nose and made him sneeze, and blew bubbles in his ears. The dip
was not full, so he paddled along and walked out at the other end.
As he stood shivering in the draining pen he heard a lot of strange voices,
and looked round in astonishment. Since he had come out he could under-
stand what the sheep were saying.
"There goes the man lamb," said the old ewe who had pushed him in.
"You might have drowned him," said her younger sister.
"Serve him right if I did," said the first one.
"Don't be so uppish," said her cousin, "even man lambs are some use.
They grow up into people to open gates for us, and see that the drinking
troughs are full."
Just then Larry bustled up behind them. "Get along there, can't you,"
he barked, "you are holding up all the traffic."
He gave Old Mischief Maker a nip on the off hind ankle as he spoke, and
in her surprise, she bounded right into the dip.
"Yah," shouted Richard, dancing on the bank.
"I never could abide dogs or man lambs," she puffed, as she climbed out.
Granddaddy told Richard to go and change, and he had nearly reached
the garden gate when he heard a deep gruff voice calling him. "Boy, come
here," it said.
He turned away from the house and went up the hill to the ram paddock,
where he saw Old 404, who was so large that he looked a king among sheep,
waiting for him. "I saw everything," said the big Merino, "and now that
you can understand sheep language I'll make you free of the station."
"What does that mean?" asked Richard.
It means that the animals will show you and the birds will tell you
things no other human has seen or heard."
"Will it work for Neenie and Yolande too?" asked Richard anxiously,
"because it won't be much fun by myself."
You can help them, but they must find out some things for themselves,"
said 404, "and now, kneel down."
"Just like being knighted," said Richard, and knelt.
The old sheep poked his pink nose through the fence and licked the boy's
forehead with his rough tongue. Then he began to speak in a solemn voice,
which, to anyone who did not understand sheep talk, would have sounded
like a deep baa-ing. "Bulb do not poison, trees do not fall on him, bush fire


do not burn him, drought do not make him thirsty, floods do not drown him,
birds and animals look after him."
Here he stopped, and turning his head, rapped Richard sharply with the
end of one of his curling horns. "That is your brand," said the sheep, "to
show that you belong to the bush."
Richard stood up, rubbing his head, and ran down to the house.
When Ada saw him she made him take off all his clothes in the motor
shed and hose himself down before she would allow him indoors. Then she
filled the bath with hot water, scrubbed him till he was pink, and washed his
hair, but even when he put on clean clothes he still smelt of dip. "Well," she
said at last, "I don't know what to do with you; the smell is dreadful and
there's a mark on your forehead that won't come off."
"Never mind," said Richard, "perhaps it will wear off, like ink spots do,"
but Ada didn't seem to think so.
Yolande and Neenie were not very nice; they said rude things about him,
and Yolande held her nose whenever he came near her. Richard took no
notice, and looked at the distant blue ranges, and he never told them that the
mark on his forehead had been made by the King of the Sheep.
<5S>
How Merinos Came to Australia
There came to George of England
From Charles the Third of Spain,
"He sends a dozen barrels
Of yellow Jerez wine,
A high and haughty marquis
Of pure Castillian strain:
"My master wants not falcons,
Nor does he seek a mate,
And fifty golden ducats
For these white steeds of thine,
The finest, keenest rapier
Toledo smiths can forge,
And seven sheep Marino,"..
He craves two of the horses
That pull the coach of State."
"All right," said Farmer George.


The Spaniards took the horses
With flowing manes and tails,
So presently he sent them
very royal command
And went aboard the galleon
And set their straining sails;
South, where his gallant captains
Had found him a new land;
But George he rubbed his forehead
And disarranged his wig,
"These scrubby sheep Marino
Seem to be fairly tough,—
"The wine," said he, "is muddy,
The sheep aren't very big."
I understand Australia's
Considered rather rough."
Farewell the silver salt lakes,
Farewell the coast of Spain,
They'll never see the fountains
And orange groves again;
But in the strange new pastures
Will grow and change till they
Are famed throughout the Empire—
Merinos of today.


3. EMU MINE
VOLANDE soon discovered that every evening, directly after tea, Granni
JL W ent to feed the fowls, so she begged to come with her
"Yes, certainly, child, you can carry the basket and gather the eggs,
said pen was as big as the tQwn house an d garden together, and
Yolande was just looking about her, when something happened to give her
a oreat surprise. An enormous downy brown head came over her shoulder
and took a big mouthful of food out of the tin in the basket
"Oh, Grannie," said poor Yolande, feeling rather frightened, what huge
chooks you have!" „ ,
Grannie looked round with a smile. "That's Mu-ee, the pet emu, she
said. "He's quite tame, and lives with the fowls for company.
Mu-ee, hearing his name, stalked round in front of them, his tail feathers
rustling like dead leaves as he moved.
"Perhaps he thinks I'm a big chicken too," said Yolande, laughing.
They hadn't gone much further when up bounded a big kangaroo with
a joey in her pouch. She took a good drink of milk out of the jug Grannie
offered her, holding it in her skinny brown hands, and then bounded off again.
"What 'strordinary chooks you have, Grannie," said Yolande. Grannie only
smiled and went on, till a shriek from the little girl made her stop and turn
round quickly.
"Oh," squeaked Yolande, "there's a horrid snake.
"Why," said Grannie gently, "look again. You mustn't be frightened of
Scales, sometimes he comes into the garden to catch flies.
Holding Grannie's hand tightly Yolande took a few steps forward, and
then she saw her snake was only a lizard, sitting on a log. His head was
nearly hidden by the big frill round his neck, while his body ended in a
pointed tail.
"Have you really any chooks here at all?" she asked at last.
"Yes," said Grannie, "but I don't know what's the matter with them to-
night, something must have frightened them or they would not be hiding
like this."
As she spoke a cloud of sparrows flew into the saltbush hedge, and look-


ing up, she saw a great eaglehawk hovering high overhead. She and Yolande
banged the food tins together to make a noise, and the hawk, thinking she
might have a gun, sailed away.
A white tipped tail feather floated down on to the ground beside Yolande,
so she picked it up and stuck it in her hair. Then she heard the fowls under
the tree calling to each other, and could understand what they said.
"Dear, dear, dear," clucked a black hen, "our supper will be cold."
"Perhaps that greedy emu will have gobbled it all up," suggested a young
White Leghorn teasingly. She had flown into the garden that afternoon and
eaten several tomatoes, so she wasn't feeling very hungry just then.
"It will be quite safe if the humans are here," said a speckled grey, so
out they all flocked,
When she had gathered the eggs Yolande noticed some strange looking
stones lying beside the path, and picked up three. They were brown outside,
and the one that was chipped had a rough pink cross on a brown ground in-
side. "What pretty stones," she cried, "I have never seen any like them."
"This paddock is the only place we find them," said Grannie. "Tommy Dodd's
father, who was a really bush blackfellow, told him the emus bring them
from a long way off, and that they go once a year to fetch a fresh supply.
Your mother used to call them emu stones."
"These seem to be the last," said Yolande, after looking about, "it must
be time to fetch some more."
When they reached the fowl pen gate she noticed the emu busily preen-
ing his feathers. "Nearly ready," he muttered to himself, "very nearly ready."
That evening, as she was going to bed, Yolande stuck the feather in her
hair to see what sort of dreams it would bring her. For a long time every-
thing was very still. Then she heard a willy wagtail on the verandah rail
by her window, talking to himself, as the saucy little birds do all through the
night.
"Sweet sleep, and a lot of pretty little dreams to you," he said, over
and over again, till she grew quite sleepy listening to him. She was just
closing her eyes when she heard a funny drumming sound outside.
"Whatever's that?" she said, sitting up in bed.
"Oh, that's only the emu giving the signal to start," answered the bird
sleepily.
Yoiande was wide awake at once. She hopped out of bed, scooted
silently down the passage, out of the back door, and over to the fowl run.
She saw the tame emu poised on the top of the fence, flapping his useless
little wings to balance himself, till he hopped down the other side. For a


j(c2=-
minute he stood peering about him, then he struck sharply with his feet ori
a patch of hard earth, so that it sounded like the beating of a drum. At this
signal a line of wild emus filed over the hill, each bird carrying a tiny sack
and a pickaxe under one wing.
"How can I ever get over," cried Yolande, standing beside the tall fence,
which was bent out at the top to make it fox proof.
"I'll show you the way," said a small squeaky voice, and looking
down, she saw Scales, the frilled lizard, at her feet.
There was a big branch laid against the fence, and he ran up this, using
it as a ladder. Yolande followed him gingerly. "Now shut your eyes and
jump," he said, when they reached the top. "You needn't be afraid, your
feather will carry you safely down."
Yolande did as he said, and spreading out her arms, floated gently on to
the ground outside the fence. When she opened her eyes she saw that
Mu-ee had taken his place as leader, and the line was moving off.
"Oh, please take me too," she called, panting as she pattered after them;
"I do so want to see an emu mine."
Mu-ee looked over his shoulder, whistled, and the line halted. "Jump
up, human chicken," he said kindly, "and don t wriggle.
Yolande gave a hop and floated up on to the emu's back. As soon as he
felt her safely astride he went on again, the wild emus following in a bobbing,
swaying, string.


They went at a tremendous rate, half flying, half running, swinging aiong
over the plain. The wind blew so hard in Yolande's face that she shut her
eyes, so she did not notice where they were going. When at last they
stopped, and she opened her eyes again, they had come many miles into
strange country.
The moon was shining brightly, stunted gum trees and huge rocks cast
deep shadows on the sunbaked ground, and high above towered the indigo
peaks of a mountain range. Yolande and Mu-ee stood on a bare patch of
earth between the rocks, while the wild emus waited quietly in a group below.
"Is it beyond the ranges?" asked the little girl, in an awestruck whisper.
"No," answered the emu, "it is only this side."
"Then where's the mine?" asked Yolande.
As she spoke Mu-ee hopped up on to a square of rock, and made that
queer whistling sound again. Two wild birds stepped out from the group,
and walked towards the mountain side, each carrying a lighted lantern.
"Now," said Mu-ee, "you shall see the mine."
He strode after the torch bearers, Yolande skipping from rock to rock
like a goat. When they reached the mountain the two birds swung their
lanterns, so that the light showed the black entrance to a cave.
Yolande wished that the emu had a hand for her, but she couldn't very
well catch hold of his cold skinny legs, so she trotted along the rocky pas-
sage beside him, the two lanterns twinkling ahead, and the sound of many
feathers rustling behind.
At last the passage opened out into a huge cave. Pendants of stone hung
from the roof to meet half finished pillars rising from the ground, great veins
of many coloured crystal gleamed and sparkled in the walls till Yolande was
almost dazzled, and stumbled as she walked.
You stay here," said Mu-ee kindly, settling her on a block of stone,
with a fallen pillar for a back. "You mustn't walk about or you might get
lost, some of these caves run for miles under the mountains."
He left her then, and the wild emus filed in, stepping daintily away be-
tween the pillars till they were hidden, and she was quite alone. She could
hear their little pickaxes going tap, tap, on the wall, and sometimes the crash
of a large piece of stone falling.
Some of the stone pillars bent over till the points nearly touched the
ground, and others had grown into most extraordinary shapes. There was
one like a huge kangaroo, and another like a platypus.
She grew very sleepy, and closed her eyes. Then she thought she heard


the two big stone beasts take a rumbling step forward, and felt the cold wind
of their breath blowing over her.
She sat up with a start. "Mu-ee, Mu-ee, come and take me home," she
called, and then she opened her eyes.
The cave, the emus, and the stone animals had disappeared; she was
curled up in bed with the eaglehawk's feather laid on her pillow.
"What a sleepy head you are," said Ada, "it's long past getting up time."
"I was very busy," said Yolande, "and then I had an uncomfortable
thought in my sleep."
"No wonder," said Ada, pulling back the sheet, "I think you were lucky
to sleep at all with this rubbish about."
There, lying in the bed, still warm, and very nubbly, was a little pile
of pink emu stones!
Nice
Places
Richard:
'Possums in the gum trees
Cuddle down to sleep,
Climbing up the windmill
Nearly to the sky,
Scattered in the paddocks
Graze some tiny sheep;
I can watch the cloud ships
Sailing, sailing by;
I can hear the tree tops
I can hear the sheoaks
Singing all the day,
Rustle as they grow,
See the house and garden
I can see the ranges
Very far away.
Very far below.
Yolande:
All day long the fig tree
Makes a tent for me,
Underneath the fig tree
Where it's green and cool,
I can hear the sparrows
Coming home from school,
When the big leaves quiver
Cracks of blue I see,
Such a dreadful chatter
Such a lot of noise,
And when ev'ning's painting
Red sky overhead,
You would almost think them
Little girls and boys.
Fowls walk up the branches
Solemnly to bed.


Neenie:
Right behind the woodshed
Close against the wall,
Someone built a wurly
Roof and sides and all,
When I crawl inside it
Playing it's my house,
If I'm very quiet
Out pops Tiddley Mouse.
All Three:
Out across the paddocks
All the world's to find,
Creek curls down before us
Garden lies behind:
When we're tired of 'sploring
And come home to rest,
Windmill, fig tree, wurly—
These we like the best.


4. PETE TO THE RESCUE.
must tell Pete all dogs caught hunting sheep are shot," said Grand-
daddy, when he met Neenie and her dog looking at the big world out-
side the homestead gate.
"Show him some," suggested Yolande, running up from the garden.
"The ones near town are much smaller, and most of them have black faces,
so he mightn't think these are the same sort of animal."
So Granddaddy took them up to the little paddock at the back of the
house, where the best rams lived.
"That's a sheep, Pete," said Neenie; "don't hunt them."
Old 404 put down his pink nose and snuffled at the children, and his
great curled horns rattled against the bars. He was nearly as big as a small
pony, and very haughty, because his many times great grandfather had be-
longed to the King of Spain.
"I shouldn't dream of hunting a great ugly thing like that," said Pete,
with his nose in the air.
"Then that's all right," said Neenie.
"Would you mind showing me something that I can hunt now?" asked
Pete, sitting down and holding out a paw politely.
"Well, Pete," said Granddaddy, "I'm afraid it's waste of time your run-
ning after kangaroos. Do you see that one, going over the hill?"
Pete sat up on his hind legs. The kangaroo, which was really very tame,
took a good look at them and then bounded off. One jump, over the creek;
two jumps, up the hill; three jumps, out of sight.
Pete sat down again feeling very small. "Haven't you any cats," he
suggested in short barks, "rats, rabbits, or bottle ohs?"
"You mustn't hunt Rufus," said Yolande, as the big "marmalade"
coloured cat popped up on the top of a post near them. "Grannie says he's
very wise, because he lived with the Afghans when he was young."
"Pete wants somefing to hunt," said Neenie plaintively.
"He may certainly hunt rabbits and foxes," said Granddaddy. "I don't
suppose he'll catch any, but he'll give them a tremendous fright."
So Yolande and Neenie and Pete went down to the creek to look at the
rabbit holes. There was no water running, but there were lovely patches of


*~^s
Sand in the dry bed, and tiny caves in the banks, and soon the children were
playing busily.
Pete was enjoying himself too, for he found some delicious rabbitty smell-
ing holes, so he scratched outside and barked into them.
"What have you got there, Pete?" Yolande asked him.
"Six elephants and ten tigers and three or four of those sheep things I
mustn't hunt," he answered jauntily.
"Oh, Pete," said Yolande reproachfully, "there couldn't be elephants in
that tiny hole; Ada will put soap in your mouth for telling stories."
"Well, p'raps not elephants," said Pete, as he scratched at the red earth,
"but something very exciting."
The two little girls went further down the creek till they found a place
where a colony of martins had settled, and saw the little birds flying out ex-
citedly.
Yolande stuck her precious feather in her hair, and put her hat on the
top so that it would not blow away.
"Please don't disturb our nests," said one bird, looking anxiously at the
children's sticks; "it's been so hard to build this year. The water all went
away down the creek and never came back, so we had to carry it from the
nearest trough, a beakful at a time."
Each nest was shaped like a bottle and built entirely of mud, and they
were grafted on to the bank in bunches. There was a tiny hole at the cork
end just big enough for the mother bird to creep in, and there were beak
marks all over the outside.
"Of course not," said the children, and moved on again.
Presently Yolande found a lovely patch of sand, and decided to make a
garden with sticks and leaves and bits of grass. Neenie soon grew tired of
watching her, and went off by herself.
When she reached a place where the banks sloped she began to climb out,


and half way up she found a hollow tree trunk embedded in the earth. She
lay down beside it to peer in, and two green stars winked at her out of the
darkness.
Neenie chuckled to herself, found a long stick, and poked it into the tree
trunk, straight at those green stars. With claws outspread and fur standing
on end a great spotted wild cat sprang out, spitting and snarling.
"Save me, save me, Pete," shrieked Neenie.
Then, fortunately for her, she jumped back out of claw reach, lost her
balance, and rolled down into the creek, where the soft sand broke her fall.
At the sound of Neenie's cries, Pete came round the corner like a whirl-
wind. He took one look at the children, to be sure they were safe, and one
look at the apparition on the bank, then, barking an excited battle cry, he
bounded forward. "Ten thousand cats," he said, "up tails and at 'em."
He rushed right to the top of the bank first, and in his excitement,
knocked down a large stone which lodged in the mouth of the log, so that the
wild cat could not get back to its lair. When he started to fight he soon
found a wild cat was a very different enemy from a tame cat. This one
seemed to have claws like sharp hooks, and teeth two inches long. Pete's
wiry ccat protected his back, but soon his ears were tattered, and his nose
scored and bleeding.
The wild cat seemed to be in forty places at once, its fur slipped through
his teeth, and he couldn't get a proper grip. It could hang on to the end of
the tree trunk or the bank with its claws, while the dog slipped and rocked
about as though his toe nails had just been cut.
They got nearer and nearer the edge till at last they fell over. They
were so mixed up that they turned several somersaults in the air, and when
they reached the bottom there was nothing but a snarling, spitting, barking
mass; hair and fur and bad language flying in all directions.
Now although the children thought they had gone a long way the creek
curled round the bottom of the garden, so that Grannie, sitting on the front
verandah, heard all the noise of the fight. At the sound of Neenie's screams
she dropped her work, and ran into the office, to fetch Granddaddy and his
gun. Then Ada seized a toasting fork and Grannie took the drawing room
poker, and they all rushed to the rescue.
"Grannie, Granddaddy, come quick," shouted Yolande, when she heard
their footsteps. "Something tried to eat Neenie, and now Pete's trying to
eat it, but it's all claws, and it will kill him."
Grannie and Ada snatched the two little girls up, and the minute the wild


cat threw Pete off, Granddaddy took aim, pulled the trigger and fired. There
was a terrific bang, the wild cat gave an astounded yowl and rolled over dead,
while Pete jumped straight up in the air as though he had seen a snake.
"Dear me," he said, "who did that. Is all of me still joined on?" He shook
his four paws, one after the other, found they were still there, wagged his
tail feebly, and then tried to lick his wounds.
"Pete, darling," said Neenie.
"Good dog," said Grannie.
"You haven't been long finding something to hunt, old man," said Grand-
daddy, but when he saw how torn and hurt Pete was he picked him up care-
fully, and carried him up to the house.
Though Ada bathed his wounds for him, and Grannie gave him her
second best cushion for a bed the little dog was stiff and sore for nearly a
week, and had to be coaxed to eat. As soon as he could walk again he swag-
gered out into the yard to tell the sheep dogs stories of his fight.
"And I killed ten tigers, six lions, four buffaloes and sixteen wolves, all at
once," he said proudly.
"Oh, Pete!" said Yolande when she heard him, "what dreadful stories
you do make up;" and she went to look for a piece of soap.


j)
I >
-il
w** >
¥ , >
i»i3bl
Recipe for a Good Dog
Take the wisest furry face,
Whiskers in the proper place,
Two dark eyes, black twinkling nose —
Rough on rats and bottle ohs;
Splash some brown on head and ear,
(That's what makes him look a dear,)
Then, to rough white coat attach
On the back, a round black patch.
Put a tail left rather long,
Carried up though things go wrong;
Add good temper, mix to it
Terrier quickness, terrier grit;
Spice with love of play and sport,
Set the whole on legs cut short,
Finish with four muddy feet: —
"Pleased to meet you, I am Pete."


5. THE TALE OF TIDDLEY MOUSE.
ONE Friday, Grannie lost the key of the store; she only left it on the
kitchen table while she melted the wax to seal the mailbag, but when she
came back it was gone. Though everyone looked high, low, and level, and
Mrs. Murphy swept the kitchen floor three times, the key was nowhere to be
found.
This was a very serious matter, because Saturday was ration day, when
the cart went out to all the boundary riders with fresh supplies. Without
the key she could not unlock the store, and there would be no food but meat
for the next week.
The store was a big room near the stables, made of galvanized iron, like
all the other station buildings. Inside there were sacks of flour and sugar,
chests of tea, bottles of tomato sauce and pickles, tins of jam, cases of dried
fruit, bins of rice and sago, bars of soap, tins of pepper, baking powder, and
treacle.
There were scales to weigh out stuff like flour, and a book where every-
thing used was written down, just like a proper shop. Besides the groc-
eries there were new and shiny tin plates, quart pots and pannikins; tools,
shovels, and axes; stirrups, bridles, chains, straps, buckles, and all sorts of
harness.
The children loved carrying the basket when Grannie wanted anything
from the store. Sometimes she let them weigh out her sago or split peas,
and she always gave them a handful of sultanas or delicious moist brown
sugar, that never went down in the book at all.
Every three months Grannie sent to town for all the things needed,
and Tommy Dodd drove the bullock waggon to the railway siding to fetch
the fresh supplies. This took him two whole days, one in and one out,
because bullocks walk very slowly.
Granddaddy had another key to the store, but he always wore it on his
watch chain, and as he was away for the week end, that was not much help.
Pete was still too stiff to walk far, so Neenie went away without telling
him, and trotted off to see if she could find the key. She thought she would
go up to the stables, and look there, but as her legs were rather short she
was quite ready for a rest when she reached the woolshed. The door was
ajar, so she climbed slowly up the steps and went in.
It was dark and cool inside, and very quiet. All the pens were empty,
and there were only a few bales left, half filled with odd pieces of wool. The


engine which worked the shearing machines had been taken to the wood-
heap to work the circular saw, and some sacks of wheat were piled on the
classing tables to keep it away from the mice, because shearing time was
over. f
Neenie ccruld hear a squeaking under the boards, but she couldn t see
any mice about.
She trotted over and poked one of the bulging sacks, and a few grains
of wheat trickled out on to the floor. She had never tasted wheat before
it was ground into flour, so she caught a small handful, and began to crunch
it with her little white teeth. The instant she tasted the grain the squeaking
turned into words which she could understand perfectly. Thank you so
much for the wheat," said a tiny voice, "we were getting quite hungry."
A sleek grey mouse climbed out of a hole in the floor, helped himse'f
to a grain of wheat, and sat at her feet nibbling it.
"Who are you?" she asked.
"I'm Tiddley Mouse," he said. "Haven't you heard me scratching in
your room at night? Igo in there for biscuit crumbs."
"Are you a good Tiddley?" she said.
"Of course," he answered, "or I wouldn't speak to you. I'll do anything
you like, to show I'm pleased to have crumbs and wheat."
"Could you look into the holes in the kitchen to see if you can find Gran-
nie's lost key?" asked Neenie.
"I'll send for all my friends and relations to help at once," he said;
"wait here for me."
He popped down his hole again, and Neenie thumped the wheat sack
so that there would be plenty of food for the whole family. He hadn't been
gone long before she heard a strange rustling noise, and looked outside. The
ground was covered with mice, peering under every stone, lifting every leaf,
and shaking every blade of grass.
"They looked everywhere," said Tiddley, whisking out of his hole, "and
as they couldn't find it in the house they are searching the track up to the
stables."
The mice went to the door of the store and sniffed underneath, they
touched the walls with their noses and came back again, but they hadn't
found the key.
"I'll send for my very shy cousin and see what she can suggest," said
Tiddley.
Presently Neenie saw the mass of mice divide, leaving a lane in the
middle. Down this lane, daintily and timidly hopped a kangaroo rat. She


.. j i i'
I Cy
was about five times the size of any mouse, she had a tuft on the end of her
tail, and she sat up on her hind legs, just like a kangaroo.
"Oh darling, darling Teeny," cried Neenie, excitedly, bending down.
"Don't touch her," said Tiddley quickly, "she's very frightened of humans,
ever since one stepped on her father and squashed him flat."
The kangaroo rat shivered when she saw the little girl, but she hopped
up to her relation, and asked him why he had sent for her."
"It can't be on the ground," she said, when Tiddley had explained all
about the missing key; "have you asked the magpies if they have seen it?
They are nasty thieving birds and would take anything. They stole one of
my babies once." Then she hopped quietly away, wiping her eyes with the
tuft on her tail as she thought of her lost child.
"A very good idea," said Tiddley; "friends and relations, scatter."
The mouse army spread out in a most orderly fashion, and the mice
ran away in all directions till there was only an odd one left here and there.
"You'd better go back to the house," said Tiddley, "I'll meet you there
later."
Neenie thanked him, climbed soberly down the woolshed steps, and trot-
ted across the paddock. As she passed the cow yard stack all the straw was
rustling, and she could hear the mice talking as they went to bed.
When she reached the house she told Yolande what Tiddley's cousin
had said about the magpies, so Yolande ran indoors and fetched the eagle-


hawk's feather. "I'll creep up behind the tame magpie and catch him, and
then we can see if he knows anything about it,' she said.
"Now," said Yolande, "do you know if one of your brothers or sisters or
aunts has taken Grannie's key?"
"My Uncle Black Shirt found something this morning," he said in a
smothered voice, "but you'll never get it. He's building a nest for Aunt
White Cap on the very top of the high gum tree behind the dairy, and he's
hung it on a twig for a front door bell."
"Oh," said Yolande, "how unfortunate. Thank you for telling us
though."
The two children went up to the dairy. Richard was out riding, so
there was no one to climb the tree for them, but they hoped the wonderful
feather would help them again.
Jim, the yard boy, had just brought over the buckets of milk for sepa-
rating. He forgot all about it and stood there with his mouth open when
he saw a little girl floating gently up in the air.
Yolande circled several times round the tree before she found the right
nest. Uncle Black Shirt was rather cross when she spoke to him, bcause he
was putting his fifty seventh stick in place, and didn't like being disturbed.
Besides, he didn't want to lose his front door bell. "Go away," he said
harshly, clacking his beak in her face, "I shall snap off your nose if you
come poking it into my affairs."
But Aunt White Cap, who was a sensible bird, managed to smooth him
down. "I've noticed that humans have pouches all over them," she said,
"perhaps this one has a better front door bell somewhere about her."
Yolande felt hurriedly in all her pockets, and found six red beads off
the milk covers and stuck them on a sardine tin opener. Then she held it
out, and Uncle Black Shirt looked at it, putting his head on one side and
puffing out his chest. "I believe I could make it do," he said.
"You are always so good at arranging things," warbled Aunt White Cap.
Uncle Black Shirt held out his claw for the tin opener, while his wife
dropped the key into Yolande's pocket. The little girl thanked him prettilv
and floated down again. When she reached the ground she found Neenie
talking to Tiddley, who had ridden over on Jim's back without the boy
knowing anything about it.
Jim's mouth shut with a bang, and he went off to his dinner rubbing his
eyes, because he thought they couldn't be seeing right. The two children
trotted back to the house, and Tiddley whisked into a hole under the kitchen
doorstep.


Magpie's Morning Song
While it was dusk, perched, half asleep
On some tall tree, I heard the sheep
And mo-poke's mournful cry;
Now, peeping stars have gone to bed,
The sky's dark feathers all are shed,
Goodbye—last night—goodbye.
The sun is soaring up the sky,
His golden wings come flashing by,
Over the hill—away;
The silver cobwebs shine with dew,
The earth is polished up like new,
Good morning, splendid day.
Oh, silly folk who stay indoors,
This glorious world outside is yours,
Open your eyes and see;
If there is work there must be play,
Fold up your dreams, put them away,
Come out, come out with me.


6. NEENIE IS LOST
WHEN Yolande had learnt to ride she and Richard often went out by
themselves in the paddocks near the house. They were coming in one
afternoon, Richard lazing in the saddle like an old stockman, when they saw
a small white dot, which was Neenie, running to meet them.
"Oh Richard, oh Yola," she panted excitedly, "come quickly and see the
funny man in the yard. He's wearing a towel round his head, and he's got a
house on wheels with two horses."
The children tied Skipper and Cigarette in the shade, and ran down to
the house. In the middle of the yard stood a covered van, and beside it, an
old Afghan. He was a short, brown faced, fat little man, and he wore a
turban instead of a hat.
As soon as he saw the children he opened the doors at the back of the
van, and told them to look inside. Then Ada, and Mrs. Murphy the cook,
came out too; and Grannie brought Granddaddy to join the group.
Neenie was rather frightened, and clung tightly to Grannie's hand, but
even she went to the edge of the verandah, her eyes popping out of her head,
when the doors swung open.
"Oh!" said Richard.
"Ah!" said Yolande.
"Well, I never!" said Ada.
There were shelves all round the inside of the van, stacked with boxes
and bundles of every sort and size. Down the middle of the ceiling were
hooks, where bunches of oilskins, and men's dungarees or "blueys" hung, as
well as tidy coats and trousers. There were billies, bright new pannikins,
and a frying pan, all jumbled up in a box on the floor, with a pile of rabbit
traps on top. There were brooms standing in a corner, with two hurricane
lanterns to prop them up.
The old man climbed in by the step and began taking lids off and handing
down boxes to show his stock. He passed Grannie a collection of sewing
materials, pins, needles, cotton, scissors and tape measure; he picked out a
tray of pipes and a bundle of bootlaces for Granddaddy; and choosing a case
of coloured combs, offered it to Mrs. Murphy and Ada. Finally he lifted


down a great big jar of boiled sweets and shook it before he took off the lid
to show the children,
"Is he a shop?" asked Richard, noticing a pair of scales on one of the
shelves.
"Yes," said Grannie, "he journeys round calling at all the farms
and stations, from one end of the state to the other. Most peo-
ple are pleased to see him, and some of the women can never go to a town-
ship, so they do all their shopping with him. You don't know how awkward
it is to live miles from anywhere and run out of needles or something like
that."
"He doesn't come here often," said Granddaddy, "but I suppose he heard
you children were about."
"But we haven't any money," wailed Yolande.
"Let me see," said Granddaddy, "did I ever pay you for dipping sheep,
Richard?"
"No," answered Richard, feeling very grown up, "but I didn't think you
meant to."
"Better late than never," said Granddaddy, holding out a penny. It
was the first money Richard had really earned, so he felt very rich and im-
portant.
"I always meant to give Yolande and Neenie a prize for finding my key,"
said Grannie. "Do you happen to have any more money on you?"
In the country people seldom carry any money; they do their shopping
by post and pay their bills by cheque. Anyone who wants to go to town
has to go begging round the household to collect enough cash for a railway
fare, but fortunately Granddaddy was able to find two more pennies.
Richard spent his money on acid drops and a long strip of licorice like
black elastic, which he coiled round his wrist till he could borrow a pair
of scissors to cut it into pieces. Yolande bought sweets out of the big jar;
they looked as if they had melted and stuck together, but they tasted delicious.
Neenie held out her penny and then was too shy to ask for anything.
She really wanted some bright pink pear drops out of a small bottle tucked
away on a high shelf, but the Afghan had forgotten about them, and she
didn't know what they were called.
Grannie bought pins, needles, and thread; Ada chose a pair of hair clasps,
and Mrs. Murphy a green cake of soap; and Granddaddy remembered he
needed two pairs of bootlaces and new overalls; so that the old man grinned
happily as he put his boxes away.


Before he shut the doors of the van he called everyone to admire the
beautiful new bridle he had made for one of his horses. It had a bright blue
head band, and a piece of red flannel hanging from the throat strap to keep
off bott flies.
When the others followed him Neenie stayed behind, and taking her
chance, climbed into the van, meaning to 100k —only to look, at the pear drops,
while the brown man was away. But she tripped over a parcel, knocked her
head on a wooden box, rolled under the bottom right hand shelf, and lay
still, dazed with the fall.
Nobody thought of looking there for her, because when the big children
ran ahead to open the gate Ada thought she had gone with them, and no
Afghan would expect to find babies among his stock. So the old man shut
the doors of his van, climbed on to the driving seat, cracked his whip and drove
off with an uninvited passenger inside.
Neenie lay for some time breathing loudly with her mouth open, and
rolling about like a sack of potatoes. Then she began to wake up, and, still
half dazed, couldn't think what had happened. It was hot inside the van, and
the strange smells added to the rumbling and the bump on her head made her
feel sore and sick.
She called for help, but the noise of the wheels drowned her voice, and
even when she gave up calling to howl and yell, the Afghan did not hear.


He whipped up his horses to reach a good camping place by nightfall, and
when at last he stopped she had yelled all her voice away, and there was only
a little whisper of crying left.
The old man climbed stiffly down, unharnessed the horses, tethered them,
and set about making a fire. He was rather deaf, so never heard the whim-
pers and wails inside the van. When he had finished his supper he took
down his blankets and rolled himself up for the night.
"Want to go 'ome," sobbed Neenie, in a hoarse whisper; "want to get out
and go 'ome."
Presently, as she sat still, there came a scratching sound in the corner,
and she heard a tiny, squeaky voice.
"Whatever is the matter now?" it said.
She looked about until she saw a circle of light in one corner. It was
Tiddley Mouse, holding up a glow-worm lantern.
"Oh, Tiddley Mouse, save me, save me," she gasped.
"How did you manage to get yourself shut in here?" he asked. "I came
because I thought I should like to see the world, but I don't like it at all.
The world is far too bumpy and rattly for me."
Neenie explained how she had fallen while Tiddley listened carefully.
"Well," he said, "a big girl like you ought to be more careful. However, the
best thing for me to do is to send for my relations again." So he dug his
sharp nose down a crack in the floor and squeaked shrilly.
Presently, a long way off, they heard a rustling sound, which grew louder
every minute, but the Afghan never stirred in his sleep. Dead leaves on the
ground crinkled, and dry grass stalks crackled under the feet of an army of
mice. As they had come to look for the key, so they came now, and if Gran-
nie had seen them she would have thought there was another mouse plague.
They scampered up the shafts, over the wheels, on to the roof, down the
sides, and peeped through the keyhole, but they couldn't find a way in. "Then
make one," said Tiddley fiercely.
The mice obeyed him at once. They sharpened their teeth on the iron
tyres, ran up the door, and began to gnaw the wood round the lock. They
took it in turns, one lot working till teeth were blunt, and then making way
for a fresh team.
Neenie lay down on a pile of sacks so that she wouldn't tread on Tiddley
Mouse, and he gave her a pear drop to suck till she dozed off.
All night long the mice outside gnawed at the wood till, by morning,
their work was finished. The lock fell out with a crash, the doors burst open,


» <■ *
Tiddley scuttled down the steps, and Neenie woke and rolled out on to the
ground.
Still the Afghan slept.
The mice were very amused. They explored the van, upset the big jar,
and ran off with the boiled sweets. Two mischievous boy mice bit through
the strings so that everything hanging from the hooks fell down with a plop ;
and seveial girl mice nibbled the corners off paper bags to see what was in-
side. Three mothers clubbed together and dragged away one of the cabbage
leaf hats to make a nursery for their babies.
"I think we'd better go now," said Tiddley, "that man won't be very
pleased when he wakes up and sees what has happened to his van." So he
ordered all the mice out.
As the last one scampered into the bush the Afghan grunted and turned
over, as though he were waking up. Tiddley Mouse scurried off between the
gum trees, and Neenie followed him as fast as she could go.
Achmet the Afghan
Over the edge of the dusty plain,
Scorched by the sunshine and lashed by the rain,
Driving alone comes a queer, brown man,
Achmet the old, with his pedlar's van.


Where does he come from, how does he go?
Over the hills where the sheoaks grow,
Down in the gulleys where threads of smoke
Show him the way to some lonely folk.
What a to do at the rumbling sound,
Here is their shop come a-calling round,
How they run out at the Afghan's cry:—
"Master and Missus, come buy, come buy."
Open the doors and the window wide,
Look at the wonderful show inside,
What's in the bundles and piles of things?
Look at the boxes and dangling strings!
Needles and cottons and tape and soap,
Peppermint drops and a coil of rope,
Aprons and sponges and palm leaf hats,
Blankets, bananas, and bristly mats.
Twinkling brown eyes have a glint of fun,
Something he finds there for everyone,
Bootlaces, 'bacco, a coat and toys,
Ribbons for girls and some knives for boys.
Over the hills at the end of the day
Ever so slowly he drives away,
Camping at last when the stars are bright
Lonely old man in the lonesome night.
Dance little flames, for perhaps he sees
Snow on the mountains instead of trees,
Camels come swinging, tireless, again
Over the edge of the dusty plain.


7. THE SEARCH.
AS soon as the Afghan had gone Granddaddy told Ada he would take the
children out in the buckboard to look at a broken windmill. When he
reached the front gate and found only Richard and Yolande waiting he
thought Neenie had gone back to the house, and went on without her. Ada
thought the smallest was safe with him, and took up her mending basket
which was always full.
It wasn't till the two came back, late in the afternoon, that Neenie was
missed.
"Where's my baby?" asked Ada, when Yolande and Richard came bound-
ing in without her.
"She wasn't with us," said Yolande; "isn't she with you?"
"No," said Ada, and feeling very worried she went to ask Grannie, but
she hadn't seen Neenie either; so they began to hunt for her.
Ada, Grannie, and Yolande went all through the house and garden, look-
ing in every place where a child could hide, in case she was playing with
them. But when they could not find her anywhere Granddaddy mounted
Skipper and set off for the stables, while Richard took Cigarette and can-
tered over to fetch Mr. O'Brien, the overseer.
The men, in for their evening meal, saddled their horses again, and
joined the search party. They looked everywhere, and Pete helped, poking
his nose into holes and corners. When Mr. O'Brien suggested dragging the
dams to see if she had fallen in, Granddaddy sent for the blackfellow bul-
locky to find her tracks.
Tommy Dodd looked carefully all over the yard, but so many people
had walked about that he could not trace her footsteps at all. Then he went
to the gate, and round the garden fence, but when he said she had not gone
outside everyone grew more worried and puzzled than before.
Pete, whose tail drooped further as time went on, felt most ashamed of
himself for letting Neenie out of his sight. At last he sat down in the garden
and howled mournfully.
"Why are you making that awful noise?" said Sandy, the red cat, from
the top of a post.


"My baby is lost, and I do not know where to find her," said Pete.
"You've frightened my supper away," said Sandy, "don't do it again."
"But I must," said Pete, lifting his nose ready to howl; "I fee-ee-ee-eel
so sad."
"You've been a better dog than most," said Sandy, "so because you
haven't chased me I'll try to help you. I think your baby has gone with
the Afghan; I used to live with one, and I'd look in his van first if I'd lost
anything."
"Oh," said Pete, shutting off his howl, "would you really?"
"Feathers and fur, I would," said Sandy, "but your legs are rather short
for hunting a cart."
"Yes," said Pete, "but I'm going to try. I'm very wiry, you know."
"Don't waste time running," said Sandy, "far better catch the Kangaroo
Express. It usually passes about nightfall, and as you've never hunted it
either we can get it to stop for you."
He jumped down from his post, and they set off for the back gate.
Sandy made Pete go first, because it would be very hard for any dog to
keep his teeth out of a cat's tail if he saw it waving just in front of him.
"Mu-ee, Mu-ee," caterwauled Sandy, "are you there?"
"Yes," said the emu, "what do you want?"
"Please will you flag the Kangaroo Express, we want it to take Pete."
The emu picked up a small branch and began to wave it about, poking
his head as far over the fence as he could reach. Sandy ran up the gate post,
and sat on the top; while Pete found a small hole in the netting and
squeezed through.
Presently they heard a thumping that grew steadily louder and nearer
till a big kangaroo bounded over the hill.
"I only take parcels, not passengers; they wriggle too much," she said,
when Mu-ee explained what they wanted.
"He'll be a parcel if you label him," said Sandy, so the emu scratched
among the rubbish in the corner of the fowl paddock till he found an empty
tin. Then he tore the label off, and stuck it through Pete's collar.
"One tin of Shark Faced Salmon," he said.
Put it here, said the kangaroo, opening her pouch; so the emu picked
Pete up by the scruff of his neck and dropped him in. Pete waved a paw,
and the Night Express bounded away out of sight.
Somewhere about nine o'clock Richard and Yolande fell asleep on the
drawingroom sofa, but the grown-ups searched all night, and by dawn the
next morning car loads of men from the stations round came to help.


"We'd better look for the Afghan," said Granddaddy, "he was one of the
laSt In daylight the black tracker followed the wheelmarks of the van to the
Afghan's camp, and there the search party stopped.
The men were all very surprised to find the old man asleep, and *
doors of the van burst open, but when they woke him up he was more as-
tonished than they were. He spread out his hands and jabbered away in his
own language, but as soon as they told him they had lost a little girl, he
helped them lift out the boxes and look underneath the piles of clothes.
"I don't think she can have been here at all," said Granddaddy; some o
you had better go back and try the paddocks behind the stables. I'll stay
here and take a good look round, though I don't see how any child could walk
Most of the men mounted and rode away through the scrub, but when
Neenie heard their horses tramping she hid inside a hollow tree, because
she was afraid it was the Afghan come to catch her. When all was quiet
again she came out, but by this time Tiddley Mouse had gone far ahead, and
she did not know which way to go.
Sticks tripped her, and bushes put out branches to scratch her; her head
hurt, and she was hungry. Soon she grew so tired that she couldn t walk
any further, so she sat down on the ground and leant forlornly against an
old ant hill.
It was here that Pete found her.
The kangaroo had been frightened out of her way by the search party,


but when it was quiet again she came back and dropped him in the clearing
y now the old Afghan had turned out the van, and spread all his goods on
the ground, so Pete could easily see that Neenie wasn't there.
"But she must have been here," he said, and he sniffed about till he dis-
covered the trail leading into the scrub. Then nose to ground, he followed
her footsteps at full gallop till he found her.
"lM " Darlm S £ ete \" she sobbed, hugging him till she nearly strangled him
Neenie sick, Neenie hungry. Want to go 'ome."
i 7 t S a , 1 Tni g IWay'" 1 Way '" Said PetC ' With his head on one side ; "but we'll so
fetch us S P thCn Porhaps someone will come with horses to
starred Stfaight f ° r her t0 hold on b y and they
When Richard and Yolande woke it was still early, but they heard Mrs
up U t r 0 P thC kitCHen ' S ° 3Sked hCr f ° r breakfast Then they went
AH the horses were gone except Skipper, who came to meet them. In
very careful of i/To th ***" ° n ni§Ht ' but he had been
squashed Pad§ StirrUp irons were at all
foal." Cn expecting you ' y° un g un," he said; "I hear you've lost the filly
"Never W ®, dldnt loSe her ' she J ust went," said Richard,
find her. Hop up, .Tthat we " Felati ° nS y ° U
climbed mounted Easily
was rather small fnr + .1 s 0 a t a g a h°P- As the saddle
a low hi., and stood stiU otZ " P the Side ° f
Soon a herd of wild horses dashed up in answer to his call Th. v
-d" e b d a, ;o a h n e d .p the QUee "' 3 Shining tlaCk ' C3me ° Ver 10 « lk «o Skipped
"Th X° U mU !' find Neenie quickly, or she will die of thirst" said Ski Doer
The King and Queen will take you to look for her " bkipper.
. " k * " r
quickly without slipping," ' Can § ° over rocks


The Queen had been tame once, she had run away from her stable to
join the wild herd, so she was very careful of Yolande. The King ep
giving tiny bucks and wriggles as they went along, because he wasn t used
to having any weight on his back. >, ci •
"Take a good handful of mane and twist it round your fingers, Skipper
shouted after them; "I'll follow you along the plain."
The wild horses galloped over the hill and down the other side, sending
showers of stones flying but never once stumbling. Then they zigzagged
about the plain, but, finding no trace of child or Afghan there, dived into t e
scrub.
Many times the children were nearly thrown off as the horses swung
from side to side to avoid tree trunks, or leapt over a dry water course. They
hung on somehow, till, as the scrub grew thicker, the pace became slower.
"Tame horses and wheels came this way last night," said the King, pulling
up so suddenly that Richard nearly shot over his head. The Queen stopped
too, and for a minute there was dead silence.
"Bow, wow, wow, come and help us," said Pete then, close at hand.
Richard slipped to the ground and ran into the bushes, and Yolande
followed him. Neenie was so worn out she could hardly speak, and when
Richard found a squashed biscuit in his pocket her mouth was too swollen
to eat it. He untied his last acid drop from the corner of his handkerchief,
and she was just able to suck that, moaning a little, while Yolande squatted
beside her, crying over the tiny sore feet.
"Please look for Skipper," said Richard, over his shoulder.
The King dashed off, and soon brought the old horse, who had kept on
the track, and by now was near at hand. Skipper backed against a fallen
log, and Richard lifted Neenie into the saddle, and then pushed Yolande up
to hold her there.
"Soon men will come," said the Queen, stamping and snorting, "and they
might try to catch us. If you do not need us any longer we should like to
go away."
So Richard thanked them, and Pete made a noise like a bark mixed with
a sneeze, which meant he was very much obliged. Then the King and Queen
galloped away to join the other wild horses, manes tossing and tails flying in
the wind.
Richard took the reins and led the old horse, while Pete rushed ahead
barking like a mad thing. It was this barking that guided the last search
party to them, long before they were out of the scrub.


Somebody fired a gun, men came galloping from all directions, and
everyone cheered. Granddaddy sent for the car and packed children and dog
in, while one of the men rode Skipper home.
There was great rejoicing when they reached the homestead. Ada
hugged Neenie, Grannie hugged Yolande, Mrs. Murphy hugged Richard, and
Granddaddy looked as if he would like to hug Pete, only men don't.
Presently, when all the fuss was over, and Neenie safely in bed, Pete
marched into the office, waving his tail graciously.
"Aren't I a clever dog!" he said.
The Night Express
As soon as the stars begin to peep,
And the birds all think its time to sleep
For the sun is setting low,
As soon as the sky is turning red
The baby 'possums jump out of bed
And up in the trees they go.


Then far and faint on a distant hill,
As soon as the night is really still
You can hear a mo-poke say:—
"Now pay attention and don't forget,
There's ever so many things to get,
Are you ready? Right away.
Down from the hill with enormous jumps,
High over bushes and logs and stumps,
Steered by a wallopping tail,
With small hands folded and brown eyes bright
Bounding along through the moonlit night
Thunders the Kangaroo Mail.
The wagtail's ordered a clutch of eggs;
The crane, red stockings to warm his legs;
The whip bird, a ten foot lash;
The bell-bird, a mate to help him ring;
The cockatoo, pink paint for his wing;
And lightning, a brand new flash.
The wombat's shovel is quite worn out;
Platypus wants an elegant snout;
The pelican sends a note,
He wants to know if there's been more rain,
And are there fish in the swamp again,
And is there room for a boat?
The lizard sends for a pair of scales;
The windmill wants a couple of sails;
And the snake a whole new skin;
The laughing jack is so hoarse, he's sure
To need a bottle of sore throat cure
Or lozenges in a tin.
Whenever it's getting rather late
If you listen carefully and wait
For the mo-pokes mournful cry,
You'll know, if you see a kangaroo
Bounding along like all kangies do,
That's the Night Express gone by.


8. BEYOND THE RANGES.
at last the letter came saying that Daddy was better the children
* " were almost sorry it was time to go home.
"We've never been beyond the ranges," said Yolande.
"What is there on the other side?" asked Richard.
"Well," said Granddaddy, "I think you'd only find plains and more
ranges, over and over again, until you came to the sea."
"Then there isn't any such place?" said Richard, puzzled.
It s really a saying we have here," explained Grannie, "when other
people mean the place where dreams come true. That is a place you seldom
find, for the sort of dreams that are really wishes always seem to be coming
true a little further on, and then a little further still.
"Don't you ever find what you want?" asked the boy.
Yes, sometimes, said Granddaddy, "but you don't always know it till
afterwards."
"How very unexciting," remarked Richard, as he followed his sisters
out to say "good-bye" to their favourite places about the homestead.
I wish we had something to give Grannie and Granddaddy, to show
how we liked being here," said Yolande.
"Granddaddy's always wanting rain," said Richard slowly; "if there's a
drought the grass won't grow, and there won't be any feed for the sheep
and they will all die."
He looked at the sky as he spoke, and then gave a shout of surprise. On
the very top of the windmill, hiding the whole round wheel, was a great grey,
billowy mass.
"That's a cloud, caught in the sails," said the spider who hung her web
inside the tower, "and it's getting torn."
There was an iron ladder up the side of the windmill, but as it was very
straight and high Granddaddy would not let the children climb far. Richard
was allowed to go up six rungs, Yolande four, and Neenie two; but all these
put together would not reach the top.
"Be quick, be quick," called the spider, as the iron slats rattled, and the
pump nearly choked trying to draw water from the well; "if it isn't mended
soon all the rain will be spilt."


Hearing the children's shouts Ada came out on to the verandah, and
when they "told her about the cloud she said she would go up and fetch it.
This was very brave of her, because she was afraid of spiders.
However, she climbed to the top of the ladder, and pulled the cloud care-
fully off the iron sails. The spider waited till she was safely on the ground,
and scuttled down after her.
The three children held the pillowy, billowy mass, and Pete sat on the
middle to keep it from blowing away, while Ada threaded a needle to draw
the torn edges together. But though she tried several times, the cotton
wouldn't hold.
"It's no use," she said at last.
"Ah," said the spider, "you need something different from ordinary
thread to mend a cloud."
"What's that?" asked Richard.
"You must each give a thread of your own," explained the spider,
"But we haven't any," said Richard


"Haven't you?" said the spider; "let me try."
She ran up the boy's arm—he was sitting on the ground—and drew a
long silver thread of courage from his heart. It was tarnished in places,
when he had forgotten to be brave, but Ada covered these with the brighter
parts where he had felt frightened but still gone on. There was just enough
to mend the first hole.
Then the spider came to Yolande, and unwound a thread of thoughtful-
ness. The little girl was nearly always anxious to run errands and help
generally, but there were a few snarls made when she had been rude or
naughty. Ada managed to run the knots in, and mended the second hole.
The spider came to Neenie next, and drew out a little thread of polite-
ness. It was short, because Neenie hadn't had time to learn many manners,
and it was rather thin in places, through forgetting "please" and "thank you."
All the same, Ada used it to mend the third hole.
The cloud was now beginning to strain and pull, nearly lifting the chil-
dren off their feet, but there were still two holes left.
The spider ran up Ada's back, without making her wriggle, and drawing
out a strand each of patience, carefulness and good temper, twisted them all
together. Ada took a needle with a large eye, and topsewed the edges of
the largest hole with this strong thread.
Now there was only one small, three cornered tear left. The spider
ran quickly over the cloud to Pete, and brought back a fine thick thread of
faithfulness from the little dog.
"That's done," said the spider; "and there should be plenty of rain in a
day or two," and she scooted up the windmill.
But as Ada put in the last stitch the cloud billowed out, dragged away,
and went up like a balloon, with Pete still sitting on the bubbly part in the
middle.
"Oh," they all shrieked together, "stop it, stop it. Pete's gone."
The spider swung out quickly on the end of her web, but she couldn't
reach far enough, and the cloud went sailing away. The children ran after
it up the path and into the paddock as quickly as they could, hoping it would
catch in one of the trees on the hill. But the cloud skimmed over the highest
branches without touching, and away above the plains to the hills beyond.
"Supposing it goes to France or Spain and it comes down there," said
Richard.


"Pete can't talk French or Spanish," wailed Yolande, "whatever will he
do. He won't even know how to ask for a bone."
"But suppose he falls into the sea and is drowned," said Richard.
"Pete, oh Pete, I want my Peter dog," yelled Neenie, but by now Pete
was so far away they could not even hear his frantic barking. The tears
poured down Neenie's cheeks, Yolande sniffed terribly, and Richard wiped
his eyes several times on his sleeve.
"Cheer up," said 404, from the small yard beside them, "as you all helped
to mend the cloud it probably won't go very far away."
"But supposing he falls through when it begins to rain, and breaks all
his legs," said Richard.
"Well," said the old sheep, "I can help you, if you like, but 1 you will each
have to give up something rather useful."
"We'd do anything to save Pete, wouldn't we?" said Richard.
"Yes," answered Neenie and Yolande.
"All right," said 404, taking a deep breath; "Richard will no longer be
able to understand the language of sheep, Yolande will forget how to fly
like a bird, and Neenie will never be able to talk to mice again."
"Oh," said the children, rather dismayed.
"Don't interrupt," said the sheep. "To-night you will see beyond the
ranges, and perhaps you will be able to find Pete there. I can do no more
for you. Do you understand?"
"Yes, thank you," said Richard.
"Always remember that once you knew what animals felt and birds
thought," said the old Merino gravely, "and act accordingly."
"We will," promised the three.
"Then turn round," said the old sheep.
Richard turned, but he must have moved too quickly, for he knocked into
Yolande, and she upset Neenie, so they all fell over each other. Richard was
the first up again, and helped the other two.
"Let's go back to the house," he said. "I can't think what we were
doing, I've given my head such a bang."
"Good-bye," said old 404, sadly, as he stood watching the children, but
they never heard him.
When they reached the garden gate the cloud was hanging 1 over the blue
ranges, drawing other clouds to it.
"Perhaps Pete has managed to anchor it," said Yolande, feeling happier.
Late that night, when everyone had gone to bed, and the house was still,
Richard heard a low whinny outside his window.
"Who's there?" he asked.


•'lt's I, Skipper," said the horse. "Call the others and bring them out,
I've been sent to take you to the blue ranges."
Richard ran quickly and woke Neenie and Yolande. Then they pattered
out on to the verandah, and the old horse backed against a pile of kerosene
cases, so that they could mount.
As soon as they were all three safely settled Skipper started, but instead
of galloping he seemed to whiz through the air, so it was quite easy to stick
on. When Richard looked down he found they were really flying, for he
could see miles of bush and plain slipping along below, and the homestead
buildings like a pile of tiny toys far behind.
Presently the air grew cooler, and a long dark mountain range towered
above them. Skipper shot up and up, until at last he came to rest on the
highest peak. It was thickly dark, and when the children got off they stood
close to him, so that they could feel his great legs like four warm pillars
shutting them safely in.
"Where are we?" asked Richard.
"You are on the top of the blue ranges, and in a little while you will be
able to see the country on the other side."
As they waited and watched the air grew warmer, a soft glow spread
over the sky, and a great golden globe sailed up over the edge of the earth.
"Look," said Skipper softly, "the moon has risen."
Then the three children gazed down Beyond the Ranges, into the
country of Dreams Come True; and there was everyone they had ever known,
besides all the dreams in the world. They saw Grannie with a crowd of chil-
dren, in a place where dinners cooked themselves and plates were always
clean. They saw Granddaddy building a continent covered with farms and
stations all run the proper way. He had flocks of marvellous sheep, and
herds of black and white cattle; while all the people about him were happy
and helped each other in a neighbourly fashion.
There was Mummie, with three other people they did not recognize as
themselves, grown up straight, strong, and splendid; and there was Ada,
with a little house and several Neenies of her own.
"I want Pete," said Neenie, not interested in anything else.
There was the old ewe who had pushed Richard into the dip, driving a
whole flock of little boys; there was Pete with a pile of forty wild cats and
several bunyips he had killed himself; and Skipper, coming in after winning
the Waukennga Cup, with Richard as jockey.
In the middle of the country, high on a silver and ivory throne, dream-
ing like everyone else, sat the King. His face was beautiful but sad, for he


dreamt of an empire united, peoples at peace with one another, and a world
nt rest •••«••
Richard touched Skipper timidly.
"How did they all get here?" he asked.
"Through thinking and wishing," said the old horse.
"I want Pete," said Neenie again.
"How do you make a dream come true?" asked Richard.
"Anything worth having is worth working for," said the grave voice;
"you may never get it, but you can always go on trying. Everyone needs a
dream to hang ahead, and a life without one is like a sky without a star."
Richard looked up quickly, to see if anything was wrong, for the words
sounded so far away. But he saw something near at hand, that made him
jump with excitement.
"Look, Neenie," he shouted, "your wish is coming true now."
A grey billowy cloud came sweeping across the valley, and when for a
second, it touched the mountain top, out jumped Pete.
"Darling Pete," said Neenie, hugging him, "you mustn't ever go away
again."
Pete promised to stay at home in future, and said how glad he was to
see them. They were so busy patting him that they did not notice the light
fading, and when they looked again the golden country was hidden.
The air became suddenly cooler, so that they shivered, and hurried to
mount. Skipper whirled round on his hind legs and flew off through the
darkness this side of the ranges, till he brought them safely back to their
warm beds in the Ordinary World of Everyday, and the morning of the
Day they Went Home.
The Land of Dreams Come True
Beyond the blue ranges, I think that there lies
A tender green country of shining blue skies,
With gold sands in front and the dark hills behind,
Where everyone's happy and gentle and kind.


There ev'rything's mended that ever was broke,
And cruel nasty sayings have never been spoke,
While all the good tempers have quickly been found,
And ev'rything lost has come back safe and sound.
The hobby horse mane and the teddy bear's head,
The tricycle handles, the best doll's house bed,
The "thank yous" that left us, the "please" we forgot,
And all of the things we should do and did not.
The hopes that we cherished, the plans that we made,
The promises broken, the manners mislaid,
We d find past the ranges, if only we knew
The way to the country where dreams all come true.
THE END


Wholly set up and printed in Australia.
By HARMAN & JACKA
138 Gawler Place
Adelaide, South Australia.




' tmz 3 * M /¥ : ; •
"1 K - -# *^FVL' JL <# IDI
RZ& -' SN* ■- :
'
. \ .-• _£?•.' .-
