

VACCINATION.
BOARD OF PUBLIC HEALTH, VICTORIA.
FACTS ABOUT SMALL-POX AND
VACCINATION.
Catralagued
6907.




VACCINATION.
BOARD OF PDBLIC HEALTH, VICTORIA.
FACTS ABOUT SMALL-POX AND
VACCINATION.
Issued by the Council of the British Medical Association,
January 19 th, 1898; and lie-issued by the Board of
Public Health, Victoria, by permission,
1. The Mortality from Small-pox is much less
HOW THAH IH PREVACCINATIOX TIMES.
Bernouilli, the famous mathematician, calculated
that no fewer than 15,000,000 of human beings in the
last century died of it every 25 years. Siissmilch, an
eminent statistician of the time of Frederick 1.,
estimated that nearly every one had small-pox, and
that it carried off a twelfth part of mankind. In
London in 1660-79, of every 80,000 deaths, 4,170
were from small-pox. In Iceland in 1707-9, it killed
18,000 persons in a population of 50,000. In Glasgow,
a large and very insanitary town, in 1783-1800, of
31,088 deaths or burials from all causes, 5,959 were ;
due Chester, which on the other hand
was described by an eminent authority of the time as !
a town of “ almost incredible” healthiness, had fewer !
than 15,000 inhabitants, and contained in the year
1775 only 1,060 persons, or one in fourteen, who had not
had small-pox. In Kilmarnock, with 4,000 or 5,000 in-
habitants in 1728-64, of every 1,000 children born
alive, 161 died of small-pox. In the village of Ware, :
in Hertfordshire, after an epidemic in 1722, only 302
persons in a population of 2,515 had never had the
small-pox. Such examples could easily be added to. ]
Great diminution of small-pox mortality occurred after
the introduction of vaccination where small-pox i
inoculation never prevailed, and also in places where
small-pox inoculation had prevailed.
Dr. Ed-
wardes, in
the Practi-
tioner, May.
1896.
Dr. McVail,
Vaccination
Vindicated,
pp. 9 and
154.
Sanitation
or Vaccina-
tion, pub-
lished by
Jenner
Sooiety,
Gloucester.
Mr. C. E.
Paget, in
Transac-
tions
Epidera.
Soc. 1883-4.
Vaccine tion
Vindicated,
p. 25.
Royal Com.
Report, vol.
vi., p. 282.


Supplement
to Local
■Government
Board Re-
port for
1884.
Royal Com.
Report,
toI. vi.,
p. 270.
Supplement
to Local
■Government
Board Re-
port for
1884.
Royal Com.
Report.
Royal Com.
Final Re-
port,
Appendix
VII.
VI.
2. The Greatest Diminution in the Small-pox
Mortality is found in the early years of
LIFE, IN WHICH THERE IS MOST VACCINATION.
In Geneva in the period 1580-1760, during which
there were 25,349 small-pox deaths, 961 of every 1,000
were under ten years of age. In Kilmarnock in
1728-64, of every 1,000 small-pox deaths, 988 were
under ten years of age. In a total of 36, /55 deaths
from small-pox at all ages occurring in Kilmarnock,.
Edinburgh, Manchester, Warrington, Chester, Geneva,
and the Hague in various prevaccination periods from
1580 onwards, 17,252 were under two years of age. In
the present day, on the other hand, vaccination being
performed in infancy and having its greatest protective
influence in the earlier years of life, small-pox has
to a great extent departed from children, and trans-
ferred itself to later and less protected ages. In
London in 1884, of 1,000 small-pox deaths, only 343
were under ten years old. But this calculation
includes both vaccinated and unvaccinated persons.
In the vaccinated community the corresponding
figures were not 343, but 86 ; and in the unvaccinated,
not 343 but 612. Among the unvaccinated the 612 is
better than the Geneva 961, and the Kilmarnock 988
of prevaccination times. "V accination, by lessening
the opportunities for infection, and increasing the
intervals between epidemics, has helped even the
unvaccinated. Yet among the unvaccinated in Lon-
don, Leicester, Dewsbury, and Gloucester, small-pox
is still to a great extent a disease of childhood.
In prevaccination times, small-pox, measles, and
whooping cough were diseases of childhood. Measles
and whooping cough are still diseases of childhood, but
small-pox, and especially fatal small-pox, has been to
a very remarkable extent driven from vaccinated
childhood by means of vaccination. In the same way,
what still remains of it can be driven from later periods
of life by means of revaccination.
The manner in which small-pox differentiates be-
tween the vaccinated and unvaccinated is seen in the
incidence of the disease on towns where it has recently
prevailed. In Gloucester, for example,, there had
been extreme neglect of infantile vaccination, and the
disease attacked a school and spread there, the
scholars being children. In Leicester the infection
was accidentally introduced into the scarlet fever


hospital, and the children being unvaccinated, the
disease began to spread there. The hospital was then
emptied of scarlet fever, and no more cases were
admitted, and in the town of Leicester scarlet fever
cases increased to thousands. In Warrington, on the
other hand, infantile vaccination had been well carried
out, but there was a want of adult revaccination and
the disease fastened on the workmen in a large iron-
works. Then the workmen’s committee in charge of
the sick fund resolved “ that any member who re-
mains unrevaccinated after Monday, November 21st,
1892, shall not be entitled to any sick benefit should
he be afflicted with small-pox ; ” and in consequence
over 1,400 men were revaccinated by the works’
doctor, and many others privately. The result was
that after the middle of December there were only
twelve cases among the employes, and the health
officer of Warrington reported that these were among
men who had refused revaccination or joined the works
subsequently.
The following table teaches a lesson that cannot
easily be misread :
Percentage of total small-pox deaths borne by children
under ten years of age in recent outbreaks.
Percentage of total
Vaccination Default small-pox deaths
in antecedent years. borne by children
under ten years
of age.
Warrington... Very slight ... ... 22.5
Sheffield ... Very slight ... ... 25.6
London ... In 1883-91, lOpercent. 36.8
Dewsbury ... In 1882-92, 32-3 per cent. 51.8
Gloucester ... In 1885-94, 10'6 to 85T
per cent. 64.5
Leicester ... In 1883-92, 43-8 to;SOT
per cent. 71'4*
3. In Countries where there is much Vaccination
and Revaccination, relatively to the popula-
tion, there is little Small-pox.
In Prussia, both vaccination and revaccination
are compulsory, and small-pox mortality is almost
V.
Royal Com.
Final
Report.
* Or 66-6. The difference depends on the exclusion or inclusion
of three deaths which occurred owing- to the attack of several
children in a scarlet fever ward through proximity to the small-
pox hospital.


Dr. Ed-
ivardes in
Practitioner
May, 1896.
Dr. Sweeting
in Practi-
tioner, 1892.
Practitioner
May, 1896.
Royal Com,
Final
Report,
s. 340.
abolished.* Beginning with the year 1816, it is found
that in that country previous to the law of 1874 the
small-pox death-rate was 309 per annum per million of
' population. Since then, ending with 1892, it has been
fifteen, and in the last ten years of the period only seven.
Moreover, the compulsory vaccination age is the second
' year of life, and investigation showed that in 1886-90
more than two-fifths of the few deaths that occurred
from small-pox were under two years of age. In
Austria, where vaccination is not compulsory, the rate
instead of being seven per million as in Prussia, was 458
'in the same period. In Belgium, also, vaccination is
not compulsory, and in 1875-84 it had a rate of 441
per million as compared with Prussia’s 22 in the same
period. In Italy since 1888 vaccination of infants has
been compulsory, as has revaccination of children
attending public schools. Already a great improve-
ment is indicated. In 1881-90 the small-pox death-rate
was 355 per million per annum, and in 1891-94 it was
only 65. At the time of the European epidemic of
1870-75 Scotland, England, Sweden, and Bavaria had
a compulsory vaccination law, and their small-pox rates
per million in the worst years were 1,470,1,830, 1,660,
and 1,660 respectively. Prussia, Holland, and Austria
had no general compulsory vaccination, and their rates
in the worst years were 5,060, 5,490, and 6,180.
Coming to 1877-86, with vaccination not compulsory
in Austria, with only infantile vaccination compulsory
in England, and with vaccination and revaccination
compulsory in Prussia, the average death-rate per
million from small-pox in the capitals of these three
countries was in Vienna 670, in London 250, and in
Berlin 10. In London the rate would have been less
but for the disease spreading from the small-pox hos-
pitals that it then contained.
4. In Classes among which there is much Vacci-
nation and Revaccination there is little
Small-pox.
In epidemics, as in London, Sheffield, and Warring-
ton, revaccinated postmen and policemen remained
safe in the midst of exposure to infection. Sir Charles
Dilke stated in 1883 that the average strength of the
permanent postal service in London was 10,504 in
1870-80, and yet during all that period, including the
* As regards the Prussian vaccination laws see British Medical
Journal , 1894, vol. ii., p. 1213, and Dr. Edwardes in The Prac-
titioner of May, 1896.


great epidemic, there was not a single death from
small-pox, and only ten slight cases. In 1891-94 the
employes of the General Post-office were over 55,000,
yet there were only seventeen cases of small-pox, and
one death, though postmen owing to the nature of
their duties are specially exposed to infection.
In the army and navy, where a large majority of the
men are successfully revaccinated there is very little
small-pox—very much less than before revaccination
became so prevalent.
No persons are so terribly exposed to infectious dis-
eases as are the nurses in fever and small-pox hospitals.
As regards fever nurses, Dr. Collie, medical superin-
tendent of Homerton Hospital, declared that “the
only way in which nurses become seasoned against
fever is by taking the disease.” At Homerton, Stock-
well, and Liverpool-road Fever Hospitals, in the ten
years ending 1881, 133 of the staff were attacked by
various fevers, and 25 died. The Gateshead medical
officer wrote: “Every nurse who has been more than
a fortnight in the typhus wards has suffered from
typhus.” In Newcastle in 1882 only five out of four-
teen nurses escaped typhus, and among the nine attacks
there were two deaths. In the hospitals of the Metro-
politan Asylums Board in 1877-95, no fewer than 704
of the attendants contracted scarlet fever, diphtheria,
or enteric fever.
How is it as regards small-pox? At Homerton
Hospital, in 1871-77, 366 persons were employed. All
but one were revaccinated, and she was the only one
who took small-pox. In the Highgate Hospital the
Royal Commission found that since May, 1883, of 137
nurses and attendants 30 had had small-pox before
entering the service. Of the other 107, all except the
gardener were revaccinated, and the gardener was the
only one who took small-pox. In the Sheffield hospi-
tals, in the year ending 31st March, 1888, there were
treated 1,798 small-pox patients. The total number
of attendants, &c., was 161. Of these eighteen had
had small-pox previously and escaped attack ; 63 had
been vaccinated in infancy, of whom six were attacked
and one died ; the other 80 were successfully revacci-
nated, and not one contracted small-pox. In Leicester,
however, where vaccination is neglected, some of the
nurses refused revaccination. In the outbreak there
the total hospital staff consisted of 40 persons. Of
these fourteen had either had small-pox or had been
Royal Com.
Final
Report,
ss. 331-9.
Vaccination
Vindicated,
p. 106.
Sir Richard
Thorne, in
Royal Com.
First Report
p. 38.
Royal Com.
Final
Report,
s. 329.
Royal Com.
Final Report
s. 314, etseq.


Royal Com.
Final Report
s. 248, &c.
Dr. McVail,
Epidern. Soc.
Transac-
tions, 1896-7.
Royal Com.
Final Report
ss. 234-247.
revaccinated before the outbreak, and twenty were-
vaccinated owing to the outbreak. Among these 34
(14 and 20) one mild case occurred in a nurse whose
revaccination was ten years old. Six of the 40 nurses
appear to have been imbued with anti-vaccination
opinions, and refused revaccination. Only one of the
six now needs any protection against small-pox. Five
of them took it and one died.
5. In Places where Small-pox Prevails it attacks
a much Greater Proportion of the Unvacci-
nated THAN OF THE VACCINATED, ESPECIALLY
WHERE THE VACCINATIONS ARE COMPARATIVELY
Recent.
In the Homerton Small-pox Hospital in over 10,000.
cases treated by Dr. Gay ton nearly 21 per cent, were
unvaccinated, and among children under ten the unvac-
cinated were no less than 47‘6 per cent. The unvac-
cinated at this time (1873-84) in the population from
which the cases were drawn did not amount nearly to
21 per cent., much less to 47 per cent. On the other
hand, there is one hospital (Highgate) which does not
admit children under seven and which draws its
patients from a more universally vaccinated section of
the population, and this hospital differed from others
in London in that the percentage of unvaccinated
patients was found to be much less, the difference
being due to the difference in the ages of admitted
cases, and the difference in the prevalence of vaccina-
tion in the population from which cases came ~
6. Houses invaded by Small-pox in the course
OF AN OUTBREAK NOT NEARLY SO MANY OF THE
Vaccinated Inmates are attacked as of the
Unvaccinated in proportion to their numbers.
K Taking children under ten years old, in infected
houses in Dewsbury, 10 '2 per cent, of the vaccinated
were attacked and 50 *8 per cent, of the unvaccinated;
in Leicester, 2'5 per cent, of the vaccinated, and 35
percent, of the unvaccinated; in Gloucester, B’B per
cent, of the vaccinated, and 46'3 per cent, of the un-
vaccinated. These places are selected here because
they are centres of anti-vaccination, as to which it can-
not be truthfully alleged that the unvaccinated are
weakly children whose vaccination has been postponed
by medical certificate, or that the vaccinated and.


unvaccinated children belong to different classes,,
especially when they are compared in the households
actually invaded hy the disease. It is urged by anti-
vaccinationists that vaccination does not protect
against small-pox, but on the contrary tends to
weaken the system against all disease. Yet the
vaccinated were attacked in much less proportion than
the unvaccinated.
7. The Fatality Rate among Persons attacked
by Small-pox is much Greater, age for
age, among the Unvaccinated than among
Vaccinated.
Taking the 10,403 cases treated in Homerton Hos-
pital in 1873-84, the deaths among the vaccinated
8,234, were 869, or 105 per cent., and among the
unvaccinated 2,169, were 938, or 43'4 per cent. We
shall see shortly that the deaths among the well
vaccinated were only 3 per cent. Taking the epide-
mics in three towns, Dewsbury, Leicester, and Glou-
cester, where vaccination has been neglected, we find
that under ten years of age, among 72 vaccinated
children attacked, two died, or 2'7 per cent., but
among 961 unvaccinated children attacked, 350 died,
or 37'3 per cent. Taking persons over ten years old,
among 1,959 vaccinated persons attacked, there were
136 deaths, or 6'9 per cent., and among 331 unvacci-
nated persons there were 75 deaths, or 22 "6 per cent.
Again it is to be noted that as vaccination was prac-
tically optional in these towns, the unvaccinated
children, according to anti-vaccination theories, should
have been more able to resist death hy small-pox than
those who had been subjected to an operation which is
alleged to weaken the system and render it more
liable to disease and death.
•
8. It cannot be truthfully alleged that, indepen-
dently of Vaccination, Small-pox is a milder
DISEASE NOW THAN IN FORMER CENTURIES.
If it were the case, as is sometimes argued by anti-
vaccinationists, that the small-pox fatality rate in last
century was about 18 per cent.* of persons attacked,
Vaccinations
Vindicated y
p- '
Royal Com
Fm ?' l Re ‘
202-230.
* This rate is based mainly on a prevalence of the disease in
certain towns in the West Biding of Yorkshire in certain years
between 1720 and 1730, but no average either for a century or for
a country can be calculated on such limited data. (Vaccination
Vindicated, pp. 57-59.


Vaccination
Vindicated,
p. 88.
Royal Com.
Final Re-
port, ss.
272-298.
then the much higher rate now occurring among the
Tin vaccinated would show the disease to be much more
severe now than then. But in the last century, as in
the present century, the fatality varied greatly in
different outbreaks, as does the fatality of scarlet
fever, diphtheria, measles, &c., in the present century.
And in epidemics in the present century, whether
they be mild or severe, whether the fatalities be few
or many, and whether there be much or little vaccina-
tion in the community, it is found that both the
attack rate and the fatality rate are much greater in
the unvaccinated than in the vaccinated in proportion
to their numbers.
9. The Degree op Protection conferred by
Vaccination corresponds to the thorough-
ness WITH WHICH THE OPERATION HAS BEEN
PERFORMED, THREE OR FOUR MARKS BEING
MUCH BETTER THAN ONE OR TWO, AND A LARGE
MARK MUCH BETTER THAN A SMALL ONE.
In Dr. Gayton’s 10,403 cases at the Homerton Hos-
pital, 2,085 had good marks, and the fatality rate was
3 per cent.; 4,854 had indifferent marks, and the
fatality rate was 9 per cent.; 1,295 were alleged to be
vaccinated, but had no marks, and the fatality rate
was 27 per cent., and 2,169 were unvaccinated and the
fatality rate was 43 per cent. Taking “good” marks
only, and attending to their numbers, Dr. Gayton found
that with one mark, the fatality rate was 4T per cent.;
with two marks, 3'3 per cent.; with three marks, 2'3
per cent.; with four or more marks, 1 - 5 per cent. The
cases on which these percentages are founded were
529, 649, 518, and 389 respectively. Taking nearly
7,000 cases observed in recent years, the Royal Com-
mission found that the small-pox fatality rate in
persons with one mark was 6‘2 per cent.; with two
marks, s’B per cent.; with three marks, 3‘7 per cent.;
and with four marks, 2’2 per cent.
It is comparatively seldom that cases come to the
hospital with the small-pox eruption so far advanced
and profuse as to obscure the vaccination marks, but in
hospital statistics in this country a column is provided
for “ doubtful ” cases, and if the figures for any large
hospital be examined it will be seen that the inclusion
of such cases either as “vaccinated” or “unvaccinated”
does not alter the lesson taught by the statistics.


10. Sanitation Cannot Account for the Facts
ABOVE SET FORTH.
Whooping cough and measles deaths still belong to
•childhood as in the last century, while small-pox
deaths have been removed from childhood to later
periods of life. How could sanitation account for this
differentiation ? If it be suggested that because sani-
tation confers a special benefit on children it may have
altered the age incidence of small-pox, the answer is
got by looking at facts. In Germany, as we have
seen, vaccination is not compulsory till the second
year, and over 40 per cent, of all the small-pox deaths
occur under two years of age. In Scotland the vacci-
nation age is six months, and children under six
months make just about the same contribution (138
deaths per 1,000 deaths) to the total small-pox deaths
as they did (139 deaths per 1,000) before the vaccina-
tion law was passed. But in the next half-year of life
—the half year of vaccination —the contribution has
fallen from 153 to 47. Surely this is vaccination and
not sanitation. In a community attacked by small-
pox, how could sanitation at home protect postmen
going from door to door day after day in infected dis-
tricts ? In Leicester, how could sanitation account for
the revaccinated nurses escaping small-pox, and the
nurses who had refused revaccination taking small-
pox? How could sanitation cause small-pox to pass
over vaccinated children and seize on unvaccinated
children in houses invaded by small-pox in Dewsbury
and Leicester and Gloucester ? How can sanitation
have caused the fatality of small-pox cases to be much
less among the vaccinated than among the unvaccinated
in these towns, especially if vaccination weakens the
system and makes it less resistant to disease as is alleged
by anti-vaccinationists ? How could sanitation cause
children with three or four vaccination marks to have a
less fatality from small-pox than children with one or
two vaccination marks? In Glasgow, while sanitation
was going from bad to worse, in the early part of the
century, vaccination was introduced and small-pox
underwent an enormous diminution, though hospitals
and isolation and disinfection were entirely out of the
question. In Gloucester vaccination had been neglected,
and in 1891 the secretary to the anti-vaccination league
declared to the Royal Commission that Gloucester was
a very clean town and had always been well abreast
Royal Com.
Final Re-
port, s. 174.
Sanitation
or Vaccina-
tion.
Jenner So-
ciety’s pub-
lications.
Royal Com.
Reports, vol.
vi. p. 11.


Vaccination
Inquirer,
IS&9. S ’
of sanitary improvements, and that its death rate was-
very low. The Board of Guardians also wrote to the
Commission on the same lines. But small-pox came,
and the town suffered from a terrible epidemic, and
ever since then the anti-vaccinationists have been de-
claring that there was a great want of sanitation in-
Gloucester. What was wanting was vaccination.
For convenience, the Registrar-General many years
ago grouped together places whose death-rate was low
and classified them as “ healthy districts.” They were-
nearly all found to be sparsely populated rural dis-
tricts where, though houses may be damp and over-
crowded, and other insanitary conditions prevail,
there is little opportunity for infection. In such
places, in spite of bad sanitation, there is a lower
death-rate than in towns, because, independently of
sanitary effort, the atmosphere is purer. Also there-
is less small-pox, and it comes at a later average age,
because there is less facility for spread of infection on
account of the smallness of the population and the
distance of house from house and village from village.
In such circumstances, though there is little sanitary-
effort there is little small-pox, and unvaccinated per-
sons have a better chance of escaping small-pox attack
than they have in large towns where sanitary arrange-
ments are more elaborate.
11. Though isolation of Small-pox Cases in Hos-
pitals IS A USEFUL AUXILIARY TO VACCINATION*
IT IS NO SUBSTITUTE FOR IT.
In an unvaccinated nation it would be utterly im-
practicable to provide sufficient small-pox hospitals.
For whooping cough and measles hospital accommoda-
tion has not been seriously attempted, though these
diseases cause an enormous mortality. Where, owing
to vaccination, liability to small-pox is limited, hos-
pitals are very useful, and help to give time for
general revaccination. But in an unprotected com-
munity their almost certain breakdown is obvious.
Who would have attended to the sick in Leicester if
all nurses had had the same experience as the nurses
who refused revaccination ? In an unprotected com-
munity, instead of small-pox being limited, it would
spread in rapidly widening circles. Where a person
protects himself by vaccination and revaccination he
can defy small-pox. He carries his protection with
him wherever he goes, and a father can obtain,


protection both for himself and his family. Even if
isolation in hospitals were made more stringently
•compulsory than vaccination has ever been in this
■country there could be no complete security. The
protection of the individual might fail at any moment.
It would depend not on himself but on other people.
His cordon of protection would be a chain the mea-
sure of whose strength would be its feeblest link, and
•over not one link would he have efficient control.
Failure of parents to observe the symptoms of illness ;
failure to call in a doctor; failure of the doctor to
recognise small-pox ; failure in promptitude of re-
moval ; inadequacy of hospital accommodation ; in-
sufficiency of disinfection of persons and things—
these would be among the risks to which even a law
of compulsory isolation would leave him exposed.
Obviously the risk of collapse of voluntary isolation
would be much greater.
12. Vaccination is Very Safe.
Nothing done by human beings is entirely without
risk, but the risks of vaccination have been grossly
exaggerated. Some of the earliest anti-vaccinationists
held that the countenance of a vaccinated child might
be transformed so as to assume “ the visage of a cow.”
Later on, in the ’fifties, vaccination was accused of
making people bald-headed, shortsighted, lazy, and of
causing degeneracy in music, painting, oratory, poetry,
&c. Still later, the habit has been to get statistical
returns of increasing and decreasing diseases from the
Registrar-General and to attribute the increasing
diseases to vaccination and to use the decreasing
diseases to illustrate the view that small-pox also might
decrease without vaccination. But a disease may be
increasing at one time and decreasing at another.
Thus at one time cholera and enteric fever and scarlet
fever were blamed on vaccination, but when these
•diseases began to decrease, their decrease was, and still
is, held to show the needlessness of vaccination.
One foul disease in particular has been blamed on
vaccination. It happens that since Leicester gave up
vaccination that disease has increased there much
more rapidly among infants than in the rest of
England. So also erysipelas, while it decreased in
England by 16 per cent., increased in Leicester by
41 per cent. Similarly, diarrhoea, dysentery, and bron-
chitis, all of which have been blamed to vaccination,
Vaccination
Vindicated,
Royal Com.
Final
’


Royal Com.
Pinal
s. e J34. ’
increased much more in Leicester than in Eng-
land. The periods under comparison are 1863-67 and
1883-87. It is not to be supposed that the increase in
these diseases is due to want of vaccination, but if
instead of increasing they had diminished in Leicester,
it is undeniable that their diminution would have been
attributed by anti-vaccinationists to diminution in
vaccination, just as increase of many sorts of disease
has been attributed by them to vaccination where
vaccination is not neglected as in Leicester. The
Royal commission made most careful search for in-
juries resulting from vaccination, and, after the fullest
consideration, arrived at the deliberate conclusion
that such injuries are “insignificant” and “diminish-
ing,” and can be still further diminished. So insig-
nificant are they that vaccination is nowhere more
nearly universal than in the families of medical men,
who love their children as other men do, and who
know much better than other men can do the exceeding
safety of vaccination.
13. Calf Lymph is now Available to Boards of
Guardians, etc., for the Vaccination of
Every Child in the Country.
Reverting to the foul disease which has formed the
principal allegation by anti-vaccinationists, it is to be
noted that the use of calf lymph makes its occurrence
through vaccination an absolute impossibility, as,,
calves are not subject to that disease.
By Authority: Robt. S. Brain, Government Printer..




