

VACCINATION
IN THE
Light of Modern Enquiry.
BY
GEORGE LACY,
AUTHOR OF
XtSIKKOUS KOTOItMATOKY KSSAYS.
P B I C E THBEEPEKCE.




VACCINATION
IN THE
Light of Modern Enquiry.
BY
GEORGE LACY,
AUTHOR OP
NUMEROUS REFORMATORY ESSAYS.
IP X 2, X C 23 T XX X?/ 23 33 3? 23 XT C 23 .




VACCINATION
In the Light of Modern Enquiry.
At the present juncture, when the public mind is somewhat
agitated on the subject of small-pox, it may not be out of place
to present a few of the facts on which those opposed to the prac-
tice of vaccination ground their antagonism to it. So far as the
movement has gone yet, its promoters have been looked upon as
fanatics, crazed with an idea based on no rational data whatever.
Without at this stage attempting to controvert the supposition
contained in the latter part of this judgment, two facts bearing
upon it may be, perhaps, beneficially pointed out. The first is
that fanatics are really the motive power to all progress, and
were there none such, and all were to act on the let-well-alone
principle, social advancement would be an impossibility. The
second is that the inception of all new truths, and the develop-
ment of the doctrines built upon them, and the movements
demanded by them, is ever met with the same jeers, and the
same accusations of crazy fanaticism. It is a peculiarity of
humanity, at its present phase of growth, that the majority
refuse to perceive any virtue in anything new, until its own
inherent truth overcomes opposition, and the seal of fashionable
acceptance is set upon it. In this, they overlook the obvious
fact that, if nature is really undergoing a process of growth,
that w r hich is newest is, if only for that very reason, most likely
to be truest. It is only on the supposition of a control of a
catastrophical character that an old-established custom can be
regarded as possessing any element of permanent necessity.
The temperance movement may be quoted as a case in point.
Five-and-twenty years ago temperance promoters were stig-
matised as crazy fanatics who were without the resolution to
keep sober unless taking a pledge to do so ; but in this our day
total abstinence is beginning to be fashionable, and a man can
declare himself an abstainer without dread of being set down a
lunatic.
The anti-vaccination movement is as yet very young, but it
has already drawn within its ranks such men as Herbert Spencer,
Francis New r man, John Bright, Sir T. Chambers, Dr. C. T.
Pearce, Dr. W. J. Collins, and many distinguished Americans
and Europeans, and Mr. Spencer’s name alone is sufficient to
demand for it the consideration of all thoughtful people.
The opposition to the practice of vaccination is based on
many considerations, which I will, as briefly as may be, proceed
to recapitulate. First, it is pointed out that the medical profes-
sion is completely undecided on the question, their allegations
with regard to it undergoing continual modification. Dr.
Jenner, in 1799, said, “When it has been found, in such abund-
ant instances, that the human frame, when once it has felt the
influence of the genuine cow T -pox in the way that has been


described, is never afterwards, at any period of its existence,
assailable by the small-pox, may I not with perfect confidence
congratulate my country, and society at large, on their beholding
in the mild form of cow-pox, an antidote that is capable of
extirpating from the earth a disease which is every hour devour-
ing its victims.” In 1800 he said, in the “ Origin of Variola
Vaccina that “ it became too evident to admit of controversy
that the annihilation of the small-pox must be the final result
of the discovery.” But in 1809 he propounded a new theory —
“that vaccination protected from small-pox as much, and no more,
than small-pox itself protected from a recurring attack,” This
is a serious departure from his original position, and if the dis-
coverer and founder of the system could be so uncertain about
it, laymen may be excused if they inquire which is the correct
one.
But since Tenner’s day further departures have been taken,
and such is the want of unanimity among the profession that it
may be said, without exaggeration, that no two standard medical
works will be found to agree on all points in the matter. Some
say that vaccination is not a positive protection against an
attack of small-pox, but that the attack with people so operated
on will be but of a mild and harmless character' where otherwise
it would have been fatal. A section of this school also main-
tains that the efficacy of the operation continues only for a
period, which with some is short, and with others long. Another
theory lays it down that the process is a positive preventive
against an attack of the disease for a period, at the end of which
re-vaccination is necessary ; but here also the school is unable
to decide upon the duration of the period of its efficiency,
fourteen years, seven years, five years, three years, one year, all
have their advocates. Dr. Lionel Beale states that he has been
vaccinated twenty-one times, and it may well be asked, if all
this is necessary, whether the cure is not as bad as the disease,
and whether most people would not prefer to run the chance of
escaping an attack altogether, than to go through such an ordeal.
Another point on which the doctors differ is as to the number
of punctures required, and from one to eight is each recom-
mended. Again, there is disagreement as to the relative merits
of the ordinary stock lymph, and of the strain of Beaugency
calf-lymph, and lymph taken direct from the cow or calf. How
can there be any certainty, even in the fundamentals of a matter
in which such conflicting dogmas are laid down by those who
claim to be experts? If there be such efficacy in vaccination,
how is it that the doctors cannot agree as to what the efficacy
consists in ? Surely such uncertainty is of itself presumptive
evidence that the system is unsound at its very root.
The popular theorjr is that vaccination is in some way a
protection against small-pox, though no one could exactly
explain how, or to what degree. But though this is the popular
theory, neither legislators nor people would seem to have any
real faith in it. When Sir T. Chambers, the Recorder of


London, was arguing in the House of Commons against the
penalties for non-vaccination, he was met with the reply, “ What
right have you to allow your unvaccinated child to be a peril to
the community ?” Now 96 per cent, of the English people were
vaccinated, and were thus supposed to be in some way protected
from small-pox ; and it is surely to the point to ask what harm
a healthy unvaccinated child could possibly do to children sup-
posed to be protected. It is a distinct desertion of the citadel,
and an utter ignoring of the protective theory. Vaccination is
either a protection, or it is not; and if it is, what danger can
there possibly be to the vaccinated from any outside influence
whatever P And if it is not what is the good of it ? And yet
this is the sole argument in favor of compulsory vaccination !
The next point to which anti-vaccinators draw attention is
that vaccination has not stamped out small-pox, for that disease
is at times as prevalent as ever it was.' It is often said by the
apologists of the system that as the disease for a time decreased
very much shortly after Jenner’s discovery, it is evident that
the operation must be accompanied by the results claimed for it.
But this position admits of much question. Vaccination was
for some time very unpopular, and but a small percentage of
the population submitted to it. The Registrar's department was
not constituted until 1838, so that any figures previous to this
date are, for the most part, conjectural and unreliable, and any
statistics put forward must be received wuth reservation. But
though this is the case it is pretty certain the percentage of the
population vaccinated for twenty years after Jenner’s discovery
was very trifling indeed —not more than two per cent. This
conclusion is arrived at by analogy from the first return of the
Registrar-General's report in 1838, and from the general records
of the time. But it is clear that if the percentage was so small
it could scarcely be claimed for vaccination that to it was due
the cessation, or rather diminution, of small-pox. May it not
with more reason be said that, like all diseases, it died out of
itself ? But though this of itself would be amply sufficient to
account for the temporary lull in the ravages of the disease, yet
there is still another reason, even more immediate in its bearings
on the matter. Previous to Jenuer’s discovery the system of
inoculation introduced by Lady Wortley Montague, and
which consisted in inoculating directly with the small-pox itself,
had been largely in vogue, and the disease was thus spread
broadcast throughout the land. But with the announcement of
Jenner’s panacea inoculation was made penal by the legislature,
and it is thus obvious that fewer cases of the disease were to be
found. This seems so very clear that it is somewhat startling to
find that it is claimed for vaccinatijn, that it stopped that which
had previously been intentionally and freely disseminated, but
which the law now made it penal to do so. A statement or
argument so evidently fallacious as this could scarcely be used
were there any at hand less easy of refutation. Again, although
there was, shortly after the initiation of the vaccination theory.


a temporary freedom from the disease in a virulent form, yet in
.1818, five years before Jenner’s death, there was a malignant
epidemic, and in 1825, two years after his decease, yet another,
described in Baron’s “ Life of Jenner ” as being as severe as any
of the preceding century. Thus therefore it is a mis-statement
to say that there was really any decrease of the disease concur-
rently with the introduction of vaccination.
Yet another point may also be noted on this head. The
calculations, miscalled statistics, which appeared in the parlia-
mentary papers having reference to the national award granted
to Jenner, are so obviously conjectural and fallacious that they
may be looked upon as utterly worthless. For instance, it is
stated that 45,000 died of small-pox in the days immediately
preceding Jenner. Now these figures w r ere reached in this way :
It was ascertained that during one epidemic year 8500 died of
the disease in London, and this, multiplied into a number w r hich
was supposed to be that of the population of England—but
which nobody knew, for there was then no registrar—gave
45,000! This is certainly simple, but scarcely satisfactory.
Again, Dr. Greenlow’s tables of mortality w r ere largely used in
the “statistics.” Now Dr. G-reenlow put the mortality of
London for some years at 80 per thousand. 'But this is an
obvious impossibility, for the births could not be nearly half
that number, so that in a very few years there would not
be a soul left! Many similar fallacies meet the student of
the arguments of the vaccination apologists.
I now come to a more important point. Without tracing
the history of small-pox from the period (932 A.n.) when dis-
tinct mention of it can be first found, it is sufficient here to note
that in an epidemic of the disease there w r as no increase in the
total mortality, or general death-rate. This w r as especially the
case before vaccination was made compulsory. For instance, in
the epidemic of 1838, w hen the deaths from small-pox numbered
10,000, the total deaths from the principal zymotic diseases
reached only 37,500 ; while in 1839, when the small-pox deaths
were but 9000, the total from the same diseases was 38,500.
All the returns show similar results, and the conclusion to be
drawn from them is that all this class of disease has a common
origin, and that the circumstances of the seasons, and the general
condition of society with regard to cheap food, wholesome drink,
adequate clothing and shelter, and general sanitary arrangements
determine which particular form of outbreak w r ould be the most
ravaging. The rationale of small-pox in this light of course is
that it is merely an effort of nature to expel certain poisonous
matter bred of unnatural conditions, which w r ould otherwise be
a constant source of danger to the individual. A corroboration
of this view is to be found in the w 7 ell-know r n and oft-noticed
fact that those who recover from a severe attack of small-pox,
not induced artificially, are always remarkably healthy, and free
from disease for a long time afterwards. This w r ell-known fact
ought to carry weight among the thoughtful, for there is no


other explanation for it but that nature has thrown out inherited,
or slowly acquired, poison that would have otherwise festered
in tl\e blood and kept the subject in a perpetual state of indif-
ferent health. This of course is really the philosophy of all
eruptive diseases, but it would appear that in small-pox nature
finds alike her most violent, and most effective, cleanser of
poisonous matter. Of course it is well-known to all that medical
men can “ cure ” eruptions of this character; that is to say that
by the introduction of some mineral or vegetable substance the
threatened illness can be “ warded ” off ! But we latter-day
fanatics are bold enough to say that in this they simply drive it
inwards, and that thus the diseased matter is compelled to
accumulate, the vitality is lowered, and organic disease sets in,
and broken health, followed by early death, is the result.
In the light of this philosophy of disease a perfectly healthy
man —that is to say, one who has neither inherited any diseased
taint, nor lived in conditions to acquire any, is perfectly proof
against any epidemic, for his vitality is so great that he repels
the approach of disease. To kill epidemics it is, therefore, only
necessary to strike at the root, and, by improving the conditions,
to diminish the chance of hereditary transmission. But, alas,
this is but Utopian, for with them must go the doctors —their
occupation would be gone, and who could hope to fight against
a vested interest of such formidable dimensions !
The next point to be noted is that vaccination is directly
answerable for an immense increase in nearly all inoculable
diseases. Vaccination was made compulsory in England in 1853,
again in 1867, and still more stringently in 1871. The last
Parliamentary return to hand is complete only to 1875, but a
few items of 1877 are also available. Now, in 1847, six years
previous to the first enforcement of vaccination, the deaths of
infants under one year from syphilis was at the rate of 472 per
million of births ; but the average for the seven years, 1868 to
1875, was 1260 per million, and in 1877 it was 1746 per million.
For the same year the deaths at a similar age were, from scrofula,
increased by 660 per million, or nearly threefold; from tabes,
by 2270 per million, or nearly double ; from skin disease, by 320
per million, or more than double; from erysipelas, by 240 per
million, or an increase of one-fourth; from bronchitis, by
12,400 per million, or threefold; from diarrhoea, by 9220 per
million, or nearly double; and from atrophy, by 3480 per
million, or an increase of one-tenth. These figures are official.
They show that since it was made compulsory to vaccinate every
infant within three months of birth the mortality of children
under one year had increased by no less than 30,000 per million,
for eight causes alone. Not only so, but the increase has kept
pace collaterally with the additional stringency of the enforce-
ment. If these facts do not stand in the direct relation of cause
and effect it may well be said that figures are altogether worth-
less for any purposes of demonstration. No doubt, other
causes may be adduced as influencing ,the results, but it will be


impossible for the utmost casuistry altogether to get rid of the
awkwardness of the coincidence.*
Furthermore, the death-rate of all ages had also increased
very largely from these inoculable diseases. It may also be
noted, that although cholera was extensively prevalent prior to
1855, since wffiich it has been of rare occurrence and mild form,
yet the total death-rate from 1851 to 1875 shows no diminution
from that of the period 1838 to 1851; whereas there should
have been indicated a large decrease, unless cholera has been
replaced by some other disease equally destructive.
It will, perhaps, be said that though it may possibly be true
that certain eruptive diseases may be induced by the use of
lymph that has passed through millions upon millions of human
organisms for eighty years, yet if calf-lymph be used such a
thing would be without the range of possibility. This is the
position of that section of the medical profession on which the
facts and figures of the anti-vaccinators have made some impres-
sion. On the face of it it looks decidedly plausible, and no
doubt has quieted the fears of many who had come to have some
dread of vaccination. But here again dogma can be met with
fact. Let Dr. Seaton speak. Dr. Seaton is the Medical Officer
to the Privy Council, and it is on his reports that most of
these Parliamentary papers are based. In Deport 1870, p. 188,
he says : “ Dr. Worlomont informed me that, on more than one
occasion, practitioners who had vaccinated children with some
of his animal lymph had told him of symptoms following which,
if they had not known the source of the lymph, they would
have considered an imparted syphilis ; and there had been lately
lively discussions in France over some cases of syphilis appear-
ing in children who had been vaccinated from a heifer, the local
syphilitic symptoms manifesting themselves, it is said, at the
vaccinated spots at the termination of the vaccine process
cases which, no doubt, had humanised lymph been used, would
have been alleged to be cases of infection introduced by it.’
This is pretty clear on the point ; but more recently a great
stir has been made in the same country with regard to several
cases of syphilis supervening on vaccination with lymph direct
from the calf, though I cannot now put my hands on the papers
containing the particulars.
But, syphilis apart, it is undeniable that animals are subject,
to disease as much as humans, and as it is admitted, even by the
medical profession, that unless the lymph is quite “pure” it is
quite possible to introduce the germs of other diseases, it can-
not be inappropriate to ask whether the diseases that animals
are subject to are desirable things to run the chance of receiving.
Those who, like myself, have had much to do with cattle and
* Mr. Herbert Spencer, in his invaluable treatise on Education , while
discussing the decrease in the robustness and proportions of the English race,
as indicated by the size of the old armour, says that it is most probably partly
owing to the introduction, by vaccination, of hereditary taint of debility and
organic disease.


horses, know full well that they are just as subject to disease as
humans, and that their diseases are as malignant and as fatal.
We have already a sufficiently large and majestic an assortment
of diseases to satisfy the yearnings and ambition of the most
tender-hearted and philanthropical of doctors, and the necessity
of a further addition in the shape of foot-and-mouth disease,
red water, farcy, blue-tongue, cattle plague, or African “ sickness,’
is not altogether apparent.
This leads up to the question of “ pure" lymph. The
relevancy of the term “pure,” in connection with that which of
itself is malignant corruption, may of course be questioned by
such absurd sticklers for consistency who have not been inocu-
lated with the medical afflatus, but I cannot waste time on such
trifling. Pure corruption certainly seems to the uninitiated a
contradiction in terms, but it has received the sanction of the
profession, and that ought to be enough for everyone. But how,
it may be asked, can anything possibly be pure that has passed
through no one knows how many million constitutions, and
gathered on its course the germs of who shall say what ?
Doctors acknowledge that neither by the microscope, by the
specti’um, or by chemical analysis can the pus matter of one
eruptive disease be distinguished from that of another, when
they are at the same stage of development. Neither can they
tell good from bad, if it is possible for such distinctions to exist
in such a matter. It might well be supposed that if good vaccine
could be found it would be found for the Queen, and yet it is
well known that when she was re-vaccinated erysipelas was
induced, and she nearly lost her arm.
I now come to the most important point of all. It has been
shown that .Tenner at first declared that vaccination gave com-
plete and permanent immunity from infection of small-pox,
though he afterwards abandoned this position for another. The
generally received theory is, that it is in some mysterious degree
a protection against the disease, though, as has been pointed
out, the theory is ignored in practice by both legislators and
agitators. It is however on this ground —that of protecting
those who are already theoretically protected —that compulsory
vaccination is advocated. But what if it could be shown that
vaccination, so far from decreasing small-pox, increased it to a
very large extent. Would the doctors then discard it ? No ! for
this is exactly what the figures of the Registrar-General of
England do show, and if the doctors do not know it they ought
to do so. It has already been stated that vaccination was first
made compulsory in 1853, and more stringently enforced in 1867,
and yet more in 1871. Since 1853 there have been three
epidemics of the disease in England, the deaths during which
were as follows : —first period, 1857-58-59,14,244 ; second, 1863-
64-65, 20,059 ; third, 1870-71-72, 44,840. Thus, though the
increase of population from the first to the second epidemic was
only seven per cent., the increase of small-pox was fifty per
-cent.; and while the increase of population from the second to


third epidemic was ten per cent., the increase of small-pox was
one hundred and twenty per cent. These are hard facts that
no amount of apology or sophistry can get rid of. The figures
can be presented in a still more startling way, thus : Deaths
from small-pox in the first ten years after compulsory vaccination,
33,515 ;in the second ten years, 1860 to 1873, 70,458. In other
countries the same results have been obtained. Vaccination is
compulsory throughout Europe, except Spain and a few other
countries, and has long been enforced with the utmost stringency.
But in 1871 there died of small-pox in Prussia no less than
70,000 ; in Holland, 16,000 ; and in Hamburgh alone, 3,700, or
a ninetieth part of the entire population ! In Milan, 2,817, the
number of patients classed as unvaccinated being only 278. In
Paris the same year small-pox carried off 15,421, and in the
whole of France about 200,000. Spain, which uever adopted
either inoculation or vaccination, should, if the theory |of
vaccination is of any value at all, have been at the top of the
list, but as a matter of fact it is at the bottom, and the number
is so small that the figures are not quoted in the Report.
A year or two ago there was published a pamphlet by Dr.
L. J. Keller, Head Physician of the Imperial Austrian State
Railway Company, which was compiled from the statistics of
eighty doctors whom he had under him. The conclusions he
arrived at were that vaccination makes the healthy rather more
predisposed to small-pox than the unvaccinated and most
unhealthy; and that the greatest mortality occurs under two
years old. Many of these were of course unvaccinated, and the
fact is seized upon by vaccinists as one in favour of their theory.
But Dr. Keller says that the majority of these are the weakly
Avhom they dare not vaccinate, and he clinches the matter by
showing that his figures demonstrate the death-rate under two
years to be greater among the vaccinated than among the un-
vaccinated. Leaving out those under two years old the death-
rate from the disease was nearly equal among the vaccinated
and the unvaccinated, with a slight reduction in favour of the
latter. He concludes that the mortality in the different periods
of life follows, both with the vaccinated and unvaccinated, the
ordinary law of mortality of the human race at these respective
periods, and that vaccination has no power to alter or affect
this law of nature. He also brings into especial prominence
the fact that has long been laid stress on by anti-vaccinators,
viz : That only the healthy children are vaccinated, and the sickly
ones as a rule are left unvaccinated , as the doctors dare not run the
risk, and that if these die of small-pox the fact is placed to the
dehit of anti-vaccination, as they are returned as unvaccinated.
These facts and conclusions, be it noted, are given by a profes-
sional vaccinator, and were forced upon him in the performance
of his duties. They demonstrate that statistical tables of small-
pox cases, in which age and the normal death-rate are left out,
are quite worthless as regards a decision on the question as to
what influence vaccination may have exercised.


All the continental reports tell the same tale. In the Vienna
Medical Journal, 1872, two hundred and sixty-three deaths are
stated to have occurred among the re-vaccinated German
soldiers in the 1871 epidemic ; and none of them are without
similar cases. In America it is the same, and Dr. Rowell, Health-
officer of San Francisco, says that in the epidemic of 1868-69
“ those vaccinated and re-vaccinated since the commencement
of the epidemic were apparently thereby rendered more suscep-
tible of the disease.” In Philadelphia, in 1871-72, there were
fifty cases of small-pox, after re-vaccination, in the municipal
small-pox hospital.
Before the time of Jenner it was declared that in London, in
epidemic years, a fourteenth of the total deaths resulted from
small-pox. This statement, be it noted, was put forward by
Jenner himself, and is given for what it is worth. If there be
in vaccination the virtue claimed for it the deaths from small-
pox in London in 1871, when vaccination was enforced with the
utmost stringency, should be much less than a fourteenth of the
population Let us see. A fourteenth of the -population of
London in that year would give 5,745. What was the number
of deaths from small-pox ? 7,856 ! Truly a strange kind of
stamping out!
I now turn to the hospital reports. It will be fully under-
stood that these are not compiled by anti-vaccinators, and that
every fact that can be turned to the credit of the vaccination
theory will be so turned. To expect anything else would be to
declare that doctors are not ordinary human beings, but a race
invested with the infallible attributes which they themselves
claim. But notwithstanding this, even these reports support
the anti-vaccination view. In 1864, of the patients in the small-
pox hospitals 84 per cent, were vaccinated. In 1871, out of
14,808 cases admitted into the small-pox hospitals of London,
11,174 were returned as vaccinated. This official statement
surely does away with the protective theory, whatever else it
may help to prove. It is true that the number of deaths among
the unvaccinated is returned as much larger than among the
vaccinated, but these figures will bear investigation. It is stated
that thirty-three per cent, of the unvaccinated cases died. Now,
this statement alone should at once give rise to doubt; for the
celebrated Dr. Jurin, in 1728, before inoculation or vaccination
were invented, estimated the deaths among small-pox cases at
seventeen per cent. But it is also said that small-pox is not
such a virulent disease now as it was during the last century.
How, then, has the mortality among the unvaccinated risen from
seventeen to thirty-three per cent? It looks suspicious on the
very face of it. Let us go a little deeper into the matter. All
cases admitted into the hospitals are returned as unvaccinated
if the vaccination marks cannot be seen. But as a rule small-
pox cases are never sent to the hospital until they are decidedly
in a bad state. In 1871 the report says “394 deaths occurred
within forty-eight hours after admission.” Now anyone in the


least acquainted with the appearance of a patient in a bad stage
of small-pox must know that within forty-eight hours of death
even a sabre cut would be obliterated. And yet all these cases
would be returned as having no marks, and therefore being un-
vaccinated. An accidental occurrence in Glasgow fully cor-
roborates this view, and is to be found in the Glasgow hospital
report. The classification is made on the entry of the patient
into the hospital, and Dr. Bussell states that on one occasion,
when the hospital was not crowded, he kept the patients until
complete recovery, when, on examination, the marks in several
cases which had been entered as unvaccinated were found to
have re-appeared, and the hospital register was altered from
unvaccinated to vaccinated. If this was found to be the case
on the only occasion when such an examination was made, is it
not probable that it is always the case ? Nay, is it not a priori
to be presumed that it is so ?
But this is not all. In vaccination doctors have a theory to
support, on which depends a large proportion of their income,
and to expect them to take every pains to give prominence to
the facts telling against the theory would be manifestly absurd.
I do not say that they wilfully falsify the statistics, but I do
say that the inborn tendency of thought, which must of necessity
control them, leads them to take for a necessary fact that which
investigation would show to be no fact at all. But lam sorry
to say that, in some instances, the matter goes a good deal fur-
ther than this. It is scarcely likely that many people would
take the trouble to investigate the hospital statistics, with a
view to corroborate, or otherwise, their alleged information.
Such an undertaking must of necessity be both laborious and
disagreeable. But on one or two occasions it has been done.
In the Banbury Guardian one such investigation was reported.
There occurred ten cases of small-pox in Banbury, out of which
two died. These two were x’eturned as unvaccinated, and the
remaining eight that recovered as having been vaccinated, but
so far back that the effects of the vaccine had died out. But
the truth was found to be that all had been once perfectly
vaccinated according to Act of Parliament, and one of those
that died, twice.
Another case occurred in Leeds. In 1871 there were 115
deaths returned as of unvaccinated people. Mr. John Pickering
and Councillor Kenworthy enquired into about half these cases,
and found that of these nine were entered as unvaccinated, all
of whom had been vaccinated ; eight entered unvaccinated which
should have been entered unsuccessfully vaccinated; and four
entered unvaccinated which should have been returned unfit.
They also found a number of living people who had recovered
and who had been returned as unvaccinated, but who had been
vaccinated.
It has already been shown that those infants who are in such
a delicate state of health that the doctors dare not vaccinate
them, go to swell the numbers of the unvaccinated, audit remains to


be told that those wbo are operated on any number of times, but
do not “ take,” are also relegated to the same list. But the rising
school says that these are just they who take most. It says
that when the pustules appear readily on the arm it is merely
an indication that the subject has sufficient vitality to repel the
poison which is sought to be introduced into the system. But
when the pustules do not appear, then it denotes that the
patient has not the vital force to throw out the noxious matter,
but that it sinks into the system and assimilates with the blood,
leaving a chronic tendency to eruptive disease, a slowly waning
xdtality, and consequently a susceptibility to all manner of
epidemics, and to all baneful conditions. These unfort mates,
Avhen they are attacked with small-pox, as they are sure to bo
Avhen that disease is “ about,” are returned as unvaccinated, and
used to bolster up the cause of vaccination ; but as a matter of
fact they are poisoned by the introduction of noxious matter,
Avhich saps their life, and without which they would run, at all
events a chance, of long life.
In reference to this point the doctors’ excuse for those
dying who are undeniably vaccinated, is generally that the
operation is inefficiently performed ; that is to say that the right
number of marks were not on the arms. But here again the
figures are against the doctors. The percentage of deaths, in
1871, among those Avith four marks Ansible was 65, and Avhen it
is remembered that a large number are admitted in such a state
that no marks could possibly be seen, the return is very signifi-
cant. In the Horaerton and Stockwell hospitals out of 3085
admissions 1866 admittedly had good marks. The same report
says, in reference to those cases treated up to March 30th—
-14,400 in number —2700 of which were fatal, “ If these had
been properly vaccinated the duration of their stay in hospital
should have been about 245,000 days.” Now Jenner, in 1802,
positively declared before Parliament that the properly vaccin-
ated could not possibly take the disease, and that is Avhy he
received the national grant of £30,000. In the next place this
statement candidly admits that “proper” vaccination is quite
incapable of preventing people from occupying hospital Avards
twenty days apiece when attacked by small-pox.
One more point: During the seven years 1867-74 > there was
paid out of the poor-rates to public vaccinators, for so-called
gratuitous vaccination, £544,723; and in addition parliament
voted £43,428 to meritorious vaccinators. Is it likely that the
profession would give up this sum without a struggle ? It would
be an ignoring of all the instincts of this selfish money-grubbing
age. In addition to this it is to be remembered that this sum
only represents a small portion of its income from vaccination,
for the middle and upper classes do not patronise the public
vaccinator. Dr. Collins, of Regent’s Park, now an unflinching
anti-vaccinator, admits that he made £5OO a year by it.
What do all these facts point to ? It has been shoAvn that
the doctors cannot agree as to what really is the efficacy of


vaccination —and here it may not be amiss to quote Sir Thomas
Watson, the Nestor o£ the medical world. He wrote, in June,
1878, in the Nineteenth Century —“ It is too certain that one
objection, really formidable, exists to vaccination—that the
operation may in some few instances impart to the subject of it
the poison of a hateful and destructive disease, peculiar to the
human species, and the fruit and Nemesis of its vices .... I
can readily sympathise with, and even applaud, a father who,
with this presumed dread or misgiving in his mind, is willing to
submit to multiplied judicial penalties rather than expose his
child to the risk of an infection so ghastly.”
It has been shown that in an epidemic of small-pox there is
no increase in the general death-rate, or total mortality,
demonstrating that the disease isinerely one of the means that
nature, under present conditions, uses to get rid of the poison
Avhich bad sanitary and dietary customs have in past times en-
gendered.
It has been shown that vaccination is directly answerable
for an increase of nearly all inoculable diseases, which the
doctors overcome by recommending the use of “pure” lymph,
and others of calf-lymph.
It has been shown that collaterally with the enforcement of
the compulsory Acts there has been an immense increase in
deaths from small-pox. This is the record of the Registrar-
Geueral’s returns, and therefore unassailable by any medical
a priori objections, such as that offered when Earl Grosvenor
took the small-pox : “ Oh, it cannot be small-pox, for Dr. Jenner
vaccinated him.”
And it has been shown that the medical fraternity have a
tremendous vested interest in the continuance of the vaccination
system, and that therefore it cannot be looked upon as an im-
partial witness in the matter.
It remains only to quote the opinion of a few eminent men,
in addition to those already quoted, as to compulsory vaccination.
Francis W. Newman ; “ To punish parents for struggling to
keep their children's blood inviolate, is a form of tyranny
unheard of until modern times, and emphatically as disgraceful
as it is impious.”
John Bright: “The law which inflicts penalty after penalty
on a parent who is unwilling to have his child vaccinated is
monstrous.”
Moncure Conway : “ Government has no more right to com-
pel a parent to inoculate his child with possibly tainted lymph,
than to compel the child of a Protestant to go to a Catholic
school.”
Bir T. Chambers, Q.C., M.P., Recorder of London: “Com-
pulsory vaccination is beyond all comparison the strongest form
of ‘ parental government ’ that was ever introduced into this
country.”
Charles Bradlaugh: “It is the most oppressive piece of
legislation enacted by any English-speaking Legislature since


the passage o£ the notorious Fugitive Slave Law in the United
States.”
W. E. Gladstone : “ I view with misgiving all new aggres-
sions upon private liberty. The inequality of the Vaccination
Law is a strong reason for doing what we can to mitigate its
severity.”
Herbert Spencer : “ I wish I had known some time since
that the Vaccination persecution had been carried so far, as I
might have made use of the fact. It would have served farther
to enforce the parallel between this medical popery, which men
think so defensible, and the religious popery they think so
indefensible.”
J. W. Pease, M.P.: “ Vaccination slaughters children in a
wholesale way.”
P. A. Taylor, M.P. : “ I maintain that all the elements
justifying compulsion on the part of the'State are wanting in
this instance of vaccination.”
Dr. W. J. Collins, M.E.C.S., Esq., L.E.C.P. Edin. L.M.,
20 years Vaccine Physician in Edinburgh aud London : “If I
had the desire to describe one-third of the victims ruined by
vaccination the blood would stand still in your veins.”
Dr. C. T. Pearce, M.D., M.E.C.S., England, for many years
the associate of Sir W. Jenner and Sir H. Thompson, and who
has devoted a quarter of a century to the special study of the
disease: “Vaccination and small-pox stand in the relation of
cause and effect, and bear a corresponding ratio the one to the
other.”
Compulsory vaccination is from every point of view
thoroughly indefensible. The only ground that can be taken in
favour of compulsion by the State, is that of complete unanimity
of sentiment with regard to the matter affected by the action
whose adoption is at issue. When any section of society looks
upon the theories sought to be enforced as fallacious, then their
enforcement becomes a tyranny. For instance, compulsory
education is justifiable, because it is universally admitted that
ignorance is prejudicial both to the individual and to the com-
munity, and no one could be found to deny it. But the enforce-
ment of sectarian dogmas is unjustifiable, because certain sections
of society look upon these dogmas as fallacious. In the eloquent
words of Moncure Conway : “ When against any law a protest
arises, made in the same public interest as law itself ; when it
has no private or selfish purpose, and appeals only to fact and
argument; when, though in a small minority, it has sufficient
weight of intelligence on its side to confuse the judgment of
good citizens; then no law can remain just which meets that
protest and argument with brute force.” So it is with vaccina-
tion. A section of society, ever increasing in numbers, and in
England, the Continent, and A merica, gradually drawing to itsome
of the brightest minds of the day, sees in vaccination nothing
but dogma and fallacy, an 1 to compel them to undergo it in
pain of imprisonment is manifestly the worst form of tyranny.


In this pamphlet I have made no special reference to this or
the neighbouring colonies, because I have no data to go upon.
So far as I can find out nothing has been published in regard to
the matter. New South Wales is, I believe, the only one of
them in which vaccination is not in some way compulsory. It
is also the one most liable to “ infection,” Sydney being the port
of entry for all vessels from eastern Asia, Polynesia, and
America. This being so one would naturally think, if there be
any truth in the doctors’ theories, that small-pox would be more
rife than in the ad jacent colonies. But it is nothing of the kind ;
New South Wales has been as free from the pest as any of them,
and that in spite of Sydney being without doubt the dirtiest and
least sanitarily protected of any city of its age in thecivilised world.
How long it will remain so is not a question of vaccination or
non-vaccination; but one of good drainage, good water, airy
streets, roomy tenements, clean roads, pure water-frontages, and
such matters. Until Sydney is to a large extent pulled down
and the streets made wider, the houses larger and more airy ;
until the legislature forbid building in the suburbs on small
allotments and without wide streets; until the harbour is purified;
until the drainage is carried to a distance and deodorised ; until
water out of something else than a swamp is supplied, Sydney
may at any moment look for an epidemic of small-pox, or cholera,
or typhoid fever, or some other of nature’s fruit grown from the
seed of criminal neglect. But this will not prevent the doctors
administering their nostrums iu the arrogant presumption of
pretending to control the laws by which they themselves are
controlled. Nor, when the epidemic dies out of itself, after
having killed all whose constitutions were not proof against
it, will it prevent them claiming for their efforts the credit of
stopping that which they did all in their power to increase.
Be that as it may, I trust I have brought home to a few of
those who have released their faculties from the leading-strings
of the past, and dare to do their own thinking, that vaccination
is but another of the dogmatic shibboleths that have held us in
bondage for so long, and that so far from being the protection
it is pretended, by a largely subsidised class, to be, it is one of
the most prolific sources of disease which we have to encounter
in our journey through life.
City of Sydney Printing and Publishing Co., 15i Bridge Street.




