

VACCINATION
flsrrmnaltn:
1
PRINTED BY C. K, FULLER, GEORGE STREET,
1875.
$£




VACCINATION
ITS EVIL CONSEQUENCES
intb its ofic|in.
SMALL-POX, &c.
JOHN MORTON, M. 8., L.R.C.S.E., & L.B.A. LOND.
PKICE, Is. 6d.
Itammatfa:
FEINTED BY C. E. FULLER, GEORGE STREET.
1875.




JP IRj EP AOE .
To the Mothers of England, and Parents and Guardians throughout
the World ; I address the following pages, and trust that they may be
the means of directing attention to the evil consequences of
Vaccination.
If after perusal of this paper, they see, as I have no doubt many of
them will, the evils that are Mkely to accrue from Vaccination, they
may feel inclined to object to their offspring being Vaccinated, although
by the Compulsory Vaccination Act of England, they are compelled
by law to do so. They will find a very simple remedy pointed out in
the following pages, to prevent the vaccine virus, or any other virus,
from poisoning their children’s blood. I wish to observe, that medical
men as a rule, are now as thoroughly opposed to non-vaccination, as
before they were adverse to the performance of it, also, that those
gentlemen who are at the summit of the medical profession, are not
the fit and proper persons to give an opinion upon Vaccination, as
they have probably never Vaccinated a dozen children in their lives,
and only speak strongly on the point, from a preconceived theory, but
it is to the hard working general practitioner, that the public must
look, to learn facts, which have been gained only, from practical
experience in hundreds of cases.
At one time I believed firmly in Vaccination, having taken it for
granted that it must be right, but from the result of observation, I
have completely changed my opinion, and now always advise parents
not to have their children Vaccinated, as it seems to me, to be a
fearful, and scandalous thing, to Vaccinate these poor little infants
within three months of their birth, when their vital powers must
necessarily be weak, and the virus more likely to produce a permanent
weakly state of constitution.
When on a visit to England a few years ago, I was not surprised to
see that a medical man had been fined several times for non-compli-
ance with the Vaccination Act, as he said, he would rather leave the
country, than be the murderer of his own offspring, having previously
lost several children, whose deaths he attributed entirely to
Vaccination.
The great mortality of Small-Pox, is due, I firmly believe
(from my experience of Scarlet fever, which is another eruptive fever)
to a bad system of treatment, and if the disease had been left


entirely alone, and nature not interfered with in the slightest degree,
the mortality would have been considerably less, as I believe the
treatment adopted even up to the present time, to be worse than
useless.
Some medical men will tell you to look at the number of deaths prior
to Vaccination, in comparison with the present time. In return I will
direct their attention to the former treatment, in the doses of castor oil,
salts and senna, calomel, bleeding, blistering, and starvation, hot
baths, closed doors and windows, swaddling in flannels, no cold water
allowed, etc. I ask, how any one could possibly be expected to survive
such treatment ? Or if they did-by the aid of a good strong constitu-
tion manage, in spite of this poison-fostering treatment, to struggle
through, it was only with a shattered state of health and great dis-
figurement, but much of this is now discarded and hence I believe may
be attributed in a great measure, less, virulence of the disease.
Are we not lost in feelings of admiration and wonder, when we
contemplate the mechanism of the human body, and the beauty of its
entire structure, and know that all its wants, and everything essential
to healthy vitality, has been foreseen, and provided for, and the same
in the brute creation ? And yet man, in his mistaken ideas of medical
science, actually overlooks these facts, and contrary to what appears to
have been the design of the Creator, inoculates the human, from the
brute kingdom. I think that this is an insult to God, and man, for
man was evidently intended to exert his intellectual or reasoning
faculties, to overcoming Small-Pox, as well as other insidious, and
malignant diseases, and not to mingle the germs of brute disease with
the human blood. Before quitting the subject, I desire to state my firm
opinion, that, if every known form of septic poison were at the present
moment entirely obliterated, they would each, and all, in the course of
time, arise de novo, and be as virulent as ever, as from the continual chemi-
cal changes constantly taking place in the human body, it may justly
be looked upon as a highly delicate chemical-laboratory, and that when
any of these healthy and necessary processes are changed or interrupted
by septic poisons, attacking as they do the lymphatic glands, I cannot
see how healthy blood can afterwards be formed. I hope after perusal
of the following pages, it will be seen that Cow-pox is no Pox at all ,
but simply an irritation produced in the skin of the beast by an animal
septic poison, leading to the formation of lymph, etc., which also takes
on a highly septic nature, and thus the propagation of the disease.
Parramatta, June Ist, 1875.
JOHN MORTON.


arrimttiim ottii its (Bail Cntiseqtttnres.
Vaccine lymph, is an animal septio poison, and should therefore
of course never be introduced into the blood of man, woman,
child, or beast.
That Vaccination has modified Small-Pox, I am agreeable to
admit, (but I believe at a fearful cost to the constitution) but how
it has done so, is a question I cannot undertake to answer, but
believe it may have so impoverished some portion of the blood,
or what is still more probable, have so changed the healthy action
of the lymphatic vessels, and glands, (particularly those of the
mesentery,) that when Small-Pox follows vaccination, there is not
the same amount of pabulum, or food, for the poison to act upont
and consequently less poisonous matter to be excreted by the skin,
and as a natural result, fewer pustules are developed. A proof
of this is, that in Small-Pox, plethoric people suffer the most
severely.
Such being the case, it proves at once that some vital principle
of the blood, has been destroyed by Vaccination, or its reproduc-
tion diminished from the reasons just mentioned, this should there-
fore make us pause and consider whether such a gland, and blood
destroyer, should be still inserted into the arms of helpless babes,
or whether a bill should not at once be passed by the Legislature,
to prohibit the continuance of Vaccination.
That Vaccination has not driven Small-Pox from the surface of
the land, as Jenner prophesied, is proved by the number of deaths
that annually occur in spite of Vaccination, and all our modern,
improved sanitary arrangments.
In the propagation of Vaccination, by taking lymph from one
child and applying it to the arms of another, how do we know
whether the father or mother, to say nothing of the grandfather


or grandmothers, have not had Syphilis, Scrofula, Insanity, ect.,
and thus we become the unconscious agents of propagating disease,
although the child from whom the lymph is taken presents exter-
nally a healthy appearance, for I cannot possibly see that if we
insert the germs of one septic poison, (or matter that causes a
chemical change in the blood,) why we should not insert the
germs of another septic poison also.
I may, mention that I have had some experience of Vaccination
in a country district in England, and I recollect in many cases, erup-
tions on the body developed themselves, swelling of the lymphatic
glands of the neck, with considerable inflammation in the arms and
febrile symptoms, and I even attributed to it one or two fatal cases,
thereby showing the blood was poisoned with a septic poison, of
which we really know nothing, and if Vaccination is allowed to
continue, and the germs of a septic poison (however slight,) are
introduced into the blood from one generation to another, I think the
result will prove to be most disastrous. In fact I consider we have
a clear indication that it has already been so, as seen by the pale
and unhealthy appearance, of the rising generation, who are in no
way fitted to stand hardship, or resist disease.
I recollect quite well when a student at Edinburgh University,
the blood-letting controversy was at its height. Dr. Bennett
opposing blood letting, and the late Professor Jas. Miller, advising
its adoption in acute inflammations, “ hoping there would always be
such a robust or sthenic state of constitution, as to call for its use,’’
but I am sorry to say that the longer I live, the less need I see for it,
and cannot call to mind when I last resorted to blood letting, and
find now hot fomentations are quite sufficient, even without the
a id of leeches. In fact, we have arrived at.such a stage that our
treatment is quite the opposite of what it formerly was, and is now
supporting and stimulating,
Now, may not all this be owing to the constitution being
so undermined with one poison and another, introduced into
the blood by Vaccination, that the system will not stand
it, in fact there is now no tolerance in the human frame for
the remedy. Our ancestors had to be bled every spring to keep
them below par, but I am sorry to say, few of the rising
generation are even at par, much less above it. I can never
believe that this state of constitution has been produced by
the moder’n mode of living as some people think is the ease, but


that there must be some other more subtle agent at work, and I
feel sure, it may be principally attributed to Vaccination. In
concluding this subject, I wish to observe that if our colonial
Governments should ever make Vaccination compulsory, and
finable, and parents object to having their little ones Vaccinated, I
advise them to raise no objections^but allow the children to be
then and there Vaccinated, and the doctor receive his fee from the
Government, for as many times as he may think it necessary to
vaccinate the child, or the Government think proper to pay him for
his services—but, as soon as he has gone out of the house*
apply to the parts Vaccinated a little of the impure Pyroligneous
Acid, (known to housekeepers as “ essence of smoke,”) and I will
guarantiee, the child will never suffer from any of the unpleasant
effects produced either by the Vaccine virus, or any other virus*
introduced with it, which being of a septic nature , should as a matter
of course be treated antiseptically, and the impure Pyroligneous acid
being a powerful antiseptic, will do this most effectually.
I have never heard of inoculation being performed from a bull,
bullock, or a calf, or that the eruptive disease known as Cow-Pox
has been observed to have originated spontaneously, or without
reproduction on either of these, i. e. bullock, bull, or calf.
I believe that it is not spontaneous with them, but only a local
disease in the cow, occurring during lactation, and produced by
the causes mentioned. I therefore maintain, Cow-Pox to be a
disease incidental to the cow itself, during lactation—and local,
and produced by septic poisoning. My belief in this is strength,
ened by the following facts :
1. The eruption appearing on the udder and teats of the cow
only ; and not on the other soft and delicate parts of the
skin—such as lips, nostrils, and inner lining of the ears.
2, That when communicated to the milkers it is confined to tho
hands only.
3. That when taken from the cow and inserted into the arm of a
child in the form of Vaccine lymph, it produces only a local
effect, ( i.e .) a vesicle, and swelling of the lymphatic glands.
4, That when inserted into a beast, it invariably produces a
merely local effect.
therefore I think the only way in which Cow-Pox virus pro-
duces an injurious constitutional effect, is by virtue of its septic
nature, acting on the lymphatic vessels and glands in precisely the


same way as the virus taken from a dead beast undergoing putre-
faction, would do, if inserted into the human body, but of course
in a minor degree. Now if such is the case, it will be most
humiliating and ridiculous to find we have been inserting into the
blood of our children, the virus arising from dead animal matter.
There may be three ways of producing the so called Cow-Pox.
Having before pointed out that it is entirely a local affection, and
not spontaneous in bulls or calves, but peculiar to the period of
lactation, I shall present to the reader three successive ways in
which the disease is likely to be induced. After caieful
study of the subject, I have arrived at the conclusion that it is
produced by flies, in the following manner :
1, There is always on the camping ground of cows which have
recently calved, animal matter, undergoing decomposition,
about this, flies congregate in myriads, and from time to time,
these pests which have thus become little poisonous inocu-
lators, settle on the udder and teats of the cow, which from
the thinness of the skin and the highly irritable and vascular
state it is then in, is the most vulnerable part of the beast’s
body—thus it is that the little red inflammatory spots
are first produced, which afterwards become vesicles —hence
its septic nature.
2. It may be owing to the udder while in an inflammatory
state, coming in contact with dead decomposing animal
matter on the ground, such as maggots, worms, etc.
3. Or the vesicular eruption on the udder and teats, may be
caused by some chemical change in the milk itself.
But that it will eventually be found to originate in inocula-
tion by flies, I am almost certain, but am not in a position to
experimentalize on cows at the present moment.
I think the following will suffice to show the strong resemblance
between Cow-Pox and the phenomenon of vaccination :
Phenomenon of Vaccination.—On the third day from the in-
sertion of the virus, the wound appears red and elevated, on the
fifth day the cuticle is elevated into a pearl colored vesicle, con-
taining a thin perfectly transparent fluid, in minute quantity ;
on the eighth day, the vesicle is in its greatest perfection. On the
evening of the eighth day (after the incision) an inflammatory
circle commences at the base of the vesicle, the skin becomes
red and painful for a considerable extent around. The figure of


the areola is perfectly circular. In some cases, the subjacent
cellular membrane participates in the inflammatory circle, and
occasionally the glands of the neck swell , etc. On the eleventh it
begins to fade. Until the eighth day, the constitution seldom
sympathises, at that time however slight febrile excitement
generally comes on. There is however much variety observable
here. It is not uncommon to find the child’s body covered
generally or partially with a papular eruption from the ninth to
the eleventh day, or even later, it is frequent in children of full
habit. In another variety the specific inflammation proves very
violent it extends from shoulder to elbow and sometimes runs into
genuine Erysipelas.
A third variety exhibits about the sixth or seventh day, the
vesicle partially inflamed and scaly. A species of psoriasis takes
the place of the areola, etc. “ Library of Medicine.”
Phenomenon of Cow-Pox.—The animal usually exhibits signs
of febrile action at the outset, and after a brief period of incuba-
tion, which are closely followed, but sometimes delayed to three
or four days, by an eruption upon the udder and teats, consisting
of hard red spots, with intense painfulness and moderate swelling,
which renders milking a difficult and protracted operation. The
spots which are at first about the size of the point of a finger,
speedily enlarge, rise in the centre, and form an eminence, which
contains internally, at first a clear fluid, but afterwards, by a
further process of inflamation, the characters of the fluid are
changed to the purulent form, it is, therefore opaque. The form
of the pustule ,is characteristic and requires about ten days to
effect a transition to the stage we have named.
Around its base or circumference the colour of the skin denotes
active erythema, by an areola or circle of acute redness and
tenderness, &c.,
In some instances the febrile symptoms, which usher in the
eruptive stage are very severe. As in all exanthematous diseases,
the mucous membranes are prone to sutler inthe genend state of
affairs, the mouth becomes sore, drivelling of saliva takes place,
and the cheeks are moved outwards as well as inwards, by a
partial breathing through the mouth. Abdominal pains are evi-
dent, the animal stands with arched back and feet drawn together*
and diarrhoea comes on, the loss of flesh is therefore rapid. These
signs characterize the disease in tropical climates where it is


observed in a more malignant form, and death common from its
severity, etc. Such is the phenomenon as exhibited in the
milking cows.
After thus explaining in a crude manner my views regarding the
evils of Vaccination, and the mistaken view of the origin of Cow-
Pox which has hitherto existed, I shall take leave of the subject,
and parents will be able to judge for themselves, whether Vaccina,
tion has proved or is likely to prove a blessing or a curse.
I now direct their attention to the ensuing, which is taken from
Dr. Bennett’s Principles, and Practice of Medicine, and I think it
will demonstrate how diseases of a septic nature may be un-
consciously propagated.
“ The following case which was most carefully investigated, and
was the subject of legal proceedings, illustrates how nurses may he
affected hy syphilitic infants. In 1842, the late Dr. W. Campbell
brought me a woman with a child in her arms, to obtain my
opinion whether a skin eruption in the latter was, or was not
syphilitic. I pronounced that it was, and that the woman should
cease to nurse it, although her nipples at the time were in no way
affected. The child was the offspring of respectable parents, and
had been sent to her to nurse. In consequence of my. opinion the
infant was returned to the friends, whose medical attendant*
maintained the eruption to he non-syphilitic. The woman who
applied to me (Nurse 1,) was received as a wet-nurse into another
family, and the child sent to another nurse, (Nurse 2.) In
a week the child died, and in a few days afterwards, Nurse 2
was attacked with sore nipples. Nurse 1, shortly after entering her
new situation, also perceived sores round her nipples, and the
medical attendant of the family, after consultation with me, caused
her to be discharged. She, in consequence brought an action
against the medical man, who had caused the syphilitic infant to be
sent to her, and had mistaken the disease. The lawyer she employed
then took me to visit Nurse 2, whose body was covered with a
syphilitic tubercular eruption. Both nurses ultimately succeeded
in obtaining compensation from the medical attendant.


Small-Pox, is an animal septic poison, and should therefore be
treated antiseptically.
“ The decline of Small-Pox is frequently mixed up with other
evils, not flowing from the same source, but arising either from
the peculiarity of the patient’s habit, or the circumstances under
which he is placed. Thus it is that Small-Pox is so frequently
seen at this period of its course, conjoined with Scrofula. Nothing
serves so certainly to call into activity the dormant seeds of Scrofula,
as an attack of Small-Pox. Accordingly we find the period of
convalescence, protracted by strumous opthalmia.
We find jn like manner at this period enlargements of the cervical
glands, which sometimes suppurate, hut more often continue hard,
indolent and intractable. Scrofula develops itself in the joints or
invades the bones. It happens but too often, that the seeds of tubercle
and pulmonary phthisis are laid during the progress of Small
Pox, and especially when the secondary fever has been severe and
tedious.”*
It will be seen that after the poison of Small-Pox has expended
itself, the train of diseases most likely to follow are of a most
serious nature, and should make us strive as much as possible, by
& judicious mode of treatment to ward them off.
Whether the poison causing Small-Pox is engendered in the body
itself, or whether it is absorbed from without, is I consider of no
material consequence, enough that after it is once engendered, it
can be propagated by inoculation, thereby proving it to be of a
septic nature. But what, may I ask, has been the treatment of this
fell destroyer ? has it been of such a nature as to check, or assist
in the elimination of the poison from the body in the slightest
degree ? or rather the opposite to assist it in its poisonous action
* Library of Medicine.


to the utmost extent ? To the latter question I answer, Yes, it
has. Taking it for granted that no one will dispute its septic
nature, I ask has it ever been treated antiseptically ? To which I
most decidedly say, It has not.
Dr. Bennett says, (page 979,) “So far as I know, we have no
specific for any kind of animal poison,—for you wiU remember
that Jenner was of opinion, (and there can be no doubt that he
was correct,) that in giving vaccination to man, he was giving him
Small-Pox in a modified form.”
It will thus be seen to be the opinion of Drs. J enner and
Bennett, that Small-Pox is a poison of a septic nature, and that we
have no certain specific for septic poisons, this is a mistake, as I
have used the Impure Pyroligneous Acid, Creosote and Carbolic
Acid with the happiest results in cases of septic poisoning.
The following is a general outline of the treatment as advised by
Dr. Gregory taken from the “ Library of Medicine.”
Treatment of the initiatory stage.—The antiphlogistic regimen
is to be pursued as far as the case admits of, where pain of the
epigastrium, or of the back, or of the head is very urgent, blood
may be taken from the arm, the amount being regulated by the
fulness and force of the pulse, leeches applied to the temples where
the general character of the circulation forbids general blood-letting,
a brisk cathartic composed of three or four grains of calomel, with
eight of the compound extract of colocynth, saline draughts in a
state of effervescence with two or three grains of Jame’s powder,
great restlessness must be quieted by an opiate, conjoined with anti-
monial wine.
Treatment of the Maturative stage. —For pain in the throat,
leeches may be applied, and the bleeding encouraged by hot fomenta-
tions, when the pulse is sharp and the skin hot and dry, purgative
medicines must be administered daily ; they consist of senna and
salts, or the compound powder of jalap, or castor oil, or of calomel
and colocynth or calomel and jalap. For congestion of the lungs,
blood must be taken from the arm to the extent of fourteen ounces
and full doses of antimonial wine added to the saline draught.
When there is headache, a flushed face, etc., it will be necessary
to draw blood from the arm, leeches to the temples, and purge the
bowels freely by calomel and jalap.”
Or take the general plan of treatment by an author of a more
modern date, viz., Dr. Bennett, it will be seen that he usually


prescribed castor oil, epsom salts, and saline antimonial mixtures,
he also says there is a special treatment applicable to Small-Pox,
which deserves some consideration, viz., the application of mercurial
ointment thickened with starch, and spread over the face.
Now with all due deference to' such great authorities, I main-
tain such treatment is worse than useless, and must inevitably lead
to a most serious development of the disease or even to a fatal
result (and am not surprised that the mass flew to vaccination as a
sort of safety valve, much in the same way as many of them do
now in discarding allopathy, for homeopathy, thereby flying from
one extreme to another.
Whenever any septic poison is circulating in the blood, it must
of course so disturb its life supporting properties, that the body
becomes thoroughly debilitated, where much impregnated with it,
and would by the above course of treatment become much more so,
insomuch, that I for one, am not at all surprised, it has ; hitherto
proved so fatal, as to induce governments to make vaccination
compulsory, and by their so doing, inflicting an injury on the
population, that will take years to remove, or in fact may never be
overcome.
Dr. Bennett says the general treatment of SmalhPox, is similar
to that of the other eruptive fevers, with which opinion I quite
agree, but not with his course of treatment.
O /
Common sense tells me, that when any septic poison is circula-
ting in the blood, its vital powers must necessarily be weakened,
and that the body requires to be supported, and stimulated, and
the diaphoretic action of the skin increased, so as to assist mother
nature in the elimination of the poison by the skin, etc. The
treatment of Small-Pox, should I think be almost the same as that
adopted in Scarlet Fever, (of which I have had much experience,)
with this view, I prescribe the sesquicarbonate of ammonia, with
nourishment in the shape of beef tea, chicken broth, etc., and never
confine the patient to bed, unless too weak to sit up, and move
about. I advise the body to be sponged over with vinegar, and
where diphtheria is present, the throat to be gargled with carbolic
acid properly diluted, and cold water to quench the thirst, ad
libitum.
The only addition to this line of treatment in Small-Pox, I should
advise, would be a lotion of the impure pyroligneous acid, or
carbolic acid w be applied to the face, or the whole body sponged


over, with a lotion of either, and I fully believe without positive
proof, (as we have as yet had no epidemic of Small-Pox amongst
us,) that pitting would be so rare, as to be scarcely worth a second
thought, and the mortality more than three parts lessened.
I cannot recollect having lost any cases of Scarlet Fever, when
called in early, with one exception, a slight attack of Scarlet Fever
a little girl, who had nothing given her but rice and barley water,
the parents being afraid of increasing the fever, and as a natural
consequence the child died.
In other cases which I attended, gmd that had been previously
treated by friends and quacks, some have died, and no wonder that
they should have done so, considering the treatment they had been
subjected to, viz., purged with castor oil, salts and senna, etc.,
starved, kept in bed in heated confined rooms, all the clothes on,
flannel wrapped round the throat and body, and covered with
thick bed clothing, and sometimes a fire in the room, although the
thermometer ranged between 80° and 90°, that when I have
entered the apartment, such a heated offensive smell greeted me,
that I retreated at once, and did not venture into the room for a
short time afterwards, till some of the foul heated air had escaped,
No wonder that some of them died, and would again, I have no
doubt, under any treatment whatever, where the blood had been
nursed into such a highly poisonous state.
The imaginary fear that some people labour under about the
children taking cold is truly ridiculous, (and has I believe killed an
almost unlimited number of them, and will continue to do so, for
I think it will take much more than I am able to say, to convince
parents to the contrary,) for if there is one disease moi’e than
another, whei’e cold cannot be taken, it is Scarlet Fever, where the
skin is hot and dry, and therefore such a thing as checked perspi-
ration cannot take place.
If Small-Pox visited these shores and became epidemic, I have
no doubt just the same course of treatment would go on, and
people would die by thousands, whereas in other places they only
die by hundreds, simply from the climate being so warm in sum-
mer ; and to ward off this evil which might happen at any time,
especially now that we have mail communication with California.
I must say, that I think the Governments of the different
Australian Colonies, should endeavour either individually or
collectively, to get the plan of treatment I have suggested


thoroughly tested, ere the disease has taken root in these sunny
climes. If Small-Pox should ever break out here, the panic then
created would be something dreadful. Every one would want to
be vaccinated at once, never caring with what kind of lymph,
whether syphilitic or scrofulous, etc.*, so long as they thought there
was a chance of their being protected from the ravages of
Small Pox, which I firmly believe might, by a proper antiseptic
plan of treatment, be reduced to a minimum.
It has been stated by some writers that Cow-Pox, and Small-
Pox are identically the same disease, but whether Small-pox or
Cow-Pox, is the original'form, has been disputed.
Dr. Bennett in his Principles and Practice of Medicine, says—
“ I need not enter at length, into the discussion which has been
raised on this subject ; suffice it to say, that the identity of the
two diseases, appears to me fully established by the following
incontrovertible facts ”
1. The prevalence at the same period of the Cow-Pox among
cattle, and the Small-Pox among men.
2. The transmission by contagion, of the Small-Pox to cattle, and
the consequent development of Cow-Pox in these animals.
3. The transmission by inoculation, of the Small-Pox to cattle,
and the resulting development of Cow-Pox in those animals.
4. The transmission by inoculation of the Cow-Pox to man and
the development thereby of a pustule similar in character,
to the Vaccine Pox of the cow.
5. The transmission by inoculation of the Cow-Pox to man, and
the consequent development of and eruption similar, if not
identical with Small-Pox.”
Now I most emphatically deny, that Small-Pox, and Cow-Pox,
are identically the same, for if this is the case, when a cow has
been inoculated with Small-Pox from man, and the eruption
breaks out in the beast, in the form of Cow-Pox, why does that
Cow-Pox when transmitted by inoculation back to man not again
produce in him Small-Pox as at first ?
Because, the different chemical changes which the virus under
goes in the beasts constitution, alters it and converts it into a
septic poison of a different nature. By inoculating beasts, with
Small-Pox from man, we introduce into the animals system, a
human disease, which at once takes on a different form, but by
again inserting the virus from that animal, back to man, we intro-


duce into the human frame, an animal disease. If Small-Pox
only produced by inoculation, a distinct Small-Pox in man and
animals, I should call it an identical disease in hath. But as it will
not again produce Small-Pox, by inoculation after passing through
the beast, but only Cow-Pox, I call it a different disease altogether,
but produced from the same poison, the nature of which is altered
by running its course through a different chemical organisation,
thereby producing a virus of another nature.
Now by imbibing this diseased milk, is it not likely to cause
the food to undergo the same action, or chemical change, which is
taking place in itself, and by its absorption into the blood, pro-
duce a poisonous state of the whole system, which developes itself
in the form of Small-Pox, as we know that Cow-Pox in cattle, and
Small-Pox in man occurs at the same period.
Since writing these pages I see by a recent number of “ Braith-
waite,” that Dr. Samson has treated Small-Pox antiseptically, by
giving the Sulpho-carbolate of Soda internally.
finis.
C. E. FULLER, PRINTER, GEORGE-STREET, PARRAMATTA,.




