

CUMBERLAND'S
NO. 91. MINOR THEATRE. Pr. 6d.
BEING A COMPANION TO
Cumberland's British Theatre.
JOHN CUMBERLAND, 2, CUMBERLAND TERRACE, CAMDEN NEW TOWN.
LONDON:—SOLD BY THOMAS HURST, 65, ST. PAUL’S CHURCH YARD;
B. Steill; Sherwood and Co.; Longman, Rees Orme, Brown. Green, and Longman,
Paternoster-row; Wisebeart, Dublin; Sutherland, Edinburgh; M’Phun, Glasgow;
Turner and Fisher, New York and Philadelphia Phelan, New York; Lance, Paris;
Campbell, Hambro.
GEORGE BERGER. HOLYWELL STREET, STRAND.
Embellished with a
PINE ENGRAVING ,
from a
Drawing taken in the Theatre.
Author of Giovanni in London. Monsieur Tonson.
The Somnambulist Tom and Jerry, &c.
PRINTED FROM THE ACTING COPY
With Remarks, Biographical & Critical,
By D—G.
TO WHICH ARE ADDED
A DESCRIPTION of the COSTUME, Cast of the
CHARACTERS, ENTRANCES and EXITS, CREATIV E
POSITIONS of the Performers on the Stage, and
the whole of the STAGE BUSINESS as now per-
formed in the METROPOLITAN MINOR THEATRE S,
By W. T. MONCRIEFF, Esq
VAN DIEMEN S LAND:
AN OPERATIC DRAMA IN THREE ACTS,


A RE-ISSUE OF POPULAR WORKS.
In Weekly Numbers, Price Twopence,
THE OLIO;
OR, MUSEUM OF ENTERTAINMENT I
Consisting of interesting Tales, Romances, and Histo-
riettes; Customs, Pastimes, and Superstitions; Chrono-
logy, Biography, Topography, and British Antiquities;
Original Poetry; Anecdotes; Miscellaneous Papers, &c.
Embellished with Splendid Engravings.
Criticisms on tijc SSHorfe.
“ The Olio is one of the neatest little publications of the day ;\
the engravings are beautifully executed ; and, for clever origina-
lity, it.is really unrivalled.” — Weekly Dispatch.
“ It has its tales and romances (with spirited wood-illustra-
tions), its anecdotes, and even its little comer for criticism. —
It is well printed on good paper; and a volume must make a very
pleasant addition to the library of young friends.”— Athenaeum.
“ We know no publication which can be taken up with greater
certainty of affording amusement to the desultory reader.”—
Literary Gazette.
Price Threepence each, or the Numbers containing the Plates,
Coloured, price Sixpence each
berger’s edition of Ireland’s
HISTORY AND LIFE
OF
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE.
Detailing every Particular of his Career during the Republican,
Consular, and Imperial Governments ; interspersed with
Anecdotes of his Public and Private Life,
and including Biographical Memoirs of celebrated Military,
Political, and Scientific Characters, who flourished from the Re-
volution to the termination of the Imperial Dynasty.
®f)e I£mbclUsl)ments in tf>c 2®otfe
Will consist of highly-finished Quarto Plates, representing the
principal Battles of Napoleon, and other interesting subjects;
engraved by Mr. George Cruikshank.
LONDON: JOHN CUMBERLAND, 2, CUMBERLAND TERRACE,
> CAMDEN NEW TOWN ;
GEORGE BERGER, HOLYWELL STREET, STRAND.




Van Diemen's Land.
Agatha Now, then, for liberty, and a free pardon!
Act III. Scene 2.


VAN DIEMEN’S LAND:
AN OPERATIC DRAMA,
In Three Acts,
BY W. T. MONCRIEFF, ESQ.
Author of Monsieur Ton son , Eugene Aram, Giovanni in London, Rochester,
Tom and Jerry, The Spectre Bridegroom, Somnambulist, All at Coventry,
Cataract of the Ganges f Shipwreck of the Medusa, Joconde, The
Lear of Private Life, Shahspeare’s Festival, Pestilence
of Marseilles , $-c.
PRINTED FROM THE ACTING COPY, WITH REMARKS,
BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL, BY D. G.
To which are added,
DESCRIPTION OP THE COSTUME, —CAST OP THE CHARACTERS,
ENTRANCES AND EXITS, —RELATIVE POSITIONS OP THE
PERFORMERS ON THE STAGE, —AND THE WHOLE OP
THE STAGE BUSINESS,
As performed at the
METROPOLITAN MINOR THEATRES.
EMBELLISHED WITH A FINE ENGRAVING,
From a Drawing taken in the Theatre.
LONDON:
JOHN CUMBERLAND, 2, CUMBERLAND TERRACE,
CAMDEN NEW TOWN.




REMARKS.
Van Diemen’s Land.
John Kemble remarked, when he heard of the brilliant
success of the Botany Bay Company, that he was not at all
surprised, for they had been sent there by
We hope ere long these stars will revisit our hemisphere;
for the stage is sadly in want of talented recruits, and we
shall be happy to ship a fresh cargo in return.
We might expatiate on the flourishing condition of Van
Diemen’s Land; its legitimate drama; no taxes and tithes ;
institutions, literary, scientific, and political; and all the
elegancies that distinguish the home of patriots, who have
travelled for the good of their country;—but we forbear to
transport our readers or ourselves by extravagant descrip-
tions. “ England, with all thy faults, I love thee still 1”
We owe this drama to the circumstance of Mr. Elliston
having two sons profitably settled in Australia. Feeling a
natural sympathy for a spot so intimately connected with
the future fortunes of his children, and perhaps a wish to
keep his audiences at home, he set author, mechanist, and
scene-painter at work, that the adventurous might see what
toils and difficulties awaited them in this land of promise ;
and the merely curious reflect whether they preferred a
visit, after the old English fashion, to the lions and tigers
in the Tower, or one from a similar party by moonlight in
a forest of bush-rangers !
Among the emigrants self-expatriated by oppression or
ennui is Mr. John Hardy ; who, foreseeing the destruction
of England’s liberties in that of Exeter ’Change, where for
forty years he plied a profitable trade, packs off, bag
and baggage, to Van Diemen’s Land, accompanied by his
son and daughter. He revels in the thought of enjoying
the light of heaven, the fruits of the earth, and the springs
of the ocean, free of taxation ; yet his ardour is a little
damped when he finds that for the latter blessing he must
wait till the river overflows, when the water-company will
send him a collector or two in the shape of an alligator or
crocodile 1 The next is Mr. James Gooseberry, late of
old Covent Garden Market, green-grocer, another victim
a 3


of modem improvement. Jemmy has brought out with
him a cargo of warming-pans and stair-carpets; and, when
he hears that, in a burning hot climate, the former are not
in requisition, and, in houses with only one story, the latter
are in little demand, he adroitly proposes to turn the one
into sugar ladles, and the other into saddle-bags and hunt-
ing-breeches ! Mr. Gooseberry is passionately fond of
shooting and angling: the folks in Van Diemen's Land
(the bush-rangers especially) shoot without a license ; and
gudgeons and flat-fish are caught in great abundance by
the natives 1 Mr. Gooseberry cannot comprehend why
Christmas comes in July; why green peas are not to be
had till the anniversary of old Guy; why the Michaelmas
goose is reprieved till March ; and the Van Diemen’s Land
Surrey hills are on such a confined scale, as totally to ex-
clude those picturesque objects, the King’s Bench and the
County Gaol I Among the newly-arrived convicts are
Darby Ballylaggan, Mr. Manifold, and Mr. Sweetman.—
The first, a roasting potatoe genius and fiddler from Sligo,
transported by mistake;, the second, a literary character of
an imitative turn, and the bankers don’t like plagiarism l—
and the third, a gentleman with Major O’Flaherty’s infir-
mity. We are introduced to the celebrated Hardy Vaux,
of the Barrington school, whose autobiography will be found
an excellent vade-mecum for the young pickpocket; and
to Ikey Solomons, of Rosemary Lane, chief among the
children of Israel in the swag, mace, and fence line.—
Luckily for Ikey, he always worked under the armpits, and
was never for having a drop from the stone pitcher ! These,
with other personages of less note, aided by pun, equivoque,
song, and dance, sustain the comic part very agreeably.—
The tragic will be found in the characters of Michael Howe,
captain of the bush-rangers ; Robin Wildgorse, a poacher;
and Agatha, the early victim of his seduction. Some inte-
rest, and no little fun, are excited by the loves of Frederick
Hardy and Miss White ; and the nuptials of Darby with
Kangaree, sister of Ben-ni-long, chief of the Broken Bay
tribe, or aboriginals of Van Diemen’s Land; a dingy beauty,
with a bushel of bullocks’ horns for pin-money ! Marriages,
black and white, odd recognitions, and desperate battles
between bush-rangers and natives, wind up the plot; and
John Hardy, having had a fair taste of Van Diemen’s Land,
and compared it with his own, resolves to set sail with the
first fair wind for England, ho !
D. G.
6
REMARKS.


Costume
GOVERNOR.—Red uniform coat, —white military trowsers and
boots—cocked hat.
JOHN HARDY.—Brown suit—white stockings—shoes and buc-
kles, round broad brimmed hat.
FREDERlC.—Bluejacket—white waistcoat —nankeen trowsers.
GOOSEBERRY.—Green coat, short cut tail—yellow waistcoat,
green pantaloons.— Second dress —Drab jacket—white waistcoat and
trowsers.
BEN-Nl-LONG.—White shirt—short tranks—brown legs and
arms—scarf—lndian head dress.
FURLONG.—BIue coat—white trowsers—straw hat.
BLITHE.—BIue coat—yellow waistcoat—white trowsers.
DURANT. —Nankeen coat —yellow waistcoat—white trowsers.
WILDGORSE. —Countryman’s drab coat—red waistcoat —cordu
roy breeches —and blue stockings.
DARBYBALLYLAGGAN.—Countryman's coat —flowered waist-
coat—drab breeches and blue stockings.
MICHAEL HOWE.—Blue jacket—strip’d shirt—drab breeches
—long leather gaiters.
WHITEHEAD. —Ragged coat—red waistcoat—drab breeches.
GEARY.—Drab jacket—red waistcoat —and canvas trowsers.
BOLTER.—OId blue frock coat—white trowsers.
MANIFOLD.—OId black coat and pantaloons,
Convicts, Bush-rangers, Sfc. ragged Dresses.
ELIZA WHITE. —Grey stuff frock—white apron, cap, and hand-
kerchief.—Second Dress. —White dress—willow bonnet and red cloak
AMELIA HARDY.—Pink dress trimmed with black silk,- -bat
with white flowers.— Second dress. —White frock trimmed with
yellow—while flowers in the hair.
AGATHA.—Bluestriped skirl and body —brown stuff to lace over
KANGAREE Indian ctriped dress.
BEDIA. —Indian Dress.


Cast of the Characters
As originally sustained at the Surrey Theatre.
Governor of Van Diemen’s Land Mr. Dibdin Pitt.
John Hardy (late Cutler, of Exeter Change) Mr. Williams.
Frederic (his Son ) Mr. Warwick.
Mr. James Gooseberry {late Green Grocer in the old
Covent Garden Market) Mr. Vale.
Ben-ni-long (Chief of the Broken Bay Tribe, or
Aboriginals Vm Diemen's Land) .Mr. Forrester.
Furlong (Superintendant of the Settlers) Mr, Almar.
Blithe o mold Settler in Van Diemen's Land) Mr. Buckingham
Durant (Overseer of Mrs Vandammer’s estate) Mr. Gough.
Serjeant Firelock Mr. Hicks.
Robin Wi ldgorse (u Convict Poacher) Mr. Rayner.
Darby Ballylaggan (an Irish Convict, transported by
rnistake) Mr. Bryant.
Michael Howe (Captain of the Bush-Rangers) Mr. Oshaldiston.
Whitehead (Lieutenantof the Bush-Rangers) Mr. Bruff.
Geary (a Bush-Ranger) Mr. Lee.
Bolter (Settler at Hobart's Town) Mr Honor
Scapetrap.. .. .ditto Mr. Benson.
Manifold [a Convict, newly arrived) Mr Rogers
Sweetman ditto .’.Mr. Webb.
Hardy \aux (Convict, pupil in the Barrington School) Mr. Hobbs.
Ikey Solomons (from the East) Mr Yardlev
Billy Slyfake Mr. Asbury
Cattle Hunters, Stock-keepers, Cafres, Convict Servants, Bush-
Rangers, Inhabitants, fyc.
Eliza White (unjustly condemned) Miss Somerville
Arne ha Hardy (Daughter of Hardy) Miss Vincent.
Agat.ia (Companion of Michael Howe) Mrs. E«-erton.
Kangaree [Sister of Ben-ni-long) Mrs Vale
Bcdia (a native Woman) .V. Miss'Horton.
Inhabitants, Convicts, Cafres, &c. &e.


VAN DIEMEN’S LAND!
ACT I.
SCENE f. —Port and Bay of Hobart's Town ;—Govern-
ment House, —l .—the ocean in the back-ground.—
Scapetrap, Bolter, and other Inhabitants of Ho-
bart's Town, discovered wailing the arrival of vessels.
CHORUS.— Omnes.
Air. — “ Barcarole in Massaniello."
From England, see, the sails appear,
The tide serves right—the wind blows fair!
Now, settlers, convicts, hope and fear.
And hither, to repent—repair !
We welcome all, for, rogue or fool,
’Tis we gain still !
Van Diemen’s Land is wisdom’s school,
And pay they will !
Reform’d rogues, we, the greatest saints still make ;
Then new ones come, in all of you we’ll take !
Bol. Aye, aye, we cannot but thrive, friends ; what
with rogues and fools, —convicts and settlers, —Van Die-
men’s Land must flourish.
Scape, Well, Heaven grant the next cargo of con-
demned live stock our mother England, sends to bless us
with, may be females; —I’d fain make an honest woman
of one of them—my store terribly wants a mistress.
Bol. And mine! pretty little innocents—they don’t
forget their old vocations when they come here; —the
rogues still keep stealing—our hearts, eh, gentlemen ?
[guns fired without.
Scape. Those guns!—the vessels are entering the
bay. And here’s the Governor ; now we shall know all
about them.


Enter Governor, l.
Gov■ Gentlemen residents, I have the pleasure to an-
nounce to you the arrival of two vessels, the Turtle
Dove Transport, Vice Admiral Lillywhite, with a cargo
of convicts from Cove Sidney ; and the Swallow Cutter,
Captain Pigeon, with a party of settlers from the
Thames ! so now’s the time to supply all your wants; —
servants or stores, we shall be able, no doubt, to suit you
with both.
Scape. I don’t care how soon they’re here, Governor,
—I want a few hands on my plantation terribly ; —what
sort of a lot are they ?
Gov. All tried men, I can assure you—all men that
have had a thorough conviction of their former bad
courses, and are transported in the idea of serving you !
—they have, all, the best of recommendations.
Scape. Yes, from the jury, I suppose !
Gov. I must to the Government-house and prepare
for their coming ; —make good use of your time!
[Exit into house, R.
801. Aye, aye, Governor, we’ll look alive, never
fear ; —eh ! who are these ? —oh, some of the fresh caught
ones; —we must see what’s to be picked up from them ;
—all’s fish that comes to net in Van Diemen’s Land !
Scape. Leave us alone for making the most of things!
Enter John Hardy and Frederick, r,
801. Welcome to Van Diemen’s Land, gentlemen—
the finest country in the world for health, wealth, and
no rent and taxes.
Hardy. Thank’ye, thank’ye, friends; so, here then
we are at last, —a noble island, ’faith ; —I breathe the air
in freedom here ; —how different from smoky, thankless
London.
Fred. Yet London had its advantages, sir; —heaven
grant we may not repent our leaving it.
Hardy. Don’t tell me ! —wasn’t it high time to leave
it, when they began to pull down Exeter Change; to
dislodge a tradesman of forty years standing! To think
that John Hardy, the oldest hardware-man in Exeter
’Change, should be obliged to change at last.
Fred. It was rather hard, I must confess, sir.
Hardy. Ah! it was a sad cut-up to the cutlers, the
removal of the 'Change. But where is our neighbour
and fellow adventurer, Mr. Gooseberry?


Fred. Attending to my sister and his merchandize, sir.
Hardy. Hum ! the only wise thing he ever did in his
life, was coming here with us; he wishes to settle, he
says—doubly settle ; —would fain have a plantation and
marry your sister ; —I must see a little more of him be-
fore that’s settled, though. But here he comes, goods
and all! Well, I will forth and look about me awhile.
{Exit, r.
Fred. [looking out .] I see no signs of Eliza, —unfor-
tunate girl !—yet they said we must meet here; —surely
I could not have been deceived in my intelligence ! —I
must enquire further; this is a favourable opportunity
—let me embrace it. [Exit, l.
Enter Jemmy Gooseberry, Amelia, and Sailors, with
packages, l.
Goose. This way, Miss Mely, this way; take care of
the baggage, my boys,—mind the packages—bring them
along carefully ;—thank heaven we’re here at lastl
began to get quite sick of the sea, though I wasn’t sea-
sick. You’re looking all the stouter for being on terra-
firma, Miss Mely !
Amelia. Yes, I couldn’t have lived another week on
the water, Mr. Gooseberry.
Goose. Very weakly living on the water, certainly—
didn’t suit me—l was forced to take a little brandy with
it,—kept up my spirits that way. Oh ! these are some
of the Van Diemen Land-ers in propria, I suppose; I
must curry favour with them, as we’re going to be of a
kidney. How are you all, gentlemen—how are you ?
come to make one amongst you, my boys, Hope they’ll
soon make the grants—l’m quite longing to become a
landed proprietor : five hundred acres ! —it would make
me lord of the manor in England. I trust there’ll be a
preserve or two on the grounds, that 1 may have a pop
at the partridges, for I’m rather fond of game.
801. We find plenty of game here, squire, and pluck
it too. [aside.
Goose. They shoot without a licence here, don’t they ?
Scape. Oh, yes,the natives and bush-rangers especially.
Goose. I shan’t mind if there’s a trout-stream along
with the preserves;—l’m a good one at fishing—l can
tickle a troutever catch any fresh water fish here, eh ?
801. A few gudgeons now and then, and sometimes a
fiat fish !
Goose. Hum ! —but come, let me show off the goods


that I’ve brought with me, and then the Governor can
show off his goods, or his bads rather, for I question if
convicts can be called goods ■ but, as I’m going to open
shop here in the general line, I ought to advertise—give
’em my card ; 1 believe that’s generally done; —well, I
must be my own mouth-piece: in the first place, gentle-
men, I have the honour to be James Gooseberry, late
Green-grocer in Covent Garden.
801, [aside.] Green enough, apparently.
Goose. But to come to the business in hand, as my
friend, Bob Sykes, at the Cheshire Cheese, advised me
not to come here without bringing a few stores along with
me to dispose of, gentlemen, why I’ve taken his advice,
and brought some, that’s all.
801. What are they ?
Goose. I thought you’d be anxious ; —why, in the
first place, I’ve brought you a prime lot of warming-
pans. Shew one, Jack. [one is held up.
Omnes. Warming-pans !—ha !ha! ha ! hah !
Goose. Ha! ha !ha ! hah ! why what are you all
laughing at! —l’m sure there can’t be better ones !
801. Excuse us, squire, but you're likely to burn
your fingers with them ; —we’ve not much call for warm-
ing-pans, you see—because why ?—sheets are shy, and
we’ve never any winter here !
Goose. Oh, the devil!—curse that Bob Sykes !—-well,
I must turn ’em into wholesale sugar ladles, and ship
’em off to Jamaica, that’s all I know about it—but I’ve
more than one string to my bow. If the warming-pans
won’t suit you, I’ve a few rolls of stair-carpeting, that
will, or the devil’s in it
801. Stair-carpeting !—why that’s better still—ha !
ha ! ha ! ha !
Goose. What won't that do ?—why then I’ve put my
foot in it, it seems !
801. You havn’t shown your understanding there,
certainly, squire.
Goose. Why not ?
Scape. Stair-carpeting, when we’ve no stairs !—-ell
ground floors—only one story !
Goose. Hum ! —only one story ! —that cursed Bob
Sykes told me another story.—Ground floors ! —l’m
floored myself;—well, I must make saddle bags and hunt-
ing breeches of them; —rather unfortunate in my selection
so far, certainly ; —fnen, perhaps, my piano-fortes are
no use?—they’re all grand ones.


801. Piano-fortes ! —ha ! ha ! ha ! ha ! no use at all,
squire, unless they’re self-playing ones, or you’ve
brought somebody to play ’em.
Goose. I’ve only brought Miss Mely—she can play on
them ; —’gad, I begin to think I’ve been play’d on my-
self—that cursed Bob Sykes ! —I can teach you the gamut.
801. We knows the gammon perfectly well, squire.
If you’ll take out their insides and sell ’em us for corner
cupboards, now, we'll say something to you ! but they’re
no use for any thing else.
Goose. The fellows have no music in their souls. But
you burn candles, certainly;—what say you to a few pairs
of snuffers ?
801. Snuffers ! —lord bless you, the bats always snuff
our candles for us, squire.
Goose. I’ll try 'em no more, —the bats beat me ; —eh !
who’s this?
Enter Governor from house.
Gov. Now then, gentlemen, the convicts are ap-
proaching for your inspection ; —make your choice at
once—there’s plenty.—You can have them for either a
single or a double apprenticeship—seven or fourteen
years, which you will; nay, there are some that come
here to serve you for life. Provide yourselves with ser-
vants while you can—you may not have another oppor-
tunity for some time 1
Amelia. Convicts for servants! dear me, how parti-
cularly horrid!
Goose. Hurrah ! here they come, —I’ll hire one of
them, at all events.
Enter Robin Wildgorse, Darby Ballylaggan, Solo-
mon Sweetman, Manifold, and other convicts, es-
corted by Soldiers and Serjeant, l.
CHORUS.— Omnes.
Air. —“ Market Chorus in Massaniello
The market’s open, now’s your time.
Come pick and choose and never fear j
The choicest rogues of Britain’s clime
Transported are to serve you here!
B


Here York horsedealers you may view;
From Chcapside, shopmen you may see ,
And married men from Ireland too,
With each of spouses two or three.
Here's money-makers from the Mint;
Men-slaughterers, right down hearts of steel,
And others—you will lake the hint—
In haberdashery that deal.
Here’s imitators from the Bank—
House-agents—practis’d far and near—
Here’s rogues, in short, of every rank,
Come pick and choose, there’s plenty here.
Gov. Now then, gentlemen, please yourselves;—
stand regular, you rogues.
Goose. Very questionable looking fellows—l’ll ques-
tion two or three of them, that I may find out which will
answer before I mak£ up my mind.
Gov. They’ll bear examination.
Wild, [tmde.] Aye, and cross-examination, or we’ve
all been to the Old Bailey to very little purpose.
Amelia. What a horrid looking set of men ! [aside.
Goose. I’ll commence at once. Now then, what were
you sent here for, my good fellow ? [to Sweetman.
Siveet. If you must know, I was sent here for being a
dangerous character
Goose. A dangerous character! —l’ll have nothing to
do with you, then— [to Sweetman.
Sweet. That is, among the ladies; —they would be
marrying me, you see, four or five of them! and so the
nation got jealous and sent me here.
Goose. A little bit of polly-bigamy ; —four or five!
a dangerous character indeed !—He may be getting hold
of Miss Mely,—l’ll cut his acquaintance at once; —here’s
another—l’ll have a touch at him. What brings you
here, friend? [to Manifold.
Mani. Me ?—oh I’m no common character, I can tell
you that—l was sent here for being a little too literary ;
that is, they suspected I was fond of imitating other
people’s writings, and the bankers don’t like plagiarism.
Goose. Hum !an Old Bailey underwriter! —forgery
on a small scale ; —his policy won’t suit me. Who’s this
fellow with the sprig of green in his hat ?—he seems more
like a fool than a knave; —he perhaps may suit me—l’ll
try him!
Darby. A master looking at me—a customer, per-
haps ; fait I hope we’ll do business together ; sure he


won’t get a rare bargain in myself, Mr. Darby Bally-
laggan.
Goose, {to Darby .] What did you get your mittimus
here for, sirrah ?
Darby. Fait, sir, for no good.
Goose. Weil, that’s honest, however; for what bad
then ?
Darby. For no bad neither, master; only just for ac-
cident’s sake, sir, that’s all!
Goose. Accident!
Darby. Yes, sir, I found a parcel of notes one day,
sir!
Goose. That was lucky, however !
Darby. Not so lucky, sir, for they were all forged,
bad luck to ’em—that is, they wern’t made by the proper
persons, sir.
Goose. That was rather unlucky, certainly.
Darby. Not so unlucky, sir, for I passed them all
easy enough for the matter of that.
Goose. Well, you were lucky there, at all events.
Darby. Not so lucky, sir, for they took me up for
passing them; —clapped me into the Old Bailey, a new
place to me, sir ;—fait, but I wish I had passed them
when I first saw them, and then I’d never have walked
all the way here. By the powers but I’d a squeak for it,
for a man in a wig said I was to be hanged, the spalpleen!
Goose. Well, the deuce is in it if that wasn’t unlucky.
Darby. Not a bit of it, for they didn’t hang me at all,
sir; but sent me here instead, where, may-be. I’ll be
hired by your honour, and sure that won’t be lucky, or
may I never drink whiskey again!
Goose. I must have him. {aside.
Darby. I’m hired—l see it, without his opening his
mouth. It’s every word of it true, your honour, assure
as my name’s Darby Ballylaggan, and all Sligo knows
that same.
SONG.— Darby,
Air.—“ Gramachree. ”
As I was walking down Cheapside,
I found some notes, sir, pat,
If they were good or bad I tried
And they tried me for that
u 2


When soon the judge said, muttering,—
A black cap on his head, —
I guilty was of uttering,
Though deuce a word I said !
Goose. Darby Ballylaggan, you're the man for my
money.
Darby. Then, fait, sir, 1 hope I’ll have a little of it
when I desarve it.
Goose What can you do ?
Darby, By the powers, sir, just any thing;—all sorts
of household work, and play the fiddle—gardening and
distilling whiskey—dancing, that is, jigs, sir, —and drink-
ing it; —the manual exerciseand waiting on a lady—pig-
driving, and singing psalms, and, to conclude, lastly,
sir, roasting potatoes and other accomplishments.
Goose. I’ll have you, Darby—l’m very fond of roast-
ed potatoes;—come this way and you shall be registered
to me at once, then we’ll go and range the fields together.
Darby. That we will beautifully, sir, never fear, —
oh, we two will make a charming couple!
DUET.— Gooseberry and Darby.
Air.—“ Together let us range the fields."
Together let us range the fields,
And taste the best the island yields;
Fish, flesh, and fruit, we’ll feast our fill,
And let the devil take the bill !
[Exeunt Gooseberry and Darby into house, u.
Enter Hardy, r.
Hardy, The convicts here! —’tis time I chose ; surely
there must be some one more sinned against than sinning,
in this crew ; —this country-looking fellow—his rustic
habit should not cloak much guilt. How now, fellow ?
Wild, [aside.] That voice!—Old Hardy as I live.
Retributive justice! that we should thus meet here ;
ah! if he knew—
Hardy. What makes you a visitor to this place, sirrah ?
Wild A trifle ; 1 found venison cheaper than mutton,
and game more reasonable than poultry ! —I was a good
shot, and the Parsons didn’t like me.
Hardy. Hum! a poacher'—Another victim of aristo


cratic avarice, and ovor-wecning power !—l’ll hire this
fellow; —these poachers can turn their hands to any
thing !
Wild. You’ll find nothing comes amiss to me—l soon
pick up any thing. [ significantly.
Hardy. What is a hare—a pheasant !
Wild. Quite natural, warn’t it, sir?—l thought so.
He does not recognize me. {aside.
Hardy. Your name, good fellow ?
Wild. Wildgorse—Robin Wildgorse, from Rippon,
Backfall Oaks !
Hardy. You come far north, indeed !
Wild. Right,—though many mightn’t think so, by
my being here.
Hardy. I take you into my service, Robin—serve me
faithfully, and I will compensate you for the injustice of
the world ; —betray me, and you had better have perished
on the scaffold ! —Old John Hardy never forgives, never
forgets an injury !
Wild. I’ll take care of your property, never fear, sir.
Gov. Charming island this, friends! —you have all
the privileges of the mother country here I —freedom
of the press, magna charta, bill of rights, and glorious
trial by jury ! [to convicts.
Sweet. That’s no recommendation, Governor—we've
had quite enough of trial by jury at home—we don’t
want any more of it here !
Mani. I’ve only one unpleasant thing in coming
here, for my part, and that is I shall find my wife here!
—1 asked them as a favour to hang me instead, but they
said my case wouldn’t admit of any mitigation of pu-
nishment !
Enter Gooseberry and Darby/Vow Government House.
Goose. There, all’s settled—Darby and I are made
master and man, safe enough ! —now, if you’ve fixed on
any body, friend Hardy, for your Local-Tenant, and
Valley-de-Shamble, you’d better go in and have him in-
dentured to you at once, for here’ll be the Superintendant
coming directly, to allot us out our several grants of
land, and accompany us to our different estates ; that
done, then for another estate —the blessed state of matri-
mony ! —eh, Miss Mely ?—and then all’s settled!
Amelia. Lord ! Mr. Gooseberry !—you have the oddest
ideas !
B 3


Goose, Well, well, we won’t quarrel about that, Miss
Mely; —but, zounds! where’s Fred ?—eh ! here he comes.
Why Fred! {Enter Frederic, r. s.] you look as down
in the mouth as a convolvulus!—ah ! havn’t got your
sweetheart here; —you should have come provided as I
did—eh, Miss Mely? But if you only look sharp about
you, you’ll be sure to find some old acquaintance here.
Hardy. [ sternly .] How, sir? —would you have him
mate with guilt!—become companion to a convict?—My
curse be on him ! should he thus disgrace himself and
me ! —For shame ! for shame, sir ! —from you I looked for
better counsel!
Goose. But when it’s Hobson’s choice, friend Hardy ?
Fred. [ to Hardy.] All are not guilty, though con-
victed, sir! —too many suffer for the crimes of others,
and—
Hardy. No more, no more! espouse an outcast’s
cause, you are an outcast from my house and heart for
ever! —you know I am inflexible.—-Follow me, sir ! —’tis
time this conversation closed! Now, convict Wild-
gorse!
Wild. I know my name, sir, —I cannot have a worse,
do what I will—let them beware, then. [aside
Fred. I have obtained intelligence—unhappy girl!
[aside.
[Exeunt Hardy, Frederic, and Wildgorse into Govern-
ment House, r.
Goose. Ulloa!—why what the deuce is the matter
with your father, Miss Mely ?—that he’s so plaguey
cross-grained all of a sudden !
Amelia. Have you not heard of Eliza White, an un-
fortunate orphan, reduced by adverse fate to be the ser-
vant of our family ;—a robbery was committed in our
house—she was tried, condemned, and sentenced hither.
My father fears her meeting with my brother, who was
not proof to her attractions!—this will account for his
abruptness, his asperity—
Goose. Very touching, indeed!—l feel for all the
world just as if my head was a watering-pot,—l’m ready
to run out at both eyes for sheer sympathy:—but they
return—don’t be afraid of me. Miss Mely,—mum’s the
word with me—l shan’t blab; —that sly rogue Fred,
with his Miss White—no wonder old Hardy looked so
black!


Enter Hardy Frederic, and Wxldgorse from House.
Gov. Well, Master Hardy, have you settled your
bargain ?
Hardy. All is concluded, sir.
Wild. Yes, he has hired me, —has got one who can set
a snare—jump a fence—wrestle a fall—handle a cudgel
—track a booty—trick a keeper, aye, and bring down
a buck with any body!
Gov. This arranged, gentlemen, Mr. Furlong, the
Superintendant of the settlers to the colony, shall ac-
company you up the island ; —I presume most of you
have brought your houses with you.
Goose. Yes, sir, our’s are all ready made—l wish they
were ready furnished as well; —they’re bringing my
things on shore now. As I’m thinking of getting mar-
ried soon, I’ve brought a few head of horned-cattle with
me—a choice of seeds for my nursery—a cradle, and a
little music, though perhaps I mayn’t want that; —
some Southdowns, a Rumpford grate, and a bumble-pup-
py board!
Gov. If any of you gentlemen should wish to proceed
further on to the Swan River, there’s the Charles the
Tenth hulk, and the Napoleon transport lying in the
bay,—they’re bound direct, and will no doubt be glad of
a customer !
Goose. Swan River!—no, no, I’m not such a goose as
to sink my capital in the Swan River, though they do say
it’s a capital spec.—l won’t make ducks and drakes of my
money there!
Enter FURLONG, from house, r.
Fur. Now, gentlemen, are you all ready ?
Gov. Oh, here’s Mr. Furlong, gentlemen, and as
you’ve got some distance to go, and day’s advancing, I’d
advise you to be stirring.
801. Wish you luck, brother settlers; —let us see you
when you come back.
Goose. [to convicts, who are taking up luggage by di-
rection of Governor.] Look alive, Darby.
Darby, I’m awake, sir.
Wild. [a«t/e.J I’ll not be sleeping long !
Goose. Now, then, MissMely—now, Master Hardy—
now, Fred, —never look so white, man,—one strain for
old England, and forward’s the word.


MEDLEY CHORD S.— O m neb.
Aik. —“ Girl I left behind me.”
Though, self-exiled from England’s coast,
We part, perhaps, for ever,
We feel we love it still the most,
The farther off we sever !
Swan River or Van Diemen’s Land,
Where’er the sun may find ns,
On dearer ground we'll never stand
Than the land we’ve left behind us !
Air. —" Tight little Island.”
For oh, ’tis a right little island,
A right little tight little island,
May its commerce encrease,
While the blessings of peace
Make glad every heart in our island '
[Exeunt omnesin procession, Furlong leading the way, —
Gooseberry and Amelia, Hardy and Frederic, follow-
ed by Darby and Wildgorse, Convicts with luggage,
guarded by Soldiers, —Governor and Inhabitants sa-
luting settlers of.
SCENE II.— Commencement of Panoramic , Tour through
Van Diemen’s Land ; from Hobart’s Toivn, through roman-
tic country to Squashrnoor Village ; —River Derwent, and
Herdsman’s Cove Settlement ; —Blue Hills ; —Emu Bot-
toms, by moonlight; and Forest of Gum Trees.
Enter Furlong, Hardy, Frederic, Gooseberry, Ame-
lia, Darby, Wildgorse, Convicts, and Serjeant
and Soldiers, r. — in the same order as at the conclusion
of previous scene.
Fur. Now, gentlemen settlers, five miles further and
we reach Squashrnoor—a very pleasant village in fine
weather, I can assure you:—there we can halt awhile,
and send a detachment forward to Swampum, our place
of destination, to prepare for our arrival, and make mat-
ters comfortable; for though you leave a land of enjoy-
ments, gentlemen, you’ll find there’s still some enjoy-
ments left here, if you’ll only look after them.
Goose. I can enjoy myself any where—especially with
this beautiful scenery ; so on with you, my boys,—come,
my dear Miss Mely.


CHORUS.— Omnes.
Air.—“ Thady you Gander .”
Oh, ’tis sweet to think in Van Diemen’s Land,
Weare sure to find something still that is dear;
And that though we are far from our native strand,
We are not obliged to be stranded here.
The stomach accustomed to mutton and beef
Cannot live upon bread and potatoes alone;
But with veal and with lamb will procure the relief,
That can only with veal and with lamb be known.
Oh, ’tis sweet to think, &c.
[The party continue their route—Panorama continues ; —
series of highly picturesque vievis, leading to
SCENE III.— Village of Squashmoor, and Hemp Plan-
tations ; — Mrs. Vandammer’s Hut, R. — and grounds
on one side — Blithe’s Hut, R— and grounds on the
other; — hemp-plantations in the back ground. — Blithe,
Hardy Vaux, Bill Soames, Ikey Solomons, and Con-
victs enter.
CHORUS.— Omnes.
Air. — “ Sing tantarantara, rogues all, Sgc.”
Ne’er droop, brother convicts, but keep up the ball
For in court, or in cottage, in hovel or hall,
Mankind, as occasion permits, are rogues all.
Sing tantarantara, rogues all, &c.
Let moralists gravely declaim against vice,
But the man was ne’er born that hadn’t his price—
Opportunity makes us all rogues in a trice.
Sing tantarantara, rogues all, &c.
Enter Blithe from hut, r.
Blithe. That’s right, my boys, sing away—the more
the merrier; some birds sing all the best at the sight of
the bars, but there are other birds that sing best when the
bars are out of sight.
Vaux. Ah, goal birds, I suppose you mean ?
Blithe. Mean no offence, only exert yourselves, you’re
sure to get on. Hasn't that cut-away, Tom Gore, who
was sent here for manslaughter, become the first doctor
in the place ?—and isn’t Nick Brutf, who has been tried


at every bar in England, isn’t he now the greatest law-
yer we have ?
Faux. Practice makes perfect!
Blithe. I don’t care what a man is, so long as he isn’t
a gentleman A cobbler’s worth twenty gentlemen,—the
ast I had said he couldn’t turn his hand to any thing
but literature, so as we’d no literature here, I was obliged
to set him to carry the wash to the pigs, and he was hard-
ly fit for that; —but I must go and see that your dinner
is got ready—there’s no working well on an empty
stomach; —unlike my neighbour there, I’d win your
hearts with kindness, not with the coal river: so enjoy
yourselves, boys.
[Exit into hut, R.
Faux, We might have fallen into worse hands than
Master Blithe’s, gentlemen ; —he knows the world—has
seen life—understands things,—perhaps has been trans-
ported himself in his time ; —ah, there’s nothing like ex-
perience. What’s the ditference between our situations
now, and our masters, the settlers?—except that we’re
transported here with more justice than they are ; —we
come here for our sins, and they for their misfortunes; —
they come here at their own expence, we at the govern-
ment’s ; —they run all the risk—we share all the profit. I
never worked so hard for my dinner as when I was obliged
to steal it: depend upon it roguery’s an unprofitable call-
ing
/hey. Not always;—mine vas a profitable calling
enough if they vould but have let me continued in it!
I had as pretty a crib in the mace and fence line, as any
in all Rosemary Lane, —used to speak to twenty parcels
of swag a day, and do business vith them all; till they
laid hold of me, and booked me for seven pen’north ;
lucky 1 always worked under the arm pits, or it might
have been worse, but I vas never for having a drop from
the stone pitcher! [dinner bell rings without.
Faux. Hey ! there goes the dinner bell; now then, at
least for an hour’s refreshment and recreation; —let’s wel-
come it with our customary capers—the convicts gallo-
pade, gentlemen ;—we figured in it when we were more
fettered in our movements, and musn’t neglect it now
that we’re taking steps to lighten our hearts and sharnen
our appetites, and have no tread mill to supply its place
—so start off, my boys!
f Convict Galiopade.—At the end oj which,exeunt omnes.


Enter Eliza, from Mrs. Vandammer’s Hut, l. — watching
them off.
Eliza. Happy insensibility!—convicted, banished as
they are, still does their hour of rest bring joy to them ;
but I have no such refuge—there is no rest nor joy for
me! Wretched Eliza!—what solace is there now for
thee on earth?—the consciousness of innocence!—yes,
that should support me; —but, despite its powerful in-
fluence, I sadden, sicken, droop, despair!—surely, sure-
ly, lam but too severely tried! and I was once so happy !
Enter Durant, from Mrs. Vandammer's, l.
Bur. What’s this, evermore idling, sculkmg, girl ?
—to work, to work—do you think we keep you here to
neglect your duty thus ?
Eliza. Do T not labour incessantly—beyond my
strength—beyond my right ?
Bur. Don’t tell me! —l have long suspected your in-
tentions, madam! One of these days you mean to leave
us, to give us all the slip ; to join that fellow Michael
Howe, perchance.
Eliza. Conscious of right, Ido not fear your malice,
Slr ! f weeps.
Bur. If you have nothing else to do but weep, why
don’t you work ?—-but I’ll go and set Mother Vandammer
on you, she’s got more tongue than I have—l always get
so plaguey dry when I begin talking;—! must off and
wash my throat down with a little brandy t as it is. Be-
ware, girl ! [Exit into hut, n.
Eliza. Merciless brute ! —when will my persecutions
cease? I’ve but one friend left me—that’s a sure one!
—death!—yes, death! —Oh, Frederic and I had hoped to
live, love, for thy sake ! [turns aside despondingly.
Enter Blithe, r.
Blithe. There, I’ve left them all comfortable; —eh !
who have we here ?—my termagant neighbour, Mrs. Van-
dammer’s wench ; —crying as usual! —poor girl! poor girl!
Nay, pine not thus, lass, pine not thus; —cheer up—
you’re not the first that’s committed a little error in your
young days.
Eliza. Ah, sir, though condemned, disgraced, and
punished, ’tis undeservedly, believe me ; I am innocent!
indeed I am ! howe’er appearances may be against me!
Blithe, Ido believe you;—you wear not the hardi


hood of guilt. I would serve you, knew I but the way ;
could I buy off your term of servitude to my harsh
neighbour, your fate should be less hard !
Eliza. May heaven for ever bless you, sir !
Blithe. What brought you here ?—disclose your story
freely, and count on my protection !
Eliza. You are too good, sir. Early an orphan, ser-
vitude was my sole resource against the miseries of pri-
vation ! Received into a tradesman’s family, I laboured
cheerfully—l served him faithfully ! —all was content
and pleasure, until, unhappily, my master’s son—spare
my confusion, sir-
Blithe. Oh, oh, a little love affair, I thought as much ;
—whenever there’s mischief, little Cupid is sure to be
concerned in some way or other.
Eliza. My master gave me notice of dismissal: just at
this period,—one Sunday night,—the family were all at
chapel—the house left wholly in my charge;—l had im-
prudently stolen out to see a dying aunt—’twas but for
one short hour when I returned, I found, with horror!
the house had been broke open! the drawers had been
stripped, and no trace left to mark the plunderers.
Blithe. That was indeed unfortunate! —you should not
have left the bouse—should not have neglected your trust.
Eliza. I know ’twas wrong, but I have dearly suffer-
ed !—Suspicion fell upon me—my trunks were searched,
and, by what chance I know not, part of the stolen pro-
perty was found in them ! —The hour of trial came—l had
no friend to speak for me—no gold to fee assistance!—let
me be brief, —convicted, sentenced—my forfeit life was
spared, to end in misery and exile here!
Blithe. Poor girl!—poor girl!—’tis a sad tale, in-
deed ; yet, do not quite despair—hope still for happier
times!— some kind chance yet may turn up in your fa-
vour, and manifest your innocence.
Elizff. Alas ! I fear not!—the villains took their mea-
sures but too surely !
Alß. —Eliza.
“ Eveleen’s Bower.”
Oh, dark was the hour, when in villainy’s power,
Tfell, for the robbers in secrecy came;
The moon threw no light on their footsteps that night,
But left poor Eliza to bear ail the blame!


The runners came fast, the fell sentence was past.
And though many a fact prov’d my innocence plain ;
Yet, transported to toll, here, in Van Diemen's Isle,
Nought on earth can my character clear up again !
Blithe. Well, well, come what come may ; —in me
you’ll find a friend—on that rely ; —farewell!
[Exit, b.
Eliza. Generous, worthy man! —but vain will be
his efforts ; —there is no hope for me!—Oh! Frederic!
Frederic! could you but know your loved Eliza’s suffer-
ing's, what would be your anguish!—’tis well you do
not; —you did not deem me guilty—-there is some joy in
that.
Enter Frederic, r.
Fred. I have stolen on before them, in hopes kind
chance may haply throw Eliza in my path;—they said
that she was stationed near this spot!—Much wronged,
hapless girl!
Eliza. That voice!—gracious heavens! can it be
Frederic ?
Fred. My dear my long lost, persecuted love!
[they embrace,
Eliza. Generous faithful youth ! —but how is this ?
you here! —surely no fatal chance—
Fred. No, no, only transported, love, at seeing you.
I am self-exiled here:—’tis a blest hour for me my
coming hither, since it has led me to Eliza’s arms!—We
must prize well the moments; —my father comes—where
can we meet at eve ? for I have much to say.
Eliza. I serve on this plantation, and will be waiting
in the neighbouring wood at sunset; —enquire for the
Witch Oak.
Fred. I will not fail to be there; —we settle in the
village nearest this.
Enter Durant, l.— unobserved,
Dur. [aside.] What’s this?—Mrs. Vandammer’ssus
picions were correct, then ; —I must watch this girl,
Fred Be punctual, dearest girl, and, at all hazards,
love and liberty shall still be your’s !
Eliza. Doubt not I will be waiting.
Dur. [aside ] Love and liberty her’s ! —l’ll stop her
—let me hasten and secure the guard that are now scour-
ing the woods in search of these desperate Bushrangvrs
( [siea/s off, L.— unobserved.


Fred. Our party come !—-we are but just in time.
SONG.— Eliza.
Air. —“ Meet me by moonlight alone.”
I’ll meet thee by moonlight alone,
She'd use at the set of the sun,
And there you your plans can make known,
To foil all my judges have done.
Prosecutors have hearts made of flints,
In vain you for mercy may call,
But love gives his votaries hints,
Can puzzle all Westminster Hall.
Meet me by moonlight, &c.
Though here I’m transported for life,
Their malice, love, you can defeat—
Can make me a free happy wife,
And bid law and sulTring retreat.
My innocence all may asperse,
To freedom you still can restore—
My sentence your love may reverse,
And say can a monarch do more.
Meet me by moonlight, See.
[Frederic kisses her and hurries her off, l.
Enter Furlong, Hardv, Gooseberry, Amelia, Darby,
Wildgorse, Convicts, and Soldiers, r.
Hardy. Oh, you are here, sir,—we missed you ; —you
outstripped us; —you were not wont, methinks, to be so
nimble.
Fred. I wished to see the country, sir, and—
Hardy. Was that your only reason ? —Beware how you
deceive me ! —I am not to be trifled with ! —should 1 find
—but you know my sentiments !
Fred, [asirfe.] I'll have a few more moments with
her still!—they’re all engaged. [steals off, l.
Amelia. I shall never be able, Mr. Gooseberry, to walk
much further ; if this is Van Diemen’s Land, I wish I’d
stopped in London. No hackney coaches—no nice turn-
pike roads—no pavements—no stages—no omnibusses,
and no pastry-cook’s shops, on the way, to get an ice in.
Darby. I’d like mightily to see a snug little whiskey
tent, where one could get a drop of the cratur, and a few
potatoe grounds, myself—if it was only to show the cul-
tivation of the country.
Goose. The cattle look well; —those bulls on. the road
were very promising.
[act i.


Darby, The bulls ! —beautiful! —your honours just
taken the words out of my mouth !
Wild. [aside.] A fine sporting country this : it shall
be hard if Robin Wildgorse does not spring some game
here soon ; —’tis their turn now ; well, mine will come in
time. [Exit, r.
Enter Blithe, r.
Blithe. Ulloa ! what master Furlong!—some new set-
tlers, eh ?—Your servant, gentlefolks ; and so you have
come here to settle, gentlemen ?—1 wish you luck.
Goose. Yes, sir, I’ve got my house all ready, its putting
up now—only want it furnished, and as no house can be
furnished without a lady in it, I’ve come provided with
her too, among the rest of the goods—hav’n’t I, Miss
Mely ?
Amelia. Pray answer for yourself, Mr. Gooseberry—
I’ve no idea of any such thing as matrimony, at present;
Cupid is a very dangerous antagonist to sport with ; —the
foolish girl who games with him, is ever sure to lose!
Hardy, [coming forward.'] You speak truly and wise-
ly. girl.—may you profit by the caution you have given.
Look well before you leap ; —match not unsuitably, as
some would do, for on that leap in life, depends your
future misery or happiness !
Blithe. I should advise the young lady to marry when
she can—that is, with propriety;—she musn’t be too nice,
for it’s very disagreeable lying alone here. In our warm
climate, should their couches not be otherwise occupied,
single people are apt to find a snake or two, now and
then, creeping in, to be their companion for the night.
Amelia. Lord bless me ! that quite alters the case, —
I’m sure I never can endure the thoughts of having a
snake for a bedfellow, therefore, I’m afraid 1 must marry
you after all, Mr. Gooseberry.
Goose, [aside.] Knew she wouldn’t want forcing.
Hardy. Well, you shall make your own election—at
least you will not bring disgrace and guilt into your
father’s house, as others have essayed.
Goose. No, no ; my respectability cannot be doubted.
Only enquire in Covent Garden for that! Where is it
we’re going to settle, Mr. Superintendent ?
Fur. Swampum, sir.
Goose. Swampum!—cursed queer name; —however,
we shall be happy to see you at Swampum ! —shan
we. Miss Mely ?
c 2


Amelia. Lord, Mr. Gooseberry, what have 1 to do
with it ?
Goose. Remember the snakes ! — had her there, [aside.
Amelia. Oh! dear me' I’d forgot them; —certainly,
sir, extremely happy to see you indeed !
Goose. Have you any hunting in this Van Diemen’s
Land of your’s, Superintendant ?
Fur, Oh yes, sir ; very capital hunting, with this pe-
culiar advantage, that if you should happen to be too
lazy to hunt the game yourself, they’ll often be accommo-
dating enough to take the trouble off your hands, and
hunt you.
Goose. Dear me.' that’s very odd! —I suppose it’s
owing to their being in such a wild state. Every thing’s
in a very wild state here, sir, I suppose?
Fur. Oh, very;—you’ll see a number of remarkable
animals here; —there’s the Kangaroos now, they stand
on their hind legs, and have pouches in their stomachs, to
carry their victuals in.
Goose. There’s nothing very remarkable in that; —I
stand on my hind legs and have a pouch in my stomach
to carry my victuals in, myself. We may as well be
thinking of jogging.
Hardy. I’m ready, sir,—come, Frederic—come, girl.
Eh! where’s Frederic?—Frederic! [calls.
Enter Frederic, l.
Fred. Here, sir!
Hardy. Again missing—beware!
Goose. Farewell, sirgood-bye, my boys. Now,
Miss Mely;—now then, Darby, my boy, to the Wood-
lands !
Darby. I’ll be at your heels, sir.
[Exeunt the settling party in procession as before, L. s. r.
Blithe and Convicts seeing them off.
SCENE IV .—Continuation of Panoramic Tourfrom Squash-
moor Village to the Swampum Settlement.—Set-
tling party enter sing the Chorus,
“ Ob, ’tis sweet to think in Van Diemen’s Land,” &c
and exeunt, l.— Series of Romantic views then conduct
to Break o’Day Plains ; —Lake Echo ;— Emigrants’
Rest Village to —


SCENE V.— Swampum Settlement. —Convicts discover-
ed erecting hut, r.— Soldiers and Serjeant guarding and
directing.
CHORUS.— Omnes.
Am.— Weber's “ Bridesmaid’s Chorus.”
The Settlers hut that here we raise,
No lordly roof discloses;
Yet it has charms of higher praise,
Here health and peace reposes.
Ply the hammer then, and urge the nail.
Our efforts must not fail,
Though ours is no bed of roses.
No rent folks here are forc’d to pay,
Their goods and all distressing;
No taxes taking all away,
The brokers all possessing.
Ply the hammer then, and urge the nail,
Our efforts must not fail,
The destitute still blessing.
Enter Furlong, Gooseberky, and Darby, r.
Fur. Having got your friend Hardy and his family so
comfortably located, Mr. Gooseberry, we’ll now see you
housed. —Lucky that log hut was to be sold as it was, —
all ready to the old gentleman’s hand; —he may sing
‘ Home, sweet home !’ in comfort there now. Well, Ser-
jeant, how do your men get on ?
Serj. Just completed, Superintendant.
Goose. It will do capitally ! —there, my boys, there's
something for the grog shop for you.
ls< Conv. Success to your honour !
Fur. It’s as pretty a carcase of a hut as any man need
wish to clap his carcase into.
Goose. I’ll soon do that, Mr. Furlong;—this is the
country to build a house in—where you can pay your
timber merchant with a bill at sight—take the trees with-
out their leaves, and have nothing to pay for land tax !
—heaven bless that Bob Sykesf or persuading me to come
here!
Darby. By the powers, master, but we’ll soon give
our neighbours a rare house-warming, for there’s a ca-
pital wooden chimney I see! and I’ve set your new
Rumpford stove in a nice lump of clay—that will do
beautifully.
c 3


Fur. The government allots you,Mr. Gooseberry, five
hundred acres, in equal proportions, on .each side your hut;
and allow me to remark, sir, you can’t be more pleasant-
ly situated; —here you are in the very heart of the Swam-
pum Flats, sheltered by the Breakneck Hills; —you’ve
Crocodile Creek on one side of you, so that you need
never be in want of water; and Quagmire Meadows on
the other, that you may always be able to take a pleasant
walk when you wish it; and right behind you, if you’re
inclined to hunt or shoot, (for I think I heard you say
you’re fond of sporting) is Wild Beast Wood.
Goose. What!
Fur. Wild Beast Wood.
Goose. Wild Beast Wood ! —I beg your pardon, Mr.
Superintendant, but that’s a very odd name ;—what may
it be derived from, pray ?
Fur. Oh, merely from its inhabitants.
Goose. Inhabitants!—is it inhabited, then?
Fur. Certainly !
Goose. By whom?—if it isn’t taking too great a li-
berty.
Fur. Oh, the lions, tigers, and such like—including
a few wild boars, and a herd or two of hyaenas.
Goose. Swallow me up!—lions—tigers—wild boars!
—very great bores, indeed !
Darby. I’d like a few wild bulls better, master!
Goose. Hyaenas, too!—Oh that cursed Bob Sykes!
he never said a word about them ! I beg your pardon,
Mr. Superintendant, 1 wouldn’t wish to be impertinently
curious, but as we’re about to become such very near
neighbours, would you allow me to enquire if these same
inhabitants, these lions and boars that you speak of, ever
go out visiting ?
Fur. Occasionally ; —they’re by no means unsociable,
they take an evening stroll through the settlement
every now and then, —but it’s only when they’re very
hungry!
Goose. Very hungry!—eat me alive!—that villain
Bob Sykes!—l suppose they’re not very nice in their
appetites ?
Fur. Nice !
Goose. Yes, they’re not very particular, whether it’s
he meat or she meat they eat—whichever they meet, I
suppose; in fact, all’s meat that comes to mouth with,
them, I dare say!


Fur. Exactly; but don’t let that put you out of your
way ; —if they should happen to come to your store, you
can always get rid of them by merely throwing them
such a. thing as a part of a bull—
Darby. Oh! fait that would be a bull!
Fur. Or an odd lamb or so.
Goose. But wouldn’t that be like a general invitation?
—besides, I never give my guests lamb.
Fur. Mutton will do as well ; —they’re not at all par-
ticular, —one of your Southdowns !
Goose. It’s all up with me! —Lions! Lord bless me! I
never saw a lion in my life, except in the King’s arms,
over the shop doors! I was going to see one once at
Cross’s, but he began to roar just as 1 got on the stairs,
as much as to say, he didn’t wish to see company that
day, so as I didn’t want to make him cross, I took the
hint and came away there’s no occasion to be unneces-
sarily rude, you know!
Fur. True, true; —but come, lads, we must return
to Hobart's Town, so look alive; —farewell, my friends!
Goose. You’re not going, are you ?
Fur. Must; —take care of yourselves!—there’s not
much fear if you only go well armed, and your gun
doesn’t miss fire ; —you’re in more danger from the Bush-
rangers.
Goose, Bush-rangers ! —Lord bless me ! who are they?
Fur. The most desperate of the desperate!—run-away
convicts—out-and-out thieves!—nothing’s safe from
them, —stores —sheep—bullocks —any thing they can lay
their hands on, all goes into the bush. Why they car-
ried off a man’s hut the other day, with him and all his
family inside it ! —but good-bye,— ct>me, lads.
[Exeunt Furlong, Serjeant, Soldiers, and Convicts, u.
Goose. Steal a man’s house!—zounds! that is shop-
lifting with a vengeance!—and there’s no watchmen
here—no sending for the constable —no coroner’s inquest,
if one’s murdered I— -I’ve a great mind to call them back,
—ulloa, Mr. but then it will look so;—that con-
founded Bob Sykes!—he never said a word about my
seeing the wild beasts for nothing,—never breathed a
syllable about these terrible Bush-rangers!
Darby. Never think about them, master; —I heard
them say at Hobart’s that the soldiers are beating about
the bush for them, so they’ll soon give a good account of
them, never fear: as for the wild beasts, sure we won’t
dig a pit for them right before our door, the spalpleens!


Goose. Capital ! capital!—we’re not so bad off as I
thought for, I see that. Well, Darby, my boy, we’ve
got a house, now all we have to do is to stock it ; —but
we’ve no bazaars—no Farringdon Markets here ! —never
mind, we’ll get on somehow.
DUET.— Gooseberry and Darby.
Air —“ Barney Brallaghan.”
Darby. We’ve got a nice little cot,
We only want something to put in it;
Goose. Soon! what a glorious lot!
MissMely and I shall be shut in it!
Darby. Then for the blisses!
Goose. Be still!
Darby. I am!
Goose. We’ll have gallons of whiskey !
Darby. The kisses!
Goose, Be quiet!
Darby. I will.
And throwing the stocking so friskey!
Both. Then, one day,
There’ll be a sweet pretty prattler'
Only say,
Who wouldn’t be a settler?
Darby. For butler, for footman, and groom,
To be sure you’ll ne’er find Darby’s fellow;
In the pantry I’ll always find room,
And attend mighty sharp to the cellar!
We’ll get usan oven, that’s clear,
And sure we won’t bake our own bread; sir ;
Some malt, too, to brew our own beer,
And we’ll live ten years after we’re dead, sir!
All the day,
We’ll dance Morgan Rattler,
Only say,
Who wouldn’t be a settler?
Goose. We’ll go out and shoot kangaroos,
Their skins will make rareleather breeches;
We’ll snare the wild cats and emews,
And revel in all sorts of riches.
Potatoes we’ll plant to our hand.
Whene’er a sirloin we’ve the spit in,
And fancy in Van Diemen’s Land,
We’re again with our friends in dear Britain ■
Both. Then, hurrah !
Fame in her praise is a tattler
Only say,
Who wouldn’t be a settler ? [ they dance


Enter Wildgorse, r.
Wild. A ball and concert!—l beg pardon—l hope I
don’t intrude, gentlemen?
Goose. My friend Hardy’s man ! —oh, not at all, my
good fellow, not at all!
Wihl. Master sends his compliments, and if you’ve
got matters a little to rights, he’d be glad if you’d step
down this evening.
Goose. Oh, certainly!—visit your master directly,
Robin ; —must keep up one’s circle of acquaintance—es-
pecially when it’s confined to one; —it will be awkward
never seeing anybody’s face but one’s own. You’ve got
some game there, Robin—where might you pick it up?
Wild. I picked it up in the wood just behind here.
Goose. Wild Beast Wood! —what, did you come
through the wood?
Wild. Aye, sure.
G)ose. Lord bless me ! —you didn’t happen to meet
any thing particular in your way through it, did you,
Robin ?
Wild. Rather so.
Goose, What was it ?
Wild. Why I can hardly tell you,—but it were a main
queer looking beast—such a one as I’d never seen be-
fore, except once at our fair.
Goose. Mercy on me ! —what was it like ?
Wild. Why it had great bushy hair hangingall round
its face, just for all the world like a judge’s wig, only it
warn’t powdered ! —then it had large whiskers, and two
great staring eyes, with a mouth that opened something
like a horse’s collar, and teeth like a box of dominoes !
Goose. This beats all!—had it nothing else ?
Wild. Yes, a tassel at the end of its tail.
Goose. How particularly horrid! —Did he—say any
thing, or do any thing like, my good Robin ?
Wild. Yes, he looked at me like, and 1 looked at him,
—but that were all, for he treated me with a deal of con-
tempt. as it were—gave a growl, summat like a speaking
trumpet, and then turned on his tail and left me; —T
didn’t think it worth while to make him come back again !
Goose. Dear me, I hope they’ll always treat me with
a deal of contempt if ever they meet me. If they don’t
turn tail on me. I’m sure I shall on them. I’m afraid I
shan’t be so comfortable here as I thought I should be,
Robin '.—that confounded Bob Sykes! As you’re return


ing back, my dear Robin, I think I’ll go with you;—it
will be company like—not that I’m afraid !
Wild, Na, sir.
Goose. You can take one of the guns while I’m gone
you know, Darby, and shoot something for supper
against I come back again;—something eatable you
know, Darby, for it’s no shot no supper here, Darby.
Darby. I’ll do that thing, master, unless I happen to
be made supper of myself, by some of these hyenas, Super-
intendant spoke of; —they’ll make a bit of a bull in
swallowing me, though, for I’ll not go down their dirty
throats easily, devil choke them ; so here goes for a sup-
per, either way ! [ Exit into hut.
Goose. I’ll go and get the other gun myself, in case of
accidents ; you can just wait while I prime and load it.
[Exit into hut.
Wild. His g un!—hum! —sporting has no charms here ;
there be game enough, but there be no game laws to break,
and it be poaching that gives venison its true flavour.
Folks wouldn’t care half so much for hares and pheasants
if they were not obliged to go to poachers for them ; —ah .
if it hadn’t been for poaching—yet, still a shiny night,
and in the season of the year, there’s no delight to equal it.
SONG. —Wii.dgorse.
Air. —“ Old Country Melody .”
When I was boon apprentice
In vamous Zomerzet sliere,
Lauks! I zerved my meester truly
Vor neerly zeven yeer,
Until I took to powching,
As you zhall quickly heer;
Ou! ’twas ma delyght, in a zhiny night,
In the zeazon o’ the year.
Ou, ’twas ma delyght, &c.
Ma meester voork’d me zoorly,
I didn't valee that.
Although he groombled all the day
Whatever I woor at,
Sae long az I coold go into
The woods, amang the deer,
Ou! ’twas ma delyght, in a zhiny night,
In the zeazon o’ the year.
Ou, ’twas ma delyght, &c.
when ma meester wanted me
To voorke by candle light;
I looked up unto the moon,.
And zhe zhone vera bright.


Zo I zhow'd un a vair pear of heels
Without a bit of fear,
Ou, ’twas ma delyght, in a zhiny night.
In the zeazon o’ the year.
Ou, 'twas ma delyght, &c.
I show’d un a vair pear of heels,
And to the ale-house went,
And there a’ met zome jolly lads,
On powchingthey were bent.
They zwore me wan amaug them then,
All vor a pot of beer,
Ou, ’twas ma delyght, in a zhiny night,
In the zeazon o’ the year.
Ou, ’twas ma delyght, &c.
Noo ’tis a can vire a long un.
And a zhort un a can zell,
And zooratimes zend a haunch unto
A \riend in town az well,
A poozle all the joostices,
And make the parzons zwear,
Ou, ’twas ma delyght, in a zhiny night,
In the zeazon o’ the year.
Ou, ’twas ma delyght, &c.
As me and ma coomerades
Were zetting on a snare,
Lauks, the geamkeepoors caem oop to uz,
For them we did na kere,
Case we could fight or wrestle, lads,
Jump over ony where,
Ou, 'twas ma delyght, in a zhiny night,
In the zeazon o’ the year.
Ou, ’twasraa delyght, &c.
As me and ma coomerades
Were zetting vour or vive,
And teaking on ’em oop agean,
We caught a heere alive :
We putten into the bag, ma boys,
An through the wood did zteer,
Ou, ’twasma delyght, in a zhiny night,
In the zeazon o’ the year.
Ou, ’twas ma delyght, &c.
We popt un in the bag, ma lads,
An yoiten off vor town;
We took un to a neighbour’s hoose,
And we zold un vor a crown,
We zold an vor a crown, ma lads,
But I did nat tell ye where,
Ou, ’twas ma delyght, in a zhiny night,
In the zeazon o’ the year.—Ou, ’twas ma delyght, &c.


Then here’s success to powching,
Vor a does think it feare,
And here’s look to ere a gentleman
Az wants to buy a heere,
Bad look to ere a geamkeepoor,
Az woonazell iz deere,
Ou! 'twasma delyght, in a zhiny night,
In thezeazon o’ the year.
Ou, 'twas ma delyght, &c.
Moral.
Vhat made me vond of powching vurst,
If you vould wish to hear,
It was becase I vound that beef
And mutton were zo dear.
While 1 getgeameand venzon cheap,
Which iza reazon clear,
Ou! 'twas ma delyght, in a zhiny night,
In the zeazon o’ the year.*
Ou, 'twas ma delyght, &c.
f Exit Wildgorse, joined by Gooseberry from hut.
end of act the first.
ACT II.
SCENE I, — The Witch Oak.—Romantic dingle in Wild
Beast Wood.
Enter Ben-NI-i.ong, Chief of the Broken Bay Tribe ; Kan-
garee, his sister; Yel-lo-way, War-re-war, and
other Caffre Natives or Aborigines of Van Diemen’s
Land, stealing on.
SONG and CHORUS.— Kangaree and Natives.
Air. —“ Ackee, oh !”
Softly tread, lest white man spy,
Ollaloo! Ollalool
Pale.face him have cunning eye,
Caffre man to view !
•The author of this drama first heard the old part of this song,
sung at a small road side house, in the little village of Lillishul, War-
wickshire; and was so pleased with the humour and melody of it,
that tie was induced to add half a dozen new verses to it; this is the
first time it has appeared in a complete state.


White man come with fire in hand,
Seize poor Caffre’s native land,
Wan-ge.wali!—Yen-go-nah !
Hunt and shoot poor Caffre 1 -
Let him fear, Black man near,
Him take dark revenge !
Yet when sun in ocean set,
Olla loo ! Olla loo!
Caffre chief him wrongs forget,
Dance the spear dance through .
Wake the music of the shield,
Caffre soon make pale-face yield—
Bot-ti-bol!—Wat-ti-wal !
With him warlike waddie !
White man fear, Black man near,
Him take dark revenge !
Ben. Aye, let the colourless strangers fear! that have
usurped our plains, and would fain extirpate our race!
—let them beware the Caffre’s just revenge!—These
white men can speak fair and promise well; but what
has the dark chief ever found from them, save this?—
that they have striding legs and grasping hands —have
over-run our isle, and seized our all ; because we wore
not the same hue with them !
Kan. Caffres have black faces, but white hearts, but
white mens faces white, their hearts black !
Ben , Right, girl ; see to what state they have re-
duced the mighty Ben-ni-long?—sprung from the power-
ful race of Cam-mer-ray, Chief of the Broken Bay Tribe,
—whose word was life and death ! —What is he now?—a
fugitive!—a slave !—-yet, who like Ben-ni-long could
throw the spear, or wield the waddie ’gainst the warrior ?
—who swifter in the chase or the canoe ?—who wiser in
in the council ? —woe to the pale-faced warrior, woe !
Kan. Yet all not bad, brothersome white men
good;—white man kind to you—give clothes—give book!
Ben. ’Twas but to snare ! True their Be-an-ny, their
head chief, sought me with words of peace and love !—
true, at his wish, I went far over sea, to white man’s lands,
where their king dressed me in his warrior’s dress, and
gave rich gifts, then smiled on the dark chief, and bade
him make his people like to them—
Kan. Ah, England fine country!—white lady, very
fine lady—finer than black girl '.—all things good in En-
gland,—all kind and generous, just and merciful, there!
u


Ben, Aye, just and merciful indeed ! —What, saw
the untaught savage—the wild chief there ?—this saw
he!—he saw the white man, his neighbour, poor!—dis-
tressed! —shut him in prison ! —make him poorer still to
make him pay ! —he saw the white man hang white men,
like dogs, for stealing food to save them from starvation !
but for a wife, a daughter stolen, oh, bits of shining gold
ere ample recompense!
Kan. But pale-face way of live best, —all joy—all
good!—better than Caffre’s way; still white man sell
wife like cow in market—tie rope round her, —that not
good—Caffre no do that!
Ben. He is not civilized enough!—Ben-ni-long, sa-
vage as he was, found white men worse; —he left his
country, what found he here, when he came back ? he
found the white man chief! he found his lands all seized,
and he, their prince, the white man’s slave! He threw
off the fine clothes the white man gave him—left their
gay feasts—shut ear to their smooth words—took to his
native skins again—his hunter’s fare—and wars ’gainst
white men now, as white men warred ’gainst him!
Kan. They would be friends with Ben-ni-long—
would have us be one people.
Ben. Friends!—have they not made my people liars!
thieves?—before the white man came, Caffre saw nought
to covet and took nought. They’ve taught me something
—I will profit by ittaught me to plunder and deceive ;
-—practice will make me perfect! Keep watch here, girl,
while we go forth and prowl; should aught surprise,
make signal on thy shell, as fits the sister of a chief !
Come, warriors—Go-ran-go-ree! Now for the white
man’s stores!
[Ben-ni-long and Natives shout the War-hoop stealthily
and exeunt, r,— leaving Kangaree on guard.
Kan. I will be wakeful, brother. Ben-ni-long say true,
—white man ivee-ree ! —bad, wicked!—yet all not bad,
—Kangaree cannot wish all kill, —some pale-face good
and kind ! —better than Caffre ; —pale-face take but one
wife, that good—Caffre take two, that badCaffre
court girl with blows—beat her to make her love him,
that bad ; —white man court wife with gifts—make love
with kiss, that good ; —Kangaree be white man’s wife, —
she catch white man and make him marry!—eh! who
come?—pale-face!—let me sound alarm ! —no, no, white


girl with him! —they seem talk love! Kangaree cannot
harm, —she hide in bush and hear. [stands aside.
Enter Frederic and Eliza, l.
Fred. Yes, my dear Eliza, I should be unworthy of
your love, if 1 could for a moment have suspected your
innocence and truth.
Eliza. What words can thank you ? —the rigid have
condemned—the timid doubted, but you believe me in-
nocent, and that repays me all !
Fred. I do—l do! —thus let me prove it:—’tis partly
through my father’s prejudices, caused by my love for
you, you owe your present loss of fame and freedom ;
but one way’s left me to repair this wrong;—the mo-
ment a free settler weds a transport, that instant she is
free herself! I love—am afreesettler—thou undeserved-
ly a transport, —I offer thee my hand—accept it; —love
and liberty are thine !
Eliza. But will not your father
Fred. We will not directly disclose it to him, but
first essay to prove your innocence ; —though stern and
obdurate, he is not proof ’gainst reason ! —hope for the
best then, and consent, love; —a minister dwells near this
wood, —1 have secured a license—he has consented to
unite us!
SONG.— Eliza.
Air. —“ Thine am /.’’
Thine am I —thine am I, to soothe each care—
Thine, thine, ne’er more to sever!
Thine am I—thine am I, my Frederic dear,
Thine, thine, my love, for ever!
Now, no more, thy faithful heart
Shall throb, shall throb, and languish;
Though despair has wrung its core,
Love shall heal its anguish!
[Exeunt Eliza and Frederic, R.
Kan, [ coming forward .] Pale-faces can love then,
but not like black girl—no, pale-faces’ country cold, but
black girl have sun in her heart —warm, warm! Ha!
another white man coming ! —shall I make signal ?—oh,
no, no, Ben-ni-long would kill! and he seems kind and
gentle ; — l’ll bide in bush again ! [retires.
u 2


Enter Darby, l.
Darby. I’ve sprung no game yet; neither hare, hyaena,
lamb, lion, tom-tit, or tiger!—by the powers! but I
think sorrow will be our only supper, in spite of all their
fine tales of this same Van Diemen’s Land, where
we were to find the victuals ready dressed, and only
waiting to be eat!
Kan [aside ] Poor white man sad, —he seem un-
happy—he lament; —Kangaree would give comfort, if
she could!
Darby. Eh ! something stirring in the bush ! —one of
those terrible hyaenas, I dare say, the Superintendant
spoke about! Oh, Lord!—but I’m not afraid—l’ll rout
the devil; —come out of that you diabolical! infernal!
atrocious!—
Kan. [ appearing .] Good white man, no kill poor
black girl!
Darby. Eh ! talk of the devil, and by the powers
base’s a she devil! —black, but becoming ; —I must
frighten her though, or we’ll never be better acquainted.
Yield, you most terrible Tartar!—yield, 1 say, or kill-
ing’s the least I’ll do for you !
Kan. Dear white man, Kangaree mean no harm in-
deed !
Darby. She’s got a tongue, and what’s more, a tongue
like my own !
Kan. Iss! brother Ben-ni-long live in England—he
tea h me.
Darby. St. Patrick ! but she’s the man for my money l
—l’ll make friends with her ; —how shall I introduce my-
self?—l have it; —l’ll do it Irish fashion ; —give me a
kiss, you little devil, do.
Kan. Ha, white man make love—always begin that
way;—Kangaree cannot blush like white girl, stranger,
yet she can be true as white girl. If you love Kangaree,
she make you chief—run gold arrow through your nose!
Darby. I’m mighty obliged to you !
Kan. Tattoo you—make you great warrior !
Darby. Hum ! and get my brains knocked out, —
pleasant;—tattoo me!—score me like a spare rib of
pork ! —one might as well be barbacued at once.
Kan. You love Kangaree, white man ! she climb gum
trees, like opossum, for you—getyouhoney—dig yamfoi
you-—make you fern cake, and sing low sweet song, when
you throw fizgig, to make fish jump in your net.


Darby. Here’s an accomplished wife ! —l’ll have her;
sure my being transported won’t make my fortune, as it
has many a man’s.
Kan. You marry Kangaree, black man no burn your
hut.
Darby. The hand in hand insurance office! Here’ll
be news for my master ! Och ! it’s a bargain!—-we two
will be one, yo.u most enchanting Blackey moor, we will!
DUET.— Darby and Kangaree.
Air. —“ Happy Tawny Moor."
Darby.
Pretty Blackey moor! —pretty Blackey moor! will you, love,
Take a Paddy for your true love ?
Say ! don’t let us delay,
But settle all to day.
I have heard folks say the wooing’
Happy is, that's quick a doing—
Then, ’tis the Irish way,—
Be happy while you may!
Kangaree.
Happy Kangaree!—happy Kangaree!—will you, love,
Though you white man, have for true love ?
Play, dance with you all day,
And sport the hours away,
Black girl never long a wooing—
Lad she love her heart pursuing,
She, ’tis the Caffre way,—
Get marry when she may !
Enter Ben-ni-long and Caffre Warriors, r.
Ben. Who have we here ?—a pale-face!—die !
[ raises spear.
Darby. Och! murder ! be quiet wid you!
Kan. Hold! hold! he Kangaree’s good, good,—her
Bood-yer ree ! [interposes.
Darby. Yes, her sweetheart. What a set of fierce-
looking devils!—worse than the tigers,
Ben. Ever more the white man ! they meet us at every
turn ! Well, well, Ben-ni-long’s sister’s Bood-yer-ree must
be th ? brother of her tribe, e’en though he be a white man,
and of the nation of their foes. You must become a
chief!—must wield our arms, and bear a title in our na-
tive tongue!
Darby. Here’s preferment !
Ben. Yel-10-way, give our new brother a spear.
O 3 f Yel-10-way gives long spear to Darby.


Darby. A spear is it!—by the powers, if they hadn’t
told me it was a spear, I’d have taken it fora spit! [aside.
lien. You must from henceforth share in all our spoils.
War-re-war, give our new brother a portion of the
booty of the day ! \War-re-war gives Darby game.
Darby, Eh ! some birds and roots too !—here’s luck
for my master ! —we’ll have a supper any how now.faside.
Ben. To-morrow we attack at night the stores of two
new settlers, located here to-day.
Darby. Eh!
Ben. One lives near yonder creek.
Darby. Och, murder ! that’s our house !
Ben. Then is it sacred! Ben-ni-long preys noton
his people, as some chiefs do !
Darby. Here’s luck now ! —Sure my master hasn’t
turned up a trump card in myself!
Ben. Accept this shield, —we’ll then escort you to your
hut—to-morrow’s sun shall see you wedded to my sister.
Darby. The devil!—-och ! I’m in for it ! —master will
plJy up old gooseberry with me, may-be ; though sure
it won’t be a good thing for him.
Ben. Now, swear on this sacred hatchet, to be true
to us! and we will hail you chief.
Darby. I swear!—sure kissing the hatchet’s nothing,
nor throwing it neither! Och! I’ll make a keen chief!
I’m not the first that’s been made a chief by the savages!
Ben. Derry-bo-rang-bo-roo! for by that name you
will be known amongst us, or as your race would have it.
Fire-destroying-white-man, chief of the Broken Bay
Tribe, hail!
Darby. Brien Boroo of Derry, chief of the Broken
Head Tribe! (I’m come tosomething!) is very muchobliged
to you all, gentlemen.
Ben. Greet our new brother with our customary war
dance, then onwards for the night.
Darby. Aye, or my chiefship will have no supper !
[ Warriors dance war dance round Darby, who then exits
with Kangaree—led off by Ben-ni-long , and, followed
by Caffres, L-
SCENE II.— Interior of Hardy's Log House.
Enter Amelia, l,
Amelia. Heigho ! Mr. Gooseberry not come!—my
brother absent, —my father in his usual moodyhumour!


How heavily hang the hours!—why did I ever quit de-
lightful, lively, lovely London ? Oh ! England ! En-
gland ! we never know half thy value till we leave thee!
SONG,— Amelia.
Air. —“ Robin Adair.”
Oh, what a dull spot is
Van Diemen’s Land!
Wretched she, whose lot is
Van Diemen’s Land !
Here are no balls —no plays —
Nothing to pass one’s days;
Ah ! tell me who can praise
Van Diemen’s Land ?
Enter Gooseberry, o. f.
Goose. Miss Mely, singing !
Amelia. Yes, but not for pleasure, Mr. Gooseberry.
Goose. Oh! you find yourself lonely as well as 1!
Ah! you see we must come together.
Amelia. I don’t see any such thing, sir! — I by no
means want to add to my misery, I can assure you.
Goose. You forget the snakes !
Amelia. Oh! dear me! 1 never thought of them !
DUET.— Gooseberry and Amelia,
Air. —“ Will you come to the Bower?”
Gooseberry.
Will you come to the hut, I have built, Miss, foryou*
Only take care you do not catch cold with the dew!
Will you, will you, will you, will you, come and be wed *
Better marry than sleep, Miss, with snakes in your bed !
Amelia.
I’ll not come to your hut, Sir, howe’er you may grieve,
Till you’ve furnish’d itfitlya wife to receive!
No, Sir—no, Sir—no, Sir, I’llnotcome,! declare,
There are snakes in the grass, Sir, as well as elsewhere.
Goose. But, Miss Mely—
Amelia. Hush ! my father comes.
Goose. And in the dumps, seemingly.
Amelia. If you have any thing very particular to say
to me, you’d better come into this inner room.


Goose. What, you have got more than one room in
your house, then ?—you’re better off than I am.
[Exeunt Gooseberry and Amelia l.
Enter Hardy, d. p.
Hardy. Soh, the weary emigrant has found a resting
place at last. A free-born unstained son of England, is
glad to find a refuge, even in the spot she had selected as
her outcasts’ goal! [sits, L.
Wildgorse enters, D. F.
Wild. Old man seems glum!—l must not appear to be
observing him.
SNATCH.— Wildgorse.
Air. —“ The Ram of Derby.”
As I was going to Derby,
%. ’Twas on a market day,
I saw the finest sheep, sir,
That never was fed upon hay.
This sheep was fat behind, Sir,
This sheep was fat before—
I took him and didn’t mind, Sir,
And would, had there been a score •
Wild. Seventy pounds at three shilling a stone, and
sink the offal. Ah ! there’s no such things to be picked
up here ! —eh ! old man moves!
Hardy. Wildgorse, is that you ?
Wild. Ibe here, sir.
Hardy. ’Tis wellwe are settled at last, good fellow.
Wild. Yeas, sir.
Hardy. ’Tis a rude hut; —well, ’tis a free one ; —we
have the light of heaven here !—the fruits of earth!—the
blessed springs of ocean ! uncursed by an all swallowing
taxation.
Wild. Varry true, Sir.
Hardy. Nothing to pay for water !
Wild. Na, sir, not at present, certainly ; but Super-
intendant said if we only waited till river overflowed,
there’d be plenty to pay for water then ; and that as for
collectors, the water company would be sure, every now
and then, to send one, in the shape of an odd crocodile or
alligator, to see us!
Hardy. Well, well, be that as it may ; this, at least,


is certain law does not here hold out a premium for
perjury!—the villain’s oath cannot, as in our mother
country, strip honesty of bed and board! Bankruptcy
is no trade for hungry lawyers and convicted swindlers !
—fashion usurps not here the place of talent; —we have
no dandies elbowing genius out !
Wild. Na, sir, there be no dandies, as you say, but
there be a plaguey sight of monkies, and they be some-
thing of the same kidney, I reckon. [knocking without.
Hardy. Some one knocks, —admit them. [Wildgorse
opens door — enter Frederic.] My son ! —You have been
wandering, sir ; —you take it easily I—absent1 —absent three hours
—but for this trusty fellow’s care, we had gone supper-
less to bed!
Fred. Trusty fellow ! —Ere I went out I caught that
trusty fellow, as you style him, in our store-room, sir,
—his business there, he best can tell!
Wild. I was merely looking to see if there was any
vermin there,
Fred. There was one noxious reptile, at all events, or
1 am very much mistaken.
Wild, [aside. ] Hum !—that noxious reptile may
show his teeth, mayhap, when time shall serve 1
Fred. My absence was not without its use, sir, if it
shall, as I hope, prove but the means of rendering justice
to the oppressed and innocent!
Hardy. What mean you, sir ?
Fred. Hear me with patience:—wandering through
the forest, I met, alas! one you once valued—one you
trusted—one deeply wronged—unjustly punished,—one
who relies upon your honour and humanity for sure re-
dress !
Hardy. I’ll hear no more!—l know who you would
say !
Fred. Behold!—you will—you must, sir, listen!
Enter Eliza, d. f.— kneels to Hardy.
Hardy. Eliza!— away! away! unhappy, guilty girl!
Wild. What do I see, that girl—discovered!—but
she’s no witness—there is no evidence!
Fred. What said you, fellow—discovered! —who?—
witness—what mean you ?
Wild. I—l said that—that—you’d discovered her; —
that—that there was no evidence!
Eliza, [to Wildgorse .] Oh! if you know aught of


that fatal mystery—if you know aught that can confirm
ray innocence! reveal it, I conjure you!—here on my
knee I ask—implore—entreat!—reveal it, I will bless,
will worship you !
Wild, No, no, I—-tell you—l cannot! —what should
I know about it ?
Hardy. You trifle, girl, with time and patience !
Eliza. But for one moment, sir.
AlR. —Eliza.
Air. —“ With lowly suit and plaintive ditty.”
With lowly suit and humble ditty,
1 call upon you, sir, to pity !
Oh ! hear my voice for justice pleading,
Although condemn’d Guilt’s pains to bear;
See this wan cheek—these sad eyes streaming,
Thatl am innocent, I swear!
*
Hardy. I can but pity, girl—you plead in vain !
Fred. An Englishman, and refuse a hearing, sir!
Hardy. Whate’er ray own opinion, sir, may be, I
will not so far insult twelve Englishmen, sitting in judg-
ment on a countrywoman, as to suppose one instant they
could give a verdict contrary to truth; —they have pro-
nounced her guilty—’tis sufficient !
Fred. Juries are not infallible !
Enter Durant and Soldiers.
Dnr. Soldiers! arrest that girl! [they advance,] She
is a run-away convict!
Fred. Hold!—she is no run-away convict!
Dur. How ?
Fred. She is a convict no longer!—she is a Free Set-
tler’s Wife!
Hardy. Your wife ! —rash boy! what have you done ?
—disgraced ! —dishonoured !
Fred. Here is the certificate!—She now is as free as
you are!
Enter Gooseberry and Amelia, l.
Goose. Ulloa : what the deuce is the matter here?
Amelia. Eliza, hapless girl !
Goose. Miss White!—oh, Lord!
Fred. Only hear me, sir !


Hardy. Hence from my doors ! —I do renounce! dis-
claim you!—the husband of a convict shall be no son of
mine ! 1 am fixed ! —away! —hence ! hence ! nor tarry
for my curse!
SESTETT O.—Omnes.
Air. — Original.
Hardy. Away ! away ! stain to my name!
Eliza Sf Fred. In pity hear!
Hardy. You plead in vain!
Allied to guilt—thy father’s shame
Away 1 nor curse my sight again 1
Ame. # Goose. Relent, dear sir, be not so rash,
The storm awakes—the night is dark ;
The thunder rolls—the lightnings flash—
The wind is rising—hark hark! hark!
[storm rises.
In such a night—in such an hour 1
'Tis death to roam—then pardon, pray;
Fellbeastsare prowling to devour!
Hardy, I’ll hear no more ! —away, away!
Fred. Come, then, my love—virtue our shield
We’ll brave the worst!
Ame.Sf Goose. Stay, stay! oh, stay!
Eliza. Must innocence a victim yield ?
Hardy. I’ll hear no more !
Omnes. Away! away!
[Exeunt omnes, l.
SCENE III. —Kangaroo Hunting Grounds among the
Western Mountains.
Enter Cattle-Hunters, Stock-Keepers, and male and
female Convict Servants, severally.
ROUND. —Omnes.
Air. —“ Hark! 'tis the Indian drum."
Hark ! ’tis the guardhouse drum,
To scour the woods around,
’Till Michael Howe is found,
The soldiers come—they come! they come!
Stock K. Heaven grant them success, I say ! —While
this desperate Bush-ranger, this notorious Michael Howe,
and his gang exist, nobody’s stock is safe!


Cattle H. For certain he must be nothing- less than
devil!—he carries off bullocks as if they were kids, and
values a life as little as a turnip.
Convicts. The soldiers will give a good account of
him; —they've got one of the native women with them,
and they can track any thing;—they’ll be sure to find
him—he can’t escape;—here they are !
Enter Serjeant, file of men, and Bedia, a native woman.
Serj. Halt! —now, Bedia !
[ Bedia searches all around for trace, but is disappointed.
Bedia. No, massa—pale-face not here—bad man no
been here—further on yet;—grass not moved here—
leaves only stirred by wind; —that way, massa. [ points off,
Serj. Soh ! further a field ! —well, I’ll read you the
new proclamation, friends, and then we must be marching
again. [ reads .] “ By order of his Excellency the Governor,
whoever will give such information as shall lead to the
apprehension and conviction, if living, of the notorious
Michael Howe, run-away convict and Bush-ranger, or
any of his associates, shall receive for each, a reward of
one hundred guineas; and, if a convict, his Majesty’s
free pardon ! —God save the King!”
Omnes. Hurrah!
Serf. Now, then, lads, our next course must be to
Fourteen Tree Plain. We must then go to Joe Wright’s
—he must know something about them ; —they can’t do
without rum, and they can only get it of him; —from
thence we’ll goto the Abyssinian Mountains, and then
go to Jericho. Never fear, boys, we’ll rout them out of
the scrub like so many porcupines ! Any one inclined to
join and assist shall be well rewarded. —What say you,
friends, will you go?
Omnes. All ! all !
Serj. Bravely said !—march, then !
MARCH and CHORUS.— Omnes.
Air. —“ Oh, blest for ever be the day.”
Oh, through the gum tree forests steal,
The scrub their footsteps will reveal;
We’ll brave all dangers,
’Till we destroy this baud
Of fell Bush-rangers,
That curse Van Diemeu’s Land!


Then cheerly on, make for the bush,
This daring Michael Howe we’ll crush;
Upon him stealing
We’ll soon, alive or dead,
Our power revealing,
Bring back the monster’s head
[Exeunt omnes, l.
Enter Wildgorse, r.
Wild • What crew were that ? —soldiers ! —’tis well
they’re gone—l’ve a natural dislike to all in authority
—have had ever since I were first taken up.—This quiet
easy life don’t do for me—l have been in the hulks too
long—that spoilt me for any thing honest, —yet, it were
not always so. In my father’s cottage, when Agatha
loved me, and the vicar were my master—when I never
eat my dinner till I’d earnt it—till I’d called heaven’s
grace upon it! —never slept till I’d prayed, nor woke till
night were over,—ah, 1 were happy then—happy, for 1
were innocent; —sky always looked shiny then—l feared
no bad things—hoped all good ones ; —master trusted me
—neighbours praised me, —father blessed me—depended
on me ; —mother doted on me, and Agatha—Agatha
loved me—dearly, truly loved me ! —But now, oil, what
a change!—father be dead—died broken hearted!—and
mother—Agatha—let ms not think on’t,—l must not—
dare not; no, no, I must take old man’s traps, and off
into the bush—live as I have lived—lawless ! unre-
strained !
Enter Agatha, stealing on, it.
Agatha. Is the coast clear?—abandoned as he is, I
still must guard his safety ! —Ah ! a man!
[seeing Wildgorse,
Wild. Eh!—no!—yes—that voice!—this face—do my
eyes cheat me ?—it can’t be ! —yet ’tis—Agatha !
Agatha. Ah ! [ screams.~\ Wildgorse ! —Robin Wild-
gorse ! —and here !
Wild. Villain that I am!— Have my crimes, then,
transported you too?—tell me—tell me, Agatha. Oh!
that I have lived to ask this question! —are you—are you
—pah ! —the word choaks me ! —Are you a convict ?
Ao-atha. And worse ! —an outcast from the colony ! —I
have sought refuge in the bush; —l am—oh !do not curse
me, Robin !—You’ve heard of Michael Howe—l am com-
panion with him!


Wild. Agatha! the gentle, innocent Agatha, a hunt-
ed convict! —living with murderers ! Bush-rangers !
what have I not to answer for ? —this has been my work!
Agatha. When you so strangely disappeared, after
your many vows of constancy and truth—your promises
of marriage,—my fair fame lost—my prospects blighted,
my young heart broken ! 1 became careless! reckless I
I left my native village, where all, that once loved, shunned
me as infected! and fled to shroud my shame in riotous
London!—there, lost! abandoned! betrayed! allured!
—what wonder I soon fell a victim! —l was not wicked
in my nature, Robin—my heart shrunk at depravity !
but circumstance o’erpowered my better feelings ! —I had
been sinned against—
Wild. Too deeply, lass! —oh ! villain ! villain that
I am !
Agatha. Transported for a trifling theft, urged by
necessity, from one whose honour should have spared me
such a trespass—l was sent here -my mistress proved a
tyrant,—ill usage made me listen to a wretch who tempt-
ed but too well! —I fled into the bush, and joined with
his my fortunes ! He became master of my fate, and I
am now mate of the desperate ranger, Michael Howe !
My end 1 dare not think on !
Wild. Your guilt lies on my head ! —I am the author
of your ruin, girl, and I muot expiate it; yet, 1 meant
well, —I loved you, Agatha, would have laid down my
life for you ! but Fate willed otherwise ; —you marvel
why I fled ! —hear, girl, my horrid story, and quit me
of the sin of thy intentional desertion !
Agatha. I never thought unkindly of you, Robin, in
my worst hours; —l only wept, and prayed heaven to
forgive you !
Wild. That fatal night 1 fled, I had been down at
the Eight Bells—some Masson lads were there—we had
been drinking;—it was proposed to take a hare, —I was
too ready ; —’twas in the season of the year, in Dudley
Royal Park, a shiny night—the one I loved ; —the hares
were feeding gaily in the moonlight;—l drank in the
pure lymph that swam around me, as though it had
been wine;—the trees, and every thing, seemed clothed in
light, and ’twas so calm too —nature were quite still, just
as if listening to the joyous gurgling of the brook that
ran rejoicing in its freedom, and the sweet nightingale—
ah, Agatha! how many hours we’ve stood and heard its
song together.


Agatha . Yes, Robin ; those were happy times—they
never can return!
Wild. Never!—the flowers, too, smelt so freshly in
the dew!—all spoke of good and peace, but I could not
be warned ; —we wound through the thick brushwood,
aye, like adders; —the violets, at every step, bathing the
feet that crushed them with their fragrance;—our sport
was plentiful,—we were returning loaded, when, sud-
denly, some voices challenged us, —the keepers were
abroad, and watching us; —we fled, but they pursued,
o’ertook us, —they called upon us to surrender ! —we
turned and fought for freedom ; —’twas a stern struggle;
—one I encountered in a tangled thicket, where scarce a
glimpse of light could come; —he was a sturdy knave,
and grappled fiercely, but I o'erpowered him—the
coward called for help,— a strange hand grasped my
throat,, and J fe!t choaking ! —lt was in self-defence, —I
drew my knife—l struck him—
Agatha. Gracious heaven ! —this but too well explains
your sudden flight;—l tremble to hear further.
Wild. Nay, it must out—there’ll be relief in’t I —be
fell !—the keeper fled—l could not move, —my feet were
lead ; —I heard my victim groan !—it fixed me to him ;—•
1 dragged him to the light—the moon’s pale light, which
mournfully gleamed on his bleeding body, with watery
beams, as weeping o’er the deed ! —Great God ! what did
I see?—the playmate of my boyhood, Stephen May-
wood ! —my friend —my chosen brother ! —Chance led—
he had approached the fatal spot, and in the darkness—
Agatha. I can divine too well ;—compose yourself—
’twas no planned deed!
Wild. I had stabbed mortally ; —he looked at me as
I hung guilt-struck o’er him ; —gave a last sigh—grasped
my hand, girl, and died !—it were a kindly grasp—there
were forgiveness in it!—but what of that ?—can I forgive
myself—can heaven forgive me ?—I felt I were a mur-
derer, though ’twere in self-defence I stabbed —thougli
’twere unknowingly I killed him! —l bore his hapless
body | —oh ! ’twere a weary load—guilt must be strong
to bear a dead man’s weight,—l bore him, girl, to Foun-
tain’s Abbey Ruins ; there, in a hasty grave, I hid from
man all traces of my guilt!—ah, could I hide it from
myself-—from heaven —
Agatha. He was long missed, —’twas thought that yon
had fled together 1
k 2


Wild. Would it had been no worse! I sped to Lon-
don—Stephen’s form pursued me! —l sought the can—tried
drink to drown my thoughts—’twas Stephen pledged
me ! —I plunged in riot—Stephen still were there, his
wound still bleeding!—nothing could stop that blood !
then I grew desperate—joined in the noon-day cheat—
the midnight robbery—nothing too guilty, so that life
were spared—l’d had enough of blood; yet I wished
death, but gallows would not have me—l ’scaped a hun-
dred chances ! Now I’m here, and Stephen’s here too !
in the night I see him ! —1 see him now ! —there! there!
bleeding and pale!—forgive me! oh, forgive me!
Agatha. Calm this wild mood—repent and hope—be
virtuous from henceforth, and—
Wild. No, no, I cannot now be honest—l despair;—
I used sometimes to think thatyow—l had wild dreams, at
times, of joy and peace—of love and home, and happiness;
—that hope is gone ! —our fates are fixed for misery! and
now I’m fit for any deed of darkness!
Agatha. Nay, nay, lost, guilty as we are, Robin,
dear Robin, let’s not quite despair ! there still is hope—
I fain would save you, Robin; —we may be good—may
be forgiven yet!—Abjure the outcast’s life!—abjure it!
and—ah, the band come 1
Enter Michael Howe, Captain of the Bush-rangers’
Whitehead, Geary, Watts, and other Bush-rangers’
R. S. e. they are dressed partly in Kangaroo skins, have
long beards, and present a wild and terrific appearance.
Howe. How now, Agatha?—why this delay?—ha!
a stranger here ! —would you betray us ?—die !
[snaps pistol at Agatha—Wildgorse rushes between.
Wild. Hold ! —murder a woman !—you must kill me
first.
Howe. Eh! —what! Robin Wildgorse !
Wild. Aye, Robin Wildgorse, Michael Howe ; that is
if you are Michael Howe, which I can scarcely believe
from your appearance.
Howe. Ha! ha! ha! rather rough, certainly; but
we that live in the bush, can’t study the tailor much ;
and so, old acquaintance, you’re caught at last ?
Wild. Yes, it’s what we must all come to, Michael,
unless we happen to be stopped short in the midst of it.
Howe, What lay are you upon ?
Wild. I’m assigned to an old chap that I’ve done bu


siness with before in London, though he don’t know it
—old Hardy.
Howe. Has he any rag ?
Wild. A cly full of ridge,—has got the bit in plenty,
Howe. Why not be at work, then ?—You have only
to wait till the old man is safe in his dab, then draw his
barking irons, unbetty the lock, and the thing’s done.
We’ll steal in, snap the swag, and you can be off
with us into the bush—row in the boat with us—have
your regulars!—lt will be better than staying starving
with him, and getting ne-dash for your pains !
Wild. Give us your fam—as soon as ever it’s darkey,
to-morrow, I’ll send the cutler off sweet to his snooze—
unslour the door, and put you all fly to the plant.
Howe. Nothing can be more plummy. If the old man
should wake and be obstropolous, we’ll chiv him.
Wild. No, no! —no more stabbing—l’ve had too much
of that.
Agatha. Another deed of plunder!—perhaps worse!
—Oh, Robin! Robin! for heaven’s, sweet love—
Hoice. Peace, woman ! ere I silence you ! —Back to the
cave, and get our supper ready ! —Hence, 1 say ! —away !
[ forces her off, R. —] the prating termagant ! All, then/
is settled ?
Wild. Yeas; to-morrow night, the Log-hut by the
river—so good-bye, lads, till then ; I must off now, or
it may be my absence may excite suspicion ;—to-morrow
night we’ll have a glorious booty, and join our fates to-
gether ; —farewell!
Omnes. Hurrah ! \Exit Wildgorse, r.
Howe. A good raise this, my lads ; a rich booty and
a staunch pal! nothing could come better; —we need
something to help us—our store’s getting plaguey low—
scarcely a fire of rum a-piece left for us ; and those ras-
cally stock-keepers hide every drop they have; —that
cursed proclamation of the Governor—a price set on our
heads !—well, we must be a match for him, —must carry
all who fall into our hands into the bush—pul a price on
their heads —make them pay their footing that way, eh!
boy> v
Omnes. Bravo ! —good ! good !
Howe. Hush!—here come company!—a youth and
wench—good subjects to begin with; —draw back, con-
ceal yourselves, and observe.
[Howe and Bash-rangers retire, L.
■ 3


Enter Frederic and Eliza, b.
Fred. This way, love ; courage!—we soon shall gain
some refuge ; —our nuptials have begun but stormily, but
heaven will aid us!
Eliza. I only grieve, dear, that through me you are
an outcast!—have lost a father’s favour !
Fred. Oh, we will do well yet; —we’ll raise some
forest shed to shield us for the present,-—l’ll hunt the
kangaroos for our support;—hunger will sweeten every
meal—labour will smooth our humble couch, and self-
approval charm away each care !
Eliza. You cheer my heart to hear you!—Deserted,
pennyless as we are, still we are in the wanderer’s home
—the exile’s solace!—Van Diemen’s Land can boast a
thousand charms to aid the destitute and soothe the
wretched !
Fred. Enchanting girl!—The Governor will doubt-
lessly befriend us ! —we will petition for a grant; —I have
( a friend here, too, who, for my sister’s sake, will yield
us succour ! —so courage! courage ! Let’s on at once.
Howe, [comingforward with band.] Hold!—you must
first pay toll !
Eliza. Great heavens ! the Bush-rangers!—we’re lost!
Fred. What want you, fellows?
Howe. Your gun ! [suddenly seizing if,] This young
woman must into the bush with us !
Fred. You cannot mean it ?
Howe. I do!—they’ve put a price upon my head, the
knaves! and now I put a price upon the heads of all!
We will not harm her; —we’ll only keep her as security.
What would you lose her for?
Fred. Not for the worth of worlds!
Howe. Then you can’t grumble at paying five hun-
dred dollars to gain her! Go, youth, to the friend you
spoke of—get the money;—be waiting with it any even-
ing at Joe Wright's grog-shop, and you shall have your
wench restored to you; but mind, no blabbing!—We
shall have our spies abroad—a whisper to the military in
search of us, and she that instant dies!—nor shall you
live to go in mourning for her!
Fred. In pity !■—mercy 1
Howe. Ha! ha ! ha !
Eliza. You know not who you plead to! Now we
indeed are lost!


Fred. No ! no! I must!—I will release you ! —aye, at
all hazards! —I’ll borrow—beg—I’ll—your terms shall
be complied with, fellows !—swear that she shall be safe!
Howe. We swear !—so make your mind easy about
that; only you bring the blunt, and the petticoat shall be
right enough. Mind, Joe Wright’s, down by Black-
man’s bridge.
Fred. Farewell, dear girl! but not for long; ere
twelve hours pass, if 1 have life, you shall have liberty!
[Exit, L.
Howe. A clean spoken kid that; but come, boys, back
to the bush; now, girl; nay, nay, I’ll keep my word,
no one shall harm you,—true we can hope nothing, and
therefore fear nothing; but you may take our gage;—
there’s honour amongst thieves, and of course there is
amongst the Princes of thieves——the Bush-rangers !
Omnes, Aye! aye! we defy the world !
GLEE.— Bush-rangers.
Air.— “ Where the Bee sucks."
Where the bush grows, here hide we,
In our caverns wild and free,
Here we steal where traps can’t see;
With the bats abroad we hie,
When the sun sets, merrily.
Merrily, merrily, do we live now,
Jolly Bush-rangers, here, under the bough.
[Exeunt omnes, r.
END OF ACT IX.
ACT III.
SCENE I. —Interior of Gooseberry's Hut,
Enter Gooseberry and Darby, l.
Goose. Aye, aye, nil up the pit, Darby; we’ll take
our own chance with the wild beasts; —the only living-
creature we’ve caught in the pit yet has been myself—I
fell into it heels uppermost, the very first night, while
thinking of Miss Mely ! —lucky you were there to lug me
out by the leg; if you hadn’t, and any wild boar had
happened to have fallen in, and we’d happened to have
fallen out, and he’d pitted himself against me;—all I
can say is, I should have been very much to be pit —icd!


Darby. You may say that, master. I’ve stopped it
up, sir—l was afraid of filling it myself, and I didn’t
want the folks to pity Pat.
Goose. I’m beginning to get a little used to things
now ; but Lord, this Van Diemen’s Land is a queer place
—everything’s quite different here to what it is in Lon-
don: why the very seasons are changed!—they’ve sum-
mer at Christmas here, and winter in July !—you can’t
get green peas till Guy Faux day, nor eat your Michael-
mas goose till March; and then places ’ent a morsel like
what they’re christened after in England. I went to look
at their Epping Forest, as they call it; as much like
Epping Forest as I’m like the Hottentot Venus ; —no Bald-
faced Stag to take a glass at—no course for Easter Monday;
and as for their Surrey Hills, you may look till you’re
blind for all the beautiful views ; —no King’s Bench—no
County Goal—all the prospects on a very confined scale.
Darby. Right, sir; they’ve a Tipperary without a
jjaorsel of bog, and a county Donnybrook with the deuce
a drop of butter-milk; but we’ll get on beautifully for all
that, sir.
Goose. I began to think we’d brought our pigs to but
a very queer sort of market; for though there’s plenty of
pork running wild about the woods, the creatures know
how to save their own bacon ; —your sowing all the gun-
powder for turnip seed was rather unfortunate, too.
Darby. That was a bit of a bull, sir, certainly;—l
blowed up the ground for it—it saved digging, any how.
Goose. We’ve got a little to rights ; for though none
of the articles I’ve brought out with me do for what they
were intended for, they serve excellently for other things;
—the painted blinds make capital sheets—sleep quite in
clover in them ; the band-box forms a beautiful beaufet,
and the medicine chest does charmingly for a larder!
then the egg-basket is the very thing for a plate-rack, and
the hen-coop is a delightful China cupboard ;—we’ve
made a famous table of the bumble-puppy-board, and
nothing can do better for chairs than the flower-stands, so
I think we’re almost all furnished.
Darby. We only want the mistress, master.
Goose. Ah, MissMely, Darby!—we’re provided with
every thing else; your getting that sackful of game,
Darby, was a famous turn up; but you havn’t told me
all about it.
Darby. 1 will, sir: —while 1 was looking out for game
sir, I started a female native in a bush.


Goose. What sort of a bush, Darby ?
Darby. A blackberry bush I should think, by her
colour, sir ! She fell over head and heels in love with
me; and, before I’d time to cry parsnips, popped the
question to me, —and I hadn’t the heart to be cruel, sir;
besides, I thought you and Miss Mely would want a maid,
and my marrying her would make her the very thing for
you.
Goose. I don’t know that, Darby.
Darby. Besides, sir, she’s a great fortune—she’s a
chief, and I’m to be a chief too ; —if I marry her I’m to
be insured against being burnt out; and never to want
hares, nor any other kind of poultry.
Goose. Hum ! cupboard love ! —you think it better to
get your game by hearts than clubs ? —but our premises
being safe is something, and then the larder always being
filled is no bad look out —can’t live upon love, Darby.
Is she handsome ?
Darby. As graceful as a black swan, sir! and has a
whole bushel of bullocks’ horns for pin money.
Goose. Hum ! I don’t much approve of horns as part
of a marriage portion, Darby ; but go on.
Darby. I shall soon be a mighty great man, for she’s
introduced me to all her family. 1 shall be own brother
to Ben-ni-long, a great warrior, and very fond of rum ;
cousin to Catterwawl! uncle to the great bear, Borriborril
and I don’t know what to the big buffalo, Bungaway !
they’ve already made me chief!
Goose. A chief?
Darby. You may say that, sir; —they call me Brien
Boroo of Derry ; —sure I’m the first of my family that’s
that same; they talk of potato-ing me, and running
something through my nose.
Goose. Serving you as they do the porkers.
Darby. This is she; —come here, you little black de-
vil, do!
Enter Kangaree in marriage dress, L.
Come here, you Princess of Tea Pot Beauties; let me
have a kiss !
Kan. Good white chief, — Carridah all ready to make
Kangaree your wife now! —Brother Ben-ni-long coming
with yams and magpies—swans and fern roots—emus and
corn, for marriage present; —warriors all meet to do you
honour ; —you have six hogs at your wedding dinner !


Goose. Hum! hogs are not unusual at wedding din-
ners in more polished countries than this.
Kan. Ah ! another white man here!
Goose A birth with her is better than going to the
coal river, — eh, Darby ?
Darby. Devil doubt it, sir; don’t be frightened, my
Queen of Sables—l’m chief over you, you know, and
this gentleman is chief over me.
Kan. Ah, your prince,—Kangaree have him for her
prince too, —climb tree and swim lake—hunt—fish—dig
for him.
Goose. Very obliging, indeed ! Friend Darby I wish
you joy—l consent to your marriage with all my heart; —
no bad thing having a chief for a journeyman, and a
chief’s wife fora kitchen maid. There’ll be no throwing
the stocking, because I perceive your bride don’t wear
any ; —there’s one thing, she’ll never look blacker on you
than she does now ; and whenever she’s made a widow,
%he’ll be all ready in mourning. I must have a salute—
I shan’t make her blush, that’s one comfort!
[/is Gooseberry is saluting Kangaree, enter Amelia, r.
Amelia. So, Mr. Gooseberry, this is the way you
amuse yourself is it?—very pretty !
Goose. Confound it all ! —but Miss Mely—
Amelia, Don’t tell me, sir ; enslaved by my charms,
indeed ! you seem to be enslaved less questionably.
Kan. Ah, whitemissee ! —you love —Kangaree love—
Kangaree marry—you marry too; then Kangaree wait
on you—catch parrot to teach talk for you.
Goose. Hum ! 1 don’t think there’ll be any necessity
for the parrots, I’m much obliged to you, my good girl—
when we’re married, I dare say we shall have talk enough
without them. Come now, Miss Mely, what do you say
to following ?—no, not a fair example, but a good one.
Consent, if it's only to keep them in countenance.
Amelia. I shall not sanction any marriages, indeed !
not 1!
Goose. Remember the snakes !
Amelia. Oh, I don’t care for them ! —see what my
poor brother Frederic’s got by marrying—turned out of
house and home.
Goose. But you’ll turn into house and home, so that
will make all the difference. What do you think of my
location here?


Amelia. Your what, Mr. Gooseberry ?
• Goose. My location ! lodging’s vulgar here—all very
well in England, but won’t do for Van Diemen’s Land;
Ts’nt it a snug tie-up !
SONG.— Gooseberry.
Air. —“ I have plucked the fairest Flower. ”
I have built the snuggest hut,
I have got a water-butt;
A cellar, too, for coal,
And a very nice dust-hole
A pig-stye made for six,
If your hopes on pork you fix, —
A chimney in the kitchen,
When for cooking you’ve an itching,—
Therefore, thou maid bewitching!
To church, let’s haste away!
Amelia. I really can’t think of such a thing, Mr.
Gooseberry.
Goose. Come, come, Cupid is beating up for recruits,
let’s enlist with him at once; all new colonies should
be peopled, as soon as possible,
Amelia. I’ve heard enough of maids enlisting with
love ; better put up with the snakes than that.
Goose. That’s all very well, Miss Mely, but if you be-
come companion in arms with me, T can give you a nice
Kangaroo steamer, and a piece of capital damper.
Amelia. Lord! what are they, Mr. Gooseberry?
Goose. A steamer’s a stew; and damper’s new
South Wales staff of life! —or what do you say to part of
a broiled Opossum, or the leg of a Bandicoot ?
Amelia. Never heard of such things before in my life.
Goose. Or, if you’re for poultry, I went out birding
this morning,—shot a couple of Boobies, and a Noddy, as
they call them here; I suppose from their suffering them-
selves to be killed so easily; the creatures seemed quite
astonished when I fired at them—not used to it, I dare
say ! You see, we shan’t want for good living! Come,
now what do you say ?
Amelia. Lord, Mr. Gooseberry, you teaze one so—
and really, since my poor brother’s departure, our house
has become so dull—
Goose. Its agreed then, —Ulloa! look out!—
[lndian shout heard without; enter Ben~ni-long and


Natives, with bridal presents, and nuptial chairs to
carry Darby and Kangaree in, fantastically ornamented.
Amelia. Lord bless me ! who are these ?
Darby. Fait, but here’s the family come!
Ben. Derry-bo-rang-bo-roo! Fire destroying white
chief, our sister’s chosen, behold the nuptial presents;
we come to bear you to our resting place, all that your
race have now left to our tribe—there the sacred Car-ri-
dah attends to make you one !
Darby. Brother Ben-ni-long—and you, uncles, ne-
phews, cousins, and other relations, I’m mightly obliged
to you; I’ll be at the Carraway’s service in no time.
Ben. White strangers here ? their purpose, brother !
Darby. Fait, brother, this gentleman is my chief, and
that lady’s his chief; that is, she’s going to be—so as
they’re going to be married, as well as myself, I’m think-
ing we can have it all done under one ; for I’d like to be
married my way as well as yours, to make matters
• binding.
Ben. ’Tis honestly intentioned—we consent. Your
chief shall be our friend.
Darby. All’s right, then; we two couple can be made
one—snug enough.
Ben. Our wedding-cheer is ample enough for both.
Goose. There you hear ; —you have no excuse now,
you see, Miss Mely, every thing’s provided; no doubt
these savages will be civil enough to see us safe out of
the wood to the Parson’s.
Ben. Let our nuptial songs and dances welcome them ;
fear not, white maid, the wild chief, Ben-ni-long, has
been companion in your native England with the highest
and proudest of your countrywomen.
Amelia. A very polished Black-a-moor, I declare.
Darby. Here’s preferment, now—here’s rising in the
world.
Goose. What would that Bob Sykes say, to see this !
r ßen-ni-long and Chiefs hand Amelia and Gooseberry,
and Darby and Kangaree, into nuptial chatrs.
Ben. Now on, and be the rites performed. Ben-ni-long
will to day forget the white man’s wrongs, and yield his
soul to joy. On, brother warriors.
[Exeunt omnes in procession, Natives dancing round
Gooseberry and Amelia, Darby and Kangaree !


SCENE II.— Interior of Michael Howe's cave, in the Bush,
near Cocked Hat Hill.
Michael Howe sleeping. Eliza sitting in a melancholy po-
sition on one side of stage, Whitehead, Geary, Watts,
and Bush-rangers, discovered drinking; Agatha watch-
ing Howe.
GLEE.— Omnes, {Piano.)
Air.—“ When Arthur first in Court began !"
When Judges first in court began
To wear long hanging sleeves,
'Twasthen they took to hanging men
That happened to be thieves!
No matter whether an Irishman,
Or Sawney, the bonny Scot,
Or Taffy, that thief of a Welchman,
The gibbet was their lot.
But Jack Ketch did’nt alter the Irishman,
The Scot did’nt care a feather,
And the Welchman declar'd, that their wisest plan,
Was all to hang together.
White. Good wine, they say, needs no bush, but it’s
not so with us.
Geary. No, no, the bush—the bush for ever. Our
Captain seems to have got his dose ! he is a devil for rum,
that’s certain
White. Aye, and a rum devil too; —why he dreams
like a young maid on her marriage morning,—see, he’s at
it now! always busy, even in his sleep.
Howe, [dreaming, r.—] They pursue us! shoot the
women ! they’ll only lumber us.
Agatha. Wretch ! no tie can stay him —and have I
linked myself to one like him ? Oh, Robin ! Robin ! [ aside
Howe, [dreaming.) Aye, I like flowers, I’ll set some
round our cave, —I liked them when a boy. That stock-
keeper has rum, it must be ours ; —if he resists, silence
the knave ! —back—back, the cattle-hunters come, —In ! —
in !—the bush—the bush, —let them pass by.
Agatha. Not even blessed sleep can keep his thoughts
from deeds of blood. [aside.
Howe, [still dreaming .] Give me those roses—those
violets too —they smell so sweet and fresh, they mind
p


me of my home—when—our cottage had a jessamine, I’ll
plant one here.
Agatha. All powerful nature, that guilt so fell
should feel thy influence still. [aside.
Howe, [dreaming.] Ha! they’re upon us, —my gun
—if I should fall, let them not have my head. Now
then, come on—two of you?—nay, then I must bestir !
—I will not yield ! down, down dogs ! or—[starts up,
and awakes.] What’s this? fool’d by my dreams again !
No rest! —no peace ! I thought the military were upon
us :ha!ha ! it has not come to that yet! What was I
dreaming of besides ?—Flowers! ah, flowers ! that bodes
no good to me, —fond as I am of them, I do not like them
in my dreams ; some evil’s ever sure to be at hand when
that’s the case.
Agatha. Profit by the omen !
Howe. Peace, woman ! my fate will have its way !
I’ll note it down though! “ Wednesday—dreamt of
* flowers—mem.—to be careful,” [writes.] not that it
matters much ; were I but sure my bones would rest un-
der the spreading branches of some silver wattle tree,
with its blithe yellow blossoms, I would not care how
soon I went to sleep there.
White. Psha, yours will be a windy winding sheet,
an iron shroud—the gallows won’t be cheated, Michael.
Howe. S’death, but you shan’t ruffle me! though!
have crack’d a ken, and killed my man, ’twas through
necessity. And say that lam in the bush, and chaunted ;
am look’d for by theswaddies i what of that ? true 1 have
been a spice gloak, now and then ! —done business as top
cracksman ! still I was driven to it; but for man’s wrongs,
I could be well content to take my rum in peace,—
raise a few flowers,—and ne’er pull trigger more.
White. Oh, if you come to that, none of us had been
here were we not driven ! but one cannot put up with
every thing. Why, when I was sent here—which was
merely for ramping a swell gill of his montra, the cap-
tain of our vessel did’nt give me half wine enough.
Omnes. Infamous !—infamous !
White My nerves were rather delicate, and I required
those little luxuries ; so I pull’d him up for it, before the
Governor, directly we landed ; but instead of taking my
part, he dismissed the charge as unreasonable and frivo-
lous.
Watts. What a precious villain !


Omnes, Shocking! shocking !
White. Flesh and blood could’nt bear that, you know.
He said we convicts were allowed twice as much as
settlers, that paid forty pounds for their passage. What
of that! we ought to have ten times as much, to console
us under our misfortunes; quite enough to be transported,
without being stinted in one’s little indulgences. Let’s
turn to the business we have in hand—frisking old
Hardy’s crib—the hour approaches.
Eliza. Good heavens !my Frederic’s father! [aside.
Howe. To stall suspicion off from us, and make
every thing safe, —for I’d an ugly dream just now, —di-
rectly we gain admittance, we’ll make short work of it
with the old man and all the family.
Eliza. Merciful powers !oh ! [groans involuntarily.
Howe. What’s that? Eh! the girl groaning!—fool-
ish wench, thinking of her sweetheart ! —We’ll silence
all the family, as I said; bag the swag, and fire the ken at
once.
Eliza, [aside.'} Horrible!
Agatha , [aside.} More deeds of blood ! when will
heaven’s vengeance be aroused !
Howe. This will make Wildgorse safely ours, and do
away suspicion.
White. Aye, aye, the blame will fall on accident,
Howe. It is agreed, then; we wait but for the nightfall.
Eliza, [advancing from back.} You have the forms of
men, and you should have the hearts, [rushes forwards,
and kneels to Michael Howe.} Oh, if you ever felt one
pulse of pity—if you’d atone past wrongs, and hope for
mercy—forego your dreadful purpose ; save this devoted
family your vengeance has consigned to perish !—angels
will bless you—here on my knees—l beg—entreat—im-
plore—
Howe, [raising her roughly.} Rise, girl! what foolery
is this ?
Eliza. Strike ! kill me, but oh spare! oh spare
your victims!
AIR. —Eliza.
Air.—" The last rose of Summer
The last friends I’ve left here,
To death you condemn I
K 2


As you would have mercy,
Show mercy to them!
Leave me not here lonely,
In sorrow to sue.
But, if they must perish,
Let me perish too !
Howe. Do you forget you speak to Bush-rangers ?
pity and mercy are sworn foes to us.
Eliza. I plead in vain, obdurate wretches ; I must
form some plan. [aside.
Howe. Night grows apace,—’tis time we were pre-
paring ! come boys, let’s in, and get our arms and booty ;
—is Geary keeping watch above ?
White. He is.
Howe. He’ll guard our pretty hostage here, then—we’ll
keep faith with her spark ; nobody shall touch her, till
after tomorrow; but if the money’s not forthcoming,
aye ! and with interest too ! why, then, like other unre-
deemed pledges, she becomes forfeited, and I shall ap-
propriate her to myself. Now then, a parting glass,
and off for action, —come boys, success to our expedition.
[drinks,
CHORUS.— Omnes.
Air.—“ Bacchanal in Der Freischutz."
Come, a glass before we go,
Since our fates we do not know !
We ne’er more may drink together,
But whatever be our ’tether,
Let’s at least be merry now,
Fortune I —'tis to thee we bow! [ all dance.
Better, boldly daring, die,
Than, like cowards, basely fly;
Courage, store of gold will give us,
Cowardice—in want will leave us:
Drain the flask, we’ll not droop now,
Courage t —'tis to thee we bow ! {all dance.
[Exeunt Howe and Gang up steps; Agatha rises cautiously,
and watches them off. l.
Agatha. Would the wretch add faithlessness to all his
other crimes! let him beware! there is a point beyond
which e’en a spaniel’s sufferance falters.
Eliza. Great heavens! for what am I reserved ? oh.


Frederic! Frederic! Ah! this woman here! though
haggard, she looks human ! —sure she should have a
woman’s feeling for her sex, —I’ll try her heart, [aside.] If
ever gentle thought dwelt in your bosom, —if you have
ever lov’d—
Agatha. If I have ever lov’d, girl! ah ! did you know—
Eliza. Oh hear and aid me ! though only for an hour!
I ask no more!—l swear I will return, and suffer all
your comrades may inflict; —but—
Agatha. Enough! you have prevailed. Give me
your scarf and bonnet, —now take my hat and cloak, —
shroud yourself in them—quick ! [they exchange dresses.
Eliza. Oh ! Blessed aid! how shall I ever thank you ?
Agatha, Hush! and be ready at my bidding.—Geary,
[calling.
Geary, [who is keeping watch at the aperture above—the
entrance to the cavern, —and from which a rude flight of
stone steps, cut out of the rock, leads down to the interior of
the cave.] Ulloa! who calls!
Agatha. Agatha!
Geary, [above.] What do you want ?
Agatha. What do I want ? why, I want you to move
your body on one side, —and not stand there, blocking
up the entrance when a person wishes to pass. I have
business the other side the bush ; the gang are always
wanting something.
Geary, [above.] Well, well, come along, if you’re com-
ing, and don’t stand prating there.
Agatha. Prating you call it, being civil! —well, the
next time I speak to you, it shall do you good. I’ll send
you to Coventry, as your comrades on board the hulks
did.
Geary, [above.] S’death,jade!
Agatha. Nay ! I’ll not speak another word to you,
after this, if it would save you from hanging Now, pass
quickly—boldly—silently ! hush ! not a word—away !
[aside, Eliza in Agatha's hat and cloak ascends stairs,
Geary, [above.] Well! are you coming ?oh here you are !
what dumb? sulky devil! we shan’t get a word out of
her for a month, now she’s once affronted. Be off with
you, and a good riddance. I marvel Michael keeps her.
[ Exit Eliza passing Geary.
Agatha. She’s safe,—my heart feels lighter, let me as-
sume her place. [Agatha puts on Eliza's scarf and bon-
net.] Hi! Geary coming! [lies down as before,
f 3


Geary. [descending steps.] I’ll watch no longer out-
side, it grows chill. Where is my pretty charge ? come,
girl, up,—up, —I’d fain amuse myself with you awhile
sleeping ! I’ll steal a kiss.— [removes scarf, j Confu-
sion ! Agatha! zounds! have you rung the changes on
me '{
Agatha, [rising.] Should I say yes, what then ?—
Geary. Only that I’ll make sure of you—to hear
what Michael says to it.
Agatha. Back, dog! and give me way.
Geary. Not while this sword has any point remaining.
Agatha. Is that it ! —then have at you !
[Agatha seizes a sword and fights with Geary ; after a
smart combat she disarms him—he draws pistol,
levels it at her, —she stoops—he fires over her head ;
—she returns the fire —he staggers and falls —she
exits up steps, exclaiming—
“ Now then for liberty, and a free pardon !”
SCENE HI.— Coffee Encampment by moonlight.
Enter Wildgorse, r.
Wild, [singing.] “ Oh a shiny night is my delight,
in the season of the year!” 1 don’t see any signs of
them! they’re not at the hut! surely they hav’n’t got
into the bush ! I don’t much want to find them, certain-
ly ; Cockney might prove an awkward customer, if he
staid, —and yet, old man won’t go to bed till his daugh-
ter comes back ; so its unlucky both ways. Night ad-
vances rapidly, it will soon be Michael’s time. Eh ! who
have we here ? the birds themselves! a black-bird with
them, too!
Enter Gooseberry, Amelia, Darby, § Kangaree, l.
Goose. Now then, my dear Mrs. G., we must be
thinking of going home, love. Mrs. Bally laggan, you’ll
wait on my wife—when Darby can spare you.
Wild. Servant, sir—master sent me to look for you,
miss,—thought you were lost.
Goose, Miss ! Mrs. Gooseberry, if you please, Robin !
she’s not lost, only married !
Wild. Married! [whistles.] I was to take you to old
man, along with me!
Goose. Don’t I tell you we’re married, and can’t come!
Amelia. It’s very true, Robin, we’re married ; and
can’t come!


Darby. By the powers ! you may say that, we're
married, and cant go ! Ent we, my darling ! [to Kangaree.
Amelia. Tell pa, Robin, I’m very sorry, but'
Goose. Sorry, Mrs, G. ! what, before the first day’s
over V
Amelia. That is, I’m very glad—l mean, —that is,—
1 don’t know what I am ; —but my husband will explain
every thing, tell him, to-morrow.
Wild. Nothing could turn out better, [aside.] I wish
you joy, sir, I’ll tell old man, depend upon it. We must
take care of the house by ourselves now, —so I’ll wish
you good bye.
SNATCH— Robin.
’Twas iu the good ship Rover,
My passage here I found,
And, till seven years are over,
I shan't see English ground. [ Exit Robin, r.
Goose. Good bye,—good bye !—Sorry I couldn’t send
the old man a bit of cake. Now then, where’s your
brother Ben-ui-long, Darby, and the rest of our Black
Guards ! we shall want them to see us through the wood
back again; curs’d civil fellows those, and know what
eating and drinking is.
Darby. For the drinking, I’ll answer for them. Sir;
for they’ve clean emptied all the rum, just as if it had
been so much whiskey!—here they come.
Enter Ben-ni-long and Natives, l.
Ben. Now, brother chief, all ceremony duly done,
we’ll see you to your rest! —you style us savage, but we
boast, at least, fidelity to those we have espoused ; we
share with them, alike, our hearts, our homes, our sub-
stance !—toil for them—live but for them, —love them !
the white man cannot always say as much; take, then,
example by the dark chief, and be happy !
Darby. Make your mind easy, brother Ben-ni-long !
Devil a bit shall my blacker half here want a murphy
while I have one ; and I’ll be mighty loving, never fear
me.
Hen. 'Tis well, I will believe you—sister, if you will
quit the customs of your tribe, the hunt, the combat, the
canoe, to be the Whiteman’s bride, and live in peace, count
still on the protection of a brother ; Ben-ni-long cannot
alter; his love and care must ever be the same !


Kan. Then we are safe: —no harm can happen to Kan-
garee’s white lord, if Ben-ni-long friend.
Ben. Thou’rt right, wench ; what lord in all Austra-
lia can vie with Ben-ni-long ! Who, when he claims
the Gna-noong tribute, would dare refuse to yield a tooth
in token of obedience!
Darby. No one, I’d be bound for that; you’d be going
at it tooth and nail, if they did.
Ben. For your sakes, friends, I’ll be at peace with
England, will yield my lawful claims to this fair isle ;
nor, though they have usurp’d my rights and privi-
leges, war on the white man more:—this grasp confirms
it. [ takes Gooseberry's hand.
Goose. Signing a treaty of peace, what would they
say to this at the Cheshire Cheese ? it would make that
Bob Sykes look about him, to see me turn plenipotentiary
and enter into preliminaries with a real earnest black
Prince: but come, this settled, we’ll be off.
k Ben. Aye! now warriors !
Amelia. Stay ! some one comes ! Can it be possible !
[enter Frederic hastily , L.— ] My brother !
Fred. Have I then found you! sister! my friend!—
how anxiously I’ve sought you !
Amelia. That pallid, anxious look ! surely no fatal
accident !
Fred. Eliza—unfortunate girl!—
Goose. What, my sister-in-law !
Fred, She has fallen into the hands of the Bush-
rangers, and, unless I can raise five hundred dollars
Goose. Raise five hundred dollars ! brother-in-law !
A mere trifle! we’ll let you have it directly, won’t we,
Mrs. G., my love: very hard if we couldn’t do such a
thing as that for a relation, when he wants it. We must
make our old dad stump up for it, by and bye; it will
he all in the family, you know !
Fred. Mrs. G, ! family! What mean you ?
Goose. Oh lord! I forgot you didn’t know ! the
fact is we’ve been merely following your example,
Mely and I: getting married—that’s all, ’ent it, Mrs.
G. my love ?
Amelia. 1 believe so—Mr. G.
Goose. Yes! no fear of the snakes now !—the dollars
shall be yours directly, brother Fred—aye, and any thing
else you want. We may get into the Bush, and want a
friend ourselves, one of these days ; there’s no knowing !


Fred. This is true friendship ! I congratulate you,
sister, on the union that gives me such a brother! —
now for Eliza !
Goose. Stay ! here’s somebody else coming ! who is
this? [Enter Eliza hastily, l.
Eliza. Good people, if ever—ha ! Frederic !
Fred. Great heaven’s ! Eliza’s self!
[they rush into each other's arms.
Goose. Mrs. G. ! —I must embrace you, my dear, if
its only for sympathy ! how tender these things do make
one! [Embraces Amelia.
Fred. By what unhop’d for miracle—
Eliza. 1 have no breath for explanation ! —escaped by
miracle, I've only time to tell you your father’s life’s
in danger ; the Bush-rangers—
Fred. Ha ! —the monsters!
Eliza. There is a horrid plan to rob and murder
him—this night : perhaps this hour ! —this moment!—
Fred. Let’s haste ! I’ll hazard life ! you, friends—
Darby. We’ll all lend a hand, sir: leave an Irish-
man alone for that.
Goose. Aye, aye, I’ll go ; I wish I’d have happened to
have been married a day or two, though—if one had
known a little something about it, one might’nt have mind-
ed so much, being popp’d off!—however, come along.
Ben. Stay, you know not what you do! he who
would cope with the Bush-rangers, must have the fox’s
cunning, the lion’s courage, and the tiger’s strength:
leave all to Ben-ni-long ; he and his warriors are fit match
for them ! he owes them deep revenge,—they’ve fired
upon our helpless women, despoiled our tents ; we have
wished long to meet them, —Ben-ni-long has sworn aid
and friendship to you, and he will keep his word !—fol-
low—but cautiously and silently.
WHISPERING CHORUS.—Omnes.
From “ Obi."
Soft through the bush-wood stealing,
No print oursteps revealing.
Let caution guard the way ;
The Bush-rangers are near us,
Fell Michael Howe may hear us,
Hush ! to revenge away!
Follow, follow, follow I &c.
[Exeunt Omnes, l. — stealing off cautiously.


SCENE IV. — Grove of Peppermint and Mimosa Trees.
Enter Serjeant and Soldiers marching, Bedia preced-
ing, searching , l-
Serj. Halt! No signs of the rascals yet!
Bedia. No massa red coat ! white man Bush-ranger
no leave his foot in the grass at all here
Serj. Well, my lads, day's fairly done, now, so beat
the retreat, and let's off to the barracks to bed ! [ retreat is
heat .] Now then, march !
Bedia. Stay ! massa soldier white man; Bedia hear
steps come. Ah ! it woman’s !
Serj. Well, I declare I did’nt hear it! I shouldn’t have
wondered at her being so quick if it had been a man’s
foot; but a woman’s, it is surprizing ! faith, she’s right!
[Enter Agatha, n
What can this woman want here, and at this hour!
*[ Agatha is crossing of] Halt!
Agatha. Soldiers ! confusion ! [aside.
Serj. Your name and business! who are you ? where
are you going to ?
Agatha, [aside.] I dare not!—cannot answer !
Serj. What! do you hesitate! seize her! make her
come forward. Let’s see ! if we cant hear !— [they force
her forward.] Ha! who do I see, Agatha Mortlake ! a
run-away convict, companion of the object of our search,
the murderer Michael Howe! You are our prisoner,
woman !
Agatha, [aside.] Death to my hopes! fatal ren-
contre !
Serj. Only one thing can save you ! disclose the haunt
of this fell miscreant; enable us to seize him—and
you’re free —you’re pardoned.
Agatha, [aside.] Betray him ! yet, a free pardon, the
chance of sparing Robin's soul another crime—the poor
girl, too ! I’ll not do good by halves, —your offer I accept,
follow me, and e’er an hour is past, I’ll put the monster
in your power !
Serj. Hurrah! Forwards, and look sharp, lads; now
on woman, and see that you attempt not to deceive us,
we have an eye on you, march ! [Exeunt Omnes, l.
SCENE V.— Interior of Hardy’s Log-hut, as before;
a practicable window on one side; large practicable
chimney at the hack ; several large chests marked ‘ stores'


about the stage ; Hardy discovered sitting (K.—) in a
rude sort of arm chair —Wildgorse in attendance.
Hardy. Married, my daughter married, say you,
Robin ?
Wild, Yes, sir! so of course I didn’t press her to
leave ; one couldn’t well expect she’d come away to
night, you know, sir.
Hardy. And my consent unasked?all—all, then, have
forsaken me ; —kin, friends, the world ! but have 1 not
forsaken something, too ? my native isle—my father
land, my mother country—should 1 then wonder that
my children leave me ?
Wild. He does not move ! should Michael come, and
it is near the houi—how can I get him off? [aside.
Hardy. That headstrong boy, that Frederic ! and the
girl!—perhaps I have been hasty—harsh ! could she be in-
nocent? no, no, the proofs were but too strong.
Wild. Very strong, indeed ! the things were found in
her box, you know, sir! at least so papers said, and
they tell every thing !
Hardy. Why, aye, the press ! the press—that, ’tis
gives England its preponderance, its proud preeminence
o’er all the nations of the earth ; the press of England is
a blessing that almost more than compensates for all the
wrongs endured by her, —while that exists, 1 feel, howe’er
I may lament her errors, her privations, Old England
ne’er can falter, ne’er can fall !
Wild. Hum ! press be no rogue’s friend, though; ana
be a little too free, I think. If it had’nt been for press,
I should’nt have been here! those plaguey police reports
get every body their own ! [aside.] What you say be
all very true, sir, but it be growing late-ish, shall 1 see
you to your room, sir,—night air's cold !
Hardy. Nay, sleep is not my friend ! I'll wait till
weariness gives some assurance rest will not longer
fly me !
Wild, [aside.] I must somehow get him off!
Hardy. This isle is not so faultless as I deemed it .
ifthere’s no turnpikes, there appears toll takers—if there's
no tythes, we lose more than our tenths ! our rum and
stores most strangely have been visited !
Wild. Oh, lord ! [ aside .] Ah, ’tis the monkies, sir,
they’re very cunning here.
Hardy. They must be, to accomplish what they do !
no locks can hold against them, no hiding place escape
them.


Wild. No—or I’m not so good a smith as I think I am!
now for one of my drowsiest ditties to lull him off; he
yawns, he’ll not be long. [aside.
SNATCH.—Robin.
Air.— “ Virginia Lads !”
These buxom young lasses they led me astray,
My work I forsook more and more, every day,
And for to maintain them went on the highway,
Till at length I got lagg'd to Van Diemen’s.
While Robin is singing this stave, Yel-10-way, one of the
Natives, descends the chimney in back.
He nods—another stave, and he will be secure [
SNATCH.—Robin,
AIR.—“ Oh, Cruel /”
Oh 1 cruel was the constable, that in the cage put me ■
And cruel was the gaoler too, that turned on me the key !
And cruel was the prosecutor, who’d not let me go ;
But wished me to be bang’d, not caring if I lik’d or no.
Oh ! cruel were the witnesses, who swore unto the fact I
And cruel were the counsel, who produc’d the fatal act!
And cruel were the jury, wtio the verdict guilty gave !
And cruel was the judge, who would’nt, 'cause he could'nt, save !
[During the time Robin is singing this, Hardy gradually
dozes off. Yel-10-way opens the window, Ben-ni-long
and natives enter, and remain in hack ground concealed.
Wild. He’s off, he’s sound—he may sleep sounder soon
—would Michael Howe were here. 1 have a weight upon
my mind, —Stephen! let me not think of him—Agatha,
too. I must drive away these thoughts.—
SN ATCH,—Wildgorse.
Air. —“ For ’tis now.”
I am a brisk and sprightly Made,
And always in the ale-house boozing ;
The landlady proves kind to me,
While the landlord he is soundly snoozing.


Tow '. row ! row!
Take me, while I’m in the humour ;
For tis NOW !
[ While this is singing, Ben-ni-long, qc- conceal themselves
in the chests, Sgc. about the room ; the lid of one of the
chests falls heavily. ] What’s that ? fool, fool! A
mouse perchance ! that every trifling chance should start
me thus: [tapping heard at the window.] Ha! ’tis Mi-
chael ! Let me see that the old man is safe, yes,—now
for it, come in, boys—softly—gently—not a word ' —a
movement 1
CHORUS,— Omnes.
Air. —“ Hadyn’s Surprise
Softly tread, the coast is clear, —
The old man unsuspecting sleeps;
Gently, boys,—our prize is here ;
Soon we’ll seize his shining heaps.
See, these chests his treasures hold.
Safe secur’d from prying eyes!—
Seize them, boys, be wise and bold,
Here’s no fear of a Subpkize »
[During the singing of this chorus, Wildgorse lets in Mi-
chael Howe, §c. they steal cautiously about to the chests,
open them, and are seized by Indians, who leap out —
Tableau of astonishment !
Howe. Confusion, the ! surprized !
Hardy, [awaking.] Great heavens! what means all
this ?
Howe. We are betrayed, entrapped ! you, villain, have
deceived us ! take your reward ! [fires at WUdgorse.]
Now then, have at them, boys.
[ WUdgorse staggers to back of stage.
[Desperate combat between Michael Howe and the Bush-
rangers, and Ben-ni-long and Natives ! Natives are at
last beat back, and as Howe, %c. are forcing Hardy off,
Frederic, Gooseberry, and Darby, rush in at door, L.
[Combat renewed, —Frederic releases his father, and pro-
tects him ; Ben-ni-long and Natives rally,—Darby
fights with Howe, disarms, and seizes him. Goose-
berry is vanquished by Whitehead. —Frederic and Na-
tives are about being overpowered by the others, when
G


Agatha , Serjeant and Military, followed by Eliza,
Amelia, and Kangaree enter., r. Soldiers present their
pieces at the Bush-rangers — who surrender.
Howe. Taken at last, lost beyond all hope ! Well,
well, for years this end has been my daily thought, my
nightly dream ! and now that it has come at last, I’ll
give it welcome with my curses. I’ll die, as 1 have
lived, a gay, bold villain! —Agatha, my betrayer ! that’s
retribution, for I had doom’d her death !—lead on—and
do your worst! gibbet and mangle me, scatter my ashes,
trample me to dust, you cannot wholly crush me ! I
shall defy you still ! despite your utmost striving, for
ages, gossip crones and listening childhood shall, hear-
ing, own my power, and tremble at the name of Michael
Howe ! now dogs—away !
[ls borne off by soldiers, with other Bush-rangers.
Serj. Impenitent villain! [ to Darby.] You are en-
titled, my brave fellow, to the reward! one hundred
guineas, and, as a convict, to the King’s free pardon.
Darby. Hurrah ! I’m forgiven for what I never did,
and sure but that isn’t luck.
[ Wildgorse groans in hack ground.
Agatha. That groan!
Hardy. Instantly search! some of our friends, per-
haps— [Agatha finds Wildgorse.
Agatha. Great heaven’s ! what do I see ? Wildgorse !
Bleeding ! dying !
Fred. Bear him this way ! some help may—
Wild. No, no, it is too late; who’s this ? ah, Aga-
tha ! oh, woman’s faith ! thou star from heaven, form’d
for the storm and night, what gloom can shut thee out,
what danger quench thee ? Agatha ! bless thee, bless
thee —Ah, there’s another ! Mercy, Eliza White!—thou
comest to give evidence ! thou art too late.—l am con-
demned—to death ! —yes, Stephen waits for me, but I’ll
confess—’tis no use hiding now—thou’rt innocent, ’twas
I that did it.—
Fred. Ha! what say’st thou ? oh, as thou hop’st for
mercy, stop not now.
Eliza. Repeat the blessed sounds! I’ll ever pray for
thee!
Wild. Oh, 1 grow faint! come near—old man ! where
art thou ? let me do justice know’st thou not Matthew
Kendal ? under that name you had me once as porter; I
did not serve you long—


Hardy. ’Twas even so, I can remember now !
Wild. I gain’d a knowledge of your house—had false
keys made—l robbed it—and—ah, life ebbs from me
apace—
Eliza. Oh, if you would have mercy—speak, the rest
—you
Wild. ’Twas I that put the things within your trunk—
’twas I—ah, Stephen glares on me—thou’rt innocent—
he beckons me—Agatha, master, bless you; ah ! —I come
—mercy —forgive, I,——Agatha Agatha
[Sinks into Agatha's arms—and is borne off by her.
Hardy. My children, Eliza, Frederic, Amelia—
you too, son— [to Gooseberry .]
Goose. Yes, father-in-law ?
Hardy. Can you forgive,—forget,—and share mv
blessing and my forturie with me ?
Goose. Lord bless you, I would’nt harm a worm—
unless it injured the spring crops.
Fred. Dear sir, this moment makes amends for all.—
Eliza. Right still rewards itself! by hastening here, sir,
to save your life, I’ve clear’d my honour—dearer far than
life. I wish no other recompense.
Amelia. I’m glad all our troubles are over before the
honey moon begins; one may stand some chance of the
flitch, perhaps!
Darby. Fait ! but I shall only die with pleasure now.
Kan. Kangaree no die at all—she black girl, and live
for you, massa husband.
Ben. Ben-ni-long joys he sees you all in concord !
Hardy. Now, we will home again; “ England, with all
faults, we love thee still!”—We’ll leave Van Diemen’s
Land, —the Exile’s refuge, and the outcast’s home, —fit
offspring of a mother like Great Britain, to those more
destitute.—Unless compelled by fortune, forced by fate—
no true born Englishman should ever quit his native
Land!
MEDLEY FINALE.— Omnes.
Air.—“ Barbadoes Bells."
Amelia.
All o’er—trials fairly past,
And clear’d the clouds that late o’ercut,
Joy and peace return at last,
In Van Diemen’s Land.


If the while, you but smile,
Every care and pain repaying;
We but toil, to beguile,
And gain your helping hand
Come, then, let's dance and sing,
Sorrow to the winds let’s fling !
Soon the skies with joy shall ring,
In Van Diemen’s Land.
Gooseberry.
Alß.— “ In Town I was a Clerk so gay.”
And let me beg, you’ll kindly hear,
Jemmy Gooseberry, settler !
From London I’ve located here,
And married this fair prattler.
Settled here, ’tis who but we !
But if you frown on our glee,
We shall quite unsettled be,
T’will be such a net tier?
Darby.
Air.— “ Pat was a darling Boy.”
And pardon poor Darby, och hone l
Though I a few notes chanc’d to smuggle,
I’d much better left them alone,
For sure ’twasa queer sort of juggle !
My happiness don’t go to check,
With the black fair I've wedded and courted.
Let me hang round the swate creatures’ neck,
By the powers I’ll still be transported !
Oh, oh, oh 1 Darby’s her darling boy !
Eliza.
Air. —“ There's nae Luck about the house ”
And let me, too, for favour sue,
Your kind support pray grant.
Acquitted of all fault by you,
No greater bliss 1 want !
For there's no luck about the house,
Our means indeed were scant,
There is no luck about the house,
If your applause we want.
Omnes.— “ Barbadoes Bells.”
Come, then, let’s dance and sing,
Sorrow to the winds let’s fling,
Soon the skies with mirth shall ring,
In Van Diemen’s Land.
DISPOSITION OF THE CHARACTERS AT THE
FALL OF THE CURTAIN.
Nati. Ben, Goose. Amelia. Hardy- Eliza. Fred. Kan. Darby. Sol.


CUMBERLAND’S BRITISH and MINOR THEATRE:
COMPRISING ALL THE BEST
Crageliies—CTomcliiES—©peras—ifarrcs—iSleloUramfi, anfc Interludes,
WITH REMARKS BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL, BY D.-G.
This Work is correctly marked with the Stage Business of the Metropolitan Theatres, and from
its great utilitv is universally patronised by the Theatrical Profession, and is in constant use for
Prompt and Part Books, in the London. Dublin, Edinburgh, and American Theatres.
Each Play is embellished with a highly finished full-length Portrait of a celebrated Performer,
in a favourite character, engraved ofi Steel, from an original Drawing by Mr. Wageman, or Mr.
Buss: or an interesting Scene, engraved by Mr. Bonner, from a Drawing taken m the Theatre by
Mr, H. Cruikshank.
I.IST OP THE PEATS ALREADY PUBLISHED,
Price 6d, euch, a few very expensive Copyrights Is. each.
VOL. I.
1 Romeo and Juliet
t She Stoops to Con-
quer
3 Macbeth
4 Pizarro
Richard 111.
Douglas
7 Suspicious Husband
VOL. 11.
8 Othello
9 The Duenna
10 The Rivals
U Belle’s Stratagem
12 Cymbeline
Venice Preserved
fl The West Indian
• VOL. HI.
15 Much Ado auout No-
thing
16 The Hypocrite
17 As You Like it
18 Provoked Husband
19 The Beggar’s Opera
SO Way to Keep Him
!l The Padlock
kVOL. IV.
King John
13 Henry IV. Part I.
84 The Wonder
IS Hamlet
!6 Trip to Scarborough
7 The Road to Ruin
S»'l he Gamester
VOL. V.
!9 The Winter’s Tale
10 Man of the World
ll The Inconstant
32 Love in a Village
33 Jane Shore
34 King Henry VIII.
35 Julius Ctesar
VOL. VI.
36 Merchant of Venice
37 Merry Wives of
Windsor
38 Virgiuius, Is.
39 Lams Gracchus
*“<4ll in the Wrong
41 King Lear
42 Cato -
VOL. VII.
43 JJew way to pay
XMd Debts
14 Measure tor Measure
>5 The Jealous Wife
[6 The T empest
•7 ClandettineMuruge
48 Coriolanus
49 Every One has his
Fault
VOL. VIII.
50 The Alcaid
51 The Busy Body
52 Tale of Mystery
53 Know your Own
Mind
54 Mayor of Garratt
55 A woman never vext
56 The Maid of the Mill
VOL. IX.
57 Harbor of Seville
58 Isabella
59 Charles the Second
60 The Fair Penitent
61 George Barnwell
62 ’The Fall of Algiers
63 Der Freischutz
VOL. X.
64 The Fatal Dowry
65 Shepherd of Der-
went Vale
66 Father and Son
67 Wives as they were
68 Lofty Projects
69 Every Man in his
Humour
70 Two Galley Slaves
VOL. XI.
71 Brutus, Is. ,
72 AJi Pa-ha
V) Twelfth Night
74 Henry the Fifth
75 Love in humble life
76 Child of Nature
77 The Sleep Walker
VOL. XII.
78 Orestes in Argos
79 Hide and Seek
80 Tribulation
81 The Rival Valets
82 Roses and Thorns
83 Midas
84 Rule aWife and have
a Wife
VOL. XIII.
85 A Bold Stoke for a
Wife.
86 Good-natured Man
87 Oberon
88 Lord of the Manor
89 The Honey-Moon
90 Doctor Bolus
91 High Life below
stain
VOL. XIV.
92 Disagreeable Sur-
prise
93 The Stranger
94 Village’Lawyer
95 School for Scandal
96 The Spoiled Child
97 Animal Magnetism
98 W heel of Fortune
VOL. XV.
99 The Critic
100 Deaf and Dumb
101 T he Castle Spectre
102 T he Revenge
103 Midnight Hour
104 Speed thePlough.ls
105 Kosiha
VOL. XVI.
106 Monsieur Tonson
107 Comedy of Errors
106 The Spectre Bride-
groom
109 A Cure for the
Heart-ache, Is.
110 Amateurs & Actors
111 Inkle and Yarico
112 Education
VOL. XVII
113 Children in
W ood
114 Rendezvous
115 Barbarossa
116 Gambler’s Fate
the
135 Who wants a Gui-
nea, Is.
136 Poor Soldier
137 Midsummer Night's
Dream
138 The Way to get Mar-
ried, Is.
139 T urnpike Gate
140 Paul and Virginia
VOL. XXL
141 The Cabinet, Is.
142 Youthful Queen
143 Green-eyed monster
144 Country Girl
145 Irish Tutor
146 Beaux* Stratagem
147 The Will, Is.
VOL. XXII.
148 Irishman in London
149 Recruiting Officer
150 T he Slave, Is.
151 The Devil’s Elixir
152 “ Master’s Rival”
153 The Duel
154 William Tell, Is.
VOL. XXIII.
155 Tom Thumb
156 H appiest Day of my
Life
157 fatality
j 158 LLaugh when you
I can. Is.
159 William Thompson
117 Giovanni in London ; 160 Illustrious Stranger
118 School of Reform Ist 161 Soldier’s Daughter
119 lovers’ Vows 1 162 The Waterman
VOL. XVIII. : 163 Town and Country
120 Highland Keel 1 VOL. XXIV.
121 Two Gentlemen of; 164 No Song no Supper
Verona i 165 lock and Key
122 Taming the Shrew 166 Snakes in the Grass
123 Secrets worth know- 167 Love, Law & Physic
ing, Is. 1168 Uienzi, Is.
124 Weathercock ThOClari
125 Somnambulist 1170 The Brigand
126 Ail’s well that ends 171 Riches, Is.
well
VOL. XIX.
127 Artaxerxes
128 The Serf, Is.
129 The Lancers
130 Love for Love
131 TheMerchant’sWed-
ding. Is.
132 Race for a Dinner
133 Raising the Wind
VOL. XX.
134 Siege of Belgrade
172 The Citizen
VOL. XXV.
173 Grecian Daughter
174 Charles the All, Is.
175 T eddy the Tiler
176 Popping the Ques-
tion
1177 The Maid'd! Judah, It
1178 X. VZ.
170 Oroonoko
180 Honest Tlnevei
181 lire Hlii.d Buy


VOL. XXVI
182 Notoriety, Is.
183 Matrimony
184 A > I irsbanti at Si^lit
185 First of A pril
186 John of Paris
187 The Miller and his
Men, Is.
188 Prisoner at Large
189 Timon of Athens
190 The Prize
VOL .VXVJJ,
191 Henry IV. Part'll.
192 Forty' Thieves
193 My Grandmother
194 The Vampire
195 The Farmer
196 Elia Rosenberg
197 The Two Friends
198 Valentine and Orson
199 Follv as it flies
VOL. XXVHI.
Eoo'The Robber’s Wife
201 Magpie,or tlielMaid
802 Shakspeare’s Early
Days
203 Point of Honour
204 High Ways and By
Ways
205 'The Lee Witch
'Sir
206 St. Patrick's Day
207 The Blind Bargain
206 Robinson Crnsot
VOL. XXIX.
209 The Maid of Honor
210 Sleeping Draught,
211 TimoUr the Tartar
212 Modern Antiques
813 King Richard 11.
214 Mrs. Wiggins
215 Comfortable Lodg-
ings
216 The Exile, Is.
21" Day after the Wed-
ding
218 The Adopted Child
VOL. XXX.
219 The Bride of Lud-
gate, is.
280 Tekeli
224 Old and Voung
222 The Bee Hive
223 Hartford Bridge
224 Two Strings to'your
Bow
225 The Haunted Inn
226 Howtogrowßich.ls
227 Fortune's T'rolic
228 The Haunted Tower
, VOL XXXI.
229 Killing no Murder
230 Mr. and Mrs.Pringle
231 The Antiquary Is.
232 Agreeable Surprise
233 Son-in-Law
234 ()|>ei: House
2.35 Falls of Cl vde
236 1.2, .3, 4,5, by Ad-
vertisement
237 Peeping Tom of Co-
ventry
VOL. XXXII.
2.3BCastle of Andalusials
2.39 One o’Clock
240 Julian, Is.
241 Comus
242 I'ontainbleau
243 F.nglisli Fleet
244'The Widow, or
who wins
245 1 he Camp
216 Personation
VOL. XXXIII.
247 Maid or Wile
248 Castle of Sorrento
249 Faustns, Is.
250 All at Coventry.
251 Tom and Jerry.
252 Robert the Devil,
253 Lestocq,
254 Cataract of the
Ganges.
255 Old Regimentals.
VOL. XXXIV.
256 Presumptive Evi-
dence
257 Wild Oats
258 Hit or Miss
259 Ambition
260 The Jew and the
Doctor
261 The Knights of
the. Cross
262 Is he Jealous ?
263 Hundred Potmd
Note
264 Rugantino
265 The Steward. Is.
VOL. XXXV.
VOL. 1. to XXXI. may
be had in boards.
Price £7. 6s. 6d., -
CUMBERLAND’S
Minor Theatre.
VOL. I.
1 The Pilot
2 Heart of Mid-lothian
3 Inchcape Bell ■
4 Mason of Buda
5 The Scapegrace
6 Snil Dhuv the coiner
7 The Earthquake
8 “ My Old Woman”
9 Massianeilo
VOL. 11.
10 Don Giovanni
11 Paul Jones
12 Luke the Labourer
13 Crazy Jane
14 Living Dutchman
15 Yes!! I
In Forest Oracle
17 Ivanhoe
18 Floating Beacon
VOL. 111.
19 Sylvana
20 'Tom Bowling
21 Itmkeepet of Abbe-
tile
22 Lady'of the Lake
2,3 Billy Taylor
24 Two Gregories
25 Wandering Boys
26 Paris and l-oudon
27 A Day alter the Fair
VOL. IV.
28 Humphrey Clinker
29 Mischief-Slaking
30 Joan of Arc
31 The Ruffian Boy
32 Fortunes of Nigel
33 The Wreck i
34 Every - body’s Hus-
band
35 Banks of the Hudson
36 Guy Faux
VOLV.
37 The Devil’s Ducat
38 Mazeppa
.39 Mutiny at the Nore
40 Pedlar's Acre
41 ” No !!!”
42 Peveril ot the Peak
43 Thalaba
44 W averley
45 Winning a Husband
VOL VI.
46 Holer, the 'fell of the
Tyrol
47 Paul Clifford
48 Damon and Pythias
49 Three Hunchbacks
50 Tower of Nesle
61 Sworn at Ihgngate
52 Mary Glastonbury
53 The Red Rover
54 Golden Farmer.
VOX- VII,
55 Grace Huntley
56 “ The Sea!”
57 Clerk of Clerkenwe
58 Hut of the Red
Mountain
59 John Street, Adelph
60 Lear of Private Lil
61 John Overy.
62 Spare Bed.
63 Smuggler's Daughp
VOL. VIII,
64 Cedar Chest
65 Wardock Kennils
66 The Shadow
67 Ambrose Gwirett
69 Gilderoy
69 Fate of Galas
70 The Yeung Reefei
71 Revolt of the Work
house
72 The Man and tl
Marquis
VOL. IX.
73 Gipsy Jack
74 I.urline
75 The Fire Raiser
76 The Golden Calf
77 Man-Fred
78 Charcoal Burner
79 •• My Poll and ray
Partner Joe"
80 The Sixes I ”,'
81 Good-Looking Fe
low
82 The Wizard of th
Moor
VOL. X.
83 The Roof Scramble
Miss Phillips
Mr. Young
Miss Chester
Mr. Macready
Mrs. Bunn
Mrs. West
M iss Smithson
Mad. Vestris
Miss M.TreA
Mr. Wallack
Mr. Kean
Mi, C. Kemble
Mr. W. Farren
Miss Vincent
Mr. Harley
Mr. Jones
Mr. Mathews
Mr. Kean, jun.
Mr. Dowton
Miss K. 'Tree
Mr. W.H. Williams
Mr. O. Smith
Mr. Keeley
Mr. Cooptr
Mr. Webster |
Mr. Osbaldistoa
A List of the Portraits.
Miss Foote Mr. Liston
M iss Paton M iss Grad don
Miss Love Miss F. Kemble
Mr. T. P. Cooke
Mr. Brabant
Mr. Power
Mr. Elliston
Mr. Fitzwilliam
Mr. .1. Reeve
Lmdon : Published by John Cumberland. No. 2. Cumberland Terrace, Camden New lowi
Sold hv O. Berger. 42. Holywell street, Stra'ni; and T Ilnist 65, St. Paul’s Church yard.
