

DICKEY AWL,
Or. Easter Plonday for ever.
A Cobbler I am, andniy name is Dick Awl,
I'm a bit of a beast, for I live in a stall !
With an ugly old wife, and a tortoiseshell cat,
I mends boots and shoes with a rat a tat, tat*
To I de rol*
This morning, at breakfast, on bacon and spinach,
Says 1 to my wife, ' I'm a going to Greenwich*'
Says she,' Dickey Awl, aye and I will go too,
Si} S 1, 4 Mrs. Awl, I'll be d d if you do.'
i Tol de rol.
One word brought another—a shocking m'shap 1
She gave me the lie, and I gave her the strap t
To tarry at home, then, I thought it a sin,
s ) I soon boiled out, - but I bolted her in.
Tol de rol.
To Greenwich by water, I merrily sped,
A'id saw thetn all rolling it, heels over head;
The sun was so bright, so high the wind blew,
I spied—what I don't mean to mention to you.
Tol de rol.
Hut when I got home, (it is true, on my life,)
Hill Bittton, the tailof, was off with my wife;
Though old, Mrs. Awl has no fancy to bolts,
siic has but one tooth, but that is a colt's.
Tol de rol.
Ah S illy. my love! 'twas a vefy bad plan,
To cut me, and choose the ninth part of a man •
she thought in eloping, so cunning aiid tricky,
With poor Dickey Awl it would soon be all Dicky *
Tol de rol.
If Hill and my rib should get into a fray,
lie may sell her by auction the next market day,
If nobody bids for the sweet pretty elf,
Knock her down, my dear Billy and keep her
yourself. Tol de rol.
Van Dieman's
Land.
Come all vou gallant poachers, that ramble void
of ca re
That walk out on moonliglit night with your dog,
gun and snare,
The lofty hare and pheasants you have at your
command,
Not thinking of your last career upon Van Die-
in an s land.
Poor Tom Brown, from Nottingham, jack Wil-
liams, and poor Joe, (well know,
We are three daring poachers, the country does
At night we were trepan'd by the keepers hid in
sand,
Who for 14 years, transported us unto Van Die-
man's land.
The first day that We landed upon that fatal shore,
The planters they came round us full twenty score
or more, (hand
They rank'd us up like horses, and sold us out of
Then yok'd us unto ploughs, my boys, to plough
Van Dieman's land.
Onr cottages that we live in were built of clod and
clay, (nay,
And rotten straw for bedding, & we dare not say
Our cots werefenc'd with fire, we slumber when
we can,
To drive away wolves and tigers upon Van Die-
mau's land.
ItVoften when I slumber I have a pleasant dream*
With my sweet girl a setting down by a purling
stream, (mand.
Thro' England I've been roaming with her at com-
Now I awaken broken-hearted on Van Diemans
land-
God bless our wives and families likewise that
happy shore, (no more,
That isle of great contentment which we shall see
As for our wretched females, see them we seldom
can, land.
There's twenty to one woman upon Van Dieman's
There was a girl from Birmingham, Susan Sum-
mers was her name, (the same,
For fourteen years transported We all well know
Our planter bought her freedom, and married her
out of hand,
She gave to us good usage upon Van Dieman's
land.
So all you g til ant poachers give ear unto my song
it is a bit of good advice, altho' it is not long.
Throw by your dogs & snare' for to you I speak
plain, (again.
For if you know your hardships you'd never poach
Printed by W. TAYLOR, 14, Waterloo Road,
near the Victoria Theatre. Country Order 9
punctually attended to* Shops supplied.
Printed by TAYLOR, 16, Waterloo Road.
