

V
/




still at this very time. When a system of national education
was contemplated, conferences took place between the heads of
either church, as to what books should be used as text-books at
the proposed schools/ The friends of Irish education could not
agree upon this knotty point, and the proposed national schools
were therefore abandoned. Now, could they not have fixed,
amidst the mass of good books in every country out of Turkey,
on some that would have displeased the religious consciences of
no one ? Could they not have found out books that were not
religious, and which would have merely taught the poor young
folks to n»ad and spell ? Even Mother Bunch would have
sufficed in Such a case. Could we but, teach the youth of the
present generation to read Mother Bunch, those of the next
generation \fould read what they please,' without leave asked of
priests or laity.
van diemen’s land.
At a period when so much distress prevails among the popu-
lation of the British Isles; when thousands of the unhappy na-
tives of Ireland are sinking under the torture of famine and
disease; when the mountaineer looks to the little cultivated
patches of his native glen, divided and subdivided among his
half-clad and half-fed brethren, and listening to the tale of the
stranger, who talks to him of forests and prairies, in which the
deer roams, and the partridge flutters, and the tall herbage is left
to the denizens of nature, gives a smile to the thought of hap-
piness which he might there enjoy, and a sigh to that of leav-
ing the land of his fathers, every hill and valley of which is
associated with some inspiring reminiscence; when the despond-
ing labourer and manufacturer of England, the merry and the
rich, sees around him a helpless family, pining under privations
which they cannot endure, and finds himself denied the com-
forts and the necessaries for which he would gladly bestow the
labour of his hands, while others riot in wealth lor which
no hands'have laboured; —at such a period, our mind naturally
turns to the subject of emigration. Of the vast expanses of un-
occupied land to which we have laid claim in the most distant
VOL. 111. no. xiv. y


parts of the globe, our North American territories have of late
attracted the greater number of those unfortunate persons, whom
necessity has forced to leave their native land. The Scotch, in
particular, knowing that already great numbers of their brethren
have settled in the forests of the New World, attached to their own
country, its government and institutions, and averse from great
transitions, take the shortest way to a new home, to which they
are to be welcomed by their old friends, and seldom think of
settling elsewhere than in Canada and Nova Scotia. But there
aie places, more distant indeed, and more calculated to sever
the sympathies that bind men to their native land, which afford
the necessaries of life with as little labour, and hold forth as
cheering a prospect of ultimate comfort to emigrants, and of
prosperity to their offspring.
In our ramble over the map of the world, the great land of
Australia must peculiarly attract our attention. The most
Avhimsical ideas have pervaded the public mind respecting this
country. Tribes of naked and houseless savages, so low in the
scale of humanity as to form the link between man and the ba-
boon, and with heads so hard that they hold them out to each
other to be beaten with iron-wood waddies; an animal said to
be half-beast and half-bird, the Ornithorhynchus; the extraordi-
nary creature named the Kangaroo, progressing by enormous
leaps on its hind legs, and carrying about its young in a bag;
a host of little quadrupeds of a like nature, differing in orga-
nization from those of the Old World; black swans, ground
parrots, and an astonishing profusion of singular forms of vege-
table life,—have given rise to the idea, that, in New Holland,
Nature is different from what she is in other countries. A con-
tinent, without a single animal so large as a Lancashire hog,
with no wild cattle on its plains, no deer or antelope on its
hills, no tiger in its thickets, and no indigenous fruit equal
to a green gooseberry, seems altogether anomalous. In other
countries, too, the land is usually higher in the interior, and
less elevated towards the coasts; —whereas here, the moun-
tains are distributed in the vicinity of the shores, and the inte-
rior seems to consist of a vast expanse of low land; and some of
the larger rivers, instead of emptying themselves into the ocean,
are lost in the marshes of the midland solitudes; in which, when


it has unluckily been surrounded by the waters, the emu, a bird
like an ostrich, and incapable of flying, blows up a bladder in
its breast, and thus floats away to the nearest shore. But, for
all this, experience has shown that New Holland is, in most es-
sential respects, like other countries—that the course of nature
is the same there as elsewhere—that the white intruders are
often more savage than the black aborigines—and that human
life exhibits the same phenomena as in Old England.
The soil and climate of New Holland have been alternately
lauded and vituperated. While some depict that interesting
country in Arcadian hues, golden and green, and glowing with
all the freshness of luxuriant nature—others describe it as one
of the most dreary regions on the face of the earth, and picture
rugged and sterile hills, desolate valleys, pastures of rank grass
with blades as tough as shreds of parchment, trees bedizened
with rustling, glittering and juiceless foliage, and a periodical
scantiness of moisture destructive of cultivated vegetation. It
is our intention, on a future occasion, to offer some remarks on
this great austral land, and the colonies which we have planted
along its coasts. At present, we turn to a more manageable spot,
situated in its immediate vicinity.
The Island of Tasmania, or Van Diemen’s Land, is situated
between 40° 42' and 43° 43' south latitude, and between 145° 31'
and 148° 22' east longitude, and is separated from the continent
of New Holland, off the south-eastern extremity of which it lies,
by Bass’s Strait, a channel about 100 miles in breadth. It was
discovered in 1642, by Abel Jansan Tasman, who named it
Van Diemen’s Land, in honour of Anthony Van Diemen, go-
vernor-general of the Dutch possessions in the East Indies. The
first Englishman who visited it was Captain Furneaux, in the
Adventure, who, having been separated' in a thick fog, off St
Paul’s Island, from Captain Cook, on his second voyage, an-
chored in Adventure Bay, on the east side of Brune Island. In
1798, Lieutenant Flinders and Mr Bass, of the ship Reliance,
discovered that it was an island. In 1803, the first settlement
was made on it by Lieutenant Bowen, with a party from Port
Jackson ; and, in 1804, Colonel Collins, who had settled with
a party at Port Phillip, on the north side of Bass’s Strait, re-
moved to Van Diemen’s Land, and arriving in the Derwent


River, fixed the seat of government at a place which he named
Hobart Town. In 1804, Colonel Paterson formed a new set-
tlement at Port Dalryraple, on the northern coast. In 1811,
Governor Macquarie visited Hobart Town ; and about this time
the dependency of Norfolk Island being abandoned, its inhabi-
tants removed to Van Diemen’s Land. About 1810, the emi-
gration of free settlers to this country commenced in England,
and since then, not only individuals and families, but whole
companies, have continued to betake themselves to it. In 1825,
Van Diemen’s Land was proclaimed independent of the govern-
ment of New South Wales.
This island is of a compact form, its length and breadth being
nearly equal, and its coasts not much broken up by arms of the
sea, or projections of the land, excepting at the south-eastern
corner, in the vicinity of the Derwent. It contains upwards of
23,400 square miles, of which more than el even-twelfths remain
in their original state. The coasts are generally high and
rocky, but in the northern parts low and sandy. It is abun-
dantly supplied with excellent harbours: the Derwent on its
southern side; Port Davey and Macquarie Harbour on the
western; Port Sorrel and Port Dairymple on the northern;
Oyster Bay in Maria Island, Great Swan Port, and several
others, on the eastern coast. This circumstance, it is hardly
necessary to observe, must tend greatly to accelerate the pro-
gress of colonization, and facilitate intercourse with other
countries.
The surface is diversified by hill and dale. Ranges of mo-
derate elevation have been found in all parts of the country that
have been examined. Some of the mountains have been con-
jectured to be at least 4000 feet high, although none of them
seem to leach the limit of perpetual snow. Table Mountain or
Mount Wellington, above Hobart Town,on the Derwent, is 3064
feet in height. In short, the island may be said, in general, to
be hilly or mountainous, although there are fine plains of con-
siderable extent along the principal rivers.
The geological constitution of Van Diemen’s Land is little
known. The higher mountains are vaguely described as consist-
ing of granite and other primitive rocks, and the lower tracts of
limestone, sandstone, and other secondary deposites, among which


have been found beds of coal, with numerous petrifactions. The
latter mineral is said to be abundant in the neighbourhood of
Macquarie Harbour; and whole mountains of iron-ore occur in
that of Launceston on the Tamar. Slate, basalt, copper-ore,
alum, and asbestus are also mentioned; and from the salt springs
which occur, it is probable there are dcposites ol that valuable
substance. At a place called Saltpan Plains, 65 miles from. Ho-
bart Town, are two pools, one containing forty, the other twenty
acres, on which is formed every summer a crust of excellent salt,
from a quarter to half an inch in thickness.
On account of the mountainous nature of the country, it is
well supplied with water. The principal rivers are the Tamar,
which runs northward, and forms at its mouth the estuary of
Port Dalrymple, and the Derwent, which flows southward.
The sources of the latter rise towards the centre of the island,
and those of the former farther to the eastward. The Tamar,
on account of the rich and extensive plains along its banks, is of
great importance, although towards its mouth the soil is sandy
and of inferior quality. It is along these rivers that the popu-
lation of the colony is chiefly scattered, and a communication is
established by a road from Hobart Town to George Town, the
extreme northern settlement, along a course of 164 miles. r Io
the east of the Derwent is a small stream, called Coal River,
which runs into North Bay, and to the west is the Huon River,
which is larger than the Derwent, but which has not yet been
traced to a greater distance from its mouth than about forty
miles. All the larger rivers of Van Diemen’s Land terminate
in estuaries or arms of the sea, resembling the friths of Scot-
land, and forming the harbours which have already been men-
tioned. Port Davey, an inlet on the south-west coast, receives
two rivers; and Port Macquarie, about the middle of the western
coast, receives other two. There being sufficient declivity, the
rivers flow with more or less rapidity, and therefore do not sub-
ject the adjacent tracts to the sudden inundations which are so
common in New Holland. The colonists have taken advantage
of this circumstance by erecting mills upon many of the streams.
Numerous Jakes, some of them of large size, have been dis-
covered in different parts of the island. One of them is stated
to be about fifty miles in circumference.


The climate is temperate. The higher mountains are co-
vered with snow during the greater part of the year, and on a
few of them patches may be seen throughout the summer; but
in the valleys snow seldom lies longer than a few hours. The
frosts, however, continue long in spring, especially in the higher
grounds of the interior. The mean temperature of the lower
parts is about 60°, and the climate is not subject either to great
extremes of heat and cold, or to long droughts or rains, the sea-
sons being regular and well defined. In consequence of this re-
gularity, the climate is found to agree much better with Euro-
pean constitutions than that of the neighbouring continent.
The neighbourhood of Hobart Town is subject to violent blasts,
which seem to owe their occurrence to the existence of the Table
Mountain in the vicinity. These blasts seldom last above three
hours, but are exceedingly violent.
The vegetation of Van Diemen’s Land is in a great degree
similar to that of New South Wales. The greater regularity
of the seasons, the plentiful supply of moisture, and the mo-
derate temperature, produce a greater continuity of verdure.
The pastures are of excellent quality, and in many districts
entirely clear of brushwood, affording the richest supply of
food for the numerous herds and flocks which the colonists
rear. Extensive plains covered with this luxuriant herbage
are to be seen in all directions along the Derwent and Tamar,
while in other parts, and especially along the bases and sides
of the hills, are magnificent forests of valuable trees. In
the vicinity of Emu Bay, says the aufhor of the Hobart Town
Calendar, “ the moisture and vegetation is so great, and the soil
is so rich, that there appears a struggle among the several spe-
cies for space wherein to grow. Frequently may be seen three
or four plants springing from the same root. Occasionally they
form themselves into the most grotesque shapes. Near the skirt
of the forest, before emerging on the beach, the trees grow to a
very great size. One stands above all its fellows, like Dido
among her attendants, which measured at a little distance from
the base 63 feet round; and another, which had lately fallen
and lay near it, was found to be 180 feet to the first branch,
and about the width of a moderately sized road, the whole
length over which an expert bullock-driver, or the old man in


the northern hemisphere that used to drive Charles’s wain, might
safely conduct his carriage. Both these trees were of the stringy
bark species.” The most common forest trees are several species
of gum-tree (Eucalyptus), the stringy-bark tree, which is of the
same genus, Sassafras (Cryptocarpa glaucescens), tea-tree (Me-
laleuca linariifolia), beef-wood (Casuarina), and many others
which it is unnecessary to name. The Huon Pine and the Ad-
venture Pine are trees of great value peculiar to Van Diemen’s
Land. The wood of most of these trees is hard, and in general
well adapted for furniture. Little of it has yet been exported
from the colony, but all the buildings and several vessels have
been exclusively constructed of it. It is remarkable that here,
as in New Holland, there are scarcely any indigenous fruits of
the least value, or any vegetables proper for affording sustenance
to man. The cider-tree, a species of Eucalyptus, exudes a sac-
charine fluid, resembling molasses, which the natives procure by
boring holes in the bark, and which, on settling, ferments and
forms a kind of wine.
The character of the Aborigines of a country is a subject of
much importance to colonists, their security in a great measure
depending upon it. But whatever may be that of the natives
of Van Diemen’s Land, the English settlers have nothing now
to fear from them, as the number of these miserable creatures
that are yet left to roam the woods is estimated at only 600.
They are of a timid disposition too, so that half a dozen of
Europeans armed with muskets might make their way in the
midst of them without interruption. They, however, cherish a
most inflexible hatred against the white intruders, for which the
conduct of the latter has afforded them too much reason. As
in all countries where civilized man has interfered with his wild
brethren, little mercy has been shown in Van Diemen’s Land
to the rightful proprietor of the soil. The natives, when they
first became acquainted with the settlers, showed the most
friendly disposition towards them, until a most unfortunate oc-
currence converted their confidence and good will to dread and
enmity. In the absence of the Lieutenant-Governor, a military
officer, who had been entrusted with the command, seeing a
large body of natives approaching, received his friendly visitors
with a discharge of grape and canister shot, by which dreadful


havock was produced. Since then the natives have avoided all
intercourse with the settlers, and their hostility has further been
excited by subsequent acts of tyranny. The English, in fact,
especially those of the stock-keepers who have been settled in
remote parts of the country, have been in the habit of de-
stroying as many of the natives as possible, and the latter have
endeavoured to retaliate whenever an unfortunate straggler
came in their way, “ The best possible arrangements,” says the
Hobart Town Almanack, “ have lately been adopted by the
Government throughout the island, and parties of military and
field police are stationed to watch or scour various districts, so that
if the whole of the tribes are not speedily apprehended, a certain
period must be put to their outrages. An establishment has been
formed on Brune island, for the domestication and instruction
of such as are caught.” Such, then, is the fate of the Van Die-
men islanders; they are received with discharges of musketry,
murdered by stock-keepers and bush-rangers, and when they
begin to retaliate, are placed under military law, pursued and
killed, or if caught alive, are packed off to an island to be civi-
lized in durance.
The aborigines of Van Diemen’s Land appear to belong to
the Negro race, like those of New Holland, from which they do
not differ essentially in form. Like the latter, they are remark-
able for the thinness of their arms and legs, the lankness of
their bodies, and the consequent appearance of disproportion
in the size of the head. They are of a blacker colour than the
New Hollanders, and have the hair more woolly. They have
no canoes of any kind, but employ the rudest temporary rafts in
crossing the rivers or creeks. Their spears are heavier and more
rudely constructed than those of the natives of the continent,
and in throwing them they do not employ the stick, which en-
ables the latter to cast them with so much force and precision.
The manners of this tribe have never been properly ascertained,
and in a few years they will probably become extinct, more es-
pecially as the number of females is supposed not to exceed
seventy.
In New Holland and Van Diemen’s Land, there will be no
mulatto race, as in other countries in which Europeans have
settled; for although temporary intimacies have been formed


between sailors and native women in this colony, in consequence
of which some samples of an improved breed have been seen, no
marriage has ever taken place between an Englishman and an
Australian damsel.
There have been worse savages in Van Diemen’s Land, since
the commencement of colonization there, than the natives.
These were the runaway convicts, or bush-rangers, with which
the colony was at one time dreadfully infested. Murders, rob-
beries, and other atrocities, have been represented as the ordi-
nary amusements of these wretches. In 1817, they were so
numerous that the more respectable part of the agriculturists
found it expedient to retreat to the towns, in order to preserve
their lives. By a serious of energetic measures, however, they
have been extirpated, and the island at present enjoys a state
of perfect tranquillity.
The animals are nearly the same as those on the Continent.
The great kangaroo ( Macropus major) and the brush kan-
garoo (M. elegans) are both abundant. The former is the
largest of the indigenous land animals. The native dog or
wolf of the continent (Canis australis) does not occur here;
but an animal known by the name of hyena or panther, al-
though it is neither, occasionally commits great havock among
the flocks. It is of considerable size, usually measuring six feet
from the snout to the end of the tail, and of a greyish colour,
striped with black across the back and sides. The female car-
ries about its young in a bag, like most of the Australian
quadrupeds. This animal, which is the largest beast of prey
in these countries, is cowardly, and in no degree formidable to
man. The wombat is also of considerable size, and there are
numerous small quadrupeds of various species ; but, excepting
the kangaroo, there is scarcely a native land-animal of the least
importance to man.
The marine mammifera are very numerous. Seals are plen-
tiful along the coasts, as are dolphins and whales. In Novem-
ber and December, the latter are seen abundantly in the har-
bours and creeks, to which they seem to retire at that season
for the purpose of bringing forth their young. They some-
times go up the Derwent as far as Hobart Town, where they
are occasionally captured.


The birds of Van Diemen’s Land are in general the same as
those of the Continent. The emu, or Australian ostrich, oc-
curs in the interior. Pigeons, parrots, cockatoos, herons, ducks,
swans, pelicans, and many other species, are found in great
abundance. Serpents of various kinds, several of them poison-
ous, occur in the country, although less abundantly than in
New Holland. The sea abounds in fish, as do some of the
rivers; and as to crustaceous animals and shell-fish, especially
oysters and mussels, no country can be better supplied with
them than this.
The excellent pasturage with which the country abounds has
given rise to the extensive rearing of cattle and sheep, to which
the climate is well adapted. In the more remote districts, the
cattle are allowed to range at large, and in this state become
perfectly wild. A number of men go out, and with logs con-
struct what is called a stock-yard, or circular enclosure, into
which they drive the cattle, by galloping after them, and
cracking their whips. - Here they are kept without food, of-
ten for several days, until a sufficient number is collected. A
man enters, having a long pole, to the end of which is at-
tached a noose of hide-rope, which he throws over the horns
of one of the cattle. When it is fixed, another man entangles
the hind legs of the animal with a noose, by which it is thrown
over. The four legs are then tied together, and the branding-
iron is applied to the buttock. In this manner also, the cattle
are caught for the market, and afterwards driven to town.
When the calves are about half-a year old, the herd is collected
in the same manner, and the males are castrated. The cattle
of Van Diemen’s Land are represented as in general superior
to those of New Holland. The system of wild grazing, which
is attended with numerous disadvantages, is now, however, be-
coming less extended, and cattle are reared in the same manner
as in England. The sheep first carried to Van Diemen’s Land,
were from Bengal, and were of the most inferior description:
but they have been improved by crossing with the Saxon and
pure Merino breeds, as well as with the Leicester and other
English varieties. The pure Merino is also bred. The finer
wools are largely exported to England.


The horses, which were originally imported from India, and
have been improved by importations from England, are not in
general of a large size or showy appearance. There are hardly
any cart-horses, all the agricultural operations which require
animal power, being performed by bullocks.
Good mares vary in price from L. 40 to L. 100, geldings
from L. 60 to L. 100. Ewes sell at from L. ItoL. 1,10 s.;
Merino and Saxon tups from L. 10 to L. 50; wedders from
15s. to L. 1. Working bullocks cost about L. 20 the pair;
cows and bulls all prices from L. 2 to L. 50, according to their
quality ; milk cows L. 20 to L- 25.
The great fertility of its soil, and the excellence of its cli-
mate, render Van Diemen’s Land suited for most of the crops
usually grown in England. Wheat is of better quality than at
Sydney, and, owing to the lower degree of temperature, oats,
barley, and beans thrive better. The same cause, however,
prevents several vegetables, which succeed in the parent colony,
from being cultivated with advantage. Of this kind are the
maize, the orange, and the apricot. Turnips, rutabaga, cab-
bages, pease, onions, and English grasses, answer as well as
in Europe. Apples, plums, peaches, and cherries, grow so
rapidly as to produce fruit in abundance the year after they
are grafted. Rasps, gooseberries, and currants are very com-
mon, as well as strawberries. Melons, gourds, and cucumbers,
grow in the open air. The hop and vine have been cultivated
with extraordinary success. Potatoes, which in New Holland are
generally inferior to those of England, succeed better here. In
short, the cultivated vegetation is everywhere such as to leave
nothing in this department to be desired by the colonists. So
abundant is the produce, that so early as 1817, when the crops
on the river Hawkesbury, in the parent colony, were destroyed,
20,000 bushels of wheat and 380 tons of potatoes were exported
to supply the deficiency. The circumstance, that large tracts
of fine land are everywhere to be seen unencumbered by trees
or shrubs, renders the operations of the settler less laborious
than in many other parts of the world. As in New Holland,
the burning of the grass, before the commencement of spring
and autumn, is quickly succeeded by a luxuriant and juicy
herbage. In some of the settled districts, the scenery is de-


scribed as almost English, the fields being enclosed by fences,
and hedges of hawthorn and other plants ; while the gentle
declivities, verdant plains, and winding streams, together with
the character of the sylvan vegetation, are little apt to remind
the settler that he has chosen a home so remote from his na-
tive land.
There being few grants on which a portion of the land is not
naturally free of timber, the labour required in procuring a crop
is less than in most other unsettled countries. Large tracts of
open and grassy land occur in the valleys, and along the rivers,
as well as on the more elevated plains; but the soil of the latter
is of inferior quality. Forest land is usually cleared by paying
a certain sum for each tree grubbed up. The trees are sawn
across, piled together, and burnt, the ashes being then spread
over the ground. It is a frequent practice merely to notch the
trees, and trust to the first gale of wind for levelling them. The
stumps are left in the soil, and many of the settlers allow them
to remain so for years, being satisfied with cultivating the inter-
vals. The first settlers broke up the ground with hoes, and
sowed wheat year after year. The richness of the soil may be
inferred from the circumstance that ten or fifteen crops of wheat
have been successively obtained. As in the United States, the
land, when thus exhausted, is left to itself, and new fields are
taken in. At present, however, ploughs drawn by bullocks are
in common use, and the most improved system of agriculture is
daily making progress over the settlement. The usual seed-
time is the beginning of September, and the harvest season is
from January to March. In this season the weather is gene-
rally fine, and many of the settlers thrash their corn in the open
air, beside the stacks. The usual mode of enclosure is by rail-
fences, although some farmers run a ditch along the fence to
prevent the spreading of the conflagration, which often extends
over miles in the bush, when the stock-keepers set fire to the
natural pasture.
Farm-houses are usually constructed of wood, and roofed
with shingles. Many, however, are built of brick, which in
most places can readily be made in the neighbourhood. Build-
ing of all kinds is very expensive. The houses of some of the
richer inhabitants are constructed of freestone; and, in time, the


Inhabitants of Hobart Town,
5700
Launceston,
1000
Settled districts and townships, .
. 13,000
Circular Head,
300
Macquarie Harbour, .....
300
Maria Island,
200
Total inhabitants,
20,500
Of whom are children under 10,
3,200
Male adults,
12,300
Female adults,
3000
Of the wretched Aborigines there are,
Adult males, ......
500
females,
70
Children,
30
buildings will be greatly improved, as there are abundant mate-
rials of good quality in the island, especially sandstone and slate,
of the latter of which none has as yet been worked.
Some attempts have been made at forming markets, at which
an abundant supply of excellent stock has been exhibited. Roads
have been made connecting all the principal settlements. These,
although not in the best condition, are sufficient for the present
state of the colony, and are daily receiving improvement. They
are made by chain-gangs, composed of convicts, who have been
returned by the settlers to government, as useless or unprofitable
servants, and of such as are confirmed drunkards, or otherwise
unmanageable. The bridges are usually of wood.
The colony was first located in 1804, and was for many years
a close port, there being no direct communication with England,
excepting for government vessels, all goods being received from
Sydney, of which Van Diemen’s Land was a penal settlement.
During the first years, therefore, no considerable progress was
made in peopling the country ; but, after the colony was de-
clared independent of New South Wales, and its capabilities
began to be known in England, free emigrants began to flock
to it. According to the Hobart Town Almanack, the popula-
tion, as computed for the Ist January 1880, was as follows:
Total in the woods, . 600
The country having, as already stated, been at first a penal
settlement, the basis of the population consisted of the refuse of


the vile, sent from New South Wales, of whom were formed
the gangs of bush-rangers which, from 1812 to 1826, infested
the colony, and of which some account may be, we can hardly
say gratifying, to our readers. 4 ‘ We entered,” says the editor
of the Hobart Town Almanack, “ the only hut at that time
upon the plain, the former scene of Michael Howe’s catastrophe.
We found in it a lonely woman, her husband being engaged
with the others among Mr Lord’s cattle, on the further side of
the Ouse. We seated ourselves a few minutes in the hut, inquir-
ing how she managed in so lonely a retreat. “ Nothing troubles
me,” said she, “ except sometimes when I awake at night, and
my cow comes to haunt me,” meaning Mike Howe, contracted
for Michael Howe. This renowned adventurer, as we learn
from Mr Widowson, in his Account of the Present State of
Van Diemen’s Land (1829), “ was a fellow who arrived in Ho-
bart Town, in October 1812, and shortly after went into the
bush, the gang then consisting of twenty-nine in number. In
May 1814, an amnesty was granted to those who would give
themselves up, with the exception of such as had been guilty of
murder. Howe accordingly availed himself of the conditions,
and surrendered, but very soon went off again, with an old
companion named Whitehead, who was the leader.” In April
1815, after they had committed various atrocities, a party of
nine persons was made up “ to attack the gang, which then con-
sisted of eight men, and a native girl of colour named Mary.
The pursuers found the gang close to a large hollow tree, from
which they fired with impunity upon the party,” wounding five,
of which two afterwards died. “ Military parties were now
sent after them, and many inhabitants armed themselves and
joined in the pursuit. A reward of fifty guineas was proclaimed
for the apprehension of any of the delinquents, and a like sum
to any one giving information of aiders or abettors. On the
10th of May following, the gang renewed their depredations,”
but were met by a party of the 46th, who fired upon them from
a house which they had attacked, and wounded Whitehead the
leader, who, on receiving the shot, ran after Howe into the
woods, and was immediately decapitated by him. The body
was gibbeted on Hunter’s Island. Howe now became leader.
Soon after two of the gang were taken and executed.


“ The gang, soon after this, was augmented to fourteen men
and two native women, but three of them w r ere shortly after
killed by a party of the 46th. In March 1817, the gang had
some suspicion that Howe meant to betray them. The latter
became aware of this and left them, accompanied by the black
girl. In April, whilst pursued near Jericho by a party of
troops, being hard pressed, and, in order to facilitate his own
escape, he bred at the poor black girl, who, from fatigue, was
unable to keep up with him. She, however, received but little
injury; and, together with Howe’s knapsack, gun, and dogs,
fell into the hands of the pursuers. This girl afterwards be-
came particularly useful as a guide to the military, from the
sagacity peculiar to the blacks in tracing footsteps where Eu-
ropeans would not suspect them.
“ After the loss of the girl and his accoutrements, Howe wrote
a letter to the governor, offering to give himself up, and to furnish
important information respecting his old associates, who, to the
number of twenty, under a man named Geary, were committing
the most outrageous atrocities.” The governor having promised
him his personal safety, he surrendered, and was lodged in
gaol; but no information was received from him, and he again
effected his escape. After this he went alone, and the gang was
gradually dispersed. A man named Watts, the leader of an-
other band, together with a stock-keeper, succeeded in capturing
Howe, who, however, contrived to kill both, as they were lead-
ing him to Hobart Town. At length a soldier, named Pugh,
and a stock-keeper of the name of Worrall, concerted a plan, by
which he was enticed to enter the hut of one Warburton, a kan-
garoo hunter, who had promised him ammunition. “As soon
as he entered, Howe cocked his loaded gun, upon which Pugh
immediately fired, but missed him. Howe exclaimed, “Oh !
that’s your game, is it ?” and instantly retreating a pace or two,
returned the fire, but also missed. Worrall now fired, but with
no better effect. Howe then rushed out, chased by the other
two, who gained upon and at length overtook him, when a dread-
ful combat ensued with the butt-end of their respective guns.
At last, overpowered by repeated blows on the head, Howe fell,
and expired without uttering a word.”
In 1825, a new gang committed great ravages, scouring the


country at a prodigious rate, and robbing houses, fifty and sixty
miles from each other, in the course of the same day ; but they
were all by degrees lodged in prison and executed.
A bush-ranger, previous to being hanged, confessed that he
had assisted in murdering eighty-one of his comrades. Another
confessed that he had committed thirteen capital olfences, and
broken out of gaol eight times.
Such were the bush-rangers. The country, however, is now
happily freed of them, and there is little probability that any
new gang will ever be permitted to run their career without
experiencing more formidable obstacles than even their prede-
cessors.
Until about 1819, the island remained a penal settlement;
but it has since received a large proportion of free emigrants, in
consequence of which the state of society has been greatly im-
proved. Respectable persons are daily arriving as merchants
or settlers, and the colony has been materially bettered by the
great number of convicts which have lately been sent out by the
government, most of which act in the capacity of servants to the
settlers. A serious inconvenience is produced by the want of
women, of which there is only about one for every four males.
In Hobart Town there is enough of friendly intercourse among
the better sort of people, who visit each other in regular form,
and have frequent parties, balls, and other amusements, But
little cordiality subsists between the inhabitants and the military
and civil officers. In fact, the people in general, find or fancy
reason to oppose themselves to most of the measures of govern-
ment, and a continual paper war is carried on between the two
parties. As in most new settlements, hospitality is freely ex-
tended to the traveller; and a stranger who arrives at the capi-
tal with letters of introduction from respectable persons, easily
gets acquainted with all the principal inhabitants. Notwith-
standing the abundance of eatables in Van Diemen’s Land, the
expenses of living in Hobart Town are very great. In the first
place, a house with not more than four small rooms and a kit-
chen, rents for sixty or eighty pounds a-year, while those of
better quality rent proportionally higher. Beef sells at from
4d. to Bd. the pound ; mutton at about half that price. Fowls
are 2s. 6d. the pair; a goose or turkey from 7s. to 10s.; and


eggs Is. 6d. the dozen. Batter sells at 2s. to 2s. Gd. the pound;
milk at 6d. per quart. Articles imported from England are, of
course, extravagantly high.
Hobart Town already occupies a space of upwards of a mile
square, and, comparing small things with great, is said to stand
on seven hills, like ancient Rome. The streets, which run at
right angles to each other, are macadamized, and the houses in
general respectable. Most of them are of wood, and have a
garden in front; but many are of brick or freestone, while,
others are built of rough stone, cemented with stucco. The
warehouses are large and substantial, and some of the public
buildings and churches sufficiently handsome. There are four
principal inns, and upwards of thirty licensed public-houses, be-
sides a multitude of grog-shops. In short, the capital of Tas-
mania is in every respect worthy of the honour conferred upon
it, although, as Mr Widowson says, its inhabitants are the most
mercenary set he ever met with, in their incessant levying of
contributions upon the stranger’s pocket.
Launceston, on the Tamar, 123 miles distant from Hobart
Town, is much inferior in size. The houses are mostly of wood,
and the streets kept in a bad state of repair. The situation,
however, is highly favourable to commerce, and part of the
neighbouring country is of the finest description. There is no
other town of any importance, and it is unnecessary to enter
upon any description of particular farms or districts
Since December 1825, when the colony was proclaimed inde-
pendent of New South Wales, the administration is conducted
by a Governor, who resides at Hobart Town, assisted by various
civil and military officers. The executive council consists of the
Chief Justice, the Colonial Secretary, and the Police Magistrate,
with the Governor as president. On all important occasions, the
Governor is obliged to have recourse to the advice of this body,
which, however, he may reject, should he consider it expedient
so to do. The legislative council consists of fifteen members,
some of which are usually members of the executive council also.
The supreme court, having civil, criminal, and ecclesiastical juris-
diction, consists of the Chief-Justice, Attorney-General, Solicitor-
General, and other officers. There are various other courts, and
a long roll of justices of the peace and police officers. In 1829,
VOL. in. no. xiv. z


the military force consisted of 2 field officers, 29 commissioned
officers, 74 non-commissioned, 11 drummers, and 711 privates.
There is a regular post-office establishment. The scale of
postage is 3d. for a single letter, a distance not exceeding ten
miles, and Is. for 100 miles. Colonial newspapers are free.
No opportunity is neglected of forwarding letters to Europe,
every vessel which leaves the port of Hobart Town or Launces-
ton being, by a late act of council, compelled to take mails. The
inland mail leaves Hobart Town, on horseback, every Saturday
morning, and arrives at Greenponds, distant 29 miles, about 10,
letters being left at all parts of the road whither they are di-
rected. From Greenponds, the mails proceed on foot, by a se-
cond messenger, who arrives at Sorrel Springs, 58 miles from
Hobart Town, about Bin the evening. A third messenger, who
relieves the former, carries the mails to Launceston, 124 miles
from Hobart Town, where he usually arrives about 8 on Sun-
day evening. Branch messengers proceed in various directions
from the general route. The return post leaves Launceston
early on Tuesday, and the mall arrives at Hobart Town on
Wednesday evening. Messengers are also dispatched to New
Norfolk, Pittwater, Oyster Bay, and other located districts.
There are four banks in Van Diemen’s Land. Of public in-
stitutions may be mentioned the Van Diemen’s Land Society,
instituted for the publication of scientific information, and the
establishment of a museum and botanic garden, a mechanics’
institution, several religious and benevolent societies, and four
libraries.
Besides the King’s Schools, to which are admitted children
who are entirely destitute, or who have only one parent living,
or whose parents are unable to afford them education, or whose
parents pay for their maintenance and education the sura of
L. 12 per annum, there is a considerable number of establish-
ments for the instruction of youth at Hobart Town, New Nor-
folk, Norfolk Plains, Launceston, Coal River, &c.
If the number of periodical works circulated in a country be,
as some allege, a criterion of the degree of civilization to which
it has attained, Van Diemen’s Land must rank high, for it can
boast of not less than eight: the Hobart Town Gazette, devo-
ted to the promulgation of government orders, proclamations,


&c.; the Colonial Times, the Tasmanian and Austral-Asiatic
Review, the Hobart Town Courier, the Launceston Advertiser,
all weekly papers; the Hobart Town Almanack, the Hobart
Town Sheet Calendar, and the Austral-Asiatic Sheet Almanack.
There are as yet few manufactures in the colony. In Maria
Island, coarse woollen cloth for the prisoners has been manufac-
tured to a considerable extent. Several breweries have been
established at Hobart Town, Launceston, and other places.
Wine has also been made in small quantity. Glue and
ment, hats, salt, barilla, soap, coarse earthen-ware, and bricks,
are the chief of the other manufactured articles.
The imports consist of iron goods, woollens, piece goods,
malt liquors, spirits, wine, tea, tobacco, agricultural implements,
furniture, paper, and numberless other articles. At the port of
Hobart Town, the imports for one year, ending the 30th Sep-
tember 1829, were L. 259,186. The exports for the same pe-
riod amounted to L. 101,069.
The articles exported from Van Diemen’s Land to Sydney,
Rio de Janeiro, the Cape of Good Hope, the Isle of France,
and Great Britain, are, wool, wheat, flour, potatoes, oil, seal-
skins, hides, bark, cured meat, hams, barilla, sheep, and cattle.
Wool, which has become a staple commodity, is largely export-
ed to England. The wheat, which is of very superior quality,
is exported chiefly to Rio de Janeiro and Sydney; to the latter
of which places potatoes, hay, and other articles of agricultural
produce are also sent in considerable quantities.
Having now presented an outline of the state of this import-
ant colony, we proceed to offer some remarks which may be
useful to persons intending to emigrate to it.
The principal articles which a settler requires to carry with
him for farming and domestic use, are, iron-work of ploughs,
harrows, and carts, saws of various kinds, wedges, axes, timber-
chains, bullock-chains, splitting knives, spades, shovels, potato
and garden hoes, rakes, sickles, scythes, sheep-shears, carpen-
ters’ tools, hinges, locks, nails, iron-pots, pans, tea-kettles, scales
and weights, tin dishes, knives, looking-glasses, window-glass,
hats, gloves, soap, paper, brushes, guns, pistols, powder, shot,
and a selection of useful books, one of which, if he be a Scotch-
man, will of course be the Bible.


Should a person be desirous of investing part of his money in
goods, the articles which are most in demand in the colony are,
shirts, stockings, gloves, strong jackets and trowsers, ribbons,
lace, millinery; axes, saws, spades, cutlery, tea-kettles, iron,
earthen-ware, stationery-ware, tobacco, and rum.
All articles should be packed as closely as possible, to save
freight. Large vessels are preferable to small, on account of
their superior accommodations. The usual rates of passage are
about eighty guineas for the cabin, and forty for the steerage.
The best time for embarking is from the middle of spring to
that of summer; and as the voyage lasts four or five months,
the settler arrives in spring, when he has fine weather to look
about him, and time to prepare a habitation before the winter.
On arriving, he addresses himself to the Surveyor-general,
who furnishes the established form of application to the gover-
nor, for which he pays 2s. 6d.; the Governor being satisfied of
the respectability of the applicant, instructs the Colonial Secreta-
ry to furnish him with a letter to the Land Board, that the
amount of capital which he can command may be ascertained.
All live stock, and agricultural implements, are considered as
capital, as well as any government half-pay or pension. The
Governor being informed of the amount of capital, the applicant
is furnished with a land order, addressed to the Survey or-gene-
ral. A map of the colony is exhibited, and information furnish-
ed, in the Surveyor-general’s office. The applicant having made
a selection, apprizes the. Surveyor-general by letter, who in-
forms the Governor, when an order is issued to take possession of
the land. Should the applicant neglect to take possession of the
land within four months from the date of the written authority,
all that has passed is annulled, and he must renew his applica-
tion. Land thus disposed of without purchase, is granted in
fee-simple, and held in fee and common socage, on payment
of a quit rent ol L. 5 per cent, per annum, on the value of the
land. The quit-rent does not become payable till the end of
seven years, and may be redeemed at twenty years’ purchase.
Although the ordinary period for issuing the grant is at the ex-
piration of seven years, yet should proof be adduced, after one
year of actual occupation, that a sum equal to the value of the
land has been expended upon it, the settler has an immediate


right to receive his title-deeds. Lands are granted in die pro-
portion of one square mile, or 640 acres, for every L. 500 of
capital, up to four square miles, or 2560 acres, which is the
largest grant that is made without purchase, the smallest being
320 acres.
Persons desirous of obtaining land by purchase, address them-
selves to the Surveyor-general, in a prescribed form, which is
obtained at his office, on paying 2s. 6d. The lands selected by
individuals who have obtained leave to purchase, after being
surveyed and valued, are put up for sale. Sealed tenders are
addressed to the Colonial Secretary, and at the end of a month
after the land has been put up for sale, the tenders are opened,
and the land disposed of to the highest bidder. The purchaser
may pay the whole purchase-money at the time of sale, in which
case he has a discount of 10 per cent.; or he may pay 10 per
cent, on the purchase-money, and the rest by four half-yearly
instalments; or he may pay 10 per cent, on the purchase-money,
and one moiety of the residue by two half-yearly instalments,
upon which he receives the plenary title-deeds of the land con-
veyed in fee-simple, on his lodging in the hands of government
a maiden mortgage on the land, as a security for the payment
of the other half of the purchase-money.
Individuals of respectability may also rent land of the crown
from year to year. In this case no tenders are accepted at a
lower rate than twenty shillings per annum for 100 acres, and,
in general, no smaller tract than 500 acres is leased. Should
the government require the land at any time, the tenant must
resign it after three months’ notice.
It has already been mentioned, that convicts are given out or
assigned to settlers, as servants, the desired number being ob-
tained on application to the superintendent at Hobart Town.
But free servants from Britain, although more expensive, are,
of course, more to be depended upon. The necessary prepara-
tions, such as the purchase of carts, bullocks, and provisions,
being made by the settler, he sets out upon his journey, and
arrives upon his grant, where, having set him down, we must
leave him to labour as diligently as he can, in clearing a portion
of ground for corn, felling trees, erecting a log hut, and endea-
vouring to meet the wet season with as impenetrable a front as
possible.


Much valuable information on all subjects connected with
emigration to this colony, will be found in Evan’s Geographical,
Historical, and Topographical Description of Van Diemen s
Land, London, 1822; in Widowson’s Present State of Van
Diemen’s Land, London, 1829 ; and in the Hobart Town Al-
manack ; to which, among various other sources, we are indebt-
ed for much of the statements made in the foregoing pages.
Until the Government shall afford assistance to emigrants, it
is obvious that the poor, who would be most benefited by re-
moval, cannot betake themselves to Van Diemen’s Land. Surely,
when vast sums have been expended on useless expeditions, and
on institutions which have never fulfilled the objects contem-
plated by their founders, it were hard to refuse to the half-
starved artisan and peasant, the pittance that would transport
them to a land where the exercise of their energies would afford
them abundant means of subsistence. Those in comfortable
circumstances at home, we would advise to remain where they
are, for nowhere else can they enjoy the advantages to be found
in their native country, notwithstanding the fickle and some-
times stormy character of its physical and political atmosphere.
But the man who can muster a few hundreds, and who is fond
of agricultural pursuits and rural pleasures, will find in Tasma-
nia, that the labour of a few years will render him tolerably in-
dependent and comfortable, and enable him to transmit to his
family an estate sufficient for the subsistence of many genera-
tions. Young men of good character, and well recommended,
however little money they may have on arriving, are sure of
finding abundant and profitable employment; and the exporta-
tion of five or six thousand spinsters, good, bad, and indifferent,
would confer an essential benefit on the country and the colony.
We have now finished our remarks on the interesting and
prosperous colony of Van Diemen’s Land, which may be geo-
graphically considered as a portion of the great region of Aus-
tralia. The continent itself, which, with its vast forests and
grassy plains, its long ranges of rugged mountains, its rich allu-
vial valleys, its numberless streams, diversified climates, and all
the treasures of its unexplored mineral constitution, has received
but a sprinkling of European population on a few points of its
extended coast, will furnish a more fertile subject, to which we
shall, on a future occasion, direct the attention of our readers.




