









THE
BRITISH MAGAZINE
3VI O NTHLY RE(MSTER
RELIGIOUS AND ECCLESIASTICAL
INFORMATION,
m§TC§mY,
AND
DOCUMENTS RESPECTING THE STATE OF THE POOR,
PROGRESS OF EDUCATION, &c.
— :j, - ~ -x
VOL. I.
■
LONDON:
JOHN TURRILL, 250, REGENT STREET.
M DCCC XXXII.
[entered at stationers’ hall.}




CONTENTS OF VOL. 1.
ORIGINAL PAPERS:— J>Hge
Editor’s Address 1
On certain Consistencies observable in
the Gospel History 10, 109, 534
Reflections on the Occasional Services of
the Church of England :—The Or-
der of the Burial of the Dead ... 16, 122
On the Precedent for Church Spoliation
afforded by the Reformation 21
Fourme of the Order for the Generali
Fast (1563) 33
The Home Missionary Society 105
Matthew Thorndike 1] 7 223
Spherical Sounding Board (with Eng.) ’ 125
On the Combinations to resist Tithes”... 126
Roman Catholic Abuse of Tithes 129
On the Present State of Dissent 209
On the Comparative Importance of the
Sermon and the Prayers 218
Directions for Behaviour at Church ... 228
Translation of Maimonides 229
On the Principles of Dissent 813, 425
Memoir of Wm. Hales, D.D. ...321, 432, 553
Irish Tithes—and the Candid Statements
of the Roman Catholics 328
Specimens of the Style and Temper oif the
First-rate Assailants of the Church 439
s* A few Thoughts upon Sacred Poetry ... 450
Parabolic Sounding Boards (with Engs.) 457
On the Use of Scripture Terms 529
Church Architecture 546
Parish Churches:
No.I. Preston, Sussex (with Eng.) . 28
No. 11. Alderington, near Brighton
(with an Engraving). 130
No. 111. Hodnet, Shropshire—Bishop
Heber’s—(with an Engraving) ... 330
No. IV. Poynings, Sussex (with Eng.) 444
No. V. St. Budeaux, Devon (with an
Engraving) 541
NOTICES OF THE OLDEN TIME:
Extracts from Buxted Register 35
The Horse Market in St. Paul’s 133
Pepys’Memoirs 230
Extracts from South 231
Extracts from Johan Harryson’s “Yet a
•* Course at the Romish Fox” ... 335, 659
Evelyn’s Conversation with the Arch-
bishop on Church Abuses 338
Heylyn’s Character of the Puritans 338
Preamble of an Act, 17 Charles 11, c. 2,
for the Union of Churches 338
Transcript from the Parish Register of
Poynings 459
Residence of Clergy—Dimensions of a
Residence House—Consecration of
Burying Ground, &c 460
SACRED POETRY 133, 233,* 339
CORRESPONDENCE 46 °’ 560
Letter to Editor on Church Revenues... 140
Clerical Justices " 246
Address of the Clergy of’Derby 147
Reparation of St. Alban’s Abbey (with
an Engraving) 234
On the Observance of the Sabbath".’.'.’.’.' 236
On the Revival of the Convocation 241
On Letting Land to the Poor 244
Letters from Dr. Burton 341 434
John the Baptist " ’ o 4 k
On the Burial Service 343
Mr. Soames on the Quadripartite or Tri-
partite Divisions of Tithes oko
On Pluralities 355
L acts connected with Church Emolument 358
Letter from a Tithe-holder 462
An Apparent Contradiction in the Burial
The !r™..;—«•
The Law respecting Dilapidations 469
On the Means of Encouraging Attend-
ance at Worship 47q
Benefits of Episcopacy in the West Indies 472
Experiment for enabling Labouring Poor
to Brew at home 472
Suggestions for ameliorating Agricultural
Distress 470
“Nullum Tempus” Bill !!!!!!"!!!”" 477
On Penny Clothing C1ub5.....!".!!!""”), 477
Observations on the Pentateuch 561
Influence of the Name of Cyrus 564
Remarks on a Passage in the Volume of
Sermons lately published by the Bi-
shop of Chichester 56g
On Letting out Small Portions of Land
to the Poor 569
On the Circular of “ The Committee of
General Literature and Education
appointed by the Society for Pro-
moting Christian Knowledge” 571
On the Burial and other Occasional Ser-
vices of the Church of England ... 573
On the Narrowness of Pews !!! 575
On National School Lending Libraries . 676
NOTICES AND REVIEWS:—
Inaugural Address at the Chichester Li-
terary Society, by the very Rev. G.
Chandler, Dean of Chichester 37
Sir H. Davy’s Consolations in Travel... 38
Christian Missions—Shoberl’s Present
State of Christianity—Dr. Croly’s
Sermon at Northfleet 40
Life of Thomas Ken, D.D !!!!!!!! 148
Lives of British Divines


The Latest Heresy—Cliristus Crucifixus
—Letter to Sir T. Baring-—Essay
on Division of Tithes—On Clerical
Education Apocalyptic Churches
153—165
Sermons by the Rev. Edward Burton ... 245
Dr. Gleig’s Farewell Sermon 247
Oxford : a Poem 248
Terrot’s Biblical Cabinet 260
The New Testament, with a Commentary 251
Suggestions for improving the Condition
of the Industrious Classes 252
Scenes in our Parish 869
Tennemann’s Manual of the History of
Philosophy 371
Rectory of Valehead 371
History and Descriptive Account of Bri-
tish India 372, 582
The Mutual Recognition and Exalted
Felicity of Glorified Saints 372
Poems; St. John in Patmos—Gospel
Miracles—The Immortality of the
Soul—The Pleasures of Religion ... 373
The Christian’s Family Library. Part I. 376
Rev. T. Dale’s Discourses before the
University of Cambridge 376
Records of a Good Man’s Life 377
Girdlestone’s Parochial Sermons & Papers 480
Short’s Sketch of the History of the
Church of England 480
Hall's Sermon at Tenbury, on the Gene-
ral Fast-day 482
Fowle’s Assize Sermon at Salisbury—
Bennett’s Sermon at Trinity Church,
Marylebone Ackland’s Discourse
upon the Times—D’Arblay’s Apos-
tolic Gift of Tongues 483
Cattermole’s Sermons 483
Tiptaft’s Letter to the Bp. of Salisbury. 484
Palmer’s Origines Liturgicse 484
Sewell’s Parochial Sermons 486
Jones’s Claims of Religion urged, &c. ... 488
Stonard’s Discourses on the Evidences of
the Christian Religion 489
Liddiard’s Three Months’ Tour in Swit-
zerland and France 489
Faber’s Apostolicity of Trinitarianism ... 490
Shuttleworth’s Consistency of Revelation 491
The Messiah, a Poem; by R. Montgomery 577
The Remains of William Phelan, D.D. 678
Rebecca, a Poem; by Rev. A. G. H.
Hollingsworth, A.M 680
Dr. Evans’s Sermons 581
Dr. Doddridge’s Devotional Letters 681
Rev. R. W. Evans’s Sermons 681
Memoir of Felix Neff. 682
Ainger’s Parochial Sermons 582
Parkinson’s Sermons 582
Account of the Nature, Use, and End of
the Office of Dean Rural; by J.
Priaulx, D.D 583
Dr. Wilkins’s Charge 683
The Invalid’s Help; by Rev. E. P.
Hannam 583
Letter to Lord Ebrington 583
Dr. Chandler’s Charge 583
Pictorial History of the Bible—Parts 1.,
11., and 111 584
REPORTS OF MEETINGS, &c. :
Scriptural Education in Ireland 42, 158
Appeal of the Protestants in Ireland ... 51
Temperance Society 64
Report of Commissioners of Inquiry
into Ecclesiastical Courts 155
Labourers’ Friend Society 161
Schools under the Establishment 162
Society for Promoting the due Observ-
ance of the Lord’s Day 254
Incorporated Clergy Orphan Society ... 255
Mrs. Ashton’s Charity 257
National Society for the Education of the
Poor, &c 258, 382, 416, 496, 584
Diocesan and County Committees of the
National School Society 259
The King’s School, Canterbury 259
British and Foreign Bible Society 378
Naval and Military Bible Society 378, 589
Church Missionary Society 379
Mendicity Society 380
Society for the Suppression of Vice 381 i
Sunday School Union Society 382
Festival of the Sons of the Clergy 415
Clergy Orphan Society 416
Society for the Promotion of Christian
Knowledge 416
Prayer Book and Homily Society 416
St Ann’s Society Schools 416
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals 416
London Itinerant Society 417
Society for the Propagation of the Gos-
pel in Foreign Parts 417
St. Paul’s School 417
Philological School 417
British and Foreign School Society... 492, 589
British and Foreign Temperance Society 493
Reformation Society 495, 689 Jk
Governess Mutual Assurance Society ... 495
Capital Punishments 496
Church Building Society 684
The Poor Law Commission 585
Declaration of the Board of National
Education.—(lreland.) 586
Clergy Mutual Assurance Society 687
City of London National Schools 693
Society for the Suppression of Juvenile
Vagrancy 593
London Female Penitentiary 594
TRIALS:
The King v. Rev. P. N. Joddrell Clerk. 57
Southall v. Lynes 165
Lambert v. Fisher 170
The Attorney-General v. M‘Lean, Bart. 170
The King, on the Prosecution of the
Bishop of Exeter, v. Coulton 171
Tufnell v. the Colchester Gazette 172
Wise v. Metcalfe 261
Prescott and others v. Masters 264
Vaux v. Yollans 265
Ellis v. 266
Hon. and Rev. W. R. Capel v. Child
and Bruton 883, 497
Rev. Dr. Grey and the Parishioners of
Bishopsgate 386


Page p
Henry Malden v. the Churchwardens of Abstract of the Bill to Restrain and Re- b
Soham 387 gulate the Holding of Pluralities 398
Thompson v. Bearblock and Bearblock . 387 The Church of Ireland 399
Parish of St. Mary, Lambeth 498 Statistics of Sedgley and WhitwVck!!!!.’’ 502
On the Indelibility of Clerical Orders ... 499 Commutation of Tithes for Land 602
Farnworth Church.—J. Rothwell v. R. Glebes of Clergy 503
Seddon and J. Haworth 594 j Copies of Returns made to the Commis-
Austen v. Allen 695 ; sioners of Poor’s Law 504
Pakenham Tithes. Casbourne v. Report of the Commissioners for Build-
Chandler 597 ing New Churches 509
Second Report of the Tithe Inquiry
DOCUMENTS:— Committee 310
Facts respecting the Church of England i The Cottage Allotment System 510
and her Revenues 60 University of Durham 593
State of the Diocese of Peterborough 64 Account of Receipts and Expenditure on
State of the Diocese of Durham ...... 66 the Repairs of Ruthin School 601
Emigrants—Amount of Poor Rates— i Fourfold Division of Tithes—Dr. New-
Araerican Land Company—Justices | land’s Work 602
of the Peace 66 Beer Act Amendment Bill 605
Information published by the Commis- 1 Building of Churches 606
missioncrs for Emigration 66 Important Information to Emigrants ... 607
Summary of Savings Banks, &c. in Eng- Mr. Sadler’s Bill to Regulate the Labour
land, Wales, and Ireland 72 . °f Children in Mills and Factories . 608
Augmentation Act 73 j Tithes in Ireland 609
Glebes 172 Statistics of Crime .] 610
Amount of Livings 173 Cruelty to Animals 611
Petition to House of Lords from Pet- Statement respecting the Irish Church . 611
worth, Sussex 174 Van Diemen’s Land Company (with
Information to Persons emigrating 173 Engravings) 612
Parish Accounts of Petworth 177
Documents respecting Ireland 178 1
Education in the Agricultural Districts. 183 Ecclesiastical Intelligence: —Ordi-
Christians in Maine-America, &c 183 nations, Clerical Appointments, Pre-
New Vestry Act 266 ferments, Clergy Deceased, &c. ...81, 185
National Society 268 289, 401, 511, 617
i&tak7i-EiSS=i 273 u * n '“ OTrrw -«“*«*•620
Society for more Bishops in India., 273 Births, Marriages, and Deaths 86 191
Documents on Ireland 277 oqa ait mq’gog
Scriptural Education in Ireland 281 i ’ ’ ’ "
Statement of Criminals committed for Obituary gg ) jgg
Trial, in England and Wales, during „,
the last three years 282 Events of the Month ... 91, 194, 299, 412
Ditto in Scotland, during the last 7 years 284 320, 627
Ditto in Ireland, ditto 285 Science 204 309
Emigration 287, 388 ~ t,
Home Missionary Society 288 4VEW Books 99, 204, 310, 423, 327, 637
Irish Unions 389 Miscellaneous Intelligence 101 205
Letter of N. C. on Parochial Taxes, &c. 394 310 40)’ 503’ 633
N.


errata.
Page 321, line 30, for Kingston read Kingston.
Page 325, line 21, for too read so.
Page 327, line 3, for building read build.
Page 397, line 9 of the note, for Baker read Bairns.
\
x.


Ossory.. |
In Compounded Parishes .. .
In Uncompounded ditto . . .
. . . £14,345
... 10,130
24,473
Leighlin |
In Compounded Parishes .. .
In Uncompounded ditto . . .
. . . 18,092
2,700
20,792
Ferns ..
Kildare. .
Supposed to be about
Ditto
7,000
5,300
Total
That “ the ceiling and walls of mills and factories shall be whitewashed
every year.”
That “ the ceiling shall be of [ ] height.”
That offenders against this Act " shall forfeit a sum not exceeding 20 1., nor
less than 10/.”
“ Only one penalty shall be recoverable in one day.”
TITHES IN IRELAND.
REPORT BROUGHT FROM THE LORDS TO THE COMMONS.
By the Lords’ Committee appointed a Select Committee to inquire into the
Collection and Payment of Tithes in Ireland, and the state of the Laws
relating thereto ; and to report their observations thereon to the House;
and to whom were referred certain Petitions, and Papers, and Accounts
upon the Subject Matter referred to the Committee ordered to report:—
That the Committee have proceeded to examine into the subject which has
been referred to them; and although they have not yet been able to bring
their inquiries to a close, they think it their duty not to defer laying before
the House their opinion on parts of the evidence which has been brought before
them, and on circumstances which call for the immediate attention of the
legislature. A resistance, more or less decided, to the payment of tithe
appears to have been made in several parts of Ireland, but more particularly in
the counties of Kilkenny, Carlow, and Tipperary, and a portion of the Queen’s
County, and supported by means of organised, illegal, and in some instances
armed combina.tion, the danger of which is increased by the peculiar circum-
stances of Ireland ; but which, from whatever cause they may arise, if allowed
to continue, and to extend themselves successfully to other districts, cannot fail
to be applied to other objects, and ultimately to subvert the dominion of the
law, and endanger the peace and security of society.
It appears that the consequence of these proceedings has been, that, in the
districts where resistance has been made to the payment of tithes, the clergy
have in many instances been reduced to the greatest distress.
The estimated amounts in the districts where this resistance has chiefly
prevailed, according to information laid before the committee, of sums due for
the tithe, are, in the dioceses of
, , r In 113 Compounded Parishes .. 23,490
J In 25 Uncompounded ditto, on
P . | an average of those which have
L been compounded 4,197
27,687
It appears to the committee, that, in order to afford immediate relief to the
distressed clergy, it is expedient that his Majesty should be empowered to
advance to the Incumbent, where tithes have been illegally withheld, or to
his representatives, upon a petition verified by affidavit, sums not exceeding
the amount of the arrears due for the tithes of the year 1831, proportioned
August, 1832. 4 I


to the incomes o) each according to a scale diminishing as their incomes
increase.
ihat as a security for the repayment of the sums so to be advanced, his
Majesty shall be empowered to issue orders to levy, under the authority of a
law to be passed for this purpose, the amount of arrears due for the tithes of
(.he year 1831, without prejudice to the claims of the clergy for any arrear
tnat may be due for a longer period, reserving in the first instance the amount
of the advances so made, and paydng over the remaining balance to the legal
claimant.
That where the tithes claimed by the party petitioning shall be under the
operation of the Composition Acts, the amount to be advanced shall be regu-
lated by such composition, where the amount of tithe shall have been
regulated by? such agreement; and in all other cases by the average amount of
the tithes, which have been really? and bona fide paid or secured to the incum-
bent of such parish for the years 1827, 1828, and 1829.
1 hat in order to the more effectually levying the amount of the sums so to
>0 advanced, it shall be lawful for the Attorney-General to proceed, either by
petition to the Court of Chancery or of Exchequer, or by civil bill at the
quarter sessions of the county in which the parish or part of the parish of such
incumbent is situated, against all or any of the parties from whom such
arrear shall be claimed as due by such incumbent; and that the said courts
lespectively issue process for the recovery of the sums to be by them awarded,
conformably to the provisions to be inserted in such Act of Parliament,
and similar to those contained in several Acts of Parliament of Ireland in the
years 1787, 1/88, 1799, and 1800, with such additions and alterations as may
be thought fit to be introduced into such Act, as adapted to the circumstances
now existing in Ireland.
Pmt strongly as the committee are impressed with the necessity of main-
taining the authority? of the law, and relieving the pressing wants the clergy
are suffering from a breach of it, they have anxiously turned their attention to
the practicability of effecting an useful alteration in the present sy?stera; and
although the inquiry in which they are engaged is not sufficiently advanced
to enable them to pronounce a distinct opinion as to the best means of re-
moving the evils connected with the collection of tithes in Ireland, enough has
appeared to satisfy? them that with a view to secure both the interests of the
church and the lasting welfare of that country, a permanent change of system
rvi ,c requited. Ihat such a change, to be satisfactory and safe, must
involve a complete extinction of tithes, including those belonging to lay
impropriators, by? commuting them for a charge upon land, or any exchange
for or investment of land, so as effectually to secure the revenues of the
church as far as relates to tithes, and at the same time to remove all pecu-
niary collision between the parochial clergy and the occupiers of land.
STATISTICS OF CRIME.
7 TYr N i the , ast twent Y' one years the number of commitments in England
and Wales has been, males. 224,152; females, 46,522; total, 270,674? In
1811, the number of commitments was 5,337; in 1816, POOI-’in 1821
13,115; m 1826 16,164; and in 1832, 19,647 ; exhibiting a progressive in-
crease of about the same ratio in each period of five years ; between the first
y?ear and the last, crime, as evidenced by? the commitments, has increased
nearly 400 per cent The number of convictions in the seven years ending
acf l mtted ’ l1 ’ 762 ’ no bills found, 9,287; total commitments,
56,308 ; of these, 4,902 were sentenced to death ; executed, 584, about one in
nine. In the seven years ending 1824, convictions, 62,412 ; acquitted, 17,708-
7°oaQ ILS foUl ! d 'i ?H 28 ; - total commitm ents, 92,848; sentenced to death!
7,288 ; executed, 628, one in 13. In the seven years ending 1831, convictions.


85,251 ; acquitted, 23,442 ; no bills, 12,819 ; total commitments, 121,518 ; sen-
tenced to death, 8316 ; executed, 410, about one in 23. In the seven years ending
1817, there were executed for forgery, 101 ; the seven yearsending in 1826, 55 ;
and the seven years ending in 1831, the number was only 17 out of 218 convic-
tions. The convictions for murder have also decreased. In the first period
there was 151. In the second, 122; executed, 104. In the third, 100;
executed 87-
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS,
Mr. Mackinnon’s Bill to prevent the improper treatment of animals repeals
the *2 lst George 111,, cap 67, and the 3rd George IV., cap. 7L and enacts that
if any person shall wantonly or cruelly beat, abuse, torture, ill-treat, or keep
without sufficient food, any cattle or domestic animal, or shall otherwise ill-
treat, or drive or convey ’ [?] in any waggon or other conveyance, so as to
cause unnecessary pain to any such animal; or shall pelt with stones, beat,
or drive, or hunt away, or set dogs at any such cattle; every offender shall
forfeit for the first offence a sum not exceeding 40s. nor less than 10s.; and for
the second offence be imprisoned for not less than two nor more than three
months. Constables and peace officers may seize offenders, and take them
before a magistrate. Magistrates may make by-laws similar to those of Lon-
don, for the regulation of the markets, number and badges of the drovers, &c.
All slaughter-houses, knackers’ yards, and such other places, shall be licensed
annually by the magistrates, registered, and open to the inspection of consta-
bles or inspectors; and any respectable individual, having obtained a magis-
trate’s permission in writing, may, at seasonable hours, visit such places to
prevent and report any cases of cruelty. The words " Licensed for slaughter-
ing Cattle,” or " Knacker’s Yard,” to be placed over the door, under a certain
penalty; the owner to be responsible if the tenant cannot be found. The
vestry in any parish is empowered to appoint inspectors of slaughter-houses,
who are to ascertain and report if any unnecessary cruelty is exercised, and
if the animals are in a healthy state, fit for the food of man. The inspectors
to be paid out of the poor -rate. A penalty not exceeding 5 1. nor less than 40s.
is imposed on persons keeping pits for baiting dogs, bears, or other animals.
STATEMENT RESPECTING THE IRISH CHURCH.
From Mr. Lefroy’s Speech on the Irish Tithe Question in the House of Commons,
on Friday, the 1 3th instant.
Mr. Lefroy concurred in the sentiments expressed by the noble Lord, and
was rejoiced to see him meet, as he had done, the resolutions of the Hon.
and Learned xMember for Kerry—resolutions which were indicative of nothing
less than the spoliation of the Church. (Hear, hear.) He should be glad,
however, if the noble Lord had expressed himself with more distinctness on
this point (Hear, hear.) The Noble Lord had said that the Church of Ire-
land was too large. If by this he meant to say, that there should be a more
equal and proper distribution of the property of the church amongst the
clergy of the church, he should not object to such a proposition ; but if the
Noble Lord meant the observation as an echo of what had fallen from the Hon.
and Learned Member for Kerry, with a view to the diversion of church pro-
perty to any other purpose, then he must protest against such a. doctrine. (Hear,
hear ) He felt convinced, however, that the Noble Lord, with his usual can-
dour’ would have stated the fact, had such been his object. The number of
benefices in Ireland was 1244 or 1252 ; but taking it at 1252, and the num-
ber of Protestants at 1,269,288, he found that this proportion gave to each
benefice a congregation of 1000 ; and it was proved that the average income
of the several benefices was not more than per annum. He would as


them whether that was beyond what was just and reasonable. He admitted
that, in the distribution of the revenues of the church within itself, there was
an unjust inequality ; but the question now before the House did not relate
to that inequality. Whenever that question should come fully before the
Legislature, it would be easy to adopt a regulation which would render the
distribution of church property, he would not say equal, but just and reason-
able. Within the last twenty-one years, there was an increase of 697 resi-
dent clergymen in Ireland. The Hon. Member for Kerry was not borne out
in the assertion, that there were large livings in Ireland in which there was
not a single Protestant. Though there might be parishes in Ireland, in which
there were few or no Protestants, still those parishes were only parcels of
unions, in which there was a numerous Protestant population. The Hon. Member
for Kerry said, that all he wanted was, to abolish tithes without interfering with
vested interests; but what did the Hon. and Learned Member mean by vested
interests ? They were not for the life of the existing incumbent alone, but also
for the lives of his successors. (Cheers from the ministerial side.) He was
not surprised at these cheers, proceeding, as thev r did, from persons whose ears
were familiar with the cry ot “Down with the Church”—from persons whose
correspondents from Ireland supplied them with scarcely any other informa-
tion than that relating to the growing power of conspiracies and combinations
against the Established Church of Ireland. After the oath which Catholics
had taken on coming into Parliament, and after the evidence which the Hon.
and Learned Member for Kerry had given before the committee in 1826, he
was astonished how that Hon. Member could now come forward and urge an
amendment, the object of which was to transfer to Roman Catholic institu-
tions the whole property of the Established Church. The Hon. and Learned
Member proposed a tax in proportion to the value of the land; but this propo-
sition differed in no respect from the Tithe Composition Act.
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND COMPANY.
(From History of Van Diemen's Land.)
The subject of emigration bas of late been much under the consideration of his Majesty’s
Government. It is one of considerable difficulty, and the documents respecting crown lands
and emigration, which have been printed by order of the House of Commons, dated the 13th
October last, shew the anxiety of the Colonial Department to meet the difficulties, and to devise
such measures as will best and most effectually promote this important object.
Extensive surveys have been ordered in the Australian colonies, and the territories are to
be divided into counties, which are to be forty miles square, to be apportioned each county
into hundreds, each of which shall comprise an area of 100 square miles, and those sub-
divided into parishes to comprise an area of twenty-live square miles, having' regard to divisions
by natural boundaries, formed by rivers, streams,'or highlands.
V hen these surveys are made, lists of parishes and charts are to be prepared and exhibited,
and the lands therein are to be put up for sale from time to time ; the highest bidding to be
accepted, provided it should at least amount to five shillings per acre; ten per cent, deposit is
to be made; and the balance paid within one calendar month; the lots to be put up tor sale
to comprise 640 acres at least. Such are the plans devised for encouraging capitalists to go
out to these colonies; and with a view to supply them with labourers, as well as to relieve the
counties in the south of England, supposed to be over-populous, and to place agricultural
labourers in usefulness and comfort on their arrival, several measures are proposed.
A tax is recommended to be laid in the colonies on convict labour, which tax is to be
extended to those convicts who have tickets of leave ; a fund is to be raised from the sale of
land, which will be applicable to the expenses of sending emigrants ; the labourers so sent out
are to be hired for a stated period, not more than seven years, and during that time one-
fourth ot the wages they receive is to be paid to Government, till the advance made for
defraying tue cost of their passage is paid, when, of course, such payment will cease; and last,
an abatement in the purchase or redemption of quit-rents, now payable, is suggested, upon the
principle adopted with the Van Diemen’s Land Company for taking out a limited number of
free emigrants in 1827, which was a remission of twenty pounds for each woman and sixteen
pounds for each man then sent by the Company.
Such are the plans proposed to encourage emigration. But his Majesty’s Government have
paid moie paiticular attention to induce the emigration of females, and it would be impossible


to devise any measure more important to the Australian colonies than to afford assistance to
the emigration of young and respectable women ; and it would be equally beneficial to the
voung women themselves, for whether in domestic employment, or in those portions of vvoik
in fiekl husbandry and the management of dairies, to which they are fat, there is abundance o
Ul The estimated expense of sending out young women is sixteen pounds each, and
mittee of emigration appointed by Government propose that half that amount should be
defraved by' the parents or by the young women, either from their own funds or private sub-
scription, which they maybe able to rafse, and the other half from the coion.altreasuryjand
reckoning that from'the sources just enumerated 10,000 k wih be this year at the disposal of
Government, they propose sending 1200 female emigrants,-namely, 800 to Sydney, and 400 to
Van Dhmen’s Land. An annul supply of that number will be most advantageous, and a
greater boon could not be given to the colonies. , , , + yu p Van
S Whatever contributes to the prosperity of the colony must be to the Van
Diemen’s Land Company. Bad management might destroy the hopes of the Company witn
St materklly afec/ng ke colony, b& the Company could not flourish if the colony did no
nrosoer. Every measure, therefore, that can be promoted for the good of the colony, wIU be
beneficial to the Company, who are settlers in it upon a large scale,
be also highly advantageous to the colony, which has already derived great benefit horn
establishment. His Majesty’s Government fixed the location at the north-west corner of the
island which had never been traversed by civilized man ; a nucleus was thereby formed a
distant point, so that in exploring the country, its character and capabiht es might be developed,
romls made to communicate with the located districts, and the intermediate space made
available for private settlers; whilst, therefore, it would have cost Government great expense
and delay to ascertain the nature of that country, the whole has been
tract placed at the disposal of Government tor private settlers. So,
derived great advantages from the capital expended, and from the Company s stock. It was
their interest to send sheep from Europe of the very purest breed ; no pains were spared in
the selection • they have given a character to the stock of the Company, and by the sale of
rams, have*improved the sleep of the colony and given a character to the whole. The intro-
duction of the best breeds of sheep, horses, cattle, and pigs, is directly advantageous to the
Company, but the benefit is soon felt in the colony. The people, also, who have
out do much good; some who went in the service of the Company possessed gieat talents,
integrity andlierseverance; they have had the means of acquiring and diffusing knowledge
as toZe’capalulities and resources of the island ; and those who have been sent in more
humble situations were men of excellent character and respectable in then stations. All these
do good to the Company, but the benefit is spread over the society of the island ; the intei ests
of fhe colonists and the Company are hereby identified; the Company can do nothing advs
tageous to itself without being beneficial to the colony.
We now proceed to give a history of this Company from its own Reports.
Extract from First Report.
“ In a very early stage of the application to Government for a legal sanction of the Company,
a pledge w exacted? that the shares should not be issued to the public so as to become a
marketable or speculative oroperty, until the Charter should be obtained. 1 his pledge has
been redeemed ; but the Directors have felt that they would not be honourably fu fillmg the
intentions of Government, unless they acted in all other respects in conformity with the pro-
hibition. It is for this reason that they have, contrary to the examples of other companies,
forborne to issue a Prospectus, and to invite a general application lor their shares, Hus omis-
sion calls upon them to enter a little more fully into their plans and proceedings.
“ It is little more than twenty years since the first settlement was made by £ ie . ™
the Island of Van Diemen; and a few years only have elapsed, since the public m England
b ‘gan to be acquainted with its soil, climate, and productions. The regulanty and salub ty
of Its climatef the variety of its surface, affording dry and
natural grass and herbage, and alternating with rich and well watered valleys, the whole
moderately timbered, but in general free from those dense masses ot wood and jungle, which
so frequently cover the lands in the tropical and temperate regions, point it out as a country
having some striking and very peculiar advantages for the purposes of pasturage and a o n-
CU *‘ U Tliere cannot be a greater proof of the estimation in which this island is held, than the
rapidity with which the colonization of it has advanced, and the eagerness with which the
fertile portions of its land have been sought after and settled. Its population, which m 1810
was only 1256, holding 359 acres of land, amounted, in 1821, to 728 a, holding 723,679 acres.
The estimated population of 1823 was 12,000; and the quantity of land granted m the two
last mentioned years was, according to Mr. Evans, the Deputy-Surveyor-General, 132,370
acres. The stock of sheep, which in 1810 was 3070, m 1 821 was 170,391; an inereue m
eleven years nearly in the proportion of from one to sixty ; while other ive stock have multi-
pbed in a corresponding ratio. Its growing wealth as a commercial colony may be estimated


“ mou,,ted 10 47>25< “- 5 aDd
s,Sci' vh!cl ' “ "■- ■» .ppi y .» fof;™r„ g f
With respect to the selection of the lands to be granted to the Cnmnantr fV.„ f n
ndes are knl down by Earl Bathurst, in a letter dated the 15th of " g
tSj£S%’ mmm “ ”" ) ' be C " m!,,,iMe -» I--"* • cl»f»d vveTdXS
xair" in °* r - »»viif.n= g .: h si -rs
- S'f-w -««
one-and-a-half, or thirty shillino-s tier inn/ ;i ? tura B* ttnd ullage, on which a quit-rent of
payable in the manner already deterged • Thich aUwTntv veS t 0 1 68/- 15s ' P er anrulm >
sterling-. 3 ’ wxut - n at twenty years purchase amounts to 9575/.
iMSiPSiIi
improvement which his found to attain in U n ° f capable of all the melioration and
—b—n. .^T^«SS&?iS2S’4S
u 3 e ca P lta, . iB 1.000,000/. sterling, divided into 10,000 shares of 100/ each
o-s£s£ass; ssr k — - •
<( ~ Lxtract fr om the Report made to the third yearly General Meeting.
Head f °f
Jying somewhat scattered and divided. b suffiuency of good and useful land,
and grazing land! ° f eXCellent meadow
consist, in general, of barren heatlwnl ." 00t ®h e ep-run down the west coast, was found to
of land suitable for a bT^^ 5 S ° sat$ at a sufficient tract
over a wider space than L.ild tWKe, v, , had ’ w * tllout extending the boundaries
nient to the Company W been aDowed ** Government or gave been conve-
r therefore despatched on the Ist of
former excursus had been from tw ,S’ ? ex ™ ln e a large open district, which on
the best hopes of the ag-ents Ho dia * i Client points of view, and promised to realize
The desc, given by Mr . Hellye, of the conn.,, veiled over by hi,,, i„ .hi, i„ M .


esting journey, has since been confirmed by Mr. Fossey, another surveyor of the Company,
who, entering it from the eastward, came upon a different part of the Surrey Hills; and'
crossing the river called the Leven, represents the country in its vicinity as so admirably laid
out by nature, that it assumes very much the appearance of a nobleman’s domain, both as to
extent and good quality.
“ These concurring narratives immediately determined the agents on looking to the district
of the hills as their future site of the Company’s grant; and the Directors have the satisfaction
to report, that a minute of agreement has been signed on behalf of the Company, by which
permission has been obtained of his Majesty’s Government to select one block of 20,000 acres
at Circular Head; and two blocks, to comprise together 220,000 acres, in the districts just
described, all at the valuation originally agreed upon. The useless or unprofitable land wliich
it may be necessary to include, in order to give a well-defined boundary, will be granted to
the Company gratuitously, according to the stipulation mentioned in the last Report, and is
allowed to extend to one-fourth part of the whole grant, or an addition (if needful) of 62,500
acres. _ A fourth block of 10,000 acres will be selected at the option of the Company, at some
point intermediate between the larger grant and the settled districts.”
Extract from the Report made to the fourth yearly General Meeting.
“ At Circular Head about 100 acres of land had been broken up in April, 1827, and 60
acres more in the following season, making 160 acres under the plough, and bearino- wheat,
barley, oats, turnips, potatoes, and other crops suitable to the wants of the establishment
Two abundant crops of excellent hay had been got in, made entirely from the native gi-asses'
sufficient for the consumption of the stock of cattle. The principal buildings erecting or
finished at this point are, a commodious house, weather-boarded and shingled, the frame Imd
fittings of which were sent from England; a smaller house for the use of the superior officers
of the establishment; cottages and huts for the servants and for the labouring classes; a large
store-house ; a barn and threshing machine; shops and work-places for the different artizans •
requisite sheds for sheep and cattle. The surrounding land has been fenced and drained
under the able direction of Mr. Goldie. A substantial, but not expensive pier or jetty of
wood had been constructed at the north-west point of the harbour, under the direction of Mr.
Hellver, at which the Tranmere and the smaller vessels had discharged their cargoes.”
The fifth and sixth Reports, dated 1830 and 1831, give very few additional particulars with
respect to the district to be allotted to the Company; they mention the completion of the
roads; viz., one laid out and made under the superintendence of Mr. Fossey, from Laun-
ceston through the Surrey Hills; the other from the Surrey Hills through the Hampshire
Hills to Emu Bay, by Mr. Hellyer, with bridges, which were erected over the rivers and
streams. And they state the definitive arrangements which had been made with the govern-
ment at home with respect to the allotments of land, which were determined upon in the fol-
lowing locations:
160.000 acres at Woolnorth, in one continuous tract.
20.000 at Circular Head and the coast adjoining.
10.000 at Hampshire Hills, in one continuous tract.
10.000 at Middlesex Plains, in one continuous tract,
130.000 at Surrey Hills, in one continuous tract.
10.000 the estimated quantity of good land in the three islands, viz.,
Robins’ Island, Walker’s Island, and Trefoil Island.
330,000
The following is the return of live stock on the 30th June last:—
Sheep and Lambs, viz. 306 Rams
3153 Ewes
2393 Lambs
1480 Wethers
Cattle 361
Horses, Mares, and Foals 93*
The account which Mr. Curr gives of the people employed on the establishment is most
satisfactory. There is no necessity for either military or civil power to keep them iu order;
they proceed cheerfully with their labour, and complaint is seldom heard. This may in some
measure be attributed to the care which has been taken in selecting the free servants, who
have been sent from this country. Good conduct and good character have been indispensable
qualifications; every applicant was rejected upon whom there was stain or taint, and then-
previous good character was the ground of hope that they would be useful and respectable.
In this the Directors have not been disappointed; but in addition to their good qualities, they
have been well managed by Mr. Curr. Strict, whenever offence has been committed—
I he sale of bulls for breeding, and of horses, is a source of revenue to the Company.


thoughtful, considerate, and encouraging to all who have conducted themselves well, he has
acquired a moral influence over the people far more desirable, and, with regard to the interests
of the Company, far mors advantageous than coercion, restraint, or punishment; and it will
be a subject of pride to him, as well as satisfaction to the proprietors, to find the men who
were first sent out by the Company, and whose agreements for the term of years have expired,
settling themselves in the island with respectability and comfort, and with the prospect of
seeing their families prosper in the world. The following extract from Mr. Curr s despatch,
dated Launceston, 4th May, 1831, will be read with interest and pleasure :
“ It has been a source of sincere satisfaction to me, in which I am sure the Court will par-
ticipate, to find all the old indented servants of the Company, who went out per the Tranmere
and Caroline, doing extremely well, with not more, I believe, than one exception, and, with the
same one exception, very well spoken of. The farming men are generally in places at wages
of from thirty to fifty guineas a-year with a maintenance; the shepherds 30Z. to 60Z. a-year;
the mechanics are cliiefly in this town, and earning 10s. per day and upwards: these latter
have got town allotments, and are most of them budding or about to build good brick cot-
tages for themselves. 5 ’
Thus it follows, that though the Company engage their servants at low wages, in compa-
rison with what are given in some parts of the island, and have them indented for a term of
years as a remuneration for the expense of sending them out with their families, those men
are enabled with their comparative low wages to save money, and at the expiration of their
terms to establish themselves respectably. The maintenance of families in the colony is little
felt, as the women can always earn good wages. Mr. Curr says they can even enrich them-
selves ; and children have ample employment in the fields, and earn sufficient for their main-
tenance. It must be also highly gratifying to the proprietors to know, that they have thus
been the means of enabling industrious and united families, who, with the utmost toil, were
scarce able to support themselves at home, to live in comfort and to enrich themselves in Van
Diemen’s Land; and the number of respectable persons whom the Company have sent out
must place the establishment in a very favourable point of view both with the colonists and
the government.
The higher officers who went out with Mr. Curr have all left, or are about to leave, the
employment of the Company, their engagements having been fulfilled.
The persons who have bean sent out since the last General Meeting have been —1. Mr.
King, an experienced farmer, as superintendant of farms; 14 shepherds, viz. 6 from Scotland,
5 from Wiltshire, 3 from Norfolk; 3 masons and bricklayers from Oxfordshire and Bucking-
hamshire ; 2 carpenters; together with their families, consisting of 13 women, 7 boys, and
24 girls. The men are chiefly engaged to replace those whose terms are about to expire, and
they are indented for the term of seven years at much lower wages than have been paid to the
persons whom they succeed; so that the expense of sending out the families will be soon
remunerated to the Company; all these, except five, are gone out in the Forth, Captain
Robertson, and are to disembark at Circular Head, having a large quantity of stores on board
for the establishment.
The other buildings at Circular Head consist of Beach Cottage, for the officers’ residence,
56 feet by 13, having four rooms and kitchen; officers’ sleeping-rooms at the back of the
store; Company’s office, 33 feet by 15, in two rooms; storekeeper’s office; freemen’s cot-
tage, 48 feet by 23.9, in seven rooms, accommodating three married men and their families,
and the single men ; seven other cottages, See. ; a most complete farm-yard, round which are
built, and communicating with it, appropriate barns, stables, &c. ; the fencing completed is
931.53 chains, or llj miles in length, inclosing 8 fields of arable land, 3 paddocks, 11 pasture
fields, with drains and excellent roads; the population consists of 43 men, 11 women, 10
boys, and 13 girls.
At Emu Bay are built, a jetty; store, &c. 60 feet by 20, in two rooms, with loft and shed;
five cottages, with small paddock and garden; blacksmith’s shop; saw-pit.
At Hampshire Hills, officers’ houses, cattle sheds, &c.; the fencing completed is 543 chains,
or 6| miles in length, with drain and roads complete.
At Surrey Hills, the officers’ house and rooms; about eight cottages, with sheep-sheds,
stock-yards, &c. The population at Emu Bay and the Hampshire and Surrey Hills, consists
of 62 men, 7 women, 3 boys, 3 girls : in all, 79.
At Woolnorth, store, six cottages, with blacksmith’s shop, and stable. The population con-
sists of 24 men, 4 women, 3 boys, 4 girls ; in all, 37.
The roads which have been constructed are
22 miles cut through dense Myrtle Forest.
miles in one line, say from Emu Bay to the Race Course, measured; and mile-
boards put up, with numerous timber bridges, large and small: the whole line
can be travelled, except in the very highest floods.
12 miles from Hampshire Hills to Burghley.
8 miles from Burghley to the Race Course.
9 miles from Chilton to Burghley.
96£ miles.










Oue very substantial bridge has been erected at Weybridge, where the breadth of the stream
is 55 feet; another at the Hampshire Hills, very substantial, over a stream 88 feet wide.
It appears that all the charges incurred in exploring, in the survey, buildings, roads, &c.
amount to 80,060 1. 13s. Id. or Is. B hd. per acre; add to this the value of quit rent, and
the laud, with every expense which has attached to it, will be 2s. 3d. per acre, whilst the
lowest price for the worst land in the worst situation, without roads, clearing, buildings, or
fences, in Van Diemen’s Land, is now fixed at ss. per acre.
The summary of the expenditure was as follows :
• S •
Investment in land go 050 jg ]
Do. in sheep 30,717 2 8
Do. m horses 4 979 jg j
Do. in cattle 4,127 13 7
Do. in stores, furniture, implements, and machinery 15,479 10 11
“ ~ uuu imumujj 1U 11
Do. m shipping (Friendship and Fanny) 2 154 10 3
Cash, bills, and debts owing to the Company in Van Diemen’s Land ... s’,BBl 11 3
of 91,391 0 10
As per balance sheet and abstract taken to the 30th June, 1830.
The Proprietors must be aware that more money will necessarily be required, not to defray
current annual expenses, but upon those permanent investments, buildings, &c. which are
required on all new' and unoccupied estates, in order to make the land valuable, as well for
cultivation by the Company, as for tenants, or for sale. The main expenses are already in-
curred : the country is explored and roads constructed; but the locations must be greatly
increased in value, and rendered available for every purpose, by the erection of farm-houses,
barns, &c., and by inclosures ; —these will give good annual remuneration.
With respect to the payment, first of the current expense of the establishment, and next
interest and profit, the Directors feel extremely anxious to give such full and minute infor-
mation as will enable the Proprietors to judge for themselves. Mr. Curr is of opinion, that
the current expenditure will be paid this year, by the sale of produce and shipments to
Europe; and judging from the quantity of wool, &c. which will be exported, and the sales of
live stock in the colony, together with the produce of the soil, it appears that this expectation
will be realized.
The following computation will shew the ground upon which this estimate is formed.
Mr. Curr states that the w r ool which will be sent, and which he is now about to ship, wmuld
be not less than 120 bales, and will be in much better condition and quality than any yet
received, reckoned at 20 1, each
Ram lambs, produced last year, 868/.—present estimate 1500
Bulls—last year, 51 /.—do 200
Horses and mares, 24 will be saleable at 20/. each 480
Wheat, potatoes, butter, cheese, &c., in 1829, produced 2300/., reckoned ... 3000
Bark, wood, and other articles, reckoned 1000
£B5BO
The expenditure was 8800/. in the year 1830. When, therefore, the rapid increase of live
stock is considered, the Directors can, with confidence, hold out the prospect of early divi-
dends ; it must evidently be advisable to postpone the expectation of them for one or two
years; but they trust they may fairly calculate upon being able to announce a dividend in
1834, of which, however, the Proprietors, from the accounts on the table, will be able to
form their own opinion.
ECCLESIASTICAL INTELLIGENCE.
ORDINATIONS.
Bishop of Oxford, Christ Church, Oxford June 24
Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry
Bishop of Gloucester, Gloucester Cathedral July 8
Bishop of Worcester, Worcester Cathedral ...July 25
August, 1832, 4 k


Name.
Adams, Thomas Simon
Barker, Henry Raymond
Brown, Edward Langton
Bloxam, John Rouse
Browne, Robert W
Brown, T. Birch Llewelyn ...
Breeze, John
Bell, Henry
Barry, James
Bloxsome, V/. Henry
Cameron, Archibald Akin ...
Cargill, Richard...
Cox, James
Cook, William
Corfield, Thomas
Daubensf, Arthur James
Davis, Thomas
Denison, George Anthony
Dudley, Joseph ...,
Dunlass, Arthur Philip
Eyre, Fred. Drought
Gleadow, Thos. Littlewood ~
Goldney, Adam
Grice, Joseph Hill
Grose, Thomas
Hawkins, Edward
Heaume, Geo. Du
Jeune, Francis
James, Horatio
John, Edward St
Judge, Lawrence E
Knight, John
I.ynn, Geo. Goodenough
Morgan, John Blackstone
Parkin, John
Payne, Edward
Penson, John P......
Pearson, Hugh
Perry, Thomas Corbett
Robinson, John E
Tarbutt, Arthur Charles
Thackwell, Stephen
Tracy, John Cassel Hanbury.
Whidbourne, Geo. Ferris
Wood, Chas. Fred. Bryan....
Allen, William Birkett
Billingsley, J. R. F
Brown, Geo. Augustus
Campbell, John Usher
Colley, James
Curteis, Thos. Chandler
Dawson, Fred. Akers
Elrldge, Robey
Evans, Richard
Frcemantle, W. Robert
Greene, Edward
Harrison, Jasper Nicolls
Heurtley, Chas. Abel
Layton, Fred. W. H.
Madan, George
Meade, Edward
DEACONS.
Degree. College. University. Ordaining Bishop.
B.A. Now Oxford Bishop of Oxford
M.A. Merton Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Trinity Camb. Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Demy of Magd.Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B.A. St. John’s Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Jesus Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Queen’s Camb. Bp. of Lichfield &Cov.
B.A. Corpus Christ! Camb. Bp. of Lichfield & Cov.
Queen’s Camb. Bishop of Gloucester
B.A. Wadham Oxford Bishop of Gloucester
B.A. Pembroke Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B. C.L. Catherine Hall Camb. Bp. of Lichfield & Cov.
IM. A. Christ Church Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Trinity Camb. Bp. of Lichfield & Cov.
B.A. Clare Hall Camb. Bp. of Lichfield & Cov.
B.A. Brasennose Oxford Bishop of Gloucester
B.A. Queen’s Oxford Bishop of Worcester
hi. A. Oriel Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Worcester Oxford Bishop of Worcester
B.A. St. John’s Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Christ’s Camb. Bp. of Lichfield & Cov.
B.A. Christ’s Camb. Bp. of Lichfield & Cov.
B.A. Trinity Camb. Bishop of Oxford
BA. Christ Church Oxford Bishop of Worcester
hi. A. Clare Hall Camb. Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Pembroke Oxford Bishop of Oxford
M.A. Pembroke Oxford Bishop of Oxford
M.A. Pembroke Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Christ’s Camb. Bp. ofLichfield & Cov.
BA. Downing Camb. Bishop of Worcester
M.A. New Oxford Bishop of Worcester
B.A. Queen’s Camb. Bp. of Lichfield & Cov.
B. A. Christ Church Oxford Brshop of Oxford
B.A. Trinity Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Queen’s Camb. Bp. of Lichfield & Cov.
g-A- New Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Worcester Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Queen’s Camb. Bp.ofLrchfield&Cov.
ivr a Lincoln Oxford Bishop of Worcester
M.A. Christ Church Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Wadham Oxford Bishop of Oxford
B.A. Pembroke Oxford Bishop of Worcester
B.A. Oriel Oxford Bishop of Gloucester
( Bishop of Gloucester,
B.A. Queen’s Oxford < by Let.dim. from the
_ . „ l- Bishop of Exeter
TT A TA 1 1— r i r,- , r „
Pembroke Oxford Bishop of Gloucester
PRIESTS.
Bishop of Oxford
Bishop of Gloucester
Bishop of Oxford
Bishop of Worcester
Bp. of Lichfield & Cov.
Bishop of Oxford
Bishop of Oxford
Bishop of Gloucester
Bp. of Lichfield & Cov.
Bishop of Oxford
Bishop of Oxford
Bishop of Oxford
Bishop of Oxford
Bp. of Lichfield & Cov.
Bishop of Oxford
Bishop of Worcester
D.C.L. St. John’s
M.A. Lincoln
M.A. Magdalen
B.A. Pembroke
B.A. St. John’s
B.A. St. John’s
M. A. Brasennose
M.A. Wadham
B.A. Queen’s
M.A. Magdalen
B.A, Magdalen
M. A. Worcester
M.A. Corpus Christi
B.A. St. Peter’s
B.A. Christ Church
B. A. Wadham
Oxford
Oxford
Oxford
Oxford
Camb.
Oxford
Oxford
Oxford
Camb.
Oxford
Oxford
Oxford
Oxford
Camb.
Oxford
Oxford


Name. Degree. College. University. Oduining Bishop.
Morrell, Henry Cox M.A. Christ Church Oxford Bishop of Oxford
North, William M.A. Jesus Oxford Bishop of Oxford
Partington, Henry B.A. Christ Church Oxford Bishop of Oxford
Pitcher, John Earle M.A. Oriel Oxford Bishop of Gloucester
Piercy, John LL.B. Catharine Hall Camb. Bishop of Worcester
Reynolds, Henry M.A. Jesus Oxford Bishop of Oxford
Romney, Francis Henry B.A. Worcester Oxford Bishop of Gloucester
Saxton, Charles Waring M.A. Christ Church Oxford Bishop of Oxford
Spencer, John B.A. Trinity Camb. Bp. of Lichfield&Cov.
Strong, Clement Dawson B.A. Magdalen Oxford Bishop of Gloucester
CLERICAL APPOINTMENTS.
Belin, C. J Vice Principalship of Elizabeth Col., Guernsey.
Burn, H Preb. Stall of Llangunllo, Brecon.
Butt, J. W Mastership of Bromley School.
Dobree, Daniel First Classical Master of Pembroke College.
Hartwell, F. B Vicar-Gen. for the Southern district of the Isle of Man.
Hooper, William Nixon ...Minor Canon of Winchester Cathedral.
Hone, Richard Brindley ...Domestic Chaplain to the Earl of Haddington.
Marsh, William Domestic Chaplain to Viscount Galway.
Smith, Jeremiah Prebend of Lichfield Cathedral.
PREFERMENTS.
Name. Preferment. County. Diocese. Patron.
AUington, John Croxby, R. Lincoln Lincoln Lord Chancellor
Betts, Thomas D’Eye Martelsham, R. Suffolk Norwich F. G. Doughty, Esq.
Bicker, J Wingfield, P. C. Suffolk Bishop of Norwich
Birkett, J Lazeby, R. Lincoln Lincoln J. Fardell, Esq.
Biddulph Henry Stanlake, R. Oxford Oxon Magdalen Coll., Oxon
Boone, J. Shergold... Paddington New Church Middlesex London Bishop of London
Boulton, Anthony ... Preston Capes, R. Northam. Peter bo’ Sir C. Knightley, Bt.
Buckle, Wm. Lewis Baustead, V. Surrey Wint. Rev. W. Buckle
Bushby, E Impington, V. Cambr. Ely I). &C. of Ely
Cross, J Meriot, V. Somerset B. &W. D. St C. of Bristol
Dalton, Henry St. Leonard’s, Bridgenorth Thos. Whitmore, Esq.
Dene, J Newton Tracey, R. Devon Exon The King
DureH, T. Vavasour Pyrton, V.
Oxford Oxon D. &C. of Christ Ch.
Devon Exon
Farwell, Arthur Stoke Fleming, R.
Flesher, John T Tiffield, R.
Goodman, John Kemmerton, V.
Northam. Peterbo’ Thomas Flesher, Esq.
GloucesterGloster Mayor & Cor. Glouc.
Harrison, J. Butler... Evenley, V. Northam. Peterbo’ Magdalen Coll., Oxon
Henslow, J. Stevens j,^ r t y j- Berks Sarum Lord Chancellor
Hellicar, Ames Fivehead, V. & Swell, V. Somerset B. &W. D. &C. of Bristol
Jackson, E. D | S ’ aucbes 'Lancash. Chester Mrs. Owen
Kekewich, Charles... Grenton, R. Somerset B. &W, Sir T. Blomefield Bt.
King, Isaac Bradenham, R. Bucks Lincoln Bishop of Lincoln
Laurence, R.F { C ¥|‘^ e with Ber '| Oxford Oxon { D^- of Ch - Ch -»
Luttrell, A. 11. Y.... Minehead, V. J Somerset B. &W. F.F, Luttrell, Esq.
T . T f St. Michael & St. Trini-J T , TD. & C. of St.
Lup ton, James | ty, Queenhithe, R. J London | Paul’s
Moore, John Alrewas, V. Staffordsh.L. & Cov, Chan, of Lich. Cath.
Okes, William {Barnaby Suffolk' \ Norwich Caius Co 1” Canlb ’
Orman, C. J p °c' \ Norfolk Norwich Sir T. Hare, Bart.
rEast and West Rain-1 ( w . •
Phayre, Richard ■' ham, R., with St. V Norfolk Norwich m^ e ,j, .
( Mary Coslany, P.C. J L 01 vnsenci
Phillips, John Ainfield, V. Sussex Chichester Earl of Asburnham
Raines, F. R Milnrow, P. C. Lancash. Chester Rev. R. W. Hay
c c w ( St. Ishmael, V., with Carmarth. St. Dav. Lord Chancellor
oauuuers, b. \ Dale? p. C . Pembroke St. Dav. Lloyd Phillips, Esq.


Name. Preferment, County. Diocese, Patron.
Smith, Samuel Lois Weedow, V. Northamp.Peterbo’ King’s Col., Camb.
Smyth, Charles Alfriston, V. Sussex Chichester Lord Chancellor
{North Newton, R.Preb. N
S “™ ETlofP.mto.fe
Chapel annexed J
Stone, Samuel At. Augustine, R.
Tasker, Henry Soham, V.
Thompson, Edward . Lambourn, V.
Twining, Daniel Therfield, R.
Vallack, B. S St. Budeaux, P. C.
Watson, Thomas Tottenhill, P. C.
West, J Aisholt, R.
Norwich Norwich D. &C. of Norwich
Camb. Ely Pembroke Col. Camb.
Berks Sarum Dean of St. Paul’s
Hunts Lincoln D. &C. of St. Paul’s
( Rev. J. Hatchard,
Devon Exon < Vicar of St. An-
L drew’s, Plymouth
Norfolk Norwich Bishop of Ely
Somerset B. & W.
CLERGYMEN DECEASED.
Crosthwaite, J w “^ l Chich. Earl of Egremont
Davies, David Milton Chapel, C.
Field, Ttoma. C. } W ' York Y » l »•
Foyle, Edward Kimpton, R. Hants Win. George Foyle, Esq.
Hodson, William ... Milnrow Lancash. Chester Rev. R. W. Hay
Hooper, John Eaton Wilts
Ireland, Thomas Chaplain to H. M. Forces Cape of Good Hope and Ceylon
Lagden, H Balsham Camb.
Mills, Thomas Bumpstead Helion, V. Essex London Trinity Coll., Camb.
Manley, W. Nicholas St. Peter’s, C. Dublin
Morgan,J.Blackstone Garsington, C. Oxon Oxon t^Head>ship
Outram, E. H
Peter, Southemhay
Sandford, Edmund... Nutfield, R. Surrey Win. Jesus Coll., Oxon
Scott, Tufton C. ... $ w l th I °* I Cant. $ Archbishop of Cant.
( Birchmgton, R. j Thanet J ( Vicar of Monkton
Serle, Ambrose Helvedon Hatch, R. Essex London A. Serle, Esq.
Spence, William Berrynarbon, C.
Tophara, J Coniscliffe, V.
Devon Exon T. Edwards, Esq.
Durham Durham Bishop of Durham
UNIVERSITY NEWS.
OXFORD.
Saturday, June 30 th.
In a Convocation, holden on Monday last,
it was unanimously resolved that a loyal and
dutiful Address should be presented to his
Majesty, on occasion of the treasonable attack
lately made on his Sacred Person.
On Tuesday last the Examiners for the
Hebrew Scholarships notified to the Vice-Chan-
cellor that Benj. Harrison, B.A. and Student
of Christ Church, was appointed to the Hebrew
Scholarship on the Pusey and Ellerfcon foun-
dation, and James Robert Burgess, 8.A., of
Oriel College, to that on the foundation of the
late Mrs. Kennicott.
Thursday the following Degrees were con-
ferred :
Bachelors in Divinity Rev. W. Kay,
Fellow of Lincoln ; R ev. T. Price, Fellow of
Jesus.
Masters of Arts Rev. W. Gllkes, Pem-
broke, grand comp.; T. Lewin, Corpus, grand
comp.; H. C. Nowell, Corpus; Rev. A.
Stewart, Alban Hall; Rev. R. W. Whitford,
St. Edmund Hall; Rev. D. Adams, Rev. W.
Moore, M. R. Jeffreys, Christ Church; Rev.
H. C. Smith, Balliol; W, W. Tireman, W.
Bulky, Demies of Magdalen; Rev. W. J.
Meech, Fellow of New Coll.; Rev. R. Eld-
ridge, Rev. L. Tomlinson, Wadham College.
Bachelors of Arts —C. F. Broadbent, St.
Mary Hall; W. Offley, University; W. Hig-
gens, E. C. Swainson, Worcester; W. H.
Edwards, Brasennose; G. P. Wyatt, J. C.
B. Borough, S. R. Wood, Christ Church;
T. D. T. Calvert, Queen’s.
Subjects for 1833—Latin Verse, Carthago —
English Essay, On Emulation. —Latin Essay,
De Atticorum Comcedia. English Verse,
Grenada.
Theological Prize “ The Analogy of
God’s Dealings with Men would not lead us


to expect a perpetual Succession of Miraculous
Powers in the Church.”
The subject above stated, as appointed by
the Judges, for an English Essay, is proposed
to Biembers of the University on the following
conditions ; viz—l. The Candidate must have
passed his Examination for the Degree of B. A.
or 8.C.L.—2. He must not on this day
(June 28th) have exceeded his Twenty-eighth
Terra. —3. He must have commenced his
Sixteenth Term eight weeks previous to the
day appointed for sending in his Essay to the
Registrar of the University. In every case
the terms are to be computed from the Blatri-
culation inclusively.
On Blonday last the following gentlemen
were admitted Scholars of St. John’s College :
T. C. H. Leaver, Founder’s Kin. ; S. H.
Russell, J. A. Hessey, G. K. Morrell, T.
Ward, Reading, Blerchant Tailors.
The same day J. S. Pinkerton, E. W.
Vaughan, J. J. Pratt, F. J. Kitson, were ad-
mitted Actual Fellows.
On Thursday last, Blr. T. Dand and BTr.
T. Calvert were elected and admitted Taber-
dars of Queen’s College; Blessrs. J. Treacy,
J. Hunt, and W. Wilson, were elected Scholars
on the old foundation; and W. Andrews, of
Exeter College, an Exhibitioner on the founda-
tion of Sir Francis Bridgman.
Preachers of St. Marys Rev. the Prin-
cipal of St. Alban Hall, Sunday morning.
Rev. Mr. Lancaster, Queen’s, Sunday after-
noon.
Preachers at St. Martin s Rev. Blr.
Sewell, Sunday morning, (Charity Sermon.)
Rev. Blr. Firth, Sunday afternoon.
July Ith.
The following is a list of those Candidates
who have obtained classical distinction in JDis-
ciplinis Maihematicis et Physicis: —
Class I. H. Jones, Commoner of Jesus;
C. E. Lefroy, Commoner of Christ Church ;
F. Rogers, Commoner of Oriel; E. P.
Vaughan, Commoner of Balliol.
Class lI.—A. BTenzies, Scholar of Trinity.
Class Hl.—None.
Class IV—G. T. Baker, Commoner of
Christ Church ; H. B. Crommelin, Commoner
of Magdalen Hall ; D. Deboudrey, Gentleman
Commoner of Blagdalen Hall; H. N. Loring,
Commoner of Exeter.
Number of Fifth Class, 104.
Examiners R. Walker, 81. A., Wadham ;
A. P. Saunders, 81. A., Christchurch; and
W. Falconer, 81. A., Exeter College.
The Gasses in Literis Humanioribus ap-
peared in our last number.
At a Convocation holden in the Theatre, on
Wednesday last, the Honorary Degree of Doc-
tor in Civil Law was conferred on the following
gentlemen :
The Earl of Bandon; Lieut.-Gen. Sir T.
Brisbane, K.C.B. F.R. S., &c.; N. A. Vigors,
Esq., F.R. and L.S., Secretary to the Zoolo-
gical Society, &c.; J. DTsraeli, Esq., F'.S.A.,
the Historian of Charles the First.
They were all presented iu appropriate
speeches by the Rev. Dr. Bliss, the Deputy
Professor of Law, and received with every
mark of respect and approbation.
The Creweian Oration, in Commemoration
of the Founders and Benefactors of the Uni-
versity, was delivered by the Rev. Dr. Cramer,
the Public Orator; after which the prizes were
recited in the following order ;
Lathi Verse “ Attila John Thomas,
Scholar of Trinity College.
English Essay “ The Study of different
Languages, as it relates to the Philosophy of
the Human Blind Benjamin Harrison, 81. A.,
Student of Christ Church.
Latin Essay —“De Stoicorum Disciplina
T. L. Claughton, 8.A., Fellow of Trinity
College.
English Verse —“Staffa;” R. Palmer,
Scholar of Trinity College.
On Thursday last, the following Degrees
were conferred;
Masters of Arts J. IT. Philipps, Oriel,
grand comp.; Rev. T. H. Blaitland, Oriel;
T. T. Jones, Oriel; Rev. J. E. S. Hutchin-
son, Wadham ; IT. Bostock, Wadham ; Rev.
G. C. Bethune, Trinity; Rev. R. V. Towns-
hend, Brusennose; T. S. Lightfoot, Exeter;
Rev. J. Dinning, Queen’s; H. S. Tremen-
heere. Fellow of New College ; Rev. H. S.
Sayce, Pembroke; Rev. T. E. Burrow, BL A.,
of Queen’s College, Cambridge, admitted ad
eundem.
Bachelor of Arts —Rev. J. T. C. A. Tren-
chard, Trinity (incorporated from St. John’s,
Cambridge.)
On Saturday last, "Wadham College Election
took place, when E. Cockey, 8.A., was ad-
mitted Actual Fellow of that Society; E. W.
Foley, 8.A., and J. B. Dyne, 8.A., were
elected Probationary Fellows; C. W. Diggle
was elected a Scholar (Founder’s Kin.), and
E. Whitehead a Scholar on the Somersetshire
Foundation. The brother of this gentleman,
from the same School, obtained a Scholarship
at Worcester about a fortnight since.
On Sunday last, a Sermon for the benefit of
that excellent Institution, the Medical Dispen-
sary and Lying-in Charity, was preached at
Carfax Church, by the Rev. W. Sewell, 81. A.,
Fellow of Exeter College. The sum of
28/. Bs. 2d. was collected after the service.
On Tuesday last, a Sermon for the benefit
of the Radcline Infirmary was preached at St.
Blary’s Church, by the Rev. G. Chandler,
D.C.L., of New College, and Dean of Chester.
The sum of 50/. 13s. was collected on the
occasion.
On Blonday, the 25th of June, Blr. Barne,
of Trinity, and Blr. J. Woolley, were elected
Scholars of Exeter College; and on Saturday,
the 30th, Blr. Oxnam, of Trinity, and Blr.
Spranger, of Exeter, were elected Fellows of
the same Society.
Preacher at St. Martin's —Rev. J. Corfe,
Blagdalen College, Sunday morning and after-
noon.
July 14 th.
Saturday, June 7, being the last day of
Term, the following Degrees were conferred ;


Masters of Arts —Rev. W. J. Goodden,
Oriel; J. Goodden, Corpus; S. C. J. Berd-
more, Student of Christ Church,
i jßachelors of Arts— H. B. Harenc, Christ
Church; T. James, Christ Church.
At an Ordination, held by the Lord Bishop
of Gloucester, in the Cathedral Church of
Gloucester, on Sunday last, the following gen-
tlemen were ordained :
Deacons —W. H. Bloxsome, 8.A., Wad-
ham ; A. F. Daubeny,B.A., Brasennose ; J. A.
Dunnage, 8.A., Brasennose; J. C. H. Tracy,
8.A., Oriel; C. F. B. Wood, 8.A., Pem-
broke ; G. F. Whidbourne, 8.A., Queen’s.
Priests —J. R. F. Billingsly, M.A., Lincoln;
R. Eldridge, M.A., Wadham; J. E. Pitcher,
M.A., Oriel; F. H. Romney, 8.A., Worces-
ter ; C. D. Strong, B. A., Magdalen Hall.
Preacher at St. Marys —Rev. Mr. Gor-
don, Merton, the Assize Sermon.
Lecturer at St. Martin s —Rev. the Warden
of Wadham, Sunday morning and afternoon.
Saturday, July 21.
On Tuesday se’nnight the Warden and Elec-
tors from New College, in this University, paid
their annual visit to Winchester College, to fill
the vacancies occasioned by the retirement of
superannuates. The scholars on the foundation
to be placed on the roll of New College, for ad-
mission, as vacancies occur, are—
Risley, C. F. Hill, Godard, Ward, Brereton,
Huntingford, Macdonald, May, Cripps, Agnew,
Bedford, Mapleton, Glover, "Griffith, Burnett,
Hall, Jarvis, Bathurst, Upton, Lee, Clarke.
The Candidates for admission to Winchester
College stand in the following order:—
Rowden, C. F. Croke, C. F. Law, Seymour,
Saunderson, Campbell, Darnell, Gale, Coples-
ton, Terry, Lyall, Bathurst, Lee, Wind, Bridges,
Selwyn, Maclachlan, Christian, Adams, Hill,
Fyler, Fyler, Hale, Lovell.
Subjoined are the subjects for which prizes
were awarded, and the names of the successful
competitors:
Gold Medals : English Essay “ The
dangers of early success;” J. Hill.
Latin Poem —“Capitoli Immobile Saxum;”
Thomas R. Henn.
Silver Medals: Latin Speech “Pro
T. Annio Milone Peroratio;” Chas. Sweet.
English Speech “ Mr. Pulteney on the
Bill for the Encouragement of Seamen;”
Henry Wm, Cripps.
The Lord Bishop of Lincoln intends holding
his next Ordination at Buckden, on Sunday,
the 23rd of September next.—Candidates are
required to send their papers thither to his Lord-
ship before the 10th of August.
Lecturer at St. Martin's —Rev. Mr. Brown,
Sunday morning and afternoon.
July 28 th.
On Wednesday last, the following gentlemen
were admitted Actual Fellows of Magdalen
College:—Rev. H. Linton, M. A., Rev. Wil-
liam James Butler, M.A., Henry Horne, 8.A.,
and Rev. W illiam Robert Fremantle,
8.A.; also, the following gentlemen as Pro-
bationary Fellows: —Rev. James Charles Staf-
ford, M.A., William Palmer, 8.A., and Wil-
liam Walter Tireman, B.A. Afterwards, the
following gentlemen were elected Demies:
E. H. Hansell, Diocese of Norwich; Charles
Daman, Commoner of Queen’s, Diocese of
Winton; Thomas Harding Newman, Com-
moner of Wadham, County of Essex; and
Francis B. Wells, Commoner of Christ Church,
Diocese of Chichester.
CAMBRIDGE.
Friday, June 29 th.
The Rev. J. W r . Butt, M.A., rector of
Southery, succeeds to the mastership of the
school at Bromley, in Kent, vacant by the re-
signation ot the Rev. H. B. Hibbert, who re-
tires to his preferment given him by the Bishop
of Lincoln, near Louth.
Tuesday last being the anniversary of the
King’s Accession to the Throne, a sermon was
preached at Great St. Mary’s, by the Rev. E.
Baines, Fellow of Christ’s College, from Judges
xxi. 25. “In those days there was no King
in Israel: every man did that which was
right in his own eyes.” After the sermon an
anthem was performed.
July 6th,
At the congregation on Saturday last, the
following degrees were conferred :
Doctor in Divinity —A. Hudleston, Trinity.
Bachelor in Divinity —T. F. Beckwith,
Catharine Hall.
Doctor in Physic —N. F. Davison, Caius.
Bachelor in Physic— R. JVairne, Trinity.
m Bachelors in Civil Law —F. Merewether,
r riiilty Hall; A, A. Doria, Trinity Hall.
Bachelor of Arts —J. Thompson, Christ’s.
At the same congregation, W. Boyle, 8.A.,
of Trinity College, Dublin, was admitted ad
eundem of this university.
At the same time an Address to his Majesty
was agreed to, on the subject ef the recent
outrage at Ascot. Graces were also passed to
appoint Mr. Henshaw, of Trinity College, De-
puty Proctor in the absence of Mr. Musgrave;
and Mr. Burdakin, of Clare Hall, Deputy
Proctor in the absence of Mr. Currie,
On Tuesday last, being Commencement
Day, the following Doctors and Masters of
Arts were created:—
Doctors in Divinity —The Rev. J. Brasse,
Trinity ; the Rev. A. Hudleston, Trinity; the
Rev. W. Hewson, St. John’s.
Doctors in Physic —J. Staunton, Caius;
N. F. Davison, Caius; E. Beck, Jesus.
Masters of Arts— King’s College; G. W.
Craufurd, J. Thackeray, C. Lofft St. Peter’s:
G. Goldsmith, F. M. Mac Carthy, E. Phillips,
L. B. Dykes, T. Fell, W. Tillotson, T. Smith,
P. Hanham, S. Barker, H. S. Hildyard
Clare Hall: J. Grade, G. Cooke, J. F. Franck-
lm, E. Bates, L, Jackson, C. C. Beaty.' -
Pembroke : E. Nottidge—Caius ; R. Murphy,
A. Thurtell, T. Ladds, W. S. P. Wilder, J,
Macdonald, C. Bevan, J. N. Dickinson, W.
Plunckett, J. Main waring.—Corpus Christi:


G. Coulcher, E. Greaves, B. Lodge, J. Nether-
wood, T. E. Willyams, H. Pearse, R. Cox
Trinity: W. Hutt, C. J. Shaw, J. D. Wal-
ford, A. Pearson, J. Pearson, E. P. Neale,
S. N. Kingdon, R. Pashley, M. A. N. Craw-
ford, J. M. Robinson, W. Airy, C. Campbell,
W. A. Soames, W. Ogilby, J. R. Marshman,
W. H. Ross, G. M. Valentine, J, Hassall, E.
B. Bey non, E, F. Beynon, W, P, Wigram, H.
J. Greene, T. K. E. Chatfield, J. Br aine, J.
i wells, E. C. F. Jenkins, T. J. Phillips, T.
Barber, S. H. Powell, W. Walker, G. H. Bar-
low, W. W. Attree, A. Martineau, W. B. A.
Raven, G. J. P. White, M. Gibson, J. Locke,
S. Hoare, jun., T. J. Blofeld, E. O'Brien, J.
Kennck, J. Tate, J. P. Babington, R. K. Lono-,
J. R. Inge, C. S. Eustace, F. C. Rasch, H.
Malthus, G. C. Hale, J. E. Middleton, M. J.
G. Hawtrey—St. John’s: W. Martin, H. E.
C. Cobden, L. Shadwell, jun., G. Langshaw,
D. B. Baker, C. Sparkes, A. Cassels, J. Simp-
son, T. Poole, S. Smith, W. Fison, W. Clarke,
J. Bostock, T. G. M. Luckock, C. H. Lut-
widge, J. Paley, J. Peel, G. A. Cockburn, B.
Spurrell, T. Butler, R. Baldock, A. Sadler, E.
L. Sayer, C. E. Band, C. Mackie, J. Smith,
W. Boyle—Emmanuel: R. Birkett, H. W.
Mawdesley, R. Pulleine, W. H. Chapman, W.
Roby, J. Askew, C. F. Broughton.—Queen’s:
W. Adams, J, Parkin, G. Phillips, T. Scott,
A. 1. Carr, D. Capper, T. Hooper, H. C.
Michell, W. N. Nicholson, J. A. Morris, T.
Cupiss, W. Leeke—Christ’s: C. L. Smith,
E. H. Hopper, B. Chapman, J. Crossley, A.
H. Barker—Jesus: W. R. Ellis, J. J. West,
J. Hodgson—Trinity Hall: E. S. Whitbread,
Sidney; W.L.Chafy, C.Goring, A. Beatson. .
Catharine Hall: H. Philpott, W. H. Clarke,
J. Robinson, R. W. Packer, J. Lakeland, E.
Vinall, W. Purvis—Magdalene: C. D. Rad-
cliffe, H. L. Jones, S. E. Bernard Downing;
G. Dunnage.
At a congregation yesterday the following
degrees were conferred ;
Musters of A rts— Rev. W. M. Lawson, St.
John’s; Rev. W. L. Weddall, Catherine Hall;
Rev. W. D. Tyson, Catherine Hall; Rev. J.
Hurnall, Emmanuel; Rev. G. Johnston,
Sidney.
Licentiates in Physic —J. Harris, Trinity ;
J. Farre, St, John’s.
Bachelors in Civil Law —T. W. Greene.
Trinity Hall.
At the same congregation 11. Parsons, M. A.,
of Balliol College, Oxford, was incorporated
M. of Trinity Hall, in this University'.
On Saturday last, Richard Paul Amphlett,
B. and Charles Shorting, 8.A., of St.
Peter’s College, were elected Foundation Fel-
lows of that society ; and Thomas Fell, 8.A.,
and William Tillotson, 8.A., Fellows on the
Gisborne foundation.
Select Preachers —The following gentlemen
have been elected to preach on Sunday after-
noons during the months to which their names
are affixed :
1882. October... Rev. J. J. Blunt.
November Rev. Professor Musgrave.
December Rev. Temple Chevalier.
1838. January... Rev. T. S. Hughes.
February Rev. Edw. Raines, Christ’s.
March ...Rev. R. W. Evans, Trinity.
■April The Hulsean Lecturer.
May Rev. Hugh James Rose.
The anniversary meeting of the President
and Governors of Addenbrooke’s Hospital was
held at Great St, Mary’s Church, on Friday
last, when a sermon on behalf of that excel-
lent institution was preached by the Rev.
Hugh James Rose, B.D. Christian Advocate,
from Halations, vl. 10— ct As we have therefore
opportunity, let us do good unto ad men."
The collection at the doors amounted to
65 1. 12s. Id.
The sermon, at St. Mary’s Church, on Sun-
day morning last, was preached by the Rev.
Dr. Hewson, of St. John’s College, from
2 Peter, i. s— And beside this, giving all
diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to
virtue knowledge . ” The afternoon sermon was
preached by the Rev. Dr. Hudleston, of Trinity
College, from Proverbs, iv. 13—“ Take fast
hold of instruction ; let her not go ; keep her ;
for she is thy life."
July IQth.
The Address from this University to the
King, on the subject of the recent outrage
committed against Ids Majesty at Ascot, was
presented to his Majesty at St. James’s Palace,
on Wednesday last.
The King having taken his seat on the
throne, the Duke of Gloucester, as Chancellor,
preceded by three Esquire Bedells, advanced,
and was followed by the Vice-Chancellor,
accompanied by the Registrary, the Dukes of
Rutland, Northumberland, and Buccleugh, the
Marquis of Camdem, the Earl of Brownlow,
the Bishop of Chichester, Mr, Ooulbourn, and
Mr. Peel, the representatives for the Univer-
sity, and a numerous tram of every decree
amounting to upwards of two hundred. °
The Duke of Gloucester having read the
address, the King returned a suitable answer;
after which, the members of the
consisting of the Vice-Chancellor, the Master
of Sidney, the Provost of King’s, the Master
of Jesus, the President of Queen’s, the Master
of Corpus, the Master of Pembroke, Dr. Gel-
dart, the King’s Professor of Civil Law, Dr.
Bond, the Rev. Edw. Ash, Christ’s College,
the Rev. J. Graham, Queen’s College, the
Public Orator, the Proctors, and Registrary,
were presented to the King, and had the
honour of kissing his Majesty’s hand. The
three Esquire Bedells and' Dr. Haviland,
Regius Professor of Physic, were also presented.
All were most graciously received, and the
King appeared in good health.
In the evening, the Duke of Gloucester gave
a splendid entertainment to the deputation,
and a large portion of the noblemen and gentle-
men who accompanied the Address.
KING’S COLLEGE, LONDON.
Distribution of Prizes, —A very numerous
and respectable attendance of the supporters and


friends of this institution took place in the large
theatre of the college on Friday, 6th iust., for
the purpose of witnessing the distribution of
the prizes awarded in the senior department
and the school. His Grace the Archbishop of
Canterbury, accompanied by the Bishops of
London and Llandaff, Earl Brownlow, Lord
Henley, and other members of the council,
entered the theatre at three o’clock, and the
Principal, Professors, and Masters having made
their several reports, the following prizes were
presented by the Archbishop to the successful
competitors at the Midsummer examination.
Senior Department of College Students —
In Theology— l. J. A. Freere; 2. H. J. C.
Smith; 3. E. Sleap; 4. J. Smith; 6. W.
Winchester In Classical Literature—
Senior Class— 1. J.A. Frere; 2. E. Sleap —
Junior Class— 1. J. Smith; 2. G. Sweet.--
In Mathematics —1. R* A. Gordon; 2. W.
W. Pocock; 3. F. W. Shaw; 4. R. Pepper-
come.—ln English Literature Henry
J. C. Smith In French Literature —1.
Henry Triten ; 2. J. E. Cooper.
Junior Department. Sixth Class Mat-
thison, Hatchard, Fincham, S. Williams, Boi-
leau, Garvock—Fifth Class —Dowling, Collier,
Roope, Salmon. —Fourth Class —Stone, Robin-
son, Canton, Warner, Cpllingdfn, Hartley.—
Third Class—Hilliard, Bourne, Calvert.—Se-
cond Class—Foggo (senior), Heisch, Harrison,
Norris, Bailey, Collison—First Class—Bucke,
Chapman, Rhodes, Shaw.—French Language
Hatchard, Boileau, De Souza, Duncan.
In the course of the distribution (each stu-
dent and pupil being called upon to come for-
ward and receive the prize to which he was
entitled), the Bishop of London and the Rev.
Dr. D’Oyly stated that they had perused seve-
ral of the examination papers in theology, the
classics, and English literature, and that these
papers bore evidence of an unusual degree of
talent as well as knowledge of their subject;
and it was added that at a recent private ex-
amination of the junior department, conducted
by some of the learned members of the council,
the result was highly creditable both to the
masters and pupils. On this occasion also
prizes were given to the most meritorious pupil
in the Hackney, St. Peter’s, and Pimlico
Schools, which, as well as the Stockwell
School lately formed, are in union with the
College.
UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW.
This University was founded in 1450; and is
governed by a Chancellor, Lord Rector, Dean
of Faculty, Principal, and Professors. The
following statement of the average annual value
of the Professorships, which arises chiefly from
the fees of the students, is from the Commis-
sioners’ report, and may, therefore, be relied on
as correct. The following are in the gift of the
Crown;—The Principal, 485 1.; Prof, of
Anatomy, 1058/.; Law, 456/.; Astronomy,
uncertain ; Church History, 882/.; Chemistry,
627/.; Surgeiy, 692; Midwifery, /.; Phy-
sic, 608/.; Natural History, 216/. The fol-
lowing are in the gift of the College ;—Divi-
nity, 430/. ; Mathematics, 614/. ; .Moral Phi-
losophy, 740/.; Natural Philosophy, 690/.;
Humanity, 1242/.; Hebrew, 868/.; Greek,
1668/. The Principal and most of the Profes-
sors have good houses in the College.
The present Principal is minister of the Inner
High Church, a living in the gift of the
Crown, which was also held by his predecessor.
The late Professor of Hebrew held, at the
same time, St. Andrew's Church, in the city.
The Professors have the patronage of ten exhi-
bitions, founded in Balliol College, Oxford ; and
which last for ten years, of the yearly value
of about 180/. each. These were founded,
upwards of one hundred years ago, by John
Suell, Esq., a native of Scotland, with the
view of supporting the cause of Episcopacy
in that portion of the kingdom ; but it is said
that the pious intention of the founder has not
been adhered to in this respect, as most of the
exhibitioners do not take orders; and that very-
few in any way have ministered to the cause of
the Scottish Episcopal Church.
STATISTICS
f 1880-
PRUSSIAN UNIVERSITY
During the Summer of
Foreigners.
UNIVERSITIES.
1706
978
Berlin
Bonn
Breslau -
Griefswald
Halle
Koenigsberg
Munster


*■ «■


