

VANCOUVER
AND HIS GREAT VOYAGE,
The Story of a Norfolk Sailor,
Captain Geo. Vancouver, r.n.
1757—1798.
BY -
G. H, ANDERSON.
Tbew £ Son, King’s Lynn, Printers to His Majesty the King




Un r p
e/o


George Vancouver


VANCOUVER
AND HIS GREAT VOYAGE.
The Story of a Norfolk Sailor,
CAPTAIN GEO. VANCOUVER, R.N.,
1757— >798.
G. H. ANDERSON.
Thew & Son, King’s Lynn,
1923.




TO VANCOUVER’S MEMORY.
Vancouver! in whose veins were blent
Twin strains of that old Viking blood,
Holland’s and England’s, which had sent
Its farers forth on each full flood
Of sea-search, Life as liefly lent
To wrath as brotherhood ;
Once “Cook’s brave middy,” trained with ear
And eye alert, and toughened then
In Rodney’s fight: with Gardner near
He watched, nor recked (O Englishmen,
Have ye forgot?)—unknowing fear —
Where foes should smite, or ivhen !
O breed of Britain’s Ocean-Kings,
Through that long century's war-romance
Two Empires grappled, as in “rings”
Of sea-sway : while, in coward trance,
Half Europe gazed ! Urania sings
“ Ye broke proud Bourbon France,
“And pushed forth Britain’s battle-line
Till, grappling dire Napoleon's star,
Pale Nelson’s ’scutcheon could outshine
The whole world’s blazoned ‘ fields ’ of war,
Making all-glorious, half-divine,
The Hell of Trafalgar ! ”


O rare sea-rovers, handing down
To us the shot-torn flag of Blake,
And gathering always new renown,
Whatever keel-cleft path ye take,
Lead, and we follow —doom or crown !
We, youngest sons of Drake !
Ah, but ye waged a nobler light,
’Gainst slave-hood, ignorance, rapine, wrong
Into dark caves ye flung Hope’s light:
To People's moaning, “ Lord, how long ? ”
Ye seemed God’s angels in mailed might,
And in your pity strong !
So —sacred trust our coasts shall keep !
Came shrewd Vancouver, some loved name
Of England’s great ones graving deep
On crag and cape : words edged with flame
Whose gleam may rouse us from the sleep
Of dotard ease or shame.
Staunch human-hearted mariner,
Unbaflled, wakeful, unafraid, —
Cleaving, through sea-tides dark or fair,
Unhindered avenues of trade, —
By such keen eye and tireless care
Was world-wide England made !
At Vancouver’s Well,” by Dr. Laurence Rentoul. of Melbourne
published by Macmillan & Co., London.
By permission of the Author.


PREFACE.
The requests of several of my friends for this reprint
encourage me to hope that it may be worth issuing.
I have included a few illustrations and a memorandum
as to the navigator’s birthplace.
By the kindness of Mr. S. S. Burlingham, who allowed
me to peruse the Friends’ Title Deeds, I think I have been
able to settle definitely the exact position of the Van-
couver house. This, and tracing the descent of Bridget
Berners from the ancient Norfolk Kerville family as well
as from the Grenvilles of Cornwall and Devon, have given
me great pleasure.
The two illustrations of Wiggenhall Church are from
blocks kindly lent me by the Norfolk and Norwich
Archaeological Association.
G. H. A.


a
rt
JS
O
a>
n
t n
WM ©
I i s
m ■"
Kg s
I# 8
» §
jn >
H & „
<u
Cf co
g s
o .
i— c
O rt
a) E
l« c
a
H s OO
D 5 I —>
I >■
S* S
s i
t/)
5
c
<D
0)
C/5
o
u>
o
c
rt
S
o
rt
■s
«
rt
O


Carved Seats in the Church of St. Mary the Virgin, Wiggenhall,
shewing the Kerville Arms on one of them. (See Chap. I.)


Kerville Tomb in the Church of St. Mary the Virgin, Wiggenhall.
(See Chap. I.)


Doorway, New Conduit Street, King’s Lynn, leading into the
Courtyard of John Vancouver’s House.


GEORGE VANCOUVER'S BIRTHPLACE.
The property in New Conduit Street, Lynn, was conveyed
in 1755 to Philip Case and Samuel White in trust for Sarah
Vancouver and her son John, the former of whom was to
receive an annuity of £l6 out of the estate and the latter to
take an}- balance.
In 1755 John Vancouver was living in Tower Street. The
next year he was rated for the house in New Conduit Street,
and he continued there until his death in 1773.
George was born 22nd June, 1757.
In 1774 Charles Turner, the acting Trustee under John
Vancouver’s will, sold the property to Richard Raven, who
retained the part on which Mr. Potter’s house was afterwards
erected, and sold off the remainder to the Quakers and others.
The property purchased by the Vancouvers comprised :
(1) A capital messuage with the buildings, stable, yard,
gardens and appurtenances abutting on the street in
part, and the messuage next mentioned in other part
towards the South.
(2) A messuage abutting North on the capital messuage,
South on the street, East on the passage leading from
the street to the capital messuage, and West on the
messuage next mentioned.
(3) A messuage West of the last described messuage.




Items 2 and 3 are clearly the present Labour Exchange.
The portions of the property sold to the Quakers were :
(a) So much of the capital messuage extending north-
ward of the kitchen lately occupied by John
Vancouver, which kitchen and rooms over were then
added to the messuage No. 2 above. The capital
messuage projected about two feet more in the front
eastward than the said kitchen.
(6) A yard or garden late in the occupation of John
Vancouver, north-westward of the capital messuage.
(c) That part of the courtyard in the front eastward of
the capital messuage, together with the passage or
gateway leading thereto from New Conduit Street, to
be divided by a wall from the part now Mr. Potter’s.
Another wall was to be built in a circular form from
the north-east corner of the yard of No. 2 above to
the north-east corner of the said kitchen.
Richard Raven reserved the right to build one or more
room or rooms over the gateway leading out of the street
into the courtyard, which accounts for Mr. Potter’s house
extending over the gateway.
It seems quite clear from the above that John Vancouver’s
house stood on the site of the Friends’ Meeting House, and
that the northernmost room of the Labour Exchange which
abuts on the Meeting House was the kitchen of the house.
The rooms north of the Meeting House are probably a part
of the capital messuage.




ft -,.. .■?’ \ ' ‘j,
i' -. ’ , ■ ,
SlS'' *m Sm* i~
0 ‘ ’' ' ' f <* ’ >’’'
** . v^v? >? 7*EK| ‘I ** A i ' "-'*■ &:jt
Bb -* B
BH < 1
S 9'H1 *** r , ' & v ~ > | *
Parliament Buildings, Victoria, B.C.— A Statue of Captain Vancouver stands on the top of the Dome.


Reprinted from the “Lynn Advertiser
VANCOUVER
HIS GREAT VOYAGE.
THE STORY OF A NORFOLK SAILOR.
CHAPTER 1.
1757—1775. Early life and first
voyage with Cook,
In the history of navigation during
th© eighteenth century the fame of
Captain Cook almost obscures the
achievements of the many other dar-
ing navigators of that time. The
story of Coofs wonderful career, —
his humble birth, his flight from the
uncongenial village shop, the years
of obscure drudgery in a coasting
ship, th© services rendered under cir-
cumstances of great danger in con-
nection with the conquest of Quebec,
his voyage of as great renown as any
in the history of the world and, fin-
ally, the tragic end —is familiar to
most of us. Cook was forty years of
age when, in 1768, he started on the
first of his three famous voyages
which was undertaken for the purpose
of making an observation of the
transit of Venus. On this voyage
(completed in 1771), parts of the
coast of New Zealand and Australia
w©re explored and the Society and
other islands were discovered. The
second voyage (1772-1775) was for the
discovery of “Terra Australis Incog-
nita,” the great southern continent


which for two hundred years had
been the dream of navigators and
which had been marked in anticipa-
tion on many an old map.
On board Cook’s ship, the “ Resolu-
tion,” on this second voyage was a
lad of fourteen who was destined to
continue the work of the great navi-
gator. This lad, George Vancouver,
was bom at King’s Lynn, his father,
John Jaspar Vancouver, being of
Dutch descent.
The Vancouvers may have been
among the many Dutchmen who
came over to assist in the engineer-
ing works connected with the drain-
age of the Fens, but it is more pro-
bable that they were refugees from
the 16th century persecutions in the
Netherlands. George in the journal
of his great voyage siays he named
“ Point Couverden” after the seat of
his ancestors. Couverden or Coever-
den is the nam© of a town in North
Holland.
Sarah Vancouver, the widowed
mother of John Jaspar and the grand-
mother of George, was rated in Lynn
as a householder up to 1759. In 1752
and 1755 she occupied the fifth tene-
ment from the White Hart Inn and
next to a larger house occupied by Dr.
Lidderdale in St. James’ Street. Her
house was therefore probably next to
the present Conservative Club. In
1758 she was rated in Stonegate Ward.
She died in 1769. John Jaspar Van-
couver was married to Bridget Ber-
ners, of Lynn, on 22nd June, 1749,
in the church of All Saints’, South
Lynn. Although nothing is known of
John Jaspar Vancouver’s ancestry,
that of his wife is particularly inter-
esting. Five miles up the River Ouse
from Lynn Haven, in the parish of
Wiggenhall St. Mary the Virgin, is
a mansion known as St. Mary’s Hall,
which includes a part of the old
Manor House of the Kerville fam-
ily, who for five hundred years
(Stephen to James I.) were Lords of
the Manor. The Kervilles, who were
allied by marriage to many of the
principal local families, also owned
estates in several neighbouring p&r-


ishes, and when Blomefield’s History
of the County was written their arms
(Oules, a chevron or, between three
leopards’ faces argent) were to be seen
in the windows of various churches
in the district. Edmund Kerville, in
the 14th century, married a daughter
of Sir John Tilney, The wi'e of his
grandson, Thomas Kerville, was a
daughter and co-heir of Gilbert
Haultoft, Baron of the Exchequer,
and their grandson Humphrey mar-
ried Anne, daughter of Jeffrey Cobbe,
the Squire of Sandringham. Thomas,
the son of the last-named Humphrey,
married Alice, daughter of Sir Henry
Bedingfeld, of Oxburgh, a supporter
of Queen Mary, Governor of the
Tower, and the “jaylor" of the
Princess, afterwards Queen, Eliz.
abeth. Thomas Kerville also espoused
the cause of Queen Mary and he, with
two others, was appointed to enter
Wisbech Castle and hold the same
for the Queen’s use. Henry Kerville
(the son of Thomas), who married
Winefred, daughter of Sir Anthony
Thorold, Knight, was a Catholic, and
his name appears among the principal
Recusantg in Norfolk. In 1586 he
agreed to pay .£SO per annum during
the time he should not to church,
this being the highest amount in the
list. His son. Sir Henry Kerville,th©
last of th© name to own the Manor,
married Mary, daughter of Francis
Plowden. He also was devoted to
the ancient faith, and being accused
of holding Papist meetings at his
house, wag imprisoned for some time.
The parish church, which stands
quite near the Manor House, contains
memorials of the Kervilleg in their
glory and decay. For it® old oaken
benches with their richly carved
ends, considered some of the finest
of their kind in the kingdom, we are
probably indebted to th© pious gen-
erosity of some of th© Kervilles,
whose arms can be seen on one of the
seats. On the floor of the south
aisle is a small marble slab in which
is set a heart of brass with an in-
scription in memory of Sir Robert
Kerville, who died in th© 15th cen-
tury, while on a mission abroad, and


whose heart, enclosed in an iron
casket, was brought home by a monk
for burial in the family chapel. Near
this is an elaborate monument which
tells in stone the story of the end
of this knightly family. Sir Henry
Kerville, who died in 1624, is shown
lying beside hig wife. Beneath are
the etfigies of Gervase the little heir,
in swaddling clothes, who died in in-
fancy, and of Mary, his sister, the
last of the Kervilles, who died at the
age of four, a year after her father’s
death. After Sir Henry’s death, the
estate appears to have been held for
a short time by the Cobbes of Sand-
ringham, probably as trustees. In
the 21st of Charles I. (1645-6), how-
ever, it was delivered to Gregory
Gawsell, a descendent of Thomas
Gawsell, of Watlington, and Cather-
ine Kerville, sister of the Humphrey
Kerville, who married Anne Cobbe.
The Gawsells held considerable estates
in Norfolk in the time of Edward
IV. Gregory Gawsell was a supporter
of the Commonwealth, being one of
the Treasurers of the Eastern Associ-
ation. He was Sheriff in 1649, and
died childless in 1656. Elizabeth
Gawsell, his sister, had married
Arthur Berners, of Finchingfield,
Essex, and their son Hatton Berners,
succeeded to the St. Mary’s estate on
the death of his uncle, Gregory
Gawsell.
The Berners familv was an import-
ant one in Essex, and on the south
side of the parish church at Einch-
ingfield their Chantry chapel still
contains an altar tomb with brass
effigies, clad in heraldic dresses, of
John Berners and hig wife, 1523.
Hatton Berners, son of the aforesaid
Hatton and grandson of Arthur, had
for his wife Bridget, described on a
tombstone in St. Mary’s church as
the “only sister of Sir Simon Leach
of Devonshire, Knight of the Bath.”
A more illustrious relationship than
this might have been claimed, for
the mother of Mrs. Hatton Berners
and of Sir Simon Leach was Lady
Bridget, daughter of Sir Bevil Gran-
ville, one of the boldest and most
successful of the Cavalier leaders


Sir Bevil, on th© first outbreak of
the Civil War, joined the Royal
Standard and, marching into Corn-
wall, rescued the whole county from
th© Parliament, attacked the partisans
of the Commons and routed them at
Bodmin, Launceston and Stratton.
His last and most brilliant action
was at Lansdowne Hill, near Hath,
where he fell in the hour of victory,
sth July, 1643. A monument was
erected on the spot recording his
loyalty, his valour and his death.
At the moment he was slain he had
the patent for the Earldom of Bath
in his pocket, with a letter from
King Charles I. acknowledging his
services. His eldest son took up the
title at the Restoration, and his
daughters were allowed to rank as
Earl’s daughters. A s till more famous
ancestor was Sir Bevil’s grandfather.
Sir Richard Grenville, “ th e pride of
North Devon,” who figures largely in
Kingsley’s “Westward Ho!” and the
story of whose heroic light in the
“ Revenge,” “ at Flores in the Azores,”
has been immortalised by Tennyson
in the well-known ball.ad “which,
while the sea endures, the sea-wolves
of England will love to hear.”
The Berners and Leach families
were both attached to the Royalist
cause. Hatton Berners, at an attempt
to restore Charles II- in 1659, was
ordered to find three hors?s for Col.
Gurdon’s troop, and Simon Leach
was knighted at the Coronation of
Charles 11. on 23rd April, 1661. An
entry in the Register of St. Mary’s
church records the death of Mrs.
Berners in these words: “ Mdam
Bridgett Berners, wife of Hatton
Berners, Esq., dyd at St. Mary’s Hall
Jan. 15th at 5 o th clock in the even-
ing and was buryd at St. Mary’s,
Jann. the 18th, 1705.”
Hatton Berners was High Sheriff
of Norfolk in 1667. He died in 1713,
and was followed by his son Gregory,
who, dying in 1715, was succeeded in
the estate by William Berners, an-
other son of Hatton. William mar-
ried Jane Hotchins, of Lynn, and by
her had several children, one of


whom wag Bridget Berners, who be-
came the wife of John Vancouver.
In the parish register at St. Mary’s
is the following entry: " Bridget ye
daur. of Will. Berners and Jane his
wife bap. Aug. 24, 1715." William
Berners, described as “of Lynn," was
Sheriff in 1717. He died in 1727, and
his wife in 1725. Soon after his death
the estate had to be sold to pay his
debts, and apparently the family
moved into Lynn. From the union
of John Vancouver and bis wife
Bridget there were six children, viz.:
Bridget, baptised 24th April, 1751;
Sarah, baptised 16th April, 1752;
Mary, baptised 13th January, 1753;
Charles and John, baptised 11th Nov.
ember, 1756; George, baptised 16th
March, 1761. The baptism of the
eldest child, Bridget, took place at
All Saints’ church, where her parentg
had been married, and this suggests
that they then lived in South Lynn.
All the other children were baptised
in the parish church of St. Margaret.
In th© cas© of George, the youngest
child, the Vicar, Dr. Charles Bagge,
has, in addition to the date of the
ceremony, specially recorded that of
his birth, 22nd June, 1757, probably
because nearly four years bad inter-
vened between the birth and the
baptism.
For about twenty-two years from
February, 1748, John Jasper Van-
couver held the office of Deputy Col-
lector of Customs, a position of some
responsibility when Lynn ranked as
one of the chief ports of the king-
dom. The report of the Commission-
ers for auditing the public accounts
in 1784 shows that the annual duties
at Lynn exceeded those of all other
ports except London, Bristol, Liver-
pool and Hull. Many of the man-
sions of the Lynn merchants of the
period remain and give some idea
of the princely style in which they
lived. The Deputy Collector’s ap-
pointment was not from the Crown,
but from the Customer and Collector,
a “patentee," whose office was a
sinecure (worth it is said .£1,200 a
year), all the duties being discharged


by his deputy. The Customer and
Collector for whom John Vancouver
first acted was Charles Turner, one
of a powerful local family who dom-
inated the town for about a hundred
years, their names occurring over
and over again in the lists of its
Mayors and Parliamentary Repre-
sentatives. They were allied by mar-
riage to the Walpoles of Houghton,
an earlier Charles Turner, who was
created a Baronet in 1727, having
married Mary Walpole, the sister of
Sir Robert Walpole, the great Prime
Minister (who himself represented
the town in Parliament for forty
years), and Horatio Nelson was a
great-grandchild of this marriage.
Charles Turner, the Collector, was a
second cousin of Sir John Turner,
the third Baronet, and he was suc-
ceeded in the office by a son-in-law of
Sir John, Robert Hales, under whom
John Jasper Vancouver still acted as
deputy. John Vancouver also held
for many years an important ap-
pointment under the Lynn Corpor-
ation, in whose Minute Book, under
date 3rd Feb., 1748, it is recorded that
"This day John Vancouver, Gentle-
man, is by the Deputy Mayor, Aider-
men and Common Council appointed
Collector of the Town Dues until
Michaelmas next.” The town dues
were charges payable to the Corpor-
ation as the Harbour Authority, and
it was usual for the Collector of Cus-
toms to be appointed to the office
of Collector of these dues “as from
its peculiar relation to shipping he
alone oould collect them with advant-
age to the Corporation funds.” Two
sureties had to be found for a five
hundred pound bond with the Cor-
poration, and Charles Turner was
one of them. This appointment was
renewed annually over twenty times.
In 1754 John Vancouver’s mother,
Sarah Vancouver, widow, was accept-
ed as one of the sureties. In 1759-60
John Vancouver and another “sub-
stantial burgess” were chosen to col-
lect the Church rate in one of the
wards of the town, and in 1750 he
and Charles Turner were appointed


Surveyors of Highways in the parish
of South Lynn.
At the Parliamentary elections in
the Borough there must have been
some doings which would shock pres-
ent day politicians. Although there
were only about three hundred voters,
an election in 1746 is said to have
cost Sir John Turner and one of the
Walpoles <£4,000, and on another, in
1767, no less than .£12,000 was spent
by the three candidates. In these
contests “election squibs” played an
important part, and John Vancouv-
er's connection with the Turners
brought him under notice in some of
these effusions. In one he is refer-
red to as “ Vancouver, That little
vagary-harlequino all over,” and in
another we have the following refer-
ence:
“No more that grating sound to
Turner’s ears,
The name of Molineux, alarm our
fears;
No longer wanted in the streets to
Hector
Sir John’s great Bulwark strut, the
great Collector;
While little Van his happy stars
shall bless,
And not one soul shall wish him
to be less.”
In a county election in 1768 John
Vancouver voted for the Tory candi-
dates, de Grey and Wodehouse,
against Coke and Astley, Whigs.
At the time of George’s birth the
Vancouvers were living in a house
on the north side of Fincham, other-
wise New Conduit, street. The
churchwardens’ books show that John
Vancouver from 1752 to 1755 lived in
Tower street. In 1755 he and his
mother purchased the hous e in New
Conduit Street and he was rated
for it in 1756 and 1757, his
name appearing for the fourth house
from the " King’s Head” (until 're-
cently the George Inn, New Conduit
Street), his next-door neighbour be-
ing Robert Underwood, who was Town
Clerk from 1729 to 1767. New Con-
duit street has perhaps undergone


more alteration than any of the Lynn
streets, for the houses on the south
side of it were completely demolished
about 1865, and their sites thrown
into the roadway. Before this it
must have resembled the very narrow
Sedgeford Lane. The Vancouver
house stood west of the present Con-
gregational chapel. The Friends
meeting house and rooms and part
of the Labour Exchange stand on its
site, the older parts of the Friends'
buildings being adapted from por-
tions of John Vancouver's “capital
messuage.” The existing ancient
Gothic doorway opened into a pas-
sage which led to a court yard on
the east or front of the house.
Mr. •F. Potter's house is built
on part of the property, which in-
cluded a fair sized garden or or-
chard. The two previous occupiers
had been Dr. Geo. Hepburn and Dr.
Joseph Taylor. It is very probable
that the ancient doorway was the
entrance to the mansion of an old
time merchant of Lynn, John de
Burghard, Mayor 1326, 1332 and 1337,
whose Will is to be found in the Red
Register. The street was formerly
known as Burghard's Lane.
We know nothing of George Van-
couver's boyhood. He would, most
likely, be sent to the Grammar School
then conducted in the upper part of
the Charnel chapel, adjoining the
parish church, where Eugene Aram’s
arrest must have been witnessed by
some of the contemporaries of the
Vancouver boys.
Nearly all the inhabitants of the
town were dependent on or connected
in some way with the shipping trade,
and the boys must have heard much
of the life of the sea. Lynn sailors
helped in good numbers to make up
the crews of the warships. Many
were pressed men, and there would
be frequent calls by naval vessels to
receive some of these unfortunates.
In 1758 it is recorded that “this
year there was 18d. in the pound
collected every quarter for the Poor
Rates occasioned by the number of
seamen there were impressed for the
Navy whose familiies had relief from


the parish.” One of the ships of the
Royal Navy at this time bore the
name of “ Lynn.” A local diarist
notes in 1759 that the guns of St.
Ann's Fort were fired on October 19th
for the conquest of Quebec.
The Lynn merchant vessels traded
to all parts, the imports of coal and
wine being particularly large, and a
few were engaged in the whale fish-
ery. Barges took a large proportion
of the imports up the river into no
less than eight different counties, and
returned laden with corn for export.
The clang of the workmen's tools
in the yards where vessels were built
and repaired would be familiar sounds
in the town.
Perhaps, later in life when he was
brought into controversy with the
Spaniards, George might remember
how in 1762 " His Majesty's declara-
tion of war against the King of Spain
was publickly read at the Hall door
and Market Cross, upon which oc-
casion the Mayor and Aldermen ap-
peared in their scarlet, and the Com-
mon Council in their usual formal-
ities, attended by the sword and
maces, and the other Corporation
officers, with drums, etc.”
In 1768 the Vancouver children lost
their mother, and five days after
George's eleventh birthday she was
buried at Wiggenhall St. Mary. In
the Register of burials we have this
entry: “Bridget, wife of J. Van-
couver, Gent., June 27, 1768.” She
was probably the last representative
of the Kerville, Gawsell and Berners
families to be buried at St. Mary's.
Dr. Burney, the eminent musician,
lived from 1751 to 1760 in Lynn, where
in 1752 his famous daughter, Fanny
Burney, was born, and afterwards
through his second marriage with a
Lynn lady his connection with the
town was continued. His son. Jam eg
Burney,bom 1750 (afterwards rear-ad-
miral) was second lieutenant on board
the “Adventure,” one of the two ships
taken by Capt, Cook on his second
voyage of discovery. In Dr. Burney's
memoirs we are told how it was on


his recommendation that the Earl of
Sandwich, first Lord of the Admiralty,
whom he met at Houghton Hall, en-
trusted the preparation of the history
of Cook’s first voyage to Dr. Hawkes-
worth, and later on when Dr. Burney
was invited to Hinchingbrooke, Lord
Sandwich’s seat, he obtained the ap-
pointment of his son in one of Cook’s
ships. It has been suggested that a
friendship between the Burney and
V ancouver families led to George V an-
couver being attached to the exped-
ition. Captain Cook’s commission for
this voyage was dated Nov. 28th,1771,
at which time George Vancouver
would be just over fourteen years of
age. The ships sailed from Deptford
9th April, 1772, but did not finally get
away from Plymouth Sound till 13th
July. George Vancouver was rated as
an able seaman, but was placed on the
quarter-deck as a junior officer. To
the boy, just fresh from school, this
voyage must have been a wonderful
experience, crowded, as it was, with
a variety of delights and hardships.
The ships were not chosen for speed
or comfort. They were, in fact,
Whitby-built vessels of the collier
type, similar to those in which Cook
had traded along the English coagt so
many years. The “Resolution," 462
tong burden, carried 112 men, and the
" Adventure," 336 tons, had a crew of
81. A large number of animals and
fowls were also taken, with sufficient
provisions for an extended voyage. It
will be easily seen that the men’s ac-
commodation could not be luxurious.
The outward journey from Plymouth
to Table Bay occupied 109 days. After
leaving the Cape the greatest care
was taken to husband th© stock of
fresh water, and everybody had to
wash in salt water. Three times,dur-
ing the months of December and Janu-
ary in 1772-3, 1773-4 and 1774-5, search
was mad© for th© great southern con-
tinent, until in ©ach case the way
was blocked by walls of ice in the
Antarctic Sea. It is related that on
one occasion when Cook was preparing
to tack, in 72 degrees latitude, young
Vancouver went to the end of the
ship’s bowsprit, and that he used af-


terwards to say he had been nearer
the South Pole than any other man.
The hardships and difficulties experi-
enced were considerable. We read ot
the ships sailing for six weeks among
icebergs, and the naturalist attached
to the expedition speaks of the "dull
hours, days and months passed in this
desolate part of the world." He says
they were almost perpetually wrapped
in thick fogs, beaten with showers
of rain, sleet, hail and snow, sur-
rounded by innumerable islands of
ice, against which they daily ran the
risk of being shipwrecked, and forced
to live upon salt provisions. The
rigging was constantly encrusted with
ice, which cut the hand§ of those who
were obliged to touch it. Fresh water
had to be collected in lumps of ice
floating on the sea when the cold
and the saline element alternately
numbed and scarified the sailors'
hands. No wonder that the men were
glad when the Captain had to abandon
the quest and steer northward again
for New Zealand, Otaheite and the
other delightful islands of the Pacific.
The intervals between these excursions
into the realms of ice were occupied
in surveying the coasts of the previ-
ously discovered islands and cruising
about in search of others. At the
end of the third attempt to find a
southern continent the globe had
been completely circumnavigated in
or near the Antarctic circle and the
southern ocean had been traversed
in all directions. The great object
sought, however, could not be found.
When the ships arrived at Spithead
on 30th July, 1775, after an absence
of three years 16 days, they had
sailed over a greater space of sea
than any ship ever did before, their
tracks forming more than thrice the
circumference of the globe.
While George Vancouver was so
far away from hi s native town en-
during the hardships of an Antarctic
summer, in January, 1773, his father
had died. There is an entry in the
Bt. Margaret’s churchwardens’ ac-
counts under the date 12th January,
1773, of the payment of eight shil-


tings for a peal of the bell Margaret
for John Jasper Vancouver, and on
13th January he was laid to rest
under the shadow of the church of
All Saints, where twenty years be-
fore he had been married. He had
given up his appointment under the
Corporation in September, 1770. No
reason is given in the Records, but
most likely it was failing health.
By his will, dated 21st January, 1771,
Charles Turner, Esq., and the Rev.
Charles Phelpes, vicar of South
Lynn and afterwards of East Winch,
were appointed Executors and charg-
ed with an equal division of his pro-
perty amongst all his children, John
Davies, of Watlington, Esquire, be-
ing named as guardian of the child-
ren until they should attain the age
of 21. The house in which he resid-
ed, with adjoining premises, of which
he was the freeholder, was sold a
year after his death for <£Bso. John
Davis, who was appointed guardian
of the children, was Lord of the
Manor of Watlington. He was
cousin to John Vancouver’s wife,
being, like her, a grandchild of
Hatton Berners. He died in 1778.
John Vancouver, the younger,
seems to have succeeded his father
as Deputy Customer. At any rate,
he was acting in 1784 under Robert
Hales. How long John Vancouver
the younger held his appointment is
not known. He was, however, rated
for a house near th© Customs House
in 1788.


CHAPTER 11,
1776-1780. Second Voyage with Cook.
The interval of rest before Cook
commenced his last and fatal voy-
age was only a short one. On 6th
Feb., 1776, he received his commis-
sion to again command his old ship,
the “ Resolution,” in an expedition
to discover a sea-way from the Paci-
fic to the Atlantic at the north of
the American continent. Previous
attempts had been made to sail from
Bast to West. This time it was
delermined to start from the Pacific
and endeavour to sail eastward to
the Atlantic. The “Discovery,” a
ship of 300 tone, commanded by
Capt. Clerke, was selected to accom-
pany the “Resolution,” and George
Vancouver was appointed as a mid-
shipman on th© smaller vessel. Sail-
ing from Plymouth on 11th July,
1776, Table Bay was reached on 18th
October, ten days less being taken
than on the previous voyage. They
were in New Zealand in February,
1777, and then sailing across the
Pacific from south to north, calling
here and there, discovering islands,
surveying coasts, they arrived off
North America in March, 1778, and,
reaching Nootka Sound on 24th
April, the real business of the ex-
pedition—the search for a passage to
th© Atlantic —began. The usual
hardships began likewise, and in the
cold latitudes the crews continually
lamented their departure from
beautiful Tahiti, and compared un-
favourably the northern people with
those of th© tropical islands. Un-
fortunately, too, provisions seem to
have become scanty, and an occas-
ional gift of fish from natives or a
catch by themselves was hailed by
th© crew with the greatest delight.
Cook now sailed about the North
Pacific in many directions, examin-
ing the coast and searching for an
inlet which should lead to the de-
sired passage, but without success.


The most northerly point reached
was 69° 36% and Cook then came to
the conclusion that the sea in that
region was never free from the Polar
ice which he there encountered.
Retracing his course, the Captain
again reached the Sandwich Islands,
which he had discovered on his out-
ward voyage. The men were full of
joy on arriving at this haven "after
suffering excess of hunger and a num.
her of other hardships most severely
felt for the space of near ten
months." At Hawaii, his last dis-
covery in the Sandwich group, the
great navigator met his tragic death
on 14th Feb., 1779. The command of
the expedition devolved on Capt.
Clerke, who, however, only retained
it a very short time, for he died on
2nd August, and the two vessels
made their way to England, where
they arrived on 4th October, 1780,
minus both their commanders.
Thus ended, most sorrowfully,
Vancouver’s second voyage. He was
now a man of 23, and in the nine years
service under the greatest navigator
of the ago he had gained experience
which enabled him later on to record
hi 8 name indelibly on the map of
the world.
During Cook’s second voyage, Mr.
William Wales acted as Astronomer
on the Resolution. Vancouver being
on the same ship was fortunat© in
having his studies directed by that
eminent mathematician, and years
afterwards he wrote in the journal
of his great voyage, “The west point
of Observatory inlet I distinguished
by calling it Point Wales, after my
much esteemed friend, Mr. Wales,
of Christ’s Hospital; to whose kind
instruction, in the early part of my
life, I am indebted for that inform-
ation which has enabled me to
traverse and delineate these lonely
regions.” Mr. Wales (who wag elect-
ed a Fellow of the Royal Society in
1776) was not, as stated in the Dic-
tionary of National Biography, en-
gaged in Cook’s last voyage; for he
was master of the Royal Mathematical
School at Christ’s Hospital from 1775


till his death in 1798. On this last
voyage the duty of taking observa-
tions on th© Resolution was perform-
ed by Cook and his second lieuten-
ant, Mr. King, while William Bailey,
who had been assistant astronomer
on the previous voyage, was engaged
for that purpose on the Discovery,
to which ship Vancouver was at-
tached.


CHAPTER 111.
1780 —1790. Service Under Kodnet
and Gardner.
After his return to England, Van-
couver lost no time in rising another
step in his profession. On the 19th
October, 1780, he passed his examin-
ation as a Lieutenant, and on the
9th December following he was ap-
pointed to the “ Martin” sloop. Soon
afterwards he was moved into the
“ Fame," a ship of 74 guns with a
crew of 550, which was attached to
the West Indian fleet under the com-
mand of Rodney. This period was a
most critical one in the history of
our foreign possessions. England had
then assuredly to meet, the “three
corners of the world in arms.” Hol-
land, France, Spain were all arrayed
against her and, worst of all, her own
children in the North American Col-
onies had rebelled and thrown off
her rule. Many of her possessions
had gone, and in the West Indies
only Jamaica, Barbadoes and An-
tigua were left to her. Spain had
long coveted Jamaica, and the French
fleet of thirty-six line-of-battle ships
under the Count de Grasse, in the
early part of 1782 made a determined
attempt to capture the island. The
French were to be joined by the
Spanish fleet. The combined fleets
would have amounted to sixty ships
of the line. Rodney, with twelve
ships of the line, joined Hood at Bar-
badoes on 19th February and took
over the command of the British fleet
now numbering thirty-three. Three
other ships which arrived afterwards
brought up the total to thirty-six.
The object of the British Admiral
was to prevent the junction which de
Grasse desired to make with the
Spaniards. On Bth April the French
weighed anchor, but were soon pur-
sued and overtaken by Rodney off
Dominica. After a short fight be-
tween some of the ships on the fol-
lowing day, the French, favoured by


the wind, withdrew from action.
Followed persistently by the British,
de Grasse was reluctantly brought to
action. A great battle lasting twelve
hours took place on 12th April, the
French being totally defeated. Their
loss in killed and wounded amounted
to 9,000; that of the English being
under 1,000. The loss on the “Fame"
was only 15, and on Rodney's ship
the “Formidable” 54. De Grasse wa s
taken prisoner and conveyed to Eng-
land. Jamaica was saved, the naval
power of France and Spain destroyed
and the war at an end. This import-
ant engagement was Vancouver's
only experience of actual warfare.
The “Fame” returned to England in
1783. In the next year Vancouver
was appointed to the “Europe,” and
in her sailed to Jamaica in 1786 under
Commodore Alan (afterwards Lord)
Gardner. He left the “Europa” in
September, 1789, and was appointed
second in command of an exploring
expedition about to be despatched to
the South Seas. A new ship named
the “Discovery” was fitted out under
Vancouver's superintendence, but be-
fore the preparations for the voyage
were completed events happened
which caused the expedition to be
abandoned and which brought to Van-
cover the opportunity which has
made him famous.


CHAPTER IV.
1790 Nootka Dispute.
On the 15th May, 1790, Parliament
was informed by a message from the
King of a fresh quarrel with Spain,
and for a time it looked as if noth-
ing could prevent an outbreak of
hostilities between the two countries.
It appears that one John Meares,
formerly a commander in the Eoyal
Navy, in May, 1788, in a trading ship
called the "Felice,” entered Nootka
Sound on the north-western coast of
America, where he was soon after-
wards joined by two other ships, the
“ Iphigenia” and the “ North-West
America.” He traded with the In-
dians and purchased from the chiefs
Maquilla and Calicum, to whom the
district belonged, the whole of the
land that forms Friendly Cove,
Nootka Sound, in his Britannic
Majesty’s name for “eight or ten
sheets of copper and some trifling
articles.” Meares then sailed for
China, leaving behind the " Iphi-
genia” and the “North-West Amer-
ica” with instructions that they were
to winter in the Sandwich Islands.
When these two vessels returned to
Nootka in the following spring they
were seized by the commander of a
Spanish frigate. The captains and
crews of the English ships were made
prisoners, and on the arrival shortly
afterwards of two other vessels, the
“Argonaut” and the "Princess
Royal,” belonging to Meares, these
also were seized. The Spaniards
justified A heir action by the allega-
tion that the coast and the adjacent
seas belonged to Spain and that any
foreign ships trading there were guilty
of smuggling, if not piracy. Meares,
as soon as he heard of the outrages,
proceeded to England and complained
to His Majesty’s Government on 30th
April, 1790. Satisfaction and repar-
ation were at once required from
Spain. As the Spanish Government
did not comply with the English de-


mands, a message from His Majesty
was on 15th May laid before Parlia-
ment containing information of the
acts of violence complained of and
expressing the King's determination
to support the honour of his crown
and the rights of the English people.
The House of Commons unanimously
voted an address approving the policy
adopted by the Government, and voted
a million pounds for the purposes of
enforcing the rights of the country.
Preparations for war were now made
by both countries. A large English
fleet known as “the Spanish arma-
ment” was assembled under Lord
Howe. Spain, however, at last gave
way, and agreed that the settlement
at Nootka Sound was to be restored
and reparation made for the injuries
sustained by Meares. It was further
agreed that British subjects should
enjoy free navigation and fishing
rights in the Pacific Ocean and South
Seas provided that they should not
go within ten leagues of any part of
the coast already occupied by Spain.
Arrangements were made that an
English officer should be sent out "to
receive back in form the territory
on which the Spaniards had seized,”
and at the same time to make hn
accurate survey of the coast north-
wards from the 30th degree of north
latitude. For this duty Vancouver
was .selected. On the abandonment
of the proposed expedition in the
“Discovery” he had been appointed
to the "Courageux,” commanded by
Gardner. When the “Courageux”
was paid off Vancouver was promoted
to the rank of Commander, 15th
December, 1700. The “Discovery,”
being already fitted *'or a voyage, was
selected for the expedition to Nootka,
and Vancouver was appointed to com-
mand her. The burthen of the vessel
was only 340 tons, and that of her
armed tender, the " Chatham” (Lieut.
Wm. Eobt. Broughton, commander)
135 tons, and there were 100 men on
the “Discovery,” and 45 on the
" Chatham.”
Vancouver tells us that the Dis-
covery was copper-fastened, sheathed
with plank and coppered over, while


the Chatham was only sheathed with
copper. The former mounted ten
four-pounders and ten swivels; the
latter, four three-pounders and six
swivels. He expresses his satisfac-
tion with the provisions furnished
for the voyage and names several of
the articles supplied. Sour-krout and
portable soup were sent in large pro-
portions, and for medicines, among
other things, Dr. Jenner’s powders,
vitriolic elixir, and a hundred-weight
of Peruvian bark. There was also a
liberal assortment of various com-
modities, useful and ornamental, to
help in the establishment of friendly
intercourse with the natives. The
vessels wer e supplied with everything
necessary for protection against any
hostile attempts of the native Indians,
while for the “amusement and enter-
tainment of such a s were peaceably
and friendly disposed” there was a
“ most excellent assortment of well
prepared fireworks.”
By the written instructions, dated
Bth March, 1791, the ships were to
proceed to the Sandwich Islands and,
while wintering there, to examine
and survey the islands. As soon as
the weather should be favourable in
the following February or March
they were to repair to the north-west
coast of America for the purpose of
acquiring a more complete knowledge
of it. Orders from the Government
with reference to taking over the
buildings and land seized by the
Spaniards were to be sent to the
Sandwich Islands by another vessel.
In the examination of the coast the
principal objects to be kept in view
were: Ist, To acquire information
with respect to any water communi-
cation between the north-west coast
and the country upon the opposite
side of the continent. 2ndly, To as-
certain the number, extent and situ-
ation of any settlements made by
any European nation, and the time
when such settlement was made.
In the prosecution of the host-
named object particular attention
was to be paid to the examination


of the “supposed straits of Juan de
i'uca."
Great care was to be taken to
avoid giving any ground of jealousy
or complaint to the subjects of His
Catholic Majesty, and to co-operate
with any Spanish ships which might
be met with employed on similar
service.
All the work was expected to b©
completed so that the ships could
return to England in the summer of
1793.
Additional instructions, dated 20th
August, 1791, were duly sent to Van-
cover by the “ Dcedalue” transport
to receive from the Spanish officer
commanding at Nootka possession of
the buildings and districts or parcels
of land which were occupied by His
Majesty’s subjects in the month of
April, 1789.


CHAPTER V
1791-2 New Holland, Society anl
Sandwich Islands, New
Albion, Strait of Juan db
Puca & Vancouver Island.
The Discovery left Deptford on the
7th Jan., 1791. This was the first
trial of the ship under sail, and she
satisfied Vancouver that he had a
“handy and in all other respects a
very comfortable vessel.” She was de-
tained in the Long Reach taking on
board ordnance stores and other
things from Deptford dockyard, leav-
ing on the 26th for Portsmouth, where
she arrived on sth Feb. Certain de-
fects in the ship's head being reme-
died, Portsmouth was left on 3rd
March, and on the 12th Falmouth
was reached. Here the Discovery had
to wait for the Chatham, whose pre-
paration had not been so forward.
Both ships sailed out of Carrack Road
on Ist April, and Vancouver records
that “at midnight we took a long
farewell of our native shores.”
The choice of route to the Pacific
Ocean having been left to Vancouver,
he decided to go by way of the Cape
of Good Hope. The Chatham was
found to be a bad sailer and “very
crank.” Cape Town was reached on
10th July, Here four seamen, who
seemed unfitted to the service, were
replaced by others. The precautions
taken for the preservation of the
health of the crews are described as
follows: The store rooms were "clear,
ed, cleaned and washed with vinegar,”
and notwithstanding the weather was
hot and the smoke and heat were in-
convenient and disagreeable, good fires
were burning between decks in the
fore part of every day to keep up a
constant circulation of fresh and pure
air throughout the ship.
The vessels left the Cape on 17th
August, “saluting the garrison with
eleven guns, which were equally re<-


turned.” Before leaving, several of
the crew were attacked
with dysentery, and a marine died
after the ship sailed.
Australia, then called New Holland,
was the next destination, and land
was sighted on 26th September. A
conspicuous promontory at the south-
west corner of the continent was
given the name of “ Cape Chatham”
“in honour of that noble earl who
presided at the Board of Admiralty
on our departure.” Sailing eastward
along the coast they discovered a
capacious harbour which Vancouver
named “King George the Third’s
Sound.” On the 29th the British
■colours were displayed. His Majesty’s
health drunk, and formal possession
was taken “of the country from the
land we saw north-westward of Cape
Chatham so far as we might explore
its coasts.” Various capes, islands
and mountains were named as the
ships proceeded. Storms and con-
trary winds kept the ships in the
newly discovered sound, the time be-
ing employed in surveying the inlet
and the land on its edge, until the
11th October, when the voyage was
continued eastward. On the 21st Oe-
tober Termination Island was found,
and so named because it wag the end
of the researches on thig coast. The
length of coast surveyed extended to
110 leagues. No natives appear to
have been met with, but deserted vil-
lages were seen and extraordinary
devastation of the forests had been
caused by fires. Descriptions arp given
in the journal of the voyage of the
animal and vegetable life observed,
and of such minerals a® came under
notice. For the benefit of those who
might visit the country afterwards,
vine cuttings and water cresse s were
planted and several kinds of seeds
were sown.
On leaving New Holland a south-
easterly course was steered, and on
the 26th October Van Dieman’s Land
(now Tasmania) was sighted. Round,
ing that island, the ships made for
Dusky Bay in New Zealand (which
Vancouver had previously visited in


1773 with Capt. Cook) and they arriv-
ed there on 2nd November. A violent
gale was encountered here, the Dis-
covery being driven from her anchor-
age and sustaining considerable dam-
age to her sails and rigging. It was
decided to put in at Facile Harbour
inside the Bay, and some time was
spent there in repairing the vessels.
When these repairs were well ad-
vanced an excursion was made in
three boats over the spacious Bay
and the upper part of the northern
arm, the onlj part not examined by
Cook, and by him called “Nobody
knows what," was explored. This
arm was found to be divided into
two branches, leaving (what Cook
called Apparent Island), a peninsula
joined to the main land by a high
but narrow ridge of mountains. The
heads of these tWo branches Van-
couver humorously designated “ Some-
body knows what." Facile Harbour
and Anchor Island Harbour were
carefully surveyed during the stay.
On the 22nd November the ships sail-
ed out of Dusky Bay, the health of
the crew (many of whom had been
sick since leaving Cape Town) per-
fectly re-established. Only one with a
chronic complaint and two with
wounds were on the surgeon's list.
The care of his men’s health seems
always to have been uppermost in
Vancouver’s mind, and “on the most
trilling occasion of indisposition, no
person was ever permitted to attend
hi s duty." This was Vancouver’s
hfth visit to New Zealand.
The next appointed rendezvous was
Matavai Bay in Otaheite, one of the
Society Islands. On the way a cluster
of seven craggy islands, not seen by
Cook, extending about six miles, was
discovered and named from their
dangerous position “The Snares.”
Another island which Vancouver
named Oparo was discovered on 22nd
December. Some of the natives came
off to the ship, and after consider-
able persuasion went on board, where
they were presented with various
articles. Owing to these gifts, the
Captain says, "we shortly had as


many visitors as it was pleasant to
entertain.” The Discovery on reach-
ing Matavai Bay found the Chatham
already there. On the way Lieut.
Broughton had discovered and taken
possession of an island which he
named ChatlTam Island. On landing
he had met some natives and tried
to barter with them, but though will-
ing and anxious to take, they gave
nothing in return. Some of the
natives proved hostile in the end,
and unfortunately one was killed by
the English in self defence. Van-
couver expresses hig satisfaction at
finding when the two ships met “that
every individual composing the soci-
ety of each vessel was in a most per-
fect state of health.” While here the
Captain made some strict regulations
for trading with the natives.
The hospitable Otaheitans (who
have pleased every voyager who has
touched at their charming and fruit-
ful island) were delighted by the visit
of the Englishmen. They crowded on
board as soon as the Discovery was
anchored. Vancouver wag grieved to
find that most of the friends he had
left in 1777 were dead. The king
Otoo wag still living on another is-
land, but had resigned his kingdom
to his eldest son, a boy 9 or 10 years
old, who had taken the nam e of Otoo,
the father (whom Vancouver speaks
of as “my old friend”) now calling
himself Pomurrey.
The first day of 1792 was observed
as a holiday by the crews. " Every-
one had as much fresh pork and plum,
pudding as he could make use of; and
lest in the voluptuous gratifications
of Otaheite we might forget our
friends in old England, all hands
were served a double allowance of
grog to drink the healths of their
sweethearts and friends at home."
Perhaps to account for the omission
of “wives” from the toast list, Van-
couver adds “ It is somewhat singular
that the gunner of the Discovery was
the only married man of the whole
party.


The stay at Otaheite extended over
three weeks, during which a small
boat was built and the vessels over-
hauled. Friendly intercourse was
preserved with the natives, presents
were exchanged, and on one occasion
they were treated to fireworks, but
another promised display later was
withheld as a punishment for the
theft of some linen. Axes were looked
upon as the most valuable presents
by the native men. Red cloth and
linen were also much in request, while
the ladies most desired scissor s and
(vanity of vanities!!) looking glasses.
Vancouver laments that tbe islanders
were neglecting their own. manufac-
tures and becoming more and more
dependent on occasional callers for
various European commodities. The
old chief Pomurrey was sent for and
wag found to have a “perfect recol-
lection” of Vancouver, who, he ob-
served, however, “ looked very old
since we had parted.” Pomurrey at
one sitting drank a bottle of brandy
without diluting it. This, as might
be expected, produced violent con-
vulsions, but, after an hour’s sleep he
“ arose to all appearances as much
refreshed with his nap as if he had
retired perfectly sober,” The old
man wanted more drink, and on his
being refused and expostulated with,
he accused Vancouver of being a
stingy fellow. The latter determined
to cure him by letting him have as
much brandy or rum as he chose to
call for. In less than a week the
cure was made, Pomurrey ceasing to
ask for spirits and being satisfied
with a few glasses of wine at and
after dinner. One of the chiefs
brought for inspection a portrait of
Oapt. Cook drawn by Mr. Webber in
1777. This picture was kept in the
house of the chief of Matavai and had
become a public register. On the back
of it was recorded the fact that the
“Pandora,” the ship despatched to
search for the “Bounty” mutineers,
had quitted the island on Bth May,
1791. It will be remembered that the
Bounty left England in December,
1787, arrived at Matavai Oct., 1788,
and in April, 1789, some of the crew.


flattered with the hopes of a happy
life among the Otaheitans, and also
attracted by some of the women, who
are described by the captain of the
Bounty as “ handsome, mild and
cheerful in their manners and con-
versation," so far forgot their duties
and position as English sailors as to
rise in mutiny, casting off the cap-
tain and those who were loyal to him.
The .Pandora was sent to search for
the mutineers, and, as stated, had
only left Otaheite with 6 ome of them
seven months be. ore Vancouver’s
visit. The subsequent history of the
remainder of the mutineers is roman-
tic. Years afterwards the sole sur-
vivor and the children of some of his
guilty companions were discovered on
an island of the Pacific called “Pit-
cairn” Island, and that island and
another, —Norfolk Island —are still
peopled by descendants of the mutin.
eers. Vancouver frequently saw some
of the women who had infatuated the
mutineers, and he remarks that they
“were not such as we should have
imagined could possibly have tempted
Englishmen to so unpardonable a
breach of their duty,” and indeed he
speaks very disparagingly of the
beauty of the women, his opinion dif-
fering considerably from that of Capt.
Bligh of the “Bounty.” The account
given by Vancouver of his stay at
Otaheite is lengthy and full of inter-
est, giving as it does minute descrip-
tions of the natives, their customs
and ceremonies.
Our voyagers left on 24th January,
1792, directing their course northward,
having now for the first time pointed
their vessels’ heads towards the grand
object of the expedition, and on the
Ist March they came in sight of
Owhyhee.one of the Sandwich Islands.
The reception at these islands was not
of such a hospitable character as at
thfc Society Islands, and difficulty was
experienced at Owhyhee in getting a
supply of water. At Woahoo and
Attowai the inhabitants were a little
more friendly, but still they compared
unfavourably with those of the is-
lands previously visited, and Van-
couver speaks with great disgust of


their morals. They found some Eng-
lishmen living at Attowai engaged in
collecting sandal wood and pearls for
an American trader. An elderly chief
named Enemoh affected to recollect
Vancouver’s former visit with Capt.
Cook, adding that he was present
when Vancouver gave a lock of his
hair to another chief named Taio,
who had ever since preserved and car-
ried the relic about with him. This
incident appears to have been im-
pressed on Enemoh’s memory by his
being refused a similar pledge of
friendship, while it had quite gone
from Vancouver’s recollection. The
visit to the Sandwich Islands was con-
cluded on 16th March. At one time
great apprehensions were felt that
some attack might be made, and
watchfulness was observed to guard
against any such treachery. Before
leaving, however, a better opinion of
the natives appears to have been
formed, and they were treated to a
firework display. Presents were ex-
changed as usual. The chief desire of
the natives was for firearms, but their
requests for these were firmly refused.
On 17th April Vancouver arrived,
in about 40 c N. latitude, within two
miles of the coast of New Albion, as
the country north of Mexico and Cali-
fornia,now known as Oregon and Wash.
ington in the United States, was then
called. This name of “New Albion"
was given by Sir Francis Drake. Here
the expedition had (after an absence
from England of more than twelve
months) arrived at a point where the
real work for which it was despatched
was about to begin. At this time
very little appears to have been known
of the country bordering on the
north-east of th© Pacific ranging be-
tween California and Alaska. A map
prepared after Cook’s last voyage
shows that there was more familiarity
with Alaska and Behring’s Strait,
where names are thickly studded all
along the coast line. Cook had called
at Nootka, the entrance to which he
had named “King George’s Sound,"
but he had no idea when he landed
ther© that he was on a large island
and consequently what we now know


as Vancouver Island is not shown as
detached from the mainland. So also,
a little further north, we do not find
Queen Charlotte Islands marked.
Cape Ferpetua, Cape Foulweather and
Cape Flattery at the entrance to Juan
de Fuca Strait are names given by
Cook, while north of Nootka we have
the vague statement “ Land seen by
the Spaniards 1775.”
After Cook’s time, certain parts of
the coast were visited by various
traders in search of furs. Nathaniel
Fortlock in the “ King George,” with
George Dixon in the “ Queen Char-
lotte,” during the years 1786-7 traded
along the coast southward from Cook’s
river to Nootka. Dixon discovered
and named Queen Charlotte Islands
and Queen Charlotte’s Sound after
his vessel. John Meares was at Prince
William’s Sound in 1786, and at Noot.
ka in 1788. His transactions with the
chiefs at the latter place may be
looked upon as having laid the found-
ation of British dominion in Western
Canada. ll e published in 1790 an ac-
count of his voyages illustrated by
engravings and maps. A French
edition was also published. On one
of the maps he indicates an alleged
track of the American sloop Washing,
ton by a channel from Juan de Fuca
Strait round what he terms “North-
ern Archipelago” to an entrance north
of Queen Charlotte Isla/nds. George
Dixon, in 1791, published a vigorous
attack on Meares for misrepresenting
in hi s book important facts relative
to geography and commerce, including
the map referred to above. It cer-
tainly seems that no reliance can be
placed on the statement that the
Washington circumnavigated Van-
couver Island. Captain Robert Gray,
who was in command of the ship at
the time she was said to have made
the voyage, disclaimed the honour.
Vancouver was fortunate enough to
meet Gray in command of another
ship, the “Columbia,” just before
reaching the Straits of Juan de Fuca,
and he says in his journal: “It is not
possible to conceive anyone to be mor e
astonished than was Mr. Gray, on his
being made acquainted, that his auth-


ority had been quoted, and the track
pointed out that he had been said to
have made in th© sloop Washington.
In contradiction to which, he assured
the officers that he had penetrated
only 50 miles into the straits in ques-
tion, in an E.S.E. direction; that he
found the passage five leagues wide;
and that he understood from th©
natives that th© opening extended a
considerable distance to the north-
ward; that this was all th© inform-
ation he had acquired respecting this
inland sea, and that he returned into
the ocean, by th© same way he had
entered.” Gray was succeeded in the
command of the Washington by Capt.
John Kendrick, and Meares, in a re-
ply io Dixon, stated that he got his
information from a man who talked
with Capt. Kendrick. Kendrick, how.
ever, did not afterwards make any
claim to the important discovery of
the passage, which it is safe to assume
he would have done had h© mad© the
voyage. The weakness of th© unsup-
ported hearsay evidence on which
Meares relied justifies us in classing
the supposed track of the Washing-
ton with other very manifest errors
in th© chart. Reports had been ob-
tained from th© natives that Nootka
was on an island; both Meares and
Gray had sailed a short distance up
the strait; and these facts may have
been the basis of the conjectural track
which Meares marked on hi s map.
Vancouver sighted new Albion,
slightly south of Cape Mendocino, and
he then followed th© coast in a north-
erly direction. Point St. George,
Dragon Rocks, St. George’s Bay, and
Cape Orfordi (after the noble earl
of that title “my much respected
friend”) being named on the way.
The Earl of Orford at this time was
the celebrated Horace Walpole, who
had previously been one of the mem-
bers for King’s Lynn. When, how-
ever, Vancouver left England, George
Walpole, a grandson of the great
Prime Minister, held th© title, and it
was in his honour that the cape was
named, hig death, on sth December,
1791, not being known to the voyagers.
Cap© Perpetua being passed they had


“nearly reached the northern extent
of the coast seen thereabouts by Capt.
Cook.” On the 28fh April Point
Grenville in lat. 47 p 22' was passed
and named after the Eight Hon. Lord
Grenville. On the 29th the ships were
brought to anchor within the entrance
to the Staits of Juan de Fuca.
There is a good deal of mystery
about the connection of the name of
Juan de Fuca with this estuary. De
Fuca is said to have been a Greek
pilot, in the service of Spain, who,
in 1592, entered, on the coast of North
America, “ a broad inlet of the sea
between 47° and 48 e ” and to have
sailed therein more than twenty days
until he came, as he thought, into the
Atlantic. He then returned by the
same route. By some it is thought
that de Fuca really navigated the
Gulf separating Vancouver Island
from British Columbia, and that when
he reached Queen Charlott© Sound he
imagined that he had passed from
th© Pacific to the Atlantic, and dis-
covered the north-west passage.
Others, again, are of opinion, from
statements in th© narrative which are
at variance with fact, that there is
great suspicion “as to whether the
reported voyage was ever performed
or the hero of it ever existed.” The
balance of evidence, however, seems
to favour de Fuca’s claim to the dis-
covery of the strait. Captain Bark-
ley, of the British trading ship “Im-
perial Eagle” rediscovered the inlet
in 1787, but did not explore it. Bark-
ley Sound on the south-west side of
Vancouver Island was discovered and
named by Captain Barkley at the
sam© time. It is generally admitted
that Captain Meares was the first
Englishman to actually enter the
strait, and he it was who designated
it by the name of Juan de Fuca. He
sailed up a short distance and then,
being attacked by natives, wag com-
pelled to return. It is evident that
there were great expectations that
this strait might prove the beginning
of a waterway connecting the Pacific
with the Atlantic, it having been
“ alledged that the Spaniards have re.
cently found an entrance in the lati-


tude of 47° 45' north, which in 27
days course brought them to the vic-
inity of Hudson’s bay." It will be
remembered too that Vancouver was
enjoined to pay particular attention
to this strait. On 30th April the
ships sailed up the inlet along the
southern shore and, as they proceeded,
conjectures as to its nature varied
from hour to hour.
At one time, high land just rising
from the horizon ahead seemed to in-
dicate a speedy termination of the
inlet. Then, the land not being
visibly connected, it was thought
that it might form a cluster of
islands. A very conspicuous craggy
mountain covered with snow was
seen’rising “apparently at a very re-
mote distance.’’ This mountain, the
highest peak in the Cascade range,
and which we now know to be 10,700
feet in height, was given the name
of Mount Baker in compliment to
Vancouver’s 3rd lieutenant, who first
observed it. By the evening a long,
low, sandy point on the Southern
shore was reached, which was named
New Dungeness from its great re-
semblance to Dungeness in the Eng-
lish channel, and here anchor was
cast. This was almost directly op-
posite the site, on the northern side
of the Strait, where the city of Vic-
toria now stands. May-day was spent
in searching for a harbour and a
supply of water both of which were
found, and next day the ships were
taken into an inlet which was duly
named “ Port Discovery." The beau,
tiful surrounding country called to
the minds of the wanderers “certain
delightful and beloved situations in
old England." Vancouver was charm-
ed by the He says, “To de-
scribe the of this region
will, on some future occasion, be a
very grateful task to the pen of a
skilful panegyrist. The serenity of
the climate, the innumerable pleas-
ing landscapes, and the abundant fer.
tility that unaissidted nature puts
forth, require only to be enriched by
the industry of man with villages,
mansions, cottages, and other build-
ings, to render it the most lovely
country that can be imagined; whilst
the labour of the inhabitants would
be amply rewarded in the bounties


which nature seems ready to bestow
■on cultivation.” The country was,
however, nearly destitute of inhab-
itants. Those seen were friendly and
resembled the natives of Nootka, but
were cleaner. They bartered bows
and implements for knives, trinkets,
etc., and were very anxious to sell,
for some pieces of copper, two child-
ren, each about six or seven years of
age. An encampment was formed on
shore and the following is a descrip-
tion given of the work of overhaul-
ing the vessels: —" On Thursday
morning the 3d we sat seriously to
work on board, and on shore where
the sailmakers were repairing and
altering the sails; coopers inspecting
the casks; gunners airing the pow-
der; and parties cutting wood, brew-
ing spruce beer, and filling water;
whilst those on board were as busily
•employed in necessary repairs about
the rigging; getting the provisions
to hand; clearing the main and after
holds for the reception of shingle
ballast, of which we had for some
time stood in much need; some of
our carpenters were stopping leaks
about the bows, and the rest assist-
ed in caulking the Chatham's sides.”
Eastward of Port Discovery an im-
portant opening, with many
branches, was found and named
Admiralty Inlet. This name has now
nearly gone out of use, having been
superseded by that of Puget Sound.
The Discovery’s yawl and launch and
the Chatham’s cutter were engaged
from the 7th to the 14th May in ex-
ploring and surveying the offshoot
from Admiralty Inlet named Hood’s
Canal, after Lord Hood, a harbour
at the entrance being called Port
Townshend “in honour of the noble
marquis of that name.’’
The Townshends are intimately con.
nected with the history of Norfolk.
Many of them sat in Parliament for
the county or some of its boroughs.
Sir Horatio Townshend was one of
the six commoners who with six peers
wenf to the Hague to entreat Charles
11. to return to his dominions. For
his services in bringing about the
“Restoration” he was. in 1661, created
Baron Townshend of Lynn Regis, and
in 1682 he was advanced to the dig-
nity of Viscount Townshend of Rayn-
ham (the family seat), about eighteen


miles from Lynn. The great-grand-
son of the Ist Viscount was advanced
to the dignity of Marquis Townehend,
and he is the Marquis to whom Van-
couver her® refers. This nobleman,
who was godson to George 1., had a
distinguished career. At the siege of
Quebec he became commander-in-chief
after the death of Wolf, and to him
the town surrendered. He also fought
at Dettingen, Pontenoy, Culloden and
Laffeldt. He was Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland for five years, and held many
other important posts.
At various points along the coast
tall straight poles like hag staves or
beacons 90 to 100 feet high were ob-
served but for what purpose these
were fixed Vancouver was unable to
discover. Similar poles are several
times referred to by him, and he al-
ways seems curious to know their use.
it has since been ascertained that
the Indians used the poles for the
purpose of catching ducks. Nets were
stretched from one pole to another,
and in these the ducks were caught
at night or during thick weather.
In one place two poles, about fifteen
feet high from the ground, had on
the top of each a human head re-
cently placed there. A singular
method of disposing of the dead was
noted, canoes suspended between two
or more trees twelve feet from the
ground contained the skeletons of
two or more persons. Baskets hold-
ing the skeletons of young children
were found suspended on high trees,
and human bones were found scat-
tered about the beach in great num-
bers.
The ships left Port Discovery on
18th May, the Chatham going north
to explore what looked like an archi-
pelago of islands, and the Discovery
continuing the examination of Ad-
miralty Inlet. The survey of the In-
let lasted a fortnight. A harbour
(now a naval station of the United
States), on the western side of Ad-
miralty Inlet, was named Port
Orchard, after H. M. Orchard, who
is entered on the Discovery’s muster
roll as a clerk. South of this har-
bour an island was named Vashon’s
Island “ after my friend Captain
V ashon, of the Navy.” The southern
extremity of Admiralty Inlet was
named Puget’s Sound, after one of


the officers, a branch of the Inlet to
the north-east being termed Possession
bound. Inside the latter, at a place
named after “ a particular friend"
Penn's Cove, a deserted village
was found with several sepulchres
rormed exactly like a sentry box.
one of the witnesses to Vancouver's
will was Granville Penn (a grandson
of the founder of Pennsylvania), and
he may have been the “ particular
friend" referred to. Mr. Whidbey,
who circumnavigated the island
named after him on tlie east of the
entrance to Admiralty Inlet, met with
some natives who had not, appar-
ently, seen any Europeans beiore.
They showed a great desire to be
satisfied as to the colour of the vis-
itors' skins; making signs that the
hands and faces were painted white,
and when convinced of their mistake
“ their astonishment was inexpress-
ible.” The western arm of Possession
bound was named Port Gardner, after
\Tce-Admiral Sir Alan Gardner, un-
der whom Vancouver had previously
served, and the smaller or eastern
one wag designated Port Susan, after,
it is said. Admiral Gardner's wife.
The tth June, being the anniversary
of the King's birtnday, all hands
were served “as good a dinner as we
were able to provide them, with
double allowance of grog to drink the
King's health,” and formal possession
was then taken of the coast from that
part of New Albion in- lat. 3S° 20'
north and long. 236° 26 1 east to the
entrance to the “supposed” straits of
Juan de Fuca; as likewise all the
islands within the straits and in the
interior sea, which was honoured with
the name of the Gulf of Georgia, the
continent binding the said gulf be-
ing named New Georgia, in honour
of His Majesty.
The north and west points respect-
ively of Admiralty Inlet were named
Point Partridge and Point Wilson,
the latter alter Capt. Geo. Wilson,
of the Navy, "my much esteemed
friend.” The name of the other point
is accounted for by the fact that
Captain Vancouver’s brother, John,
married, in 1786, Martha, daughter of
Henry Partridge, K.C., Recorder of
King’s Lynn, by his second wife,
Alice, daughter of Simon Taylor,
merchant. The Taylors lived in the
house in Queen Street, Lynn, now


known as Clifton House. The initials
S. T. and the date 1708 may still be
seen on a cistern he.ad on the front
of the house. One of the family, also
named Simon Taylor, Mayor in 1675
and 1681, and Member of Parliament
1678-1684, was knighted 9th July, 1684.
Tile Partridge family is still repre-
sented in Lynn by a member of the
legal pro.ession.
The ships were now headed north
from Admiralty Inlet up the Gulf
of Georgia, and on Bth June Cypress
island (named from the abundance of
upright cypress) was reached, and the
Discovery’s anchors were oast inStmw-
berry Day on the western side of the
island, but the Chatham w T as driven
to the eastward by a strong flood tide
and lost her stream anchor. The
anchorage in Strawberry Day being
much exposed it was decided to pro-
ceed further north, and on 11th June
Birch Bay (named from the abund-
ance of black birch trees) was
reached. Here it was arranged to
station the ships while the coast was
examined from boats. Mr. Whidbey,
in the Discovery’s cutter, attended by
the Chatham’s launch, was to make
further observations to the south-
east; and Vancouver in the yawl, ac-
companied by Mr. Puget in the
launch, was to proceed further up
th© main inlet of the gulf. Van-
couver wa© absent from the ships
from the 12th to 23rd June. It is
evident from the care that was taken
to explore every opening on the con-
tinental side that Vancouver had al-
ways in mind th© hope of discovering
some inlet which would prove the be-
ginning of a navigable passage to the
Atlantic. A point north-west of Birch
Bay was named Point Roberts “after
my esteemed friend and predecessor
in the Discovery,” and on the 13th
an important inlet was reached. This
was named Burrard’e Canal, after Sir
Harry Burrard, of the Navy, and it
is particularly interesting from the
fact that on th© shores of this inlet
now stands th© city which bears the
name of th© valiant sailor who com-
manded the little expedition which
sailed up the channel on that June
day in 1792. The growth of th© city
of Vancouver is phenomenal. The
whole of th© little town which stood
on the site was completely destroyed
by fire on 13th June, 1886. The in-


habitants pluckily set to work at once
to rebuild their homes. A charter of
incorporation was granted, the name
of Vancouver being given to the new
town. in fifteen years the population
reached 26,000. By 1003 it had risen
to 30,000, and it now amounts to
200,000. The city is the mainland
terminus of the Canadian Pacific
Kailway, and it has one of the finest
harbours in the world. The shipping
returns for 1019 show a total of 23,000
vessels entering and leaving the har-
bour with a registered tonnage of
over ten millions. Where now stands
this important town, with its hand-
some buildings, electric cars, ship-
building yards and other indications
of prosperity, our voyagers only saw
“ two or three natives straggling about
the beach."
Point Grey on the southern side
of the entrance to Burrard’s Canal,
was named after Capt. Geo, Grey, of
tile Navy, and the point on the north,
ern side was named Point Atkinson.
Howe’s Sound (so named in honour
of Admiral Earl Howe), Ijing between
Point Atkinson and Point Gower and,
further to the north-west, Jtervis's
Canal (after Admiral Sir John Jervis)
were carefully explored before the
course of the boats was directed to-
wards the station where the ships had
been left. In each case it was found
that the ©astern range of snowy moun-
tains was an “ impenetrable barrier
to that inland navigation of which
we had heard so much, and had sought
with sanguine hopes and ardent ex-
ertions to discover."
On the way back to the ships two
Spanish vessels of war were met with.
These vessels were engaged in survey-
ing the gulf, and Vancouver records
li is mortification in finding that others
had already examined the external
shores a few miles beyond where his
own researches had so far extended.
I'rom the Spaniards the news was
obtained that Sen. Quadra, the Span-
ish commander, was waiting the ar-
rival at Nootka of the English ex-
pedition in order to necociate the re-
storation of those territories to the
crown of Great Britain.
On the 23rd June the English ships
were reached, a distance of 330 miles
having been traversed in the boats.
The next day the ships sailed out of


Birch Bay and, accompanied by the-
S'panish vessels, proceeded up the
gulf to the north-westward. A
large number of whales playing about
in every direction favoured the asser-
tion that a passage to the ocean would
be found by persevering in the pre-
sent course, and in that course,always
keeping close to the continental shore
and anxiously examining every inlet,.
Vancouver proceeded cautiously on
the voyage which, ultimately on 9th
August, 1792, took him again into the
Pacific Ocean, and thus proved that
the land to the westward of his
course, and which now bears his
name, was an island. The ships an-
chored in several places, and survey-
ing parties were sent out in the
boats.* How thoroughly their work
was done may be best judged by re-
ferring to the chart of the locality
published with the History of the
Voyage. The navigation was often
difficult. Dangerous intricate chan-
nels, studded with rocky islets, had
to be threaded; and when the Pacific
had been nearly reached, the Dis-
covery grounded on a bed of sunken
rooks. As the water fell, the situa-
tion became alarming. When the
tide was at the lowest the ship’s fore-
foot was in only about 3i feet of
water, while her stern was in four
fathoms. Fortunately, the weather
being favourable, there wa s no swell
and she floated off with the next
tide without having received any ap-
parent injury. The Chatham also
grounded soon afterwards, but was
got off without much difficulty. Many
of the names bestowed during the
voyage, on headland, island and inlet
still remain in use. Point Mudge,
Johnstone’s Strait and Broughton’s
Archipelago were named after officers
in the expedition. Naval friends
were honoured by Call’s Canal,
Knight’s Canal, Point Duff and
Mount Stephens. Point Upwood at
the southern end of Texada Island
was named “in remembrance of an
early friendship.’’ Most likely this
was after a family named Upwood of
Terrington, near Lynn. They ac-
quired the Lovell’s Hall estate in
1688. The last male representative
was Vicar of Terrington, and he
died in 1868. Desolation Sound ob-
tained its name from the “desolate,.


rude and inhospitable aspect ” of the
surrounding country. The
at the entrance to this Sound were
respectively named Point Sarah and
Point Mary. Two of his sisters bors
these names, and though Vancouver
does not tell us so there can be little
doubt that it was after them that he
called these two points. A few In-
dian villages were seen and visited
during the voyage. The natives were
uniformly friendly, but, as usual,
given to thieving. Some of them
were armed with muskets, which they
had apparently obtained from the
Spaniards. More than three months
were occupied by this interior voy-
age. Queen Charlotte’s Sound, where
the ships emerged into the ocean,
had been named in 1786. This name,
and those of Smith’s Inlet, Calvert’s
Inlands and Fitzhugh’s Sound, be-
ing names given by the first discov-
erers, were continued by Vancouver.
Before turning towards Nootka,
Vancouver spent ten days more in
investigating the continental shore.
While so engaged he was surprised
by the arrival of an English trading
brig. Learning that Senr. Quadra
was “ waiting with the great-
est impatience to deliver up
the settlement and territories
-at Nootka,” Vancouver decided to
abandon the northern survey for the
present and sail for Nootka. Accord-
ingly, on 19th August the vessels
sailed round the north side of Cal-
vert’s Island and on the 28th they
reached Nootka. Vancouver records
that he was received “ with the great-
est cordiality ” by Senr. Don Juan
Francisco de la Bodega y Quadra.
He also notes his gratification with
a repast such as lately they had been
little accustomed to, —“a dinner of
five courses served with great ele-
gance,” royal salutes being fired on
drinking health to the Sovereigns of
England and Spain.
And now began a diplomatic duel,
which lasted for about three weeks.
Quadra attempted to justify the action
of his countrymen, and, while deny-
ing that Mr. Meares had any house
at Nootka or had ever purchased
any land there, offered “without pre-
judice to the legitimate right of
Spain ” to cede to England the
houses, offices and gardens which


were taken from British subjects in
April, 1789, observing at the same
time that Nootka ought to be the
most northerly Spanish settlement,
the land to the north being left free
to both parties. Vancouver firmly
declined to enter into a discussion
on the respective rights and preten-
sions of the Courts of Spain and
England, his powers being only to
receive the territories which, accord-
ing to the convention of 28th October,
1790, Senr. Quadra was authorised to
restore and put him in possession of.
These territories he understood to
be “Nootka in toto and port Cox ” (or
Clayoquot), and he refused to enter-
tain the idea of hoisting the British
flag on the spot pointed out by
Quadra “not extending more than a
hundred yards in any direction.” He
also claimed as “ ports of free acess ”
all establishments north of St. Fran-
cisco, which he conceived to be the
northernmost settlement occupied by
the subjects of His Catholic Majesty
in April, 1789. Several interviews
took place between the two com-
manders, and letters passed between
them, but they could not agree. At
one interview everything appeared to
be settled, Quadra accepting Van-
couver's version and inquiring who
the British intended to leave in pos-
session. Soon afterwards Vancouver
was surprised to receive a letter from
the Spaniard in which the original
contention was revived. So a settle-
ment of the dispute was as far off
as ever. In the end, negotiations had
to be broken off and an arrangement
made to refer the differences to the
respective Courts. During all this
fencing the friendly personal inter-
course was not affected in any way.
The two commanders visited, dined
together and appear to have formed
feelings of great respect for each
other. A suggestion made by Quadra
that Vancouver should name some
port or island after both of them
resulted in the tract of land which
had first been circumnavigated by the
Englishman being named “Quadra
and Vancouver’s Island.” The Span-
iard’s name has long since dropped
out of use, but the island still bears
the name of the English commander.
While the negotiations were in
progress, Vancouver, accompanied by


Quadra, paid a formal visit to the
Indian chief Maquinna, who was
greatly pleased by this attention. A
few days afterwards the Chief, with
two wives and some relatives, re-
turned the visit and, says Vancouver,
“ they had not been long on board
when I had great reason to con-
sider my royal party as the most
consummate beggars I had ever seen.”
Everything which struck their fancy
they demanded and if refused affect-
ed to be offended. On this occasion
some of the fireworks which had been
brought for the purpose were let off
to amuse the guests. It is recorded
that the Spaniards had succeeded in
gaining the good opinion of the
natives, who regretted the prospect
of their quitting the station.
Vancouver, in his account of the
negotiations with Quadra, expresses
the hope that his actions will not be
found liable to censure “ when the
very important commerce of this
country shall be properly appreci-
ated.” It was a great satisfaction to
him that a few days after the nego-
tiations were suspended a Portuguese
vessel arrived, having on board a Mr.
Robert Duffin, who had accompanied
Meares in 1788, and was with him on
his first arrival at Nootka. Mr.'
Duffin’s account of the transaction
between Mr. Meares and the Indian
Chiefs proved to Vancouver that his
action in refusing to agree to the
Spanish proposals was right.
Despatches were now prepared for
England and entrusted to the Ist
lieutenant, Mr. Mudge, who it was
hoped would return with further
instructions.
On arriving at Nootka, Vancouver
had found awaiting him the Doedalus
store ship laden with a supply of pro-
visions and stores for the use of the
expedition. The crew of this ship had
passed through some most distressing
experiences. The ship had a narrow
escape from destruction by fire near
the Marquesas Isles and Lieut. Her-
gest the commander, Mr. Gooch the
astronomer, and one of the seamen
were murdered by the inhabitants of
Woahoo whilst on shore procuring
water at that island.
On 12th October, 1792, Nootka was
quitted and the three ships sailed


southwards along the coast making
observations and explorations as they
proceeded, the Chatham being left on
the way to make further investiga-
tions of the Columbia River and the
Doedalus to make observations at
Gray's Harbour.
Broughton, with the Chatham,
spent about a fortnight in exploring
the Columbia River, up which he went
about 120 miles, the greater part of
the way in boats. He gave the names
of officers of the expedition to several
tributaries and islands, and a point
at the end of his journey he called
“Point Vancouver.” “Having every
reason to believe that the subjects of
no other civilized nation or state had
ever entered this river before,”
B'rodghton formally took possession of
it and the country in its vicinity in
the name of th e King. It appears,
however, that Capt. Grey in the
“Columbia” had been about twelve or
fifteen miles up the river earlier in
the same year and these rival claims
to discovery afterwards caused
trouble between England and the
United States.
The Discovery arrived at the
Spanish town and settlement of St.
Francisco on 14th November. Here
they were most hospitably enter-
tained, and Vancouver gives a
very minute description of the set-
tlement and the surrounding country.
The Chatham having arrived, both
vessels sailed from St. Francisco,
“ as fine a port as the world affords,”
and made for Monterrey where they
found at anchor, besides the Doedalus,
three Spanish vessels, one of which
was commanded by Senr. Quadra,
who had taken up his residence at
the Governor’s house. The English-
men were welcomed and again treated
in a most friendly manner. It was
here arranged, with the kindly help
of Quadra, that Lieut Broughton
should proceed across the continent
of America with further despatches
for England. Provisions and stores
were taken off the Doedalus, which
was then laden with live cattle and
despatched for the service of the in-
fant colony in New South Wales.


CHAPTER VI.
Second Visit to the Sandwich
Islands and Survey of the
American Coast.
In the early part of 1793 another
visit was made to the Sandwich
Islands. Nearly a month was spent
at Owhyhee, the natives of which
were extremely hospitable. Van-
couver was evidently pleased with
the king, but he had some little
trouble in settling the jealousies of
the minor chiefs over the division of
presents which he made to them.
He embraced every opportunity to
convince the king and his chiefs that
a peaceable mode of life was to be
preferred and more conducive to their
happiness than the continual state of
warfare that had so long disgraced
their islands. A visit was made to
the fatal spot where Capt. Cook was
murdered. The natives were at much
pains to produce reasons for this
catastrophe and to shew that it ful-
filled the prophecies of the priests
who had foretold it. Before the
party left the island the Sovereign
desired that a superb cloak of yellow
feathers which he had worn in his
last battle for the sovereignty of the
island might be presented to King
George. Wherever English sailors
went at this time they appear to have
spread the fame of their sovereign.
King George, so much so that they
came to be known by the natives of
the places they visited as “King
George men.” As usual, surveys and
observations were made, and on 9th
March the ships sailed for Mowee,
where Vancouver again devoted him-
self assiduously to promoting a peace
between the inhabitants of this and
the neighbouring islands. The pover-
ty of this island was very marked,
and no wonder, after a war lasting
eleven years. One of the chiefs pro-
duced to Vancouver a lock of the
latter’s hair which had been given
fourteen or fifteen years before when
Cook was at the island and which had
been treasured ever since. The fame
of the fireworks having reached the


natives they requested a display,
which was given. From here the
Chatham was sent hack to Nootka
for 'repairs. The Discovery next made
for Waohoo with one of the Chiefs
from Mowee on board to aid in bring-
ing to justice the surviving murder-
ers of the Captain and Astronomer
of the Doedalus. Three men were de-
livered up, and after all the available
evidence of their guilt had been care-
fully sifted they were publicly exe-
cuted. Surveys of the island were
made, presents bestowed on the
chiefs, and the usual display of fire-
works was “ regarded with a degree
of awful surprise not before ob-
served.” After sailing round Attowai
and Onehow this visit to the Sand-
wich Islands was concluded on 30th
March, 1793.
Nootka was again reached on 20th
May, and finding that the Chatham
had departed two days before, the Dis-
covery proceeded to the North West
and overtook the Chatham in Fitz-
hugh’s Sound between the mainland
and Calvert’s Island. While neces-
sary repairs were being made to the
Discovery the coast was examined by
two boat parties. An inlet branching
from the Sound into the continent
was named Burke’s Canal after the
Right Hon. Edmund Burke, and an
island on its western side was named
King’s Island after Capt. Jas. King
of the navy. The ships again sailed
northward on 10th June.
Muscle Canal, Poison Cove and
Carter’s Bay (to the east of Princess
Royal Island) owe their names to the
death of a seaman named Carter by
poisoning through eating mussels.
Several other men were poisoned, but
recovered.
The navigation of the channel
which led into Milbank’s Sound was
found to be extremely intricate and
tedious, on one occasion the Dis-
covery only gaining half a mile in
four hours. The south east point of
the entrance into Milbank’s Sound
was named Cape Swaine after the
3rd Lieutenant of the Discovery.
The course now taken lay between
the continent and Princess Royal
Island. The extensive inlets to the
north of that island were examined,
among the names <*iven in this
neighbourhood being Gardner’s Canal,


after Sir Alan Gardner, and Hawkes-
bury’s Island after Lord Hawkesbury,
who subsequently became Lord Liver-
pool. About the 2nd July the ships
anchored near the Isle de Gil at
the north-west corner of Princess
Royal Island. From that point a
boat expedition explored a channel
running north-west, which was named
Grenville’s Canal, after Lord Gren-
ville. The land on the south-west
side of this channel was named
Pitt’s Archipelago, after the Right
Hon. William Pitt; and an island
at the northern end, Stephens Island,
after Sir Philip Stephens of the
Admiralty. An inlet into the main-
land to the north-east of Pitt’s Archi-
pelago was called Port Essington.
All these names still survive. The
opening called by Vancouver “Port
Essington ” is now the Skeena
River and “ Port Essington ” is a
settlement just within its estuary.
Near the mouth of this river now
stands the town of Prince Rupert, the
terminus of the Grand Trunk Pacific
Railway, which carries passengers
from the Atlantic to the Pacific over
3,600 miles of Canadian territory,
and from Prince Rupert regular
passenger steamers ply to Vancouver
city by the course so far taken by
the expedition through Grenville
Channel. On the 14th July the ships
left their anchorage with the object
of proceeding towards the ocean
through Nepean Sound, and then
no rth ->west w air d through the Canal
del Principe between Bank’s Island
and Pitt’s Archipelago. North of
Stephens Island, three English ves-
sels engaged in the fur trade were
met with and Vancouver says "the
satisfaction arising from meeting
with our fellow countrymen in such
distant regions of the globe was very
mutual on this occasion.” The open-
ing from Chatham’s S'ound running
between Stephens Island and an-
other named Dundas’s Island (after
the Right Hon. Henry Dundas) was
designated Brown’s passage, after the
commander of these three trading
vessels. Mr. Brown told Vancouver
that he had heard from th© natives
of an opening in the continent which
led to a very considerable inland
navigation. Coming to a channel,
north-east of Dundas’s Island, which


afterwards he named Observatory
Inlet, Vancouver hoped he had reach-
ed the inlet referred ho. He sailed
some distance up this channel and
anchored at a spot which he called
Salmon Cove. He now took charge
of a surveying party, which in
twenty-three days (traversed 700 geo-
graphical miles without, as he dis-
appointedly says, “having advanced
our primary object of tracing the
continental boundary more than
twenty leagues from the station of
the vessels.” In that excursion he
explored and named Portland Canal
(after the Bentinck family), pro-
ceeded north up a channel which he
named Behm’s Canal (in gratitude
to Major Behm for his kindness to
the officers and crews of the Resolu-
tion and Discovery in 1779) and
rounded the island which he named
the viceroy of New Spain
“Revilla Gigedo.”
On returning southward the party
was treacherously attacked by a party
of natives on the west coast of this
island. Two of the crew were wound-
ed, but the Indians were easily dis-
persed by a discharge of firearms.
This attack was quite unexpected,
a§ hitherto the natives had been
always friendly and tractable. A
small opening still named “Traitors’
Cove ” commemorates this affray. An
interesting place name is that of
" Point Nelson ” in Behm’s Canal,
“after Captain Nelson of the Navy,”
as we have here probably the first in-
stance of a place being named after
the future Admiral. The ships were
ireached again on 16th August, to
the great relief not only of the boat
crews, whose provisions were nearly
run out, but also of those left on the
ships. Vancouver remarks on his
return, “such were the perplexing,
tedious, and laborious means, by
which alone we were enabled by de-
grees to trace the north-western
limits of the American continent.”
Some important astronomical and
nautical observations having been
made in his absence led him to be-
stow the name we have already re-
ferred to of Observatory Inlet. The
west point of the inlet was named
Point Wales, after Mr. Wales, of
Christ’s Hospital, and the east Point
Maskelyne, after the Astronomer


Royal, the Rev. Nevil Maskelyne,
who from 1782 to 1811 was the non-
resident Rector of North Runcton,
two miles from King’s Lynn. On
leaving the inlet the ships proceeded
to the north-west and the next place
of anchorage was named Port Stew-
art, on the east coast of what is now
known as Cleveland Peninsula. As
usual, exploring parties were des-
patched. One made a further examin-
ation of Behm’s Canal, while an-
other went northward through
Prince Ernest’s Sound and rounded
the group of islands, the principal of
which are now called Zarenbo, Etolin
and Wrangell, but which was orig-
inally named after the Duke of York.
On leaving Port Stewart the ships
continued a north-westerly course up
the Strait which was named after
the Duke of Clarence. The land to
the west of the strait was named
Prince of Wales’s Archipelago. After
devoting a short time to surveying
the coast north of this Archipelago,
it was decided not to go further north
this year. Vancouver says that al-
though by no means satisfied with
the small extent in a direct line
which had been examined during the
summer, yet he derived consolation
in reflecting that in all probability
they had overcome the most arduous
part of their task and, further, that
there could no longer remain a
doubt as to the extent or fallacy of
the pretended discoveries by De Fuca.
On 22nd September the Duke of
Clarence’s Strait (the entrance to
which is now known as Summer
Strait) was left, and once again the
ships turned towards the south.
Sailing along the western side of
Queen Charlotte’s Islands, giving
names on the way to North Point,
Frederick Point (now Frederick
Island), Cartwright’s Sound, Engle-
field Bay and other points, on calling
again at Nootka it was found that
no intelligence had been received
either from Europe or New Spain.
The Chatham now proceeded to
Bodega to obtain further information
respecting that port, while the Dis-
covery went on to St. Francisco.
When joined at the latter port by
the Chatham the two ships sailed for
Monterrey, and on the way fell in
with the Doedalus laden with stores


for them. A south-easterly course
was steered along the coast of .New
Albion, careful observations of the
shore being made on the way. At
St. Barbara, the commandant al-
lowed supplies of wood and water to
be obtained, and furnished the expe-
dition with cattle and other stores.
The examination of the coast was
finished on 14th December, 1793, at
the 30th degree of north latitude near
St. Domingo. Remarking on the
scattered Spanish settlements and
Catholic missions along the coast,
Vancouver says: “ The Spaniards, in
doing thus much, have only cleared
the way for the ambitious enter-
prizers "of those maritime powers
who may seek to be benefited by
the advantages which the fertile
soil of New Albion seems calculated
to afford "; and, after pointing out
how the Spaniards had stocked the
country with an abundance of cat-
tle, had pointed out fertile spots,
introduced valuable vegetables and
proved which were suitable for
growth there, and also how the mis-
sionaries had weaned a large propor-
tion of the natives from their un-
civilised savage way of life, he goes on
to say that “ all these circumstances
are valuable considerations to new
masters, to whose power, if properly
employed, the Spaniards would have
no alternative but that of submis-
sively yielding. That such an event
should take place appears by no
means to be very improbable. The
advantages that have already been
derived and are likely still to
accrue, in the prosecution of a well-
conducted trade, between this coast
and China, India, Japan and other
places, may on some future day,
under a judicious and well-regulated
establishment, become an object of
serious and important consideration
to that nation which shall be in-
clined to reap the advantages of such
a commerce.” These are the words
of a far-seeing man. The country
is now held by an English-speaking
nation, and Spain is only represented
by the names given during her feeble
occupation, while the commerce be-
tween this coast and the Eastern
hemisphere surpasses anything that
Vancouver could have ever dreamed
of.


CHAPTER VII.
1794 Third visit to the Sandwich
Islands and conclusion of the
Survey of the Coast of North-
West America.
The ships, on leaving New Albion,
sailed again for Owhyhee, which was
reached on 9th Jan., 1794. The King
and his subjects were delighted by
this further visit, and it is evident
that Vancouver was extremely popular
with them. He had won their confid-
ence, and though firm in his dealings
and rigorously insistent on the hon-
esty of the natives, he made them
see that he was wishful only for their
good. Th e fruits of this treatment
were very apparent. The wants of
the expedition were readily supplied,
and all such offices of kindness as the
Englishmen stood in need of were
executed by the natives “with such
promptitude and cheerfulness a g to
indicate that they considered their
labours amply repaid by our accept-
ance of their services." A further
proof of their goodwill was the per-
mission given to attend their religious
ceremonies. But the most important
■evidence of the trust which the natives
reposed in Vancouver is the fact that
they voluntarily acknowledged the
sovereignty of King George over their
island. The following inscription
on copper recording this act was de-
posited in a conspicuous place at the
royal residence: “On the 25th of Feb-
ruary, 1794, Tamaahmaah, king of
Owhyhee, in council with the principal
chiefs of the island assembled on
board His Britannic Majesty’s sloop
Discovery in Karakakooa bay, and in
the presence of George Vancouver,
commander of the said sloop; Lieuten-
ant Peter Puget, commander of his
said Majesty’s armed tender the Chat-
ham; and the other officers of the
Discovery; after due consideration,
unanimously ceded the said island of
Owhyhee to His Britannic Majesty,
and acknowledgd themselves to be sub-


jecte of Great Britain.” This cession
was never confirmed by the English
Government. The stay at Owhyhee,
much to the regret of the natives, was
brought to a close on 3rd March, and
after devoting eleven more days to
the examination of other islands in
the group, sail was made northwardly.
On 12th April the Discovery reached
Cook’s River, Alaska, and the exam-
ination of the shores was proceeded
with. Finding that this opening was
only an extensive arm of the sea, its
name was changed from Cook’s River
to Cook’s Inlet, and Vancouver re-
marks that “ had the great and first
discoverer of it, whose name it bears,
dedicated one day more to its further
examination, he would have spared th©
theoretical navigators, who have fol-
lowed him in their closets, the task
of ingeniously ascribing to this arm
of th© ocean a channel, through
which a north-west passage, existing
according to their doctrines, might
ultimately be discovered.” Consider-
able anxiety for the safety of the
ship was caused at times by the
drifting ice and rapid currents.
By the 15th the examination of the
inlet was completed and sail was made
for Prince William Sound, east of
Cook’s Inlet. The 16th was ushered
in by a sight little expected in these
seas, not less than 200 skin canoes,
each carrying two Indians, visiting
the ships. These natives were almost
all men grown, so thei tribe to which
they belonged must have been a con-
siderable one. Some bartering war
done with these natives who, like all
the others lately seen, "conducted
themselves with great propriety.”
The examination of Prince William’s
Sound occupied the expedition until
16th June and the Sound “proved to
be a branch of the ocean that re-
quires th© greatest circumspection to
navigate.” The delineation given in
the account of Capt. Cook’s last voy-
age was found to be faulty in some
very important particulars, and Van-
couver attributes many of these
errors to the Editor of th© History of
the Voyage. In addition to trouble


from the treacherous shoals and rocks
some very violent storms were en-
countered, and these did considerable
damage to the rigging and sails.
Kussians engaged in collecting furs
were seen at various points along the
coast, which was very sparsely inhab-
ited by Indians. Port Etches on
Hinchinbrook Island at the entrance
to the Sound was left on the 20th
June. Contrary winds made the pro-
gress eastward very slow and Kaye's
island was not passed till the 26th.
The southern point of this island was
given the name of Cape Hamond
after Sir Andrew Snape Hamond,
who distinguished himself in the
American war and who from 1794 to
1806 was Comptroller of the Navy.
Sir Andrew purchased an estate at
Terrington, near Lynn, and his house
there is still called “Hamond Lodge.”
A low projecting point of land in
lat. 59 p 47 ; and long. 219 s ' 17', passed
on Ist July, was called point Manby,
after the master of the Chatham. On
the 3rd a strange sail was seen east-
ward. This proved to be the "Jack-
all,” commanded by a Mr. Brown,
from whom startling accounts of the
state of Europe were received. The
tidings of the death of Louis XVI., of
the anarchy in Prance, her declaration
of war against England, the attempts
which the discontented were making
in Great Britain by the promulgation
of French doctrines to subvert our
inestimable constitution, “ breaking as
it were from a cloud upon the minds
of persons so little prepared to re-
ceive them,” became the subjects of
most serious and painful reflection for
our voyagers.
Cape Fairweather wag passed on the
6th, and on the 7th the entrance to
Cross Sound was reached. The west
point of the entrance was named
Cape Spencer in honour of Lord Spen-
cer. A place of anchorage was found
on the east side of the harbour, and
named Port Althorp, for a station
while the examination of the inlet was
being made, and here the Chatham
(which had been despatched from
Prince Williams Sound to survey the


coast as far as Port Mulgrave) joined
the Discovery again. The principal
surveying party working its way into
the Sound found that the main chan-
nel (which was given the name of
Chatham’s Strait) brought them again
into the ocean. The detached land
on the west of Chatham Strait was
named George Ill's. Archipelago. Sev-
eral arms branched off from the main
channel, and to* one of these, running
northward into the continent, Van-
couver has given particular interest
by the names he connected with it.
The arm or branch itself he called
Lynn Canal “after the place of my
nativity, the town of Lynn in Nor-
folk," while the point at the entrance
to it he named Point Couverden “ after
the seat of my ancestors." About mid-
way, on the east side of the canal,
ig a bay which he designated “Ber-
ners Bay” and its southern comer
“Point Bridget,” after hig mother's
family and Christian names, while
the northern corner he named “ Point
St. Mary's,” after, no doubt, the
home of his mother's family, the par-
ish of Wiggenhall St. Mary the Vir-
gin being always referred to locally as
“ St. Mary's.” The party had a nar-
row escape from some apparently
peaceable and friendly, but really
hostile, Indians, whose artful char-
acter caused one place to be named
“ Point Seduction,” while “ Point Ee-
treat” marked the place to which the
party retired after their unpleasant
encounter with the natives. Although
the inland navigation round King
George Ill's Archipelago was good
it was incommoded, and in some
places nearly closed, by large frag-
ments of floating ice, and this decided
Vancouver not to take the ships that
way. but to pursue his route by the
ocean, which would also allow him to
delineate the exterior coast. Accord-
ingly, on 29th July, he sailed south-
ward along the shore, and on Ist
August anchored in Christians Sound,
the southern entrance to Chatham’s
Strait. From this station two parties
were despatched. By the 19th the
work of surveying was finished, the


work of the present season being con-
nected with that of the two preceding
years; and to commemorate this the
harbour where the ships were anchor,
ed was named Port Conclusion. Many
names which still find a place on the
map of the neighbourhood were given
at this time. An island directly south
of Lynn Canal was called Admiralty
Island, and th© waterway on the east
side of it Stephen’s Passage. The
channel south of the island and con-
necting Stephen’s Passage with Chat-
ham Strait was named Prince Fred-
erick Sound In Stephen’s Passage we
have quite a number of Norfolk
names. Port Snettisham, Point An-
mer, Holkham Bay, Port Houghton
ar© all named after villages not far
from Vancouver’s birthplace, while
Point© Styleman, Coke, Astley, Wind,
ham, Hobart and Walpole commemor-
ate well-known Norfolk families. The
uncommon nam© of Vandeput which
was given to a promontory on the
north coast of Prince Frederick’s
Sound raises some speculation ag to
whether it had any family connection
with Vancouver. Peter van d© Put,
an affluent London merchant in the
middle of the 17th century, married
a daughter of Dierick or Theoderick
Hoste, of London, merchant, and of
Sandringham, near King’s Lynn. Both
families were of Dutch extraction, as
Vancouver also was. The Host© fam-
ily, who owned the Sandringham es-
tate for about 150 years, originally
came to England to escape from the
persecutions of the Duke of Alva in
the Netherlands. Peter van de Put's
mother was Sarah Jaupine, the daugh.
ter of another refugee, while his sis-
ter and a daughter were both named
Sarah. George Vancouver’s grand-
mother and one of hi© sisters also
bore that name. It seems therefore
possible that Point Vandeput may
have been so designated because Van-
couver’s grandmother was a descend-
ant of the family of that name.
The adjacent continent north west-
ward from New Cornwall (named in
the previous year) to Cross Sound was
called New Norfolk, and in the name


of and for Hie Britannic Majesty, his
heirs and successors, possession of the
continent from New Georgia, north
westward to Cape Spencer at the en-
trance to Cross Sound, was taken with
colours displayed, boats’ crews drawn
up under arms, three volleys of mus-
ketry, and all the other formalities
usual on such occasions, not forget-
ting a double allowance of grog for the
purpose of drinking His Majesty's
health. This tract of country forming
part of the Province of Alaska is not
now British territory. It gradually
fell under the dominance of the Rus-
sians, and they disposed of their
rights to the United States in 1867.
Vancouver now concluded that the
surveying work of the expedition had
at length been completed, and that
the precision with which the survey
had been carried into effect would
“ remove every doubt and set aside
every opinion of a north-west passage
or any water communication navig-
able for shipping, existing between
the North Pacific and the interior of
the American continent, within the
limits of our researches.” A sidelight,
showing that the quest for this pas-
sage had been ever in the minds of
the voyagers,is we mention that when
the last two exploring parties had
met and were resting in the evening
before returning to the ships, “no
small portion of facetious mirth passed
amongst the seamen, in consequence
of our having sailed from old Eng-
land on the first of April for the pur-
pose of discovering a north-west pas-
sage, by following up the discoveries
of DeFuca, He Fonte, and a numerous
train of hypothetical navigators.”


CHAPTER VIII.
179 T—1795. End of the Voyage.
The two ships departed from Port
Conclusion on the 22nd August for
ISootka Sound, which was reach-
ed on 2nd September. Here Vancouver
was grieved by the intelligence that
Senr. Quadra had died in the month
of March. Once again he records his
admiration, gratitude and respect
for the late Spanish Governor’s con-
duct towards the English and his
“deepest regret for the loss of a char-
acter so amiable and so truly orna-
mental to civil society.” If was found
Chat no instructions had arrived from
either the Spanish or the English
Governments for dealing with the
deadlock in which the negociations
had ended. Partly to enable many
necessary repairs to be done to the
vessels and partly with the hope that
despatches might yet be received,
the departure from Nootka was de-
layed for some time. This hope was
not, however, fulfilled, and on the
17th October the ships again sailed
southward. At Monterrey Vancouver,
was again disappointed at finding no
despatches. The acting Governor
kindly sent an extraordinary courier
to St. Diego, more than 400 miles
distant, to ascertain whether any
had been received there, but he re-
turned without any. While the ships
were at Monterrey the long-expected
instructions from the Spanish Gov-
ernment arrived, but none came
from England. The Spanish instruc-
tions stated that no further alterca-
tion would take place with respect
to the precise meaning of the first
article of the convention, as the re-
spective Courts had adjusted that
matter in an amicable way, and
nearly on the terms repeatedly offered
by Vancouver to Quadra in Septem-
ber, 1792. Having maturely consid-
ered this intelligence Vancouver con-
cluded that his government did not
expect he should remain away longer
than the survey of the coast might
require. His stares and provisions
were also in a very exhausted state,
—for some time he had been obliged,
owing to his stock of powder being
low, to ask that the firing of salutes


at the place of call might be dis-
pensed with. He therefore deter-
mined to make for home by way of
Cape Horn.
On the way South, every oppor-
tunity was taken advantage of to fix
the position of important promon-
tories on the main land. The Isles
of Cocos and Gallipagos were visited,
four days being spent at the former.
Some attention was given to this
island, which it was thought might
become “ a place of importance to
those whose pursuits may direct them
to this part of the Pacific Ocean,”
furnishing as it did a supply of
good water, fuel, cocoanuts and other
stores! Two days were celebrated by
the usual “ extra allowance of grog ”
and “an excellent dinner,” one being
Christmas Day, 1794, and the other
the anniversary of the departure
from Falmouth and the commence-
ment of the fifth year of their
labours. The springing of the Dis-
covery’s main mast made it necessary
that the ship should repair to the
nearest pout for the purpose of pro-
curing a new mast. Valparaiso was
the port chosen, and the warm wel-
come given by the Governor and re-
sidents left no cause to regret the
visit. With a plentiful allowance of
fruit and vegetables some scorbutic
patients were soon restored to health.
An excursion wa e made to the capital
city St. Jago by invitation of the
President and Captain General of the
kingdom of Chili, Don Ambrosio Hig-
gins de Vallenar, whose fluency in
speaking English excited the visitors’
astonishment until they learned that
he was a native of Ireland, who had
entered the service of His Catholic
Majesty. At St. Jago, which had then
about 30,500 inhabitants, Vancouver
and the officers who accompanied him
were overwhelmed with hospitality
by the President, officials and other
residents, and the Englishmen were
somewhat embarrased in having to
attend, in their threadbare uniforms,
a Levee at the Palace. They were,
however, soon put at ease by the
friendly Captain-General, whose gov-
ernment is spoken of by Vancouver
in the highest praise. This brilliant
Irishman, whose genius Vancouver
recognised, had not then attained his
highest office. "The realms of fic-


tion,” says a recent writer, "can
surely produce nothing more mar-
vellous than the career” of this re-
markable man, “ the greatest British
subject that had ever set foot in
South America.” Ambrose O' Hig-
gins, born in 1720, in County Meath,
the son of a farmer, was as a boy
employed in menial work in the house
of his father’s landlord. An uncle,
who was a priest in Spain, under-
took to train the boy for the Church.
Ambrose, however, after studying for
some time, decided to emigrate to
America. He landed at Buenos Aires
with a small stock of merchandise.
Later on he was at Lima, in Peru,
selling his wares from a stall near
the Cathedral. He did well by his
trading and settled down in Santiago.
He then entered the service of the
Government and soon displayed tal-
ents which rapidly brought him into
prominence. He was employed in im-
f moving the roads of the country; he
ed expeditions against the hostile
Indians, whom, after conquering, he
actually induced to assist in his work,
and to live in friendly intercourse
with the Spaniards; he provided new
water supplies, improved the sani-
tary conditions of Ithe towns and car-
ried out a host of important reforms.
He was created Marquis of Osorno
and made Captain-General of Chile in
1792, and this wa® his position at
(the time of Vancouver’s visit in 1795.
In the following year he was pro-
moted to be Viceroy of Peru, the
highest position in South America
and one which has been compared
with the present day Viceroyalty of
India. At Lima, the Capital, where
he had formerly stood with his stall
before the Cathedral, he ruled Peru,
wisely and well, for five years until
his death in 1801.
In remedying the defect which had
led to the ships stopping at
Valparaiso the voyagers were not so
fortunate, for there was not a spar
either there, or in the country within
reach, of a size sufficient to be con-
verted into a mast and the expedient
had to be adopted of turning the old
mast end for end, bringing the most
defective parts below the deck and
making it as secure as their means
allowed. This was only a sorry make-
shift and it was with not a little


anxiety that Vancouver proceeded on
his way. Four year’s hard wear had
wrought sad havoc on the ships and
with a main yard in three pieces,
split sails and badly worn ropes, the
ultmost care had to be exercised in
navigating the ships during some
strong gales which they soon en-
countered.
After rounding Cape Horn in the
last days of May, 1795, the ships
made for St. Helena, which was seen
from the Discovery on 2nd July.
The Chatham arrived next day, hav-
ing kept up her reputation for slow
sailing on the return journey. Learn-
ing there that hostilities had broken
out between England and Holland,
Vancouver promptly took possession
of a Dutch East Indiaman as a
prize. The Chatham was sent off
about ten days later with despatches
to the British General at St. Sal-
vador, Brazil. The Dutch prize hav-
ing been committed to the charge of
Lieut. Johnstone, the Discovery, with
spars, sails and rigging repaired,
left St. Helena on 15th July. Al-
though Vancouver had been informed
that the National Assembly of France
had decreed that the Discovery and
Chatham should pass the seas un-
molested by the French cruisers,
notwithstanding the existing war
between the two countries, it
was a great relief to him when he
came up with a fleet of ships under
the convoy of H.M. ship Sceptre.
Three weeks later he records that
“ from our masthead the glad tid-
ings were announced that land was
plainly to be seen." This land was
the Western coast of Ireland, and
the fleet anchored in the Shannon on
12th September, 1795. Resigning the
command of the Discovery to his first
Lieut., Mr. Baker, Vancouver next
day took leave of his officers and
crew, “not, however, without emo-
tions which, though natural, on
parting with a Society with whom I
had lived so long, snared so many
dangers, and from whom I had re-
ceived such essential services, are yet
more easily to be imagined than I
have the power to describe.” A few
days afterwards he deposited the
books, papers and charts relating to
the voyage at the Admiralty. The
Discovery arrived in the Thames on


20th October, 1795, while the Chatham
reached England three days earlier.
In closing the record of his long
voyage in the Discovery, lasting as it
had four years eight months and 29
days, Vancouver, reflecting on tihe
dangerous service and the many perils
passed through, says: “I offered up
my unfeigned thanks to the Great
Disposer of all human events for the
protection He had been pleased on ail
occasions to vouchsafe unto us and
which had now happily restored us
to our country, our families and our
friends.” And truly there was much
to be thankful for when it is consid-
ered that out of about one hundred
and fifty men on the two
ships, one only had been lost
by disease and five from acci-
dents, and that (with one exception)
all who returned were in perfect
health. This one exception stands
out whenever reference is made to
the good health of the voyagers all
through the years 1794 and 1795. The
constitution of Vancouver himself
had been seriously undermined by
the hardships of Ms calling. He had
not been well enough to take much
part in the surveying expeditions of
1794. On one occasion he says that,
considering himself sufficiently re-
cruited, he determined to take
charge of a surveying party, but after
a few hours he was obliged to return
to the ship and was confined for sev-
eral days to hie apartments.


CHAPTER IX.
Some of the Voyagers.—Discipline.
—Dealings with Natives.
The Muster Books of the Discovery
and Chatham show that besides Van-
couver there were at least nine Nor-
folk men on the two ships. There
may have been more, as the place
of birth i s not always given. Five
of the nine were connected with
Lynn.
Spelman Swaine was bom there
on Ist Jan., 1769, being the second
son of Spelman Swaine, of Levering-
ton, Cambs., by his marriage with
Dorothy, daughter of Walter Robert-
son, Mayor of Lynn in 1747 and 1761.
Arthur Young, the famous traveller
and agriculturist, who was apprent-
iced for three years to Mr. Robert-
son, and who afterwards married
Miss Allen, a sister of Dr. Burney's
second wife, refers in his auto-
biography to Miss Robertson, saying
“ She was of a pleasing figure, with
fine black expressive eyes, danced
well, and also sang and' performed
well on the harpsichord; no wonder
as she received instructions from Dr.
Burney.” Spelman Swain© the
younger entered the navy in 1782.
passed for lieutenant in 1791, and
was one of the master's mates on the
Discovery when the expedition sailed.
He became master of th© Chatham in
1792, and later in the same year third
lieutenant of the Discovery. After
the completion of the voyage he serv-
ed in several ships, obtaining his
captain's commission in 1810. From
1834 to 1848 (when he died at Wisbech)
he acted as Chief Bailiff of the Isle
of Ely, an appointment in the gift
of the Bishop. He was given the
rank of Rear-Admiral, retired, in
1846. Several curiosities collected by
him during the voyage are still ex-
hibited in the Wisbech Museum.
Cape Swaine, Millbank Sound, was
named by Vancouver after his
lieutenant.


Thomas Manby, a native of Denver,
Norfolk, wag the son of Matthew
Pepper Manby, by his wife Mary,
daughter of John Woodcock, of Lynn.
Members of the Manby family lived
at Lynn, and most likely Thomas
was a pupil at the Grammar School
there, as we know his brother
George William, the inventor of the
rocket life-saving apparatus, was.
Thomas Manby wag at hrst a master’s
mate on the Discovery. At the be-
ginning of 1793 he was appointed
master of the Chatham, and in 1795
was moved back to the Discovery
as acting lieutenant. The western
headland at the entrance to Yakutat
Bay (called by Vancouver Beering’s
Bay), Alaska, wa s named Point Man.
by. In after years Manby command-
ed successively the “Charon,” the
“Bourdelais,” and the “ Africane,"
doing good service in transporting
troops,convoying traders and cruising
against privateers.
The town of Langley, twenty
miles from the city of Van-
couver, is said to be named
after John Langley, a marine on the
Discovery, who settled in Lynn as an
innkeeper and recruiting sergeant.
He is mentioned in J. D. Thew’s
“ Recollections” as one of the char-
acters of the town. Some of his
descendants are still living in
Lynn.
Among the A.Bs. we have John
Massingham and William Gamble, of
Lynn, John Rycraft, of Yarmouth,
John Allen, John Willis and Samuel
Manning, who are given as of Nor-
folk. The last-named was made
boatswain’s mate on 4th March, 1791.
Poor Sam must have celebrated hie
promotion very unwisly, for on the
10th he was punished for drunken-
ness. The nature of his punishment
is not stated, but for a similar of-
fence another culprit was given three
dozen lashes.
Several officers of the expedition
did good service and in after years
obtained high rank, e


Zachary Mudge, lieutenant of the
Discovery whose name was given to
a cape in the Gulf of Georgia, be-
came an Admiral.
Peter Puget, another lieutenant,
after whom Puget Sound was named,
became a C.B. and a Rear-Admiral.
William Robert Broughton, com-
mander of the Chatham, who on a
later voyage made very accurate sur-
veys of the coast of Japan and the
Loo Choo Islands, of which voyage he
published an account, became a C.B.
Joseph Baker, lieutenant, drew the
principal charts published with the
journal under the “immediate in-
spection" of Vancouver. Mount
Baker, in the Cascade range, named
after him, is the Mount Ararat of
Indian legend. His name was also
given to Baker Islands, Columbia
River, and Point Baker, Alaska. He
seems to have been held in high
esteem by Vancouver. He attained
the rank of captain, and in 1811
was highly praised for services rend,
ered in connection with the defeat
of the Danes at Anholt.
Archibald Menzies, naturalist and
surgeon, collected a large number of
plants during the voyage, some of
which are in the British Museum,
some at Kew, and others at Edin-
burgh. He published an account of
the voyage in Loudon’s Magazine of
Natural History. The black spruce-
fir of British Columbia is named
after him “Abies Menziesii."
The Hon. Thomas Pitt (born 1775),
rated as A.B. on the Discovery, seems
to have been a troublesome and un-
ruly lad. He had been three times
flogged before Vancouver, on 7th Feb.,
1794, for some act of insubordination,
took the drastic step of discharging
him from the ship, which was then
at Hawaii. Pitt had then, by the
death of his father in January. 1793,
become second Baron Camelford, and,
although this was not then known by
Vancouver, it speaks well for the
latter’s fearlessness in maintaining
discipline that he did not hesitate to
expel a youth with such influential


family connections. If any justifica-
tion for Vancouver's action were
needed it is supplied by the after
career of this quarrelsome nobleman.
Pitt reached Malacca on a trading
vessel, and there joined the “Resist-
ance" as an able seaman. Soon af-
terwards he was appointed acting
lieutenant of the ship, but on 24th
Nov., 1795, was summarily discharged
and left to find hie way back to
England. Vancouver, after his ar-
rival in England, was challenged by
Camelford to a duel, and he agreed
to accept the challenge if any flag
officer to whom the case might b©
referred should decide that he owed
Camelford satisfaction. This refer-
ence Carftclford refused, and meet-
ing Vancouver one day he attempted
to assault him, but was prevented
by some bystanders. In 1798, when
commanding the “Favourite” sloop,
Camelford shot dead the lieutenant
of another ship who, apparently with
good cause, disputed his claim to be
the senior officer at Antigua, where
both ships were. For this, Camelford
was tried and, unaccountably, ac-
quitted. His next escapade was the
planning of an expedition to obtain
a set of French charts. On being
arrested, and having his conduct dis-
approved by the Admiralty, he re-
quested that his name might be struck
off the list , of Commanders, and this
was done. In 1799, for knocking a
man downstairs at a theatre, he was
fined .£SOO, and in February. 1804. he
wag engaged in another theatre quar-
rel and fight. A duel on 7th March,
1804, with a Mr. Best, whom he had
grossly insulted, resulted in the
death, three days later, of this pug-
nacious peer. Grenville's Canal, be-
tween the mainland and Pitt’s Archi.
pelago. and Point Grenville on the
New Albion Coast, were named by
Vancouver after Lord Grenville (a
cousin of Wm. Pitt, the great Prime
Minister), who married Anne Pitt, a
sister of the second Baron Camel-
ford. Lord Grenville, before his
elevation to the peerage, was suc-
cessively Speaker of the House of
Commons and Foreign Secretary. He


wa s Premier in 1806, his administra-
tion being known as that of "all the
talents." He belonged to the family
of Grenville of Wotton, Bucks., a
younger branch of the Grenvilles of
Devon.
A charge which has been made
against Vancouver that his discipline
was unnecessarily harsh seems to rest
entirely on this case of Thos. Pitt,
Lord Caraelford. We have to remem.
ber that flogging wag a common pun-
ishment in the navy at this time,
and the commander of such an ex-
pedition as this, thrown as he was
on his own resources for several
years, could not afford to overlook
any breach of discipline. But though
he may have been very strict, Van-
couver’s journal shows that he took
a fatherly interest in his men and
was always ready to recognise any
good work done by them. When a
boat surveying party is absent longer
than expected he is full of anxiety
and apprehension. The brewing of
“excellent spruce beer” and the cele-
bration of notable days were no doubt
all meant to keep the crews in a
cheerful humour. Never grudging
in hi s praises, he speaks in one pas-
sage of the "consolation derived on
all painful occasions by having the
most explicit confidence in the dis-
cretion and abilities of my officers
and the exertions and ready obedi-
ence of my people."
In his dealings with the natives,
Vancouver was always guided by a
charitable consideration for their
feelings and customs, and here his
character compares most favourably
with that of Capt. Cook, whose cruelty
and hypocrisy, there is little doubt,
caused the brawl in which he lost
his life. Even when one of his
parties is attacked he advances as a
possible excuse that the natives may
have been previously defrauded by
dishonest traders, as he found some
had been. On another occasion he
refuses to allow a coffin to be opened
or disturbed for fear of giving pain
to the friends of the deceased. At


one place where he called for wood
and water and found a poor empty
dwelling, he “ caused to be deposited,
near the watering place, some beads,
knives, looking-glasses and other
trinkets, as a compensation to the
solitary owner, should he ever re-
turn, for the wood we had cut down.”
At th© end of his journal he attests
that his sincere desire had always
been to deal in such a way as should
prevent the necessity of resorting to
measures which might endanger the
lives of the Indians, and after resid-
ing, as it were, amongst them for
more than two years without having
occasion to fire a shot in anger, he
had hoped to have completed hi© re-
searches without the loss of life to
a single individual belonging to the
countries visited. In this, however,
he was, as we know, disappointed.
The number of Indians from Traitors'
Cove who fell in the unprovoked at-
tack on 12th August, 1793, could not
be ascertained, but with this excep-
tion only two natives afterward© lost
their lives in consequence of the ex-
pedition. A missionary to the Sand-
wich (now known as the Hawaiian)
Islands about 30 years ago says that
the natives loathed the memory of
Cook, while on the other hand they
loved that of Vancouver, and a cor-
respondent at Honolulu, the capital
of these islands, says “Vancouver
was the best friend the Hawaiians
had among the earlier visitors, and
did much to enable Kamehameha to
unite the group in one kingdom and
put an end to the constant internecine
warfare that had existed for many
years before the arrival of Cook.”
The museum at Honolulu has a
copy of Abbot’s portrait labelled
thus: “George Vancouver, English
navigatoir, and la true friend to
Hawaiians."


CHAPTER X.
JOURNAL OF THE VOYAGE-
DEATH OF VANCOUVER
CONCLUSION.
The Spaniards finally evacuated
Nootka on 28th March, 1795, when the
British flag was hoisted there. This
event must have been very gratifying
to Vancouver, completing as it did
the work of his voyage. And her© it
may be said that probably it is due
to his tact and firmness in the negoci-
ations with Quadra that Vancouver
Island and British Columbia now
form part of the British Empire, and
that had his work been followed up
at the time the Sandwich Islands and
the states of Washington and Oregon
might possibly also have been Brit-
ish possessions.
During his absence from England
Vancouver had been advanced, on
28th August, 1794, to post rank, prob-
ably in recognition of his work as
shown by the despatches conveyed to
England by Broughton. After his re-
turn he gave all his energies to the
preparation of the journal of the
voyage. This work is a continuous
record of the gallant sailor’s whole-
hearted devotion to the tasks on
which he was engaged. Hi® earnest
desire that his work should be done
as accurately as possible is most
noticeable. Observations are com-
pared and checked with scrupulous
care, and if an observation made by
Cook or some other voyager is found
to be inaccurate it is only corrected
after the closest investigation.
The surveying work undertaken
during the voyage was very exten-
sive, including as it did the coast of
North West America from 30 p north
(Lower California) to 60 p north
(Cook’s Inlet, Alaska), the Sandwich
Islands and part of the south-west
coast of Australia. A modem geog-
rapher says that Vancouver’s survey


■wa s “»* thorough and so accurate as
to be available to the present day."
Another eminent authority. Pro-
fessor Davidson, of the University of
■California, who was for more than
forty years engaged on the Pacific
coast with the U.S. Coast and
Geodetic Survey, gives his testimony
to the work in these words; “I have
gone over every foot of the work
done by Vancouver on this coast and
I wish to say that he was a great
big man.”
Beyond the fact that he must have
worked industriously on his history
little is known of Vancouver’s doings
in the two and a half years which
he lived after the completion of his
voyage.
In April, 1798, worn out and a dy-
ing mah, he took up his residence at
the famous “Star and Garter” Inn,
Richmond. It is said that on first
entering the Brewer room of the
Hotel he exclaimed, “In all my
travels I never dept eyes on a more
beautiful spot than this. Here would
I live and here would I die.” On th©
28th of the same month he made a
will by which after a legacy of .£25
to his agent, Mr. Sykes, he gave to
big elder brother John the rest of
his property, which was then " about
to be engaged in the purchase and
improvement of Ealing Manor in
Berks” subject to the payment of
fifty pounds per annum to his brother
Charles and of twenty-five pounds per
annum to each of his sisters Sarah
and Mary Vancouver, and in the
event of his brother Charles dying
before both or either of his sisters,
then the annuity of fifty pounds given
to Charles was to be equally divided
between his said two sisters. One
witness, as previously stated, was
Granville Penn, and the other David
Dundas, most likely the eminent
physician of that name.
Twelve days later, on 10th May,
1798. the weather-worn sailor was
dead.
He wag buried in the churchyard
of St. Peter’s, Petersham, Richmond.


Inside the church is a mural tablet
bearing the following inscription:—
“In the Cemetery
adjoining this Church
were interred in the year 1798
the mortal remains of
Captain George Vancouver, R.N.
whose valuable and enterprising
Voyage of Discovery
to the North Pacific Ocean
and
round the World
during five years of laborious survey
added greatly
to the geographical knowledge
of his countrymen.
To the memory
of that celebrated navigator
this monumental tablet
is erected by
The Hudson’s Bay Company.”
The grave outside is marked by a
severely plain headstone bearing the
simple record: “Captain George Van.
couver, died in the year 1798, aged 40.”
Ealing Manor, which Vancouver
was apparently arranging to purchase,
is in the parish of Hampstead Norris,
near Newbury. To this he may have
been attracted by the fact that the
Partridge family had an estate in
the county, and also by his friend-
ship with the Penns, whose seat was
at Stoke Park, just over the bound-
ary of the neighbouring county of
Bucks. The proposed purchase was
never completed.
Until within a few weeks of his
death Vancouver wag engaged in the
preparation of the journal. The first
two volumes were printed and more
than half the third. So far he had
examined the work and compared it
with the engraved charts of his dis-
coveries. He had also prepared the
introduction and the remainder of
the third volume, with the exception
of about 100 pages. Hi§ brother John,
assisted by Captain Puget, completed
the work, which was published in
1798 at the expense of the Board of
Admiralty. It consists of three quarto
volumes illustrated by eighteen en-


gravings with an accompanying folio
of ten charts and six sheets of coast
views. John Vancouver, in his dedi-
cation to King George 111., says he
trusts that, to the discoveries of Cap-
tain Cook, “the exertions of Captain
Vancouver will be found to have
added the complete certainty that,
within the limits of his researches on
the continental shore of North-West
America, no internal sea, or other
navigable communication whatever
exists, uniting the Pacific and At-
lantic Oceans.”
Sixty years later, when the north-
west passage wa s discovered by Cap-
tain McClure’s expedition, further
north than Vancouver had looked for
it, so far north, indeed, as to be com-
mercially useless, another son of
Lynn, Samuel Gurney Cresswell, after
carrying home despatches for the Ad.
miralty, was welcomed in his native
town ag " the Englishman who first
traversed the long sought north-west
passage.”
An octavo edition of Vancouver's
journal in six volumes was published
in 1801. With this there was only
one general chart, the copper plates
from whch the charts accompanying
the first edition had been printed
having been lost in the meantime. An
illustrated French edition was pub-
lished in three volumes, 1799-1800.
All the editions of the work are now
very scarce.
The National Portrait Gallery, Lon.
don, has a portrait of Vancouver
painted soon after his return from
his long voyage, and described in the
official catalogue as follows: "Painted
probably by Samuel F. Abbott (1760-
1803). A half length figure wearing
dark blue suit with gilt buttons and
a plain white neck cloth, seated to-
wards the right. On a table to the
right lies a volume inscribed Tloly
Bible.’ In the background arranged
on three shelves are books of voyages,
inscribed Cook’s, Anson’s, Magellan
and Drake. A red curtain is behind
to the left. The terrestrial globe be-


side Him shows the North Pacific
Ocean, and a line across it is in-
scribed 'Cook’s track.’ Eyes dark
yellow grey, fair complexion, smooth
cheeks, red lips, double chin; eyebrows
broad, very dark, arched and remark-
ably short. Countenance rather
youthful."
There is a copy of this portrait
in the Parliament Buildings at Vic-
toria, British Columbia.
In King’s Lynn but little atten-
tion has been paid to the career of
the great navigator, and until quite
recently very few indeed of the towns-
men were even aware that it was
his birthplace. Thanks, however, to
the exertions of Mr. F. H, Partridge
a copy of Abbott’s portrait wag ob-
tained for the Town Hall and un-
veiled by the Mayor on 17th Decem-
ber, 1914, when the following lines
were read by Mr. Partridge:
The Vancouver Portrait
Lynn, who has sent so many sons
to fly
The flag of Britain in far distant
seqs.
Has ever shown a parent’s modesty
In careless disregard of Fame’s
decrees.
Loth to make choice of one or of
another
As more renown-deserving than his
brother.
No doubt she loved them all and
took a pride
In their achievements, when they
were recorded;
And they, her sons, it cannot be
denied.
By gifts of Freedom were at times
rewarded.
This done, she made no more ado
about them —
Those who received no praises did
without them.
She must have felt some interest in
Who, through home-sickness, not
in conquest’s boast.
Mindful of good beginnings well be-


Scattered our Norfolk names upon
a coast
Thousands of miles away—Truly
Proud of his birth as an East Anglian.
Now many pour their blessings on
the name
Of George Vancouver, born in dis-
tant Lynn;
And our old Borough finds reflected
fame
As source of their Columbia’s origin.
His name stands foremost on her
hist’ry’s page.
And Lynn becomes a place of pil-
grimage.
“We in our thousands reverence your
“ The sturdy founder of colonial
might,"
Says fair Columbia, "Lynn, what
have you done
“To keep his honoured name
revered and bright" ?
Lynn, conscious of the fame that
should be his.
Replies “ Not much I fear, but Here
it is."
F.H.P.
It is a pity that the man whose
name has been given to an important
island, to one city in Canada and to
another in the United States, should
not in Mg native town have been
commemorated by the naming of some
street or place. A good opportunity
is now offered to remedy this by the
making of the proposed new road
from the South Gate, which might
very well be called Vancouver Road.
Although attached to the profession
of arms, Vancouver wag essentially
a man of peace. There was nothing
spectacular about his life, and his
death was not, like Cook’s, a tragic
one. For many years no advantage
wa s taken of his discoveries. The
Napoleonic wars were raging, and
the country was absorbed in so many
startling events nearer home. These
factors perhaps explain why his
career ,af?ter canning some passing
interest at the time of his return


and death, soon ceased to attract
attention. It is only in quite recent
years, consequent, doubtless, on the
growing importance of the land so
intimately associated with his lab-
ours, that enquiries have been made
which have led to the disclosure of
the facts which are so far known.
As late as 1907 Professor Meany, of
Washington, in his annotated reprint
of the first volume of the journal,
commenting on the scarcity of in-
formation on the subject, said "It is
a matter of surprise to find how very
little is known of the man himself.
Brief biographies in the encyclo-
paedias keep his name from total
oblivion. Through all these nothing
is said of his family or his person-
ality, the place of his birth is not
mentioned, and even the exact date
is unknown.”
As time goes on, no doubt, further
information will be forthcoming. One
would like to know more about his
father’s family. Did they, as has
been suggested, voluntarily immi-
grate into this country to assist in
work similar to what they had been
accustomed in their native Holland,
or were they refugees from the re-
ligious persecutions which drove so
many of their compatriots to the
shores of England ? About his
brothers and sisters, the information
is extremely scanty. John was living
in 1809, his wife having predeceased
him in 1807, leaving no children. His
brother Charles and his sisters Sarah
and Mary were evidently living at
the date of his will, the sisters being
unmarried. Bridget, his eldeslt sis-
ter, who is not mentioned in the will,
was married in 1774 at Grimston, Nor-
folk, to Christopher Dixon, of Snet-
tisham.
For many years after George Van-
couver’s voyage and death the coun-
try bordering the shores of North-
West America was left to the trapper
and hunter. The whole of what is
now known as British Columbia was
ruled up to 1858 by the Hudson’s Bay


■Company, who discouraged settlers
in the country. Differences soon
arose with the United States, which
claimed the land as far north a® 54 9
40' N. The British Government re-
sisted this claim, Th© difficulty was
tided over for a time by treaties in
1818 and 1827 providing for a joint
occupation, but ilt was brought to a
head in 1846 by the United States
giving notice terminating this ar-
rangement. Once again there was
talk of war about this piece of ter-
ritory, but a compromise offered by
the British Government and accept-
ed by the States settled the boundary
along the 49th parallel and the centre
of the Strait of Juan de Fuoa. In
1849 the Hudson's Bay Company had
a grant of Vancouver Island for ten
years and a Royal Governor was sent
out. The first elective Assembly for
the island met in 1856. The great
influx of miners consequent on the
gold discoveries on the Fraser River
in 1858 made it necessary that a sim-
ilar government should be set np
on the mainland, the whole of which,
west of the Rocky mountains, was
therefore made a Crown Colony. The
name of British Columbia given to
this colony was chosen by Queen Vic-
toria. The two colonies were united
in 1866, and the final step of union
with the other provinces of Canada
was taken in 1871.
In this fast progressing province
the memory of Captain George Van-
couver is held in great veneration.
The spot where he met Senr. Quadra
at Nootka is marked by a monument
bearing the following inscription;
" Vancouver and Quadra met here in
August, 1792, under the treaty between
■Spain and Great Britain, of October,
1790. Erected by the Washington
University State Historical Society,
August, 1903."
The island with which Vancouver's
and Quadra's names were at first
jointly linked, and which owing to
the agreement of its latitude with
that of th© mother country and its
similar relative position to the ad-


joining continent, hag been termed
the " England of the Pacific,” is now
called by Vancouver’s name only. On
this island, at the charmingly situ-
ated city of Victoria (th© seat of
government and capital of British
Columbia), a Statue of George Van-
couver crowns the dome of the mag-
nificent Parliament Building; while
on the mainland, th© commercial
metropolis of Western Canada (“the
Sunset Doorway of th© Dominion”
“midway between the hemispheres,
th© point of egress from the new and
the entrance from the old”) has been
most fittingly named after him—
VANCOUVER.


