

limiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiniiiiiiiiiinriiiiiiiiiiiiituiiiiiiiniiimiiiiilMniiuiiiiiinniniiiiiiiiiiiliiljl^^
For Members Only.
VARIOUS SYSTEMS
TRAMWAY TRACTION
By W. F. HOW.
\Jdead before the Civil and Mechanical Engineering Section of the
Royal Society of N. S. Wales , 17th August, 1892.~\




For Members Only.
VARIOUS SYSTEMS
TRAMWAY TRACTION
By W. F. HOW.
[Read before the Civil and Mechanical Engineering Section oj the
Royal Society oj F. S. Wales, 17th August, 1892. ]
Discussion 19th October, 1892.
Samuel E. Lees, Printer and Stationer. 83 York Street.




VARIOUS SYSTEMS OF TRAMWAY TRACTION .
Mr. E. B. Price
Said he had been asked by the President to take part in the
discussion on Mr. How’s paper. He proposed to confine his
remarks to the Portrush Electric Tramway in Ireland, on which
he was Resident Engineer, as he thought a short account of some
of the difficulties overcome in the construction of the first Electric
Tramway in the United Kingdom—and the first constructed for
commercial purposes in the whole world—would prove interesting
to the members of the Society. By some oversight Mr, How had
omitted to mention this Tramway, but had given a short account
of the Newry and Bessbrook, which was not half as long, and
was not commenced till after the public opening of the Portrush
line, to which it formed a sort of sequel, having been constructed
by Dr. Edwd. Hopkinson, who, as Messrs, Siemens’ Electrician,
was his (Mr. Price’s) associate at Portrush,
The Portrush line was commenced in 1881, and formally
opened by the Lord-Lieutenant in 1883, although Electric cars
had been running constantly for a year previously. The
line is eight miles long, having been extended two miles since
first opened. It was originated by the Messrs Traill Bros., of
Co. Antrim, who obtained the Act of Parliament for working by
steam or any mechanical power, and invited the late Sir Wm.
Siemens to join the undertaking, and work it by electricity. This
was just after the successful trial of the Berlin Electric
Tramway.
Although no more difficult line could have been selected for
experimental purposes, Siemens joined heart and soul in the
work. At first it was tried to work by insulating the permanent
way with asphalt, but this proved a total failure, owing to the
Act compelling the Company to ballast the “ tram path ” with
the top of the rails ; then a 3rd. rail, raised 4 inches on pitch-
pine posts, was adopted, with success. This it was possible to do,
as the tram was laid at one side of the country road. This 3rd
rail was T section, 191bs. per yard, set in “ insulite ” caps, and
fished together. It, as well as the permanent way (401 b. steel
rails), were joined by copper expansion loops, rivetted and
soldered. This was a troublesome operation, in which vast
quantities of spirits of wine were used to heat the rails. When
passing gates and side roads the current was carried underground


by an insulated cable. The car, having two gathering brushes,
■was long enough to over-ride all gates without breaking contact,
and the momentum carried across wider openings. The line being
single, passing-places were provided, always on an incline, the
ascending car taking the inside line so as not to lose its current.
For experimental purposes a 15 h.* p. agricultural engine was
used to drive a 15 h. p. Dynamo, and this sufficed till the whole
line was completed. Then a waterfall was purchased, and a pair
of 50 h. p. turbines and a large Dynamo erected. This entailed
the blowing up of an old mill and the construction of expensive
works, which delayed the formal opening of the line. In fact,
work was carried on night and day, and a complete trial
by water power was only run on the evening previous. Sir
Frederick Bramwell, Sir Wm. Siemens, Sir Wm. Thompson,
Professor Fitzgerald, and other scientists, anxiously watching the
result late into the night. The generating station was three-
quarters of a mile from the Bushmills end of the line, and was
connected by an underground cable. The opening ceremony
proved a great success, and was attended by the scientific men of
the United Kingdom, few of whom knew how nearly it proved a
total failure. Although everything worked beautifully the
previous night, and again at daylight next morning, when the
four cars to be used in the procession passed over the whole line
at 12 miles an hour, yet just half-an-hour before the arrival of
the Lord-Lieutenant one of the underground cables crossing a
gateway about 2 miles from Bushmills broke down, causing a
leak of 15 h. p. even when no cars were running. There was
just time to despatch a telegram to Portrush to start only one car
at a time up the steep hill at the commencement, and luckily the
cable did not break down entirely. It was with a sigh of relief
that the speaker saw the first car load arrive at the generating
station. During luncheon the leak was found, cut out, and steam
got up in the experimental engine at the other end, and the leturn
journey successfully accomplished, half by water and half by
steam-produced electricity, without anyone being the wiser.
These were the sort of failures which had to be contended against
—the principle was sound, but the details were often faulty.
Electricians have since learned to construct dynamos with good
bearings, and to use proper insulation. Many a time our field
magnets fused, from oil splashing in and destroying the insulat-
ing rubber. Everything was exposed to dust and dirt, while much
of the work was as fine and delicate as clockwork j now all is
changed for the better.
The motor dynamo was carried on a bracket beneath the
floor of the car, from which, after reduction of speed, power was
conveyed to the driving wheels by means of a steel link chain,
similar to what is now used in cycles, but then it had to be


specially designed. At first steel spiral cords were tried, running
in grooves ; they worked beautifully on a level, but failed to grip
on a 1 iu 30 grade.
With such a simple matter as the gathering brush much
difficulty was experienced, as in those days electricity was sup-
posed to have such a preference for copper that nothing else could
be used. After knocking many forms of copper brushes to
pieces, a spring steel collector was used, made like an ordinary
double car spring. Great elasticity was required, owing to the
pitching of the 4-wheeled cars and the number of openings to be
passed; here the ends of the 3rd. rail were bent down, forming
slopes up which the collectors glided.
It was only after most exhaustive trials that the Board of
Trade Inspectors would pass the line as safe. Automatic
brakes were required to be fitted, to prevent the speed exceeding
12 miles per hour, and electricity was not allowed to be applied
to this purpose. The difficulty was overcome by the adoption of
the brake invented by him. These when tried down an incline
of 1 in 30, with current full on, stopped the car immediately, and
almost threw General Hutchinson, Government Inspector, over-
board. Then the strength of the current used (250 volts) had
to be proved not dangerous to life, even to a naked person sitting
on the 3rd. rail. This stringent test was carried out, the volun-
teers being the Engineer-in-Chief (Mr. W. A. Traill) and Dr.
Hopkinson, neither of whom were nearjy so susceptible to
electricity as himself. Some notes of this point may be of inte-
rest. Though hundreds of shocks were rec-ived, no one was
injured with currents up to 300 volts, yet this same current
killed two horses when the riders used the 3rd. rail for a mount-
ing step; the instant each placed his hand on his horse's neck
the horse fell dead. Yet a horse’s fore-foot had been placed on
the 3rd. rail, and no injury resulted. Dogs at first often placed
their noses against the rail with astonishing results. In a short
time, however, the dogs learned to keep to the other side of the
road. He had seen a sparrow receive a shock in an amusing
way. The bird lit on the raised rail, and of course received
no shock, as it did not form contact with the earth. In reaching
out to pick a drop of dew off a tall blade of grass it completed
the circuit, and was tumbled in a heap; it recovered, however, in
about five seconds. The doctor at Portrush used to prescribe so
many minutes current for rheumatic patients, one great advan-
tage of the continuous current being that it does not cramp, and
therefore the recipient can let go at pleasure. Seeing the severe
effects of even 300 volts, one should be very careful in adopting
the overhead, or any system in which high tension electricity is
used.


With regard to working expenses, comparisons made between
different Tramways may be very misleading, owing to the charac-
ter of the roads. The Portrush line had heavy grades and sharp
curves. In one place a curve of 40 feet radius on alin 25
grade. The summit level was 180 feet over the starting place,
and many intervening depressions had to be crossed, and, being a
Tramway, the level of the road could not be departed from to any
extent. The Newry and Bessbrook line, on the other hand, was
a Railway on private land, and although the grade was steep, the
curves were very easy. The restrictions placed by the Board of
Trade and the Grand Juries had done more to prevent the exten-
sion of Tramways in the old country than any other cause. Even
on country lines the showing of steam or smoke could be followed
by a heavy fine, and the speed was limited by automatic brakes.
On the Portrush line a good opportunity was afforded of
comparing the cost of working a Tram motor with an electric
car when the electricity was generated by steam power, using the
same fuel—coke—in each case. In full working, the locomotive
weighed 7 tons and drew 12 tons behind it. The electric car weighed
3 tons 5 cwt. empty, carried 20 passengers, and drew a waggon
behind weighing 6 tons. The engines generally used 11 cwt.
coke per day of 10 hours, and ran 60 miles, drawing 1 car.
To drive the same car 30 miles by electricity required 3 cwt. of
coke to be burnt in the stationary engine, the trips being taken
once an hour for 5 hours. When using the water power it was
impossible to compare the cost, as the water power cost only £25
per year, and he (Mr. Price) left before the item of wear and tear
could be estimated. The following notes may be of interest to
electricians —Resistance of line, ‘23 o.h.m.s. per mile; E.M.F., 225
volts; insulation 500 to 1000 0.h.m.5., according to moisture in
atmosphere; loss due resistance 4 per cent, with 4 cars running,
each using 4h. p.; leakage total 2 - 5 amperes.
Mr. Price, in conclusion, hoped he had not occupied too much
time in relating some of the difficulties which had to be overcome
in the construction of the Tramway. He was glad to say that
electricity had proved a great success, and was annually convey-
ing thousands of tourists to the far-famed Giant’s Causeway.


Mr. R. E. Jones.
The subject of Tramway Traction is one of more than passing
importance to Engineers, although in this country, owing to the
want of concentration of population, there are but few towns
where any system of tramroacl other than that worked by horse
power, can hope to become a commercial success. Mr. Grimshaw
.asks what is a tramway, and how is it to be distinguished from a
railway 1 One authority states the former to be “ any two smooth
parallel tracks upon which wheels without flanges may run.”
Another terms it “ a street railway for cars.” The latter appears
to be the more reasonable definition. I think, however, the chief
difference between the two “ ways ” is that a railway carries
freight of all kinds and weights for all distances; whereas a
trarnroad is more confined in its action, never of long length, and
with much more limited capacity as to haulage power, &c.
Although the subject of Tramway Traction is one of con-
siderable interest, yet I think the question of the cheapest mode
of constructing and working light railways is at the present
time of far greater importance to this country, in which large
districts exist without even reasonable access to market, and
where the usual type of line cannot be provided, owing not only
to its great initial cost, but also to the further charges for mainte-
nance and working. Such a subject, h jwever, is I think, distinct
from that at present under review, although the line of demarca-
tion between Tramways and Railways is, as Mr. Grimshaw states,
not very clearly defined.
The question before us is a large one, if we take into con-
sideration all kinds of Passenger and Mineral Tramways. So far
the discussion has been confined to the former, and I think
rightly so, as the latter are constructed and worked in various
ways, each case being adapted to its own locality and peculiar
conditions ; it is, therefore, well nigh impossible to devise any
type of motive power capable of being universally and economic-
ally applied to such works.
Dealing, therefore, with Passenger Tram locomotion, we com-
mence with Horse power, which, in England, on the Continent,
and even in the States and Canada, still holds its own with the
later developments of traction. According to Mr. How, the
initial cost of horse tramways with their equipment is far less than
that of any other system ; but he gives the working expenditure
at a much higher rate than either steam or electricity. No doubt
this would be so in England and on the Continent, but in this
colony, where horses and feed are generally cheap, I feel sure the


cost of working will compare favorably with any other kind of
Tram traction. Unfortunately, I have no statistics upon this
point. At Adelaide the horse tramways appear to be worked
cheaply and well. We live, however, in times when each minute
saved in a journey is considered of value, hence the desire for
quick locomotion. This has been obtained by
Steam power, of which no better example exists than our
own City and Suburban Tramways. That, in narrow streets with
steam engines moving along same, there is a certain amount of
danger to life, will be admitted ; also the great inconvenience to
traffic ; but it must be acknowledged our network of Tramways,
giving speedy and constant access, as they do, to almost every
part of the city and suburbs, would be much missed were they to
disappear. And when we find, with all their costly construction
and maintenance, they pay a dividend of per cent., we should
be careful before advocating any change which, although scienti-
fically progressive, might be far less remunerative to the State.
Respecting Compressed Air, which Mr. Selfe so manfully
champions for Tramway Traction, I think it must be confessed
that little progress has been made to bring this force into practical
use, although attempts have been made to do so. I remember,
some years ago, seeing in London, a model for a tunnel under the
English Channel, through which the trains were to be propelled
by compressed air. No doubt it is not now proposed to apply it
in the same manner. What is to be studied, is not its power—
which cannot be denied—but its economic application compared
with other systems of traction, and so far tliis comparison has
been unfavorable with either steam or electricity, although I hope
the future which Mr. Selfe predicts for it will be realized.
Coming now to Electricity, it must be admitted America is far
ahead of any other country; and when we read of the waters of the
mighty Niagara being made to play their part in supplying elec-
trical power for the working of many industries, we cannot fail to
admire the spirit of enterprise and love of scientific investigation
which so largely prevails in the great country across the Atlantic.
So far in the discussion there is a preponderance of opinion in
favor of the Overhead Electrical System ; what is known as the
Storage Battery System being condemned. An interesting paper
was furnished very recently to the Institute of Civil Engineers
by Mr. Ruttan, M.1.C.E., city engineer of Winnipeg :—“ In
Boston,” he states, “ there is a gradual change from horse to
electrical traction, the advantages of the latter being greater speed
and cleanliness. Regarding the Overhead and Storage Systems r
the first cost appears about the same for both—engine power also
—but it is probable in future less will be required for Storage
Tramways. On the Overhead System the power required is very
variable, as the engine loading changes suddenly, necessitating


full steam-pressure to be kept at its maximum, whereas the
Storage Cars are independent units, and the engines at the central
station may therefore be run at a constant rate, developing the-
average power to move the cars on the line. Taking the electrical
efficiency of the storage battery at 80 per cent, and of the over-
head wire 90, we have the total E.H.P. required for the former
187-5 against 333 for the latter.” The conclusions arrived at by
Mr. Ruttan are : That a road which is not too long, and upon
which there is heavy traffic, affords the best opportunity for
economically working the overhead system, while a straggling
road with comparatively light traffic affords the most favorable
conditions for the storage batteries. He further adds that the
overhead system has probably reached its maximum efficiency,
while the storage battery has not yet done so. At Washington
the same company works both systems, the batteries being charged
from wires of the overhead lines. I tind from the latest return
of our Railway Commissioners that on the Randwick and
Waverley tramway, 1J- miles is reported to have cost £II,OOO for
its electrical construction and equipment on the Thomson-Houston
principle. The sum of £2459 was expended in working for ten
months as against £1915 by steam for a similar period, the latter
showing a saving of 21 per cent., which seems to prove the
change in the mode of traction which was here determined upon
lias borne good results, at any rate from a commercial point of
view. The North Shore Cable line, also 1| miles in length, cost
£7902 to work for the year, or times as much as steam on the
Randwick tramroad. This comparison, however, is scarcely fair,,
as the traffic-earnings of the latter were much less than the former.
A more even comparison may probably be made with the city and
suburban system, which we find cost 16 per cent, less to work
than its cable neighbour at North Shore, whilst the latter also
expended nearly four times as much in working as the Newcastle
and Plattsburg steam tramway, which earned 27‘88d. per train
mile, and gives a profit of 4'82 per cent, compared with 4-27 on
the North Shore cable. According to Mr. Thow, the working
expenses of the Electrical and Cable systems are nearly equal.
Mr. How puts the latter at 50 per cent, more than overhead
tramways. Taking, however, a mean, a tolerably fair comparison
can be made with steam. In a recent cablegram it was stated
The Mersey Docks and Harbour Trust had decided to erect six
miles of overhead electric tramways, thus shewing the favor in
which the system is there held. The City of Hobart too, is, lam
informed, about to adopt electricity as a motive power for its
tram roads. It must be acknowledged the Cable System , as in
vogue both in Melbourne and North Sydney, is most attractive,
works over heavy grades with cleanliness and ease, and in these
respects is much to be preferred to either steam or horse power.


But when we find that at North Shore the initial cost, including
equipment, is £50,245 per mile, as against about £IO,OOO for
either electric and steam tramways, there must be a great saving
in working expenses to compensate for the extra interest on con-
struction. We, however, do not find this to be the case. On a
revenue basis the North Shore Cable cost 71 per cent, to work, as
against 82 on the City Tramways and 73 on the Plattsburg line.
It must, I think, be admitted that with so many different condi-
tions, both as to locality, grades, traffic, cost of labor, life of road
and rolling stock, a proper comparison between the different
systems is almost impossible. Both the Electric and Cable
systems admit of working over heavier and steeper grades than
steam.
The conclusions I have arrived at are, whereas in Sydney we
have a system of steam tramways, doing excellent and successful
work, a greater gain should be shewn than is now apparent before
any change can be recommended. And, as already pointed out,
there are very few towns, in this colony at any rate, where any
but horse tramways can be expected to commercially succeed.
With respect, however, to the general question, I think that for
heavy, continuous traffic, overhead electrical system is both
economical and effective, although, no doubt, its beauty is not
quite clear to Mr. Buskin ; but, then, he objects to many works
that do not harmonise well with nature. For light traffic I prefer
the Electric Battery System, as being cheap to construct, with
less loss of power in working.
I append a few statistics relating to various Systems of
Traction in New South Wales :


be
Tramway.
Design
Cost per
mile
Earnings
per
mile.
*2
O <n
> o>
c S
Analysis of Working Expexsbs, giving
PER CENT AGE OF CHIEF ITEMS.
Remarks.
C3
s
System.
including
equipment
Per cent
ing ex{
date.
Perma-
nent
Way.
Cars,
&c.
Loco.
Power.
Traffic
Exn’u’s.
General
Charges
Total.
*37
City and Suburban
Steam...
£
25,213
£
7,549
82
22-70
4-68
4804
20-37
4-21
100
£
Pays 554 dividend
7i
Newcastle and Plattsburg ...
Do. ...
10,120
1.826
73
1107
6
o
54-78
24-78
2-37
100
Pays 4 82 dividend
14
Rand wick and Waverley
Do. ...
7.683
25 53
2-77
55-46
15-25
•99
100
U
Do. Do.
Electric
7 683
t
15-41
•33
7137
11-87
1-02
100
li
Norlh Shore
Cable ...
50,2-15
7,415
71
11 52
7-86
57-63
20-94
205
100
Pays 4-27 dividend
* This includes 1
S miles from Bridge Street to Railway Station, carrying
an immense traffic.


Mr. G. E. Cowdery.
Ix considering a matter of this kind, the question that naturally
presents itself to us is, What is the best system of Tramway
Traction for Sydney. That the suburbs of Sydney require a
satisfactory system of Suburban Railways is generally admitted,
but it appears, until that is satisfied, the public will hold to the
steam they have until they get the steam they desire. That
granted, they will quickly fall into line for abolishing stenm
tramways and substituting a more suitable system of Tramway
Traction, where steam and smoke will not be required, and where
the noise will be reduced to a minimum.
Should it be decided to abolish steam and substitute cable,
the whole of the existing track must be removed, and, further,
the miles of single line must be duplicated in order to allow
the cable being worked over the whole of the existing track, a
total distance of 38 miles of double track. This would cost at
least £1,500,000.
I also estimate, to carry a similar amount of traffic to that
hauled by the present steam lines, a number of subsidiary lines
would be required in the city proper, which would probably in-
crease the capital expenditure required for cable tramways to
£2,000,000. It also means that the existing capital for steam
tramways, which amounts to £1,000,000, would be practically
thrown away. We would therefore require a capital of £3,000,000
to supersede steam by cable.
On the other hand, if the overhead electric system (and this
must admittedly be the only other rival) be adopted, there would
not be the slightest necessity to remove the existing track as it
is well adapted for electrical working. It must also be remem-
bered our lines extend some distance into the suburbs—to Botany,
miles; Five Dock, 7 miles; and Dulwich Hill, 6 miles, thus
favouring electric construction.
The cost of converting our 63 miles of single track into
electric installation I estimate at £630,000. I would therefore
favour electric traction, not only for its low first cost, but its
easy adaptability to our requirements.
Few electrical engineers will hold that the overhead wires
are not objectionable, and would be pleased if they could be dis-
pensed with. The greatest difficulty, however, is to familiarise
the public with them, but this should not be harder than to make
them used to steam and its attendant noises. I should therefore
like to see a line constructed in a thickly populated district with
steep grades, where not only the public would become familiar


with the wires, but would be enabled to test its load-hauling
■capacities up steep inclines and more‘clearly demonstrate its
commercial value. One of the greatest difficulties, to my mind,
in comparing the commercial advantage of electric over steam
traction, is to ascertain fairly accurately the maintenance charges
in each case. It is well known that invariably when a new line
is first made, whatever be the traction, the maintenance charge is
necessarily light, often leading investors to a too sanguine view
of their investment, forgetting that each year the material
becomes more worn and the cost of labour increasing proportion-
ately. Of course it generally follows the earnings yearly increase
as the population grows, but this is not always proportionate, and
is subject to many disturbing influences.
To what extent the maintenance of an overhead electric
line, with its motive power and electrical connections, would in-
crease at the end of six or seven years, it is difficult to es imate;
and it appears to me that here caution must be exercised in com-
paring the maintenance cost of electric with either steam or
cable tramways, for it must be remembered that electric overhead
lines are little more than four years old.
It therefore appears to be a fair question to ask in reference
to the extract from the Census Bulletin , No. 55, on Transporta-
tion, quoted by Mr. Thow—How long have the nine electric lines
been in operation as compared with the ten cable ? Do they run
through as populous districts in each case ? Is the amount of
vehicular traffic similar? And are the grades and curves very
much the same ? Such questions as these have a very important
bearing on the question, and no comparison is complete unless all
the local conditions are fairly stated.
I would add that these figures, given in the Census Bulletin
5)5, have already, owing to their careless compilation, caused a
large amount of irritation and correspondence. It has been
pointed out, for instance, that the cost given for an electric line
as £lO,OOO a mile is a single line unpaved, and £70,000 for cable
a mile of double track well paved.
Taking the yearly permanent-way maintenance of our city
and suburban lines at £52,000, I calculate that, were they
worked under the electrical conditions, ths cost would not exceed
£40,000, a yearly saving of £12,000. I arrive at this by care-
fully watching the cost of maintenance under the two conditions
on the Waverley to Randwick line, and also by estimating that
by the removal of the heavy motors from the streets the life of
the road would be increased from nine years to twelve years.
With reference to the comparatively heavy maintenance on
the North Shore Cable line, I would point out it is worked under
very severe conditions. The trams run to meet the boats, and
naturally the traffic at the busy parts of the day is in one direc-


tion, so that, especially in the evening when ascending the steep
inclines and when a dummy and two loaded cars are attached to
the rope and stop and start on the inclines, a very severe strain
is thrown on to the cable, causing a short life for the rope and
consequent heavy maintenance. It is only fair to add, with refer-
ence to the cost of cable tramways, the tendency has lately been
to greatly reduce the first cost by the construction of shallower
tunnels. The maintenance has also been reduced by using better
constructed cables and increasing their life by the adoption of
tangential pulleys on sharp curves.
It is also interesting to note the great difference in the life
of cables, even of the same makers, some lasting two or three
months, others twelve, under apparently similar conditions.
Even in the same rope half the rope may wear badly while the
other half remain fairly good.
This, as far as I can learn, has never been satisfactorily ex-
plained.


Mr. P. B Elwell
Having been honoured by an invitation to join in the discussion
upon this subject, I feel bound to contribute any information or
suggestions that I may be able to do, although it is doubtful
whether my contribution will not prove both stale and valueless.
Mr. How has thoughtfully protected himself fro n criticism
to a great extent by giving his object as mainly that of promoting
a discussion, and it is in that respect more especially that he
deserves our thanks.
Amongst other proposed methods of traction, one gentleman
has referred to a continuously revolving shaft, an idea that I can
recall as having occurred to me some twenty years ago, when the
question of superseding locomotives on the Metropolitan Railway
was first raised, and I explained my idea in a letter to, I think,
The Engineer, but, on going into details, I arrived at the conclu-
sion that it was not good enough. The facility with which the
cars could be started, stopped, reversed, or shunted was very
attractive.
Mr. How states that the Chicago Railway Co. in 1889 had
600 cars running on a line 20 miles long at a speed of 10 to 12
miles an hour. This is a marvellous instance, if correct, and
presents the perfection of a cable line, namely, an almost con-
tinuous string of cars. But I can hardly believe that a2O
seconds service—that is, a car every 20 seconds—could possibly
be maintained at any speed approaching 10 miles an hour. It
only allows 110 yards between the cars, on a double track, and
would be about three times the traffic of the Melbourne Tram-
ways.
If such conditions were practicable, there is not the least
doubt but that the line would prove highly economical, and, if
passengers were sufficiently numerous, extremely remunerative.
The efficiency of such a line, i.e., the power actually applied to
the cars as compared with the indicated horse power of the
engines, would probably reach nearly 50 per cent.
And now, if I am not proving tedious, I would say a few
words about this all-important subject of Efficiency. It is for
the public to say whether they will have Steam Trams, Cable
Trams, Overhead-wire Electric, Conduit Electric Trams, Accu-
mulator Trams, or any other sort of Trams, or no Trams at
all; and I would not for a m ment try to persuade them that
Steam was unobjectionable, or that the Cable was the imper-
sonation of safety, or that over-head wires interfered in no way
with the aesthetic aspect of the streets. I would prefer that the
public formed their own opinions upon such points.


But it is for engineers to point out the various technical
advantages and disadvantages of each system as affecting the
cost of working or general convenience, and this question of
efficiency is one of the greatest weight.
The bare statement that the Cable is only capable of showing
an efficiency of 25 per cent, whilst the directly driven Electric—
either by overhead wire or underground conductor— gives us 50
per cent., is of little value although perfectly correct under certain
circumstances ; on the contrary, it may prove very misleading,
because it is quite possible for a Cable line to show 30 per cent,
efficiency, whilst an Electric one only gives 20 per cent., and
examples may be given of this in practice.
The characteristic conditions —length of the line, density of
traffic, grades, curves, description of roadway, climate, prevailing
rates of wages, etc., not to mention fiscal policy of existing
Government must first be obtained. The comparative efficiency
of the different methods of traction can then, and not until then,
be calculated with accuracy.
For instance, let us imagine a practically straight route on
a continually ascending grade of 1 in 10, and a traffic demanding
a one-minute service of cars. Under such conditions there could
be no question as to the advisability of adopting the Cable as
the most efficient and remunerative system.
On the other hand, take a line with many grades and curves,
the former not exceeding 1 in 15, with a 2|- or 3-minute service
of cars. In this case Electricity would carry the day, and leave
the Cable far behind as a paying concern.
Again, take an outlying line connecting two or three suburbs
or a township with the nearest Railway Station, where a service
of one car per hour, or even less, meets all requirements. Neithei
Cable or directly driven Electric systems would answer in such
an instance. The most efficient and economical service, not con-
sidering horse traction, would be between Steam and Electric
Accumulators, with advantage to the latter if local rates of wages
are very high, and to the former if especially low.
Of the three cases I ha ve suggested above, the first is rarely
met, and, consequently, the Cable can seldom compete favourably
•either with Steam or Electricity. The second case is more or less
that of most tramways, and that is why the overhead Electric
has made such prodigious strides in America, where it has gener-
ally superseded animal power on existing lines ; and here I would
■draw attention to the general impression—correct under certain
conditions, but quite erroneous under others—viz., that, of the
two methods of direct Electric traction, the Overhead wire and
the Conduit as used at Blackpool and Buda Pesth, the cost of the
latter is very much greater than that of the former.


mately as follows :—
OVERHEAD WIRE.
CONDUIT.
Way...
£ 10,0D0
Permanent Way and Con-
£14.000
Overhead wires, poles, feed-
duit, etc.
ers, and either under-
Motive power, etc.
2,000
ground return wire or
Rolling stock
2,500
connections between rails
2 000
Various
500
Motive power, etc.
Rolling stock
Various
2,000
2.500
500
£17,000
£19,000
Balance being about 11
per cent....
2.000
£19,000
Take, for instance, the following very probable case :
A line has to be constructed through a populous city, over one of
its main streets, which is wood paved, and the traffic is expected
to be very heavy, say a 21-minute service of large cars. The
comparative cost per mild of the two systems would be approxi-
Thus, under the above conditions, the Conduit lino only costs
about 11 per cent more than the Overhead wire, and with a
newly-invented Conduit it would be even less - ; and it is, as I
said before, for the public to say whether it is not worth this
extra 11 per cent, of initial cost in order to dispense with all
poles and wires. The efficiency of either arrangement is practi-
cally the same, the advantage being slightly in favour of the
Conduit.
Of course, if we take an instance under totally different con-
ditions, say the conversion of an existing line from Steam to
Electricity, and where a 10-minutes service will answer all
purposes, it will be found that the Conduit will cost two or three
times as much as the Overhead wire. But if the conversion can
be carried on simultaneously with the relaying of the road, the
cost will again be brought down to a similar ratio to that in the
case of a new line.
Whilst on the question of the Direct Electric system, I
would draw attention to the great improvement recently brought
into use in the States for the purpose of controlling the motors,
viz., of commutating the current delivered to the car motors
instead of merely introducing more or less dead resistance as was
formerly the practice, and is still on most lines. The principle
involved is an old one—electrically speaking—having been used
in connection with Accumulators for the last ten years or so, but
it has only lately been carried out in a thoroughly practical
manner in connection with directly driven cars, mainly on account
* This estimate (Permanent Way) is probably too low, in which case the net difference
would be still less.


of the want of a suitable commutator that will stand the severe
action caused by the breaking of the high pressure current used
in direct electric traction and consequent arcs at the commutators.
But, by aii ingenious arrangement of magnets these arcs have
been rendered harmless, and it is said that one of these commu-
tators has been worked backwards and forwards as many as fifty
thousand time-t, at the rate of two hundred and fifty times a
minute, without damage to the wearing surfaces.
Mr. How gives a few, somewhat ancient, cases of Secondary
Batteries, or Accumulators, being tried for Tramway traction,
but he does not tell us that the Birmingham Tramways Company
have been using them for the last three years ; that the North
Metropolitan Company of London have been working a section
of their lines for about four years ; or that the line between
Schevening and the Hague has been working for two or three
years—all fairly satisfactorily—and, as the Batteries are likely
to become cheaper in consequence of the expiration of the main
patents, this method of traction will probably extend. But if I
were to describe the various forms of Secondary Battery with
which I have experimented during the past ten years I should
keep you here a I’night, or I should soon find myself speaking to
an empty room ; but I may mention that there are three forms,
of the “ Plante,” “ Faure,” and “ Demazures ” types respectively,
which show great capabilities, and the two first may be considered
thoroughly practical. One has just given me a discharge corres-
ponding with 25,000 foot pounds of energy to one pound of
battery, with promise of durability.
Let us for a moment consider the advantages of the Accumu-
lator system. First, from the public point of view, we have—
1. Complete absence of Overhead wires or Conduits.
2. No alteration required in existing lines.
3. Absolute independence of each car or tram. And, from
the Engineer’s point of view, more particularly—
4. No risks of imperfect contacts, either overhead or on the
rails, causing arcs, and, consequently, waste of energy.
5. No risk of a temporary break in the current, caused
either by the trolley missing the wire or by very dirty rails.
6. The advantages that, even if a car were to leave the rails,
it could be driven over the wood blocking and on to the rails
again.
7. The advantage that the Shunt-wound motor can be used,
and a higher average efficiency obtained (Shunt motors cannot be
used either with the Overhead wire or Conduit, on account of
the uncertain contacts above-mentioned).
8. That the Generating Plant can be worked at a uniformly
full power, and it is well known that Steam engines—especially
compound engines—work very inefficiently at powers much below


Cable
... 12 tons.
Electric (direct-driven)
... 18 „
Electric (Accumulators)
... 23 „
Steam
... 25 „
full load. The variations in total load—even when a large num-
ber of cars are in use on one line—are great in either of the
direct-driving systems.
The disadvantages are principally in extra weight of rolling
stock, about 20 per cent, under the best circumstances, and the
hitherto heavy wear and tear in the Accumulators.
Whilst on the question of weight, I would draw attention to
a comparison, highly in favour of the Cable system, to which I
have not seen any allusion made up to the present —the wonder
being that, with such advantages, the Cable should still prove so
costly. It all tends to show that the principle of traction by
Cable is bad under ordinary conditions of street tramway work-
ing, and should only be used under exceptional circumstances.
Now, let us take for this comparison four cars, one Cable,
one direct driven Electric, one worked by Accumulators, and one
by a Steam motor, each carrying 150 passengers—l am obliged
to lix upon a rather large size in order to give steam a fair
“ show.”
The total working weight of each without passengers will be
found approximately as follows :
Allowance is made in each case for strength to bear overloading
to the extent of 25 per cent, to 50 per cent., and for mounting
grades up to lin 16.
Steam is weighted with the special disadvantage over all the
others, in that as much as six tons have to be carried on a single
pair of wheels, whereas, in the other types, there need never be
more than three tons to one pair of wheels, and, in the case of
the Cable, considerably less.
By this comparison we see that the Cable can well afford to
be of low efficiency, because the dead-weight to be propelled by it
is only two-thirds that of the direct-driven Electric, to carry the
same passengers.
Consequently a Cable line giving the average efficiency of
25 per cent, is practically equal to an Overhead wire road show-
ing 38 per cent., to an Accumulator system showing 48 per cent.,
and to a Steam tramway giving 52 per cent, commercial
efficiency.
Notes on the Discussion of September 21, 1892.
Mr. Selfe remarks how “ very simple ” a compressed air
engine would be as compared with an electric motor car, but it
appears to me that, when one considers that an electric engine


need have but one moving part, viz., the driving ax'e, and but
one pair of journals to keep in order, and that there are no
cylinders to be re bored, piston rings to be renewed, valves to be
faced up, connecting rods to be taken up, eccentrics to be looked
after, etc., etc., and all of them grinding away with the dust and
mud, one can hardly arrive at anything but the contrary conclu-
sion. As an instance of what modern electric motors will stand,
I might cite a case where one of these motors combined with a
mining drill was thrown down an embankment some fifty feet
high into a pool of water. It was shortly afterwards picked out,
and immediately started to work without repairs or re-adjust-
ments.
Mr, Grimshaw makes a rather startling statement as regards
efficiency of Gearless, Single Reduction, and Double Reduction
motors respectively, viz., 70, 60, and 50 per cent., and I presume
he alludes to the mechanical efficiency, because it would be quite
as correct to state that they were of 70, 80, and 90 per cent,
efficiency respectively. That would be electrical efficiency, and
3 7 ou see that the one tells against the other, so that, taking the
commercial efficiency, there is not much difference. The
practical point is that the Gearless motor is the heaviest and
most costly, but least expensive in wear and tear ; the Double
Reduction motor being cheapest and lightest, whilst most costly
in wear and tear.
Mr. How has referred to the experimental trial of the
Overhead wire system at Randwick. This was discontinued
because there was no further object to be gained by continuing
it on that section of line, and I might mention that the whole of
the material will probably be brought into use again very shortly.
Mr. Grimshaw has apparently confused the terms “ series ”
and “parallel” with motors and accumulators where he states
that, “in starting, it is usual to work the motors in series
, . but sometimes exactly the reverse is done.” The fact being
that, in the case of motors, they are started in series and then
thrown into parallel ; whilst, in the case of driving by Accumu-
lators, the BATTERIES are usually started in “ parallel ” and after-
wards thrown into “ series.” The effect is precisely the same in
either instance.
Mr. Thow’s information is most interesting and valuable,
and it is with the ulterior object of confirming its value that I
would draw attention to his remark regarding the cost of steam
traction as in Sydney being more expensive than any other
systems. He appears to have overlooked the point of car
capacity. In Sydney (City and Suburban) this is 70 seats,
whilst in Boston it is, I think (or was), only 26 seats, and at
Korth Shore (Cable) about 10 seats. Consequently, to make a
fair comparison, Mr. Thow’s figures require considerable revision,


and it will be found that the cost per seat comes out remarkably
low in the case of the Sydney Steam Trams—the North Shore
Cable costing about twice as much.
The term “ car-mile ” may be very misleading, and I would
suggest that of “ seat-mile ” as a more accurate unit for calcula-
tions. I think Mr. Grimshaw has anticipated me in drawing
attention to this point.
Finally, I am hardly prepared to admit as Mr, Thow
expresses it, “our relation, as English engineers to electricity, as
a motive power, is a very long way indeed behind that of the
Americans,” in spite of the gigantic progress made by the latter
in the simplest form of electric traction, viz.—by the overhead
wire.
How about the Blackpool Tramway, with its traffic of ten
50-passenger cars over only two miles of line, doing about 800
car-miles per day in the summer season. Where has the Conduit
system been so successfully worked in the States? And we must
remember that this line has been working for six or seven years.
Again, where in the States is there a traffic anything
approaching that which the City and South London Electric
Bailway can deal with ?
And far more progress has been made in the still more
difficult problem of traction by accumulators in England than
in America.
And where in America have they had the enterprise to
construct an elevated electric railway equal to that now being
built at Liverpool ?
Finally, as regards size of engines and dynamos, the
Americans are again all behind, for where can you see engines of
10,000 I.H.P. each, driving dynamos fifty feet in diameter, such
as those erected by the London Electric Co. at Deptford ?
The Americans have had the exceptional chance of going
ahead with the Overhead wire, and—they have gone.
I have to apologise for occupying so much of your time, and
beg to thank you for your kind attention.


Mr. J. I. Haycroft, M.E., Q.U.L
Mr. How in his paper reviews very concisely the several means
used fur the purposes of Tramway Traction, and states his principal
object was to promote discussion on such an interesting subject.
Taking a broad view of the question, which is the best system
to adopt, 1 do not think any hard and fast rule can be laid down
as a guide, Ihe most suitable traction to be used in a particular
district should, I consider, be guided by local circumstances—such
as grades, fuel, probable traffic, &c.
I am not surprised at Mr. How marvelling at the existence
of steam tramways in Sydney. I cannot see, however, in the face
of the tabular statement furnished by Mr. Thow, how he (the
author) considers them cheap.
In comparing, from a broad point of view, the systems of
traction in use at the present day-—such as steam, cable, horse and
electrical—the first, steam, may be put on one side as not likely
to make headway for several reasons. It brings additional noise,
dirt and smoke into city streets, and in point of economy is far
below the stationary engines used in cable and electric systems,
also the great weight of the motors causes rapid deterioration of
the track.
Comparing electric traction with the cable and horse traction,
the first embodies all the advantages of the others and is wanting
in those features which are objectionable in them.
In deciding the question of traction, the chief points are :
cost, operating, expenses, safety, reliability and durability. Even
granting that the operating expenses of the three systems are
equal, there are many advantages offered by the use of electricity
over horse or cable traction. As to its reliability, there can be
little question ; the experience of existing roads is the best proof
on this point. Experience has also shown that as regards durability
all that could be expected from machines subjected to such treat-
ment has been arrived at. Among the many advantages of electric
over cable or horse traction is increased speed. In the horse and
cable systems there is a limit to the speed attained ; the speed in
the cable system cannot be varied without great wear on the cable;
in crowded streets and in open suburbs the same speed approxi-
mately must be maintained.
With the electric system, the rate of speed can be varied at
will to suit requirements. Increased speed means an increased
car mileage and receipts ; also an important item is the ability of
the electric motor to haul one or two cars, and thereby render it
possible to double the carrying capacity of the road.


Unlike the cable system, whose existence depends on an
unbroken cable, in the electric system every car is a separate
locomotive.
As an example of economy in cost of equipment, on five cable
roads in America the cost was 350,000 dollars per mile of road ;
horse traction, 41,000 dollars per mile ; and electric traction,
36.000 dollars per mile. The victory of electric over cable trac-
tion has been most marked in the West end system of Boston,
and the nearly equally large institution in Minniapolis and St.
Paul, referred to by Mr Tliow.
On the lines followed by the Sprague Electric Railway and
Motor Company’s overhead trolly system in Richmond, in 1888,
there are at the present day no less than 325 roads in the United
States, England, Germany, Italy and Japan, using 7,000 motors,
4.000 cars, and 2,000 miles of track, and carrying three-quarters of
a billion of passengers per annum. Nearly a quarter of the street
railways in America are electric, about two-thirds horse, and only
one-twentieth cable. Grades of 13 to 14 per cent, (about lin7) ;
distances up to six miles from central station; speed as high as
thirty miles per hour for single cats ; and trains of from one to
four cars are in use on the electric roads.
Another point in favour of the electric system is the immunity
from accidents observed in the case of employees. Not less than
10,000 operatives are employed, yet not even one life has ever
been lost by contact with the standard potential adopted.
The City and South London Electric Railway is a type of
what I consider would be the best solution for a city railway in
Sydney. This line is 6| miles in length. The rails are laid in iron
tubular tunnels, 10 feet 6 inch diameter, up and down tracks being
separate, thereby ensuring good ventilation. The generating
plant is at the Stockwell or southern end. The trains consist of
three cars and electric locomotive. The locomotives weigh ten
tons each, and the armatures are attached direct to the driving
axles of the engines, thus doing away with the necessity of gearing;
this, of course, is only possible where high speeds are allowable.
Each locomotive has two electric motors, the current being
obtained from an insulated conductor of steel laid between the
track rails, the latter acting as return portion of circuit. Though
the cars are lit electrically, the stations derive their light from gas.
A fixed fare is charged for any distance, the passengers paying on
entering through a turnstile. The cars are all one class like our
trams. Trains are run every five minutes, at an average speed
of twenty-five miles per hour.
An underground road of this description is peculiarly suitable
for Sydney \ it can be constructed quickly without damaging or
defacing property, and is secure from interruptions or accidents
to which surface lines are liable, and much higher speed is


permissible. It also does away with the objection, fanciful or
otherwise, levelled at the overhead system of electric traction
with its standards and net-work of wires.
In New York several schemes are proposed at present to
substitute some means of transit for the elevated railway, called
by several names, such as “ Arcade Railway,” “ District Railway,”
“ City Railway,” and “ Underground Railway,” having one feature
in common, viz., traversing the city, either wholly or in part, by
means of its avenues, directly under its surface. The motive
power proposed is electricity, with provision made in the tunnels
for accommodation of gas, steam, and water pipes, with telegraph,
telephone and electric power cables. The cost of the city railway,
partly four tracks and rest two tracks, is estimated at tifty-seven
millions dollars.
Electric traction, by storage batteries, is being tried in
Philadelphia on the Waddell Entz system. The storage
battery is undoubtedly the ideal system of electric traction ; each
car is a unit in itself, and no out door construction nor special
track are necessary. The threespecial features of the system, which
distinguish it from other storage battery systems, are as follow :
an alkaline accumulator, with plates of iron and copper is used,
instead of an acid accumulator with lead plates. The motor is
very light, running at low speed, and with single gearing, and
the batteries and motor are so arranged that, when running down
hill, the motor acts as a dynamo, and partially re-charges the
accumulators. The battery is a development of the accumulator
brought out by Desmazures ; it consists of a plate of iron and one
of copper, with a specially porous surface, immersed in a solution
of potassium zincate. When the cells are being charged, metallic
zinc is deposited on the iron electorode, and the copper is oxidized ;
on discharge, the zinc is dissolved and the oxide of copper reduced,
potassium zincate being formed.
For one car, 100 cells are used, placed under the seats, these
giving froth seventy to eighty volts, and can deliver as much as
300 ampheres of current without evolving gas or serious heating.
The weight of the cells is about 60°/ e of lead accumulators of
same capacity. The armature in the motor is a gramme ring, and
the field magnets are inclosed by it, the armature and brush
holders being supported by a non-magnetic frame. The armature
makes 450 revolutions per minute, when cars travel at the rate
of ten miles per hour. The length of the track is three miles, and
the results, up to date, are most satisfactory.
H, B. Prindle, in Engineering, says, “ that the already exten-
sive and rapidly increasing use of electricity for street car propul-
sion is due to the fact that it possesses, in a marked degree,
advantages over its competitors —steam, animal power and the
cable.” This belief is strengthened by the fact, that among the


street railway companies who have adopted it are to be found
some of the largest, and at the same time, the most conservative
companies in the country (America).
Its permanency is unquestionable, and whatever changes
may take place in the next few years will be in the nature of
improved apparatus, the result of time and experience, rather
than changes in the underlying principles of electric d propulsion.
Mr. F. J. Sprague, President of the American Electrical
Institute, in his annual address last June at Chicago, said,
“ There will probably be in operation within twelve months in
the United States, five electric locomotives, varying from 700
to 1200 H.P., and from forty-five to eighty tons in weight.”
The 700 H.P. engine will be required to haul a train of 450
tons at thirty miles an hour up a grade of 26 feet to the mile, and
if there is sufficient track room they wil be driven at a speed of
at least seventy-five miles, and, perhaps, 100 miles per hour for
short distances.
A?S-ESx
V
. ✓ j/
A s W


Mr. W. F. How in reply.
I have a few words to say in reply to the remarks which have
been made upon this subject of “ Tramway Traction.” It will be
understood that I do not advocate any particular system of Tram-
way Traction or any special manufacturer, but from the investi-
gations I have made I feel sure that traction by cable and
electricity are the only two efficient systems at present in opera-
tion to any extent. I have therefore referred to those systems to
a greater extent than to other schemes that have been devised.
Mr. Norman Selfe has written about motors driven by com-
pressed air, and has referred to an invention for which he claims
great advantages. I heard that Mr. Selfe had had experience in
tramway motors before I left England, but could obtain no par-
ticulars about the invention or results obtained from it, and as it
appeared that there was not a compressed air motor running here,
I naturally assumed that it had not proved an efficient or economical
machine. Hence my remarks that cars driven by compressed
air had never to my knowledge been adopted by a tramway com-
pany.
In the communication Mr. Selfe sent to our honorary
secretary, he explained that very little had been done with com-
pressed air, although “ marvellous strides had been made in its
practical use ”; but he qualified his statements by mentioning
that the improvements have been made “ in a small way.”
Many improvements in a fairly large way have been made
since compressed air was first used for driving machinery. The
principal ones relate to the efficiency of the compressors and
heating the air before using it in the motors.
When high pressures are required, there is economy in using
compressors having two or three cylinders, and cooling the com-
pressed air as it passes from one cylinder to another, thus redu-
cing the useless resistance due to the generation of heat during the
compression.
Diagrams taken from such compressors show' that the other-
wise adiabatic curve is greatly modified and the isothermal line
is approached; but notwithstanding this improvement, if the air
is used in the motor without heating, the efficiency of the motor
rarely exceeds 30 per cent, of the brake power of the engines
driving the compressors.
The principle of all dry air refrigerating machinery is to
first compress the air, subtracting the heat due to compression,
and then allow the cold compressed air to do work in the air
expansion cylinders. As heat is required for the performance
of work, the air is cooled, and the result is that a very low


temperature is obtained, and if the air is not first dried by some
process, considerable inconvenience is caused by the formation of
snow and ice in the exhaust passages.
This same action occurs in all cases where compressed air is
used without heating it before it enters the motor to be driven,
and this has long been known, and therefore Mr. Selfe’s remarks
respecting the heating of air being a great improvement is not at
-all new.
It has been stated by a high authority that the efficiency of
.a motor driven by compressed air in Birmingham amounted to
73 per cent, and I see no reason why this statement should be
doubted, if fuel is employed for reheating the air before use; but
I take it that for tramway, air at high pressure would have to
be employed, or some plan like that of the Hughe’s and Lan-
caster’s system of frequently charging the reservoirs adopted.
Air is different in its character to steam, as the latter
requires so much latent heat to convert water into its gaseous
form, and the sensible, as compared to the latent, heat is very
small; but having converted the water into steam, a very small
proportion of additional heat increases its pressure, and it is
therefore economical to work with steam at high pressure. The
case is different with air, and it has been proved that there is a
loss of efficiency in using air at high pressure.
Again, when very high pressure air is used, there is invari-
ably trouble with the joints and loss of air by leakage through
the piston.
In the system I have referred to as having been tried
between Stratford and Leytanstene, in England, a compressor
having three cylinders was employed to obtain the pressure of
1000 lbs. per square inch.
The station was at the terminus of the line, and, when I saw
the plant, a car was being charged with air ; but before the maxi-
mum pressure had been reached a connection on the motor burst
and that was the last I saw of the plant. Some of the
cars, however, ran for a short time afterwards, and many very
favorable newspaper reports were published upon the subject, but
the cars ceased running after the experiments had been carried
out a short time. Sir Frederick Bramwell was Consulting Engi-
neer to the Company, and no expense was spared in obtaining as
perfect a plant as possible. The London Tramway Co. was most
anxious that the scheme should be a success, but it proved a
failure.
Driving by compressed air is still largely used for mining
purposes, but in many cases, in America and England, electricity
has been adopted for driving pumps, coal cutters, fans, &c., in
mines, when an efficiency of over 65 per cent, is claimed when
driving through a conductor two miles long.


By efficiency I mean the effective brake horse power of the
steam engine driving the dynamos as compared with the effective
horse power of the work done by the motor driven.
This driving of mining machinery by electricity would be
largely adopted in coal mines charged with explosive gases, if it
were not for the fear mining managers have of explosions being
caused by sparks from the dynamos.
With regard to Mr. Grimshaw’s remarks relating to the
underground railways in London; the separate motors would not
have been used had there been sufficient head room to enable the
dynamos to have been fixed on the cars. It is obvious that the
weighted dummy, whose sole duty it is to draw the cars, is much
more severe upon the road than if the dynamos were fixed on the
axles of the cars themselves, when the adhesion of the wheels
would be in proportion to the passengers riding in the cars.
Mr. Grimshaw was, I think, under a wrong impression when
he mentioned that I explained that it was not necessary for over-
head wires to be unsightly.
All overhead wires in a populous city, and the poles carrying
them, are to my mind unsightly, whether they be for telegraphs,
electric lighting, or other purposes; and although there is not
so much danger to be apprehended from them here as there is in
colder climates during the snowy seasons, still there is some
trouble occasionally through them, and I recently saw a telegraph
pole with its wires attached that had been blown down during
the recent gale in Sydney.
That Sydney people consider the numerous telegraph wires
along the streets objectionable is obvious from the fact that some
attempts have been made to hide them in George Street behind
cast-iron ornamental work, and I think nearly everyone would be
pleased if the Telegraph Department were to continue the work
they have commenced and place all wires in the city below ground.
I can make but few remarks respecting the information Mr.
Thow has given.
A short time back I met Mr. Thow, who had a copy of the
paper I prepared, and he then pointed out a clerical error in the
spelling of the name “Van Depoele.” lof course thanked him,
but at the same time wondered what he knew about tramway
traction. I have since learned that he had made a study of the
subject when in the States, and was consequently far better posted
up with the latest developments of the cable and electric systems
of tramways than I had been.
The only matter in which I do not agree with Mr. Thow re-
lates to the overhead conductors in the streets of large cities.
He does not see much objection to them, but they are to my
mind very objectionable, and although Melbourne and Sydney are
strung in all directions with telegraph wires, and in Melbourne


overhead wires are largely used for carrying electricity for arc
lighting, having a potential of over 2000 volts, which is far more
dangerous than tramway cables which work with 500 volts, I do
not think any additions should be made to the existing wires and
poles, and therefore for cities I think that at the present time
some other than the overhead electric system should be adopted.
I fully believe, from my own enquiries and from Mr. Thow’s
valuable information, that the overhead electric system is, at the
present time, the most economical and effective, and it can be
adopted with great advantage in country towns and suburban
districts.
Great strides are constantly being made in electrical inven-
tions, Several gentlemen have referred to improved secondary
batteries, and we may yet hear of the discovery of a light and
efficient storage battery which can be universally applied to
tramway traction.
T thank you, Sir, and the gentlemen who have taken part in
the discussion upon this paper, for the kind manner in which it
has been received, and I hope the subject will have justified its
introduction.
S. E. LEES, PRINTER AND STATIONER, 83 YORK STREET, SYDNEY.


f tOS'7 $




