

VENEREAL DISEASE.
(A) THE MENACE IN OUR MIDST.
J. KING PATRICK. M.D., B.Sc., D.P.H.
Read at Strength of Empire Congress, Brisbane, September 25, 1919
Of the many problems confronting humanity to-day I make bold
to say that there Is not one more insistent than the eradication of
venereal diseases. The incidence of these diseases in our midst
affecting as they do every class of society, reflecting on the most
intimate relationships of life and having consequences so far-reaching
in relation to national physique and the future of the race, constitute
a menace to the community second to none. It is no new problem.
Syphilis has been known and described since the end of the 15 th
century, when Charles VIII. of France invaded Naples. The sever-
ity of that epidemic was such that it attacked about a twentieth
of the population.. Syphilis must have existed for many hundred
years prior to the 15 th century, and in all probability venereal dis-
eases have existed ever since prostitution has been known. In the
words of Sanger: “Prostitution is coeval with society. It stains the
earliest mythological records. It is constantly assumed as an exist-
ing fact in Biblical history. We can trace it from the earliest twi-
light In which history dawns, to the clear daylight of to-day, without
a pause or a moment of obscurity.” Although the problem is
thus by no means a one it is is only within quite recent years
that any attempt has been made to enlighten public opinion and to
stimulate the public conscience on the question. Up to a few years
ago no one outside of the medical profession, who valued his reputa-
tion cared to discuss sexual matters in public. A conspiracy of
silence existed, participated in by the clergy, social workers, and
the press, and so ignorance on fundamental and essential facts of
sexual hygiene was fostered. The bold man who sought to break
down the barrier was immediatealy brought up against what Ber-
nard Shaw in his Introduction to Brieux’s play “Damaged Goods,”
calls “that curious tribal survival, the Taboo.” “Taboo,” says Shaw,
“is not morality, not decency, not reason, justice, or anything
agreeable; it is a traditionally inculcated convention that certain
things must not be mentioned, with the inevitable result that under
this strange protection of silence they fall into hideous corruption
and abuse, and go from bad to worse, whilst those who know what Is
happening must look on, tongue-tied, at the innocents playing un-
warned on the edge of a hidden precipice, and being sacrificed to
the Taboo in appalling numbers every day.” This policy has fostered
an enormous amount of ignorance, and in this connection the Eng-
lish commissioners express the opinion that the evils which lead to
the spread of the diseases “are in great part due to want of control,
Ignorance, and inexperience.” Brieux puts the following weighty
words in the mouth of the Doctor in this play ’ Damaged Goods”:
“Syphilis must cease to be treated like a mysterious evil, the very
name of which cannot be pronounced. The ignorance in which the
public is kept of the real nature and of the consequences of this
disease helps to aggravate and to spread it. Generally it is con-
tracted because ‘I didn’t know’; it becomes dangerous for want of
proper care, because T didn’t know’; it 1s passed on from person to
person because T didn’t know.’ People ought to know. Young men
ought to be taught the responsibilities they assume, and the misfor-
tunes they may bring on themselves.”.... “The mystery and hum-
bug in which physical facts are enveloped ought to be swept away
and young men be given some pride in the creative power with
which each one of us is endowed. They ought to be made to under-
stand that the future-of the race is in their hands, and to be
taught to transmit the great heritage they have received from their
ancestors Intact with all- its-possibiiities to their descendants.”
Any campaign which aims at removing the menace of venereal
diseases from our midst must there'ore employ in the forefront of


its propaganda methods a policy of education and instruction. It is
an encouraging sign of the times that within the last year nr two
the policy of prudery and mock modesty formerly obtaining has
been slowly but. surely giving place to a more promising attitude of
candour and com-monseuse. This is reflected in the attitude of
thinking people everywhere of the Press and of Societies such as the
National Council for Combating Venereal Diseases in England, and
kindred associations like our own Strength of Pimp ire Movement in
Queensland. That education is the keynote of all propaganda work
was recognised by the British Royal Commission on Venereal
Diseases, The Commissioners say: “We attach great importance'to
the educational aspect of the question, Tt is, in our opinion, abso-
lutely necessary that the public should have fuller knowledge
of the grave evils which exist among us and of their effect upon the
national life, present and future. At the same time we believe that
instructions and warning should be given to the young of -the moral
anti physical dangers which may imperil them.” They continue: ‘Tt
venereal diseases are to be stamped out it will be necessary not only
to provide the medical means of combating them, but to raise the
moral standards and practice of the community as a whole. Such in-
structions should be based upon moral principles and spiritual con-
siderations, and should by no means be concentrated on the physical
consequences of immoral conduct.”
The Australian Committee concerning Causes of Death and
Invalidity in the Commonwealth in their Report on Venereal Dis-
eases (1916) make certain recommendations as to education which
are here epitomised.
The committee insist on the value of educational iniinences.
They advocate the individual inculcation of principles of con-
tinence and clean living in boys of about the age of 15 by fathers
and schoolmasters. Men should be instructed by lecture, ami tech-
nical and trade schools, universities and the military authorities
should regard such instruction as one of their primary responsi-
bilities. Girls should be approached through mothers and school-
mistresses. The efficient education of medical students and of quali-
fied medical men so as to ensure a high standard of efficiency in
diagnosis and treatment Is insisted on.
It will thus be seen that education must follow two distinct
lines.
(1) Education which seeks to inculcate a proper moral standard
of living.
(2) Instruction on the physical effects of venereal disease,
Education under the former head must of necessity be an evo-
lutionary process and must be initiated when the subject is young.
Direct results cannot therefore be anticipated in our time, but such
education, which it is undoubtedly the province of the Church, edu-
cational agencies end enlightened parents to impart, would tend to
reduce sexual promiscuity. If sexual promiscuity wore abolished
to-morrow the Venereal Disease problem would be solved. A.s this
highly desirable consummation is not likely to eventuate at once,
instruction on the physical effects of sexual disease is highly desir-
able and it is just these physical and purely medical tads that I
propose to put before you this afternoon.
The term venereal disease includes two separate and distinct
diseases, syphilis and gonorrhoea, each caused by its own specific
organism, and each affecting the infected person in its own distinct-
ive way. Venereal diseases are most often communicated by prom-
iscuous sexual relationships, but are also conveyed to innocent
Individuals. This is the tragic fact in connection with these dis-
eases which I wish to emphasise strongly. It has been held by some
that venereal disease is a just retribution for sin, and that sufferers
should be classed as criminals rather than as patients. I shall
endeavour to show that the great mass of suffering, pain, crippling
and disability fall, pot only on the original victims of the diseases’
but on thousands of innocent and unsuspecting women and children
causing deafess, blindness, life-long invalidity, feeble-mincledness ,
and paralysis; in fact, including practically the whole gamut of
human suffering. The Commonwealth--J?i,eporL, referring to Svphills
describes it as the great devitalises It is probably responsible for
more disease, more incapacity misery than any other single


agent or cause/’ Professor Sir Wi. Osier, the eminent English
physician, considers that “of the killing diseases syphilis comes
third or fourth,'' and the same authority states that “a student who
was thoroughly taught syphilis would acquire a good knowledge of
all branches of his profession. 1 ' So protean are its manifestations
m the later stages of the disease.
Let us now briefly consider the disease which carries such
wrecking of human lives and blasting of human hopes and aspirations
in its wake.
.Syphilis: rhe immediate effects of this disease are comparatively
trivial, and if efficiently treated by modern means at the outset it is
extremely amenable to treatment. The disease is caused by a min-
ute parasite inoculated from a diseased into a healthy person, and
passes through a primary stage lasting for a few weeks, with mainly
local symptoms. The secondary stage which follows, manifests
signs of a more generalised infection, during which time, as is the
case in the primary stage, the disease is highly infective. In the ab-
sence of efficient treatment the disease passes into the tertiary stage,
characterised by grave manifestations, which may show themselves
alter the lapse ol many years, and the disease now becomes a verit-
able sword of Damocles threatening the patient’s health and life at
any moment. The disease, regarded by the patient merely as a
disagreeable memory or possibly entirely forgotten by him, proclaims
itself afresh in a manner which cannot be ignored. Growths In the
brain may cause paralysis or convulsions; eye affections may pre-
judice or destroy the sense of sight; the tongue, or the organ of
voice may be eaten away or destroyed; the bones may be attacked
leading to intractable disease, carrying in its wake incalculable
Buttering, disfigurement, anti in the majority of cases a lingering and
painful death. The arteries may he affected, becoming thickened
and brittle, or developing ulcerous patches on their internal surface.
Arterial degeneration may lead to rupture of the vessel or to gradual
dilatation of its walls, constituting the condition known as aneurism,
causing grave symptoms and an ever-present danger of sudden death
from rupture. The heart itself may be affected leading to valvular
disease, gross changes in the muscular substance of the organ or to
the distressing condition known as “angina pectoris.”
In addition recent means of scientific precision based on methods
of bio-chemical and bacteriological investigation have proved that
many diseases which were formerly regarded as separate entities,
or vaguely regarded of having a syphilitic basis in a tew cases, arc
in each and every case late manifestations of this dread disease.
Such conditions as the serious and fatal nervous disease known as
“locomotor ataxia” and the grave form of mental disturbance known
as “General paralysis of the insane” are now Included in this
category.
The disease as described is of the “acquired” variety, that is
to say, the germ of the disease is directly Inoculated into the victim.
The sex organs are the most usual site of inoculation, hut it may also
he acquired on the lips, through kissing infective persons, on the
breast by suckling syphilitic infants, or by doctors, nurses, and mid-
wives through handling Infective patients, It may also be inno-
cently acquired by the use of various articles such as a spoon or cup
or pipe previously used by an infective Individual.
In addition to this “acquired” form the disease may be con-
genital or hereditary. In other words the disease may be transmitted
by parents to their children, and this constitutes the most pathetic
and tragic fact in connection with the whole queslon. Syphilis may
be inherited from the father or mother or both. In the majority of
cases the father infects the mother, who in her turn infects her un-
born child. Syphilis is a very frequent cause of abortions, miscar-
riages, and still birth. In one series of cases quoted in the Report
of the English Royal Commission out of 1001 pregnancies in 150
families where syphilis existed, there occurred 172 miscarriages Di-
still births and 229 infant deaths; while of the 600 live children,
390 were diseased.
The ante-natal deaths'in England and Wales during 1914 were
sstimated to he 138,249, ojTj one-sixth of all children horn alive. The
hereditary form of the disease is responsible for an appalling loss o£
potential human life, and for, an equally tragic number of puny, iU-


nourished, debilitated infants with an extremely precarious hold oil
life, who die in their thousands in the first year of their existence,
and go to swell the already huge infantile mortality rate one of
the greatest blots on our boasted modern civilisation. In 1914, 3326
children died during the first few weeks of life in Australia from
debilitating conditions almost entirely attributable to syphilis. Add
to that the ante-natal death-rate, and it will be seen what fearful
ravages this scourge is making year by year in the dilection of
depopulation. Truly a massacre of the innocents, which no thinking
man or woman can contemplate with complaisance and equanimity
in this young country of ours where healthy, able-bodied men and
women must prove to be our greatest national asset. It we now
consider the congenital syphilitic child \yho_ survives, his hold on
life is still precarious, and he is apt to die from slight causes, and
has slight resisting power to disease, notably tuberculosis. Affections
of the cornea, or clear part of the eye, causing opacity with i ©suiting
impairment of vision and subsequent blindness, are common among
such subjects. It is an appalling fact that more than half of all
oases of blindness are duo to venereal diseases. Deafness isalao a
common result of congenital syphilis. Dr. Bennie, repoi ting on
behalf of the section for diseases of children, at the Australian
Medical Congress, held at Melbourne in 1908, said: “Fully'2s per
cent of the sick children in Melbourne are tainted with syphilis,
and about 10 per cent of the total number of children in Melbourne
are syphilised. . . .nearly half the children who die aie infected
w jth syphilis. Speaking generally, the chances of dying before
puberty tire for the syphilitic seven times greater tlum foi the non-
syphilitic.” , . , ..
Gonorrhoea is due to a specific mico-orgmsm called the gono-
coccus, discovered by Neisser in 1879. It is almost always acquired
by sexual intercourse, hut may he communicated by contaminated
articles of clothing to the eyes of unsuspecting persons, where it
sets up a violent inflammatory disturbance, frequently ending in
the loss of- the affected eye or eyes. Gonorrhoea is popularly be-
lieved to be a trivial ailment, but so far is this from being the case
that in the chronic uncured state, it frequently leads to infection of
innocent Wives and blindness in unfortunate children infected from
the mother in the act of birth. In the acute stage it affects the
urethral passage in men, and during that stage gives rise to symp-
toms so clamant that the existence of the disease cannot be ignored.
Thousands of afflicted men under these conditions fall into the
hands of quacks and charlatans, or even attempt to treat themselves.
The acute stage passes off in spite of the attentions of these
gentry, for truth to tell it would pass off after the lapse_ of a
certain time, even If it were entirely untreated. But mark this dis-
tinction. Acute gonorrhoea, especially if treated promptly, under
appropriate and skilled treatment, is eminently curable, but the
disease if untreated' or unskilfully treated, passes into a chronic
stage characterised by symptoms which are practically negligible,
but in which the disease is potent for evil to the victim himself in the
form of serious and crippling complications, and has a great liability
to become acute again on provocation, especially by over-indulgence
In alcohol. Ido not propose to enumerate the various complications
of neglected gonorrhoea in the male subject; suffice it to say that, it is
capable of causing conditions characterised by intense suffering,
much crippling, destruction of virility, and in many cases death,
usually many years after the original attack, which has probably
been almost forgotten in the interval. In addition it is important
to remember that the disease in the chronic stage is still capable of
being conveyed to others, and so we have the tragic fact that
innocent wives are infected by their husbands, ignorant, probably
that they harbour the deadly gonococcus in their bodies. The
consequences-lu the case of women thus infected are terribly serious
and cause, by involvement of the internal reproductive organs, con-
ditions leading to serious operations, chronic invalidity, and sterility.
In this connection an analysis of all serious operation cases in,
hospitals for women’s diseases reveals the startling tact that 45-50
per cent, are necessitated by condition'sy&aoeable to infection by
gonorrhoea. It is to be noted that these \ iterations usually Involve
the removal of the organs of reproductidh in young women with a


consequent sterilisation of large numbers of potential mothers.
Gonorrhoea is the commonest cause of sterility in women —probably
50 per cent, of all causes. How many hundreds of women have had
their cherished maternal aspirations blasted by this cause? An-
other awful consequence of gonorrhoeal infection is the acute eye
disease contracted by infants at time of birth from infected mothers.
In N.S.W. 30 per cent, of the blindness among the inmates of an
institute for blind children was traceable directly to this disease.
Analysing 1100 cases of blindness among children in the London
Blind School nearly 2 5 per cent, were found to be due to gonorrhoeal
infection. Gonorrhoea then is not a trivial incident to be discussed
with a smile and dismissed as a joke. It is pregnant with hideous
possibilities, not only for the unhappy victim of the disease, but also
for innocent women and children. Consider the virtuous wife
doomed to chronic life-long invalidism and the innocent child con-
demned to the utter darkness of blindness as the result of earlier
acts of incontinence on the part of the husband and father. The
young man sows his “wild oats’ 1 thoughtlessly, heedlessly, and the
world smiles tolerantly, but who thinks of that terrible harvest
of suffering, incapacity, sorrow, and pain which the innocent must
help him to garner in? “The woman pays” in the form of acute
inflammatory _ and suppurative diseases of the generative organs,
involving major operations and leading to pain, disablement, and
invalidity to multitudes who stoically regard it as the birth right
of suffering womanhood, I wish to sound a grave note of warning
to every man. The slightest trace of persisting discharge may
communicate infection. The disasters that follow marriage are
commonly due to ignorance of this fact or to an attitude of mind
which refuses to give credence to what is sometimes regarded as a
doctor's fad. Another loathsome aspect of the question la dealt
with in the Commonwealth Committee’s Report, as follows:
“Gonorrhoea in little girls is peculiarly lamentable. The British
Royal Commission refers to the utterly unfounded superstition that
congress with an innocent child banishes venereal diseases. Hor-
rible results of this belief are not unknown In Australia. Mr.
Clubbe, P.R.C.S., gave evidence in Sydney that every year there
were about 500, children at the Sydney Children’s Hospital suffering
from gonorrhoea,”
Prevalence of Venereal Disease.
For many reasons it is difficult to arrive at an exact idea of the
prevalence of venereal disease among the civilian population, in
the Army and Navy exact statistics are available, and this fact has
rather tended to foster the idea that venereal diseases are essentially
associated with the services. This is, of course, not by any means
the case and the Incidence of venereal disease is quite as groat,
if not greater, among the civilian population aa it is in the services.
The British Royal Commission were led to the general conclusions:
“That the number of persons-who have been infected with syphilis,
acquired or congenital, cannot fall below 10 per cant of the whole
population in the large cities, and the percentage affected with
gonorrhoea must greatly exceed this proportion.” At the Medical
Congress held in Auckland, New Zealand, In 1914, a special com-
mittee presented g. Report which affirmed that; “It is fairly certain
that 12-15 per cent, of the population of London, Paris, and Berlin
are syphilitic, and in addition a much large number are gonorrhoeic.
There is good reason for thinking that Australian cities are affected
to much the same extent. There are no other diseases which cause
so much loss to the community.” The Commonwealth Committee
(1916) estimate that exclusive of abortions and still-births, 7159
deaths occurred in Australia in the year 1914, which could reason-
ably be ascribed directly and Indirectly to syphilis. In 1908 Pro-
fessor Sir Harry Allen, of Melbourne, in a series of 100 consecutive
routine post morteu examinations found clear evidence of syphilis
in 32, and more or less doubtful evidence of syphilis in 30 others,
American observers provide us with the following figures;—■ 80
per cent, of all men in cities have had gonorrhoea at one time or
another; 45 per cent, of them subsequently infect their wives. It is
estimated that in New York to-day to-day there are one million
persons infected with venereal disease, of whom 800,000 suffer from
gonorrhoea. It is further stated that million men are annually


Infected with gonorrhoea in the United States. One could go on
quoting statistics "ad nauseam,” but I think I have said enough
to demonstrate the fact that the problem of venereal diseases in our
midst is a very real one involving questions affecting national
health and efficiency. The eradication of venereal diseases from our
midst would mean the elimination of a great wastage of human life
—potential and actual —and the removal of untold disability, maim-
ing, disfigurement, suffering, pain, and sorrow.
The ocomonte effects of these diseases are of the greatest
importance. They entail a heavy logs to the State from various
points of view. In the matter of human life and health they exact a
terrible toll, and in money they entail a huge expenditure. Both
gonorrhoea and syphilis lead to an enormous annual loss of child
life. These diseases are active agents in causing sterility in both
sexes, thus crippling potential parenthood. Of ante-natal deaths
and deaths in early infancy a large proportion are due to syphilis.
Syphilis is responsible for tremendous numbers of miscarriages,
still-births, and diseased offspring. It also contributes largely to
the infantile mortality rate. At the earlier stages of life, therefore,
the loss to the State is very considerable. Blindness and deafness
are frequent sequelae of venereal diseases. To the expenditure
incurred in the treatment of these children must be added the addi-
tional cost of their education. The cost of educating a deaf child
la ten times, and of a blind child about seven times the cost of
educating a normal child. Mr. Bishop Harman, after exhaustive
enquiries on the subject, has produced figures to show that more
than half of all cases of blindness among children in England are
the result of venereal diseases in the parents. Boss of working power
among adults from the earlier effects of the disease has been worked
out for the Army, and If corresponding figures could be obtained tor
the civilian population they would doubtless reveal a very large
aggregate loss. Especially is this the case where facilities for
treatment are not, established on an adequate and efficient scale.
Neglect of the diseases and inefficient treatment lead to the time
of disability being protracted and to great risk from late manifesta-
tions of both diseases. In their later manifestations both syphilis
and gonorrhoea are responsible for a vast amount of incapacity. Dr.
Mackenzie, of Glasgow, has published some interesting figures show-
ing the relationship between syphilis and insanity. He examined
the blood of 78 6 insane patients with the following results. Of
that number 234 were considered clinically to be suffering from
general paralysis of the Insane. Of these 221 gave a positive blood
test. Of G 4 eases of imbecility and idiocy 2 5 per cent, gave a positive
reaction. Altogether of the 786 cases examined 34 7, or nearly half,
gave a position reaction to this test for the existence of syphilis.
It is merely necessary to mention as a corollary to this statement
that treatment and housing of lunatics in England during the year
1913 cost £3,000,000 sterling. The Royal Commissioners sum up
the matter in the following words: “It is clear that if the various
sources of loss could he rendered In terms of annual expenditure,
the resulting loss would he enormous. We cannot expect that the
whole of this loss can be avoided; but we are satisfied that a large
proportion of the total expenditure in the future be saved, and
that the savings would far more than counterbalance the cost of the
measures for the prevention and treatment of the disease.”
1 have placed before you some facts concerning this problem,
which must compel the serious attention of every thinking man and
woman in the community. A state of affairs is revealed which calls
in no uncertain voice for the application of urgent remedial measures
and for sane and enlightened action by those who govern us, directed
deliberately and fearlessly at the root of things. Let us consider
briefly in what direction this effort should he expended.
At first sight the solution of the problem appears to be simple,
viz., find out the cause and remove it. What is the cause of the
existence of venereal disease in our midst? What are the sources
of infection? You may venture' the opinion that prostitution is
responsible, and if you do yon have not grasped the whole truth.
If we would control all the 1 infective women in a community we
would have to go very far outside of the ranks of the professional
prostitute. In every city there are thousands of women who indulge


in sexual promiscuity as a side issue and often not for direct, mone-
tary gain. This army of “-amateurs” ia incapable of control, and
is the greatest source of venereal infection among men. II we
take the acceptance of money as the distinguishing line between the
professional and the amateur we find the following interesting
figures, quoted by Dr. Cumpston: At Laugwarrin camp 10 5 2 men
were questioned; 2 9.5 per cent, had paid; 70.5 per cent, had not
paid. At the Victorian Health Department Clinic of 995 cases
questioned 44,82 per cent, had paid, and 55.17 per cent, had not
paid. At Bulford V.D. Hospital in England all men who entered
were questioned on the point and the figures, if published, ought
to be instructive, as enormous numbers of soldiers were treated. I
know as a matter of fact from a perusal of the admission register
that the number of men infected hy amateurs was infinitely greater
than those infected by professionals. It will be seen, then, that,
regulation of brothels and regular examination of prostitutes ia
likely to have very little effect on the incidence of the diseases, and
is, on the other hand, positively harmful in that it gives men who
frequent these places a false sense of security, That such ’women,
even under regular examination, can be described as always non-
infective is a fallacy—a fallacy which many men have relied on, and
found to be associated with very tragic results. The Commonwealth
Committee expressed themselves as opposed to any form of G.D.
Act or siny system of control of brothels, apart from ordinary police
supervision. The committee are of opinion that “any system of
harrying scatters the women wider, with increase of the mischief.”
The problem of the prevention and eradication of venereal diseases
resolves itself broadly into the employment of two chief lines of
action, viz.; (1) Educational measures, and (2) provision of ade-
quate and up-to-date methods of diagnosis and treatment.
(1) I have already said something about education and instruc-
tion as a factor in the fight against this national scourge.
(2) Provision of facilities for diagnosis and treatment. This ia
a question of the greatest importance, as accurate diagnosis hy mod-
ern methods of precision and treatment on modern lines as applied
to existing cases of venereal disease are absolutely essential in order
to prevent the spread of the diseases, and to avoid all the dangerous
consequences to the patients themselves, and the tragic results to the
innocent women and children which I have enumerated. Especially
ia this a question of urgency at the present time, as war has always
had the effect of greatly increasing the incidence of these diseases.
L.et us consider how it has affected our own country, Dr. Cumpston
in a Report entitled “Venereal Disease in Australia,” dated..;. May,
1919, states that the number of man who have suffered from venereal
disease after enlistment and during service with the A.I.F. between
August, 1914, and September, 1918, have been 55,000. This figure
represents individuals, not attacks, and many men have had more
than one attack. To quote Dr. Cumpston: “The return to Australia
of 5 5,000 soldiers who have had venereal disease whilst on active
service abroad will create a situation of considerable Importance to
the health of the community. It cannot be expected that although
these patients have received treatment for their diseases abroad and
after their return, they will all remain tor all time in a non-infective
condition. Many of them are bound to suffer from delayed manifes-
tations, or to become again infective. The records show that the
enlistment of large numbers ef men from the country districts has
resulted in their Introduction to irregular sexual intercourse, and
their infection with venereal disease. As venereal disease has
hitherto been almost confined to the metropolitan districts, the
demobilisation of the military forces returning from service abroad
will almost certainly result in the widespread Infection of the
hitherto uninfected country districts.
It Is clearly impossible to deal with all these men under mili-
tary conditions,'as this would an-tai) the maintenance of extensive
military camps, and the detention of large numbers of impatient men
therein for prolonged period?;
The necessity therefore for having the civil administration
perfected at the earliest moment, so that these cases will be auto-
matically dealt with, is self-evident.”


The provision of facilities for diagnosis and treatment Is a
measure of first-rate importance, and the treatment must be efficient
and up-to-date. Legislation has been introduced compelling infected
persons to undergo treatment and to continue such treatment to a
successful conclusion. Such legislation becomes largely futile df
proper facilities for treatment are not provided by the State, and the
existence of such coercive legislation imposes a distinct responsibility
on the authorities to provide the necessary facilities. As Dr. Cump-
Bton remarks: “The treatment of the venereal diseases has developed
to such an extent that special experience in certain technique is
necessary for their proper treatment. The old routine administra-
tion of drugs to be swallowed has largely given way to methods of
local treatment, and specialised methods of administration.... It
there rests upon the authorities the responsibility of seeing that
treatment is available for whoever requires it, there is an equal
responsibility for insuring that the treatment is in accord with the
most modern methods of established value.”
How far has our Government in Queensland realised and acted
upon the grave responsibility resting upon them in this connection?
Dr. Cumpst.ou in his report dealing with the provisions made for
treatment in Queensland says; “At the Brisbane General Hospital
there is a limited amount of indoor accommodation and an out-
patient clinic, which is held on three afternoons and one evening
weekly. The attendance at these clinics is admittedly small, and the
treatment unsatisfactory. There is no provision for irrigation treat-
ment of gonorrhoea the clinic can hardly be described as
vigorous or satisfactory The Commission of Public Health has
been anxious to supplement this Incomplete accommodation by the
establishment of clinics dealing with venereal disease. Although
the Minister has now sanctioned Hie establishment of two such
clinics in suitable places in Brisbane, these premises are not yet
available” (May, 1319). Unfortunately the last statement still
remains true. Dr. Cumpston further points out that although half
of the notifications of venereal disease in Queensland come from
towns outside Brisbane, the hospitals in these towns “appear to be
still without, any special provision for the treatment of venereal
diseases.” He further remarks that “the necessity for proper pro-
vision at every large hospital is obviously urgent.” Dr. Cumpston
sums up by saying: “The present position is unsatisfactory to the
extent that the creation of venereal clinics on modern lines is being
very slowly developed. Upon the successful working of an adequate
scheme of facilities for treatment depends the whole success oi this
venereal diseases experiment, and at present the delays in this
respect threaten the future success of the whole system of venereal
diseases control.” It is incumbent then that every one of us should
regard ourselves as missionaries ready and willing to do our part to
dispel the thick fog of ignorance and superstition surrounding this
most vital problem. It is our bounden duty to exert ourselves to
educate public opinion and to stimulate the public conscience, so that
our rulers may realise that this problem must be grappled with not
in a parochial and pettifogging manner, but with enlightened states-
manship, having in view the fact that money judiciously and liberally
applied to the amelioration of venereal diseases would yield a hand-
some dividend, a dividend of useful healthy human lives, of national
prosperity and efficiency, and would render unnecessary the large
sums spent on palliation and in providing for the large numbers of
human derelicts, the direct result of the wholesale infection of the
public by venereal diseases. A policy of eradication wisely directed
and efficiently administered, including education, treatment, and
legislative measures calculated to bear on the many aspects of the
question would mean a wonderful saving of life —potential and
actual —diminution of many disabilities, including blindness, deaf-
ness, paralysis, and insanity, a diminution of expenditure on hos-
pitals, asylums, and special institutions, and would spell increased
health and efficiency, improved physique, and better and healthle*
enjoyment of life. Surely this is a truly democratic ideal, worthy of
the earnest attention of any country'' or any Government which
professes democratic principles.
