

AUSTRALIAN EDITION.
Fred Russell
ON
Ventriloquism.
A Practical Guide
by a Practical Man.
Clear and Reliable
Directions,
Mimicry
Made Easy.
Funny
Experiences.
Smart “Gags" and
Witty Dialogues.
Original Ventriloquial
Sketches,
Price s
ONE Shilling.


.. SOA T GS
Popular Hits of 1904.
CHAS SHEARD & CO.
AND
FRANCIS, DAY&HUNTER
(LONDON).
Alwavs.
An old love dream.
Asleep in the Deep.
Bill Bailey.
Because I love you.
Break the news to Mother.
Coon, Coon, Coon.
Cast Aside.
Colleen Oge Asthore.
Deep cold sea.
For old time s sake.
Hello, Central.
Honeysuckle and the Bee.
I can’t tell why X love you.
IX all the stars.
If you please, Miss, give me
heaven.
In friendship’s name.
•lust as the daylight.
Just as the sun went down.
Link Divine.
Love’s Serenade.
On the banks of the Wabash.
Please, Mr. Conductor.
Shade of the palm.
She was happy till she met you.
Somebody loves me.
Strike up the Band.
Stay in your own back yard.
Sunflower and the Sun.
Sweetest Story.
Three Little Words.
The Black Sheep.
What might have been.
When I think of you.
When the harvest days.
Won’t you come to my tea-
party?
You can get a sweetheart any
day.
To be had from all Book and Music Sellers throughout
Australasia.
Sole Agents for Australia;
Melbourne :■ ALLAN & CO. Propy. Ltd. Collins St.


Ventriloquism
AND
Kindred Firts,
BY
FRED RUSSELL,
Of the Palace Theatre, Alhambra, Crystal Palace, &c., &c.
An Historical and Practical Treatise, giving
Explicit and Reliable Directions,
whereby the whole art of
DISTANT VOICE ILLUSION,
FIGURE WORKING, and
VOCAL MIMICRY
MAY BE ACQUIRED.
With Instructions How to Manipulate Ventriloquial Figures,
To Imitate Musical Instruments and Animals,
To Give a Ventriloquial Entertainment, Remarks on Engagements,
Selections from the Author’s Famous Humorous Dialogue for Figures,
and an
Original Ventriloquial and Mimetio Sketch, entitled “Clara’s Babies.”
PRICE - - ONE SHILLING.
Copyright 1898 by Fred Russell.
Melbourne: ALLAN & CO- Prop Ltd., Collins St.
1904
And from all Booksellers throughout Australia and New Zealand.


MR. FRED RUSSELL AND “COSTER JOE.”


FRED RUSSELL,
(Extracted from “ The Professional World.”)
“ There is not in England to-day an entertainer whose appearance
on the stage is hailed with more delight, or one who can sustain the
hilarity of his audience to a greater extent, than the popular
ventriloquist so widely known under the nom de theatre of Fred
Bussell. ‘ Coster Joe,’ too, as a public character, is almost as well
known as the Prime Minister, and from the moment his jaw starts
wagging until he leaves the platform—whether the period be ten
minutes or forty—laughter reigns supreme.
“ Mr. Bussell, who is an Irishman, was educated for the journalis-
tic profession, and is a member of the Institute of Journalists. After
short engagements on minor journals, he became associated with the
Hackney and Kinysland Gazette, an influential North London news-
paper ; but in the meantime, he had cultivated the mimetic gifts
with which nature has so liberally endowed him. When Mr.
Chevalier appeared, Mr. Bussell brought out a life-like model of the
comedian (the famous ‘ Coster Joe,’) and the cleverness with which
this automaton was voiced and worked brought the performer to the
front at a bound, so that in a very short time his concert connection
assumed gigantic proportions. He still maintained his association
with journalism, however, and when the editor of the Gazette died, the
proprietors had sufficient confidence in Mr. Bussell to offer him the
post, which he accepted. But the double life —newspaper work in
the day time and entertaining at night—told upon his health to such
an extent that it became imperative to give up one or the other.
Early in 1896, Mr. Charles Morton saw him at a concert, and at
once offered an engagement at the Palace Theatre. The result of
the experiment was that he gave up newspaper work, and took per-
manently to the ‘ halls.’ Indeed, he became such a favourite at
the Palace Theatre, that, within a period of twenty months from his
first appearance, he gave over 400 performances there—a record in
music hall annals. His rise in public favour was very rapid, and he
soon became recognised as the leading exponent of Ventriloquism in
the Kingdom, a position he has maintained ever since, notwithstand-
ing that the number of his rivals and imitators is legion.
“ Mr. Russell has endeavoured—and successfully—to raise the
tone of the ventriloquial art above the generally accepted standard.
The automata he uses are marvels of mechanical skill, and his


dialogues are really witty. He is very quick in turning to account
incidents occurring amongst the audience, and such impromptu
‘ wheezes ’ are always most acceptable. Possessing an excellent and
well-trained voice, a great feature is made of the songs he introduces.
“ One of the great factors in Mr. Russell’s success is his uncon-
ventionality. He is the originator of the style of entertainment he
gives, and the first of modern ventriloquists to perform with one
figure only, a method which has been so extensively copied by the
mediocrities who gain a livelihood by assimilating methods made
popular by others. When Mr. Russell first appeared, there was not
another ventriloquist on the music hall or concert stage performing
with but one figure ; now, as we all know, there are dozens, with
news boys, sailor boys, page boys, and boys ad infinitum —all imita-
tions of ‘ Coster Joe.’ Mr. Russell enjoys the great advantage of
being able to write bis own dialogue, and he never presents anything
to the public which is not absolutely original.
“ 1 Coster Joe's ’ popularity is not confined exclusively to music
hall and theatre goers. He is ever a welcome guest in the ‘ halls of
the aristocracy,’ and during the season is in great demand at drawing-
rooms and similar functions. His Majesty the King has enjoyed
many a hearty laugh at Joe’s vagaries, and amongst his most con-
sistent patrons he includes the Earl of Leven, Alfred de Rothschild,
and the late Chief Justice, Lord Russell of Killowen.
“ Socially, Mr. Russell has accomplished good work for the pro-
fession with which he has thrown in his lot. It was mainly due to
his efforts that the Vaudeville Club, the handsome rendezvous for all
stage people, was established in London. He is chairman of directors
of this concern, and his popularity, with his confreres is also
evidenced by his election to the position of King Eat—president of
the leading society of vaudeville performers in the world, which
numbers amongst its members all the ‘ stars of the profession.’ His
predecessors in this office include men of such world-wide reputation
as Dan Leno, Eugene Stratton and Paul Martinetti.
“ Finally, most people who have heard him will agree it is no
exaggeration to state, that as a ventriloquist, Fred Russell stands
alone, as a humorist he has no superior, and that the dramatic critic
of the Telegraph hit the mark exactly in a recent notice in describing
him as ‘ the best, brightest, and most original ventriloquial enter-
tainer of the age.’ ”


AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
Having regard to the great popularity of Ventri-
loquial entertainments, it is somewhat remarkable that the
exponents of this fascinating Art are not counted by
hundreds instead of by units. There is no lack of litera-
ture dealing with the subject • but, nevertheless, my friends
have so often urged upon me that there is room for a com-
prehensive practical manual by a practical man, whose posi-
tion before the public would be likely to give his words
weight, that I have undertaken to set down here the results
of my own experience and research, in the hope that I
may be of service to the “ earnest seeker after truth/' and
to the advancement of the Art.
I propose to treat the subject historically, theoretically,
and practically. The reader will find incorporated in the
succeeding pages most of that which is best and to the
point in the writings of those who have had better oppor-
tunities than I of acquiring information with regard to the
history of Ventriloquism; whilst the practical observations
—by far the most important of the three heads —are based
on the experience gained during the years I have had the
honour to be an exponent of Ventriloquism in each of its
several branches. The student will not be required to
wade through an ocean of words by a literary “ hack,”
or tyro in the Art; but will have the advantage of the
experience of a practical man, who in all modesty ventures
to assert that he has gained public approval as an Enter-
tainer, and who “ speaketh that which he doth know.”
FRED. RUSSELL.
Gresham House, Victoria Park, London.


HISTORICAL.
Dealing first with the History of Ventriloquism, it is
well I should state at the very outset that in treating a
subject of such comparative obscurity it is impossible
for me to accept responsibility for the absolute truth
of every anecdote related. Indeed most of the stories
relating to the feats of Ventriloquists have been more or
less coloured by the narrators, and, being told over and
over again, have not lost anything in the process. I have
done all in my power, by comparing the different accounts
given by contemporary writers, to ensure the accuracy of
every statement made, and, at any rate, I have studiously
refrained from heightening the colours myself.
Ventriloquism, if not actually as “ old as the hills,”
is unquestionably a very ancient Art. It can be traced
back 3000 years, and was utilised by the expert among
our early forefathers for purposes altogether different
and more reprehensible than its professors would dream
of now. Where ignorance or superstition reigned almost
supreme, the man who had mastered the secrets of Ven-
triloquism had an excellent chance of acquiring an abun-
dance of this world’s goods, to say nothing of “ kudos,”
which was almost as valuable in those days, at the ex-
pense of people not so wide awake as himseif.
It is generally conceded that the various kinds of
divination ” exercised by the ancients, and which were
stated by the spiritual pastors and masters to be by a
“ familiar spirit,” were really effected by means of Ven-
triloquism. The Mosaic Law, delivered 1500 years before
the Christian era, expressly forbade the consultation of'
those having “ familiar spirits.” In Leviticus xx. 27 we
read: “ A man or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or
that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death ”; and Isaiah
xxix. 4, clearly indicates what was understood by a familiar
spirit: “ And thou shalt be brought down and shalt speak
out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the
dust, and thy voice shall be as of one that hath a familiar
spirit, out of the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out
of the dust.”


In his book on Ventriloquism published in 1772,
Mgr. I’Abbe la Cnapelle, Censor-royal at Paris, tells us
that the responses of the Greek and Roman Oracles in
reality emanated from the priests in close attendance.
Apollonius Tyanseus, a philosopher born at Tyana, the
capital of Cappadocia, a few years before Christ, pro-
fessed to work miracles, and is said to have gained some
of his most startling effects by addressing himself, ventri-
loquially of course, from the branches of a tree. The
ancient Greeks believed in what is called gastromancy,
the priest replying to questions put to him without moving
his lips, so that the enquirer was led to believe that a
“ Minister of the interior,” was actually enlightening him
from the region of the priest’s diaphragm.
In the Middle Ages Ventriloquism appears to have
been a greater source of danger to its professors than to
anyone else, for it is recorded that many persons who prac-
tised it were accused of witchcraft, and put to death in con-
sequence. Early in the Seventeenth Century, however,
people became wiser, or at least more tolerant, and per-
mitted themselves to be amused by that which had before
filled them with superstitious awe.
Louis Brabant, valet to Francis 1., King of France,
is the first Ventriloquist of whom we have any definite
knowledge, and, according to all accounts, he was a
wonderfully expert operator. It is related of him that by
the exercise of his ventriloquial powers he obtained a
very desirable wife, although he had failed to satisfy the
lady’s parents as to his fitness to become their son-in-law
by the ordinary methods of procedure in these matters.
■ In the bygone days Ventriloquists were called “ whis-
perers,” and Charles I. had attached to his Court one
i Henry King, a native of Oxford, who was styled “ The
King’s Whisperer.” He once entertained the English
Court with a most realistic representation of the slaugh-
tering of a sheep, with no adventitious aid beyond that of
a screen, from behind which could be heard the cries of
the animal, the sharpening of the knife, the quarrelling of
the butchers, and the barking of a dog. This is said to
have caused the utmost astonishment to those present.
Cardinal Richelieu, the proud, ambitious, and unscru-
pulous statesman of France, who died in r 642, is said to


have pressed a Ventriloquist into his service to help him
in one of his many political difficulties. A Provincial
Clergyman, whose presence in Paris interfered With the
Cardinal’s schemes, had to be got rid of somehow, and it
was hardly desirable that he should be put in durance
vile, if other means could be adopted. Richelieu, whilst
listening to the performance of a Ventriloquist, conceived
the idea of frightening the Clergyman away, and so called
upon him, accompanied by the “ Whisperer.” Whilst they
were conversing beside the fireplace, a mysterious voice
bade the worthy man return to his diocese, as his life
would be in peril did he remain at Court. He took the
hint and his departure, and thereby probably saved his
head.
Except for vague reports of the doings of a female
“whisperer” named Jacobi, who astonished the natives
at Haarlem, the capital of the province of North Holland,
about 1680, we have a long interval of silence in respect to
the Art and its professors; and the next exponent we hear
of is a blacksmith named Honeyman, who resided in
London, and commenced operations in the early part of
the eighteenth century. Honeyman, who was nick-named
“ the talking smith,” was a great practical joker, and it is
said that one of his so-called jokes caused the death of
one Thomas Britton. This Britton was a collector of
manuscripts, and a musician of considerable ability. He
frequently gave musical parties at his residence in Clerken-
well. Honeyman, who attended one of these assemblies,
conceived the idea of frightening the musician, who was
known to be of a very nervous temperament. The subject
of spectres having been introduced in the conversation
and Britton’s nervous system shaken by wild stories of
ghosts, Honeyman caused a voice to be heard calling upon
the musician to prepare, as death awaited him. This so
frightened Britton that he lost his reason and died soon
after, in the year 1714. He was buried in Clerkenwell
Churchyard, and the circumstances of his death are re-
ferred to in one of the poems of Matthew Prior. Honey-
man survived his victim ten years.
About 1750 Ventriloquism became very popular, and
its most noted English exponents at this period were
Macleroy and Moore. Twenty years later two Continental


Ventriloquists created sensations in Paris and Vienna re-
spectively by reason of their extraordinary powers. The
Austrian representative, Baron Mengen, made use of a
“ figure ” to illustrate the Art, and his humorous conver-
sations with a wooden doll gained for him a great measure
of popularity. He was also very expert in the imitation of
animals, and is said to have been the first to reveal the
secrets of Ventriloquism, which had been hitherto very
jealously guarded by its professors.
The Parisian Ventriloquist, whose name was St.
Gille, followed the occupation of a grocer at St. Germain-
en-Laye, until he discovered that fame and fortune awaited
him as a public entertainer. From descriptions given of
this artiste’s performance he appears to have brought
the art to the highest pitch of excellence. In the presence
of a Board of Commissioners of the Royal Academy of
Sciences, he did some wonderful things. “Voice-throw-
ing” was St. Gille’s speciality, and in order to convince
the Commissioners of his ability to deceive, a semi-public
test was arranged. A story was purposely circulated that
spirit voices had been heard in the neighbourhood, and
that a commission had been appointed to. investigate the
matter. All those who attended the “ investigation ” were
informed of the real facts of the case with the exception
of one lady, and she was kept in ignorance in order to
test the strength of the illusion upon her. The investiga-
tors arranged a sort of picnic, and whilst they were lunch-
ing, the lady in question was called by name apparently
from several different directions. The illusion was kept up
for a considerable time, and the lady was absolutely con-
vinced that she had been spoken to by a “ spirit.”
In the memoirs of the Empress Josephine there is to
be found mentioned one Thiemet, a Ventriloquist and
facial artist, said to have been a great favourite with the
Emperor Napoleon. He visited London in 1786.
James Bums, an Irishman, attained great popularity
in the North of England about 1790. He usually per-
formed with a wooden doll, but was also an expert
“ Distant Voice ” Ventriloquist and Imitator of Musical
Instruments. Among other stories told of this person is
one which relates to a visit he is said to have paid to


the Sheffield Fish Market, where he astonished the stall
attendants by making the fish talk.
Sugg, another famous Ventriloquist, was a contem-
porary of Burns, and practised the Art for many years.
He died in 1831, having attained the age of 80 years.
Sugg was a man of considerable resource, as will be
gathered from the following story. He had arranged to
give a series of entertainments in one of the suburbs of
London, but the good folks of the neighbourhood being
“ rather backward a cornin’ forward,” as the showman says,
the Ventriloquist decided to try a sensation as a means of
advertisement. He dressed a doll in baby clothes, and at
the busiest hour of the day ran through the streets, the
“ child ” in his arms apparently screaming lustily. Stop-
ping at a baker’s shop Sugg entered, seemingly with the
intention of purchasing a cake for the infant. The crying
still continued, however, and Sugg, apparently at his wits’
end, rushed from the shop into the bakehouse at the rear,
and threw the doll into the furnace. He was at once ar-
rested and taken before a magistrate, and it was with the
utmost difficulty that he convinced “ his worship ” it was
all a joke and not a murder. Sugg is said to have greatly
astonished his companions whilst travelling on a coach in
the West of England by imitating the cries of a child
apparently caught in the wheels. This story is incorpor-
ated in “ Valentine Vox.”
Fitz James, “Val,” and Professor Charles all minis-
tered to the amusement and astonishment of our great
grandfathers at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
Fitz James combined facial business with Ventriloquism,
and “ Val ” was a conjuror of high repute. Professor
Charles was the originator of the “ experiment ” —also in-
corporated in “ Valentine Vox ” —of imitating the cries of
a supposed drowning man, and he thereby caused great
delay in the progress of a vessel carrying him to America.
About 1820 two Continental Ventriloquists became
known to fame —one a Swiss doctor named Compti, and
the other a famous Frenchman, Mons. Nicholas Marie
Alexandre, generally conceded to be the finest Ventrilo-
quist who, up to that time, had appeared in public.
Alexandre appeared in London in 1823. He quickly be-
came a great public favourite, and was patronised by


Royalty. Many anecdotes are related in connection with
Alexandre. He is the original hero of the story, claimed
by a large number of Ventriloquists since, of having caused
a stoppage of traffic in the Strand at midday. The story
goes that Alexandre, being called upon by one of his
friends to give an example of his powers, caused a cry to
be heard apparently proceeding from the centre of a load
of hay being carted along the thoroughfare. A crowd
assembled, and, notwithstanding the protests of the man
in charge of the cart, commenced to unload the hay. As
they proceeded the cries became more urgent, but when
the cart was empty nobody could be found.
Alexandre’s success led to a boom in Ventriloquism,
and the number of professors increased by leaps and
bounds. His most notable successors were W. Nightin-
gale, who lived until 1840; Jacobs, a very clever Ventrilo-
quist and Mimic, flourishing in the early fifties; Law,
Askins, Sutton, Gallagher, Fritz Renard, and Joel. Mac-
millan attained front rank, and Thurton the monologue
entertainer was also a Ventriloquist. His “Odd Folks,”
however, were not ventriloquial figures, as some may think,
but character impersonations.
Mr. W. E. Love comes next in order, and he was
undoubtedly a great “ distant voice ” Ventriloquist. A good
story is told of him, which is worth repeating. He was
performing at the Assembly Rooms, Grimsby, but had
not gone far with his entertainment when, he was inter-
rupted by the most dismal yells and bowlings from above.
The proceedings were stopped, and enquiries made, from
which it was gathered that in that part of the entertain-
ment when, by means of his powers of vocal deception,
Mr. Love caused an invisible person to be heard singing
on the roof, a native of an adjoining village, who had been
induced to patronise the entertainment, and who had
never before witnessed a similar performance, felt con-
vinced that the performer had a confederate. Being well
acquainted with the house, he slipped out unperceived,
and ascended by the back stairs to the roof of the build-
ing, with the firm determination of opening the eyes of the
audience, and exposing the confederate of the performer.
At this juncture, two other wiseacres in the company en-
tertained exactly the same opinion, and, accordingly, fol


lowed the steps of him who had first made his exit from
the apartment. Arrived at the summit of the garret
stairs, they found the trapdoor wide open—this they
thought looked suspicious; but, on ascending to the tiles
they discovered the first mentioned Paul Pry in the act of
reconnoitring, with his head placel close to the chimney
pot. Doubt was now out of the question; they therefore
commenced belabouring their unsuspecting victim with
such vigour that had not his wailings brought some of the
people connected with the establishment to his assistance,
the consequences might have been serious. Mr. Love
died on the 16th March, 1867, at the age of 62 years.
We now arrive at what may be termed the “ figure ”
era. Prior to iB6O, Ventriloquists seldom availed themselves
of the assistance of mechanical dolls to illustrate the Art,
but, for the most part, were content to amuse and as-
tonish with distant voice illusions and polyphonisra. One
of the first to make use of figures was Professor James. He
was followed by Charles Young, Professor Grant, Frank
Mordaunt, Jester, E. D. Davies —the latter particularly
well known to Australians—and Lieutenant Walter Cole,
who first carried out the idea of working with a group of
life-size figures. Cole made his initial appearance in Lon-
don in 1870, and for over 30 years remained a great
favourite. He divided public favour with Mr. Fred. Mac-
cabe, who in his day was one of the finest “ distant voice ”
Ventriloquists and all-round entertainers ever seen. This
brings the history of Ventriloquism well down to our
own time. The Art has many clever representatives
before the public to-day whose names will readily recur to
those who take an interest in the subject.


THEORETICAL.
VENTRILOQUISM—What it is, and
What it can do.
The chances are that a person entering into conver-
sation with a performer on the subject of Ventriloquism
will immediately propound the question, “ Is it a gift ?”
Professional Ventriloquists, not unnaturally I think, con-
sidering that the object is to keep rivals out of the field as
long as possible, have been known to foster the notion that
Ventriloquism is a gift, either by a direct statement to that
effect, or by mysterious hints as to the difficulty and
danger of “ throwing ” the voice. Indeed, in an interview
published not long ago, a well-known Ventriloquist, who
is still before the public, says : “ Ventriloquism really con-
sists of a peculiar formation of the muscles of the throat.
It is a gift. If a man is not born a Ventriloquist he will
never become one.” I cannot agree with this statement.
Whilst it is true that some persons have a much greater
natural aptitude for its acquisition than others, it is never-
theless a fact that Ventriloquism is an acquired art, and is
not a gift in the ordinary acceptation of the term; that is
to say, one’s ability to Ventriloquise does not depend upon
any peculiar conformation of the vocal organs. There are
many persons who look upon Ventriloquism as something
quite beyond the power of ordinary mortals, but who, if
they only knew how to set about it, would make good
performers; yet on the other hand there are thousands
who, if they were to try until the crack of doom, would
never even reach the “ indifferent ” stage. Natural quali-
fications are necessary to attain any measure of proficiency
in Ventriloquism as in anything else. One must have
sound lungs, a correct ear, strength and flexibility in the
throat; the skill to imitate, which really depends upon a
correct ear and sound vocal organs; histrionic ability, for
the judgment of the audience must be deceived as well as
the ear, and therefore the ability to lead people’s judg


merit astray without seeming to do so is a great factor in
determining whether a person will be a successful Ven-
triloquist or not.
Having disposed of this question, I hope to the satis-
faction of the reader, we will proceed to investigate what
Ventriloquism really is. In Gregory’s Dictionary of Arts
and Sciences we are told “ Ventriloquism is an Art by
which certain persons can so modify the voice as to make
it appear to the audience to proceed from any distance.
An exquisite delicacy of ear perceives every difference
which change of place produces in the same sounds.
Possessed of such an ear, and a sufficient command over
the organs of speech to produce a sound in all respects
similar to another proceeding from any distant object, to
the audience the sound which the Ventriloquist utters
must appear to proceed from that object. There can be
no doubt that, by a peculiar modification of the organs of
speech, a sound of any kind can be produced which in
faintness, tone, body, and, in short, every other sensible
quality, perfectly resembles a sound delivered, say, from
the roof of a house opposite; the ear will naturally, with-
out examination, refer it to that situation and distance;
the sound which the person hears being only a sign which
he has from his infancy been constantly accustomed by
experience to associate with the idea of a person speaking
from a housetop.” Here we have the whole thing in a
nut-shell.
The opinion of experts is somewhat divided as to
whether or not the term “ Ventriloquism ” is a misnomer.
It is derived from, the Latin words venter and loquor, which
mean literally to speak from the stomach, but of course
there are no organs of speech in that part of man’s
anatomy. The Germans have it das hauchreden —belly
speaking. Sir David Brewster, however, says Ventrilo-
quism loses its distinctive character if its imitations are
not produced by a voice from the stomach. He agrees
that the voice does not actually come from that region,
but when the Ventriloquist utters sounds from the larynx
without moving the muscles of his face, he gives the
sounds strength by a powerful action of the abdominal
muscles. Hence he speaks by means of his stomach, al-
though the throat is the real source from which the sound


proceeds. Mr. Maccabe coincides, and maintains it is cor-
rect to say that, although the voice does not actually come
from the stomach, the abdominal muscles play an import-
ant part in bringing about the illusion. I think the stu-
dent will agree with these opinions after he has practised
awhile. My own experience certainly is that there is a
contraction of the abdominal muscles in forcing certain of
the ventriloquial sounds.
The word Ventriloquism, as popularly understood,
covers the entire range of vocal illusion; but in reality
there are three divisions—viz., Ventriloquism proper, Col-
loquism and Polyphonism.
Ventriloquism proper is the imitation of sounds as
they appear when heard from a distance—the technical
term is “ Distant Voice ” —and is brought into play by the
performer when he holds a conversation with a man on the
roof, or in the cellar. It is also used when imitating the
cry of a boy in a box, the muffled sound in this case being
almost identical with the distant voice. The Ventrilo-
quist cannot “ throw his voice. Even in these days of
Higher Education it is a remarkable fact that the majority
of people believe the Ventriloquist really “ throws ” his
voice; that is to say, can make his voice explode at a
distant spot without any sound being perceptible in the
intervening space between the Ventriloquist and the place
where the sound appears. A moment’s consideration
would be sufficient to convince any intelligent person of
the impossibility of this, but people do not give it that
consideration. They accept the general idea that it is so,
without enquiry. The uninitiated will say, “ Oh, but I
heard Mr. So-and-so* throw his voice to the roof.” No;
you only thought you did. You were deceived, but the
deception practised upon you by the skilful Ventriloquist
was so true to nature in every respect that you could not
tell the difference between the effect produced by the
performer and the sound which would have been heard
had a person really called out from the spot. The impres-
sion that a Ventriloquist can “throw” his voice has been
fostered by Cockton’s clever book, “Valentine Vox.” A
very large proporton of those who take up the study of
Ventriloquism are led to do so by reading this most enter-
taining novel. I am sorry to play the part of the wet


blanket, but truth compels me to state that nine out of ten
of the feats Valentine Vox is said to have performed are
outside the range of possibility—quite beyond the power
of the most accomplished Ventriloquist who ever lived or
is likely to. Whether Cockton himself, when he wrote
“ Valentine Vox,” really believed it possible that such
feats could be accomplished as are placed to the credit of
his hero, it is hard to say. In Cockton’s day Ventrilo-
quism was little understood and much misunderstood. He
may have heard some of the expert professors of that
time, and, without analysing the matter, arrived at the con-
clusion that such illusions as he describes were possible.
In his preface he commits himself to this statement:
“ The power of an accomplished Ventriloquist is well
known to be unlimited. There is no scene in life in
which that power is incapable of being developed; it
gives its possessor a command over the actions, the feel-
ings, the passions of men, while its efficacy in, loading
with ridicule every prejudice and every project of which
the tendency is pernicious cannot fail to be perceived at a
glance.” I beg very respectfully to say that Ventriloquism
can do nothing of the kind; and so far from the power of
the Ventriloquist being unlimited, it is very limited in-
deed. His statement is calculated to make one think that
Cockton himself believed the Ventriloquist capable of
accomplishing all he describes; yet on the other hand it is
difficult to conceive that a man who had so carefully and
exhaustively inquired into the Lunacy Laws, in order to
ensure the main part of his book being quite accurate,
would “ give himself away,” so to speak, by displaying
ignorance in the other matter. However, the reader can
rest assured that if he has taken up the study of Ventrilo-
quism with the object of rivalling the feats attributed to
Valentine Vox, he is wasting his time in an effort to do
that which is impossible.
Colloquism is the imitation of the human voice
without any distant effect, and is brought into play when
the entertainer apparently holds a conversation with one
or more mechanical dolls. From this statement it will be
gathered that most of the performers now before the
public should be called Colloquists, although I have no
doubt most of them could give a legitimate “ voice-throw


ing ” Ventriloquial turn if they so desired, or if they did
not know from experience that it is much more profitable
to use figures, which make people laugh. Nevertheless,
whichever branch of the Art we practise, we shall still all
be classed as Ventriloquists. During a recent Provin-
cial tour I described myself in the bill-matter I sent to
one of the halls as a “ Colloquial humorist.” I don’t ex-
actly know what impression the manager gathered from
that description; he may have imagined I was a new
variety of comic singer or knockabout artiste; but he evi-
dently had no thirst for novelty, for he wrote that he had
engaged me as a Ventriloquist, and should expect me to
give a Ventriloquial entertainment.
Polyphonism is really mimicry—the art of imitating
various sounds, such as the cries of animals and birds,
musical instruments, etc., without attempting to deceive
the listener as to their direction. Polyphonism differs from
Ventriloquism in that it is imitation without illusion. The
Ventriloquist aims at deception; the sound he produces
is not supposed to originate with him, but to come from
some distant spot. The ■Polyphonist, on the contrary,
simply imitates. There are two classes of mimicry now in
vogue. The first has its representatives in the clever
people whose performances consist of the imitation of the
vocal and other peculiarities of prominent actors, singers,
and music-hall artistes. The leading lights of the other
class—the true Polyphonists—imitate the denizens of the
farmyard, musical instruments, sawing, etc. With the
former class I have no concern. It is quite impossible to
give instructions which would enable people to mimic our
great actors and singers ; but with respect to the other
class the case is different, and I hope to be of service to
those whose ambition in this direction does not go beyond
the imitation of ordinary sounds, musical instruments and
animals.
Having explained what Ventriloquism really is, and
what can and cannot be accomplished by the expert per-
former, we will proceed to discuss the methods by means
of which the various illusions are brought about.


PRACTICAL.
VENTRILOQUISM IN PRACTICE.
Now we come to deal with the practical side of our
subject. It is an exceedingly difficult matter to expound
in print everything connected with the Art; there are so
many technicalities which could be explained so much
better viva voce, but I hope to avoid confusing the issues
by endeavouring to convey my meaning in as few words
as possible, so that the student may not be put to any
trouble in picking out the points which are essential to his
advancement.
THE ART OF BREATHING.
Fiist of all you must master the art of breathing
properly. Before any attempt is made to experimentalise
with the voice, you must be able to control the breath so
that you may hold it, without straining, for a considerable
time. Almost everyone knows —or should know —that the
proper way to breathe is not through the mouth, but
through the nose. The air should be drawn in through
the nose and the mouth kept shut, the lungs being inflated
at each inspiration to their full extent. Stand erect, take a
deep breath through the nostrils, retain it in the lungs as
long as possible, and then let it out gradually, not through
the nose, but through the mouth. If you practice this
exercise daily and make a mental note of the number of
seconds you retain the breath, you will find that after a few
days you are able to hold it twice the length of time you
could at the first attempt. You will appreciate the value
of this power of retaining the breath later on, when you
have to give off a long sentence in a Yentriloquial voice.
Apart from Ventriloquism, however, this system of train-
ing the respiratory organs will be found beneficial to
health. The mouth was never intended by Nature as the
channel for drawing in the breath, and the habit—a very
common one. T admit —lays the foundation for all manner


of diseases of the lungs, for by drawing in the cold air
direct we expose to undue strain the delicate membranes
of the throat and the lungs. Breathe through the nose.
CONTROLLING THE FACIAL MUSCLES
Having mastered the art of breathing, the next im-
portant preliminary step is learning to control the facial
muscles, so that you may be able to talk not only without
movement of the lips, but also with absolute rigidity of
countenance. Although it requires a considerable amount
of practice to enable one to talk freely and naturally
without moving the lips or nerves of the face, it is by no
means difficult to accomplish. The student should always
practise before a looking-glass. Let him stand up, keep
his mouth almost closed, so that the upper teeth just touch
the lower lip, and watch closely that the expression of the
face is a natural one.
PRELIMINARY PRACTICE WITH THE
ALPHABET.
Standing in front of the looking-glass, and keeping
the mouth in the position recommended in the preceding
paragraph, the student may now commence to articulate,
and he cannot do better than start as he did in the days
of his childhood—with the alphabet. He must go right
through the alphabet without moving his lips. The
vowels and most of the consonants will present no diffi-
culty, but B, P, M, and, to a lesser extent, F and V, will
cause trouble. Perhaps I need hardly have classed F and
V amongst the difficult letters, as the student will find he
can readily sound these letters without moving his lips by
an accentuated breath directed against the top teeth. It is
not possible, however, to pronounce B, P and M without
some- movement of the lips, and therefore these letters,
and the words in which they should be expressed, must
be “ slurred,” or the sound of the letters and words imi-
tated as closely as possible. After the student has had a
little practice he will find himself capable of doing this
without the difference being distinguishable to any extent.
B is very awkward to dispose of, but you can substitute
the letter which most resembles it in sound according to


the word used, and so make it pass muster. Pis another
caulker, and again the V or the F (really produced by a
hard breath forced against the top teeth) must be used in
its place. M, the last of the difficult letters, may be indi-
cated by “ ng,” such as “ ngan ” for man. Repeat the al-
phabet over and over again, for the object is twofold:
first, to acquire the habit of talking without facial move-
ment, and secondly to articulate plainly with the lips
still. Try it first of all by forcing the sound against the
top teeth, keeping the tongue as low down as possible.
Then go through the exercise again, raising the tongue
a little and forcing the sound towards the back-part of
the roof of the mouth. You will find this enables you
to repeat the alphabet in two quite distinct tones of voice.
Next practise short sentences, always bearing in mind the
B’s, P’s and M’s, and their equivalents.
SOUND.
To become a successful Ventriloquist one must be
able to appreciate sound as it falls on the ear, and this
is not quite such a simple matter as it may appear. To
imitate a sound correctly, the original must be thoroughly
understood. Nature is of great assistance to the Ventri-
loquist in this respect, for everyone knows how difficult
it is to locate the exact direction and distance of a. sound.
If a person calls to you in the street, for example, it is as
likely as not that you will turn in the wrong direction to
ascertain whence the sound came; and it is often impos-
sible without minute examination to fix the precise spot at
which a mouse is scratching in a room. It is the busi-
ness of the Ventriloquist to imitate sounds, not as they
are heard at their source, but as they appear when they
reach the ear. Therefore you must study sound. This can
best be done by getting a friend to go- to one of the top
rooms of your house and hold a conversation with you;
or you may go to some open space and ask your friend to
shout from a distance. Another good method is to visit a
place where building operations are in progress, and listen
to the workmen as they call to one another, paying parti-
cular attention to the sound as you hear it, and after-
wards trying to imitate it as closely as possible.


ACTION.
Action, again, is another important point to be
studied. The Ventriloquist has to do> something more
than imitate sounds. He must be to all intents and pur-
poses one of the audience himself, simply questioning his
friend on the roof on their behalf, and must appear as
anxious to hear the answer, and as doubtful what that
answer will be, as anyone present, although he furnishes
the reply himself. Other things being equal, a good actor
will make a much better Ventriloquist than one who is an
indifferent actor, because he is able by little tricks and
movements to govern the imagination of those who watch
him. If the Ventriloquist were not able to give a hint
as to the direction of the sound, or if there was not some-
thing in the surroundings to indicate it, his performance
would be a failure, for the audience left to themselves
without any guide would be completely fogged.
THE “DISTANT” VOICE.
The student who has carefully read and digested the
directions already given should by this time understand
the art of breathing, should be able to control the mus-
cles of his face, and pronounce the alphabet and short
sentences without moving his lips; he should also have
acquired a knowledge of sound, and an appreciation of
the importance of acting as applied to the Art. The next
step is to master the three principal voices in Ventrilo-
quism : the “ distant ” voice, the “ middle ” voice, and the
“ colloquial ” voice. We will take the “ distant ” voice
first; and I would observe here that I propose to give
these directions in as few words as possible, for if they are
plain and brief they are the more likely to be readily
understood.
The “ distant ” voice is, as its name implies, the
voice which is used when the performer desires to bring
about the illusion of a person shouting from the roof of a
house, or from some distant spot. Although there are
several modifications, of which more anon, all “ distant ”
voices are practically the same. Now, try this: Call out
in your natural voice “Hi P prolonging it as much as you


can, opening the mouth well. Then close the mouth,
letting the top teeth just touch the inside of the lower
lip and call out “ Hi!” again one octave above, but keep-
ing the sound at the back of the throat, turning the tongue
toward the roof of the mouth, and slightly contracting
the abdominal muscles. You will find the sound emitted
is exactly the same as if a person had answered your
call from a distance. There you have the secret of the
“ distant ” voice in a nut-shell, and to say much more is
simply to confuse the issue. Of course you will not be
perfect at first, but the very few words I have purposely
used are really sufficient to indicate all that is necessary.
Practise for a week or two, study sound, imitate it, and you
will be all right.
The “ distant ” voice can be made to approach or
recede. To bring the voice nearer the sound has to be
gradually released from the back of the throat, and
brought forward in the mouth. If the voice has to die
away in the distance, you simply reverse this method.
THE " MIDDLE” VOICE.
The “ middle ” voice is only a modification of the
“ distant ” voice, but it is sufficiently distinct to warrant
being dealt with separately. It is the voice which is near
by, which comes through some obstacle to the audience,
such as from the other side of a, door, or from a box on
the stage, the lid of which is only partially closed. Before
commencing the study of this voice you must thoroughly
understand what it is you have to imitate; and here I
would impress once more the necessity of studying sound.
When you have a clear and definite knowledge of the
sound you are to imitate, try to reproduce it in the top
part of the throat, keeping the breath well under control,
so that you actually utter the sounds without breathing.
If you maintain the same pitch and tone as that in which
you address the “ voice,” you will get a deadened, muffled
sound, exactly resembling a person speaking in a passage
with a closed door intervening. If the voice is to come
through a thicker substance, such as a wall for instance,
raise the pitch a little, and make the sound fainter, be-
cause a person calling from an adjoining room would


naturally speak louder than if he were only just outside
the door, and the sound would -be at a greater distance.
The “ man in the cellar ” illusion should also come
under the head of this “ middle ” voice, rather than the
“ distant.” Lower the pitch of the voice, getting the sound
as far down the throat as you can. Draw the jaw back to
make the cavity in the mouth as large as possible, and get
a slight abdominal pressure in order to strengthen the
tone, for the breath in this case also must be held back.
" COLLOQUIAL” VOICES.
In using Colloquial voices for the purpose of ap-
parently endowing with speech a set of “ figures,” or for
conversing with a supposititious person behind a screen, no
attempt need be made to “ throw ” the voice. All the
Colloquial voices, whatever character they may assume,
are based on two —the “ old man ” and the “ old lady ”
—and when once these have been acquired the rest is plain
sailing. To make the contrast between his own voice and
the voices of his creation as distinct as possible, the Ven-
triloquist should enunciate very clearly, and should pitch
the Ventriloquial voice in a different key to his own.
The Old Man. —The voice for the “ old man ”is
usually obtained by rolling the tongue back so that the
tip just touches the roof of the mouth, the Ventriloquist
speaking in as deep a tone as he can conveniently assume.
Emit the sound from that side of the mouth nearest the
figure which is supposed to be talking, or to the screen
behind which the man is apparently concealed. If you
wish to imitate an Irishman or a Scotchman the voice is
the same, except that the tone is altered for the sake of
contrast, and the dialect imitated—even exaggerated —for
Ventriloquial purposes.
The Boy.—The cheeky boy’s voice is produced in
the same way as the old man’s, except that it is pitched
higher and the sound sent more in the direction of the
nose.
The Old Lady.—Speak in a high key through the
nose, always keeping before your mind the sound of a
“ Punch ” call. This voice should be well accentuated,


with a kind of complaining Wail in it, for the old lady in
Ventriloquism is usually of a very querulous disposition.
Little Girl. —The same as the old lady, except that
it is pitched in a higher key, is not so full, and is brighter.
To accentuate the difference between the old lady and
the child there should be incompleteness of expression,
hesitation, and softness in the latter case. The old lady’s
voice should be made harsh; but with the little girl an
effort must be put forth to infuse a certain amount of
sweetness into the childish tones.
Baby. —This voice is similar to the little girl’s, but
is pitched still higher, and is forced more through the
nose. Study from Nature, and if you are anything of a
mimic it -won't take you very long to reproduce the sounds
which made you a general nuisance in the earliest stages
of your existence.
Other voices may be required, as every Ventriloquist
has his own peculiarities; but those I have given form
the stock-in-trade from which all others are manufactured,
and if you master these you will have no difficulty, by
altering the tone and pitch, to suit almost any character
you may desire.
VENTRILOQUIAL FIGURES.
Having reached this stage, you will probably be
anxious to know something about Yentriloquial “figures,”
how they are made, how they are manipulated, and what
they cost.
The heads of Yentriloquial figures are made of
papier-mache. The jaw moves on a long hinge, jointed
at the back of the neck in order to give the mouth a
level drop, and is brought back by a spring, one end of
which is fixed to the top of the head and the other to
the hinge, just inside the mouth. The head is usually
fixed to a small shaft with a lever about half-way down,
to which is attached a string running up to the mouth,
so that the performer, grasping the shaft and touching the
lever with his thumb, is able to control the movements of
the mouth. The small dolls have no shafts, but there is
a hole at the back of the neck, into which the performer


thrusts his thumb, and is able to make the mouth move by
pressing the hinge. The better class of heads are fitted
with a number of eccentric movements, such as eyes to
turn and roll, and hair to fly up.
The bodies of Ventriloquial figures in the smaller
and cheaper varieties are also made of papier-mache.
Large figures, however, which have to> be fitted with
mechanical movements, are partly constructed of wood.
The back of the body is open, so that the performer can
grasp the shaft of the head, which comes through the
neck hole. The heads are not usually attached to the
bodies, but can be taken out and placed inside the
figures for convenience in travelling. The arms of a
figure are sometimes made to move by a stick in continua-
tion of the forearm, which is concealed by the coat, and
worked by the performer, unseen. Legs of sitting figures
can be moved in a similar way.
The cost of a Ventriloquial figure is anything between
30s. and ;£io, according to size and the number of move-
ments with which it is fitted. Some of the elaborate
automata used by professionals cost a great deal more
than the higher sum I have mentioned, but these of course
are “ special orders.”
The complaint I have to make against the manufac-
turers of Ventriloquial figures is that as a general rule
they turn out such terrible monstrosities, and shapeless
masses of deformity. I attribute a great deal of the
favour shown me by the public to the fact that “ Coster
Joe ” has such a natural appearance. He is shapeable,
his limbs are correctly proportioned, and he looks like a
real boy. His face was modelled according to my own
ideas and instructions, and it was a long time before I
could get the exact expression I wanted; but I feel amply
repaid for the trouble and expense. Joe’s head is abnor-
mally thick —please take this in a literal sense—and he is
fixed up with all the little improvements and strengthen-
ings experience Ifas suggested; but I have acquired the
habit of knocking him about, and there is a great deal of
realism in the blows he receives, so that, notwithstanding
I always have the best obtainable, the average life of a
head with me is only about a fortnight. I could make
them last much longer I have no doubt, but directly I


observe any tendency in the head to crack, or go wrong,
I throw it aside, for one can never feel safe unless he
knows the figure is in good trim. One night at the Palace
Theatre I omitted to examine the fittings before going on
the stage, and therefore failed to notice that the screws of
the lever and neck hinge were loose. The result was
that with an exceptionally heavy “ clout ” I knocked Joe’s
head right off, and it rolled to the footlights. I was con-
siderably astonished at the occurrence, as it was altogether
unexpected, but had sufficient presence of mind to walk
towards the head and cause it to upbraid me as it lay on
the ground for my brutal conduct. By this means I got
out of the difficulty very well; but if that accident had
occurred to a beginner it would in all probability have
completely upset him and ruined his show.
At the Alhambra one night, I was about half-way
through my performance, when, in striking Joe, his left
eye, which I suppose had been gradually loosened, was
forced in, and fell through the head into the mouth,
clogging the action of the jaw. I was compelled to stop
and remove the eye from the mouth, and in doing so
dropped it on the stage. Everybody saw this and also
marked the absence of the eye, and the people shrieked.
Joe immediately commenced to abuse me, and for the
remainder of the time I was on the stage continually
referred to the loss of his optic, bringing in some satirical
remark with reference thereto whenever a favourable
opportunity occurred. It went so well that if I could
afford it I would knock his eye out every night. This
sort of thing is not very embarrassing to an experienced
performer; but in the case of a novice it would be a
different matter. Therefore, I say, have good figures.
POLYPHONISM.
If it is difficult to convey in print what one actually
means when dealing with Ventriloquism, it is ten times
harder to make oneself understood wtten writing of the
imitation of animals, musical instruments, and ordinary-
sounds, because of the impossibility of “ spelling ” some
sounds. In studying Polyphonism you must be, more than
ever, guided by the ear. Read the following directions
carefully, and then study the sounds from Nature.


SAWING.
Let the tongue rest against the bottom teeth, and
make a sound as if you were trying to clear the roof of
the mouth of phlegm; then quickly bring the tip of the
tongue to the palate and draw in the breath through the
clenched teeth, making as much noise as possible. Of
course you must imitate the action of sawing.
PLANING.
This is very simple. You have to make a sound
which is best described by the letters “ ush,” with the
accent on the “ sh,” cut short every time by pressing tbs
tip of the tongue against the roof of the mouth. Dif-
ferent tones for heavy or light planes can be obtained by
the action of the lips, which a moment’s practice will re-
veal. Don’t forget that you have to imitate the action of
planing as well as the sound.
FRYING A CHOP.
A capital imitation of the sound made in frying a
chop or steak can be produced by clenching the teeth,
pressing the tongue against the upper row, and hissing,
alternately opening and closing the lips, sometimes slowly,
sometimes rapidly.
SODA-WATER.
An effective imitation of the opening of a bottle of
soda-water or lemonade is the one I have adopted, and
which, I think, is an improvement on the old method of
drawing the cork and pouring out the liquid. You are
supposed to hold in the left hand a “ small soda ” bottle,
force in the stopper, pour the liquid into a glass and
drink it off. Draw the lower lip over the bottom teeth,
and press down the top teeth as firmly as you can without
hurting yourself. Force the lip outward with an explosive
“ fizz,” and the tip of the tongue will just protrude between
the teeth. Keep up a hissing sound whilst going through


the action of pouring the soda-water into a glass, and then
carry the glass to the mouth. The pressure of the edge of
the glass against your lip will alter the sound, which you
gradually reduce in volume as the liquid is supposed to
disappear.
In connection with this imitation a funny incident
recurs to my mind. I was once asked by a Concert Agent
to give a gentleman instructions in Ventriloquism. I
agreed; and it was arranged that I should visit the pupil’s
residence. When I arrived I was shown to the drawing-
room, and found myself in the presence of two gentlemen
well past middle-age. The one who had the appearance
of being the younger of the two' commenced the conversa-
tion by requesting me to give an example of my capability.
I pointed out that I was not there for the purpose of
giving an entertainment, but to instruct one of them in
the Art, and I added that I had been given to understand
this person had already seen my performance, and that
was the reason he had particularly requested I should
attend. The gentleman agreed, but still expressed a
desire to hear what I could do before we went any further.
Accordingly I took my stand beside a, window, had a con-
versation with an imaginary Irishman behind the curtain,
apparently drew a tooth for him (unconscious satire !) and
then sent him out of the window and down the street
to the chemist’s to get some cotton wool to stop up the
cavity in his jaw. My audience of two applauded, and
I proceeded with a few Polyphonic experiments, including
sawing, and this imitation of the opening of a bottle of
soda-water. The gentlemen were manifestly satisfied, and
the elder one was then introduced to me as my pupil. He
was a tall, military looking man, perilously close to the
“ sixties.” He informed me that he had seen my perform-
ance at one of the music-halls, and was anxious to acquire
some knowledge of the Art, so that he might amuse his
friends. He was not inclined to take a series of lessons,
but felt sure that if I would explain a little he could
manage the rest, as he had “ read a book on the subject.”
The illusion of the Irishman behipd the curtain struck
him as being something near his mark. I tried to explain
that he must first master the details of speaking without
moving the lips, etc.; but he assured me he would get


over those difficulties himself if 1 would show him how to
produce the voice behind the screen. I tried, but of
course a,s he had not perfected himself in the elementary
exercises, my efforts were foredoomed to failure. He
grunted and groaned, and made a terrible mess of it, and
at last gave it up as a bad job. My pupil next questioned
me in reference to the imitations, and I told him that
they, unlike Ventriloquial effects, could be acquired almost
immediately by anyone who had mimetic powers. Deter-
mined, I suppose, not to go “ empty away,” he asked me
to show him how to do one of these imitations, and I
chose the soda-water experiment as being the easiest. I
explained that he had to place the top teeth on the lower
lip, and then to send the lip from under the teeth with as
much force as possible. He did as directed, blew with
all his might, but immediately gave vent to a muffled
“ Oh!” and clasped his hands over his mouth. Hf had
blown his false teeth out!
DOGS.
For the big dog, roll the tongue back and say “ Ow!
0w! Ow!” as far down the throat as possible. For a
little dog, such as the terrier, bring the tongue forward in
the mouth and repeat the “ Ow!” business. For a very-
small dog the sound should be sent through the nose.
DONKEY.
Draw the breath in sharply, saying “ Hee,” and break
it off immediately as if you were about to hiccough.
Without pausing, roll the tongue towards the roof of the
mouth and say “ Haw ” well down in the throat. This
will give the donkey’s well-known “ Hee-haw.”
QUARRELLING CATS.
Cats are imitated by uttering a noise like “ ngew!
ng-01-row!” the sound being directed through the nose as
high as possible, and with as many variations as you can
assume. Quarrelling cats can be imitated by keeping one


set of sounds in a lower key than the other, the final
“ Phitz! Phitz !” with which these midnight prowlers
usually conclude their “ spar ” being produced in the
same way as the forcing in of the soda-water bottle
stopper.
PARROT.
Tongue rolled well back, the sound being made in
the throat but forced through the nose.
HENS.
Press the lips together, and utter a succession of
“ tucks,” keeping the tongue well forward in the mouth
and forcing the sound through the lips.
COCK-CROWING.
Don’t try to say “ Cock-a-doodle-do ” in this imita-
tion ; make it “ 000-o-00-00-ooo,” and you will be more
likely to succeed. For the Bantam the sound goes
through the nose; for the larger species think of the “ old
man’s ” voice, but produce the sound nearer the top of
the throat.
DUCK.
Roll the tongue towards the back part of the palate,
say “ Wuack ! Wuack!” —not “quack”—down in the
throat, and send the sound through the nose.
THE BLUEBOTTLE.
This is another effective imitation, and affords the
novice an excellent opportunity for acting in a small way.
Press the lips tightly together, except at the left corner,
where you leave just sufficient space for the wind to force
its way out when you blow hard. The wind passing
through this slight aperture causes a vibration which is
exactly, like the buzzing of a blue-bottle. Chase the sup-
supposed tormentor about your end of the room, flicking
him off with your handkerchief whenever he settles, finally


dodging him about on a window L pane until his capture is
effected. If the sound is modulated it will add greatly to
the effect. When the fly reaches the window-pane the
sound should be sharper and rather jerky.
BANJO.
“ Ping,” “ pong,” and “ pang,” are the three sounds used
to imitate the different tones produced by the twang of
banjo strings; the sound should have a, metallic quality,
and must be directed towards the nasal organ.
MUSETTE AND SHEPHERD’S PIPE.
Pinch the nose, make a cap for the mouth with the
palm of the hand, and go through the tune, uttering
sounds “ tar-rar-rar-rar ” (never mind about the “ Bom-de-
ay ”) commencing each breath with a “ tar,” and making
the “ rar-rar-rar ” serve for the rest.
CORNET.
Make a sort of funnel with the hand held close to
the mouth; keep the lips open and go through the tune
with the words “ tut tut,” and “ ta ta,” making a liberal
use of the tip of the tongue.
VIOLIN.
This is a difficult instrument to imitate, but it can
be done by keeping the lips closed, smoothly humming
the tune, and directing the sound through the nose, as in
the case of the baby. The pizzicato effect is managed by
means of the lips. Still hum the tune, cutting off each
note sharply with the lips, as if you were trying to say
“ blup ” without parting them.
VIOLONCELLO.
The ’Cello can be imitated in the same way as the
Violin, except that the tone is much deeper, and is not
forced through the nose to the same extent.


SIDE-DRUM.
The side-drum is to be imitated by a succession of
sounds indicated by “ ter-r-r-up,” the “ r’s ” being rolled
as much as possible. The vocal chords should not be
used at all in this imitation.


IN CONCLUSION.
I think I have told you nearly all there is to be told
about Ventriloquism, Colloquism, and Polyphonism. I
have striven to make the directions as intelligible as pos-
sible; but, as I have stated before, it is very difficult
to convey all one would like to in cold print, and it is
beyond the power of mortal man to set forth in words all
the twistings and contortions of the tongue and vocal
organs necessary to produce sounds incidental to some of
the imitations. I do not pretend to make a, Ventrilo-
quist or a Mimic of every person who peruses this book;
all' I have attempted is to explain the method and general
principles upon which these complex Arts are founded.
• Whilst the majority of those who read these pages
will do so merely because they are interested in the sub-
ject, or because they would like to know sufficient of the
Art to amuse their own family circle, others may be in-
clined to take up the study with the object of making
money by it. My intention has not been to create pro-
fessionals. Study Ventriloquism by all means, if only to
amuse your friends. It will help to pass away pleasantly
many an otherwise dull evening, and your company will
be much sought after in the society in which you move.
But if you have a good berth in an office, warehouse, shop,
or elsewhere, don't throw it up to become a “ pro.” The
life is hard, unsettled, and, for the rank and file, un-
profitable. The salaries may look all .right on paper, but
when you come to deduct agent’s fees, travelling expenses,
and the extra cost of living away from your home, there
is not much in it. The average “ pro.” is no better off
than a good mechanic or a person who has a decent berth
in the City, and his life is certainly not such a comfort-
able one. The fact that one or two music-hall artistes
draw a salary equal to that of a Cabinet Minister mav
tempt you to try the “ halls ”; but Punch’s advice to
those anxious to marry comes in here very emphatically—
Don’t. The market is already glutted, and in no depart


ment of the theatrical business are there so many artistes
“ resting ’ as in the Ventriloquial and mimetic branch.
Clever men, with the experience of years to guide them in
the search for “shops,” are “out” half the year; and
managers, who are, of course, men of business, have not
been slow to take advantage of the 'glut, with the result
that salaries have been cut down accordingly. If you axe
exceptionally clever and exceptionally fortunate, a music-
hall manager or agent may “ discover ” you, and get you
an engagement at one of the halls; then it rests with
yourself what progress you make. This is the kind of
thing which very seldom comes off, however, and there is
nothing for it but to commence at the bottom of the
ladder and fight your way up rung by rung. The arduous
apprenticeship in fourth-rate halls, at something less than
a living wage, is calculated to knock the romance out of
a stage career in double-quick time. Suppose you decide
to ignore all this, however, and are determined to try your
luck, then you should send your credentials to one of the
music-hall managers and ask him to see your performance
at rehearsal. If he consents, and you really have some-
thing out of the common, he will give you a trial-turn in
the evening programme, and if you go well an engagement
may follow.
If you are performing in a drawing-room, don’t be
vulgar. Music-hall audiences require stronger meats, and
like a piquant flavour. You must make your figures
natural, and if you have a “ vulgar boy ” he must be
vulgar; but there is a limit, and it is wise to keep well
within it.
Impromptu remarks often make a hit, but in trying to
be funny, don’t be personal unless someone tries to take
a “ rise ” out of you; then, if you feel equal to the emer-
gency, “go for him.” A case in point. I was playing at
one of the London Music-halls where the gallery boys are
notoriously “ hot.” In the course of the dialogue, “ Coster
Joe ” enumerates the dishes enjoyed at a coster wedding
feast, and at one point he is supposed to say, “ And we
had chamber-of-horrors.” “ Chamber-of-horrors!” I ex-
claim, “ What is that ?” and Joe answers, “ Sheep’s head.”
Now, some of the gallery boys had thoroughly digested
this—l mean the remark, not the sheep’s head —-for one


night, directly I asked the question, “ What is that ?” and
before Joe could answer, someone in the gallery shouted,
“ ’Ere yer are, cull!” and the half of a sheep’s head came
whizzing through the air and fell about two yards from
me. I was considerably astonished at first, and thought
someone had thrown a boomerang at me; but glancing
down I observed what it was and at the same time
noticed that the large bone was quite devoid of meat.
At once I turned Joe’s head towards the gallery and
caused him to say, quietly and very deliberately : “ Thanks,
cully; I see yer had yer dinner off it afore yer chucked
it down!” The laugh was against me at first, but Joe’s
remark scored tremendously, and effectually turned it
against the perpetrator of the “ joke.” Under such cir-
cumstances as these the sympathy of the audience is
always with the performer if he answers smartly.


DIALOGUES.
“DOMESTIC INFELICITY.”
Ventriloquial Dialogue for Old Man and
Old Lady.
Figures on Stage with covers over heads, Old Man on
Performer's right, and Old Lady on left.
V. indicates the Ventriloquist ; O.M. the old man ;
0.L., the Old Lady ; T. the boy, and G. the girl.
V. : Ladies and Gentlemen,—l have the pleasure of introducing to
your notice this evening, a little Ventriloquial sketch, and,
with the assistance of my old friends here —
O.M, ( interrupting): Now, then, governor, how much longer ?
V.: Half a minute, sir.
O.M. ; Well, let’s have this fly-catcher off, it’s enough to choke yer.
(Here the old man should be made to cough as if stifled. This
sound should he a little muffled whilst the cover is over the
figure’s head).
V. ; ( taking cover off) ; Well, there you are.
O.M. ( grumbling ) : Keeping anyone covered up like this all night.
V. : I apologise to you, and to the lady also.
O.M. ; Never mind her. That’s a face that wants hiding.
V. : Come, I say !
O.L. : You used to think very different to that at one time.
O.M, : Well, you needn’t remind me of it; I’ve got sense now.
V. : Come, sir, this is out of order.
O.M. : What is ? Her dial ?
O.L. : Oh dear! Oh dear I (sobbing).
O.M. : Hullo, another shower.
Y. : Pray don’t distress yourself, Madame.
O.L. : It’s very hard to be held up to ridicule at my time of life.
O.M. : I’ve seen you held up to get home.


O.L. : Anyhow, you were glad enough at one time to take me out.
O.M. : Yes, and I wasn’t long before I found out I had been taken
in.
V. : Come, come, don’t quarrel. Why I always thought you were
such an admirer of the fair sex.
O.M. : So I am,
O.L. : So he ought to be. Look what he’s got here.
O.M. : Guess what it is, and you can have it.
V. : I’m afraid you don’t quite understand the sex. You know a
good woman will go through anything for the man she
loves.
O.M. : Yes, even through his pockets and sneak his overtime.
O.L : You used to say I looked like a lily.
O.M. : Yes, and you didn’t take long to fade.
Y. : Come, you are hurting the lady’s feelings. You took her for
better or worse.
O.M. : That’s the worst of it.
V. : What is ?
O.M. : She is.
O.L. ; That’s the way he is always insulting me.
V. : I’m sorry to hear it.
O.L. ; What do you think he did last Sunday ?
V. : I’ve no idea, Madame.
O.L. : He came home intoxicated.
V. : Then he broke the Sabbath.
O.M. ; Yes, and nearly broke my nose on the fender, too.
V. : I’m sorry to hear this. Why do you drink the nasty stuff ?
O.M. : ’Cos it ’aint thick enough to eat.
O.L. : My first husband never treated me like that.
V. ; He died young, did he not ?
O.M. : Yes, and lucky to get off so easily.
O.L. : My first husband was in a high position.
O.M. : Lived in a garret.
O.L. : He held an excellent situation for five years.
O.M. : Under Government.
Y, : What was his occupation, Madame ?
O.M. : Grinding wind.
V. ; Hold your tongue. Did your husband earn good wages,
Madame ?
O.L. : What do you say?


V. : What did he get on Saturdays ?
O.M. ; Tight!
V. ; We had better change the subject, and leave family matters
alone.
O.L. : I’ve done with his family.
O.M. : Yes, you've done all the lot one way and another.
O.L. : Now you’re stretching it.
O.M. : That’s what you did with my sister’s shoes.
O.L. ; My friends never asked you for anything.
O.M. : No, they took it without asking.
V. : That's the worst of having relations
O.M. ; It is the worst of relations having you.
V. : Now, come, let us talk of something else.
O.M. ; Eight.
V. ; I have heard, Madame, that you are a very nice singer. Per-
haps you would not mind obliging us with a song.
O.M. : Don't ask her, old man, you’ll be ill.
V, : Just keep quiet.
O.L. : I could sing when I was young.
O.M. : That’s a day or two ago.
O.L. : I had a nice falsetto voice.
O.M. : You've got a nice false set o’ teeth now.
V. ; Please behave, sir.
O.L. : I sang with Sims Beeves once.
V. : Indeed ! I never heard of it.
O.M. : Quite likely not. He sang inside the hall; she sang in the
gutter.
V. : Now, as you won’t let the old lady sing, perhaps you’ll oblige
yourself.
O.M. : I don’t mind, if the old Dutch will join in the chorus.
V. : Will you join in, Madame ?
O.L. : Oh yes.
(Old Man sings sohg, and Old Lady joins in chorus, the two
singing alternate lines.)


“CLARA'S BABIES.”
This sketch was produced by me at the Brighton
Aquarium on July 14th, 3890 It is intended to illus-
trate the three branches of the Art—Ventriloquism
proper, Colloquism and Polyphonism.
w a*
The stage “ set ” is very simple, consisting of a
folding screen, one or tivo chairs, and a table. The
properties, three figures — girl, hoy, and baby ; lemonade
glass, stool for girl, dentist's forceps, ivalking stick and
newspaper on table. Performer attired in morning
dress, or dressing gown.
V.: Well, I’m afraid I’ve committed a very rash act. Having
accepted the invitation of my sister Clara to spend a few
days with her and her husband at their suburban
residence, leaving my surgery to take care of itself, I
suddenly find myself sole guardian of the entire establish-
ment, including their three very interesting but somewhat
troublesome children. The fact is, Clara and Bob—that’s
her husband wanted to go to a garden party, but as
Mary, the nurse girl, has her “ day out” to-day, they were
disposed to give up the idea until I, in an unguarded
moment, rashly undertook to transform myself into house-
keeper and nurse, and I sincerely hope 1 shan’t have
cause to regret it. My experience of children is decidedly
limited, and I hardly appreciate becoming a family man
on such short notice. However, they have gone, so
there’s no help for it. Now, let me see; I think I can
manage Tommy and little Clara all- right; but I’ve my
doubts about the baby. Clara put him in the cradle in
the other room, and said he would sleep for hours. I’m
sure I hope he will. If he should wake, what on earth
should Ido ? Oh, it won’t bear thinking of! But it is of
no use meeting trouble half way, although the bare
thought of what might occur makes me wish I had never
visited this suburban retreat. My brother-in-law is
alway raving about the charms and convenience of the
suburbs, but I don’t see where it comes in. The leading
characteristics of this particular neighbourhood appear to
be jerry-built houses, match-making mammas, and ama-
teur mechanics. The latter especially are very much in


evidence. The men, who spend the greater part of the
day in the City, utilize their evenings, and, I regret to say,
their Sunday mornings, for the erection of out-buildings,
such as summer-houses, and things of that kind. Now,
the fellow who lives next door here sadly disturbed my
rest last Sunday morning by the row he made putting up
that very nnromantic structure, a fowl-house. About
seven o’clock I was aroused by a strange noise, and on
looking out of the window I saw our neighbour, with his
shirt sleeves rolled up to the shoulder, planing away at a
board for dear life, and producing a sound like this :
(Imitation of Planing).
Of course, sleep was out of the question, so I sat at the
window and watched him. Having planed the board to
his entire satisfaction, he took up a large saw and
proceeded to cut away at a plank like a steam saw-mill.
We will imagine this walking stick to be the saw. This is
the row it made :
(Imitation of Sawing, kneeling on the Chair).
There was a knot in the wood, but this did not stop him.
Wiping the perspiration from his manly brow, he pro-
ceeded :
(Imitation of Sawing through knot. This is done by making
the sou ml harder , and pitching it in a higher key).
Apparently much exhausted after this unwonted exercise,
he refreshed himself with a “B-and-S.”
(Imitation of opening Soda-water bottle).
My attention was next drawn to the neighbour on the
other side, whose fad is the cultivation of live-stock
When I first observed him he was walking from the house,
with a small terrier close to his heels. The presence of
the dog seemed to annoy the gentleman, and the following
dialogue ensued. “Go in, Charley ” (dog barks). “Go in,
sir” (loud hark). “ Get down, will you ” (dog growls and
snaps). As the dog would not go in by fair means the
owner tried foul. He administered a severe kick to the
dog, which departed yelping.
(Imitation of dog yelping, cries gradually getting fainter).
Having disposed of the dog our neighbour walked to his
fowl-house to gather the eggs; then we had a classic
concert something like this :
(Imitation of hens cackling and cock-crowing).
A little Bantam, about ten gardens off, could not resist the
temptation, and joined in the chorus with—
(lmitation of Bantam, with rather distant effect).


The noise disturbed a donkey in the stables at the, back,
and he raised his voice, and exclaimed in melodious
tones —
(Imitation of Donkey).
Not being equal to a repetition of this kind of thing, I
asked Bob to shift my quarters to the front of the house ;
but there the noise created in the morning by the early
tradesmen made sleep impossible.
(Imitation of street cries, such as Milkman, Coal-man, Water-
cress man, etc.).
How slowly the time drags! (looks at watch), no chance of
Clara and Bob returning yet. Now, how shall I kill time?
Well, we’ll have a cigar to start with. When I was in the
garden just now, I met Pat, the gardener, with his face
swollen like a baboon s, and evidently suffering a martyr-
dom from toothache. Knowing I was a dentist, he asked
me if I could help him, and I promised if he would come
here I would see what I could do with the troublesome
molar. (Knocking heard off). Who's there?
Pat : (outside door, “ middle voice ”) It's me, sor.
V. : Oh ! there he is. Come in, Pat.
(4 very good effect can he obtained here by causing Pat to say
in the “ middle ” voice “ All right, sor," immediately making
a slight noise with the foot like the slam of a door, and then
let Pat say, in the full colloquial voice, “ Here I am, sor").
Y. ; (going to side of curtain, Pat apparently being behind). Well,
Pat, how is the tooth now ?
Pat : Sure, its awful, sor.
V. ; Well, shall I take it out ?
Pat : Will it hurt ?
V. : Not much. Now, which one is it ? This ?
Pat ; Here, hold on, sor, you’ve got the wrong one.
V. : Is this it ?
Pat : That’s it, sor.
V. : (producing forceps) Now let me get a firm hold of it.
Pat (in mumbling voice as if he had something in his mouth) : Here,
hold on, you’ll break my jaw !
V. : Now, then !
Pat : Ob ! Murder ! ! Is it out, sor ?
V. : Yes that is all right now, Pat. Mind you don’t get cold air in
the hole.
Pat ; I’d rather have some cold whisky, sor.


V. I dare say you would. Well, here’s a shilling; go and get
some. You need not shut the door.
Pat : All right, sor.
V. : Take care.
Pat : All right, sor.
V. : Don’t take all the shilling’s-worth of whisky at once, Pat.
Pat : All right, sor ; I’ll drink four healths to you. Thank’e, sor.
(Make Pat’s voice gradually get fainter and fainter after the
words “ need not shut the door ” and the effect will be as if he
were going down the passage).
Y. : He has gone. ( Looking at watch). X say, they are a long time
at that garden-party. I wonder when they will return.
I’ll just have a glance at the paper (sits down and takes up
newspaper).
Little Girl (behind screen) : Uncle !
V. : That’s one of the children.
G. : Uncle!
V. : Well, Clara, what is it ?
G. : I want you.
Y. : What for ?
G. : I want to come out.
V. : Have you anyone with you ?
Tommy : Yes, I’m here, and I wish you’d take me out of it, she’s
sitting on my chest.
V. : Oh, we’ll soon relieve you of that. Come along, my dear,
(Brings girl out). Why, you do look nice.
G. : Let me stand down.
V. : Why ?
G : I don't like to be cuddled.
V. ; Don’t you ? You will when you get older.
G. : Shall I ?
V. : I think so; most young ladies do. Now, will you sit on this
stool. How is that ?
G. ; Mind my sash.
V. : There, is that better ?
G. : That will do.
T. (behind) : I say, Uncle, when are you going to take us out of
this ?
Y : Presently, if you are not rude.
T. : Who’s rude ?


V. : That will do, sir.
T. : Well, take me out of this.
V. : Hold your tongue.
T. : Shan’t.
V. : I shall box your ears if I come there to you.
T. : No yon won’t.
V. : Don’t contradict.
T. : Your another.
V. (going to curtain) : Now let me hear another word from you.
T. : Go and eat coke.
(V. goes behind curtain, and boy has a beating, and cries out).
V. ; ( coming from behind curtain with boy) : There, now perhaps
you’ll behave.
T. : Why don’t you hit one your own size ?
V. ; That will do.
T. : You're not going to knock me about like this ; I'm not a door-
mat.
Y. : You should not be saucy.
T. : I ain’t
V. : Don’t contradict.
T. : ’Garn.
V, : Be quiet, sir.
T ; Coward.
V. : Will you hold your tongue ?
T. : No.
V. : Then I shall have to thrash you again.
T. : Yes, you try it on, that's all.
V. : Order, sir.
T. : Order! I think you had better order me a coffin.
V. : Do be quiet, Tommy.
T. : Well, don’t you knock me about.
Y, : Now, look here, if you behave yourself, and answer a few
questions, I'll give you some money.
T. : Fork out your ooftish, I'm on.
Y. : You vulgar boy ; that’s not the way to speak. What do they
teach you at school ?
T. ; Oh, lots of things.
V. : Do you know the alphabet ?
T. : Bather.


V. : Well, let me hear you repeat it.
T. : You won't forget the money, will you ?
Y. : Oh, no. Now just repeat the letters after me (V. goes through
the alphabet, hoy repeating each letter).
Y. : A. B. C. [boy stops and looks rvand), C! What do I do with my
eyes ?
T. : Squint.
Y. : No. C. D. E. F. G. H. I.
T. : You?
V. : No, I!
T. ; Well, that is you, ain't it, fathead ?
V. (hits him) : You impudent young scoundrel.
T. : Here, don’t be so handy.
V. : Ah, Tommy, I’m afraid your education has been neglected.
Do you go to school regularly ?
T. : No. I play the “ wag.”
V. : Ah, I thought so ; you play truant, do you ? If I were your
father I’d cure you of that.
T. : Father never lays a hand on me.
V. : Indeed !
T. : He’s rather lively with the stick, though.
Y. : And you deserve it. (To girl) Now, my dear, will you sing a
nice little song for me ?
G. : What will you give us if Ido ?
V. : Well, if you sing very nicely I’ll give you a penny. I’ve a
lucky pennyhere with a hole in it.
T. ; Don’t give her that; she’ll fall through the hole and lose
herself.
Y. : Never mind him, my dear ; you sing the song and I’ll give you
the penny.
G. : Have you got one ?
T. : Hullo, she’s on your track.
V. : Yes, my dear, of course I have.
G. : Let’s look at it.
T. : That’s right, kid ; you get the stiver first.
V. : Look here, will you behave yourself?
T. : All right, keep your hair on.
V. : I shall tell your father directly he comes home. Now, perhaps
as you’ve spoilt Clara’s song, you’ll sing yourself.


T. : Not if I know it. (Baby cries). There’s someone going to sing
for you.
V. : There’s the baby. Now you must go behind the curtain again.
(V. puts figures behind the curtain, and baby commences to
cry vigorously again )
V. : All right, I’m coming. Oh ! here’s a treat. ( Goes to side and
brings on dummy baby, making frantic efforts to stop its cries.)
What on earth shall I do ? (Baby screams louder than
ever.) Clara said I was to give him the bottle if he awoke.
Where is it ? Ah, here it is. (Business with feeding bottle ,
which soothes the baby for a minute, but it suddenly screams
out again) Oh, I shall commit murder in a moment.
(Tries to hush baby , which continues screaming. A loud Rat-
tat is heard ) Thank goodness, here they are at last.
Never again will I undertake the charge of “ Clara’s
babies.”
Curtain.


“Coster Joe” Interviewed.
[The following “ Interview ” originally appeared in the
well-known humorous journal, “ Illustrated Bits.” It is
one of the best examples of Coster slang extant.]
“ Our Boss is nothing if not original, but I plead
guilty to experiencing a slight feeling of astonishment
when I received peremptory orders from ‘ He-who-must-
be-obeyed ’ to interview a ventriloquial figure—Coster
Joe,’ to wit.
“ 1 Coster Joe,’ as every Londoner and most provincials
are aware, is the wonderful little automaton introduced
by Mr. Fred. Russell, the ventriloquist, in his entertain-
ment, ‘ Ventriloquism Up-to-Date.’ They are such a busy-
pair that it is a difficult matter to obtain half-an-hour’s
conversation with either; but I managed to get ‘Joe’
into a quiet comer while he was waiting for his turn at
the Palace Theatre the other night, and elicited from
him—no matter how—a few items of interest. In answer
to my inquiries, ‘ The Nipper ’ said:
“ Where wos I bom ? I wosn’t bom at all, and I
ain’t like Topsy neither, I didn’t growd. I was ‘ he-
volved,’ as my guv’nor calls it.
“It was like this ’ere, yer know. The guv’nor used
to belong to the journalistic perfession. I've ’card people
say as ’ow ’e wos a editor —more like a fat-editor—-but
fancies ’e must ’a been a ‘ penny-a-liner,’ or some other
stoomer o’ that kind. Any’ow, his powers o’ suction bein’
somethin’ marvrilious, ’e soon found out ’e couldn’t earn
enough splosh at the ink-slingin’ fake to find ’im in beer,
so ’e makes up ’is mind to try another emag, and as ’e
was alius a-kiddin’ ’isself on ’is ventreacleism, or wotever ’e
calls it, ’e starts a-chuckin’ ’is voice about—more ’un 'e
does with ’is money, I give yer my word!
“Fust of all ’e tries the fake with a lot of figgers;
but ’e wasn’t long a findin’ as that game was played out.
Besides, with a big show ’e ’ad to carry a lot o’ ‘ props,’
and as ’e fell out with ’ard work years ago ’e looks abaht
fur sumthin’ easier. The end of it was that I makes my
fust appearance on any stage, although plenty of other
ventreaclists ’as sneaked the idea and pinched my gags


inter the bargin’ since then. That’s the worst o’ this busi-
ness, there’s so many bloomin’ people who are alius on
the look out to pinch yer ideas and yer gags. Why, I’ve
’card other vents —and big ’uns at the game, too —crackin’
my gags to further orders, and as for the smaller fry,
well, I thinks we keeps ’em agoin.
“ But, to resoom, as the parson says. The guv’nor ’e
sends down to the Midlands somewheres to get my dial,
and, as ’e is werry fond o’ tellin’ everyone, ’e made my
carcase ’isself—not in the ordinary course o’ nature, yer
know; but ’e gets a few bits o’ deel, some canvas an’
stuffin’, and manufacters me body in ’is backyard. • ’E
made sich a thunderin’ row a’doin’ of the job that all the
neighbours thought ’e was a’ buildin’ a fowls’-’ouse. Then
’e got one o’ ’is noomerous lady friends to make me a
pair o’ ‘ round-me-’ouses, a ‘ Charlie Frescot ’ and 1 I’m
afloat ’; stuck on a few perlies, and —’ere I are.
“ ’Course, with a ’andy little bloke like me to work
for ’im, the guv’nor wasn’t long afore ’e was adoin’ all
rite.
“ Then we ’as a cut at the music-’alls, and didn’t it
take on ? Rather ? Why, at the Palace Theatre, where
we opened, we ’ad a run ’o mor’un fifty weeks rite orf
the bloomin’ reel. Went for-a week and stopped for a
year; and now we’ve got nearly every music-’all worth
goin’ to on our books.
“Do we get abaht ? What ho! Music-’alls and
mansions, theatres and thieves’ kitchens, workhouses and
warships, lecture-’alls and lunatic asylums. Why, we’ve
been everywhere and showed afore nearly everyone. I’ve
’ad a cut at the Prince o’ Wales mor’un once, and other
members o’ the Royal Family is quite common. The
Juke o’ York is all rite, and the fust time ’is Royal Nibs
took me on I thought he’d a bust. He said some werry
nice things to the guv’nor, who, as per usual, shoves
’isself forward and leaves me in the background.
“Wot do yer say? Do we enjoy ourselves! Do we
not! At the music-’alls and concerts we often meets some
lovely donahs, and, don’t you forget it, the gals is werry
fond o’ me, altho’ the guv’nor tries to cut me out. When
I’m a’ lavin’ on a chair or table waitin’ to go on, they
comes and looks at me, and says, ‘ Ain’t ’e a darlin’ ? I
love the little rascal.’


“ Only fancy, ’ow would you feel if some lovely donah
like Lottie Collins, Anna Held, Marie Montrose, or
Madamoselle Fougere—ah! me ’eart! Fougere! —wos to
come up and call you a darlin’! Wouldn't you waltz on
yer ear ? ’Course, I never says nothin’ or they might get
a little shy, which is the nature of series; but it do make
the guv’nor wild ’cos they won’t tork to ’im like that.
’E wouldn't keep ’is mouth shut, I lay a quid.
“Work, did yer say? Lor’ lumme, it’s all work.
Why, I’ve been thro’ that bally show as many as eight
times in one night, and five or six times is nothin’. This
week we’re a doin’ the Matinee Theatre, the Canterbury,
the good old ‘ Mo,’ the Paragon, and the Palace Theatre,
with one or two odd concerts chucked in. I tell yer strait
it do give yer socks to sit on Russell’s bloomin’ knee and
crack gags by the yard, to say nothin’ of the clumpin’ I
captures about every minit if I ’appens to chime in with
some little remark what don’t quite suit his nibs.
“ Yus, ’e’s very tricky is my guvnor. When I gets a
good ‘ round ’ for a song or somethin’ like that he takes all
the credit and I gets none. But, lor’ lumme, where
would Fred Russell be without me? Up the bloomin’
pole, or in the Lump, long ago. He ain’t got no gratitood
in ’im. He gets all the pieces, but who does the work?
That’s wot I wants to know. As my old pal Teddy Kent
says in one o’ the songs he rote for me :
It’s the figger wot does it,
It’s the rorty little figger,
I does all the work
While Russell Jerks the jigger.
I cracks the gags and sings
While ’is nibs just works the strings,
Wot’s ’is show, I’d like to know,
Without the little figger!
Atouci-u, -.vuuueil t'awtkner, 20 McKiuop M., Melbourne.


testimonial from Walter Omond
(Holder of the Mouth Organ Championship
of Australia).
130 Russell Street,
Melbourne, March 17th, 1904.
Messrs. Allan & Co.,
Dear Sirs,
Thanks very much for the sample of the Crackajack
Mouth Organs which you were kind enough to send
me. I have played, I think, on every Mouth Organ
that has ever been imported into Australia, and I have
no hesitation in saying that the Crackajack is the best
all-round instrument I have ever played on, combining
as it does what is best in all the others, with none of
their disadvantages. The tone and music to be obtained
from the Crackajack is undoubtedly superior to all
others, and I shall have much pleasure (with your per-
mission) in recommending them in my Mouth Organ
Tutor, which I am about to publish.
Yours faithfully,
WALTER OMOND,
J
„ CRACKAJACK Senior ”
THE CRACKAJACKS are the Best the World produces.


UiUa/ti Mf
FLAT RECORD TALKINu \mm\m.
• • •
THE KING OF TALKERS.
THE TALK OF KINGS.
3 1508 01141249 6
-f~3,
We invite you to call and thoroughly inspect’ our machines. There is no more
complete Talking Machine department iii Australasia.
Our Trices are reasonable.
Other Features of our unique Talking Machine Dept.
Hundreds of Itecords in our record rack.
Private lioom for use of Customers selecting Itecords; sound-proof and
comfortably furnished. Prompt service in all departments.
Write for our Catalogue and Itecord Lists.
Prices— £4 4 0 £5 15 O £9 9 0
ff
276-278 COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE.
