

THE
NEW ZEALAND LOAN &
MERCANTILE AGENCY CO
LIMITED.
VERBATIM REPORT OF MR. JUSTICE VAUGHAN
WILLIAMS’ STATEMENT, WITH FULL TEXT OF
OFFICIAL RECEIVER’S REPORT AND
RECONSTRUCTION SCHEME.
EDITED BY PHILIP MENNELL.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
Published at the Offices of
“ THE BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN,” 31, FLEET
STREET, LONDON, E.C.




MR. JUSTICE VAUGHAN WILLIAMS’
STATEMENT.
FULL AND SPECIAL REPORT.
THE following is the text of the important statement
made by Mr. Justice Vaughan Williams on Monday,
the 7th May, summarising the evidence given before him by
the Directors and other officials of the New Zealand Loan
and Mercantile Agency Company, Limited. Extended as
the report which appears in the Times and other papers is,
it is a mere precis as compared with the verbatim and
practically official report which is given below.
The report having been submitted to Mr. Justice Vaughan
Williams, the following reply has been elicited from the
learned Judge :
Royal Courts of Justice,
May 11, 1894.
SIR, —I am directed by Mr. Justice Vaughan Williams to inform you
that the report of his statement which you submitted to him seems, as far
as he has been able to examine it, absolutely correct. —Yours faithfully,
R. I. Coates.
Philip Mennell, Esq.
Mr. Justice Vaughan Williams : Before I make the
statement that I am going to make, I want to read a letter
that Mr. Stewart, the Official Receiver, has received from
Mr. Russell. He also received a letter from Mr. Moore, the
auditor, upon the same subject. The letter says : “ Sir,
Referring to our conversation on Saturday, I now beg to
state I was not in Court early on Friday, when Mr. Moore
gave his evidence ; but I cut from the Times the annexed
report.” Then the report says, among other things—l need
B


not read the whole report at length—something about a sum
of ,£1,991 19s. 1 id., and I seem, by the newspaper report, to
have said that the document contained figures which afforded
a key to certain matters. It appeared to show that the Loan
Company handed over for Mr. Russell’s use£l,99l 19s. nd.,
on the mere suggestion by Mr. Battley that this should
be done. The witness did not contradict this, but said that
he himself had only acted on instructions. His lordship said
he could not understand how it was that the Directors of the
Loan Company handed over its funds and finances to
be dealt with by Mr. Battley for the use of Mr. Russell,
according to his convenience and fancy. There was another
portion of the document which required explanation ; as to
H. J. B.’s guarantee, Mr. Russell’s letter goes on, “In
reference to this report I have to say, (1) That the sum of
£1,991 19s. 1 id. therein referred to, and a sum of £2,44853.
were not new items, but the concluding parts of previous
items. The precise amount of the balances due upon the
Raglan Run and Russell properties was not known here early
in 1891, and so round sums of £30,000 and £42,000
respectively were taken and dealt with. In due course, the
correct amounts with interest and charges to a later date came
to hand, and were found to be respectively £2,448 ss. and
£1,991 19s. 1 id.” He goes on to explain that this allocation
of the money was accounted for in that way. Ido not think
it necessary to read any more of either of the letters. I have
only to state that it seems to me that the explanation which
Mr. Russell now gives, and which Mr. Moore did not give, is
a satisfactory explanation, and that therefore Mr. Russell is
entitled to have me state that there is no ground, with regard
to this particular sam, for saying it was improperly or rashly
credited to or allowed to him.
I want also to say with regard to the statement that I am
going to make that I have, as far as possible, avoided
repeating the statements in the Report of the Official Receiver;
because really the matters which are stated in that report are
stated with such admirable clearness and accuracy that any
attempt on my part to reproduce the facts under a statement
of my own would not at all add to the clearness of the story.
Of course, if the evidence given had in any way altered or
detracted from the Official Receiver’s statement I should be
bound to take notice of that, but so far as the Official


Receiver’s statement goes I cannot find that there is any
single statement of fact from beginning to end of that state-
ment which is altered or modified by the evidence that has
been given before me. Indeed, if it were not for the fact that
in the evidence before me other matters had been dealt with,
I should be content to leave the story exactly as it is told in
the Report of the Official Receiver.
Now with regard to my own statement, I have no right to
give any judgment upon the evidence that has been taken in
the course of this examination, and I do not propose to do
so; but, inasmuch as it is desirable that the evidence given
by the witnesses should be put in the form of a continuous
report, and inasmuch as the witnesses have necessarily been
examined in succession, and the statements made by the later
witnesses have often affected earlier witnesses, I think it right
to make a statement of the effect of the evidence which has
been given, and when I have made this statement, if any
witness wishes to come forward and to give any explanation
with regard to matters which have been stated by witnesses
who have given evidence subsequently to himself, such
witnesses shall have the opportunity of so doing. Moreover, as
many of these transactions took place some years ago, and
were of a very complicated character, I think it right that any
witness should have the opportunity of correcting or adding
to the evidence which he has already given upon any part of
the transactions of this Company.
The main matters that have been inquired into seem to
divide as follows :—First there is the issue of Debentures after
1879, the year in which the Company took the opinion of
counsel, and the subsequent issue of Debenture Stock in 1888,
as to which it is said generally that the Company issued
prospectuses and application forms inviting subscriptions for
Debentures which they must have known to have been mis-
leading in that they suggested that the Debentures or
Debenture Stock issue, would give those who took them a
security on the property of the Company, when, in fact, they
did not do so.
The second matter which has been inquired into is the
issue by the Company in 1892 of the Debenture Stock which
has been called the Schroder Debenture Stock, and which
gave to those who subscribed to it, specific security over the
property of the Company to the detriment, as is alleged, of the
B 2


prior holders of Debentures and Debenture Stock. It is said
with regard to this issue that although the Company invited
prior Debenture-holders who were unsecured to come in and
take in lieu of their Debentures, or unsecured Debenture
Stock, the new Debenture issue, yet they failed to tell the
earlier Debenture-holders that they were unsecured, although
they must have been aware that some, at least, of those
Debenture-holders supposed that their Debentures gave them
security.
The third matter enquired into is the allegation that the
Company failed to disclose matters materially affecting the
financial condition of the Company, which they ought to have
disclosed to their shareholders ; and further that the balance-
sheets, which from time to time were issued, were positively
misleading.
The fourth and last matter enquired into is the transaction
between the Loan Company and the Land Company, as to
which it is said that the transactions were entered into not
bona-fide in the interests of the Company, but in the interests
of Mr. Russell and those who had been associated with him
in the Waikato Land Association.
Now I propose to take each one of those matters, and to
state shortly such of the facts as are not in controversy, and
then to add to these the explanations and allegations of
individual witnesses not forming part of the admitted story.
The directors of the Company, shortly after its formation
in 1865, began to issue annual prospectuses inviting applica-
tions for Debentures. In 1879 a question was raised in
London by the Board of Directors as to whether these
prospectuses were not so worded as to indicate that
the Debentures would give a charge over the assets
of the Company, and a case was stated for the
opinion of counsel The evidence seems to leave it doubtful
as to who prepared this case, but the general result of the
evidence seems to be that the case was prepared by Messrs.
Hollams, Son, & Coward, the solicitors, upon the instructions
and with the assistance of Mr. Russell. Now, that case
stated for the opinion of counsel contained this passage:—
“ The Company is in the habit of issuing applications for
these Debentures in the annexed printed form, in which it is
stated that the Debentures are amply secured upon the
unpaid capital of the Company, and the freehold and other


securities upon which the paid-up capital and money received
upon the Debentures have been advanced. A form of docu-
ment called a Debenture issued by the company with coupons
attached is also annexed. It will be seen that this document
does not profess to give any charge upon the property or
assets of the company. It is apprehended that the lenders of
the Company of money upon these securities are merely in
the position of ordinary unsecured creditors. The term
‘ Debenture ’ as applied to companies subject to the provisions
of the Companies Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845, is, of course,
well known as giving the holder of the Debenture definite
preferential rights. It is hardly necessary to say that
companies formed under the Companies Act, 1862, have from
time to time issued Debentures, and that some of these docu-
ments have been specially secured by mortgages upon the
property of the Company, and that others have affected to
give a lien and security, but in many instances documents
similar to those now under consideration have been issued,,
and several cases of the latter kind have from time to time
been before the Courts with reference to the effect of such
documents, and in those cases the instruments appear to have
been unreservedly spoken of as Debentures. Other
companies, in order to avoid the difficulty in the use of
the term Debenture, have issued bonds with coupons
attached. The term Debenture has thus perhaps become a
somewhat ambiguous one, although the general impres-
sion seems undoubtedly to be that the holder of a
Debenture is in a more favourable position as respects
security than an ordinary creditor. The Mortgage Debenture
Act, 1865, does not apply to the Company in question. The
expression in the Act ‘ Mortgage Debenture ’ seems to sup-
port the suggestion that instruments may be recognised as
Debentures which do not give preferential security. The New
Zealand Loan and Mercantile Agency Company issues these
Debentures in exchange for cash without discussion at its
place of business in London, and by its various agents and
correspondents throughout the country. The Debentures
now in circulation amount to upwards of two million pounds.
As already stated, the Company is prosperous, and the holders
of the Debentures have no ground whatever for uneasiness
as to the security for their money. At the same time it might
be very prejudicial to the interests of the Company, and place


will not be renewed, but that new Debentures under a revised
form of application, to be signed by them, will be issued in
exchange for those already matured.”
The Directors had this opinion read at a Beard Meeting.
Mr. Mundella thinks that only part of the opinion was read,
and not that part relating to the prospectuses inviting sub-
scriptions for debentures ; but the evidence of the other
Directors, and in particular the evidence of Sir James
Fergusson, seems to prove conclusively that the opinion was
read at length, and that the portion of it relating to the appli-
cation forms was discussed in the presence of Mr. Mundella.
The Directors having had this opinion read, it was resolved that
Messrs. Hollams should be consulted as to the changes in the
application form which they considered necessary to carry out
the opinion of counsel, and an altered form was submitted to
the Board, which form the Directors generally believed to be
the alteration advised by Messrs. Hollams as sufficient to
carry out the opinion of counsel. What that alteration was I
will say in a moment, but I wish first to say that there is a
great difference in the recollection of Mr. Hollams and Mr.
Russell with regard to the responsibility for this alteration.
Mr. Hollams says that, so far from the alteration being
an altered form recommended by him, in fact, Mr.
Russell proposed to him some such alteration, and that
he expressed his opinion to Mr. Russell as to the insufficiency
of it. Mr. Russell, on the other hand, says that the altera-
tion was prepared by Mr. Hollams, and handed by him to the
Company, as being the alteration necessary to carry out the
opinion of counsel. The actual paper containing the draft
alteration has unfortunately been lost, as have some other
documents of the Company, and so one has not the assistance
of those to enable one to form a conclusion as to whether the
story of Mr. Russell, or that of Mr. Hollams is to be
preferred. There is, as I have said, a considerable conflict of
evidence as to whether in fact Mr. Hollams was responsible
for the altered form ot prospectus. The Board of Directors
seems certainly to have been informed that the new form had
been prepared by Mr. Hollams, and Mr. Russell states that it
was, in fact, received from Messrs. Hollams, but Mr. Hollams,
who gave evidence upon the private examination by the
Official Receiver, gave the following evidence. He is
asked: “(Q.) Then, in the 1880 prospectus, the words


read, ‘ The Debentures are issued free of expense to
the lender, and are amply secured by the unpaid capital
of the Company.’ There is a variation of the words.
The statement that Mr. Paul made was that the Company
Avere advised by your firm on that?—(A.) No, as far as I
know, not. Ido not recollect ever having seen that. I have
a distinct recollection of after this opinion Mr. Russell calling
upon me and showing me some proposed alteration, and my
saying to him I did not think the language which he suggested
was satisfactory, and I wanted to make it clearer. Beyond
that I do not think I saw or heard anything more.—(Q.) I
may take it that you did not advise the Board that this was a
correct mode of stating it ?—(A.) No; to the best of my
belief I never saw that.—(Q.) It says in the Bill, ‘ Perusing
and settling form of circular as to renewal of Debentures.
Perusing and considering form of prospectus as amended
with respect to Debentures.’ (A.) So far as I was
concerned, as I said just now, I recollect a substituted
statement as to this matter (no doubt there were other forms
which I may have seen) being shown to me, and my not
liking the language, and suggesting that it should be altered.
—(Q.) Your form of Bill would rather lead one to suppose
you advised on it ?—(A.) I have a very distinct recollection
■of a discussion with Mr. Russell as to the exact language, and
I may say my habit is to like to make things very plain. I
know he did not quite like the very simple language which I
suggested, and how it was solved Ido not know.” Prior to
1879 the wording of the invitation to investors to take
Debentures had run as follows :—“ The Debentures are issued
free of expense to the lender, and are amply secured upon the
unpaid capital of the Company, and the freehold and other
securities upon which the paid-up capital and the money
received upon the Debentures has been advanced.”
After getting the opinion of counsel the directors by a
resolution of October 22, 1880, determined that Messrs.
Hollams, Son, & Coward be consulted as to the changes in
the application forms, which they considered necessary in
•order to carry out the opinion of counsel, and on November
5 an altered prospectus was issued, which ran as follows :
“ The Debentures are free of expense to the lender, and are
amply secured by the unpaid capital of the Company, and by the
investments and general assets of the Company.” This altera-


tion seems in the opinion of the directors themselves, according
to their evidence, to have been wholly insufficient to remove
any misleading feature which the old prospectus contained; but
the directors say they adopted this alteration because they
understood it to be the alteration drafted by Mr. Hollams, as-
sufficient to carry out the opinion of counsel. Some of the
directors also stated that they the more readily adopted this
alteration, although they considered it to have no material
effect, because they personally thought that even the old form,
of prospectus was not misleading when taken in conjunction
with the form of debenture, which clearly gave no specific
charge. Beyond this alteration in the form of the application
nothing was done to carry out the opinion of counsel,
except that a circular invitation was issued to the Debenture-
holders whose Debentures were falling due, which ran as
follows : —“ I beg to inform you that the above Debenture will
be paid at maturity, and I hand you form of discharge to be
endorsed thereon before presentation at the due date. I
enclose form of application containing particulars of the rates
of interest and terms on which Debentures will be issued by
this Company, and should you desire to invest the above
amount, or any portion thereof, I shall feel obliged if you will
fill up the form and return it not later than
Yours faithfully, , Secretary.”
It will be seen that this circular in no wise intimated to
those to whom it was issued that there would be any difference
between the new Debentures issued and those which had
already matured.
The revised form continued to be used down to 1889 with
no other alteration save that the word “ amply ” was dropped,
and the statement made was “ The Debentures and Debenture
Stock are limited to and secured by the unpaid capital, and
by the investments and general assets of the Company.”
In 1888 the Company again issued a prospectus with the
object of obtaining subscriptions for 4 per cent.
Debenture Stock, the issue to be at per redeem-
able after twenty years at ,£llO. A statement was made in
the prospectus that “the Debentures and Deben'ure Stock of
the Company are secured on the capital investments and
general assets, which exhibit a toral of upwards of pCßoo,ooo.’ y
The stock certificate issued by the Company under this
prospectus states that “ the stock is constituted and secured


by trust deed.” The certificates issued to the Stockholders
under this issue of 1888 are identical in terms with the
certificates issued under the Schroder issue of 1892, to which
I shall presently make a reference.
The difference between the two issues, whereby the issue of
1892 w T as specifically secured, and that under the issue of
1888 was wholly without security, appears only in the respective
trust deeds.
The wording of the application form for the issue of 1888
appears to have been very carefully considered by the Board,
no less than five successive drafts being submitted to it, and
some of the alterations in the successive drafts being in the
handwriting of the Chairman of the Board on the day on which
the respective drafts were brought up. One of the earlier
drafts stated that the Debentures were secured by the unpaid
capital; but the word “by ” was substituted for the word
“ on ” in the draft ultimately adopted, which, however, omitted
the reference to unpaid capital.
In 1892 a prospectus was issued for the purpose of securing
subscriptions for an issue of 4 per cent. Con-
solidated Debenture Stock, at redeemable at
par on January 1, 1953. This prospectus contemplated the
creation of 137,35 7 °f this Stock, the balance of which
over and above the above mentioned was proposed
to be given, as far as required, to the holders of outstanding
Debentures and Debenture Stock, in substitution for their
existing securities, the conversion to be made in all cases on
an actually fixed basis.
The question of the effect of the issue of this secured
Debenture Stock of 1892 upon the unsecured Debentures
and Debenture Stock of prior issues seems to have been much
discussed by the Board. A circular, inviting the holders of
outstanding Debentures and Debenture Stock to come in and
take stock of 1892, in substitution for their existing securities,
was approved by the Board, subject to any alterations which
Messrs. Schrdder might think necessary.
Whether the prospectus and circular actually issued was in
the form approved by the Board, or whether it was in any way
altered by Messrs. Schroder, does not appear clear. The
draft approved by the Board is not forthcoming. It may be
observed that the prospectus actually issued did not state that
the outstanding Debentures and Debenture Stock were


absolutely unsecured, although it did state that the new
issue would be secured by a mortgage on the uncalled
capital and a floating charge on the undertaking of the
Company effected by a Trust Deed executed on August 4,
1892.
During the time that the Board were effecting the issue of
the Debenture Stock of 1892 various letters were written by
or on behalf of the holders of outstanding Debentures and
Debenture Stock, which seemed to intimate clearly to the
Directors that some at least of the holders of outstanding
Debentures and Debenture Stock were under the impression
that their Debentures or Debenture Stock were secured on the
uncalled capital and the general assets of the Company. Some
of the answers given to those inquiries do not seem to have
indicated at all clearly to the inquirers that the Debentures
and Debenture Stock which they held were unsecured ; but
some of them did so plainly enough.
It would seem from the evidence of Mr. Paul that those
letters of inquiry were brought to the attention of the Board,
but most of the Directors, and notably Sir John Gorst, said
that they had no recollection of those inquiries, and the
answers thereto being brought to the attention of the Board.
It is to be observed that at the time of the issue of 1892 the
financial condition of the Company was far from good;
alarming reports having been for a long time before that date
received by the Company as to very large accounts due to the
Company in the Colonies and the inadequacy of the securities
held there for them, and the Company already having had
resort to such questionable modes of raising money as in-
structing the Australian Manager to draw on the Company in
London, discount the drafts in Melbourne, and remit the
proceeds to London by telegraph.
The evidence given by the witnesses does not seem to
afford any satisfactory explanation, either as to why the
Company had for so many years abstained from informing the
Debenture-holders of their unsecured position, or as to why
some distinct notice was not given to them as to their position
at the time when they were invited to come in under the issue
of 189 2, the explanation given being generally that the
Directors thought that these holders of unsecured debentures
were aware of their position, which is difficult to understand
having regard to the case laid before counsel by the Directors


themselves in 1879, and the inquiries by Debenture-holders
made in 1892.
I will now pass to the third matter inquired into, that is to
say that the Company failed to disclose matters affecting the
financial condition of the Company, which they ought to have
disclosed to their shareholders, and further that the balance-
sheets which from time to time were issued were positively
misleading. And when dealing with the evidence on this
point, I will also deal with the evidence affecting the question
how far the Directors were justified in declaring the dividends
which they did declare, and in particular in declaring and
paying in February, 1893, the dividend which they did declare,
including the interim dividend declared in June, 1892.
Now it appears that in October, 1888, the London Board
desired Mr. Larkworthy, the Managing Director, to proceed
to the Australasian Colonies to carry out some proposed
change in the management at Auckland, and to inspect and
report on the business and position of the Company through-
out those colonies.
Before I deal further with Mr. Larkworthy’s visit to the
Colonies I wish to say this with regard to Mr. Larkworthy
himself. I am not speaking only of the evidence which was
given by Mr. Larkworthy, but I am speaking also of evidence
that cannot be contradicted in the shape of the letters that
passed at the time. I am speaking also of the evidence
which was given by the various Directors before me, and I
say, having regard to all that evidence, that the Company
possessed in Mr. Larkworthy a most valuable and trust-
worthy servant. I say further that it is tolerably plain upon
the evidence that if Mr. Larkworthy had continued to be the
Managing Director of the Company, and had not been forced
{for that is the only word which describes the true state of
things which happened) to leave the Company, the Company
in all probability would not have been in liquidation at the
present day. I could not help seeing from the mode in which
several of the Directors gave their evidence that they thought
that Mr. Larkworthy, in making the statements which he did
on the requisition of the Official Receiver, was guilty of some
sort of disloyalty towards the Directors with whom he had
been associated. I can only say that in my judgment
Mr. Larkworthy showed no disloyalty whatever to those
gentlemen. His tendency, if wrong, was rather a tendency


wrong in the direction of trying to shield them in respect of
matters as to which they undoubtedly deserved blame, and 1
can only say, comparing his evidence with the evidence of
Mr. Paul, the manager, that if Mr. Paul, the manager, had
taken the same view of his obligations of frankness when
examined before me that Mr. Larkworthy did, this examina-
tion would probably not have lasted nearly the time that it did.
But to return to the visit of Mr. Larkworthy to Australia.
The following is the Board Minute of October 29, 1888,
addressed to Mr. Larkworthy :
“ In view of the Annual and Extraordinary General Meeting
to be held in February next, and of the explanations regarding
the position and affairs of the Company and the proposed
change in its constitution, which it will be then necessary to
give to the shareholders, the London Board desire that Mr.
F. Larkworthy should as soon as possible proceed to the
Australasian Colonies. . They accordingly authorise him to
inspect and report (note “ report ” having regard to the
evidence of Mr. Russell) on the position and business of the
Company throughout those colonies, and instruct the
Manager to telegraph to the Colonial Board announcing Mr.
Larkworthy’s proposed visit, and requesting them to afford
him the requisite facilities for such investigation, and pending
Mr. Larkworthy’s arrival to delay Mr. Battley’s contemplated
visit of inspection there. It was therefore resolved that Mr.
Larkworthy be instructed accordingly. Extracted from the
minutes. Henry M. Paul, Manager.”
The following is the letter, dated October 29,1888, from Mr.
Mundella to Mr. Larkworthy, enclosing this Board minute: —
“ Dear Sir, —I beg to hand you the enclosed extract from
the Board’s minutes of this day’s date, authorising your
proposed visit to Australia and New Zealand, in connection
with the affairs of this Company, and on behalf of the Board.
I further empower you to negotiate for the establishment,
subject to the adoption by the shareholders of the revised
articles of association, of the Board of Advice in Australia,
consisting of two or more members, to sit at Melbourne.—
Yours faithfully, A. J. Mundella, Chairman of the Board
meeting of Directors. —October 29, 1888.”
On November 30, 1888, Mr. Mundella again wrote to Mr.
Lark woi thy to the following effect :
“ I have taken care that Paul should supply you with the


fullest information of what is going on at home, and I have
endeavoured to secure that everything that is said and done
at this end shall fully recognise and maintain your authority.
Your interests shall not suffer in your absence if I can help
it; and lam bound to say, in justice to my colleagues,
that they manifest the fullest confidence in and good-
will towards you. Elder : lam increasingly afraid of his
business. The news of drought is serious, but what is worse
he seems so difficult to control, vide his proposals that we
should take shares in new Local Companies. His grasping at
business is ruinous. We cannot rely on the Bank of New
Zealand. We have enormous indebtedness to the Bank in
Melbourne, and heavy liabilities at home. We may have to
meet them all at once if any crisis or accident should come to
disturb confidence. What you must do is to reduce our
liabilities in the Colonies, and get us strengthened on this
side. Never forget what we have to encounter in 1890, and
it will come soon enough. It is to you we look for informa-
tion, and I sincerely trust you will find everything sound ; but
you must get the business under control, and you must have
your agents competent and responsive to our reasonable
requirements.”
Mr. Larkworthy left England in the beginning of November,
1888. During the stay of Mr. Lark worthy in the Colonies he
addressed the following letter to Mr. Elder, the manager at
Melbourne : “Private Official, Sydney, May 14, 1889.
“ The Manager, M elbourne,
“ Dear Sir, —With reference to my late official visit to
your branch, and to the various matters concerning the
Company’s business discussed between us, I think it will be
well for me to place on record in the form of this letter,
the conclusions which we have mutually arrived at and
on behalf of the London Board to hand you instructions
relative to the future policy to be adopted in connection with
numerous important questions of Finance and Management.
Australian finance. —From the memorandum enclosed herein,
made up as at 19th inst., it appears that the total Australian
commitments with London amount to of which
the Melbourne proportion, exclusive of the due
July 4 to the National Bank of Australasia on the mortgage
from the Real Estate Bank is
I do not think it is necessary to read that portion of the


letter, which merely relates to the heavy liabilities of the
Company itself in Australia at this time, and to the large
amount, which would be required to be collected and got into
hand in order to meet the liabilities of the Company, both in
London and in the Colonies. Mr. Larkworthy concludes
with these words:—“ I cannot too earnestly impress upon you
the gravity of this point” (that is the necessity for the col-
lection of the outstanding debts) “owing not only to the
needs of London, but to the dangerous accumulation of the
Company’s liabilities in Melbourne and Sydney. The London
Board has regarded the present position with the greatest
concern and anxiety, and I am expressing the views of my
co-Directors when I state that measures are not only impera-
tively necessary, as already indicated, to relieve that position,
but it may be necessary in the immediate future to make
further demands on your resources, to enable them to prepare
in some satisfactory degree, to meet heavy engagements in
connection with Debentures which mature during the year
1890 and 1891. I have accordingly to ask that your best
energies be devoted to this matter, in order that the object in
view may be successfully accomplished. With regard to new
business involving the employment of permanent capital, or of
any portion of that about to be called up, it is, of course,
manifest that the Company cannot, under any circumstances,
enter into fresh obligations.”
I do not think that when the Company entered into the
fresh obligations which it did enter into in regard to its
transactions with the Land Company, affairs were any better
(to say the least of it) than they were when this letter was
written. The letter proceeds:—“ The Directors fully recognise
that, in order to provide for our financial necessities,
there may probably be a diminution in the volume of earnings
in connection with the produce department, although you
seem to anticipate that the limitation of our business, in the
direction we have decided upon, will not of itself exercise any
special influence upon our profits, having in view the very
high rate we pay for some of the accommodation we receive.
It should, therefore, please be understood that until you are
placed in receipt of advice from London authorising new com-
mitments, no advances whatever should be made, except those
absolutely needed in carrying on accounts already in the
books, or in connection with produce for immediate realisa-


tion. Further, it will be necessary, in regard to those securities
in our books, which it is either inexpedient or impracticable
to part with, that the expenditure we shall be called on from
time to time to make, especially in those cases where, owing to
the position of the liability, we shall be justified in exercising
control, be subjected to rigid check, in order to prevent
more money being permanently absorbed in the accounts.
I need scarcely remark that this last is an extremely
important point, for you, I am sure, already realise it.
With regard to the list (as per copy enclosed) of amount of
permanent capital to be called in, I have to remark that, with
reference to the properties of ‘ Albacutuya,’
Borambil, and Laubenfelde under the
heading of Moneys receivable from realisation of properties
prior to December 31, 1889 ; or say at latest before February
29, 1890, seeing that the sale of these properties, at the values
placed against them, would make actual what now may be
regarded as only an estimated loss of about I think
it is due to the Board, that they should be consulted as to the
policy of the Company in this matter. I fully approve of the
policy of immediate sale at the prices named, and I have,
therefore, to request that you will at once report the position
of these properties to London, and make any negotiations for
sale subject to the approval of the Board.”
I have read that part of the letter at length, because, when
one comes to consider hereafter the Report which was issued
in 1890, it is important to bear in mind that with respect,
at all events to these three properties, there was a loss as to
which the term “contingent” was hardly applicable. “Refer-
ring again to the list of amounts of permanent capital
to be called in, the London Board will look with anxiety
and pleasure for reports from you as to the progress
being made in obtaining repayment, and I shall be glad if you
will have such reports transmitted regularly to London every
month after my departure from the Colony, conveying full
information with regard to each account on the list.” This
seems to have been done, and they are what I shall refer to
presently as the “ Progress ” reports. “ Unsecured accounts :
The number and amount of these liabilities in the branch
books have already been the subject of conference between us,
and it is understood that steps will be immediately taken in
many cases to place them on a secured footing. In the


remaining cases, as I am satisfied as to the high standing of
the obligants, and you have pointed out that to seek security
from these would jeopardise important wool connection, I am
content that the accounts should stand in their present position,
subject to the final decision of the Board. In regard to new
business of this kind, whilst I am satisfied that a certain lati-
tude ought to be accorded to our managers when an extension
of business is being sought, I need only now say that the Board
wishes it to be regarded as a fixed rule to be adhered to under
existing conditions, that uncovered advances other than of
a purely nominal amount, or of a strictly temporary character,
must not be allowed.” I do not think there is anything
further in the letter which it is material to read until I
come to this heading : “ Interest taken to Company’s Annual
Profit Accounts :—Please note that in no case in future under
any circumstances must interest be taken to profit when
charged on liabilities where a deficit on the security already
exists, or where such an eventuality may be anticipated on
realization. If the account be one in which we have not taken
possession of the property representing the security, then the
interest should be charged as usual, and carried to “ Interest
Suspense Account,” such total reserves accrued during the
current year to be transferred to London at Annual Balance
date with other general profit amounts. It is also questionable
whether interest should be taken to profit of Interest Account
at all, unless there be not only a safe cover in the security
held, but that the working operations of the obligant have
enabled him to earn the interest which he has to pay the
Company. There would of course frequently be exceptional
cases where this last stipulation would not be applied, but our
rule is that unless we can legitimately appropriate interest
for the benefit of our profit accounts without rendering
the relative security less satisfactory than it previously
was, or jeopardizing the recovery of any portion of the debt,
then such interest would be held in reserve. Kindly act in
conformity herewith, especially in connection with the list in
your possession of Accounts on which deficits are estimated
already to exist.” Then follow details which are not important
and the letter finishes thus : —“ In conclusion, lam glad to be
able to congratulate you upon the improved prospects of
business we now enjoy, and to express the hope which under
the circumstances I think is almost assured, that we are now
c


at the commencement of a period of favourable years, which,
with an improved Land Act for New South \Y ales, of which
also there is every expectation, will materially strengthen our
securities, and assist you to an important extent, in adjusting
our finance. I am, dear Sir, your faithfully, F. Larkworthy,
Managing Director.”
I think having read that letter written by Mr. Larkworthy
to Mr. Elder, during the time of his visit to Australia, it is
desirable that I should read also in this connection a letter
which was written on July 12 1889, that is before Mr.
Larkworthy left Australia to Mr. Mundella, because this letter
puts in a somewhat condensed form the result of Mr.
Larkworthy’s visit to Australia. The letters that I have
thought it necessary to read are somewhat lengthy, but I am
afraid to leave out any considerable portion of them because
I might inadvertently leave out some portion upon which the
Directors, when they were considering the state of things
before they issued their report in 1890 may have relied,
therefore I think it safer to read these letters sub-
stantially at length. The letter to Mr. Mundella runs
thus :
“Dear Mr. Mundella, —To provide for the pos-
sibility of my stay being extended here beyond the period
at present contemplated by the Board, and with the
view to place the Board in possession of the information
I have gathered, and the opinions I have formed concerning
my mission to these Colonies, as soon as possible, I take the
opportunity of the departure of Mr. Dodds for London, to
place in your hands, for the information of the Board, the
result of my labours. I may state that as far as I know, I
passed in review every liability of the Company, at branches
and agencies, however small, and discussed with managers
such liabilities in detail. The returns I had prepared for me
were of the most ample character, and these will be forwarded
by me, separately to London, for permanent record.
Forming part of the Returns I now forward by Mr. Dodds
will be found lists of the liabilities at each branch and agency,
at dates slightly antecedent to my visit, excluding produce
advances, which are of a temporary character. The Melbourne
Branch list, being of special magnitude and importance, is
preceded by an Index, arranged alphabetically, of all the
advances comprised in the same; and, further, to facilitate


reference, by what may be called an Index in epitome, or an
abridgment of the particulars of all the accounts classified in
two-fold form, namely :—First, under the head of geographical
position of the advances, as denoting different kinds of tenure;
and, second, in regard to the class of property. These lists,
where required, are supported by reports by Managers, on the
accounts with estimates of value, and where any special
report from an outside source, or from any member of our
own staff otherwise than the manager has been obtained, this
is also given. Notes of discussions with Mr. Elder are
appended to his reports, and the Board will find certain reports
by Mr. Dodds, on properties and securities of the Company in
New South Wales, visited by him, which are of special value
seeing his long familiarity and expertness in dealing with
properties of this character. There will also be found a pro-
gressive memorandum of capital at use at the Australian
branches from September, 1888, to June, 1889, showing iis
growth, and the sources from which it has been derived, and
appended to the same are statements showing respectively how
the capital was employed on March 4, 1889, and the rates of
interest charged on its use. Finally, I have to refer to a list
of deficits to a certain extent provisional, which will be found
with the other documents, amounting to against
which, if landed property and premises are adjusted according
to present values, there will be a reserve of about
In connection with this list, I have to explain that the
estimates therein relating to New Zealand and Sydney accounts,
although not in some cases agreeing with the expressed
opinions of managers and of our New Zealand Inspector, area
•close approximation to their views, and will, in my opinion, be
found, on average, to represent the loss which will accrue to
•the Company on realisation of the securities to which they
refer, provided a reasonable time and fair conditions are
afforded for their sale. In preparing these deficits I have
not been guided by any rigid principles or rules, as such are
not applicable, but I have studied and endeavoured to repre-
sent in them the class of security, its character and conditions,
and where the capacity to earn interest existed, the extent of
its power in that direction. In fixing the deficits on Fiji
securities, I have been guided by the information recorded at
Auckland, and in possession of our staff. A report may
.•shortly be'expected from Mr. Lawry on our securities there,
C 2


but it can hardly place them in a better light than that in
which I now exhibit them, seeing that they are neither saleable
nor can they be worked at a profit. It will be observed that
I have not inserted any deficit in this list against our interest
in the Waikato Land Association, and the reason for my
omitting this property is that experiments were proceeding in
connection with the lands on certain portions of the estate,
which, in the event of their success, may place this Company’s
property on a better foundation than was apparent when I
visited the same. In regard to that portion of the list of
deficits relating to Melbourne Branch I have been guided by a
desire to bring my views into harmony with those of Mr.
Elder, and consequently the deficits referred to represent Mr.
Elder’s views, acquiesced in by me, after much discussion with
Mr. Elder, and after revision, in many cases, of his first
estimates. But I wish the Board to understand that these
valuations, based on the carrying capacities of the runs at so
much per head of sheep, by which leaseholds have been
inserted or excluded from the list, are not current values nor
such as will be attained under ordinary circumstances ; but they
are those which may be attained after a period of prosperity,
and under favourable conditions of the wool market —such,
for instance, as did prevail at the beginning of this decade, and
which I trust we may shortly enter upon again. It will be noted
that a difference of from ss. to 9s. per sheep, which would be
necessary to make these estimates perfectly safe at the present
date, would make a very serious addition to this list, and in
view of the existing depression in values, consequent on the
adverse experience of the last few years, which, however, is not
the main cause of the serious position into which many of our
accounts have fallen, I am of opinion it would be unwise and
unfair to calculate deficits on the basis of present values. In
forming my estimate of current values, I have been mainly
assisted by a gentleman of the highest reputation as a stock
and station agent.” It does not seem material that I should
read that. Then I will pass on to the next passage in this
letter, which is material: —“ Although Mr. Dodds ” (that is the
gentleman who assisted in the valuation, and not the gentle-
man whose name was to be given privately) “ is, presumably,
well-known to the London Board as one of our most efficient
colonial officers, nevertheless, I would venture to say that
there is no one at this juncture who could afford the Board


more extensive and reliable information concerning the
securities of the Company, and it is also due to him that I
should add that had it not been for his assistance in unravelling
the surroundings of the securities of this branch, I could not
so speedily have attained the knowledge I now possess, nor
could I have presented that knowledge so concisely and
accurately for the consideration of the Board.”
This letter to Mr. Mundella I have read at length as
showing the nature of Mr. Larkworthy’s report as to deficits
which he estimated at ,£347,000, and his desire that the Board
should examine Mr. Dodds as to the facts on which the report
was based.
It seems that, notwithstanding the suggestion of Mr.
Larkworthy that the Board should avail themselves of the
presence of Mr. Dodds in London to interrogate him
personally as to his inspection in Australasia, Mr. Dodds
seems to have been sent back by the Board to New Zealand
without any personal inquiries whatever as to the financial
position of the Company in the Colonies being made of
him.
Mr. Elder seems to have arrived in London towards the end
of the year 1889, and to have suggested that the Report of
Mr. Larkworthy, and the valuations of Mr. Dodds, were not
in all respects reliable; but it is to be noted that the reports
seem at one time, at all events, to have represented the joint
conclusions of Mr. Elder and Mr. Larkworthy.
The question then seems to have arisen as to how far it was
proper that the results of Mr. Larkworthy’s investigation
should appear in the report of the Company to the share-
holders at the commencement of 1890, and the advice of Sir
Thomas Paine, the Solicitor of the Company, was sought on
this point.
Sir Thomas Paine himself, in the first instance, seems to
have considered that the Report to the shareholders ought to
contain a paragraph referring to the results of the investiga-
tions of Mr. Larkworthy; and Sir Thomas Paine prepared a
paragraph for insertion in the Report, copies of which para-
graph he forwarded to Sir George Russell, Mr. Russell, and
Mr. Mundella. The paragraph prepared by Sir Thomas
Paine for insertion in the report, ran as follows : —“ The busi-
ness of the Company continues to increase, and as the latest
accounts from the Colonies are most encouraging as to the


prospects of this season, the Directors think themselves just-
fled in expressing a confident hope that it will continue to
increase, and that the long series of unfavourable years has
come to an end. But it is impossible that such a con-
tinued period of depression can pass away without some
unfavourable results, and Mr. Larkworthy’s investigations in
the Colonies have led the Directors to the conclusion that
there are several heavy accounts the realisation of which must
be more or less uncertain; though there is reason to hope
that, with a return to a more prosperous period of business, a
fairly satisfactory result may ensue. Under these circum-
stances, the Directors feel that the safer and more prudent
■course will be to limit the dividend now declared to the rate
of 10 per cent, per annum without the customary bonus, and
they are satisfied that this is in the shareholders’ interest, and
will ultimately strengthen the position of the Company.”
I think that anyone reading that paragraph, prepared by
Sir Thomas Paine, would say that, although it does contain a
direct allusion to the investigations of Mr. Larkworthy, it is a
paragraph prepared upon what Sir Thomas Paine told us
ought to be the principle which should guide Directors in
giving information to shareholders. It should not be “ too
strong,” he said. But be that how it may, eventually it was
resolved that, instead of a paragraph appearing in the Report,
the Chairman should include in his speech a statement
referring to the results of Mr. Larkworthy’s investigations.
The resolution to include a reference to the results of these
investigations in the speech seems itself to show that the
Directors had no substantial doubt as to the accuracy of Mr.
Larkworthy’s conclusions.
The Report as actually issued contains no allusion whatever
to Mr. Larkworthy’s investigations or the results of them. It
seems to have been drafted by Mr. Thomas Russell, who also
drafted the passage to be introduced into the speech of the
•Chairman, Sir James Fergusson. There is some dispute in
the evidence as to this point; but it seems to me that the
balance of the evidence points to the preparation of that
passage having been by Mr. Thomas Russell. The actual
passage in the Chairman’s speech ran as follows:—“Well,
gentlemen, of course there are some accounts relating to
stations which have suffered greatly, with regard to which we
have had to make special provision, as I have said, but we


have every confidence that all these accounts will work out
satisfactorily, with the provision we have from time to time-
made, and which we are now, in our increased prosperity,,
making in larger measure.” Unless I had been told that that
passage referred to the investigations of Mr. Larkworthy and.
the results of those investigations I certainly should not
myself have guessed it. It is as difficult to find the reference
to Mr. Larkworthy’s investigations in Sir James Fergusson’s
speech as it is in some of the puzzles that appear in the weekly
papers, to find a particular object in a general sketch, which is
made by the artist.
It will be seen, moreover, that the Directors so far gave
effect to the report of Mr. Larkworthy that the dividend
which, together with the bonus, had theretofore for some time
been fifteen per cent, was reduced to ten per cent. The
correspondence between Mr. Larkworthy and Sir Thomas
Paine on this subject throws so much light on the course
taken by the Directors that I think it desirable, in spite of
its length, to read it.
On January 22, 1890, Mr. Larkworthy wrote to Sir Thomas
Paine as follows : —“ The results of the last Board Meeting of
the Loan Company, at which you were present, in regard to
the points raised by me were : (1) it was decided not to
adjust the interest on certain accounts in Australia, but in lieu
thereof to take about an equivalent sum from the apparent
profit of the year—namely, and place the same to
the credit of the Public Reserve Fund. This settlement,
although not correct in my opinion, as it gives a fictitious
view of the profits, is not worth contending against, as the
amount instead of being at private interest suspense account,
is kept at public reserve and is not paid away. (2)
The reduction of the dividend to an amount not exceeding
the absolute profit for the year was conceded.” (Very inte-
resting as a matter of concession.) “ (3) Your recommenda-
tion to which reference was made in your letter of January 17,,
namely, that a saving paragraph be inserted in the report
referring to the depression which had so long prevailed in the
Colonies, and to the necessity for making provision for con-
tingent losses expected by managers to be incurred thereby,
was not accepted by the Board. In lieu thereof the Board
adopted a paragraph ascribing the reduction of dividend to
the increased responsibility devolving on the Board, and to


the recent great expansion of the Company’s business.”
(That passage seems again to show that, by some one at all
events, the passage in Sir James Ferguson’s speech was
settled.) “In regard to this decision, supplemented by the
express intention of the Board, to refer in the speech from
the chair to contingent losses in some shape, the particulars
of which reference have yet to be decided upon, I should feel
obliged if you will favour me with a line giving me your
assurance that, in your opinion, I am doing right in acqui-
escing in this solution of the difficulty.”
Sir Thomas Paine replied to this letter on January 25 as
follows: “Your note of the 22nd has been forwarded to me
from London. I believe you are aware I sent to Mr. Russell,
Sir George Russell, and Mr. Mundella, copies of the paragraph
which I drafted and which you saw. Personally I should have
preferred some more direct allusion than the report as
circulated contains with reference to possible losses; but these
will be alluded to in the Chairman’s speech ; and there was, I
thought, considerable force in the suggestion that any allusion
to them in the report would be attended with danger, and I
confess I think that the removal of the entire control of the
Company’s business to London, does of itself afford a good
reason for the prudent course of cutting down the dividend and
taking the other steps contemplated. As long as the thing
required is done 1 do not think it advisable to be over-
particular as to the reasons given. lam pleased to be the
depository of your confidence, but once again let me remind you
that I think I ought not to be considered the adviser of any
one Director apart from the Board.” Ido not think that the
rest of the letter is material. Then Mr. Larkworthy, on
January 27, writes again to Sir Thomas Paine:—“l have
your letter of January 25, 1890, from Cannes, and I note
what you say about being the adviser of any one member of
the Board. I shall take care not to trespass upon you in any
other matter which may arise, but in these you agreed to
become arbitrator, and I have loyally accepted your decision.
I suppose you can have no objection, on your return to
London, to agree with me the details of our conferences in
legard to these questions of difference whilst our memories
are fresh, as in the event of the future verifying my conclu-
sions, which I believe it will in most cases, the Board
Minutes of the Company, on the dates 16th and 20th, bear no


record of the purpose for which you had been invited to
attend those meetings. Your name even, as having attended,
was excluded until I insisted that it be inserted, and your
attendances are now inserted, but that is all. This is a con-
tinuation of the suppression which has been applied to all
matters connected with my mission to the Colonies, and the
unfair way in which I have been treated since my return
to England. In regard to the contradictory state of the in-
formation on which you have based your decisions, you will
please bear in mind that Mr. Elder is now contradicting
himself, as I have reported in my deficit list, no other deficits
than those agreed to by him when I was in Melbourne, except
those of New Zealand, with which he has nothing to do.
Since my list wa; prepared, estimated losses have been
disclosed as actual in Melbourne to the extent of ,£15,380,
and in New Zealand of ,£22,684.”
It is desirable, in connection with the Report of 1890, and
the speech of Sir James Fergusson, to bear in mind that at
the date of that Report these losses were no longer con-
tingent losses, but were actual real losses. I do not think
there is anything in Sir Thomas Paine’s answer which it is
necessary to read at length. He only points out that
Mr. Elder was a stranger to him, but that as a gentleman,
holding a responsible position, he was bound to give due
weight to the statements made by him. That is the corre-
spondence, so far as is material, between Sir Thomas Paine
and Mr. Larkworthy.
Now it seems that the report of Sir James Fergusson’s
speech, as it appeared in most of the daily papers, did not
contain the passage in question, that is the passage which was
introduced into the speech in substitution of the paragraph in
the report. And, moreover, the report of the Chairman’s
speech which the Company had printed for the purpose of
distribution amongst the Shareholders and Debenture-holders
also omitted this passage. The attention of the directors was
called by Mr. Larkworthy to this omission, and it was resolved
that a fresh edition of the report of the speech should be
issued, including the omitted passage. This further edition
was issued, and did contain the omitted passage.
There is nothing, however, specially to call attention to the
passage which had been previously omitted, and the following
memorandum was printed on the fly-leaf of the amended


edition:—“A desire having been expressed for a fuller
report of the proceedings at the 25th Annual General Meeting
a report in extenso is sent herewith.”
I do not believe that there is any one of the Directors who
gave evidence before me who, when he looks back at that
statement printed on the fly-leaf, must not look back to it
with regret. It is just one of those statements of half truth
which really indicates a determination not frankly to
tell the truth, more strongly than a bare statement of fact
does. It is perfectly obvious that that statement on the
fly leaf suggests an untrue reason for issuing a fresh edition,
and that the reason for stating that untrue reason was a fear
that it would be dangerous or “strong,” to use Sir Thomas
Paine’s expression—to call too much attention to the matters
in question. Butler, the author of “ Hudibras,” says that a
man who equivocates is worse than the man who lies, because
the man who lies would fain deceive one—his fellow creature;
but the man who equivocates would fain deceive three —his
neighbour, himself, and his God.
Some portions of the evidence of Sir James Fergusson as to
ihis speech on this occasion throw considerable light upon the
omission of information which was really afforded to the
Shareholders regarding Mr. Larkworthy’s Australian investiga-
tions. Mr. Bray, the learned counsel for the Official Receiver,
says, “ I think I must ask you a few words about your speech.
Now, you were chairman in February, 1890?—(A.) —Yes.
<{Q.) —In your speech I find this—‘But with this satisfactory
iprogress, and with accounts showing net profits larger than
those of 1888, we nevertheless recommend the increase of
our Reserve Fund, instead of paying the usual bonus, and we
liave come to this conclusion, after full consideration, though
not without some hesitation, for there are no circumstances
known to us which render it less legitimate to divide a bonus
now than when I last addressed you.’ ” When Sir James
Fergusson last addressed the shareholders they had not seen
Mr. Larkworthy’s report. Then Mr. Bray says: —“ Do
you think that could be correctly stated having regard to Mr.
Larkworthy’s report?—(A.) Yes, at least you may depend
upon it, I did not say this, nor did the Board consent to what
I was going to say without very full consideration, and I think
that the chief point justifying that statement was that our
Reserve Fund was sufficient to cover the estimated losses.'


(Q.) But you did not tell them so; I will read what your'
say: ‘ I may say in passing that we have resolved to restrict
the area of our business by withdrawing from Fiji, where we
have had an agency of small importance. But having
made provision out of our earnings for bad and doubtful
debts sufficient according to the reports of our respon-
sible officers ’ ” (including, I suppose, Mr. Larkworthy)
“ ‘ and even more largely than in former years, and having,
further had the advantage of conferring with our able
general manager in Australia, Mr. David Elder, whom I am
glad to see here to-day.’ ” (I remember that the printed report
says that the shareholders cheered at that point.) “‘ We have
deemed it prudent, in view of the possible recurrence of bad
seasons or of bad trade, instead of paying the bonus, to carry
a corresponding amount to the reserve fund, which will then
amount to ooo.’ Now, you say, ‘But having made pro-
vision out of our earnings for bad and doubtful debts, sufficient
according to the report of our responsible officers.’ If by bad
and doubtful debts you mean to refer to contingent debts . , -
(A.) No; when you say ‘ bad and doubtful debts ’ they are
not what are called contingent debts.” I cannot help saying
with regard to that, that I think, in a sense, Sir James
Fergusson is right, that is to say, there is a sort of inner circle
of company financiers who have given to certain words within
their circle particular meanings, and I agree that if you take
the meanings that they apply to the words “ bad and doubtful
debts,” contingent debts as to which there is no great prospect
of realisation are perhaps not bad and doubtful debts; but I
very much doubt whether the average shareholder, when he
hears that provision has been made for bad and doubtful debts,,
does not think that that includes a provision for debts of this
character, that is to say, debts as to which the debtor is insolvent
and unable to pay, and as to which the security is not likely to
realise anything like enough to pay the mortgage debt. I think
that the average shareholder would be much surprised if he
were told that ought not to be treated as a bad or doubtful
debt, because no one can say what may happen when the
actual realisation takes place. But to go on with this
examination. Mr. Bray says : “By bad and doubtful debts
you mean to refer to contingent debts ?—(A ) No ; when you
say ‘ bad and doubtful ’ debts they are not what are called
contingent debts. —(Q.) I do not know if you have the report


before you ?—(A.) Yes.—(Q.) Can you show me anything in
your speech to show that you had made provision for con-
tingent debts, or that the reserve fund was otherwise than
perfectly intact ?—(A.) At the head of page 5 the first
paragraph of the quotations was intended to remind the
shareholders, and not to disguise from the shareholders, that
there were accounts which gave us anxiety. We did not
regard these embarrassed stations deficiencies, even if they
were taken at which I do not think was the case
at that time, because we had written off, if I remember right,
or Sir James Fergusson is quite right
there. “(Q.) You had reduced it to Still, that
would make a big hole in the reserve fund.—(A.) So it would.”
It would do more than make a big hole in the reserve fund,
it would swallow it up. “It would take the whole of it; but
we did not consider them as dead losses, and we do
not consider them now as dead losses, as far as I under-
stand it.” I do not know what “ dead losses ” may
mean. It may be another term of the inner circle of
financiers, which outsiders are not expected to under-
stand. “ (Q.) Then I will come to this passage at the top
of page 5, which I will read to you and ask you if you think
it was understood by the shareholders as communicating to
them anything like what even you yourself think. ‘Well,
gentlemen, of course, there are some accounts relating to
stations which have suffered greatly, and with regard to which
we have had to make special provision as I have said; but we
have every confidence that all these accounts will work out
satisfactorily.’ That does not indicate that you were relying
on the Reserve Fund for the provision, but that you had
already made special provision for them. Do you think that
that was quite the thing ?—(A.) We believed we had made
special provision for all that could be considered losses up to
that time ; because we hoped many of these deficiencies would
be only temporary, resulting as they did from one of the
severest droughts ever known in Australia.”
It is worthy of observation that at this meeting direct
questions were put to the Chairman by Mr. Winser and Mr.
Bennett relating to Australian mortgages and securities; but
neither gentleman succeeded in obtaining any further informa-
tion, although the Chairman purported to answer the questions.
Mr. Winser said : “ Mr. Chairman, I should like, if you would


be kind enough to supplement your statement by giving us
some more details with regard to the mortgage part of the
business. Our mortgages come to a very large amount, and I
should be very pleased to hear a satisfactory account with
regard to them. I think that important part of the business
has been very much neglected by our Chairman in the past,
and I hope that in the future it will be more noticed. I think
it is very important, because the stability of this Company
very much depends upon this portion of our business.” That
is what Mr. Winser said. Now Mr. Bennett said, “ The only
thing I blame the Directors for is that they do not take us
more into their confidence as to the securities we hold in
New Zealand and Australia, and I should like to know —I do
not see why we should not know —what proportion of those
securities are in hand, and what amount is paid interest upon.
I have, personally, the greatest confidence in the directors, but
I maintain that I am entitled to know something more than
they tell us—something more about the state of our securities
—and if they put us into their confidence they will not lose
by it. I would rather hear the very worst than have any
cooked statement that would partially satisfy the Directors and
deceive us. The shareholders should know all that is strictly
true.”
The answers given by Sir James Fergusson were these:
“ With regard to what Mr. Winser said, you will see, if you
compare the figures of the last two years, that there has been
a slight increase on the amount of the loans on mortgage
between 1888 and 1889, from to
There are cases in which it is necessary to give some further
assistance, but T can assure the shareholders, as I stated last
year, that the policy decidedly is to restrict that class of
business as much as possible, and to develop our commercial
business ; and now that the Board in London have taken the
full control of the affairs of the Company, that policy will be
much more strictly maintained.” When Mr. Winser wanted
to know whether the Chairman would be kind enough to
supplement his statements by giving them some more details
with regard to the mortgage part of the business, I wonder
whether he thought that that answer gave him more details, or
whether he considered that that gave him a satisfactory
account with regard to the mortgage part of the business.
And then with regard to Mr. Bennett’s question the Chairman


said: “In connection with this subject, Mr. Bennett asked
a very just and per tinent question, and said that the
shareholders would like to know a little more, and
that they would rather know the worst than be kept in the
dark. Gentlemen, I would not be one to conceal matters if
there was anything to tell the shareholders that ought to give
them a more just estimate of their position. I need not tell
gentlemen who have been associated with Australia and New
Zealand all these years, that had it not been for the practice
of this Company, ever since I have known it, to take from
profits large sums to set against bad and doubtful debts, we
should have been in a different position today. But Ido not
think you can play your cards with the faces up on the table.
I do not think we can publish to the world the details of our
business. I can only say that I for one am very sensible of
the responsibilities resting upon me as a director, and I
believe that feeling is shared in by all my colleagues.” (Cer-
tainly it was shared by Mr. Larkworthy.) “ If the shareholders
trust us so far as to be satisfied with what we tell them, I can
only say that we will spare no pains to guard their interests
and to see that we do not get the Company into trouble by
glossing over difficulties.” So much for the report of the speech.
It seems to me very doubtful on the evidence, whether the
directors really distrusted in any degree the reports and
valuations of Mr. Larkworthy and Mr. Dodds; but be that
as it may, as time went on the reports from the Colonies must
have satisfied the Directors that the reports of Mr. Larkworthy
were, if anything, too optimistic. The contingent deficits on
Australian Mortgages continued to increase in the Colonial
reports received by the Board in London, until by the autumn
of 1892 the estimated deficits on these accounts exceeded
Year after year the balance-sheet appeared, and
year after year there was nothing to show to the shareholders
the alarming state of the Australian Mortgage accounts. The
speeches of the respective chairmen indicate no anxiety on
the part of the Directors. The balance-sheets, of which I
shall have to say more presently, indicated nothing to cause
anxiety. The commercial reticence of the Directors in not
publishing even to the shareholders the details of their
business, seems to me to have been communicated to the
officers of the Company alike in London and in the Colonies.
I have said that in the autumn of 1892 the estimate of the


contingent deficits on Australian mortgages alone, leaving
New Zealand out of the question, amounted to this enormous
sum of over These estimates were prepared by a
Mr. Barker, an officer who specially undertook the work of
reporting to the Company on this part of their business. His
report seems to have been handed to Mr. Elder, the general
manager of the Company at Melbourne, in October 1892, and
to have been forwarded by Mr. Elder to the Company with a
variety of other documents in a separate cover marked “ Con-
fidential A.” The general letter covering all these documents
seems to have arrived in England on December 17,
and in the ordinary course would have been read and con-
sidered by the Board in time to enable the Board to in-
troduce as much of the communication as they thought
proper into the report and balance-sheet to be published
at the beginning of 1893, but on December 14, 1892, the
Company received from Mr. Elder a cablegram as follows :
“Referring to our special letter” (that is the letter which was
numbered 28/74) “retain enclosure marked ‘Confidential A’
unopened until further advice.” Mr. Paul, the manager in
London, who received this cablegram, says that he communi-
cated its purport to the directors, but the directors one and
all, except Mr. Russell (who was en route for Australia, and
arrived there on January 5 or shortly before) deny that the
cablegram was communicated to them, or that they had any
knowledge that the document “ Confidential A ” was remain-
ing unopened. The description of the cablegram in the
cablegram book, appears to support the statement of the
directors, because this particular cablegram is spoken of in
that book as “ formal.” In fact, however, the document
remained unopened in accordance with the request contained
in the cablegram, until after the receipt of a further
cablegram on June 5, 1893. The further cablegram
ran as follows: —“Referring to our telegram of December 14
opened enclosure ” that referred to the special letter
marked 28/74, and the enclosure was the enclosure
marked “Confidential A.” It will be seen, therefore, that
the result of the conduct of Mr. Elder, the Colonial
manager, and Mr. Paul, the London manager, was that in-
formation of the most important character was kept back from
the Directors for many months. Mr. Russell, who left
England in October, 1892, on a special mission


Mr. Thomas Russell: No; December, 1892.
Mr. Justice Vaughan Williams : I am corrected as to the
date, but it is really not important, because the important
date is the date of his arrival, and there is no doubt that he
arrived on January 5. Mr. Russell, who left England on a
special mission of business of the Company, became aware
shortly after his arrival in Melbourne on January 5 of the
course which Mr. Elder had thought fit to adopt; he did not
in any way communicate that to his brother Directors in
London until the receipt of the cablegram of June 5, 1893, to
which I have referred. Mr. Russell, therefore, whether or not
he approved of the conduct of Mr. Elder, at all events took
advantage of what Mr. Elder had done, and joined with him
in the policy of keeping the Directors at home in ignorance
of this serious Report of Mr. Barker until the Report
published in the beginning of 1893 had been actually issued
to the shareholders.
I will now proceed to examine how far the balance-sheets
issued during those years were full and fair, and properly
drawn up, so as to exhibit a true and correct view of the state
of the Company’s affairs, and draw attention to parts of the
evidence affecting the responsibility of the Directors and
Auditors respectively for the admitted irregularities and
deficiencies of these balance-sheets.
Some of the irregularities appear in all the balance-sheets,
others only appear in the later balance-sheets issued during
the years when the Company had begun to get into financial
straits. It will be remembered that Mr. Larkworthy, in his
letter of May 14, 1889, in the plainest and most direct of
terms, told Mr. Elder that in no case in future, under any
circumstances, must interest be taken to • profit when charged
on liabilities where a deficit on the security already
exists, or where such an eventuality may be anticipated on
realisation, and pointed out that it was questionable whether
interest should be taken to the profit of interest account
unless there be not only a safe cover on the security held,
but the working operations of the obligant have enabled him
to earn the interest which he is to pay the Company. The
attention of the directors was again and again called to this
matter by Mr. Larkworthy, but when the early balance-sheets
came to be made up the amounts carried to profit of
Interest Account continued, as far as I understand them, to


include unearned interest in respect of many accounts, and
this was done notwithstanding the fact that reports which
were called by the witnesses “ Progress Reports,” and also
returns relating to these specific accounts, informed the
Directors of the true state of affairs. In many instances,
it is true, the unpaid interest was carried to a suspense
account, but ultimately, in the balance-sheet of 1892, the
profit entries, by means of which the balance was arrived at,
out of which the dividend purported to be paid, included
unearned interest carried in regard to one account en bloc
from the suspense account to the profit of interest account.
This item amounted to no less than £ 14,000, and no satis-
factory explanation was offered by anyone as to why this was
done in the year 1892. There does not seem to have been
at this time any immediate prospect of a realisation of the
properties held against these accounts, such as would yield a
sufficient sum to bring into the coffers of the Company this
unearned interest. The same balance-sheet includes as an
item of profit the sum of ;£i 1,000, the anticipated dividend
on shares held by the Loan Company in a Company, knowti
as the Land Company, which dividend had not been declared,
and, in fact, never was declared. Ido not mean to say that
these specific items appeared in the balance-sheet, but there
were totals made up of items, including these sums.
Moreover, the very large sum of £318,000, the investment
of the Loan Company in shares of the Land Company was
included in the balance-sheet of 1892, in a total under the
heading of “ advances on wool and produce in hand and to
arrive, current accounts, debenture stocks and expenses,”
instead of being included under the heading which
appeared in the balance-sheet “stock and share invest-
ments.”
It is right with regard to the ,£II,OOO that I should read a
paper which seems to have been placed before the Directors
which gives the reason for dealing with the dividend that had
never been declared or paid in the way in which it was
declared. This paper is called the “New Zealand Loan and
Mercantile Agency Company, Statement of the Company’s
Public and Private Reserves with a List of Nominal Assets in
the Years 1888-1892.” Then come the nominal assets; and
at the end of it is written this : —“ In addition to the figures
in this statement a sum of ;£i 1,420 appears in the Company’s


books at the close of the year 1892 to the debit of the New
Zealand Land Association, Dividend Suspense Account. This
was done in order that the amount might be included in the
Company’s balance-sheet for that year. It was expected that
a dividend equal to that amount would be received from the
Association when its accounts were closed for the year (or
say for fifteen months to March 31, 1893), but as it proved
no dividend was declared, and in consequence the amount
may be considered as a nominal asset.”
I am not sure that I have rightly described this document
as being before the directors, but whether it was, or was not,
it expresses what I understand them to express as the reason
(or rather what I understand the auditors to express as the
reason) for the inclusion of the for dividend in the
profit and loss account as profit earned. I therefore thought
it right to read it.
I have mentioned these irregularities in the balance-sheet
as matters that ought not to have escaped the attention ol the
Directors. Their attention had been specially called to the
impropriety of carrying unearned interest to profit. The
Reports and Returns which had come before them must
have called their attention to the fact that there were many
estates which were paying no interest whatever, and their
plain duty was to have made inquiries of the officers of the
Company as to what was being done in respect of an
unearned interest. Then with regard to the inclusion of the
investment in Land Company’s shares under the inappro-
priate heading of “ Advances on wool and produce in hand,
and to arrive, current accounts, debenture stocks, and
expenses,” the directors having regard to their very large
investment in the shares of the Land Company, ought,
if they had given the balance-sheet the slightest attention,
to have discovered this improper entry. Unfortunately,
it is impossible to forget that the evidence shows
that the Directors were fully aware that so large an
investment in shares in a Colonial Land Company, at
a time of great land depression in the colonies, was
likely to receive hostile criticism from the shareholders,
if their attention was openly called by the Report or balance-
sheet to the nature of the investment. (This entry appears
in the balance-sheet alike of 1891 and 1892.) The fact is
that there is nothing in either Reports or balance-sheets to


call the attention of the shareholders to this enormous specu-
lative investment of the Directors.
The next point with which I propose to deal is the balance-
sheet from the point of view of the Auditor. The balance-
sheet for the year ending December, 1892, is admittedly not
what it should have been. I mean admittedly by the
Auditors. Nor, for the matter of that, are those for 1890
and 1892, but I deal with 1892 as being the last and worst.
Taking first the liabilities side, the reserve, which was in fact
a mere uninvested excess of assets over liabilities as appearing
in the balance-sheet, should not, in my opinion, have been
described as a reserve fund at all, but as a reserve. In the
next place Debentures and Debenture Stock should have been
so entered as to show the nett amount received. It may be
true, and is true, that somewhere on the asset side of the
account the ,£141,000, the amount of expenses and discount
allowed to the contractors, who took 50,000 stock, issued
at 94, at 85, can be found hidden ; but it ought to be so
entered in the balance-sheet that the net amount received by
the Company in respect of the Debenture Stock could be
learnt by the shareholders, because this really had
to come off the reserve as an available asset. Pro tanto , the
reserve was not a reserve upon which the shareholders could
fall back in case of need. The simplest mode of doing this is
to enter the gross amount and the deduction both on the
liability side, and to carry out the net only into the items going
into the total. Moreover, it is plain that terminable Debenture
Bonds and Debenture Stock should not be lumped together,
for they ought not to be treated in the same way in the
balance-sheet. It is obviously essential to arriving at a correct
view of the affairs of the Company to know what proportion
of the Debentures are in the nature of Terminable Debenture
Bonds, which may shortly have to be paid off.
Taking next the assets side, the loans on mortgage and
secured Loans are entered at ,£3,880,629, whereas, in truth,
the contingent losses mentioned in the successive reports to
which I have called attention, coupled with the fact that the
unproductive capital at this time amounted, according to the
returns, to over ,£9,000,000, which facts should have led to a
large sum being written off this item. It is plain that if this
had been done, a large part, if not the whole of the Reserve
or Reserve Fund, as it is called, would have disappeared, and
D 2


the balance would have been largely the other way. The
next item is Stock and Share Investments, which he entered
at a total of only, whereas, in truth, at this time the
Loan Company held shares in the Land Company to the
amount of These shares are included under the
head of “ Advances on Wool and Produce on hand and to
arrive, Current Accounts, Debenture Stock, Expenses, &c.”
This item it is to be observed, even if otherwise correct, would
be irregular in not separating the Debenture Stock expenses
from the rest of the entry. That the 1,000 ought to have
been a separate item was the view of the auditors, which
they expressed to the manager. They said so, but gave
way ultimately. But the entry of the shares in the
Land Company under this heading is a much more
serious matter. In this case again the auditors them-
selves objected to the entry, and yet allowed it, not only in
this year, but in the previous year. An auditor who
thus, contrary to his own judgment, allows the form of the
balance-sheet to be controlled by the Directors and servants
of the Company whose accounts' and conduct he is employed
by the shareholders to check, fails in the plainest duty of an
auditor. The very fact that an auditor is asked to accept
suggestions of this sort as to such matters should put him on
his guard.
There is also another investment in shares, the entries
regarding which I confess are quite unintelligible to me—the
English and Australian Pastoral Company. The Loan Com-
pany had a large quantity of these shares, in shares
and in Debentures. In 1891 the shares, as far as
I understand, were included under the heading “ Loans on
Mortgages.” In the balance-sheet of 1892, 250 shares only,
in respect of 155., being 17s. 6d. per share paid up in
this Company, are included under stocks and shares. Mr.
Moore could not tell us exactly under what head or in what
shape the balance appeared, but probably under “ Loans on
Mortgage.” No dividend seems to have been paid, but some
is carried to profit and loss, but whether as dividend
or as interest on the loans on the properties which the English
and Australian Company was formed to take over, Mr. Moore
did not seem to know. He excused himself on the ground
that the matter had been dealt with by the Colonial Auditor.
There is one observation I will add as to the liabilities side


of the balance-sheet. In each year down to, but exclusive of,
1892, the auditors seem to have included under the head of
“ Bills received for Collection,” the amount of what has been
called the “Private or Secret Reserve,” which consisted
chiefly of unpaid interest on mortgage loans which was carried
into the books of the Company to Suspense Account. I have
not got to determine judicially the propriety of this practice,
but, as at present advised, I think it a wholly wrong practice.
It is an entry which does not speak for itself, and it is an entry
which is not intended to speak for itself. The practice seems
to me inconsistent with the balance-sheet giving a true and
correct view of the position of the Company. There is no sort
of reason why this amount carried to private or secret
reserve, as it is called, should not be entered in the balance-
sheet as “Amount of unpaid interest carried to Suspense
Account.”
Then as to the profit and loss account. The total
amount to the credit of the profit and loss account at the
end of the year, including £8,820 brought forward from the
preceding year, is represented to be £69,365, which the
Directors state in the Annual Report is at their disposal for
the payment of dividend, &c. But this amount includes the
following sums improperly taken credit for: —(1.) Sums trans-
ferred from interest suspense account representing interest which
had been charged to the accounts of various debtors, but which
had not been received, and is not likely to be received,
£21,765. (2) Dividend on shares held by the Company in
the New Zealand Land Association which had not at that date
been received, and has never, as a matter of fact, been
received, £11,419 (not only not received, it has not been
declared). (3) Interest taken to credit on the advances made
by the Company to Thomas Baird, of Woolerina, whose
station was being worked at a loss, and against whom no
interest had been charged since 1886, £14,750, making a
total of £47,934. This deducted from the ,£69,365 gives
an apparent available balance of ,£21,431; but it is only
apparent, because against this has to be set the amount of
interest payable on calls paid in advance on 6th Issue Shares,
amounting to £22,500. That interest obviously is an amount
which ought to have gone to debit before arriving at the
balance of profit and loss, and if that had been deducted the
result is that, so far from having any fund to distribute, there


was in fact a deficiency of It will thus be evident
that there were no funds available for the payment of a
dividend; whereas an amount of was distributed in
dividend for this year.
These being the irregular items of the balance-sheet for
1892, it remains to say a few words as to how far on their own
evidence the auditors are responsible for these irregularities.
It is unnecessary to say anything more as to the irregulari-
ties on the liability side of the accounts, but with regard to
the asset side of the accounts, the admissions of the auditors
make it clear that the accounts put before them showed them
that great losses might be anticipated in respect of the loans
on mortgages and secured loans, for even though the auditors
perhaps had not before them the estimates of the contingent
losses they had before them the progress accounts of the
various mortgage estates, showing that many of the estates were
paying no interest whatever, and that many of them were
being worked at a serious loss. They had also before them
the fact that the unproductive capital in New Zealand and
the Australian Colonies together amounted to over
Mr. Bray: Would your lordship allow me to say that I
think some injustice may be done to the auditors by that
statement? I do not think they saw those Progress Reports.
I think you will recollect that Mr. Moore said they ought to
have been shown to them, but never were shown to them.
Mr. Justice Vaughan Williams: lam much obliged to you
for the correction, but I can only state my own understanding
of the evidence. I understood Mr. Moore to say that he, at
all events before the issue of the Balance Sheet for the year
1892 at the beginning of 1893, had the figures of the results
of those Reports before him. In his own handwriting in the
notes from which he prepared the Balance Sheet is a state-
ment, first, of the unproductive capital for the year 1891,
dividing the unproductive capital between Australia and New
Zealand ; and further it is then stated with regard to 1892. I
cannot, myself, see how Mr. Moore could have arrived at
those figures, unless in some shape or other he had had the
progress reports before him at the time ; but it is better that
the matter should be treated as a doubtful one, and I am
obliged to Mr. Bray for calling my attention to it.
But the observation that I am going to make is one on
which another observation will arise. I do not say quite


equally if the auditors had merely before them the statement
of the unproductive capital, and in saying that I have the
advantage of the statement of the opinion of both auditors
themselves, for both Mr. Moore and Mr. Peat stated that if
the amount of the unproductive capital is kept in view, the
balance-sheet as issued ought not to have been issued.
Having these facts before me, it seems to me that if the
balance-sheet is really to afford a correct view of the state of
the Company’s affairs, the auditors ought to have insisted
upon a substantial amount being written off this credit, in
respect of the contingent losses, or ought to have insisted
upon some note appearing on the face of the balance-sheet to
show that these loans largely consisted of unproductive
capital—indeed, the auditors themselves admitted this. Some
sort of justification was put forward on the ground that the
Colonial accounts were certified by Colonial auditors, but it
seems to me that this can afford no justification in a case
where the English auditors had before them this detailed
information and purported to deal with it.
If the auditors intended not to be responsible for a credit
entry like this certified from the Colonies they should have
expressly said so in their certificate. As to the entries in the
profit and loss account of sums which were really not earned
at all, being really unpaid interest and dividends, as to which
there was, to say the least of it, no immediate prospect of
payment, the auditors hardly attempted to put forward a
justification.
Some suggestion was made of a resolution of the Directors
in regard to the transfer of from the suspense
account; but even if there had been such a resolution, which
there was not, the auditors ought not, with the knowledge
they had, to have acted on such a resolution.
Lastly, 1 come to the transaction between the Loan Com-
pany and the Land Company, which in the result seems to
have been one of the causes which, coupled with general
Australian depression, compelled the Loan Company to go
into liquidation. In order to understand the evidence relating
to this transaction, it is necessary first to summarise that part
of the evidence which explains the original history of the
Waikato Land Association, Limited, out of which the New
Zealand Land Company grew. This evidence so absolutely
confirms the statements in the Report of the Official Receiver


that I cannot do better than read the paragraphs of that Report
relating thereto. I will read paragraph 31, “The value of the
Company’s interest in shares and debentures of other com-
panies is returned in the statement of affairs at Of
this amount is in respect of their interest in
the New Zealand Land Association, formerly called the
Waikato Land Association. The following are the circum-
stances under which this interest arose. (32.) The Waikato
Land Association, hereinafter called the Land Company, was
formed and registered on December 24, 1879, an d was pro-
moted by Mr. Thomas Russell, Sir F. Whitaker, Captain W.
Steele, Mr. D. L. Murdoch, and Mr. H. Reynolds, who comprised
a syndicate. (33.) The Directors of the Land Company in
London were Mr. Thomas Russell, Sir-James Fergusson, Mr.
A. J. Mundella, Mr. H. J. Bristow, and Mr. H. H. Graham.
The first-named were also Directors of the Loan Company;
Mr. Bristow joined the Loan Company’s Board in 1890,
and subsequently, in 1891, Sir John Gorst (who had become
a Director of the Loan Company in 1890) also joined the
Board of the Land Company.” I think that was as repre-
senting the Loan Company. (34.) “In consideration of a
bonus of one-fifth share in the syndicate property (which
fifth share was eventually sold for in cash) the Loan
Company made some large advances to the Land Syndicate
prior to the formation of the Land Company amounting to
about which advances were spent in improving the
property, and were repaid by the Land Company out of pro-
ceeds of Debentures subsequently issued by them. (35.) The
capital of the Land Company was divided into
30,000 shares of each, all of which were issued as having
£lO paid to the following persons as vendors in terms of
the agreement for purchase.” I may say that with regard
to the Directors who were called before me, some of them,
at any rate, I am not sure whether it was not all of
them, said they were quite unaware that they were described
in this deed as vendors. As they were not members of
the Syndicate, probably it was not actually quoted in that
way. “ The capital of the Land Company was
divided into 30,000 shares of each, all of which
were issued as having paid to the following persons as
Vendors, in terms of the agreement for purchase:—Thomas
Russell, 11,400 shares; Sir F. Whitaker, 6,700; Captain


Steele, 5,700; D. L. Murdoch, 3,Boo’’(that makes for the
Syndicate 28,500); “H. Reynolds, 1,900; Sir James
Fergusson, 500; A. J. Mundella, 500; and H. J. Bristow,
500 (total, 30,000). The three persons last mentioned, as far
as can be ascertained, acquired their shares, and also the
shares subsequently transferred to them, from those interested
in the Syndicate for a consideration, it is believed, of
jQ2> 6s. Bd. per share. The Land Company is not in liquida-
tion, and I have not to consider the propriety of this transac-
tion as shown by this Report, so far as the Land Company is
concerned ; but when one has to consider the course taken
by the Directors of the Loan Company in their transactions
with the Land Company, it is a matter not to be entirely left
out of consideration, that those gentlemen, Directors of the
Loan Company, had apparently allowed themselves to receive
from Mr. Russell and the other members of the Syndicate,
something very like a gratuity. The importance of this fact
is, of course, very much minimised by the fact that the transac-
tions between the Loan Company and the Land Company did
not take place till ten years later, but still such is the fact. I
make that statement because that paragraph says: “ The
three persons last mentioned, as far as can be ascertained,
acquired their shares and also the shares subsequently trans-
ferred to them, from those interested in the Syndicate, for a
consideration, it is believed, of 6s. Bd. per share.” That
is, 6s. Bd., jQio paid. Then follows in the Report
the Somerset House List of shareholders in May, 1880,
which makes no material alteration in the way in which
the shares seem to have been parcelled out. Then para-
graph 37 : “ The Official Receiver has no material from
which he can ascertain the actual amount spent by
the Syndicate to represent the capital of
which was issued to them.” During the examination
a paper was put before me which purported to show
that something between and had
been spent upon the property, but it included the interest
upon the advances, so that would have to be deducted
from the expenditure, and also there were no accounts what-
ever of the expenditure. Money seems to have been spent
through the agency of the Loan Company, and the truth of
the matter is that the accounts which were placed before me
are merely the accounts of the Loan Company plus interest


and expenses and commission. “(38.) In 1887 the Land
Company in order to meet Debentures then falling due, which
it was considered desirable not to renew, decided to make
calls of 4 7s. 6d. per share payable by instalments extend-
ing to 1890, on their shareholders, and subject to the
sanction of the London Board of the Loan Company,
the Colonial Board of that Company recommended an
advance by the Loan Company to Mr. Ru6sell of
to pay the calls on his shares in the Land
Company.” It should be observed that the Report of the
Colonial Board was not produced in evidence. I do not
think it necessary to go through it at length, but there is this
observation to be made upon it, that it was the report of
persons who, one and all, were deeply interested in the
Bank of New Zealand subsequently, and the Report
itself shows how much interested the Bank of New Zealand
subsequently was in supporting the Waikato Land Association.
“(39.) The Colonial Board of the Loan Company recommended
an advance by the Loan Company to the Land Company up to
in order to enable the said debentures then falling
due to be met. This proposal was agreed to by the London
Board of the Loan Company. The security to be given by
Mr. Russell was apparently left to the Colonial Board of the
Loan Company to determine.” It is right to say that the
security required seems to have been sufficient and proper
security. (40.) “ The advance to the Land Company was to
be secured, as far as can be ascertained, by ‘ B ’ Debentures,
which, in 1891, were exchanged for shares of the Land Com-
pany as hereinafter mentioned.” These Debentures at this
time were not a good security. (41.) “In 1890 the Land
Company’s property was independently valued at ,£357,000
by Mr. Aitken, a land agent in Auckland, for the purposes of a
further debenture issue.” (42.) “ The valuations were made
upon instructions that the valuer was not to value the property
at its absolute selling price but to take into consideration the
sums which have been expended on the estate as also the
revenue derived from present working of the property,
and the fact that the owners have made arrangements to
continue improving the estate from their own resources,
with a view to its development and ultimate sale.”
(43.) “At December, 1890, the financial position of
the Land Company was, as far as the Official Receiver


can ascertain, as follows : —Liabilities First Debentures,
,£44,820; total, £"251,040.” It is right to say that the
liabilities on the first Debentures showed a substantial reduc-
tion from what it stood at in 1887. Then “ Assets -Property
as per Mr. Aitken’s valuation in April, 1890, £357,390;
Interest and other charges during year, £5,000; total,
£372,510. Live and dead stock, £26,970; other assets,
say, ooo; total, £424,480. Apparent surplus to meet
liabilities (,£376,000) to shareholders, £173,440.” So that
at this time apparently on this Report, the shareholders having
only that amount to go to them, had lost something like half
their capital. Then paragraph 44, “At this date the net
revenue of the Land Company appears to have been about
£6,000, while the interest on the Debentures (198,000) then
issued, and the expenses of management, amounted to about
£11,000.”
Now that is the statement of the Official Receiver. There
was put in evidence a statement by Mr. Thomas Russell,
which he seems to have made in 1891, and to have placed
before, at all events, some members, if not all the members,
of the Committee who were to deal with this question, and
the particular copy before me has something written upon it
by Sir John Gorst. I do not propose to read that Report
verbatim ;itis a long Report, but think it necessary more
or less to deal with the effect of that Report, and also with
the effect of the Report which was made by Mr. Battley, the
manager. It is clear from these Reports, and from the
Report of Mr. Russell, that the Waikato Land Association in
1887 was insolvent; it was earning no income whatever. It
had in the year 1887 a deficit of £4,000. It had issued
Debentures, the annual interest upon which amounted to
£12,500. Of the .30,000 shares in the Association, 12,693
shares, carrying a liability of £126,930, were held by share-
holders unable to pay anything whatever towards their
liability; 10,880 shares were held by Mr. Russell, who also
was insolvent at that time, and who had entered into a deed
of arrangement with his principal creditor, the New Zealand
Bank, by which he, in consideration of transferring to that Bank
certain securities, was allowed to postpone the payment of his
liability to the Bank, for the purpose of enabling him to make
arrangements forthe payment of theimmediate callof£4 7s. 6d.


on his shares in the Land Association. This call he was
enabled to meet by borrowing £40,000 from the Loan
Company, for which, however, he gave security, including a
good estate known as the Raglan Run. The sum raised by
this call was not sufficient to enable the Association to meet
its liabilities, and the Loan Company advanced to the Associa-
tion a further sum of £30,000 on the security of B Debentures.
Some of these facts which I am stating of course appear also
in the paragraphs which I have read from the Official
Receiver’s Report; but lam anxious to show that in substance
the view taken by the Official Receiver now in 1894 was the
view that Mr. Russell himself took in 1891 when he made this
statement.
The Loan Company further advanced tc the Association
two sums of £29,000 and ,£IB,OOO. It was to meet this state
of things that the Loan Company made the sixth issue of
shares, increasing their capital by £500,000. It is said that
the result of these operations was to much improve the position
of the Association, increasing its area of grass from a few
thousand acres to 25,000 acres, and proportionately increasing
its sheep carrying capacity. It is further said that in 1890 the
valuation of Messrs. Aitken, taken in the interest of the
Debenture-holders, shows that the value of the property of
the Association was £"170,000 in excess of its liabilities.
Now, assuming this valuation to be reliable (this is, of
course, my comment on Mr. Russell’s statement, and is not
his statement) the Association had lost nearly half ot its
capital, but the fact is that the valuation ex facie was not
reliable, being based upon a past expenditure which was not
vouched, which admittedly had been most injudiciously
expended, and upon a prospective as distinguished from a
realisable value, which prospective value was arrived at on
the assumption of large expenditure, which the Association
had no means of making.
All this appears by a memorandum of Mr. Russell which
he laid before the Committee, Sir John Gorst, Sir George
Russell, and Sir Edward Stafford, appointed to consider a
proposed scheme under which the Loan Company were to
invest largely in shares of the Association.
No one who reads Mr. Russell’s memorandum can suppose
that this investment, as an investment, was a sound invest-
ment for the Loan Company to make. It is, moreover,


obvious from the memorandum itself that the investment was
proposed for the purpose of saving the Association from
going into liquidation with its attendant consequence of the
ruin of Mr. Russell. The liability of the Association and Mr.
Russell to the Loan Company to a large extent secured as it
was, was obviously not a sufficient reason for making this in-
vestment.
The real reason urged in Mr. Russell’s memorandum was
that the failure of the Association, many of the Debentures of
which were held by the same persons as those who held
Debentures in the Loan Company, would seriously prejudice
commercial credit generally in New Zealand, and in particular
the credit of the Loan Company.
Such being the financial condition of the Association and
its relation to the Loan Company, let me examine the bargain
which was arrived at, and the negotiations leading up to it.
But before so doing, I propose to read a few passages from a
letter addressed by Mr. Larkworthy to the Chairman and
Directors of the Loan Company just before he resigned his
office as Managing Director. This is a letter dated October
27, 1890, and it is addressed to the Chairman of the New
Zealand Mercantile Agency Company, Limited, 1, Queen
Victoria-street. “ Dear Sir, —Referring to the Special Com-
mittee appointed by the Board on October 24, consisting of
Sir Edward Stafford, Sir George Russell, F. Larkworthy, to
take into consideration the application of the Waikato Land
Association, through Mr. Russell, for further advances, and
also the application of Mr. Thomas Russell for certain further
financial assistance on his own account, I desire to place on
record —with every respect for the Board, and denying
all personal feeling in the matter —that, as my opinions
are already well known in connection with these
proposals and the further advocacy of my opinions at
such Committees could only be productive of strife,
which on several occasions of late has disfigured our
meetings I have decided to decline to serve on that
Committee. The close connection of the Waikato Land
Association and the Auckland Agricultural Company with the
New Zealand Loan Company through identity of Directors
and officers has been one of the chief difficulties of the Land
Company, and hence the presence of Sir Edward Stafford on
that Committee would, in my opinion, destroy the independ-


ence of its action and conclusions, as that gentleman is asso-
ciated with Mr. Russell on the direction of the Auckland
Agricultural Company, which Company Mr. Russell has
informed the Board of the Loan Company is likely to be
wound up in bankruptcy.” There is a contradiction on the
evidence as to the anticipated winding up of that Company,
and Mr. Russell is obliged to admit that the statement went
too far.
Then the letter goes on : —“ I desire now to reiterate my
objection to any further financial support being accorded to
the Waikato Land Association for the reasons : —(i.) That the
highly dangerous financial position of the Loan Company does
not justify an extension of fresh advances of any kind, but
point imperatively to the urgent necessity for the limitation of
our existing business, and of providing for the Company’s
financial requirements otherwise than by the dangerous and
irregular system of the issue of accommodation bills, which
are at present current to a considerable extent. (2.) That the
Loan Company’s existing investment in the second Debentures
of the Waikato Land Association, upon which no interest has
been paid since the investment was made, is, in my opinion,
not only temporarily unproductive, but is unsecured, and,
notwithstanding the report of Mr. William Aitken, which Mr.
Russell has lately handed me, will ultimately result in loss to
the Loan Company.” Then follows some comments on Mr.
Aitken’sreport, saying that the report ought to be treated with
the greatest caution.”
Then the letter goes on : —“ I further most strongly protest
against any further financial assistance being accorded to Mr.
Thomas Russell on the grounds— (1.) That the financial posi-
tion of the Loan Company, as already referred to, will not
allow of any such assistance being given ; and (2.) That Mr.
Russell has admitted that he cannot meet his existing
liabilities to the Company, and these liabilities are not
adequately secured.”
The scheme, so far as regards the Loan Company, was
referred, as I have said, to a committee consisting of Sir John
Gorst, Sir George Russell, and Sir Edward Stafford, who were
selected as being Directors of the Loan Company who had no
interest in the Association. On the part of the Association
the negotiations were conducted by Mr. Russell. The Com-
mittee of the Loan Company were advised by Mr. Battley, the


then principal officer of the Loan Company in New Zealand,
who was temporarily in England.
It is worthy of observation, however, that Mr. Battley had,
during the greater part of its existence, been the Secretary of
the Association and intimately connected with Mr. Russell in
the conduct of its business. One member of the Committee,
at least, was unaware of this relation of Mr. Battley to the
Association, and said in his evidence that had he been aware
of it, he shouid not (to use his own expression) have
“swallowed Mr. Battley’s scheme whole.”
Mr Battley submitted a written report to the Committee.
It begins with these words:—“ln response to the instruc-
tions of the Board to bring up a scheme for the future
administration of lands in New Zealand in which the Com-
pany is interested ”; and it proceeds to mention three large
estates, Mata Mata, Waikato Land Association Limited, and
Raglan Run (I am not sure whether I have the second one
rightly), and disposes of the former by saying that it is self-
supporting earning interest, and will require no further call in
capital; and then deals with the Waikato Land Association,
and Raglan Run in detail.
So far as the Waikato Land Association is concerned, Mr.
Battley’s report points out that in 1887 financial arrangements
had been made between the Bank of New Zealand and the
Loan Company, for the carrying on by them respectively of
the Auckland Agricultural Company, Limited, and the
Waikato Land Association, Limited, for three years. It also
points out that since 1887, nearly the whole of the shares in
the Auckland Agricultural Association had been acquired by
the Bank of New Zealand. It should be observed, however
(although this report does not say so), that the Bank of New
Zealand was deeply interested in the Auckland Agricultural
Association, which had been created to take over land in New
Zealand, in which this bank was interested, the management
of which interfered with the proper business of the bank ;
and was also in a position of mortgagee, and a very large
creditor of the Auckland Agricultural Association.
The report then goes on to say that since 1887 the share-
holders of the Association had contributed and the
Loan Company, on account of “B” Debentures
and a working over draft of £I B,OOO secured, however, by a
special mortgage of lands, growing clip of wool, &c., and that,


as a consequence, the Debenture Debt has been reduced by
some ,£60,000, and the development of the estate had
progressed largely, the gross revenue from it having improved
by £IO,OOO a year, and the sheep having been increased from
6,900 to 24,200.
There was annexed to the Report a statement “ A,” showing
in detail the position and prospects of the estate of the Asso-
ciation. This statement shows the net income in 1890 to be
£6,000, as compared with a net deficit in 1887 of 000.
It, however, also shows that the debenture debt still amounted
to a large sum, that is and that the fixed charges
and debenture interest amounted to a year, that is
to say, the Report shows that the Association is still unable to
pay its way. The Report then points out that the total
indebtedness of the Loan Company to the Association was
and estimates that an expenditure of in
four years might be hoped to increase the estate net yield
from ,£6,000 to ,£20,000. I would observe in passing that I
do not understand the Report to mean that the Association
would then have a net income of ,£20,000 a year after paying
debenture interest and fixed charges, but that it would have
that fund out of which to pay the debenture interest and fixed
charges for management. If this is correct, the estimated
income would, at most, arrive at some ,£B,OOO per annum.
The Report then deals with the Raglan Run Estate, which
was an estate consisting of short leaseholds, and estimates that
an expenditure of £ 60,000, being £32,000 for improvements
and purchase of freeholds from the natives, and £27,000 for
the liquidation of an existing debt, might in a few years yield
a net revenue of ,£19,000. The probable net income to
carry a profit and loss is not stated, but the estimated capital
value of the estate when improved is only put at ,£IOO,OOO.
This state of things regarding these two estates is sum-
marised as follows in the Report. This is what Mr. Battley’s
Report says : —“ It is therefore evident ( a ) that a considerable
amount of money will be required for the completion of the
improvements and profitable development of these two estates;
That this expenditure will be greatly to the advantage of
the Loan Company in making the properties carry their own
burdens and yield profits beyond.” It is difficult to under-
stand what that means, since the only properties of the Loan
Company which were to be transferred to the Land Com-


pany were properties which already were yielding 6 per cent,
or something like that.” (c) Such expenditure will also
largely add to the capital value of each estate, and make por-
tions of the properties now undeveloped and unprofitable
contribute to revenue; ( d ) This is the only policy which can
possibly lead to ultimate sale and sub-division of such lands.
In the meantime no sale or determination of the liability
is practicable, while, on the other hand, all the conditions
are specially favourable for agricultural and pastoral opera-
tions. The Colony of New Zealand is fast recovering
its position ; the exports are increasing largely and rapidly,
and a demand for land must follow a profitable use
for it. My experience during the past two years has shown
that wise expenditure in developing revenues of property have
uniformly been attended with most satisfactory results. I have
therefore no hesitation in recommending the adoption of the
plans by which this policy may be carried on in the cases in
question and in others hereafter referred to.”
No one can read these conclusions without seeing that
however cogent the arguments might be for the expenditure
of these moneys by the Loan Company, had the Loan
Company been the owners of these two estates, the whole
cogency disappears when one recalls the fact that the whole
interest of the Loan Company in these estates consisted in
the indebtedness of the owners of the estate, that is, the
Association, to the Loan Company of two debts of
secured by B Debentures, and fully secured by
wool clip.
The very words of the Report which follow those conclusions
show that the true object of the scheme was to save the
Waikato Land Association from going into liquidation, for the
Report goes on thus: —“ In the case of the Waikato Land
Association, Limited, the position has to be accepted that the
contributions by existing shareholders had practically reached
the limits of possibility. It is then estimated that in con-
nection with the above estate, there would be required during
the next four years at least of further capital for
development, &c., and says that such a large sum taken from
the resources of the Loan Company would seriously restrict its
ordinary operation in New Zealand, and be otherwise unde-
sirable, and that it would appear to be wise to consider a more
comprehensive plan by which capital could be provided with-


out drawing it from the Loan Company’s own resources."
Then follows the plan. It is plain, notwithstanding that some
of the expressions used are such as to give the idea that the
plan is a plan to assist the Loan Company in unloading
onerous properties in some such way as the Bank of New
Zealand had done when it created new companies upon which
to unload its burthen of onerous lands, yet the main object of
the whole plan was simply the reconstruction of the Waikato
Association as a means of saving the Association and Mr.
Russell.
The mode in which the scheme suggested that the plan
could be provided without drawing it from the Loan Com-
pany’s own resources, was, that the reconstructed Land Asso-
ciation should issue debentures, and thereby raise a sum of
and that, as a condition of so doing, the Land
Association should take over from the Loan Company lands
of the Loan Company at a capital value of £"182,000, and
yielding a revenue of over £IO,OOO a year, being 6 per cent,
on the capital value. In effect, the money was to be raised
by the Loan Company giving up some of its best land,
yielding a net income of £IO,OOO a year, which certainly
looks very like raising money by drawing on the resources of
the Loan Company, and, at all events, bears a little resem-
blance to a scheme to enable the Loan Company to unload
its onerous properties, as it was said the Bank of New Zealand
had done. Mr. Batley’s report says, “ Appendix E herewith
shows the present and future financial position; it will be
observed that the Loan Company hold the Southern estates at
a cost of £189,000, on which 6 per cent, was being earned,
and that in those other accounts aggregating £90,000,
5 per cent, was being earned, and that on £30,000
Waikato Land Association B Debentures making the
total of the Loan Company’s advances and capital £309,000.”
This amount was to be turned into shares in the new
Company, as to which the Report of Mr. Batley went on to
say that the Loan Company should in some form have a
preference dividend on £279,000, the ,£30,000 B Debentures
not participating until the revenue should admit of full interest
on ordinary capital. It was suggested that a fair division of
the 35,000 ,£2O shares (,£lO paid up) would be for
the Loan Company to have 31,500 shares, leaving 3,500
shares for allocation among (a) present contributing share-


holders of Waikato Land Association, Limited, who have paid
up ,£75,500. ( b ) Mr. Russell for his interest in Raglan Run
and the properties mortgaged to the Loan Company, and now
included in valuations at only the amount of the mortgage on
them. It was proposed to allocate 2,000 shares to the
contributing shareholders of the Waikato Land Association,
and the balance of 1,500 to Mr. Russell. The Report went
on to say “But in regard to these allocations of 3,500 shares
there would have to be some provision that the dividend
should not accrue until the Loan Company had received
equivalent to 6 per cent, on 28,000 shares, equal to ,£280,000,
the shares taken by the Loan Company in exchange for the
Waikato ‘ B ’ Debentures being placed on the same footing as
the 3,500 shares allotted to Mr. Russell and the other share-
holders in the Waikato Association.”
In view of the possibility of the reconstructed Company
paying dividends in excess of the 6 per cent., the Report said
that it would appear to be only fair that, if and when good
profits were secured, those who made such great sacrifices
(meaning thereby the existing shareholders in the Waikato
Association) should have some chance of participation in the
profits. This could probably be effected by creating deferred
shares, the holders thereof only to participate after, say, 6 per
cent, had been distributed in the ordinary shares for a period
of three years, and that the Loan Company having borne the
main portion of the burthen and risk, and having accepted
meantime 6 per cent, on its capital, would be entitled to
one-half of such deferred shares ; the Waikato Association
shareholders and Mr. Russell taking the other half, according
to their respective interests.
I am afraid that these extracts from Mr. Battley’s report do
not give a very coherent idea of its character. The leading
features, however, are plain enough. The Waikato Land
Association is insolvent, but has a fine undeveloped or half-
developed property which will become valuable if several
hundred thousand pounds are spent upon it; let the Loan
Company provide this by taking over the bulk of the shares
with a liability of for calls, and add some of its
best income-bearing land to the undeveloped land of the
Land Company ; let Mr. Russell also bring in his equity
of redemption in Raglan Run and the other properties, the
loans on which are proposed to be paid off; and then it is


said that at no distant future the Waikato Land properties
will become valuable, and the new Land Company a great
success. The price which the Loan Company is to pay for
its shares in the Land Company was, it will be seen, first,
the transfer to the Land Company of some of its most
valuable properties ; secondly, the release of debts due to the
Loan Company from the Land Company and Mr. Russell,
amounting to no less than The shares representing
the Loan Company’s own property, transferred to the Land Com-
pany, were to get 6 per cent. ; the shares representing the
debts released 5 per cent. The profits in excess of the
dividend are to be divided rateably in the shape of dividend
on deferred shares distributed between, first, the Land Com-
pany, and secondly, Mr. Russell, in respect of what I call the
Russell properties; and thirdly, the existing shares in the
Waikato Land Association. Such, I say, was the scheme put
forward, and this report of Mr. Battley was adopted by the
Committee, and, on the recommendation of the Committee,
without discussion, by the Board.
The minute of the resolution at the Board meeting of May 14,
1891, ran as follows : —“ Report of Committee on certain New
Zealand accounts appointed per Board minutes of April 16
was adopted as annexed and then it is annexed to the
book —“ power being given to the Committee ( a) to make any
modifications in adjustment of the shares, capital, &c., and
(/>) to make any adjustments necessary in closing the accounts
consistently with the general principles of the scheme.” Now
there is no record of the Committee ever having met again to
consider the scheme, and it seems very doubtful from the evi-
dence of the members of the Committee whether they did in fact
so meet; but it seems that the Committee left the adjustment
of these matters so referred to them by the Board to Mr.
Russell and Mr. Battley to carry out as they thought best.
One modification in Mr. Battley’s scheme seems to have been
made before the report of the Committee was adopted by the
Board ; that is to say, the share of the Loan Company in
the deferred shares was altered from half to one-third, for this
alteration appears in red ink on the draft of Mr. Battley’s
report, annexed to the minute book; but various other
modifications of the scheme were arranged by Mr. Battley and
Mr. Russell. These modifications are all in favour of the
Land Company and its existing shareholders, and none of them


in favour of the Loan Company. The most serious of these
alterations were that the rate of interest on the shares in the
Land Company taken by the Loan Company was reduced
from 6 per cent, to 5 per cent.; and the whole of the excess of
the profits of the Land Company, beyond the 5 per cent, on
the ordinary shares, was appropriated to the Deferred Shares,
instead of the excess being divided between the Ordinary Shares
and the Deferred Shares, as proposed by Mr. Battley’s
report, as adopted by the Board. There is a draft of
what is called the joint report of Mr. Russell and Mr.
Battley embodying these alterations. There is no trace,
however, in the minute book of the Company of its
adoption by the Committee or by the Board; but on the
completion of the agreement between the two Companies
effect was given to these modifications. The draft report
bearing date June 27, 1891, runs as follows : —“Waikato Land
Association. Joint Report by Mr. Russell and Mr. Battley.
Since the adoption of the Committee’s report progress has been
made in carrying out the Board’s decision. Some delay has
been occasioned by the necessity for obtaining the consent of
every member of the Association to the changes proposed, and
the surrender of some of their shares. (Mr. Murdoch’s
residence in New Zealand has caused delay.) This consent
has now been obtained, and nothing remains but to comply
with some formalities and to make the necessary alterations
in the Articles of Association. It is expected that the
new arrangements will be complete within two months.
There were a few questions of minor importance left open
for adjustment between the old shareholders and the Loan
Company as representing a part of the new capital brought into
the Association, but power was given to the Committee by the
Board to deal with these questions, and, subject to confirmation
by the Committee, the following arrangements have been made
by Mr. Battley and Mr. Russell. First: Mr. Battley’s original
suggestion was that the Loan Company should get a pre-
ferential dividend of 6 per cent, on the whole of its capital,
new and old. This recommendation was made mainly on
the ground that new properties amounting in value to
brought in, were earning nearly 6 per cent., but on
the other hand, some of the Loan Company’s capital hereto-
fore at risk in the Association was not earning any interest at
all, some only a small rate, and a considerable sum (^35,000)


was practically lost; the suggestion of 6 per cent, on the
whole amount could not be maintained, and appeared harsh.”
That report is altered by “ a small rate ” being altered into
“5 per cent.,” and “practically lost” is altered into “un-
covered or worse, and therefore Mr. Russell held that,” “the
suggestion of 6 per cent, on the whole amounts could not be
maintained and appeared harsh.” These marginal comments
are the comments of Mr. Battley. Apparently Mr. Battley
could not quite stomach himself swallowing this alteration,
and, therefore, it is put in that shape “ and therefore Mr.
Russell held that the suggestion of 6 per cent, on the whole
amount could not be maintained, and appeared harsh.” I
think Mr. Battley’s expression “Mr. Russell held” was most
appropriate, because Mr. Russell was obviously the arbiter
who had to determine, at his own will, exactly the conditions
upon which this transaction should be carried out.
Then the joint Report goes on : —“ It is now arranged that
the whole of the preference capital shall bear interest at 5 per
cent, only, but that the interest actually earned by the Loan
Company’s new properties, value shall be paid to
the Loan Company up to 6 per cent, for a period of four
years, or for a shorter period if the Association earns sufficient
to pay 5 per cent, on the whole preference capital.” As to
the first part of that, that is the provision for the temporary
repayment of the larger interest. Mr. Battley’s marginal note
is, “ I think this is very fair.” With regard to the other, his
marginal note is, “ I don’t quite follow this.” I share Mr.
Battley’s condition; I cannot follow it.
The Report goes on : “ Secondly, a further question was
raised by Mr. Russell as to the justice of transferring a sum of
from a deferred position to a preferential one. This
suggestion was made by Mr. Battley before he saw the form
of the debenture which secured the The
was totally unsecured and in fact disputed.” As to that, Mr.
Battley says :—“This is fairly stated.”
The Report continues : —“ Mr. Russell’s objection was
strongly supported by at least one member of the Committee,
Sir E. Stafford, who stated that if adhered to he would move
the reduction of the number of bonus deferred shares
allotted to the Loan Company from one-third to one-fourth.”
Why, exactly, Sir Edward Stafford, who was a Director of the
Loan Company, and negotiating upon the Loan Company,


thought it right to say that if some amendment against the
interests of the Loan Company was not introduced, he would
suggest a more serious amendment, I really do not under-
stand ; but possibly Sir Edward Stafford’s connection with the
Auckland Agricultural Association, and his general knowledge
of the financial condition in New Zealand, may have moved
him to make the suggestion.
Then the Report says:—“ Upon further consideration Mr.
Battley admitted that his proposition was not tenable.” Mr.
Battley will not have that. This has been prepared by
Mr. Russell, and Mr. Battley writes in the margin instead of
“ was not tenable,” “ might in view of the further information
be modified,” —“and a compromise has been made by which
the ,£35,000 of Preference Stock which was to have been
allotted to the Loan Company is reduced to ,£31,165, and
the difference has been divided between the other proprietors
in proportion to the respective interests.” Mr. Russell being
one of the proprietors and getting by far the largest propor-
tion, and Mr. Battley’s comment is, “ Reading this with last
section of the paragraph, I am content with the compromise.”
Then it goes on : —“ The Loan Company’s proportion of
the deferred shares, viz., one-third of the whole, remains un-
altered.” Well, it had been one-half, but it remains at the
reduction. Then it goes on : —“ Thirdly. The whole of the
current indebtedness of the Association to the Loan Com-
pany (except the money advanced to retire Debentures which
is to be repaid out of new Debenture money) is to be repre-
sented by preference shares so as to start the new undertaking
free from debt. 4th. The preference shares to be taken by
the Loan Company will be issued by the Association for cash,
and the Loan Company will receive payments for the pro-
perties purchased in cash. The deferred shares will be trans-
ferred to the Loan Company from the old proprietors to whom
they are being issued. sth. The Company’s name will be
altered from the ‘ Waikato’ to the ‘ New Zealand Land Asso-
ciation ’ within a month from the present time. Application
for the alteration will be [made to the Board of Trade forth-
with. London, June 27, 1891, Thomas Russell; Frederick
Battley.”
The words in the margin seem to have been comments by
Mr. Battley on the draft report as prepared by Mr. Russell (as
he says after consulting with Mr. Battley).


There are two or three other matters which it is desirable to
note before completing the history of the negotiations between
the Loan Company and the Land Company. One is the
report of Mr. Russell to the Land Company with relation to
these negotiations. It is set out in the minutes of the Land
Company on May 13, 1891, and runs as follows: —“The
Chairman ” —that is Mr. Russell; this is his report to the
Land Company—“ reported the arrangements he had made
for the introduction of new capital, subject to the approval of
this Board and the Shareholders of the Association. The
arrangements referred to embraces : (1) The introduction of a
large amount of new capital, represented by valuable estates
in New Zealand of the value of upwards of
These estates are now the property of the Chairman
and the New Zealand Loan and Mercantile Agency
Company, Limited, and they are to take shares in the
Association for their respective interest thus brought
in. (2) The surrender by the proprietors of the
Waikato Land Association, Limited, of a very large
part of their shares in the Association to be given in
payment for the newly-acquired propeities, but receiving in
lieu thereof a large number of deferred shares without
liabilities. (3.) The creation of deferred shares to be divided
among the present and new proprietors. The deferred shares
to take all profit and dividends after 5 per cent, is paid on
ordinary shares. (4.) The raising new capital
for the further development of the Estates and the general
purposes of the Association. (5.) These arrangements will
relieve the Shareholders of all future contributions ; they will
have to surrender a large part of their interest in the Waikato
Land Association, but they will acquire a large proportionate
interest in the other properties acquired, and that without
having to make further payments of money. (6.) When
details are actually fixed, particulars will be supplied to share-
holders, and their individual assent sought to the arrangement.
The Board expressed its approval of these arrangements.”
Very naturally !
Two observations arise on this Report: First, that the
existing shareholders in the Land Company had their
attention called thereby, very pointedly, to the advantages
which they, would get by being relieved from their liability in
respect of future calls on the shares they held in the Land


Company; and it is to be noted that at this time the Land
Company had actually made a call of 6s. 6d. a share, and that
this call was unpaid except by Mr. Murdoch, whose payment
in respect of this call was subsequently returned to him.
Secondly, it is to be observed, that Mr. Russell assumes that
the dividend upon the ordinary shares in the Land Company
to be taken by the Loan Company will be limited to 5 per
cent., and all excess go to the deferred shares, a great portion
of which were to go to the existing shareholders in the Land
Company, although, according to Mr. Battley’s report, the
ordinary shares taken by the Loan Company were to carry
6 per cent, interest, and the excess was, according to Mr.
Battley’s report, to be divided between the ordinary share-
holders and the deferred shareholders. No trace of the
alteration from 5 per cent, to 6 per cent, appears n the
documents of the Loan Company until the joint report of
Mr. Russell and Mr. Battley on June 27 ; and no trace at all
appears of the arrangement that the whole of the excess
beyond the 5 per cent, should go to the Deferred Share-
holders, excepting in the new Articles of Association of the
Land Company, which were not settled till long afterwards,
and no explanation is offered of how it came to be inserted
in those Articles.
All this shows how entirely the Committee of the Loan
Company allowed Mr. Russell to determine everything
accorning to his own will, and how conscious he was of his
own power, because here we find him on May 13, 1891, fore-
telling alterations that first seem to have been mentioned to
Mr. Battley about the time of the Report of June 27 —a
month later —although the arrangement appeared really only
made in the Articles, and in the ultimate agreement. No
doubt, so far as regards Mr. Russell’s relations to the Loan
Company were concerned, he was perfectly justified in telling
them that these, or any other terms which seemed to him at
the moment to be convenient, would be the terms upon which
the independent Committee of the Loan Company would
approve the transaction.
There are also three letters addressed at this time by Mr.
Russell to Mr. Murdoch, Mr. Mundella, and Sir F. Whitaker
which throw a good deal of light on the view which Mr.
Russell himself took of the bargain between the Loan
Company and the Land Company. They are as follows :


This is the letter to Mr. Murdoch, dated May 14, 1891 :
“My dear Sir, —I have yours of March 17, and note its
contents. Then comes ‘ Waikato Land Association.’ I
have previously referred to a plan which I had made for
making this concern into a much larger one—in fact, ot
making it more of a New Zealand character than it has
hitherto been, and I am happy to be able to inform you that
this view has also been taken by the other shareholders and
by the Loan Company. There is little doubt in my mind
that, if we could have raised the necessary capital to have
continued the works upon the Estate and meet the interest as
it fell due, we should have been much better off to have con-
ducted this business on our own account to a profitable and
paying issue; but inasmuch as of our uncalled capital
was tied up by mortgage to the debenture holders, and could
not be made available except as liquidation, and as the share
holders could not otherwise have made capital available for
the purposes of the Association, we have thought it
better to resort to a larger plan, by which, while
the shareholders of the Association will make great
sacrifices in connection with what they have paid up, and
some sacrifices of the future profits of the undertaking,
they will be immediately relieved from further payment of
calls, and from a very large share of the liability upon shares.
We had raised the profits of the Company from nothing
in 1887 to over in 1890, and in a very few years we
should have been able to have placed the concern in a posi-
tion to make dividends, but we are obliged to forego these
advantages to meet our present needs, and I have accordingly
made an arrangement by which the Loan Company are to put
in a very large amount of additional capital in the shape of
Southern properties and to take shares in payment for them ;
while I put into the Association the whole of my property in
New Zealand, together with the Raglan Run and get shares
to represent that property. I cannot give you the precise
details, because they have not yet been fixed. The general
principle is agreed to and the proportion of shares which we
are to get in the new undertaking is fixed. I enclose to you a
paper which will show approximately how the thing works out,
but you must not understand this is definitely settled. It may
be subject to slight modifications, but not of any material
amount. Under the neiw arrangement you will get 292


shares and you have to surrender to the Company 3,335
shares, and a transfer will be sent you for that purpose.
The paper will show you that we obtain by transfers from
the Shareholders 15,866 shares. We also acquire by for-
feiture the whole of the shares belonging to Messrs. Steele,
Reynolds, and Sir F. Whitaker. These shares are all to be trans-
ferred to the owners of the purchased properties set out in the
paper sent you. The Company will thus become the owner of the
various estates set down in the schedule, and the owners of
these estates will take the shares which the present proprietors
surrender, and those which are procured by forfeiture in
payment for those properties. Certain of the shares will carry
dividends forthwith about 5 or 6 per cent., and in four years
(really two years I believe) the other shares will come in for
dividend also. All the southern properties are earning 6 per
cent. —the Raglan Run about the same interest—the W. L.A.
about 3 per cent, on the Debenture Issue —it will shortly be
greater. In fact in two years’ time all these shares will be
earning 5 or 6 per cent. The Association’s name will be
altered to the ‘ New Zealand Land Association ’ —‘Waikato’
siruck out. The Loan Company will thus become the
owners of all the shares except those which we shall hold,and
they will carry the burden of liability upon those shares, but
in consideration of th : s assistance which they render they are
to get one-third of a number of deferred shares which we are
to create, the other two-thirds going to the Association’s old
proprietors and myself in the proportion to which we con-
tribute properties. These deferred shares will have no
liability whatever, they will be fully paid. The
Association thus strengthened by the addition ot
new and substantial shareholders carrying the burden
of liability upon the shares and strengthened by the acquisi
tion of a large amount of very valuable property all
interest bearing, will increase its debenture issue up to
This money will be available, for the purposes of
the Company, completion of the improvements, payment of
interest, &c., and Batdey’s calculations are that in four years
time these deferred shares should return a very considerable
amount of interest —something like Bor 10 per cent. I need
scarcely tell you that this arrangement is highly satisfactory to
us who have been bled to death by the past, and who have
not the means to continue that bleeding process much longer,


and if Mr. Battley’s calculations are reliable the arrangement
must be a highly satisfactory one to the Loan Company, which
will be relieved from the necessity of providing further capital
out of its own funds, and will be handsomely rewarded by its
proportion of the deferred shares, which it obtains for nothing.”
I am afraid these calculations of Mr. Battley were not realised
—“in fact, as the price of the assistance they render, without
putting their hands in their pockets for cash. I feel
that I have taken a great responsibility upon myself in
agreeing on your behalf to this arrangement, and I trust
you will confirm the action I have taken, and I shall be glad
if you will let me know immediately after the receipt of this
letter by telegraph of your decision. If you approve of what I
have done, send me the word ‘ Approved ’ through the Waikato
Land Association, and in that case please execute the transfer
of the 3,335 which we send you, and return it to me by the
earliest opportunity. I cannot suppose that you will demur to
the arrangement, but, if you do object, then nothing remains
for us but the liquidation of the Association, and I need not
point out how disastrous that would be to you and to myself.
If you leave the matter in my hands I will take care that you
get your fair allotment of the deferred shares, which, as I have
before told you, will be fully paid, and without responsibility.
Please to regard all that I have written to you as entirely con-
fidential, as Battley has not sent any advice to Dodds or Lawry
by this mail, and advices will not reach them before the next
mail I write to you promptly because I want your immediate
assent or dissent to the arrangement, which, by the way,
relieves us from the payment of the call due to-day, the money
for that call being provided by the new concern, and we have
repaid to the Loan Company your with interest for
transmission to you.—Yours faithfully, Thomas Russell.”
Then comes the letter to Mr. Mundella, July 28, 1891.
“My dear Mundella, —I enclose the transfer of the
shares in the Waikato Land Association, which you have to
part with under the new arrangement. This transfer will be
required while you are away on your holiday, as we are now
only waiting the arrival (by next mail) of the deed, which was
sent out for the signature of Messrs. Murdoch & Buddie to
complete all the arrangements agreed upon. You will have
left ninety old shares of each, on which £l4 7s. 6d. has
been paid up. These are now Preference Shares entitled


only to 5 per cent. You will also get 2,318 shares of ,£1
each fully paid-up Deferred Shares, taking all the profits after
payment of 5 per cent, on the Preference. —Yours faithfully,
Thomas Russell.”
Then there is the letter to Sir Frederick Whitaker, May 14,
1891.
“My dear Whitaker, —I have your note of March 28.
We are making fresh arrangements in connection with the
Waikato Land Association, and it has become necessary to
forfeit the Shares held by yourself, Steele and Reynolds. We
are greatly extending the capital and operations of the Associa-
tion. We have purchased a number of other properties, and the
shares are being taken in payment of them, so that we require
the forfeited shares to complete the arrangements we have
made. I suppose this will be looked upon by you as a great
relief. You will be free from future liability upon the shares.
There remains, of course, the amount already called up, and
if you are desirous of making any proposition in relation to
that liability the Directors will now be in a position to deal
with that question. Ido not suggest anything, nor do I even
press you, nor do I think you will be pressed, so that it is
more a matter of sentiment than anything else. I am only
sorry that it is not in my power to assist you still further, but
it must be a great relief to your mind to feel, at all events, that
a line is being drawn limiting your further responsibility in this
matter. The new arrangements which we have been able to
make are of such a nature as will enable us to procure capital
to complete the improvements at the Waikato Land Associa-
tion and other New Zealand properties in which I am
interested, and I have a strong hope that I may be able to
get back some of the money I have had to sacrifice in these
most unprofitable undertakings.—Yours faithfully.
Thomas Russell.”
These letters seem to me to make it plain that the view that
Mr. Russell was putting forward to his brother shareholders in
the Land Association was that by transferring their shares to
the Loan Company they were getting rid of a burthen of
liability which the Loan Company would have to carry. No
wonder that Mr. Russell writes to Mr. Murdoch, “ I need
scarcely tell you that this arrangement is highly satisfactory to
us, who have been bled to death by the past and who have not
the means to continue the bleeding process much longer,”


nor that he writes “ I cannot suppose that you will demur to
the arrangements, but if you do object, then nothing remains
for us but liquidation of the Association, and I need not point
out to you how disastrous that would be to you and to myself.
If you leave the matter in my hands I will take care that you
get your fair allotment of the deferred shares, which, as I have
before told, will be fully paid and without responsibility.”
It is not unworthy of note that while Sir Frederick
Whitaker, whose shares had £lO paid up, was to suffer for-
feiture and be thankful to be relieved from further liability,
Mr. Russell, who had paid up a little more, that is to say,
£l4 7s. 6d., and who, although he had not made default as
Sir Frederick Whitaker had, yet was unable to pay any more
in calls, not even the 6s. 6d. which had just been called up, is
allowed to transfer his shares to the Loan Company at their
paid-up value of £l4 7s. 6d.
The agreement embodying this arrangement was sealed on
September 3, 1892. The result of it was that the Loan
Company sold to the Land Company four properties which
stood in their books at ,-£189,000 at an agreed price of
£"182,500, the consideration being 9,118 shares, £l4 7s. 6d.
paid, and 5,143 shares, £lO paid. The 9,118 shares were
the shares surrendered by the existing shareholders other than
forfeited shares. The 5,143 shares were forfeited shares
which had been held by Sir F. Whitaker and Messrs. Steele,
Reynolds, and Eclin, who had made default in the payment of
the £4 7s. 6d. call. The Loan Company also released the
debt due from the Land Association in consideration of a
transfer of 2,100 of the forfeited shares, credited as
fully paid, together with 5,500 (£2O) shares, £lO paid.
The Loan Company also released Mr. Russell’s indebtedness
to them in consideration of a transfer by him of 5,090 of
his own shares in the Land Company, £l4 7s. 6d. paid up.
This release restored to Mr. Russell his Raglan Run property
freed from the mortgage debt. This property he transferred to
the Land Company in consideration of £IOO,OOO fully paid
deferred shares, of which he gave one-third, viz., 33,333 to the
Loan Company as provided by Mr. Battley’s amended
scheme. The effect of these transactions was that the total
indebtedness of the Land Company, and of Mr. Russell, to
the Loan Company, amounting together to about £165,000,
was cancelled ; and the group of properties standing in the


Loan Company’s books at ,£189,000, and producing a revenue
of ,£10,500, was transferred to the Land Company, the con-
sideration of the whole being 26,951 shares in the Land
Company (excluding the deferred shares), with a paid-up
value of £352,669, and carrying a liability of ,£211,000. I
think at this moment of time the liability was £IBO,OOO only,
but subsequently to this transaction the Loan Company
purchased shares from Mr. Russell, of those shares which
were left to him, of the value of £20,000, taking those at
their fully paid-up value. Some questions were put to the
Directors with regard to that transaction, and the justification
for it was that Mr. Russell had been at that time, which was
in 1892 or the beginning of 1893, to Australia for the service
of the Company, and he was short of immediate cash, and it
was considered that the best thing to do was to give him that
cash by purchasing these shares, which, I think, were exchanged
for Debentures of the Loan Company, which debentures Mr.
Russell could turn into cash. Whether or not the Directors of
the Loan Company had a right to give Mr. Russell such a gratuity
and say nothing about it I do not know, but that is what they
did. The shareholders in the Land Company who surrendered
the 9,118 shares, while losing (if it can be called losing) the
,£l4 7s. 6d. per share which had been paid up, transferred to
the Loan Company the liability of £5 12s. 6d. per share,
which they were under, amounting to £51,289, and received
from Mr. Russell in exchange fully-paid deferred shares.
It is difficult to see what advantages the Committee of
the Directors of the Loan Company conceived that the Loan
Company were deriving from an arrangement which had this
result. The Loan Company, while taking on itself an enor-
mous liability in respect of the transfer to it of the bulk of
the shares of a Land Company owning only half-developed
unprofitable properties, and while giving up large properties
earning 6 per cent., so that they might be amalgamated with
the unprofitable land of the Land Company, was not to
unload on to the Land Company a single unproductive or
onerous property. The members of the Committee and Mr.
Battley in his Report, seek to justify the transaction by
comparing it to a transaction which had previously been
entered into by the New Zealand Bank for the
purpose of relieving the Bank of onerous properties;
but, in fact, this arrangement was nothing like the


arrangement made by the New Zealand Bank, the only
properties transferred by the Loan Company to the Land
Company being paying properties, which, in no sense, were
onerous, and the Loan Company, by its absorption of the great
bulk of the Land Company’s ordinary shares, took in effect
upon itself (for, as some of the members of the Committee said
in their evidence, the Land Company under this arrangement
became little else but a department of the Loan Company),
the whole of the onerous property of the Waikato Land
Association, a property which up to that time had never been
worked at a profit, and in respect of which the only hope of a
future profit at the end of some years was by an immediate
large expenditure by the Loan Company out of its own
resources, an expenditure which, in fact, amounted to
26,000. It is true that this expenditure was to be repaid
to the Loan Company out of the proceeds of a debenture
issue to be made by the new Land Company, and was, I
believe, in, fact, so repaid ; but the burden of this issue
indirectly fell on the Loan Company by reason of the large
interest in the shares*of the Land Company, and the conse-
quent liability for further calls, which, under the arrangement,
the Loan Company was to take upon itself.
But what was the Loan Company to get by this arrange-
ment if everything turned out according to the most sanguine
expectations which could be formed of the scheme ? Why,
nothing but a maximum dividend limited to 5 per cent., and
a share in any excess available for dividend which might be
earned, to the extent of one-third of the deferred capital.
The condition of the chance of earning this 5 per cent, on
the ordinary shares was the release of an indebtedness of the
Land Company and Mr. Russell to the Loan Company of
over a debt which was apparently fully secured, or
nearly so. The ordinary shares which the Loan Company took
in consideration of all this were shares which the Loan
Company accepted at their fully-paid value, notwithstanding
that they were shares in a company which was insolvent,
which had never earned a dividend, which had a debenture
issue of of which was immediately due,
and which, admittedly, had lost nearly half its capital even
upon a most favourable valuation based on prospective values
to be attained only by large future expenditure. Apparently
the members of the Committee, in comparing this trans-


action with the transaction entered into by the New
Zealand Bank, took into consideration the transfer by
the Loan Company to the Land Company of six properties
standing in the Loan Company’s books at .£365,000 in
consideration of a new issue of shares in the Land Company
at par value (£200,000 Ordinary and £IOO,OOO Deferred
Shares); but this transaction was no part of the scheme to
which the Directors of the Loan Company assented in 1891,
for it was not effected until the year 1893. That it was no
part of the scheme is proved to demonstration by the fact
that in July, 1891, the Loan Company sold these properties
to the English and Australian Pastoral Company, a Company
promoted by the Loan Company, and the mortgagors of the
properties in question, who, between them, seemed to have
owned all the shares. The transaction in 1893, in form at all
events, was not a sale by the Loan Company to the Land
Company at all, but a sale by the English and Australian
Pastoral Company to the Land Company.
Now let us look at the other side of the picture. Mr.
Russell, by means of the arrangement, relieved himself of an
indebtedness to the Loan Company of £75,000 by a transfer
of shares in the Land Company paid up to the extent of
£l4 7s. 6d. per share of the par value of £73,168, and carry-
ing a liability of ,£28,632, representing a holding by Mr.
Russell of an equal amount of shares in the insolvent Waikato
Land Association. Mr. Murdock, Sir James Fergusson, Mr.
Bristowe, Mr. Mundella, and the other existing shareholders in
the Waikato Land Association relieved themselves of shares
in that Association to the extent of 6,337 shares, carrying a
liability of £35,870; and got in exchange Deferred Shares
in the new Land Company carrying no liability whatever, and
entitled to all dividends in the Land Company in excess of
5 per cent.
I have now tried to summarise the results of the evidence
regarding.
Firstly: The issue of Debentures and Debenture Stock
between 1879 and 1892.
Secondly: The issue of Schroder Debenture Stock in 1892
and the disclosure or non-disclosure to the old Debenture-
holders of their unsecured position.
Thirdly : The non-disclosure by*the Directors to the share-
holders of the true financial condition of the Company, the


misleading balance-sheets and the payments of dividends which
were not justified.
Fourthly: The transactions between the Loan Company
and the Land Company.
It is no part of my duty to allocate the blame in respect of
these matters. I have only to summarise the results in fact,
and the facts seem to be :
Firstly : That the Directors, after getting the opinion of
Counsel in 1879, did not act upon the opinion to any sub-
stantial extent, but continued to issue application forms for
Debentures, in terms differing only to a small degree from
those which they had been advised were misleading. That
this course is sought to be justified in respect of the issues
other than their Debenture stock issue of 1888, on the ground
that the form of application used was that settled by Mr.
Hollams; but that gentleman denies that the form was his,
and the form is not forthcoming. The prospectus and appli-
cation form for the Debenture Stock issue of 1888 was
admittedly prepared, and was carefully prepared, by the
Directors themselves.
Secondly : That at the time of the Debenture stock issue of
1892 (the Schroder issue) although prior Debenture and
Debenture Stockholders were invited to come into the new.
issues at a small sacrifice, yet the circular issued tu the prior
Debenture-holders did not mention their unsecured position,
although at the time of the issue numerous letters had been
received by the manager of the Company showing that the
prior Debenture-holders were, some of them, under the'
impression that their Debentures were specifically secured.
It should further be stated that a large proportion of the prior
Debentures were terminable Debentures many of which were
falling due at short dates, and that the holders of these
Debentures, if informed that they were unsecured, might
instead of taking the new issue have insisted on being paid off,
and not have come in under the Schrdder issue. In fact,
there were terminable Debenture-holders to the extent of
who did not come in under the Schroder issue, i
Thirdly: That the Directors did not in the year 1890
disclose by their annual Report, the information which they
had received from Mr. Larkworthy, although they accepted
the information as substantially true. Moreover this non-
disclosure was deliberate, after much discussion, and the


Report actually issued, even when taken in conjunction with
the speech of Sir James Fergusson, was not calculated to
inform the shareholders of the existence of the state of things
mentioned in Mr. Larkworthy’s report, but rather to negative
the existence of such a state of things.
It further appears that the Reports subsequent to 1890 were
calculated to mislead the shareholders as to their financial
condition in respect of their Colonial mortgage loans, and this
although the Special Reports, the Progress Reports, and
other Colonial Returns in the hands of the Directors had
informed them that the unsound condition mentioned in
Mr. Larkworthy’s Report was being intensified from year to
year.
Then with regard to the balance-sheets and the profit and
loss accounts issued annually with the reports, these were mis-
leading. Large sums ought to have been written off the credit
item in respect of Colonial mortgage loans ; and if this had
been done to a proper extent the reserve would have wholly
disappeared from the balance-sheet, whereas, in fact, the sum
written off was quite insignificant. Moreover, the items on the
assets side of the balance-sheet were most misleading. The
enormous investment in Land Company’s shares and in shares
in the English and Australian Pastoral Company appeared
under no heading under which it was likely to be recognised ;
and although there was a heading of assets “ Stock and Share
Investments,” yet these investments in the shares of Colonial
Land Companies appeared under the heading “ Wool and
Produce on hand and to arrive, Current Accounts, Debenture
Stock, Expenses, &c.” This was done in spite of the protests
of the auditors ; and the evidence goes a long way to show
that the object of putting these investments under this mis-
leading heading was the fear of the criticisms of the share-
holders, and the damage to the credit of the Company if the
balance-sheet plainly disclosed the fact of these investments.
Again, although this heading included, in w'ords, “ Deben-
ture Stock Expenses,” no one, without explanation, would
suppose that the asset side of the account included a sum of
for such expenses. I do not say that with proper
details Debenture expenses might not appear on this side of
the account, having regard to the fact that on the other side of
the account the directors charged themselves with the full
nominal amount of the Debenture issue; but I do say that the


evidence shows that the object of this unarticulated entry was
to conceal from the shareholders and the public the enormous
cost by way of discount to Messrs. Schroder, at which the
issue hadbeen placed. In fact, it was admitted in evidence
that this was so, and it was sought to justify it by saying that
had the fact appeared, the issue beyond the amount which
Messrs. Schroder took firm would never have been placed to
any considerable extent. Finally, I have the authority of the
auditors themselves for saying that the above-mentioned asset
item, “ Loans on Mortgage and Secured Loans,” ought not to
have appeared at the amount at which it did appear, having
regard to the fact that the accounts of the company showed
that there was, at this time, unproductive capital in respect of
those loans to the amount of over and that the
Reports of the Company showed contingent losses to the
amount of over
Now as to the profit and loss account. The amount of the
balance is stated at 2s. 3d. in the balance-sheet for
the year 1892. This, together with 15s. 3d. brought
forward from the previous year, is stated in the report to
which the balance-sheet is attached, to be the net profit for
the year 1892 of os. 9d., but by the appropriation of
that sum it appears that is appropriated to the
payment of interest at 5 per cent, per annum on capital paid
in advance on shares. This is clearly an item of interest and
not of dividend, and should come off the ,£69,365 os. 9d.,
leaving, in round figures, ,£47,000; but when the details in
the profit and loss book by which the balance is arrived at are
looked at it is plain that three sums are improperly included ;
first, there is a sum of, in round figures, £22,000, which is
brought in from the suspense account, to which the
unpaid interest on some of the loans had been carried.
There is no fact proved which in any way justifies
the bringing in of this amount to profit. Secondly,
there is the sum of £14,000, which, similarly, has been
carried to Suspense Account as three years’ unpaid interest
on the Woolerina Estate. It is sought to justify this on the
ground that a year later the Woolerina Estate was sold by
the Land Company to the Loan Company, for a sum
payable in shares of the Land Company, which would have
been sufficient to pay this interest of £14,000, together with
the principal. This justification on the evidence fails


altogether. The transaction did not take place till the year
after the Profit and Loss account was settled, and when the
transaction was completed the was paid in un-
marketable shares. And, thirdly, there is a sum of over
dividend on shares held by the Loan Company in
the Land Company. In 1892 no such dividend had been
paid or declared, nor has it in fact ever been paid or declared
down to the present time. These three sums put together
give a total of which wipes out entirely the profit
balance. It follows that the dividend in this year was, in
fact, paid out of capital. The auditors objected to these
items being carried to profit. Their objections were made to
the manager, Mr. Paul —in one case by a letter written to
him, in other cases orally. The Directors state that the
objections were not brought to their notice.
With regard to the non-disclosure by the Directors and the
misleading statement made, these seem the leading facts,
except the suppression by Mr. Paul, in pursuance of a telegram
from Mr. Elder, of a document which I have spoken of as
* l Confidential A,” containing information extremely material
to be known before the balance-sheet of 1893. The Directors
deny entirely that they had, until June, 1893, any cognisance
of this, but it is worthy of remark that if the evidence of the
Directors is accurate there seems to have existed a system of
suppression in the offices of the Loan Company of matters
which the servants of the Company personally gained
nothing by suppressing, and which they must have suppressed
in what they conceived to be the interest of the Directors.
The fact of such suppressions throws a strong light on the
estimate formed in the offices of the Company by its servants
of the standard of commercial morality of the Directors —their
masters.
Lastly, with regard to the Land Company transaction the
evidence seems to show irresistibly that it was at the time it
was entered into, a transaction calculated to bestow immediate
and direct benefits upon the existing shareholders in the
Waikato Land Company, who so many of them were Directors
of the Loan Company in exchange for a speculative benefit of
a most limited character hoped to be gained by the Loan
Company. The evidence further shows that the Directors
deliberately withheld all information from their shareholders
respecting this transaction. It may be, on the evidence, that


the Directors of the Loan Company, or, at all events, the
Committee, that is to say, Sir John Gorst, Sir George Russell,
and Sir Edward Stafford, approved of this transaction rather
from ignorance of its true nature, resulting from the careless
performance of their duty, than from any deliberate intention
to benefit existing shareholders in the Land Company
at the expense of the Loan Company. It may
be that the true deduction from the evidence is that
their approval resulted from a fixed belief that everything
recommended by Mr. Russell must be right and for the
interest of the Company. The evidence, at all events, shows
that they left him absolute master of the situation. I have
not, however, to determine this. I have only to state the
evidence, which plainly is that these gentlemen in the
witness-box did not, and probably could not, explain the
leading features of this arrangement.
It has been said that the directors of the Loan Company
had so large an interest in shares in that Company that they
were not likely to have done anything knowingly to the
detriment of the Company.
Now this is, to a large extent, true, and I think it just to the
Directors to read a table which I have had prepared of their
holdings in this Company. First there is Sir John Gorst’s
share account; he held 500 shares in the Loan Company
at the time of the liquidation; then there is Sir
James Fergusson; he held at the time of the liquida-
tion 542 shares in the Loan Company, and also
100 Sixth Issue Shares, which he bought, however, at the
suggestion of the Loan Company, and the Loan Company
advanced him the money to enable him to pay for those
shares. Then there is Mr. Larkworthy’s holding, which seems
to be 430 shares and 100 Sixth Issue Shares. Sir George Russell
had 500 shares; Sir Edward Stafford had 750 Ordinary shares
at the date of the liquidation, and with regard to the Sixth
Issue shares he also held 105. Mr. Bristow’s account I have
got here. I am glad to be able to call attention to this because
I think that while Mr. Bristow was under examination I was,
to a certain extent, under a misapprehension. Mr. Bristow at
the present time holds, of Ordinary shares, apparently 500.
He seems to have held more shares at one time, but the re-
duction is accounted for in this way —that in February, 1889,
he transferred 108 shares to Sir George Russell, which, I


suppose, was for the purpose of Sir George Russell’s qualifi-
cation ; and the other transfers are small matters. Then he
held of the sixth issue shares at one time a very considerable
number. He seems to have disposed of all those, but I
understand from a letter I have received from Mr. Bristow
that he held those shares in trust; and Mr. Bristow gave his
evidence so carefully and accurately that anything Mr.
Bristow tells me I should treat certainly as being reliable.
Then the only one left outstanding is Mr. Mundella’s share
account. Mr. Mundella at the time of the liquidation held
no shares whatever in this company. He held at one time
761 Ordinary Shares and 100 Sixth Issue shares. The
100 Sixth Issue shares he seems to have transferred to a Mr.
Whitehead upon August 17, 1889. With regard to the other
761, he parted with 200 of his Ordinary shares on March 2,
1889, and he seems to have parted with the residue shortly
after his accepting office under the Government. That was
put forward as the reason for his parting with those shares. It
may have been so, but I thought it right to communicate with
Mr. Mundella’s counsel, the present Solicitor-General, and ask
him to ask Mr. Mundella what he had done in respect of the
other shares that he held. I understand that Mr. Mundella
still holds, in the first place, his New Zealand Deferred shares.
It may be, of course, that he stills holds those because they
are unsaleable. Ido not know how that is ; and with regard
tohis investments in other companies, there may be special
reasons for his continuing those investments; but I do not
understand that he, upon taking office, gave up all these
investments.
I have now finished this wearisome statement, and there is
only one other thing I wish to say, but it gives me some
pleasure to say it; that is, that with some exceptions which I
do not mean to give myself the pain of mentioning, but which
I will leave to the consciences of the individual gentlemen; the
evidence of the witnesses has been given with great frankness.
I found that, generally speaking, there was not a disposition
to fence with the questions, or in any way to deny matters
that ought to have been admitted.
I think I ought to say in regard to Mr. Moore one thing—l
felt it my duty to make some observations during Mr. Moore’s
examination which were not complimentary to Mr. Moore. I
have heard from Mr. Moore since, and I understand that he


was suffering from ill-health, and could not do himself justice
in the witness-box. It may be that that is the explanation
of it.
I should like to say this further : I do not know what view
those persons who have been examined take of this examina-
tion, but I cannot help thinking that they themselves regret
that the examinations did not take place at a much earlier
period; that they had not the opportunity of giving the ex-
planations, such as they are, much earlier : that they had not
the opportunity was, I have no doubt myself, the result of
some persons being of opinion that to hold these examinations
before the reconstruction of the Loan Company was accom-
plished, might prejudice the negotiations for reconstruction. I
can only say that I do not agree with the persons who took
that view in the slightest degree. If it was true it was no
reason for postponement, but so far as the Directors them-
selves are concerned I am quite sure they must feel that those
persons who imagined that this postponement might be in the
interest of either of the Loan Company or its Directors made
a great mistake, and were very bad friends of the Directors.


APPENDICES
3n tbe Ibtgb Court of justice.
No. 00202 of 1893.
Companies (Winding-up).
MR. JUSTICE VAUGHAN WILLIAMS.
IN THE MATTER OF THE COMPANIES ACTS, 1862 to 1890.
AND
IN THE MATTER OF THE NEW ZEALAND LOAN AND
MERCANTILE AGENCY COMPANY, LIMITED.
Summary of the Statement of Affairs at 21st July , 1893, the date of
the Winding-up Order , and the Official Receiver's Observations
thereon.
(Statement of Affairs, pages 6 and 7.)
The Winding-up Order was made on the Company’s petition presented
on the 12th July, 1893.
The Company suspended payment on the 10th July, 1893.
The Company was registered on the 6th April, 1865, in England, and was
formed in the terms of the first prospectus, for the purpose of carrying on
the business of financing and mercantile agency in connection with pastoral
properties, wool, &c., and it was pointed out that New Zealand, owing to
the rapid increase of population and consequent development of trade,
was a most inviting field for the establishment of such a business ; the
intended operations of the Company were declared to be quite apart from
legitimate banking business, which latter had proved to be unequal to
meet the demands upon it throughout that Colony. It was represented
that the Company would have a very close connection with the Bank of
New Zealand, by which means a business and connection would be at
once obtained, and the Province of Canterbury was indicated as the most
favourable field for the operations of the Company in relation to pastoral
properties.
IF will thus be evident that no established business was acquired by the
Company on its formation, and it would appear that the idea of forming
the Company originated amongst the Directorate of the Bank of New
Zealand, referred to in the prospectus.


The promoters are said to have been Mr. Robert Porter, Mr. W. S.
Graham and Mr. Falconer Larkworthy, who became Directors of the
Company; no commissions or other remuneration were paid to them, so
far as is known, in connection with the promotion.
The Company since the time of its formation has extended its business
very considerably, and at the end of 1892 it had in addition to a head
office at Portland House, Basinghall-street, E.C., five branch offices in
Australia and twenty-two branch offices and agencies in New Zealand
(most of the said branches having warehouses or stores connected with
them), with correspondents elsewhere.
The Company’s business throughout has been practically identical in
character with what was proposed in the first prospectus.
The following schedule gives particulars as to the persons who have
constituted the Directorate of the Company :
LONDON
BOARD.
Name.
Date of
1 Date of
Present Interest in
Joining^
Retir'm’nt.
Company.
Jameson Alers Hankey ...
1865
1866
Nil.
Emanuel Boutcher (dead)
1865
1888
Nil.
(,£5,000 4 per cent.
Robert Porter
1865
00
00
On
< Debenture Stock (1888
( Issue).
Philip Vanderbyl (dead)...
1865
1869
Nil.
Wm. Smellie Grahame ...
1865
1872
Nil.
Falconer Larkworthy
1865
1890
10 6th Issue Shares (fully
paid).
Thomas Russell, C. M.G.
1865
Present
Board.
500 £25 Shares (£2 10s.
paid).
Sir Ralph Ploward, Bart,
(dead)
1868
00
U)
Nil.
Rt. Hon. Anthony John
Mundella, M.P
00
1892
Nil.
Rt. Hon. Sir James Fer-
gusson, Bart., M.P
1876
Rejoined
1885
542 £25 Shares (£2 10s.
Present
Board.
paid).
100 6th Issue Shares fully
paid).
750 £25 Shares (£2 10s.
Sir Edward Wm. Stafford,
1880
Present
paid).
G.C.M.G
Board.
5 6th Issue Shares (fully
paid).
Sir George Russell, Bart.,
1889
Present
500 £25 Shares (£2 10s.
M.P
paid).
500 £25 Shares (£2 10s.
paid).
Henry Joseph Bristow ...
1890
Present
Board.
Sir John Eldon Gorst,
1890
Present
500 £25 Shares (£2 10s
Q.C., M.P
Board.
paid).


COLONIAL BOARD.
Name.
Date of
Date of
Present Interest in
Joining.
Retir’m’nt.
Company.
Thomas Russell
1865
1874
500 Shares (£2 10s. paid)
Thomas Henderson
1865
1868
Nil.
George Burgoyne Owen...
1865
1889
Nil.
Robert Waterston
1865
1876
Nil.
James Williamson
1865
1888
Nil.
David Limond Murdoch...
1865
1889
50 Shares (£2 10s. paid)
(2,150 Shares (£2 10s.
< paid) and 725 Shares
l (£5 Paid).
Charles John Taylor
1868
1876
James Tannock Mackelvie
1868
1872
Nil.
John Logan Campbell ...
1872
00
00
VO
1,207 Shares (£2 10s.
paid).
Captain James Stone
1876
1885
Nil.
Samuel Browning
1876
1888
Nil.
Josiah Clifton Firth
1879
1887
Nil.
Allen Kerr Taylor
1888
1889
Nil.
The Colonial Board was dissolved in 1889, since which date the affairs
of the Company in Australia and New Zealand have been conducted by
respective General Managers acting under the instructions of the London
Board. The Managers at the present time are Mr. David Elder, in
Australia, and Mr., Frederick Battley, in New Zealand.
By Article 70 of the Articles of Association a Director is required to
hold shares of the nominal value of
The nominal capital of the Company was originally but was
increased in February, 1872, to .£1,000,000; in March, 1876, to
.£2,000,000; in February, 1878, to £3,000,000 ; in July, 1884, to
,£3,500,000, and in April, 1888, to £4,500,000, all shares being of the
nominal value of £25 each.
The first issue of shares took place in April, 1865, when 20,000 shares
were allotted, on which there has been paid, in addition to the application
and allotment money of £2 10s. per share, a total sum of £12,642 10s. in
advance payment of calls. On this amount, interest at 6 per cent, has
been paid on £320; interest at 7 per cent, on £1,175 ; and dividends on
the balance of £11,147 10s.
The next issue took place in 1872, when 20,000 shares were allotted, on
which there has been paid the application and allotment money of £2 10s.
per share.


The next issue took place in 1876, when 40,000 shares were allotted, on
which there has been paid, in addition to the application and allotment
money of £2 10s. per share, a premium of I os. per share.
The next issue took place in 1878, when 40,000 shares were issued, on
which also there has been paid in addition to the application and allotment
money of £2 10s. per share a premium of 10s. per share.
The next issue took place in 1884, when 20,000 shares were allotted, on
which there has been paid, in addition to the application and allotment
money of £2 10s. per share, premiums of ;£i per share on 10,000 shares,
and £2 ss. on the remaining 10,000 shares.
The next issue took place in 1888, and these shares are generally
referred to as Sixth Issue Shares ; 20,000 shares were then subscribed for
and allotted, on which, in terms of the prospectus, £2 10s. was payable
on application and allotment, and carried dividend and bonus, and
£22 10s. was payable in advance of calls, and bore interest at 5 per cent,
per annum, preferential to all dividends. On this issue the whole of the
share liability has been paid.
The premiums on the shares issued have consistently been carried to the
Company’s Reserve Fund.
It will be observed from the above that the total number of shares
issued is 160,000, of which 20,000 are fully paid, and the remaining
140,000 carry a liability of 10s. per share, except in the case of the
20,000 first issued on which a total advance payment on account of calls of
los. has been made.
The number of shares on the London Register is 101,788, including the
20,000 shares fully paid. The number of shareholders is upwards of
1,200, nearly all resident in the United Kingdom.
The Company has also kept a Register at Auckland, New Zealand, on
which the number of shares is 52,422, held by about 350 shareholders
resident in that Colony. There are in addition Registers at Melbourne
(Victoria), Sydney (New South Wales), and Adelaide (South Australia),
on which the aggregate number of shares is 5,790, held by about 50 share-
holders resident in these Colonies.
The first issue of shares was to the public, but all subsequent issues until
the Sixth Issue, which was also to the public, have been for the most part
to the Company’s own shareholders.
The dividends paid by the Company have been :
For eight months ending
December, 1865 ... 6 per cent.
From 1866 to 1870 ... 10 per cent.
From 1871 to 1874 ... 10 per cent, and bonus of 2% per cent,
each year.
From 1875 to 1888 ... 10 per cent, and bonus of 5 per cent,
each year.
From 1889 to 1892 ... 10 per cent, without bonus.
The total uncalled capital is £3, 137,357 10s. The average share-
holding is about 100 shares, representing an average liability of about
Subjoined will be found a schedule giving particulars of the largest


holdings in the United Kingdom, New Zealand, and Australia, with the
liabilities thereon :
UNITED KINGDOM.
NEW ZEALAND.
AUSTRALIA.
No. of
Shares
held.
Liability
thereon.
No. of
Shares
held.
Liability
thereon.
No. of
Shares
held.
Liability
thereon.
1,613
1,758
1.875
1,950
i,459
2.875 i
£ S.
36,292 10
39,555 0
42,187 10
41.875 0
32,127 10
62.875 0|
1,696
1,207
2,000
1,400
1,408
4,023
£ S.
38,160 O
27,157 IO
45,000 0
31,500 0
31,680 0
90,517 10
200
337
200
200
500
200
£ a
4,500 0
7,582 10
4,500 0
4,500 0
11,250 0
4,500 0
11,530
£254,912 10
n,734
£264,015 0
1,637
£36,832 10
It would appear from preliminary inquiries which the Official Receiver
has made that in the event of its being necessary to call up the whole of
the uncalled capital there are many of the shareholders who could at
present only be expected to meet their liabilities to a limited extent.
The Official Receiver, for the purpose of showing the extent of the
Company’s operations, has summarised the Balance-sheets and Profit and
Loss Accounts for the last ten years, and particulars appear on the two
following sheets. The accounts have been made up in London at the
31st December annually, and include the Colonial figures at the 30th
September previous. (See pages 80 and 81.)
The insolvency of the Company is attributed to the absence of the
customary banking facilities owing to the recent financial crisis in
Australia, and to the consequent inability to realise assets which under
normal conditions could readily have been disposed of.
The Statement of Affairs was filed on the 15th August, 1893, and is
submitted by the Right Hon. Sir James Fergusson, Bart., M.P., the
Right Hon. Sir J. E. Gorst, Q.C., M.P., Sir George Russell, Bart., M.P.,
Sir Edward W. Stafford, and Mr. H. J. Bristow, Directors, and Mr.
H. M. Paul, the London Manager.
As regards the figures relating to the Colonies, it has to be pointed out
that these were ascertained for the purposes of the Statement by means
of cable only, in view of which fact they must to some extent be regarded
as approximate.
The summary of the Statement of Affairs will be found on pp. 82
to 85.


LIABILITIES.
I 1
„ Capital paid ' „
Date. | Capital. in j R eser . ve
advance. 1 * un “'
Debentures
Fixed Deposits,
&c.
Bills for Collection
Current Accounts,
Debenture
Interest, &c.
Bills Payable.
Guaranteed Sundry Accounts
Mortgages j payable in
(See Contra). Colonies.
Premiums on
Shares.
Surplus, being
Balance on
Profit and Loss
Account.
Totals.
£ ' £ J £
31st December, 1883 300,000 14,245 0210,000
»> >> 1884 310,000 14,245 0:220,000
>» »> 1885 340,000 14,245 o;25o,ooo
»» >» 1886 350,000 14,245 0265,000
,» 1887 350,000 14,245 0270,000
tt >> 1888 400,000 463,685 01270,000
*» »> 1889 ‘400,000463,642 10270,000
>> »» 1890 400,000462,767 10290,000
>» >> 1891 400,000462,767 10310,000
»> »» 1892 400,000462,642 10330,000
£ S. d.
2,559,407 O O
3,071,074 0 O
2,990,602 O O
3,121,229 0 O
2,906,938 O O
2,902,801 0 0
3,053,754 O O
3,048,030 7 8
2,825,985 17 0
3,135,005 19 2
£ S. d.
1,118,365 II 8
787,500 IO IO
919,295 8 5
861,470 16 7
1,049,072 2 4
1,390,096 10 1
986,285 15 1
1,388,487 14 1
1,608,208 1 1
1,084,040 4 10
£ S. d.
563,197. 6 5
655,352 16 6
688,228 3 O
664,878 O I
545,591 12 I
762,841 5 2
756,690 2 3
699,279 2 4
851,180 15 8
774,007 13 6
£ s. d. | £ s. d.
292.437 0 0198,627 7 3
387,459 10 0191,067 1 2
412,309 10 0 174,451 18 6
442,836 19 4294,642 4 2
513,063 19 41352,288 10 2
434,363 3 0123,628 8 11
344,328 3 0 373,265 15 0
340.438 3 0647,213 1 4
292,139 3 0 346,565 9 4
251,129 3 0415,272 12 8
£ s. d
12,500 0 0
15,000 0 0
5,000 0 0
£ S' d.
47.868 15 10
56,582 12 6
49,207 9 3
39.868 1 4
51,379 10 0
52,776 12 9
64,844 2 0
60,531 7 1
60,685 2 3
37,506 18 9
£ J. d.
5,304,148 1 2
5,705,781 11 0
5,853,339 9 2
6,059,170 1 6
6,052,578 13 11
6,800,191 19 11
6,712,810 7 4
7,336,747 5 6
7,157,531 18 4
6,889,605 1 11
ASS
ETS.
Date.
Cash in Hand
and
at Bankers.
Bills Receivable.
Premises, Stores,
and Plant.
Stock & Share
Investments.
Loans on
Mortgage.
Loans on
Mortgages
Guaranteed
(See Contra .)
Advances on Wool and
Produce, & Acceptances
on Account of Ditto.
Current Accounts, &c.
Sundry
Accounts
Receivable in
Colonies.
Totals.
31st December, 1883
99 9 9 I884
>, „ 1885
ft ,t 1886
tt „ 1887
1888
n t, 1889
»» tt 1890
1 1 „ 1891
,, tt 1892
£ s. d.
12,611 15 4
111,926 4 0
32,587 0 10
37,751 18 3
105,014 13 11
1 44,399 10 5
141,346 0 4
137,177 1 3
147,256 11 2
130,999 1 8
£ s* d.
I77,8ll 18 6
219,153 9 I
184,312 2 O
355,322 15 IO
396,441 4 9
278,469 9 5
447,879 5 10
746,635 15 3
339,076 8 7
370,489 7 5
£ S. d.
238,501 5 10
259,969 IO 4
293,284 2 5
296,034 13 3
291,312 15 8
225,084 7 4
230,293 19 4
312,507 14 2
342,514 4 11
354,730 2 8
£ S. d.
73,108 7 7
46,267 ii 8
46,672 16 8
49,528 16 8
51,056 6 8
61,925 10 1
18,629 1 4
17,481 17 6
18,219 12 6
18,769 11 0
£ S. d.
3,489,320 6 7
3,649,681 12 5
3,771,368 II I
3,777,546 4 9
3,432,9H 6 3
3,866,726 2 O
3,890,074 12 6
3,874,790 15 9
3,552,083 13 II
3,680,629 II O
£ S. d.
292.437 0 0
387,459 IO 0
412,309 IO 0
442,836 19 4
513,063 19 4
434,363 3 0
344,328 3 0
340.438 3 0
292,139 3 0
251,129 3 0
£ S' d.
744,838 8 4
829,216 1 4
870,987 17 9
874,257 14 5
1,026,720 6 0
1,421,588 15 5
1,455,695 0 11
1,521,737 11 5
2,007,525 13 1
1,903,428 12 11
£ S, d.
275,518 19 O
202,107 12 2
241,817 8 5
225,890 19 0
236,058 i 4
367,635 2 3
184,564 4 1
385,978 7 2
458,716 11 2
179,429 12 3
£ s. d.
5,304,148 1 2
5,705,781 11 0
5,853,339 9 2
6,059,170 1 6
6,052,578 13 11
6,800,191 19 11
6,712,810 7 4
7,336,747 5 6
7,i57,53i 184
6,889,605 1 11
PROFIT AND L0SS ACCOUNTS.
Date. | Charges.
——.—.
Gross Profits.
Net Profits.
Carried to
Reserve Fund.
Dividend at io °/ 0 , and Interest
on calls paid in advance.
Bonus at 5 °/ 0 .
31st December, 1883
tt tt 1884 ...
,, tt 1885
it tt 1886
» „ 1887
tt it 1888 ...
tt ,, 1889
a a 1890 ... ...
>i ,, 1891
,, „ 1892
£ s. d.
60,612 19 I
58,804 3 3
61.624 2 3
60,802 9 4
60,492 8 11
59,5io 3 6
65,988 4 2
77,517 14 0
79,777 17 9
80.624 8 10
£ s. d.
119,310 14 0
124,531 18 n
120,096 4 8
103.727 0 5
126,434 9 n
126,609 15 6
3 3
157,008 13 1
163,660 6 11
141,168 14 4
£ S. d.
58,697 14 II
65,727 15 8
58,472 2 5
42,924 11 I
65,942 I O
67,099 12 O
84,411 19 1
79,490 19 I
83,882 9 2
60,544 5 6
£ s. d.
10,000 0 0
17,500 0 0
20,000 0 0
20,000 0 0
20,000 0 0
£ S. d.
3L376 9 0
31,709 15 8
33,876 9 0
36,209 15 8
36,376 9 0
50,036 19 3
63,816 4 0
63,759 19 0
63,728 14 0
63,716 4 0
£ S. d.
15,637 10 0
15,804 3 4
16,887 1° O
18,054 3 4
18,137 10 0
19,776 3 4'
£665,754 n 1
;£i,332,948 1 0
667,193 9 11
,£87,500 0 0
£474,606 18 7
£104,297 0 0


SUMMARY OF THE STATEMENT OF AFFAIRS,
On the 21st day of July, 1893, the date of the Winding-up Order,
(I.) As Regards Creditors.
Gross
Liabilities.
Liabilities.
Expected
Rank.
TO
£ s. d.
1.757,926 0 0
11,655 0 0
474,611 6 4
H5,775 0 9
(See Note.)
Debts and Liabilities, viz. :—
Terminable and Perpetual Deben
tures and Debenture Stock
(1888)
Terminable Debentures overdue,
&c.
Unsecured Creditors
Creditors fully se- ,
cured ... £145,775 0 9
Estimated value of
securities .. 153,403 7 5
£ a
1,757,926 0
”,655 0
474,611 6
d
c
c
4
Estimated Sur-
plus to contra £7,628 6 6
796,932
13 7
Sundry Advances
supposed to be
covered, deduc-
ted per contra £796,932 13 7
39,851
8 3
Acceptances and
drafts against
produce sup-
posed to be
covered ... £39,851 8 3
275,824
13 7
Creditors partly
secured ... £275,824 13 7
Less estimated
value of securi-
ties £269,613 17 4
205,698
351,299
,377,oio
-F* OJ O
OO O
Estimated to rank for dividend ...
Liabilities on bills discounted
other than the Company’s own
acceptance for value £205,698
Not expected to rank for dividend
Other Liabilities£35i,299 3 0
Not expected to rank for dividend
Loans on 4 per
cent consoli-
dated debenture
stock, including
interest, de-
ducted contra £1,377,010 4 0
6,210 16
99 9 9
99 99
9 9 99
3
99
99


Gross
Liabilities.
Liabilities.
Expected to
Rank.
£ s. d.
3,042 16 7
Preferential Cre-
ditor for taxes,
deducted contra 3,042 16 7
£ s. d.
tt tt tt
Estimated surplus after meeting
liabilities of Company, subject
to cost of liquidation
2,250,403 2 7
862,656 3 4
5,439,626 6 1
(See Note.)
3,113.059 5 n
Assets.
Estimated to
Produce.
Cash in hand
Fixtures, fittings, office furniture, &c.
Investments in shares, &c. ... £897,742 17 9
Company’s premises in Australia
and New Zealand ... ... 353> 2 94 0 0
Book debts 4,153,836 3 n
£ s- d.
97 8 5
1,707 10 4
£5.404.873 1 8
Deduct —
Reserve fund balance ... 199,310 9 0
£5, 2 o5,562 12 8
Deduct —
Sundry advances per contra ... 796,932 13 7
4,408,629 19 1
406 0 10
7,628 6 6
74,643 1 4
Bills of Exchange or other similar securities on hand
Surplus from securities in hands of creditors fully
secured, per contra ... ...
Sundry Accounts in transit, receivable in Colonies ...
Estimated total assets ... ...
Deduct loans on 4 per cent, consolidated debenture
stock secured on the assets of the Company as per-
contra ...
Estimated net assets ...
Deduct Preferential Creditor as per contra ...
Estimated amount available to meet unsecured
Creditors, subject to cost of liquidation
4,493,112 6 6
1,377,010 4 0
3,116,102 2 6
3,042 16 7
3,”3,059 5 ”


The nominal amount of unpaid capital liable to be called up is
£3, 137,357 ios.
Note.— These figures are given as they appear in the Statement filed
by the Directors, but it will be obvious that they are overstated to the
extent of 15s. nd.
(II.) As Regards Contributories.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
I
140,000 Ordinary
Estimated Surplus as
Shares of £25
above, subject to
per Share.
cost of Liquida-
Amount called up
tion, £862,656 3 4
at £2 10s. per
share 350,000 0 0
Capital paid there-
on in advance... 12,642 10 0
362,642 10 0
20,000 Ordinary
Shares (Sixth
Issue), £25 per
share.
Amount called up
at £2 10s. per
share 50,000 0 0
Capital paid in ad-
vance thereon... 450,000 0 0
500,000 0 0
862,642 10 0
Unclaimed dividends on shares ... 13 13 4
£862,656 3 4
£862,656 3 4
The Directors have valued the assets at a figure which makes the
Company, without the assistance of uncalled capital, appear to be in a
solvent condition, and have prepared a statement, of which the following
is a summary, explaining the disappearance of the Company’s nominal
reserves :—
EXCESS of ASSETS over capital and liabilities on
£
J. d.
the 31st December, 1889
Thus:— £ s. d.
334,844
2 O
Reserve Fund 270,000 0 0
Balance of profit and loss account 64,844 2 0
Gross profit arising from carrying on business from
£
s. d.
31st December, 1889, to 31st December, 1892 ...
Interest, &c., earned by the Company, between 31st
1,010,679
9 11
December, 1889, and 31st December, 1892, but
not passed through the Profit and Loss Account
pending realisation ... ...
175,655
1 1
Assumed gross profit from 1st January, to 10th July,
1893
124,650 16 11
£1,645,829
9 n


EXPENSES of carrying on business from 31st Decem-
ber, 1889, to 31st December, 1892.
Thus: ~ £ s. d.
Salaries and Wages ... ... 147,374 3 6
Rent, Rates and Taxes 38,509 10 1
Miscellaneous Expenses ... 45,509 3 6
Depreciation written off ... 9,600 0 0
Interest on Loans from Bankers
and on deposit and current
accounts 81,286 2 10
Interest on Debentures and Calls
paid in advance on 6th Issue of
Shares 414,035 17 11
Interest on Consolidated 4 per
cent. Debenture Stock ... 5,391 4 6
£
741,706
51,023
s. d.
Bad debts written off to 31st December, 1892
Directors’ Fees from 31st December, 1889, to 31st
2 4
0 O
December, 1892
6,62 5
IQ 2
Dividends paid since 31st December, 1889
Proportion of expenses attending share and Deben-
ture issues written off between December, 1889,
189,362 19 O
and 31st December, 1892 ...
16,656
14 7
Grants to Officers’Provident Fund
Expenses of carrying on business from 1st Tanuary,
1893, to 10th July, 1893 £ s . d.
Salaries and Wages 5,365 1 0
Rent, Rates and Taxes ... 4,422 2 0
Interest on Loans 74,454 9 8
4,500
0 O
Directors’ Fees from 1st January, 1893
Sundry Accounts now written off—
(1) Consolidated 4 per cent. Debenture Stock
84,241
1,050
12 8
0 0
Expenses account ...
(2) Amount of said Debenture Stock lodged with
Messrs. J. H. Schroder & Co., in excess of the
*150,999
3 11
amount of their debt
(3) Amount included in Balance-sheet of 1892
as an asset under the heading of “ dividend
13,278
10 9
suspense account ”
Total amount written off Book Debts for the purposes
of the present statement including the item of
11,419
17 4
£ 1 99,3 10 9 s - appearing in the summary
374,965
10 1
9 11
* This includes a balance of £13,728 6s. 4d. of expenses on Debenture
issues prior to 1892.
As regards the London Office, the Books of account appear to be of a
complete and satisfactory character.


The total number of individual creditors returned in the Statement is
upwards of 4,500: the contributories number about 1,600.
The liability of the Company on debentures, which are returned as
unsecured, is made up as follows :
Rate per cent.
Terminable Debentures,’! ~ ,
maturing 1893-1902.. / A 1,508,868 mostly 4 J per cent.
Perpetual Debentures ... 184,993 4 per cent.
Debenture Stock (1888) 64,065 4 per cent.
£1.757.926
In addition thereto it will be observed that the Company is under a
total liability of £1,377,010 4s. in respect of 4 per cent. Consolidated
Debenture stock and interest, and it will be convenient at this point to
review generally the operations of the Company in respect of its
Debentures.
The present Debenture liability is to a large extent the result of the
issue of various prospectuses, all of which appear to have been extensively
advertised.
Under Article 37 of the Articles of Association the Directors are
restricted as regards their borrowing powers on Debentures to the amount
of the uncalled capital.
At a very early stage of its history the Company appears to have begun
to borrow money on Terminable Debentures. A general form of
application was supplied to intending investors, and one noticeable
paragraph in the forms used prior to August, 1892, is to the following
effect : —“The Debentures and Debenture Stock are limited to and are
secured by the unpaid capital (£3,137,233), and the investments and
general assets of the Company.”
It, however, appears that no security was specifically charged for the
benefit of this class of investors.
These Terminable Debentures have been issued at par.
In 188 x the Company issued a prospectus with the object of obtaining
subscriptions for four per cent. Perpetual Debentures, to be issued at £97
per £lOO, and also with the view of inducing the holders of Terminable
Debentures to convert them into these Perpetual Debentures. The
Perpetual Debentures were to be redeemable by the Company on six
months’notice at £lO5 per £lOO nominal. This prospectus also stated
that the Debentures “ are amply secured by the unpaid capital of the
Company (which at present exceeds £2,600,000), and by the investments
and general assets of the Company.”
In 1888 the Company again issued a prospectus with the object of
obtaining subscriptions for £250,000 four per cent. Debenture Stock, the
issue to be at £97 per £lOO, redeemable after 20 years at £llO. A state-
ment was made in this prospectus that:—“ The Debentures and Deben-
ture Slock of the Company are secured on the capital, investments and
general assets, which exhibit a total of upwards of £8,000,000.”
The stock certificate issued by the Company under this prospectus states
that : —“ The Stock is constituted and secured by trust deed.”
No security, however, appears by the Trust Deed to be specifically
charged to the Trustees, the holders of this stock being consequently in the
same position as ordinary unsecured creditors.


In 1892 a prospectus was issued for the purpose of securing
subscriptions for £550,000 four per cent. Consolidated Debenture
Stock at £94 per £lOO, redeemable at par on the Ist January,
1953. This prospectus contemplated the creation of £3,137,357
of this stock, the balance of which, over and above the £550,000 above-
mentioned, was proposed to be given as far as required to the holders of
outstanding Debentures and Debenture Stock, in substitution for their
existing securities, the conversion to be made in all cases on an actuarially
fixed basis. The prospectus does not state that the outstanding Deben-
tures and Debenture Stock were absolulely unsecured, but does explain
that the new issue would be secured by a mortgage on the uncalled capital
and a floating charge on the undertaking of the Company, which charge
was duly effected by a Trust Deed executed on August 4, 1892, and
referred to hereunder.
The whole of the £550,000 offered for subscription was subscribed for,
and in addition ,£345,965 Terminable Debentures, £201,972 Perpetual
Debentures, £91,197 1888 Debenture Stock, and £3,000 fixed deposits,
were converted on the terms set out in the prospectus. Besides these there
has been issued Stock for £21,396 12s. iod. in satisfaction of capitalised
interest, &c., and £160,564 os. 2d. in respect principally of further
subscriptions at 94 per cent., which brings the total issue to £1,374,094 135.;
this amount, with £2,915 ns. for interest owing, represents the present
liability.
The issue of this Consolidated Debenture Stock was effected at consider-
able expense to the company; the stamp duties, commissions to agents,
&c., appear to have amounted to about £7,000 ; the discount, in respect
of the issue having been made at 94 per cent., amounts to upwards of
£60,000; a commission amounting to £46.750 was allowed to Messrs.
J. H. Schroder & Company for services in connection with the issue of
£550,000, and the same firm appear to have received also a further com-
mission of £15,664 in respect of the conversions from Terminable and
other Debentures into Consolidated Stock.
The form of Stock certificate issued by the Company states, it may be
observed, in terns identical with those of the 1888 Stock certificate, that:
“ The Stock is constituted and secured by Trust Deed.”
Notices, with forms giving investors an opportunity to exchange their
security, were issued on 22nd July and 6th August, 1892, and a reminder
was sent on the 10th April, 1893, intimating that the option would only
remain in existence until the 24th April, 1893, after which date the terms
of conversion would be subject to periodical arrangement, regulated by the
current market price.
Up to 1892 the Company’s annual business prospectuses (issued with
their published accounts) refer to the position of the Debenture Holders in
terms practically identical with those used in the form of application for
Terminable Debentures, namely, that they were secured by the unpaid
capital and by the investments and general assets of the Company. In
the published accounts of the Company to the 31st December, 1892, the
Consolidated Debenture Stock is included in the Company’s total liability
on debentures under the head of “Debentures and Debenture Stock,
The conversion was referred to in the Company’s Report presented to
the Shareholders on the 3rd February, 1893, in the following terms :


“ During the last six months the Directors formulated a scheme for the
issue of £550,000 4 per cent. Debenture Stock and for the conversion and
consolidation of the various outstanding Debentures and Debenture Stock
of the Company into one uniform 4 per cent. Debenture Stock. Although
this operation was carried out only during the closing months of the year
1892, not only was the above issue of Debenture Capital succesfully
accomplished, but the scheme of conversion has since been largely adopted
and is proceeding satisfactorily. This conversion is a highly important
episode in the history of the Company, and as it progresses it will not only
strengthen the position of the Company, but conduce to greater economy
in its administration.”
On the 13th July, 1893, Mr. Alexander Young, 41, Coleman Street,
E.C., was appointed Receiver and Manager for the Debenture Stock-
holders under the 1892 issue, and he is now in possession of and dealing
with the Assets of the Company.
The Company has in a number of cases allowed commissions to agents
for securing Debenture and Debenture Stock Investments, which commis-
sions have varied from J to I per cent.
The “Terminable Debentures overdue, &c.” (£11,655), represent
liabilities which the Company would in the ordinary course have paid off
prior to the 21st July, 1893.
The “ unsecured indebtedness” (£474,611) is made up as follows :
Sundry Creditors to a considerable extent
£
s.
d.
holding Bills
Estimated amount that will be owing to brokers
and factors when various account sales have
29,310
9
II
been rendered
Amount owing owing on Bills, &c., to Colonial
2,360
11
0
Bankers
Interest owing on Terminable and Perpetual
Debenture and Debenture Stock (1888) to 10th
107,626
O
0
July, 1893
Amount owing for unpaid guaranteed mortgages
6,626
19
8
and interest warrants
Drafts drawn on the Company in the Colonies,
846
16
9
but not accepted
Sundry accounts in transit, including the differ-
ences between London and Colonial inter-
14.436
8
6
official balances (approximate)
Unsecured Creditors in Australia as ascertained
62,228
0
6
by cablegram
Unsecured Creditors in New Zealand as ascer-
154.673
0
0
tained by cablegram
96,503
0
0
Total
474,611
6
4
Of the “Creditors fully secured” (£145,775) one, whose claim is
returned at £93,707 is. iod., is stated to hold as security certain bills
received by the Company from customers, certain debentures of another
Company, and a number of bills of lading, together estimated at the total
realisable value of .£101,335 Bs. 4d. ; another creditor, whose debt is


£40,054 15 s - nd., holds as security 4 per cent. Consolidated Debenture
Stock of the Company of the nominal value of .£53,333 6s. Bd., which
amount is included in the item of £1,377,010 4s. already referred to ;
and another creditor for £"12,013 3 s * holds certain further acceptances by
the Company’s customers and bills of lading, estimated as of the amount
of the debt.
All the details of the securities held by creditors whose claims are
supposed to be covered, viz., £796,932 13s. 7d., are not available, only
the totals having in some cases been received from the other side, but the
total book value would appear to be £"i, 151,873. These securities appear
to form part of three classes of assets, viz., Company’s Premises, Invest-
ments and Book Debts (including loans on mortgages), and Bills
Receivable.
The “ Acceptances and drafts,” amounting to £39,851, are returned as
having documents attached, which are estimated to be of more than suffi-
cient value to cover the amount of the claims; since the Statement of
Affairs was filed the majority of these claims have run off, and the balance
is expected to do so in due course.
Of the “ Creditors partly secured ” (£275,824), one, whose debt
amounts to £246,824 13s. 7d., is stated to hold as security certain cus-
tomers’ bills, certain debentures of another Company, and a number of
warrants over wool and other produce, which are together estimated at
£243,613 17s. 4d.; another creditor whose claim amounts to £29,000, holds
security (Stock Mortgages and Wool-liens) which was cabled from the other
side as being of the value of £26,000, but of which no particulars were
forthcoming when the Statement was filed. Subsequent advices made it
appear that the latter security will probably be of sufficient value to cover
the debt.
The liability of the Company on bills discounted (£205,698) is a figure
ascertained by cablegram, from which it would appear that the amount
owing in Australia is £175,669, and in New Zealand £30,029. The latter
amount is expected to run off in due course. With regard to the amount
owing in Australia, it should be stated that the principal portion thereof
consists of Customers’ acceptances, against which securities are held by
the Company ; these, securities, taken at their book value, are in excess
of the amount of the Bills, but it is not expected that the Bills will be met
at maturity in all cases.
The “ Other liabilities ” (£351,299) represent the Company’s obliga-
tions on mortgages, &c., which they have guaranteed. £201,299 of the
mortgages are on properties in New Zealand which are considered to fur-
nish adequate security; the balance of the liability (£150,000) is in
respect of the Debentures of another Company, which is in liquidation,
and Trustees for Debenture-holders are in possession of its assets; the
liability in the latter case cannot at present be estimated.
The “ Investments in shares, &c.” (£897,742), comprise Debentures
and Shares in other Companies, several of which investments, it is stated,
were made in small industrial and pastoral undertakings to attract
business ; the Official Receiver is disposed, from the limited information
regarding these investments, which up to the present time has come into
his possession, to regard the estimate of their value as a somewhat san-
guine one. Some ot the shares carry liability amounting in one case to
£211,697 : the Directors do not regard this particular claim as likely to


be enforced, but the Official Receiver is not clear that their view of the
position is a correct one.
The “ Company’s premises in Australia and New Zealand” represent
about twenty warehouses and stores, land and office premises. The
amount must not be taken as immediately realisable, but it is stated that
the valuation would be a fair one for the purpose of a going concern.
The “ Book Debts ” (£4,153,836) must be regarded to some extent as
a doubtful asset. The amount represents (at book values) the advances
made on pastoral and other properties, Bills and Drafts receivable and
amounts owing on individual accounts, less a special reserve of
£175,655 is. id. These figures bear no actual relation to the valuations,
which may be more or less. The securities held are charges on pastoral
runs, wool liens, mortgages on stock, &c. The Company in London has
not a complete detailed valuation of all the securities held, although in certain
cases full particulars have been furnished. At the present time there are no
data in London from which a conclusive opinion as to the value of these
securities can be formed. Upwards of fifteen stations were at the date of
the winding-up order under the Company’s management, summaries of the
results of the working of which had been sent to London from year to
year.
With regard to the value of the assets generally Messrs. Turquand,
Youngs, & Co. report on the 2nd August, 1893, that “ Their real value
must obviously depend to a large extent upon the way in which they are
dealt with. In the event of a forced liquidation, and apart from the
machinery of a going concern, there must be necessarily in present circum-
stances an enormous loss. In the event even of a satisfactory scheme of
reconstruction being carried, under the terms of which the Company
would not be obliged to realise except in favourable times and when con-
ditions were favourable, and notwithstanding the fact that we have applied
the balance of the Reserve Fund, £199,310, in reduction of the apparent
value of the Assets, and had previously treated in a similar manner the
whole of the Reserves created in past years and remaining at the Credit
of Contingent and Suspense Accounts amounting to ,£175,655, making
together £374,965, we are of opinion, after an inspection of the material
which have been placed before us, that further loss will eventually have
to be provided for, although it is impossible at present to say to what
extent.”
Messrs. Turquand, Youngs, & Co. have prepared a schedule of advances
which, exclusive of sums under £3OO, exhibits in a concise form the
figures appearing in the latest reports, and represents the position in
Australia at 24th April, and in New Zealand at 27th March, 1893. It
will be observed that the figures do not agree with the present position,
but they are sufficiently in agreement to show the nature of the accounts.
(See page 91.)
The Directors also consider that, by reason of the financial crisis expe-
rienced in Australia during the present year, and the consequent difficulty
in assessing the value of assets there, it may be needful, as a prudential
measure, to make further provision against contingent losses, the amount
of which they cannot at present estimate.
The “ Sundry accounts in transit ” (£74,643) must, for the present,
pending the receipt of further mail advices and the final adjustment of
accounts with the Colonies, be regarded as approximate.


Amount of Advances.
Australia.
New Zealand.
Total.
No.
Amount
No.
Amount.
No.
Amount.
Average.
,£300 and under
120
97,988
399
320,896
519
418,884
807
2,000
»
n
5»ooo
45
141,362
85
255,275
130
396,637
3,051
5,000
)»
>>
10,000
23
M7,705
36
236,278
59
383,983
6,508
10,000
>>
25,000
36
558,721
30
442,072
66
1,000,793
15,163
25,000
n
50,000
28
940,738
6
189,881
34
1,130,619
33,253
50,000
))
>5
75.ooo
8
407,688
2
125,320
10
533,008
53,300
75,000
100,000
2
181,673
2
181,673
90,836
100,000
>5
>>
150,000
4
508,400
1
115,128
5
624,228
124,845
Total
266
2,984,275
559
1,685,550
825
4,669,825
5,660


In certain cases a a divergence from the figures given in the Statement
of Affairs may occur, but the Official Receiver learns, at the date of this
Report, that, since fuller inquiries have been made and various adjustments
of account effected, the total original figures remain substantially correct.
The London Manager, Mr. H. M. Paul, states that the goodwill of the
business is of very considerable value, in consequence of most valuable
wool and produce connection, and extensive agency business throughout
the Australasian Colonies ; and that the Company does the largest wool
consignment business of any institution connected with the said Colonies.
The issue and conversion of Debentures and Debenture Stock are
matters as to which further inquiry may be deemed to be desirable;
the question of applying for a Public Examination is being considered.
The issue of these Observations and the Notices of the Meetings has,
with the sanction of the Court and at the desire of the Committee hereafter
referred to, been delayed in order to give the Committee an opportunity
to report the result of their deliberations to the creditors and shareholders
at the Statutory Meetings.
PROPOSED SCHEME OF ARRANGEMENT.
Under an Order of the Court, a Preliminary Meeting of Creditors,
other than the Consolidated Debenture Stockholders, who, as before
stated, are secured by Mortgage of the Assets 'of the Company, was held
on August 4th, 1893. At the meeting the following resolutions were
passed unanimously:—
“ That a Committee of Creditors be appointed to consider the posi-
tion of the Company, the rights of the various classes of creditors, and
the possibility of framing any scheme of reconstruction, and to report
to a future meeting to be called by the Official Receiver.”
“ That the Committee should consist of nine persons, two of whom
should be 1892 Consolidated Debenture Stockholders.”
The following names were approved : Mr. W. C. Slaughter, Mr.
A. O. Robinson, Mr. Robert Beatson, Mr. William Garson, Mr.
11. C. Bowles Bowles, Mr. Vesey G. M. Holt, and Mr. James
Sparrow, and it was resolved that the two others, representing the
1892 Consolidated Debenture Stockholders, should be nominated
through Messrs. Hollams, Son, & Coward, the solicitors in the
Debenture action.
Although no one representing the interests of the Consolidated Deben-
ture Stockholders has, as proposed by the above resolution, actually
joined the Committee, the Committee has been in communication with the
representatives of the Consolidated Debenture Stockholders, with regard
to the position of the Company and the scheme of arrangement.
A scheme of arrangement has been practically agreed to by the Com-
mittee, but its issue is withheld pending the settlement of an unforeseen
difficulty which has arisen at the date of this report.
C. J. STEWART,
Official Receiver and Provisional Liquidator.
33, Carey Street, London, W.C,
20 th December , 1893.


New Zealand Loan & Mercantile Agency
Company, Limited.
SCHEME OF ARRANGEMENT.
(As approved by the Comtnittee of Creditors appointed at the Meeting
held on August 4, 1893.)
1. A new Company shall be formed with the same name, to acquire the
undertaking and property of the old Company, and to assume and provide
for its liabilities in manner hereinafcer mentioned.
2. The capital of the new Company shall be 900,000, in 320,000
Ordinary Shares of £lO each, and 200,000 5 per cent, cumulative
Preference Shares of £3 10s. each, preferred as to capital and convertible
into Preference Stock when fully paid.
3. A call of £22 10s. per share shall forthwith be made on the Ordinary
Shares in the old Company.
4. Forthwith after incorporation, the Board of Directors of the new
Company shall make to each holder of Ordinary shares in the old
Company, except S'xth Issue shares, an al'otment, conditional on accept-
ance thereof within fourteen days, of two Ordinary shares in the new
Company each credited with 10s. paid and one Preference share for every
share he holds in the old Company. The following payments shall be
made upon the shares in the new Company :
On Ordinary shares — £1 per share fourteen days after allotment, with
option to pay same by the following instalments with interest from
that date at 5 per cent, per annum, until payment:—
ss. per share 14 days after allotment.
ss. ~ 6 months after allotment.
s®* » 12 ~ ~ ~
s®* »» 15 >» » »
On Preference Shares —£3 10s. per Share, fourteen days after allotment,
with option to pay same by the following instalments, with interest
from that date at 5 per cent, per annum until payment:—
10s. per Share 14 days after allotment.
1 os. ~ 3 months after allotment,
i os. )j 9 )) j)
20s. ~ 18 ~ ~ ~
20s. ~ 24 ~ ~ ~
Acceptance of allotment, and payment of the first instalments, as above,
shall release the Shareholder from the call upon his shares in the old
Company.


5. The Board of Directors of the new Company shall allot to each
holder of fully-paid Sixth Issue shares in the old Company of £25 each, in
satisfaction of all claims in respect thereof, one Preference share in the
new Company fully paid, and two Ordinary shares, for each Sixth Issue
share in the old Company. Upon the Ordinary shares £1 1 os. per share
shall be credited as paid, and £8 10s. per share as a payment in advance
of calls, carrying a fixed dividend at 5 per cent, per annum. Such
dividend shall be cumulative, but payable out of profits only, and shall rank
next after dividend on Preference shares.
6. Holders of Ordinary shares of the old Company, other than Sixth
Issue shares, shall be entitled to have the amounts paid by them to the
old Company in advance of calls credited, so far as the same may extend ;
firstly, to the payment of the sum of £1 per share on their Ordinary shares
in the new Company; secondly, to the payment of £3 10s. per share on
their Preference shares, and the balance (if any) as a further payment on
their said Ordinary shares in the new Company.
7. The effect of this would be as follows :
Total calls under Clause 4 ,£770,000 o o
Deduct payments in advance of calls ... 12,642 10 o
£757,357 10 o
Subscribed capital of the new Company :
160,000 5 per cent. Preference shares of £3 10s. each (fully paid) £560,000
40,000 Ordinary shares of £lO each (fully paid) 400,000
280,000 ~ ~ ~ (30s. paid) 2,800,000
£3,760,000
8. Any shareholder of the old Company who shall not within fourteen
days after notice of allotment of shares in the new Company, as aforesaid,
accept the same and pay the first instalments on the Ordinary shares and
Preference shares allotted, shall be excluded from the benefit of this
scheme, and remain liable for the call on the Ordinary shares of the old
Company. In the case of shares entered on any Colonial register the
period shall be twenty-one days instead of fourteen days, and in Australia
acceptance of allotments may be made to the offices of the old Company
at Adelaide, Melbourne, or Sydney, and in New Zealand at Auckland.
Provided that the liquidator may, in special cases, at his discretion,
extend the times above-mentioned upon such terms as he thinks fit.
9. The new Company shall pay all claims payable in priority in the
winding up of the old Company, and also all interest accrued to July I,
1893, on Guaranteed Mortgages, Debenture Stock, and Terminable and
Perpetual Debentures.
10. The new Company shall satisfy all costs, charges, and expenses
incident to the liquidation, the preparation and carrying out of this scheme
(including those of the creditors’ Committees) and the creditors’ meetings
and the proceedings consequent thereon, and of the plaintiffs and
defendants in the action “ Schroder v. The New Zealand Loan and
Mercantile Agency Company, Limited,” 1893, S. No. 2,580, as between
solicit' r and client.


11. The new Company shall create perpetual prior lien and “ A ” and
“ B ” Debenture Stocks to the amounts requisite for the purposes of this
scheme, as follows :
(1) Prior Lien Debenture Stock carrying interest at 4 per cent, per
annum from April 1, 1894, and secured by a specific first mortgage
in favour of trustees upon the uncalled capital, and upon all proper-
ties and mortgages to be defined in a list to be identified by the
signatures of Mr. Alexander Young and the Chairman of the
Committee of Creditors, and by a floating first charge upon the
undertaking and property of the new Company. This Stock will
be redeemable at a premium of 2\ per cent.
(2) “A” Debenture Stock carrying interest at 5 percent, per annum
from April 1, 1894 and secured by a specific second mortgage in
favour of Trustees upon the uncalled capital and upon the properties
and mortgages comprised in the said list, and by a floating second
charge upon the undertaking and property of the new Company.
This Stock will be redeemable after redemption of the Prior Lien
r Debenture Stock at a premium of 5 per cent.
(3) “ B ” Debenture Stock carrying interest at 5 per cent, per annum
from April 1, 1894. So long as any Prior Lien Debenture Stock
is unredeemed, such interest shall only be paid so far as the profits
of the new Company shall suffice for that purpose after paying
interest upon the Prior Lien Debenture Stock and the “A”
Debenture Stock, but shall be cumulative and be a debt provable
in the event of liquidation, and no dividends shall be paid so long
as any such interest is in arrear. When the Prior Lien Debenture
Stock shall have been redeemed, the interest shall be payable with-
out reference to profits. The “B ” Debenture Stock shall be
secured by a specific third mortgage in favour of Trustees, upon the
uncalled capital and upon the properties and mortgages comprised
in the said list, and by a floating third charge upon the undertaking
and property of the new Company. This Stock will be redeemable
after redemption of the “A” Debenture Stock at a premium of
5 per cent.
All the said Debenture Stocks will be issued in sums of or any
multiple thereof. All redemptions shall be by drawings at six months’
notice, and all stock redeemed shall be cancelled and not re-issued.
12. No class of Debenture Stock shall be increased by more than
,£IOO,OOO beyond the amount required for the purposes of this scheme
without the consent of that class in general meeting, and in the case of the
Prior Lien Debenture Stock, the consent also of three out of the four
Trustees for the Prior Lien and “A” Debenture Stocks.
13. The Trustees for the Prior Lien Debenture Stock shall be nominated
by a majority of the Trustees for the Consolidated 4 per cent. Debenture
Stock of the old Company, and the Trustees for the “A” and “B”
Debenture Stocks shall be nominated by the Committee of creditors.
14. The new Company shall issue to each holder of the Consolidated 4
per cent. Debenture Stock of the old Company an equivalent amount of
Prior Lien Debenture Stock of the new Company. The new Company
shall also pay to each holder of the said Consolidated 4 per cent. Deben-
ture Stock, all interest due to him up to March 31, 1894.
15. The new Company shall issue to each holder of 1888 4 per cent.


Debenture Stock, 4 per cent. Perpetual Debentures, and Terminable
Debentures of the old Company, “A” and “B” Debenture Stocks of
the new Company, in equal moieties to an amount together equal to his
holding of the said Stock and Debentures. The new Company shall also
issue to each holder of the said Stock and Debentures Prior Lien Deben-
ture Stock to an amount equal to the interest upon his Stock and Deben-
tures from July 1, 1893, to March 31, 1894.
16. The new Company shall issue to each holder of mortgages, charges,
or other securities of the old Company (not being Debenture Stock or
Debentures of the old Company), or of Debentures or other securities
(other than mortgages) guaranteed by the old Company, “A ” and “ B ”
Debenture Stocks in equal moieties at par to an amount equal to any
deficiency in principal and interest.
17. As regards mortgages guaranteed by the old Company, in respect of
principal or interest or both, the new Company shall until realisation
collect the interest and acconnt to each holder of such mortgages for such
part thereof as he may be entitled to receive under his agreement with the
old Company (the new Company retaining as commission the balance of
such interest), and shall realise such mortgages as opportunity offers, with
power to the Board of Directors of the new Company, with consent of the
holder, to agree to any extension or renewal thereof. Upon ultimate
realisation, the new Company shall issue to each holder of any such mort-
gage, “A” and “ B ” Debenture Stocks in equal moieties, to an amount
equal to any loss by him of any guaranteed principal or interest.
18. The new Company may enter into any arrangements for settling,
defining or dealing with the claims of any of the creditors mentioned in
Clauses 16 and 17 hereof, and redeeming the securities held by them upon
such terms as the new Company may think fit, including the issue of
Prior Lien or “A” or “B” Debenture Stocks. Provided that every
such arrangement shall be subject to approval by (1) The liquidator of the
old Company until the liquidation is closed ; (2) The Trustees for the
Prior Lien Debenture Stock when appointed, and until their appointment
the Trustees for the Consolidated 4 per cent. Debenture Stock of the old
Company, and (3) The Trustees for the “A” and “B” Debenture
Stocks when appointed, and until their appointment the said committee of
creditors.
19. The new Company shall pay to each creditor unsecured on current
account and unsecured holder of bills payable, upon which the old
Company at the commencement of the winding up was liable as
acceptor, drawer, or endorser, or under a contract to accept the same,
12J per cent, of the amount of his claim with interest at 5 per cent, per
annum capitalised to June 30, 1894, on such portion thereof (if any) as
carries interest, in cash, in four equal instalments of per cent, on
July 1, 1894, October I, 1894, April 1, 1895, and October 1,
1895, with interest at 5 per cent, per annum upon the amount of such
cash for the time being unpaid. For the remaining per cent, the new
Company shall issue to each such creditor Prior Lien and “ A ” and “ B ”
Debenture Stocks in the proportion of 37J per cent., 25 per cent., and
25 per cent, respectively.
20. The new Company shall pay each creditor under £lO in cash, half
within three months after the incorporation of the new Company, and half
within six months.


21. The new Company shall issue to each creditor not herein specially
provided for, “A” and “B” Debenture Stocks in equal moieties to an
amount equal to his claim provable against the old Company.
22. Forthwith after this scheme shall have become finally binding on
all parties, each creditor of the old Company shall, subject to the carrying
out of this scheme, hold his claim in trust for the new Company, and shall
at the expense of the new Company, release or deal with the same as the
new Company directs. The new Company shall deal with such claims
for the purpose of entitling them to enforce the call under Clause 3, of
ensuring the carrying out of this scheme and preserving the relative rights
and liabilities of the assenting and non-assenting shareholders. The
Trustees for the Consolidated £4 per cent. Debenture Stock of the old
Company shall hold their security upon trust for the Trustees for the
Prior Lien and “A”and“B” Debenture Stocks according to their
rights of priority as hereinbefore defined and for the purpose of carrying
out this scheme, and every shareholder accepting shares in the new
Company in accordance therewith shall be discharged from liability under
any charge upon the uncalled capital of the old Company.
23. All sums received by the new Company on realisation of freehold
or leasehold properties, or mortgages, or charges, shall after payment of
expenses and of any other moneys properly payable thereout, be paid to
the Trustees for the prior Lien or “A” or “B” Debenture Stocks,
according to their rights of priority as hereinbefore defined. Three-fourths
of such moneys shall be applied in redeeming the Debenture Stock of
which they are Trustees, and the remaining one-fourth shall be paid to the
new Company and employed in the business. The whole net proceeds of
sale of all shares in any Company held by the old Company shall be paid
to the said Trustees respectively, according to their rights of priority as
hereinbefore defined, and applied in redeeming Prior Lien and “ A ” or
“ B ” Debenture Stocks respectively, according to their rights of priority as
hereinbefore defined.
24. The Board of Directors of the new Company may at any time apply
in redeeming Prior Lien and “ A ” and “ B ” Debenture Stocks, according
to their rights of priority as hereinbefore defined, such sums as they shall
think fit, in addition to those to be so applied under Clause 23.
25. The Trustees for the Prior Lien and for the “A” and “B”
Debenture Stocks shall in each case be two in number, and shall be
remunerated by the new Company. The first Trustees for the “A”
Debenture Stock shall also be the Trustees for the “ B ” Debenture Stock,
but in case any conflict of interest shall arise between the “ A ” and “ B ”
Debenture Stocks, separate Trustees for the “B” Debenture Stock may
be appointed.
26. As regards creditors who would become entitled hereunder to
fractional parts of ,£lO of Prior Lien or “ A ” or “ B ” Debenture Stocks,
the Stock representing such fractions shall be issued to the Trustees of
those Stocks respectively, and the creditors shall receive fractional Scrip
Certificates.
27. The Trustees for the “A” Debenture Stock shall have power
from time to time to appoint one of themselves or some other person to
be a director of the new Company and to fill any vacancy occurring in
the office of any director so appointed.
28. So long as any Prior Lien Debenture Stock shall be unredeemed


no person shall be appointed auditor of the new Company who shall
be disapproved of by the Trustees for the Prior Lien and “A” Deben-
ture Stocks or a majority of such Trustees, and thereafter by the Trustees
for the “ A ” and “ B ” Debenture Stocks or a majority of such Trustees.
The Auditor or Auditors in addition to giving a general certificate shall
also, so long as any of the Prior Lien Debenture Stock shall be unre-
deemed, certify each year whether in his or their opinion the profits of
the Company admit of payment of interest at the full rate of 5 per cent,
per annum on the “B” Debenture Stock, and if not, at what rate (if
any). The Auditor or Auditors shall also furnish to the Trustees for
the Prior Lien and “ A ” and “ B ” Debenture Stocks respectively all
such information as they shall require concerning the affairs of the new
Company.
29. The Trust deeds to secure the Prior Lien and “A” and “B”
Debenture Stocks respectively and the Memorandum and Articles of
Association of the new Company shall contain all such provisions as shall
be required by the Trustees for the existing Consolidated 4 per cent.
Debenture Stock of the old Company and by the said Committee of
Creditors, and any difference shall be determined by Mr. H. H. Cozens-
Hardy, Q.C., or such other Counsel as may be agreed on.
30. The Board of Directors of the new Company shall consist of not
less than five nor more than seven members. No person shall be
appointed a first Director who shall be objected to by a majority of four
persons, to be nominated, two by the Trustees for the Consolidated 4 per
cent. Debenture Stock of the old Company and two by the Committee of
Creditors, and thereafter, and so long as any of the Prior Lien Debenture
Stock shall be unredeemed, no person shall be appointed a Director who
shall be objected to by the Trustees for the Prior Lien and “ A ” Deben-
ture Stocks or a majority of them, or thereafter, by the Trustees for the
“A ” and “B ” Debenture Stocks or a majority of them. Subject as
aforesaid, the Board shall be elected as may be provided by the Articles
of Association.
31. If on realisation or valuation for the purposes of a Balance Sheet the
assets acquired by the New Company shall be found to exceed the amount
given for the same, such excess shall not be taken into account for the
purpose of dividends, but shall to the extent of be carried to a
Capital Reserve.
32. No transfer of shares of the new Company shall be allowed until, as
regards Preference shares they are fully paid, or, as regards Ordinary
shares, the call of £1 per share provided for by Clause 4 has been paid or
credited as paid, unless the Transferor shall sign a proper document to
make him jointly and severally responsible with the Transferee for all calls
up to 10s. per Preference share and 20s. per Ordinary share. When
the call of £l per share is paid or credited as aforesaid, transfers of
Ordinary shares may be allowed to persons who in the opinion of the
Board of Directors of the New Company are responsible for the amount
remaining unpaid on such shares.
33. This scheme is subject to such modification as the Court may
require or direct to be made therein.
34. Unless within one month after sanction hereof by the High Court
of Justice or Court of Appeal in England the New Company shall be
incorporated, and unless, within one month after such incorporation, or


such further time in either case as the Court may approve, allotments of
sufficient Preference shares and Ordinary share of the New Company shall
have been accepted as aforesaid to produce not less than the sum of
when 1 os. and £l per share respectively have been paid, and the first
instalments of 10s. and ss. per share shall have been paid thereon
respectively, the Liquidator may, within one month after the expiration
of either of such periods on the application of the Board of Directors of
the new Company, or of the Trustees for the Consolidated Four per
Cent. Debenture Stock of the old Company, or of the said Committee of
Creditors, annul this scheme, but in that case the c ists hereinbefore
provided to be borne by the new Company shall be paid out of the assets
of the old Company.
Dated the 9th day of January, 1894.


