

WOMEN’S POLITICAL ASSOCIATION.
VERBATIM REPORT OF
Mrs. Pankhurst’s Last Speech
BEFORE
HER
ARREST.
Given at the Town Hall, Chelsea,
Friday, 21st February, 1913.
. f J .
l am very glad to have this one more of explain-
ing to an audience in London the meaning of the women’s revo-
lution, because it is as much a revolution which is going on in
Great Britain as is that series of events taking place in Mexico
—a revolution. We here in Chelsea are too far away from
Mexico to be able to judge of the merits of the case over there,
but one thing we do know, and it is this: That, rightly pr
wrongly, a large proportion of the population of Mexico have
come to the conclusion that life under the form of government
there was intolerable for them, and therefore they have done
what men in all the history of the world have thought them-
selves justified in doing; they have revolted against their
government, and they have adopted the usual methods employed
by men. They have taken to methods of insurrection.
Now, when the treatment of the Franchise Bill and the
Woman Suffrage amendments were tinder discussion in the
House of Commons, Lord Robert Cecil said that, had men in
this country been treated as women had been in that matter,
there would have been insurrection. There was no doubt about
it. Well, T think we have convinced the British public that when
women are treated in that way they also take to insurrection.
Ijow, if you get the right point of view about what we have been
doing, you will realise that our insurrection is characterised by
| very much greater self-restraint than are men’s insurrections.
®I read.Mhat in Mexico thousands of non-combatants have not
merelymad their letters destroyed, but they have had their lives
rrihH were the circumstances there that these
human Jjfodies had paraffin poured over them, and were set
S'light Wid burned, in order to put a stop to the dangers of
pestilence. That is how men conduct civil wars.
Well, you know perfectly well that, in spite of the alarmist
accounts that you see in the press, so far in our agitation no
human being has suffered except the women who are fighting
for the liberty of women. As far as we can secure it, even at
tremendous risk to ourselves, that self-restraint on the part of
women, and that safeguarding of human life will be maintained
until we have won, but short of that we mean to do everything
and all things that become necessary in order to settle this ques-
tion of the status of women in this country once and for all.
“I am a Law-abiding Woman.”
Now, when people take to methods of insurrection, when they
proclaim a civil war, they take upon themselves a very serious
responsibility. No one recognises that more than the women
who are fighting in this women’s civil war. I am by nature (and
so are all our women) a law-abiding woman. Nothing but ex-
treme provocation leads women to break the law. Nothing but
extreme provocation would lead women to interfere with the
ordinary life of any other human being, but I maintain, without
fear of contradiction, that never in any civil war in this country,
or any other country, have men had greater provocation, greater
grievances than have women at the present time. I accept any
challenge to prove that the condition of women, that the dangers
to which women are exposed—the grievances of women, are
as great —no, are greater—than have been the grievances of any
section of any population in any country when civil war has
been thought justifiable.
T have with me here to-night a report of women, and men, too,
who are engaged in dealing with those most unfortunate mem-
bers of the community who are not safeguarded by law, or the
administration of the law, as they ought to be, and who never
will be until wonlen possess political power and have a better
control over the law. I say to women in this meeting: listen to
what I am going to read to you in a few words, and then tell me
if you are not satisfied that this sort of thing can only be
stopped by a revolution such as ours. I ask you whether we are
not justified'in everything that we have done in our attempt
to wake up the public conscience of this country, and force the
Government of the day to do something to remove these
grievances. It is from a report presented at the last annual
conference of that highly respectable and constitutional body,
the National Union of Women Workers. These facts are given
by a woman who read the paper. Early this year a girl of
fourteen and a half years, expecting confinement, appeared at
the Central Criminal Court against a man of forty-five years old.
He pleaded guilty. The judge heard no evidence, gave the
police no opportunity of showing there was much against the
man besides. The sentence was six months’ hard labour, and
only this morning women who from the higfufST motives have
broken the law because they have been driven to it by the insult
to them, these women were sentenced to tnfe**same' term of
imprisonment as this man. But this is worse: At the September
Sessions this year, a girl of thirteen and a half, and expecting
confinement, appeared against a middle-aged man, who was
proved guilty, and the sentence pronounced was three months
in prison. That is only a month more than I got on the last
occasion when T was sentenced for breaking a window valued
at 3/-. At every assizes and at every sessions there are cases
like this, and even worse.
In addition to those facts, reference was made at that con-
ference on the need that existed for rescue homes, not for
women of full age, but for little children under twelve years of
age. Facts were given there, and that was at a meeting where J
only women were present, because it was considered that these
tacts were not nt tor discussion in ordinary public meetings? i'
They are fit, ladies and gentlemen, so long as these things are
permitted to go on. When we read of babies of two and a half
years being brought into these private Lock Hospitals suffering
from unnamable diseases because of the awful conditions of our
so-called civilisation in great cities, I say. Are women not justi- f®
tied in trying to get some political power to put a stop to them?
Fight the right way,” says someone. Well, I was speaking
the other night in a hall which is named after a great man who
fought in this country against absolute monarchy. Cromwell
and his army fought against the divine right of kings. Charles
1. believed sincerely—and many agreed with him—that kings,
because they were kings, had a divine right to rule; they had a
divine right to tax the people of this country and spend their
money, as they pleased without being responsible in any way.
Well, you have abolished the divine right of kings, but you have
got the divine right of the man voter substituted for it, and we
women to-day are fighting against that divine right. You ad-
mire the courage of men like Cromwell. Well, so"do we; but it (
takes a great deal, more courage, ladies and gentlemen, to fight
against eight million divine rulers than it did to fight against
one.
Rulers by Divine Right.
I know perfectly well .that these rulers by divine right of ours,,
are not against women really. I know perfectly well that the
average man is fair-minded and reasonable, and I know, speak-
ing of the average voter, he is quite ready to admit that, if a
woman qualifies for a vote like a man, if she pays her own rent
and her lates and taxes like a man, she has as much right to a
vote as he has. All the public opinion worth having is on the
side of justice and fair play to women, but unfortunately the
average man, the average voter, wants to be allowed to go on
with his business. He does not put himself very much out of
the way about any grievances except the grievances that come 4
right home to himself. Well, we have been trying to rouse
him by argument, we have been trying to rouse him by per-
suasion. You do rouse him sufficiently at a meeting tr vote for
the resolution for Woman Suffrage, but he goes home after he
has heard a good speech, and goes to sleep after saying what
a good meeting it was, and then forgets all about it until he
