

THE OPERA LIBRETTO.
VERDI’S
GRAND OPERA
OF
I LOMBARDI!
AS PERFORMED BY
THE R OYAL ITALIAN OPERA
COMPANY.
Melbourne:
PRINTED BY AZZOPPARDI, HILDRETH AND CO.,
POST OFFICE PLACE.


A SEWING MACHINE
IN
BVE RY FA MIL Y I
The true value of a really good Sewing Machine, and the
important position that it is certain to occupy in the domestic
economy of every family, are points which every father and
every mother should take into their most earnest consideration.
Without a Sewing the mother is a slave. What
sewing there is to be done is only half done, and other equally
important domestic work 13 left undone altogether.
The introduction of a Saving Machine works perfect marvels.
Ten times the amount of .’‘sewing can be easily accomplished in
less than half the by hand only, and need it be
said that those other thousand and one domestic affairs, all
important in building up the happiness of a family, receive an
amount of attention never dreamt of before.
PRICE NEED NOT PREVENT!
E. C. Waddington and Co., by the introduction of the
popular English System of Time Payment, have placed first-
class Machines within the reach of every family; and as a year
can be taken to arrange for them, they will actually pay for
themselves.
WANT OF KNOWLEDGE NEED NOT PREVENT.
E. C. Waddington and Co. teach Customers, without
charge, plain sewing in less than one hour, and a perfect know-
ledge of Machine in a few short lessons, also without charge.
B. C. WADDINGTON & CO.,
85 ELIZABETH STREET.
(Corner of LITTLE COLLINS Street.)


§|f %fm i’ikrifii.
VERDI'S
GRAND OPERA
OF
I LOMBARDI
AS PEEFOBMED BY THE
Italian foMPAj^v.
PBINTED BY AZZOPPAKDT, TTILDUKTIt AND CO.,
POST-OFFICE PLACE.


ARGUMENT.
Pagano and Aryino are the sons of one of the Lombard con-
querors of Rhodes. Pagano, deeply enamoured of Viclinda, and
enraged at her preference for his brother, attacked and wounded
him, and then fled his country. As the curtain is raised you
behold the monks and the people assembled before the Church
of St. Ambrose, in the island of Rhodes, to celebrate the return
of the pardoned culprit. He arrives, and his injured brother
cordially forgives and embraces him. But in the heart of the
latter the same unquenchable feelings still rankle. He once
more meditates the destruction of his brother, and the possession
of his sister-in-law. At night he invades with an armed hand
his abode ; but in the dark he mistakes his victim, and kills his
own father instead of his brother. Remorse takes possession of
his heart, and he flies to a wilderness in Palestine to expiate his
crime, and, under the garb of a hermit, he acquires a great
reputation for sanctity. Years of repentance have elapsed —it
is the moment when all Christian knights and princes have been
summoned to the first crusade, and Arvino and his followers
have landed in Palestine, obedient to the call of Peter the
Hermit. Here he soon hies to the holy recluse (Pagano) in his
mountain retreat, seeking from the Hermit counsel and consola-
tion in his sorrows, for the Saracen chief of Antioch in the con-
flict has carried away his daughter. Pagano, concealed by his
garb, promises a termination to his brother’s sorrows, which he
knows he can effect j for Pirro, formerly his squire aid confidant,
now a repentant renegade, has promised to yield Antioch, where
he holds a command, to the Christian bands. In that city,
Giselda is immured ! she is in the harem of Oronte, but pro-
tected by his mother, Sophia (secretly a Christian), and passion-
ately beloved by her son—who, under the double influence of
love and conviction, determines to become a convert to her faith
—Giselda forgets her Christian friends, and listens but too
fondly to the vows of her Saracen lover; but Antioch is be-
trayed to the Christians, led by Arvino and Pagano : all the
Saracens are put to death, and Giselda, by her lamentations over
the fate of her true lover, brings down on her head the wrath of
her father. In the retreat where she has taken refuge from his
anger, her lover, Oronte, who has escaped from his enemies,
reappears in the disguise of a Lombard. The lovers fly together,
but being pursued by the Christians,. Oronte receives a fatal
wound ; Pagano comes and takes him to his cell, and there the
Saracen prince dies a Christian convert, whilst Giselda, in her
despair, through divine interposition, is consoled by a vision of
paradise. Pagano, who has become the guardian spirit of his
injured brother, accompanies him to the siege of Jerusalem, and
is wounded to death defending him. As he dies, he removes his
cowl and reveal his i ame. Ills death forms the final catastrophe
of the opeta.


I LOMBARDI
(VERDI.)
ACT I.
Scene I. — Square in front of St. Ambrose',
Chorus of Citizens,
Oh, noble example!
Observe them! how cheerful and happy
.Each face beaming with joy and delight!
Fagano alone in his eyes shows the traces
Of years passed in crime, deep as hate, dark as night.
Still, in that sternest and fiercest of faces.
The tempest of hale in his heart may be seen.
But rarely the wolf’s cruel raging
Is followed by feelings kindness serene.
Worn. In this quiet hour, why from the Cathedral
Are gay sounds resounding, and glad footsteps bounding!
Oh! tell me, I pray you!
Men. This day does the pardon of Heaven
Descend upon one who was lost;
Fagano, the bandit, repenting his baseness,
Returns to the comforts and pleasures of home.
Worn. Oh ! tell me, what destiny fatal
Did force him away from his country to roam ?
Men. It was Yiolinda, a gentle maiden,
Fair as an angel, vain of her beauty.
The youth who was both rich and handsome,
To her betrothed, failed not in duty.
But poor Viclinda, loving another,
Arvino husband soon did she call;
Fagano, madden’d by contempt and hatred,
A fearful vengeance vowed on them all.
One day (oh! day of crime and of horror!)
He stabbed his brother —then quickly flying
Far from his country, lost and remorseful,


In sacred places praying and sighing,
Thus he for many years his crime repented.
Longing to visit home once again.
And now, by Heav’us forgiveness made happy,
Free is he from guilt’s iron chain.
See ! each face is with happiness beaming!
G-lad smiles appear in each countenance here!
Except in Pagano’s—the traces of anguish
And long years of crime in those dark eyes appear.
Still, in that sternest and fiercest of faces,
The tempest of hate in his heart may be seen :
But rarely the wolf’s cruel raging
Is followed by feelings of kindness serene.
Sckke ll. — Pagano, Arvino, Viclinda, Oiselda, and
Pirro.
Pag. In this great and solemn temple,
'Which, bore witness to my sin,
Humbly I implore a pardon,
Peace for my dark soul to win.
Arv. Come, then ! embrace thy long-lost brother !
And may Heaven bless our meeting !
Clio. Live Arvino! noble heart!
Gris. & Yic. Peace and pardon !
Pag. (aside) Oh, fearful shame!
HOW. IS IT THAT THUS YOU TREMBLE ?—Duet.
Gtiselda and Arvino.
Gis. How is it that thus you tremble, father dearest ?
What makes your head so fev’rish ?
Why art thou dreaming ?
The hope of thy heart is granted,
All faces with happiness beaming.
Thy heart with trouble’s afflicted,
Why not divide it with me ?
Arv. My soul ariseth within me !
I freeze! my heart with fear is fraught!
Gis. The hope of thy heart is granted,
Then why art thou still afflicted ?
Arv. He looks with stern hate upon me j
Suspicion my mind hath afflicted !
Pag. Pirro, oh, list to me ! Heaven ne’er will’d it
He should be saved from my rage!
Fools ! you have transfixed me—my heart
Js bursting, and you think in peace to live!


Pir. Signor, a word from you is law !
I have a hundred ministers of vengeance ;
This very night shall deep horrors be acted —
, Like spectres they shall to you appear.
Cho.. He has embraced him 1 and little thinketh
That he’ll betray him —Heaven be his guide !
All unprepared, no danger he sees,
Yet his heart’s silence no peace hath supplied !
Citizen. Listen, all, to the city’s decision!
By the voice of Peter, the inspir d one, •
Thou art summon’d, most noble Arvioo,
And Commander of Crusaders proclaimed!
Arv. I accept this most difficult duty, —
For my country I freely will shed my blood !
Oh, my brother, embrace me :
Heav’n and earth both have witness’d our vows.
All. Oh, impious! upon him who breaketh his promise,
Opprobrium and infamy, surely descending,
Shall blot out his peace ; and his comfort shall vanish
Who stains day’s pure sunshine with innocent blood.
OH! TALK HOT OF ENMITY.
Arvino, Pagano, and Ohorm.
Oh! talk not of enmity ever between us!
Like brothers, our bright swords we’ll draw ’gainst our foemeu
Together like lions we’ll rush oh our quarry,
The impious pagans, who hate all that’s good !
Oh, impious! upon him who breaketh his promise,
Opprobrium and infamy surely descending,
Shall blot out his peace, and his comfort shall vanish,
Who stains day’s pure sunshine with innocent blood.
Scene 111.
Cho. To thee, oh, sainted mother,
Humbly we lift our voices ;
Here, in these happy cloisters,
Each heart with praise rejoices.
Hive us sweet rest, dear Virgin,—
Oh, grant us heavenly dreams!
In night’s dark hour preserve us,
Watch o’er us till our waking!
Foil all the plots of wickedness
Which impious men are making!
We’ll sing thee songs of joy again
At sunlight’s earliest beams.
5


Scene IV. —Pagano and
Pag. Oli, Virgin! at this time Heaven
Is surely clos’d against thy prayers ;
For on this fatal night of vengeance dire
My poniard-blade shall be falling.
Can nothing save me from this crime appalling?
Oh, Pirro, can my rack’d spirit
Avoid this dreadful deed ?
E’en love itself makes holy a deed of wrong!
WRETCH! BELIEVE NOT.—Am.
Hagano.
Wretch! believe not that I’ve forgotten
You were happy when I was grieving;
Thou by fortune wert blessed beyond deserving,
While for me despair’s dark web was weaving ?
Overwhelm’d with grief and sorrow,
Like a mountain stream rudely pouring,
First a silver thread of crystal water,
Then a giant stream is roaring!
Thus, while away from all I freely rove,
Is my heart devour’d by the deep pangs of love!
Pir. Many friends lie here concealed,
Waiting orders from their master.
Pag. Have them ready !
And let the fire be kindled,
Blazing fast and faster.
Scene V. —Chorus of Soldiers.
Pag. ’Tis a work of greatest danger!
He has servants true and ready;
But, if ye succeed, rewarded
Ye shall be —be firm and steady.
Sold. What care we for storm and danger p
O’er our hearts they have no power;
Never heeding lightnings flashing
At the midnight’s witching hour,
Still with stealthy step approaching,
Boor or wall no safeguard proving,
Heedless of their cries and weeping,
Strike the blow —perhaps when sleeping—
And so to heaven well pleased we send
Many a soul, to serve a friend!
And with daggers steeped in gore,
Drink and feast when all is o’er
6


HOPE OF VENGEANCE. Aik.
Pagano .
Hope of vengeance, soul inspiring,
Now my countenance doth brighten ;
X have waited for years so many,
That success my soul doth lighten ;
Though my heart with gilt overflowing,
Told me I should one day win.
Yes! and thy beauty, of seraph seeming,
Shall be mine alone, in spite of all my kin.
Sold. Yes, commander, in your service
We your foes will quickly slay !
Scene VI. — Gallery in the Palace of Folco. Viclinda ,
Giselda, and Armno.
Vic. Trembling I stand before some unknown danger—
No ; on his face is gleaming a dark cloud,
Not of sorrow, but of stern hatred.
Come then, Giselda, and let us pray
To heaven to protect us from evil:
I swear that if my husband and your father
Return in safety hither,
Barefooted I will go, and pray before
The holy sepulchre!
Arv. (From within) Return, dear wife, into thy house
And do not wander—there may be danger.
Gis. Oh, heaven! is danger near us ?
Arv. My father has just now told me
He heard the sound of footsteps
Coining this way, but he was agitated—
Perhaps some merry-making.
Come, then, dearest!
Gis. Hear us, thou holy Virgin!
[Kneeling with Viclinda
HOLY MARIA! Air.
Giselda.
Holy Maria! in mercy hear us,
Entreat thy Son, our Lord, to shield us ;
Grant to us, oh mother, thy sweet intercession!
Oh, blessed mother, thy favour yield us !
Virgin most holy, Mother of Heaven,
For our distresses thou, intcrceeding,
Wilt surely gain us love and protection,
From our dear Saviour, by thy kind pleading.


Scene VII. —Pirro and Pagano.
Pir. Come, then, Arvino now is resting in slumber :
A servant told me.
Pag. Oh, rapture!
Quickly the fire is spreading,
And by the bright flames flashing
I shall soon see the triumph of my vengeance.
Yes, in a few short moments 1
I come, then !
[He enters cautiously the apartment of Arvino.
Scene Ylll. —Firro alone ; afterwards Giselda ,
Fagano and Viclinda.
Pir. Now the fire the soldiers kindle !
Hear I now their sabres clashing ?
I will hasten—’tis a pastime
Which I like to join in playing.
[Exit, brandishing his sword. — Viclinda crosses the
stage rapidly, pursued by Pagano.
Vic. Wretch, unhand me ! —Oh, husband !
Pag. He dies if he dares to pursue you!
Follow silently.
Vic. At your feet Ed sooner die.
Pag. Oh, none can save you—
You will now be mine for ever !
From my love no more shall you e’er sever!
Neither grief nor lamentation
Will provoke an answer from him
Whom you hated and despised.
Scene IX. — Arvino , Gisdda i Firro , and
with torches.
Arv. I hear him !
Pag. lam o’erwhelm’d!
Blood ! but whose blood P—My dagger
Struck some one—whose blood was it ?
Ois. & Vic. A father’s !
All. Oh, horror!
Monster infernal and horrible!
The earth should swallow thee!
Hath not the Eternal his thunder
To slay thee with his flames P
Thy name alone will terrify
The host of Heaven!
8


Ary. Parricide ! may the sword drink thy life-blood,
Etch here where thy father is lying !
Gis. Do not now to his crime add another!
Have no more scenes of horror and death !
Pag. Now be firm, man ! thy courage is waning !
See, now I draw my sword from its scabbard.
[He makes a movement to stab himself with Jiis sword,
but is prevented from doing 00 by the Attendants.
Cho. Villain ! to thee to be living
Will be punishment greater than death.
All. Hence lon thy vile head the Eternal
The crime-mark of Cain hath imprinted ;
More than serpents and flames of Avernus
Thy soul shall with horrors be tinted !
Thou shalt never wander ’mid the flowers,
But through woods and o’er rugged mountains scaling,
On thy brow a blood-stain shall lower,
At thy heels shall a demon be wailing !
END OE THE EIEST ACT,
ACT II.
Sceke I. — A Hall in the Palace of Acciano,
Cho. It is the truth, then P
Acc. I myself
Hare seen their weapons gleaming!
Cho. The braggarts come ! Upon the breeze
Their colors now are streaming I
By great Mahomet’s thunder
We soon shall see them slain!
Acc. Cruel and strong, exulting still,
Plunder and rapine mark their track ;
Murder and horror on them wait—
Grant, Allah, we yet may drive them back!
Cho. Allah, descend and punish them
Who desecrate thy fame 1
All. Should Europe’s thunders o’er us roll,
Whirlwinds upon them then awake ;
Thy lightnings swift from pole to pole
Their shattered hosts will break.
Strength in our hearts instilling,
9


As with one mind we rise,
We swear! never to sheathe our swords
Till we have slain our enemies !
And, burning with new-kindled zeal,
Fury unites ns, new strength imparting ;
Our foes we’ll conquer,
Or nobly, nobly fall! [Exeunt
Sc ewe ll. —Oronte and Sophia.
Oro. Oh, mother dearest, how fares my love ?
Sop. She sigheth, weepeth, calls on her lover —
Haply now her poor heart is breaking!
Oro. On earth there lives no mortal
Joy like to mine partaking !
Sop. Oh, would that all-bounteous heaven
My sou’s mind would enlighten, and make him happy
MY HAPPINESS I WOULD DIFFUSE. Dust.
Oronte and Sophia.
Oro. My happiness I would diffuse
Into her trusting, noble heart,
And to her spirit with my love
More blessed peace impart,
Like that which reigns in the stars above,
From whence pure light is given ;
Ah! and then, where mortal never pass’d,
I would with her ascend to heaven!
Sop. Oh, consider! thou must give
Thy religion for her love,
And bend thee to her father’s Lord.
Oro. By thy wishes I will move.
Sop. Blessed tiding!
Oro. Oh, dearest mother !
Something whispers to my heart,
That the God whom she adores
Will never two such fond hearts part.
Oh, like an angel beauteous,
From heaven’s gate descended,
By thy pure eyes’ deep glancing,
I’m with thy being blended !
Oh, come, and with thy presence bless
My vision with thy loveliness.
Oh, come, and with thy presence bless
This doubting, loving heart!
Come, with thy presence bless
My vision with thy loveliness.


Come, with thy presence bless
This true, this true and faithful heart!
Sop. Lore’s angel will watch o’er thee,
And ne’er will from thee part.
"Scene lII. — A gently-sloping mountain. A hermit.
Her. ’Tis solemn silence ! Oh, wretched,
When will the roar of cataracts and tempests
With war's rude clamour unite I
Prom weeping these poor eyes ne’er will cease,
Till from the summit of the mountain
The vessels of the Crusaders, with flowing standards,
appear.
Can my hands e’er atone for crimes committed ?
Or guilt like mine be pardon’d ?
Would that I could tear down the Moslem flag.
Still all is silent.—Oh, wretched.
Only just Heaven can wash away my tears ;
Kind Heav’n alone can grant peace and pardon
To this soul with guilt overladen !
But when a voice terrific speaks and says,
“ ’Tis Heaven that wills it!”
When on this land the glitt’ring Cross
Shall in the sunbeams glisten,
Then, with a heart full of fury,
To the war-trump I’ll listen ;
Then shall this cold hand grasp the sword
With more than youthful fire ;
Again, my soul, reviving,
Shall feel the joys of Heav’n !
But who comes this way so quickly ?
By his dress, a Mussulman.
Let me retire.
Scene IY. — Pirro.
Pir. For pity’s sake,.
I pray you, hear my guilty story !
All around proclaim your goodness—
Can I ever be forgiven ?
Tell me, if I pardon can obtain
Por crime so great as mine ?
I AM PIRRO. Aib.
Pirro.
I am Pirro, and once a Lombard ;
I did aid a parricide ;
Like a coward, hither fleeing,
I my country did forsake.


Grief and terror did me guide,
A suppliant to heaven and thee ;
Grief and terror did me guide,
A wretched suppliant at your feet.
Her. Arise, and hope !
Pir. To me the walls
Of Antioch are confided.
Her. Whence those sounds
Pir. Hark ’tis the
Soldiers of the Cross, so much derided.
Her. Heaven! what say’st thou ? is it the truth P
Go, and Heav’n will grant thee pardon,
Miserable now no more,
The Judge of Sinners pardons thee,
If thou deliver up
This wicked city unto me!
Pir. Holy father, I will open
All the gates of this great city,
Through its impious crowds advancing
The red cross of love and pity!
Her. But the sounds appear advancing —
Heav’n! the Lombards.
Pir. Ah, yes, the Lombards!
Go ! and seek for safety in
The Hermit’s cavern.
Scene Y, — The Hermit enters the Cavern with Pirro,
and re-appears with a helmet and sword.
Her. Thou’lt still
Protect him who wields thee once again,
My faithful friend, my good old sword!
PRAT, ART THOIT THE HERMIT OF THE
CAVERN. Duet.
Arvino and Hermit.
Arv. Pray, art thou the Hermit of the cavern ?
Her. I am, my son ; what wouldst thou here ?
Arv. Pray for us, that heaven’s anger
May no longer cause us fear.
Her. Know you not to whom your speaking ?
Arv. Ev’ry one whom here we meet,
Says that lieav’n, its vengeance wreaking,
Spares where’er thou dost entreat.


A band of Mussulmen invaders
Stole from me my only daughter ;
Long I follow’d in their footsteps.
Till I lost them near to this quarter.
Her. Tell me, hast thou many valiant soldiers ?
Arr. Yes.
Her. Thy daughter thou quickly would’st see ?
Arv. Let all Europe, collected here,
Witness her restoration to me.
Her. Oh, how joyful! now night is coming.
Brother Lombards, follow me ;
And, before to-morrow’s dawn,
Ye of the city shall masters be !
Arv. Sainted father, to glory inciting,
All our soldiers are inspired by thee.
All. Ah, false Allah lon thy head is falling
Vengeance promis’d and never forgotten j
Holy voices around us are calling,
Justly proclaiming thy last day is come.
See, the Cross on the still air is gleaming,
With a sanguine light around us beaming j
Crush’d to pieces is the Moslem’s standard,
The infidels are vanquished—now they run.
Scene YI. — Interior of the Harem. Women in
attendance on Giselda.
Clio. All hail, lovely stranger, sweet model of beauty!
We circle around thee, in-mazy dance moving ;
Ear from thee for ever bo sorrow and danger,
Surrounded by pleasure, gay, happy, and loving!
Orontes thy pow’r and thy beauty is owing;
Hail, beauteous stranger, beauteous stranger!
Why didst thou depart from the home of thy father ?
On, did a false lover away from thee stray ?
Be happy, and lift up those eyes brightly beaming—
Here love and Orontes both bow to thy sway.
A bund of bright maidens awaits on your pleasure,
All anxious to please thee, too beauteous stranger !
Oh, foolish ! thou’rt splendid! thy bright eyes have
conquer’d
Our prince, who ne’er bow’d at the shrine of love before;
But soon thou shalt hear of the death of thy kindred,
Who ne’er shall return home from Palestine’s shore.
Away —let her pray to hor god in the hour of her danger -
Hail, beauteous stranger, beauteous stranger 1


ScBHE YII.
OH, MOTHER IN HEAVEN. Ais.
Giselda.
Oh, mother in Heav’n ! relieve my sorrow,
Protect me, and give to my heart its lost gladness,
Oh, why didst thou leave me to sighing and sadness ?
While love is unholy, no joy can I borrow.
In vain are my pray’rs for your coming—
Alas ! there’s no returning,
Oh, would that I might be suffer’d to ascend to thee,
I see along vista of horrible hours,
Which life a dark phantom, upon me now lours.
Ah! oh, would I might be suffer’d to ascend to thee.
Cho. Who will save us !
Gis. Those cries, what mean they ?
Oho. Let us fly !
They slay us, they slay us !
Scene Ylll. —Turkish Soldiers, Crusaders, Women
of the Harem and Sophia.
Women. Who will shield us from death and its terrors,
If by the Prophet his people are left ?
Gis. The Crusaders!
Sop. Oh, Giselda,
A traitor unworthy the enemy did guide !
I of husband and son am bereft!
Gis. Ah, what say’st thou ?
Sop. The monster! who slew
My son and husband 1
Scene IX.— Arvino, the Hermit and Knights.
Gis. My father ! —it is my father!
Her. See, my lord, I but told you the truth.
Arv. Dear Giselda, return to the arms
Of thy father!
Gis. What blood is this ?
Sop. Woe is me !
Gis. No ! ’twas no just reason, ’twas not for Heaven,
The earth was moisten’d with human blood;
’Tis wicked madness, not pious feeling,
That slays the heathen and deems it good!
No voice from heaven did command it:
No, Heav’n wills it not—no, Heav’n wills it not.
Arv. & Clio. What hear we ?


Her. & Sop. Oh, misery!
Gis. What dreadful mist
Does blind your eyes to the power of Heaven ?
HEAVEN’S MERCY FLYING. Aib.
Oiselda.
Heav’n’s mercy flying, I see now,
I see hatred horrible,
Still in the distance, still, in the distance, terrible !
Disclos’d to no one, the soul shall first be lost,
The land we love, and e’en the air.
Oh, impious holocaust of humanity,
To human agony the God of Heav’n is deaf,
And will not listen to our pray’r j
Her Peace, foolish woman!
Arv By slaying thee
Alone can I stay thy impious raving.
Gis Oh, slay me!
Her She’s raving!
Oh, misery ! grief has destroyed her—
Her reason is vanish’d—she madly raves!
END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
Scene I. —The Valley of Jehosaphat. Soldiers, Cru-
saders, and Pilgrims.
Cho Jerusalem! Jerusalem!
The sacred, the promised land,
Our blood, well spent has, gained thee j
Weave the garland—clasp every brother’s hand!
At each remembrance of the sacred places
Tears our eyes will bedew ;
Grant, oh, kind Heaven, when this life is ended,
We may still to thee be true!
Pil We fought, and we have conquer’d the proud
Moslems, and gain’d the sacred tomb ;
Here fell the giant wolf who slew
The lambs in his cavern’s deep gloom.
Upon this summit the Nazarene was weeping
Over this fatal city ;
’Twas here he died a death of shame,
When there were few to pity!


All All! at each remembrance of the sacred places.
Tears our eyes will bedew ;
Grant, oh, our Father, when this life is ended,
We may still to thee be true ;
Oh, mountains and valleys eternally sacred,
Sacred to human thought,
Through the mercy of kind Heaven,
We conquer’d when we fought!
Scene 11 .-^Giselda.
Gis Why am I thus unhappy ?
Though I have found my father,
My breath faileth me —the air of heaven
Alone reviveth me—all seems deserted!
I vain I try to sing—my mind, distracted by passion,
Will not towards heaven direct its thought.
Only love fills my bosom !
Scene lll. — Oronte.
Oro Giselda I
Gis My eyes deceive me!
Oro Ah, no I indeed,
Oronte embraces thee!
Gis Ah, it’s a dream, that I
Thy brow am bathing with my tears!
Oro Oh, Giselda!
And didst thou, then, so soon forget me r 1
Gis Alas!
I mourn’d thy death !
Oro In the deadly combat,
I, by the foe struck down,
In hope of seeing thee, became a coward.
From land to land in vain I wander’d,
And in disguise have hither come,
Once more to see thee,
And then to die!
Gis Talk not of dying !
Oro All’s lost for ever!
My country, parents, relatives, my sceptre,
And with thee life'
Gis No ! I’ll follow thee :
Let us fly, then.
Oro Dost thou mean it ?
Gis I will share thy destiny.
Oro Oh, unhappy girl! bethink thee,
Maledictions lie upon me.


’Mid the wild and rugged forest
1 my rest alone am taking,.
Like a wild beast m liis cavern,
Scarcely sleeping, to misery waking ;
Lor my bed the boundless desert,
Lying cold and stern before me;
And tlie howling of the wolf
Alone shall tell thee I adore thee!
Then only shall I be happy,
With the flame of thy love in my heart.
Gris Oh, haste thee! there’s danger each minute !
They will seek your life, to take it.
Oro Think again !
Ois I’ll think no more :
Death or danger, I’ll undertake it.
Oro Ev’ry evil I can bear,
Since she my lot will share !
Come! away, then ]
Ois Ah, yes, for you,
Country, friends, and life, I would resign.
Oro Rather than possess my kingdom,
Do X proudly call thee mine.
Gris Happy for me this misery,
Tents of the Lombards scorning.
Breathe, ye soft winds of Araby,
Fresh is the breeze of morning.
Oh, Heav’n will surely pardon me,
That I for love am flying :
Mother, forgive me! for love like mine
Is like that of Hearn, undying.
Oro Lost and resign’d to misery,
Wilt thou thy own fair homo resign P
Friends, home, and country, 1 will leave,
Well pleased to call thee mine.
We’ll share each joy and misery.
And ne’er till death will part,
And Heav’n will ever succour
And bless each faithful heart.
Voices To arms!
Oro That summons!
Ois That sound comes from
The Lombard camp—l tremble for thee.
Both Fly, then, quickly ! not death shall divide us,
Nor Heav’n nor earth snatch thee from me.
Sceke IV. —Aetino, alone.
Arv What did I see ? Madness and fury, raging,


tress me down to the earth! She fled away f
Borne by an Arab steed of wondrous speed,
While from the care a man ran swiftly.
In a moment all vanish'd from my sight. [country,
Ah, vile one! —Impious, born to oast opprobrium on thy
Why wert thou born to shame me,
Thou wretched and ungrateful!
Thou source of all my sorrow, oh, why did I
E’er give thee life, unhappy being!
Scene V.— Soldiers, Crusaders.
Arv I seemed, beneath an oak,
To sit in melancholy mood;
Within the forest appeared,
A dazzling image of the Virgin,
From whence issued a command,
Saying, ' Arise, oh King!
At the foot of this image
Lay down thy sword and helm.’
Thy words, oh, holy Virgin,
Arvino in deep humility obeys j
Thy image I will adorn
With my ancestral crown;
But do thou heal the wounds
Which plunge my land in grief,
And let the foreign rule
Pall lightly on my native soil.
DEADLY THE WEIGHT, A MARTYRDOM. Am.
Arvino.
Deadly the weight, a martyrdom,
The' crown on my brow was pressing!
Why may not I in liberty
Breathe thy pure air, oh heav’n, thy choicest blessing ?
Peace, peace, which to the beggar’s heart
Thy protection will ever bring,
Let me, too, with hope, look forward to,
For now no longer am I a king.
Ah, no longer a king ; ah, no longer a king ;
For now no longer am I a king.
Cho Oh, heav’n, these gloomy thoughts
Chase from his burdened soul.
We, his subjects, silently and faithfully
Will ever follow our king.
Scene YL— A Cavern. — Giselda and Oeonte,
wounded.
Gtis Here stay and rest thee! —Alas ! with
Cruel vengeance have our enemies smitten!


Ore) 1 faint—Giselda! _ i
Gis What return is this
To me for all my love !
Oro I’m dying!
G-is Oh, peace ! —oh, peace !
Thou art not dying —I with my robe
Have closed the cruel wound they’ve made.
Oro ’Tis ail in vain—in vain you pity me !
Gis Oh, listen to me, God of my fathers, hear me !
Thou, my mother from me rending,
This world’s happiness did shatter;
Now the only one who lov’d me
Will soon from me be taken —
Cruel thou!
Scene VII. — The Hermit , Giselda, and Oronte,
Her Who dares accuse Heav’n ?
Love, alas ! hath driven thee mad!
G-is What words fall on mine ear F
Oro Who art thou P
Her I promise thee,
If thou wilt turn thee to our faith,
A heavenly mansion shall be thine.
Gis Heaven inspires thee )
Oro Oh, yes! completed,
Oh, Giselda, is the task now
Which I have so long desired !
Holy father, come near to me.
Her Rise, then ; not vainly Heav’n you’re seeking,
You its glory soon shall see!
Jordan’s pure and holy waters
Shall be a fount of life to thee !
Gis In the eyes of Heav’n no longer
Is our love a crime !
Then live—live for me 1
Oro Unusual rapture
Fills my soul with happiness !
WHAT SACRED PLEASURE. Dttbt.
Oronte and Giselda.
Oro What sacred pleasure fills each vein,
Joy and delight attending !
I scarce can see thy moisten’d eyes,
Though thou’rt over me bending I


Gris Oh, do not die ! or wait for me,
Heaven my last hope granting !
Oh, pray that we may together die,
Oh, death to me enchanting !
Oro Draw near me ! oh, moment of happiness !
Cease thy tears, in heaven I’ll pray for thee !
Ois Ah ! can you, then, die, and leave me ?
And of all hope bereave me ?
Why do the angels close heaven to me ?
They open’d it to thee!
They open’d it to thee !
Oro Ah I In heaven I await thee,
In heaven we shall meet again
Her Now his last hour at length has come,
His heart to Heav’n is turni g ;
If but one pulse with life remain,
To joy is chang’d his mourning.
Love’s sure reward is sorrow,
Hope for a blissful morrow :
Amid the hosts of angels,
Ye’ll never part again ’
END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
Scene I. — A Cavern. Oiselda.
Cho Thou’rt welcome, dearest maid, —for thee
Are happy visions rising;
Through thee, in Paradise, we see
A blissful soul uprising ;
Come, then, with him thy joy dividing,
Seat thee down by the lov’d one’s side.
GHs Oh! ’tis a semblance of Heaven !
What splender supernal!
And see ! the dawn is preparing
Of a morning eternal!
Oronte, among the angels stay for me !
Oro ’Midst hosts of spirits,
Oiselda, through thee, I remain!
Heav’n has my pray'rs accepted—
I soon shall see thee again! [vanishes.
But hie thee, and tell the people
To strengthen hope j


Tel). them that Shoe’s waters
Will give them life and hope.
Gris How prodigious! to this dark cavern
Low is chang’d a paradise!—’Twas a dream,
But now my heart feels reliev’d !
This sudden change—no, it was no dream !
NO, IT WAS NO DREAM. Aie.
Giselda.
No, it was no dream ! my soul believes it!
I have heard that lov’d one’s voice again j
In his hands I see the blessed palm waves:
All my pray’rs are not in vain.
Oh, ye warriors of the crusade,
Holy laurels around ye are growing !
There the sacred stream is flowing
Which each sickly heart will heal j
There the sacred stream is flowing
Which each sickly heart will heal j
There the sacred stream is flowing
Which each sickly, each sickly heart, each heart
will heal.
Scene 111. — Crusaders , Pilgrims, and Women .
FROM OUR HOMES. Choeus.
From our home and its pleasures we’ve wandered,
At thy promise alone hither wending;
By a holy father invited,
Now we ask thee our cause to befriend.
Downcast looks now are seen on our faces,
Now thy servants are weak and faint hearted!
Oh, do thou, Lord, with courage inspire them,
’G-ainst their foes thy great cause to defend!
Could we now feel the breezes of Lombardy
Blowing freshly o’er valley and mountain,
Once more fanning our palid features,
We might rest by a clear sparkling fountain!
Mem’ry cruel but causes lamenting,
While before us such scenes she is bringing,
While our lips parch’d with thirst are now scorching,
’Neath the rays of the burning sun's gleam,
’Neath the rays, ’neath the rays, the rays of the sun’s
burning, burning gleam.
Voices To Siloe! to Siloe!
Cho Whence those voices ?


Scene IY.— Griselda, Hermit, Anino.
Gis Kind Heayen,
Ever gracious, hears his people’s pray’rs!
Let all the people stand around the water
From Siloe o’erflowing!
Cho Oh,joy! oh,joy!
Ary Hear me, ye Lombards, hear me !
Let all slake their thirst, but surely
Ye will never be the last to climb
Those sacred walls, your lord deserting—
The infidels prevailing. Hart ye!
The trumpet and the bugle now sound —
The Holy Land shall surely now be ours.
All Yes, war ! war !
War to the knife
’Gainst the infidels waging,
We, like lions in strife,
’Gainst our enemies wildly are raging.
How before the breeze our banner is waving,
Floating emblem of fear and of slaughter ;
Vict’ry hovers o’er us on the wings of morning,
Pointing upward, where gleams a golden crown.
Scene Y. — Hermit, supported iy Oiselda and Arvino.
Arv Rest thee upon me! Come into my tent!
Rest, unhappy man—but you speak not!
Gis Alas! in ev’ry place I saw him fighting —
He is surely wounded.
The walls he mounted!
Her Who are you ?—mate way there!
Arv Lookup! remember, Arvino now is near you.
Her That name—Arvino —peace, oh, peace!
This blood is Arvino’s!
< )h, Heav’n ! shed at my feet by me!
I kill’d my father!
Arv What sayest thou?
Gis Be calmer —be calmer!
See, you are with the friends you sav’d.
Her Oh, Heaven! Oh, how that voice
Clears my brain and cheers my heart;
Tnou art the angel sent to pardon.
Arv Who art thou ?—say, art thou —
Her lam Pagano !
Arv & Gis Heaven! Can tins be ?


Pag One little moment of a misspent life is left me.
Oh, my brother! before high Heaven,
Which soon of life will have bereft me,
At the summons of death appearing,
And my punishment completed —
Oh, forgive me—curse me not!
Qis Father, his crime
Hath kind Heaven remitted.
Pag Oh, my brother!
Arv Yes, thou hast conquered.
This good man will absolve thee I
Pag lam happy ! —oh, let me, while dying,
Look again upon that city.
Scene the Last. — Pilgrims, Ladies, Warriors,
Crusaders.
Pag Praise to Heaven! I now die contented ;
Through thy mercy, I mercy obtain !
Thou my dying in sin hast prevented,
And my sorrow has not been in vain !
Arv Oh, Pagano ! since heaven forgiveth thee,
And death now is poising his dart,
In thy last moments Heaven relieveth thee, —
Thou’rt pardon’d indeed by this heart.
Part in peace! —to my husband in Heaven,
And mother beloved, reunited,
Then this heart, freed from earth and its leaven,
For care will be fully requited !
Cho For this victory humbly we praise thee,
And ascribe to thy honor and glory!
Thou hast sav’d us, and alters well raise thee,
To tell to all ages the story 1
END OF THE OPERA.
Azzopparcii, Hildreth & Co., Steam Printers, Melbourne.
23


WHITNEY, CHAMBERS & CO.,
Invite attention to their large and varied Stock of
FBHiaisame iftQHMoaasaY
The various Departments are replete with a full choice of
CUTLERY.
Table and Dessert Knives, Carvers, Steels’
Sharpeners, Pocket Knives, Ladies’ Scissors, &c.
ELECTRO PLATE.
Porks and Spoons, Fish-eating Knives and Forks,
Fruit Knives and Spoons, Dessert Sets, Dish
Covers, Tea and Coffee Services, Kettles, Waiters,
Cruet, Fickle, Egg, Lunch & Liquor Frames, &c.
JAPANNED WARE.
Shower, Hip, Sponge, and Children’s Baths, Tea
- Trays, Waiters, Toilet Sets, Water Cans.
KITCHEN FURNITURE.
Saucepans, Kettles, Boilers, and utensils for
ever 7 purpose. - %
DRAWING & DINING ROOM.
Register Grates, Fenders and Fire Irons, Mats,
Chimney Ornaments, Marble and Bronze Clocks.
Catalogues on Application —
WHITNEY, CHAMBERS AND CO.,
OPPOSITE TOWH HALL, MELBOURNE.


THE MOST PERFECT MODERN FURNITURF.
W. H. ROGKE & CO.,
40 S& 4S! COLLINS STREET EAST
IMPORTERS AND MANUFACTURERS OP
FIRST-CLASS FURNITURF
ARTISTIC DESIGNERS AND DECORATORS.
OP
THE LATEST LONDON & PARISIAN NOVELTIES
SUITED TO ETEET CLASS OF HOUSEHOLD.
PAIIDIAN CABINET*, Ebon? ami Walnut, Inlaid ami Ormo u, exqui.itdy
Designed and Ornamented-
CHEFFONIERS of L test Mode, Filagree Carvings. Inlaid Panels, Ac.
GROUPED OTTOMANS. CONVEKoAIIONAL CHAIRS.
DAVKNPORTS and CANTERBURIES.
TABLES—Monkey, ‘J'ripod, Gipsy, and " Five o'clock Ira*'— for Drawingrooms,
White and Gold, Ac.
EAST CHAIRS, of “8” and other shapes; also, NEWEST MAKE of p amboo
and Tooled Leather.
DININGROOM end LIBRARY SUITES, in Oak(Golhic) and Mahogany.
BEDROOM SETS, of most Modern Patterns, in Uuon Pine end otllvr Woods.
INFAN'J S' FOLDING COTS—'‘En Luxe.’’
DRAWINGROOM SUITES
IN SATIN. BROCATELLE.
SILK REP. CRETONNE.
DININGROOM SUITES
IN MOROCCO. ROAN LEATHER.
HAIR CLOTH.
OAK LIBRARY SUITES
IN LEATHERS of Every DESCRIPTION.
BEDROOM SUITES
IN HUON PINE. MAHOGANY. CEDAR.
Gothic Oak and Mahogany Sideboards and ook Cases.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL.
INCOMPARABLE Assortment selected in London and Paris,of OIL PAINT-
INGS, CHROMO-LITHOGRAPHS, OLEOGRAPHS, ENGRAVINGS,
and PHOTOGRAPHS.
CHARMING Novelties in FENDERS and FOOTSTOOLS.
CARPETS—Brussels, Tapestry, Kidderminster, Felt, and Dutch.
FLOORCLOTHS and MATTING—Stair. Floor, ana Passage.
CURTAINS—Lace.Leno, Damask, Mosquito,Satin, Silk, and Rep.
MIRRORS and PIER GLASSES.
EVERY class of FURNISHING IRONMONGERY, DRAPERY, WARE, and
ORNAMENTS.
TABLE COVERS. COUNTERPANES, and every possible Requisite for Furnish*
ing. Most Modern Chintzes, Ac.
NEWEST TRIMMINGS for all kinds of Furniture.
Illustrated Catalogues forwarded on Application . Orders by Post
promptly attended to.
On application, First-class Tradesmen sent to any part of the Colony
to give Estimates and prepare Flans.
Noth the Address— 4o and 42 COLLINS-STREET EAST.
