



Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce


VERSES
written on active service
by
C. B. H. JOHNSON,
6th Battalion A.I.F.
Killed in action in France on 14th May , 1918.




IN EGYPT.
We have sailed by the light of the Southern Cross
For the Pole Star’s steadfast wake.
And we count as gain our every loss
For our glorious Empire’s sake.
Our eyes range over the desert glare,
And our feet rebel at the sands.
For our hearts, and the pent up anger there,
Are bound for the war-swept lands.
We guess at the thoughts the Pyramid thinks.
Whose myriad years are an hour;
We read the riddle of the Ghizeh Sphinx,
And we know the secret of power.
We dieam of our sunlit coral seas
And the rollicking roll of the downs,
And the geyser blast, and the grazing leas.
And the wealth of our sea-girt towns.
We dream of the glens of our snow-fed hills,
And the scent of the Kauri pine.
And the wealth of the crop that the tiller tills.
And the call of the gleaming mine.
But we toil—for we feel in the silence of night.
And the roar of the morning drum,
That the day and hour of the finishing fight
To us all will surely come.


A rough hewn hit o’ limestone on the spot w’ere Ginger lies.
Bears a proper soldier’s tribute—“A brave man never dies”;
And I ’ear the sent’nel sayin’, when the judgment story's
told,
’‘All’s well! Pass, little comrade, to your dugout, made
o’ gold!’’
W’ere the wailin’ croon of shrapnel plays a requiem o’er
your ’ead,
In the slime of muddy Flanders, w’ere the bravest fought an’
bled.
I’ll go lookin’ for you. Ginger, w’en I’ve crossed life’s firin’
line.
And w’ether ’ell or ’eaven—may I meet you. Pal o’ mine.


IF.
(New Style.)
If you can sleep when shells are falling round you,
Nor dream that one of them may fall on you;
If you can act so that no man may doubt you.
But make allowances for others too;
If you wait and see the trench walls crumbling.
Or watch your dugout being blown to bits.
Or see your best pal killed, and, without grumbling.
Take up your gun and try to score some hits.
If you can smile when hail or rainstorm drenches.
If you can think when fever numbs the brain;
If you can meet with water in the trenches
And take a pump and pump it out again;
If you can bear to see the high explosive
Wreck your new parapet and strip your wire.
But without using language too corrosive
Take up your tools and build ’em both up higher.
If you can make a heap of all your smokes.
And halve it with some blighter whose got none,
And lose your half, nor cadge from other blokes.
And only chalk it up against the Hun;
If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew
So that you’re well in hand when under fire.
And so hold out when there is nothing in you,
Except the Fear which says to you “Retire.”
c<xu
If you. talk with fools and keep from swearing.
Or drink with men and not get over mellow;
If, when you’re hit and almost past ajl caring.
You’ve got the strength to help some other fellow;
If you can give your flask and all that’s in it
To keep a wounded Hun from feeling sad;
Yours not the earth, nor very much that’s in it.
But which is more, you’ve earned your pay, my lad.


LEAVE.
They have got my ammunition in the quartermaster’s store.
And it wouldn’t spoil my sleeping if I never saw it more;
They have read the orders to roe, and they’ve warned me good
and strong
That I mustn’t carry letters to the people there along;
They have scrubbed and cleaned and clothed me, they have made
me spick and span.
Looking more a raw recruit than a two-year service man;
And they’ve given me directions, with a dreadful lot of jaw.
And a little piece of paper—which is all I asked ’em for!
Ah! I’m going, yes, I’m going, and I do not care a damn
For the war that’s always warring or the soldier that I am;
For I’m full of beans and bunco—for you’ll readily perceive
When you meet me at Victoria—for I’m going home on leave.
There’s a foot slog to the rail head that will take me half a day.
But I’ll do it at the double, in the old Dorando way;
I am loaded with equipment and the regulation kit.
But I’m prancing, light and airy, and it doesn’t weigh a bit.
If my feet were torn and blistered, if my boots were to a shred.
If the pack upon my shoulders were a solid lump of lead.
If the muck were to my ankles, and it simply poured with rain,
I should still beat all your records, for I mean to catch that train.
Ah! I’m going, yes. I’m going! I could carry twice the load.
As I scurry hell-for-leather down the cobbled Frenchy road;
Fritz retiring isn’t in it. What a log you’d have to heave
If you tried to check the going—for I’m going home on leave.
There’s a little country village not a hundred miles from town.
There’s a handy train from Fusion that will quickly run me down;
I shall get there in the morning, when the world is fresh and sweet.
And the breakfast laid and waiting, and no ration ham to eat.
I shall steal along the pathway, I shall slip inside the door,
I shall love the dear old homestead as I never did before;
And I’ll click my heels together, as the army taught me to.
And I’ll say, if tears will let me, “There’s your soldier back with
you.”
Ah! I’m going, yes, I’m going, with my rifle and my pack;
There’s a wife and sever’l kiddies who’ll be glad to see me back;
There’ll be something doing yonder in the morning—get me,
Steve ?
For they don’t know that I’m coming—that I’m coming home
on leave.




