

i u


.
'


VICE AND ITS VICTIMS
SYDNEY.
THE CAUSE AND CURB.
A PUPIL OP THE LATE PROP. JOHN WOOLLEY, D.C.L.,
PRINCIPAL OF SYDNEY UNIVERSITY,
“ To err is human —to forgive Divine-”
■Sgtmeg:
PUBLISHED, FOR THE PROPRIETOR, AT EDWIN H. BECKE’S,
221 Pitt Street, next Punch’s Hotel.
1873-


(. . r
PRINTED BY HENRY SOLOMON,
CAXTON STEAM MACHINE PRINTING OFFICE, 156 PITT STREET.


PREFACE
It is with much diffidence that the Author submits this little
work to the public judgment; but if any good should arise from
its publication, by the adoption of any remedy that will give a
check to immorality and delinquency, it will prove to him a very
great and genuine source of happiness. Conscious, also, of its
want of critical accuracy and precision, he trusts some indulgence
may be extended for its many imperfections. Men who really love
their country, and who are anxious for its prosperity, will re-
joice with the Author in the prospect that the Legislature will
ultimately step in to devise effectual remedies, some of which
he has humbly suggested in this work.
In speaking plainly upon these social diseases, he has only
endeavoured to emulate the plain language and teachings of the
highest dignitaries in the English Church in Sydney. Both His
Lordship the Bishop, and the Very Eev. Dean Cowper, called
“ a spade a spade,” at the large and influential meeting held in
the Masonic Hall for the purpose of taking into consideration
the question of providing better means for promoting Public
Morality. The Author regrets to add that some citizens of Sydney
have objected to the title and contents of this book, under a
pseudo morality, like tha of the renowned Mrs. General, who
was not to be told of anything shocking—nothing disagreeable
was ever to be looked at,” and who, in her teachings, expressed
her conviction that “ a truly refined mind will seem to be ignorant
of the existence of anything that is not perfectly proper, placid
and pleasant.” Nevertheless, it is only bare justice to state that,
in the work now submitted, not one exceptional expression has
been used.
It is consoling, however, to know that there are men and
women here as true, high-minded, virtuous, and intelligent, as


are to be found in the world, ready to remove these false con-
ceptions, and to contribute to the improvement of the morals of
the people, by the adoption of those practical remedies which
cannot be applied until these social ulcers have been thoroughly
examined and probed to the core.
To diffuse this work as largely as possible throughout all ranks
of the community, it is published at a very low price, in the hope
that the working-classes will perceive that the vices, errors, and
crimes of the people are exposed only for the purpose of amend-
ment ; and that they can aid the good work as much as those
who are occupying higher seats in the State, if they will “ only
put their shoulders to the wheel,” and infuse a little life and
energy into the dry bones of a professing Christianity.
September 19 th, 1873.


TO ALL
GOOD MEN AND WOMEN
WHO DESIRE
THE SOCIAL REGENERATION
and the
INTELLECTUAL AND MORAL ADVANCEMENT
THEIR FELLOW CREATURES,
“WORK AND LABOR OF LOVE,”
RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED
THE AUTHOR.


v .


CONTENTS.
PART I.
DRUNKENNESS.
PART 11.
ROVER T Y.
PART 111.
THE GREAT SOCIAL. EVIL.
PART IV.
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT.
PART V,
CONCLUSION.


r Vi a
CORRECTIONS.
Page 1, line 10, for “ here then is,” read “ here there is.”
Page 17, line 2, insert the word “not” before the words “one hundred
yards.”


DKUNKENNESS.
This degrading vice appears to have been more or less prevalent
in all ages. If we believe in the records of the cases of Noah
and Lot, we should almost be compelled to acknowledge that
it was a natural result, co-eval with the introduction of the grape.
Montesquien said, “ Go from the equator to our pole, and you
will find drunkenness increasing together with the degree of
latitude. Go from the same equator to the opposite pole, and
you will find drunkenness travelling south, as on this side it
advances towards the north.” It has certainly reached Sydney,
and in its most revolting and degrading form. Here then is
none of the poetry which constitutes the soul of Bacchanalian
indulgence in other sunny climes in the north ; it is seen in all
its phases as an unsoftened vice. The ruin of Rome was entirely
owing to the luxurious habits, engendered by indulgence in
wine ; and the social progress of this young city of Sydney is
hindered most lamentably by the drunken habits of her in-
habitants; and her morality has equally suffered. It is the
cause of nearly all the degradation, misery, poverty, and vice
found in this city. Men of Sydney, will you not, one and all,
agree with us in the answer to the question—What has Drink
done ? It has ruined the health, encouraged extravagance, and
rendered a man unfit for labor. It has prevented him from
obtaining situations of trust. It has stolen away his reason,
and entailed misery upon his family and posterity,—for the love
of drink may be inherited. This is the answer. The disgusting
character of the vice and its results are thus admirably described
by Lucretius :
Cum vini penetravit
Consequitur gravitas membrorum, prsepediuntur
Crura vacillanti, tardescit, madet mens,
Nant oculi; clamor, singultus, jurgia gliscunt.
How true a picture i the Roman drawn! Let us essay another :
At the corner of Market-street, outside the Bar of a well-known —
I was about to say Hotel; but it is only a drinking shop,—stood
a member of one of the learned professions, a gentleman ; yes,


when sober, no man in Sydney could be more gentlemanly. He
was trying very bard to maintain tbe centre of gravity, his
tongue lacked its wonted volubility, and his eyes seemed fixed upon
vacuity. As we approached him, he recognized us, and his saluta-
tion was, —“Well, old boy, are you going to shout ?” We tried all
we could to induce him to go to some respectable place where
he was known and take a sleep for an hour or two; our efforts
were unavailing —he rushed frantically away in the direction of
King-street to meet his death! He fell at the crossing, sus-
tained a compound fracture of the thigh, and died in the
Infirmary shortly afterwards.
Now this unfortunate gentleman was never meant by nature
to be the dissipated man who died “ from the effects of intem-
perance,” as is frequently seen in the newspapers. He was a
most amiable and generous man; one of those rara aves who
“ did good by stealth and blushed to find it fame.” Poor fellow,
he lies in Haslem’s Creek cemetery a victim to drink. True, mis-
fortune had overtaken him, and instead of bearing up manfully
against it, he drowned his crushed spirit in the depths of intoxi-
cation. With an extreme sensibility, drink induced in him a
partial insanity and an absolute misery of the heart, which drove
Trim on, and preyed upon him in silence. He might, perchance,
have died broken-hearted, and then the critical, the generous,
the meek and merciful public, would have recorded a different
verdict to the one they gave : “ Served him right.”
Drunkenness has a dreadful effect in anticipating the effects
of age. Look at that man, with feeble tottering step and hoary
head, and shrivelled cheek, passing the Joint Stock Bank at the
early hour of seven in the morning. Where has he come from,
and whither is he going ? He went to a wretched bed, for which
he paid sixpence in Clarence-street last night, drunk of course ;
and he has risen betimes, for he cannot sleep; he is bound for
the altar of his demon, there to quaff the poisoned cup in his
honour. He stands awhile at the shop of Lasseter & Co. and is
sorry he cannot collect his thoughts, and summon resolution
enough by gazing on the various curiosities which adorn the
windows, for the shutters are only now being taken down: so
he plunges across the road, dashes through the glass doors of
his Sanctuary opposite to escape the blue devils so close upon
liim—with the exclamation, “ Prank, Jamaica hot! ” Now this


individual is not much over forty years of age, though he looks
as emaciated, hoary, and wrinkled as if he stood on the borders
of fourscore. Who is this man ? You all know him —a man
of genius, whom nature has gifted with greater power than his
fellows, but she has equally mingled with his cup of life more
bitterness. He is mostly melancholy, for his mind possesses a
susceptibility, and delicacy of structure unfitting him for the gross
atmosphere which surrounds him hourly. His high talent
renders him sad and gloomy, but—
“ He lives in a bright beaming world of his own;
And the light that illumines is all from within.”
Glass follows glass until the misanthropic spirit flies away, and
a serenity prevails over his mind; bye and bye, his imagination
becomes expanded, and filled with a thousand delightful images.
His faculty of language is excited, and he pours forth a stream
of ideas in the most enthusiastic language. He soon afterwards
gets confidential, and tells you how he got “tight” the night
before last, and that a “bobby” who didn’t know him nailed
him somewhere, he forgot where, and took him to the watch-
house, where they made some coffee for him, because he had
money to pay for it; that he was brought before Capt. Scott
next morning, and, being “an old offender,” was fined 10s. or
seven days. After this his mental powers get quite out of tune
and he talks wildly, but drinks steadily, until his expression be-
comes idiotic; and finally, after vain attempts to rise, drops his
head powerless on the table. Such is the character of old Silenus
of Sydney. In the morning, stern repentance comes. He is
heartily ashamed and sorry for his conduct, and swears that
nothing shall tempt him to commit himself again.
“ Here come the suffering Mai’tyrs!” Such was the exclama-
tion of a rubicund publican, as he stood at his door in George-
street watching a troop of wretched-looking men and women
marching down to the Central Police Office from other watch-
houses, early in the morning. At ten o’clock they, one by one, are
called up and addressed as follows: “You are charged, John
Smith, with being drunk in George-street last night; do you
plead guilty, Smith?” “ Pleads guilty your worship.” If it is his
first offence he is sometimes discharged, or he is fined ss. or two
days’ gaol. And so on, all through the list of drunkards; men and
women are sent to gaol with a few words of red-tape advice,
until this absurd and solemn farce is played out.


The scene changes. It is no longer the Central Police Court,
with its bright specimens of legal acumen and transcendent in-
tellect on the bench, sitting in judgement upon thirty or forty
poor, wretched inebriates. It is in front of a different kind of
bar, not more than 100 yards from the Court, that two men are
assembled, nervously quaffing rum hot. They congratulate each
other upon their discharge from the dismal cell of the lock-up,
where they had been compelled to wait from Saturday night
until discharged on Monday morning. They are talking quietly
to each other of the events of the last 36 hours, when one of them
starts back suddenly, with the exclamation, “Look Joe! I’m
blowed if that ai’nt the cove that was on the bench this morning,
and he’s a nipping it like we are!” “ ’Tis true, ’tis pity; pity
’tis, ’tis true !” 'there, within a few feet of each other, were the
judge and the judged; both partaking of alcoholic stimulants,
differing only in quality, the one being Hennessy’s three-star
brandy and the other Jamaica rum. All that we could say would
not enforce the fact more completely, that the daily infliction of
fine or imprisonment of drunkards is about the most absurd piece
of magisterial comedy ever played—more particularly when
magistrates, by their own drinking-habits, give a licence and
sanction to a practice which half-an-hour before they outwardly
condemned. Verhum Sapienti. Does not the re-appearance of
the drunkard in the dock prove something more than that our
system is a useless sham, in so far as the prevention of drunken-
ness is concerned ; and are we not prepared to admit that the
enlightened Americans are right in their diagnosis, that drunken-
ness is a disease which should be cured not punished ?
In an article on the results of drink in Great Britain, the
Pall Mall Gazette says :
“ Taking the population of Great Britain as a whole, and assuming it as
anxious for information as to its past conviviality, we cannot do better than
refer it to a return just printed by order of the House of Commons, from
which it may, at all events, learn that it was a little drunk last year. It
appears from this return, which, with a brutal coarseness, is simply headed
‘ Drunkenness (Convictions),’ that putting the population in England and
Wales at 22,712,266 persons, there were between July 1, 1871, and July 1,
1872, 1.35,004 convictions for drunkenness or for being drunk and disorderly,
of which 11,726 were second and 3884 third convictions, and 6054 had been
preceded by three or more than three convictions, the total number of sum-
mary convictions for offences of all kinds being 422.290. In the case of
Scotland, the totals of the columns are not given, and the return, to judge
from the ‘ remarks,’ seems a very imperfect criterion of the sobriety or inso-
briety of its children; but many of them, to judge by the figures given,


seem to have had quite as much as was good for them, in Glasgow especi-
ally, where out of 477,156 persons, 5913 were decidedly drunk, and some of
them disorderly into the bargain, and without quoting figures, Dundee seems
to have had quite its full'share of the whiskey-bottle. Of 5,402,396 people
in Ireland, only 79,354 were convicted of being drunk and disorderly, 12,121
of whom are returned as second, and 8,694 as third convictions, and 15,279
as the ‘ number which had been preceded by three or more than three con-
victions ’ —the total number of convictions for criminal offences of all kinds
during the same period being 179,806. This return, which, will, no doubt,
be believed implicitly by those who place unlimited trust in official statistics,
is in truth utterly valueless for all practical purposes, as pointed out by the
chief superintendent of police at Birmingham in the column for ‘ Remarks.’
‘ Inasmuch,’ he says, ‘ as the Return of Habitual Drunkenness as required
by the Home Office Circular deals only with “ Convictions for Drunken-
ness,” it does not give a true idea of this class of crime, as very many of
those who have but the record of one conviction against them in the period
given, have been in custody on the charge of drunkenness as many as seven
or eight times, but have been discharged by the justices, notwithstanding
its being from the tenth to the sixteenth time of such persons being in cus-
tody, and in nearly every case on the’charge of drunkenness; but at all
times drunkenness was an element in their offences. Again, many pri-
soners, whose record is from the second to the twentieth time in custody,
have been brought before’the justices charged with being drunk and com-
mitting some other offence, and for which latter they have been committed,
and the “ drunken ” part of the charge is constantly lost sight of. Then,
again, there are those (and no inconsiderable number) who have not the
record of a conviction against them within the period stated, who have been
two, three, or more times brought before the justices on the charge of drun-
kenness, but have been discharged notwithstanding the case being as bona
fide as if a conviction had been obtained.’ ”
This dreadful habit or disease pervades all classes of the com-
munity, and is spreading among the youth of Sydney with fear-
ful rapidity. We have visited a great number of the principal
cities of the old and new world, and we are loath to confess that,
for vulgarity, larrikinism, ignorance, and juvenile depravity, we
are bound to yield the palm to the young men of Sydney.
Their total want of the common courtesies and amenities of life
towai’ds the other sex, their foul and disgusting language, their
colonial slang and vile oaths, all point in an unmistakeable man-
ner to their origin and training. With some of these hopeful
young colonists, it is the usual custom to assemble in groups on
Sunday afternoon in the Domain and other places, where by
their language and disgraceful conduct they offend, even if they
do not insult, every respectable female who passes them. Some
charter a boat and take girls younger than themselves over to
the ships in the harbour, and we are informed that scenes of
unmitigated depravity on the part of boys and girls are the usual
results before they separate. One of these licentious crews
leaves Balmain every Sunday evening for Cockatoo Island or
North Shore, And it is solemnly asserted that in a certain boat-


shed in this port is kept, written on the wall, a record of the
names and ages of young girls seduced, with the names of their
seducers, and the date of its commission.
Whilst these sheets were passing through the Press, we re-
ceived a most interesting letter from a gentleman into whose soul
the iron has evidently deeply entered. It was by mere accident
that we met him in the Botanic Gardens, one afternoon. We
were trying to make out the specific name of one of the Grevil-
leas, when he politely assisted us, and quietly entered into the
habitat, locality, and botanical characteristics of this interesting
genus of plants; so much so that, as a botanist, we were quite
charmed. We sat down and talked first of commonplace matters,
but our companion insensibly led us into all the mysteries of
scientific lore, until the “ knell of parting day” gave warning
that the gardens would shortly be closed. We told him that we
were about publishing a small pamphlet on the prevailing vices
of Sydney. He immediately became very melancholy, and after
awhile he said, “I wish I had known in time, I think I could
have been of some assistance to you; give me your address,”
We gave him our address and a few days afterwards received
the following letter from him, which we give in full, omitting
only those parts where names are mentioned :
Sydney, 12th August, 1873.
Dear Sir,
How consoling to a mind oppressed by heavy grief and sorrow is the voice
of an amiable, genial companion. Such a blessed effect resulted from our
late conversation in the Botanic Gardens as I wended my way towards, —I
dare not say Home ! no, that place is too holy for me, and I have no home.
Your kind words and manner, the first I had experienced for months, came
over my sinking soul like sacred music, and imparted to me an almost
celestial serenity. Kind words ! how easy ’tis to use them, and yet they
are oft forgotten in the hour of need; and many are the noble souls lost for
ever for want of them, many are the once cheerful homes desolate, and many
are the husbands and wives parted for ever for want of them.
I was born in the County of , My father was a gentleman of con-
siderable fortune, who gave me an education fitted for a man of independent
means, but he gave me no profession. I entered Trin. Coll., Cam., at the
age of 19, and in due course took a B.A. degree. Unfortunately I did not
follow up the honors thus gained, or I might have entered the Church, and
by this time perhaps have been a Bishop, but my father thought I should
make a betted yeoman or gentleman farmer, so he injudiciously paid £2OOO
into the bank to my credit, and put me in possession of nearly 400 acres of
excellent land to farm. I became a Member of the Royal Agricultural
Society of Englandattended all their meetinvs, filled my bookcase with
all the works on agriculture I could find, from the Gervase Markham’s com-
plete Country Gentleman, 1643, down to the last essay on Underground
Drainage, by Smith of Deanstone. I was a bold and fearless rider then, and
bunted regularly wth the shire hounds, I also shot every


season, and was passionately fond of horses and dogs. I had quite a col-
lection of agricultural implements at my farm, quite as many and as varied
as Mr. Ainsworth has at his store in York-street; and I knew personally
every implement-maker in the kingdom. As to patent manures, I tried
them all from guano down to super-phosphate of lime, and experimentalised
on them with all the zeal and ardour of Liebig or Mechi. I was enthusiastic
in the breeding and fattening of stock, and showed “ Old Fat Rumps ”
against all England for two years and was never beaten. I became a Member
of the Norfolk Flax Society, and went over to Ireland to inspect the growth
and management of flax on the estates of the Earl of Erne, and arrived there
in 1846 just as the potatoe famine commenced. I was hot there in the height
of that dreadful calamity ; but I saw sights even in the North of Ireland, that
“ froze my young blood,” and I got hack to “ merrie England” just in time
to receive the news of the repeal of the Corn Laws. This put the finishing
stroke to my experimental farming, for wheat fell from 12s. 6d. a bushel to
4s. 6d. or 55., so I packed up my traps, and with £2OO in my pocket I hid
farewell to England and her Howard’s ploughs, Crossbill's clod-crushers,
Mangoldwurzel and Shorthorns ; and took a cabin passage to Port Phillip
via Adelaide in the good ship . We were only 115 days at sea, and I
verily believe if my father had then offered me a ploughmanship in
perpetuity, I would gladly have accepted it, so disgusted was I with the sea
and all its belongings.
I was a guest of the well-known Oapt. in Adelaide and visited the
Burra Burra and Kapunda Mines and after a stay of six weeks took passage
to Melbourne, now a magnificent city, then a mere village in comparison,
with stumps and “ crabholes” in the public streets. Here, by virtue of first
class letters of introduction, I entered the best society, and my education
and bona mores made me a general favourite. But I must digress for a brief
space, or you will be at a loss to understand my qualifications generally.
lam far removed from an egotist; you will therefore clearly comprehend my
motive for informing you how I became possessed of so much “ general in-
formation.” I have said that I hunted once or twice a week, and that 1
shot, played cricket, and joined heart and soul in all those truly English
sports which have made Englishmen respected and feared in court and camp.
But I did more than this. For four years I studied hard. Night after night,
after a hard day’s run, have I sat up reading, writing, and studying. I had
an insatiable desire to acquire knowledge. No matter what the subject was,
whether belonging to the domain of Science, Literature, Art, Theology, or
Natural and Moral Philosophy, I worked away until I mastered it. I studied
Chemistry under Professor Way, Botany under Dr. Lindley and Professor
Henslow ; I explored the old Red Sandstone and the Silurian System with
Murchison ; followed the researches of Newton in infinite space, and almost
worshipped in mute and silent adoration as I saw dimly through the mists
that enveloped his stupendous law of gravitation ; and wondered wor-
shipped more as I grasped for the first time the divine third law ot Kepler
in relation to the squares of the periodic times and the cubes of the mean
distances, of that bright sisterhood set in the blue concave. And then, with
a mind cultivated and more matured, I turned to that being so “fearfully
and wonderfully made,” the crown and coronation of the Universe, —-Man;
I found in the fascinating sciences of Anatomy, and Animal and Cerebral
Physiology, an everlasting source of mental and spiritual delight. These,
and a number of other concomitant studies, made up a mine ot int filectual
wealth, which, I thought would eventually place me among the foremost
men of the day. I thought, indeed, with “Poor Richard,” —
“ Learning is better than house and land,
For when house and land are gone and spent,
Then learning proves most excellent.”
For some years I succeeded even beyond my highe it anticipations I had an
excellent house and several hundred acres of land about seven miles out of


Melbourne, which I improved and embellished in accordance with the
teachings of J. C. Loudon. I was the first man in the colony to introduce
the reaping machines in 1849. I also set an example of spade husbandry
and market gardening on a large scale—having in one year grown three
acres of onions and five acres of green peas. I scoured the streets of Mel-
bourne for thirty boys to pick these peas, and sold them at £1 per bag in the
shells And all this time I held an excellent appointment under the late
First Lord of the Admiralty, the Right Hon. H, C F. Childers, M.P. My
varied talents brought me in contact with the chief men of the day,—
Edward Wilson, Mr. Superintendant La Trobe, Foster, Ebden, Rusden, Capt.
Clark, and a host of others, and I was requested to stand for North Bourke
in the first Constitutional Parliament, but declined in favor of Charles
Hilton Bight, who was returned at the head of the poll. The diggings
broke out shortly after, and from that hour I date my downfall, —but I will not
anticipate. You can form an idea of what Izvas. You shall now discover
what I am.
I have said that I was passionately fond of horses ; I consequently supplied
myself with the best I could purchase. My draught horses were the admi-
ration of the country, and I have frequently realized from £l6O to £2OO for
first-class stock. I was one of the first who arrived, on Forest Creek,
Mount Alexander, and continued for some years to send loading to those
diggings and Bendigo at pi-ices varying from £BO to £l2O a ton. I had five
teams constantly on the roads, and, having given up my appointment, it was
usual for me to accompany the teams, as there was often property
amounting to thousands of pounds on my drays. I have slept under my
dray for five weeks at a time. It was on one of these occasions that I first
contracted the fatal habit of drinking spirits. The roads were almost im-
passable in places and we were compelled to double-bank very frequently. Then
the nights were cold and wet, and it seemed excusable to take a drop under
such circumstances. We were stuck for five days in the Black Forest
with scores of other teams, and on this occasion every man in my party was
more or less drunk. We reached the stores on Forest Creek at last, but the
spirit of insubordination and lawlessness was rife among my men and they
left me, compelling me to pay them for their trip up under threats. There
was no protection at that time, and I had to submit I drove three empty
drays back myself as well as T could, but the bullocks knew they were
going home and gave but little trouble. I drank pretty hard all the way
back ; and, after receiving for that trip upwards of £SOO, I gave vent to my
newly-acquired habit, and spent at the rate of £2O a day on myself and
others. But why prolong by repetition these confessions ? This state of
things continued for years.
My wife was an angel; and I may safely say that she did all that an angelic
woman could do to wean me from the terrible habit. I was not an habitual
drunkard, but would occasionally remain sober for weeks ; then break out,
and continue drinking for a fortnight or three weeks, until in fact I became
too ill to drink more, eating but little all the time. I had two lovely chil-
dren whom I verily worshipped, and although I loved them so dearly, yet
even for their sakes, I could hot abandon the fatal legacy; I say legacy, for
I am now convinced that T had an hereditary predisposition for stimu’ants,
and this, combined with a highl} r sanguine nervous temperament, made me
peculiarly susceptible to alcoholic impressions.
After my arrival in Sydney,—
“Where I drained the cup of sadness —
AVhere my spul was stung to madness,
And life’s bitter, burning billows, swept n y burd ined being o’er ”
I determined to turn over a new leaf and give up drink altogether. I
believe I should have accomplished this end if I had been fortunate enough


to have succeeded in obtaining an appointment or situation. But this was
not to he. I called on scores of people—l wrote scores of letters of applica-
tion to no purpose. I had no town references. I determined to make friends
by my own ability. I succeeded. I soon knew far too many people in the
city, and was constantly thrown in the way of temptations, with what result
you can easily imagine. Years passed by, and my wife and children arrived
from England; and through my wife’s influence I obtained a situation as
Manager of a station. I was a contented and happy man. During the whole
time I was in charge of the station I never touched stimulants of any kind ;
but my happiness was of short duration : the proprietor became involved, the
Bank sold the station, and once more I arrived in this city. I had a severe
illness, and my beloved wife worked and toiled without a murmur, and
supported us all through my long illness. Better a thousand times I had
died then, it would at least have saved me from the unavailing agonies of
remorse.
After my recovery, things grew desperate ; and, although I occasionally
made money, I took but little home, for
“ The harpies and the ravens,
Human vampires, sordid cravens,
Preyed upon my soul and su'.stance till I writhed in anguish sore ;
Life and I then seemed mismated,
For I felt accursed and fated
Like a restless, wrathful spirit, wandering on the Stygian shore !”
The end came at last ; by the advice of her friends my wife left me, and
The golden bowl —life’s token,
Into shining shards was broken.’’
I was desolate; homeless, wifeless, childless, friendless, and penni-
less. What I did for some weeks I do not remember, or how I
supported life. I know that I drank, in the vain attempt to drown my
sorrows ; and I also know that I was often very hungry. For months I
wandered hie et übi.que, and the mark of Cain seemed branded deep in my
flesh. For months I slept in a species of cave in the rocks, into which I had
taken some dry grass; and oh 1 the dreams that came in that dismal hole.
Often have I crept out and gazed upon those eternal stars, “ the forget-me-
nots of the angels,” and prayed aloud that I may not be forgotten by God,
even if all on earth had forgotten me. I became very much attached to this
novel sleeping-apartment, for although I managed occasionally to make a
little money, I preferred my cave to the questionable comfort of a low boarding-
house. Thus passed the winter away, when “Tortured by a nameless
yearning,” I could not resist the desire of beholding once more my wife,
whom 1 loved with all the ardour of a youthful affection. After three weeks’
constant toil, I discovered her residence. I had been drinking heavily for
some time previously, but when I reached her house that night I was quite
sober. It was late, and yet there was a light burning, and I concluded she
was as ever working with her needle. I stole quietly to the Venetian blind,
which shaded the window, and I could just obtain a slight glimpse of her
seated at the table, but not working, not sewing—she was writing. For a
moment she raised her head, and I then saw she was weeping bitterly. My
knees knocked together, and my hands trembled as I summoned courage to
knock at the door. She inquired who was there, and T replied; she then
rose, and throwing wide the casement said, in tones of bitter reproach, yet
not unmingled with sorrow, “ Begone ! there is an angel in the house, this
is no place for you;” pointing at the same time to the little cradle raised high
from the ground. I looked, and there was my boy, my blessed darling child,
pale, cold, dead ! I have never seen my wife since.
Farewell, sweet child of my affection, no more will you greet me with
your bright and cheery smile ; yours was the happy beaming face that
always lit up with pleasure at niy approach, though all the wor d beside
looked gloomy on me. We shall 'meet again ; and, amid the crowd of angelic


spirits, you will be the foremost to welcome me as I land on that exquisite
shore! I know not where they have laid you;—no stone marks the resting
place of my bright and gentle boy ! What matter ?
“ Can storied urn, or animated bust,
Back to its mansion, call the fleeting breath P”
I know that the “grave’s lone night can never be thy home and that
when I again behold you it will be as a bright spirit
“ In your Father’s mansion,
Clothed with celestial grace,
And beautiful with all the soul’s expansion,
Shall I behold your face.”
I have nearly done. I know that my days are numbered, and that
I shall soon “go to the land of the Hereafter.” Sooner or later
though it be, I will do all that one man can do to stamp out this
pestilence from our sunny land. T will lecture, I will write and I will show
in propria person /?, that a drunkard can be reclaimed. Ido not drink now ; I
have conquered the demon that has pursued me for years with unremitting,
inexorable constancy.
“ Star of the unconquered will!
He rises in my breast;
Serene and resolute and still,
And calm and self possessed.”
A.nd, in the shadowy future, perhaps, when time shall have tried and
proved the sincerity of my resolutions—though it may have silvered mv
locks, and withered my cheek—an hour may yet come, when “ my soul with
sorrow laden ” shall be lifted from iis desolate loneliness ; when my prose
shall be turned to poetry, sunshine illumine my weary path, and,
like a silver bell, the dear and cherished voice shall whisper in my ear, “ You
have kept your troth ! let the past be forgotten ; take again my unchanged,
unchanging love,
“ Like an amulet of safety, to your heart for evermore.”
Thus ends “ this strange eventful history.” It is a sad case, but
we are pleased to be able to state that the unfortunate subject of
it has completely vanquished the enemy. His temperament was
so peculiarly constituted that he indulged to excess periodically,
and was in the intervals of these indulgences remarkably sober.
Macnish relates one instance of it in a gentleman distinguished
by the power of his eloquence in the senate and the bar. The
drunken mania—for it can get no other name —came on periodi-
cally : —“ These persons, from a state of complete sobriety felt the
most intense desire for drink, and no power, short of absolute
force, or confinement could restrain them from the indulgence.
In every case they seemed to be quite aware of the uncontroll-
able nature of their passion.” If any of our readers are victims
to this periodic intoxication, we strongly recommend to them the
subjoined cure. It was adopted by Capt. Vine Hall with perfect
success :
Cube foe Drunkenness. —Sulphate of iron, five grains; peppermint
water, eleven drachms; spirits of nutmeg one drachm; magnesia, ten
grains,


This preparation taken in quantities equalto an ordinary glass,
will, it is said, make a temperate man of the greatest drunkard,
by removing the desire for alcoholic stimulants. A quantity
equal to an ordinary dram should be taken whenever the patient
has a desire for drink. It acts as a tonic and stimulant, and
so partially supplies the place of the accustomed liquor, and
prevents the absolute physical and moral prostration that follows
a sudden breaking off of stimulating drinks.
Those who indulge in spirits are more subject to delirium tre-
mens than beer or wine drinkers. “ The disease comes on with
lassitude, loss of appetite, and frequent exacerbations of cold,
the pulse is weak and quick, and the body covered with a chilly
moisture. The countenance is pale, there are usually tremors of
the limbs, anxiety, and a total disrelish for the common amuse-
ments of life. Then succeed retching, vomiting, and much op-
pression at the pit of the stomach. When the person sleeps, he
frequently starts in the utmost terror, having his imagination
haunted by frightful dreams. The tongue is dry and furred.
Every object appears unnatural and hideous. There is a con-
stant dread of being haunted by spectres. Black or luminous
bodies seemed to float before the person : he conceives that ver-
min and all sorts of impure things are crawling upon him, and
he is constantly endeavouring to pick them off. * *
Such in nine cases out of ten, is the character of delirium tre-
mens. When the patient perishes from it, he is generally car-
ried off in convulsions. It may run into madness, or confirmed
idiotism.”*
We have given this diagnosis nearly in full, in the hope, it
may be kept as a terrible picture, always present to the imagin-
ation of any one who may be tempted to indulge either in
habitual or periodic intoxication. Bet him reflect that he will
be attended daily by a demon that will haunt him as a shadow,
and intrude upon him at all hours, day and night. Disease will
wait upon his steps, and Dropsy, Palsy, Emaciation, Poverty, and
Idiocy, followed by the pale spectre Death, will be his attendant
spirits, and will in the end claim him as their prey.
To those who are suffering from the effects of spirit drinking,
and are subject to nervous debility, trepidation of the limbs, &c.,
* Macnish’s Anatomy of Drunkenness.


the administration of from two to four grains of Oxide of Zinc
will be attended with the best results.
There is an immense quantity of colonial ale drank in Sydney,
chiefly by working men. It is more nourishing than spirits, but
it is apt to induce corpulency. The abdomen is enlarged, and
seldom parts with it, though the lower extremities may be in a
state of emaciation —the very worst symptoms that can befall a
corpulent man. *
We know not whether this colonial ale is adulterated with any
injurious ingredients, but we are aware of one disease which
is peculiar to persons who drink it in large quantities. It is a
disease spoken of by Dr. Darwin, under the title of Psora Ebriorum.
“ Elderly people,” he says, “ who have been much addicted to
spirituous drinks, as beer, Avine, or alcohol, are liable to an erup-
tion all over their bodies, which is attended Avith very afflicting
itching, and which they partially propagate from one part of
their bodies to another Avith their own nails, by scratching them-
selves ” We are acquainted with a case of partial paralysis, in-
duced by drinking colonial ale. But the nose is the organ that
betrays the dram drinker and the devotee of Bacchus. The
“jolly nose” becomes red and fiery, like that of Bardolph. \
Methyomania, or drunken madness, results from spirit drinking.
Of 1,428 cases admitted to Bethlehem Hospital, 181 or 12 per
cent, were caused by drink. Erom the report of the Com-
missioners of Lunacy in 1844, it appears there were 9,876 cases,
* This did not escape the marvellous observation of our immortal Bard—
“ Chief Justice. Do yon set your name in the scroll of youth, that are written
down old with all the characters of age? Have you not a moist eye, a dry
hand, a hollow cheek, a white beard, a decreasing leg, an increasing belly ?
Is not your voice broken, your wind short, your chin double, your w T it single,
and every part about you blasted with antiquity ? and yon will yet call
yourself young? Fie, fie, fie, Sir John.”
t il Falstaf. Thou art curadmiral, thou bearest the lantern in the poop;
but ’tis in the nose of thee : thou art the knight of the burning lamp.
“ Bardolph. Why, Sir John, my nose does you no harm.
“ Falstaff. No, I’ll he sworn 1 I make as good use of it, as many a man
doth of a death’s head or a niemento-mori. I never see thy face, hut I think
of hell-fire. * * * When thou runn’st up Gadshill in the night to catch my
horse, if I did not think thou hads’t been an ignis fatints, or a ball of wild-fire,
there’s no purchase in money. Oh ! thou art a perpetual triumph—an ever-
lasting bonfire light; thou hast saved me a thousand marks in links and
torches, walking with me in the night betwixt tavern ai d tavern; but the
sack thou hast drunk me would have bought me lights as good and cheap at
the dearest chandlers in Europe. I have maintained that Salamander of
yours with fire any time this two-and-thirty years. Heaven reward me for it,"
12
VICE AND ITS VICTIMS :


of which 1,792 or 18 per cent, were caused by the use of in-
toxicating liquors. Spirituous liquors produce more disease than
vinous liquors ; indeed, the latter are generally innocuous. The
true character of the disease called methyomania, and the horrors
attending it, are well-known to all who have witnessed cases of
delirum tremens. It is a lona fide form of insanity. The law
stepped in, in the case of the monomaniac; and why can it not
do so in the case of the methyomaniac ? The monomaniac might
he of use and advantage to society, but the methyomaniac ruined
the society by which he was surrounded.
Macinsh, also, gives an interesting and highly characteristic
anecdote in reference to this peculiar stage : —“A gentleman of
very amiable disposition, and justly popular, contracted habits
of intemperance; his friends argued, implored, remonstrated;
at last he put an end to all importunity in this manner—to a
friend who was addressing him in the following strain:—‘Dear
Sir George, your family are in the utmost distress on account of
this unfortunate habit; they perceive that business is neglected,
your moral influence is gone, your health is ruined ; and depend
upon it, the coats of your stomach will soon give way, and then
a change will come too late !’ The poor victim, deeply convinced
of the hopelessness of his case, replied thus, —‘My good friend,
your remarks are just, they are indeed too true ; but I can no
longer resist temptation : if a bottle of brandy stood at one
hand, and the pit of hell yawned at the other, and if I were
convinced I would be pushed in as sure as I took one glass, I
could not refrain. You are very kind. I ought to be - grateful
for so many kind, good friends, but you may spare yourselves
the trouble of trying to reform .me : the thing is impossible.’ ”
When a man becomes a drunkard from family broils, it is gene-
rally a bad case. He finds no comfort at home, and gladly
seeks for it out of doors. The domestic sympathies and affec-
tions, which oppose a barrier to dissipation and wean the mind
away from the bottle, have here no room to act. Home is soon
changed to Pandemonium, and its happiness for ever wrecked.
A most afflicting case has lately come under our observation. A
lady, the wife of a physician in the interior, the mother of a
fine family, and in all other respects an excellent woman, con-
stantly allows her physical cravings for the bottle to overcome
her social and religious obligations. All sorts of stratagems are
13
drunkenness.


resorted to by her to gratify this propensity ; and, in spite of every
precaution wliicb her friends take to prevent it, she contrives to
obtain the deadly poison which is fast driving her to the mad-
house.
We have said that this social vice pervades all classes. We
could give some remarkable cases of drinking among the “upper
ten ”in this colony; but we do not think any benefit would arise
from the detail of individual cases, and many of them would be
too revolting. There was a good story told of the late Dr. G
who was much addicted to the pleasures of the table. He was
sent for very hurriedly late in the evening, to attend a fashion-
able peeress. The Doctor had been indulging rather liberally,
and did not feel quite up to the mark to give an opinion in a
case of such importance. However, go he must, nolens volens, for
the Duchess had sent her carriage for him. He approached the
bedside of her grace, with blinded eyes and swimming brain,
took her hand and felt her pulse, holding his watch in the other.
He could see half-a-dozen hands on the face of his watch, but
it was utterly beyond his vision to distinguish the seconds or
minutes. He felt his time was come, and muttered, rather too
audibly, the ominous words “Drunk, by G —d.” This by-play
was only intended to describe his own state at that moment; but
he had hit the right nail on the head, for his noble patient was
affected with the same complaint. This memorable and lucky
diagnosis made his fortune. In a paper read before the Irish
College of Physicians, on “Drawing-room Drunkennes,” Dr.
McClintock says: —
“ It is a matter of notoriety that the immoderate use of diffusible sti •
mutants has greatly increased of late years among classes ■whose education
and social condition should have been sufficient preservatives against the
destructive vice. It is well known to physicians that alcoholism is to be
met with among the occupants of drawing-rooms as well as the fre-
quenters of tap-rooms. What has so widely spread this pernicious habit
among the present generation it would be difficult to say. Probably more
causes than one have contributed to bring it about. I cannot help
thinking that the intense strain put on the intellectual faculties in every
profession, trade, and pursuit in the mental competition of these days,
must create or foster an appetite for diffusible stimulants. Nervous
exhaustion craves for the alcoholic stimulus; whereas physical or mus-
cular exhaustion will more eagerly demand solid aliment. Furthermore,
to be candid, I must own to a feeling that our own profession is not
wholly free of blame in this matter. I know well that 1 am here trench-
ing on delicate ground; but, 'Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, magis amicus
veritas and I strongly suspect that the modern treatment of disease by
the free use of stimulants, though fulfilling an important therapeutic
indication, has occasionally developed a morbid habit or taste, eventualing


in moral and physical diseases of an incurable kind. I would qualify
this, however, by adding that the declaration of inebriates themselves
on this point is of no value whatever, as they are notoriously untruthful,
and are always glad to throw the blame of their evil habit on the physi-
cian or surgeon.
“ Nearly all the cases of alcoholism which have fallen under my obser-
vation were females of the better class in society. All, with scarcely an
exception, concealed the habit they had acquired of drinking to excess, so
that it often needed a lengthened investigation and a careful analysis of
all the symptoms, before any positive conclusion as to the real cause ot
the patient’s condition could be arrived at.
“ All sought medical advice on account of some derangement belonging
to alcoholism, though apparently not themselves recognizing the source
from whence their ailments sprang. I should qualify this by saying that
a few were brought by friends who had no suspicion of the patient’s
habits. The intoxicating liquors taken varied a good deal, viz., brandy,
gin, champagne, port, sherry, whisky, ale, porter, and (in one case) tinc-
ture of ginger—of which her daily allowance, for a length of time, was
one pint. This unfortunate lady, who moved in a high circle, and was
what is ordinarily called a strong-minded person, eventually died of jaun-
dice, enlarged liver, and ascites. It is very well known that, where the
ordinary spirit cannot be obtained, the victims of this passion will not
hesitate to drink eau de Cologne, lavender water, sal volatile, compound
spirits of lavender, and, in fact, any spirit they can lay their hands on.
Most of us here have known or heard of the museum porter at one ot our
schools of medicine who used to drink the spirits of wine off the anato-
mical preparations when he had not the means of buying a more potable
description of alcohol. In justice to his palate, 1 must add that this was
before the methylated spirits came into use,
“ The ingenuity displayed by many of these individuals to hide the
vice, and elude the precautions for keeping away the much-coveted drink,
is most curious, often exhibiting great faculty for^invention.”
We are inclined to the opinion of many medical men, that
those persons who have been for years in the habit of indulging
largely in drink, should not be too suddenly deprived of it. It
should be done by slow degrees, and should be the result of con-
viction. As a means to this desirable end, we beg to suggest to
such individual the following expedient. Let him fill a bottle
with the liquor for which he may have a weakness, and after
taking his first “ nip,” let him replace it with pure water. On
the second occasion he may require one, let him do the same,
and so on every day, replacing the liquor abstracted with water,
until at last the mixture will become thoroughly insipid. We
think by the time he has got through half of the spirits, he will
be completely cured.
We know of one remarkable case of a lady (the wife of a
colonel in the army who resided for many years near Mel-
bourne, and who was cured of the habit of drinking by the old
colonel, sending home to her one day a small cask of brandy, with
instructions to have it put in her bedroom. She was highly


offended, and, whether from opposition or otherwise, she became
a temperate woman from that hour.
We believe there are upwards of 600 public houses in the city
and suburbs of Sydney, the proportion being nearly double that
of the butchers,’ and almost double that of bakers’ shops. Now,
we ask, is this suppply commensurate with the natural require-
ments of the people of this colony ? The total number of publi-
cans’ licenses granted throughout the colony in 1868, was 2,198 :
an amount which must create some alarm in the minds of those
who duly consider the influence of opportunity , and the weak
moral powers of resistance to temptation in the lower and work-
ing classes. Well may Shakspere have said,
“ Oh, opportunity, thy guilt is great;
’Tis then thou execut’st the traitor’s treason ;
Thou sett’st the wolf where he the lamh may get;
Who ever plots the sin, thou ’pointest the season ;
’Tis thou that spurn’st at right, at laws, at reason;
And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him,
Sits sin, to seize the souls, that wander hy him.”
111-regulated public houses, conducted by men of loose conduct
and depraved morals, are the greatest nuisances that can exist
in civil society : and what a vast number of such are to be found
in Sydney ! Innumerable are the temptations which are to
be found in these haunts of idleness. Here, low gaming is
carried on, and billiard-bagatelle becomes the fascinating syren,
luring the young and unwary, and, amid orgies in which both
sexes join, poisoning the mind of all ranks in the humble walks of
life. Prostitutes of the lowest rank are permitted, when the
gains of the landlord are thereby promoted. In fact, there is
scarcely any moral evil by which society is affected—the mind
debauched, the virtuous parent cruelly distressed, and the ruin
of families and individuals effected—which is not generated in
these low public-houses.
We can vouch for the truth of the following case; it was
related to us by a personal friend of the victim, and, who accom-
panied him on two occasions to the house indicated.
Mr. B was manager of a station in the southern district,
and had held his situation as such for many years, during which
period, he had contrived by economy, and by his general business
talents, to save upwards £2,000. About seven months ago he
came up to Sydney for a spell, and was, we believe, staying
either at the Royal Hotel or Williams.’ In the course of his


rambles, he, in company with our informant, entered a well-
known public-house in Castlereagh-street, one hundred yards
from the ruins of the Prince of Wales Theatre. He and his
friend both became intoxicated, and remained in the house all
night: Mr. B sleeping in his clothes on the sofa in the par-
lour, and his friend was acccommodated with a room upstairs.
During the night Mr. B had rather incautiously taken out
a large roll of notes, and handed one of them to the barmaid to
pay for drinks. There were no men in the house, only women
connected with the place*: In the morning the roll of notes was
non est. Mr. B took the matter philosophically, and as soon
as the Bank opened, went down with his friend and drew and
cashed a cheque for £125. The two friends then parted, ar-
ranging to meet in the evening. About 10 p.m. they met at one
of the cafes, and Mr, B was prevailed upon to leave a portion
of his money, £75, with the landlord of the cafe, retaining only
£4O. He had already spent £5. Urged on by some insane in-
fatuation, he again visited the same public-house near midnight,
where the drunken carouse was repeated, and, after lying in his
clothes all night, found himself minus every note and sovereign
he had, leaving him only some loose silver in his waistcoat
pocket. Our informant endeavoured to make an investigation
into the robbery, but Mr. B would not allow him, adding, “It
is time for me to clear out now, for in four weeks I have made
a pretty good thing of it; I have lost my situation and I have
spent £800.” Our informant states, that he is morally certain
that the barmaid robbed his friend after he had gone to bed;
and that he has since given the landlady to understand that he
believes she was a party to the robbery.
Social and moral evils cannot be remedied by law. You cannot
make a man sober by Act of Parliament, any more than you
can create chastity, honesty, or truth; but you can do this by
Act of Parliament: you can refuse r to legalize temptation to
vice, A working-man may get through three or four public-
houses on his way home, but he will hardly get by seven or eight.
Here they are to be found at every corner; and the best sites in
the city are occupied by public-houses, which are a standing dis-
grace to a Christian colony. But the people will revert to
stimulants of some kind, do what you will; hence, if the large
army of Temperance men are really in earnest, let them build up


some grand counterpoise to the public-house. Their Temperance
Hall in Pitt-street is about the most repulsive-looking place in
Sydney, Where is their cheap cafe, their working-men’s clubs,
their easily accessible libraries to induce the working-man to
spend his time more profitably than in the public-house. They
have done nothing but preach Temperance, and the result is seen
in increased and wide-spread drunkenness. Over and over again
have we heard the remark made by men who were willing to be
saved : “There is no place in Sydney where you can sit down
for an hour, without going into a public-house.” These men are
therefore compelled to walk the streets, till from sheer weariness
they are glad to spend, perhaps, their last threepence in a pint of
“stringy bark,” for without spending something, they could not
sit or read the paper.
On the other hand, look at that blaze of light streaming from
yonder bar, where hot-spiced wine, Jamaica hot, and “ Tom and
Jerry ” are the Shibboleths of the night. Teetotalers and
Temperance men take a leaf out of this man’s book ; he is turning
over £20,000 a-year ; put up your plate glass, burn plenty of
gaslight, and make your temperance cafe as cheerful and as tasty
as you can. Hang round your walls the finest pictures and
engravings that can tend to refine and elevate the mind, and let the
beverage you sell be of the very best description, while books
and periodicals circulate unceasingly; and we solemnly believe
that within a brief time it would be the resort of thousands, who
would derive mental and moral good from its innocent advantages,
whilst it might be the glorious means perchance of rescuing from
eternal perdition some sinking and despairing soul.
It may be urged that such refreshment-rooms might prove a
snare in leading our mechanics to forsake their homes ; but any
man who would be tempted away from his own fireside by the
most attractive cafe, has long since been caught by the flashy
seductions of the public-house. Many mechanics and laborers
live too far from home to return in the dinner hour. What is
the alternative ? The careful wife will send his dinner by one
of the children, who is in consequence kept away from school;
or sometimes the workman carries his meal with him, and goes
to the nearest public-house to eat it, washing it down with a pint
or two of Tooth’s or Castlemaine ; and then as we have witnessed,
he is frequently tempted by boon companions to have another


pint, and the disgraceful carouse of the night is begun at the
dinner-hour.
For the man with good wages, and a good wife who knows
how to economize, there is no need of such places. But for the
man without a home, or even for him who may have on©** but
such a one, that when he says “there’s no place like home,” he
means there’s no place so miserable, dirty, and uncomfortable, —
a place where the dining-room, drawing-room, kitchen, nursery,
and washing-house are all rolled into one apartment —
where damp clothes are steaming overhead, and dirty children
are crawling underfoot. We can show you scores of such places
in Sydney. Can a man who has been toiling all day stay there ?
Where shall he go? We know not. There is no place in Syd-
ney but the public house. And then, when you throw into the
scale a decided taste for beer, and contrast the bright, smart,
cheerful aspect of the tavern, and the actual need of some stimu-
lant, you cannot wonder that his choice is for the public-house.
Let us have our working-mens’ club and cafe. Make the trial;
until made we cannot judge. The working-man will not abuse
his liberty, any more than those gentlemen who are found at
their clubs night after night, and not blamed either.
Now for the site. It must be, in a good situation, in a tho-
roughfare frequented by working-men; and, as the number of
public-houses in the neighbourhood would form an unfailing
test of the right place, we would propose the Haymarket; for
there are only fourteen public-houses immediately around and
near it. Large bodies of workmen are also employed within an
easy distance, to say nothing of the market-gardeners who as-
semble there three times a week.
It must have a good manager and his wife ; and the latter must
be an active, stirring, economical, business-like, cleanly woman,
with a pleasant smile to welcome her customers. The manager
must be clearly informed that it is working-people for whom the
Club is provided, or he may give himself airs and snub them, in
order to cultivate a higher class of customers. We will not go into
details. We only again repeat our firm conviction; that the
establishment of a bright, cheerful Coffee-house and Club, ador-
ned with flowers, pictures and mirrors ; where music shall charm
and soothe—and where everything that gives charms to the
public-house shall be found, —would do more for the Temperance


cause than has ever been done before ; that it would become a
serious rival to your gin-palaces, your singing-halls, your taverns >
and your low public-houses, which are now demoralizing our
working-men and working-women, who are in reality the bone
and sinew of the colony, the very nerve and marrow of the land.
We will add a few words on the modus operandi which we con-
ceive, should form the basis of a Working-man’s Club.
1. It cannot be expected that these club-houses can at first
flourish without aid and countenance from the worthy and be-
nevolent, any more than can schools. When the poor man has
been taught the value of knowledge, and his taste has been
improved, and his means increased, he will require no extra-
neous aid.
2. It is desirable that women should participate in their ad-
vantages. It has been said they would neglect their duties.
But neither men nor women should neglect their duties for the
club or anything else. The object being to infuse a high moral
tone into this portion of society, it seems an infringement of the
laws of nature to exclude women, who will help to humanize
and soften down the asperities of the stronger sex.
3. They should be managed chiefly by working-men.
4. To create facilities for social intercourse, amusements, and
rational recreation, should be the primary objects; with a quiet
reading-room and classes for those who wished to improve them-
selves.
5. They should be open on Sundays, There is really no social
or moral evil difference between the rich and poor, and the for-
mer keep their club open on Sundays. Moreover if they are to
be regarded as antidotes and counterpoises to the public-houses,
the necessity of doing so will be apparent.
6. No gambling, betting, or cardplaying allowed, and no in-
toxicating drinks of any kind admitted, with exception of sound
and cheap colonial wine. In reference to this rather difficult
question, we will only say, that if working-men are intelligent
enough to form clubs for themselves, they must be as free to
make their own regulations as the members of the Union or
Australian Clubs; but if they seek the aid of a club outside of
their own, they must submit to the conditions which that club
might think proper to impose. With regard to smoking, we
believe the habit to be both harmless and popular, and for those
who smoke rooms (as in other clubs) should be provided.


Lastly. These clubs should be thoroughly unsectarian, socially,
politically, and religiously.
A club founded on these principles, would tend to promote
the morality of the people, and as young men above the age of
eighteen might be admitted, they would be enticed from the cor-
ners of the streets, and the public-houses. Workmen will find
time to use these club-houses, as they now find time to spend in
the public-house. They would find in them means df improving
their social and moral condition, and that of their families ; and
additional comforts and intellectual and social recreations would
inevitably follow the establishment of such an institution we
have, however feebly, endeavoured to describe.
In thus pointing out a practical remedy for the prevention of
so much drunkenness, and by which men of previous bad cha-
racter may live honest, sober, and Christian lives, we have
shown you how you may successfully compete with the public-
house and rum-shop. If wealthy men would only assist the move-
ment with greater liberality, then more could be done in the way
of ornamenting these “public-houses without the drink,” these
“ come and well-comes.” Men, unreacbed by other agencies,
would be drawn by the free reception professed and given;
drinking habits would be broken up j desires for self-improve-
ment awakened; men who now know not their letters would be
taught to read and wield the mighty pen; desolated homes
would be be re-furnished, and neglected children re-clothed.
Your Schools would be replenished, and your places of worship
better attended. Masters would be better worked for, public-
houses and pawnbrokers would lose their custom, and shop-
keepers better supported and more regularly paid ; the general
character of the people would be improved; domestic happiness
and comfort restored, bad language given up, lives reformed,
and “ God, even our own God,” would give us his blessing.
All this can be accomplished by removing as much as possible
temptations to drunkenness, and multiplying those to sobriety.
They must compete with the gin-palaces and rum-shops in their
blaze of light, warmth, and ornament; and, if possible, made
doubly or trebly attractive. Give them any attractive name you
please; provide smoking-rooms—for it would be cruel to deprive
the working man of his pipe,—and let the sale of good cheap
wine be permitted, if a club, founded only on a teetotal basis,


does not satisfy the comparatively steady men and moderate
drinkers. You will find this an absolute necessity, we think,
for such men will never be induced to join, unless they could
obtain the refreshment to which they were accustomed.
At Chatham, in 1862, a movement was got up for providing
amusement for the soldiers ; a building was erected and meetings
held; but, when they discovered that no beer was to be allowed,
the soldiers withheld their subscriptions, and the project fell to
the ground.
Playgrounds should also be attached to a Working-mans’ Club,
or Coffee Palace, and we must try and induce the women to tidy
themselves and look on at their games of football and cricket,
and at night we would back a cheerful fire, with a fender and
slippers, against the pavement and the pipe, or the public-house.
Take the working-classes from the public-houses by amusement
more than instruction. At the eleventh annual meeting of the
National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, held at
the Ulster Hall, Belfast, 1867; Dr. Lancaster, F.R.S., said:
“In my own experience with a little Working-mens’ Institute,
in the neighbourhood yf Hampstead, I have found that when I
induce my wife and daughters to go down and play the piano
there is a crowded room; but that if I deliver a lecture on
Science, there is a wonderful difference. I find too, that patron-
age is a great evil. “My lord” sends down his £6, and says ‘as
long as you avoid politics and religion you shall have my patron-
age.’ That is not the way |to treat working-men; they are as
independent as any other people, and it is not by getting up
meetings with great names that you will induce men to attend
these institutions ; you must draw them by Moral influence.”
This liquor traffic, in short, is a question of momentous im-
portance to all who are laboring philanthropically for the physical
prosperity of the people; and as the working-classes themselves
are most interested in this great question, should they not be
the most anxious and active laborers in the cause ? On the one
hand, there will be much hard work and little leisure or happi-
ness ; and on the other, there will be less work, better wages,
and more of the comforts of life. Without sufficient food,
clothing, fuel, and shelter, and other comforts, no true happiness
can exist. Let the working-men, then, recollect that they have
to bear the burden of drink-made criminals, paupers, and lunatics,
22
VICE AXD ITS VICTIMS ;


and that the vast annual expenditure, or rather waste of capital
in drink, deprives thousands of them of both work and wages,
and keeps them back from accomplishing their social and political
advancement.
Intemperance then being the chief source of crime, of juvenile
delinquency, of poverty, insanity, and physical suffering, what
more can be done to check it ? Religion has failed —for Scotland,
with all her reverence for religion, is proof of this. Education
has not been found efficacious in resisting its progress. In
Prussia and the New England States, where national education
is highly cultivated, drunkenness prevails to a large extent, and
is on the increase. Public amusements have been proved vain,
as witness Prance. The only remedy is Prohibition - . Where-
ever this had been tried, wherever a wise restriction on the sale
of intoxicating drinks had been adopted, there invariably fol-
lowed diminished intemperance, and an improved state of
morals. This was the case not only in England, but in Germany,
Prance, the Netherlands, Belgium, and the United States. Let
us try then first of all to root out all ill-regulated, low public-
houses, by doubling the license, trebling it the next year, and so on,
so as to squeeze out of existence these dens of iniquity. The
respectable and intelligent licensed victualler will not object to
pay a double license, if a more wholesome and increased trade
results from such a course, whilst the public morals must neces-
sarily be vastly improved.
Let all confectioners have the privilege of selling colonial
wine, without a license, or under a license of a moderate amount.
Let us endeavour to establish Working-men’s Clubs, where
good, sound, and cheap wine may be procured by those who
prefer it to coffee.
The letter of Jules Joubert, Esq., Secretary to the Agricul-
tural Society of New South Wales, on “ Our Wines,” in the
Town and Country Journal, 30th August, fully endorses the views
we have attempted, however feebly, to advocate, viz., the
general sale of our own invigorating and wholesome wines, free
of license. Mr. Joubert thus eloquently and practically writes:—
“Prom observations made during my short excursion through the valley
of the Hunter, I feel now satisfied that ere long we may anticipate a radi-
cal and beneficial change in the ‘ moral condition ’ of the population of
this colony. It may, perhaps, seem a far-fetched notion in the eyes of
many, who will ask: ‘What on earth have the Vignerons to do with the
morality of the people?


“ To these I recommend a walk through the streets of many large centres
of population, particularly ‘ After Dark.’ They cannot fail to notice the
horrible state of degradation, the squalid poverty and wretchedness
brought on by intemperance, and abuse of alcoholic or fermented liquors
of the filthiest kind. The introduction of a wholesome, cheap wine, pure
juice of the grape, which, I find yields, in the Hunter River district, the
most productive of all crops (upwards of 10U3 gallons to the acre) will, if
judiciously placed before the people or New South Wales, gradually take
the place of the intoxicating drink they now consume to the utter des-
truction of both body and soul.
in order that this most desirable end should be arrived at, unity of ac-
tion among the growers is necessary ; first to be satisfied with a fair price
for their wine, and secondly to obtain from legislature that these wines
be sold freely throughout the colony. I mean that the sale be not tram-
melled by either tax or license. What the “ Pise.” may lose will be amply
made up by the decrease in the ‘ personnel ’ of our ‘ gaols, lunatic asy-
lums,’ and other institutions, which now draw so heavy on the public
funds.
“ Dephts of good sound wines should be found in as great a number as
public-houses ; the growers keeping a strict ‘ surveillance ’ over these in
order to check and prevent and ‘ falsification ’ or tampering with the wine.
This I most earnestly urge upon them. It is the most essential point for
the ultimate success lam anxious to arrive at. The overgrasping propen-
sity of all dealers in liquor throughout the colony, causes perhaps more
real mischief than the actual intemperate habits of the people. The
amount of drug mixed with almost every drhp of 4 drink,’ and the nefarious
effects of this 4 drugging,’ are unfortunately very little known.
“ How many 4 houses ’ are there in New South Wales where the traveller
can call for a bottle of colonial wine ? and what will be the average of
those in which he will find a glass of genuine sound wine ? Should he be
so fortunate as to succeed, the price he will have to pay will certainly put
an untimely end to his patriotism. I have seldom, if ever, been able to
procure a ‘pint’ of potable wine under 2s. or half-a-crown! At that rate
wine-growing would indeed be a most lucrative pursuit. The grower, I
find, is satisfied with a much less figure. Wines can be purchased at from
4s. to 7s. a gallon. I have visited cellars, last week, where no less than
50,000 gallons of wines are being carefully and skilfully allowed to mature
for market —and yet here, in the city of Sydney, within seven or eight
hours’journey from these cellars, we cannot with any degree of safety seek
for a single glass of such wines. It is indeed time that we should have a
reform. Able men are daily denouncing intemperance —they preach total
abstinence; would they not do better if they rested satisfied with 4 reform? ’
A man who will adhere to drinking colonial wines only, will never
fall under the denomination of a drunkard, or even an intemperate man.
44 G-ood sound wines, such as I tasted in abundance on the Hunter, will
4 cheer and comfort the heart of man,’ but never cause drunkenness, or
breed vice. To the strong and healthy, I commend that clear, bright,
wholesome juice of the 4 Rineau blanc,’ ‘Yerdeilho,’ or 4 Shiraz.’ The
warm, generous Burgundy and Malbec will invigorate and strengthen the
invalid—replenish the vigour, and harden the sinews of the working-men.
At present, prejudice and the difficulty to obtain colonial wine, are the
only obstacles in the way ; we may readily get over the latter, the former
is more difficult to overcome. At the dinner which closed the Singleton
meeting, 1 was struck at the 4 marked ’ preference the majority of the guests
gave to the 4 eobeign wines ’ placed on the table, although it was amply
furnished with 4 the choicest' vintages joi the district, liberally supplied by
the growers. I did not ascertain from the gentlemen who 4 quaffed ’ bum-
pers of sherry (?) port ( ? ?) or champagne (???) how they felt next morn-
ing. I behaved veby kindly to the various bottles of 4 Kaloudah ’ and


4 Dalwood ’ that came within my reach, I joined most heartily in all the
toasts of the evening, and I am happy to acknowledge that the wines I
drank dealt with me with a reciprocity of kindness which I am bound to
appreciate to its fullest extent.”
There is a movement on foot in Sydney, to establish an Ine-
briate’s Asylum and Reformatory. We believe it to be surrounded
by many difficulties, more particularly when we look at the
financial considerations involved. In America, with her immense
population, there are men of standing and position, who habit-
ually “ liquor up ” all day long, and who find seclusion and res-
traint in one of these asylums necessary. They pay very high
for their voluntary absence from the world, but find all the com-
forts and luxuries they have been accustomed to, such as reading-
rooms, billiard-rooms, and a sumptuous table, everything in fact
but King Alcohol. The usual weekly charge ranges from 10
dollars to 25 dollars. There are few habitual drunkards here
able to pay even £l a week; and the majority would be men
whose sole means depended upon their liberty. An establish-
ment like the Sanitarium at Media, near Philadelphia, is, at
present, an impossibility here, where such an asylum would have
to be supported almost entirely by State aid. But we do think
that our legislators should provide some kind of hospital or
sanatorium, where the unfortunate drunkard could be treated as
a patient, rather than as a criminal, and where he at least, might
have an opportunity of redemption, out of harm’s way, and by
which his self-control could be restored, and his moral safeguard
braced, so as to enable him to resist future temptation. It is
worth the trial. It may not be possible to effect a cure in all
cases, for it is almost impossible to say when a complete cure is
effected ; the effects varying so widely in different individuals.
Dr. Parrish, the Superintendent of the Sanatorium at Media,
says he never marks a man “cured” when he leaves. He has
to be watched afterwards, and judged by his subsequent conduct.
As rule, he entertains good hopes of the patient who is what we
should call “ a gentleman by habit and feeling,” although he has
this unfortunate failing. On the other hand, he finds that a
“low-lived man,” of generally depraved tastes, is almost sure
to relapse. The number of cures is roughly estimated at 40 per
cent, in these establishments.
In the London Times there have recently appeared some
forcible articles on the Great Vice ; but we regret to add that no


practical remedy has yet been suggested. We subjoin the
following extracts from this paper, which require no comment: —
“ The world, however, cannot be governed by absolute ideas. That there
is a great evil among us is patent to all men. It is eating away the life of
the people. It is not to be met by any declamation against intemperance.
But philanthropists, and even economists, regard its existence as a national
danger as well as a public loss. To arrest it in some way or other is an obvious
duty, not from any logical standing such as would satisfy the teetotaler, but
because it is found to be a source of misery and wretchedness to a great
mass of the people. It is found that every low public-house has its
surrounding of drunkenness; that an increase of such public -houses multiplies
the number of drunkards ; that in every neighbourhood where a house of
this description is established it demoralizes a section of the people ; that the
inducements offered to consumption, daily and hourly destroy the lives of
men ; that every newspaper shows a victim, and every gaol-delivery shows
a criminal, who has been made so by the fatal snare. It, therefore, becomes
necessary to do something. No man has yet propounded an effectual remedy.
But it is thought that by stopping the multiplication of public-houses, and
suppressing those that are manifestly unfit, this will be promoted. Men
who discard logic as an absolute guide are therefore prepared to acquiesce
in some such measure. They say that the evil is so terrible, and increasing
so fast, that it must be arrested. If there is no other way of stopping a fire,
it must be done by a barrel of gunpowder under the adjoining premises. It
is a bad thing to interfere with men’s liberty, or to adopt doubtful principles
in government, but it is so sad to see men dying by hundreds and thousands
from drunkenness, that something must be done ; if by confiscation it must
he done; if by compensation, it must be done; if by creating something
which assumes the character of a monopoly, it must be done. The world
has pronounced the evil to be intolerable. This is the state of the question at
the present moment in England, and next session Parliament will be occu-
pied in discussing it.”
“ Upon several points of the great question moved by Lord Derby and the
Provident Knowledge Society there cannot be a difference of opinion.
Drunkenness is the national vice, an inexcusable scandal, and a horrible
evil; it produces improvidence, perpetual dependence, recklessness, degrada-
tion, and deliberate pauperism. It has increased in spite of immense ef-
forts, and is now at least as bad as ever; if there is any change, tvorse than
ever. The various provisions for making small savings easy and secure
have not had a success at all proportionate to the requirements of the case,
or the annual aggregate of wages and industrial profits. It is plain that the
working-classes alone spend every year in drink more than the entire capi-
tal they have in all the savings banks ; and if they would only drink mod-
erately for one year, they would be able thereby to double their total deposits.
Such people, it is too evident, will not take due care of themselves or their
families. Every kind of improvement stops and breaks down because it
has to be forced on those who are indifferent to it, and are hardly conscious
of the want. Drunkenness is debt, and it breeds a debtor class like that of
old Home, who were virtually slaves. In this country they fall-into the
hands of traders who repay themselves for the delays and bad faith of their
customers by compelling them to take articles of food, drink, and clothing
adulterated for the very purpose. The drunkard’s wife and children pay his
debts by milk half water, by iron filings, and poisonous dyes in their tea,
by meat unfit for human food, and by lodgings which are nests of disease.
Whatever may be said about the necessity or harmlessness of strong drink
in moderation, it must be admitted that the actual indulgence is excessive
and enormous. On these points we all agree ; and he certainly must be either
very bold or very paradoxical who can view the results of such systematic
indulgence without some degree of fear. It is impossible to regard our own


as the normal or healthy condition of a community. And when we know,
as we must, that the greater part of our working-people never have a shil-
ling to call really their own, and that accident, sickness, or old age will throw
themselves and their families upon public relief, we seem like a party of
philanthropists assembled to interchange sympathies, for once, or some ob-
jects of pity and sources of solicitude, upon which all are agreed to the ex-
tent that these things ought not to be, and that, if they go on as they are,
worse things are at hand."
“ What is wanted is give to thrift a material and attractive form, if possible
varied, and to suit various characters and circumstances. As this is not
easy, andean only be done imperfectly, the next best thing, and the most
possible, is to carry the Provident Association to every man’s door, and adapt
it to the various contingencies of his position. A working-man in the
receipt of good wages, and in his ordinary health, ought to pay in for half-a-
dozen objects, and be armed against misfortune at all points. But in one
way or another, thrift must not be left to the barren accumulation of figures
and the contemplation of the sum total. It must be recommended, em-
bodied, adorned, and made a living interest. It is thus that all the duties
of life and all the objects of existence are put before us in some winning
form. Economy is not to be taught or learnt by itself. It must be a goodly
company, with a corresponding growth of the social charites. Thrift has
unkindly aspects, and must, therefore, be mated and consorted with a wiser
and truer kindness than that of boon-fellows. Thrift is chilly, and must be
warmed. How shall this be done ? It is a work, no doubt, and one worthy
of heroes; but it has to be done. A vast population has sloughed off into a
condition that seems to have put them out of the human nomenclature.
What are they, in reality, who live only for the day or the hour ? That
swamp has to be drained, teun and air have to be forced into it. There is
no good in just talking to it or about it. The Englishman has a constitutional
right to do what he likes with his own money and time, within limits of
common propriety. We cannot put him to bed like a child, or drench him
with water when he wants beer, or put him under the charge of his more
reasonable but meddling neighbours. We cannot make him lock up the
twopenees that burn in his pocket. Nobody has yet become good or wise
by law. The best chance for this poor fellow, the rough basis of our great
empire, is that a good many men of heart and sense are doing their best for
him. It is something new for a public department to came forward and
in the interest of moral improvement. What if the Tost Office should win
a triumph where the Home Office has failed, and where the Education
Department still beholds a battle with varying fortunes and unknown re-
sults ? Find the poor man something better to do with his hard-earned
money ; take it in charge if he will give it up, that he may not run to the
shop like the youngest village urchin and satisfy the craving of his gullet.
We know there are those who say it is best the working-man should drown
his faculties in drink, and become a sotted beast instead of a rival or an
antagonist. If he chooses to commit moral suicide, and make himself a
helpless slave, let him, say these. But this is neither an honourable specu-
lation nor a safe one. We are proud to have abolished slavery. We have
now to abolish the worse slavery of those who make it their very plan of
life to be always paupers and self-sold slaves.”
In concluding this portion of our subject, we append the for-
mal prpfession of faith of ‘ ‘ The American Association for the
Cure of Inebriates,” as embodying the latest view of enlightened
American opinion.
1. Intemperance is a disease. 2. It is curable, in the same sense that
other diseases are. 3. Its primary cause is a constitutional susceptibility to
the alcoholic impression. 4. This constitutional tendency may be in-


herited or acquired. 5. Alcohol has its true place in the arts and sciences.
It is valuable as a remedy, and like other remedies may be abused. In ex-
cessive quantites it is a poison, and always acts as such when it produces
inebriety.
We have given more prominence to, and a more elaborate notice
of, drunkenness than any other of our subjects, because we believe
it to be the origin, direct or indirect, of almost every crime As
long as men and women will preserve themselves from the baneful
influences of intoxicating drinks, so long, and no longer, can society
have confidence in them in either business or social relations. We
know that the commission of crime is not confined to drunkards
only, and also that all drunkards are not criminally or viciously
inclined ; but we are well assured that in the ordinary derelictions
of non-drinkers there is much less probability of an entailment of
misery and suffering beyond the actual offender than when the
treble sin of drunkenness is associated with it.


POVERTY.
At the first glance it may appear a very harsh, social judgment
to classify poverty among the vices. It is not necessarily a vice,
but it may become so, when it is the result of the gratification
of the brute or animal instincts, without any consideration for
the future. Moreover, poverty in many cases results from the
weak intellectual brains and prematurely developed passions of
the subjects of it; and nearly all paupers have a defective and
sometimes vicious organization. Idleness is decidedly a vice, and
poverty and it generally are twin-brothers. The busy unknown
may not be rich, but he will never be poor, never become a
pauper, for his intelligence will generally prompt him to join a
benefit-society, by which means he will provide support in case
of accident or sickness. In a state of abject poverty man cannot
be said to be a civilized human being. Pauperism has been
defined by Archbishop French as being maintained in idleness
by public charity. Encouraged, nay, urged on, to a life of in-
dolent inaction, and owing his wretched subsistence to that forced
charity which, reversing the description of the quality of mercy
“which is not strained,” may be truly said to be doubly cursed,
cursing “ him that gives and him that takes,” his existence cannot
but be miserable.” Here the Archbishop evidently makes pauper-
ism distinct from poverty and indigence, for poverty, as we have
stated, is not necessarily and of itself degrading. Its con-
comitants may be perfectly honorable. We know a lady in this
city who has been in great poverty for some years, but who has,
nevertheless, won the esteem and affection of all to whom her
story is known. She is now a widow; her husband had a
Government appointment, with a of £4OO a year. He
insured his life for £IOOO at the age of 26. Two years after-
wards he contracted the fatal habit of what he used to call
“nipping”; pale btandy was his favorite drink, and of this he
generally drank, on an average, about half a bottle a day. On a
weekly constitution, such as he had, together with his sedentary


occupation during the day, the effect can be easily imagined.
He first lost his appointment, drank more; pledged or sold his
policy of insurance; and died, leaving his widow penniless with
three children. The brave-hearted woman made no sign, and
it was only by the merest accident we discovered that for weeks
she and the children had been living almost entirely on bread
and tea, the greater portion of her earnings as a needlewoman
being swallowed up in rent and keeping her children decently
clad. “ One-half the world does not know how the other lives,”
and if they changed places could never appreciate the means
whereby they lived. Now this lady, although very, very poor,
did not belong to .the pauper class. There were many shifty ex-
pedients in her case, but no ingrained habits, no long-descended
legacy of poverty, inhaled with the fusty atmosphere of the
localities marked out by fate as their only inheritance; she
worked out an instructive truthfulness, and, spite of everything
adverse, trudged on without despair.
Have you ever thought, gentle reader, of the nature of this
terrible change and dreadful struggle for existence, as in the
case of this unfortunate lady ? Born and nurtured in affluence,
the idolized beauty and joy of her father, she’gave her heart and
hand to a drunkard, though she knew it not, nor did he ever
contemplate, when he wooed and won her, that he would ever
become one. The father dead, —all dead who could have helped
her, —left with three helpless children in a strange city (her
husband had come from Melbourne after losing his appointment),
does it not seem surprising that she did not give up the contest
as utterly hopeless, and seek relief in. death ? Once, she told
us, she had taken two of her children down to the water’s edge,
hardly knowing with what intention, when the eldest girl looking
up in her eyes said, “ poor Papa, I wish he was here, he would
like this pretty view.” She clasped her child in her arms, the
long pent-up tears came, easing her bursting heart, and she
hurried home with her child —her darling child—who had thus
unconsciously saved her from the death of a suicide.
But with the poor, these effects seldom occur. They are, as it
were, to the manner born to endure mental wear and tear, from
which others would seek relief in death. Their griefs lose their
poignancy by repetition. How else could they live on from year
to year, amidst the weary, sickening uncertainty of their miserable


scrambling lives ? The evils that would slay other men, stronger
in body and mind, and who would have no other resource than
to oppose aud to be crushed, pass lightly over the unthinking,
yielding, busy poor.
How comes it then that so much injustice has been done to
the poor, through a harsh, social judgment ? The answer is
ready—“ From Saxon serfdom down to modern pauperism, the
old key-note of contempt and isolation vibrates unchanged.” For
800 years the upper classes of society have persistently legislated
in the most vigorous manner, as regards the poor, in a selfish
spirit of oppression and class isolation. In Sydney this great
social problem is being worked out, more or less, by the “let
alone,” or self-help principle, in opposition to the Irutum fulmen
of law. The very cripples who crawl along our streets prefer
liberty and a precarious life of poverty to the refined isolation
of the Liverpool Asylum; and hundreds of shoeless children are
actively employed in selling matches. Whilst on this subject, we
regret that no attempt has yet been made to establish a Shoe-
black Brigade among the Sydney boys. This light labor is now
performed almost entirely by men. It is true one or two of them
are old and infirm, but the majority are hale and hearty ; and
we are told on good authority that most of them are well off.
We proposed this scheme to the mother of a family of seven
boys, all living together in Argyle-place —having observed them
for months always selling matches, and always ragged and bare-
footed, even during the most dreadfully wet weather. Her reply
was as follows :—“ They ought to be at school, for their father
gets every week £3 10s.—but as soon as he is paid at five o’clock
on Saturday, he goes off on the spree, and I never see him till
sometime on Sunday morning. He does’nt always knock it all
down, so if I get a chance, I put by all I can get from him when
drunk; but it is seldom more than 15s. or £l a week, and that’s
not much in our large family.” ’Twas the old tale. This man
occupies a good position on one of the wharves, and could be
reclaimed. We recommend his case to the newly-formed society
for the promotion of morality, and shall jpe glad to furnish his
name and address. We will show them how to do this before
we have done : for it is a delicate operation. The wretched
place they live in may have something to do with his conduct;
but his wife and children are acclimated to the conditions of a


low social and moral life—the merit of their endurance is all
their own—and whatever sin, or crime that may arise from the
recklessness that hardens and degrades their natures must be
charged to society.*
Few persons are aware of the terrible sufferings endured here
by the houseless poor. Numbers of them are contiuually arriv-
ing in town from the country, and most of them utterly destitute.
These may be classed among the floating or casual poor. Weary,
jaded, footsore, and hungry, they seek a temporary refuge per-
haps late in the evening at the Soup Kitchen and Night Refuge,
in Kent-street. We have recently had a glowing account of the
vast benefits conferred upon the poor and homeless by this insti-
tution. We have reason to know that this Soup Kitchen is a
disgrace to any civilized city.
One of the regulations of this institution is painted outside
the entrance gates, “No person admitted after nine o’clock.”
A stranger arriving at the gates at half-past seven or eight p.m.,
would fondly imagine that he could at least enter and rest him-
self. Vain imaginings’! no matter if it rains “cats and dogs,”
he must wait outside until the magical hour of nine. Lucky for
him if Mr. Lee, the Superintendent, is in at that hour; for, unless
he be, the Cerberus will not admit him. Upon one occasion Mr.
Lee was absent with the night-watchman, and five or six shiver-
ing wretches, some of whom had walked from twenty to thirty
miles that day, were compelled to wait at the gate from eight
o’clock till half-past ten, until he arrived. We will, however,
suppose the traveller to have gained admission into the yard,
what is the accomodation which this boasted institution affords
him ? A little after nine o’clock, the groom of the bedchamber
calls over a list of names, and as each man answers, he gets his
own “ swag ” if he has one ; these men are those who have been
there for several days, perhaps. Our traveller, at last, ventures
near the sanctuary, and nervously asks if he can be supplied with
a blanket as the night is cold. He is told there are no blankets,
and that he had better follow the others through the last door in
the opposite building. He does so, and finds himself in a small
square room, on the floor of which, by the dim light of a fraction
* We have heard since the above was in type, that Capt. Scott endea-
voured to form a Shoe-black Brigade, hut the boys would not clean boots
for a penny.


of candle, about an inch long, he discerns ten or twelve human
beings, some smoking, some cursing and all apparently sunk in
the lowest depths of misery and degradation. A gruff voice at
length arouses him from the reverie this sight has created, with
“Go up stairs, mate, there’s no room here.” And srreh a stairs !
A mere ladder, with very narrow steps, and placed at such an
angle, as to offer every facility for tumbling backwards. Safely
landed at the top, he is astonished to find himself in a low, dark
loft, with a shingled roof above him ; and, where it joins the
wall of the building, with about six inches of space left, through
which the cold night wind, rushes with fearful violence. Occa-
sionally there is an apology for a candle swung from the roof,
and by its aid he finds he is surrounded by mates galore. From
fifteen to twenty men are lying on the floor, each separated from
his fellow by a loose board about five feet long and six inches
deep. Near the end of this exquisite chamber is an iron bucket,
which completes the garniture of the bedroom. He at last
stretches his weary limbs on the cold floor; but, alas! not to
sleep. The terrible oaths, the frightful tales, the foul language,
banish sleep from him altogether, even if he escape the pediculi
which abound in that famed locality. Once or twice during that
wretched night, he feels in his waistcoat pocket, to see if his last
sixpence is safe, and heartily prays for morning. Several times
has Mr. Lee been out, threatening Mick or Jack with instant
expulsion, if they do not cease from making “ night hideous ”
with their sweet voices. And when the rosy morn appears, the
poor traveller rises with great difficulty, for his limbs are stiff
and benumbed from cold and fatigue, and he leaves this hos-
pitable mansion at daybreak, heartsick, disgusted, and a trifle
more degraded than when he entered. And this is a true pic-
ture of the Sydney Night Refuge. Numbers of poor, houseless,
and destitute beings, find rest and shelter under the trees and
rocks in the Domain. We know this is against the law, and
that they are liable to be disturbed by the ranger, if not taken
in charge by the police; but it is doubtful if such stringent
measures do not drive many of them to desperation, and perhaps
crime. An Australian poet, having in view, perhaps, the places
we have indicated as the chosen ones of the houseless and
wretched for their temporary rest, has thus feelingly sung send
pleaded for them :


“ For misery, often, these a shelter make;
Forsaken wretches loiter here to weep
O’er want and woe by day—at night betake
Their wasted forms, so ill clad here to sleep ;
While, at their side, awaiting till they wake,
The ghastly phantoms constant vigils keep ;
Awake, they see the dreaded substance there,
Whose shadow filled their dreams, and urged despair.
“ The heiress, too, of sorrow, sin, and wrong —
Whose crime 'tis almost criminal to name—
Flies hither, from the selfish, heartless throng,
So slow in aid to save, so swift to blame !
For her a mere existence to prolong,
Is but to lengthen suffering and shame.
Should better thoughts e’er prompt her good to choose.
Where’er she turns the Nemesis pursues.” *
We almost despair, when we see the immense difficulties which
surround this question of poverty in Sydney and suburbs. No
man or woman who does not investigate the truth of the sad
facts, personally, would credit the amount of frightful destitution
that prevails in our midst. Something might be done by Govern-
ment in the matter, for there is no doubt that drunkenness, do-
mestic feuds, and vice in its most appalling forms, as well as
lingering sickness, are the natural results of a condition which
it is alike the imperative dutj and interest of the Government,
and of individuals, to strive to remedy as speedily as possible.
Something on the basis of a Model Lodging House might
be formed, like that at Leeds. This was fitted up with seventy
beds to start with, in a house without any external pretentions,
but which, by its internal arrangements, its good management,
and its cheapness, draw away a very large number from the
abominable and filthy abodes by which it was surrounded. At
the end of the first year, the gross expenses were considerably
more than covered by the receipts. This encouraged further
extension ; still the demand increased, until a regular Mechanic’s
Home was formed, where at a charge of 4Jd per night, a better
class of men lodged, with the use of a commodious kitchen and
sitting-room. The receipts from the two houses, from the one
with 120 beds at 3d., and the other 3d and 4£d averaged over £l3
per week ; and the weekly expenditure about £6. The balance
remaining for profit, after making a fair allowance for deprecia-
tion of stock, as well as for replacement of capital, always
yielded over six per cent, on the outlay. 120 beds were made up
at 3d. per night, and 31 at 4£d.
* Ode to Diana , by Samuel Hawker Banks, canto vii., st. 4 and 5.


The Bushman’s Club, started a short time since in Castlereagh-
street, failed for a very simple reason, viz., absurdly high
charges. For the same amount, 15s. a week, a bushman could
dine sumptuously at Julius,’ Coleman’s, or Easy’s, and have an
excellent bedroom and sitting-room, with attendance.
Few institutions for %e improvement of the social and moral
conditions of the poor, have been more appreciated than Baths
and Wash-houses. They are now very popular in the large
cities of England, and could be made equally so here. A few
years back, the upper classes used these only as a luxury or
medicinally; now, working men appreciate the benefits of the
bath, and find that cleanliness improves their health, enables
them to endure labour, and mitigates, if it does not cure the
cutaneous diseases to which they are liable. Working-men who
take a warm bath occasionally, will not tolerate dirty homes.
One of the first effects, we believe, would be experienced by the
pawnbrokers, and no doubt the public-houses would eventually
share in the good effects, as they both thrive upon the vices of
society; and we can hardly imagine that any of one or two hundred
men bathing at six a.m. on a Sunday morning, would turn from
the bath to the rum-shop.
But still more important advantages spring from the use of
the laundry, where, by the labour of one person, it frees the
lodging from the nuisance of the “ washing day’’—to avoid which
many working-men resort to the public-house —cleanses and puri-
fies the linen of a family, and stops at the threshold the progress
of infectious disease. In conjunction with drying-closets, they
work admirably, and articles put into the closet at a temperature
200° will in a few minutes become dry, sweet, and wholesome.
We consider it the duty of the clergy to teach the poor the social
and intellectual benefits to be derived from warm bathing and
cleanliness.
The following extracts are from reports on the condition of the
working population of a few large towns, in relation to the effects
of poverty and privation on the public health :
‘ ‘ I am extremely anxious to express my opinion on this point,
in the most decided and explicit manner, because I am satisfied
that as long as the poor are in a state of great destitution, and
are not provided with adequate nourishment, clothing, and shel-
ter, no sanitary regulations with regard to the cleansing and


ventilation of the streets, and the removal of the sources of
malaria, effectually check the spread of fever.”—Howard’s Re-
port on Manchester.
“It is to be remembered that many of the evils I have pointed
out are, perhaps, the inevitable results of poverty; and I believe
that fever, to a certain extent, is an inseparable accompaniment
of extreme poverty, affecting large masses of the community.”
—Report on the Sanitary state of Liverpool, by Dr. Duncan.
“ I cannot, from the investigations I have made into the locali-
ties and progression of fever, connect its ravages with the nui-
sances which are exterior to the houses of the poor. It seems
to me to be the offspring of their poverty itself, which renders
their constitutions susceptible of the attack, especially when ex-
posed to contagion. The progress the disease has made from
place to place, indicates the powerful operation of contagion as
an exciting cause ; whilst its selection principally, though by no
means exclusively, of the poor, shows that poverty is the great
exciting cause.
“In fact, poverty, when it attains to a certain pitch, seems to
me to reduce all other predisposing causes of disease to insignifi-
cance, in comparison with its direful influence. Scanty, uncer-
tain, and unnutritious food, insufficient clothing, squalor of per-
son, incessant labour, sinking of the heart, cold lodgings, filthy
beds, or harsh substitutes for beds, the atmosphere of their
dwellings confined for the sake of warmth, and poisoned by
noxious exhalations ; these hold the vital functions too rigidly
and cruelly in their gripe, to permit the remote influences of
climate to be in any appreciable degree effective for good or evil.”
—Dr. Sym’s Report on Ayr,—Report of Poor Law Commis-
sioners for Scotland.
The Ragged Schools are grappling with an immense difficulty.
The wretched condition of hundreds of children must surely be
a matter of great consideration to our statesmen. They must
be aware that most of those who enter those habitations are gro-
velling in ignorance, low in morals, and uncivilized in manners.
Reared in a pauper atmosphere, depressed in spirit, and with a
low temperament, they must, by the laws of social gravitation,
inevitably sink in time among the adult paupers, and become
the progenitors of a similarly-depraved race. One or two pounds


per annum, therefore, judiciously expended on their now plastic
minds, will save the State at least £2O per annum for their
training in a reformatory, or some hundreds in the future for
their maintenance as convicts.
Many parents object t» their children being taken away from
against their will, as they keep them occasionally employed in
earning a few pence for them by selling matches and collecting
bottles and old iron. The only way of getting them, is to put
the police to watch them, and if they are found vagabondizing
about town, let that fact justify their being sent to school.
Vagrancy was annihilated in Aberdeenshire by Sheriff Watson,
in this way. He found the better class of children were glad to
come to his school, and eat the dinner; but the vagrant class
remained untouched, because they preferred their idle life, and
because their parents preferred to have them at their beck and
call. He therefore resolved upon another plan: he secured a
large barn, and, being sheriff, he was able to work in a more
authoritative manner than another. He told the police upon a
certain day to bring all the children they could find in the street
vagabondizing about, and they brought them. The scene was
awful from the kicking and struggling, but he gave them a din-
ner, he gave them some instruction, and he them another meal
in the evening. He said his proceedings might be considered as a
breach of the liberty of the subject, but he did not think he had
done more than give them a rough invitation to dinner. At any
rate, he told them to come again, and they would find a dinner,
instruction, and work provided for them. “I cannot make you
come,” he said, “ but I can take you up if you won’t come, and
will vagabondize in the streets.” The consequence was, that in
the course of six months, the 300 or 400 vagrants dwindled down
to two.*
We know not if our Industrial School Boards have the power
which he assumed, but we think that decisive measures like the
worthy sheriff’s might convert our ragged children into respect-
able tradesmen, without infringing upon the laws of political
economy. At any rate, nothing can be more absurd than putting
a book into a child’s hand and expect him to derive any improve-
* Miss Mary Carpenter’s speech on the Education of Neglected Children,
National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, Leeds Meeting,
1871.


merit from it, if the poor little fellow’s stomach is empty. The
true method of adoption, if possible, is this : The children should
be brought to school as early, and kept as late as possible. They
should be provided with plenty of food—breakfast at eight, a
good dinner, very plain and inexpensive, at one p.m., and ano-
ther meal before they went home. But, to prevent making pau-
pers of both the children and parents, some industrial employ-
ment should be provided for them. They would thus to some
extent earn their living, while they would receive instruction,
and be the whole day under civilizing influences. But as “all
work and no play, makes Jack a dull boy,” so we would advocate
lai'ge play-grounds for the children; and in those parts of the
city where civilization was only represented by the policeman;
these play-grounds should be surrounded by walls, to hide the
hideous vices without, and where the moral teachers could con-
tinue their training. Another advantage would result, in refer-
ence to home teaching and influence ; for the parents could be
reached through the children, and help afforded in the shape of
food and clothes. Then the mighty power of good over evil
would develope itself, for we sincerely believe that these little
ones might be the divine means of influencing the parents for
good, instead of the parents influencing them for evil.
Children are quick to perceive, and they would very soon
sharply criticise and contrast the comfort, the cleanliness, and
the high moral atmosphere of the school, with the poverty, the
filth, and the immorality at home. Their innate faculties of
Hope and Ideality, their love of the beautiful in Nature and
Art would be developed ; and they would, almost insensibly, so
indoctrinate the minds of their parents with their newly-
acquired refinement and intellectuality that different hopes,
different habits, tastes and aspirations would begin to flourish
in that hitherto-neglected home.
“The poor ye always have with you,” was spoken eighteen
hundred years ago by one who knew them well. Is this state of
things, then, to last as long as man occupies this globe ? Is
poverty to continue the lot of a vast number of human beings
for ever? Is the problem incapable of solution? “If this be
true,” said one of the most profound thinkers of this century,
“ political economy might have a needful, but it would have a
melancholy and a thankless task. * * * * Poverty,


like most social evils, exists because men follow their brute
instincts without due consideration. But society is possible,
precisely because man is not necessarily a brute. Civilization,
in every one of its aspects, is a struggle against the animal
instincts. Over some, even of the strongest ones, it has shown
itself capable of acquiring abundant control. It has artificial-
ized large portions of mankind to such an extent that of many
of their most natural inclinations they have not a vestige or
remembrance left. If it has not brought the instinct of popula-
tion under as much restraint as is needful, we must remember
that it has never been seriously tried. What efforts it has made
have mostly been made in the contrary direction. Religion,
morality, and statesmanship have vied with one another in in-
citements to marriage, and the multiplication of the species, so
it be but in wedlock. Religion has not yet discontinued its en-
couragements. The Roman Catholic clergy (of any other clergy
it is unnecessary to speak, since no other have any considerable
influence over the poorer classes,) everywhere think it their duty
to promote marriage, in order to prevent fornication. There is
still in many minds a strong religious prejudice against the true
doctrine. The rich, provided the consequences do not touch
themselves, think it impugns the wisdom of Providence to
suppose that misery can result from the operation of a natural
propensity; the poor think that ‘ God never sends mouths, but
he sends meat.’ No one would guess, from the language of
either, that man had any voice or choice in the matter. So com-
plete is the confusion of ideas on the whole subject, owing in a
great degree to the mystery in which it is shrouded by a spurious
delicacy which prefers that right and wrong should be mis-
measured and confounded on one of the subjects most momentous
to human welfare, rather than that the subject should be freely
spoken of and discussed. People are little aware of the cost to
mankind of this scrupulosity of speech. The diseases of society
can, no more than corporeal maladies, be prevented or cured
without being spoken about in plain language. All experience
shows that the mass of mankind never judge of moral questions
for themselves, never see anything to be right or wrong until
they have been frequently told it; and who tells them that they
have any duties in the matter in question while they keep within
matrimonial limits ? Who meets with the smallest condemnation,


or, rather, who does not meet with sympathy and benevolence for
any amount of evil which he may have brought upon himself
and those dependent on him by this species of incontinence ?
While a man who is intemperate in drink is discountenanced
and despised by all who profess to be moral people, it is one of
the chief grounds made use of in appeals to the benevolent that
the applicant has a large family and is unable to maintain them.
Little improvement can be expected in morality until the pro-
ducing large families is regarded with the same feelings as
drunkenness, or any other physical excess. But while the aris-
tocracy and clergy are foremost to set the example of this kind
of incontinence what can be expected from the poor?” *
The children of the poor, and indeed of the working-classes,
should be early taught that industry, knowledge, skill, and
economy, are the essential qualities of a prosperous workpeople ;
and they should have their minds at once disabused of that mis-
chievous notion, that “luck” is the basis of success. Let them
have as clear and as comprehensive a view as possible of the im-
portant fact that labour is the one great universal condition of
life, and that habits of diligence, attentiveness, perseverance,
and forethought can be acquired in early life, forming habits
and setting in train causes that must inevitably affect their future
life. So, in reference t© their moral education : teach them that
their social well-being depends upon strict integrity; and that
one of the most important conditions of success is a good moral
character, a just reputation for honesty, truthfulness, industry,
sobriety and punctuality. And hence, in after life, having been
proved to them at the outset, they are convinced there can be no
individual prosperity without sound business morality, and thus
the chief motive for immoral conduct, viz., pecuniary gain, is
entirely removed.
* Principles oj Political Economy , by John Stuart Mill, vol. i., p. 457.


THE GREAT SOCIAL EVIL,
It was our intention, originally, to have traced the career of a
prostitute from her first appearance to her retirement or death, but
we now prefer showing the extent of female frailty in Sydney in
another way • for, upon calmly reviewing the matter, we found
ourselves forced into the tacit acknowledgement that this was one
of the great social evils which could not be prevented. In the
language of Mr. Acton, one of our best authorities on the subject:
“ But it would be well that no delusion should be encouraged as to
the possible extirpation of the evil; as long as man was strong and
woman weak, as long as woman’s honour might be bartered as her
last resource against starvation or crime, she would be liable to fall.
All that could be hoped for was a mitigation of the evil and of its
consequences.”
The youth and manhood of Sydney are rapidly being corrupted
and destroyed. There is a class of girls and young women here—
(hopeless specimens of whom may be seen airing themselves in the
Domain and Gardens on Sunday afternoons, and on Sunday nights
in George-street, putting even rough modesty to the blush by their
shameless speech and acts which the police are powerless to stop)—
that is sapping the foundations of the State, and urging youth to
ruin and infamy. Mothers ! can you credit the fact that there are
a vast numbers of girls of the age of thirteen or fourteen who are
living in a state of open or secret prostitution. Nay, we have it
on the authority of one of our highest physicians that girls under
the age of twelve are known to him, not only as prostitutes but, also,
that many of them are suffering from a loathsome disease. All
this is because things are done by halves here, or not at all; the
young and thoughtless rush into the vortex of dissipation, a»d,
unable to discriminate, become victims to the licentiousness which
is suffered to prevail. ,
Nine-tenths of the young men of Sydney find one of their chief
pleasures in the villainous song books and sheets of songs which are
monthly launched here—the taste for which has been introduced


by some of the genus homo who rejoice in the very questionable
title of “ star comique,” —and in frequenting low places of amuse-
ment, where vice
“ Seen too oft, —familial - with her face,
They first endure —then pity—then embrace.”
For the pul-pose of understanding more clearly the whole subject,
it will be necessary to view it in several ramifications. In point of
extent, it would exceed credibility; but only a portion comes to
the surface. With that portion we will deal first.
The general mass of the women (whatever their exterior may
be —whether they be clothed in silks or in rags)—who are known as
Common Prostitutes on the Town, are composed mainly of women
who have been in a state of menial servitude; and who, from the
love of idleness and dress, together with the misfortune of good
looks in some instances, have mostly from inclination resorted
to prostitution for a livelihood.
jJiUDtXUtUjXUXX -LUX d XX VCXXLIUUVX.
Of the class of well-educated women we do not think the number
very large. The education which developes intelligence generally
creates a pride, which induces them to shun the common herd, even
if the social grades of their patrons did not necessitate such a dis-
tinction ; but the differences observable in conduct, dress, and
ordinary association must not always be placed to or against the
credit of education.
Since the burning of the Prince of Wales theatre the class of
common prostitutes who usually assembled in its precincts has
been much scattered—giving place to a grade lower in their social
scale —and only occasionally muster in force. Many of them paid
a visit to the neighbouring colonies, or sought “ fresh fields and
pastures new” in our El Dorados of the west. Yet, notwithstanding
the constant draughts from their ranks by death and disease, it is
astonishing and alarming to witness the almost daily increase in
their number. They are usually found running in couples, two or
perhaps three, either taking a house between them in Woolloo-
mooloo, a favorite locality; or, living in a boarding-house kept for
the especial accommodation of themselves and friends by ancient
retired members of their own class, or (shame to manhood !) by
creatures of their opposite sex who live and grow rich on the very
high percentage they demand from their victims of shame and its
necessities These women arc more dangerous to young bushmen
and strangers from over sea than to city men by whom they are


well known. To the disgrace of the authorities, the unrestrained
licence given to these women in the streets, and the almost unin-
terrupted toleration of those who harbour them and fatten on their
folly is most extraordinary; and the quiet endurance of so much
indecency, vice, and impropriety of language in public places, very
strongly marks the growing depravity of the times. How far the
property-owners, who knowingly let their houses to those panders
to vice, are chargeable with encouraging its existence we leave
the moral portion of the public to determine. To us it sometimes
appears as if the general mass never cares to inquire by whom
houses are owned or occupied, or by what means wealth is amassed
Their mental vision is dazzled and distracted by the brilliancy of
the golden calf, to whose worship alone they devote themselves,
body and soul. The words which Shakspere has put into the
mouth of King Lear apply, not only to “ vice and its victims in
Sydney” but to all implicated in our charges of immorality, direct
or otherwise:—
“ Through tatter’d clothes small vices do appear ;
Kobes, and farr’d gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold,
And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks :
Arm it in rags, a pigmy straw doth pierce it.”
But there is still a greater evil appertaining to some of these
women. Apart from the naturally degraded and poisonous nature
of their profession and practices as regards themselves, immorality
is answerable for innumerable robberies and embezzlements which
have been perpetrated for the purpose of supporting these unhappy
creatures, and with whom connections had been first formed in the
public streets. Perhaps, however, the worst form of evil pertaining
to prostitution as it exists in our midst in all its naked and uncon-
trolled hideousness is the depreciation of the physical fibre of the
colony by the transmission of disease, even to the third and fourth
generations, entailing infection and misery upon innocent children.
If for no higher than the physical reason contained in the cursed
inheritance which must descend to our offspring we have & sacred
duty to perform in asking for some protection from what threatens
to be a national scougre—a “ fire which cannot be quenched.” *
Very recently a sad case came under our own observation. A
young married man arrived by the late train from Goulburn, on his
way for Melbourne, to go into business as general furnisher and
upholsterer. He brought with him £llO, all in sovereigns, He had


not been in Sydney before, except to pass through it, and sallied
forth with his money in his pocket. He was just turned twenty-
five years of age. After visiting one of the theatres, he met one
of these girls, who enticed him to a neighbouring restaurant, to
have supper. They both drank freely, and he accompanied her
home. The steamer sailed for Melbourne the next afternoon, but
he was kept too well supplied with champagne, (bought with his
own money) to give a moment’s thought to the steamer, and re-
mained with this woman until his money had dwindled down to a
few pounds. He was then told he had better go on to his cousin;
and he left the house of this depraved woman, a mere wreck
of humanity, sick, feeble, half-crazed, and diseased. After paying
a good sum to a quack doctor, he was partially cured, and was,
until very recently, working at Farmer and Co.’s new building in
Pitt-street, at 6s. a day. His wife passed through Sydney to join
him in Melbourne, as he had arranged ; but he told us he would
never see her again, and that he was raising funds to go to Eng-
land. For this class of women we would prescribe rules. “ Thus
far shall you go, and no farther. The laws of decorum shall be
strictly observed in the streets, and in public-places. In such
situations you shall no longer become instruments of seduction,
and debauchery.”
It is a true characteristic of virtuous minds, where they cannot
overcome or destroy, to lessen as much as possible, the evils of
human life.
These evils alluded to above, might be materially abated in two
ways. First, by the practice of other countries, —by registration
and compulsory personal inspection and treatment, —but not by
police authority, as adopted on the Continent,
Second, by the proper application of medical science to diseases
which now actually rage in Sydney, as unrestrained as small-pox
before the discovery of vaccination.
In reference to the first proposed measure, the example of our
neighbour, Brisbane, and many other places, may be quoted where
chastity is at least secure against the inroads of violence and
disease to a very great extent; where the public eye is not
offended by scenes of gross lewdness; and where unrestrained
latitude is not allowed as an inlet to many other crimes.
In adopting the second measure, it would be at least possible to


provide better and more ample hospital accommodation. We know
not what number of beds (if any) are set apart in the Infirmary
for diseased prostitutes, but we are of opinion, that the State and
the Corporation, acting through the Hospital Board, should defray
the cost of some special hospital At Paris and Vienna, things are
so managed. Visitation external to the hospitals, should also be
carried out. Not only would the public health be benefitted, but
the public morals, for nothing tends so much to harden and deprave
unfortunate women, as habitual disease, and the sense of utter
abandonment.
In several portions of the city, there are houses inhabited by
women, who have a number of these girls constantly living with
them, and from whom they receive a percentage of their receipts
from prostitution. There are two in Castlereagh-street, one of
which is kept by the notorious Mrs. N A third is in Elizabeth-
street, not far from Bathurst-street, and there are two or three on a
smaller scale in Yurong-street; and others scattered over the city.
There is a lane next the Scandinavian Singing Room, which is
tenanted almost solely by prostitutes. It was in this lane, that a man
was drugged and robbed of £2OO by two women of the town, whom
he met for the first time in the street. He was ten minutes too
late to place his money in the Bank, and had it in his pocket, when
he entered one of these sinks of iniquity. From the house in Eliza-
beth-street, a well-known prostitute made her escape across the
Racecourse in the night, with only her chemise on, carrying with
her £l5 belonging to some man. She was afterwards apprehened
and convicted. In Exeter-place, there are constantly dreadful
scenes taking place among girls of this class; and we are told that
one woman is slowly decaying from the ravages of a frightful
disease. In Sussex-street, Kent-street, and kindred localities
they swarm in all the misery, destitution, and degradation contin-
gent upon their wretched position.
A few months ago, a little child was observed sitting on the
kerb-stone opposite a house in Woolloomooloo, and upon being
asked what she was waiting for, replied she was waiting for the cab
to take her away. The kind lady who lived there, took the child
into the house, and gave her some tea, and in the course of conver-
sation, discovered that her mother was a woman of the town, who
with three other girls lived in Philip-street. The child said her
mother was then in gaol ; and in precocious language and manner (for


she was not more than seven years old) gave a most horrible account
of her mode of life, and that of her mother, and the other “ ladies ”
who lived with her. It appears from the statement made by this
child, that her mother had a baby, and that it was her custom to
leave this baby from eight p.m. until twelve or one o’clock in the
sole charge of this child. It was heartrending to hear the poor
little child describe how this baby cried for food, and how she tried
to give it milk from her own bosom; to use her own words, “ poor
itty sing, I had no milk, and it cried and cried, oh, a long time,
till it went to sleep, and then I went to sleep, where I always slept
—on the stairs !” When her mother came home, according to the
child’s tale, she usually “ brought a lot of coves, and then they all
got drunk. I used to be up early to boil the kettle, or "Julia (her
mother, she always spoke of her as Julia) would beat me.” At
length, on one of these midnight orgies, a drunken row took place,
and in the scuffle, one of the “ coves ” fell'backwards on the baby
lying in the cradle, and ’crushed it till the blood issued from its
mouth, and the baby died. What became of it, or whether there
was an inquest, the child could not tell; but when her mother was
sent to gaol, a friend took the poor, neglected, little child, and
cared for it well for a time, until, as we afterwards heard, it found
a refuge and more natural mother in the Destitute Children’s Asy-
lum, at Randwick. And these dreadful scenes were enacted in
our midst, and within a stone’s throw of St. James’ Church, and
the Supreme Court of New South Wales. 0 tempora, 0 mores !
“ The idle and frivolous habits,” says Miss Ellen Layton, “ en-
couraged or contracted on board ship, utterly unfit many women
for their duties in the colony. Anyone acquainted with the sub-
ject, will testify to the immense importance of maintaining strict
discipline and industrious habits among emigrants, especially among
the women ; and it is to be hoped, that all who are entrusted with
the management of emigration, will see that the additional cost of
superintendence is more than saved to the colony, if the emigrants
are protected from the evils, which have too often made them a
burthen instead of a blessing to the land of their adoption.” Miss
Layton puts the case very mildly, indeed ) but the glaring fact re-
mains, that the ranks of prostitution have been over and over again
recruited by girls who owe their ruin to causes which influenced
them on ship-board, when not subjected to the most carpful supe^-


vision—'to say nothing of the timbers who put on the mantle of
chastity temporarily, in order to obtain a passage to the colonies,
with the predetermination of again adopting their previously
vicious mode of life.
If, as we have said, you cannot enact virtue, and that this serious
evil will have sway in some shape or other, after the exhaustion of
all preventive measures; surely, as a measure of political necessity,
some order and system can be infused into it. In India, female
chastity is highly regarded, and was formerly preserved by rearing
up a certain class of females, who were under the conduct of
discreet matrons, in every town and village, and with whom an
indiscriminate intercourse was permitted. Their morals, however,
in other respects, were strictly guarded, and their minds were not
susceptible of that degree of depravity which prevails here and in
Europe. They were taught accomplishments, exhibited at public
entertainments, and were even called upon to assist at religious cere-
monies.
There is a variety of this first-named class found haunting the
poorer portions of the city, Clarence-street, Kent-street, Sussex-street,
&c., and whose conduct and language, only show, a deeper shade of
depravity and moral degradation.
There is another class of women here, who might be classified as
clandestine prostitutes. Some of them are kept-women, but the
majority combine the business of dressmaking and similar light
work. They constitute a numerous class. Many of these are verv
young, and although still in their “ teens,” are mothers of one or
more children. One very nice-looking girl, living in Kent-street,
does not look more than twelve or thirteen years of age, and yet
she has had two children.
The disgraceful scenes that take place in and around the Belmore
Markets, on a Saturday night, surpass all description. A little girl,
certainly not more than fourteen years old, was seen there with a
gin-bottle of ale, dispensing it out to boys as young as herself.
She was quite drunk, and, after finishing the beer, the boys carried
her into the Belmore Gardens. *
The infamous practice of youg men personating women has also
been introduced into Sydney. There are two young scamps who
have repeateily dressed themselves as women in the most fashion-
able clothes, and their heads adorned (?)'with customary chignons.


They were both sitting in the pit of the theatre on one occasion
lately, and attracted much attention from the extremely high
colour on their cheeks and their peculiarity of dress. On another
occasion, one of them went in a cab with a man to a ball held in
Balmain,'and danced the whole night as a woman, without being
discovered; he wore a book-muslin dress, with all the accessories
usually worn by ladies. The same fellow narrowly escaped being
apprehended by a policeman in Park-street one night, but gave leg-
bail, the policeman following close after, down George-street, up
Market-street to Kent-street, where he jumped through a window ;
and, although the constable searched the house, no trace of him
could be found. This hitherto successful female impersonator has
the voice, walk, and general carriage of a woman. The suspicious
and illegal if not immoral practice of impersonation is not confined
to the male sex. We have seen, on several occasion, and very
recently in Erskine-street, two girls of about seventeen years
appareled in the habiliments of a developed larrikin of the present
time, even to the indented billycock hat and high-heeled boots, On
former occasions we have see the same two individuals in King-street,
parading between Pitt and George streets before the gaze of people
who took no care to disguise their curiosity and wonder, and under
the very nose of the police. There could not be the slightest mistake
as to which sex they belonged, for Nature has been too precise in her
handiwork to leave the sex a matter of the slightest doubt. When
we saw them their object appeared to be to attract the attention of
someone passing; this effected, they moved off at a smart pace till
they had traversed the limits we have given, when they halted and
performed the same rdle. We asked ourselves a question which
many another one might have asked himself —What can be the pur-
pose of this attempt at destruction of sexual identity ? The reply
which suggested itself to us was not favourble to morality, take it
whichever way you please. And, to'our thinking, no better illus-
tration could be given of the heartedness of the first principles of
vice in the minds of the morally uneducated youth of this great
city. They belong less to the poor than the uneducated classes.
They are above the reach of absolute want; but they are ignorant
of the very idea of anything beyond sensual gratification, and quite
destitute of the smallest of those virtues which, when practised,
form the basis of society and human happiness.


The restrictions against marriage are productive of much evil.
If prudent mothers would allow their daughters to marry young
and honorable men with moderate incomes, instead of waiting for
wealthy squatters and others, we have no doubt that seduction and
its attendant crime of infanticide would be diminished, besides
many other evils which are the natural results of celibacy. The
“ accomplishments” now too generally addended to a girl’s education
as a means of fitting her for u society” in after life, generally
defeat the intention which prompted their being taught. The
parents, it may be, are unabled, pecuniarily, to gratify their long-
cherished wish of making a lady of their darling, and they live to
discover that time and money have been both expended to unfit
her entirely for the station to which she socially belongs. With
her.education and school-associates she has imbibed ideas of future
wealth and position; nor are these visions dispelled till she returns
to the domestic hearth and household gods, where she finds herself
a stranger to everything but in name, Unable to assist in the duties
of the house, with which she is totally unacquainted, in course of
time she feels herself in the way ; longs for a quality of attire her
parents cannot afford to purchase ; becomes discontented with home
and resolves to leave it for a situation, but is fitted only for that of a
governess, for which there are no vacancies. She would get married,
but finds “ nobody coming to woo,” win, and thus realize those
golden dreams she had indulged in ; while the tradesman or the
mechanic in search of a partner in whom he could find a helpmate,
and with whom he could be happy, avoids her as something to be
dreaded. What follows in her mind but discontent and disgust of
everything, almost of life ? This victim of pride and misdirected
kindness is felt to be a “ white elephant” at home, and goes out
occasionally for a walk to some place suitable to her romantic ideas,
where she may bewail her condition in solitude, meeting there,
perhaps, some fashionably-dressed roue in search of prey, in whom
she finds an agreeable and flattering, if not a sympathizing com-
panion. The end is not far off, though sometimes slow in its
approach. It comes by one of several ways, but it comes, as surely
as night follows the day, and needs no description. This pipture-
we have given is no imaginary sketch ; it is only one of many we
wot of, and is introduced to show the destructive policy of edu-
cating heads only ; morals must not be neglected, nor any opportß-


nity lost of instilling into the female mind the great and wholesome
truth that woman’s mission on earth is a higher and more noble
one than to he a merely ornamental puppet, at first the toy and
then the contempt of mankind.
The whole subject of virtue fallen from its lofty and glorious
place; the regret, sorrow, suffering, and —in the present state of
our social organization—the utter hoplessness of recovery on the
part of the fallen, has been so graphically described in the work
quoted from on our page 34, that we are tempted to make another
extract. Instancing one of the thousands of cases which exist,
and working out the problem in the only way we think it can be
successfully done, the writer says :
“ Scan her sad career, from when her face
With innocence and and virtue brightly beamed,
And gave the wearer beauty—where no trace
Remains of what once there so lustrous gleamed ;
But only marks of passions which debase,
And errors unattoned and unredeemed
Then ask thyself on whom shall rest the blame ;
The authors or the patrons of her shame ?
“ The tender object of a father’s love—
The subject of fond mother’s fervent prayer
Directed to the Throne of Grace, above.
And theme of fervent supplication there —
From ark of rest forlorn and wandered dove—
Where can’st thou now for love and peace repair ?
How that obtain for which thy soul doth yearn,
When Charity’s professors from thee turn ?
“ Is there no hope for her—nor here, nor hence ?
Discarded by her kind on every hand —
By wiles withdrawn from that proud eminence
Where love and virtue side by side both stand—
Will never man accept her penitence,
Nor from her forehead move the burning brand ?
By His example happiness restore,
Who to the woman said, “ Go, sin no more ! ”
“These might have erred—have taken that false step
On ruin’s path, the fairest and the first—
But shall they ne’er the widening breach re-leap.
Nor taste the purer spring for which they thirst ?
Return no more to fold the “ wander’d sheep ” ?
By mail's decree alone remain accurst?
If all for sins performed stand unforgiven,
Who may for mercy hope or enter Heaven ? ” *
But this must be the work of women. If women will only com-
bine, they can become the saviours of their countrywomen, and the
* Ode lo Diana, canto vii., st. 6 to 9.


best solvers of these mighty social problems. Let them lay aside
their pseudo morality, and look upon their fallen sisters without
loathing; and let them feel thankful that they have passed through
the ordeal scatheless.
For the letters which he has recently published Dean Cowper
deserves thanks: his intentions are good; but, like many other well-
intentioned persons, he fails to suggest a remedy for the evils that
already exist. He tells us that if parents brought up their children
in a Godlike manner, that the evil might have been averted ; but he
knows as well as we do, that the moral atmosphere of four-fifths of
the rising generation is vitiated and clogged by long-descended
vices, and that it is utterly impossible for light, liberty and social
happiness, and morality, to be developed under such adverse con-
ditions. When men and women are compelled to endure abject
Poverty and her sister Hardwork, continually, without a breathing-
time even to think; there will be but small chance of initiating a
better code of morals in their households.
The great evils of seduction and prostitution, and attendant crime
of infanticide, appear to be as problems which can only be solved by
legislative action. It will be absolutely necessary to speak plainly,
and look them boldly in the face. In seduction, there is, without
doubt, an amount of villiany that needs exposure: for the means
adopted to effect seduction, are so subtle and insidious as to rank
among those by which nature is subdued. Shakspere had this
fact in view when he made Brahantio say to Othello —
“ Judge me the world, if ’tis not gross in sense
That thou hast practised on her with foul charms.
Abused her delicate youth * * * * ”
But, whether the arts practised be fair or foul, they should be
inhibited and out of warrant”
By every known law, moral or social. In “ Measure for Measure,”
act ii. sc. 2, Angelo (acting for the Duke) says of seduction —
“ Condemn the fault, and not the actor of it!
Why, every fault’s condemned ere it he done :
Mine were the very cipher of a function,
To find the faults, whose fine stands in record,
And let go by the actor.”
If, then, we are ready to condemn the seduced, let the seducer be
no longer greeted with smiles; let him him be scouted as a villian
from every honourable man’s house, and let every good and virtuous
girl mark her sense of his atrocious conduct, by shunning hiqj as


she would a leper. This society can do, —but, as it is a well-estab-
lished fact that few men would have the courage to persevere if
repulsed, so woman must (to a very great extent) he held also
responsible.
Dr. Ryan, in his Philosophy of Marriage , says, “ Bastardy can he
lessened to a very great extent, if not wholly, by throwing the en-
tire responsibility of the act upon the woman, by affording her no
redress against the man.”
Be this as it may, our duty is plain; we should endeavour to
prevent crime following indiscretiou, by a more charitable view of
the matter as regards the woman. Instead of driving her to des-
pair, or to infanticide, and suicide, lot us try to win her back to
virtue in a gentle and Christian spirit. Let us endeavour to show
her, that, though having erred, she is still human ; that all hearts
are not steeled against her, and that she will find no one ready to
u cast the first stone” at her, but many to point the way to a
brighter future.
To strike at the root of prostitution, the I egislature must adopt
“The Contagious Diseases Act,’ for not only would the future con-
tamination of our manhood be prevented, but it would be the means
of drafting off as it were, many very young girls who have only
recently entered upon vicious and abandoned lives. These, upon
registration, would of course be provided for in a suitable reforma-
tory, and by this means, be gradually inducted into scenes where
the rewards and the blessings of virtue would form a more attrac-
tive future than the past could ever have led them to hope for.
It has been urged by the opponents of this Act, that it had a
tendency to degrade the unfortunate women brought under its
operation. But one of the important results, has been the suppres-
sion of juvenile prostitution, and which is so prevalent in Sydney.
By the Act giving supervision to the police, many very young girls
have been restored to their parents, who would soon have been des-
troyed, body and soul; and at the same time, degraded women of
all classes, are brought within reach of moral influences. Add to
this, that the prevalence of disease would rapidly diminish, until
it perhaps altogether ceased to exist, and every man who desires
the reformation and moral improvement of his fellow creatures, will
hail as a great blessing, the introduction and operation of this Act
in the city of Sydney.
VICE AND ITS VICTIMS :


The I London Examiner thus forcibly exposes and condemns the
law of seduction
“ The present state of the law of seduction is an apt illustration of our
position. In the first place it may very well be asked, why is a remedy at
law given to, or rather for, women and not to men ? Is it supposed that
men are the only seducers, and women the only people who are seduced?
That would be a strange opinion indeed for a people whose chief fountain
of moral inspiration is the Bible. The very first section of that book
teems with instances of the seduction of men by women. From Eve to
Potiphar’s wife we have one long list of women using their persuasive
powers in order to lead men into evil. We know that it will be replied to
this, that the legal remedy is given to women and not to men, not because
women only can be seduced, but because they are most injured. But this
only gets rid of the difficulty by raising a more serious one. Why should
a grown-up woman be protected from the consequences of her own acts?
Why should any person be allowed to come into a court ot law and ask for
damages caused by an act to which she was a consenting party ? We
know that by a legal fiction, it is not supposed to be the woman herself
who brings the action, but her father, who sues on account ot the loss of
her service. ‘ The law is this,’ says the Attorney-General, ‘ you must show
some kind of service and loss of service in order to found the action; but
that done, the damages need not be limited by loss of service. Sixpence
might cover the injury sustained from loss of service, and damages of
£IU,UOO be awarded for injury to the feelings.’ So clearly are the damages
not given on account of the loss to the father, that a bill is now before
Parliament, which proposes to abolish the fiction of service, and the Attor-
nej-General said, on that bill being read a second time, that the law should
bo altered so as to give the woman herself the right of action. Now, it
was revolting enough that a woman should be held the property of her
father —a position from which she only escaped to become the property ot
some other man ; but this at least avoided the absurdity of compensating
a person for damage done by himself. What is now proposed ? An adult
human being of sound mind is to be allowed to come before a judicial tri-
bunal, and to plead, * I have done what is held to be an immoral act, and 1
find lam hurt by having so done. If I had stipulated with the other party
to the depd for a price for my degradation, you would not have enforced
the payment of it; but this 1 have not done. Will you, therefore, please
to fix the amount I am to receive, as liberally as you always do, and see
that it is paid to me ? ’
“ While this is what the law does for those whom true kindness would
teach to be the custodians of their own honour, what does it do tor those
whom it ought to protect? What does it do for children? It is hardly
believable that a man is allowed to plead the consent of a child of ten
years as a reason why his offence should be considered as a mere misde-
meanour, and the consent of a little girl of twelve, removes it altogether
from the category of crime. A woman of forty may come into a court of
law, and plead that she has been led away by the wiles of youth of twenty
years, and ask for compensation ; while the consent of a little girl who has
entered her teens, and knows not evil, is held to absolve the aged debauchee
from any other punishment than a pecuniary fine. Protection is given
where it degrades, and is withheld where it is necessary in order to save
unsuspecting childhood from contamination. The law does that
ought not to be done, and leaves undone that which ought to be done. And
it is the tree of which this is the fruit, upon which women are cautioned
not to lay their sacrilegious hands. When they ask for electoral rights,
they are told that the law is made by their husbands, and fathers, and
brothers. It is well at such times to recollect facts like these.”


True to the motto we have have adopted, we are compelled to
speak in plain language, on a subject that has been the cause of
earnest discussion. We allude to the syphilitic disease commani-
cated by vaccination. We believe indiscriminate vaccination to be
most mischievous and dangerous; and that it is the duty of the
state, to institute a most searching investigation into the history of
the constitution of the child from whom the lymph may be taken,
as well as the history of its parents, if possible. “Itisto be la-
mented for the sake of science, and for sanatory reasons, that there
is still such obdurate scepticism on this vital and momontous ques-
tion. Too much importance cannot be attached to it, for it affects
the whole community. In this colony, especially, where, considering
the number of our populatien, syphilis prevails in a palpable form, to
a greater extent, than anywhere else in the British dominions, there
ought to the greatest vigilance, and the most ample precautions
taken; yet there is, lam sorry to confess, the most stoical indiffer-
ence to the question of vaccinal syphilis.”*
Dr. Beaney records his own large experience in the work we have
quoted from, and that of some of the most eminent men of the
day. And he ably sustains his position, by giving the following
extract from the Lancet , 24th Nov., 1866. “ Two medical prac-
titioners having drawn the attention of the Academy of Medicine,
Paris, to a reported outbreak of vaccinal syphilis in the department
of Morbihan, M.M. Depaul and Roger were dispatched on the part
of this body, to investigate the matter on the spot. From their
Report it seems that a midwife, residing at Grandchamps, received,
on the 20th May, some vaccine lymph in glasses from the prefecture
and next day vaccinated two infants with it, by name Mahe and
Moroy, both apparently in excellent health. A week afterwards,
she vaccinated from Moroy’s arm, a strong healthy child, three
months old. As it was intended to vaccinate several from this last,
six punctures were made in each arm, ail of which were followed by
pustules. On the 3rd, 4th, and sth of June, the midwife took this
child to various communes, and practised numerous vaccinations,
from its arms —'more than eighty, as she averred. On the 12th of
June, further vaccinations were made from the children of the first
series, and by the 9th of July, the two practitioners who drew the
attention of the Academy to the circumstance, had met with thirty
* Constitutional Syphilis , by Dr. J. G. Beaney, Melbourne.


infants , from among those of hath sexes, who manifested well-marked
signs of primary and secondary syphilis. They also believe that the
lymph supplied by the prefectwre, was the origin of all the mischief."
The official report handed in by MM. Roger and Depaul was
couched in the following terms: — “1. Several of the children
whom we have examined were undoubtedly suffering from secondary
syphilis. 2. We see no way of explaining this contamination but
by vaccination. 3. As to the origin of the virus: it is very pro-
bable that the poison is traceable to the lymph, preserved between
two pieces of glass supplied by the authorities.”
“ The recent enthusiasm in re-vaccination which followed the
invasion of small-pox into the colony has been fruitful in illustra-
tions of my arguments touching this question. Several adults from
the country, and amongst them some well-known squatters, have
visited me for advice touching unexpected and severe eruptions of
various kinds that have immediately succeeded their re-vaccination.
In all these cases I have been able to discern, distinctly, primary
or secondary syphilis.” * Again, “My own observation leads me
to conclude that the milk of the nurse, if she be syphilitic, does
infect the infant she suckles.” f
This awful disease is of so subtle a character that no disease yet
known is more readily communicated. It may even be transmitted
by kissing: a terrible instance of syphilis in a child twelve years
old who was kissed by her uncle as he started on a journey, is
given by Beaney, in the work we have been quoting from. In
addition to this fact, he cites a case where “ The cousin and sister
of an infant affected with congenital syphilis, had shared in their
attention on the invalid, which had perforated ulcers on its lips
during a few days previous to its death, and a sore mouth for a con-
siderable time before. It died when thirty-six weeks old. When
it was twenty-five weeks old, its sister and cousin, supposed to bo
exhausted from watching, began to be languid, feverish, restless,
and to suffer from pains in the head and limbs. Soon afterwards
they had soreness of the mouth and eruptions about the at
the angles of which syphilitic tubercles appeared. The mother
cautioned the little nurses not to kiss the baby again j but,
too late, the mischief was done : the usual symptoms of constitu-
tional syphilis affected the cousin, and, after ten years of suffering
Beaney’s Constitutional Syphilis, p. 372.
t Ibid, p. 400.


from the time of her contamination, she died. The sister dragged
on a miserable existence until 1849, when, contrary to the judge-
ment of her mother, and notwithstanding the eruption on her face,
she married.”
“ There is, also, a well-known case at Sarenta, where every nun
became affected by kissing a little girl who had previously been
kissed by a stranger. I may also mention the case of an infant
which was taken from Paris to Montmorency, which affected its
nurse; she infected her husband, and so the contamination went
on.” *
This Protean disease is everywhere : in the blood, the milk, and
in the saliva; and is now generally believed to merge into scrofula
in the progeny thence ensuing the individual affected. Enough,
however, has been said to show the necessity of Society being
completely armed at all points against the attack of this deadly
foe—more particularly when we know that it rages here in its most
terrible forms.
* Lancet , quoted by Dr. Beaney.


CRIMEIiANDIPUMSHMENT.
We have shown that drink and its concomitants are prolific sources
of many evils, and, among others, of crime. But crimes are com-
mitted by persons who do not drink to excess; and it is an ex-
ceedingly difficult question to answer, “What are the principle
causes of crime ? ” It is almost impossible to deal properly with
this question until the sources of evil, and the causes which pre-
dispose to it, are known and studied with a view to its pi’evention.
It has too long been regarded as a question belonging rather to the
domain of religion or morality, than of social science. Sir Walter
Crofton has affirmed that the answer to the question, What are the
principal causes of crime—must be, drink and bad company. There
is no doubt that bad company is the master cause of crime—bad
example at early age. Of 1000 prisoners referred to in Table U.,*
895 had been convicted before they were out of their teens.”
Physical causes, however, lie at the root of most of our social and
moral evils. In paupers and criminals, there is generally a defective
organization,—that is, they have weak or diseased brains; their pas-
sions are prematurely developed; and they seek personal gratifica-
tion in the most direct way j in any way but that of continued
industry.
All, then, that is wanting in such individuals, to bring about a
criminal result, is the increased action of their diseased or unbal-
anced brains, with a diminution of power in the restraining or pru-
dential faculties. When this takes place, criminal impulse obtains
the mastery. The causes of the abuse of the faculties, are an ab-
normal largeness, or smallness of the cerebral faculties, and unfavour-
able external circumstance,! and the two conditions co-existing
together, give rise to crime, But the criminal is born with these
conditions, and must bear all the evils consequent upon them to his
* See end of this article.
t Excessive poverty, for instance, may lead to stealing, when Acquisi-
tiveness is not abnormally large ; and drunkenness often leads to fighting
and other deeds of violence.


grave. He is as little chargeable with it as guilt as a great musi-
cian, who is born with an extraordinary development of the organ
of Time, is entitled to boast of this gift as a merit of his own.
In the writings of the celebrated Jeremy Taylor, Bishop of
Down, Connor, and Dromore, than whom a more pious, learned,
and orthodox bishop, never wore the mitre; the following remark-
able passage occurs :—“ If a man be exalted by reason of any excel-
lence in his soul, he may please to remember that all souls are equal,
and their different operations are because their instrument is in
better tune, and their body is more healthful or better tempered,
which is no more praise to him, than it is that he was bprn in Italy.
On the other hand, if his course entitles him to no reward in this
world, beyond the natural one of the inevitable happiness of mind,
which Heaven has decreed to be the consequence of its physical
health, so it is but fair to allow that the opposite course can merit
no punishment, beyond the inevitable pain which Heaven has de-
creed to be the consequences of its physical derangement. If the
argument is good for anything, it must tell both ways with equal
force.”
If an enlightened medical practitioner reads a statistical report
of deaths in the city of Sydney, and perceives that the deaths from
consumption bear the same proportion to the populatation, year
after year, what conclusion would he draw ? He could only arrive
at this one, that the lungs of a certain number of individuals are
too weak to stand the influences of the climate Now when we find
in statistical reports, the same number of robberies, the same num-
ber of murders and other crimes, occurring year after year amongst
a population, does not the conclusion follow, that there is a certain
number of persons in that community whose moral faculties are not
sufficiently strong to enable them to resist and overcome temptations
to crime. In fact, does it not shew that there is a particular class,
and that class only, which is predisposed to crime ? It is
ble to account for the uniformity of the numbers in any other way.
Whoever has read E. Quetelet’s work Sur VSommee, et les devel-
oppments de.ses Faculties, cannot fail to see that there is a law at
work, producing regularly the same effects, year after year. M
Quetelet says : —“ This possibilty of assigning, beforehand, the num-
ber of the accused and condemned which should occur in a coun-
try, is calculated to lead to serious reflections, since it involves the


fate of several thousands of human beings, who are impelled, as it
were, by an irresistable necessity, to the bars of the tribunals, and
towards the sentences of condemnation, which there await them.
These conclusions flow directly from the principle, already so often
stated in this work, that effects are in proportion to their causes,
and the effects remain the same , if the causes which produced, them do
not vary.”
“ When we perform an action, we perform it in consequence of
some motive or motives; those motives are the result of some
antecedents; and, therefore, if we were acquainted with the whole
of the antecedents, and with all the laws of their movements, we
could, with unerring certainty, predict the whole of their imme-
diate results. If, for example, lam intimately acquainted with the
character of any person, I can frequently tell how he will act under
some given circumstances. Should I fail in this prediction, I must
ascribe my error, not to the arbitrary and capricious freedom of his
will, nor to any supernatural pre-arrangement, for of neither of
these things have we the slightest proof; but I must be content to
oppose either that I had been misinformed as to some of the cir-
cumstances in which he was placed, or else that I had not suffi-
ciently studied the ordinary operations of his mind. If, however,
I were capable of correct reasoning, and if at the same time I had
a complete knowledge both of his disposition and of all the events
by which he was surrounded, I should be able to foresee the line of
conduct which, in consequence of these events, he would adopt.” *
The importance of statistics cannot be too highly esteemed by
the Government, as they form an amount of evidence—an immense
array of facts carefully compiled, well digested and classified ; and
which, if wisely studied, would teach us more of the real natnre of
man than ean be obtained from any other source.
Taking, as an illustration, the crime of murder, we find that
this capital crime is committed with as much regularity as the flow
of tho tides and the changes of the seasons. “In everything that
concerns crime, the same numbers re-occur with a constancy that
cannot be mistaken; and that is the case even with those erfmes
which seem quite independent of human foresight, such, for
instance, as murder, which are generally committed after quarrels
arising from circumstances apparently casual, Nevertheless, we
* Buckle’s History of Civilization in England.


know from experience that every year there not only take place
nearly the same number of murders, but that even the instruments
by which they are committed are employed in the same propor-
tion.” * This is the language used by the first statesman in
Europe, and subsequent investigations have confirmed its accuracy.
We know, now, indeed, that it is quite possible to predict with
certainty that certain crimes will be committed, scarcely varying
from year to year; and, what perhaps is still more remarkable, that
the fluctuations in the amount of crime will be actually smaller
than the fluctuations in mortality.
The same law operates in the singular crime of suicide, and
leaves no doubt that it is the result of the general condition of
society. “In a given state of society, a certain number of persons,
must put an end to their own life. This is the general law, and
the special question as to who shall commit the crime depends, of
course, upon special laws; which, however, in their total action
must obey the large soaial law to which they are all subordinate.
Even in London, notwithstanding the vicissitudes incidental to the
largest and most luxurious capital in the world, we find a regu-
larity greater than could be expected by the most sanguine believer
in social laws; since political excitement, mercantile excitement,
and the misery produced by the dearness of food, are all causes of
suicide, and are all constantly varying. Nevertheless, in this vast
metropolis, about 240 persons every year make away with them-
selves : the annual suicides oscillating, from the pressure of tem-
porary causes, between 260, the highest, and 213, the lowest. In
1846, which was the great year of excitement caused by the Rail-
way panic, the suicides in London were 266; in 1847 began a
slight improvement, and they fell to 256 ; in 1848, they were 247 ;
in 1849, they were 213; and, in 1850, they were 229.” f
Now all this forces us to the conclusion that the offences of men
are the result, not so much of the vices of the individual offender,
as the state of society into which that individual is thrown. Mr.
Rawson, in his Inquiry into the Statistics of Crime in Enyland and
Wales , says, “No greater proof can be given of the possibility of
arriving at certain constants with regard to crime than the fact
which appears in the table—that the greatest variation which has
* Que veldt, Sur I'Homme., voJ. 1, p. 7.
t Buckle’s History oj Civihzalitn in Enyland.


taken place during the last three years, in the proportion of any
class of criminals at the same period of life, has not exceeded one-
half per cent.”
What, then, are the primary causes of crime ? The answer is,
certain mental predispositions. In other words, an undue prepon-
derance of the low animal nature, and an undue deficiency of
mental and moral powers. Such an organization, however, does not
necessarily produce crime, hut seems to give its possessor a tendency
towards gross and powerful animal indulgences and impulses, at the
same time that he has hut weak powers of restraint. He seems
unable to resist temptation. The causes, then, consist in natural
predisposition, and it is a self-evident proposition, that punishment
does not, and cannot remove the cause, since no punishment will alter
the inherent disposition of any criminal.
Take the case of two individvals who are organically weak in-
the lungs. In the one the love of pleasure is moderate, and the
reflecting and prudential faculties strong; in the other this combi-
nation is reversed. Now, if a physician told these two individuals,
that if they indulged in late hours, and dissipation in hot rooms,
that premature death would he the consequence j would his warn-
ing have the same influence on both ? The individual No. 1,
would take care to avoid all pleasures and self-indulgence that
would tend to shorten his existence; whilst the individual No. 2,
would allow no warning voice to interfere with his love of sensual
gratification, and would look upon death, even, as a far distant event.
The lesson taught in the foregoing illustration is, that the fear of
death as a restraining motive, operates in the inverse ratio of the
force of the temptation
In most criminals, the love of self-gratification and indulgence,
as the love of idleness, intoxication, and other vices, are generally
plus, and the moral, and, sometimes, the intellectual powers minus.
Now this peculiar organization must exist in any individual, or he
could not become a criminal. “ The form of head,” says Macnish,
“in all dangerous criminals is peculiar. There is an enormous
mass of brain behind the ear, or a comparatively small portion in the
frontal and coronal regions. Such a conformation always charac-
terizes the worst class of malefactors, and, wherever it exists, we
find an excessive tendency to crime.”
Such an individual will be incapable of realizing the fear of


death, while his feeble moral powers will never lead him to con-
sider duty, or calculate consequences.
Disease of the brain, and an irregular, ill-balanced brain are both
insanity, and may be transmitted to offspring.
But the plea of insanity, when a crime is committed, -does not,
or should not, lessen the responsibility; and there is no necessity
for any inquiry into the sanity or insanity of the criminal, or of
endeavouring to trace their unascertainable boundaries. This res-
ponsibility should be followed by restraint and cure, and, if possible,
reformation. Capital punishment is not curative, and, as a means
of deterring others, it operates in the inverse ratio of the danger,
to avert which it is applied. In other words, it will deter all those
who are naturally intelligent, virtuous and prudent ; all men, in-
deed, whose brains are favourably balanced ; but it will have but
very slight effect on those who have natural proclivities to crime.
The penalty of death, as an example, is only momentary, and of
no effect It disgusts the good, and brutalizes the bad ; and, as an
act of extreme violence, it teaches violence to the people.
Death is rarely dreaded, often courted; and, oftener still, antici-
pated. Indeed, the coincidence of the suicidal with the homicidal
propensity is now generally recognized.
The punishment of death is immoral as well as useless and
unnecessary. As the law stands at present, we simply kill the
criminal ignominiously and without torture. But if the object of
the advocates of capital punishment is to restrain by the terror of
the severest punishment, then —as simple death does not restrain
why not make the punishment more terrible by adding torture to
death ? Because public sentiment revolts against torturing crimi-
nals ; and if public sentiment is ' consistent with itself it will
abandon death as a punishment. Death a punishment! Nay, is
it not, on the contrary, an institution of an all-wise and merciful
Creator to be met with firmness, courage and hope ? We are all
under sentence of death ! Every Sunday, from the pulpits of our
churches, the ministers of the Gospel bid us to prepare for it; the
soldier and sailor go into action without the least dread of it, and
are praised for their courage 5 the true-Christiau philosopher at last
rests from his labours, and resigns himself to it with cheerfulness.
How, then, can death be regarded as a punishment —as a ter-
rible calamity, sufficient to restrain the daring ruffian, the cruel


reckless villain, from crime ? The criminal in the dock may tell
the jury which has convicted him and the judge who has sentenced
him that they are under the sentence of death also; and that, per-
haps, only a short time will elapse between the execution of the
sentence on him and them. If all men were immortal, save those
put to death by law for crime, then to deprive the criminal of life
would be the acme of human misery; but, under the present con-
stitution of human nature, it is barbarous, immoral,, and irreligious.
There are journalists advocating severity, who emblazon the
Bible on their sheet. They are not aware that Benevolence is moral
power, whilst violence and selfishness are moral weakness. Let
these men open the sacred volume and read only two passages in
Matthew’s Gospel, ix. 13, and xviii. 21,22: ‘I will have mercy,
and not sacrifice ” ; and, “ ‘ Lord, how often shall my brother sin
against me and I forgive him ? Till seven times ? ’ Jesus said unto
him, ‘ I say not unto thee until seven times, but until seventy times
seven.’” Are these words without meaning? How shocking is it
to hear men from the pulpit demanding blood for blood, and eternally
quoting the Old Testament laws of retalliation, as applicable to
the followers of Christ in the nineteenth century. They seem to
forget that there was once a sermon preached on the mount, in
which the meek and lowly Jesus said, “ Ye have heard that it hath
been said ‘An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth ’; and
again, ‘ Thou shalt love thy neighbour and hate thy enemies,’ but
I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them which curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despite-
fully use you and persecute you.” The Christian doctrines incul-
cated by Jesus nowhere sanction the taking away life.
“ What! ” say these self-appointed guides to truth, “ kindness to
criminals! Is that the new practical philosophy ? Prove to us
that oil is the best extinguisher of fire, and we will admit that the
best cure for the ‘ double-distilled villain,’ the ruthless, bloody,
midnight ruffian, who defrauds, despoils, maims, tortures, muti-
lates and murders his helpless victims, is to lodge him comfortably,
work him pleasantly, feed him substantially, speak to him gently
and encouragingly, give him all your heart, and try to get his !
Away with such drivelling! Tie me the miscreant up; flay him
with the cat-o’-ninetails, and then hang him like a dog, as he is,
for a terrible example to all similarly-disposed wretches.”


Thus speak the very same propensities which have led to the
crimes complained of; and thus have these propensities, blindly
acting, defeated their own intentions since the beginning of the
world to the present day. “ The wrath of man worketh not the
righteousness of G-od.” “ The meek shall inherit the earth.” The
self-proclaimed scourge-men and hangmen are not the meek. They
will not inherit the earth; they will be defeated by their own
hands.
By the adoption of more humane principles, criminal jurispru-
dence would be relieved of a difficult task, by .assigning responsi-
bility to every criminal. But the responsibility would be the same
which the patient in typhus fever incurs, one to be put under
treatment, separated and confined for the sake of his own cure, and
Society’s protection from him, as a dangerous member. In the
language of Mr. Sampson,—“ The doctrine of responsibility, which
appears to me to be alone consistent with reason, religion, and
morality, is simple this : that so far from the Creator having sent
into the world some beings who are responsible, and others who
are exempt from responsibility, there is, in fact, no exception what-
ever, and that every human being is alike responsible (according to
the degree of his departure, either in body or mind, from the de-
gree of sanity necessary to a proper discharge of his social duties),
to undergo the painful but benevolent treatmert which is requisite
to his cure,” *
The novelty of this mode of treatment may astound many per-
sons, if propounded to them as the thesis—That the infliction of
punishment for disorders of the brain is no more reconcilable to
our ideas of justice than would be the infliction of punishment for
disorders of any other organ of our physical frame. It may be
objected that no punishment of any kind would be enforced on
offenders, and that nothing would be presented that would deter
others from crime; but the following extract from Mr. Sampson’s
work is so strikingly beautiful, and answers the objection so com-
pletely, that it is given in full: —
“ Let any man contemplate for a moment the possibility of his
being placed in a situation where all the long-cherished and
strongest tendencies of his mind are opposed, and where the only
* Criminal Jurisprudence considered in relation to Mental Organization , by
M. B. Sampson.


feelings that he is permitted to gratify are those, the exercise of
which has, up to the present moment, been most distasteful to him;
he may then form some idea of those moral remedies which have
cure, and cure only, for their object. Let the religious man con-
template what his sensations would be were he forcibly held in a
situation where only the grossest impiety and blasphemy were
breathed around him, and amid which he should be compelled to
exist without the power of expostulation or resistance. Let the
benevolent man imagine himself compelled to watch day by day,
in some Inquisitional cell, the infliction of torture upon helpless
and unoffending beings. Let the mother, who has found all her
delight in the presence of her children, contemplate what her feel-
ings would be if they were withdrawn from her sight and know-
ledge. The pain which would be felt in these instances would,
nevertheless, not exceed that which must be felt by those who are
suddenly forced to abandon the gratification of long-loved vices
which arose from the predominance of the lower feelings, and to
submit to a discipline of which cleanliness, industry, justice, sub-
ordination, and a consideration for the feelings of others are the
prominent features. Yet, in the latter case, the pain inflicted
would only be subservient to kindness—it must be that which had
been decreed by Heaven, and not revengefully administered by
man. Between man and man, however different their relative
situations may be, nothing but love should ever subsist. He who
lives in the practice of religion and virtue should not look, even
upon one who. is staggering in the wild intoxication of crime, with
any other feelings than the love and pity which the sad fate of a
brother should awaken, —love for him as a fellow-man possessing
the same capabilities of an eternal destiny, liable to the same
sufferings, and sharing—all misused, neglected, conflicting though
they be —the same inherent feelings. If we could cure the evil
dispositions of men without any pain whatever, it would be our
duty to hail the opportunity of doing so, instead of looking out
eagerly, as we do now, for the means of inflicting punishment long
before we have satisfied ourselves that the punishment will produce
improvement. As the Creator has established a system whereby
pain must be suffered as the consequence of a disobedience of His
laws, He has not left this penalty to be inflicted by thq ignorant
hand of man, but has provided that, in the natural order of things,


it shall immediately follow, and, in fact, arise out of the offence
itself. Man., therefore, has nothing to do with punishment —this
has been provided for by the Creator; but, although it cannot be
averted, after an act of disobedience, we may lessen the future
weight of human misery by arresting the offender in his wrongful
career and prevent him from adding, by the commission of new
offences, to the amount of pain he is already destined to endure.
To diffuse, then, by general instruction and example, a knowledge
of the Divine laws, the relations subsisting between the constitu-
tion of man and his Maker and the inevitable consequences of
disobedience, is our first duty. The next, is to remove from tempt-
ation all those who are so constituted as to be peculiarly liable to
its effects; to prohibit the use of the faculties which they may
have abused, and to force into activity those, from the non-existence
of which they have fallen into crime.”
We have been informed by an intelligent warder at Berrima
Gaol that a very large percentage of the prisoners in that gaol are,
more or less, insane. They are mostly long-sentence men, and the
dreadful ordeal of separate treatment for nine months breaks down
their health, then hope, then intellect; the innate animal impulses
are gratified in an unnatural manner, and the end is- either imbe-
cility or partial insanity.
The same warder related to us the following conversation which
he had with one of the prisoners in that gaol. This man had been
sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment for “ sticking-up ” and robbery
under arms:—
Q , Do you know that the Clarks were hung for the same offence
that you committed ?— A. Well, what of that?
Q. Did you not think about their fate when you were bush-
ranging ?— A. Not I!
Q. What did you think; or did you ever think at all about it ?
A. Think! why I thought it was a shame to hang them
two coves. They never took life.
Q. Now, suppose you had been sentenced to death, what would
your feelings be ?— A. Oh ! I never thought I should be; and, if I
should, why I’d suffer like a man. What’s the good of funking ?
We have take upon ourselves a most responsible duty; but,
trusting that our efforts may prove beneficial, we shall proceed to
lay as bare as possible some of the many schemes now resorted to


by men and women in Sydney belonging to several classes of
society. It will be quite unnecessary for us to dilate upon capital
offences—they usually are quickly discovered and the criminals
punished, excepting, perhaps, in cases of infanticide. But with
regards to burglaries, robberies, and larcenies in general, we may
at once state that the stolen goods, as a rule, are not taken in
pledge by the pawnbrokers. Domestic servants, shopmen, and
amateur thieves do certainly resort to the pawnshop, but not the
professional thief. A very large proportion of stolen goods in
Sydney are purloined by persons who, from a childhood of street-
arab life, have been initiated into all the arts and mysteries of the
burglar.
Now there is in this city a class of men who are known in
London as “ Fences.” They arc of two kinds, stationary and peri-
patetic. You may easily distinguish the former by their placards
in the windows, “ Gold and silver bought,” “ Wardrobes purchased,”
&c,, &c.; and if you wish to test, by the offer of goods for sale, any
of these houses, you will soon have palpable proof how easily goods,
no matter how obtained, can be passed off, and converted into a
more negotiable condition. In one of these shops we discovered a
valuable book which we had most unaccountably lost nine months
before; and we have no doubt that many gentlemen and ladies in
and around Sydney would be able to identify articles they have
myteriously lost.
With jewellery this is differently managed. There is a handy
back room, where crucibles at a white heat are ready for all emer-
gencies. People go into that room as freely as if it was a public-
house parlour, and empty their pockets of gold and silver jewellery
and plate into their separate crucibles, where they are speedily
renduced to ingots.
The dealers in second-hand goods belong to the second class, and
should, in our opinion, be compelled to take out an annual license
in the form of a railway season-ticket, and to have printed thereon
the special duties and liabilities involved by its possession. They
should also be compelled by law to enter in a book all purchases of
goods of a second-hand character, together with the name and
address of the seller, and amount paid; such book to be liable to
inspection by the police. The metal and marine-store dealers are
at present practically without control. These receivers arc the


breeders of tbievcg. There is a young man living in Pitt-street
now, in an honest way of earning his living, who gave us the
following statement as the result of his experience : “ Regular
thieves never pledge stolen property with the pawnbrokers; they
dispose of it to the ‘ fences,’ men who never thieve themselves, but
who can afford to buy any amount of stolen property. Some of
these men keep shops, and pass as respectable tradesmen; others,
keep low public-houses and do nothing but buy and sell. Jewellery
and plate are all melted down ; watches are sent abroad. The
jewels are taken out.”
Many of the cabmen in Sydney are in league with prostitutes,
and aid them in their nefarious conduct and villainy. Still more
villainous has been the practices of one or two of these men. It
is not very long ago that a servant girl hired a cab from near the
Royal Hotel, telling the cabman to drive her up to Surry Hills;
instead of which, however, the scoundrel drove her somewhere out
in the direction of Moore Park, and there brutally and criminally
assaulted her. Another girl employed a cabman from Campbell-
street to the residence of the Rev. JDr, W. Beg. 314 Crown-street.
He drove her out to Double Bay, and, turning down a lonely road
for some distance, he pulled up and told the girl to get out of the
cab. She resolutely refused and ultimately gained her point, when
he drove her back and left her at Dr Beg’s, where she had been
engaged as a servant. It is to be regretted that she did not give
the ruffian in charge, but she did not tell her mistress till he was
gone. Every female hiring a cab should be careful to take the
number of it,
Penal legislation has a grand work in hand, to minimise crime at
the least cost of suffering; and to treat every criminal as a medical
man would treat his patients, by applying an appropriate remedy
to every particular case. You cannot maintain due reverence for
law unless the people regard the law as equitable, and public
opinion has frequently condemned the brutality of our laws ; many
of these have been repealed —such as those relating to stealing
from a dwelling-house or bleaching-grounds, sheep-stealing, forgery
and shoplifting—the penalty on conviction in those cases being
death j and people now only express their astonishment that such
laws were ever suffered to disgrace the Statute Book, And so it
will be in reference to the law as it stands at present for murder.


Once within the walls of such a prison as Darlinghurst Graol, and
guarded by faithful men, would not the murderer be as safe as if he
were in his grave ? But you would have him executed ; not out of
a spirit of revenge, or retaliation; not because his death would
prevent other murder; not because the precepts of the Old Testa-
ment demand his life ; —'then for what ? Simply to render your
own safety more certain.
Suppose a man enters your house for the purpose of robbery.
You are the stronger, and you seize him and safely bind him, so
that he cannot move hand or limb. In this condition, you take a
pistol and blow his brains out; would society justify the act ?
Certainly not; there could hardly be found an individual who
would not revolt against such a cowardly murder. Yet this is pre-
cisely what society does in carrying out the sentence of death by
law; and it is maintained that man cannot rightfully delegate to
society the power to do that which would be morally wrong if done
by an individual, —nor, when the power to act has been given, is
the responsibility in any way altered or lessened by the action of
numbers or the sanction of law.
We commend, most heartily, to the authorities the following
principles declared at the congress held at Cincinnati, in October,
1870, on Penitentiary and Reformatory Discipline, most of which
have been accepted in England with very great unanimity:—
“1. The progressive classification of prisoners, based on cha-
racter, and worked on some wOll-adjusted mark system.
“ 2. Since Hope is a more potent agent than Fear, it should be
made an ever-present force in the minds of prisoners by a well-
devised system of rewards for good conduct, industry, and attention
to learning Rewards, more than punishments, are essential to
every good prison system.
“ 3. The prisoner’s destiny should be placed measurably in his
own hands; he must be put into circumstances where he will be
able, through his own exertions, to better his condition. A regu-
lated self-interest must be brought into play, and made constantly
operative.
“ 4. High qualities, and a special training, are required to make
a good prison or reformatory officer. Then only will the adminis-
tration of public punishment become scientific, uniform, and suc-
cessful when it is raised to the dignity of a profession, and when
men are specillay trained for it as they are for other pursuits.


“ 5. A system of prison discipline, to be truly reformatory, must
gain the will of the convict. He is to be amended, but how is this
possible with his mind in a state of hostility ? No system can
hope to succeed which does not secure this harmony of wills, so
that the prisoner shall choose for himself what his officer chooses
for him. But to this end the officer must really choose the good
of the prisoner, and the prisoner must remain in his choice long
enough for virtue to become a habit. This consent of wills is an
essential condition of reformation.
“6. The most valuable parts of the Irish Prison System—the
more strictly penal stage of separate imprisonment, the reformatory
stage of progressive classification, and the probationary stage of
moral improvement and natural training —are believed to be as
applicable to one country as another.
“7. More systematic and comprehensive methods should be
adopted to save discharged prisoners, by providing them with work,
and encouraging them to redeem their characters and regain their
lost position in society. The State has not discharged its whole
duty to the criminal when it has punished him. Having raised
him up, it has the further duty to aid in holding him up. And to
this end it is desirable that State Societies should be formed which
shall co-operate with each other in this work.”
70
VICE AND ITS VICTIMS I


TABLE I— Showing —
FIRST CONVICTIONS, SUPPOSED TO BE TRACEABLE TO—
Number examined who on occasion of
last offence had been
Indicted.
Convicted.
Totals.
M.
P.
M.
F.
1. Bad Coin pan
a. Acquaintances made in the street, workshop, or home
126
32
74
18
250
b. Acquaintances made in the public-house and dancing-saloon
69 :
0
25
7
2. Drink •••
43
13
126
23
205
3. Poverty ... ••• ••• ••• ••• •••
11
6
25
10
52
4. Opportunity
33
7
35
2
77
5. Want of principle
44
11
5
7
67
6. Bad temper ...
7
4
51
34
96
7. Immorality or wantonness ...
4
12
12
11
39
8. Incapacity and imbecility ...
3
2
6
0
11
9. Other cksses
1 13
1
73
15
102
Total
1
353
88
432
127
1000


TABLE II. —Showing the Ages of 1000 Prisoners at the time of
their First Conviction.
10 years and under ... ••• 19 examined.
11 .. 4
12 15
13 „ 20
lO n
14 „ 27
15 „ 51
16 „ . 72 ”
17 „ 57
18 „ 75
19 „ ■ 55
20 „ 44
21 „ 45 ”
22 „ 41
23 „ ••• 28
24 „ 33 ”
25 „ 40 » 1
26 „ 30
27 „ , 22 »
28 „ 32 ”
29 „ 24
30 „ 40 151
40 „ 50 65
50 „ 60 37 ”
60 : „ 70 12
Above 70 years 4 ’•
1000
: I


CONCLUSION.
These four formidable evils. Drunkenness, Poverty, Prostitution
and Crime, with their concomitants Seduction and Infanticide,
stand like giants in the path of social and moral progress. To
devise judicious and salutary laws, to check if we cannot entirely
remove them, should be the earnest desire and endeavour of all
who are anxious for the well-being and future progress of the
colony. This is the duty of the Statesman, whose talents and
experience should prompt him to hail with joy any proposition
that would tend to lessen these grievous social evils. He should
be unceasing in his efforts to discover the causes which lead to such
disastrous effects; to pursue, with unremitting vigilance and per-
severance, every remedial measure that would appear to him wise,
just, and practically beneficial; and to foster by personal effort,
encouragement and pecuniary aid, any scheme whereby the social
and moral advancement of the people can be effected. Party feel-
ings and questions should give place to combined action until these
moral ulcers are effectually rooted out and destroyed.
The principles of Social and Political Economy, the social con-
dition of the working-classes, the improvement of their dwellings,
and the establishment of well-managed clubs, and commodious
baths and wash-houses; the all-important question of juvenile
depravity and reformatory treatment; the better education, training
and employment of women ; the causes of poverty; the laws of
population and health; criminal jurisprudence, and the causes of
crime. These, and many other important subjects, should demand
his constant attention and study ; and let him also bear in mind
that “ The lesson which English legislation teaches, is, that those
are the best laws which are dictated by the people to fheir rulers;
and that flo laws, however wise and just in theory, that originate
with the rulers, are of any practical value, unless they are under-
stood and accepted by the people.” *
* The Kiglit Honorable Massey, M.P.


The two grand evils —drunkenness and poverty—seem to go hand
in hand. Mr. Chandler, editor of the United States Gazette, after
a most searching investigation, writes thus of the United States of
America: —“ Close every grog-shop in the country, and all the
poverty may be supported by the present existing institutions,”
The Provost of Dundee gave Mr. Gough, the eloquent Temperance
advocate, in his own handwriting, this statement :—“ As chief
magistrate of this large manufacturing town, I unhesitatingly
affirm that nine-tenths of the poverty and crime is caused directly
by the use of intoxicating liquors as a beverage.” There may be
other causes of pauperism, such as high prices, as in England just
now, where meat is not within the reach of the poor, or from a
scarcity of grain. “ But where is that scarcity ? I will tell you
where it is not. There is no scarcity at the brewers and distillers.
If men are dying of starvation,.their storehouses are full of grain.
Father Matthew told me that at the time when the half-starved
husband had not strength enough to lift the dead body of his wife
and lay her in the grave ; when the little child was found with its
thin lips drawn tight across its teeth in the agony of death, clutch-
ing seaweed and sucking it for nourishment, the distilleries had in
them an unprecedented quantity of grain; and that in the year
after the famine in Ireland 47,000,000 bushels of grain were des-
troyed to make intoxicating liquor in Great Britain—enough to
have fed every man, woman and child who died of starvation.” *
In the ample fields of Social Science the good Clergyman wilf
find work enough, and even increasing labour. He must handle
these social evils “ without mittens.” If he asks “ How can I work
so that I can rescue the drunkard?” We reply—Give him your
sympathy ; help him by your experience and confidence. “ Yes,
bathe will abuse my confidence.” What if he does? Is it not
better that nine hundred and ninety-nine should abuse your confi-
dence than that one should perish for the want of it ? You must
not rest content when you have got the drunkard to sign the
pledge ; this is only the declaration of war against his enemy,—he
has now to bear the brunt of the battle, and he needs your help
ani sympathy.- Give it him ; tell him not that he has. brought all
the evils upon himself, “ Judge not lest ye be judged.” Your
Master did not say, “ Let them alone ; they are past all reforma-
* Orations , by J. B. Gough, p. 90,


tion ; they have brought it on themselves.” Think what a horrible
sight this fair world would appear to the angels, if left in despair
and hopleless because “ they had brought it on themselves.” No !
every drunkard is your brother—a weak-minded brother, who may
yet stand side by side with you to be judged, though you are of the
stronger mind. Many drunkards are. when sober, noble-hearted
generous men, tender-hearted and kind, and ready to help the dis-
tressed; it is the drink that makes them fiends; and, while you
regret the brutality of the drunkard, raise your voice of indignation
and condemnation against the cause that has brutalized him. Do
not vex him in his nervous, prostrate wretchedness, with spiritual
admonitions. You must work and not preach, ever bearing in
mind that “ Laborare est orare ,” for until the physical wants and
necessities of your flock are satisfied you may look in vain for any
permanent spiritual improvement. When the ignorant are enlight-
ened, the poor relieved, the drunkard reclaimed, the vicious re-
formed, and social happiness pervades the hearths and homes of
those who are now bound down with corroding care and misery,—
then, and not till then, will Christianity achieve her triumph;
then may you look into the future with hope, as you review the
triumphs of the past, with thankfulness and praise.
But it is to the Wives and Daughters of our country that we
look for prompt and effectual aid. You are the “ministering
angels” whose special province it is to imitate more closely the
beautiful life of your Master in continued industry ’mid the haunts
of sorrow, sin and suffering; yours is the happy privilege to diffuse
virtue, affection and gentleness throughout the social field. Man
is too harsh, too rugged, to deal with many of these delicate ques-
tions, and is often unjust; but you, our countrywomen, can win a
glorious empire not only by your sense of justice, but by the grace
and delicacy, the tenderness and purity, which give you the mighty
power to soften and humanize every class of society. Go forth,
noble army of Christian women, and fight against the terrible
enemies that surround you and may even blight and desolate your
happy homes; for it is a principle of abstract science that, in all
cases, re-action is equal to action. You will find a glorious reward
for your labours. Every sinking form you cheer and support;
every fallen sister you lift and encourage ; every poor and needy
soul you sustain ; every drunkard reformed by you; when man and


all his race shall have disappeared from the face of our planet, will
trace living characters on the walls of that great “ Temple not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens”—not the “ Mene, mene,
telcel upharsin” of the pagan king, hut the everlasting record of
your glory and your love. By that same eternal law of re-action,
you will be judged. Interrogate every particle of air that floats in
the regions of infinite space, and it will bear witness of the good
deeds done by you; ask of every wave that dashes on ten thousand
desolate shores, and it will record the loving labours of your active
life. Do not put off - until you take your departure to the land of
spirits, “ act, act in the living present,”
“ Whilst living, give and taste the bliss that flows
From others’ good, relief of others’ woes ; ”
And when, in the fulness of time, after a well-spent life of active
Charity you are called to a better land, a mighty host of happy
spirits will meet you at the celestial portals, and guide you to the
glory that shall be yours for evermore.
To aid in bringing about this grand Social Regeneration, the for-
mation of a Moral Police seems both necessary and practical;
whose duties should be to seek out and relieve all cases of poverty,
destitution, sickness and vice. A noble band of men and women,
all working heart and soul for the common good, would be the pride
and the admiration of the civilized nations of the earth. Organized
with care, and enrolling in its ranks workers, not dreamers, incal-
culable blessings would inevitably follow. Individual cases of
struggling poverty, of thoughtless youthful indiscretion, of innocent
sufferers through drunken habits and vicious surroundings, would,
by their instrumentality, be brought to light Go, armed with the
staff of Benevolence, inculcating only one law, the divine law of
kindness ! “To do justice, love mercy, and walk humbly before
God,” should be the motto emblazoned on their banner. The widow
and orphan, whom they had cheered and cherished, would mingle
with their supplications to Infinite Love a blessing on their noble
endeavours; their fallen sister would turn to them as the ship-
wrecked sailor to the life-boat, and the bitterness of her woe would
be blotted out with her tears of repentance. The prisoner in his
cell would hear the angel voice ringing in his ears, telling of the
glad evangel of hope and future happiness ; and with the poor, the
sick, the halt, the lame, the blind, the drunkard, the distressed,


and all who suffer and endure, they would freely and daily mingle,
supported and cheered by their Master’s words : —“ Whatsoever
thou doest to the least of mftle and lowest, that thou doest unto
A glorious era is approaching, when every child of the Eternal
One shall be found actively labouring in the great fields of the
universe—in art, in science, in the courts of justice, in the sanc-
tuary of Brotherly Love ! When the social ulcers are cleansed or
removed by their united labours; when vice is, in reality, hated,
and a purer atmosphere of light, liberty, and social happiness shall
develope the genius of our race; then will the moral wilderness
blossom as the rose, and the lion and the lamb lie down together
in peace. When distributive Justice pervades the social earth,
then Virtue will bloom with an immortal beauty; the Sun of
Righteousness will arise in the horizon of Universal Love, and
shed his genial rays over all the fields of Peace, Plenty, and
Human Happiness,
Caxton Steam Machine Printing Office, 156 Pitt-street, Sydney.
77
CONCLUSION.




R. BOURKE,
iWfl & 4Mi Hate i §mdkx,
19 7 IP IT T S T IR> EET,
NEXT THE NEW POST OFFICE.
AH-» MIS yjTTS».
<®ueen Insurance Company.
HEAD OFFICES-LIVERPOOL AND LONDON.
New South Wales Branch :
LYONS’ BUILDINGS, 227 CEORCE-STREET, SYDNEY.
Capital, £2,000,000 I Invested Funds, £558,000.
Fire Reserve, £BB,OOO. 1 Life Fund, £174,000.
Annual Income, £300,000. Fire Losses Paid, £1,310,000.
_ FIRE BRANCH.
■lolicies issued at Lowest Rates to cover Buildings, Stock and Merchandise, &c., in Town
and Country.
Losses by Gas Explosion, from Fire by Lightning, made good.
LIFE BRANCH.
Medical Referee —A. MOFFITT, Esq., M.D., F.8.C.5., &c.
RATES —The lowest in Sydney. ADVANTAGES offered by no other office in the Colony.
BONUSSES as high as granted by any Mutual offied, and SECURITY unquestionable.
LOSSES HUNT SYIDETE3T.
Agents wanted in all Townships where the Company is not represented.
J. 0. NEILD, Jun., Chief Agent.
COMMISSION AND AGENCY BUSINESS OF EVERY DES
CRIPTION Undertaken by
or. C. IsTIIBIjID, tTuisrioiß.
227 George-street, Sydney.
E. H. WILLIAMS,
0
2 8 0
GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY


J. HURST, Fo
Morkiruj Matchmaker ani Jrtodler,
299 GEORGE STREET,
(late j. w. hall,)
Has on sale a large and varied assortment of Gold and Silver Watches and
Colonial Gold Jewellery, Chains, Kings, &c., of the newest pattern and best
workmanship. Clocks in every variety,
REPAiRS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION FAITHFULLY DONE.
EDWIN H. BBOKE,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
Jato anfc §mral Jtoiaafr,
221 PITT STREET
(HAIGH’S CHAMBERS,)
SYjDItTIEJNr.
TERM S—IST S 3 T T CASH,
TAMBAROORA HOTEL.
PEEBCH
G. DUVERNEUI
(Late chef -de-cuisine of the Merchants’ Dining Hall, Sydney Exchange);
Respectfully thanks the public for the patronage accorded him for the last twelve months
and begs to notify that he is now in a position to cater for gentlemen requiring a good meal
with despatch.
DINNER, 9d.; TEA, 9d.; BOARD, 10s. 6d. PER WEEK.
OBLIGING WAITERS ALWAYS IN ATTENDANCE.
£T NOTE THE ADDRESS: 81 KINO STREET.
M. GOULSTOJN,
PRACTICAL TAILOR,
418 GEORGE STREET. SYDNEY,
OPPOSITE THE AUSTRALIAN JOINT STOCK BANK.
N.B,—All garments well made, thoroughly shrunk, and a perfect fit guaranteed,
A Large Stock of Seasonable Tweeds always on hand.
©TALL PURCHASES NOT APPROVED OF WILL BE EXCHANGED,




