

m
'%4
I
/


mr . /
, mr
1
..
■ ’
. ■ :
■ .
!
, ' . ; • .
■
>
;
* ' • . ■ " ■ / f//.
; ■ V"
i
: *
•; ’ ■ 4 -: •
f ■ ,
1 v , ■. ' ii • - -r"’
i
< " ' , , -
. r * **■' ; • . ■■■
:
i ; i.‘ \ -
: v ■ - -■ ■ .
; ■ y ■, -■•■■■
;■ , • • ;
’ V \
- > v . f • ... ■ ; •
1
f .
i < * -t , . $
v' ' . * • V : , ■ I
* ■ :
. ■ ■ •
.. • , ' •
■
• . )f , v , ..■• ' 5 >a.K5^v; *
• i .’ ,• ;• : ,r 1
■: /•* 1
r • . , .
. S ' • . .. . • ■ . v - * J
■
a; v r ■
■ ■
! ,
..... . . ■■v’*, *
; , 4.V
kft ; ,
■ I
L
w
r "
%
.1 f


INDEX.
t\ 53 55 p °l2>i4-o
PAftF
HISTORY OF AUSTRALIA TO VICTORIA’S CONSTITUTION. By E. Jerome Dyer .... 3
HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT OF VICTORIA. By E. Jerome Dyer 10
FACTS AND FIGURES OF VICTORIA TO 1893. By Henry Heylyn Hayter, C.M.G., Government Statist.
Constitution and Government ; Climate and Rainfall of Victoria ; Defences ; Population—Nationalities,
Religions, and Occupations of the People, Aborigines ; Marriages, Births and Deaths ... 16
■ dUU VyLLUpaliUllo Ui LUC i CUpiCj xlDOllglllCO y irldl 1 Dii Ulo clliCl L/Cdlllo • , , 1U
Finance—Revenue and Expenditure ; Municipal Revenue and Expenditure ; Public Debt ... 16
Royal Mint; Savings Banks . . . 18
Trade and Commerce —Imports and Exports ; Shipping ; Nationality of Vessels entered and cleared, 1891 ;
Foreign Vessels entered and cleared, 1891 ; Principal Articles imported ; Principal Articles exported . 18
Manufactures, etc. ; Manufactories, Works, etc. . ‘ . 20
Railways; Tramways 20
Post and Telegraphs—Post Offices; Money Orders ; Postal Notes; Electric Telegraph ; Mail Subsidies;
Cabhs ; Time occupied by Mails between England and Australia, 1891 ; Telephones .... 21
Education —University ; State Education ; Private Schools ; Results of Victoria’s School System . . 22
Clergy and Churches ................. 22
Prices to Consumers of Agricultural, Grazing, Dairy, Farm-yard, and Garden Produce, and of Miscel-
laneous Articles such as Wines, Spirits, etc. 22
Victorian Production ................. 24
SOCIAL LIFE IN VICTORIA. By Agnes G. Murphy 26
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY AND GEOLOGY OF VICTORIA, with Notes on the Geology and History of
Gold Mining, and the newly discovered Tin and Coal Fields. By Reginald A F. Murray 1 , F.G.S.,
Government Geologist of Victoria.
Physical Geography 29
Geology of Victoria ... .............. 33
Victorian Gold Mining ................. 34
Future Mining Prospects ................. 37
HORTICULTURE. By William Elliott, Horticultural Editor of The Leader.
General Introduction ................. 37
übiiciai inn uutu/iiuii •••••)••••••••••• 04
Botany ; Public Parks and Botanic Gardens ; Horticultural Societies ; Market Gardening ; Plant Nurseries 38
Privati Gardens ; Fruit Varieties .............. 40
Export of Fruit; Bonuses for the Planting of Fruit Trees and Vines ; Scent and Herb Farming ; Vegetables 41
VINE CULTURE AND WINE PRODUCTION. By J. W. Bear 42
LAND SETTLEMENT IN VICTORIA. By E. Jerome Dyer.
Prospects and Regulations 44
Present Output from the Land, and Future Prospects , . , . . . . . . . 45
The Mallee Country ................. 45
Chief Provisions of the Victorian Land Act referring to the Mallee ......... 45
Abstract of Part I, of the Land Act 1890 ............. 46
How to get on the Land ; Hints for Immigrants and the Inexperienced ....... 46
The Village and Land Settlement Schemes ............. 48
VICTORIAN TREES—Timber ; Bark and Tanning ............ 48
ANIMAL LlFE—Native Animals ; Introduced Animals ............ 49
IRRIGATION AND INTENSE CULTURE IN VICTORIA.
The Mildura Colony .52
The Goulburn Valley . ................ 54
The Lower Loddon and Gunbower Districts ............. 56
The Castlemaine and Bendigo Districts 56
The Wimmera District T ................ 58
Concluding Remarks ................. 62
AGRICULTURE. By John Lamont Dow (late Minister of Agriculture for Victoria).
General Introduction 62
Fertility of the Soil; the Climate and Rainfall ............ 64
Productions—Wheat, Oats, Barley, Maize, Leguminous Crops, Root Crops, Hay and Grasses, Hops,
other Products ; Dairy Farming ............ . . 65
Compared with America ; Agricultural Education ; Prices of Products and Land . . . . . 66
LIVE STOCK HUSBANDRY. By “ Bruni,” of The Arqus ahd Australasian.
Sheep .................... 68
The Wool Export Trade ................ 69
Horses and Cattle 70
Pigs 72
The newly established Meat Export and its Promising Outlook . 72
THE VICTORIAN DAIRYING INDUSTRY-ITS PROSPECTS AND THE EXPORT TRADE. By E.
MSSt Jerome Dyer 74
% FINANCIAL OUTLOOK AND THE NATIONAL DEBIT. By’G. D. Meudell.
Introduction 78
Victoria’s Liabilities and Assets ............... 78


■
v
*■ -i \
DEDICATED BY SPECIAL PERMISSION
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL OE HOPETOUN, G.C.M.G.,
GOVERNOR OF VICTORIA,
IN’ RECOGNITION OE HIS DEEP INTEREST IN THE SOCIAL, AGRICULTURAL, AND MINERAL
DEVELOPMENT OE THE COLONY.
ED I TOR’S NOTE.
Thk work “ Victoria and Its Resources” has been especially prepared for the purpose of not only giving
the people of foreign countries a brief and clear idea of the progress and resources of Victoria, but its raison
</' etre is mainly to convey to the people of the mother-country a more perfect knowledge of the history and
progress, the material and social development, of one of the noblest provinces of the British Empire,
than they at present possess.
Facts and figures may be instructive and conclusive, but they are not always so pleasing, impressive,
and effective as faithfully written description, accompanied by judiciously selected photographs of the chief
features,of the letterpress. The pictures in this work are actual photographs, transferred by the new “Crisp
Photo” process; and, as “the camera cannot lie,” these views should carry that conviction with them
which “ word painting ” might fail to impart.
A glance at the index will convince everyone that an earnest effort has been made to supply a brief,
yet reliable and fairly complete, resume of Victoria’s commerce, resources, and development, up to date; in
which the splendid prospects for future development, and the remarkable progress of the last few years,
are expertly dealt with.
The value of this work rests, not only in the fact that the pictures form an object-lesson which tells
its own story, but also in the fact that the majority of the articles have been specially written by gentlemen
possessed of expert knowledge and extensive Australian experience in connection with their respective
subjects.
The Editor has had a difficult task in arranging the outline of the subject-matter, and in classifying
the work in such a manner as to make it as complete a descriptive, statistical, and illustrated publication
upon Victoria and its resources as the limited space would permit. He regrets that brevity forms the chief
feature, and occasions much interesting matter concerning the subject to be left untold. It might be said
that a subject of such magnitude should not be dealt with unless in the exhaustive form its importance
demands ; but the extraordinary development of the agricultural resources and the export trade of the last
few years, the great richness and extent of the resources still undeveloped, the prospects of the country
with increased population, the demand in Great Britain and other countries for further reliable information
about this fertile land, the kindly invitation which our people offer to those of other countries to come
and share their prosperity, and the opportunity which the newly discovered “ Crisp Photo ” process of
F. AV. Niven and Co. offered of pictorially illustrating Victoria’s principal features and the enterprise of
its people, fully justify this publication.
The Editor particularly thanks the very efficient staff of contributors, whose names are attached to
their, respective articles, for their generous and painstaking assistance. The Editor and Publishers also
wish to acknowledge their great indebtedness to the Hon. Sir George Dibbs, Premier of New South Wales;
the Hon. J. B. Patterson, Premier of Victoria ; the Hon. W. T. Webb, our Minister of Agriculture; the
Hon. J. Mclntyre, our Minister of Lands; the Officers of their Departments ; Mr. E. J. Thomas, Secretary
to the Premier; and many others whose kindly assistance has been of jrreat value in completing this work.
mi. .
aphers
•imited,
lino id It,
ut.






THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIA TO VICTORIA’S CONSTITUTION.
By E. JEROME DYER.
Introductory Note. —This sketch of Australian history is brief, but correct, according to the best available authorities and latest verified records. Amongst
the many to whom I am indebted—including the Hon. J. B. Patterson, Premier of Victoria, and Mr. E. J. Thomas, Ids secretary, through whose assistance I procured
much valuable information from the Government Offices, Mr. H. H. Hayter, C.M.G., Government Statist of Victoria, and others—l must single out the Hon. Sir
George Dibbs, K.C.8., Premier of New South Wales, who generously placed at my disposal records and information which have enabled me to elucidate many points
in Australian history previously misunderstood, and to prov ide those interested in Australia with a brief and thoroughly reliable account of its discovery early
government, development, present position, and future prospects.—E.J.D. S *
“What heresy!” exclaimed fche council of the Vatican, as they
arraigned Galileo for his audacity in supporting the principles of Coper-
nicus on the shape and motions of the earth, and his declaration of
belief in the existence of other and greater lands, far beyond that line
which marked the meeting of sea and sky. The church had
founded its belief on the authority of the great philosophers Pythagoras,
Plato, Aristotle, Aristarchus, and Ptolemy, and listened with pious
horror to the immortal Galileo disputing a teaching which the great
and all-powerful Christian church had adopted as one of its tenets.
Though the church proved temporarily triumphant in thus silenc-
ing Galileo, his disciples were many, and not idle, as they felt the full
glow of the new light that was to penetrate that outer realm of dark-
ness, over distant seas and through that vast immensity of space, in
which the twinkling stars smiled their nightly greeting; and they knew
that a wider knowledge of the wonderful works of God, in the illimit-
able space which enveloped the earth, would strengthen, rather than
weaken, the necessary reverence for the Creator and His works.
Kepler kept Galileo’s memory alive by further developing his
hypothesis, and was followed by Newton, who completely revolutionised
the old order of astronomical belief, and brought within the range of
probability the likelihood of the existence of great undiscovered lands
with productive possibilities and climatic conditions, equal, if not ex-
ceeding, those of the old world.
An adventurous spirit had been stimulated amongst the Spanish,
Dutch, and Portuguese, by the vague accounts of strange lands, told by
traders driven out to sea in their voyages to distant parts, and by the
statements of learned men of those countries, who compared these
accounts with their own scientific researches, and numberless were the
expeditions which set out to unravel the mysteries of the seas in the
South and West. Of the leaders of these, the most renowned are—
Marco Polo, who discovered China, the East India islands, and the east
coast of India, in 1270; Vasco de Gama, who discovered South Africa
and the west coast of India in 1498; and the discoverers of America,
the chief of whom are—Columbus, 1492; Alonzo de Hoyeda, 1494;
Amerigo Vespucci, 1494 ; Sebastian Cabot, 1498 ; Caspar Corteral,
Cabral, and Pinzon, 1500; Solis, 1515; Magellan, 1519; and
Schouton, 1610. Other European navigators, leaving the completion
of American discovery to men content with lesser famb, sought for
glory in other seas, as the pioneers of Australian discovery. But,
before it is shown how Newton’s genius opened the eyes of the British
nation to possibilities beyond the power of arms, and proved the spark
which lit the train of that science, invention, and discovery, which has
placed England at the head of all nations, the Dutch and Spanish dis-
coverers deserve at least passing mention in the part they played in the
discovery of Australia.
Mr. R. H. Major, of the British Museum, has ascertained in his
researches that a Provencal pilot, Guillaume le Testu, as early as 1542,
knew something of the existence of Australia, as a map in the Depot
de la Guerre at Paris, bearing his name, undoubtedly indicates a
knowledge of the existence of land in Australian seas.
A Jean Rotz presented one of these early maps to King Henry
VIII., and Sir Joseph Banks presented another to the British Museum.
These maps represented the land known as Terra Australis as
extending from the south, and beyond the tropic of Capricorn, nearly
to the Equator, and its coast-line extending all round the South Pole.
The northermost part of this land was divided by an inaccurately
defined strait, the mainland in the south being called the Londe of
Java, and the smaller the Lytil Java.
Early in the reign Queen Elizabeth the subject of colonies was
first discussed in England, and papers were laid before Her Majesty on
the advantages likely to accrue from new discoveries of lands not taken
possession of by the Portuguese, Spanish, or French, and especially of
those colonies lying beyond the Equinoctial*.
However, the only colonies established in the reigns of Elizabeth
or her successor were those in Korth America and Guiana.
* The manuscript from which these records are taken is endorsed by Lord Burleigh—.A Dis-
covery of Damir Lying Beyond the Equinoctial, 1573—and has been published in the Hakluyt
Society's edition of Frobisher’s Voyages, 1867, pp 4-8;
In 1606, De Quiros, the Columbus of Australia., discovered the
islands of the New Hebrides, thereby suggesting the probability of
further islands in these waters, but to his captain, Torres, probably
belongs the credit of being the first authentic navigator to see Aus-
tralia. Separated from his commander in a storm at the New
Hebrides, Torres sailed west through the narrow passage between
Australia and New Guinea, now known as Torres Strait, and though
his accounts contain no mention of the fact, there is little doubt that
he saw Cape York, the northernmost point of Australia, but believed it
to be one of the numerous islands through which he was passing.
About the same time, the Dutch, who had a settlement at Java,
sent out a small vessel, the Dia/fhen, or Dove, and its crew must be
credited as being the first Europeans who landed on Australian soil, as
the Dutch records state they landed on the coast of the Gulf, after-
wards called Carpentaria, but having rather a disagreeable brush with
the natives, in which some of the sailors were killed, they turned round
and sailed for home, calling the place of the disaster Cape Turn-again.
The name of the commander of this expedition is not known, nor,
excepting a rough chart entry, was there any account written, and
therefore the record of a landing is not well substantiated.
It is evident, however, that the Dutch were the real discoverers of
Australia, as, following this expedition, there are various well-verified
accounts of Dutch traders touching the coast. The first reliable
account of Europeans landing is that of Dirk Hartog in 1616. He
landed on an island in Shark Bay, which now bears his name. Then
followed Zeachan in 1618, Jan Van Edcl in 1619, the vessel Van de
Leuwin in 1622, Nuyts 1627, General Carpenter, who completely
surveyed the large gulf in the north which takes its name from this
navigator, De Witt in 1628, and Captain Pelsart in 1629, all of whom
added to the discoveries of the Dutch on the west and north coasts.
However, these discoveries are of little value to history, and in the
eyes of the Dutch were of less value to them, inasmuch as for upwards
of fourteen years they neglected to take any further notice of what
they described as an ugly chain of inhospitable and uninhabitable
islands, probably established by a merciful Providence as a home in
these far-off seas for the wild sea-fowl.
In 16-42, Anthony Van Diemen, the enterprising Dutch governor
of the Indies at that time, having read the account of De Quiros’
voyage, published at Frankfort in 1634, and being ambitious, resolved
to signalise his governorship by some special service. He therefore
despatched his friend, Abel Van Tasman, to ascertain more about the
inhospitable islands which former navigators and East Indian traders
considered so worthless. Had the Dutch followed up Tasman’s dis-
covery, their country would undoubtedly have held a more prominent
position among the nations of the world than it does to-day, as he dis-
covered Tasmania, formally took possession of it by implanting the
Dutch flag on the sandy shore of Storm Bay, and called it Van
Diemen’s Land, afterwards christened Tasmania by the British settlers
out of compliment to the discoverer. Tasman then sailed west, and
discovered and named New Zealand. The following year he paid a
short visit to the Gulf of Carpentaria, and, with the exception of
another expedition which Van Diemen sent out in 1664, of which no
account has ever been discovered, this concludes the last attempt by the
Dutch, or any other nation, excepting the British, and one or two
short expeditions by the French, at completing the discovery of
Australia.
Though the Dutch evidently attached little value to these dis-
coveries, they were very proud of the achievements of their country-
men. In addition to having outline maps of the north, and nearly all
the west coast of Australia, to which th ey gave the name New Holland,
and of the south and part of the west coast of Tasmania, which they
show on their charts as belonging to the mainland, they also laid down
in mosaic work on the floor of the Town Hall of Amsterdam a copy of
Tasman’s chart. Civil wars in Great Britain, and the wars with the
Dutch, Spanish, and French, kept England from taking part in the
discoveries which other nations were vigorously prosecuting, but the
country was well through with its civil wars, though still engaged in
foreign broils, when its people were roused from their mental torpor by






their excellent timbers, and the fitness of the stone (freestone) for
building purposes. Captain Cook formally took possession of this land
of promise by hoisting the British flag, and tiring the customary salute,
and on May 6th set sail on the return voyage. Though he passed and
named Port Jackson (in honour of his friend, Sir George Jackson, the
Secretary to the Admiralty), it was left to Governor Phillips, the first
Uovernor, to discover this, the most perfect, and it is said, the most
beautiful harbour in the world, and on which, as is well known, Sydney,
the capital of New South Wales, is situated.
With the exception of a short visit to Tasmania in 1776—which
he imagined a part of the continent—Cook only paid one visit to Aus-
tralia proper, but he would doubtless have paid another, and probably
a much longer one, if his useful and brilliant career had not been cut
short by the treacherous natives of Hawaii. It was this dauntless
navigator’s fearlessness that caused him to be the last to attempt to
leave the island. Just as he turned his back on the bloodthirsty
savages, after seeing all his crew safely on their way to the boat, the
natives struck at him with their spears, and pierced him through and
through. And so it was that the intrepid Cook died. His was a
noble character, unselfish and chivalrous, scholarly and kindhearted,
ardently loving his wife and family, yet devoted to his country, and the
advancement of science and discovery. James Cook was cut off at the
comparatively young age of 48, in the full enjoyment of a sound con-
stitution, a fund of knowledge due more to undaunted perseverance
than natural genius, and with all the characteristics of a brave, good
man. Not unmindful of the benefits they have derived from his ser-
vices in the discovery of Australia, and inspired by a heartfelt admira-
tion of his truly noble personality, the people of New South Wales
-erected in 1879 a monument to his memory, which now adorns Hyde
Park. The New South Wales Government has also recently purchased
the only remaining relics of his celebrated voyages—the compass,
telescope, and water-bottles, which are said to have been used by him
on board his ships—and these are now deposited in the Sydney
Museum.
Writers in the past have been under illusions which recent re-
searches have now entirely di-pelled. They are notably—the naming
of Botany Bay, New Holland as distinguished from Australia, or Terra
Australis , when the name Australia first appeared, and the naming of
New South Wales. Though Cook undoubtedly at first named the bay
now known as Botany, Stingray Harbour, it is evident that as an
afterthought he gave it that of Botany Bay. Hawkesworth, the editor
■of Cook’s and Bank’s journals, gives Cook’s own words as they ap-
peared in his journal :—“ The great quantity of plants which Mr.
Banks and Dr. Solander collected in this place induced me to give it
the name of Botany Bay.”
Historians in the past appear to have agreed that Terra Australia
or Australia, and New Holland were one. Though this was an
easy error to fall into, it has been proved beyond doubt that Terra
Australis was the name given to the vast continent supposed to extend
right round the South Pole, and almost up to the Equator, including
New Guinea; and New Holland only consisted of that portion of the
continent on the south-west, west, and north, which the Dutch dis-
covered. The publications of Dampier, Dalrymple, Flinders, and the
records of the Dutch and French geographers confirm this. While
New Holland was known to exist in the west, the object of further ex-
peditions was to ascertain more about the great continent of Terra
Australis, which was believed to exist in the east. At the time when
Tasman discovered and named Van Dieman’s Land in 1642, that island
was supposed to belong to the mainland, yet the name was accepted
without demur, as it was thoroughly understood that the name New
Holland only applied to that portion of the coast discovered by the
Dutch, otherwise Van Diemen’s Land must also have been called New
Holland. The name Australia, as applied to this continent, though
unconsciously suggested in various forms by many writers, first ap-
peared in its direct application in Dalrymple’s Historical Collection of
Voyages and Discoveries in the South Pacific Ocean, published in 1770,
just after Cook sailed in the Endeavour. Dalrymple evidently in-
tended to point it out as a proper name for the country, as it occurred
in capitals many times throughout the work, but it did not come into
general use until 1820, thirty-two years after the first English settle-
ment. Cook was unaware of the suitability of this title, and continued
mistakingly to call the country New Holland, though some writers
have had it otherwise.
One of the earliest records in which the origin of the present title
■of the continent can be found is an old French map by Pierre Des-
celliers, in which a conjectural outline of the Great South Land is
earned La Terre Australle, the original of which is in the British
Museum, and fac-similes in the public libraries of Melbourne, Sydney,
and Adelaide. When De Quiros discovered the islands of the New
Hebrides, thinking them a portion of the Great Unknown Land, he
named the largest island La Austrialia del Espiritu, or “The Southern
Land of the Holy Spirit.” De Quiros is supposed to have given this
name for two reasons ; first, because Phillip the Third, King of Spain,
to whom De Quiros presented a memorial of his voyage, was head of
the House of Austria—hence Austria-lia, and secondly because pos-
session of the country had been taken on the King’s birthday, the
festival of the Holy Spirit. In fact, the eastern coast of New
Holland, previous to the time of Cook’s discoveries, was known on the
maps by the name given by De Quiros, fo:- the simple reason that the
New Hebrides islands were considered a portion of a vast continent,
the east coast of which was named New Holland.
Coming nearer the name as it now stands, Dalrymple is found, in
1770, adopting suggestions of the French geographer, De Brosses, in
his Histoire des Navigations aux Terres Australes, 1756. In his intro-
duction to his collection of voyages, Dalrymple said :
“I have inserted another head of partition, Australia , comprehending the
discoveries at a distance from America to the eastward.”
It is noted here that Dalrymple left out the i in De Quiros’ Austria!.
The idea was probably suggested by the name of Austral-Asia, applied
by De Brosses to the discoveries in the Pacific, south of Asia. Flin-
ders, however, has been generally credited with the selection, or at
least with the first public application of the name in his Voyage to
Terra Australis, published in 1814, in which he wrote :
“ Had I permitted myself any innovation upon the original terms, Terra
Australis, it would have been to convert it into Australia, as being more agreeable
to the ear, and an assimilation to the names of the other great portions of the
earth.”
When Governor Phillip was commissioned by King George 111, to
take possession of the east coast of New Holland (as it was defined in
Phillips’ commission) from the northern cape or extremity of the coast
called Cape York to the South Cape (south of Tasmania), the colony
was named New South Wales, but from whom this inappropriate name
came is a matter of doubt. It is certain that the King’s commission to
Phillip, of May 2nd, 1787, contained the name, but the statement
that Captain Cook conferred it is questionable. Though Hawkesworth,
who edited Cook's Voyages, credits that navigator with the inspiration,
it is contradicted by the fact that in none of Cook’s logs or journals,
private or official, is it so stated, nor reference anywhere made to the
name, and the journals of his subordinates are equally silent. Either
some obscure and forgotten official in England has to be thanked for
the incongruous appellation, or, what is most probable, it was an after-
thought of Cook’s.
So impressed was Cook with the beauty of the country he had
discovered, its salubrious climate, and the probability of it becoming a
mighty empire of the future, that he urged the British Government to
form a colony at Botany Bay. The American War at this time lost to
England Virginia and the plantations to which convicts had hitherto
been transported, and thus, no doubt, the American War and England’s
defeat resulted in Australia’s gain, as there would have been less desire
to undertake the government of a continent so little known and so far
removed, had the fortune of war been on the side of the British.
Transportation of criminals to the plantations of Virginia had ceased
with the Declaration of American Independence in 1776, and to this
Australia probably owes its present position Soon after peace had
been declared with the United States, the colonists who had remained
loyal pressed their claims on Parliament for compensation for the losses
they had sustained in the war. They had been driven out of their
homes, outlawed and ruined men, and were consequently forced to seek
refuge from the tempest, wherever they could find oae. Among the
proposals made for relieving their distress it was suggested in 1783, by
James Maria Matra, a man of considerable political influence, that
some of them should be settled at Botany Bay. His proposal was
supported by Sir Joseph Banks, and submitted to the Government.
Though Matra’s scheme was not adopted, he is entitled to the credit of
having drawn up the first plan, and made the first formal proposal for the
colonisation of New South Wales. The temper of the age at that
time, however, did not favour colonising experiments in which colonists
were to be free agents and the expenses paid by the public treasury.
At any rate, the ministry then in power would have nothing to do
with it. Thus the matter dragged on for some years, until a change of
ministry brought with it change of ideas, and it was resolved to use the
materials of Matra’s scheme for the purpose of framing a plan of quite
a different character to that intended by the author.
Slow as the progress was, and tedious the delay, let it be
remembered that but for the really important person who stood behind
the scenes, the negotiations which occupied the interval between
August 1783 and August 1786 might have extended over a much
longer space of time, and might peradventure have come to nothing at
all, and the east coast of Australia a French or some othe.r nation’s
colony. The idea of founding a colony at Botany Bay clearly originated
with Banks, the botanist of Cook’s first voyage. It was proposed by
him in 1779; from him it passed to others, and was at last formulated
in set terms for the approval of the Government by men who quoted
Banks as the great authority on the subject. Ministers in their turn
consulted him with as much confidence as the promoters of the scheme
had done; and it was undoubtedly on his strong persuasion that the
order was at last given for the experiment and despatch of an
expedition to the shores of New South Wales in 1787.*
In 1779 Banks was examined before a committee of the House of
Commons, appointed to enquire into the state of the gaols, and the
question of transportation. He spoke strongly in favour of Botany
Bay as a field of operation, arguing that its soil and climate were such
as would soon enable a settlement to become self-supporting. The
committee did not express any opinion about Botany Bay or any other
* G. B. Barton, LL.B. {Official History of N.S.W., from the Records),


place, as the existing laws on the subject of transportation applied only
to the colonies and plantations in North America ; but it recommended
the establishment of a colony, or colonies, of young convicts injiewly-
discovered countries in some distant part of the globe, and suggested
an alteration of the law to meet the case (Journals of the House of
Commons, vol. xxxvii. p. 311). Leave was given to introduce a
bill to this effect, but it was not until Pitt’s administration in 1783
that a definite movement was made in the direction of establishing a
convict settlement in New South Wales.
At this time Sir Joseph Banks was the only living man of note
who had any personal knowledge of the country, and it was to his
untiring efforts, and his accurate and circumstantial journal of Cook’s
first voyage, that the nation was indebted for all it cared to know about
New South Wales, (Hawkesworth, Cook's First Voyage of Discovery,
vol. ii. p. 13.) “ Banks it was,” wrote Lord Broughton, speaking
from his personal knowledge of the man, “ who may be truly said to
have planted and founded the colony of Botany Bay,”
When Lord Sydney, in 1787, determined to establish a penal
settlement in some distant and newly-discovered country, he consulted
Sir Joseph Banks before the Cabinet, and on his recommendation
Botany Bay was fixed upon as “the site of the new intended settle-
ment.” For many years afterwards, and through many changes of
administration, his advice was sought on every matter of importance
connected with the colony. (Barton’s Official History of New South
.Wales.) He took the deepest interest in everything affecting the
progress of settlement, and was looked upon as the country’s patron
saint. Amongst his correspondence, many letters bearing evidence
upon this fact w r ere found. An extract of one from a ship captain,
William Wilson, in 1806, reads as follows :
“By my voyages I have learnt that both the islanders of Otaheite, and the
:olonists of New South Wales, justly look up to you as the patron and promoter
>f their prosperity.”
There can now be no doubt that the sole motive of the English
)ccupation of Australia was to relieve the gaols in Great Britain. In
: act the Government made no announcement of their intention to form
i colony for the good of the colonists and the future benefit of the
lation, but merely contented themselves with an intimation that they
proposed to transport a number of felons, in order to relieve the' gaols,
n the speech with which George 111. opened Parliament on the 23rd
ianuary, 1787—the year in which the expedition sailed—the only
eference to the subject was the following :
“ A plan has been formed, by my direction, for transporting a number of
:onvicts, in order to remove the inconvenience which arose from the crowded
state of the gaols in different parts of the kingdom ; and you will, I doubt not,
sake such further measures as may be necessary for this purpose. (Parliamentary
History, vol. xxvi. p. 211.)
Notwithstanding the recommendations of Matra, Sir George
Young, and others, and the urgent representations of Sir Joseph Banks,
the Government of England apparently gave no thought to the
desirability of annexing Australia, or as it was then called New South
Wales, save as a penal settlement.
On May 13, 1787, Captain Arthur Phillip, under the King’s
commission, set out to form a convict settlement at Botany Bay. His
Beet consisted of the Sirius warship, its tender the Supply , together
with six transports for convicts, and three ships for stores. Of the
convicts five hundred and fifty were men, and two hundred and twenty
were women. To guard these there were on board two hundred
soldiers. Captain Hunter was second in command, and Mr. Collins
went out as judge-advocate to preside in the military courts.
Captain Phillip, Governor of New South Wales, arrived in the
Supply (after a voyage of thirty-six weeks, in which but one marine
md twenty-four convicts were lost), and dropped anchor in Botany
Bay on January 25, 1788, just one year and two days after the King’s
jpeech to Parliament on the proposed settlement. Phillip found the
waters of the bay too shallow for his ships to enter properly, as they
bad to lie off near the heads, so without delay he sought a better
larbour. Thus was discovered “that most beautiful of all bays,” the
Port Jackson of Captain Cook.
The formal proclamation of the colony took place on the 7th
February, on the slope of Point Maskelyne, afterwards known as
Dawes Point, where the Governor, surrounded by his officers, the
Marines drawn up under arms, and the convicts stationed apart, called
apon Captain Collins, judge-advocate, to read aloud the Commission,
:he Act of Parliament, and letters patent, relating to the foundation of
ihe colony, and the British flag was unfurled to the fresh Australian
areeze. Thus began the history of a land destined to become England’s
—and perhaps Europe’s—main source of food supply, the greatest
leritage of the Anglo-Saxon race, and the pride and glory of the
British Empire.
Embarrassed by famine, discontented officers and men, and re-
ractory convicts, Governor Phillip had a very arduous task for the
vhole period of his administration. Indeed, so great were his trials
ip to the arrival of shipments of provisions in 1791, that his health
jave way, and he fairly broke down, but with a sternness that always
[ave duty first place, and made his authority respected, he continued
•n until Major Francis Grose, who had arrived in 1792, bearing a
ommission as Lieutenant-Governor, had become acquainted with the
ull and heavy requirements of the onerous position, and then, on the
,oth of December, 1793, the first and worthiest Governor of the
“Greater Britain” departed for England, where he retired to Bath on
a pension of £5OO a year, granted him by the Imperial Government.
His memory will always be held in respect, not only as that of the
first Governor, but as that of a man who, undtr the most trying cir-
cumstances, laboured conscientiously to do his duty. During his ad-
ministration the first town was built, the first church erected, and the
first land regulations drawn up. Phillip’s object was undoubtedly to
establish a foreign possession which, like a good child to a worthy
parent, would be helpful if necessary, and always a source of pride and
satisfaction. To this end he endeavoured to develop the agricultural
and pastoral resources of the country, and build at least a solid founda-
tion to his good purpose. The spirit in which he had settled down to
his work may be judged from the following assurance he gave Lord
Sydney while in the midst of his troubles :
“ Anxious to render a very essential service to my country by the establish
ment of a colony which, from its situation, must hereafter be a valuable acquisi-
tion to Great Britain, no perseverance will be wanting on my part, and which
consideration alone would make amends for the being surrounded by the most in-
famous of mankind. Time will remove all difficulties ; as to myself, lam satis-
fied to remain as long as my services are wanted. lam serving my country, and
serving the cause of humanity,” ( The Historical Records oj New South Wales.
Published by N.S.W. Government.)
his arrival, and tour betore his departure, Phillip
irn of the live stock made, for the purpose of as-
number of stock in the colony on the Ist May,
Drove interesting to compare the development of a
rt made bv Governor Phillip, his statistical returns
en alongside the returns of 1888 :
Horses. Cattle. Sheep. Pigs. Rabbits.
390,602 1,575,487 46,965,152 264,111 d g
315.000 1,333,873 10,623,985 243,461 | » *
170.000 440,000 7,254,000 179,000 Ig® §,
305,865 4,473,716 12,926,158 73,663 J- ® o-S
42,196 97,079 1,989,978 27,120 |~o- §
29,528 147,092 1,547,242 52,408 Ia 2 “
187,382 895,461 16,677,445 369,991 J ®
1,440,573 8,962,708 97,983,960 1,209,754 Millions in-
numerable.
7 7 . 29 74 5
(Barton’s Official History of flew South Wales).
r established by Governor Phillip speedily disap-
Maior Francis Grose, Commandant of the New
One year after his arrival, and four before his departure, Phillip
had a statistical return of the live stock made, for the purpose of as-
certaining the exact number of stock in the colony on the Ist May,
1788. As it may prove interesting to compare the development of a
century with the start made bv Governor Phillip, his statistical returns
of 1788 are here given alongside the returns of 1888 :
One year after his
Name of Colony.
New South Wales
Victoria
South Australia
Queensland ...
West Australia
Tasmania
New Zealand
Total
In the whole of Aus-
tralia
The good order established by Governor Phillip speedily disap-
peared as soon as Major Francis Grose, Commandant of the New
South Wales Corps, assumed the position of Lieutenant-Governor.
The source of Grose’s misgovernment appeared to be in his sympathy
with his brother officers. He superseded the civil magistrates, and ap-
pointed officers in their place; disregarded the express instructions of
the Imperial Government, not only in making extravagant grants of
land to the officers, but also in allowing them an excessive supply of
convict labour—thirteen servants each, instead of two, and permitted
them to pay for labour with spirits instead of money, in order that
they might make enormous profits on the sale. Spirits were sold to
them at the Government stores at first cost, and were retailed at any
price they pleased. It had always been Phillip’s policy to prevent the
convicts from obtaining spirits, knowing that otherwise he could not
hope to preserve discipline, still less to reform them. But no sooner had
he left the colony than the military and civil officers of the establishment
eagerly seized the opportunity for making money by this traffic, the result
being that the habits of drunken debauchery spread through the
settlement. The officers made it their business to import spirits and
wine, not only from England, but from India, the Brazils, and the
Cape of Good Hope. As soon as it became known abroad that a good
trade could be done in Sydney Cove with spirits, cargoes were shipped
from all parts of the world. (Andrew Garran, M.A., LL.D., His-
torical Atlas of Australasia.) Though this state of things was extremely
detrimental to the proper establishment of the settlement and the de-
velopment of a young country, and severely taxed the energies of the
Governors who succeeded Grose, it had the effect of stimulating
maritime trade between foreign countries and the colony.
Captain Patterson succeeded Grose in 1794 as Lieutenant-Governor
until the arrival of Governor Hunter in 1795, who endeavoured
to suppress the liquor traffic, and restore the good order which formerly
existed, but his easy administration and weak will—though a humane
and just man—rendered his efforts quite ineffectual, and he was re-
called in 1800. It was, however, under Hunter’s administration that
agriculture made very rapid strides, and Mr. John Macarthur, pay-
master of the New South Wales Corps, laid the foundation of the
sheep farming industry in Australia, with the small stock of three rams
and five ewes, which he purchased on his voyage out at the Cape of
Good Hope. King George also assisted him with some pure-bred
sheep, and thus, with a grant of 10,000 acres, he established the be-
ginning of what is now the most valuable industry in Australia—
the wool production and export. Live stock were at this time at


prices which some Australian pastoralists would not object to at the
present time. A cow brought £BO, a horse £9O, sheep £7 10s. each,
and pigs £5 each.
Captain Phillip Gidley King succeeded Hunter, and remained in
office until the 12th August, 1806. He gave great attention to the
advancement of agricultural and pastoral development, though, like his
successors, the officers of the New South Wales corps troubled him so
with their unscrupulous conduct in the traffic of rum, even going so far
as to introduce stills and manufacture spirits, which they sold at a
profit of 500 per cent., that he resigned his position in despair. It was
the demoralizing drink traffic, which yielded such tempting profits, that
proved the bane of the governors at this time ; indeed, to such an
extent was it carried on that the most responsible officers bfecame
engaged in it. When King assumed office, “ the chief constable was a
publican, and the head gaoler sold rum and brandy opposite the prison
gates.” It is especially worthy of note that during King’s governor-
ship an emancipated convict, George Howe, started the first newspaper
in Australia, the “Sydney Gazette.”
Captain William Bligh was the next governor, taking office on
13th August, 1806. He, however, proved a most ignoble failure ;so
much so that he was actually arrested by his own officers and driven
out of the country. He was a harsh, strong-willed, and impolitic man,
and will ever be remembered as the notorious Captain Bligh of the ship
Bounty, known to all English readers in the story of “ The Mutiny
of the Bounty.” By some freak of fortune in after years he became an
admiral.
During the period which followed Bligh’s enforced abdication,
Lieutenant-Color el G. Johnstone, Lieutenant-Colonel Furneaux, and
Colonel W. Patterson administerd to the office of Governor, but on
the 28th December, 1809, Major-General Lachlan Macquarie entered
on the duties of the office, and though a most egotistical man, proved
an energetic governor, with, what was greatly required at that time, a
strong vein of philanthropy running through his active but self-
conceited nature. He made serviceable roads, opened up good country,
settled the people on the lands, marked out towns in suitable places,
and took a warm interest in the progress of religion and education of
the young colonists. When he left for England in 1821 there were
250,000 sheep in the colony, prosperous settlements far inland, and a
bright and happy outlook before the country.
His successors, Sir Thomas Brisbane, 1821-25 ; Governor Darling.
1825-31 ; Governor Bourke, 1831-38—in whose term of office, by-the-
way, the grape-vine was first introduced by James Busby, and the first
large plantation, the Camden Park Vineyard, was planted by William
Macarthur—and Sir George Gipps, 1838-46, bring us up to Sir Charles
Fitzroy’s governorship of New South Wales, in whose administration,
in 1851. "Port Phillip, or the colony of Victoria, was granted its
independence under the governorship of Charles Joseph Latrobe, who
assumed this important office on 15th July, 1851.
What effect the early convict settlements have had upon Australia s
development and social progress it is difficult to estimate. It is
undoubted that until quite recently in certain English circles Australia
was referred to sneeringly as “ the convict settlement of New South
Wales;” and even now many letters are addressed to Melbourne, the
mighty capital of Victoria, and the eighth largest city of the British
Empire, as though it were in New South Wales. This ignorance of
Australian geography is lamentable and almost unpardonable, and the
stigma most unfair Transportation of convicts to New South Wales
ceased in 1841, and the great gold discoveries of a few years later
absorbed them all, except the few who, transported for political and
probably trivial offences, had settled on the lands, and proved men
whom even arrogant Old England might be proud to own. Perhaps it
has been unfortunate for Australia that there were not more of these
men ; but the places they might have filled have been taken by those
brave pioneers to whom Australia is deeply grateful for the glorious
position it occupies to-day. It is to these sturdy old adventurers—
almost all of whom were British-born—and to the few questionably-
guilty, unselfish, and stout-hearted “ ticket-of-leave ” men, whom we
have to thank for the marvellous enterprise shown in the country’s
development in these early days.
It is a fact well known to the officials and emigrants of that period
that those convicts who were vagabonds and bad at heart remained
wandering rogues all their lives, ending their useless existences on the
goldfields, in well-merited confinement in Her Majesty’s gaois, or in tin-
miserable sloughs to which, in their natural laziness and vagabondage
they had drifted. But those who owed their transportation to the
conspiracies of others, or to errors far from criminal, went the way of
honest men ; and numberless are the stories relating to their unfortunate
cases, some pure fabrications, the majority too true. Who has not
heard of the unhappy “ lag,” whose descendants are now wealthy and
respected Sydney residents, transported for having in a mad prank
knocked a sheep on the head, taunted by wild companions, who, like
himself, contained more wine than wisdom? What old colonist ;s
ignorant of the story of the well-known wealthy “Government” man
of Melbourne whose cold-blooded brother swore a cruelly false informa-
tion in order to secure the whole of an inheritance, of which otherwise
he would only have had one-half ? The falsely-accused one merely took
his brother’s horse in order to visit a distant neighbour, and his
brother eagerly seizing the opportunity took out a warrant for horse-
stealing. When he heard of this the horror-stricken brother fled, thus
lending an appearance of guilt to what was not only an innocent
proceeding, but fin ordinary art of brotherly freedom. He was.however,
transported for life, narrowly escaping being hanged.
Every settler who emigrated to [New South Wales or Van Diemen’s
I and at the beginning of the century lost the right to be tried by a jury
of his peers ; he lost the right (if he had previously possessed it), to
vote for a representative to express his views as to the laws he had to
live under and the taxes he had to pay. In short, his most notable
civil and political rights were forfeited, and he passed under the sway
of benevolent despotism, This was not perhaps unreasonable for the
early colonies intended as convict settlements, but it produced scandalous
hardships later on. Australia had been occupied for 50 years befoie
there was any pretence of a jury system, and then the act of 1823
provided only for a jury of seven military and naval officers for the
trial of criminal cases. It was not, however, until 1835 that the jury
system really appeared in courts of justice, and not until 1842 that
Australians were granted for the first time meagre rights of Parlia-
mentary representation.
In 1842 a bill was passed providing that in each colony there
should be a Council of 36 members, 12 nominated by the Governor, and
24 elected by the possessors of freehold to the value of £2OO, and
tenants dwelling in houses valued at £2O a year. But bftween
1840 and 1850, emigration to Australia had made it impossible to
apply the old convict argument in full force. The question might,
however, have simmered were it not for the asitation which arose for
the separation of Port Phillip from New South Wales. When this
matter came before lord John Bussell’s Cabinet, he determined in a
statesmanlike manner to deal at the same time with the whole question
of the loss of rights by British colonists. Accordingly, the bill intro-
duced by him in 1849 provided, firstly, for the erection of Port Phillip
into a separate colony ; secondly, for the appointment in each colony of
a Legislative Council like that of New South Wales; thirdly, that as
soon as such Council was constituted it should have power to frame for
its own colony whatever form of government it pleased the colonists to
adopt; and, fourthly, machinery was provided for a federal council and
a uniform tariff. The bill was attacked, and it was suggested that the
Imperial Legislature should frame for each colony a constitution of the
English type ; but eventually the measure passed, only stripped of its
references to a uniform tariff and federation. The signally liberal
features # of the measure was the power given for each colony to frame a
constitution for itself. It is to be regretted, however, that until
recently the Australian colonies have turned a deaf ear to the suggestion
so wisely made years ago by the legislators of the mother country in the
direction of federation.
Australia has a grand destiny before it, but the glorious fulfilment
can only be conceived when its colonies—sturdy offshoots of British
enterprise—federate on the friendly ground of a general assimilation, a
uniform tariff, and united defence.
During the first fifty years following the first settlement at Sydney
Cove little attention was given to developing those bountiful resources
in which Australia is now found to teem. Inland exploration
proceeded slowly, and in almost every instance the reports brought
back by the venturesome travellers as to the appearance of the country
were adverse to settlement. This disparagement of the land arose from
various causes, chief among which was that these pioneers were looking
for grazing land. They knew little about the peculiarities of the
Australian climate, and thus, conducting their explorations during the
hot summer months, they concluded from the country’s parched appear-
ance that it was unfit for settlement.
The prevailing idea of settlement in those days meant sheep and
cattle raising. Afterwards, when the liability to drought, and the
capricious Australian season were understood, fine pastoral ' land was
found in large and convenient areas, and the “ squatter,” as the holder
of a license to occupy Crown lands for pastoral purposes was termed,
pushed on to the far interior. The area licensed to each individual
application often covered 300 square miles, and was termed “a run,”
the residence on it being styled a “ station.”
Commerce developed very gradually, and, until the discovery of
gold, inland towns and villages, all invariably called “ townships,” were
small and few. Within the last thirty years, however, a surprising
development has taken place, and the wool-grower or cattle raiser has
retreated still further to the interior, his former “runs” being occupied
by “selectors,” as farmers are termed. The colony of Victoria,
especially, shows marvellous enterprise in this direction, irrigation
trusts and settlements being in course of formation, in which it is
proposed to carry on viticultural, horticultural, and dairying pursuits,
on the intense culture principle In fact, within the last four years
inconceivable strides have been made in these industries. Dairy
factories and creameries have been erected ; fruit canning and jam
factories are being established, and in great tracts of country, hitherto
considered almost valueless, irrigation channels convey the priceless
fluid to districts which are now beginning to teem with delicious fruits
md tropical vegetation.
The whole of Australia was originally reckoned as a single Crown
colony, the Governor residing at Sydney, but under the direct control of
the British Ministry. At present the mainland is divided into five
colonies, each presided over by a Governor appointed by Her Majesty
the Queen. The island of Tasmania, divided from Victoria by Bass
Straits, now also enjoys the same privilege.
The area of the Australian mainland is something over three million
square raih«, and measures 2,500 miles from west to east, and 1,950 miles




from north to south. The northern portion lies within the tropic of
Capricorn, but the greater part is only sub-tropical. Long mountain
chains run chiefly from north to south, but their elevation is not very great
as compared with old world and American ranges. The loftiest mountain
is less than 10,000 feet high, and few exceed 6,000 feet, which elevation,
however, in Victoria, is an almost perpetual snow region, though
glaciers are unknown. Lower ranges, connected with the main ranges,
spread over the country from east to west for hundreds of miles, but in
the interior vast arid plains also exist, computed to be below the level
of the sea.
The country is now pretty thoroughly explored, the latest
discoveries proving the existence of immense fertile plains in the
northern part of West Australia, which until within the last decade
was supposed to be quite barren. Enormous forests exist all over the.
country, consisting chiefly of varieties of the eucalyptus tree, many of
which form valuable timber, and out of the leaves of which the world-
wide celebrated and highly invaluable eucalyptus oil is extracted in
large quantities. Good grass also grows on many of the plains, and in
other districts it has been found that sheep thrive well upon a plant,
which exists in soil too acrid for herbage called “ salt bush ”
(mesembryanthemum).
Salt and fresh water lakes cover extensive areas in a line, which
leads geologists to surmise that at one period the western half of
Australia was divided by a continuous series of lakes from the eastern
half. Some of these lakes are formed in the craters of extinct volcanoes.
Large rivers are but few, the longest being the Murray, which rising in
the Victorian Alps, forms the boundary line for a considerable length
between that colony and New South Wales, then, after a tortuous
course of 1,300 miles, it finds an outlet to the sea in South Australia.
The river Darling, rising near the Queensland border, flows into the
Murray after a course of 1,160 miles. Besides these, the Murrumbidgee
and the Lachlan Rivers are navigable inland for some distance. There
are also some fairly-sized rivers in Northern and Western Australia, in
countries wdiich are scarcely yet inhabited; and report says that there is
more than one large river in Central Australia, running towards the
west, but of these more reliable information is wanting.
The natural water supply of Australia possesses somewhat peculiar
features. For instance, deep and rapid rivers will run for eight
months, sometimes the entire year, through hundreds of miles of
country, and then terminate in a lake which has no outlet. Again, on
some plains brackish water can be obtained at any spot at a depth of
from 30 to 80 feet; sinking further, to a depth of from 200 to 300 feet,
fresh water will rise a few feet in the shaft, yet no rain will have
fallen on the watershed area of some millions of acres for months,
and even years. In these districts also a tree shrub is met with
which, if uprooted, and the root cut and placed in a vessel, clear, sweet
water will presently be distilled from it. Again, along the coast, fresh
water can generally be obtained by sinking in the sand just above high-
water mark. Artesian wells have been successful in tapping inex-
haustible supplies of fresh water in the plains of all the colonies, com-
pletely revolutionising the state of things on the drought-stricken runs
of the “ back ” country of New South Wales, Queensland, and Vic-
toria. Bores have been put down in some instances thousands of feet,
and in almost every instance great reservoirs, throwing millions of
gallons daily high into the air, have been struck. It is impossible to
estimate the value of this “ God’s best blessing ” to these parched
plains of the “ back-blocks.” In mining for gold in Victoria, the old
river-beds of present streams have been discovered beneath lava flows
at a depth lOO to 300 feet below the present surface.
The rainfall of Australia approximates as follows: —In the hill
districts, 50 inches per annum; undulating woodland districts, 30 to
Victoria
Tasmania
The settlement of Port Jackson in 1788, and the early colonization
of New South Wales, has already been dealt with in the preceding
article upon Australian Discovery. The first known Europeans who
trod what is now Victorian soil were Mr. Clarke, the supercargo, and
some of the crew of the Sydney Cove, wrecked early in 1797, who
reported, when they reached Port Jackson, that they were driven ashore
south of Cape Howe. In December of the same year Dr. George Bass,
a surgeon in the Royal Navy, and also a skilful navigator, and Matthew
Flinders, a midshipman, started in a whale-boat, manned by six seamen,
and, passing Cape Howe, coasted along that part of Victoria now called
Gippsland, and, rounding Wilson’s Promontory—the southernmost point
on the Australian Continent—entered Western Port on the 4th of
June, 1798, He, however, returned to Sydney without discovering
Port Phillip Bay. Up to this time the southern portion of Australia
was supposed to have been connected with Van Diemen s Land, and the
wide passage now known as Bass Straits to be only a deep bight. Dr.
Bass’ discovery was of great value. His fate was an unhappy one.
After having completed his survey of the Strait he returned to England
from Sydney, but came out again with Captain Bishop in the brig
Venus, intending to trade between Sydney and Spanish America.
Name of Colony.
Melbourne
Sydney ...
New South Wales
South Australia
Queensland
Adelaide.
Brisbane.
Hobart .
New Zealand
Wellington*
Perth
Western Australia
THE HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT OF VICTORIA.
50 ; plains adjoining, 20 inches. Over the far interior plains from 5
to 15 inches is the average, though rain has been known to have been
entirely absent two or three years consecutively. However, artesian
wells are rendering the occupants of these parts quite independent of
the rainfall, as the water supplies so procured seem not only inex-
haustible, but the volume which forces its way from the earth is run
into channels, and conducted through gardens, cornfields, and to dis-
tant parts of the estates, as drink for the stock and irrigation for
the soil.
The mineral wealth of Australia is enormous, and is distributed
all over the country, with the exception of coal, which, though hitherto
only found in the north-east of Hew South Wales, is now being dis-
covered in vast and payable quantities in the province of Gippsland,
Victoria. In Tasmania is the biggest tin mine in the world ; in New
South Wales the biggest silver mine in the world; in Queensland the
biggest gold mine in the world; in South Australia one of the biggest
copper mines; in New South Wales (Newcastle), and probably in
Gippsland, Victoria, the most extensive coal measures anywhere are to be
found. But though hundreds of millions of pounds sterling worth of
minerals have been raised in Australia, it is certain that thousands of
millions remain to be won.
The bulk of the population are of English extraction, the Aus-
tralian-born, however, increasing in greater proportion than the
immigrants at present. The aboriginal population, never very great, is
rapidly disappearing, being represented by a few tribes residing on
specially reserved lands in New South Wales and Victoria, though in
Queensland and West Australia they roam at will over the vast areas
of unoccupied land. Their estimated number of 80,000 is probably
somewhat overstated, though it is difficult to tell, as so much of Aus-
tralia’s interior is yet undiscovered.
The population of Australia in 1891 was 3,036,570, and with
Tasmania and New Zealand added 3,809,895, being 1*239 persons to
each square mile.
The following are the names and populations of the capital cities
of the Australian colonies, including Tasmania and New Zealand :
Capital City.
Population in IS9I.
490,896
387,434
133,252
93,657
33,450
33,224
8,447
By the above it is seen that Melbourne, the capital of that colony
named after Her Most Gracious Majesty, V ictoria —the smallest, though
by far the richest and most prosperous of all the colonies—has a
population of over 100,000 more than Sydney. From this great
southern city, it may safely be said, Australia is directed. The head
offices, and chief shareholders of most of the great enterprises which are
developing Australia and making its illimitable resources known to the
world, are in Melbourne. Its position—being the centre city of the
five capitals of Australia—enables it to command this influence.
As Great Britain is the smallest, though richest and most important
section of the British Empire, so is Victoria, named after the Empire’s
good Queen, the smallest, richest, and most powerful of its cqlonies.
* In 1891 three New Zealand towns had larger populations than Wellington, viz., Auckland,
61,298 ; Christchurch, 47,846 ; and Dunedin, 45,866. In all these eases the suburbs arc included.
Bishop went mad, and Bass took command of the vessel, and sailfd to
Valparaiso to open a trade. The Spaniards consented, and were at first
amicable; but Bass and his sailors were taken prisoners their first day
on shore. Dr. Bass was sent to work in the quicksilver mines, and was
never heard of again.
Lieutenant-Commander James Grant, of H.M.S. Lady Nelson, was
the first known white man who sighted the south-western district of
Victoria. In 1800 this gallant sailor navigated the southern shores of
Australia in his little vessel of only 60 tons, and emulated Captain Cook
as a noraenclator. He named Capes Northumberland, Bridgewater,
Nelson, Sir W. Grant, and Otway, and Mounts Schank and Garnbier,
Lawrence Road, and Julia Percy Island. Portland was called after the
Duke, then one of the Secretaries of State. Lieutenant Grant was the
first European after Bass to sail through the Straits. In 1801 Grant,
in the Lady Nelson , surveyed the Victorian coast from Wilson’s
Promontory to Western Port. In the course of this voyage he landed
on Phillip Island, in Western Port Bay, and cultivated a garden patch
with a coal shovel, the only implement available! Lieutenant Grant
returned to England, and was succeeded in command of the Lady Nelson
by Lieutenant John Murray, who, on the sth of January, 1802, first


discovered Port Phillip Bay. The Heads were passed, the shores
explored, the united colours of Great Britain and Ireland were hoisted
on land and ship, and the port was taken possession of in the name of
His Sacred Majesty, King George 111. In his report Lieutenant
Murray states that the country reminded him of Greenwich, The hill
on the eastern side of the Bay, known to all Victorians as Arthur’s
Seat, was so named by the Scotch naval officer after the eminence above
Edinburgh. The next navigator in Victorian waters was Matthew
Flinders, whose talent and services during the Bass expedition had been
fully recognised by the English Government, In July, 1801, Flinders
sailed from Spithead, in command of the sloop of war Investigator, with
instructions to make a complete survey of the Australian coast. The
Arctic explorer, Sir John Franklin, was a midshipman on board this
vessel. On the 26th of April, 1802, Captain Flinders entered Port
Phillip, and ascended both Arthur’s seat on the eastern shore, and the
You Yangs mountain on the western. From the latter he viewed the
fine plains of the interior, and the hills around the present city of
Ballarat. Fifty years later, from the same height, one might see
caravans of coaches, drays, and pedestrians by the thousand, bound to
and from the fields of gold. Flinders afterwards sailed northwards,
from Sydney through Torres Straits, and circumnavigated the continent
for the first time, naming it Australia, and claiming possession of it for
Great Britain. His after fate was an unhappy one. The first vessel
in which he sailed from Sydney, on his return to England, was wrecked
on the Barrier Reef. The record of that disaster, and of Flinders’
voyage of 700 miles in an open boat, is one of the most startling of the
stories of the sea. Again starting from Sydney, the unlucky navigator
was taken prisoner by the French, at the Mauritius, and detained for
more than six years. When he was released he passed four years at
home, writing the account of his discoveries, and died in 1814, at the
early age of 40. Posterity recognises Matthew Flinders to have been
“ the most generous, most learned, and yet most modest of Australian
explorers,” In the trio—Darapier, Cook, Flinders—British pluck and
enterprise were worthily represented. They deserve honour from all
Englishmen and ail Australians.
The reports of Murray and Flinders induced Governor King to
despatch Mr. Charles Grimes, Surveyor-General of New South Wales,
to make a thorough examination of the newly-discovered Bay. Mr.
Grimes left Sydney in November, 1802, in the colonial schooner, the
Cumberland, of 29 tons, with orders to “ walk round ” Port Phillip.
Mr. James Flemming and Mr. James Meehan were assistant surveyors,
and the little craft was under the command of Lieutenant Charles
Robbins, of H.M.S. Buffalo, who carried despatches to “warn off” the
French commodore, Baudin, who was known to be on the coast with
the vessels Geographe and Naturalists under his command, and to be
meditating the annexation of the south coast of Australia for the French
Government. The Cumberland left Sydney on the 23rd of November,
and on the Bth of December fell in with Commodore Baudin, at Sea
Elephant Bay, on the east coast of King’s Island, and the despatches
were then and there delivered. After exploring King’s Island the
Cumberland proceeded on her voyage, entering Port Phillip Heads on
the 20th of January, 1803. Recently “ The Journal of the Exploration
of Charles Grimes, kept by James Flemming,” has been found by Mr.
J. J. Shillinglaw in the archives of the Colonial Secretary’s Office at
Sydney, and this shows that the greater portion of the coast line of
Port Phillip, to some distance inland, was explored by Mr. Grimes and
his party. The first ascent of the Yarra was made on the 2nd of
February, 1803. On one occasion the paity breakfasted on what was
afterwards known as Batman’s Hill (which has been swept away for the
Melbourne Spencer Street Railway Station), and consequently have the
honour of being the first white men who trod the site of the Victorian
capital. On the 7th of February Mr. Grimes went up the river as far
as Dight’s Falls (Studley Park). In its first mention it is called by
Mr. Grimes the Great River. Mr. Flemming concludes his report by
saying—“ The most eligible place for a settlement that I have seen is
on the Freshwater River (the Yarra). In several places there are
small tracts of good land, but they are without wood and water. The
country in general is excellent pasture and thin of timber, which is
mostly low and crooked.”
During the same year Lieutenant-Colonel Collins, who was judge
advocate in Captain Phillip’s expedition, which colonized New South
Wales, was sent out from England with a small armed force and a party
of convicts in order to form a settlement on the shores cf Port Phillip,
similar to that at Sydney Cove. This expedition, consisting in all of
402 souls, comprised 15 Government officials, 9 officers of marines, 2
drummers and 39 privates, 5 soldiers’ wives and a chi.d, 307 convicts
with 12 of their wives and a child, carried in H.M. ship Calcutta, 50
guns, 1,200 tons, and the tender Ocean, 481 tons, sailed from Spithead
the 24th of April, 1803. On the voyage out the Calcutta called at
Teneriffe, Rio Janeiro, and Simon’s Bay, at which places stock and seed
were purchased ior the new settlement. Ttie Calcutta made King’s
Island on the Bth of October, “the land about Port Phillip ’ on the
9th, and entered the harbour the same day. The Ocean, which had
been in company more or less all through the voyage, arrived on the
7th, two days previous A landing was made in a part of the southern
portion of the Bay, about eight miles from the Heads, near the present
site of the pijpulai watering place, Sorrento. Several explorations
were made into the country, resulting generally in a belief of the
unsuitability of the locality for a settlement. The first interviews with
the natives were friendly, but on one occasion there was a disposition
to attack the settlers, when the chief being Warned was shot dead.
Divine service was held on the 23rd of October, “ to return thanks for
the prosperous voyage and safe arrival in the harbour.” Finding no
water (all that could be obtained was from casks sunk in the sand)
Collins abandoned such an apparently sterile and inhospitable spot on
the 27th of January, 1804, after a short sojourn of a little over three
months, tempted too, no doubt, by the glowing accounts he had heard
of the beauty and fertility of the opposite shores of Tasmania, to which
place he removed.
Governor King, in his despatch to Colonel Collins, dated Port
Jackson, 26th November, 1803, writes—“lt appears as well by Mr.
Grimes’ and Mr. Robbins’ survey, as well as by your own report, that
Port Phillip is totally unfit in every point of view.” The general orders
issued by Colonel Collins during his stay at Sullivan’s Bay (which were
printed on the spot on a small press set up under a gum tree) have been
made public. In the order of 31st December he regrets that circum-
stances compel him to employ the Sunday in labour (in loading the
Ocean for their departure), but defends it on the ground that “the
sooner we are able to leave this unpromising and unproductive country
the sooner we shall be able to reap the advantages and enjoy the
comforts of a more fertile spot.” In a letter to Lord Hobart, Collins
concludes by saying—“ When all the disadvantages attending this Bay
(Port Phillip) are publicly known, it cannot be supposed that commercial
people will be very desirous of visiting Port Phillip.”
Colonel Collins’ attempt at settlement in Victoria resulted in the
country being thoroughly despised by the Sydney authorities. But
during his stay the first sermon was preached, the first marriage took
place, the first white child was born, the first death occurred. Also, it
is recorded that some officers of the Calcutta found in the sandy bed of
a stream, near Port Phillip, grains of a sparkling substance which some
thought to be gold, but the majority declared to be mica. They probably
had fortune within their grasp, and knew it not. One of the convicts
under Colonel Collins’ rule, William Buckley, succeeded in escaping,
and, when the party sailed away, was reputed to have died in the bush.
For twenty years Buckley, living amongst the blacks, was the only
white man in Victoria. No attempt was made to explore it, either
from the sea or the land ; Colonel Collips had damned it for ever. The
historian of the expedition, Lieutenant Tuckey, wrote of Port Phillip—
“ The kangaroo seems to reign undisturbed lord of the soil, a dominion
which he is likely to retain for ages.” Victorians of the present
generation thank him for his unpromising report, otherwise it might
have been a convict colony. But during this twenty years a fringe of
territory around Sydney had prospered. Flocks and heilds had increased
and multiplied. Fresh pastures were eagerly sought for.
The early pioneers, who settled on the fertile country between the
sea coast and the Blue Mountains, had an idea that there was either a
great navigable river or an inland sea on the other side of the then
impenetrable boundary. In 1817, Messrs. Wentworth and Blaxland
scaled the Blue Mountains to the head-waters of the Macquarie. John
Evans followed these as far as the present productive Bathurst plains.
About the same time, the explorer Oxley made journeys along the Mac-
quarie and Lachlan, proving without doubt the existence of a watershed
to the south-west, and the probability of a mighty river. But the first
white men who saw the Murray, and crossed Victoria, were neither
scientific explorers nor Government officials, but two stockmen in search
of new fields.
Hamilton Hume and W. 0. Hovell, in 1824, crossed the Australian
Alps from New South Wales, and discovered the Upper Murray, which
was named the Hume, in honor of the father of one of the explorers,
who was then a Government official in Sydney. Then they found the
Ovens and the Goulburn, which they named the Hovell. Crossing
these, and over the Dividing Ranges, after a sixteen weeks’ journey of
more than 400 miles, on the 16th of December, 1824, they came ta
Corio Bay, near the site of the present town of Geelong, and then went
back again without making any attempt at settlement. Hamilton
Hume was afterwards second in command to Captain Charles Sturt, one
of the bravest and most intrepid explorers the world has ever seen. Mr.
Hume died in 1873, at Yass. Hovell was two years afterwards
attached to an expedition despatched from Sydney in order to forestall
a supposed design of the French to occupy some portion of the southern
coast. This consisted of detachments of the 3rd and 30th Regiments,
under the command of Captain S. Wright and Lieutenant 8.1. Burchall,
and was despatched in H.M. ship Fly and the brig Dragon to the shores
of Western Port Bay, at a place called Old Settlement Point, facing
French Island. The place was occupied for about a year, and then
abandoned at the instance of Governor Darling, on the ground that the
place was not fit for colonization, though the reports of Hovell and the
military officers hardly afford the reasons for such a decision. The ruins
of the dwellings at Western Port are yet to be seen.
After this the coast of our colony was visited by whalers and sealers
from Tasmania, and ten years later the first permanent settlement in
Victoria was formed at Portland Bay, 266 miles westward of Port
Phillip, by the Messrs. Henty. The late Mr. Edward Henty, who died
in 1878, was the real founder and father of the colony, of which Port-
land was the cradle. Edward was the son of Mr. Thomas Henty, banker
and landowner in Sussex, who, with his sons, emigrated to Launceston,
Tasmania, in 1831. Edward Henty, being anxious to learn something
about the capabilities of Australia for settlement, sailed for Spencer’s
Gulf, and stayed there two months examining the country. He secured
a passage back to Launceston in the Thistle. Bad weather drove the


Thistle to take refuge in Portland Bay. Edward Henty was struck
with the natural capacities of the country. In Tasmania no good land
could be obtained, while here it was be had for the taking. At this
time there was no white man in Southern Australia, save Buckley,
nearer than King George’s Sound on the west, and Twofold Bay on the
east. Edward Henty again visited Portland Bay in 1833, and his
father some months after fitted him out with farm implements, fruit
trees, and vegetable seMs.
On the 19th of November, Edward Henty placed his foot on
Victorian soil, being the first white man who landed here with the
intention of stopping. The first building erected in Victoria was Rich-
mond House, where the first Victorian native citizen, Richmond Henty,
was born. Edward Henty made the first plough, turned the first
furrow, planted the first vine, shod the first horse, and sheared the first
sheep in Victoria. He and his brother Stephen were largely successful
in whaling pursuits, as well as in the breeding of flocks and herds, an
occupation begun to be known in Australia as “squatting.” Mr.
Francis Henty, who was a boy when he landed at Portland with his
brother, is still living in Melbourne. The name of Henty has from the
birth of the colony been foremost in the city as well as in the country.
When Sir Thomas (then Major) Mitchell, in 1836, made his celebrated
journey overland, traversing a considerable portion of the as yet un-
known territory which he named Australia Felix, he was astonished,
when he arrived at the sea at Portland Bay, to find ships in the water
and houses on the land. He thought it was a nest of pirates, and the
Hentys thought the Major’s party was a gang of bushrangers. They
were equally happy at being undeceived.
In the early part of 1835 a syndicate was formed in Tasmania,
then known as Van Diemen’s Land, to colonize Port Phillip. John
Batman, a native of Parramatta, New South Wales, was at the head
of this. He sailed from Georgetown on the 12th of May, in the small
schooner Rebecca. On the 29th he entered Port Phillip Heads, and,
landing on the west side of the Bay, ascended Station Peak (the You
Yangs), following in the track of Matthew Flinders, a copy of whose
chart was in Batman’s possession. He surveyed the beautiful downs,
“ called Iramoo by the natives,” which Hume and Hovell had passed
over. Then Batman ascended the Freshwater and Saltwater rivers,
described by Surveyor-General Grimes. The former he called the Yarra
Yarra, presumed to be the native term for “ever-flowing.” He had
several interviews with the natives, and entered into a simple arrange-
ment with eight of the principal chiefs for the transfer “to him and to
his heirs for ever ” of some 800,000 acres of land (which would now
include Geelong and Melbourne, and all its suburbs) in consideration
of receiving a certain quantity of apparel, and other miscellaneous
wares, particularised as “20 pairs of blankets, 30 tomahawks, 100
knives, 60 pairs of scissors, 30 looking-glasses, 200 handkerchiefs, 100
lbs. of flour, and 6 shirts,” a “ deal ” worthy of the Dutch captain who
bought the island of Manhattan, the site of New York, from the
Indians; or of the New Caledonian speculators of the present day in
the New Hebrides This “ bargain” was, however, ignored and nulli-
fied by the Government; as was a similar one dealing with 100,000
acres of land beyond Geelong. Ultimately the Governor of New South
Wales allowed the Batman Association £7,000 in the remission of the
purchase of land at Port Phillip as compensation in respect of their
claims, “ recognising the services which the company had rendered, by
assisting in the colonization of the new country.”
Batman was followed in the. same year by Mr. John Pascoe Fawk-
ner, who despatched the schooner Enterprise fr om Georgetown on the
27th July, 1.835, which sailed up the Yarra, and on the 28th or 30th
August was moored by its* captain, John Lancey, to a tree standing on
the present site of the Australian Wharf. Two horses, two pigs, three
dogs, and a cat were landed with the provisions—the first imports into
the new settlement which Mr. Fawkner may fairly claim to have
founded. Mr. Fawkner, when he landed on the banks of the Yarra on
the second voyage of the Enterprise , formed a cultivation paddock of
80 acres on the south side of the river “He turned the first sod, built
the first house, opened the first church, and started the first newspaper
in the settlement,” and was, in fact, the father of Melbourne To Bat-
man, however, may be credited the fame of being the first colonizer of
the shores of Port Phillip Bay. Mr. Fawkner died on the 4th of Sep-
tember, 1869. Mr. Batman died on the 6th of May, 1839, at his
residence on the slope of Batman’s Hill, and was buried in the Old
Cemetery on Flagstaff Hill. In the early part of 1882, an obelisk
of dressed bluestone, raised by public subscription, was placed over his
grave. Mr. Batman’s journal, and also the deed made with the natives,
are now in the Melbourne Public Library.
Batman and Fawkner were soon followed by other pioneers from
Van Diemen’s Land. The “ Wild White Man” Buckley, who had been
32 years among the blacks, became interpreter to one party of settlers.
On the 10th of November, 1835, 50 pure Hereford cows and 500 sheep
were landed. Stock was driven overland from New South Wales. The
*• downs of Iramoo ” were soon covered with the flocks and herds of the
white settlers. Officialdoom in Sydney suddenly awoke to the fact that
there was a southern part of Australia to govern and tax. The church,
in the person of the Rev. Mr. Orton, a Wesleyan minister, had previously
come to the fore. The first sermon was preached by him in April, 1836,
under the shade of the Casuarina oaks on Batman’s Hill. The State
asserted itself five months later.
On the 29th of September, 1836, Captain William Lonsdale, of the
4th Regiment, arrived at Port Phillip, in H.M.S. Rattlesnake, Captain
Hobson, after whom Hobson’s Bay is named, and assumed the position
of resident magistrate. He selected the present site of Melbourne for
that of the future city, his selection being endorsed by Sir Richard
Jlourke, Governor of New South Wales, in his visit some six months
after, in April, 1837. Captain Hunter, military secretary; G. K.
Holden, private secretary; Captain P. P. King; and the late Mr.
Robert lloddle, surveyor, accompanied Governor Bourke. Mr. Hoddle
laid out the town of Melbourne, and the Governor gave it its name,
after the then Prime Minister of Great Britain, and also named the
principal streets. Prior to this time the settlement was variously known
as Bearbrass, Bearpurt, Batmania, Doutigalla, Yarrow Yarrow, and
Glenelg.
A few months later James Baker, the Quaker missionary, thus
describes the settlement: —“ The town of Melbourne, though scarcely
more than fifteen months old, consists of about 100 houses, amongst
which are stores, inns, a gaol, a barrack, and a school-house. Some of
the dwelling-houses are tolerable structures of brick. A few of the
inhabitants are living in tents or in hovels, resembling thatched roofs, till
they can provide themselves with better accommodation. There is much
bustle and traffic in the place, and gangs of prisoners are employed in
levelling the streets. The town allotments (of half an acre each) were
put up here a short time since at £5 each, the surveyor thinking £7
too much to ask for them ; but the fineness of the country has excited
such a mania for settling here that they sold for from £25 to £lOO
each.” The Bank of Australasia was started in 1838. Fawkner’s first
newspaper, the Advertiser , made its appearance the same year. Inland,
pastoral man drove his flocks over the plains to the north and west.
Far beyond Corio Bay most fertile land was discovered by the pioneers
from Tasmania. The magnificent country around Lake Colac was taken
up and afterwards purchased from the Crown by Mr. William Robertson,
ef Hobart, one of Batman’s syndicate. The Colac pure-bred herds have
since been renowned, even in Great Britain. The city of Geelong, with
its good harbour in Corio Bay, sprang into existence through the fertility
of the western pastures. For a long time this was a formidable rival
to Melbourne. The yearly exports of wool and tallow and hides from
the province of Port Phillip went on increasing, immigration from
Great Britain swelled the population, thousands of acres were under
crop, Melbourne was made a city, and in 1850, the year previous to the
gold discovery, Port Phillip, not fifteen years old, had a revenue of
£230,000 ; its exports amounted to £760,000, and its population was
over 76,000. Such figures show that the colony, even at that early
day, had ample sources of prosperity, quite irrespective of the golden
wealth which shortly was to bring it so prominently before the civilised
world, making Melbourne by name the best known of any city in the
colonies of England.
The year 1851 was notable in Victorian history. In February the
great “ bush ” fires occurred. For hundreds of miles the whole country
was wrapped in flames, the most fertile districts were utterly wasted,
flocks and herds were abandoned by their keepers, the whole population
fled for their lives, destitution and ruin spread over the whole colony.
The ashes from the forests on fire at Macedon, 46 miles away, fell
into the streets of Melbourne. The annals of the colony contain no
more disastrous day than “ Black Thursday.” On the 16th of July
following, Mr, Charles Joseph Latrobe, who had been “Superintendent”
of the district of Port Phillip since 1839, was sworn in as Lieutenant-
Governor of the new “Colony of Victoria.” “Responsible Govern-
ment ” was not, however, introduced until 1855. The present
Constitution is moulded on those of the United Kingdom and the
American States. The two Houses of Legislature make laws subject to
the assent of the Crown, as represented generally by the Governor of
the colony, “ advised ”by Ministers having seats in Parliament. Both
Houses are elective, members of the Legislative Council, or Upper
House, being returned by voters possessing property qualifications.
For the Legislative Assembly, or Lower House, an elector only needs
residential qualification, practically manhood suffrage. In 1851, how-
ever, the Legislative Council, established by the act of separation from
New South Wales, consisted of thirty members, ten Government
nominees, the rest elected by the people. The early meetings of the
Council were stormy, and Governor Latrobe was perhaps the best
abused administrator the colonies have known. But shortly occurred
an event which drove all ideas of politics from the minds of Victorian
colonists—the discovery of payable gold diggings “uplifted Victoria in
a night, as it were, to the position of a nation and a power in the
world,” and advanced her destinies hunched* of years at one bound.
As early as January, 1849, a shepherd in the employ of Mr. J. Wood
Beilby, who had a station on the South Australian border, discovered
gold in a creek near the Pyrenees, a mountain range in the west of the
colony so named by Major Mitchell, who was a Peninsular veteran.
This shepherd sold his treasure to Mr. Charles Brentani, a jeweller in
Melbourne, but carefully concealed the locality of the trove, until fall-
ing sick, and being nursed by his master, in gratitude he imparted to
him the secret that he had discovered, worked, and sold gold. Mr.
Beilby communicated this to Governor Latrobe, who, following the tactics
of the Sydney authorities, would have hushed up the fact. But there
were other than ignorant shepherds to deal with. At the time when
people from all parts of the world hastened to the Californian gold-
fields, Australia suffered in losing hundreds of her people, who flocked
thither. This in the end, however, proved a blessing, for when the
gold-seekers returned they were struck with the similarity between the
rock and soil of their adopted land and that they had just left.
They sought for gold and found it. A man named Esmond discovered
it in quartz rock at Olunes Then it was found at Buninyong and at


The General Post Office, Melbourne, at the corner of Bourke and Elizabeth Streets, is a colossal edifice , and the headquarters of the
post and telegraph systems of Victoria.
The Law Courts form a grand quadrangular pile fronting William, Lonsdale, and Little Bourke Streets. They took four years to
complete, and cost £BOO,OOO.
The Custom House is a solid, substantial building of Grecian-lonic architecture, fronting the River Yarra Wharf in Flinders St.
Collins Street has become the Regent Street of the antipodes. Shabbily dressed people are nowhere seen in Australia, and certainly
not in Collins Street. One extremity of the street is in the exclusive possession of the medical faculty.
The Railway Pier at Port Melbourne (formerly called Sandridge) is a great accommodation to the extensive shipping trade.
The Fitzroy Gardens at East Melbourne are beautifully laid out and kept in splendid order. A rustic work therein is depicted below,
as well as a small corner of the Zoological Gardens in the Royal Park, where a fine collection of foreign and Australian mammals and
birds are kept. Admission sixpence, except on Sundays, when the public have free access.


Ballarat. When the reports reached Melbourne, members of all classes
were seized with the gold mania, and there was “ a rush ” to the gold-
fields. Desks, offices, shops, ships were deserted. Closely following
the Ballarat finds came those of Mount Alexander and Bendigo, which
fanned the flames of excitement to a frenzy. The people were “ drunk
with the hope of gold.” From every quarter of the globe ships sailed
into the once peaceful harbour. Victoria was crowded with searchers
for fortune ; in one year nearly 80,000 immigrants being added to the
population of the colony. From that time it has advanced with giant
strides. Well may Victoria and its capital be termed marvellous !
Well may old men who remember Collins Street as a broken forest,
shake their heads when they gaze upon the fashionable crowd on the
“ Block,” and feel like Tulliver, that “ the world is too much for them.”
Who would recognise in the Melbourne of 1893 the “ bush town” of
forty-five years ago ? Then the streets were full of gum-tree stumps
and deep ruts. The principal thoroughfare, Elizabeth Street, w 7 as for
months in the year a flooded quagmire, in which on one occasion a
waggon and team of horses were absolutely swallowed up, and bullock
drays were daily bogged. Iron buildings and bark “ humpies ” were
seen on every hand, and what is now the important municipality of
South Melbourne was a sea of tents known as Canvas Town. The old
pioneers who have not “made their pile” tell strange tales of the
doings in those early days when Gold was King, and each man did that
which was right in his own eyes. Yet the records of crime are very
•slight. The rude, rough, hard life on the gold-fields, whilst it produced
a few bushrangers, tempted by the enormous spoils within their grasp,
was not productive of petty offences. With gold flowing from every
man’s hand and pocket, hunger and want were unknown here. Mel-
bourne may not have been very moral in those days, but of “ habitual”
criminals it had few, and the vagrant and the pauper were unknown.
Melbourne is now one of the most beautiful capitals in the world,
and it is also the most populous and important city in the southern
hemisphere. Including its suburban municipalities, eighteen in number,
all lying within a radius of ten miles from the Town Hall, it contains
500,000 inhabitants. Mr. Anthony Trollope well described it as “ one
of the most successful cities on the face of the earth.” It is well laid
out with wide and regular streets, with broad side-walks well paved and
lighted. Tree planting in the streets has been extensively carried on,
giving a pleasant shade as well as refreshing the eye. The buildings
are not only handsome, but many are of great architectural merit. The
cathedrals and churches, schools, Parliament House, Treasury, Town
Hall, Post-office, Law Courts, Custom House, University, Museum,
Free Library, National Gallery, clubs, theatres, and other public in-
stitutions are worthy of special admiration. The banking corporations
and insurance companies are settled in buildings which would adorn
Threadneedle Street. The wharfs on the banks of the Yarra now give
accommodation to large ocean-going steamers. The shops and ware-
houses are equal to those of most cities in the Old World. Everything
neccessary to make life content and easy can be procured in Melbourne.
And the mansions in the fashionable suburbs are only less gratifying
•evidences of the prosperity of the people than the thousands of pleasant
cottages which one sees on every road within a few miles of the city.
Any visitor to the colony must be struck with the perfect arrangements
for water supply. There is hardly the smallest cottage without its
bath-room. The most important reservoir is the Yan Yean, which is
an artificial lake at the foot of the Plenty Ranges, nearly nineteen
miles from Melbourne proper. A few years back, complaints as to the
quality of the water of the Yan Yean were numerous, but now the
water, though perhaps not quite pellucid, is perfectly safe and pure.
In the past, many complaints have been made upon the drainage and
general sanitary system, but these charges will shortly give place to the
highest praise and satisfaction, as a most complete sanitary and drainage
system on the plan of Mr. Mansergh, one of the most competent
sanitary engineers of London, is now being vigorously carried out at
a cost of many millions sterling.
The numerous parks and reserves and public gardens in and
around Melbourne are heritages sacred to the health and enjoyment
of the people, which astonish the “ new chum ” from crowded European
cities, where one is taxed for space to breathe. This is above all a
place for the people. In no large town of the world has a working
man so many enjoyments as in Melbourne, or so many privileges.
There is no State Church here, but free State schools give secular
instruction to children whose parents may be willing to accept it.
Children between the ages of six and fifteen who do not attend the
State schools must give evidence that they are educated at a private
school up to a given standard. The whole country, as well as the
metropolis, is dotted with State schools. The cost of free education to
the State approaches nearly £1,000,000 per year. The Free Library,
Museum, and Picture Galleries, and the Botanic and Zoological Gardens
afford free recreation and instruction to the labourer and mechanic, ns
well as to the clerk or shopman. Melbourne is plentifully furnished
with provident, charitable, literary, scientific, and social institutions to
suit all classes and creeds. In the matter of amusement, the in-
habitants of the metropolis are furnished with four theatres and several
music-halls. At the Exhibition Building and at the Town Hall grand
concerts are weekly given. .Besides the Mayor and Town Clerk, the
two greatest civic functionaries outside London, Melbourne possesses
a “ city organist,” whosr position in the musical world is as that of the
Poet Laureate in literature. But theatre and concert-loving as are the
Victorians generally, it is in out-door sports that they chiefly relax.
Cricket, lawn tennis,, football, rowing, yachting, and bicycle riding are
the most popular amusements. In cricket our native youth have
made their mark against the Gentlemen and Players of England at
Lord’s. There are no more perfect arrangements of the kind in the
world than those at the Melbourne Cricket Ground, where the
members’ pavilion is not only a “ grand stand,” but possesses dining,
billiard, and bath-rooms. Football is as popular here as in some
parts of England. Next to cricket, horse-racing absorbs the affec-
tions of the Victorian people. In any new township a race-course is
one of the first things laid out. Young Australian natives of both sexes
are as much at home in the saddle as Arabs or Comanche Indians.
Melbourne possesses two first-class race courses within a few minutes*
ride by rail from the city. At FJemington the greatest race in Aus-
tralia, the “Melbourne Cup,” is run early in November (our spring).
From every part of the continent people of all classes then flock to Vic-
toria’s metropolis. The “Cup Week” is the Carnival of Australia.
If Fleraington is like Epsom, Caulfield course may be said to be the
Ascot of Melbourne. The stranger at the Cup meeting will perhaps
get a better sample of Victorian customs than anywhere else. There is
an annual attendance of not less than 100,000 people on Cup Day, yet
the “ new chum ” will be surprised to see that policemen are conspicuous
by their rarity, that there is scarcely a trace of drunkenness, and that
amongst the vast crowd, the members all well dressed, and with money
in their pockets, nothing but good-humoured order prevails. Here,
where every one’s working hours are so much shorter than in other parts
of the world, the toiler with hand or brain has no temptation to make a
Saturnalia of his holiday. There is less drunkenness in Victoria and as
little crime as anywhere in the world.
Victoria, however, should not be judged only by its metropolis.
The island townships deserve mention. Ballarat, the second city in the
colony, is situated exactly 100 miles from Melbourne. It well bears
the title of the “ Golden City.” In the early days, the gold-yielding
powers of Ballarat were simply marvellous. No district in the world
produced so much gold in such a short space of time. It has been stated
that, in many instances, “claims” not more than 8 feet square and
about the same depth, yielded from £lO,OOO to £12,000 each. At the
Prince Regent mine, men made as much as £16,000 each for a few
months’ work. At one claim, a tubful of dirt yielded £3,325. The
“Welcome Nugget,” found in 1858, was sold for £10,500, Those days
have gone, but Ballarat, as it is now, is still more wonderful than when
gold was, in very truth, “ more plentiful than blackberries,” when it was
“ scattered a thousand times like seeds upon the earth.” For example,—
at the beginning of June this year, 1893, the shares in the Steiglitz
mine, near Ballarat, were sold at one shilling each, yet a fortnight
later, so great was the yield of gold, they were freely saleable at £5
per share. Anthony Trollope, some thirteen years ago, said with justice,
of Ballarat, that it struck him with more surprise than any city in
Australia, that, “in point of architectural excellence, and general
civilised city comfort, it is certainly the metropolis of the Australian
gold-fields.” Sturt Street, the principal thoroughfare, is a mile and a
half long, 200 feet wide, and has a fine row of trees in the centre.
The principal buildings on either side are the City Hall, Post-office,
Mechanics’ Institute, banks, theatre, hospital, and several large churches,
The population is 50,000. The reservoirs from which the water supply
is obtained have a storage capacity of 600,000,000 gallons. These
works cost £300,000. Lake Wendouree now adds to the charming
aspect of the city ; hundreds of small yachts, miniature steamers, and
rowing boats in numbers float on the lake, which is stocked with perch,
trout, and carp. The Botanical Gardens, on the other side of the lake,
are prettily laid out and well kept. The finest wool in the world is
produced near Ballarat, and on Sir William Clarke’s estate, a few miles
from the town, and on the small farms in the forest of Bungaree,
splendid crops are grown. Ballarat is now not only “ a city of gold,”
but is an important inland centre.
Bendigo, or, as it was termed, Sandhurst, is a little over 100 miles
from Melbourne. It has nearly the same population as Ballarat,
40,000. In 1851, shortly after the first gold discovery, Bendigo was
found to contain that precious metal in such abundance that in a short
time it became famous for the number of its immense nuggets, the best
known of which was the “ Victoria Nugget,” which was bought by the
Victorian Government and presented to Her Majesty. In 1872
Bendigo, then Sandhurst, took rank as a principal Victorian city. It
is certainly equal to any European city of the same size. The most
prominent buildings are the Masonic Hall, the Town Hall, and hospital,
together with a very fine theatre. The streets of Bendigo are beauti-
fully planted with English trees, the cool shade of which is as pleasant
to visitors as to the residents. In the centre of the town is a public
fernery known as “Rosamond’s Bower.” Pall Mall is the principal
business thoroughfare. The streets have a total length of about 100
miles. Bendigo is rich in ether ways besides gold. The district
produces yearly more than 1,000,000 bushels of grain, 17,000 tons of
hay, and some 160,000 gallons of good wine. Fruits of all kinds grow
most luxuriantly in the volcanic soil.
Schools of Mines have been established at Bendigo and Ballarat,
to which are attached museums, containing geological and technological
specimens, models of mining machinery and mining plant, sections of
mines, and geological maps and plans. At these schools instruction is
given not only in the various branches of science connected with mining
operations, in the theory and practice of mining and safe conduct of
mining works, mining surveying and raining engineering, but also in
many other subjects not necessarily connected with mining. Students
at the Bendigo school number about 380, and at the Ballarat school


about 500- The annual income of the two institutions is about £5,900,
r.f which all but £1,900 is granted by Government. Schools of Design
have also been established at twenty-five other places in Victoria, in
connection with a Royal Commission for promoting technological and
industrial instruction. There are over 2,800 pupils on the rolls of these
schools. An exhibition of the work of pupils is held yearly in
Melbourne, and local exhibitions are held in other towns.
Geelong, which takes rank as fourth in Victorian cities, is
picturesque y situated in Corio Bay. At one time it was thought it
would continue to rival Melbourne, and from its fine harbour, position,
and rich back country there was a good foundation for the idea. But
an id:-a it remains, although Geelong is ever ready to come to the front.
Some important woollen factories are situated here, and “ Geelong
tweeds ” are celebrated in the colonies. There is no danger of any
“ Mississippi wool ” getting into this fabric. In the western district of
Victoria there are many important towns, Warrnambool being the chief
centre, as well as an important shipping port. Belfast and Portland
rank next to Warrnambool as sea-port towns. Hamilton, nearer to the
South Australian border, is the capital of a fine pastoral district. In
the east, Sale is the chief town in Gippsland, an extensive and prosperous
division of the colony, which was discovered bv Mr. Angus MacMillan
in 1 839.
Echuca, on the Murray, is the principal city in the north of
Victoria. In the old days this was a crossing-place for stock from New
South Wales. From Echuca there is a vast river traffic. During the
winter months, when the Murray’s waters are swelled by the thousand
tributaries from the Australian Alps, steamers ply to Albury on the
one hand, and to South Australia, New South Wales, and far inland
rivers on the other. Echuca, a river-port, is only second to Melboui\ne
in the ar ount of its shipping tonnage inwards and outwards. The
most beautiful thing in Echuca is the park, chiefly because nature has
been encouraged, educated in fact. Sitting here on the logs in careless,
happy indolence, watching the river in its ever-flowing passage to the
sea, and listening to the sweet warbling of the birds overhead, every
sense is pleased, “drinking delights from the murmur of streams and
the flutter of wings.” The railway bridge at Echuca is the finest thing
of the kind in the southern hemisphere. Of iron (over 4,000 tons
being used in its construction), it is 1,905 feet long, and cost £124,000,
having been made at the joint expense of the two colonies. It was
opened in March, 1879. The Murray is for nearly 1,000 miles the
northern boundary of Victoria. It was discovered in 1830 by Captain
Charles Sturc. From New South Wales he traced the Lachlan to the
Murrurabidgee. and the latter to its debouchure into a magnificent
stream of 350 feet wide, and from 15 to 20 feet deep, which, in honour
of the then Colonial Secretary, Sir George Murray, he gave its present
name. Leaving the main body of the expedition in depot on the
Murrumbidgee, Captain Sturt started down the river in a whale-boat
and a small skiff built in seven days. Captain Sturt overcame all
obstacles—dangers from snags as well as from the hostile natives on
shore—and in 32 days arrived at a large but shallow lake, where
finding it impossible to force a passage through the dangerous navigation
of Lake Alexandrina to the sea, he turned back. The return journey
was one of suffering, as the stock of provisions were all but exhausted.
Brave Charles Sturt lost the use of his eyes through blight and lack of
proper treatment on these journeys. He died in England in 1869.
Few men have done so much good work for Australia and received such
a pittance of reward and honour. Until 1851 the mighty father of
Australian waters, the Murray, was almost an aqua incognita. No
sounds, save perhaps the “coo-ee” of some wandering blackfellow, or
the screech of a wildfowl, flying startled from its nest among the reeds,
awoke echoes in the quiet bends. The pelicans and the beautiful blue
and white cranes lazily flapped their wings above the river s surface
unmolested. The fish in its waters multiplied, unheeded by all except
the natives and the hungry shags, whose descendants to this day haunt
dead trees along the banks. The pant and thud of a river steamer,
retarded by a heavily-laden barge, ne’er, as now, caused a “ mob ” of
kangaroos to pause, curious for a moment, and then to scamper across
an arm of land till lost to sight in the bush. In 1853, Captain Francis
Gadell, in the little steamer, Lady Augusta, navigated the Murray for a
distance of over 1,300 miles from its mouth. A true Argonaut was
Captain Cadell, for he exploited the land of the real Golden fleece,
•opening up a vast extent of country for pastoral purposes. The Murray
would be one of the most useful rivers in the world if the channels of
its head-waters were locked, and a supply stored for navigation during
the dry season. But the sources of the Murray and its tributaries are
in New South Wales, and in this matter joint action by the two colonies
has not yet been decided upon.
It is but 57 years since the first settlement was made in Victoria ;
now it possesses nearly a million and a quarter of inhabitants. The
■country is traversed by a network of 2,763 miles of railway, and dotted
with prosperous townships. Its imports for 1891 were valued at
£21,711,000, its exports at £16,000,000. The gold-yield for 1891 was
576,400 ozs., valued at £2,305,600, and the total value of gold raised
in Victoria from 1851 to the end of 1892 amounts to the immense
and almost fabulous sum of £232,405,716 ; and the silver yield—
including that of Broken Hill, which, though in New South Wales, has
its directors and offices of management in Melbourne, where its shares
are chiefly held—was 10,838,000 ozs., which, at 4s. per oz., amounts
to £2,167,600. The yield of tin, for some time hampered through the
unsuitability of anpliances used, is now beginning to show signs of
revival by the introduction of new machinery and a new method of
treatment. Pastoral produce (mainly wool), about £10,240,000 ;
agricultural produce, £7,710,000. The present great triumph of Victoria
is in the great coal industry, which has sprung into existence within
the last three years. Immense deposits have been found in Gippsland,
and new discoveries are being made every day. Manufacturing interests
have been fostered in the capital and other towns of the colony ; the
yearly value of manufactured goods is computed at £22,400,000.
The three great industries, however, of Viticulture, Horticulture,
and Dairying, with the accompanying export trade, are destined
to place Victoria at the head of the wealthy food-producing
countries of the world, in the very near future. The export of meat
will play no unimportant part in this, as it has now been started
with the best assurances of success by the enterprising firm of Phipps,
Turnbull, Hotson, and Company, of Melbourne; but the above-mentioned
industries more directly concern the population, wealth, and rapid
development of Victoria. The export of dairy produce has increased
nearly £500,000 within the last three years, and promises to treble
itself within the next two, while the export of wine, fruit, and meat
promises even greater returns. Victoria is essentially an intense
products country, and gives every indication of ultimately proving
Europe’s main source of food supply.
There are State schools and churches and newspapers everywhere
—of the latter, four “dailies” in Melbourne. We have an Observatory
we are proud of, and a Government Astronomer who, like our
Government Botanist, is a scientist of world-wide repute. We have
also a military and naval force, and our shores are well protected.
We have no fear of foreign invasion. Victorians are proud of their
colony, but they are also proud of being Australians of British blood.
More than 95 per cent, of our Victorian population is British, or of
British parentage. England and Great Britain are yet spoken of as
“home” here. In spite of the establishment of the Melboun e
University, which grants every degree except those in. Divinity, a large
number of Victorian youths are yearly sent “ home ” to school and
college (partly, it is said, because the examinations are much easier
there). Yet there is room here for many of our race ; for although by
the side of the flocks and herds of the squatter, one sees the corn-fields
and potato-patches of the small farmer, the vineyards of the wine-
maker, and the irrigation settlements of the fruit-farmer, there is plenty
of forest yet to be cleared and bush land to be cultivated. There is a
tendency in Victoria, as in all the colonies, to centralization in the cities
and townships, the urban population amounting to more than half the
population of the whole colony. The factories and mechanical trades
absorb perhaps too large a proportion of our youth. Girls, too, prefer
to work sewing-machines in the clothing warehouses to domestic
service, although they would find the latter a better paid and easier
employment. The immigrants most welcomed in Victoria will be stout-
hearted and level-headed farming men* of the English tenant-fanm r
type, with merely enough capital to pay their way for one year and buy
two or three cows, or an assortment of fruit trees, with the few farming
implements necessary for the industry in which they embark; but they
must be men who can fight churlish Nature, or train her in softer
moods, as the early pioneers of the colony did.
Those early pioneers! From Henty and Batman and Fawkner and
Robertson to the men of the last decade, farmer or sailor, or trader or
miner, they were all the very salt of the earth ! During the gold fever,
the brains and the blood, the mental courage, as well as the bone and
muscle, of Europe flocked hither; and the fittest survived. Victoria has
ever been essentially a pioneer colony. It owed nothing to Government
aid; in fact, its early prosperity was retarded by Government inter-
ference. It was founded solely by individual energy; and its people have
ever remained pioneers. It is in their blood. Victorians, Burke and
Wills, were the first to cross the continent in 1860. They lost their
lives, but made their names immortal. A massive monolith of granite
was placed over their graves in Melbourne cemetery, and a fine bronze
statue of the two explorers, from a design by Charles Summers, was for
years the chief sight of Collins Street—since removed to a more
prominent position in Spring Street, in order to make room for the cable
tramway —an object lesson for our youth. The Burke and Wills
expedition cost the people of Victoria £57,000. The end justified it,
for within two years of the death of the leaders from starvation,
“ tierces of beef were displayed in Melbourne, salted down from cattle
pasturing on the spot where they perished.” Far away in the “ back
blocks” in the centre of the continent, in the sugar lands of the North,
on every new gold field, Victorian muscle and energy and capital are to
be found. In the South Sea Islands, in the pearl fisheries of Torres
Straits and Western Australia, Victorian pioneers are foremost; and
Victorian enterprise has done much towards the exploration of New
Guinea. Although they claim Victoria to be the richest, the most
populous, the most prosperous, and the most energetic of all the
Australian colonies, yet Victorians were the first to raise their voices
for the Federation of the Colonies, the Political Unity of Australia.
Then the people of all the provinces, at present divided by absurd local
prejudices and jealousies, will be joined together for defence, and, if
need be, for defiance ; and some day in the near future, following out
the manifest destiny of the British race, with the dear Old M other
Country, and her eldest born, the United States of America, will be
linked together in a strong bond, ruling land and seas, and giving laws
to all the world.—[ Portion of the first , and the latter part of this sketch
is a revision of an article by Julian Thomas (“ The Vagabond” ), which
appeared in the Handbook to the Colonial and Indian Exhibition of 7666'.]


1893.
CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT,
The legislative authority in Victoria is vested in two Houses of
Parliament, viz., the Upper House or Legislative Council, consisting of
18 members returned in fourteen provinces, each member being elected
for six years, a small property qualification existing for both electors
and members; and the Lower House or Legislative Assembly, which
consists of 95 members, elected for three years (unless dissolved sooner
by the Governor), returned in 84 districts or electorates. There is no
property qualification for members of this House, and every male of 21
vears of age or upwards, untainted by crime, is allowed a vote. In the
year 1892 the electors on the rolls of the Legislative Council numbered
163,153, and those on the rolls of the Legislative Assembly 278,812.
Of the whole population of the colony one in every 4-2 is an elector for
the Lower House, and there is a member to every 12,186 persons. If
Victoria were to be represented according to population in the same
proportion as the United Kingdom, she would, instead of sending 95
members to Parliament, return only about 20.
The executive power is in the hands of a Governor appointed by
the Crown, who acts under the advice of a responsible Ministry, con-
sisting of ten members.
Municipal or local government is almost universal throughout
Victoria, all but about one per cent, of its whole area being divided into
urban or rural municipalities. The former are called cities , towns, and
boroughs, and the latter shires. They are regulated under an Act of the
Legislature, each municipality being a body corporate, with perpetual
succession and a common seal, capable of suing and being sued, and of
purchasing, holding, and alienating land. The cities, towns, and
boroughs number 60, and the shires 137. They have power to levy
rates, and are also subsidised by the State. Their peculiar functions
are to make, maintain, and control all streets, roads, bridges, ferries,
culverts, water-courses, and jetties within their respective boundaries ;
also to regulate under proper by-laws the markets, pounds, abattoirs,
baths, charitable institutions, and the arrangements for sewerage, light-
ing, water supply, prevention of fire, and carrying on of noxious trades.
Together, they contained, in 1891, 1,143,957 inhabitants, or all but a
four hundred and fiftieth of the population. The total value of the
rateable property in municipalities was assessed in the same year at
£203,351,360, and the annual value at £13,733,770. Rates may be
levied as low as 6d. in the £, and as high as 2s. 6d. ; but the most
common rating is one shilling.
CLIMATE AND RAINFALL OF VICTORIA.
From its geographical position, Victoria enjoys a climate more
suitable to the European constitution than any other colony upon the
continent of Australia, resembling that of the more favoured portions
of Southern Europe. In the thirty-three years ended with 1891, the
maximum temperature in the shade was 111*2° Fahr., viz , on the
14th January, 1862; the minimum was 27°, viz., on the 21st July,
1869; and the mean was 57-4°. Upon the average, on four days
during the year the thermometer rises above 100° in the shade; and
generally on about three nights during the year it falls below freezing
point. The maximum temperature in the sun ever recorded (i.e.,
since 1857) was 178 s°, viz., on the 4th January, 1862, The mean
atmospheric pressure, noted at an Observatory 91 feet above the sea-
levei, was, in the twenty-eight years ended with 1891, 29 94 inches;
the average number of days on which rain fell was 131, and the
average yearly rainfall was 25‘56 inches.
DEFENCES.
Victoria is well protected from external attack ; not only is the
approach to the metropolis guarded by forts and torpedoes, constructed
upon the most approved principle, but the colony possesses a small but
efficient fleet, and land forces numbering about 7,360. The fleet con-
sists of a flagship, an ironclad turret ship, two gunboats, three torpedo
boats, and several armed steamers. The land forces embrace a paid
artillery corps, and a militia consisting of foot and mounted rifles, field
and garrison artillery, and engineer and torpedo corps. The ships and
troops are commanded by Imperial officers, who are paid by the colony.
All the forces are enrolled under a Discipline Act, and about £300,000
is expended annually for defence purposes.
FACTS AND FIGURES.
B-! HENRY HEYLYN HAYTER, C.M.G. (Government Statist).
POPULATION.
FINANCE.
Population of Victoria. —Although Victoria occupies no more
than the thirty-fourth part of the Australian Continent, from various
causes such has been its attractiveness, as compared with the other
colonies of the group, that, according to the returns of the last census
(taken on the sth April, 1891), it was still the most populous Aus-
tralian colony, and contained 38 per cent, of the inhabitants of the
whole continent. The population at the census referred to was
1,140,405. Between the census day and the end of 1892, the inhabi-
tants are estimated to have increased to 1,167,329, consisting of
.607,780 males and 559,549 females. These numbers show an average
of about 92 females to 100 males, or 109 males to 100 females.
Nationalities. —According to the census of 1891, about 97 per
cent, of the colonists are British subjects by birth, and only about 3 per
cent, are foreigners. The native Victorians numbered about 714,000,.
or 63 per cent, of the population ; the natives of other Australian
colonies numbered 77,000 ; the English, 158,000 ; the Irish, 85,000 ; the
Scotch, 51,000; the Germans, 11,000; the Chinese, 8,000; and the
natives of other countries, about 36,000.
Religions. —The religions of the people, as returned at the census
of 1891, were as follows ;—Protestants, 837,000 (this includes all
Christian denominations, excepting the Roman Catholics); Roman
Catholics, 249,000; Jews, 6,500; Buddhists, Confucians, <kc., 6,700;
and persons of other sects or of no denomination or religion, about
41,000.
Occupations. —The occupations as returned at the census are
classified under a great number of heads. They may, however, be
condensed into the following groups ;—Ministering to government,
7,000; ministering to religion, 2,300; ministering to health, 3,500;.
ministering to law, 2,100 ; ministering to education, 7,300; ministering
to art, science, and literature, 6,800 ; traders, 36,900 ; ministering to
entertaining or clothing, 54,500 ; domestic servants, 49,400 ; contrac-
tors, artisans, and mechanics, 94,700 ; engaged in mining, 23,100; en-
gaged in pastoral pursuits and agriculture, 131,700; engaged in land
carriage, 22,500; engaged in sea navigation, 6,200; dealing in food,
22,800; labourers, 34,100; wives, widows, childi’en, &c., 693,400; fol-
lowing other pursuits or no occupation, about 42,000.
Aborigines. —At the first colonization of the district now called
Victoria, the aborigines were ofiicially estimated to number about
5,000 ; but according to other and apparently more reliable estimates
they numbered at that time not less than 15,000. When the colony
was separated from New South Wales in 1851 the number was ofiicially
stated to be 2,693. At the census of 1891 the number returned was
only 565, viz., 325 males, and 240 females, and of these 248 were half
castes. It is believed, however, that some aborigines escaped the
notice of the enumerators, and that there are really about 730 in the
colony. The existence of the few that still remain alive has no poli-
tical or social significance whatever. The race will probably become
extinct in the course of a few years.
MARRIAGES, BIRTHS, AND DEATHS.
Marriages in Victoria numbered 7,726 in 1892, or 6‘65 to every 1000-
of the population. In the same year births numbered 37,831, or 32'54
per 1,000 of the population, and deaths numbered 15,851, or 13 - 63 per
1,000 of the population, which is exceedingly low proportion. Seven-
teen deaths per 1,000 persons living has been held by high authority to
be a natural rate of mortality in countries where adults and children
exist in their normal proportions, but few countries can show so low a.
rate. For instance, in England and Wales the death rate averages
about 19 per 1,000 ; in France about 22 ; in Germany about 24 ; in
Italy about 29 ; and in Austrian Hungary about 30.
Revenue and Expenditure. —The revenue of Victoria, in the
financial year ended with the 30th June, 1891, was £8,343,588, and
the expenditure was £9,128,699. The revenue per head was £7 7s. 3d.,
and the expenditure per head was £8 Is. Id. The amount raised by
taxation was about £3,252,638, or 39 per cent, of the whole revenue,
the principal item under this head being Customs duties, which yielded
£2,480,635. The land revenue amounted to £613,451, and the railway




revenue to £3,306,580 Besides the ordinary expenditure just alluded
to, an amount of £3,427,195, derived from the proceeds of loans,
w ;s also expended during the year on railways and other public works.
Omitting the receipts from the sale and occupation of land and from
railways, in order to make the figures comparable with those of other
countries, the balance of revenue in 1890-91 was £4,423,557, or a
larger amount in proportion to population than is raised in any country
in the world out of Australia. The amount per head was £3 18s. Id.
as against £2 19s, lOd. in France; £2 7s. in the United King’om;
£2 19s. 4d. in Germany; £2 6s. 2d, in Holland; £2 ss. Id, in Belgium;
£2 3s. 9d. in Italy; £1 17s. sd. in Austria-Hungary; £1 16s. 9d. in
Spain ; and £1 ss. in the United States ; yet such are the resources of
the colony that the large amount named has been raised without diffi-
culty, and taxation has scarcely been felt.
Municipal Revenue and Expenditure. —The revenue of muni-
cipalities consists of amounts received from rates, licenses, dues, &c.,
supplemented by a State subsidy. In 1891, their total receipts
amounted to £1,879,861, and their expenditure to £2,097,386. The
State subsidy, which is divided amongst the different municipalities
according to a scale based upon the amount they respectively levy from
rates, amounted to £450,000.
Public Debt. —ln the beginning of 1892 the public debt of Vic-
toria amounted to £43,638,897, which is equivalent to a proportionate
indebtedness of £37 13s. lid. to every man, woman, and child in the
colony. Seventy-eight per cent, of the debt was borrowed for the con-
struction of railways, 15| per cent, for works of water supply, and the
remainder for defences, State schools, construction of a graving dock,
and for miscellaneous public works and buildings. It will be observed
that the debt, unlike the national debts of most of the countries of the
Old World, was not incurred for expensive wars or other unproductive
objects, but for the prosecution of works of a permanent character,
necessary for the development of the colony, from which amounts are
already received sufficient to go a long way towards payment of the
interest on the loans, and by which succeeding generations will be
largely benefited. The debt as a whole bears interest at the rate of 4
per cent. (See article on Finance by G. D. Meudell).
ROYAL MINT.
The Melbourne branch of the Royal Mint was established in 1872.
From the time of its opening to the end of 1891, 12,829,773 ozs. of gold
had been received thereat, valued at £51,352,820. Gold is issued from
the Mint as coin or as bullion. The former, with the exception of
554,614 half-sovereigns, has consisted entirely of sovereigns, which
have numbered 45,635,541. The bullion issued has amounted to
1,307,966 ozs valued at £5,436,599.
SAVINGS BANKS.
Every facility is afforded in Victoria to persons desirous of invest-
ing their savings securely and profitably Two kinds of savings banks
exist—the ordinary savings banks, which were established in 1842, and
the post-office savings banks, which were established in 1865. Both of
these are State institutions; of the former there are 18, and of the
latter 370, According to the returns for 1891, the number of
depositors in the two institutions was 300,781, who had to their
credit £5,715,687, or an average of £l9 os. Id. to each depositor.
Most of the depositors belong to the working classes. The highest rate
of interest savings banks are permitted to give on moneys left on
deposit is 4 per cent. The full rate is paid by both kinds of insti-
tutions
TRADE AND COMMERCE.
Imports and Exports. —ln 1891, the declared value of goods im-
ported into Victoria was £21,711,608, and that of goods exported
therefrom was £16,006,743. The excess of imports over exports was
thus £5,704,865, and the total value of external trade was £37,718,351.
Per head of the population, the value of the imports was £lB 18s. 7d.,
and that of the exports £l3 19s. 2d., or together £32 17s. 9d.
These proportionate values are higher than corresponding amounts
in most other countries in the world. In the latest year of which
returns are at hand, the value per head of the external trade of the
United Kingdom was £l9 13s. 2d., that of France was £lO 14s. 9d., that
of Germany £lO 13s. lid., and that of the United States was only
£5 9s. 2d. Nearly half the external trade of Victoria is with the United
Kingdom, and nearly a third with the neighbouring colonies—prin-
cipally New South Wales. In 1891, the principal articles imported
were wool (chiefly from across the border), valued at £3,372,154 ; sugar
and molasses, £1,051,838; cottons, £973,704 ; woollens, £903,657 ;
livestock, £1,553,727; iron and steel (exclusive of railway rails, &c.),
£878,509; and gold (including specie), £1,081,455. The principal
exports were wool, of the value of £7,165,092; gold (including specie),
£2,641,443; wheat, flour, and biscuit, £1,397,983; and live stock,
£457,394. Articles of Victorian produce or manufacture were repre-
sented in the exports by £13,026,426, being equivalent to £ll 7s. 2d.
per head of population ; or to 81 per cent, of the total exports. The
three staple articles included in the list were—wool, of the value of
£6,638,983 ; gold (including specie), £2,598,103; and wheat, flour, and
biscuit, £1,311,705.
Shipping. —The vessels entered and cleared at Victorian ports in
1891 numbered 5,091, of an aggregate burthen of 4,715,109 tons, and
carried 186,040 men. The tonnage was in excess of that in any former
year. Eighty-two per cent, of the vessels, embracing 87 per cent, of
the tonnage, and carrying 94 per cent, of the men, were steamers.
Some idea of the extension of Victorian commerce may be formed
from the circumstance that, although the population of the colony in-
creased by 5G per cent, during the twenty years ended with 1890, the
tonnage of vessels entered and cleared in the last as compared with the
first year of that period increased more than threefold ; also, that whilst
the population in the ten years ended with 1890 increased only 32 per
cent., the amount of tonnage in 1890 was twice as large as that in 1880.
Of the vessels inwards and outwards during 1891, 77 per cent,
embracing 53 per cent, of the tonnage, were Colonial; 16 per cent.,
embracing 35 per cent, of the tonnage, were British ; and 7 per cent.,
embracing 12 per cent, of the tonnage, were Foreign. Of the crews
entering and leaving Victorian ports in that year, 54 per cent, were
attached to Colonial, 35 per cent, to British, and 11 per cent, to
Foreign vessels. The fo’lowing are the figures from which these
proportions have been derived :
Nationality
Nationality.
of Vessels Entered and Cleared, 1891.
Vessels Entered.
Vessels Cleared.
Colonial
British
Foreign
Number. Tons. Men. i Number. Tons. | Ken.
I 1
1,958 1,248,615 50,413 1,977 i 1.268.860' 50.732
394 804,729 31,931 400 1 821,670 32,124
179 285,520 10,465 183 1 285,708 10,323
i
2,531 2,338,864 92,861 2,560 2,376,245 93.179
jn vessels visiting Victorian ports in the last five years,
amber have been German : in 1891, the next largest was
Total
Of Foreign vessels visiting Victorian ports in the last five years,
the greatest number have been German ; in 1891, the next largest was
Norwegian, and the next French and American in equal numbers. The
following are the nationalities of such vessels, the numbers entered and
cleared of each nationality during 1891 being shown :
Germany
Norway
France
Foreign Vessels Entered and Cleared, 1891
Country.
United States
Sweden
Belgium
Denmark
Japan
Chile
Hawaii
Italy
Nicaragua
Austria
Total
Imports of
Vessels Entered. Vessels Cleared. Both.
170
Principal
Articles,
Order.
Articles.
1886
Books
Value of Imports.
194,236
104,583
127,917
82,584
Stationery
Musical instruments
234,350
84,891
113,748
2
8
9
Watches, clocks, and watchmakers’ mate
rials
73,082
Cutlery
Machinery ...
Sewing machines
Tools and utensils
Building materials
Furniture and upholstery
29,272
185,098
51,491
39,962
160,774
93,779
104,584
46,312
257,957
70,145
58,154
130,638
68,163
Drugs and Chemicals
Matches and vestas
Opium
78,130
48.651
41.651
61,611
94,259
892,868
312,728
61,478
32,963
79,318
Paints and colors
Carpeting and druggeting
Woollens and woollen piece goods
Silks
88,024
903,657
306,199
973.704
Cottons
Linen piece goods and manufactures
Haberdashery
Apparel and slops
Boots and shoes
1,027,674
42,160
420,608
389,814
105,828
35,967
239,236
519,948
153.433
118,610
Gloves
Hats, caps, and bonnets
Hosiex-y
Bags and sacks (including woolpacks)
Butter and cheese
Fish ... ...
Meats—fresh, preserved, and salted
Fruit (including currants and raisins)
Flour and biscuit
111,086
122,377
132,192
96,779
143,634
206,032
86,638
6,758
18,107
163,840
139,395
17,547
205,533
16,429
26,237
39,500
319,859
16,434
Grain —wheat
55,719
~ oats
~ other (including malt and rice)
Sugar and molasses
76,456
135,173
853,419
28,767
91,313 •
1,051,838


' <>,
-Jjj
; r


Imports op Principal Articles, 1886
1891— Continued.
Value of Impoits.
Or.lar.
Order. !
Articles.
Beer, cider, and perry...
Coffee
Hops
Spirits
Tea
Tobacco, cigars, and snuff
Wine
Hides, skins, and pelts
Leather, leatherware, and leathern cloth
Wool*
Paper (including paper bags)
Timber
Wooden ware ...
Oil of ah kinds
Coal
Earthenware, brownware, and chinaware
Glass and glassware
Gold (exclusive of specie)
Specie—gold ...
~ other...
Jewellery ... ..;
Iron and steel (exclusive of railway rails,
telegraph wire, etc.)
Lead—ore, pig, pipe, sheet
Manufactures of metal... ...
Nails and screws
Plated ware ...
Live stock
| Fancy goods ...
j Hardware and ironmongery
Oilmen’s stores
Total
All other articles
Total Imports
Exports of Principal Articles, 1886 and
Articles.
ISS6. ISOI.
£ £
2(i0,C50 270,491
,'>0,222 44,130
23,285 13,307
380,232 466,427
668,472 626,173
291,684 304,491
116,606 130,038
129,102 159,478
167,618 159,419
2,331,599 3,372,154
250,530 301,908
j 1,170,539 897,264
55,662 43,113
219,691 282,794
610,768 837,810
I 105,260 98,918
157,788 117,851
569,442 716,510
32,593 325,562
33,392 39.383
54.310 40,171
748,002 878,509
24,048 42,493
147,434 180,282
43,503 59,240
45,006 20,927
32,404 72,695
928,505 1,553,727
90,958 57,545
220,204 157,276
30,035 35,838
£16,464,981 £19,241,408
2,065,014 2,470,140
£18,530,575 £21,711,608
1886 and 1891.
1 j Boo'<s
j Stationery
9 | Michinery
15 i Woollens and woollen piece goods
16 ! Silks
Vulue of Exports.
73.295
34.958
07,862
17 i Cottms
79,751
31,867
68,930
77,815
218,012
49,260
£
70,172
42,237
18 Haberdashery
U | Apparel and slops
i Boots and shoes
102 901
20 j Bags and sacks
21 i Butter and cheese
86,038
91,322
80,120
70, -209
48,395
98 9SG
j Meats—fresh and preserved
~ salted (including hams and bacon)
22 Fruits (inclu ling currants and raisins) ...
Fionr and biscuit
45,702
19,862
191,762
47,197
76,239
34,724
234,205
22,498
Grain wheat...
392,521
166,916
6,787
69,113
~ oafs ...
~ other (including malt and rice)
Onions
j Potatoes
i Sugar and molasses
23 ! Coffee
488,347
909,630
0,819
35,093
34,696
43,212
32 936
120,532 52,085
144,631 175,445
23,959 5,548
Spirits
Tea
85,324
322,299
111,729
56,251
10,174
16.461
1,005
9,581
98,763
281,477
13,745
121,900
96,951
338.813
Tobacco, Cigars, and Snuff
Wine
103.776
69,785
24 T Bones and bone dust ...
Candles
Horns and hoofs
Hides
Skins and pelts
Leather, leatherware, and leathern cloth
Soap
Tallow
Woolf
12,731
7,910
,VO5
19,905
25 Bark
4,999,662
30,782
174,139
Hay, straw, and chaff...
Timber
20 Oil of all kinds
31 Gold (exclusive of specie)
Specie—gold ...
~ silver
32 Antimony ore, regulus, etc.
Copper ore, regulus, etc.
Iron, etc.
Manufactures of metal...
206,729
232,130
28,795
163.412
7,165,092
84,132
21,936
40,777
28,571
336,874
32,218
423,709
1,610,829
0,623
35
2,217,734
20,950
12,101
47,041
37,127
Tin, tin ore, black sand
33 | L : ve stock
35 i Hardware and ironmongery
I Travellers’ samples
4,080
2,954
77.339
51,571
Total
All other articles
Total Exports
393,510
3 2,734
71,049
£10,925,282
870,039
011,795,321
2.413
457,394
49,486
81,797
15,023,078
983,667
16,006,743
* Including the value of wool imported into Victoria across the Murray.
t Including wool from across the Murray, which is also included in the return of imports ante.
MANUFACTURES.
Manufactories, Works, etc. Manufacturing enterprise in Vic-
toria has for years past been stimulated by protective duties. Great
difference of opinion exists as to the wisdom of such a policy; but,
whether in consequence or in spite of these imposts, there can be no
doubt that Victoria, as a manufacturing country, now occupies a far
higher position than any other colony of the Australasian group.
Statistics of manufactures and works in operation are collected annually.
The collectors are instructed to obtain returns only from establishments
of an extensive character, except when the existence of industries of an
unusual or interesting nature seems to call for special comment. No
attempt is made to enumerate mere shops, although some manufacturing
industry may be carried on thereat; were this done, the manufactories
of the colony might be multiplied to an almost indefinite extent.
According to the latest returns, there are in the colony 93 flour-mills,
which, during the year, operated upon 8,892,090 bushels of wheat and
313,724 bushels of other grain; 68 breweries, in which 17,505,463
gallons of beer were brewed ; 215 brick-yards, some being also potteries,
which made over 207,000,000 bricks, and pottery valued at £79,319;
128 tanneries, fellmongeries, and wool-washing establishments, which
tanned 1,925,566 hides and skins, stripped the wool from 2,276,000
sheepskins, and washed 11,200,000 lbs. of wool; 7 woollen-mills,
which used 2,474,441 lbs. of wool, and produced 1,196,747 yards of'
tweed, cloth, and flannel, 3,033 pairs of blankets, and 1,336 shawls ; 34
soap and candle works, which made 140,000 cwt. of soap and 60,800
cwt. of candles ; 13 tobacco manufactories, which manufactured
1,065,000 lbs. of tobacco, over 10,000,000 cigars and 1,100 lbs. of
snuff ; 6 distilleries, which made 457,000 gallons of spirits ; 165 forest
saw-mills, which produced over 69,000,000 superficial feet of timber ;
74 butter and .cheese factories (this number has been trebled for year
1892-93), which made 5,842,942 lbs. of butter, and 818,282 lbs. of
cheese; 22 bacon and ham curing establishments, which slaughtered.
61,390 pigs, and cured 7,245,500 lbs of bacon and ham ; 191 establish-
ments working in books or stationery; 6in musical instruments; 18
in wood-carving and turning works; 8 in designs, medals, and dies; 5
in philosophical instruments; 4 in surgical instruments; 8 in arms and
ammunition; 367 in machines, tools, and implements; 302 in carriages
and harness; 18 in ships and boats ; 65 in houses, buildings, <tc.; 122
in furniture; 56 in chemicals; 249 in dress; 24 in fibrous materials;
4 in animal food ; 50 in vegetable food ; 199 in drinks and stimulants;
59 in animal matters; 364 in vegetable matters; 46 in coal (gasworks)
and lighting; 63 in stone, clay, earthenware, and glass; 9 in water
(ice making); 26 in gold, silver, and precious stones ; and 53 in metals
other than gold and silver. The total number of these establishments
is 3,141, of which 1,785 use steam or gas engines.
RAILWAYS.
All the railways in Victoria are the property of the State, whosT
policy it has been to open up the interior by their means to such an
extent that railway communication should keep pace with settlement,
be the latter ever so rapid. The consequence is that railways are
extending to the most remote parts of the colony, and it appears probable
that ere long there will be a railway at every man’s door, the advan-
tage to farmers, graziers, miners, and all others who have business rela-
tions with the interior of the colony being inca’culab’e. Cheap excur-
sion trains are run weekly as well as at all holiday seasons, the tickets
of the former being available from Friday until Monday, and those of
the latter for much longer periods. At the middle of 1891, 2,7G4 miles
were open for traffic, 278 miles of which were laid with double lines.
The cost of construction, inclusive of roliing stock, and building a
bridge over the Murray to connect with the New South Wales lines,
was £35,765,968, or an average of about £13,000 per mile; of this
amount £33,949,606 was raised by means of debentures, and the
remainder was paid from the general revenue. The train mileage
during the year was 12,249,747. The total receipts amounted to
£3,298,567, and the working expenses to £2,310,645. The net income
was thus £987,922, which is equivalent to a return of 2 - 886 per cent,
on the whole capital cost, or of 2 91 per cent, on the debenture capital.
THE MELBOURNE TRAMWAYS.
The total length of tramways constructed to the 30th June, 1892,
amounts to 47 miles 0£ furlong, of which 43 miles 2£ furlongs are
worked by cables and stationary steam engines, and the remaining 3
miles 6 furlongs by horses. The last line, along the St. Kilda Espla-
nade, If mile long, on the cable system, was opened on the 27th
October, 1891, thus completing the present authorized system.
The cable lines form one of the largest systems of thi-s description
of tramway in the world, and the method of construction adopted com-
bined all the best features and latest improvements of lines constructed
both in America and Europe.
A uniform fare of 3d. is authorized to be charged on the tramway
lines, except on the section between the Spencer Street and Prince’s
Bridge Railway Stations, via Flinders Street, on which the fare is Id.
But the company is required to run, upon all lines open for traffic,
every morning between the hours of 6 and 7 and every evening between
the hours of 5.30 and 6.30 (Sundays and public holidays excepted),
two or more carriages for workmen at a fare of throe half-pence per
journey. All fares will be, by Act No. 765, Section 26, subject to


revision by Parliament after the lapse of 10 years from the date of the
first 20 miles of tramway being opened for traffic, viz., on the 31st
December, 1897.
Traffic of Melbourne Tramways, 1885-6 to 1891-2.
Average
Year ended 30th June. Extent Open
(Double Track).
Train Mileage
Passengers
Carried.
Total
Receipts.
No.
18.353 250
17,09 ',047
31,133,444
45,000,364
45,273,578
48,044,826
43,825,439
497,631*
1,508,516+
4,036,253
6,396,874
7,453,667
9.169,912
8,592,962
188,531
207,329
362,581
526.588
527,342
562 541
511,915
4ti 50
Noth. The first line was ripened for traffic on the 11th November, 1885. The following rates
of wages are paid by the Company : —First-class, Gripmen. 475. ; Conductors, 455. per week.
.Second-class, an average of three-fourths of these amounts, except on special occasions when the
men do more work and often earn first-class rates.
POST AND TELEGRAPHS,
Post Offices. —A very efficient postal system exists in Victoria,
and post-offices are established throughout the length and breadth of
the colony; 1,729 of such institutions existed at the beginning of 1892,
as against 1,429 five years previously. In the same quinquennial
period, the letters and newspapers despatched and received in a year
increased from 56,000,000 to 85,000,000. The postage on letters to
places in any of the Australasian colonies is twopence per ounce, and
on newspapers one halfpenny each. The postage on letters to the
United Kingdom is twopence halfpenny, and on newspapers one penny.
Money Orders. —Money-order offices in Victoria in connection
with the Post-office have been established in 443 places, and the system
is being rapidly extended by the opening of fresh offices. Besides the
issue and payment of money orders at these places, such orders are
issued in favour of Victoria, and Victorian orders are paid, at places
not only in Great Britain and Ireland and the various Australasian
colonies, but in most of the other principal countries of the world.
The number of money orders issued during the year 1891 was 258,776,
of an aggregate value of £767,757, and the number paid was 244,453,
of an aggregate value of £761,120. The number and value of orders
issued in favour of the United Kingdom are always much greater than
the number and value of those received therefrom ; but the reverse is
the case with orders between Victoria and the neighbouring colonies.
The commission on money orders is 6d. for sums not exceeding £5 to
places in Victoria, and for sums not exceeding £2 to places in the other
Australasian colonies ; whilst an extra 6d. is charged for every additional
£5 in the former, and for every £3 and £2 alternately in the latter
case. For sums over £5 and under £lO, the commission is Is. to
places in Victoria, and 2s. to places in the other colonies. To the
United Kingdom, British colonies outside Australasia, and foreign
countries named, the scale is as follows : —Not exceeding £2, Is ; from
£2 to £5, 2s. Gd.; from £5 to £7, 3s. 6d.; from £7 to £lO, ss. Money
orders may be made payable in the Australasian colonies by telegraph at
the following rates : —Under £5, to places in Victoria, Is.; New South
Wales, 2s. ; Australia and Tasmania, 3s. ; Queensland, 4s. For
sums over £5 and under £lO, to places in Victoria, Is. 6d. ; New South
Wales, 3s. ; South Australia and Tasmania, 45.; Queensland, ss.
Money orders are not granted for sums exceeding £lO.
Postal Notes. —Postal notes are also issued, for use within the
colony, for any amounts not exceeding £1 ; at charges ranging from |d.
to 3d. The number of such notes issued or so paid during 1891
was 492,921, having a total nonimal value of £201,783.
The subsidy to the Peninsular and Oriental and Orient Companies
is paid by the different colonies according to the terms of the contract.
All the Australasian colonies now contribute except New Zealand.
Fiji joined in contribution from the Ist October, 1890, the proportion
paid by it (about £47 annually) being divided amongst the other
contributing colonies. Omitting Fiji, the amounts of subsidy due for
the two years ended 31st January, 1893, by each contributing colony
are as follow :
Mail Subsidy payable by each
Contributing
Colony,
1891 and 1892,
Amount of Contribution Payable.
Colony.
1891-2.
1592-3.
Victoria
New South Wales
Queensland...
South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania ...
26.369
26,679
*2O 595
26,767
9,711
7,580
1,063
3,598
9,4-25
7,4X3
1,224
3,556
Total
£75,000 £75,000
The average time and the fastest time occupied in the transmission
of letters from Australia to London, and vice versa, by means of
various routes during 1891, were as follows :
* For ten months only. f For nine months only.
Time occupied by Mails
BETWEEN
idon to Australia.
Service.
England
Average
Time.
Australia
, 1891.
Melbourne, vid Brindisi and
Ceylon (P. and O. steamers)
Melbourne, vid Brindisi or
Naples (Orient steamers)
Melbourne vid Suez (French
steamers)
Sydney, via San Francisco
(Pacific steamers)
Brisbane, rid Brindisi and Torres
Strait(British-India steamers)
dys. hrs.
33 314-15
Quickest
Time.
dys. hrs.
30 3|
32 22 31-60
33 0
32 12 11-12
40 15-6
Australia to London.
Average
Time.
dys. hrs.
332014-15
Quickest
Time.
dys. hrs.
32 3 7-30
33 0 43-60
32 013-15
3718 9-20
31 111-12
2913 11-30
37 0
44 3 27-30
4013 47-60
It will be remarked that the mails en route to Australia were, on
the average, delivered in quicker time by the Orient than by the P,
and O. steamers, and those en route to London were, on the average,
delivered in quicker time by the former than by the latter. The
quickest time occupied in the conveyance of mails to Melbourne, in
1891, was by aP. and O. steamer, in 30J days, and the quickest time
to London was by an Orient steamer, in 31 days 2 hours.
A telegram from Melbourne to London has to travel along
13,695 miles of wire, of which 2,704 miles, or about a fifth of the
whole distance, is in Australia. At the same time, Australia receives
sd. out of every 4s. per word, or about one-tenth received for telegrams
transmitted. On Ist January, 1893, the rate was raised from 4s. to
4s. 9d. per word. This will greatly reduce the subsidy payable by
Victoria.
Electric Telegraphs. —Telegraphs in Victoria are Government
property, and are worked in connection with the Post-office. Tele-
graphic communication exists between 787 stations within the colony,
and the Victorian lines are connected besides with the lines of New
South Wales, and by means of them with Queensland. They are also
connected with the lines of South Australia, and by their means with
Western Australia, and with the Eastern Archipelago, Asia, Europe,
and America. They are, moreover, united with submarine cables to
Tasmania and New Zealand. In 1891 the miles of line along which
poles extended numbered 7,170, and the miles of wire 13,989 ; the
telegrams transmitted numbered 3,065,351, of which 89,969 were on
Government business. To places within Victoria, telegrams containing
not more than six words are sent for 6d., Id. extra being charged for
each additional word. To New South Wales the charge is Is. for ten
words; to South Australia and Tasmania, 2s. ; and to Western Aus-
tralia and Queensland, 3s. To New Zealand ten words are sent for
3s. 6d., each additional word being charged 6d. To England or the
Continent of Europe, the rate is 4s. lOd. per word. In the'case of
telegrams to places on the Australian Continent, names and addresses
are not charged for; to places in Tasmania they are not charged for
unless they exceed ten words, but all words above that number are
charged for as part of the message. In the case of telegrams to New
Zealand and places outside Australasia, the names and addresses of
both sender and receiver are charged for as part of the message.
Including aerial and underground cables, there were 1,200 miles
of telephone line and 8,731 miles of telephone wire in the colony at ihe
end of 1891, Some of these lines, however, are exclusively used by
the Railway Department, and are not available for public use, the
wires being, where possible, carried on the same poles as telegraph
wires. The telephone wires erected by the Postal Department are
carried along 441 miles of special poles, and are for the most part con-
nected with the Telephone Exchanges. The length of lines and wire,
and number of instruments in use, under the control of each Depart-
ment are shown in the following table :
TELEPHONES.
Under the control of
Telephones, 1891.
Miles open.
Postal Department
Railway Department
Sets of Telephones
in use.
'J otal
Line
(poles and cable).
7,921
810
3,729
Until September, 1887, the Telephone Exchanges in Victoria were
worked by a private company, but in that month the business, together
with buildings and plant, was purchased by the Government. The
price paid was £40,000, but a considerable amount had to be expended
to place the Exchanges in thorough repair. There are now eleven
Telephone Exchanges in the colony—two of which were opened during
the year 1891, viz., at Footscray and Brunswick. The switch-board
accommodation was increased during the year to admit of the operators
having only 50 subscribers each to attend to, instead of 100 as pre-
viously, and by this means more prompt attention is secured. In the
Central Exchange there are now 26 sections of switch-board employed.
* Consisting of 441+ miles of poles, 85+ of aerial cable, and 10 of underground cable.


Melbourne
i8 a
l,t>u8
1890.
... 1,769
1891.
1,818
Ballarat
137
126
119
Beniigo (Sandhurst) 100
70
56
Geelong*
81
143
171
W arrnambool
• •••
64
57
Footscray
• •••
12
Brunswick
|M
13
Windsor*
” 26
53
60
Malvern*
36
45
46
Brighton*
• M4
34
34
Hawthorn*
13
18
New subscribers not entered in register .„
35
■with a capacity to accommodate 2,400 subscribers ; 80 female switch-
hands are employed during the day, and 6 male hands at night. The
receipts for 18yl, exclusive of £2,284 from private lines, amounted to
£35,498; the total number of subscribers, exclusive of 209 who used
private lines, at the end of the year was 2,439, and the amount of
subscriptions payable during the year was £37,226. At present only
subscribers are supposed to use the lines. The establishment of public
telephone offices is still under consideration. The number of subscribers
at the various Exchanges in the colony at the end of each of the last
three years, together with the amount of subscriptions payable each
year, was as follows ;
Subscribers to Telephone Exchanges, 1889 to 1891.
Total ... 1,988 2,307
2,439
S tSi.g ti y"a 3 r P,y * b l e } *29.203 .. £34.580 „ £37,226
EDUCATION.
University.— The Melbourne University was established under a
special Act of the Victorian Legislature, which was assented to on the
22nd January, 1853. This Act, as amended by an Act passed in 1881
{the two consolidated made 54 Viet. No. 1,151), provides for its
endowment by the payment of £9,000 annually out of the general
revenue. This amount has been increased by Parliament from year to
year, the total amount of subsidy paid in 1891 being £17,250. The
Act further provides that no religious test shall be administered to any
one to entitle him to be admitted to the rights and privileges of the
institution ; also for the election, by the senate, of a council consisting
of twenty members, to hold office for five years, of whom not more than
three may be members of the teaching staff, and for the election by
them, out of their own body, of a chancellor and a vice-chancellor; also
for the constitution of a senate, consisting of all male persons who have
been admitted to the degree of master or doctor, and for the election
by th-ra annually of one of their body as warden, as soon as the
superior degrees should amount to not less than JOO. This number
was reached in 1867, and the senate was constituted on the 14th oP
June of that year. The council are empowered to grant in any faculty
except divinity any degree, diploma, certificate, or license which can be
conferred in any university in the British dominions. Royal letters
patent, under the sign-manual of Her Majesty Queen Victoria, were
issued on the 14th March, 1859. declaring that all degrees granted, or
thereafter to be granted, by the Melbourne University should be
recognised as academic distinctions and rewards of merit, and should
be entitled to rank, precedence, and consideration in the United King-
dom and in British colonies and possessions throughout the world just
as fully as if they had been granted by any university in the United
Kingdom. The foundation stone was laid on the 3rd July, 1854, and
the building was opened on the 3rd October of the following year.
On the 22nd March, 1880, the University was thrown open to females,
and they are now admitted to the same corporate privileges as male
students ' For some years afterwards they were not allowed to study
medicine, but this prohibition has now been removed. Affiliated to
the University are colleges in connection with the Anglicans, Presby-
terians, and Wesleyans, as is also the Ballarat School of Mines. The
University Hall, built at a cost of about £40,000, is called the Wilson
Hall, after Sir Samuel Wilson, who contributed the greater portion of
the funds for its erection. From the opening of the University to the
end of 1891, 3,271 students matriculated, and 1,816 degrees were
granted, of which 1,457 were direct, and 359 ad eurulem. The students
who matriculated in 1891 numbered 209, and the graduates in the
same year numbered 135.
State Education. —The State educational system of Victoria, the
basis of which is that secular instruction shall be provided, without
payment, for children whose parents may be willing to accept it, but
that, whether accepted or not, satisfactory evidence must be produced
that all children are educated up to a given standard, has been most
successful in its operation; and for securing the object sought to be
attained, it is believed, compares favorably with that of any other
country in the world In 1872, just before the present system came
into operation, the number of children returned as on the rolls of State
schools was 136,055, whilst in 1891, after the system had been in
force for nineteen years, the number had increased to 253,469, or by
86 per cent. It has been estimated that the children attending school
for not less than 40 days in each quarter amount to about 57 per cent,
of the numbers on the rolls. (See map of State schools in illustrations).
Private Schools.— Besides the State schools, which are attended
by five-sixths of the children under instruction in the colony, there are,
* These Exchanges are also connected by means of trunk lines with the Melbourne Exchange.
according to the returns for 1892, 759 private schools, attended by
37,203 scholars. Some of these private schools are attached to religious
denominations, as many as 208, with 21,799 scholars, being connected
' v vith the Roman Catholic Church, Six are called colleges, or grammar
*choo!s, two of which are connected with the Church of England, two
with the Roman Catholic, one with the Presbyterian, and one with
the Wesleyan Church. In these, as well as in some of the other
private schools, a very high class of education, quite equal to that
obtained in the best public schools in England, is given.
Results op Victorian School System. —lt has been officially
stated that nearly all the children in Victoria between the ages of six
and thirteen (the school age), receive education during some portion of
each year. Ihe results are shown in the very large proportion of
educated children comprised in the population. According to the
returns of the census of 1891, of every 10,000 children at the school
a g e j 9,389 could read, 8,770 of whom could also write, and only 611
were unable to read. The proportion of instructed children indicated
by these figures is much higher than the proportion prevailing in any
of the other Australasian colonies, and is equalled in few, if any, other
countries.
CLERGY AND CHURCHES
Clergy.— There being no State religion in Victoria, and (with
he exception of payments to gaol chaplains) no money boffig voted
for any religious object, the clergy are supported by the efforts of
the denomination to which they are attached. The clergv, ministers,
&c., number 1,583, of whom 234 belong to the Church of England, 182
to the Roman Catholic Church, 221 to the Presbyterian Church, 271 to
the Methodist Church, 61 to the Independent Church, 52 to the Baptise
Church, 458 to the Salvation Army, 94 to other Christian churches,
and 10 to the Jewish Church. Besides these there are other officials
connected with some of the sects who, without being regularly ordained,
perform the functions of clergymen, and are styled lay readers, lay
assistants, local preachers, mission agents, Ac. The nuinner of these is
not known, but it no doubt materially swells the ranks of religious
instructors in the colony.
Churches and Chapels.— The buildings used for public worship
throughout Victoria number at the present time about 4,700, which
number comprises not only regular churches and chapels, but school-
houses and public or private buildings. Accommodation is provided
for 644,000 persons, but the number attending the principal weekly
services is said not to exceed 515,000. More than 336,000 services are
performed during the year. Of the whole number of buildings used for
religious worship, 1,040 belong to the Church of England, 549 to the
Roman Catholics, 945 to the Presbyterians, 1,443 to the Methodists,
115 to the Independents, 114 to the Baptists, 346 to the Salvation
Army, 6 to the Jews, and 175 to other denominations.
PRICES.
The following are the quoted prices of the principal articles of
consumption, also of live stock, in Melbourne during the year 1891.
In country districts the cost of groceries, tobacco, wines and spirits,
Ac., is naturally somewhat higher, and that of agricultural and graz-ng
produce, firewood, Ac., somewhat lower, than in Melbourne:—
Prices in Melbourne, 1891.
Articles.
Wheat
Barley (malting
Oats ...
Maize ...
Bran ...
Agricultural Produce.
per bushel
Hay ...
Flour (first quality)
Bread...
per ten
per 41b, loaf
Prices.
Grazing Produce.
Horses—Medium to heavy draught
~ Saddle and light harness
Bullocks, fat ...
Milch Cows
3s. 4d. to 4s. 94.
3s. 6d. to ss. 3d.
2s. to 4s. 3d.
3s. to 4s. lOd.
Bd. to Is 3d.
£3 to £4 10s.
9 9
Sheep, fat
Lambs, fat
Butchers’ meat—B -ef, retail
£8 to £lO Ids.
4|d. to 6d.
99
per 11",
~ ~ Mutton ~
>» >» ~
» 99 Pork „
tp 9, Lamb ~
£l2 to £4O
£8 to £2O
£5 to £l4
> J
per quarter
£3 10s. to £l5
6s. to 18s. 6d.
3s. to 14s. 6d.
Dairy Produck.
Butter, fresh ... ... ... per lb.
Cheese... ... ... ... ... ~
Milk ... ... ... ... ... per <
3d. to 9d.
2d. to 6d.
sd. to Sd.
7d. to lOd.
per quart
Farm yard Produce.
Turkeys ...
Geese...
Ducks...
Fowls ...
Rabbits
2s. to 3s. 6d,
per couple
lOd. to 2s.
7d. to Is. 6d.
4d. to od.
ss. to I 5«.
4s. to Ss. 6d.
3s. 6cl. to 7s.
3s. to ss. 6d.
fld , tn I <». 4d.




Prices in Melbourne, 1891 — Continued.
Articles.
Prices.
Farm-Yard Produce.
Description of Manufactory,
Work, etc.
Pigeons
Sucking pigs
Bacon ...
per couple
each
per lb.
Is. to 2s. 6d.
ss. to 15s.
Sd. to Is. 4d.
lOd. to Is. 6d.
lOd. to 2s. 6d.
per doz.
Garden Produce.
Musical Instruments.
Organ-building establishments
Pianoforte manufactories
Potatoes
per cwt.
2s. 6d. to ss.
3s. 6d. to 7s
Onions, dried
Carrots
per doz. bunches
Turnips
Radishes
Cabbages
Cauliflowers
Lettuces
6d. to Is.
6d. to Is. 6d.
6d. to Is.
Carving Figures, etc.
Wood carving and turnery
works
n
per doz.
2s. to 4s. 6d.
2s. to ss.
Is. to Is. 6d.
to sd.
Designs, Medals, and Dies.
Die-sinkers, engravers, medal
ists, trade-mark makers
Green peas
n
per lb.
Philosophical Instruments,
Miscellaneous Articles,
ETC.
Electric - lighting apparatus
manufactories
per lb.
Coffee ...
Sugar
6d, to 2s.
Bd. to Is. sd.
2d. to 3d.
2£d. to 4d.
Is. lid. to ss.
2£d. to 4d.
sd. to Bfd
Id.
20s. to 265.
9s. 3d. to 14s. 6d.
Philosophical instrument manu-
factories
Tobacco
Soap
Surgical Instruments.
Surgical instrument, truss—
manufactories
Candles—‘sperm
Salt
Coals
per ton
Firewood
Arms, Ammunition, etc.
Blasting powder, cartridge,
dynamite, etc. —manufactories
Fuze manufactory ... ...
Shot manufactories
Wines, Spirits, etc.
Ale—English ..
Porter—English
Brandy
Rum
per doz.
7s. 6d. to 11s.
Bs. to 10s. 6d.
225. 6d. to 355.
))
per gal.
Machines, Tools, and
Implements.
Whisky
Geneva
15s. to 18s.
18s. to 28s.
60s. to 625. 6d.
Sss. to 80s.
Agricultural implement manu
factories
•• ))
per case, 15 bottles
per doz.
Port wine
Sherry
Boiler and pipe-covering manu-
factory
Cutlery, tool—manufactories...
Domestic implement* manu-
factories
Iron foundries and engineering
establishmentsf
Nail manufactories
Claret
335. to 80s.
18s. to 955.
335. to 115 s
12s. to 305..
Champagne
Colonial wine
VICTORIAN PRODUCTION.
Pattern-makers
Manufactories, Works, etc., 1891 and 1892.
■(lncluding Flour Mills, Breweries, Distilleries, Tobacco Manufactories, Brickyards, Potteries,
Tanneries, Fellmongeries, Wool-washing Establishments, Woollen Mills, and Soap and Candle
Works, as well as all other Manufactories, Works, etc.)
Sheet-iron and tin works
Carriages and Harness.
Carriage lamp manufactories...
Coach, waggon, etc.—manufac-
tories
Perambulator manufactories ...
Saddle, harness—manufactories
Saddle-tree, etc., manufactories
W hip manufactories
Trtni Number of |
I Number of m E P B^L P Horse :P° wer
E nents h ' ' Steam or & | Machinery.
~ients - iGas Engines.
Year ended
March.
t KiloV. merits using of
1
3,104 ; 1,740 | 29,174
3,141 ; 1,785 | 30,780
37 i 45 | 1,606
j ... i
3turing establishments c
ned are named in the fo
Number of Approximate Value of
Hands Lands,* Buildings,
employed. Machinery and Plant.
-/* ocq t ip *7*7o aaq Ships and Boats.
-0 00- i «’l?o’q-q Ship. Boat-builders ... „
02,220 16,472,859 Shins’ whpfils hl , . _
Ships’ wheels, blocks, &c.—
Increase
Decrease
manufactory
Graving-docks, patent slips, &c.
| 4,144
I
300,589
Houses, Buildings, etc.
The manufacturing establishments of all kinds respecting which Architectural modelling worksf
returns are obtained are named in the following table, and their num- Enamelled mantelpiece manu-
bers are given for 1890-91 and 1891-92. For the former, which was factori * s
~ ° Lime and cement works
the census year, are also given the approximate values of materials Venetian blind manufactories
used and produced, and for the latter year the number of hands Earth-closet manufactories ...
employed, and the approximate value of machinery, plant, land and
buildings. The establishments are generally of an extensive character, Furniture.
• , ° ~ J . , « . , ’ Bedding, flock, and upholstery
the exceptions being in cases where the existence of industries of an manufactories
unusual or interesting nature might seem to call for notice, or where Bedstead manufactory
machinery worked by steam, gas, or water is used. No attempt is Cabinet works, including bil-
made to enumerate mere shops, although some manufacturing industiv T makers
u - j ~ . r L • j ~ „ - V „J Iron-safe manufactories
may be carried on thereat. Were this done, the “ manufactories ” m Looking-glass manufactories ...
the colony might be multiplied to an almost indefinite extent. Picture-frame makers, &c. ...
2
4
9
might be multiplied to an almost indefinite extent. Picture-frame makers, &c. ...
Manufactories, Works, etc., 1891 and 1892. Chemicals.
. _ Chemical works
1890-91. 1891-92. Dye works
Essential oil manufactories ...
-I A Valueof- e Approxi- Ink > blacking, blue, washing-
.n of Manufactory. ? g !°| .'j mate value powder, Ac.—manufactories
.York, etc. I I S j '2 j? „ ° f Japanning works
Bs t ISs' pinnr 7wi Paint, varnish—manufactories
5-2 Materials i Articles ” S riant, cana, Printimr-inlr immifnctnripa
used. produced. ■*| w «jd rrmimg iok manutactones ...
j w ' I w Buildings. Saltworks
[ I i
Textile Fabrics
sd Stationery. j £ £ £ Woollen mills
k manufactories, II 152,360 | 248,900 11 998 211,250
ring stationers j ’ Dress.
lithographic print- 162, 459,858 1,363,086 ,179 3,966 1,185,462 Boot manufactories
thmp.nfflT 'll * Cloth in factorips
Manufactories, Works, etc., 1891 and 1892. Chemicals.
_ Chemical works
1890-91. 1891-92. Dye works
Description of Manufactory,
Work, etc.
Materials j Articles
used. j produced.
£ £
152,360 | 248,900
459,858 1,363,086
Books and Stationery.
Account-book manufactories, 11
manufacturing stationers
Printing and lithographic print- 162
ing establishmentsf
Photo-lithographic works ... 1
Clothing factories
Fur manufactories
* In the case of establishments standing upon Crown lands no
land is given. The number of such establishments was 245 in 1891,
t Including paper-bag manufactories.
estimate of the value of the
and 212 in 1892.
Manufactories, Works, etc., 1891 and
1890-91.
« Approximate
•s c Value of—
o v
g E
J-g
i|
S 5 5
w
Materials
used.
1892
Articles
produced.
6,300
'—Conti lined.
5,635
10,100
1,900
1891-92.
9,710
O g T 3
ua » °
<U c -o >.
.c -c co
B-~ £’s.
® S
SS.JS w
w
Approxi-
mate value
of
Machinery,
Plant, Land,
and
Buildings.
9,050
1,830
14,149
3
2
3,450
14,804
4,806
263,714
20,640
10,350
4,500
20,950
,166,516
15,810
119,644
27,070
3
2
12,500
3,650
692,125
26,110
14,400
2,480,941
7,050
238,096
49,220
22,692
4,450
80,423
5,470
179,192
27,055
12,100
2,610
240,000
3,800
506,625
2,359
1,566,830
3,999
20,500
4,020
155,337
3,500
419,990
1,869
154,076
4,557
8,820
4,400
7,400
14,^61
10,957
IG,2‘j3
11,788
18,800
9
1
8
2,200
46,568
5, 250
89,532
21,866
89,810
141,589
7,495
7,450
2,450
118,859
8,340
13,968
13,582
321,892
426,445
44,505
7,578
4,800
17,36?
4,750
57,080
238
21,200
85,762
6,660
43,658
17,248
151,362
180,864
19,090
79,950
7,500
18,0C0
17,000
15,510
86,050
21,625
13,534
47,000
8,500
94,932
170,687
1
2
o
5
18,700
476,366 | 844,202 101 4,109
621,671 11,127,887 103 4,774
20,470 | 37,665 8 62
]O,4M)
3,570
253,249
234,167
340,658
10,980
* Including bellows, churn, washing-machine,
t Including brass-founders,
f Including ventilator manufactories.
etc., makers.


Manufactories, Works,
j
I
Description of Manufactory, j ~
Work, etc. \~-B
etc., 1891 AND
Dress — Continued.
Hat, cap—manufactories ... : 17
Hosiery manufactories ... j 3
XXUC'iCi.Jf IV.I ... .
Oilskin, waterproof-clothing — | 5
manufactories
Umbrella & parasol— manufact. j 10
IS9O-91.
Fibrous Materials.
Rope, twine, mat, bag, sack
manufactories
Sail, tent, tarpaulin—manufact.
Approximate
Value of—
Animal Food.
Bacon-curing establishments ...
Butter factories
■Cheese Factories*
Butterine factories
Meat-preserving establishments
Milk-condensing works
Veg etable Food.
Biscuit manufactories
Confectionery works
Flour mills
Jam, pickle, vinegar, sauce—
manufactories
Macaroni works
Maizena, oatmeal, starch
manufactoriest
Drinks and Stimulants. J
Aerated waters, gingerbeer,
liqueur, &c.—works
Breweries
Coffee, chicory, cocoa, mustard,
spice —works
Distilleries
Malthouses
Sugar, treacle— refineries
Tobacco, cigai s, snuff —inanuf’s.
Animal Matters.
Boiling-down, tallow-rendering
establishments
Bone mills & bone manure m’fts.
Brush manufactories ...
•Catgut manufactory I
Curled hair manufactories .. !
Glue, oil—manufactories ... !
Leather belting (machinery) m’fs. |
Morocco, fancy leather — man’fs. I
Portmanteau, trunk— manuf’s. i
Soap, candle—works
Tanneries, fellmongeries, and
wool-washing establishments
Vegetable Matters.
Bark mills
Materials
used.
1892
•U,569 93,058
6,160 10,145
•24,620 48,800
Basket-making works§
Broom manufactories
37,542
181,356
70,162
Chatf-cutting, corn-crushing—
worksll
•Cooperage works
Cork manufactories
Fancy-box, hat-box—manuf’ts.
Paper manufactories ...
Sawmills, moulding mills,
joinery, &c.—works
80,549 118,486
23,595 43,856
200,530
157,816 283,716
79,920 147,450
1,620,125 2,043,604
77,624 | 137,069
129,200
195,997
491,932
35,587
41,469 106,937
166,51 5 ! 217.596
435,000 I 575,000
1i8,070 '.39,627
70,578
il
8
1
27,955 53,380 |l3 I 81 41,565
23,680 47,750 j 9 352 22,595
5,000
3,2-21
J 1,372 14,972
6,925 16,700
8,620 7,498
229,903 348,316
793,679 1,226,853
26,700
4,940
16,200
544,314
23,667
4,400
7,940
27,500
Articles
produced.
59,620
227,122
85,431
281,100
153,800
365,930
971,489
00,322
92,252
10,400
Continued,
S I i Approxi-
og j -6 \ mate value
tS > •§ » of
-g i -S. ! Machinery,
£-5 j ft 2* : Plant, Land,
-2.’* \ m i and
* i 1 Buildings.
1,127,857
1
3
37,100 7
1881-92.
£
63,593
6,580
16,470
17,889
18,182 10
20,100 3
738,941 214
47,405 33
9,164 3
16,763 6
61,000 3
125,091
2,600.298 84
IT
431
1,695
13,700
68,135
125,634
22,430
150.700
98,511
631,498
123,475
12i’020
322,6 U
1,510,648
72,850
158,800
183,820
297,437
136,942
26,415
5,955
11,150
7,290
4,570
8,790
221,727
365,206
7,535
10,%0
13,769
272,073
47,080
4,500
19,514
129,000
666,200
2,129
* A large quantity of cheese and butter is made on dairy farms which are not returned as
factories, and therefore are not included in this table. Some of these have steam engines, and
use cream separators and other machinery. It was ascertained that in 1890 as many as 14,112
hands were employed in such establishments exclusively on dairy work,
t Some of these factories also make coffee, cocoa, spice, &c.
J Places where wine is made are not included. The number of wine-presses returned in 1891-
■92 was 590.
S See also Brush factories under Animal matters, ante.
il All these establishments used machinery worked by steam, wind, or horse power. They
must not be confounded with chaff-cutting and grain-crushing machines in use on farms, which
■.numbered 18,764.
H Including £008,759, value of timber sawn from Victorian Jogs.
Manufactories,
Works
Description of Manufactory.
Work, etc.
Vegetable Matters—
Continued.
Sawmills—forest
Strawboard manufactory
Coal and Lighting.
Electric light works ...
Gasworks
Ironfounders’ charcoal factory
Stone, Clay, Earthenware,
and Glass.
Asphalt paving material wwks
Asbestos works ...
Brickyards and potteries
Cement tile works
Filter manufactories
Glass manufactories—works ...
Stone and marble sawing,
polishing—works
Water.
Ice manufactories
Gold, Silver, and Precious
Stones.
Goldsmiths, Jewellers, and
eleotroplaters (m anufacturing)
Royal Mint
Metals other than Gold
and Silver.
Brass and Copper works—gasa-
lier manufactories
Lead, pewter, and zinc—works
Pyrites works ...
Smelting works...
Wire-working establishments
Total where only one return
was receivedf
Total ... . il
Total value of manufactured'!
articles, less cost of raw - 5,461,257
material J
In 1891, which was the year of the census, an enquiry was made
respecting the value of the materials used and articles produced in all
manufactories. This enquiry was responded to in most instances, and
in cases where the information was not given the value has been esti-
mated upon the same proportions as obtained in similar works respect-
ing which information was supplied. The result is given in the two
columns preceding the final one of the last table. The totals and
difference between them—to which has been added an estimate for the
value of the bricks and pottery made—together with similar results
for the previous census year are as follows :
Value of Raw and Manufactured Materials, 1881 and 1891.
1880-81. 1890-91.
£ £
Value of materials operated upon 7,997,745 ... 12,006,233
~ articles produced 13,370,836 ... 22,390,251
22,390,251
Increased value ... 5,373,091, or67percent. 10,384,(0 s, orSGpercent.
Bricks at £1 per 1,000 53,566 ... 241,928
Value of pottery 34,600 ... 68,160
10.694,106
* Exclusive of land, estimated at £85,000.
I The particulars of these have been combined in accordance with a promise made that the
contents of individual schedules would not be published.


The conditions of social life in Victoria are so freshly free and
generally agreeable, that in every section the most cordial intercourse
prevails, and residents are enabled to get more variety into their lives
in a general way than is possible in the older lands, where class dis-
tinctions more strictly obtain. Lovers of solitude, according to the dictum
of the great Greek philosopher, only admitted of two classifications—
“ wild beasts ” and “gods,” and it must be at once confessed that life-
loving Victorians disavow all claim to either rank. Among the American
transcendentalists, when Henry Thoreau said, “ I would rather be a
bachelor in hell than a boarder in heaven,’’ the deliverance was
accepted as evidence of the coveted idealism; but to Victorians such
an argument could have little meaning beyond the daring expression of
aa eccentric who was willing to forfeit for a fancy life’s best gift—the
society of living men and women. Shelley, Montaigne, Newton, and
many others have tried to make strong the advantages of solitude, but
their own experiences considerably negatived the value of their theory,
and left their more sociable fellows to reap a richer harvest of happiness.
A marked general equality in matters of society and education
readers social intercourse in the colony much more attractive than in
cauntries where the highest culture is often thrown into close contact
with the narrowest ignorance, thus rendering agreeable communion
extremely difficult.
Society contributes a richness of ideas that adds materially to the
pleasures of life, and if Victorians show a greater preference for its
wide cultivation than the people of older lands, then the result should
be apparent in a more democratic tolerance and happier wisdom.
hirst visitors to Melbourne must be apprehensive of considerable
astonishment when, instead of the ordinary colonial town, they find
themselves in a city of great extent, covered with magnificent buildings,
and boasting of many advanced institutions which are yet strange to
several European capitals. To the average traveller, Victoria is the
capital of Melbourne,” a “suburb of Sydney,” or something of that
sort, for it must be allowed that even in well-informed circles in the
old country ignorance of Australian geography too frequently obtains.
There have been a lew instances where travellers were not surprised to
find that Victoria is the most important of the Australian colonies,
that she has contributed over three hundred million sterling in gold to
the financial factors of the world, and that her capital is the ninth city
o£ the world; hut, generally speaking, friends at the other other side
have little idea of the extent or importance of this settlement. That
Victorians do not fall into similar error with regard to antipodean
affairs is doubtless due to the generosity of the educational system,
which, by its free and compulsory conditions, has ensured among the
people an average standard of intelligence which is not equalled
perhaps among any European people except the Germans. Nor has
this average education precluded flights into the higher regions of culture
according to some of our critics; rather is there evidence that, as in the
days of Greek supremacy, it will eventually tend towards the exaction
of the highest work from those who aspire to be leaders in literature
and art. The rush and generally exciting conditions of colonial life
are not so conducive to the highest forms of culture as are the conser-
vative ways and inspiring traditions of the older cities; but in Mel-
bourne we have already sewn seeds of ambitious desire and artistic
development which will blossom in the spring of a liberal enlighten-
ment, now that the excitement of early colonial settlement has subsided.
In many of our private schools for boys and girls we have educational
establishments which equal in every respect the first institutions in the
United Kingdom; while the Melbourne University course is of such
a very high standard that the admission of English and foreign
graduates to ad eundem degrees has always attracted the gravest con-
sideration of the governing council. The Melbourne Unfversity was
the first in Australia, and one of the first in the world, to admit women
students on terms of equality with men. In the Arts course women
have been specially successful, the number who are entitled to use the
letters B.A. and M.A. being now very considerable, while several have
graduated in science and medicine. In 1892, Dr. Margaret Whyte
secured honours both in medicine and surgery above all male students
and her appointment to the staff of the Women’s Hospital has been
attended with complete success. Dr. Constance Stone, who was the
first lady registered by the Victorian Medical Board, at once began
practice that section of Collins Street by custom consecrate to the
most ambitious medical men, and from the first she held her own
among her learned professional brethren.
Art is guided and fostered by the Victorian Artists’ Society, an
institution which numbers upwards of two hundred members, many
of whom have exhibited at the Royal Academy and the Paris Salon.
At the Salon this year a .Melbourne sculptor, Mr. E. B. McKenneil, is
the only foreign artist who has secured honorable mention. This
young student was favoured with the special notice of Madame Sarah
Bernhardt during her visit to Melbourne, and it was m deference to
hor advice that he decided to study in Paris, a course which has been
SOCIAL LIFE IN YICTOKIA.
By AGNES G. MURPHY.®
Mies Aanes O. Muiphy ie Social Editress o i Punch, the premier society journal of Australia.
rendered possible for him by the generosity of his Melbourne friends.
Our National Gallery possesses many fine works by the great modern
painters and sculptors of England, France, and Germany ; and in con-
nection with this gallery there is a triennial scholarship, which entitles
the winner to three years’ art study in Europe. There is also a school
of painting with “ life ” classes in connection with the Victorian
Artists’ Society and the National Gallery, and in addition there are
numerous private schools over which successful Academy and Salon
exhibitors preside. Through the medium of the Royal Anglo-Aust-
ralian Society of Artists, which secures art loans for these colonies, we
are enabled each year to see some of the latest and best work,
“ Marvellous Melbourne ” and “ Musical Melbourne ” are two of
the alliterative titles bestowed on the city by admiring critics, and the
propriety of both adjectives is generally admitted The Australians
are essentially a singing people, and whether listening to the carolling
of the bushmeu, the jodelling of the milkmen, or the enthusiastic
plaudits that greet a Melba or a Patey in the Melbourne Town Hall,,
one is forced to the conclusion that music is felt and loved in this “ Italy
of the South.” During the last International Exhibition, and for
some time afterwards, Melbourne maintained an orchestra of sixty
performers, which, under the direction of Mr. Frederic Cowen, got
through an amount of musical work that would not discredit the
standard of any old world centre. At present there exist the Ron al
Metropolitan Liedertafel, the Melbourne Liedertafel, the Melbourne
Philharmonic Society, and the Victorian Musical Association, all in a
flourishing condition, and through which the public are assured of
efficient representations of the great musical works; while there are
many minor societies—professional and amateur—which do much to
foster the native taste for music. As a further instance of the musical
appreciation of the people, it may be mentioned that while some
dramatic “stars” have not reaped a golden harvest, yet no musical
luminary has ever visited Melbourne with other than the most satisfac-
tory results Sir Charles and Lady Halle, Madame Patey, Miss Amy
Sherwin. Signor Foli, and Madame Antoinette Sterling have all enjoyed
the most gratifying support, and the return of Madame Meiba is
. generally spoken of as an occasion which shall mark the millenium of
enthusiasm among her admiring compatriots.
The atmospheric conditions are greatly in favour of excellent vocal
development, and the metropolis boasts of several teacheis who have
secured the most artistic successes in the matter of voice-culture. But
it is not only in vocal but in instrumental music that the colony haa
marked a splendid record, although her existence has not yet reached
six decades According to tradition, Australian birds are bereft of song,,
and as a recompense it would seem as though their due share of melody
had passed into the throats of the people. While the latter duly
appreciate the beauties of Wagner, Beethoven, Gounod, Mozart, Men-
delssohn, and Haydn, it must be admitted that there is at all times a
very nice appreciation of the lighter music. The Melbourne people
are sufficiently jin de siecle to appreciate the most modern phases of
stage amusement, but where it is a question of choosing between light
comedy and comic opera, the latter wins the favour. It is a standing
joke against Australians that while they are more exacting as to the
character of their public amusements, and ever clamour for change,
yet they are not willing to pay so much for the privilege as patrons in
Great Britain and Ireland. Whatever be the cause, it is quite true
that the charges for admission which obtain here in this richer country
are much lower than in the United Kingdom. For this reason people,
mayhap, go oftener to theatres and concerts than would otherwise be the-
case, and thus doubtless their tastes are so educated that they some-
times will not tolerate a bill that has perhaps enjoyed a lengthened run
in the motherland. In passing, reference may be made to the recent
establishment of a Chair of Music at the Melbourne University, where
numerous students are now studying for degrees in the divine art.
The geniality of the climate secures unusual favour for all out-door
amusements, and so racing, football, golf, tennis, and cricket attract
an almost abnormal share of favour, and at certain seasons these dis-
tractions, especially racing and football, seem with many to become the
real business of life. Love of amusement is certainly the dominant
feature of Victorian life, although unfriendly critics have given priority
to an intemperate race for wealth. To the ordinary sporting enthusiast
it may seem that the conditions of Victorian sport are too closely allied
to mere business methods, but the general interest is indisputable.
All the principal race meetings are generously patronised by womanity,
and in the “ boom ” time, when everyone took a little license, it was no
unusual thing to see women of fashion in the betting paddock, laying
their own wagers. In the sobering light of subsequent developments
they are now less enthusiastic in following racing matters.
“ In everything else we are made wiser by age, but in love of
money be become more mercenary than is either needful or becoming.’*
This saying has been allotted world-wide application, and Victorians
can scarcely claim to be exempt. A few years ago the colony was


The Victorian Houses of Parliament, situated on a commanding eminence at the head of Bourke Street, were erected from designs
by Messrs. Kerr and Knight. The faqade is a superb structure of the Corinthian order, built oj Grampian stone, exceedingly hard and
white. The visitor enters a grand vestibule, over which a lofty dome will he placed when the design is fully carried out. Beyond this
is the Victoria Hall, in the centre of which stands a full length statue of the Queen in her robes of state. 2 his magnificent half
separates the two chambers—the Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly—in which the members of Parliament hold their
sittings. The building also contains an extensive Parliamentary Library.
The Flemington Racecourse, depicted below, is situated three miles from Melbourne Town Hall, on aflat bounded by the Saltwater
River on two sides, and by hills, from all parts of which the racing is seen to advantage. The \ictorian Racing Club has a Crown grant
of 801 acres, and has purchased 24 acres in addition. The club gives every year £44,800 in added, money ; of this sum £4,400 is to
steeplechases, £24,000 to handicap flat races, £5,500 to weight for age races, and £5,500 to special weight races. On the Melbourne Cup
race day, when over 100,000 holiday-makers are assembled, and some of the best horses in the world compete for per naps the richest stake in
the world, the sight is well worth going a long distance to see.


stricken by a financial fever, and while the epidemic raged everyone
seemed possessed of the desire to become wealthy without much effort,
without much labour. Up till then the colony had enjoyed an almost
continuous run of prosperity, and when people made fortunes in a few
weeks or months, it was regarded as a natural outcome of an all-round
success. Soon the bubble burst, princely entertainments were aban-
doned, extravagant retinues were curtailed, and many financial
magnates walked abroad under the shadow of suspicion or even direct
charge of fraud. In their doings, mayhap, they were actuated by
Juvenal’s deliverance—“ Dare to do something worthy of imprisonment
if you mean to be of consequence,” But to be serious, although the
people who risked their money and lost it now chafe under that loss,
still the calm judgment of the masses is that in almost every case these
directors erred in judgment and not with criminal intent. Among
the most level-headed of Victorian public men there are not wanting
those who argue that this temporary reverse which has come upon
the colony will assuredly lead to better things both in the social and
commercial life of the people. Cicero held that “ the man who has
always been fortunate cannot easily have a great reverence for virtue,”
and during this brief period of depression there can be no doubt that
the characters of the people as well as the basis of their institutions
will be strengthened and impi’oved.
Religious life in Victoria is marked by a greater liberality than that
which obtains among the masses in the United Kingdom, and if this
liberality is sometimes linked to a too great irreverence for sacred matters,
this is doubtless the result of the secular system of education which the
religious bodies are still hoping to amend. With the exception of the
High Church of England and Roman Catholic sections, people are not
very particular as to which church they attend, many of the church-
goers often dividing their patronage in a way that would have charmed
Sydney Smith. Despite this division of interests, when occasion
requires there is not wanting evidence of earnest good work on behalf
of the congregations; in fact, it may be that the success which generally
attends efforts to raise moneys for church funds is due to the
co-operation of all denominations. Visitors are often surprised by the
closeness with which the Sabbath is kept in such an advanced com-
munity; certainly nothing could be more different to the Continental and
American Sunday. The libraries and picture galleries are closed, no news-
papers are published, the tram and train services are greatly reduced,
and it is not permissible to exact a charge to any entertainment, even
of a religious order. This latter difficulty has lately been overcome in a
measure by the institution of Sunday concerts at which a collection
is made. In the matter of Sunday observance, Sydney is much more
advanced than Melbourne, but there is a general hope that the libraries
and picture galleries of the latter city will shortly be thrown open.
There is no state church in the colonies, but Victoria is blessed with a
recently-born denomination, known as the Australian church, which
has for its creed a Presbyterian kind of Unitarianisrn.
There are few features of Victorian social life more agreeable than
the liberal views that obtain with regard to the occupations of women.
As clerks, type-writers, journalists, teachers of painting and music,
agents, Post Office employes, telephone operators, and University
teachers, great numbers of women are emploved ; while, as has been
already indicated, there are several engaged iu the practice of medicine.
The severe financial crisis from which the colony is just emerging
compelled many ladies to seek a living in some of these ways, and
Melbourne even boasts of a society belle who now directs a successful
dressmaking establishment, while other lesser known social people have
elected to try their luck in tea and flower shops, as the demand for
governesses is entirely out of proportion to the supply. It may not be
wholly inapropos to state that these ladies who have been obliged to
relinquish the attractions of society for the more sordid pursuits of
business have never had their way made rougher by the snubs of former
friends ; indeed, the dressmaker referred to is always welcomed at all
the most exclusive society reunions.
Globe-trotters who have scampered through the entire Australian
continent in a few weeks, and who have then published their opinions
in England, have been prone to charge Australians with the crime of
tuft-hunting, but no charge could be more absurd. The Australians
are essentially a people of democratic tendencies, and Imperial honors
do not always raise the recipient in the special estimation of his fellows.
That Victorians do “ lionize ” some distinguished visitors is true, but it
would be unjust and ungenerous to say that these visitors are always the
most important social people; indeed, there have been instances when
high titled personages have been allowed to pass through the colonies
without attracting any undue notice, while musical and dramatic celeb-
rities have been accorded the most deferential and enthusiastic attention
Madame Sarah Bernhardt’s visit will long be memorable for the
intense interest which it aroused During her season the prices at the
theatre were doubled, and despite this advance hundreds were turned
away nightly. Her hotel was besieged by callers, her movements were
noted and attended by demonstrations of extraordinary popular favour,
and every night the theatre rang with wonderful manifestations of fervour
and delight, and yet the Australians are not an enthusiastic people
such as the French, the Irish, the Spanish, and Italian. Contact with
the theatre and theatricals is very welcome to Victorian society people,
and when they get an opportunity to “ lionize ” a dramatic star, he or
she runs considerable risk of being “killed with kindness.” In no
country in the world are amateur theatricals so general as in Victoria.
Amateur dramatic societies flourish in extraordinary numbers, and
there is scarcely a family of which some member has not appeared in
a “ show ”of some kind or other. Teachers of elocution have been in
great request for years past, and the teaching of skirt and fancy dancing
is so general that among the leading families in the metropolis it is
quite the exception to find a child ignorant of the most fantastic figures
of the choric art. It will thus be seen that young Victoria possesses
good qualifications for these amateur performances which are so general,
and by which a handsome and almost regular revenue is raised for the
local charities. Attention may be directed to an effort recently made to
raise funds for the Women’s Hospital, over £6OOO being secured by
means of a “Week of Self-Denial,” and this without the aid of direct
personal appeal.
Victorians are gradually settling down to be a reading people,
a taste which they have good opportunity for cultivating, since the
colony possesses, pro rata , ten free libraries for every one in England,
and the excellence of the Australian press has even been admitted by
the most unfavourable critics. Melbourne is also blessed by the
existence of several literary societies of undoubted merit. There is the
Austral Salon, managed entirely by ladies, and with the Countess of
Hopetoun as president, which has had a perfectly unchequered existence.
Gentlemen are admitted as associates, but have no voice in the manage-
ment of the club, which holds weekly and monthly literary meetings.
There are the Warrawee Club, a more democratic feminine association;
the Shakspeare Society, which has existed for several years ; the Royal
Society, open to men and women, and mainly scientific; the Hypatia
Club, chiefly fostered by University students ; the Princess Ida Club,
a social and literary society for women students of the University;
the Alliance Franchise, devoted to the popularising of the French
tongue; the Home Reading Union and Time and Talent Association ;
while there are countless minor societies, exclusive of those directly
affiliated to the University, where intellectual advancement is the
guiding principle. In connection with the Public Library there is a
free-lending section, and there are several other libraries where all the
latest and best books and magazines are always obtainable. Of religious,
benevolent, temperance, and nursing societies, there are many, indeed
in this class of organization it would seem that Victoria is almost more
than up to date, and so with her hospitals, both general and special.
The climatic conditions render out-door life so attractive that the
home life of Victorians naturally suffers. So much pleasure is asso-
ciated with al fresco doings that it is not to be wondered at that the
home is not so tenderly associated with one’s life as in the motherland,
although this assertion is to some extent negatived by the care and
attention that is lavished on the beautifying of Victorian homes.
Many Melbourne people have station residences several hundred miles
away in the back blocks of Queensland, and they think as little of
journeying from one home to the other as an English person does of
the journey from London to Holyhead. This indifference to travel has
something to do with the want of a deep attachment to home, and it is
notable that the people change their residence with as little thought as
a lady does her gloves. It is no unusual thing for ladies to travel from
Brisbane to Melbourne, or vice versa, for the sake of attending some
ball or race meeting. This, with other conditions which have been lightly
touched on, gives a freedom of manner that is very agreeable to the
visitor who has always been bound by the conventionalities of a
drawing-room in Mayiair. It may be that persons of deep culture
are more rarely met with “ this side of the line,” but for average
brightness, debonnaire bearing and a kindly freedom of manner, the
young Australians have few rivals. This gives a great charm to the
traveller who is jaded by the ways of London society. Not that there
is really any other great difference between the doings of tlie fashion-
able world in Belgravia and Toorak. The drawing-rooms are as
elegantly appointed, the gardens are as w T ell tended, the entertainments
are as carefully arranged, the ladies as handsomely gowned and
jewelled, and all the etcetras as complete.
During the season, which opens with the Queen’s Birthday ball at
Government House and closes with the Melbourne Cup carnival in
November, beauty and fashion are seen to special advantage in
Victorian society. The present Governor of Victoria, the Earl of
Hopetoun, entertains in a most elaborate scale, and many English and
European nobles have bten astonished by the brilliancy of these
Government House balls. The ball-room itself is a very fine hall,
painted in a most artistic manner and lit by electricity, and hospitality
is dispensed on lines that would credit a royal host. On certain
days Lady Hopetoun holds receptions, the attendance sometimes
running up to nearly three thousand persons, and on the Queen’s
Birthday the Governor holds a levee, which is something of a State
function, and necessitates the wearing of evening dress or uniform by
all who attend. These receptions and levees do not confer any privilege
beyond that of mere attendance on those who present themselves.
Those who desire entree to Government House must call occasionally
aid inscribe their names in a book kept in the hall for that purpose,
and from those names so inscribed the Governor selects those whom
he proposes to favour with his hospitality.
The Governor, by reason of his position, does not accept any
private hospitality, and so the only recognition his guests can make,
is to inscribe their names as described. The Mayoress of Melbourne
also holds periodical receptions, and from the callers on these occasions
the list of guests for civic hospitality is compiled. Several of the
leading private residents also entertain on a most generous scale, and
occasionally one finds a lavish host in a man whose spelling is as original
as his grammar is eccentric, but this is an inseparable condition of
colonial life, where fortunes and positions are quickly made and marred.


Some rather unlettered colonists on whom Fortune has smiled
beamingly, do not bear out the saying of Claudius, that “ nothing is
more harsh than a low man when raised to a certain height ”; and it is
a notorious fact, that some of the most tiresome Victorian vagrants are
bearers of high names and pedigrees, showing that Tennyson’s teaching
is not reversed at the reverse side of the globe. During the winter
season hunting is indulged in, and the fearlessness of Australian riders,
men and women, give special zest to the chase.
VICTORIA : PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY AND GEOLOGY,
By REGINALD A. F. MURRAY, F.G.S., Government Geologist of Victoria.
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY.
Position.
Victoria occupies the south-eastern portion of, and is the southern-
most colony on, the Australian Continent.
It lies between the 34th and 39th parallels of south latitude, and
the 141st and 150th meridians of east longtitude. Its extreme length
from east to west is about 420, its greatest breadth 250, and its extent
of coast line nearly 600 geographical miles.*
Area.
The area of Victoria is 87,884 square miles, or 56,245,760 acres,
being less by nearly 2,000 square, miles than that of Great Britain, and
computing only about a thirty-fourth of the total area of the Australian
continent, which is estimated at 2,944,628 square miles.*
Boundaries.
The boundaries of Victoria are—on the west, South Australia, the
dividing line being about 242 geographical miles in length, approxi-
mating to the 141st meridian of east longtitude, and extending from the
sea, near the mouth of the Glenelg River, to the Murray River, On
the north, the Murray River, from the 141st meridian to the principal
source of the river at Forest Hill. On the north-east, a straight line
running south-easterly from Forest Hill to Cape Howe. On the south,
from Cape Howe to the 141st meridian, the Pacific Ocean, Bass Straits,
and the Southern Ocean.*
Mountain and River Systems.
A Cordillera or mountain chain, conforming approximately in
direction to the eastern and south-eastern coast lines of Australia,
extends from Cape York, the extreme northern point of the island
continent, through Queensland and New South Wales into Victoria,
which latter territory may be described as comprising the south-eastern
portion of Australia, and as including the southern terminal spurs of
the Cordillera.
The Cordillera passes into Victoria at Forest Hill, and trends
thence south-westerly to a point near St. Clair, between the head-
waters of three of the principal streams of Victoria, namely, the Yarra,
falling into Port Phillip, the Goulburn, an affluent of the Murray, and
the Thomson, running into the Latrobe River, a few miles above where
the latter enters the Gippsland Lakes.
From St, Clair a great spur of the Cordillera extends through the
colony, in a general direction slightly to the north of west, to the Glenelg
River, near the South Australian border, where the range slopes down
to the low-lying, nearly level, country of which the western margin of
Victoria, from the sea to the Murray, principally consists. The
Grampians, including the Sierra, the Victoria, the Dundas, and the
Black Ranges, constitute the terminal western points of this mountain
chain.
Another spur, which will, for the sake of distinction, be here
termed the Southern Spur, branches from the Cordillera at St. Clair,
and extends southerly, but in a very zig-zag manner, to Wilson’s
Promontory, the extreme southern point of Australia.
This spur is not so conspicuous a mountain chain as the western
range, but is of geographical importance, being really a portion of the
main watershed line extending from the extreme northern to the
extreme southern point of Australia.
The Main Divide.
The portion of the Cordillera from Forest Hill to St. Clair, and
the western range, together constitute geographically, and will be here
referred to as the “ Main Divide ” of Victoria, forming, as it does, the
watershed line between the Murray River system on the north, and
the numerous streams debouching on the southern coast.
* From Handbook for the Calcutta Exhibition, prepared by Mr. Hayter, the Government
Statist.
With Notes on the Geology and History of Gold Mining and the Neichy-discovered Coal Fields.
Some reference has now been made to nearly every topic of social
interest, and it only remains to say, that Victoria possesses exceptional
resources for the amusement, advancement, and intellectual culture ol
her people, who are blessed with splendid possibilities, which now that
her period of unrest has passed away, they are directing towards the
attainment of the highest ideals of life.
The loftiest summit of the Australian Cordillera is Mount
Kosciusko, 7,300 feet above sea-level, situated in New South Wales,
about 24 miles northward from Forest Hill. In Victoria, the highest
points of the Main Divide are between Forest Hill and St. Clair. The
names and heights of the principal are as follows:—Forest Hill, (a' out)
5,000 feet; Cobberas, 6,025 feet; Mount Tambo, 4,700 feet; Mount
Hotham, 6,100 feet; The Twins, 5,575 feet; Mount Howitt, 5,715
feet; Connor’s Plain, 5,500 feet; Fullarton’s Spring Hill, 5,400 feet;
and Mount Matlock, 4,561 feet.
Mount Bogong,* 6,508 feet, and Mount Feathertop, 6,303 feet, the
highest mountains in Victoria, are peaks on northern spurs from the
Main Divide, the former between the Kiewa and the Mitta Mitta, the
latter between the Kiewa and the Ovens Rivers.
Besides these there are—on spurs extending north from the Main
Divide—Mount Gibbo, 5,764 feet; Mount Wills, 5,758 feet; Mount
Cope, 6,015 feet; Mount Buffalo, 5,645 feet; Mount Cobbler. 5,342
feet; and Mount Buller, 5,934 feet; while on spurs running south
there are—Mount Tamboritha, 5,381 feet; Mount Kent, 5,129 feet;
Castle Hill, 4,860 feet; Mount Wellington, 5,363 Ret; and Mount
Useful, 4,756 feet.
Westward from St. Clair to Mount Strickland the Main Divide
maintains *n average elevation of not much less than 4,000 feet, but
from Mount Strickland westward none of the highest peaks attain that
altitude. Mount Disappointment, 2,631 feet; Mount Macedon, 3,324
feet; Mount Buangor, 3,247 feet; Lar ne Gerin, 3,123 feet; Mount
Ararat, 2,020 feet; and Mount William, in the Grampians, 3,827 feet
above sea-level, are the highest elevations westward from the meridian
of Melbourne.
The average height of the Main Divide may be approximately
stated at about 3,000 feet, some of the lowest gaps being little over
1,000 feet above sea-level.
The Main Divide has a general bearing of a few degrees south of
west, taking a direct line from Forest Hill, on the north-east boundary
line, to Mount William, the highest peak of the Grampians, in the western,
part of the colony. The average distance of the Main Divide from
the coast is approximately 70 miles, or about the distance which the
two mountains above referred to (Forest Hill and Mount William) are
from the mouths of the Snowy and Hopkins Rivers respectively, so that
a straight line between the two latter points is nearly parallel with one
between the two mountains.
In its principal deviations the course of the Main Divide conforms
noticeably to the configuration of the coast line ; the southernmost
point of the former is where the Cordillera bifurcates at St. Clair, and
is directly north of Wilson’s Promontory, the southernmost point on the
coast line. The Divide recedes northward, conformably to the inden-
tation of Port Phillip, turns again slightly south-westward, and then
deflects north-westward, coinciding in general direction with the coast
line from Cape Otway to Portland.
Of the leading spurs branching from the Main Divide on the north,
only some of those eastward of the Ovens River extend as far north as the
Murray ; the spurs westward from the Ovens terminate on level country
many miles back from the Murray.
The extreme eastern portion of Victoria, a triangular area, bounded
by the Snowy River, the north-east boundary line, and the sea, is a
mountainous tract connected with the Cordillera by a very devious
mountain range extending from New South Wales; the two principal
mountains in this tract are Mount Deddick, 4,318 feet high, close to
the boundary line, and Mount Ellery (aboriginal name Goongrah),
4,255 feet, about the centre of the area.
On the southern slopes of the Main Divide the leading spurs
separating the principal drainage areas lying between Cape Howe and:
Port Phillip extend down to, or to within a short distance of, the sea
but to the westward of Port Phillip a wide extent of low lying, anl
level or slightly undulating country, intervenes between the foot-hills of
the Main Divide and the coast line. An isolated mountainous tract,
known as the Cape Otway Ranges, totally unconnected by any con«
spicuous leading range with the Main Divide, lies to the south of a line
* This was the name given by the aborigines to a large species of moth which frequents the
mountain at certain seasons in great numbers, and was highly prized by the blacks as an article
of diet.
(Continued at page 32).


The Peninsular Company was founded in 1837, although the steamers which it
owned had actually been running to the Peninsula a year or two previous to that
date. In 1840 the Company was expanded into the Peninsular and Oriental
Steam Navigation Company, being incorporated by Royal Charter. Its jubilee
occurred in 1887, and was signalised by the construction of four steamers of
greater size than any vessels the Company had previously built, the “ Victoria,’’
“ Britannia,” “ Oceana,” and “ Arcadia,” amounting together to about 26,000
tons, and costing but little short of £BOO,OOO. Since then have been added the
“Himalaya” and “Australia,” still larger and more powerful steamers, and
another somewhat similar, but exceeding them in tonnage, is at present on the
stocks. The original cost of the fleet amounts to upward of seven millions. No
other shipping company has a record of the same length of public service,
combined with such a wide range of operations. Whether in point of tonnage
(and that of the most costly description), or in the extensive field of its labours, the
Company must be admitted to stand at the head of all similar enterprises, and
now that the balance of its half century’s work is struck it will hardly be denied
that there stands to its credit A record of valuable services performed in a spirit
of enterprise, with advantage to the State and to the commerce of the Empire.
JAPAN.
AUSTRALIA.
“ The importance of the bid for the pati’onage of the increasing number of
persons who travel solely for health or pleasure, which is now being made by the
well-known Peninsular and Oriental Company, is easily understood by examining
their advertisement and prospectus. A passenger may travel on board their vessels
about 25,000 miles for a hundred guineas, which is about the sum for which return
tickets can be had to Australia, China, or Japan. When we consider the large
size and complete arrangements of the vessels comprising their fleet, the safety
insured by the tested ability and discipline of their officers, the liberality of their
table, and not least, their excellent medical staff, we recognise the importance of
the step which this Company has taken in popularising ocean travel.”
Left Gravesend
Arrived Brindisi
Left Brindisi
5 p.m 12th May.
4.20 a.m. 21st May.
0.45 a.m. 22nd May.
2.54 a.m. 15th June.
Arrived Adelaide
PORTS EN ROUTE.
Ceylon. —lf fortunate, the traveller will get his first peep of that pearl of
the East—Ceylon—just before sunrise, when he will gain a view of the celebrated
mirage of Adam’s Peak.
Passengers must divide the objects of interest if they wish to find satisfaction.
Say Colombo, its temples, &c., Mount Lavinia, and the cinnamon gardens in the
outward routes ; and Kandy, with its palaces and wonderful buildings, and the
most wonderful gardens of the w'orld at Peradinia, in the homeward passage.
STRAITS SETTLEMENTS.
Penang, or Prince of Wales Island, one of the Straits Settlements, is
situated on the west side of the Malay Peninsula, and has an area of 164 square
miles. Georgetown (the capital) is the commercial centre. Travellers en route
will generally have time during the steamer’s stay to land and visit the water-
fall, a drive of four miles, or perhaps to mount the Penang Hills, about 2,700
feet, at the top of which will be found the government bungalow, the signal
station, and a comfortable hotel. The view from this height is very fine, present-
ing a magnificent aspect of tropical luxuriance, while the change from the heated
plain below will be found delightful. The temperature of Penang is uniformly
high, tempered by tropical squalls and showers. Vegetation, fruit, and flowers
are profuse ; the roads are good, and many pleasant drives can be obtained.
Steaming time,
Brindisi to Adelaide,
16*47 knots per hour.
FLEET OF THE
PENINSULAR AND ORIENTAL
STEAM
Singapore Island is at the extreme south of the Malay Peninsula; is 27
miles long by 14 miles wide ; it is comparatively level, the highest hill being only
520 feet high. The town of Singapore has many buildings of elegant and sub-
stantial appearance. The principal business quarter for Europeans is in Raffle’s
Square. The large native quarter is not very inviting, though its mixed popula-
tion shows every variety of Eastern race. Outside the town excellent roads
branch off in every direction, shaded with trees ; and travellers will find ample
means of locomotion for viewing the island and town by steam trams, gharries
drawn by the sturdy little Malay ponies, and the imported Japanese “ jeurick-
shaw.” The climate is not unhealthy. The heat of the day is great, but
tempered by a sea breeze and frequent showers, while the nights are compara-
tively cool.
COMPANY,
Registered
Tonnage.
Effective
Horse
Power.
Registered
Tonnage.
Australia
Himalaya
Arcadia
Oceana
10,000
10,000
Peshawur
Aden
6,898
3,92,3
6,362
7,500
Mirzapore
Pekin
3,913
6,3(32
7,500
3,908
Victoria
Britannia
Rome...
6,268
7,500
6,257
7,500
Khedive
Brindisi
Rosetta
Rohilla
Ravenna
Bombay
Shanghai
Canton
Ancona
Surat
3,890
3,553
5,545
6,000
3,525
Oriental
5,045
6,000
CHINA.
Peninsular
Carthage .
Valetta
5,045
6,000
3,386
5,013
5,250
3,216
Hong Kong. —The island of Hong Kong lies off the coast of the Kwantung
province of China at the entrance of the Canton River. The harbour is one of the
finest and most beautiful in the world. It is formed by a sheet of land-locked
water between the island and the mainland, and has an area of ten square miles,
which is always crowded with ships of every type and variety, set as it were in a
framework of noble scenery, gives a picture that is ever animated and magnificent.
Travellers on landing will find the favourable impressions raised by the view of
Hong Kong from the harbour confirmed. Hotels and club house give good
accommodation, and the “ accredited ” stranger will find no reason to complain of
“ Taipon ” hospitality. The climate and temperature in the cold season—from
October to April—is cool and bracing from the influence of the N.E. monsoon,
but the remaining months, while the S.W, monsoon prevail, ares hot and trying.
The wet season commences in May, and continues until the beginning of
4,919
5,350
3,216
Massilia
4,918
5,350
Parramatta
Ballarat ..
5,000
3,142
4,748
5,000
3,142
Bengal
Coromandel
Chusan
4,499
4,500
4,499
4,500
V erona
Assam
Siam
3,130
3,0(50
4,496
4,500
3,050
Manila
Ganges
Sutlej
Shannon
Clyde
4,210
3,000
4,206
4,500
Hydaspes
Cathay
Malwa
Nizam
2,996
2,995
4,206
4,500
2,970
4,189
4,500
2,735
4,136
4,500
Gwalior
2,733
Thames
Java
4,113
4,500
4,093
3,000
Lombardy
Venetia
Thibet
2,726
2,726
Formosa
Malacca
4,045
3,000
2,622
4,045
3,000
Teheran
2,622
Kaiser-I-Hind ...
4,029
4,000
XXX building
4,200
August.
THE PENINSULAR AND ORIENTAL STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY.
HIMALAYA’S RECORD PASSAGE, BRINDISI TO ADELAIDE,
24 DAYS 2 HOURS.
reached the inner anchorage at 4.8, her rate of travelling up Hobson’s Bay exceed
ing 17 knots per hour.
Effective
Horse
Power.
4,000
3,000
4,000
4,000
4,000
2,800
3,500
3,500
3,500
2,500
2,500
2,500
3,500
2,600
3,500
3,000
3,000
2,50 C
2,500
2,500
2,500
2,500
2,500
2,500
2,000
2,000
3,000
Yokohama, the most important of the ports open to foreign commerce, is
built on a plain surrounded by low hills and a highly cultivated country, and its
proximity to Tokio, the capital of the empire, gives it a special character. It is
the starting point whence to visit, not only the capital, but many places of
interest. Travellers will find every needful accommodation in the way of hotels,
shops, guides, and guide-books. The best time to visit Japan is in April, May,
and June.
Sydney.— Port Jackson, the harbour of Sydney, is one of the most secure
and picturesque ports in the world, the harbour being perfectly land-locked.
The environs of Sydney are simply charming, and afford ample opportunity for
excursions, so that a stranger can spend a fortnight or three weeks in the city
and neighbourhood with great pleasure. The climate is salubrious, the tem-
perature in summer and winter being not very unlike that of Naples. Frost is
seldom seen. August is generally stormy, but there is no regular rainy or bad
weather.
The weather during the earlier stages of the voyage was favorable to rapid
steaming. The 930 miles intervening between Brindisi and Port Said were
traversed in 2 days 8 hours 30 minutes, at an average speed of 16'46 knots per
hour. Between Suez and Aden she travelled still more rapidly, the record rising
to 16'55 knots. Head winds were encountered between Aden and Colombo, the
average speed falling to 16'9 knots. The maximum speed of 16'74 knots was
attained between Colombo and Albany, the longest and most tempestuous stage
of the voyage. The weather met with after leaving Colombo, down to 7 degrees
S., was squally and wet; thence to 23 degrees S., fresh to strong trades and
head seas prevailing. When within 300 miles of Cape Leuwin the “ Himalaya ”
ran into a strong S.E. gale, accompanied by high seas. The run to Adelaide was
completed under still less favourable conditions. A fresh S.W. gale prevailed in
the Great Australian Bight. The wind raised a high, confused sea, causing the
vessel to roll and toss about, and rendering the work of stoking both difficult
and perilous. This accounts for the comparatively low record of this stage, 16 - 23
knots per hour. After leaving Adelaide the “ Himalaya ” was driven along at a
high rate of speed. She has established the record between Melbourne and the
South Australian port. She covered the 500 miles separating the two ports in
exactly 30 hours, or half an hour quicker than the “Australia” on her record
passage. The “ Himalaya ” entered the Heads at 2‘5 yesterday afternoon, and
The “ Australia” made the previous record voyage between Europe and the
Antipodes at the beginning of last May.
NAVIGATION




from Geelong to Warrnambool; the highest point in these ranges is
Mount Sabine, 1,800 feet above the sea, and from the range of which
it is the culminating point numerous spurs decend to the coast, where
they terminate in cliffs and bold head-lands.
The Southern Spur.
The Southern Spur,branching from the Cordillera at St. Clair, trends
southward for some miles to Mount Baw Baw, a conspicuous mountain
of over 5,000 feet in altitude ; it then turns westerly as far as the head
of the Latrobe, forming the dividing range between that river and the
Yarra; thence it makes a south-easterly deflection and decends to a
level not 500 feet above the sea, in the neighbourhood of Drouin, where
it forms the watershed line between the valleys of Gippsland and of
Western Port. From here the spur rises again and forms the Strzelecki
Range, over 2,000 feet in altitude above the sea.
As the Strzelecki Range, and further south-east as the Hoddle
Range, it forms the main watershed line of the South Gippsland Ranges,
and with its numerous offshoots constitutes—within an area lying south
of a direct line from Western Port to the Gippsland Lakes—a moun-
tainous tract, whose only connection with the Main Divide is the low
ridge near Drouin above referred to.
From the Hoddle Range one spur decends to Cape Liptrap, while
another slopes down to a narrow low isthmus between Corner Inlet and
Shallow Inlet.
South from this isthmus rises a rugged mountainous peninsula, con-
sisting wholly of granite, of which the highest peak. Mount Latrobe,
is 2,400 feet above the sea, and the terminal point is Wilson’s Promon-
tory, the southernmost extremity of Australia.
Rivers and Drainage Areas.
That portion of the Murray River drainage area contained within
Victoria lies to the north of the Main Divide, and comprises more than
half of the entire area of the colony. The total length of the river is
1,300 miles, of which 980 border Victoria, and it is navigable by
steamers as far as Wodonga, about the 147th meridian. The principal
Victorian tributaries of the Murray are the Mitta Mitta, the Kiewa,
the Ovens, the Goulburn (navigable for a considerable length), the
Campaspe, and the Loddon, all of which rise in the Main Divide, and
are fed by numerous tributaries. Westward from the Loddon are the
Avoca, the Wimmera, and several smaller streams, which run only
during wet seasons, and whose waters rarely reach the Murray, being
received in lakes and swamps, the overflow from which is absorbed by
the porous soil of the low-lying tract forming the north-western district
of the colony.
The Southern Spur separates the country lying to the south of the
Main Divide into two great divisions, each of which contains a number
of distinct drainage areas.
In the eastern division, which comprises nearly the whole of
Gippsland, there are several independent streams, of which the principal
are the Genoa, the Bern, and the Brodribb, draining considerable areas
between the Snowy River and Cape Howe. The Snowy River has its
sources in New South Wales, but a large portion of its drainage area
lies in Gippsland ; its western watershed line is ° range starting from
near Mount Tambo, on the Main Divide, and extending to the low
country west of the river mouth. The principal Victorian tributary of
the Snowy River is the Buchan, rising between Forest Hill and Mount
Cobberas.
Between the Snowy River and the Gippsland Lakes is a small
drainage area, the waters of which pass to the sea through Lake Tyers.
From that portion of the Main Divide lying between Mount Tambo
and St. Clair, and from the Southern Spur between St. Clair and the
Hoddle Range, rise a number of rivers which irrigate the richest portions
of Gippsland, and finally mingle their waters in the Gippsland Lakes,
whence they reach the sea by a common outlet. The principal of these
rivers are the Latrobe or Glengarry, the Morwell, Narrican, and Moe,
joining the Latrobe from the south and west; the Tangil, the Tyers, the
Thomson, and the Macallister, affluents of the Latrobe from the
north.
The Latrobe flows into Lake Wellington, the westernmost and
largest of the lakes, which also receives the Avon, .. moderately-sized
river heading from Mount Wellington.
A broad deep channel named McLennan’s Straits connects Lake
Wellington with Lake Victoria, and the latter joins Lake King, into
which enter the Mitchell or Wonnongatta, the Nicholson, and dr
Tambo Rivers.
The outlet of the lakes to the sea is sometimes closed by sand to
the passage of vessels, but usually it is navigable by steamers and
sailing vessels of moderate draught.
Inside the lakes are always navigable, and of the rivers which enter
them the Latrobe and Mitchell are navigable by fair-sized steamers for
about seven miles respectively up to Sale and Bairnsdale, the two
principal towns in Gippsland.
Between the Gippsland Lakes and Wilson’s Promontory a number
of minor streams empty themselves into various inlets along the coast.
The Albert and the Tarra running into Port Albert, and the Agnes
running into Corner Inlet, head from a range which forms the divide
between their waters and those of the Morwell, and is an eastern off-
shoot from the Hoddle Range. The Franklin, the Bennison, and
Stockyard Creek head from the Hoddle Range and flow into Corner
Inlet.
In the main-western division—that lying south of the Main Divide
and west of the Southern Spur—are a number of distinct drainage
areas.
Anderson’s Inlet receives the River Tarwin, of which the eastern
branches head from the Hoddle Range, and 'the northern from the
Strzelecki Range, both portions of the Southern Spur. The Rowlett
River, entering the sea between Cape Patterson and Western Port,
heads from a western offshoot of the Strzelecki Range, which extends
down to Griffith’s Point and forms the southern watershed of the streams
falling into Western Port. In the drainage area of Western Port the
principal streams are the Bass and the Lang Lang, rising in the Strze-
lecki Range, and the Tarago (late Tarween), with its affluent the
Buneep, heading from a range which branches westerly from the
Southern Spur and forms the divide between Western Port and Port
Phillip. For several miles the Tarago skirts the western slope of the
Sou*hern Spur at Neerim, and on leaving it receives Brandy Creek,
heading from the low “saddle” to which the spur descends near Drouin.*
From the southern portion of this saddle small streams flow westward
to the Lang Lang ; all waters eastward from it flow into the Moe
and belong to the Gippsland drainage system.
The Port Phillip drainage area is a very extensive one ; its principal
river is the Yarra, whose extreme sources are at the bifurcation of the
Cordillera near St. Clair.
The main northern tributaries of the Yarra—the Saltwater or
Maribyrnong, the Plenty, and the Watts—rise in the Main Divide,
while of the southern affluents, some head from the Southern Spur, and
others from its branch-range which divides the Western Port from the
Port Phillip drainage area. From this range, portion of which is known
as the Dandenong Range, several minor creeks descend to the eastern
shore of Port Phillip.
The Werribee rises in the Main Divide and enters Port Phillip
mid-way between Melbourne and Geelong.
The Barwon enters the sea through Lake Connewarree, a little to
the west of Port Phillip Heads, and takes its rise at Mount Sabine, the
culminating point of the Cape Otway Ranges. The Leigh or Yarrowee,
and the Moorabool, both northern affluents of the Barwon, have their
sources in the Main Divide.
In the Cape Otway Ranges a number of creeks and rivers head
from the Mount Sabine Range. The principal of these are the Barrum,
running into the sea at Apollo Bay , the Aire, five miles N.W. from
Cape Otway, and the Gellibrand, which heads from Mount Sabine, and
draining the northern part of the Otway Ranges, joins the sea a few
miles N.W. from Moonlight Head. Curdie’s River intersects the low-
lying western portion of the Cape Otway district, and, passing through
a wide shallow lake near its mouth, enters the sea between the Gelli-
brand River and Warrnambool.
The Hopkins, which drains a wide area, has its outlet at Warrnam-
bool, and its sources in a considerable length of the Main Divide,
extending from north of Ballarat to the Grampians. The Glenelg
River, rising in and skirting the northern slopes, flows round the western
extremity of the Grampians, and after being joined by the Wannon,
which receives their northern drainage, enters the sea at the western
boundary-line of the colony.
Lakes.
North of the Cape Otway Ranges, in low-lying country between
the watersheds of Curdie’s River, the Gellibrand, the Hopkins, and
the Leigh Rivers, is a district containing numerous lakes, salt and fresh.
The largest of these, and also the most extensive in Victoria, is Lake
Korangaraite, a salt lake covering nearly 58,000 acres, situated in a
large central depression about 350 feet above sea-level, receiving the
drainage of 1,200 square miles, and having no outlet save by evaporation.
Lake Colac, a few miles distant, covers nearly 7,000 acres, and is quite
fresh, but has an outlet for its superfluous waters.
Lake Burrumbeet, 10 miles westward from Ballarat, covers over
5,000 acres, is fresh, and has an outlet to the Hopkins. A number of
the lakes in the Western District occupy the craters of now extinct
volcanoes, and though not of large extent, are in many cases of great,
depth, and of highly picturesque appearance.
The explanation of the lakes having outlets being fresh, while those
having none are salt, is that in the case of the latter the salt brought'
by rain waters from the soil of the surrounding country is collected in
them and has no means of escape, while in that of the former the salt
is carried away in solution and cannot become concentrated in sufficient
quantity to affect the taste of the water. Some of the salt lakes become
dry in summer, and a thick crust of salt remains in their beds ; this is
collected and made of commercial value.
Several large lakes on the plains of the North-western District are
fine sheets of water in wet seasons, but, being very shallow, are liable
to become dried up during drought; the principal of these are Lake
Hindraarsh, Lake Tyrrell, and Lake Buloke. There are no lakes
among the mountains of Victoria, except Lake Omeo, a shallow
depression in the Omeo Plains, an elevated plateau near the heads of
the Mitta ; this lake is also liable to become dried up during the summer
time. The Gippsland Lakes, and the various inlets along the coast,
have been already noticed. Among the latter, Port Albert and Corner
Inlet are navigable by medium-sized vessels, and Anderson’s Inlet by
smaller craft. Western Port is a noble bay, navigable by the largest
♦The waters of the Lang Lang and Tarago find their way to Western Port through an immense
swamp, known as Koow-ee-rup, covering an area of 70,000 acres, which, when drained and reclaimed,
is likely to prove of great value, on account of the fertility of its soil. The waters of the Moe and
several other streams find their way to the Latrobe through a similar but smallerswamp known a«
the Moe Swamp.


vessels through either entrance, and around Phillip Island, at its
southern portion, and by smaller craft to its head, through the deep, but
narrow, channels which extend on either side of French Island, further
northward.
Port Phillip, whose northern extremity, Hobson’s Bay, is the port
of Melbourne, and the western arm, Corio Bay, that of Geelong, is
easily navigable by, and affords safe harborage to, the largest vessels
. afloat.
Apollo Bay, Warrnambool Bay, and Portland Bay are good ship-
ping ports, but do not afford very secure harborage for large vessels
in unfavorable weather.
GEOLOGY OF VICTORIA.
The following Table indicates the groups of rock formations known
to exist in Victoria; most of them have been proved on palaeontological
evidence to be the equivalents of well-explored analogous formations in
Europe and elsewhere.
Table of Geological Formations Occurring
in Victoria,
Distinguishing Colour on
Geological Sketch Map.
Groups. Divisions. Distinguishing C
Geological Sket
ct
£ Recent and in progress ... ... L
i I
Oh \ Pale Olive G
© ;■ I
.2 (a.) Upper Tertiary (Pliocene) ... J
S'-Js (b.) Middle Tertiary (Miocene) ... Light Yellowi
: a (c.) Lower Tertiary (Oligocene) ... Emerald Gree
'3
O
¥
o »
,2 c 3
S"a (d.) Oolitic (Carbonaceous) ... Light Burnt
th §
® >, (e.) Upper Palaeozoic (probably Upper
.2 £ Devonian) ... ... ... Light Burnt
g 2 (f.) Devonian (Sedimentary Rocks) ... Blue
(g.) Upper Silurian ... ... ... French Grey,
"■a (h.) Lower Silurian ... ... ... Neutral Tint
Cri '
v
(i.) Metamorphosed Stratified Rocks
~ n (Paiasozoic as regards Geological Age) Light Purple
»*\
O
r
’3 ( (j-) Newer Volcanic \ ( Pink,
g J I Igneous rocks of the ! '
’oj i Tertiai’y period j
m • > l(k.) Older Volcanic ) ( Pink, barred
a
S-I 6
C
'S |p Hb) 1 rappean 1 igneous rocks of the upper ( Indian Red.
J b and lower Palaeozoic z
i (m.) Granitic ) Epochs ... ... | Carmine.
0
Pale Olive Green.
Light Yellowish Drab.
Emerald Green.
Light Burnt Sienna.
Light Burnt Umber.
Blue
French Grey.
Neutral Tint.
Light Purple.
Victoria presents no striking geological features of which counter-
parts cannot be found in other parts of the world. Representatives
of many of the formations known elsewhere are wanting, or occupy
insignificant areas, in Victoria, though it would appear that some of
these were once present, but have been subsequently removed by
denuding agencies; others are perhaps concealed by overlying beds.
The principal gaps are those which in other countries are filled by the
Eocene beds of the Tertiary, by the cretaceous rocks of the Mesozoic,
•and by the Permian and carboniferous strata of the Palieozoic eras.
Generally described, with reference to the physical configuration
of the country, Victorian geology presents the following main features;—
Ist. The Main Divide, and its accessory systems of ranges to the north
and south, forming a great central longitudinal area, composed of Lower
Palaeozoic rocks, through which protrude masses of granite and trap-
pean rock, and on which are overlying or flanking deposits of Upper
Palaeozoic, Mesozoic, and Tertiary age.
2nd. The two great southern projections of Victoria, comprising
the South Gippsland and Western Port ranges on the east, and the
Cape Otway ranges on the west of Port Phillip ; also an area in the
Western District lying south of the Wannon and east of the Glenelg
Rivers. 1 n these three areas the prevailing rock formation is Mesozoic,
more or less overlaid or flanked by Tertiary, sedimentary, and volcanic
layers.
Wilson’s Promontory, however, the extreme southern portion of
the South Gippsland ranges, consists entirely of granite, between which
and the Mesozoic area appears a strip, extending from Corner Inlet to
Cape Liptrap, of Upper Silurian rocks.
3rd. The low-lying, level, or slightly undulating areas where Ter-
tiary and Post-tertiary sedimentary deposits constitute the surface
layers, such as the great plains bordering the Murray, the western
and south-western margin of the colony, a tract extending from the
eastern shore of Port Phillip to the head of Western Port, the Gipps-
land plains, and various minor areas bordering the coast.
4th. The area in which newer volcanic rocks of the Upper Tertiary
period are the prevalent surface formation. Of these the principal is
that lying westward of the meridian of Melbourne, and extending to
that of Portland ; bounded on the north by the foot-hills of the Main
Divide, and on the south partly by the coast and partly by the Cape
Otway ranges. In some places strips of volcanic rock extend over the
Main Divide, thus connecting the great volcanic areas lying to the
south with those of less extent on the slopes towards the Murray.
A number of small and a few extensive tracts are occupied by
older volcanic rocks, of the Miocene or Middle Tertiary epoch.
Throughout the colony sedimentary and volcanic cappings and out-
liers of Tertiary age overlie the Mesozoic and Palaeozoic rocks up to
elevations of nearly 6,000 feet above sea-level. Tertiary beds of
marine origin are not, however, found at elevations higher than 1,000
feet above sea-level, all deposits beyond that altitude showing evidence
of being due to fluviatile or lacustrine action, so far as the now
visible arrangement of their materials is concerned.
Granite.
Granite occurs in protruding masses, forming isolated areas of
varying extent throughout the colony. It does not follow any defined
line or mark any main axis of elevation ; at only a few intervals does
it constitute the crest of the Main Divide, and the largest areas occupied
by it are among the offshoot systems of ranges formed by leading spurs
north and south from tne Main Divide. In many instances granite
occurs in isolated out-crops, forming groups of hills rising abruptly
from, and surrounded by, low level country.
Except where in less elevated tracts the outlines have been
softened by denuding agencies, the granitic areas usually present a
rugged physical aspect, and jutting, out-crops of bare weathered rock
are frequently surmounted by huge egg-shaped masses or “ tors ” stand-
ing on end, and appearing as though a touch would overturn them.
The soil of the granitic areas is, as a rule, poor, and supports only
medium-sized timber, but in some localities, where the climatic con-
ditions are favorable, there flourishes a gigantic forest growth of the
tallest trees in the world (Eucalypts) amongst an almost impenetrable
scrub of native hazel, musk, dog-wood, sassafras, and pittosporum, with,
numerous smaller shrubs and tree-ferns of several species.
The native beech (Fag us Cunnivghami), the most beautiful of our
forest trees, attains its greatest perfection in these localities.
Trappean Rocks.
The intrusive trappean rocks are frequently found so blended with
the granites that a line of demarcation can hardly be drawn between
the two. They occur in some instances over extensive areas ; in others,
they form huge longitudinal dykes. In the first class, felsites, quartz
and felspar-porphyries, granite-porphyries, and syenite-porphyries are
the prevailing distinctive forms ; in the second, greenstone and diorite
are the more common varieties. Near Lancefield occurs a greenstone
which was once largely used by the aborigines for manufacturing stone
tomahawks, and the sight is still known as “ the native tomahawk
quarry.”
The features of the trappean areas are usually bold and picturesque;
the soil is superior to that derived from the granite, and, like the latter,
supports a luxuriant vegetation where the climatic conditions are
favorable.
Though lower than the sedimentary older Palaeozoic rocks, as
regards stratigraphical position, the granites and intrusive older trap-
pean rocks are really younger, geologically, as regards their present
structure, for they have evidently been in a heated condition, and have
cooled therefrom since the deposit, and while under the superincumbent
pressure, of the Silurian strata; in fact, portions of the latter have no
doubt been absorbed by underlying igneous masses, and transmuted
into granite and kindred plutonic rocks.
The Metamorphic Rocks,
These appear, for the most part, to be altered Silurian rocks, and
prevail in the western and north-eastern portions of the main mountain
system. Around the western bases of the Grampians, and along the
upper portion of the Glenelg River, are found mica-schists, quartz-
schists, serpentine-schists, and other forms in great variety, while in
the north-eastern district the prevailing rocks are mica-schists and
gneissose-schists, which latter frequently pass into a schistose granite.
The country drained by the upper waters of the Mitta Mitta consists
of metamorphic rocks, and is rugged and alpine in character, diversified
by many conspicuous mountain-peaks, bold steep ranges, and deep valleys,
through which flow never-failing streams. Portions of this country
are heavily timbered and scrubby, while others are bare and rocky,
clothed with a scanty growth of heathy scrub and snow-grass, traversed
by broad peaty valleys, and somewhat resembling portions of the Scottish.
Highlands in scenery. Some important gold-fields, such as Omeo, are
situated in the eastern metamorphic area, while Ararat and Stawell lie
along the lines of passage of the metamorphic into the normal Silurian,
rocks in the western portion. No payable gold has, however, been
found associated with the metamorphic rocks west of the Grampians.
The Silurian Rocks.
The Silurian rocks constitute the principal portion of the central
mountain system of Victoria ; the Lower Silurian rocks prevail west-


ward and the Upper Silurian eastward of the meridian of Port Phillip.
The former consist of slates, indurated shales, schistose sandstones,
and occasionally quartzites of various colours and textures ; they have
been up-tilted and compressed into a series of successive anticlinal
and synclinal folds, the lower edges of which have been invaded, meta-
morphosed, and partly absorbed by the subjacent plutonic rocks,
■while the upper have been planed off by denudation.
The normal strike of the up-tilted strata is nearly meridional, and
the dip invariably at a high angle, frequently almost vertical; the dis-
tinguishing fossils are various species groptolites.
The Upper Silurian group comprises many varieties of sandstone,
shale, and mudstone, some conglomerates, and a few limestones and
marbles; they are less acutely flexured, more variable as regards their
direction of strike, and have a lower average angle of dip than the
Lower Silurian strata. The more common fossils are trilobites, orthoceras ,
spiri/ers, and some graptolites of various species.
The scenery of the Lower Silurian country is characterised by a
good deal of sameness, though by no means devoid of beauty. Con-
stituting as it does the less elevated western portion and foot-hills of
the Main Divide, it presents few conspicuous mountain points, and has
been chiselled by denudation into a number of groups of ranges of
medium height and nearly uniform appearance, traversed by numerous
creeks and gullies tributary to the large rivers. Once well timbered,
most of the Lower Silurian country has been stripped of its forests to
supply the wants of the miners, and is now covered with a plentiful
growth of young saplings, rising to repair the loss.
The Upper Silurian country is more diversified as regards scenery ;
the mountains are loftier, exhibit far bolder outlines, and have been less
generally denuded of their natural forest growth. In the lower districts
bread grassy flats border the larger streams, and from these the hills
rise steep and abruptly, lightly timbered, fairly grassed, and sculptured
into an infinite variety of contour.
Both groups of Silurian rocks possess special interest as the sources
of gold-supply. The most extensive and permanent alluvial gold-fields,
the heaviest nuggets of gold, the greatest number of the largest and
most persistent auriferous quartz lodes have been found where the
Lower Silurian rocks prevail. The gold-fields of the Upper Silurian
tracts are farther apart, cover less areas, yield smaller nuggets, and
contain, as a rule, smaller and less persistent quartz-lodes,* but in many
places have proved locally richer in alluvial gold, and have always
maintained a higher average yield of gold per ton extracted from quartz,
than those of tne Lower Silurian areas.
Devonian Rocks.
The Devonian group is best developed in the Snowy River drainage
area, and comprises rocks of igneous origin and limestones. The former
consist of a series of porphyries and felsitic rocks, which bear evidence
o&having been the lava-flows of the Devonian epoch, subsequently meta-
morphosed to their present forms. The scenery of the mountainous
country where these rocks prevail is wild and grand, characterised by
rugged steppes and bold ridges, whose neai’ly precipitous sides descend
into deeply eroded valleys and rocky gorges. The timber is somewhat
sparse, and the herbage scanty. The limestones occur in isolated
patches, occuping basins in the older rocks, and the areas occupied by
them exhibit steep but well-rounded hills, lightly timbered and fairly
grassed, with occasional cliffs and bare outcrops of limestone. The
principal fossils of the Devonian limestones are spirifers and some ganoid
fishes.
Upper Paleozoic Rocks,
The above general term has been provisionally applied to groups of
rocks occurring in the Grampians, in the central portion of Gippsland,
and at Mansfield, and comprising thick-bedded sandstones, flags, shales,
and conglomerates, frequently nearly horizontal, and rarely steeply
inclined.f The Grampians exhibit a succession of mountain peaks,
having on one side a gradual slope conformable to the incline of the
rock layers, and terminating in rugged precipices on the other.
At Mansfield the Upper Palaeozoic beds are nearly horizontal, and
occupy a basin in the granites and Silurian rocks which form the
surrounding lofty and rugged mountains ; the basin itself is open and
well grassed, and agreeably diversified with smooth hills and rocky
scaurs, the latter formed by the out-crops of the harder bands.
In Gippsland there occur, intercalated with the sedimentary layers,
bands of porphyry, melaphyre, and other igneous rocks, representing
the lava-flows of the period, and the country occupied by these rocks is
characterised by bold lofty mountains, precipices and rocky gorges.
There are few more rugged tracts in Victoria than the Upper Palae-
ozoic area lying between the McAllister and Wonnongatta Rivers,
from the edge of the Gippsland plains up to the Main Divide.
The Mesozoic Rocks.
This group consists of sandstones, shales, and, occasionally, con-
glomerates, yielding various forms of fossil flora— Twniopteris, Zamites,
Feeopteris, Sphenopteris, and (in the beds of one locality) Gangamopteris.
The fossil fauna as yet found consist only of two species of Unio.
The rocks of the Western Mesozoic areas contain but few coal-
seams, too thin to be workable. Those of the Eastern, or South Gipps-
!aud and Western Port areas, contain coal-seams of small but workable
• A notable exception occurs in the case of Cohen’s Reef at Walhalla, worked by the Long
Tunnel Company, whose property stands first among dividend paying quartz mines.
t At Mansfield and in Gippsland some of the beds yield fossils of Upper Devonian or lower
jarboniferons aspect; among these are species of Lepidodendrou, Archceopteris, Cordaites, and
iragmentary portions of fossil fish.
size, and of excellent quality, which will doubtless be developed when
railways penetrate that country.
Portions of the Mesozoic areas consist of open well-rounded grassy
hills and downs, but for the most part they are rangy, and even
mountainous, covered with a dense forest of large timber and a
luxuriant growth of scrubs and ferns. The soil of these tracts being
of excellent quality, thousands of acres have been taken up by selectors,
and are now in course of being cleared and cultivated.
The Tertiary Formations.
The Oligocene Lower Tertiary beds are only exposed at a few
places along the coast, and at one spot inland near Hamilton. They
consist of grey clays, often containing septarian nodules, and rich in
fossils, various species of Cyproea , Limopsis , Aturia, and Voluta being
the prevailing forms.
The marine beds of the Miocene or middle tertiary group consist
of limestones and calcareous sandy and clayey layers, principally
exposed along portions of the sea-coast and on the sides of valleys
inland, within an altitude of about 600 feet above sea-level. They
are rich in fossils, the teeth of sharks, toothed whales, and seals, eai-
bones of whales, and a great variety of molluscs, including several
species of Trigonia, Pecten , Terebratula, Cardium , &c.
The Miocene formations of lacustrine and fluviatile origin are
chiefly clays, lignites, gravels, and conglomerates, and are met with
up to elevations of nearly 5,000 feet. Some of the gravels and con-
glomerates yield alluvial gold, derived from the denudation of the
Silurian rocks. Some of the beds are rich in fossil leaf impressions,
chiefly of lauraceous types.
The older volcanic rocks mark the close of the Miocene epoch, of
which they were the lava-flows, and, where undecomposed, consist of
hard, dense, dark basalts. They are usually, however, decomposed into
variegated clays, containing half-decomposed nodules of basalt, and
yield perhaps the most luxuriantly fertile soils known in Victoria.
The Upper Tertiary sedimentary formations consist of conglomer-
ates, gravels, sands, clays, &c., of both marine and fluviatile origin.
The former compose heathy and sparsely timbered tracts of poor soil;
the latter are frequently covered by newer volcanic layers, and comprise
most of the richest alluvial gold deposits.
The newer volcanic rocks represent the close of the Tertiary
period, and consist of many varieties of basalt, which constitute the
surface rocks of the wide open plains south of the Main Divide. It is
to the excellent pasturage afforded by these tracts that Victoria owes
much of her eminence as a country. The soils
covering or derived from the disintegration of these rocks are usually
very fertile.
The Post-tertiary or recent formations occupy every flat and gully,
but are most widely developed in the great level grassy plains of the
Gippsland and Murray River valleys. Generally the soil of these
plains is excellent for agricultural or pastoral purposes, and the country
is naturally devoid of timber and scrub, except along the river margins.
In the north-western portion of the colony, however, there are exten-
sive sandy tracts, and large areas are clothed with a dense growth of
mallee scrub, a dwarf species of eucalyptus.
The fossils of the Upper and Post-tertiary formations comprise
the remains of many gigantic extinct forms of marsupial animals, more
or less allied to their dwarf congeners of the present day, numerous-
mollusca, and, in the Upper Tertiary gold-drifts, a number of species
of fossil fruit, many of which are distinct from, and others allied to,
the existing types of vegetation.
VICTORIAN GOLD MINING.
Its Geology and History.
This industry comprises two principal classes—quartz and alluvial
gold mining. The first, veins and lodes, or “ reefs” of quartz traversing
the Silurian rocks, and containing gold, are mined in much the same
manner as other metalliferous lodes, and the quartz is crushed and the
gold separated by means of appliances which will be referred to here-
after. These auriferous reefs occur in a number of zones or belts of the
highly inclined Silurian strata, between which are intervening zones of
apparently the same character, but containing reefs barren of, or poor
in, gold. The quartz is contained in the Silurian rocks in an infinite
variety of forms—as solid lodes, coinciding with the planes of nearly
vertical strata ; as “ saddle formations,” resembling in cross-section a
succession of inverted thick at the apices, and thinning out in the
legs; as successions of blocks; as flat veins; and as assemblages of
veins and bunches, following certain bands of the Silurian rocks, or
traversing igneous dykes which intersect the latter.
The gold occurs in the quartz in many forms—as small specks, as
strings and ragged pieces, occasionally attaining a large size, and, more
rarely, as crystals or groups of crystals.
The principal associated minerals are iron, copper, and arsenical
pyrites, galena, and zinc-blende ; the iron pyrites frequently contain a.
large proportion of gold in mechanical combination.
“ Alluvial ” gold mining includes a number of different conditions,
varying from “surfacing”—where the gold is found in the thin soil and
rubble, covering the surface of nearly exposed Silurian rock—to “ deep
lead ” mining, where the concealed auriferous gravel deposits of ancient
river-beds are reached by means of sinking costly shafts through
hundreds of feet of volcanic and sedimentary layers which overlie them.
Under whatever conditions, however, it may be found, “ alluvial” gold.




means detrital gold, or that which, once contained in veins and reefs of
quartz, has been disintegrated and conveyed by geological action to
various distances from the sites of those matrices.
Geological investigations tend to show that the gold-bearing reefs
were formed in the Silurian rocks of Victoria before the close of the
Palaeozoic era, and that the upper portions of these rocks, with their
contained quartz veins, have been planed off by denudation to the extent
of thousands of feet in vertical height. All the alluvial or detrital
gold deposits yet found in Victoria are no older than the Middle
Tertiary or Miocene epoch; many of them are Post-tertiary or recent.
This does not, however, imply that gold-bearing drifts older than
Tertiary never existed; there is good evidence that such were exten-
sively developed, but they have been denuded, and their component
materials re-arranged and concentrated by the geological action of the
Tertiary and Post-tertiary epochs. The denudation of the Silurian
i’o-ks, and the disintegration of the gold contained in their quartz veins,
has been in constant progress during the long ages which have elapsed
from the later portion of the Paleozoic era to recent times, and much
of the alluvial gold has entered into the composition of many different
deposits which have been successively formed, denuded, and re-dis-
tributed. From its high specific gravity, the gold has always tended to
remain near its sources, while cubic miles of its parent rocks have been
denuded and carried away: hence all the remunerative alluvial gold
workings occur on, or in close proximity to, the auriferous zones of the
Silurian rocks. The great richness of some of the alluvial fields often
appears disproportionate to the auriferous quality of the quartz reefs,
and. though large pieces of gold have often been found in quartz, none
of them have equalled the great nuggets found in the detrital deposits.
The explanations of these apparent discrepancies are that an incal-
culable amount of Silurian rock and contained quartz reefs has been
disintegrated to supply the auriferous gravels, and also that the quartz
in the removed portions was richer, and contained gold in larger masses,
than what remains undenuded.
The latter deduction is arrived at by backward reasoning on the
fact that, notwithstanding many local exceptions, our quartz lodes
have generally proved richer, and contained larger pieces of gold, near
the surface than at great depths, justifying the belief that the removed
upper portions were still richer and contained still greater masses of
gold.
Historical Outlines,
From the establishment of the colony in 1836, to 1850, the
progress of Victoria was measured by the increase of flocks and herds,
the taking up of large areas as pastoral runs, and the slow increase of
population and wealth, consequent on the gradual development of the
wool-producing, and, in a minor degree, the agricultural resources of the
country. As a matter of course, the large open tracts of rich land,
affording abundant natural pasturage, were first tenanted, and as these
became occupied, smaller detached areas of similar character, in con-
junction with larger ones of poor rangy country, were taken up.
The population was thin and scattered, the difficulties of travelling
were great, and the means of communication slow and limited.
Towards the close of the fifth decade of this century, the financial
condition of Victoria was low ; live stock, the main wealth of the
settlement, were of small value, and the general prospects appeared
gloomy. The commercial health of the community was at such a stage
as, in the case of the bodily health of a growing individual, would
require a stimulant to promote increased activity of circulation and
development of the powers of growth; this stimulant was at hand in
the shape of gold, to the presence of which men’s minds became
thoroughly awakened in 1851.
Some time previously to actual discoveries of gold being made, Sir
Roderick Murchison, the late eminent geologist, had predicted them on
the strength of specimens of Australian rocks which had been sent to
him. Various stories were also in circulation as to pieces of gold being
found by employes of station-owners and others, but were either dis-
credited or hushed up. The squatters did not want the even tenor of
their bucolic existence disturbed by an influx of gold-seekers, or else
did not realise the possibilities of speedy wealth to themselves arising
from confirmation of the reports.
The great gold discoveries in California, followed by those in New
South Wales, inspired efforts to achieve similar results in Victoria, and
these efforts were crowned with unexampled success.
Between March and September, 1851, gold was found at Clunes,
Mount Alexander, Ballarat, Buninyong, the Pyrenees, and various
other localities.
Licenses to dig were first issued in September, 1851,* and, as the
richness and extent of the fields became apparent, a movement of
population took place, unparalleled, save in the case of California, in
the world’s history. Thousands and thousands of men flocked from
the mother country to Victoria ; most of them were young or in their
prime, full of energy and courage, and in their ranks were the best
specimens of the Anglo-Saxon and Celtic races. It is the decendants
of these men that now form the bulk of the Victorian people—and
under a bright sunny sky and genial climate they are developing in the
highest degree those characteristics which go so far to form a great
nation.
From 1851 to 1855 was Victoria’s period of hot youth ; the rich-
ness of some of the diggings was marvellous ; pounds weight of gold
to the tubful of washdirt were frequently obtained in choice spots;
* Gold-fields and Mineral District* oj Victoria, by R. Brough Smyth.
large nuggets were unearthed from time to time ; men who previously
had never had five pounds at once in their possession, suddenly became
owners of hundreds or thousands. Some quietly returned home to
enjoy their affluence, but the majority simply went mad, and spent
their earnings recklessly.
Ninepins were played with bottles of champagne, for which he who
broke fewest had to pay ; dozens of the same wine were emptied into
tubs and drank from tin pannikins, spirits or porter being frequently
added to give body to the drink.
Gorgeous satin “jumpers ” or blouses were fashionable, and it was
not rare to see a lucky digger so attired lolling in a carriage, with pipe
in mouth, and good store of potables, accompanied by the fair tem-
porary partner of his joys. One man, at least, who has since known
poverty, had his horse shod with gold, and general “shouting” or
treating all comers to drink, sometimes to the extent of hundreds of
pounds at one “ shout,” was the correct thing on the part of the lucky
ones.
In more than one case, men went back rich on the return voyage
of the same ship by which they arrived; but many of those who were
most successful wasted all, and are now in poverty, while others settled
in the country, embarked in other pursuits, and are now among the
leaders in commerce, the various professions, and the Legislature.
Most of the great gold-fields were opened during the few years
immediately following the first discovery, the prospecting population
being then so great. Other new fields of less importance and exten-
sions of old ones have since been opened up from time to time, but no
great discovery in shallow ground has been made for the last ten years,
nor can such be now expected, as no large area of possibly auriferous
shallow country remains untried.
As the rich shallow diggings of the early days became exhausted,
the auriferous drifts resting on the Silurian bed-rock were traced
further, and at increasing depths, until they took the form of leads, or
gravel deposits, filling ancient river beds, concealed by overlying
volcanic layers and other formations. As the geological conditions
became better recognised, adventurous miners took courage to sink
through these layers, and found the leads passing under them to be
frequently as rich as the shallower deposits. Capital was fearlessly
invested in powerful steam machinery to drain the water, to haul the
wash-dirt to the surface, and to separate the gold, for which latter
process large and costly appliances gradually superseded the primitive
machines.
There are now leads being worked at depths of from 400 to 500
feet from the surface, and alluvial mining plants whose pumps are
capable of raising millions of gallons of water daily. The positions and
depths of leads supposed to be auriferous are now usually first ascer-
tained by means of boring, for which purpose diamond drills have of
late been extensively used. Shafts are then sunk through the superin-
cumbent layers into the bed-rock, drives are extended, and rises from
the latter put up to the gravel, which, if payable, is then excavated
and brought to the surface to be washed. Tens of thousands of pounds
are frequently expended before the deep alluvial mines become remuner-
ative, and sometimes after all failure is encountered ; but, nevertheless,
successes have, in the main, counterbalanced the failures, and increas-
ing experience tends to lessen the risk of the latter. There are still
hundreds of miles in length of unworked leads which are likely to
reward future enterprise.
Quartz Mining.
During the first few years of gold digging little or no attention
was paid to quartz mining. Gold was found in the out-cropping quartz
reefs, and people used to break out the richer specimens as a Sunday
afternoon amusement, at Bendigo and elsewhere. Soon, however, it
was found worth while to crush portions of the stone with pestle and
mortar, or other crude appliances, and to separate the gold by washing.
The next step was the introduction of Chilian mills—large pans, in
which heavy rollers were made to revolve by horse-power, and so
pulverize the quartz—and mercury was used to retain the disintegrated
gold.
By degrees batteries of stampers worked by steam-power came
into vogue, and year by year improvements were made in their con-
struction, and in that of the various means of saving the gold. There
are now at work on the various gold-fields throughout Victoria hundreds
of crushing plants of from five to nearly a hundred heads of stampers
each, and fitted with every appliance to facilitate the crushing of the
quartz, the amalgamation of the gold with the mercury, and the saving
of the amalgam.
For saving the pyrites contained in the quartz, and the extraction
of the gold therefrom, special appliances are attached to the principal
crushing plants, and in some places the treatment of pyrites has become
an important industry.
In quartz, as in alluvial mining, the early modes of working were
rude and simple, and conducted with little effort at systematic mining.
There was also a distrust as to the downward permanence of the lodes,
partly arising from the actual diminution in richness of some of them
as followed downwards, and partly from an expression of opinion,
alleged as emanating from high scientific authority, that the lodes were
not likely to prove remunerative below a depth of 400 feet from the
surface. As far back as 1858, Mr. A. R. C. Selwyn, then Government
Geologist, indicated the groundlessness of this fear, but the idea had
taken root, and for some time tended to retard quartz-mining develop-
ment.


Lansell’s 180 mine
... 2,640 feet (sinking deeper)
New Chum and Victoria
2,448 „
Moonlight Company ...
2,409 „
North Old Chum
2,310 „
Victoria Reef Quartz ...
2,302 „
Victory and Pandora ...
2,300 „
Lazarus Company
2,264 „
Old Chum \ ... ... •
2,210 „
Garibaldi Company
2,183 „
By degrees, however, it was found that in many reefs whose pay-
able quartz had died out at short distances from the surface, other
“ makes ” of auriferous stone were to be met with by sinking deeper, and
confidence was restored as fresh discoveries were made at increasing
depths in the quartz lodes of Stawell, Sandhurst, Clunes, and other
mining centres. There are now many mines in which highly remuner-
ative quartz is being obtained at depths varying from 1,000 to 2,000
feet. In Mr. George Lansell’s principal mine at Sandhurst it is being
mined at between 2,000 and 2,500 feet.
At Ballarat, the Band of Hope and Albion Consols mine was for
many years the premier alluvial mine of the colony, and auriferous
gravels of extraordinary richness were mined at from 200 to 400 feet
from the surface, beneath volcanic and sedimentary layers.
When the alluvial deposits were nearly exhausted, attention was
turned to the quartz reefs found intersecting the Silurian bed-rock, and
this mine is now one of the premier quartz mines, its workings extend-
ing to more than 1,500 feet from the surface, and still progressing
downwards.
This mine has since been partly eclipsed by its neighbour, the
Star of the East; and several other important mines are being developed
under the Ballarat and Sebastopol Plateau, along a course of several
miles in length, in the bed-rock underlying the worked-out gutters.
The total yield of gold obtained in Victoria, from the first dis-
covery to the end of 1565, has been, roughly, 54,000,000 ounces, and
the proportions of that total ootained respectively from quartz and from
alluvial workings are about equal, though during the first ten or fifteen
years the alluvial gold greatly exceeded in quantity that obtained from
quartz.
In future it may be expected that the yield from quartz will yea'
by year progressively exceed that from alluvial workings.
Extensive and important as are the known quartz mines of
Victoria, the total area occupied by them is insignificant compared with
what are of probably similar character, which, although as yet untested,
contain alluvial gold deposits, and these are sure indications of the
proximity of auriferous quartz.
There is little cause for doubt that, as predicted by Mr. A. R. C.
Selwyn twenty years ago, the quartz lodes of Victoria are likely to
equal the tin mines of Cornwall as permanent fields for mining industry.
The British capitalist hesitates to invest in Victorian gold mines,
but not many years back dropped a million or two in those of India,
which proved failures. Had a tithe of the amount lost in India been
judicially expended in Victoria, the result would have been very
different.
FUTURE MINING PROSPECTS.
Gold.
It is true that the annual gold yield of Victoria has decreased to
about one-fifth of what it was during the first few palmy years, when the
easily won stores of wealth were rapidly found and taken possession of
by the vast prospecting army of the early fifties.
It does not appear likely that the reduced yields of the past few
years will ever be greatly exceeded, but on the other hand there appear
no grounds for apprehension that any further serious diminution is
likely to be experienced for decades to come. Confidence in deep
quartz-mining is becoming firmly established, and every now and then
some quartz field—worked to shallow depths and abandoned years ago—
is further explored and found worth reopening, and working to depths
undreamed of 30 years back. There are a great number of such
abandoned fields that may be regarded as certain to repay enterprise, as
well as great areas of country wherein the rich alluvial yields once
obtained most surely indicate the existence of auriferous reefs that
will be eventually discovered by means of diligent exploration.
Another prediction that may be ventured is, that though the yield
of gold during future years may be not more, or even less, than at present,
it will give a better return for the capital invested.
Whether truly or not, it has often been broadly stated that every
ounce of gold costs £5 to win, and this may be true if all the wasted
outlay on ill-judged enterprises and “ wild cat ” mines be taken into
consideration ; but if the expenditure on actually gold-bearing ground,
even though not in all cases payable, is alone reckoned, it will probably
be found that gold mining has yielded a commercial profit to those
engaged in it, not to speak of the general gain to the community that
has accrued from gold mining, even at occasional loss to the individual,
for, assuming the latter to expend £5 in producing an ounce of gold,
the community is so much the richer by the value of that product.
HORTICULTURE.
Horticulture has advanced with great rapidity in Victoria during the
last thirty years, and both commercial and private gardens have largely
increased in numbers and extent. In 1857, the acreage of gardens and
orchards was estimated at 1,939£, while in 1892, the area had increased
to 24,483 acres, being an increase of 3,707 acres upon the previous
The ten deepest mines in Victoria are :
New Chum Railway Co. ... 2,180
Tin Mining.
By WM. ELLIOTT, Horticultural Editor of The Leader , Melbourne.
Warned by past experience, capital is now being, and will in the
future be still more, judiciously applied, and its operations directed into
mining enterprises that are warranted by the practical and scientific
knowledge garnered during the last 40 years. By this means
absolutely worthless ventures will gradually become fewer, and the
profits on legitimate expenditure proportionately larger, even though,
the total annual return be less.
The third mine mentioned, the Moonlight Co., is at Stawell, all
the others are at Bendigo.
Though it is now several years since tin-bearing dykes were dis-
covered in the belt of country extending from Mount Wills to Mitta,
and much capital has been laid out on exploration, machinery, &c., no
actual profits can so far be recorded. This is due partly to over
speculation on too extravagant anticipations, and partly to large
expenditure on costly machinery, afterwards found to be inefficient,
without first ascertaining by experiment the best method of disinteg-
rating and saving the ore.
The stamper batteries employed cause the ore, which is very
friable, to be reduced very considerably to slime, which escapes down
the stream, and consequently only, a small portion of the actual per-
centage is saved.
With the establishment of better methods of treatment, it will
probably be found that the ores are payable, as the dykes are large, and
contain tin in proportions varying from 1| per cent, to as much as 1(>
per cent. The extension of the ore shoots to great depths has been
proved, and what tin has been smelted has been pronounced of first-
class quality, owing to freedom from deteriorating alloys. It may there-
fore be predicted that with more suitable appliances and economical
working the Mount Wills and Mitta tin-fields will before long yield
profitable returns.
Coal Mining.
A most gratifying advance has been made in the development of
the coal resources of Victoria during the last two or three years.
For a long time there prevailed not only the most complete
ignorance of, but a blind disbelief in, the existence of coal at all in
Victoria on the part of the great majority of the population. When
the fact was established beyond all cavil, it was held that the coal
seams were too small in thickness and extent to be payable, and that
the coal was inferior in quality. The writer may claim to have been
for many years almost alone in persistently advocating the development
of our coal resources, and in adhering to the opinion that they would
be ultimately found capable of supplying at least a portion of our local
requirements; also, ten years ago, recommending the plan, lately
adopted, of reducing the railway freight, so as to place the local product
on a more equal footing with the imported.
By means of the enterprise of those who entered warmly into the
matter, and the assistance rendered by the Government in the way of
boring, the existence of considerable areas of workable coal of good
quality has been proved, and actual dividends have been paid to share-
holders in various Victorian coal mining companies.
It is true that our proved coal-bearing area is comparatively small,
and that considerable tracts occupied by carbonaceous rocks are devoid
of workable coal seams, but we nevertheless know that we have, actually
available to the miner, many millions of tons of coal in seams of work-
able size, ranging up to four and a half feet in thickness, and of quality
in many cases only inferior by a slight percentage to that of the best
coal of New South Wales. There is also a vast extent of ground, as
yet untried, in which it is probable that further discoveries will be
made.
It is difficult to estimate the value of the industries that will be
stimulated into existence during the next few years by the development
of our local sources of fuel supply, occurring as they do in a region of
remarkable fertility, of which it might be said that every rood can
maintain a man.
years. Of orchards and gardens the area was 29,504 acres, and of
market gardens, 7,931 acres. During the year 1891, the import of
fruit, including currants and raisins, was of the value of £319 859
the exports being valued at £69,113. Of the importations, apples’
black currants and raspberries have arrived from Tasmania/ but the


business is decreasing, consequent on the low prices now obtained (apples
having fallen nearly one-half in price during the last half-dozen yeais),
and the duty of 9d. per bushel, now levied. Grapes are imported from
South Australia, oranges from New South Wales, bananas and pine
apples from Queensland and the Fiji Islands. The chief fruits grown
in Victoria are:—Almonds, apples, apricots, cherries, currants, figs,
gooseberries, pears, peaches, plums, quinces, raspberries, strawberries,
and vines; while oranges, lemons, mulberries, nectarines, Japanese
persimmons (Diospyros Kaki), walnuts and chestnuts are cultivated to
a smaller extent.
BOTANY.
Victoria can boast that her Department of Botany is presided over
by one of the most eminent botanists of the present age, in the person
of Baron Ferdinand von Mueller, K.C.M.G., F.R.S., M.D., who has
worked uninterruptedly in Australia since 1847, and, by his assiduous
labours on the flora of this and adjacent countries, his explorations of a
lai-tre portion of the continent of Australia, his extensive herbarium,
his°chemical and phytograph ical researches, his large and valuable con-
tributions to the flora of Australia, and his numerous other publications,
has extended the bounds and enriched the science of Botany to a large
and much-appreciated extent. With his name must be honorably
associated that of Mr. Joseph Bosiste, M.P., one of the pioneers of
botanic research in Victoria. Mr. Bosisto, singularly enough, was a
fellow labourer in the paths of science with Baron von Mueller in South
Australia as far back as 1849, and since then both have been closely
identified with the important discoveries connected with the Eucalyptus
vegetation. In all matters connected with materia medica Mr. Bosisto
occupies a high position, and the College of Pharmacy in Melbourne
now stands as a monument of his efforts as a legislator to advance the
cause of science.
PUBLIC PARKS AND GARDENS.
Land for Public Parks, Gardens, and Recreation Grounds has been
reserved in connection with all the more important cities and towns in
the colony; the land being placed under the management of the respect-
ive town and borough councils. The grounds are supported by rates,
subsidised by annual grants from the general revenue. Those in the
neighbourhood of the metropolis comprise an area of 4,766 acres, in-
cluding 604 acres under the joint control of the Government and the
Melbourne City Council; the Botanic Garden, 83 acres; Government
House Domain, 152 acres; University Grounds, 109| acres; and the
Royal Horticultural Gardens, 28 acres.
BOTANIC GARDENS.
Public Gardens, generally termed Botanic Gardens, are common
throughout the colony, ground for the purpose having been set apart in
connection with all the principal towns. The gardens of Ballarat, Gee-
long, Sandhurst, Castlemaine, and some of the other inland cities and
towns are very handsome and well maintained. The Melbourne Botanic
Garden, situated on the banks of the river Yarra Yarra, about a mile
from the city, is 84 acres in extent. It adjoins the grounds of Govern-
ment House and the Public Domain, of which it forms a part. It was
formerly under the direction of the Government Botanist, Baron von
Mueller, but some years ago the garden was placed in charge of a
landscape gardener —Mr. W. R. Guilfoyle,—under whose curatorship
the grounds have been extended, altered, and greatly improved. The
newer portions, as well as some of the old ground, have been laid out
in broad gravel walks, and extensive lawns with clumps and single
specimens of trees and shrubs, which have rendered the garden highly
attractive to the public, who frequent it in large numbers on Sundays
And holidays.
The gardens contain two conservatories, one devoted to the cultiva-
tion of ferns and some plants of industrial value; the other is filled with a
miscellaneous collection of stove plants in pots. There are also several
small houses and frames for propagating and other purposes, and large
shelter sheds for the hardier plants. A new shed has been recently
erected, and filled with a large collection of plants in pots scientifically
arranged according to the natural system of Botany. The older portions
of the gardens contain numerous fine specimens of palms. Araucarias,
and other conifers, various oaks, elms, and other deciduous trees, besides
Grevilleas, of which G. robusta forms a splendid picture when in flower,
and numerous other native trees and shrubs.
Among other recent improvements, an extensive “fern gully’ has
been formed; large collections of palms and cycads have been planted,
as well as groups of the more hardy of the Queensland plants.
In the lower portion of the grounds, near the river, is a large and
beautiful lake dotted with charming little islands which, planted with
ornamental trees and shrubs picturesquely arranged, produce a pleasing
effect. A portion of the native vegetation, having been allowed to
remain, adds to the interest of the scene.
The total number of plants now in the gardens exceeds 7,000 species,
exclusive of varieties. The whole of the species are distinctly labelled
with name, native country, and natural order. The condition of the
gardens is in every way creditable to the City of Melbourne, and
especially to its present director, Mr. W. R. Guilfoyle, F.L.S.
Adjoining the Botanic Garden is the Domain, 305 acres in extent,
including the grounds of Government House of 157 acres in gardens,
pleasure grounds, and extensive lawns, the whole in charge of the
director of the Botanic Garden. The Domain is intersected by walks
and drives leading to the city and various parts of the southern suburbs.
A small part remains in its natural condition, but the greater portion
has been planted with an immense number and variety of trees. These
have attained a considerable size, and produce a tine effect on the land-
scape, the Domain extending within close proximity to and commanding
one of the best views to be obtained of the city.
HORTICULTURAL SOCIETIES.
Societies for the advancement ef horticulture have been established
in every city and town of any importance in the colony, especially in
Melbourne and its immediate neighbourhood. They are supported by
the subscriptions of members, supplemented by annual grants from
Government, the Royal Horticultural Society of Victoria, located in
Melbourne, being the oldest and most important. It was established
about the year 1860, was granted an area of 28 acres of land for an
Experimental Garden, and at one time numbered 500 members, who
erected a large building for the holding of shows and other purposes.
But, falling into financial diffieulties, the garden was resigned into the
hands of the Government, who have formed it into a College and School
of Horticulture, where 25 pupils are taught the theory and practice <-f
horticulture. During the time the Society held possession, it was the
cause of a large amount of benefit being bestowed on orchardists of
this colony, as well as some of the others, by the introduction and
dissemination of the most valuable varieties of hardy fruits, the
collection of which now amounts to 633 apples, 7 almonds, 56 apricots,
6 brambles, 23 crabs, 108 cherries, 5 chestnuts, 2 citrons, 34 currants,
60 figs, 142 gooseberries, 5 guavas, 1 lime, 7 lemons, 4 medlars, 7 mul-
berries, 30 nectarines, 20 filberts, 26 oranges, 10 olives, 330 pears, 130
peaches, 24 Japanese persimmons (Diospyros Kaki), 168 plums, 13
quinces, 18 raspberries, 4 shaddocks, 37 strawberries, 162 grapes, 5
walnuts. Of these, scions and cuttings are available to all growers of
fruit, as well as others, in the colony. During the last 24 or 25 years
an average of 20,000 have been distributed annually, besides seeds and
roots of vegetables. New varieties of fruit are annually imported from
Europe, America, Japan, and other centres of production. Communica-
tions and exchange of scions, <kc., are maintained with the neighbouring
colonies, India, Japan, and other countries.
The School of Horticulture exists as a branch of the Government
Department of Agriculture, and is under the direction of a Board of
Horticulture, of which the Secretary for Agriculture is chairman ; Mr.
George Neilson, who has held the position for 20 years, being curator.
A herbarium is being formed by the Government Botanist, Baron von
Mueller. Mr. D. Me Alpine lectures on Botany and the Science of
Horticulture, weekly ; while, occasionally, lectures are delivered by Mr.
A. N. Pearson (Government chemist), and others, the lectures being
free to the general public. There are occasional field excursions to
places of botanical interest in the neighbourhood. A special plot is set
out with plants belonging to the various natural orders, in order to
illustrate the lectures and the principles of classification. The students
.are also afforded opportunities of learning the use of the microscope for
examining the structure of plants, and of detecting plant diseases.
The Society recently erected a show pavilion in the garden, at a
cost of £1,200, of which a subsidy of £5OO was granted by Government.
It is now used for various purposes, such as work-rooms, lecture-rooms,
fruit and seed rooms, and offices. The ornamental grounds are opened
daily to the public, and the other parts to members and visitors who
desire to examine the fruits and other objects under experiment. Only
one tree of each variety is grown for fruiting, but reserves are kept in
stock to provide against accidents or decay in the permanent trees.
MARKET GARDENING.
The business of growing vegetables for market has attained a high
degree of proficiency in the colony, more especially in the neighbourhood
of the metropolis, where a large area of land is devoted to it, and
whence supplies are sent to up-country towns, as well as to the neigh-
bouring colonies, nearly 2,000 tons being yearly exported. In the
country the principal supply of vegetables is grown by Chinese, who
are located in the neighbourhood of the principal towns, and also in
the suburbs of Melbourne, where they have greatly increased in number
of late years They are the chief hawkers of vegetables. The Chinese
cultivate their gardens in small patches, chiefly by hand labour, but the
Europeans employ horse labour wherever it can be applied. The bulk
of the gardens are situated to the east and south-east of Melbourne,
where the soil is almost pure sand, and easy to work. Some of the
yields of vegetables obtained in such gardens as that possessed by Mr.
W. Woodmason, of Malvern, about four miles from Melbourne, are
simply marvellous. Cauliflowers have turned the scales at 42 lbs.
Cabbages averaging 26 lbs. weight, and parsnips 36 inches in length, are
not uncommon ; while mangel-wurzel are grown turning the scale at 56
lbs. The land is highly manured, and heavy yields are obtained. The
produce is also of excellent quality. Two crops a year, or three crops
in two years, are generally grown. The produce not exported is dis-
posed of in the metropolitan markets, chiefly the Victoria Market,
where an average of 300 carts attend twice a week during the summer
season, each grower selling his own produce. The area under crop
amounted to 7,931 acres in 1892.
PLANT NURSERIES.
These have become numerous of late years, one or more being
established in the neighbourhood of every large town, and several in
country places where the propagation of fruit trees constitutes tho


The Melbourne Town Hall, corner oj Collins and Swanston Streets, is a very handsome building, and is worthy of the Queen City.
It contains a large and handsome hall, together with a magnificent organ.
The Queen's Wharf is an open reach of the Yarra River, in the heart of the city, and is the berthing place of the magnificent
steamers of the U.S.S. Co. of New Zealand and other companies, and large sailing ships from all parts of the world.
The Botanic Gardens, containing nearly 100 acres, on the River Yarra banks, are beautiful both by nature and art. They are in
charge of Mr. Wm. R. Guilfoyle, F.L.S.
The aboriginal blacks are fast disappearing from Victoria. Our illustration, therefore, will be doubly interesting as a memento of
an almost extinct race.
Prince's Bridge is a new structure of massive but elegant design across the river Yarra in line with Swanston Street, built nt a cost
of £70,000.


principal business; the demand for these being very large, both in
Victoria, the neighbouring colonies, and New Zealand. In the neigh-
bourhood of Melbourne, nurseries are numerous, some being of consider-
able extent, and kept in a style that would be creditable to similar
establishments in any part of the world. The collections of plants are
now very extensive and are being annually increased by importations.
Owing to the mildness of the climate in winter, a large number of
species that require to be housed in Europe thrive out of doors the year
round, stove plants alone requiring the protection of glass and artificial
heat; but they are not much grown in nurseries owing to the smallness
of the demand. Fuchsias, Pelargoniums, Cinerarias, Cyclamens, and
Chinese Primroses are grown in unheated houses. In these nurseries
the plants are mostly grown in pots, and, except when being propagated,
are located in shelter sheds constructed of frames, shaded with lattice-
work or brushwood. There are also a large number of smaller nurseries
in which flowers and market plants are grown. A large business is
done in bouquets both in the markets and in shops in Melbourne, where
excellent taste is displayed in their make-up; flowers being plentiful
both summer and winter. In the country nurseries, the propagation of
fruit trees is the chief business.
Nurserymen’s catalogues have attained a size which, with the ex-
ception of orchids and other stove plants, will bear comparison with
those of Britain.
Numerous seed and florists’ shops exist in the principal towns, some
of them managed in conjunction with plant nurseries. The bulk of the
seeds consumed is raised in the colonies and New Zealand, whence a
large proportion of the grasses and clovers are obtained. Improved
varieties of some fruits and vegetables have originated in Victoria,
obtained by means of crossing and selection. The newer varieties of
flowers and vegetables are annually imported from Europe and America
by the principal seedsmen. Some business is also done in the exporta-
tion of cauliflower and other vegetable seeds to Britain.
PRIVATE GARDENS.
These have rapidly increased in number, especially in the neigh-
bourhood of the cities and towns. Villa gardens generally contain one
or more glazed structures for the culture of greenhouse and stove plants,
including orchids, of which some collections are being formed. Among
the estate owners in the country districts are some who have gardens of
a few acres in extent, but in general they are no larger than is necessary
to meet household requirements; though some have planted trees rather
largely for shelter and ornament. Cottage gardens are numerous and
generally well kept, the climate admitting of their being gay with
flowers throughout the year. Scientific gardeners are not in great
demand, but there are a few in the colony whose productions would
pass with credit in any part of the world. Flower gardening is chiefly
of the old-fashioned style, massing or any other form of bedding being
rarely attempted.
In shrubberies and other ornamental grounds a great variety of
trees and shrubs are to be found, most of the best species and varieties
procurable in Europe, America, and other parts of the world having
been imported, the enterprise of nurserymen and some amateurs being
great in that direction. Coniferse are in great request, nearly all the
pines and cypresses procurable in California, besides many others,
being cultivated. Of these Pinus insignis and Cupressus macrocarpa
are in the greatest demand, many thousands being planted annually
for shelter or ornament. Both of these grow with great rapidity in
almost any kind of soil, and in a few years form large timber trees.
The Abies and the Picea sections succeed best in the cooler districts.
Of cedars, the Deodar is the favourite, being the quickest grower and
the most graceful. The Wellingtonia (Sequoia) gigantea thrives fairly;
handsome specimens of 40 feet or more in height being not uncommon.
Of Araucarias, six species are grown, forming specimens of perfect
symmetry and great beauty, A. imbricata is the most suitable for
the cooler districts, the others preferring a more genial climate. The
bunya bunya, of Queensland (A. Bidwilli), grows very rapidly, and
forms a handsome specimen, well furnished with a mass of polished
green foliage. The golden arbor vitae (Biota aurea) is in great request.
The native pines—Frenella—form handsome dwarf trees. The larch
thrives in the cooler districts, where it competes for pre-eminence with
Abies Douglasii.
Taking a few of the more ornamental shrubs in alphabetical order,
the Acacias are amongst the most beautiful when in flower. The tree
myrtles—Acrnena—form very handsome, finely-shaped bushes, beautiful
both in flower and fruit. The American aloe, Agave, grows luxuriantly,
and flowers at from twelve to twenty years of age. The species of
Arbutus succeed fairly well in the drier parts, aud mnch better where
the temperature is lower. Brugmansias stand exposed the year round,
and flower magnificently Cacti of numerous kinds thrive admirably
out of doors. Camellias require shade -when grown in the open air, and
then flower magnificently. The common and Portugal laurels thrive
and attain the size of trees in the cooler districts. Eucalyptus ficifolia,
which produces crimson flowers in abundance while quite young and
small, forms an object of exceeding beauty. The laburnum prefers the
cooler climates, and flowers freely. The native and New Zealand species
of Dracama form noble objects. Ficus australis and F. macrophylla
form large dense bushes or low trees. Magnolias of all species form
large bushes, and flower magnificently. Neriums thrive well, and
flower freely. The plane—Platanus—attains a large size in the cooler
districts. Pittosporums are, of all evergreens, the best adapted to the
climate, forming handsome specimens and fine ornamental hedges.
Rhododendrons require shade in the warmer parts of the colony, but
flourish exposed in the cooler districts. Schinus Molle is of great value
as a shade tree. Besides those already mentioned there are an immense
number of dwarf shrubs that attain great perfection, such as the Indian
Azalea, Daphne indica, Boronia, Bouvardia, Chorizema, Deutzia,
Eriostemon, Erica, Erythrina, Escallonia, Fuchsia, Hydrangea, Lantana,
Lasiandra, Pomegranate, Pelargonium, Petunia, Salvia, Veronica, and
Weigela. Of roses, about 400 varieties are grown. Among climbers
are Bignonia, Bougainvillea, Clematis, Lapageria, Passion flowers,
including Tacsonia and Glycine sinensis.
Among herbaceous plants, Dahlias, Chrysanthemums, Phloxes, Pent-
stemons, Carnations, Columbines, Cyclamens, Iris, Mesembryanthemum
—numerous species—and Verbenas. Bulbous and similar plants flourish
exceedingly, including Amaryllis, Anemone, Gladiolus—grown in every
garden—Hyacinth, Ixia, Lilium—magnificent, Narcissus, Ranunculus,
Tulip, Sparaxis, Guernsey lilies, Tuberoses, Tritoma, and several others.
FRUIT.
Fruit culture is practised throughout nearly the whole of the
colony. In some of the more densely populated districts orchards of
100 to 150 acres have been planted, and their numbers are rapidly
increasing. They are very numerous in the neighbourhood of the
metropolis, vhere they generally exist in conjunction with market
gardening ; these range from 8 to 20 acres in extent. Owing to the
variety of climatic conditions, all the fruits of temperate regions can
be cultivated. A large number of varieties are grown, all the best to
be obtained in Europe and America having been imported and
propagated.
Numerous varieties of fruit huve been raised from seed. In apples,
varieties of great excellence, both dessert and cooking, some of the
former almost equalling the best of the imported sorts. While in
pears, some colonial varieties are unsurpassed by the best European.
Peaches, plums, cherries, and strawberries of excellent quality have
been also raised. Owing to the large supply, fruit has become so cheap
that all classes are able to obtain it.
Apple.
This fruit is, of all others, the most esteemed ; it thrives in all
parts of the colony, succeeding best where the summer temperature is
moderate. The trees grow with great luxuriance, come early into bear-
ing, and yield a crop every year, unless the blossoms happen to be
injured by frosts, which, however, rarely occurs. They thrive in ail
kinds of soil, from a nearly pure sand to a strong loam. The fruit is
large in size, fine in colour, and excellent in flavour. Canker in apple-
trees is unknown in the colony, but they are liable to suffer from
fungoid and insect pests
Apricot.
The apricot is highly esteemed, and is in great demand for dessert,
cooking, and preserving. It thrives everywhere, but prefers the warmer
regions, where its produce is both large and fine. The trees attain a
large size, and rarely miss yielding a heavy crop.
Almond,
The almond thrives everywhere; it is specially adapted to dry,
stony soil, and requires very little attention. It is frequently used
for shelter on the exposed sides of orchards, and bears abundantly. In
the shrubbery it forms a splendid object when clothed with a mass of
blossoms in early spring. Seedling almonds are frequently used as
stocks for peaches.
Cherry,
This fruit is very largely grown, the trees almost invariably bearing
a heavy crop. It thrives in all climates, more particularly in the
coolest, and is the best adapted of all fruit trees to the strong volcanic
loams that exist in various parts of the colony. The fruit attains a
large size, and is of excellent quality. The trees commence to bear at
an early age, and occasion very little trouble in pruning; they are very
rarely attacked by either disease or insects.
Currants
The different kinds of currants succeed well in the cooler districts,
where they yield heavy crops of fine fruit. The black currant is in
great request for jam-making and other culinary purposes.
The fig thrives in all, except the coldest, parts of the colony, and
exceptionally well in the warmer northern districts, where it grows
with great luxuriance, the trees attaining a large size, and fruiting
heavily every year, the fruit being of large size and good quality. Fig-
drying has been successfully practised, but has not yet become estab-
lished as a business.
Filbert.
Trees of the filbert and other nuts grow with remarkable luxuri-
ance iu the rich soils of valleys in the more temperate regions,
where they hear enormously. Nuts are in great demand, and bring high
prices in the market.
Gooseberry.
This well-known fruit thrives in all parts of the colony except the
warmest, but grows best where the summer temperature is low. In
such situations the bushes attain a large size, and bear enormous crops
The fruit is much used for cooking and jam-making.
Grape.
The grape, as a dessert fruit, thrives and ripens its fruit in all but
the coldest climates, and in all varieties of soil or situation. It grows


as a bush in gardens, or trained to a fence or trellis ; it rambles over
die cottage verandah, and even in the heart of a city or town it continues
to thrive, its roots extending dozens of yards beneath the pavement. It,
however, brings its fruit to the greatest perfection in the zones of highest
temperature, where bunches and berries of enormous size, tine colour,
and excellent flavour are produced.
Melon.
The melon thrives in the open ground in all the warmer and more
temperate parts of the colony ; the seed being sown in ordinary garden
soil ; little or no attention is required by the plants until the fruit is
ready to gather. Both rock melons and water melons are in great
•demand in the markets, and also a cross-bred variety of sugar melon,
which attains a large size and is much used for jam.
Mulberry.
This is well adanted to the more moderate zones, where it rapidly
forms a tree and produces abundance of fruit. The silk-worm mulberry
also grows well, but is rarely utilised.
Peach.
This fruit, one of the most delicious grown in the colony, ripens its
fruit nearly everywhere. The trees require much attention in warding
off the attacks of aphides in spring, and they are not long-lived. When
in good soil the fruit attains a large size, and acquires an excellent
flavour. A number of colonial seedlings have been raised; these prove
more robust than some of the imported varieties and are generally pre-
ferred by growers for market.
Pear.
The pear is highly esteemed as a dessert fruit, many of the imported
•as well as several seedling varieties being unsurpassed for flavour. The
trees quickly attain a large size, and rarely fail to produce a full crop,
the fruit attaining a large size. They thrive in nearly all parts of the
colony.
Persimmon (Diospyros Kaki).
This fruit, introduced only a few years ago, is becoming popular
on account of the rich flavour and fine colour of its fruit, which renders
the trees highly ornamental; these are very precocious, trees of three or
four feet in height preducing several dozens of fruit. Young trees are
annually imf)orted from Japan.
Plums.
Plums are in great request, and are largely grown in all districts.
The trees are very prolific, r-arely failing to produce a full crop, and
when not overloaded the fruit is very large ; it is much used for jam
and other culinary purposes. On account of its abundance, the fruit
can be obtained in the markets at a very low rate. The drying of
prunes has recently been commenced.
Quince.
This fruit is grown, though in small numbers, in nearly every
garden. The trees crop well, and produce fruit of large size.
Raspberry.
This fruit succeeds well in the moderately cool districts, where it
bears abundantly, rarely missing a crop. The fruit is highly esteemed,
and ki great request by jam manufacturers as well as private persons.
It is grown in several parts of the • colony, for local supply.
The metropolis obtains its principal supply from the rich valleys of the
upper portions of the Yarra, and it is estimated that the value of this
fruit forwarded to Melbourne exceeds ,£150,000 per annum; the
average price in the market being 3d. to 4d. per pound.
Strawberry.
The strawberry is very prolific, and the plants continue to bear for
a great number of years; two crops invariably, and sometimes a third,
being borne in succession each year. The fruit attains a large size on
} properly-enriched soil.
Walnut.
This tree thrives in all districts except the hottest, and produces
abundance of fruit at an early stage, but is not extensively grown.
EXPORT OF FRUIT.
In consequence of the enormous increase in fruit culture during
recent years, the production has become so great as to glut the markets
and bring the prices so low that there remains very little profit for the
growers, so that the export of fruit has become a question of the utmost
importance, and though it has been practised to some extent for a good
many years, it has not yet become thoroughly successful, either in the
selection, the packing, or the treatment on shipboard. Recently it has
been placed in the cool chamber of the ship, but there appears to be an
uncertainty regarding the steadiness of the temperature, cases having
been opened in London and the contents—apples—found to be frozen,
while in other instances it has been proved that the temperature has
been allowed to rise too high ; therefore the best authorities have come
to the conclusion that it is not advisable to stow the fruit in cool
chambers, but in the hold, where, if a sufficiency of fresh air is allowed
to circulate by means of passages between the stacks of cases, there
would be a greater certainty of success -than when it is stowed in cool
chambers.
The first organised attempt to bring Australian fruits under the
notice of Europeans was a small parcel of apples despatched to an
exhibition at Vienna, in 1873, by Mr. John Carson, president of the
Royal Horticultural Society. Each fruit was named, wrapped in a
piece of tissue paper, laid in small paper boxes, and the whole enclosed
in a large case, which was placed in the cooling room of the P. and O.
Co.’s steamer. When the case was opened, the fruit was. with only one
or two exceptions, found to be in excellent condition. A similar con-
signment was sent to Florence the following year. In 1878, several
cases of apples and pears were despatched to the Paris Exhibition, where
they arrived safely, and as in the former instances were awarded a dip-
loma and bronze medal. In 1880-81, several cases of fruit were sent to
Ceylon and India, which also proved a success. The next export of
importance, besides single cases taken by passengers in their cabins, was
to London in 1883, consigned to the celebrated pomologist, Dr. Hogg,
editor of the Journal of Horticulture, who stated that he was surprised
by the beautiful appearance and admirable condition of the fruit. In
the same year another consignment was successfully transmitted to the
Calcutta Exhibition; and another in 1886 to the Indo-Colonial Exhi-
bition. By that time the growers themselves had begun the business of
exporting, and it has been continued annually ever since, until it is now
of considerable extent. In the beginning, prices were high and profits
large; but prices having fallen greatly, the profits have become small,
but exporting is still regarded as a remedy by growers, which will
undoubtedly come to pass when the business is thoroughly understood
and carefully and intelligently put in practice. It will, however, be
imperative that markets should be found in other places besides London.
India would absorb all the fruit grown in the colony, but there is no
regular communication. Another market might be found in Ceylon,
also in America, and probably in other parts of the world, but there
must be more unanimity amongst the growers, who ought to form a
combination, so that only fruit of the best quality, properly graded and
packed, the supply regular in quantity, properly placed on shipboard,
where a suitable and regular temperature is maintained, the consign-
ments being not only to London, but to the other cities and large towns
in Britain, as well as to other parts of the Northern Hemisphere.
BONUSES FOR THE PLANTING OP FRUIT TREES
AND VINES.
A great impetus was given to the planting of grape vines and
fruit trees, a few years ago, by the offer of a bonus by the Government
of the day, on the recommendation of the Hon. J. L. Dow, then Minister
of Agriculture, when the sum of £233,000 was granted by Parliament
to promote fruit-growing and other industries. Of that amount,
£75,000 was offered to growers of grapes, other fruits and general
vegetable products, including payments of bonuses upon acreage planted.
For grape vine culture, a sum not exceeding £25,000 was made avail-
able for payment of bonuses to persons who, during that and future
seasons, would plant and cultivate vines on land of which they are
occupiers, in a locality approved by the Minister Another sum of
£25,000 was made available for other fruit trees and bushes of all the
various kinds grown in the ooleny, with the exception of walnuts, chest-
nuts, and strawberries. For the fruit-bearing trees, bonuses up to £3
per acre; for bush fruits, half that amount. The conditions were:—Of
the bonuses for trees, four-twelfths were to be paid one year after
planting; three-twelfths after two years; two-twelfths after four years;
and one-twelfth after five years. Another sum of £25,000 was made
available for persons who, between the 20th May, 1890, and the 30th
June, 1895, sow or plant and cultivate vegetables to be used for the
manufacture of fibre, paper, oils, syrup, sugar, tannin, drugs, dyes,
scents, insecticides, and such other things as may at any time be
approved by the Governor-in-Council. This portion of the offer of
bonuses has not, however, been responded to to anything like the
extent of those for fruits, very little having yet been undertaken in
these branches of culture.
SCENT AND HERB FARMING.
The Government itself, however, established a scent farm of 20
acres in extent at Dunolly, a few years ago, which is conducted under
the management of Mr. F. Mellon (a European grower of scents and
perfumes), who has already produced and exhibited a large proportion
of all the various scents and perfumes now in commerce. The largest,
and almost the only other scent farm in the colony, is situated at
Mitcham, in the shire of Nunawading, about 20 miles east of Melbourne,
It was established about 25 years ago by Mr. W. H. Slater (a native
of Mitcham, near London), who has carried on the business of growing,
distilling, and otherwise preparing herbs and flowers for commercial
purposes, and who has found an excellent market for all he could
produce. The extent of his herb garden is only 5 acres, but he is an
orchardist as well, Mr. Slater has found the business highly profitable,
as, for instance, in the case of mint, he has obtained four tons per acie,
yielding 6 lbs. of oil to the ton, or 24 lbs. per acre; value, 355. per
pound, equal to £4l from an acre of land ; while lavender has yielded
oil of the value of £ll7 per acre; results which clearly show the
suitability of the soil and climate for their culture.
VEGETABLES.
Vegetables of all the kinds commonly grown in temperate climates,
and some that cannot be successfully grown in Britain, succeed well,
and are extensively cultivated, hardly a family in the longer-settled
districts being without a daily supply, either purchased or grown by
themselves, all the year round. A large quantity can be grown with a
moderate amount of labour, where the soil is properly tilled and
manured.


Asparagus.
This esteemed vegetable grows luxuriantly in all parts of the
colony, and attains a large size under liberal culture. It is in great
request during a long season, and can be purchased at reasonable rates.
Bean.
Broad beans can be grown in all climates, as the seed is sown in
autumn, and the crop gathered in spring before the heat of summer
ajrrive. Kidney beans, both dwarf and runner, are grown extensively;
they bear abundantly, and are in season from the beginning of summer
to the end of autumn. They are sold at such rates as bring them within
the reach of all classes.
Beet.
This root succeeds in all soils and all climates. It is in great re-
quest, being used either in a fresh or pickled state. The roots, like
others of similar nature, are allowed to remain in the ground until
wanted for use, a supply being obtainable at all seasona
Brocoli.
This is rarely grown, as the plants require too great a length of
time to attain maturity, and its place is filled by the cauliflower.
Cabbage.
The cabbage is the most largely grown of all green vegetables.
The plants come quickly into use, and attain a large size; cabbages can
be had every day in the year, and with very little labour.
Cauliflower.
The cauliflower is one of the most esteemed of vegetables; it may
be obtained throughout the year in the cooler districts, and in others
except during the hottest months. It grows luxuriantly, becomes
rapidly fit for use, and attains a large size. Plants, including leaves,
stem, and roots, have been grown to 42 lbs. weight, the head, dressed
for market, weighing 36 lbs.
Carrot.
This root, which thrives everywhere, is in great request, and very
extensively grown. The roots are rarely troubled with any kind of
insect.
Celery.
Celery prefers the cooler districts, but may be had everywhere
during winter and spring. Its culture has greatly increased of recent
years.
Cucumber,
A few growers cultivate the cucumber in heated houses during the
winter season, but the demand is not great at that time. Large quan-
tities are grown in the open ground in summer. They are in con-
siderable demand for pickling and other purposes.
Bt j. w. bear*
In his work entitled Select Extra-tropical Plants , Baron von Mueller
describes several different varieties of wild evergreen vines, having
oblong serrated leaves like those of the laurel, as common to Australia ;
but although the vine is indigenous to this continent, it has never been
cultivated with a view to utilising its fruit, so that it is only necessarv
to refer to this fact en passant.
It is now more than half a century since the vitis rinifera of
Europe was first introduced into Australia. “ The credit of this step is
due to the energy and enterprise of Mr. James Busby, who in 1831
embarked for Europe, not only to procure an ample supply of vine
roots most suitable for the climate and soil of a distant land, but to
acquire by inquiry and investigation, a practical knowledge of the
culture and treatment of the vine and its fruit, as pursued in the
foremost wine countries of the Western Continent.
“In the course of his lengthened journey, he secured select cuttings
from the vines of Jerez and Malaga, in Spain, and other useful varieties
from the vineyards of Roussillon, Cote-d’or, and Champagne, in France;
and was fortunate enough to obtain the liberal grant of a couple of
plants from each of some 400 or 500 choice species from the botanical
garden of Montpellier, besides 137 others from the gardens of the
Luxembourg. Some ten years subsequently a further movement in this
direction was made by Sir Wm. McArthur, who stocked the plantation
at Camden Park, distant about forty miles from Sydney, with the
vines he imported from Germany ; and these arrivals were supplemented
from time to time by other species of European origin.”
This interesting account of the early history of vine-cultivation in
Australia is taken from the valuable work entitled The Vine and its
Fruit , by Mr. James L. Denman, of London, who concludes his
remarks on the subject as follows;—“ As New South Wales is the
parent colony, so is Camden Park the mother-vineyard of Australia ;
and as the pioneer and planter of two vast staple industries—wine and
wool—the name of McArthur will deservedly go down to posterity with
honour and personal esteem.”
From New South Wales “vine-growing” spread rapidly to the
sister colonies of Victoria and South Australia, and in later "years to
Leek.
Lettuce.
Onion.
Potato.
Pumpkin.
Rhubarb.
Tomato.
Turnip.
VINE CULTUEE AND WINE PEODUCTION.
* Mr. J. W. Bear, of “ Chateau Xabilk " Victoria. Author of Vilicultural Resources of Victoria.
This attains an immense size under liberal culture; it is in use for
nine months in the year.
This grows well, with little trouble, throughout the year. The
summer crops are sown where they are to remain. Only the cabbage
lettuce is used.
Onions are grown in large quantities both in the garden and the
field. In 1892 the acreage amounted to 2,661, yielding 14,682 tons,
many tons being exported. In gardens the early crops are sown in
autumn and transplanted; field crops are sown in spring.
Peas can be gathered throughout the year, except occasionally
in summer, should the drought be severe; they are, of course, finest in
spring and early summer. The plants are rarely supported in any way,
as they do not attain a great length.
Potatoes are very largely grown in gardens and fields, a larg° pro-
portion being exported. Young potatoes may be obtained in gardens
at all seasons.
This fruit attains a large size ; it is grown to some extent for use
in winter.
This is in great request, and is largely grown by market gardeners,
who are able to pull three or four crops a year from each plant. It is
in use during eleven months out of the twelve.
The demand for this fruit has largely increased within recent years,
and immense quantities are now grown and sold very cheaply. For
early crops the plants are raised in heat and planted against fences or
walls, where they sometimes remain till the following season, fruiting
all the while. Later crop plants are supported by stakes or trellises.
The markets are supplied for about nine months in the year.
Turnips are in season every day in the year. They become quickly
fit for use, but do not succeed well in the drier districts except during
the winter season.
Vegetable Marrow.
There is a large consumption of this vegetable. Ti e seed is sown
in the open ground in spring, and where the soil is good heavy crops
are yielded; very little attention beyond gathering the fruit being;
required.
Queensland and Western Australia, It is, however, in Victoria and'.
South Australia that viticulture and wine-production have made the
greatest progress, and promises at no distant time to assume propor-
tions more commensurate with the vast natural resources for these
purposes at their disposal.
The climate most congenial to the nature of the vine extends from
the 35th to the 50th degree of latitude, representing a relatively
narrow zone north and south of the equator, rather more than 1000
miles in width. Victoria occupies the south-eastern portion of, and is
the southernmost colony on, the Australian continent. It lies between
the 34th and 39th parallels of south latitude, and is thus almost
entirely within the zone in which the vine can be cultivated with the
greatest amount of profit and success. In variety of climate and
fecundity of soil, Victoria offers advantages for vine-cultivation which
are not surpassed by any other country ; while her varied climatic
and physical conditions enable her to produce “ types ” of wine of'
widely different character ; from the delicate wines of the central and
northern districts of France, to the more generous and potent vintages
of the Spanish Peninsula, Italy, Sicily, and Greece.
In order to give a more accurate idea of the special character of the
colony’s resources in this respect, it may be as well to briefly describe
the chief features of the different vine-growing districts of Victoria,
which may be classified under three distinct zones or regions as
follows:
1. The cool region , extending from the sea-coast to the Great
Dividing Range, having an average rainfall of 24 to 30 inches, and a
climate similar to the central and cooler vine-growing districts of
France. This zone is suited to the production of the lighter class of
dry table wines—the most valuable for commercial purposes similar
to those of Bordeaux, Burgundy, and Champagne.
2. The temperate or intermediate region , situated on the northern
side of the Dividing Range, which comprises the central districts
of the colony, having an average rainfall of 20 to 26 inches, with a
climate similar to that of the South of France and Northern Italy
This zone includes the Lower Goulburn Valley, Bendigo, and Great




Area of Land Under Vines.
Gallons of Wine Produced.
1889-90.
1890-91.
1891-92.
1889-90.
1890-91.
1891-92.
es
7,867
8,044
7,431
688,685
842,181
913,107
15,662
20,686
23,868
1,578,590
1,997,593
1,554,130
7,352
9,535
12,314
510,674
762,770
795,631
1,763
1,981
1,988
164,626
189,274
168,526
...
1,088
1,023
1,004
205,632
194,180
166,664
33,732
41,269
46,605
3,148,207
3,985,998
3,598,058
Australian Wine Exports, 1890-91-92.
lony.
1890-91.
1891-92.
Gallons.
Value.
Gallons.
Value.
es
48,480
£14,000
54,143
£11,644
• ••
146,331
31,990
160,981
32,516
...
...
221,885
44,288
286,188 :
58,684
416.696
£90,278 1
501,312 !
£102,844
Western districts, and is suited to the production of the fuller bodied
wines, of the full-Burgundy, Roussillon, and Languedoc character, and
of the vine-lands bordering the Lower Rhone, known as “ Cotes du
Rhone.”
3. The rearm, dry region , extending in a north-westerly direction
from Rutherglen to Mildura on the River Murray, having an
average rainfall of 10 to 18 inches, with a climate similar to that of
Spain, Southern Italy, Sicily, and Greece. The greater part of this
region, as are also some of the northern portions of the central region,
is more or less dependent on artificial irrigation for successful viticulture.
It is suited to the production of strong wines of the Spanish and
Portuguese character, and is also specially adapted for the cultivation
of the raisin and currant varieties of the vine. With suitable irrigation
these yield immense crops of fruit which can be dried in the sun
without the aid of artificial heat.
It is impossible at the present time to determine what may be the
exact extent of land suitable for vine-growing in this colony. There
can, however, be little risk of exaggeration in stating roughly that
each one of these regions contains 5,000,000 acres of land suitable for
vine-cultivation, or 15,000,000 acres in all, equal to the combined
vine-growing areas of France, Spain, and the larger half of Italy at the
present time. With such resources it is certain that viticulture will
eventually become the leading industry of Victoria, as probably also of
South Australia, and it is safe to predict that the southern colonies of
the Australian continent will ultimately take their rank as the most
important wine-producing countries in the Southern Hemisphere, and
possibly of the world.
Some idea of the proportions since attained by the wine industry
in Australia is afforded in the subjoined figures taken from the Year
Bool: of Australia for 1892 :
Colony.
Xew South Wales
Victoria ...
South Australia ...
Queensland
West Australia
Totals
Colony.
Xew Souta Wales
Victoria
South Australia
Totals
PROSPECTS AND REGULATIONS.
Throughout the British Empire just now a significant movement
is taking place. People are beginning to turn to the soil and its pro-
ducts as the most profitable and reliable source of obtaining a modest,
if not handsome, income, as well as a cheerful, healthy, and tranquil
existence.
This is particularly the change of thought which Victoria is just
now experiencing, a change no doubt brought about by the extra-
ordinary depression and failures of financial institutions through which
the country has just passed, but a change which promises to prove an
experience to Victoria of incalculable value, though like most valuable
experiences, bitterly and dearly bought. To quote the words of Mr.
John West, Victoria’s honorary irrigation expert—“ It was true of
communities, as of individuals, that in time of trouble and stress what
they required was courage, faith in their destiny, help from within
instead of without; and, in the face of the recent depression and
disaster, now if ever, was the time when this country’s people, by
courage and self-help, could rescue Victoria from its despondency.
Behind the depression the heart of the country was sound. From the
Murray to the sea there was a feeling of buoyancy and faith in the
country’s unbounded resources.”
Men were beginning to realise that the country districts offered
the chance of a competency and a home, instead of being merely a
place where men might make “ a lift ” before passing on to the city.
Farmers were more receptive of new ideas, and one of the minor
branches of agriculture, viz., dairying, had been lifted from almost
oblivion into a place in the front rank of profitable industries—a very
triumph of enterprise.
LAND SETTLEMENT IN VICTORIA,
By E. JEROME DYER.
In the year 1880 the total area of land under vines in the three
leading colonies was 14,117 acres, viz.:—N. &. Wales, 4,800; Victoria,
4,980 ; and South Australia, 4,337 acres, which produced 1,672,445
gallons wine. In 1892 this area had increased to 43,613, producing
3,262,868 gallons wine, of which quantity 501,312 gallons were
exported, having a value of £102,844.
There are upwards of fifty different species of European vines
that are, or have been, cultivated in Australia.
The following are the varieties most generally in favour either for
wine, table grapes, or raisins :
WHITE.
Reisling Roussanne (or White Hermitage)
Chasselas Pineau Blanc Pedro Ximines
Gouais Aucarot Baxter’s Sherry
Muscat de Frontignan Verdeilho Muscat Gordo Blanco
RED.
Cabernet (or Carbinet) Shiraz (or Hermitage) Malbec
Pineau Xoir Pineau Meunier Mataro (or Espar) *
Carignanc Black Hamburg Black Prince
Grenache Brown Muscatel (or Frontignan) Zante (Currant)
Owing to the widely scattered nature of the vine-growing districts,
and the difference in their climatic condition, a good deal of uncer-
tainty has existed, both as to the species of vine best suited to any
particular locality or site, its mode of culture, and the value of its
produce for purposes of commerce. Of recent years, however, Vine
and Fruit Growers’ Associations have been formed throughout the
colony. These have been useful in producing an interchange of ideas
on matters of general importance to growers, and in arousing a keener
and more intelligent interest in the subject in the different vine and
fruit-growing centres. There are now sixteen of these associations in
Victoria, and there can be but little doubt their influence will be
more widely felt and appreciated as the industry continues to develop.
The total number of vinegrowers, small and large, in the colony is
about 500, of which less than 100 are owners of vineyards varying in
extent from 20 to 200 or 300 acres.
It is, unfortunately, true that the reputation of Australian wines
has suffered in past years from the large quantities of immatuie or
imperfect wines that have been annually forced on the market by
growers of insufficient capital or inadequate cellar-accommodation.
Measures are now, however, being adopted to remedy this important
defect by forming Wine Maturing Companies to construct suitable
cellars or depots, in which wine can be more carefully looked after and
matured than has hitherto been possible with the limited accommodation
available for this purpose. This will ensure Australian wines being
placed on the market in fit condition as an “ article of commerce ” in
the European acceptation of the term. There is no doubt ample room
m each of the colonies for one or more companies of this kind, and it
is certain that when justice has been done to Australian wines by
means of a proper system of maturing and conserving them until fit
for commercial use, their merit and natural quality will be far more
marked and apparent, and a largely increased den.and for them both at
home and abroad will result.
All along the line of vision, indeed, the great central fact loomed
up that in the diversity of the soil and climate of this country, and the
reversal of the seasons as compared with those of Europe and America ;
in the splendid facilities for transport now bringing Victoria in closer
touch with the old world, it had opportunities of development which the
world might envy, and which, if its people were true to their traditions
and to the traditions of the British race, they should take advantage of.
Victoria had 66 million acres of land, of which 24 millions were either
alienated or in process of alienation. Reserves for timber, water
supply, &c., amounted to 4f millions, the mallee—virtually a new
province—contained 11 million acres, and 14 millions were left for
settlement, about half of which was held under a pastoral lease. Vic-
toria in 1892 produced from mining £2,500,000 ; from manufactures—
after deducting the cost of the raw materials—£9,7so,ooo ; from pas-
toral and agricultural pursuits, £18,000,000, an item made up of cereals
of all kinds. £6,250,000 ; wool, £4,000,000; stock, £4.000,000 ; dairy
produce, £2,750,000 ; orchards, vineyards, «fec., exclusive of wine, 1
£1,330,000 ; and wine, £310,000. This was no small result, con-
sidering the vast amount of time and attention given to pioneering
work, and having to deal with new conditions and surroundings. The
enterprise, however, of developing the prolific resources of the soil were
greatly hampered in the past by an extraordinary dislike on the part
of the people to agricultural pursuits, and their peculiar propensity to
drifting to large cities in the colony, where they either lived in ease on
the little they had easily and quickly acquired from the riches of the
land, or engaged in pursuits less dignified, and far less profitable, than
that of agriculture. The country naturally suffered in consequence
hence the recent depression. The young colonists were undoubtedly


the worst offenders in this distaste for rural life— a distaste probably
attributable to the loneliness and generally cheerless conditions of the
Australian settler’s life.
However, a change of ideas has come over the people ; these con-
ditions are becoming ameliorated, and the rising generation are taking
more kindly to the very lucrative and elevating work of husbandry. It
is a particularly cheerful sign at the present time to see so many young
men who had passed through brilliant educational courses going into the
country and giving their brains and force of character to the exalta-
tion of country life. Then, too, the better methods in farming had had
their effect. Dairying had in a few years been simply revolutionised
—the rotation of crops following, and the cultivating of the seed bed
through the summer, were all helping it on. Wrong ideas as to the
value of the soil and climate were being dispelled by the progress of
agriculture, and districts which the pioneers regarded as worthless were
proving our best, How many illusions had the settlement of the broad
northern plains, and later, the cultivation of the mallee, destroyed !
Taking a few of the industries separately. In five years, largely
through the valuable work done by the Vegetable Products Commission
in sending a committee to other countries to study the dairy factory
system, which had formerly been a mere adjunct of farming, a source
of much toilsome work for women, arid uncertain profit, had been lifted
into a surprisingly sound and hopeful position. Now we had 300 dairy
factories in work. In 1890 Victoria exported 828,000 lb. of butter,
but the bulk had risen to 1,700.000 lb. in 1891, to 4,790,000 lb.
in 1892, and last season it reached 8,000,000 lb.
New Zealand, in a period of tribulation like Victoria’s, was saved
chiefly by the rapid expansion of the frozen meat trade, and placed
upon her legs again. Ten years ago her exports in that way reached
£19,339 ; in 1891 they were £1,194,724, while by-products to the
extent of several hundred thousand pounds were realised from the
industry.
Of all country occupations none had . greater charm than fruit
and vine culture, which were associated chiefly with small holdings.
Mildura had done great things in showing the possibilities of extension
here. It had its difficulties—what new and great enterprise had not 1
—but with such splendid settlers success was certain. Victoria had
now under cultivation in fruits and vines 60,000 acres, while California
—a country which, in age, climate, soil, and^ population, may well be
compared with Victoria—had 270,000 acres, and in spite of all
assertions as to its being overdone, were planting faster than was being
done in this country.
The question as to a market was often raised. Let us look first at
what we had to do to exhaust our own. Amongst our imports at
present were—castor and other vegetable oils, £51,000 sterling per
annum ; linseed oil, £40,000 ; olive oil, £14,000 ; flax and hemp,
£53,000 ; dried fruits, £94,300 ; opium, £31,000 ; nuts, £B,OOO ; grass
and clover seed, £13,000 , other seeds, £10,000; eggs, £22,300 ; broom
corn, £7,300 ; and perfumery, £6,100. Nearly all these could be pro-
duced in Victoria, indeed the country was singularly suitable for them.
But these possibilities were small as compared with those beyond.
Australia’s contribution to Great Britain’s food bill was interesting.
We sent 14 million’s worth out of 62 millions’ worth of breadstuff's, a
quarter of a million’s worth of butter out 11 millions’ worth, £21,000
worth of bacon and hams out 9£ millions’ worth ; 2 3-5 millions’ worth
of frozen meat—half from New Zealand—out of 9 millions’ worth ;
£71,000 worth of wine out of 6 millions’ worth ; £74,000 worth of
cheese out of 5 millions’ worth; £94,000 worth of fresh fruit out of
5| millions’ worth ; nothing towards 2 2-3 millions’ worth of currants
and raisins: and only £4,000 worth of poultry, rabbits, «kc., out of
three-quarters of a million’s worth annually imported. How ridicu-
lous the idea of over-production seemed in face of facts like those. The
peculiar suitability of Victoria’s climate and soil to the production of
fruits, wine, and dairy produce, places the country in a position which
might well be envied by the nations of the old world. But what is
Victoria’s position to-day 1 Its vast and fruitful area is languishing
for population. Imagine a country of such extent and capability of
production with a population of only one and a quarter millions ! The
export of wine alone, only £310,000 ! Yet it is well known that there
is land suitable for vine-growing, capable of increasing this output
to £10,000,000 ! ‘
Victoria is a young country with “ a path of roses” before it; but,
it must strew its own leaves. Before the leaves are forthcoming, the
seeds or slips must be purchased and labour expended in cultivating.
And so it is with this “Garden of the South.” Money—little though
it may be—must go into the soil, and labour must go upon it. The
population at present in the country and on the land will undoubtedly
increase their holdings as they grow richer, but this is necessarily slow
—too slow for food-clamoring Europe, and too slow for a country teem-
ing with such riches and productive capacity as \ ictoria. It must be
borne in mind that, notwithstanding the rapidly increasing production
and export of food products —in the broad sense of the phrase—Victoria
is no richer, comparatively speaking, than other countries, and in fact,
in the immediate past, excepting the gold yield, it may be said to have
been as poor as any in the British Empire, save in the important ex
ceptions of fertility of soil and suitability of climate for agricultural
pursuits. In this respect it is certainly far in the van of all food
producing countries. But the land cannot till itself, and the present
population cannot well cope with more than the comparatively small
area which it is now dealing with. Though a well-worn platitude, it
must be repeated, that the rest of this great and luxuriant land cries out
for cultivation ; for a means of yielding its wealth of fecundity to the
labours of the husbandman. The struggling farmers of Great Britain
and the Continent would find pleasant homes and most prosperous
livings in Victoria, and its happy-hearted people would welcome them.
THE MALLEE COUNTRY, VICTORIA
The country known as the “ Mallee,” and which occupies no incon-
siderable portion of the colony of Victoria itself south of the Murray
River, and extending for hundreds of miles along the line of demarca-
tion between the respective colonies of Victoria, New South Wales, and
South Australia, was, until a comparatively recent date, scarcely known
except as a vast tract of undulating, scrubby, and uninteresting and
apparently unfertile land. Eor hundreds of square miles there was
scarcely a break (except for an occasional small sandy desert) in this
maze of Mallee scrub, being a species of eucalyptus, stunted, and
seldom exceeding fifteen feet in height, and which presented an
unsurmountable barrier to the settlement that benefited all the other
parts of the colony. However, a change was to come. Bome enter-
prising spirits, imbued with the idea that even this terra incognita might,
with the aid of modern inventions, be turned to profitable account,
secured small areas from the Crown and commenced their experimental
and pioneering work. The land was granted to them on the most
liberal terms—a nominal rent, and only one condition in their leases,
viz., to destroy the rabbits and dingoes (wild dogs) that infested it;
a»d yet even with these terms their task seemed hopeless, and would
have been hopeless had not invention come to their aid. First, the
Mallee roller, that laid the scrub down in huge pathways until
the time for burning off the debris arrived; second, the stump-jumping
plough, that enabled them to work the land in spite of the obstruction
that would have proved fatal to the orthodox implements of farming ;
third, the stump-jumping harrows, to complete the work of tilling the
soil. These ingenious contrivances in a miraculously short time effected
a wonderful transformation—“the barren wilderness was made to
smile,” and whole tracts of country were denuded of the encumbering
useless scrub. In its place could be see: vast fields of waving corn,
and more attention was directed to this region than to any other part
of Victoria. Unfortunately hundreds of square miles of this mag-
nificent country were leased in large blocks for grazing purposes only,
at a rent of two shillings and sixpence the square mile, under the then
current impression that the land was useless for any other purpose.
The leases had twenty years to run, of which ten have expired, and so
a large portion of the Mallee is still withheld from the occupation of
the number of people who desire to acquire land within its borders.
However, arrangements have been made, by compensating certain of
the lessees, to resume some 170,351 acres, and make it available for
application in allotments varying in extent from 480 to 640 acres
each. Another block of 180,353 acres will be similarly dealt with,
and it is also probable that other large areas will be available at
an early date. The rental will be at the rate of sixpence per
acre. The allotments will be granted to applicants by Land Boards.
There will be conditions of cultivation, vermin destruction, and
improvements inserted the allotment leases. The lease will be
granted for a term of years, but the land will not become the freehold
property of the lessee. Although it is not a condition of the lease, it
will be necessary for the lessee to take measures onserve water by
the construction of tanks or dams.
The area of the Mallee country is about 11,167,000 acres ; of this,
9,000,000 may be considered fertile land, suitable for wheat and fruit
growing, whilst the balance may be described as poor inferior land,
sandy in character, and covered with useless spinifex and heath.
The cost per acre of rolling down the Mallee scrub, burning off
the debris, ploughing and sowing, should not exceed for the first year
eighteen shillings per acre ; aftev this it should not cost more than six
shillings per acre to cultivate.
The soil is light in character, and will not stand a heavy succession
of crops, therefore precautions must be taken to “ rest ” portion of the
land, and work in what is known as the “ rotation system.”
Part of the country is of course remote from railway communica-
tion, but numerous townships are springing up, two railway lines are
now being constructed, and others are projected. At several different
points railways have already penetrated the Mallee for short distances.
CHIEF PROVISIONS OF LAND ACT, PART 11.,
Referring to the Mallee Country.
Section 147 (Block-Pastoral).— The area of each block available under
this section is divided into two portions, one called the “occupied,” and the
other the “leased.” A lease for the combined area is issued giving tenures of
five years for the “occupied” portions, and up to 30th November, 1903 for the
“leased.” An annual rent is charged at the rate of 2d. per sheep and Is per
head of cattle during the first five years ; 4d. and 2s. respectively during the
second five years, and 6d. and 3s. respectively during the remainder of the term
but a minimum annual rent of 2s. 6d. per square mile is charged when the
amount computed upon the stock does not cover such minimum. The conditions
of the lease require, inter alia, the extermination of all vermin on the land and
permission to cultivate or part with the possession of it ’
Sections 14*9 and 150 f Block-Pastoral. J- Under this section a lease
for the whole area is issued, terminating on 30th November. 1903 The annual
rent is 4d. per sheep and 2s. per head of cattle during the first five'years. and 6d
and 3s. respectively during the remainder of the term. The conditions of the*
lease are similar to those under section 147.
Section 157 (Allotment—Pastoral and Agricultural A lease for an
allotment is issued, terminating on 30th November, 1903. The rent varies from
£2 per square mile to 6d. per acre. The conditions of the lease are practicallv
similar to those under section 147. v


On Teases under all these sections the Crown has the right to resume
possession of the land by giving three years’ notice to that effect and paying
compensation for improvements ; also for the value of the unexpired term of the
lease.
Survey Fees.— lf more than £lO be due as survey fee on an allotment or
block, half of such amount and one instalment must be paid on issue of lease,
and the balance by equal half-yearly instalments extending over the term of the
lease. If the amount due be £lO or under, it must be paid in one sum before
issue of lease. The average amount due on an allotment is about £6.
Vermin Rate. —On every allotment and block an annual rate is collected
varying from 2s. to 11s. per square mile, according to the Vermin District in
which the land is situated. This rate is remitted to a Vermin Board for expenses
incurred in the supervision of the destruction of vermin.
Fencing. — A national vermin-proof fence, erected by the Government, runs
between the “ mallee country ” and the “ mallee border.” On lands abutting on
such fence an annual rate of £2 10s. per mile of fencing is collected to pay interest
■on the cost of construction.
Applications for land under any of these sections must be made for the whole
of a block or allotment as shown on the Land Act Map, and on the forms
prescribed by the regulations. Then, accompanied by certificates of registration,
which can be obtained from any receiver and paymaster on payment of a fee
of £1 in each case, they must be forwarded to the Land Officer in whose district
the land is situated.
ABSTRACT OF PART I. OF THE LAND ACT 1590.
All persons over the age of 18 years may take up land, but married women
cannot select under sections 42 or 49.
Application must be made on the form prescribed by regulation, and should
be forwarded to the Land Officer in whose district the land is situated. All
applications are heard by Local Land Boards appointed by the Minister of Lands.
A Section 21 (Pastoral). —Under this section a lease is issued until 27th
December, 1898, and the rent is based on the grazing capacity of the land, at the
rate of Is. per head of sheep, and ss. per head of cattle. Application must be
made for the whole of a block, as shown on the Land Act Map, and the rent is
payable half-yearly in advance.
Section 32 (Grazing ). —Under this section a lease is issued for an area not
exceeding with previous selections 1000 acres, for grazing purposes only, tenable
until 27th December, 1898. The rent is from 2d. to 4d. an acre per annum, pay-
able half-yearly in advance. The conditions of the lease require, inter alia, the
fencing-in of the land within three years, and the extermination of all vermin
and noxious weeds. Applications must be accompanied by a certificate ot
registration, which can be obtained from any receiver and paymaster on payment
of a fee of £l. At any time during the currency of the lease an agricultural
allotment as below may be obtained. # .
Section 42 (Agricultural Allotments). —The maximum area obtainable under
this section is 320 acres, which is licensed for six years. The licensee is required
to reside on the land, or within five miles thereof, to fence the land, and to culti-
vate at least one-tenth part of the area. The improvements must be of a total
value of 20s. an acre. The rent is Is. an acre per annum, payable half-yearly in
advance, and this payment is credited towards the purchase money of £1 per acre.
Applications must be accompanied by a certificate of registration, obtainable
from any receiver and paymaster, on payment of a fee of £l. If the area applied
for has not been previously surveyed, it must be marked out by tbe applicant
personally. The survey-fee is fixed according to a graduated scale, commencing
at £3 for a 20-acre block in clear open country, and reaching as high as £2O
(though it has been found that £l5 is the highest operative rate) for a block of
320 acres in heavily timbered country. After two years a lien may be given by
the licensee to the extent of half the value of the improvements. _
Section 49 (Non-residence License). —The maximum area^ obtainable under
this section is 320 acres, which is licensed for six years. The licensee is required
during the first three years of the license to put on improvements to the value of
20s. an acre; during the next three years further improvements up to 40s. an
acre. The rental is 2s. an acre per annum, payable half-yearly in advance, which
goes towards the purchase money of £2 per acre. Applications must be accom-
panied by a certificate of registration, obtainable from any receiver and pay-
master on payment of a fee of £l. The area applied for must be marked out
personally by the applicant if it has not been previously surveyed.
Section 65 (Auri/erous Lands). —Under this section the area
obtainable is 20 acres, which must be marked out personally by the applicant.
An annual license is issued, and the licensee is required to reside upon the land,
or to fence it in, and to cultivate at least a fifth part thereof. Ihe yearly rent is
5 per cent, on the capital value. Land held under this tenure cannot be alienated.
Applications must be accompanied by a certificate of registration, which may be
obtained from any receiver or paymaster on payment of a fee of £l.
Section 67 (Auriferous Lands). —Under this section a yearly license for
grazing purposes only is issued, renewable at the option of the licensee until 2.7 th
December, 1898 The rental is fixed by assessment, and the maximum area
obtainable is 1000 *cres.
Section 69 (Lands which may he Rold by Auction). —The purchaser of lands
sold at public auction is required to pay one-fourth of the purchase money in
cash at the time of sale. The balance is payable in twelve quarterly instalments
bearing interest at the rate of 6 per cent, per annum, computed from the date of
the sale to the end of the quarter in which the instalment is paid. _
Section 123 refers to annual license for grazing purposes only, which are
obtainable by public tender.
Wattle Cultivation.' —Any unoccupied Crown lands may be leased for
this purpose for a period of twenty-one years. The area must not exceed 1000
acres, and the rent is fixed by assessment, but must not be less than 2d. an acre
per annum for the first seven years, 4d. an acre per annum for the next seven
years, and 6d. an acre per annum for the remainder of the term.
Further information regarding the Land Acts may be obtained from the
Victorian Year Book for 1890-91, part via., page 239, &c., together with the
Departmental Statistics up to 31st December, 1890.
Under Section 87 of the Land Act 1890, the swamp lands of the colony are
being reclaimed at the expense of the State. As soon as this work is completed,
the reclaimed areas will be cut up into allotments not exceeding 160 acres each,
which will be disposed of on such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the
Minister of Lauds. The Condah Swamp, near Hamilton, has been
reclaimed, and the right to lease has been offered at auction with gratifying
Under Section 22 of the Land Act 1891, arrangements are made whereby
worked-out auriferous areas near the various diggings may be occupied in blocks
of not more than five acres each. The tenure is for seven years, at an annua!
rental of 5 per cent, on the assessed value of the land. Conditions are imposed
on the licensees providing for the continuous improvement of the area, and at the
end of the license term application may be made for the fee simple, credit being
given for the moneys paid as rent.
In Section 17 of the «ame Act is embodied the “ betterment principle,” as
applied to Crown lands p rovision is made that whenever Crown lands are
enhanced in value by a ui >!ic works, either actually completed or in contem-
plation, a portion of sue nhanced value shall be returned to the State in the
shape of increased rental* or purchase money The Land Act limits the extent
of such increase to not less than one-eighth greater than, nor more than double,
the maximum rent or upset price which would have been placed on such lands
but for the construction of such public works.
HOW TO GET ON THE LAND.
Hints for Immigrants and the Inexperienced.
How to get away to the country and become a farmer, a dairyman,
or a wine and fruit grower, is now a pressing question with many an
industrious tradesman in Melbourne. Many who desire to make the
change from town to country in nine cases out of ten do not know how
to proceed, and as mistakes committed at the start often lead to ultimate
disappointment, a few hints on the matter wall no doubt be welcomed
by those who are comparatively ignorant of country life.
I am frequently asked the question, What part of the country
would you recommend me to go to ? Now, although I have a pretty - '
good knowledge of the country generally, a question of that sort is at
once a puzzler. I received a letter the other day, for example, asking
me what North Beaconsfield was best adapted for. The writer gave no
indication of what his intentions were—whether he proposed starting a
fruit orchard, a dairy, or a laundry. So it is easy to see that without
having a specific knowledge of the pursuit a person wants to engage m
it is impossible to give him advice.
Certain parts of the country are adapted for dairying and others
for fruit-growing, just as some are for stock breeding or wool-growing.
Before going to the country a man should make up his mind before
selecting a part to settle in what he really intends to do there. Any-
one with a taste for wine-growing or the raising of choice and delicate
fruit should not think of putting his ideas into practice at Toora or in
Croajingolong. Most excellent potatoes, and parsnips, and clover, and
grass, and milk and butter can be raised in Gippsland, but the fruit-
grower, as well as the wheat-grower, must go north, into the warmer
regions of the colony.
It is a matter of little importance, I think, what branch of farming
is preferred, so fur as making a profit is concerned Wheat-growing is
as good as dairying, and dairying is as good as wheat-growing. Again,
fruit-growing is as profitable as vine-growing, or wool-growing, or anything
else, where the same relative amount of capital, and energy, and enthu-
siasm are applied to each, providing, of course, that a fairly suitable
part of the country is chosen for carrying on that particular industry.
Much depends upon the man himself, and whether he has started the
right business on the right spot.
Before starting anywhere it is necessary to consider carefully the
amount of capital required and how much is likely to be available for
some years to come. Make no mistake on this point; that a man can
no more commence farming without tangible means or credit of some
sort than he can start a store or factory in the city. In this country
the Government is the selector’s chief friend and creditor ; but it should
be remembered that a block of land on the Government terms is of no
value to a man absolutely toithout means. Of course, it does not require
a large capital to commence farming on a small scale on selected land,
but still some cash is needed, and the sum is unfortunately rather more
than many who desire to go to the country have by them. The question
remains to be solved how T a poor man without any capital at all can
start in the country with the hope of making a living for himself and
family.
Village settlement schemes may be useful in their way, but my
advice to those contemplating a country life is to keep away from them.
There is presently so much land being thrown open for selection that
any person desirous of making a home in the country need have no
difficulty in getting a suitable block. It is a matter of choice with the
individual himself whether he prefers going to the mallee or to Gipps-
land. He can go to either part, his decision resting upon the kind of
farming he wishes to follow. The clearing of the heavy timber is a.
slow and costly operation, but those who are patient and persevering
seem to prosper as well ultimately in Gippsland as the farmers do on.
the plains in the north. In the mallee a good start can be made at
wheat-growing on a capital of £l5O. The settler would necessarily have
to live in a tent the first year ; £lOO of the money would be laid out
in a team and implements, and the remaining £5O would be required to
maintain the selector until he got his first harvest off the ground. His
operations would gradually extend and increase, and within five years,
with average luck and good management, the settler would be the
possessor of a good house and a well-improved farm, worth about five
times the original capital on which he started.
Another cheap and easy way of getting on the land is to purchase
an irrigation block—there are plenty available—on terms. By planting
it out at once in fruit trees and vines, and then working for others
part of the time, a man can, in about three years, have a place that will
occupy his time fully, and yield him a good profit on his labour and
outlay. It requires rather more capital to begin fruit-growing than
wheat-growing. The man entirely without means cannot establish an
orchard or vineyard, but there are landowners in the irrigation districta
of the colony who are willing to give industrious families every assist-
ance and encouragement to settle on the land. A great deal more could
be done in this way than has yet been attempted. The owners seem to
want population to flow towards their neighbourhood, but the price they
usually demand for their land debars the people from purchasing.
An alternative plan to selecting for those with small capital is to
lease a farm for a terra, with the option of purchase if the place prove
suitable. On no account should a person of inexperience sign a lease
without first getting a practical friend’s advice on the subject. It is




always well to test the resources or capabilities of any farm for a year or
two before purchasing. All its good and bad points will by that time
have been discovered, and after-regrets will be less likely to occur. Is ot
infrequently one hears even men of verv long experience exclaim,
“ Well, if I had known this or that before, I would never have bought
the place.” The thing to avoid is giving more for a property than it
may be worth. A place may be, and very often is, of more value to
one man than it is to another, and until one is acquainted with all its
features and peculiarities, coupled with our own particular requirement,
it is hard to say just exactly what it is worth. This is where the
advantage of leasing for a year or so comes in before purchasing a
farm—you can try it and prove it for yourself. If you are afterwards
disappointed wdth your bargain you know who is to blame.
Leasing is carried on in various ways. In these times the tenant
can generally make his own bargain—that is to say he can either pay
the rent in hard cash or in produce or “kind,” to use an old-world term.
A fixed money rent is the best system to adopt, generally speaking.
The tenant has then a greater inducement to farm well and make the
place yield as much as possible, than where the landlord takes half the
produce. Of course, where a money rent is agreed to the tenant has
to take the risk of loss caused by droughts or plagues which may hap-
pen to come along; and these misfortunes do turn up every now and
then. The tenant has to fortify himself accordingly by offering a rent
that covers all probable disasters on an average run of years.
When a mixed system of farming is possible of being carried on,
it is much more satisfactory both to landlord and tenant to pay or
receive the rent in cash instead of in produce. There is no workable
plan of checking the quantity of produce raised on a farm where a
number of horses, cattle, sheep, pigs, and poultry are maintained in
addition to the various crops grown. The landowners of Victoria are,
therefore, mostly obliged to adopt the system of renting their farms at
a money-rent. The “share” system, now greatly in vogue in New
South Wales, is only adapted for purely wheat-growing lands.
In many quarters there is meanwhile awide-spread belief, amount-
ing to craze almost, that the place to go farming to-day is in Riverina.
I know it is a fact that the wheat-growers over there have been pros-
pering; but in Victoria we have equally as good land, so that given an
equal chance, there is no reason—except the tariff regulations—why
farming should not be as profitable in this colony as it is across the
Murray.
Several of the large landowners in Victoria are offering every
facility and encouragement to industrious people who are desirous of
settling on the land. What better opportunity of getting on the land
does anybody want 1 It is cheaper than selecting at the start, and
much easier. As already remarked, the custom of letting the land on
shares, which prevails largely in New South Wales, is only suitable for
a one-crop system of farming. The farmer agrees to do all the work,
provide all the horses and machines required, and hand over to the
landlord one-half of the produce he raises. In a good season these
wheat-growers do fairly well if they work the land properly.
“ Thistledown,” Argus.
THE VILLAGE AND LAND SETTLEMENT SCHEMES.
The Lands Settlement Bill of the present Government is an honest
attempt to carry out the system of small holdings which has lately
commended itself to public opinion. It must clearly be understood
that it is in addition to and not in substitution for the several modes
of land settlement now authorised by law, one of which, the Tucker
Village Settlement, forms a subject for a page of illustrations in this
work. There is to be the village community, the homestead association,
and the labour colony. The first two refer to settlement proper, the
third is designed for the temporary employment of persons out of work,
and will be a quasi-charitable institution.
The main features of this great Land Bill is that all the land to
be deat with belongs to the Crown. An idea of the amount available
may be obtained from the following :—Of the total area of Crown lands
in the colony (56,245,760 acres), 22,467,288 acres have been sold or
selected. This leaves 33,778,472 acres, and deducting reserves, roads,
rivers, <fec. (8,069,865 acres), we have still 25,708,607, or over three
million acres more than has been yet alienated.
The Village Settlement provides that the allotments are to be of
from 1 to 20 acres per settler, according to the quality of the land.
TIMBER.
Whilst extensive tracts in Victoria are either lightly wooded
without undergrowth—giving a park-like appearance to the country—
or are altogether untimbered, large forests exist in the mountain ranges
as well as in many other localities; indeed, there are few parts of the
colony where the settler will not find within easy reach, if not on his
own land, sufiicient timber for fencing and building purposes as well as
for firewood. In some of the forests, the trees attain to a height
VICTORIAN TREES.
These areas are to be occupied permissively for three years on certain
conditions, and at a nominal rent, and at the expiration of that period
a lease is to issue for 20 years, the rental going towards the payment of
the purchase money of the freehold, which is fixed at £1 per acre.
There are covenants for residence, cultivation and improvement, and
to ensure these allotments falling into the hands of the class for whom
they are designed, no one who is the owner of two acres or upwards of
freehold land, or who is the lessee of a pastoral or grazing area, or a
selector under the homestead settlement clauses of the present Bill, or
the holder of an agricultural licence under the present Land Act, will
be allowed to take up a village community allotment, nor will one per-
son be allowed to hold more than one permit or lease. Some such
provisions as these were necessary to prevent the whole system dis-
appearing by the aggregation of the allotments in a few hands If an
allotment is to pass from the possession of a holder, it must be to a
person who will take his place as a resident of the village community.
A sum not exceeding £l5, paid in small amounts weekly, will be
allowed by the Government to each settler to assist him in settling on
the land.
The Homestead Associations , to which the second part of the Bill
applies, provides that were six or more persons form themselves into an
association, a block of Crown lands, not exceeding 2000 acres, may be
set apart for their occupation ; but no homestead is to consist of more
than 50 acres, and all the allotments in the association’s block are to go
to the now landless alone. The owner of more than 50 acres of free-
hold land, the lessee of a pastoral, grazing, or agricultural area, or the
holder of a village community allotment, will be ineligible to become
a member of one of these homestead associations. In addition to the
cultivation allotments under this part of the Bill, the Governor-in-
Council is to set aside 100 acres adjoining for the purpose of a township,
and each settler is to receive a lease of half an acre of such township
land, which is always to go with the cultivation section of the holder.
Recreation ground to the extent of 40 acres is to be reserved out of
the township area, and, presumably, the ba l ance of allotments, if any,
are to be sold to such traders as devote themselves to supplying the
wants of the little community. The whole association will thus be
brought into immediate contact, so far as residence is concerned, with
manifest advantages as regards school, post office, and other adjuncts of
civilisation. As the whole of the intending residents are to be brought
together in a friendly way in the first instance, such a community
should have a very fair chance of living in peace and harmony. But
there are economic advantages to be obtained by such an arrangement
as should not be overlooked. If the members of an association choose
to confine their operations mainly to one kind of production, they will
be able to promote its success in many ways by combined effort.
Should dairying be favoured, the settlement can found its own creamery,
owned and managed by those immediately interested. Should the land
be suitable for the growth of the grape, a winery could take the place
of a creamery, and the vintage of a whole settlement made into wines
of a uniform character. If the raising of fruit be depended on, the
evils of bad packing and choice of unsuitable fruits could more easily
be avoided than now, when every small producer is a law unto himself.
It is almost needless to add that a number of growers acting thus in
combination would be better able to command a profitable market than
a host of independent producers.
The third part of the Lands Settlement Bill deals with the question
of Labour Colonies. The crown is to give the necessary land, and to
subsidise the colonies when formed by £2 for every £1 privately sub-
scribed, but is to take no direct part in the management, which is to
be vested in trustees appointed by the Governor-in-Council. The
object of these “colonies” will be to give work, temporarily or per-
manently, to all who apply for it, and who comply with the rules. It
is not to be supposed that many of the inmates of a labour colony would
remain there permanently when opportunities of acquiring areas of
land of their own, or of obtaining private employment of a lucrative
character, offered themselves. But in a time of general distress men
who object to be the recipients of charity would have no hesitation in
entering a labour colony for a time, since whatever they there received
would be paid for with their labour. Theoretically, there is nothing
objectionable in this proposed institution, and whether or not it proves
a blessing or otherwise will very much depend on the character of ita
administration.
unequalled in any other country. On a range called the Black Spur,
situated between Healesville and Marysville, as well as in parts of the
Gippsland and Cape Otway ranges, there are instances of trees
measuring 400 feet in height. It is believed that the tallest which
has been actually measured was 480 feet high, but it is doubtful
whether specimens are still to be found of that height. The majority
of these giants are perfectly sound throughout, and their straight white
stems, shooting up 200 or 250 feet before the first bough is reached


pre'ent a most striking appearance. All of these are of the eucalyptus
tribe (gumtree of the colonists), the tallest being those of the variety
called eucalyptus amygdalina or giant gumtree. As timber, the most
valuable Victorian tree is the eucalyptus rostrata or red gum. Its great
hardness and durability and the ease with which it is walked, as well
as its peculiar power of resisting the attacks of insects, causes it to be
extensively used for railway sleepers, piles, bridges, and a variety of
other purposes. Scarcely less prized is the eucalyptus globulus or blue
gum, which is of much quicker growth than the former, or than any of
the other eucalypti. This tree is not only valuable for its timber, but
it has become famous throughout the world for its alleged property of
preventing the spread of infectious diseases and fevers, which has
caused it to be successfully acclimatised and extensively grown in Spain,
Italy, the south of France, Algeria, the Western States of America,
and other countries. There are many other varieties of the eucalyptus
family, the best known being the ironbark (E. leucoxylon) and stringy-
bark IE. macrorrhynca ). The former of these, in point of hardness and
durability, is only second to the red gum; whilst the latter, although
less durable, is specially valuable in consequence of the facility with
which it can be split into palings, shingles, slabs for mining purposes,
staves for casks, &c. The essential oils and gums of some of the
•eucalypti possess important medicinal properties, and the virtue of
■others has yet to be discovered. Besides the eucalypti, fag us Cunninghami
NATIVE ANIMALS.
None of the quadrupeds running wild upon the Australian Con-
tinent are dangerous to man. The only carnivora are the native dog or
dingo and the native cat. The former is a cowardly animal, very des-
tructive to sheep, but kept in check, and, in all but scrubby and
mountainous districts of an isolated character, now exterminated by
the settlers. The native cat resembles a ferret in shape, and is of like
predatory habits, but is often much lai’ger. It possesses a prettily-
spotted skin, which is prized by the furriers. Many species of kangaroo
•exist, the largest being the “ old man ” ( macropus major). Kangaroos
were much complained of inconsequence of the quantity of grass they
•consumed, to the detriment of sheep and cattle ; they have, however,
now been driven back from the more settled portions of the colony, but
abound in districts which are still thinly peopled. The leather made
from their skins is soft, but strong and durable, and that of the smaller
varieties resembles kid ; their tail sinews, moreover, are used in surgery.
The opossum, an animal of arboreal habits, thicker but not so long as
a rabbit, is found in large quantities in most parts of the colony ; it is,
however, ruthlessly pursued for the sake of its skin, of which handsome
and comfortable travelling rugs are made. bear is a kind
of sloth, twice as large as the opossum, and of similar habits. The
wombat is a clumsy animal with a blunt head, dark in colour, as large
as a rniddling-sized pig, living on roots and burrowing under ground.
The bandicoot is shaped like a kangaroo, but with much shorter legs in
proportion to its size, the head being like that of a rat. There are,
besides, the native or ant-eating porcupine and the platypus—the
latter being an amphibious animal resembling a mole, but with a
duck bill. Of birds, the best known are the emu or Australian ostrich ;
the so-called “ native companion,” a large species of crane ; black and
white cockatoos ; parrots of various kinds : the splendidly-plumaged
lyre-bird ; pigeons of several varieties; snipe, quail, and plover; wild
ducks, geese, and black swans ; the magpie or organ bird, noted for its
musical cry ; the laughing jackass and the mopoke ; also several species
of owls and kites. Under the head of reptiles, their are several species
of lizard, the largest being the so-called iguana,” which sometimes
attains a length of six feet; the death-adder, and the tiger, black,
brown, and whip snakes, all tolerably common and most deadly , also
the carpet snake, a small species of python, the only non-venomous
snake found in Victoria. The crocodile, which abounds in the streams
and rivers of the northern part of Australia, is never found within a
thousand miles of Victoria. The best edible fish are the sea whiting,
flounder, garfish, ling, pike, and sole (scarce). Of less delicate flavour
are the kingfish, schnapper, bream, flathead, rock-cod, pike, stranger,
mullet, pilchard, trevalli, salmon-trout, and barracoota. Sharks
of various species abound on the coast, rendering bathing dangerous
in unprotected places. Of river fish, by far the largest is the
gigantic Murray cod, which sometimes attains a weight of 50
to 60 lbs., and is occasionally even heavier. The Murray perch
and Murray bream range from 5 to 8 lbs. in weight, and, as well
as the cod, abound not only in the Murray but in all the streams
to the north of the Dividing Range, and are brought in quantities to
the Melbourne markets. In the streams to the south of the main
range the most esteemed fish are—the blackfisb, ranging from 2 to 5 lbs.;
ANIMAL LIFE.
BARK FOR TANNING.
INTRODUCED ANIMALS.
or evergreen beech, and the acacia melanoxylon or blackwood, are
the most important timber trees, the latter especially being found ad-
mirably adapted for the manufacture of railway carriages, also for
furniture, which is almost indistinguishable from that made of the best
walnut.
Several species of acacia, locally termed “ wattle,” supply bark
for tanning purposes, those most used being the black, silver, golden,
and swamp wattles. These, especially the first-named, have been so
much sought after for years past that the supply on Crown lands has
become nearly exhausted, and the wattle is now being extensively cul-
tivated by private individuals, and bids fair in some localities to yield
a more profitable return than legitimate farming. It is of exceedingly
quick growth, being ready for stripping of its bark in five or six years.
Whilst its timber, which is valueless, becomes finer on good land, its
bark-producing properties are said to be greatest on poor arid soils; it
is, therefore, well suited for certain sandy belts bordering on the coast,
and is also being grown by the Government along some of the lines of
railway. The price of the dried bark has been rising for years past,
and now ranges from £8 to £lO per ton. Large areas of land suitable
for the growth of the wattle have been recently been thrown open for
selection.
a small species of grayling, locally called the herring, which rises readily
to a fly, but which has been somewhat scarce of late years; the
Gippsland perch, which also rises to a .fly ; and the small mountain-
trout. There are also quantities of eels in these streams, but, strange
to say, none are to be found in the streams to the north of the range.
A large marine crayfish is very common, and is daily brought to market,
as is also, sometimes, a gigantic marine crab. A small river crayfish
abounds in the streams throughout the colony. The Murray and its
tributaries produce a small lobster, which is much appreciated for the
table. Insect life is exceeding prolific in Victoria Cicadas of several
varieties fasten upon the leaves of the gurntrees at certain seasons,
keeping up a deafening hum as long as daylight lasts ; grasshoppers
and locusts make occasional inroads upon the crops and herbage ; ants
of various species are numerous mosquitoes abound in marshy localities
and on the banks of rivers ; the common house-fly and the blow-fly are
the despair of housewives ; gorgeous butterflies flit about in the sun-
light, delighting the eye and almost causing forgetfulness of the damage
done by their tribe whilst at the caterpiller stage; beetles of curious
shape invite the attention of the entomologist, various species of mantis
almost startle the beholder by their close resemblance to the leaves of
the plants on which they feed.
The Zoological and Acclimatisation Society of Melbourne has
done much to introduce animals and birds from other countries, and
their efforts have been seconded by those of private individuals. The
selections, however, have not always been judicious, as, for instance, the
rabbit, which has now multiplied so much in all parts of the colony as
to be the occasion of serious loss to the grazier and farmer, which* has
led to persistent attempts being made to exterminate these animals by
snare and poison; the fox, first introduced for purposes of sport, but
which, in certain localities, has proved most destructive to lambs
and poultry; and the sparrow, imported in consequence of its supposed
insectivorous proclivities, but which has proved most destructive to
fruit, but hardly at all to insects. The introduction of other animals
has, however, been beneficial. Several species of deer, liberated in
various parts of the colony, have increased in numbers largely, and,
whilst they have been the cause of enjoyment to many, have been a
nuisance to no one. The hare is to be found in most localities, and
affords scope for the establishment of coursing clubs in many of the
inland towns, whilst it is much esteemed and can be purchased cheaply
for the table. Numbers of pheasants and California quail have been
set free, but, probably in consequence of their eggs being often des-
troyed by native cats, are not yet numerous in any part of the colony.
Thrushes, blackbirds, skylarks, and other song-birds have also been
liberated near Melbourne, and their notes are sometimes heard, especialM
in the vicinity of the Botanical Gardens ; it is to be feared, however,
that their nests have been much interfered with by boys, which has
prevented their rapid increase. Trout, carp, perch, tench, dace, and
goldfish have been successfully placed in many of the streams, and
some of these fish in the lakes. Attempts have been made to acclimatise
both the English and the California salmon, but these have not been
successful; perhaps the experiments have been tried upon to small a scale.


COMPAGNIE DES MESSAGERIES MARITIMES.
The largest of French Shipping Companies, and one well in the front rank, amongst the foremost of the world, the “ Cornpagnie des
Maritimes,” has been running from 1882 a monthly service between the European Continent and Australia.
In the old times, somewhere about the end of the first half of the century, the society, then known under the name of “ Messageries-
Nationales,” undertook only the inland carrying business. In 1852 a new departure was made, the inland carrying being discarded for the°more
important over-sea business; additional capital was subscribed for the new undertaking, and the present <; Compagnie des Messageries Maritimes”'
came into existence, with a working capital of £2,400,000, and power to increase to £3,840,000.
The object of the new society was to run subsidised postal services, in place of the Government steamers, which had hitherto been
exclusively used for that purpose. The postal services were at first limited to the Mediterranean coast, and afterwards gradually extended to the
Black Sea, the Atlantic, the Indian Ocean, and the Pacific. In addition to the postal lines, the company owns a few others subsidised by
colonial capital, besides certain non-subsidised lines of some importance, and the M.M. flag, at first confined to the Mediterranean shores is-
now flying and well-known in most ports of the world.
Some statistical information respecting the “Cornpagnie des Messageries Maritimes” may be found of interest as giving an accurate
idea of the importance of this powerful concern.
In January 1893 the M.M. fleet numbered 59 steamers, with an aggregate tonnage of 200,300 tons, and a total horse power of
145,15075 kilos. The distance covered by these steamers during twelve months is 2,500,000 miles; the number of passengers travelling by
them in the same period 113,500. The staff of the company numbers 10,830 hands, all told, of which 5,500 are officers and° crews, and 4 000'
mechanics and laborers at the dockyards.
The principal lines of the Messageries are as follows :
The Mediterranean and Black Sea line—Steamers of 2,000 to 3,000 tons sailing twice a week from Marseilles, and touching, amongst other
ports, at Alexandria, Jaffa, Beyrouth, Tripoli, Messina, Smyrna, Constantinople, Odessa, Athens, Trebizonde, and Batoura.
The India, China, and Japan line—Being a fortnightly service, made by steamers of 4,000 tons, calling at Calcutta, Madras, Pondichery,
Colombo, Singapore, Hong Kong, Shanghai, Kobe, and Yokohama.
The South American line—Steamers of 6,000 tons, sailing three times a month from Bordeaux to Vigo, Lisbon, Dakar, Bahia, Rio de Janeiro,,
Montevideo, Buenos Ayres.
The Australian, monthly service—At first running via Mauritius in thirty-eight days, with steamers like the “ Natal,” the “ Oaledonien,” the
“Sydney,” the “ Salazie,” the “ Yarra,” the “ Oceanien,” and now following a more direct route via Mahe with such well-known steamers as
the “ Australien,” the “ Polynesien,” the “ Armand Behic,” the “ Yille-de-la-Ciotat,” of a gross tonnage of 7,000 tons each and 7,000 horse-
power, travelling at a speed of 18 knots, and landing their passengers in London within 28 days of their leaving Melbourne.
The ports of call on the Australian line are Port Said, Suez, Aden, Mahe, Albany, Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, and Noumea.
Passengers and cargo may be booked through branch lines to Kurrachee, Bombay, Reunion, Mauritius, Tamatave, Zanzibar, and the east coast of
Africa.
The four steamers now running to Australia have been all specially built for this service. The first of them, the “ Australien,” left
home on her maiden trip in March 1890, followed 12 months afterwards by her sister ship, the “Polynesien.” Then came in 1892 the
“ Armand-Behic,” named after the late chairman of the company, and at the beginning of the present year the latest addition to the fleet,
“Yille-de-la-Ciotat.”
La Ciotat is a town in the south of France, where the dockyards of the company are located, and an idea may be gathered en passant
of the way they manage things there by remarking that the “Portugal,” the “ Bresil,” the “la Plata,” all steamers of 6,000 tons, now running
to South America, were built during the last four years concurrently with the Australian steamers, and the latter being completed, the company
is now engaged in building new boats for the China line.
The principal dimensions of the M.M. Company’s steamers employed on the Australian line are nearly the same for each, and as-
follows : —Length overall, 510 feet; beam, 52 feet; depth from main deck, 36 feet 9 inches ; depth from spar deck, 45 feet ; draught (mean),
25 feet 10 inches; displacement, 9,506 tons.
All the internal arrangements have been devised to afford passengers the greatest possible comfort and freedom. The cabins are
unusually large, and the ventilation throughout made a special point. Accommodation is provided for 130 passengers in the first saloon, 74
in the second saloon, and about 150 in third class. The first-class cabins are amidships and on deck, with two berths only in each, placed at
right angles, so as to give both occupants the best possible light and ventilation. Another point well deserving of mention is that every cabin-
has a full-sized port-hole, inside first-class rooms being entirely unknown on board the M.M. steamers. The first-class dining saloon, most
elegantly and elaborately decorated, is situated amidships on the main deck, measures 46 feet in length, and takes the whole width of the steamer-
on two of the boats, whilst a small passage alongside of it has been reserved on both the “ Yille-de-la-Ciotat ” and “ Armand Behic.” Next to-
the saloon is the ladies’ boudoir, likewise tastefully decorated. The social and music room, luxuriously furnished, is on the spar deck above the
dining saloon, and communicates with the latter by means of a large and elegant staircase of oak, carved in the most artistic and finished style.
The smoking room, measuring 28 feet x 19 feet, is placed at the back of the dining soloon.
The decorations of these smoking rooms has been made a special feature, being on a different plan in each steamer. Whilst on the-
“ Polynesien” painting representing some of the principal sights of Paris may be admired, on board the “ Australien” the decorations are entirely
of the purest Japanese inlaid work. The panels on the “ Armand Behic ” are of terra-cotta, framed in dark plush, giving to the room a quaint
and most attractive appearance; and finally on the “ Yille-de-la-Ciotat ” you may see a series of allegorical blue enamelled paintings, all relating
to the gentle weed and its enjoyment, and treated in the most artistic manner.
The second-class passengers have their comfortable cabins, saloon, smoking-room, and the accommodation in the third-class has been
also carefully looked after, the passengers in the third class being provided with well ventilated cabins, bathrooms, deck promenade, etc., and
dining saloon, where their meals are served to them by the waiters of the steamers.
The main deck is roofed in by a flush spar deck 500 feet in length, which extends from stem to stern, and possesses a double-
advantage—it shelters the main deck and forms a magnificent promenade.
Such steamers as those were bound to be well appreciated by the Australian community, and deservedly so. The most direct route
enjoyed on board the best appointed steamers, in the largest and loftiest cabins, with the most delicate food and that strict attendance to one’s
comfort rarely found elsewhere, a glimpse of Paris on the way, and a landing in London well within a month from departure, are only a few of
the advantages the company affords to its clients.
Through its efficiency also the Australian export trade with the Continent has, during the last decade, and especially of late, progressed
by leaps and bounds. Wool, grain, tallow, and skins have been shipped direct to the consumer in increased quantities every year, to the manifest
benefit of the producer.
The Messageries Maritimes Company is managed from the Marseilles head office, under the supervision of the Paris Board of
Directors. It has its own agency in London, 97 Cannon Street, E. 0., with a branch at 51 Pall Mall, S.W. ; also in Sydney, the principal
agency for Australia, at 15 Macquarie Place. In Adelaide Messrs. Harrold Bros, are its representatives, and in Melbourne their affairs are-
managed by the old and well-known firm of Dalgety and Co. Limited.




There can be little doubt that, as in California—a country which in
age, resources, and indeed almost every respect, may be likened to Vic-
toria irrigation is destined to become an important factor in deter-
mining the development of the soil, and thus enabling Victoria to sustain
a xelatively dense population. Some years since public attention was
aioused to the importance of this question, and the Government of the
day initiated a gigantic scheme of national irrigation embracing almost
the whole of the colony. A portion of the public works connected with
this scheme has already been completed, and the foundation laid to
extensive systems of irrigation for the benefit of this and future genera-
tions, when the fertile regions of the Murray and other irrigable basins
shall teem with millions of prosperous vignerons and fruit farmers,
and the country for hundreds of miles shall form vast oases of fruiG
bearing vegetation, nurtured by a net-work of irrigating channels, and
nourished by the strength of the beneficient Australian sun.
[77iis article will now deal with the separate divisions of Victoria
according to report recently prepared hy Mr. Stuart Murray , Chief
Engineer of the Victorian Water Supply Department .j
THE MILDURA COLONY.
Any account of the progress of irrigation in Victoria that did not
take note of Mildura would be incomplete. The Mildura settlement is
the scene of the greatest experiment in irrigation yet undertaken here,
and the success or failure of irrigation at Mildura would have largely
influenced its success or failure throughout the colony. The Govern-
ment has not invested money in the Chaffey enterprise as it has invested
money in the form of loans advanced to trusts, and in the construction
of costly national works in the Goulburn Valley, in the Loddon Valley
and throughout the settled portions of the dry northern districts ; yet
it has a distinct right of property in Mildura in virtue of the'con-
cessions it has made to its founders. They have been given, subject to
the fulfilment of certain conditions on their part, a block of 50 000
acres of land as a free gift, with a further area of 200,000 acres on very
favourable terms. But, more than all, they have had handed over to them
a large share of the colony’s inheritance in the waters of the Murray
River—a concession, practically in perpetuity, of so much water as may
J rec l™ e(1 for the complete irrigation of this enormous block of
KAn aCr6S ’ and for the service of the community of, it may be
500,000 or more of people that will eventually dwell there.
A series of articles by a recent writer in the London Daily
Chronicle are conceived in a spirit of discriminating criticism that com-
mends them to the judgment of the thoughtful. The key-note is struck
ln vu. followill g sentence, extracted from the first of the series :
“ Whatever the result of the existing experiments may be, it must be
patent to every careful observer that in the encouragement of inland
colonisation, both by migration and immigration, lies the main hope of
building up the prosperity of Australia on an unassailable basis of
national happiness and wealth.” And further on, addressing some
words of caution to the sanguine enthusiast, warning him against being
too precipitate in investing his capital on the faith of glowing adver-
tisements, he says :—“ Of course, when success is assured, he may have
more money to pay for land, but he need not fear that his patience will
misuse him, as immediately Mildura becomes a proved business
thousands of acres of similar land will be available at a reasonable
P rice ;, the . position taken up by the writer be conceded, even in »„•
qua ified and limited degree, it is at once obvious how much a matter of
pubhc and national concern is the success of the Chaffey enterprise
Ihe Goulburn River is known, from careful measurement of its volume
and study of its conditions, to be capable of providing water for the
complete and continuous irrigation of an area of land somewhat larger
than that conceded to the Messrs. Chaffey. The whole of this land-even
acre of it—is the property of private owners. The Government has
already expended ,£400,00() on national works needed to make the water-
available for the land, and it stands committed, in effect, to a further
still greater expenditure. What the owners and occupiers of the land
have done towards turning this vast expenditure to profitable account
wil! be the subject of special inquiry in the course of this investigation.
? , Go L u i ll scheme is but one, though the largest of several, on
which the Victorian Government have entered for rendering water the
property of the State available for the use of holders of agricultural
lands. It has besides loaned large sums to the trusts created under the
irrigation law for the construction of local works, for the distribution
and utilisation of the water so rendered available, and for the con-
struction of works designed to divert and distribute water from other
natural sources. How great, then, is our interest in the success of the
experiment now in progress at Mildura becomes at once apparent.
The agreement between the Victorian Government and the Messrs.
Chaffey was signed in May, 1887—that will be five years ago next
autumn ; and possession of the property was entered upon on the 4th
of August following. The progress may be briefly summarised as
follows :—ihe present population numbers 4,000, of whom nearly one-
halt are actually engaged in the clearing, preparation, and cultivation
IRRIGATION AND INTENSE CULTURE IN VICTORIA.
i of the soil, either as land-owners or as workmen. The area of land sold'
' Chaflfe y is - in numbers, 17,000 acres, whereof
■ 10,000 have been planted, 500 are under various kinds of annual or
green crops, and an additional 3,000 are cleared and ready for cultiva-
i tion or planting. The remainder are held for future improvement.
Of the plantations, about two-thirds consist of raisin vines. The
• others, in the order of their importance, comprise wine grapes,
apricots, oranges and lemons, peaches, olives, and other fruits. The
i expenditure by the Messrs. Chaffey on works for the service of the
settlement has been far in excess of that provided for by their agree-
“J; These comprise eleven pumping plants (ranging from 200 to
1,000 horse-power each), 150 miles of main and 300 miles of secondary
and distributing channels (whereof about three miles are lined with
concrete, made from the local lime), together with syphons, flumes,
bridges, and other secondary works.
So much for the extent and character of the settlement and the
work done. Now for the results of the work, in its financial and com-
mercial aspects. So far, the settlement has been maintained chiefly bv the
capital brought into it by the settlers themselves and by the expen-
diture of the firm of Chaffey Brothers and Co. Little of what it has
produced has been sold to the outside world. No doubt a material
xmtiibution to the support of the settlers has been derived from their
own produce. Some of them have earned a few pounds by growing
fodder for the horses employed by the firm and in other similar ways?
and one or two of the more energetic and enterprising have made a
living by supplying fruit and vegetables to their neighbours. But all
this contributes nothing to the solution of the main problem. Even
the few tons of raisins and dried apricots purchased from the settlers by
the firm last year, or the larger quantity purchased this year, go but a
little way towards solving it. The price the firm will pay for these
small lots of first produce is hardly any criterion of what the world
will give for the general bulk of the crop, when the whole of the land
is under cultivation and the limit of the local market has been reached.
It is a fact that, at the present moment, as much as sd, per lb. may be
obtained in Melbourne for first-class samples of colonial-grown cooking
raisins, and good currants fetch a price but slightly lower. In the
London market, however, good currants are worth no more than Ud.
per lb., cooking raisins 2£d., and the best table raisins 7d. The difference
between the Melbourne and London prices is due to the import duty of
2d. per lb., the cost of freight, insurance <fec., and the addition of the
charges of the merchant and shipper.
The wine industry at Mildura is on a somewhat different footing
from the dried-fruit business. Victorian wine may be fairly said to
have already found its place among the beverages of the world. Ruther-
glen and Great W estern are not so well or widely know as Bordeaux
and Dijon, but they are undoubtedly in a fair way of becoming so.
People who drink good wine, and who can afford to pay for what they
drink, consume the wines of these localities, not because they can get
no other, but of choice. They are drunk under their proper titles in
England and to some extent on the continent of Europe; and there is
good reason to believe that they are used for blending purposes, or,
in other words, for the production of high-priced French clarets.
Victorian wine, therefore, may be said to have passed the ordeal. Its
price, in competition with other wines of like class, is established; and the
grower who can live by his vineyard now may assume that he is
in possession of a property that will maintain its value and that will
provide a living for himself and his descendants in perpetuity. But
Mildura will not produce good wines of the claret and Burgundy class.
Any attempt to produce these, in its soil and climate, would result in
failure. But it will produce good wines of another class—heavy-
bodied, rich, or fruity red wines, suitable for the manufacture of port
or for blending with the thinner, but more delicately-flavoured dry
wines, will do well here. So also probably will the heavier class of
sherries. The results thus far obtained from the vineyard of Messrs.
Murray and Seal, in Deacon-avenue, point to this conclusion; and
there is every reason to think that the crops will be heavy. The
deep soil, strongly impregnated with lime, the hot sun, and the ever
available water, will insure a large production of must. For high-
class brandy Mildura will, in all probability, attain a reputation
that will be worth money to vignerons.
It would be hardly possible to speak too highly of the manner m
which the Messrs. Chaffey’s firm has given effect to their part of the
agreement relating to the Mildura settlement, or the pains they have
taken to instruct, guide, and assist the settlers there. It has been
such as to entitle them to all the assistance and support the Govern-
ment can fairly and lawfully give. The position and prospects of the
cultivating land-owners is as hopeful and promising as reasonable men
will expect. By the outlay of a little capital and a good deal of hard
work the industrious may be assured a present livelihood, under condi-
tions that to most will prove agreeable. The future promises competence ,
independence, fortune to those who are willing to labour and wait.
Occasion was taken in the course of the trip to Mildura to pay a visit
to Renmark, just across the river from Mildura, and, though we have no


Physche Bend Pumping Station-Messrs, Chaffey Bros., Mildnra.
The first landing place established —Murray River, Mildnra.
Physche Bend Pumping Plant, 1000 h.p., Mildnra.


direct interest in the success of the Renmark settlement, a brief
reference to its position and prospects may here be pardoned. The
conditions on which the Chaffey firm hold the Renmark block from
the South Australian Government are practically identical with those
on which they hold Mildura from the Victorian. But the settlement
at Renmark is not so old, by about a year, as that in our colony. The
present population of Renmark is about GOO, among whom the pro-
p ition of cultivators is nearly the same as at Mildura—that is to say,
they number rather less than one-half of the entire community. The
area of land sold is 4,500 acres, of which 1,500 are either planted or
under crop, the total cleared being 3,000. Of the cultivated lands,
W 0 acres are occupied by plantations, and 950 are under lucerne,
sorghum, maize, hay, and garden crops. Of the plantations, vines
(chiefly raisin vines and Zante currants) cover more than a half; the
remainder consists of apricots, peaches, oranges, figs, prunes, and
sundry fruits. The works constructed by the firm comprise, besides
four powerful pumping plants, 10 miles of main channels (of which
half are lined), and about 15 miles of secondary and distributing
channels, 'lhe water applied is computed at 24 inches per annum, as
against 15 inches at Mildura, the greater demand being due to the
greater porosity of the soil. As, however, the lift is lower at Renmark
tmxn a,t Mildura, the cost of 24 inches at the former is no more than
of 15 inches at the latter place. The soil at Renmark likewise strikes
one as being of somewhat superior' quality to that at Mildura. It
is cei tainly better land for ordinary crop's, though for such specialities
as the raisin vine and orange it would be rash to hazard an opinion
except after extended experience.
i lt is worthy of note that the South Australian Government have
marked out a block of land nearly adjoining the Renmark block,
apparently for the purpose of an irrigation settlement, and have made
engineering trial surveys for a system of works to supply the block
with water from the Murray.
Tire Hon. A. Deakin, in the course of the address above referred
to, said ;
Mildura as a whole has got five years’ start of the rest of Australia in the
production of the special fruits which you have set yourselves to produce. Now
what is the value of five years’ start, knowledge, and experience ? It can scarcely*
. think, be measured in money when you recollect how large the market is, the
imports amounting to nearly half a million a year within these colonies alone for
these products of yours. Then without sending a single orange, or olive, or
raisin outside the colonies, you have a market within the bounds of these colonies
dor halt a million sterling annually for the very goods you produce ! You have
mutsule that a market which some describe as limitless, but we need not consider
that, because you will have the first monopoly of this home market as soon as you
are ready to take it. Gentlemen, this is the greatest private enterprise any
■Colonial Government ever sought to encourage ; it is the greatest private enter
prise in Australia, ; it is one of the biggest, I believe, in the world, and the germ
of anything you like in the future.”
In conclusion, just a word upon the manner in which the land may
be acquired. Both at Mildura and Renmark the price is from £2l to
the fruit-cultivation lands ; and those who require further
facilities may spread the payment of the purchase-money over a term of
ten years.
As to the people who came out from England, Lord Ranfurly,
who owns and personally superintends a very successful plantation at
Mildura, was of opinion that Mildura was not the place for a very
poor man to make certain of succeeding in. He considered that the
buyer of a Mildura block should bring £5O per acre, if he proposed to
work on his land, and earn his own living until his plantation came
info bearing that was, that a man who took up 10 acres should bring
£.)00 with him. In the case of investors merely ; who did not intend
to work t)ieir own blocks, £65 per acre was little enough. He was,
however, only speaking his own ideas, and people with less might,
perhaps, succeed.
Those desirous of gaining further particulars can obtain them by
applying at the London offices of the Australian Irrigation Colonies
(Chaffey Bros., Limited), Cornwall Buildings, 35 Queen Victoria Street,
Londun, E. 0., or at the Company’s Head Offices, Melbourne, Victoria.
THE GOULBURN VALLEY.
The Goulburn is the largest of Victorian rivers. It has the largest
drainage area, the greatest mean volume, and the most permanent
stream. The area of its basin, down to the weir recently constructed
near Murchison, is little less than 4,000 square miles, and a consider-
able proportion of this area consists of high mountain ranges, whose
melting snows maintain the volume of the river far into the summer.
The term Goulburn Valley would, strictly applied, include this great
basin. It is, however, by popular usage limited to the plain that
extends from Murchison northward to the Murray, through which
winds the Goulburn River after its debouchment from the ranges.
Here it is to be understood in a still more restricted sense—it is to be
taken as including only that portion of the plain commanded by the
works, actual or projected, of the Goulburn irrigation scheme. This
comprises, east of the river, the projected East Goulburn Irrigation
Trust district, with an area in round numbers, of 225,000 acres; and
west of the river, the district of the existing Rodney Irrigation Trust,
with an area of 278,000 acres, and that of the Echuca and Waranga
Waterworks Trust, with an area of 272,000 acres, or about 775,000
acres in all.
The district of the proposed East Goulburn Irrigation Trust—it
has not been actually constituted—includes a great part of the shires
of Shepparton and Numurkah, and smaller portions of the shires of
Goulburn, Euroa, and Yarrawonga. It has a present population of
i about 3,600 persons, and a total annual rateable value of about £46,000..
The Rodney Irrigation Trust district—which trust has been constituted,
and is proceeding with the construction of its works—is nearly coter-
minus with the shire of Rodney, and has a population of 2,800, and
an annual rateable value of £54,000. The Echuca and Waranga
Waterworks Trust district, comprising part of the shires of Echuca
and Waranga, has a population of nearly 3,000, and an annual rateable
value of about £45,000. Within the area referred to as the Goulburn
Valley, there are also included the towns of Shepparton, Numurkah,
and Wunghnu, Tatura, Kyabram, and Mooroopna. These, which have
a joint population of 5,260, are not reckoned as part of the area com-
manded by the works. The population and rateable value stated above
are independent of them. That area, therefore, is 775,000 acres on
both sides of the river, with a total rural population of 10,400 persons,
an annual rateable value of £145,000, and an immediately dependent
urban population of 5,260, settled in six towns that are within the
borders, though excluded from the area, of the irrigation district.
Each of these towns, excepting Wunghnu, has a separate water service
of its own, some of them dependent on the irrigation works as their
source of supply. The lands on the east side of the river are supplied
with water for domestic and stock use only by the Goulburn River, the
Broken River (which is one of its tributaries), and the Broken Creek
(which is an effluent of the Broken River), also by some artificial
channels supplied chiefly by pumping from these sources. The west
side of the river has a much more efficient system—a very complete
reticulation, comprising nearly 400 miles of channels, supplied by
gravitation from the national works constructed by the Government.
These are ample to provide fully for domestic and stock wants, with a
surplus available for the irrigation of a limited area. ,
The national works, designed to provide water for the service of
the Goulburn Valley, comprise a weir on the river, about eight miles
above Murchison; a channel on the east side from the weir, northward
about 30 miles; a channel on the west side, about 26 miles north-
westerly, to a large reservoir to be constructed at the Waranga Swamp;
and a channel from the Waranga reservoir, about 40 miles further
north-westerly, to the crossing of the Campaspe River. Of these there
have been completed to date the weir, the off-take regulators at the
heads of both the eastern and western main channels, and about 15
miles of the channel on the west side, with two regulating sluices and
off-takes on it. The weir is a large and costly structure of solid masonry,
with flood-gates of cast and wrought iron, manipulated by turbine
gearing, and lowering into chambers provided for them in the body
of the work. The constructed portion of the western main channel
has a normal mean width of 121 feet, by a carrying depth of 7
feet, and is capable of conveying a volume of x’ather more than
100,000 cubic feet of water per minute. The sum expended on these
national works to date—inclusive of the cost of lands taken, the large
area submerged above the weir, the provision of roads and bridges in
lieu of those interfered with or destroyed by the works, and the oilier
charges incidental to such an undertaking—has been £418,000 ; and a
further sum of £754,000, or a total of £1,172,000, will be required for
their completion Besides this the trusts have expended on works,
chiefly for the supply of water for domestic and stock use, a sum of
about £140,000 advanced to them by the Government; and will have
to expend a further £BOO,OOO before water can be made fully available
for irrigation throughout their districts.
It will be understood that as the Goulburn River must of necessity
be the source of water supply for irrigation within this district, and as
on the east side of the river there has not yet been constructed a single
mile of channel from the weir, there can be no irrigation on that side
of the river. On the west side the main channel has been carried 15
miles, and the construction of a further 4 or 5 miles will be proceedi d
with immediately. The reticulation channels of both the Rodney and
the Echuca and Waranga Trusts are supplied from the national channel.
The works of the former are already capable of giving a supply for
irrigation to part of the trust area, and they are being enlarged and
extended so as, in time, to be able to supply the whole. Those of the
latter are on a smaller scale, adapted to provide an ample supply for
ordinary use, but not for irrigation, except in a very limited way. To
enable them to carry a full irrigation supply they must be enlarged in the
same way as those of the Rodney Trust are being now. It is within
the area of the Rodney Trust, therefore, that any irrigated lands are to
be looked for in the Goulburn Valley.
Within the district of the Rodney Trust about 2,000 acres have
been prepared and planted with fruits intended for irrigation, and a
similar area has been prepared and laid down under various kinds of
fodder crops, also intended for irrigation. The fruits most largely
planted are raisin vines, and, after them, wine grapes, apricots, apples,
and mixed fruits. The irrigated green crops are chiefly lucerne ; and
there are some areas of maize, sorghum, amber cane, and broom corn.
The lands irrigated or prepared for irrigation are not, as in the case of
the Chaffey settlements, in compact area's, but are scattered over a
comparatively wide area—a circumstance which adds materially to the
cost of supplying them with water and in various other ways handicaps
the cultivators. Some attempt has been made, however, to establish
settlements here on similar lines to those at Mildura and Renmark.
The Ardrnona Estate, Mooroopna, containing 1,000 acres, was pur-
chased by a syndicate, cut up, and sold in blocks varying from 10 to 100
acres to intending cultivators. The whole of the estate is commanded


Residence of W. B. Chaffey, Esq., Mildura.
A New Orange Plantation being Irrigated, Mildnra.


by the channels of the trust, and about 500 acres have been planted
with vines and fruit trees, and are now under irrigation. One of the
blocks, under the management of Mr. Lenne, is devoted to the growth
of nursery stock. Mr. Lenne’s experience is that, with the climate
and soil of the Goulburn Yalley, irrigation is highly beneficial, im-
proving both the quantity and quality of every description of fruit,
the olive only excepted. Without water the raising of nursery stock
would be impossible. The same parties who negotiated the subdivision
aiid sale of the Ardmona property are now similarly operating on an
area of land near Toolamba, also commanded by the trust’s channel.
It is in this locality (the neighbourhood of Mooroopna) that there
is to be found the greater part of the irrigated land within the district
of the Rodney Trust. About two miles from Ardmona is the Lake Erie
farm of Mr. Michael Kavanagh. On this property there are 60 acres
laid down in lucerne, divided into paddocks and kept under irrigation.
This land has maintained eight sheep to the acre throughout the
summer. The stock are now fat, fit for the market; and the lucerne
•crop is still in such condition that it should be good for several months
to come. Mr. Kavanagh has also 16 acres under mixed fruits and 20
acres under raisin vines irrigated, the whole in excellent condition and
bearing a heavy crop of fruit of unexceptionable quality. Several of
Mr. Kavanagh’s neighbours have areas under lucerne, chiefly used for
beeves and dairy cattle, and plantations of vines and fruit trees.
Wherever there is water available the lucerne paddocks and the plan-
tations are under irrigation, and their area is continually being ex-
tended.
On the east side of the river, though there is no irrigation and no
water available for the purpose, there is a considerable area of planted
land. There are, in tact, more than *450 acres of plantations, two-thirds
of which, or about three hundred acres, are in close proximity to the
town of Shepparton. These plantations comprise apples, apricots,
peaches, table grapes, and mixed fruits. There are no grapes grown
specially for raisin-making nor for the production of wine, but the
possibility of having to dispose of surplus produce, and eventually
probably of the bulk of the crop, by drying seems to be kept in view in
all planting. Besides the fruit plantations there are a good many small
areas of lucerne, maize, sorghum, and broom corn. The plantations
generally are kept in a high state of cultivation, and it is surprising
what crops of *ruit are obtained, both as to quantity and quality, under
dry tillage.
The devotion of the soil to intense culture (for which it is so well
adapted), the utilisation of the water of the magnificent river that
nature has provided, and its application to the land as solvent for the
stores of plant food it contains, can only be the work of time. The
land is there, far beyond the possibility of utilisation by its present
handful of occupants. It is of unexceptional quality; the water is
available, or is rapidly being made available, to stimulate its productive-
ness and develop its resources. It is not possible to doubt that time
will solve the problem of how this development can be best accomplished.
THE LOWER LODDON AND GUNBOWER DISTRICTS.
The Lower Loddon and Gunbower districts may be briefly described
as including the alluvial plain that stretches from Bridgewater, on the
Loddon River, northward to the Murray, and embracing the lands
adjacent to the latter river from the head of the Gunbower in the east
to Swan Hill in the west. It is distinctly of deltaic formation. With
the exception of some isolated tracks of hill country of comparatively
small extent—such as the granitic outcrops of the Terricks Range,
Mount Hope, and the Pyramid—it consists of an almost absolute
level, built up of the water-borne silt carried down by the rivers from
the high lands of the Dividing Range. The southern portion has been
so built up by the agency of the Loddon ; the northern by that of the
Murray, of which the Loddon is a tributary. Its deltaic character is
attested by the numerous old river channels that furrow its surface,
and by the network of effluents and anabranches that constitute one
of the most striking features, especially of the portion adjacent to the
confluence of the rivers. That portion of the district bordering the
Murray River and its anabranches—the Gunbower, Barr Creek, and
Murrabit—is subject to inundation by the overflow of the river. Over
some portions these»floodings occur every winter * over a larger extent,
some miles in width at some points, inundations occur only in winters
when there is a high river ; but no means has yet been suggested
whereby one can foresee or foretell when these seasons of high flood
will occur For the protection of the river bank lands, earthen levies
have been built along portions of the frontage, and these have proved
of service in saving the farmers’ crops from destruction by the over-
flows. There are about five miles in length of so constructed by
the Benjeroop and Murrabit Trust, and about eight miles by the Swan
Hill Irrigation Trust. There is also a further length of two or three
miles constructed by the Water Supply Department for the special
purpose of protecting the head of the Kow Swamp supply channel.
This likewise affords protection to a limited portion of the area.
The gross area of the district treated of in this report is about
1,250,000 acres, whereof about four-fifths are irrigable, either by
gravitation or by means of a lift of a few feet only. Not that there is
water available for this area—very far from it—but about this pro-
portion could be commanded by the water that is available. The rural
population of the district is in round numbers about 11,000, and there
is an urban population of 2,400 in the towns and villages of Swan
Hill, Kerang, Boort, Durham Ox. Pyramid, Mincha, Macorna, and
Cohuna. The annual rateable value of the property included within
this area of 1,250,000 acres, not reckoning that in the towns and
villages, is about £130,000. It is watered by the Loddon River and
by the Murray and its effluents. The works for the distribution of the
water supply are under the control of the Loddon United and Swan
Hill Shire Waterworks Trusts, their function being limited, however, to
providing for ordinary domestic and stock requirements. But a great
part of the area, aggregating a total of 623,000 acres, is under the
control of irrigation trusts that have been carved out of and excised
fmm the old water trusts. Of these seven in the southern part of the
district take their supply from the Loddon, namely, Tragowel Plains,
East Boort. North Boort, Leaghur-and-Meering, Wandella, Twelve-
mile. and Dry Lake. The Loddon itself is regulated and controlled by
a national work—that is, a work under the direct control of the Water
Supply Department—the Laanecoorie weir and clam, situate upon the
river at a point about 16 miles in a direct line above Bridgewater.
It has a storage capacity of 610,000,000 cub-c feet, or 3,812,000,000
gallons—that is, one-sixth greater than the Malmsbury reservoir, as
recently improved and enlarged. Its purpose is to regulate the river
by storing water during flood, so as to maintain the flow during the dry
seasons. Ihe middle portion of the district has three existing irriga-
tion trusts (Marquis Hill, Kerang East, and Macorna North).” These
will take their supply from a national work that is now approaching
completion. A canal, consisting in part of an artificial cutting and in
part following the line of natural creeks, will convey water from tl e
Murray when in flood into a large reservoir, formed by embanking and
otherwise improving the Kow Swamp. From the reservoir a channel
will carry the supply for delivery to the trusts. The northern part of
the district has five trusts adjacent to the Murray frontage and supplied
from that river. These are the Cohuna, Koondrook, Myall, Benjeroop
and Murrabit, and Swan Hill Irrigation. The areas of the trusts dh-
tricts are exceedingly various. The Tragowel Plains has nearly
-50,000 acres, the Cohuna 100,000, while the Dry Lake has but a little
over 1,600. The Laanecoorie weir was so far complete as to be able to
render very material service during the past summer. It is now just
finished, and will be available for full duty next season. The Kow Swamp
works have not progressed so far as to have been of any use as yet ;
they are expected to be completed during next summer, and to do partial
duty during that season and full duty thereafter. The trust works are
all in a condition to deliver water over the greater part of their areas,
while most of the trusts have their schemes practically completed. The
cost of works constructed or in progress is, as nearly as can be at
present ascertained—for national works, £300,000 ; for trust works,
£466,000. These sums include compensation for lands taken or sub-
merged, provision of roads and bridges for others interfered with or
destroyed, engineering, supervision, and management expenses. It
should be stated that included in the cost of the trust works is that of
the town supplies to Swan Hill and Kerang; but that of the Boort
town supply is not included, it being under the control of a separate
urban trust.
The middle and northern portions of the district are supplied from
the Murray—the former by means of the Kow Swamp scheme of
works, the latter from the river direct; or it would be more accurate
to say that they will be so supplied when the projects in hand have
been completed. The hope may reasonably be indulged that when
this has been accomplished there will be an assured supply of water at
all seasons ; meanwhile its scarcity has often been severely felt. The
southern portion is supplied from the Loddon River.
A present feature of the Lower Loddon and Gunbower country is
the popularity of dairying among the smaller holders and the in-
creasing output of dairy produce, chiefly separated cream to be sent to
Melbourne for conversion into butter at the factories. To this industry
irrigation is a priceless boon, and a sufficient supply of water for
ordinary use a prime necessity. There must be good drinking water
for the cattle, and a proper supply for the dairy, Winter-irrigatf d
straw crops for conversion into ensilage would prove of immense value*
watered paddocks of lucerne and sorghum promote the health of the
beasts, and augment the milk-giving faculty of the cows through the
summer.
The necessity for an artificial water supply was here more obvious.
The demand for a supply for irrigation is more urgent than in the
Goulburn Yalley. At the same time, the natural facilities for pro-
viding them are far less. This is especially true of the southern part
of this district—that commanded by the water of the Loddon River.
Still the available volume is such as, with a proper system of conserva-
tion and distribution, carefully supervised and wisely administered to
be capable of rendering immense service to the farmers. It will be
injudicious to extend the area under irrigation channels; it will be
advisable rather to enlarge the storage, so as to increase the supply to
those already constructed. Any further applications to split up the
areas dependent on common sources of supply, and thus to create
further trusts, should be severely discouraged. The aim should rather
be to promote the amalgamation of existing interests so as to reduce
the cost of administration and to insure the wise and economical use of
the water in the interests of the whole community.
THE CASTLEMAINE AND BENDIGO DISTRICTS.
The Coliban system of works, the principal portions of which were
carried out during the years 1865-70, but which have since been much
extended and improved, form, as is pretty generally known, the basis


Irrigating a Vineyard, Mildura.
An Apricot Orchard, Mildura.


of the water supply to Castlemaine and Bendigo. The principal
storage basin of the scheme is that on the Coliban River, at Malmsbury.
Its original capacity, measured from the sill of the outlet to the level
of the waste weirs, was 2,908,000,000 gallons; but, in consequence of
the supposed insufficiency of the flood escapes, the whole of the storage
was never fully availed of, and the practical capacity was thus no more
than 2,400,000,000 gallons. Improvements carried out some four or
five years ago have increased the available contents to 3,255,000,000
gallons. The catchment area of the reservoir includes 72,000 acres of
country, with a mean annual rainfall varying from 28 inches in the
lower to 45 inches in the upper portion, and the whole of which is of
a character favourable for the discharge of the rain precipitated or
its surface. Besides the principal reservoir, there are eleven minor
storages scattered throughout the supply district, all of them except
three—the Harcourt and the Upper and Lower Grassy Flat reservoirr.
—being connected to Malmsbury, and chiefly fed from it. These also
can be connected for a small outlay, and no doubt will be when circum-
stances shall warrant it. The minor reservoirs have local catchments
varying in extent from less than 100 to over 3,600 acres; but their
chief function is to act simjJly as service basins, to aid in the regulation
and distribution of the supply from Malmsbury. There are also
fourteen tanks used as service basins. These have either no local
catchments, or the catchments are so small as to be of nc moment
whatever, or the drainage from them is entirely diverted. From thv.
Malmsbury reservoir the supply is carried in an open channel to the
area served by the works. The distribution is by branch channels and
by reticulations of iron piping. There are in all 187 miles of main and
branch channels, and pipes are laid for the service of the tenements in
the whole of the towns. The distribution area embraces the towns and
villages of Castlemaine, Chewton, Fryers, Maldon, Elphinstone, and
Taradale, Bendigo, Eaglehawk, Huntly, Lockwood, Marong, Raywood.
and Sebastian, and some smaller hamlets, with the mining districts and
part of the- agricultural and horticultural lands adjacent thereto.
There are also two small trusts supplied from the works of the Colibar.
system—the Harcourt and the Emu Yalley Irrigation Trusts. The
works of the former are just completed ; those of the latter are
approaching completion, and should be ready for the service of next
summer. The Harcourt Trust draws its supply from the Harcour*.
reservoir, and distributes it among the orchards that line the banks ol
Barker’s Creek, and that form so conspicuous a feature in the landscape
visible from the railway carriages on the first few miles of the road
from Castlemaine to Bendigo. The Emu Valley Trust’s channels will
take their supply from the main Coliban aqueduct at a point about
8 miles south from the city of Bendigo, and they are designed to
supply chiefly the vineyards along the valleys of the Emu and the
Sheepwash Creeks. There is no local storage in connection with these
last-named works, though it will probably prove necessary to provide L
before the scheme becomes entirely successful.
The original purpose of the Coliban system of works was to supply
water for the mines of the Castlemaine and Bendigo districts; and no
doubt was entertained, at the time of their initiation, that they would
bring in a revenue amply sufficient to warrant the outlay incurred for
their contruction. The service of the gold-fields towns was a secondary
matter. The supply to the mines themselves—for sluice-washing
auriferous earth, for engine boilers and for the stamper-boxes and
ripple tables of the quartz batteries—was relied on as the main source
of revenue. How these anticipations have been belied by the facts it
is needless to say. But then the annual output of gold, for the whole
of the colony, was at that time £6,000,000 sterling; it had been
£10,000,000 sterling; it is now no more than £2,750,000 sterling, nor
is there any reasonable cause to suppose that it will materially increase.
T 1 le Castlemaine and Bendigo districts, especially the former, have
suffered their full share in the decline of the gold yield; and, by con-
sequence, the people have had to seek other means of livelihood, and
the administration of the Coliban works other sources of revenue.
The expenditure debited to the scheme in the public ledger is slightly
over £1,000,000 sterling, though the actual expenditure on works has
certainly been somewhat less—how much less it is now impossible to
ascertain. The daily output of water from Malmsbury reservoir varies
from about 9,000,000 gallons in winter to nearly 13,000,000 gallons in
summer. The gross revenue derived from the Coliban works is now
in round numbers £22,000 per annum, of which nearly £l,lOO is
derived from the sale of water for irrigation—more than half the sum
being for water sold from the open channels at 2d. per 1,000 gallons,
the balance from water from the pipes at 6d. per 1,000. The revenue
from this source would probably be improved by the laying of some
additional mains, and by reducing the rate for water sold from the
channels in the months May to October inclusive, to Id. per 1,000
gallons.
The major portion of the irrigation from the Coliban system is of
orchards and vineyards ; a little water is used for raising green forage
crops, but its total is quite insignificant. In the Harcourt and Barker’s
Creek portion of the Castlemaine district there are over 500 acres of
fruit planted. Almost the whole of this area is irrigated, in a greater
or less degree, from the Coliban works ; and such plantations as are
not now commanded by the channels have been laid out in anticipation
of extensions.
The orchards are chiefly on th- granitic soil formed from the
detritus of the Mount Alexander Range. Some are on soil formed
by the denudation of the slate and sandstone rocks of the Silurian
formation; while some, near the line of junction of the formations, are
on soil composed of a mixture of the two. For the purposes of general
agriculture both descriptions of soil are notorious chiefly for their
poverty, but they seem to suit admirably for the growth of fruit. The
possibility of extensions, both in respect of suitable soil and command
of water is very great. An idea of the success of the fruit-growing
industry here will best be conveyed by describing one of the
orchards. That of Mr. Lang is fairly typical of the better class of
these properties. He has 25 acres planted in fruit (apples and pears
predominating), other kinds being peaches, plums, cherries, table grapes,
oranges and lemons. The trees (apples and pears especially) bear
heavily, and the fruit is of excellent quality. One tree during the past
season yielded twenty cases of fruit; a good many of them yielded
fifteen to sixteen cases; but these are exceptional, a fair crop being
six cases from each full-grown mature tree. Mr. Lang thinks that
command of water is a condition essential to successful fruit-growing
in the Castlemaine district. The bulk of the crop is disposed of in
Melbourne, Bendigo, and Castlemaine, but a portion has during each of
the past four years been exported to London. In the present season
600 cases of apples have been despatched to England, all packed in the
modern American manner—that is, each separate apple rolled in a
sheet of tissue-paper. The cost of transit to London, in the cool
chambers of the mail-boats, is about 4s. 6d. per case, which, at recent
prices, leaves a fair profit to the grower. The trade is enlarging.
Besides fruit-growing there is a little dairying in the Barker’s Creek
district, and the two industries seem to run well together, the refuse
from the cow-yards forming excellent manure for the trees. The rural
homesteads here are good, the houses being generally of stone or brick,
substantial, tasteful, comfortable, well-appointed dwellings. The people
appear to be in easy circumstances, healthy, and well to do. The
whole is in marked contrast to some of the decayed mining localities,
with their decaying mining populations. In the Campbell’s Creek
district, lying south-east from Castlemaine, there are about 350 acres
planted with fruit, the bulk of which is cultivated dry, though some of
the orchards get a partial supply from the pipe reticulations. Here
the most of the plantations are on creek flats, the soil of which is
better adapted for dry culture than is most of that of the Castlemaine
district. In the Campbell’s Creek district, and further to the south-east
in the valley of Fryer’s Creek, there; are large areas of suitable land,
wholly uncultivated, commanded by the existing channels, and still
larger areas that could be commanded by extensions. In fact, the
possibility of increase of fruit-growing about Castlemaine is so great
that it may fairly be looked to as one of the future staple industries
of the district.
A few miles south-east from the city of Bendigo, in the valleys of
the Sheepwash, Emu, and Axe Creeks, there are about 1,000 acres
under plantations of various kinds. About 600 acres are under vines,
and 400 acres are under other descriptions of fruit. None of thisai’ea is
irrigated, but the necessity for watering during the past season has been
painfully obvious ; indeed, of late years, it has suffered a great deal
from drought The works of the Emu Yalley Trust will, when com-
plete, command the greater part of this area, and could be extended so
as to command almost the whole. They were expected to be complete
so as to have been of service before now, but there is a good deal yet
left to be done. The vines are nearly all of wine varieties Many of
the vignerons—-all the larger growers—are wine-makers, working up
their own crops and purchasing those of their smaller neighbours. The
wines command good—some high—prices, and are well in request. It
is worthy of note that the condition of culture of the vineyards here is
much below that of the Great Western, Rutherglen, or the Goulburn
Valley, and that the state of the orchards is inferior to that of the
Castlemaine district. To the north of Bendigo, along the Huntly-road
and the valley of the Bendigo Creek, about 600 acres of old diggings
have been taken up, under the provisions of a law recently passed, for
fruit-growing, and about 250 acres have been reclaimed and planted
with trees and vines A good example in this way has been set by Mr.
Carolin, late mayor of the city, who has invested a large sum in the
business. About 400 acres are commanded by the Huntly race, and
the balance by one of the pipes of the reticulation, the supply derivable
from which, however, in this locality, is inadequate for present demands,
and without duplication could afford nothing for further extensions.
Lower down the Huntly Road there are about 240 acres of orchards
and vineyards, all commanded by the Huntly channel and occasionally
getting a supply from it. Along the Specimen Gully race, between
Crusoe Gully reservoir and Eaglehawk, there are 150 acres under fruit
and vines, supplied in dry seasons, and in some measure in all seasons,
from the channel. On this line, owing to the character of the soil, fruit
cannot be successfully grown -without command of water , while in the
neighbourhood of the Huntly race it can. It may be mentioned that
under the Specimen Gully channel there is some cultivation of tomatoes,
strawberries, and other similar small fruits. Again, below the Lower
Grassy Flat reservoir, near the line of the Huntly channel, there are
about 150 acres of gardens of various kinds supplied, in a greater or
less degree, according to the character of the season, from the works.
And, again, in the parishes of Lockwood and Marong, there are about
560 acres of land planted with vines and fruit trees, commanded by
and partly supplied from the Lockwood and Marong channel.
THK WIMMERA DISTRICT.
The country watered by the Wimmera River, its tributaries and
effluents—or rather that portion of it that is commanded by the work
of irrigation schemes existent or that have been actually projected


Residence of W. B. Chaffey, Rsq., Mildura.
A New Orange Plantation being Irrigated, Mildnra.


by the channels of the trust, and about 500 acres have been planted
with vines and fruit trees, and are now under irrigation,. One of the
blocks, under the management of Mr. Lenne, is devoted to the growth
of nursery stock. Mr. Lenne’s experience is that, with the climate
«,nd soil of the Goulburn Valley, irrigation is highly beneficial, im-
proving both the quantity and quality of every description of fruit,
the olive only excepted. Without water the raising of nursery stock
would be impossible. The same parties who negotiated the subdivision
and sale of the Ardmona property are now similarly operating on an
area of land near Toolamba, also commanded by the trust’s channel.
It is in this locality (the neighbourhood of Mooroopna) that there
is to be found the greater part of the irrigated land within the district
of the Rodney Trust. About two miles from Ardmona is the Lake Erie
farm of Mr, Michael Kavanagh. On this property there are 60 acres
laid down in lucerne, divided into paddocks and kept under irrigation.
This land has maintained eight sheep to the acre throughout the
summer. The stock are now fat, fit for the market; and the lucerne
crop is still in such condition that it should be good for several months
to come. Mr. Kavanagh has also 16 acres under mixed fruits and 20
acres under raisin vines irrigated, the whole in excellent condition and
bearing a heavy crop of fruit of unexceptionable quality. Several of
Mr. Kavanagh’s neighbours have areas under lucerne, chiefly used for
beeves and dairy cattle, and plantations of vines and fruit trees.
Wherever there is water available the lucerne paddocks and the plan-
tations are under irrigation, and their area is continually being ex-
tended.
On the east side of the river, though there is no irrigation and no
water available for the purpose, there is a considerable area of planted
land. There are, in fact, more than -450 acres of plantations, two-thirds
of which, or about three hundred acres, are in close proximity to the
town of Shepparton. These plantations comprise apples, apricots,
peaches, table grapes, and mixed fruits. There are no grapes grown
specially for raisin-making nor for the production of wine, but the
possibility of having to dispose of surplus produce, and eventually
probably of the bulk of the crop, by drying seems to be kept in view in
all planting. Besides the fruit plantations there are a good many small
areas of lucerne, maize, sorghum, and broom corn. The plantations
generally are kept in a high state of cultivation, and it is surprising
what crops of "ruit are obtained, both as to quantity and quality, under
dry tillage.
The devotion of the sod to intense culture (for which it is so well
adapted), the utilisation of the water of the magnificent river that
nature has provided, and its application to the land as solvent for the
stores of plant food it contains, can only be the work of time. The
land is there, far beyond the possibility of utilisation by its present
handful of occupanfs. It is of unexceptional quality ; the water is
available, or is rapidly being made available, to stimulate its productive-
ness and develop its resources. It is not possible to doubt that time
will solve the problem of how this development can be best accomplished.
THE LOWER LODDON AND GUNBOWER DISTRICTS.
The Lower Loddon and Gunbower districts may be briefly described
as including the alluvial plain that stretches from Bridgewater, on the
Loddon River, northward to the Murray, and embracing the lands
adjacent to the latter river from the head of the Gunbower in the east
to Swan Hill in the west. It is distinctly of deltaic formation. With
the exception of some isolated tracks of hill country of comparatively
sm-ill extent—such as the granitic outcrops of the Terricks Range,
Mount Hope, and the Pyramid—it consists of an almost absolute
level, built up of the water-borne silt carried down by the rivers from
the high lands of the Dividing Range. The southern portion has been
so built up by the agency of the Loddon; the northern by that of the
Murray, of which the Loddon is a tributary. Its deltaic character is
attested by the numerous old river channels that furrow its surface,
and by the network of effluents and anabranches that constitute one
of the most striking features, especially of the portion adjacent to the
confluence of the rivers. That portion of the district bordering the
Murray River and its anabranches—the Gunbower, Barr Creekfand
Murrabit—is subject to inundation by the overflow of the river. Over
some portions these floodings occur every winter • over a larger extent,
some miles in width at some points, inundations occur only in winters
when there is a high river ; but no means has yet been suggested
whereby one can foresee or foretell when these seasons of high flood
will occur For the protection of the river bank lands, earthen levees
have been built along portions of the frontage, and these have proved
of service in saving the farmers’ crops from destruction by the over-
flows. There are about five miles in length of levde so constructed bv
the Benjeroop and Murrabit Trust, and about eight miles by the Swan
Hill Irrigation Trust. There is also a further length of two or three
miles constructed by the Water Supply Department for the special
purpose of protecting the head of the Kow Swamp supply channel.
This likewise affords protection to a limited portion of the area.
The gross area of the district treated of in this report is about
1,250,000 acres, whereof about four-fifths are irrigable, either by
gravitation or by means of a lift of a few feet only. Not that there is
water available for this area—very far from it—but about this pro-
portion could be commanded by the water that is available. The rural
population of the district is in round numbers about 11,000, and there
is an urban population of 2,400 in the towns and villages of Swan
Hill, Kerang, Bjort, Durham Ox, Pyramid, Mincha, Macorna, and
Cohuna. The annual rateable value of the property included within
this area of 1,250,000 acres, not reckoning that in the towns and
villages, is about £130,000. It is watered by the Loddon River and
by the Murray and its effluents. The works for the distribution of the
water supply are under the control of the Loddon United and Swan
Hill Shire Waterworks Trusts, their function being limited, however, to
providing for ordinary domestic and stock requirements. But a great
part of the area, aggregating a total of 623,000 acres, is under the
control of irrigation trusts that have been carved out of and excised
from the old water trusts. Of these seven in the southern part of the
district take their supply from the Loddon, namely, Tragowel Plains,
East Boort. North Boort, Leaghur-and-Meering, Wandella, Twelve-
mile, and Dry Lake. The Loddon itself is regulated and controlled by
a national work —that is, a work under the direct control of the Water
Supply Department—the Laanecoorie weir and dam, situate upon the
river at a point about 16 miles in a direct line above Bridgewater.
It has a storage capacity of 610,000,000 cubic feet, or 3,812,000,000
gallons that is, one-sixth greater than the Malmsbury reservoir, as
recently improved and enlarged. Its purpose is to regulate the river
by storing water during flood, so as to maintain the flow during the dry
seasons. The middle portion of the district has three existing irriga-
tion trusts (Marquis Hill, Kerang East, and Macorna North).° These
will take their supply from a national work that is now approaching
completion. A canal, consisting in part of an artificial cutting and in
part following the line of natural creeks, will convey water from tie
Murray when in flood into a large reservoir, formed by embanking and
otherwise improving the Kow Swamp. Prom the reservoir a channel
will carry the supply for delivery to the trusts. The northern part of
the district has five trusts adjacent to the Murray frontage and supplied
from that river. These are the Cohuna, Koondrook, Myall, Benjeroop
and Murrabit, and Swan Hill Irrigation. The areas of the trusts db-
tricts are exceedingly various. The Tragowel Plains has nearly
250,000 acres, the Cohuna 100,000, while the Dry Lake has but a little
over 1,500. The Laanecoorie weir was so far complete as to be able to
render very material service during the past summer. It is now just
finished, and will be available for full duty next season. The Kow Swamp
works have not progressed so far as to have been of any use as yet ;
they are expected to be completed during next summer, and to do partial
duty during that season and full duty thereafter. The trust works are
all in a condition to deliver water over the greater part of their areas,
while most of the trusts have their schemes practically completed. The
cost of works constructed or in progress is, as nearly as can be at
present ascertained—for national works, £300,000; for trust works,
£466,000. These sums include compensation for lands taken or sub-
merged, provision of roads and bridges for others interfered with or
destroyed, engineering, supervision, and management expenses. It
should be stated that included in the cost of the trust works is that of
the town supplies to Swan Hill and Kerang; but that of the Boort
town supply is not included, it being under the control of a separate
urban trust.
The middle and northern portions of the district are supplied from
the Murray—the former by means of the Kow Swamp scheme of
works, the latter from the river direct; or it would be more accurate
to say that they will be so supplied when the projects in hand have
been completed. The hope may reasonably be indulged that when
this has been accomplished there will be an assured supply of water at
all seasons ; meanwhile its scarcity has often been severelv felt. The
southern portion is supplied from the Loddon River.
A present fefiture of the Lower Loddon and Gunbower country is
the popularity of dairying among the smaller holders and the in-
creasing output of dairy produce, chiefly separated cream to be sent to
Melbourne for conversion into butter at the factories. To this industry
irrigation is a priceless boon, and a sufficient supply of water for
ordinary use a prime necessity. There must be good drinking water
for the cattle, and a proper supply for the dairy. Winter-irrmatf d
straw crops for conversion into ensilage would prove of immense value -
watered paddocks of lucerne and sorghum promote the health of the
beasts, and augment the milk-giving faculty of the cows through the
summer. “ °
The necessity for an artificial water supply was here more obvious.
The demand for a supply for irrigation is more urgent than in the
Goulburn Valley. At the same time, the natural facilities for pro-
viding them are far less. This is especially true of the southern part
of this district—that commanded by the water of the Loddon River.
Still the available volume is such as, with a proper system of conserva-
tion and distribution, carefully supervised and wisely administered, to
be capable of rendering immense service to the farmers. It will be
injudicious to extend the area under irrigation channejs; it will be
advisable rather to enlarge the storage, so as to increase the supply to
those already constructed. Any further applications to split up the
areas dependent on common sources of supply, and thus to create
further trusts, should be severely discouraged. The aim should rather
be to promote the amalgamation of existing interests so as to reduce
the cost of administration and to insure the wise and economical use of
the water in the interests of the whole community.
THE CASTLEMAINE AND BENDIGO DISTRICTS.
The Coliban system of works, the principal portions of which were
carried out during the years 1865-70, but which have since been much
extended and improved, form, as is pretty generally known, the basis


—
Jp''
~S *ss:
-ZtMUk r<+ &T
1Mi - .
; #S
■■'""*
/ u
/
. .
M
Sjr
i
' I
■\ r;r“
'-A 32
i
r ">• ,
-f%>^
-v--
- c-
\ V
i: r *
.-^
Bfip
‘-' y
a:
3
a
-j
*r 7
P
f| £
. V ■ i J. —
s, ■- ■
?; W& 1 j ~3S$ 1
j*w
■\>v
1 i
-v ° . - *
.
*
i
HlBSIr'F
'I
1-
<r
i
| V
8!y2L: jJJ
' ■ T ->r. k uE
'.1
7
ti; -rT.
Hk . ,
* ,^r5^, - - J^a
1
Z3
or
4' U
% ’te
; v * '* ' n
|
trnllr 1
I!.
i|
0
X !
Li
k .„ m?^li
: Mmv
h-
\
%i&-, j -
’vat
1
A " gf
3
or
V 'N^
i
n
L'A. '
,
L_
J
8
1
r' :;
ASLv
u_
M-
O
1
i>i ■ ■:• f
BijK^
1
ite|Se->V * ™
~L
1
iPfr A
F ! JP
0
'■a
nf I Jr
i^ 1
L / S
P^F
s
*9
Il
o —
l|
K
rSbri
■=
1
K
*<
V >■■ 1 - *
. jj
S-
x
1 u/
ji
L x £
t
~ ■ »■•*<
1
1
ar
\U)
2/
. X,
.rfc:
r~
i
1
or a
«C
3 fcr
S'
v_/
i
f
\
yv
A
J
m i f ,1
f
;i ||
7
*»
X
.' •■
jl. pj
. "jfWB
.
v VrJpS^
u/ o yc
i‘ «• *> j
!>
ft^i
' ; tv *
3Si
tfkJjS
p p
M -sM
*
w i u/ '■ 5 ~ i
«r j
V
K
r-
*'*3 t
J
•<1 li
i : n
B
. ,♦•• >*&9-
rMI'll! 1
\
r
|H|
i
& ‘ityfL
HSSljj
m
\
: .*
1
1
6
-:
*.. 7
f*\
' ■/!
f/
c
lateaKW
#
i
its
-+J| \r*~*S
8tfi tga;
s
I
a
_/
u
~ ■ r>
?
89
it
$
% V/ s!;
%-^v
\jl/
P - v ;.Nr
' / *
M
u i
)<
1
'tm
: ir
Uf f
l|
arl
OC
!
.n "j
44B’
r .
P
L
Oi
-i
I-
...
- i«; v
J
in
/
T.
ik;.j
V-
3H|1
<
//
//
/ / <
3
j^f
&, r> r» ■• a
HI
T
f—
3
r rr:
a ,4B
1
*
Hr
cC
7
U
_/
//
fi
r J
k£<i
Jf
a/
71
X
iw ? m*
msm*' \
t
t
/7i
S
or
h
Bbipv
5
%*. ■ *T' ;
■ > •■
■' JJ
ijk •
<
i
7
r \ \
jji
V
<
*
O
s. \ JE
L
t
CP
ip *
a.
tr
D
KT S
-
j i 1
c
\\
> f
h* 'i *
or
v p 1
\\ 4*1
or
r
■N
.. J
\\ v
—
rir.
or
\ \
A
1
<r
of
g
lit 1
UJ
>
\\
p|
if
7
Q
_/
n
jh|
«
a:
: \\
1
, 'j
. A/m*
|:K
PH
\
t
fe,
If
—
j
—.
—


acres have been sold, and the whole of these, besides 40 acres still in
the hands of the promoters, have been planted. The purchasers in the
Young Bros.’ colony are chiefly tradesmen and workmen settled in snd
about Horsham. £3OO worth of produce—grapes, apricots, and
peaches—were sold from the settlement this year. This colony is also
within the borough of Horsham. Riverside is on the south bank of the
Wimmera, a few miles above Horsham. It contains 430 acres, all
reticulated, and all sold to actual or intending settlers, the bulk of
whom are business people or mechanics from Melbourne and other
towns. Of the latter a few have entered into possession, are settled,
and working in the district. About 150 acres have been planted with
vines and fruit trees. At Dooen there is an area of land subdivided
for sale and settlement, reticulated, and supplied by a branch from the
Dooen pumping main. The total area is 50 acres, whereof 35 acres are
in the hands of the Messrs. Young and 15 acres in the hands of Mr.
Stevens. About two-thirds of it have been planted with vines and fruit
trees. Besides these 50 acres a further 100 acres are graded, prepared,
and commanded by the channels were a sufficient supply of water
available. Quantong is a co-operative settlement, on the right bank of
the Wimmera River, about 12 miles west from Horsham. It contains
2,253 acres of sandy loam, whereof 500 acres have been disposed of,
chiefly to mechanics and others from the towns. Some ten or twelve
substantial wooden houses are built or in course of building by settlers,
but no land has yet been planted, though *a wafer supply has been
arranged for, and the whole area can readily be commanded by a
connection carried from the Natimuk channel across the Wimmera.
A party of surveyors are at work setting out the reticulation channels.
The Arapiles colony is near Mount Arapiles, 20 miles west from
Horsham and 5 miles from the tbwnship of Natimuk. It contains 640
acres, whereof 200 have been sold in blocks of 10 acres and upwards,
most of the purchasers being tradespeople in Natimuk and Horsham,
though a few are of the agricultural class. Some half-dozen only are
living on the land. A portion of the sold land is in course of
preparation, but only an acre or two actually planted. This colony
will derive its water supply from the Arapiles channel and branches.
Lastly, there is the Wonwondah settlement, on the Burnt Creek, about 10
miles south from Horsham, and containing 597 acres. This area has been
taken up by the philanthropic association of which something has been
heard in connection with the names of the Rev. Horace Tucker and
the Rev. Chas. Strong. No settlement has yet taken place here, nor
lias any land been prepared or planted It is readily commanded as to
water supply by the trust’s works. Besid es these colonies there are a
number of individual holders who have patches of irrigation, either
fruit trees, vines, or lands permanently laid down in fodder plants. Some
are supplied from the channels, some by pumping from the river.
From a return prepared by the Secretary to the Western Wimmera
Irrigation Trust, supplemented by personal inquiry and examination,
it has been ascertained that the total irrigated area in the western
division amounts to 630 acres, whereof 460 acres are under vines and
AGRICULTURE.
All profound thinkers, both ancient and modern, have agreed in
basing the prosperity of a country upon its agriculture, and the mar-
vellous progress made by the colony of Victoria will be found, upon
examination, to be in accordance with this well-established truth. The
agricultural resources of the colony, although only developed to a com-
paratively limited extent, have contributed in a marked d-gree to place
Victoria in its present proud position, and the best guarantee for its
future progress is to be found in the agricultural expansion capable of
resulting from its rich soil, genial climate, and various other advantages
What has already been accomplished is the best indication of what may
be expected in the future.
In the past all the difficulties connected with carrying on agri-
cultural operations in a new country have had to be overcome. The
pioneer farmer had to learn the peculiarities of the soil and the special
conditions of climate with which he had to cope in an unknown and un-
tried country, and all this had to be done under special difficulties.
Seeds, plants, tools, and implements had to be imported from distant
countries; horses, cattle, sheep, swine, and poultry had also to be
bi ought from abroad, while the breeds best suited to the new conditions,
and the peculiar treatment necessary, had to be learned by experiments
more or less expensive. In establishing agriculture amidst all these
difficulties there were other obstacles which had to be overcome. There
were but few large towns, so that the markets for produce were
limited, and it frequently happened that when a successful harvest was
obtained the farmer would find the port glutted with foreign products.
Not only were markets limited, but they were difficult of access. There
were no roads through the forests, over the hills, or across the plains.
Rivers had to be bridged and roads had to be made before the farmers’
CONCLUDING REMARKS.
By JOHN LAMONT DOW (late Minister of Agriculture for Victoria).
fruit trees, and 170 acres in lucerne, sorghum, and pastures. The
fruits, other than grapes, comprise apricots, peaches, almonds, oranges,
lemons, apples and mixed fruits. The vines are chiefly of raisin
varieties, though no raisins are yet made on any commercial scale, and
there is no wine-making in the district.
It is evident that, for the conversion of this sparsely-peopled wheat-
growing country into a succession of densely-populated and intensely cul-
tivated irrigation settlements, there must be not only a radical alteration
in the character and capacity of the water supply works, and a largo
supplementary supply of the essential element, there must be also a
replacement of the existing rural population. Growing wheat on large
holdings, by the rudest methods of cultivation and with the minimum
of labour, was, at one time, unquestionably, the best use to which to
put this territory. Many of the Wimmera farmers have by its means,
beginning almost without capital, become wealthy men. Whether
under existing conditions it is still the best purpose to which it can be
applied, whether it will be the best purpose to which to devote it in
the future, are questions the land-owners themselves must answer.
For the younger generation the mallee country, stretching away
towards the Murray and the South Australian boundary, presents
11,000,000 acres of undeveloped possibilities.
These embrace by far the greater portion of the areas within
Victoria wherein irrigation is now practised as an aid to agriculture.
There are others, certainly. At Bacchus Marsh there are two small
trusts, one of which has its scheme of works practically completed and
in operation, the area operated upon, however, being exceedingly small,
while the other is holding its scheme in abeyance pending the settlement
of certain claims on the part of laud-owners to riparian rights in the
stream that forms the source of the water supply. Then there are
several trusts whose works are in process of construction, but have not
yet proceeded so far as to be able to supply any water to irrigators.
Among these are the Oampaspe Trust, the scene of whose operations is
the land on both sides of the Oampaspe River, in the neighbourhood of
Ro hester; the Bairnsdale Irrigation Trust, formed with the view of
irrigating the extensive and fertile area bordering the Mitchell River
above Bairnsdale, known as the Lindenow Flats, and the country
adjacent; and some others of less note.
As to the probable eventual outcome of irrigation in Victoria,, it
may be briefly summarised thus Many of us have been too sanguine ;
men are prone to be so in view of any novelty that promises increase of
wealth. But, this admission being unreservedly made, there remains
the solid fact that a large section of the land of this colony cannot be
turned to its most profitable account without the aid of irrigation, the
necessary water supply for which is likewise available ; and that
prominent among the accelerating or retarding causes in the realisation
of this profit must be the action of the State in guiding, promoting, or
discouraging the movement.
produce could be taken to market. All this up-hill work had to be
carried on by farmers who were far from schools, churches, and social
institutions.
Those who commence farming now, either upon Crown lands or
upon farms purchased from settlers, have less of these difficulties to
overcome. The large cities provide markets for produce, and supply
implements and machinery of the most approved kind, manufactured
locally and in Europe and America; seeds and plants of every kind
have been brought from all parts of the world; all the best breeds of
live stock are available ; and the conditions of soil and climate have
been so well ascertained that all branches of agriculture can be carried
on with a complete knowledge of the most suitable treatment to be
pursued. Roads have been made in every direction, the rivers have
been bridged at all necessary points, and railways have been extended
to nearly all settled portions of the colony, with the certainty that they
will follow the settlers to the districts now being newly occupied. In
addition to all this, schools have been established in the midst of every
group of settlers, churches have been built in every village, and even
the most distant portions of the colony enjoy a certain share of social
advantages.
Much has been done in a short time. It is only 60 years since the
first white man settled upon Victorian soil, but a much shorter time
has elapsed since the march of progress properly began with the inrush
of population soon after the discovery of gold in 1851. The develop-
ment of agriculture had a still more recent commencement, for at the
time of the gold diggings the land was in the possession of Grown
tenants, who leased it as sheep and cattle runs, and many years passed
before the new colonists, attracted by the discovery of gold, could


The above represents some imteresting details of the gold-hunting days of Ballarat in 1854.
The Public Library, Melbourne, is a massive but as yet unfinished building of the Corinthian order. It is approached by broad
stone steps, on which is erected a bronze statue of Sir Redmond Barry, to whose public spirit and intellectual taste the magnificence oj the
institution is so largely indebted. There is also a fine pair of carved lions on each side of the entrance. Here are stored a splendid
library of reference, some fine statuary, and a very complete technological museum, together with a noble collection of oil and watei colo
paintings, sitably housed in one of the largest and best lit halls in the southern hemisphere. The whole of this invaluable institution is
open to the public free of charge.
The Stock Exchange of Melbourne, Limited, is a recently erected and very handsome building eight stories high. The front is
constructed of Sydney freestone, handsomely worked. It is situated in Collins Street.


succeed in passing laws for the throwing open of the land to agricultural
settlers. Tip to the year 1860 land could only be obtained at auction,
and it was difficult for men of small means to obtain farms, and, al-
though more liberal land laws were passed after that date, it was not
until 1869 that an Act was framed under which agricultural settle-
ment was effectually encouraged. During the period intervening be-
tween the landing of the first white men and the passing of the Land
Act of 1869 agricultural settlement made very slow progress, but much
useful work was done, the beneficial effects of which are still ex-
perienced. Mr. Henty commenced to cultivate immediately after
arriving, and the plough which he used is preserved in Melbourne as a
historical relic, being the plough which turned the first sod in Victoria.
The farms afterw’ards near Melbourne, Ballarat, Geelong, Lancefield,
Kilmore, Warrnambool, Belfast, and other early towns tested the
quality of soils, and made known the peculiar treatment required by
different crops in the climate of the colony. Owing also to the enter-
prise of the early colonists, live stock of different breeds were imported,
so that when the public lands were thrown open for selection in 1869
the colony was well supplied with trained farmers with local experience,
stud herds of Shorthorn, Hereford, Aryshire, and Alderney cattle had
been established, as well as studs of the best draught and thoroughbred
horses, flocks of Merino, Lincoln, and Leicester sheep, with well-bred
representatives of other kinds of live stock. (See article, “ Live Stock
Husbandry,” in this book.)
It was under the above circumstances that the agriculture of the
colony began a career of remarkable development twenty-three years
ago. It may be mentioned also that the mining industry had been for
some time affording employment to a diminishing number of men, and
that many of the miners settled upon land under the liberal provisions
of the new Land Act. Under preceding Land Acts the greater portion
of the best land in the coast districts had been alienated, many large
©states used for grazing purposes having been formed, so that agri-
cultural settlement under the more liberal provisions of the Act of
1869 had to extend mainly over the northern or inland portion of the
colony. Settlements were rapidly formed in all parts of the northern
plains, and wheat growing, the most suitable industry for the pioneer-
ing stages of such districts, was quickly developed to larger proportions.
Three years after the Act came into force—viz., in 1873—the land
under cultivation amounted to 964,996 acres, while ten years later, in
1883, the area had increased to 2,215,923, and in 1892 to 2,668,604
acres. The total extent of land under the wheat crop in 1873 was
349,976 acres, and in 1892 it was 1,332,683 acres. As the production
of all other farm products also increased during the same period, while
live stock multiplied, and marked improvement was made in the quality
of the various breeds, the natural advantages possessed by the colony
for carrying on the various branches of agricultural industry are clearly
manifested by the rapid progress which has taken place. Between
18S3 and 1892 the number of sheep in the colony increased from
10,174,246 to 14,503,456, and the number of cattle from 1,287,028 to
2,226,538. When it is taken into account that the population of Vic-
toria is only at present a little over one million, and that important
mining, manufacturing, pastoral, and other industries have been carried
on, the development of agriculture which has taken place proves con-
clusively that the soil and climate of the colony afford special advantages
for agricultural pursuits. In a new country the people are eager for
large profits, and so much attention would not have been given to
agriculture had not the favourable conditions of climate and soil made
the industry remunerative.
FERTILITY OF THE SOIL.
It was soon discovered that the soil of Victoria was exceedingly
fertile It had all the appearance of being rich, and when tried it
more than realised expectations. Only a few years after the landing
of the first settlers, “ Port Fairy ” potatoes won fame on account of
their superior quality in older-established parts of Australia, and other
products were soon afterwards grown with equal success. The
potatoes were grown at Belfast and Warrnambool, on the south-west
coast of the colony, districts still famed for the production of root
crops. The rich soil is of volcanic origin, being very friable and of a
reddish or chocolate colour, capable of growing all kinds of crops for
many years without manure. A yield of from 12 to 15 tons per acre
of potatoes is sometimes obtained, and 10 tons per acre is a frequent
yield. Lancefield, Daylesford, Kyneton, Ballarat, and Gippsland
districts contain land of the same kind, and all over the colony a large
proportion of the soil is exceedingly fertile. Even in those parts of
the colony where the yield of the crops is small, the defect is not so
much in the soil as in the supply of moisture. There are in the inland
northern portions of the colony districts which do not enjoy such a
liberal rainfall as others. In such localities the yield of the crops is
generally comparatively light, but the soil is rich, a fact that is proved
from the large yield obtained in a moist season. Having extensive
areas of fertile soil in all parts of its territory, and consequently
under different conditions of climate, the products of the colony are
both abundant and varied.
THE CLIMATE AND RAINFALL.
“ The finest climate in the world.” Such is the verdict of all
observant colonists who have travelled enough to give weight to their
opinion. There is no winter in the English or American sense of the
word, The time called winter is merely the season in which there is
more rain and less heat than in summer. Very few Australians have
ever seen snow. Upon the inland mountain ranges and the elevated
land in their vicinity a little snow falls occasionally, but only sufficient
to make the ground white for a few hours. The native troes are
evergreen, not casting their leaves in the winter, alt hough English
trees and others indigenous to cold countries go through the form
apparently out of respect to old-esta*blished family customs, and
altogether the winter is only a modified summer. Stock are neither
housed nor fed in the winter. The merino sheep, which produce the
finest wool in the world, run out on the pastures all winter, generally
without even a hedge to shelter them ; cattle in the same way are not
only able to live on the pastures through the winter, but to fatten fit
for the butcher; the dairy cows also are kept milking without being
housed or fed, and when horses are not at work they spend the whole
winter in the open fields. Any farmer who knows what it is to
provide for housing and feeding his live stock through the winter in
England, Scotland, Ireland, or America will be able to understand
what advantages Victoria possesses in its winterless climate.
In order to obtain a clear idea of the rainfall of Victoria, it will
be necessary to take note of the physical features of the colony. It
will be observed, by looking at the map, that the eastern coast range
of the Australian continent terminates about 100 miles south of the
northern boundary of Victoria, or in the Gippsland district. From the
terminal point a spur called the Great Dividing Range strikes off to
the westward, and extends across the colony of Victoria. This
Dividing Range divides the colony into two parts, viz., the northern
and southern division, or if we take the whole course of the mountain
chain, including the portion of the eastern coast range of the continent
which extends into Victoria, we have the colony divided into the
inland and coast districts. On the coast side of the mountains the
territory, which average* a little over 100 miles wide, enjoys a copious
rainfall, while the inland country, averaging roughly over 100 miles
from the River Murray, the average rainfall is somewhat less. All
over the coast districts the rainfall is sufficient for the requirements of
cereal and some kinds of root crops. Wheat, oats, and barley are
successfully cultivated, and permanent pastures of English grasses can
also be laid down. Root crops also do well, good crops of potatoes
being obtained in many districts, and turnips, mangolds, and beets
yield satisfactorily. The rainfall of Melbourne, which may be taken
as representing the coast districts of the colony, has averaged for
twenty years 25'44 inches. This is more than the rainfall of London
(24 inches), Nottingham (23 - 7 inches), and Paris (22 9 inches). In
the northern or inland districts the average rainfall is generally below
20 inches, and some specially dry localities do not average more than
10 inches. In the less dry sections of the northern districts, where the
annual rainfall varies from 12 inches to 18 inches, oats, barley, and
wheat are cultivated, and satisfactory yields are obtained, but root
crops are rarely cultivated with success, while in the drier portions of
the inland districts, where the rainfall varies from 10 to 12 inches, the
wheat crop is the only one that can be depended upon to yield a fair
return in average seasons. It is important to note that the largest
number of Victorian farmers are settled in the northern or inland
districts, and, if the climate may seem to be too dry, it must be
remembered that there are special advantages which compensate in a
great measure for a deficiency of moisture. The land is generally
ready for the plough, and even when some clearing is necessary the
work is light and inexpensive. Stock of all kinds thrive remarkably
well in the warm climate, and the Australian system of harvesting,
viz., “ stripping,” by far the cheapest in the world, can be adopted.
The climate is, no doubt, drier than might be desired in these districts,
but, with the advantages referred to, the farmers are able to carry on
their industry successfully. The wheat-growers of the colony of South
Australia, the largest wheat producers of the group, have to contend
against a drier climate and a smaller yield of grain per acre.' It is
only in the driest sections of the inland districts that oats and barley
cannot be successfully grown, so that only a comparatively small
number of farmers are compelled to restrict their agricultural opera-
tions to the growing of wheat. If we examine the driest sections of
Victoria, we find that the settlers are in a prosperous condition, arising
from other advantages which tend to compensate for the deficiency of
moisture. The cheap system of cultivation and harvesting which is
carried on enables the farmer to make good profits from light crops.
There is scarcely any timber in the dry districts. Trees enough grow
in patches or belts to provide fencing timber, but every farm contains a
large area of open plain land which is ready for the plough. This land
is more fertile and as easy tilled as the prairies of Western America,
while a cheaper system of harvesting can be adopted. The peculiar
dryness of the air enables the stripper, which is a combined reaping
and threshing machine, to be used, while on the American prairies the
grain has to be reaped, bound, stocked, carted, and threshed. In the
colony of South Australia, where this cheap system of cultivating and
harvesting is adopted, the wheat-growers have been able to make a
living from crops averaging only five bushels the acre. In the dry
parts of Victoria the system of farming is similar, and the yields vary
from 10 to 12 bushels per acre. In the dry districts, too, the natural
pastures are excellent, and, as the climate is warm, stock thrives well.
Farmers in these parts, therefore, make profit both from cultivation
and stock-keeping, and they are generally prosperous and well content
with their prospects. A system of irrigation is also being introduced,


which will make some of the arid districts the most productive portions
of the colony. (See article upon “ Irrigation” in this book.) A tract of
11,000,000 acres of land lying in the northern portion of the colony
called ‘‘the Mallee,” owing to being covered with a scrub of that
name, is now coming into cultivation by means of the South Aus-
tralian scrub roller and stump-jump plough. The wheat grown here
is of the highest standard of quality, and this tract now promises to
be the great wheat-producing belt of the colony.
PRODUCTIONS.
The rich soil and warm, genial climate combine to render the
colony’s productions abundant and vatied. In the coast districts,
where all kinds of cereals, leguminous and root crops are cultivated,
the yields obtained from the unmanured land are all that could be
desired The average of the whole colony is always lower than the
results obtained by farmers who understand their business. Farmers
who understand their business, and give the land reasonable cultivation,
obtain from 35 to 45 bushels of wheat, oats, and barley per acre in
districts where the general average is not more than from 15 to 20 bushels
per acre. Much heavier yields than those stated are frequently
obtained, but from 35 to 45 bushels per acre are common when the
land is well cultivated. With potatoes, mangolds, beets, and peas the
same difference is observed between the average obtained by a rough
system of farming and upon land properly cultivated. About 5 tons
of potatoes per acre is a payable crop, and from 12 to 15 tons per acre
are frequently obtained. Hay, which is made from wheat or oats,
yields from 2 to 4 tons per acre, and English grasses for pasture are
successfully cultivated in all the coast districts. Maize is a crop
which grows well in the more moist portions of the coast districts, and
as much as 100 bushels per acre is frequently obtained. All over the
northern or inland districts wheat can be profitably produced, and in
some sections other cereals do not do so well, and this fact also tends
to swell the proportion of the colony’s wheat production. The wheat
production of the colony is capable of great expansion, but there are
more numerous opportunities and larger profits to be made by
developing the various branches of husbandry which are now being
opened up by the farmers.
Wheat. —The wheat grown in Victoria is the finest in the world.
It always brings the highest price in the London market, fetching con-
siderably more than English, Indian, American, or New Zealand
wheat. The wheat crop is generally the first sown by the new setter,
it quickly returns a profit, an£ Vfngs ‘n resources to keep the
farmer going until stock-raising, dairy?!:*, other branches of
industry are established. Many settlers have found continuous wheat-
growing upon the rich -virgin soil of the colony a profitable business ;
but the rule is that the best farmers, after a year or two, add the
growing of other crops in rotation, and establish herds of cattle, flocks
of sheep, breeding also horses and swine upon the farms.
Oats. —Oats grow well in all the coast districts of the colony and
in the more moist of the inland districts. Even in the driest sections
of the inland districts good yields of oats are being obtained by
adopting the Algerian variety, while the straw is also valuable for
fodder. In the moist districts from 40 to 50 and up to 60 and 70
bushels per acre are obtained with good cultivation, and the crop is
successfully grown in rotation with wheat, barley, and roots.
Barley. —As barley requires more moisture than wheat, there are
dry districts inland from the coast ranges where it cannot be properly
grown, but the area of its cultivation is more extensive than that of
oats. It yields good returns all over the coast half of the colony, and
upon about half of the inland area. English barley grows well, pro-
ducing a fair malting sample and a good yield, the crop being a
profitable one. Those farmers who grow barley in rotation with oat,
wheat, and root crops are generally the most successful.
Maize. The maize crop is one which is not understood by the:
majority of Victorian farmers Although crops of 100 bushels per
acre, or as heavy as in any part of America, are obtained, and those
who engage in its cultivation make large profits, the majority of
farmers do not yet pay as much attention to the cultivation of this
cereal as they should. In America it is much more extensively
cultivated even than wheat, maize being, in fact, the staple crop of the
country. It is grown as a general crop in those States where only
from 30 to 40 bushels per acre are obtained, and there are but few of
the coast districts of Victoria where better yields would not be
produced. The cultivation of maize, if attended to by the farmers,
would be as profitable in Victoria as in many parts of America.
Leguminous Crops. —Peas are largely grown with most satisfac-
tory results. Good yields are obtained, and the crop is profitable in
more ways than one, for it has been found highly valuable in a system
of rotation. Lands which had been impoverished by continuous grain-
growing have been brought back to a state of fertility by sowing the
pea crop, and in limited districts where the merits of the pea crop are
understood it plays a leading part in the system of maintaining the
productiveness of the soil. Beans and vetches are also found to do
satisfactorily. It is in the cultivation of many of these neglected crops
that the agriculture of the colony is now being greatly developed.
Our farming system offers encouraging opportunities for an influx of
good farmers, whose skill would turn our various unused advantages to
account. , ,
Root Crops. —The potato crop has been cultivated in most of the
coast districts of the colony, and it yields a much higher return than
cereals Farms upon which potato growing is carried on usually
command an exceptionally high value, a fact which bears the best testi-
mony to the profitableness of the crop. Mangolds have also been suc-
cessfully grown, very heavy crops being obtained, but, owing to the
defective system of farming, the p< >tato is the only root which has received
much attention. Potatoes, being required for human food, find a ready
market, and mangolds, beets, and carrots are grown principally for feed-
ing stock. Feeding stock is a system not adopted so extensively as in
less generous climates. The rich pastures, and the absence of cold
winters, enable farmers to keep their stock in the fields all the year
round, and cause the business of ft eding stock to be comparatively
neglected. Notwithstanding the richness of the pastures and the mild-
ness of the winters, much could be done in the way of increasing the
profitableness of stock keeping by producing food. Those farmers who
grow food for dairy cows, pigs, and other stock find the system profitable,
and they are generally more prosperous than their neighbours. Where
heavy root crops can be grown, it is not the fault of the country if they are
not cultivated. As the system of farming improves, the growing of
mangolds and carrots is found to increase, while the storag* of fodder by
ensilage is largely extending. Most of the onions used in t l >e Australian
colonies are grown in Victoria. The crop in the coast districts yields
from 10 to 15 tons per acre, and the soil, which is never manured,
shows no signs of exhaustion after more than 20 years cultivation.
Hay and Grasses. — Hay, which is extensively grown in the colony,
is made from oats or wheat, cut just before ripening. The yield is
from 2 to 4 tons per acre, the last named being the return obtained in
the coast districts, and the former in the inland districts. In moist
localities, or where irrigation is practised, lucerne is grown for hay, and
it is one of the most profitable of crops From 4to 6 tons per acre
are obtained, the crop yielding from four to six cuttings of about 1 ton
each In all of the coast districts, rye-grass, clover, cocksfoot, fog, fox-
tail, fesques, and other grasses are successfully cultivated, and it is the
practice to lay down fields in pasture after they have been growing
grain for a number of years. Comparatively little manure is used in
the colony, letting out the land in cultivated pasture being the most
common means of maintaining fertility. In the northern or inland
districts the rainfall is not sufficient to render the cultivation of Eng-
lish grasses profitable, but in those localities the growth of the natural
grass is so rapid, and the quality of the pasture is so rich, no inconvenieiice
is experienced from the absence of artificial grasses After the cereal
crop there is good pasture afforded by the self-sown grain, and in the
second year tLe natural grass has established itself so well as to carry
more stock than the unbroken pasture.
Hops —Hop-culture has been established in the colony for some
years, and there are extensive districts along the coast and near the
mountain ranges specially well suited for the industry. Although hop-
growing was introduced at a comparatively recent date, and much had
to be learned as to the cultivation of the plant and the treatment of the
hops, the industry has already assumed an important position-. The
soil and climate are much better suited for hop-growing than those of
England or the eastern states of America, as shown in the higher yields
obtained. From 20 to 25 cwt. per acre are frequently obtained from
unmanured virgin soil, and about 10 cwt. per acre is yielded by year-
ling hops. California is the only country in the world that can show
results equal to those of Victoria.
Other Products. —The tobacco crop is one which may be expected
to increase as time passes. The soil and climate have been proved to
be well suited for tobacco culture, and the cultivation of such a valuable
crop may be expected to show development with the increase of popu-
lation and the progress of the country. It will have been gathered
from what has already been said that the climate resembles that of the
south of Europe, and it follows that the various products of France,
Spain, and Italy can be cultivated in the colony. This is not a matter
of theory only, for experiments have already been tried which prove
that the various rural industries of southern Europe can be introduced
with an assurance of greater success than ever attended them in their
native country. Fruits of all kinds—from apples, pears, plums,
peaches, apricots, and oheeries to grapes, oranges, lemons, and olives
have been tried and found to flourish in a manner which astonishes
natives of the south of Europe. The mulberry grows luxuriantly, and
the intn duction of silk culture is only a matter of time. The only
reason why the colony does not produce more fruits, olive oil, and silk
is that it is too prosperous. Wages are so high that other industries
involving less labour absorb the attention of the population. The state
of California, however, the climate of which resembles that of Victoria,
is teaching us that, by adopting machinery and labour-saving methods
of management, many of the industries of southern Europe can be pro-
fitably carried on when the population is limited and the rate of wages
high. The attention of colonists has been attracted to the fact that in
California fruit-growing is developing marvellously on account of the
system which is adopted of drying apples, apricots, prunes, raisins, and
currants, and preserving fruit in cans, and the same system is now
progressing steadily in the colony. Vines and fruit trees of all kinds
grow well both in the coast and inland districts of the colony, and those
colonists who are engaged in the cultivation of vineyards and orchards
are always more prosperous than the farmers who grow only grain.
(See articles on “ Viticulture and Horticulture” in this book.)
DAIRY FARMING.
That the colony is peculiarly well suited for dairy farming follows
from what has already been said in regard to the soil and climate.
Rich natural pastures covering a fertile soil are sources of wealth in


any country, but where the climate is so mild that stock require no
shelter, even in winter, special value attaches to well-grassed land.
Just as the sheep farmer or the settler, who fattens cattle for the
market, allows his stock to graze all the year round in the open fields,
so the dairy farmer will take no special care of his milking cows.
There are here and there farmers who take their cows into sheds on
winter nights, feeding them upon straw or green fodder, but they are
exceptions, the dairy cows in general, as all other stock, finding all their
food and what shelter they need in the open fields. Those who add
some straw, hay, or green food in the winter are rewarded by extra
returns, and larger profits would be made if farmers did more in the
way of growing supplies of winter feed for dairy cows, but the natural
advantages of the country are indicated by the fact that dairying is
generally carried on without resorting to any system of artificial feed-
ing as a winter feed for stock. It is, however, pleasing to see that
ensilage, or the system of 'preserving green forage for stock, is coming
into favour. The crop is cud in a green state, and either cut into chaff
or stored whole in specially constructed pits, known as “ silos,” or
stacked and pressed down by heavy weights. The production in average
seasons is equal to the home demand, besides leaving a considerable
surplus to be exported to the neighbouring colonies. In making butter
and cheese the individual dairy system was general until about three
years ago, when the industry entered upon a period of greater progress
through the adoption of the American factory system. It is the factory
system which is now enabling our farmers to send such large quantities
of butter and cheese to England and other outside markets. In the
factory system all the milk from a group of farms is gathered into a
central dairy, mixed together, and made into butter or cheese. Some-
times the factory is owned by the farmers who supply the milk, and in
other cases it is a separate affair, the milk being purchased at a certain
price per gallon. A first-class maker is employed, and all the milk of
a district is treated at one time. The cheese or butter is not only of
good quality, but it is all the same. Orders for large quantities can be
supplied according to a given sample, and thus an export trade is facili-
tated. Labour is also economised in the manufacture, and the farmer
has not to keep hands to work a home dairy. The factory system has
been the secret of success in America, and the same prosperous career
is now opening up to the dairymen of Victoria. A few cheese factories
have been at work for several years, and now they are on the increase,
while butter factories are being extensively added to the industrial in-
stitutions of the colony.
To farmers who will apply intelligence and enterprise to the
business, there are large profits in the dairying industry. Those who
carry on the old system are doing well, but others, who have adopted
modern methods, are doing much better. The soil and climate of the
colony admit of dairying being extended almost indefinitely, and the
export trade with the English market opens up an unlimited field for
development. 'The fact that the colony is in the southern hemisphere
is an important one. When it is summer in Australia it is winter in
England, and this fact puts these colonies in a peculiarly advantageous
position with regard to supply ing the English markets. The dairy pro-
duce manufactured during the spring and summer in the colony reaches
England in time to supply the high winter market. In this, as in
many other respects, these colonies possess a great advantage over
America, for North America has its seasons simultaneously with those
of Europe. There is an extensive field for new comers to enter into the
dairying business. The existing farmers are wedded to the established
system of cultivating large fields of grain, and they have shown them-
selves slow to enter systematically upon the dairying industry.
Farmers from England, Ireland, and Scotland, who understand the
advantages of feeding stock, and who appreciate the profitableness of
dairying under favourable circumstances, have every inducement to
enter into this flourishing industry in the colony. Many landholders
have been induced by the mildness of the climate, and the luxuriance
of the natural pastures, to be content with obtaining an easy living by
taking what bountiful nature has provided, and thus there is a wide
scope afforded to the energy and skill of farmers coming from the
older countries.
COMPARED WITH AMERICA.
North America receives a constant stream of population from the
United Kingdom and Europe, and, in most cases, emigrants have
bettered their condition by going to the newer country. Can Victoria
offer equal inducements to the agriculturist who is seeking a new field
of operation 1 • Happily, an authoritative and satisfactory answer can
be given to that question. The farmers of the colony wished to know
what they had to fear from American competition in grain-growing,
wool-production, and other branches of agriculture, and to be in
structed in the best and cheapest methods of carrying on farming
operations. In order to supply this information the leading agri-
cultural journal of Melbourne, the Leader , commissioned me as its
special agricultural reporter to travel all over the United States in
1883. I reported that the colony had nothing to fear from American
competition, and dwelt upon the many superior advantages possessed
by Victoria. In the year 1886 again, Mr, Deakin, as Chairman of a
Royal Commission upon Irrigation, visited the United States, and I
accompanied him as representating the same newspaper. The report
of Mr. Deakin, and of those I agiin furnished to the Leader, all agreed
in testifying to the superior richness of the soil, and the more genial
character of the climate of this colony, as compared with those of the
United States. The verdict was to the effect, as far as climate,
soil, and other natural conditions were concerned, that the balance of
advantages was on the side of Victoria. California was the only state
in which the climate was anything like as favourable to agricultural and
pastoral pursuits as that of Victoria. The severe winter in the best
parts of the Mississippi Valley, or out on the Western Prairies, is a
great drawback to the progress of the farmer and stock-breeder. In
America the farmer must house and feed his stock in winter, w hile in
Victoria the custom is almost unknown. The fine-woolled merino
sheep, the horse stock, the fattening cattle, and the dairy cows, all
thrive throughout the year without shelter upon the open, natural pas-
ture lands. The lands in America available for settlement are from
1000 to 2000 miles from the sea-ports, while the compact colony of Vic-
toria, with its extensive coast-line, lies near its shipping ports, the most
distant districts being little mere than 300 miles inland. The
seasons are opposite to those of the northern hemisphere, giving the
colony command of the great markets of the world, while those of
India, China, and Japan are close at hand. What was worthy of
imitation in American machinery, and methods of carrying on farming
in a new country, was brought under notice, and the latest improve-
ments are now being adopted. The farmer in Victoria can adopt the
best American methods and labour-saving machinery ; he lives under
institutions second to those of no other nation in freedom and liberality,
and he carries on his industry upon a soil and in a climate unsurpassed
in the whole world.
AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION.
The importance of instructing the youth of the colony in scientific
and practical agriculture had long been recognised by thoughtful
colonists, and at length the Government set apart 150,000 acres of
land as an endowment for agricultural colleges. The endowment
lands have been assigned to three trustees and a Council of Agri-
cultural Education, representing the Agricultural Societies of the
colonies and the Government, appointed. The trustees arrange for the
letting of the endowment lands, which return a yearly increasing
revenue, and the Council is taking steps to establish high-class colleges,
with preparatory schools and experimental farms in different parts of
the colony. At the Agricultural Colleges the students receive a
thoroughly liberal English education, combined with scientific agri-
culture, as well as practical experience of all branches of farming
industry. While this state of things offers special advantages to new-
comers with good agricultural training and experience, the colleges
will in time raise the standard of agriculture in the colony. The
instruction is free in the Agricultural Colleges, as it is in the ordinary
State schools,, and the charge for board and lodging is as low as the
bare paying of expenses will admit of. The existence of such colleges
should offer no small inducement to intending emigrants to make a
home in Victoria, for a means of practically training one’s family for a
colonial career, while obtaining their education, is of no small import-
ance. One learns of two proposed institutions in England which
profess to give an agricultural training for fitting young men for
colonial life, but the training obtained under such circumstances must
be, from a colonial point of view, to some extent defective. In the
Agricultural Colleges, and upon the experimental farms which are
being established in Victoria, however, the students receive a practical
and scientific education, which tit them for a successful career in any
of the Australasian colonies.
PRICES OF PRODUCTS AND LAND.
In studying the market prices of agricultural produce, it is
necessary to remember the circumstances affecting the cost of pro-
duction. In Victoria, while the rate of wages is high, the value of
land or rent is low, advanced labour-saving implements and machines
are employed in cultivating and harvesting, there is little expenditure
for manures, and the railway transit and other charges are low. Free
land is generally worthless, and is only obtainable in inaccessible or
badly governed countries, where it can be of little value to the settler.
Even in the United States of America, where homestead farms are
given to settlers, there are no available State lands near railways which
can be taken up for nothing Every alternate block is granted—and
frequently granted—to the railway companies which have made the
lines, and the. remaining State lands within the area are raised in price
from 4s. 2d. per acre to Bs. 4d. per acre. In a word, free land is not
obtainable in any part of the world where railways, markets, and other
advantages, without which land is valueless, are provided. As the
colony of Victoria has been provided with railways, roads, bridges,
schools, local government, and all the advantages of modern civilisa-
tion, there is no free land. There is cheap land, however, and that is
more to the purpose. In the United States, where free land is
obtainable in distant places far from markets and railways, settlors
prefer to purchase from railway companies or private owners near
railways, and within reasonable distances of large towns. It is con-
sidered better to give £2 or £3 per acre near a railway town, £ls or
£2O per acre near large cities, and from £2O to £4O per acre in fruit-
growing districts supplied with water for irrigation, than to go out
into the wilds and settle upon free land. In like manner there are
distant portions of some of the Australian colonies where land is
nominally much cheaper than in Victoria, but, when its inaccessibility
and distance from market are taken into account, it is really dearer.
Purchase money is paid once for all, but distance from market means




paying annually a heavy tax in the shape of carriage, which would
represent the annual interest upon an immense sum of money. It
would be difficult to find a more promising held than Victoria for the
•emigrant with capital, small means, or only his labour to depend upon.
(See article upon “Land Settlement” in this book.) Wages are good,
living is cheap, and capital commands a fair rate of interest.
The capitalist can find a profitable investment, be his resources
LITE STOCK HUSBANDRY.
Author of “Merino Sheep in Australia.”
While the trading, manufacturing, agricultural, and mining interests
have been developed to a greater extent in Victoria than in any other
of the Australian Colonies, the pastoral interest may fairly be ranked
as second to none in importance. With a climate that is admir-
ably suited to the perfect development of all the domestic animals,
an excellent natural pasture, and scarcely any diseases among
the live stock but such as are caused by neglect or mismanagement,
it was only natural that the country should become famous for the
excellence of its flocks and herds. In this as in almost every other
industrial pursuit the enterprise of the Victorian colonists placed them
in the front rank, and for many years the sheep and cattle breeders of
the neighbouring colonies sought to improve their flocks and herds by
purchasing high-class sires from Victorian studs. Of late years the
breeding of stud stock has not been profitable in Victoria. This is
owing partly to the stock-owners in the other colonies raising their own
studs, and partly to the depreciation in value that has taken place in
all descriptions of live stock. The changes in the fashions have
reduced the value of the bright silky wool of Victorian sheep, while
the demand for wool of a more robust type has increased. But though
the rearing of high-class stud stock is at present under a cloud, the
great body of stock-owners are fully alive to the necessity for keeping
up a high standard of excellence in their flocks and herds. It is
realised that if it is only moderately profitable to raise really good
sheep and cattle, it will be less profitable to breed bad ones
The number of sheep breeders are increasing rapidly in Victoria, and
the quality of the animals raised is steadily improving
SHEEP.
Victoria under its old name of Port Phillip was the first of the
Australian colonies to demonstrate to the world that merino wool of
exceptional softness, fineness, brightness, and length of staple could be
produced in large quantities on her wide pasture lands. For nearly
half a century the Port Phillip wool held the pride of place in the
market, and it still realises the highest price per lb. of any wool in the
world. But now-a-days the demand for fine wools is limited, and the
sheep-farmers over the greater portion of the colony are devoting their
attention to producing wool of medium quality, combined with weight
of fleece and size of carcase. The climate of Victoria is well suited
to producing the fine, bright, long-stapled wool that used to be so
much sought after. In winter the cold is never excessive, snow being
seldom seen save on the high mountains. Frosts are frequent, but not
so severe as to injure the stock, and the sharpest frost is dissipated
before the sun is two hours high.
The climate much resembles that in which the merino flocks w T ere
reared in their old home in the Spanish Peninsula, when they passed
the summer in the mountains of Montana, and the winter on the
plains of Estremadura. By some people it has been thought that in
this peculiarity of climate lies the secret of the beauty of Victorian
merino wool. Victoria has been justly called the land of the golden
fieece, for it is her golden fleeces that have brought wealth to the
■country more than any other industry. This colony is another illus-
tration of the truth of the old Spanish proverb “ Sheep have golden
feet, and whenever the print of their footstep is seen the land is turned
to gold.”
The originals of the Victorian merino flocks were obtained from
the mother colony of New South Wales and from the adjacent island
•of Tasmania. The country was fortunate in having for its first
inhabitants men having sufficient skill, backed up by a fair amount of
capital, to secure the finest sheep in both colonies. It is, however, to
Tasmanian flocks that the best Victorian studs trace their origin, and
even now rams from the island flocks are greatly prized, and still realise
good prices at the annual ram fairs held in Melbourne The first to
introduce sheep into Victoria were the Messrs. Henty, who sailed from
Launceston in 1831, and settled near Portland, now a small town on
the coast of Victoria, These gentlemen were not only the first to
introduce sheep into Victoria, but they were the first colonists who set
foot in the land. To Mr. T. Henty and his sons Australia is greatly
indebted for the introduction of merino sheep of the highest class.
By “BRUNI” (GEO. A. BROWN), op the “Argus” and “Australasian,”
extensive or limited, and the man who has no money can soon
turn his labour into capital. Land being cheap, the freehold of a
farm can easily be acquired, and the farmer carries on his industry
upon rich soil in a mild genial climate, under the security of the
British flag, and in a country where the rough pioneering system has
given place to the comfort and conveniences, as well'as the educational
and social advantages, of civilised life.
The flock was formed in England, towards the end of the last centurv,
with pure merinos obtained from the flock kept by H.M. George 111.
The following notice of this flockappears in Thos. W. Horsefield’s History
of Sussex :—“ln the year 1796. Thomas Henty, Esq., purchased the
demesne lands in the parish (West Tarring), consisting of 281 acres. ,
The breed of merino sheep has been brought by Mr. Henty to great
perfection, and from his flock many have been sent to New South
Wales” Mr. Henty took first prizes wherever he exhibited his shi-fp
in England, till at last he became an exhibitor merely for honour,
being debarred from taking prizes on account of the immense super-
iority of his sheep over those of any other flock in Great Britain.
This flock wandered a long distance before it rested in its final home in
the west of Victoria. A portion was shipped to Western Australia in
1829 in charge of two of Mr. Henty’s sons ; but finding the sheep did
not thrive, they shipped them on board the Cornwallis and sailed for
Tasmania, where they were joined by their father with the rest of the
flock. Being unable to obtain the grant of land he was led to expect on
leaving England. Mr. Henty sailed for the mainland of Australia, and
took up his residence at Portland Bay, in what was then an unknown
land. Sheep from Mr. Henty’s flock have been used in many of the
old and most famous studs of Victoria ; but the flock itself, owing to
bad management and neglect, has been entirely lost.
Another source whence early Victorian colonists obtained merino
sheep was at the annual sales held by the Van Diemen’s Land Company.
This Company was formed in 1827 with the patriotic object of relieving
England from dependence upon foreign countries for a supply of fine
wool. The company imported all descriptions of stock into Tasmania,
and in one year expended <£30,000 in the purchase of merino sheep
from the best flocks in Germany. Many private individuals in those
days imported Saxon merinos, and of their produce a fair share of the
finest specimens found their way across the Straits to the rising young
colony Port Phillip. From New South Wales some good sheep were
obtained, the finest being the descendants of the celebrated Camden
flock established by Captain Macarthur in 1797, with a few pure
merinos imported from the Cape of Good Hope. These were the tii st
merinos ever brought to Australia The only sheep added to this flock
were a few purchased by Captain Macarthur about 1835, from George
lll’s stud. Since that time the flock has been bred without the
addition of any foreign blood. The Macarthur family lost their old
flock, but it has been preserved in Victoria, and is nowin the possession
of the Hon. William Campbell. The Camden sheep did much good to
the Victorian flocks, there being scarcely a leading stud flock which does
not owe some of its excellence to an infusion of Camden blood. In a
few studs, French sheep, from the Rambouillet flock, have been used,
and in others American merinos, from Vermont, have been introduced
and in some instances the change of blood has had a beneficial effect.
When Victoria first became a field for colonization, the early settlers
managed their flocks on a plan somewhat similar to that followed by
Abraham on the plains of Mamre. The world was before them where
to choose, and they wandered over the face of the country till they
found good pasture, with plenty of wood and water. They then settled,
and took up as large an area of land as they thought they would
require, which was held as a leasehold from the Crown. The greater
portion of the colony was open forest or almost treeless plains. There
were scarcely any difficulties in the way of settlement, save some tribes
of aborigines, who occasionally killed a few sheep, and the much more
troublesome dingo, as the indigenous wild dog was called. The sheep
were everywhere shepherded by day, and enclosed in hurdle yards at
night. For greater security against prowling dingo or blackfellow, a
man slept in a watch-box close to the sheep-yard. The country was
unenclosed, and one might ride from Melbourne to the boundary of the
colony in every direction, and not meet with a fence, save round a rare
cultivation paddock at a sheep station Occasionally sheep were taken
as wages by some of the shepherds, while others took sheep on terms,
the person finding the stock receiving a portion of the increase and wool;
and by these means were laid the foundations of many large fortunes.
While the land was held as squatting runs, as the leaseholds from
the Crown were called, the practice of shepherding the sheep (usually


in flocks from 1,500 to 2,000 in open country, and less in forest land)
Avas universally adopted, but gradually the advantages of running sheep
in paddocks became generally understood, and in places where timber
Avas plentiful ring fences and large paddocks were formed. Some of
the old squatters were strongly opposed to running sheep at large.
They maintained that such a spirited animal as the merino sheep re-
quired shepherding to keep him tame, and that, once granted full liberty,
he would become a wild animal. It had been found necessary from the
earliest times to shepherd the merino, and it was as necessary in young
Australia as in old Spain.
Despite the opinion of these old squatters, the work of enclosing and
subdividing the country went on rapidly, the fences being often made of
logs or brushwood. As the leaseholds were transformed into freeholds,
better fences Avere put up, and gradually Avire fencing came into general
use. As smaller enclosures Avere formed, wells were sunk, dams made, and
tanks excavated, in order to provide a sufficient supply of water for the
sheep ; while, later on, belts of timber were planted in the open country,
on a few estates, across the line of prevailing Avinds. These plantations
afford a Avelcome shelter to the stock in wet stormy weather. Fencing
in and subdividing the land, and providing an ample supply of water
for the stock, have increased the grazing capabilities of the country
gieatly, in some instances the increase t.eing fully fourfold, while the
sheep under the new management are healthier and yield heavier
fleeces than of old. Stud flocks were formed early in Victoria with
selections of the best sheep in the famous flocks of the Western
district, and annual sales of rams were established, the most noted of
these being held at Skipton, a small hamlet on the edge of the Great
Western Plain, about 130 miles from Melbourne. The inconvenience
of drawing a large number of flock-masters to such an out-of-the-way
place as Skipton became so great that at last the annual sale of stud
rams Avas established in Melbourne It is attended by sheep-farmers
from all parts of the Australian colonies, and sheep to the value
of many thousands of pounds are annually disposed of.
The effect of the new style of sheep farming Avas marked, in 1874,
by the purchase by Mr. William Gumming, of Mount Fyans, and Mr.
T. F. Gumming, of Stony Point, of the celebrated ram “ Sir Thomas ”
for the then unprecedented sum of £714. This grand specimen of a
merino ram was bred by Mr. James Gibson, of Bellevue, Tasmania.
Sir Thomas Avas six years old when he was bought by the Messrs.
Gumming, and it was estimated that Mr. Gibson had realised £5,000
by the sale of his male progeny alone. The enterprise of the Messrs.
Gumming was amply rewarded. The progeny of “ Sir Thomas ” were
almost invincible in the show-yards of the colony, and flock-masters
from all parts of Australia competed eagerly for the “ Sir Thomas ”
rams at the annual sales. The sale of “ Sir Thomas ” gave a great
impetus to the breeding of stud sheep in Victoria. Greater care Avas
taken in the selection of the breeders, and some attention was paid to
pedigree, a thing that had previously been almost entirely neglected.
For a long time an unfounded prejudice existed in the minds oi
Victorian agriculturists that there Avas something antagonistic
between the occupation of the farmer and that of the husbandman,
and it A\ r as long ere our farmers began to combine sheep husbandry
Avith agriculture. At first the farmers’ flocks were of a very inferior
character. They were known by the name' of cross-bred, which
described them exactly. ' The advantage of breeding well-bred sheep
gradually dawned on the minds of the farmers, and during the last
half-dozen years a sensible improvement has taken place in the quality
of their sheep throughout the colony, though many of them might still
be described as of a very inferior character. The merino is invariably
the sheep bred on the large pastoral properties, and it is sometimes
bred by farmers in the Avarmer portions of the colony, but wherever
there is a good rainfall, the long-wool is always the farmers’ sheep. Of
the lon "-wool breeds the Lincoln is that generally preferred. Lincolns
were at°first exclusively confined to the heavily grassed country to the
south of the Great Western Plain, where the soil is rich and the
rainfall ample. They have of late years been largely bred in the north-
east district, in the country bordering the mountain region. The
Victorian Lincolns are derived from the best flocks in England, and for
Aveight of fleece and lustre of wool, they are equal to the best in the
old Country. In size and shape the colonial Lincolns are inferior to
those raised by British farmers. Even with the long-wool sheep the fleece
with us is of greater importance than thecarcase. Until the last ten years
Leicester sheep were seldom seen in Victoria, but of late several studs of
border Leicesters have been formed, some of which are derived from Lord
Polwarth’s famous flock. These sheep are much for raising
cross-breds with merino ewes, as owing to their small heads there are
fewer deaths than when Lincoln sires are used. A few flocksof Cotswmds
and Romney Marsh sheep are kept and they are much prized in certain
parts of the country. The" Downs have only lately come into favour with
sheep breeders. A^few studs of Southdowns, Hampshire and Shropshire
Downs are bred, but they are not as much used as they should be.
Farmers use Down rams for raising lambs for the market with
success The breeding of cross-bred and comeback sheep has come
greatly into fashion during the last ten years. The cross-bred are the
produce of long-wool rams and merino ewes, the comebacks are the
produce of crose-bred ewes put to merino rams. Comebacks are h.gWy
profitable sheep, they are of large frame, yield a heavier fleece th
merino, and their wool is often more valuable than that of ordinary
merinos.
The first official return of < ;i> - sheep was in 1836, when there wore
41,332 sheep in the colony. Their increase was very rapid, and in ten
years they numbered within a trifle of three million. The number of sheep
was doubled in the next two decades, and in 1879 the number of sheep
in Victoria reached 11,749,532, and in 1883 the return was about one
million less. It is difficult to arrive at the quantity of wool produced in
Victoria, as so much wool comes across the border from the colonies of
New South Wales and South Australia, which isshipped from Melbourneas
Victorian wool In 1882 itwas estimated that the 10,172.000 sheep in the
colony yielded 52,223,000 lbs. of wool, which was valued at £3,321,000,
but, as this makes the avera.e retuni per sheep a litrle over 6s , it may
be regarded as a high valuation. In the season 1891-2 the number of
sheep in Victoria was returned as 12,928,148. In 1890-1, when there
were not so many sheep, the wool produced was 55,559,286 lbs., which
was valued at £2,862,088. The price of Victorian wool in 1869
averaged Is. 3d. per lb., and there was only a very slight falling-off in
price till 1 881, when the average was Is. 2£d. per lb. From that time a
pronounced depreciation took place in the value of Victorian wool, till
in 1890 the average was lid., and since that time the average has been
still further reduced.
The great bulk of the sheep in Victoria never receive any food save
the natural pastures of the country, and in seasons of drought great
sufferings are entailed on the flocks, and occasionally the deaths are
very numerous. Stud sheep, however, are carefully reared ; indeed,
there is a complaint among flock-masters that the stud stock are
becoming weakened in constitution by the pampering they receive.
Farmers having small scope for their flocks have been in the habit of
supplying their sheep with coarse fodder, such as wheat straw, during
summer time, when the grass fails, but there has been scarcely any
systematic attempt made to supply the large flocks of sheep with whole-
some food during the time of the year when there is scarcely any grass.
When such a thing has been suggested, the invariable reply is that labour
is too high to grow food for sheep. There are, however, indications that
a great change in the mode of sheep-farming is about to take place in
Victoria. Many crops can be grown over the larger portion of the
country on which sheep will thrive, and experiments are now being
made, with a view of ascertaining in what way fodder for sheep can be
grown and stored, to meet a bad season. In this new system of sheep
management, the farmer is naturally foremo.st, he being more used to
agricultural operations than the owners of large pastoral estates. The
low price of wool has acted as a discouragement to many flock-masters
who had taken up this matter. Already the owners of small flocks
are supplying the greater portion of the fat sheep sent to the Melbourne
market, and fully one-half of the wool that is sold in Melbourne is
from their flocks.
Prices of sheep vary according to the time of year and the
character of the season. When there has been an insufficient rainfall
in winter, and the summer sets in hot and dry, store sheep are-sold at
a very low rate. Since the country was enclosed and subdivided, the
bad habit of over-stocking has been practised by many property-owners.
Consequently, on any failure of the natural pastures, they must sell a
large portion of their stock or see them starve, and on such occasions
store sheep are sometimes to be got as low as 3s. per head. In ordinary
seasons excellent merino sheep can be bought off the shears at from 6s.
to Bs. for young ewes ; wethers rule lower, and may be quoted at from
ss. to 7s. Stud rams are too expensive for the ordinary sheep-breeder,
but very good flock rams can be purchased at from £3 to £5 per head.
Long-wool sheep rule higher than merinos ; young wethers, the first
cross between the merino and Lincoln, are much liked ; they grow
to a large size, yield a heavy fleece, which realises a good price, and
they are favourites with the butchers. Sheep-farming in most countries
is a profitable occupation, but it is in Victoria that the sheep gives the
highest return for the capital expended, even at present low prices for
wool and mutton. Land that will support a sheep per acre in its
natural condition can be purchased at from £3 to £3 10s. per acre, and
where sheep husbandry is combined with agriculture the farmer
invariably prospers. The greater portion of the Crown lands of
Victoria that are suitable for sheep-grazing have been already sold, but
land can be easily obtained in almost any part of the country, it being
bought and sold as readily as a chattel. In Australia, the possession
of large landed property confers no social advantage on the owner.
Land is held merely as an investment, and in most cases, when it will
realise more to cut up and sell as farms, the owner of a large estate is
quite willing to part with it.
THE WOOL EXPORT TRADE.
Since Victoria became a wool-producing country, on several
occasions we have had the cry raised that the production of wool had
overtaken the consumption, and the gloomiest forebodings were enter-
tained as to the future of the country when the staple industry was
ruined. On each of these occasions we have seen the price of wool,
after a depression of a year or so, rise higher than ever, new outlets
having been found for the fabric. This cry is again raised in the land,
and certainly not Avithout reason. The enormous quantities of wool
produced by Australia and the South American countries have, for a
time at all events, overtaken the demand, and this is followed, as a
natural consequence, by low prices. The depreciation in the value of
wool has entailed a very heavy loss on the flock-masters of Australia.
The present depression in the wool trade has lasted longer, and the


prices have ruled lower than on any previous occasion since Victoria
became a wool-exporting country. There is little hope that prices will
ever again retorn to the old standard, but with a slight improvement
on the present rates, sheep husbandry will still be the most staple
industry in the colony.
The visitor to Melbourne will gain some idea of the importance of
the wool trade by inspecting the magnificent warehouses erected
by the leading firms engaged in the business. The most striking of
these buildings is that of the old-established firm of Messrs. R.
Goldsbrough and Co., in Bourke Street. It is of great size, being
in five flats, and having a storage capacity of 64,212 tons measurement,
the area of all the floors being 5 61 acres. It is built of solid bluestone,
with walls almost as strong as a fortress, and it seems as if it would defy
even time. The cost of this magnificent pile of buildings and the land
on which they stand was £167,000. This firm is one of the oldest
engaged in the wool business in Australia. The warehouse of the
New Zealand Loan and Mercantile Agency Company is a remarkably
handsome structure, and is held by many to be the finest building in
Melbourne. The cost of erecting this warehouse exclusive of the land
(which from its position is very valuable) was £95,000, The Australian
Mortgage and Agency Company have an extensive wool warehouse
close by, capable of storing a large number of bales of wool.
Messrs. Dalgety and Co. have an immense wool warehouse at New-
market, situated on the main outlet from the Spencer Street railway
station. Here the wool is received from the country lines, and
despatched to the port for shipment. Messrs. Dennys, Lascelles,
Austin and Co, of Geelong, do a large wool business, most of the fine
wools of the Western district being sold in their warehouses. The
business of selling wool in Victoria has increased greatly of late years.
In the year 1881-2, there were only 157,794 bales of wool sold in the
colony, and in the season 1892-3 the sales in the Victorian warehouses
amounted to 310,828 bales. Buyers from all parts of the world attend
these sales, and there is every prospect that eventually the great bulk
of the wool produced in this colony and in Riverina will be sold in the
local market. Of last season’s clip, it is estimated that fully 64 per
cent, was sold in Melbourne and Geelong. The reduction in the price
of wool has been severely felt by Australian pastoralists. In 1883,
approximate value of Australian wool was per bale, the total
Aaiue of the annual clip being estimated at £16,073,000. In the year
1892, the value of the wool had fallen to £ll| per bale, but the
production bad increased so greatly, that the value of the clip was
estimated at £20,644,000. The wool industry must ever be of immense
importance to Australia, for large as it is now it is capable of being
greatly developed. An improved system of husbandry will more
than double the stock-carrying capabilities of these colonies, and in
this development Victoria will participate largely.
HORSES.
Among the first live stock imported into Victoria were thorough-
bred horses of the purest strains of English blood. When Melbourne
was an insignificant village of huts, a two days’ race meeting was held
on the piece of swampy land close to where the Spencer Street railway
station now stands. As the population increased, the metropolitan
course was shifted to the present site on the banks of the Saltwater
River at Flemington. The land was swampy and liable to inundation,
but gradually, and by theexpenditure of a large sum of money, it has been
converted into the finest running ground in Australia. The accom-
modation for the public has been carefully studied, and now the
Melbourne racecourse is admitted by our visitors to be equal to any in
Europe, while the way the racing is managed leaves nothing to be
desired. The grand stand will accommodate about 10,000 persons, and
there is an extensive wooden stand in the saddling paddock that
provides standing room for 3,000 spectators. Immediately behind the
grand stand rises a hill, from which many thousands of visitors have
an admirable view of the course, and on one portion of this hill a third
stand has been erected. The members’ carriage paddock, the extensive
lawn for promenading, the handsome flower-beds, grassy saddling
paddock, and large luncheon-rooms under the stand are the admiration
of all visitors to the premier racecourse in Australia, and that title
has, by general consent, been conferred on the Victoria Racing Club
course. The colonists of Victoria early developed a strong liking for
steeplechasing, and the performances of some of our cross-country
riders and horses could hardly be surpassed in any part of the world
During the last dozen years good cross-country horses have been scarcer
than formerly; this is owing to so many young well-bred horses
being purchased for the Indian market. A good steeplechase never fails
to draw a large attendance, and the Grand National Steeplechase is
second in interest only to the great racing event of the year, the
Melbourne Cup.
The race for the Melbourne Cup is held in the spring, during the
first week in November. It attracts a great crowd of visitors from all
parts of Australia. The attendance on the course has been variously
estimated, but it is safe to state that at least 100,000 persons have
witnessed each of the last four or five contests for this event. It is a
remarkable feature at this great gathering that there is no amusement
for the public but the racing, and so orderly is the crowd that such a
thing as a fight is seldom seen, a drunken man is a rarity, and the
police-van often returns empty from the course. There are no beggars
to be seen, every one is well dressed, and has money to spend, and,
strange to relate, welshing is not of frequent occurrence. In the
country every city, town, and little village has its racecourse, on w'hich
races are held, generally about the new year, or any other great holiday.
The larger cities and towns have each a well-appointed course, managed
on the plan adopted at Flemington. The Victorian Amateur Turf
Club have a beautiful course at Caulfield, about eight miles from
Melbourne, where some very important races are held. The arrangements
at this course are as good as at the V.R.C. course at Flemington, to which
it ranksnextin importance. There are several smallracinggroundswithin
easy reach of Melbourne, where meetings are frequently held On
some of these courses pony racing is in fashion. Trotting has never
been popular with Victorians, though we have a trotting club, and
occasionally trotting races are held. Trotting horses of high-class have
been imported from America, and they have been used as sires for
producing harness horses, but with only a moderate success. The prices
of thoroughbred horses have fallen greatly of late, though the prizes
on the turf are much richer and more numerous than ever. In the
early days of the settlement of Victoria the hack was in general use,
there being scarcely any other means of locomotion in the interior.
The saddle horses of that time were most useful animals, and when
well-broken made first-class hacks. Their hardihood and powers of
endurance could not be surpassed by the horses of any other country
in the world. Many of them worked their long lives without ever having
a shoe on their feet. As the country became enclosed, the streams
were crossed by bridges, roads were formed, and vehicles came into use.
At first gigs and dog-carts of English pattern were used, but they
were soon superseded by that most useful and comfortable country
vehicle—the American buggy. These were for a time imported, but
now great numbers of buggies are turned out from Victorian manufac-
tories The small blood horse, though useless for the turf, makes an
admirable buggy horse. The trade with India for supplying cavalry
remounts and artillery horses has been an important one for many
years past, and most of the likely young 1 orses raised in the country are
bought up by Indian horse-dealers. Carriage pairs of a good size and
well matched are very difficult to obtain, and realise a good price when
found British coaching and hackney stallions have been pretty freely
imported during the last dozen years, but they have not effected
the improvement in our harness animals that was anticipated. The
general impression is that there is an uncertainty about their produce.
Horse-breeding (with the exception of the thoroughbred) has not been
as carefully studied in Victoria as breeding the other domestic animals.
A very large proportion of the horses raised in Victoria are bred by
men who have not the least knowledge of the art of stock breeding.
Of late years ponies have come greatly into favour, and they are now-
raised in large numbers. The Victorian pony is usually an animal of
very >• ixed pedigree, the blood of the Timor, Welsh, Shetland, and Exmoor
ponies being mingled with the weedy thoroughbred and Arab. A few
studs of Shetland and Exmoor ponies are kept up, but the majority of
our ponies are mongrels, often good looking and almost invariably
useful and hardy.
In the breeding of heavy draught horses, Victorian stock-owners
have been very successful. In the early days of Victoria the other
colonies were searched for good specimens of draught breeding mares,
and afterwards importations of sires were made every year from the
old country. Owing to so many of the colonists being from the north
of the Tweed, the Clydesdale breed of draught horte was the most
fancied. Suffolk punches and Lincolnshire horses were imported, but
they never came into general favour, and now the draught horse of
Victoria is the highest type of Clydesdale. In fertile districts, where
there is a good rainfall, such as Kyneton, Warrnambool, and Gippaland,
Clydesdales are bred that rival the best importations from the old
country. Climate and food have effected some change in the appearance
of the Clydesdale horse, but have not injured his powers and constitu-
tion. or spoilt his appearance. The muscular system of the Victorian-
bred Clydesdale is not so well developed as that of the imported horse,
but his frame is as large and his bone as good, and many stock owners
believe the colonial horse has greater energy and quickness than the
imported horse. The hair is scarcely so abundant, but it is more silky.
For all practical purposes the Victorian-bred Clydesdale is in every
respect the equal of the parent type. Every year, just before spring,
a large parade of draught horses is held in Melbourne, at which horses
are exhibited, so that breeders can make their arrangements for the
season, or select a sire to purchase at the sale which commences the
next day. At these sales the stallions, both imported and Victorian-
bred, are sold by auction, and for the more fancied animals prices as
high as £4OO and £5OO are sometimes paid. An excellent young stallion,
fit for farm purposes, can be purchased on these occasions at from £lOO
to £l5O. Large numbers of draught mares are sold at this annual horse
fair, the prices ranging from £2O to £BO, according to quality.
CATTLE.
When Victoria was fir-t occupied by Europeans, labour was scarce*
and cattle breeding, as requiring fewer hands than sheep farming, was
preferred by the majority of the pioneers. The population was small,
production very soon overtook consumption, and the natural result, low
prices, soon followed. Prime steers of four and five years old were
frequently sold in Melbourne for £2 and £3 per head, and even this
price would not have been obtained but for the practice of boiling
down cattle for their tallow, by which means the surplus fat stock was
got rid of. Many thousands of prime cattle were at this time annually
sent to the boiling down establishments, and their tallow shipped ta


)
..
——* * * »
* * 1 t
_*—» * ** — * — *-
' f ' Tsfl
SiH
>
•*
ftfj
k-
cT
W
|W
“ if-
:J®
fjfl
V }
*
4
JpHpWj
V?
yjjLJ
f f
» •:
-
V'
o
=jf
jj
JBciji
Ifm
9
■»
Witrr*
iy
Jjl
i
- 'MhdS /
fm
K#
*
Ctr'
®f /
jJLm
■ it/ A_V
4
-*
jpfjjj
f/
M
1 J
4
4
j
.J4K9
o
W
S Z
l&f
[yfaSfP.
4
V
0-
1
o
a:
fm
4
a
-
* JJ
U-
r
JliiPB
j /r >1
•
II
u/
X
or
V J
1;'/
AM
4
>
>
r
*-
5
JKHI
’
1^1
[I
. )
J
1
r*^S
£
Li
yL JrL
5=5
||
7
'Mi
R
m
jg-jfg
S i ~—"
n$ ;
]
—
fit
pi j ri
'
4
W
1 y|
1
ji|
4
*
r
f lg
!fe
sj
/
i
°
■
§
|r
j i
x 2.1
| 1^?
ar ?--
•gl|
.
c
J
3
ft
if |<
» »: o
1 <
(JLJ
j
?j
4
>
*
>
/Sti
/-fiyfcg
N
wf - r
1
| »-
K v> v
if|
Vr
f u3
M* •
t
1
J
Jft
H
|
<c
o
* 1!
1 - —^>L
yggi
mtu
s§
Li*
;
:aWil
■. *
r
IS *
n • -
C-
*
Mjt| x
u
\ \~
4
4
p|l|i
\|
1
'H ** !
J
ypi
mV
#
L,.*i
itt
a:
j
B ■
. w
sWi
V\ v
C >S»
*
4
•* ■
%>
->
h-
\jJ
tr:
1 '
A\
■ tr-
V
V
. \
4
4
4
1
'
<
jM I S
«:
2_
i
irV ;
i x |i\
i
4
•
-
o
4
u-r
: iSL
A
rv/
4
■*
<
MTl
0
USjy|
u
>
4anp
f\
nh
.
j
SIi«l|
J
!
fll
La
\ \
#
-
rT«ll
<c
V i
j
f 1 f* I
; r^
-»
Mi
X * ! ' > »
r r-irm.w.g


England. The return derived from cattle farming was not very encour-
aging, but, notwithstanding the gloomy prospects of the industry, there
were many enterprising men in the country wbo every now and then
imported shipments of bulls and cows from the best herds in the old
country, and several studs of pure shorthorns and Herefords were
kept up. The influx of population that followed on the discovery
of the Victorian gold-fields, and the substitution of sheep for
cattle over a large portion of the country, tended to improve the
price of cattle, and encouraged the holders of cattle runs to make further
efforts to improve the character of their stock. The cattle originally
bred in the colony consisted mainly of shorthorns and Herefords. The
taste of the Victorian cattle-breeders was always for the shorthorn, and
gradually the herds of Herefords were reduced. Stud herds of shorthorns
were formed, and animals of the highest lineage were imported from Eng-
land. These high-class animals have thriven so well in their southern
home that many "V ictorian colonists have declared, after a visit to the old
country, that the shorthorns bred in Victoria are quite as good as any
reared in Great Britain.
The mania for stock of high pedigree set in with unexampled
severity in Victoria, and for a few years prices ruled exceptionally high.
On one occasion as much as 2,000 guineas was given for a heifer, and
an imported bull of pure “duchess” blood realised 4,000 guineas in
Melbourne. For some years past the prices of even the best bred short-
horns bulls have fallen so low that it has scarcely paid to breed bull* for
the market. Now and again a sale is made of £3OO or £4OO for a
very high-class bull, but sueh sales are extremely rare. Many of the
old studs have been broken up, and in the large herds breeding bulls
for sale has been greatly reduced. The Victorian shorthorn herds have
long been regarded as the finest in Australia, and they still maintain
the first place in the estimation of cattle breeders throughout our
island-continent. Should the exportation of fresh beef to England
from the northern colonies become an accomplished fact, the business
of breeding stud bulls will revive. Herefords of pure breeding were
raised in Victoria from the first, but they have not taken so the
shorthorns, and at present there are very few stud herds in the colony.
Devons have been introduced of late, but there are only a very few
in Victoria, The polled angus cattle are coming into great favour, and
there are several studs in the colony j the originals of which were
drawn from the best herds in Britain. They thrive well in this climate,
and are hardier than the shorthorn. The increase of cattle in the
early days of Victoria was remarkably rapid. In the year 1836 the
number of cattle in the infant colony was only 155 head. In ten years
the number had increased to 290,000, of which a large proportion had
been driven overland from the parent colony of New South Wales.
In the next decade the number of cattle in Victoria had increased to
646.000. For a long time after this the number remained stationary,
but in 1876 they had increased to 1,128,000 head, and the return!
made up to the end of 1883, gave the number of cattle in Victoria at
1.297.000. In 1891-2 the number of cattle had increased to 1,812,104,
cf which 405,973 were of what are known as the milking breeds.
Hitherto the cattle reared in Victoria, have received no food but
the natural pastures of the country, save in a few favoured localities
where they are fed in fields laid down with lucerne and European
grasses. Owing to the scarcity of labour and the low price of beef, it
has not been found profitable to stall-feed cattle in Victoria, nor has the
system of giving them in the fields what is called artificial food, such
as hay, corn, or roots, been practised. The natural grasses of the
country are very nutritious, and in good seasons very little difficulty is
experienced in fattening off the year’s supply of steers. Store cattle
vary in price, according to the season and quality of the stock. Three-
year-old store steers sold at from £3 to £4 per head will realise from
£6 to £8 per head when fat.
The milking breeds of cattle are well represented in Victoria.
Our Jersey herds are descended from the highest class animals that
money could purchase in the old country. Experts say that for pedigree
and beauty the Jerseys at the Melbourne “Royal” is scarcely
inferior to those seen at the best shows in England. These beautiful
cattle have lost none of their milking qualities since they have been
raised in Victoria. They are still a long way before all others as butter
cows. At the annual sale which takes place at the « Royal ” show
Victorian-bred Jerseys are purchased for all the neighbouring colonies
Ayrshires are also in high favour with Victorian dairymen. There an
several studs of this breed of cattle in Victoria, some of which an
derived from the most fashionable herds in Britain. Many of our
Ayrshire herds are of long standing, some having been established
nearly half a century ago. Shorthorns are liked by many for the
dairy, the milking families being very profitable at the pail and the
steers sell well to graziers. There are only a few Holsteins in the colony
but they have proved so profitable that they are likely to come into
general favour.
PIGS.
One of the most profitable branches of live stock husbandry over n
large portion of Victoria is undoubtedly pig-breeding Pigs thrive
everywhere and increase rapidly, they are not subject to any seriom
diseases, their food is readily grown, a fair crop being almost a certainty,
and yet in most of the agricultural districts of the country the business
of pig-breeding is strangely neglected. In a few localities pig-breedincr
is extensively carried on and the farmers realise excellent profits in the
business, but the mode of feeding leaves much to be desired. In most
farming districts pigs are kept in excellent condition on grass, for nine
months out of the year, and it is probably owing to this circumstance
that good feeding is so seldom practised, and that colonial bacon is
generally so indifferent in quality. Victoria is capable, under proper
management, of not only supplying itself with the finest bacon, but of
exporting large quantities. Throughout the southern half of the
country, pig-raising and bacon-curing can be carried on under exception-
ally favourable circumstances. Of late this business has attracted some
attention among farmers, and the results obtained by a few skilful pig-
farmers have led to the subject receiving more notice than it has done
hitherto. The low price of cereals will likely lead to an extension of
pig-farming in Victoria. At various times all the best English breeds
of pigs have been introduced into Victoria. Of these the Berkshire
is the most in favour, and so much are they fancied that one seldom
sees a specimen of any other breed. During the last ten or a dozen
years studs of Bej-kshires have been formed, and though a breeder in
South Australia for a year or two carried all before him, Victorian
breeders have again taken their old place in the front rank. Poland
Chinas have been imported, but they did not take, and the same may be
said of the white breeds, though the Yorkshires seem to be again
attracting attention. The Tam worths have lately been introduced into
Victoria, and they are probably destined to become the bacon pig of the
country. The business of bacon-curing has always been a large one
in Victoria, but quality has not been sufficiently attended'to. Pigs can
be raised and fattened more cheaply in the cooler and moister districts
of Victoria than in any other part of the world. The bacon export
trade will yet become of great importance to the colony. Bacon hogs
can be produced in any quantity, and at a price that will pay the farmer
well. What is wanted is that skilled experts should deal with properly
fattened hogs, and the result will be that Victorian bacon will be
ranked among the best in the world. The number of pigs in
Victoria is steadily increasing, and with the great development that is
taking place in the dairy industry, the increase for the next few years
should be very great. The number of pigs in Victoria in 1892
was 286,680.
THE NEWLY ESTABLISHED MEAT EXPORT AND ITS
PROMISING OUTLOOK.
The Export of Frozen Meat.
The export of frozen meat from the port of Melbourne was
attempted many years ago, and continued in an intermittent manner,
and with indifferent success until last year, when Messrs. Turnbull!
Hotson and Go. entered into the business, and so well have they suc-
ceeded in their first season that there is every prospect the industry
will become firmly establised, and profitable both to the shipping firm
and to the flock-owners. In their first season they despatched from
their freezing works at Newport about 90,000 carcases of mutton, the
greater portion of which were from Riverina flocks. Messrs. Turnbull,
Hotson and Co. have met with the same difficulties as were experienced
by those who established this important industry in New Zealand,
They found a difficulty in arranging for the shipments, to follow in
succession, the flock-masters not caring to guarantee a certain number
of fat sheep at a certain time. This is the great trouble in the business,
for unless the live stock are guaranteed Messrs. Turnbull, Hotson and
Co. cannot make arrangements for the ships to come on in rotation.
Another trouble is the condition of the sheep. Owners are inclined
to be careless in this matter, which is one of vital importance to the
future success of the enterprise. That these troubles will be overcome
in \ ictoria, as they have been overcome in New Zealand, no one can
doubt; and with a better system of live stock husbandry the output of
fat sheep and cattle from Victoria and Riverina will become so much
increased as to render this industry one of great value. " v Hitherto,
nearly the whole of the sheep in Victoria and Riverina have been fed
on the natural pastures of the country, no measures are taken to ensure
a supply of fodder to tide over a bad season, or to top up a flock of
fat sheep. There are many valuable fodder plants that can be grown
in both Victoria and Riverina for fattening sheep, and when the land
is put to its proper use in this respect the output of fat sheep will be
more than doubled. It was growing fodder for their sheep that led to
the great success that has been achieved by New Zealand sheep-farmers
in this profitable industry. Messrs. Turnbull, Hotson and Co. have
profited by their first season’s experience in the shipment of frozen
mutton. They have reduced the charges to the lowest known in these
colonies, the total cost being 2d 2d. per lb. They have made arrange-
ments with Messrs. Nelson Bros, for the handling and management of
the sheep in England, so as to ensure their disposal at the highest
rates ruling in the market. For a time all or nearly all the mutton
exported will come from Riverina, but in a few years we may expect to see
a more skilful system of live stock husbandry followed in Victoria, which
will result in a large surplus of fat sheep for exportation. The prospect
for next season’s output of fat sheep in Riverina is a very satisfactory one.
The abundant rains which have fallen will ensure a luxuriant growth of
grass, and as the stock have been greatly reduced during the last year,
all the sheep in the country will be fat. Over-stocking the native
pastures has been the common practice for years past in Riverina
and the consequence has been that a bad season brought grave disaster.
During last year several “boiling down” establishments were started




in the province, at which all the old ewes and cripples were turned
into money. The culling the flocks have received by this means has
had a highly beneficial effect. There is no pasture in the world that
will fatten sheep better or quicker than that of Riverina, and as the
sheep left have ample room, fat sheep next year will be the rule.
Lucerne-growing for topping up fat sheep is coming into practice, and
By E. JEROME DYER
(JULY, 1893.)
We want more products and an increase of exports” has been the
oft-repeated cry, and is still, notwithstanding the astounding progress
of the last three years, the far-echoed demand of our “ ironclad ”
Premier, the Hon. J. B. Patterson, It would be difficult to improve
on that terse and true definition of our great present and permanent
wants. We require to take what good gifts our portion of the world’s
crust will yield to us, to prepare them for consumption, and distribute
them amongst the consumers of the world.
It was natural that we should go first to those most easily
garnered and won, and ready in their native condition for consumption
and export, and thus pioneers gave their energies to the great grass
harvest and the ready gold. Wool and gold were their staples. The
pioneering generation has passed away, forests have been removed,
roads made, lands developed, and the extraordinary fertility of the
Victorian soil has been laid bare. Foreign countries cry out for food,
our soil cries out for cultivation.
On the near horizon of our future now, conspicuous above all
others, are two hand-breadth but rapidly distending clouds—the one,
and the larger so far, is the dairying, and the other the fruit-growing
(including the viticultural) industry. Their destiny is to fill the colony
with fatness and wealth, the realisation of which is now assuming a
shape of dignified and magnificent proportion.
Dairying was first realised as an industry of the first magnitude
and promise about the time of the Melbourne Centennial Exhibition
in 1888-89. The demands of the mother country, and the importance
and value of the industry in Europe and America, together with the
suitableness of Victoria's climate and soil for the purpose, awakened
the country to a knowledge of its resources in this direction.
Timorously as the start was made, the small export of 400 tons of
butter to England in 1889-90, in the year following the Exhibition,
proved that Victoria had practically an illimitable prospect in this
industry. It should, however, be remarked, before proceeding further
with the marvellous growth of Victoria’s butter industry, that at least
three names should always be mentioned in connection with the growth
and development of our dairying industry. They are those of Mr.
David Wilson, our present dairy expert, under whose inspiring genius
and active supervision the industry leaped from the chrysalis state into
life ; the Hon. J. L. Dow, the far-seeing Minister of Agriculture, who
will ever be recognised as the father of the butter export; and the ever-
wakeful guide, philosopher, and friend of the Victorian farmers, Mr.
D. E. Martin, the permanent head of the Agricultural Department.
Previous to the Exhibition, the production of butter in the colony
during the spring was far in excess of its requirements, and 70 per cent,
of the quality being bad, was sold at ruinous rates for making grease
a,nd soap. The impetus which the industry received in 1889, was mainly
owing to the excellent working dairy exhibit at the Centennial Ex-
hibition, the Government Travelling Dairy which visited the dairy-
ing districts of Victoria to illustrate proper methods, and the exertions
and practical lectures of its indefatigable manager, Mr. David Wilson.
Of course, the Agricultural Department and Mr. Martin were behind
all this, but it was on the publication of the report of the Vegetable
Products Commission of Enquiry, which the Government sent to in-
spect the working of the factory system in other colonies, and on the
institution of bonuses on butter exported, and for factories and
orearneries built, for which the farmers have to thank the Hon. J. L.
Dow, who wa« then Minister of Agriculture, that the butter production
began to boom. Co-operative and private factories and creameries
sprang up in almost every dairying district in the colony, ensilage and
proper fodder were grown, farmers gave their attention to special
breeds of cattle, and the sanitary condition of their dairies, and generally
the industry was conducted on more scientific lines than hitherto.
The grand effect of the Government’s wise and generous interest in the
industry is seen in the following magnificent progress of the butter
export to London :
1889- there were 400 tons exported, which realised 9£d. per lb.
1890- „ „ 1000 „ „ „ „ 10£d. „
1891- „ „ 2140 ~ „ ~ „ Is.
1892- ~ ~ 3611 ~ ~ (approximately) Is. ~
THE YICTOBIAN DAIRYING INDUSTRY: ITS PROSPECTS AND THE
EXPORT TRADE.
gradually other fodder plants will be grown. The prospect of estab-
lishing the frozen meat export trade in Melbourne never looked better
than at present. Messrs. Turnbull, Hotson and Co. have made a good
beginning, and if they receive that support at the hands of the pas-
toralists their enterprise and energy so well deserve, the future success
of the industry is assured.
An export which, in little over three years, expands from a value
of <£35,000 to £400,000, and with a well-founded prospect of increasing
at the same ratio for years to come, predicts a future for Victoria
which is well worthy the envy of the Old World.
While Victoria possesses all the advantages of soil and climate
exactly suitable for dairying, it is not to this that it owes the rapid
success of its export trade. Mr. Martin was naturally the moving
spirit in the laudable enterprise, but he had the advantage of sensible
and practical officers and wise Ministers. Bonuses for the export of
first-class butter were given for the first three years, cool storage
stations were erected at the railway sidings in dairying districts, re-
frigerated vans were placed upon the railways, inspectors were sent
round to inspect dairies and dairy stock, to see that proper cleanliness
was observed and that the herds were sound and free from disease. A
central refrigerating station at Newport, between Melbourne and the
shipping piers at Williamstown, was provided, in which exporters were
obliged to store butter until it was in a fit state of refrigeration to ship,
and inspectors were also appointed to examine each consignment as to
its fitness for export, condemning that which was below a certain
standard, and thus assuring as nearly as possible a uniform first-class
quality for export.
It will be seen by this that the Victorian Government did not
undertake the control and development of the butter industry in a half-
hearted manner, but entered into the great work with a spirit and
farsightedness which cannot be too highly commended, and it is to be
hoped, will not be forgotten. The strict superintendence of the grading,
collecting, ending, and shipping of the butter at the Newport Refri-
gerating Works, by the Government experts, which, during the last
season—lB92-93—only resulted in the rejection of 100 cases, has
succeeded in gaining for Victorian butter the well-merited reputation
of being amongst the finest quality and most reliable of any imported
into Great Britain.
One of the most commendable features of the Victorian dairy-
ing industry is the vigilance shown by the Government in keeping the
herds entirely free from those diseases common to dairy cattle. Years
before the butter export was attempted, the Victorian Government
empowered municipalities to authorise the destruction of cows afflicted
by pi euro-pneumonia , tuberculosis , or other diseases, but now that the
output is doubling itself each year, and the butter is being received
with such high favour in London, the most careful supervision is being
exercised. In view of the necessity for expert knowledge on the part
of the officers engaged, the difficulties which the municipalities had to
contend with, and the general anxiety of our producers to gain the
entire confidence of British consumers, the Government has taken the
matter into its own hands and appointed competent inspectors to con-
tinually visit dairying districts and destroy all cows showing symptoms of
disease. Many years ago, when the Government first authorised this
rigid inspection of dairy herds, Victoria and France enjoyed the com-
mendable positions of being the only countries in the world enforcing
such regulations. This control has been exercised for so long, and with
increasing surveillance, that now no dairying country exists with
healthier or more carefully attended dairy stock than those of Victoria.
A change that might well be termed marvellous has taken place in
this industry during the last four years In 1888-89 there was not one
successful factory of the half-a-dozen in Victoria. In summer hundreds
of casks of butter were sold at from Id. to 3d. per. lb. About 500
farmers were producing 1,000 tons of butter, five of which were ex-
ported and returned about £750. This year (1893) there are upwards
of 450 butter factories and creameries employing 1,200 hands; bringing
a ready-money market to something like 1 2,000 farmers for their milk,
and producing not less than 5,000 tons of butter, 3,600 of which were
exported last season to England, bringing to Victorian farmers over
£400,000 in hard cash. At this rate of progress, in less than five years
the butter export of Victoria will exceed 15,000 tons, which will realise
£2,000,000. The manufacture of cheese—a necessary and most re-
munerative adjunct to the dairy factory—and the keeping of pigs,
with the exportation of the products therefrom, should add another




.£1,000,000 to the above sum, making the value of the dairy product
export in 1898, approximately, £3,000,000. This calculation is based
upon the possibilities of our present population with an increase of cows
and pasturage. Were people of other countries seized of the splendid
advantages which Victoria offers to small farmers, and our many
millions of acres of unoccupied land peopled by well-meaning, persever-
ing settlers, our fertile soil would not be slow in yielding up its riches,
and our dairy produce export might reach a value of double the above
estimate.
Though the markets of India, South Africa, the west coast of
North America, and the east and west coasts of South America are
open to Victorian products, it is to Europe and England especially that
Victoria looks to take the bulk of its dairy produce for years to come.
In order to show the magnitude of the market which England offers for
butter, cheese, etc., the following imports for 1891 and 1892 need only
be quoted.
Imported into England.
Butter
Margarine
Cheese
11,591,181
3,558,203
4,815,369
900,170
11,965,284
3,712,884
5,417,777
930,288
Condensed Milk
Each year English demand becomes greater, and the imports from
Sweden and Denmark (England’s chief sources of butter supply)
become less. England s summer, climatically speaking, as is well
known, is our winter, and therefore our surplus season is England’s
season of scarcity. Victorian butter has improved in quality and price
each year that it has been exported, and it will continue so until the
top of the market and perfection has been reached. According to
advices this is now very near realisation, and during the last two
seasons shipments have returned prices which, were they 10s. per cwt.
less, would have well paid exporters. Thus it will be seen that
success in this industry is assured, and a future of glowing prosperity
is undoubtedly the fortune of those who conduct dairying in Victoria
with that attention and judgment so indispensible to industrial pur-
suits. 1
Any article upon the Victorian dairying industry would be in-
complete without mention being made of the largest' dairy factory
company in the world—the Eresh Food and Frozen Storage Company
Limited. The central premises in Bourke street, Melbourne, consist
of large i efrigerating rooms, cream storage and cooling rooms,
refrigerated dairy (where the cream sent in from the creameries is
manufactured into butter for local sale or export), butter storage
rooms, a handsome auction room where dairy and farm produce are sold
by auction on certain days in the week, and the necessary offices for
the large staff of clerks which this immense business requires. There
are 63 creameries belonging to this company throughout the dairying
districts of the colony, and the average number of hands employed is
200. The daily output of butter in summer is 10 tons, though at rate
of present progress the output may be 20 next summer. As the
company is co-operative in a certain sense-—having 2,000 farmers
amongst its shareholders—the profits during the four years of its
existence have not been very large, though last year a 20 per cent,
dividend was paid, and for the past six months a dividend of 5 per
cent.—not bad for a farmers’ co-operative company ! Last year this
company exported upwards of 600 tons of first-class butter of its own
manufacture, and expects every year to export half as much again as
in the preceding year. This great dairy is superintended by Mr. James
Wilson, the son of the popular Government dairy expert, Mr. David
Wilson, who is now in London in the interests of the Victorian
dairying industry. An inspector is engaged by this company for the
sole purpose of visiting the creameries and the dairy herds of suppliers
to see that the milk is up to standard, that cleanliness is observed, and
that the cows are entirely free from the slightest symptoms of disease.
The first shareholder, the chairman of directors since initiation, and
the present managing director, is the Hon. W. T. Webb, M.L.A.’, the
present Minister of Agriculture, who is ably supported by Mr. D.
Taylor, the company’s popular secretary. The founder of this great
enterprise E. Jerome Dyer, the writer, —during a journalistic tour
through the colonies and New Zealand for Victorian newspapers,
collected information which enabled him on his return to publish a
prospectus of a co-operative dairying company, with affiliated
creameries. This was the first company in Australia to adopt the
creamery system. Fourteen months were spent in holding meetings
and addressing farmers in country districts, with the result that on
23rd May, 1889, business was commenced.
The largest general dairy produce firm in Victoria is that of
Chus. Gray and Co. This firm has commodious premises in William
Street, Melbourne, and acts as agents, both in London and Melbourne,
for a great many factories in Victoria and other colonies. Their
annual turnover in dairy and farm produce is enormous, and their
export last year on behalf of factory companies and farmers was
indicative of this firm’s popularity.
Probably the best known Victorian firm connected with this
industry is that of J. Bartram and Son, of Queen Street, Melbourne.
This firm also does an immense export trade, but is better known as
the agents for the De Laval cream separators and other modern
dairying appliances.
A public company springing rapidly into prominence is the
Victoria Creamery and Butter Company, of Little Collins Street,
Melbourne. This company has 33 creameries, manufactures two tons
of butter per day in the busy season, employs 58 hands, and last
season shipped upwards of 200 tons of butter through their agents
Messrs. Chas. Gray and Co.
The Chilled Butter Company of Melbourne is also worthy of
mention as a large butter manufacturing and exporting company. Then
there are the factory companies of Geelong, Warrnambool, Rosebrook,
Euroa, Garvoc, and other inland districts, many of which have already
secured high reputation for their excellent butter in the London
market.
A firm which promises to be very much in evidence next and in
future seasons is that of Messrs. Turnbull, Hotson and Co., the great
meat exporters of Collins Street, Melbourne. Reference to this
company’s meat exportation is made towards the end of the article
upon “Live Stock Husbandry,” and views of their head offices and freez-
ing woiks are also given on another page in this book. Last season this
company exported a considerable quantity of butter to their London
agents, Messrs. R. T. Turnbull and Co., on behalf of Victorian factories,
and realised top prices. This firm does not purchase, but merely acts as
agents, and in this capacity appears to be very much favoured by
producers. Mention has been made in this article of the extensive
Government Refrigerating Works, at Newport. Some months ago,
Messrs. Turnbull, Hotson and Co. secured these works, contracting to
freeze or chill butter at a certain price. The possession of these works
should enable them to deal with the export trade in a most perfect,
convenient, and economical manner. It is beyond all doubt that the
immediate future of the dairy produce export trade is one of expansion,
which will also bring with it increased shipping space, and a consequent
reduction of exporting charges. It is also beyond doubt that with the
cream separators, milking machines, refrigerators, and other modern
appliances now being adopted in Victoria, combined with the factory
system, the output of a uniform first-class quality of butter will rapidly
increase; and with the careful supervision by Government experts of
the dairy herds, the factories and dairies, arid the butter preparatory
to export, foreign consumers will have the most thorough confidence
in the fragrant and unadulterated product of choice breeds of dairy
cattle grazed on the sweet natural and carefully selected grasses of the
fertile soil, and bred in the pure atmosphere and congenial climate of
this fruitful colony, which the people of neighbouring colonies refer to
as “ the cabbage garden of Australia,” but which foreign visitors more
aptly term “the garden of the south.”
WBROONA VINEYARD, BENDIGO.
and*^rchan^of°Austitdian^ines! 8 * S * °* ViMyard ’ **■ OWMt ' * Company, •* Melbourne, wine
wines'^both’whtfcp^’ tu middle district of Victoria, in common with others so located, is famous for production of light, delicate dry
f•’ . r P redo “ lnat ‘"«. on account of the soil suiting the growth of the red grape rather than tto white The
™es if to ha, d y Trreso t° a 'JT* F Two creeks ° r watercourses bound"* on Either side ; thus a never-failing supply for Nation
a-* h a powerful pumping plant, capable of supplying the Zse with
•ii f \ f i , , . e , Wlnes grown, after maturing for twelve months, are sent down to the Melbourne cellars (see
ensures nothtef ***** ° f a ' on6 bei "« *° 60 ’ 000 "hteh
spared no pains to Zke the nro tte of th t Wn universally successful at the world’s exhibitions, and Messrs. Brachd and Company have
/£• I!J! W n T- th6 s P “?■ u ■ that dlstrict of Victoria known to all, as shipments are sent periodically to England, Germanv India
Chma, and other countr.es, from wh.ch increased business is the result to Messrs. Brache and Company and the Bendigo vineykrds. ’


The Australian Naval Squadron consists of Jive cruisers and the torpedo boats, manned and equipped at the joint expense of the
Imperial and Colonial funds. The vessels are placed in every respect on the same status as Her Majesty s ships oj war, and are under
the sole control and orders for the time being of the Naval Commander-in-Chief upon the Australian Station The “ Katoomba, depicted
above, was constructed at Elswick, by the firm of Sir W. G. Armstrong, Mitchell, and Co. The “ Mildura, “Wallaroo, “ Tauranga,
and “ Ringarooma ” are sister ships, and present a very smart appearance, being designed to steam 20 knots. They are of 2,765 tons dis-
placement, and carry 4-7 inch quick firing guns each, besides smaller quick fivers, and if their services he ever required in action in
defensive waif are, should give a good account oj themselves.


Railways
... £36,444,605
Country VVater Works
5,005,216
Yan Yean
2,319,939
Defences
100,000
Graving Dock
350,464
Public Offices
166,195
Law Courts ...
354,259
Parliament Houses
246,452
Schools
1,105,556
Yarra Bridge...
108.042
FINANCIAL OUTLOOK.
(JULY, 1893.)
By G. D. MEUDELL *
Public credit financiering is practically of modern origin. Public
borrowing as a financial policy is the direct result of the political
thought of the present day. The two ideas uppermost in political
thought are Nationality and Socialism. Perhaps the most powerful
idea is that of Nationality, which has led European peoples, without
exception, to burden themselves with numerous public debts to protect
their countries from foreign aggression.
The same national spirit inspires all the nations to make greater
and greater sacrifice? for the preservation of their national existence.
Militarism is the direct result of this intense nationality. Militarism
has cost the European nations fully half of their debts. The public
debts of the great nations trebled between 1848 and 1882.
The second reason for the accumulation of public debts is the
modern tendency towards State Socialism, or the extension of state
functions beyond the protection of persons and property from fraud and
violence. So soon as the state begins to undertake those lines of
actixity, which should be left to individual enterprise, it embarks on the
expenditure of capital. Of course the revenue machinery of a state is
insufficient to supply money to carry on public works, and it has become
the custom of nations whose people are imbued with socialistic principles
to borrow money either from their citizens or from foreigners for the
establishment and maintenance of public works. When considering the
character of a public debt the inquirer should be careful to distinguish
between public debts which rest upon taxes and public debts based
Jipon public works. By bearing this fact in mind the unprejudiced
mind perceives an important difference between a national debt col-
lected and spent in war and one represented by reproductive property.
The Victorian public debt amounts approximately to 44 millions
sterling. Of this amount £35,000,000 has been spent on railways,
four millions on water supply and irrigation, and the balance on docks
and harbours and other works of a permanent character. From these
figures the amount borrowed for the Melbourne Water Works system
Ims been deducted, as the Metropolitan Board of Works is now respon
siole for its repayment. 95 per cent, of Victoria’s borrowings has been
devoted to railways, water works, and other revenue-producing works
gi\ing an income. Only 5 per cent, is not revenue producing, and
much of this has been spent in pioneering works, such as public roads,
bridges, buildings, schools, and defence works, most of which are non
recurring. About 98 per cent, of Victoria's public debt was absolutely
necessary to open up the country and render it available for habitation
and production : the balance of 2 per cent, may have been spent on
works of luxury, which however have their value from their civilising
influence. Comparisons of national debts per head of population are
invariably misleading, as also are most statistics relating to the increase
of public indebtedness. The burden of any debt can only be ascer-
tained by reckoning the power of the debtor to pay bis interest and
repay the principal at maturity. Before considering the solvency or
otherwise of a debtor, business men ask for his balance sheet, and
perhaps the readiest way of showing Victoria’s solvency is to produce
her balance sheet for investigation.
_ ASSETS.
Railways £38,382,340
Water Works ... ... ... 4 505 21"
Crown Lands available for settlements, not alienated, £1
each per acre ... ... ... ... ... 29,948,054
£72,835,617
LIABILITIES,
Loans
Deficit on 30th June, 1893
Balance of Assets
£44,412,371
2,000,000
20,423,246
£72,835,617
Let us examine this sheet line by line, first taking the railways.
Nearly half Victorias total annual expenduure is disbursed in runnin"
the railways, waAer works, and post and telegraphs. From various
reasons, the chief being extravagance in working expenses and
the opening of new lines to spirsely inhabited districts, the
railways do not now cover the interest paid on railway loans. The
figures at 30th June, 1892, were as follows :
Railways, nett earnings ... ... ... >-t £956 983
Interest paid on railway loans ... ... ... .. 1 337 029
Apparent 1055... .. ... ... ... ... £430 046
By a vigorous policy of retrenchment throughout the railway
services, by a cessation of mismanagement, and from the sincere efforts
being made to work the railways on commercial principles, it is
probable they will next year earn enough to pay the interest of their
construction j when they do this the 38 millions they have cost is a
first-class asset. “Water works” in the balance sheet includes the
water works of corporations and municipal bodies, Water Works
Trusts, and Irrigation Trusts, who are responsible by law to the
Government for the payment of the annual interest which in most
cases is a charge upon the pioperty of the trust, commission, or
corporation. The total revenue from water supply is £281,081 a year.
Concerning the last item of the balance sheet, it includes the whole of
the public estate of Victoria unalienated, such as timber reserves, state
forests, educational endowment reserves, mallee country, land in
occupation under pastoral, grazing, and swamp leases; and all other
land available for immediate settlement. The amount realised from
Crown lands finally alienated last year was 275. an acre, so that 20s.
an acre is not a high assessment.
LOANS.
Of the total public debt£3,419,900 worth falls due on Ist January,
1894, and with the exception of £750,000 of treasury 7 bonds due in
equal instalments in 1896, 1897, and 1898, no loan of importance
matures until 1899, when £1,500,000 has to be retired. Various
methods have been suggested for providing for the £3,500,000 due at
the end of 1893, the most reasonable of which appears to be the
proposal to renew the loan for a short period at the same rate of
interest the bulk of it now carries, namely, five per cent. Possibly the
London money market will be favourable to a conversion at a lower
rate. Excepting little Western Australia the public debt is lighter
in proportion to population and revenue than that of any other
Australian colony. The amount of indebtedness per head of population
was £3B 16s. on the 31st December, 1891, and the total debt was
equal to 5‘3 years’ revenue. The figures for the United Kingdom, if
the national debt and the paid up capital of the railway companies,
which are there private concerns, be added together, are £44 16s. per
head of population, and 7'66 is the multiple of revenue. The com-
parison is made because it is constantly stated by hostile critics that
Victoria’s debt burden is excessive, judged by old world standards.
The figures show our national debt is not more than we can carry.
After all, the test of the weight of a debt is the power of the debtor
to pay his annual interest, and not the sum total of his obligations. I
have made the comparisons because it is the generally accepted method
of estimating the pressure our debt imposes on the State. It is by no
means the most correct mode of measuring the burden. The con-
siderations surrounding the problem of determining whether a nation’s
debt is excessive are too complex to be treated lightly or unscientifically.
Neither the nominal nor the actual capital of the debt is any guide to
its actual weight, nor is the interest charged. What the inquirer
requires to do is to try and discover the sacrifices undergone by the
people of the country to meet the service of their public debt. The
least empirical method is to observe the relation of debt to annual
income, or if it be possible, its relation to the collective wealth of
society. How can we assess with any degree of accuracy the annual
income of the people of Victoria, or arrive at the total of the national
wealth 1 To ascertain the total amount of national wealth, some
statists capitalise income, others use the amount left by deceased
persons as a basis for reckoning the value of the property of the living.
Both these methods for finding out the amount of the national wealth
are unsatisfactory, because much of the earning power of the people,
such as wages, industrial and professional earnings, cannot well be
ascertained or capitalised. Perhaps the nearest approach to a safe
measure of the weight of a debt is to calculate the proportion of the
total State expenditure set apart for the payment of interest on the
debt.
In order to better understand this important question of what is
Victoria’s real debt burden, let us examine how the debt has been
spent Is it well represented by saleable assets 1 ? The annual interest
pressure may be discussed bye-and-bye. Let us now examine what
would be the cost of redemption. The following table shows how well
we have spent our borrowed money :
Harbours .. ... ... ... 275,554
Country Tramways ... ... ... 200,000
Ninety-five per cent, of Victoria’s borrowings has been spent upon
railways, water works, and other revenue producing public works, from
which the State derives a considerable income. Only five per cent, of
(th^SoS"i»tvenVApJv,-io S "i»tv e nVApJv,-in t MnfQ ,l^l V' , f l ' fclie Melbourne Stock Exchange, and is recognised as a financier of the first degree. He is a Fellow of the Statistical Society of London, and also
Fellow of the Society of Accountants and Aud.tors of England. He has been associated with hanking and finance in Victoria since his boyhood.-[ED. V. and R.]


the debt is not directly reproductive, and most of that has been squan-
dered on public buildings rather extravagantly for present requirements.
Non-economh al expenditure like this should be met out of the annual
revenue. Most nations have not a single reproductive asset to show
for their vast debts. War and standing armies are usually responsible
for the greater portion of a country’s obligations. If we were con-
sidering the question of redemption of our loan, the above figures wouid
form the basis of any inquiry concerning Victoria’s capacity to pay her
.State mortgages.
SERVICE OF THE DEBT.
The examination of our power to faithfully provide for the
■service of our debt properly follows next. The total interest of all loans
is £1,861,489, the total revenue from all reproductive works for the pre-
sent year has been estimated at £1,300,000, derived chiefly from the rail-
ways, therefore it is necessary only to provide for £564,489 by taxation
and land revenue. This is the real burden of our debt; roughly speaking
about half a million of money ! The proportion of interest on the
public debt covered by the earnings of reproductive works is 70 per
cent, of the whole. No where else in the world is such a result at-
tained.
One of the greatest mistakes committed by local Ministerial
financiers was their omission to take advantage of the years of plenty
through which we have just passed, and the high position of Victoria’s
•credit, to apply a method of conversion to the public debt. The next
best thing to redeeming a loan is to reduce the annual interest payment
upon it. This process of conversion means the reduction of the rate of
interest on stock. For instance, since 1881, 10 millions of our debt
has been redeemed, and the interest rate lowered from an average of
6to 4 per cent. About one-quarter bears interest at 3£, whilst
two-thirds bears interest at 4 per cent., and the balance at higher rates
up to 5 per cent., the average being as stated, 4 per cent. Yet one
might maintain that a bold financial policy would not have neglected
the funding of the whole of our debt into a 3| per cent stock four or
five years ago, when it was possible. There are no fund-holders here
to oppose such a scheme politically, and by making the proper terms
for the privilege in London, the operation might easily have been
carried through. This much has been said with the object of showing
a conversion of our debt is a duty imposed upon our statesmen which
the events of the next two years will force them to perform. And this
is the main strength of the Federation proposals. Sooner or later the
public debts of the Australasian colonies will be unified, and one
security will then be current at a fixed rate of interest. V ithout
federation some scheme of funding Victoria’s debt is quite in
skilful hands. Fortunately, in Victoria we are in a splendid position
to effect conversion, because our money is owing to persons outside the
colony who are not taxpayers ; therefore, no minister need fear any
political consequences for reducing the rate of interest paid on the
public debt in order to effect large savings. Frequent conversions on
small margins of interest, with Government guarantees that further
conversions would not occur for a specified term of years, is the correct
principle on which our debt should be managed ; and a policy of con-
version on sound lines would be the best guarantee the bond-holdei
could have that his interest payments would be more easily forthcoming.
We have now got to the point where it is right to consider how
the amount of interest our public works do not earn (say £564,489 per
annum) is to be provided. Under ordinary conditions State outlay
should not exceed State income. The clever financier should not aim
at a surplus, nor should he permit a deficit. His manifest duty is to
make the two forms of financial activity-expenditure and revenue-
balance each other. If he does not, his skill or his control are at fault
Some of the ablest expounders of public finance refuse to regard u-
problems of public expenditure as part of the subject of public finance.
This is because they do not agree as financiers to enter into a con-
sideration of the subject of State socialism, or attempt to defane what
are proper State wants. To business men, control of outlay is just a*
important as reform in taxation or revenue. Whether writers of
finance are justified or not in laying down rules for th.e gnu ance of
Cabinet ministers in dealing with public expenditure is beside the pt
just now. We have to decide for ourselves whether the income ana
expenditure of Victory are so well balanced as to be capable of
supplying the deficiency in the interest-earning power o our
ductive public works.
REVENUE.
For the nine years prior to the Treasury financial yeai , -
credit balance was carried forward to the next year. loss revenu
accounts for an equal number of surplus and de ci years,
is difficult to argue accurately about next years es una e ._
Premier has recently stated that he has effected
amounting to a million, which should have suffice
both ends meet without any taxation. Can t ie na 1
come be raised? There are five divisions of revenue; taxation, railway
and public works, Crown lands, post and telegraphs, an misce
receipts Daring 1892-3. revenue estimated to be derived from these
sources is, respectively, 48 per cent, from taxation; 4 P er cen
railways, public works, and the postal department, t per cen .
Grown lands; and the balance of 3 percent, from miscellaneous sou •
.Surely, this is a satisfactory account! The purely economica, rec p
of the State, comprise 52 per cent, of the whole, and its compulsory
receipts 48 per cent. Without stopping here to discuss the forms and
classifications of public revenue, let us for a moment consider the
possibility of increasing the compulsory income of the State. Nearly
half of the whole revenue is derived from customs duties, and the
increase of these duties has brought about the uneconomical result of
diminishing the revenue. We cannot accept customs duties as a source
of increased income. Next in importance are the taxes derived from
the land, which amount roughly to about £120,00, and which might
with ease be raised to double that amount. Land revenue could be
greatly increased if business-like attention were given to collecting the
arrears due by holders of the State domain. At present £535,226 a
year is derived from sales and rents of Crown lands, and with a very
slight effort this can be raised to £ 1,000,000. Succession duties and
the estates of deceased persons might be doubled without injustice, as
the present estimated yearly revenue of, say, £220,000 on private wealth
valued at £400,000,000 sterling, is utterly inadequate. Nothing
more can be expected from stamp duties, or such repressive imposts as
wharfage-rates, tonnage-dues, business-licences, or the bank-note tax.
In the industrial domain covered by the railways, post office, and water
supply, the State raises the maximum of revenue, and could not
increase it without extending its activities or damaging the public
resources. The gains of the State as a capitalist or a lender of funds
might easily be augmented with trifling public inconvenience. In Vic-
toria, the State, in its excessive respect for the socialistic tendencies of
the community, dors not charge as much for its services as would a
private individual; and law fees, mint charges, fines, and miscellaneous
receipts are all capable of being expanded. Too little attention has
been paid in the past to making public departments pay for themselves.
In one important department the State management of the public
funds is notably lax.
The various advances to corporations, water trusts, irrigation trust
and municipal bodies are not only not rigorously secured, but neither the
interest rate charged is reasonably adjusted nor the interest itself
promptly enough collected. The balance outstanding, amounting to
£350,000, might easily be collected from the local bodies, and be raised
and paid by them, if proper financial efforts were made.
EXPENDITURE.
The ideal of State economy possessed by our public treasurers has
not been to secure the balance between outlay and income. A surplus
seemed to be the aim of the treasurer, and to achieve it he strained
both sides of the account. A budget showing a surplus is just as badly
contrived as a budget showing a deficit, for both sides should as nearly
balance as careful calculations and forecast can make them. A State
is practically not limited in its expenditure ; that is to say, a State has
the inherent right to claim all the services and all the property of its
citizens. Therefore, the limit of State expenditure is generally only
reached when the limit of State revenue has been touched. This
theory must for the present give way to the practice of limiting the
number and order of State wants. In future the functions of Victorian
government will be divided into three classes—the necessary, the useful,
and the ornamental, —and its expenditure likewise classified, so that the
necessaries and decencies of State-life will be supplied, and its luxuries
curtailed. Expenditure with the object of fostering local commerce
and industry has long been regarded as perhaps the most important
function performed by our Government. This has led them to borrow
money freely for the establishment of new industries, for the holding
of huge exhibitions, establishing agricultural colleges, building railways
to thinly populated districts, assisting municipalities by loans, and
developing a system of irrigation far in excess of present demand. In
future, the zeal of politicians for extending public works will be checked
by the improbability of money being borrowed easily or cheaply enough.
Excessive State action must be prevented by more careful calculations
of the return likely to be yielded by the work undertaken ; and for
the introduction of such a safe-guard every citizen should thank the
depression period. Money will not in future be carelessly voted for
irrigation works or railways, because money will not be readily raised
for such admirable, if for the present unnecessary, schemes.
Of Victoria’s expenditure during 1893-4, it is estimated 14 per
cent, will be spent on the maintenance of law and order, 5 per cent,
on railways, water works and post offices, 10'8 per cent on public
works of a permanent character, B'7 will be disbursed on education,
3 3 on charity, and the balance on trade, navigation, and miscellaneous
services. At first the observer is struck with the extravagant expen-
diture on general government, and on law and order. The Legislature,
civil service, pensions, judges, police, and the naval and military
establishments absorb £1,187,651 a year ! Of this total nearly 50
per cent, could be saved without endangering a single necessary State
agency. On all sides it is admitted the expenditure on public instruc-
tion is overgrown, and active steps are being taken to reduce it con
aiderably. To sum up, it is apparent Victorian revenue and expenditure
will be reduced in volume to the dimensions of the budget of 1883-4,
when both sides of the account amounted to £5,000,000. This would
be £5 a head of our present population, and if the budget be increased
pari passu with the growth of population, and the expenditure per
capita be strictly maintained near £5, there can be no fear of a repetition
of the waste of the past few years.


Wool
£5,450,066
... £7,165,092
W T heat
689,254
909,636
Butter and Cheese
100,987
2.34,265
Flour
241,356
488,347
Wine
42,964
69,785
NATIONAL WEALTH AND ASSETS.
The striking of a national balance-sheet is always a difficult matter.
Mr. Hayter, the eminent Government Statist, has calculated the total
private wealth of Victoria, based on the returns for probate duties,
at £407,000,000, the value of the real estate alone summing up
£203,351,000. The railways and public works are worth £40,000,000,
and unsold Crown lands have been reckoned at £20,000,000. Sum-
marised we get this result :
Private wealth ... ... ... £407,000,000
Railways ... ... ... 40,000,000
Crown lands ... ... ... 20,000,000
£467,000,000
Loans ... ... ... ... 45,000,000
Balance of Assets over Liabilities ... £422,000,000
V ithout going to the extreme, along with many noted public
financiers who have written on the subject, of saying the State is of
permanent, and the individual of trifling, importance, and that accord-
ingly the State can claim and the individual must unreservedly accede
to all State demands in the form of taxation for the good of the State;
still it seems as though a slight readjustment of the public burdens in
the direction of making the private wealth of over £400,000,000 ster-
ling contribute more generously to the needs of the Government, is not
asking of the citizen too great a sacrifice. One economical law affirms
that taxation must be derived from the constituents of private income;
and if the error be avoided of making too heavy a charge on the
collective resources of the community, further taxation is admittedly
proper. Taxes are always ultimately paid either from the capital or
from the revenue of any country, and it seems as though the time had
arrived in Victoria for placing heavier burdens on the capital of its
citizens, and relieving those on their revenue. This opens up a wide
question, and while the present object is to prove the capacity of Vic-
toria to pay her way, it matters little whence ways and means are to
be found so long as we make sure wealth is here to provide for them.
IMPORTS.
Where additional revenue is to be raised from the capital or the
revenue of the people, it is necessary to examine how their power to
pay is being affected by their external trade.
Condensed, the position is this ; Imports are falling off at the rate
of 5 per cent., and exports are increasing at the rate of 21 per cent,
per annum. We have given up borrowing, and are exporting to pay
our debts. Victoria’s loans have invariably come to the colony in the
form of goods and material, and now the balance of the foreign
exchanges can no longer be settled by borrowing money to pay our
debts, the energies of the people are being concentrated in producing
and exporting a sufficiency in goods to meet their annual liabilities.
The moment exports counterbalance imports our difficulties will begin
to disappear. What has been done in Queensland and New Zealand
can and will be done in Victoria, Production will be vastly stimulated
by the abandonment of speculation and the substitution of hard work.
All the preliminary work for a rapid expansion of local production
has now been done, for cheap and rapid means of transit by roads and
railways have been provided from the land to the markets. And now
the pioneering period has passed, a steady accession of individual
production must proceed. Take a few of the chief articles of Victoriar.
export:
1881. 1891.
Although the total area of land cultivated has largely increased
there is much room for an increase in the area under tillage for such
productions as maize, rye, pease, potatoes, onions, green forage, chicory,
hops, tobacco, nuts, oils, and vine?, while fruit-growing is yet merely
in its infancy in Victoria. Her undeveloped industries are those of
frozen meat and coal, and just at the last moment of the depression,
sustained efforts are being made to raise these branches of production
to their proper importance. The increase in the live stock—horses,
cattle, sheep, and pigs—in 1891 over 1890 was little short of
phenomenal, the present figures being—horses, 440,696; cattle,
1,812,104; sheep, 12,928,148 ; and pigs, 286,780. By means of
refrigerating chambers on our fast mail-ships, these enormous supplies
of food can find a constant market in Britain owing to the fortunate
reversal of the seasons, which enables us to send to the people of
Britain from our plenty to relieve their scarcity.
GOAL.
The output of coal in the colony rose from 14,601 tons in 1890
to 22,834 tons in 1892, and the Government geologist has certified that
there exists in Gippsland carbonaceous rocks covering an area of 1,500
square miles, which he estimates contain in the aggregate 40,000,000
tons of coal. Between Kilcunda and o«pe Patterson a new seam of
coal is being worked which is reckoned to contain 570,000,000 tons.
The deposits of brown coal, or fossil fuel, are the largest known in the
world. Its value for domestic, manufacturing, and economic purposes
in its present form is not great, though its manufacture into briquettes
is simply a matter of time. In Germany, 1,000,000 tons per annum
of briquettes made of brown coal are used for domestic and locomotive
purposes. Within the next few years, when the problem of the right
machinery for tin mining is solved, tin will claim for itself a high place
amongst the exportable products of Victoria.
Two comparative statements can be made here which condense the
situation in a few figures. The following are the estimated totals of
revenue and expenditure according to the budget of 1892-3, tabulated in
three divisions of taxation—public estate, commercial services, and.
reproductive works.
Revenue. Expenditure.
Taxation ... ... ... £3,925,503 £2,946,196
Public Estate ... _ ... ... 561,194 875,163
Railways, Commercial Services,
and Public Works ... ... 3,567,455 4,652,341
£8,054,152 £8,473,700
The deficit is £420,402. Deducting the figures relating to the
railways from both sides of the account, we get the following result:—
Revenue. Expenditure,
Revenue ... £8,054,152 Expenditure ... £8 473,700
Railway Revenue 3,300,000 Railway Expenditure 3.452,849
£4,754,152
£5,020,851
reducing the deficit to £266,569. Following out the process of
deducting the obligations on account of the railways from the public
debt, we get the following result: —
Total Debt equals ... ... .. £44,412,371
Railway Debt 36,’444,’6()5
£7,967,766
Really our public debt is £7 18s. per head of population, a
creditable result when compared with the £lB per head in the United
Kingdom, £3O in France, £l3 in Austria, and £l4 each in Belgium
and Italy.
RECAPITULATION.
This rapid survey of Victoria’s financial position is thus concluded,
and it has been found :
(1) 98 per cent, of Victoria’s debt was incurred necessarily to open
up the country, all of which is more or less reproductive.
(2) Victoria’s balance sheet shows a credit balance of £26,423,246
over liabilities.
(3) The loans coming due shortly should be easily financed, and
there are no important loans maturing for six years.
(4) Including railway loans, the total indebtedness is £44 16s. per-
head of the population, and i - 66 times the annual revenue.
(5) Excluding the railway loans, the total indebtedness is £7 18s.
per head of population, and about one year’s revenue.
(6) For the service of the debt only £564,489 a year has to be pro-
vided by taxation and land revenue.
(7) Revenue can be increased scientifically without unduly pressing
on the earning power of the community,
(8) Expenditure can and should be reduced from £8,000,000 to
£5,000,000, or to £5 a head of the population, as it was in 1884.
(9) National wealth and assets, amounting to £467,000,000, show
a surplus over liabilities of £422,000,000.
(10) Imports are decreasing at the rate of 5 per cent, yearly, while
exports are rapidly growing at the rate of 21 per cent.
(11) Our railways are being better managed, and will certainly
pay their way, while our debt, minus the railway obligations, is a trifle
t,o be easily borne.
(12) Many new industries are being quickly developed, such as tb&
trade in meat, fruit, wine, dairy produce, coal, tin, &c. Between
1851-91 Victoria raised gold to the value of £229,663,036, and her
total exports, consisting of wool, tallow, hides, and breadstuffs amounted
to £552,902,193! What a record for 40 years ! Can it be equalled
in the world ? Already her people, who possess on rental valuations
£203,251,000 of real estate, and £204,000,000 of personal property, all
accumulated in, say, 40 years, are working hard and living economically
to wipe out the excesses of the past. Can they pay their way 1 What
an insult to an Anglo-Saxon community to ask them such a question !
The ingrained integrity of the race, its indomitable courage and self-
reliance, and this country’s creditable financial history, all unite to
dispel the doubts of the honest critic, and enable him to laugh at the
malicious mutterings of the ignorant prophet of our financial decline
and fall.




PEIMAGE DUTIES.
Revised up to September 11th, 1893, by H. N, P. WOLLASTON, LL.D.
(Secretary to the Victorian Customs Department).
Acids, viz. :
£ s. d.
Acetic, containing not more than 30 per cent, acidity
... ... ... ... ... .. per pint or lb. 0 0 3
Acetic, for every extra 10 per cent, or part of 10 per cent.
above 30 per cent. ... ... ... per pint or lb. 0 0 1
Muriatic, Nitric, Sulphuric ... ... ... per cwt. 0 5 0
Advertising Matter. (See Paper ; also Stationery)
Aerated or Mineral Waters. (See Waters.)
Agricultural Implements. (See Implements.)
Ale, Porter, Spruce, Lager and other Beer, Cider, and Perry in bottles,
per gallon or for six reputed quart bottles, or for twelve
reputed pint bottles ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 16
Ale, Porter, Spruce, Leger and other Beer, Cider, and Perry,
not otherwise enumerated, per gallon... ... ... ... 0 10
Almonds ... ... ... ... ... ... per pirt or lb.* 0 0 2
Animals, Live, viz. :
Bulls, Bullocks, Steers, Cows, Heifers and Calves, per head 110 0
Sheep and. Lambs per head 0 2 0
Pigs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... per head 010 0
Horses ... per head 210 0
Animals, Live, being Horned Cattle not exceeding ten in num-'
ber, and Horses not exceeding ten in number, which for the
previous six months have formed portion of the bond fide - Free,
working stock of any person coming across the border into
Victoria to settle on the lands of this colony ...
Apparel, slops, clothing, underclothing, and articles of attire, not
otherwise enumerated, whether wholly or partly made up
ad valorem 35 pc.
Apparel, articles of, being wholly or partly made up from materials
containing wool, the duty on which is 40 per cent, ad valorem
on importation ad valorem 50 p.c.
Apparel, being Diving Dresses, including the boots, gloves, and
helmets for such dresses ... ... ... ... ... ... Free.
Appliances or instruments, Surgical. Provided that such surgical in-1
struments or appliances are enumerated in any order of the I Free.
Commissioner, and published in the Government Gazette .. j
Arrowroot per pint or lb.* 0 0. 2
Art, Works of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Free.
Articles, Minor, of mixed or undescribed materials used in the manu-
facture of any dutiable article ; provided that such minor
articles are enumerated in any order of the Commissioner, and
published in the Government Gazette Free.
Asphyxiators, for Rabbit Killing ... ... ... ... ... ... Free.
Axles: Common Dray, with Linchpins ad valorem 25 p.c.
Common Nut, and others not enumerated—
Up to 14 in. diameter inclusive per arm 0 3 0
Above 14 in. „ ... ... per arm 04 6
Mail patent, up to 1£ in. diameter inclusive ... per arm 0 4 6
~ above in. ... ... ... ... per arm 07 0
Other patent axles, with brass caps per arm 010 0
Bacon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... per lb. 00 2
Baggage, Passengers’, being Cabin Furniture and Personal Luggage ... Free.
Bags and Sacks (except Gunnies and Sugar Mats) the capacity of
which is less than 3 bushels .. ... ... per doz. 00 6
Bags, Woolpacks per doz. 0 3 0
~ Paper. (See paper.)
Bags—Fancy, Hand, Reticules, or Travelling, including the articles
belonging thereto (if any) ad valorem 25 p.c.
Beer. (See Ale.)
Biscuits per lb. 0 0 2
Blacking, including Burnishing Ink, Dressing, Harness Polishing, and
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ad valorem 25 p.c.
Dlue ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... per lb. 00 2
Boots and Shoes—English sizes of 1888 to be the standard, viz.
Men’s, Nos. 6 and upwards per doz. pairs 3 0 0
Youth’s, Nos. 2-5 ... ... ... ... f) 22 0
Boys’, Nos. 7-1 ” I 10 0
Women’s, Nos. 3 and upwards ... ... 2 5 0
Girls’, No. 11-2 ” 1 16 0
• • No-7-10 „ 14 0
Children’s, Nos. 4-6, and slippers .. ... ” 0 8 6
With uppers of lasting or of other material not being leather,
with or without leather toecaps, but notgoloshed or vamped
with leather... ... ... .. ... pe r doz. pairs 110 0
Slippers, Nos. 7-2 0 12 0
~ not otherwise enumerated ... ~ 018 0
Shoes, spiked ... ... .. ... ... * 0 12 0
' P * ** * • * ••• ••• 94 U liS 1/
Goloshes or Overshoes ... ... ... 040
Boots and Shoes of india-rubber ... ... 0 12 0
Boots and Shoes, being children’s oto 3, and slippers of straw only ... Free.
Boot and Shoe Uppers, viz. :
Leather—Closed, Men’s ... ... ... per doz. pairs 14 0
„ ~ Women’s and Children’s „ 018 0
~ Wellington Fronts and Grafts... ~ 0 6 0
Cashmere, Lasting, or Stuff 0 3 0
Bottles—Glass or Stone, containing a reputed quart or any less quan-
tity of spirits (not perfumed), wine, ale, porter, or other beer,
and bottles containing aerated or mineral waters per doz. 0 0 6
Bottles, containing pickles ... ... ... ... ... q 0 3
Bottles of all kinds containing an imperial quart or any less quantity
(upwards of one fluid dram) of liquid or other substance not
otherwise enumerated ... ... per doz. 00 3
Bottles of all kinds containing one fluid dram or less of liquid
or other substance |. Free.
All Carts and Waggons without Springs, and Spring Carts
and Spring Drays with two wheels ad valorem 20 p.c.
All Carriages or Conveyances not otherwise enumerated
ad valorem 25 p.c.
Bicycles, Tricycles, and similar Vehicles, whether wholly or
partly made up, or parts of the same ... ad valorem 25 p.c.
Perambulators and Children’s Carriages, whether wholly or
partly made up, or parts of same ad valorem 35 p.c.
(Noth. — Any separate parts of Carriages not specially enumerated as
dutiable or free are chargeable with such duty as the Commissioner may
determine under Section 6 of Act 1082.)
Carriages and other Vehicles used in the conveyance of pas-
sengers or goods across the frontier which have been regis-
tered with the officers of Customs nearest the place
where such Carriage or other Vehicle may ply or pass, and
in such manner as the Commissioner may by any order from
time to time approve ... ... ... ... ... ... Free
Casks or Shooks, new or secondhand .. ad valorem 35 p.c.
graphic Materials) ad valorem 15 p.c.
-11 i. 1 C I__.ll _ 1 11 .11
Clocks, and all parts thereof, whether wholly or partly made up
ad valorem 20 p.c.
Clogs and Pattens ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 p.c.
Clothing—Horse. (See Rugs.)
Cloths—Oil and other Floor ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 p.c.
ad valorem 10 p.c.
••• • ••• -• ... ... ... ad valorem 10 p.c.
Cutlery of Iron and Steel, being Tools of Trade, and Axes ... Free
Doors, Wooden. (See Timber.)
Druggeting. (See Carpeting.)
Drugs, viz.:—
Ammonia, Carbonate of per pint or lb. 0 0 2
„ Liquid „ 0 0 2
Chlorodyne ... ... ... ... ... ... ad valorem 25 p.c.
Coculus Indicus ... .. ... per lb. 0 1 0
Glycerine, pure ... ... ... ... 0 0 3
~ crude ... ... ... ... ... ... >t 0 0 1
Morphia ... ... ... ...peroz. 0 16
I er pint or lb. or reputed package of that quantity or weight, and so in proportion for any such reputed quantity or wieght.
THE VICTORIAN CUSTOMS TARIFF AND EXCISE, TONNAGE, STAMP AND
Boxes—Cardboard or paper, including Paper or Cardboard (with or £ s. d.
without Printing) cut into shapes for wrapping or boxing
ad valorem 25 p. c.
Boxes or Cases, viz. : —Dressing, Glove, Handkerchief, Jewel, Scent,
Work, including the articles belonging thereto (if any)
ad valorem 25 p.c.
Boxes—Cardboard, containing non-dutiable goods ordinarily imported
therein ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Free.
Brownware, Tiles, Retorts, Fire Lumps, and Fireclay Goods, including
Fire Bricks ... ... ... ... ... ... ad valorem 20pc.
Brushware (except Artists’Brushes) ad valorem 35 p.c.
Buckets and Tubs, Wooden (see Woodenware) ... ... ad valorem 35 p.c.
M ~ Other ~ 25 p.c.
Butter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...per lb. 00 2
Butterine and Oleomargarine ... ... ... ... ...per lb, 010
Candles per lb. 0 0 2
Caps. (See Hats)
Cards—Playing ... ... ... ... ... per doz. packs 0-3 0
>i „ (in sheets) ... ... ... ... ~ ~ 0 2 6
Carpeting and Druggeting ... ... ... ... ... ad valorem 25 p.c.
Carpeting and Druggeting, being Printed Felt ... ... Free.
Carriages, Carts, and Conveyances, including secondhand, viz. :
Boston Chaises, Dog Carts, Gigs, Tilburys, and other two-
wheeled Vehicles on Springs or thorough Braces ... each 10 0 0
Buggies, four-wheeled ... ...1 Without Tops j
Waggons for carrying Goods ...I counted on I
Waggons, Single or Double-seated j Springs or , ~ 15 0 0
Waggons, Express ) I
Hansom Safety Cabs ... ... ... ... "j
Single and Double-seated Waggons 1
Waggonettes [ With Tops | ~ 20 0 0
Four-wheeled Buggies ... ... 1 j
Omnibuses and Coaches for carrying mails or pas-
sengers -. ~ 40 0 0
Baronchbs ... ... ... ... ... ... A
Broughams ... ... ... ... ... I
TOrags \ „ 50 0 0
Landaus ... ... ... ... ... ... I
Mail Phaetons... ... ... ... ... ... j
Cement (including Plaster of Paris and other products having Sulphate
of Lime as a basis) ... ... ... ... ... pe r. cwt. 0 10
Charcoal and Coal (ground) ad valorem 20 p.c.
Charcoal, Animal (ground) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Free
Cheese ... .‘.'.per lb.' 00 3
Chinaware and Porcelain (except Photographic, Scientific, and Tele-
Coffee, Cocoa, Chicory, Chocolate per lb. 0 1 0 3
Cocoa— Raw ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . Free.
Coffee —Raw ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... Free.
Combs—Toilet ... ... ... ... ... .. .. ad valorem 10 n.c.
Confectionery, Comforts, Succades, Sweatmeats, per pint or lb.* 0 0 2
Cordage (except unserviceable, when cut into lengths of not over 3
feet. Metal Cordage, and Coir Yarn), viz. :
Coir Rope ... ~ ... ... ... ... per cwt. 05 0
Other Cordage, including Engine Packing (not being Sheet)
and Housing and Seizing Lines, and Spunyarn per cwt. 012 0
Reaper and Binder Twine. (See Twine.)
Corks, cut per lb. 0 0 4
Cutlery (except Plated and Mixed Metalware, otherwise dutiable)


The Lower Moorahool Falls, above the junction of the Lai Lai and Moorahool Creeks, which are noted for their picturesque
surroundings, are situated about 12 miles from Ballarat by road. They are very much frequented by picnic parties during the summer.
In the creeks good fishing is obtainable.
The celebrated Star of the East Quartz Mining Company, Ballarat, is one of the best paying mines in the district. The Company has
a powerful battery of 100 heads, and 2,000 tons of stone are raised and crushed per fortnight, producing an average of over 1,000 ounces
of gold. The No. 2 shaft is I,7oofeet deep. Number of men employed, 400 ; total yield of gold in six years, 634,000 ounces ; dividends
paid, £lO 14s. per share on 24,000 shares, up to September, 1893. The plant is a splendid one, and forms a favourite point for inspection
by visitors to Ballarat.


Drugs— continued. £ s. d
Nitrate of Silver ... ... 0 0 6
Nux Vomica per’lb. 0 0 2
Strychnine ... ... ... ... ... ... ...peroz. 0 10
including Packing (except Photographic, Scientific, and
Telegraphic Materials), measuring outside the package as
imported ... ... ... ... ... per cubic foot 00 8
Engines, being Portable Engines, fixed on a Locomotive Boiler horizon-
tally, and fitted up with wheels and shafts suitable for trans-
port on an ordinary road ad valorem 25 p.c.
Engines, Traction Free.
Eggs .. ... ... ... ... ... .. ... per gross 02 0
Explosives (except Fine Meal Powder, not Sporting, in bulk
and in packages of not less than 25 lbs. each), viz. :
Powder, Sporting per lb. 0 0 3
„ Blasting „ 0 0 1
Gelatine and Gelatine Dynamite ... ... ... ... - 00 1
Other Explosives ’ 0 0 4
"Fancy Goods (except Artificial Flowers) ad valorem 10 p.c.
Heathers for ornamental purposes ... ... ... ... ~ 25 p.c.
Fillets—Line, for Bookbinders ... ... ’ 10 n r
Fireworks ” OQ me.
"FTI oil / .Qua A/Tno In im/1 T?J nL « 1 Tl 5 * _ \
Fish. (See Meats and Fish, also Provisions.)
Fittings, Ships’ Free"
Flowers—Artificial Free
Frilling, Ruffling, Plaitings, Ruchings ... ... . . ad valorem 25 p.c.
Bruits, dried and preserved from decay by any process ... ...per, lb. 00 3
(See also Vegetables.)
Fruits and Vegetables—preserved (not dried) packed in bottles, jars, or
other vessels, as under :
Quarts, and over a pint ... ... ... ... ...per doz. 06 0
Pints, and over half-a-pint... . ... ... ... If 03 0
Half-pints and smaller sizes ... ... ... ... * 016
Over a quart and not exceeding a gallon ... ... ” 018 0
Fruits, boiled, or partly boiled, or pulp ... . per' lb. 0 0 3
Fruits, green, being oranges or lemons ... ... ... per bush. 00 9
bruits, green, not otherwise enumerated ... ... M 0 16
Fruits, green, viz. :
Bananas ... ... y
Guavas
Mangoes . Free.
Olives
Pineapples ... ... ... ... ... . j
E ur ~E[ a ,tters (except Mungo) ... ... ... ... ad valorem 25 p.c.
rur fekms, dressed or prepared for making up ... .. ...per lb. 00 2
Furniture, including second hand (including all articles of furniture
made of metal or wicker) ... .. ... ... ad valorem 40 p.c.
1 urmture, secondhand, accompanying any passenger, which
has been in such passenger’s own use, up to £5O in value, and
which is not imported for sale Free
Furniture—Cabin. (See Baggage).
I use per coil of 24 feet or less, and in proportion for any greater
quantity ... 0 0 U
Oelatme ik non
per lb. 0 0 6
. ••• ••• ••• ... ... ...uei iu. yj u u
■Glass, viz. : r
Bent
Bevelled
Heraldic
Silvered f a d valorem 35 p.c.
Corners—Cut, bevelled, or engraved
Panes, prisms, and all other framed with metal j
Glassware, including packing, viz. :
Cut, embossed, engraved, etched, frosted, ground, sandblast,
and not otherwise enumerated (measuring outside the pack-
p age as imported) per cubic foot 0 2 6
bottles tor aerated waters (measuring outside the package as
imported). per cubic foot 0 0 6
rsottles tor medicines (measuring outside the packet as im-
rw^ 0 fG / ' •••, ••• ••• ••• ... ...per cubic foot 0 10
icr (measuring outside the package as imported) per
being locket, brooch, watch glasses, and optical, ° 1 °
scientific instruments, and photographic materials, and syphon
bottles for aerated waters Free
n aKao * i ••• ••• ••• •• rree.
Globes—School, mounted ... Tivff
__V .i. free.
Gloves—Kid or leather V . ”
icamci ad valorem 20 p.c.
” r . oth . e / . Free.
Glue Liquid, and liquid gum and cements ad valorem 20 p.c.
Glucose, solid p erll ?- o 2 i
... liquid,. ;;; ;;; percwt - ®« 2
Goods imported for the use of H.M. Forces and H.M. Government ... Free'
strain, viz. :
par cental « S 0
n/r • -r. , ••• ••• ••• ... per cental u o u
Maize, Peas, Beans, Wheat ... non
Prepared, viz. : ' ”
Barley—Pearl and Scotch ... n 7 R
Oatmeal... ... ... ... ” 09 0
Maizena, Maize Flour or Corn Flour per pint or’lb. * 00 2
r- . •• , . per bush. 0 4 6
Giain and Pulse of every kind, not otherwise enumerated, when
prepared or in any way manufactured per cental 0 5 0
ram and Pulse of every kind, not otherwise enumerated
Grease—Antifriction 1 per ton 3 0 0
Articles of Artificial Human Hair, manufactured, viz. :
Headdresses, Hair Plaits, Hair Plait Stems, Side Pads, Chig-
ri i n ? ns "■ ■" ” ••• ••• ad valorem 25 p.c.
Hams ::: ::: •- ™ ™ jj *
Handkerchiefs (except of cotton or linen only), whether made up or in
n fo p ie piece ... ... ... ad valorem 10 p.c.
Hats, Caps, and Bonnets, viz. : ”
Hats and Caps—Cloth, sewn, and not upon any foundation or
rame .. . ... per doz. 0 8 0
Hats—Children s, boys , men’s or women’s felt... mw doz. I
Hats—Boys’ and Men’s with a calico or other foundation or [ 1 16 0
frame, and covered with any material per doz I
Hats—Dress ... per doz'. 3 0 0
Hats, Caps, and Bonnets, all other .., ... ad valorem 25 p.c.
Per pint or lb. or reputed package of that quantity or weight, and so in proportion for any such reputed quantity or weight.
Hats, Caps, and Bonnets— continued. £ a d
Hats or Helmets of Pith per doz. 1 0 6
... ... ... per uoz . i u u
wF tTi* tV',; , per pint or lb.* 0 0 2
Hoods belt, Pull-over Hoods, and any article of Felt prepared for the
manufacture of Hats per doz. 0 5 0
Hops ... .. ... per lb. 00 8
Hosiery, except otherwise specified a d va l o rem 35 p.c.
Noth. —Hosiery means stockings, socks, and other machine or hand-knit
covering for the feet or legs, and no other articles (sec. IX, Act 1082).
Hosiery, being of cotton, linen, and elastic silk stockings for surgical
purposes 6 Free.
Implements —Agricultural ad valorem 20 p.c.
Implements—Agricultural, known as Reapers and Binders ... Free.
Ink—Burnishing. (See Blacking)
Ink-Printing (colored) per lb. 0 oft
Inks—M rating, liquid or powder ad valorem 10 p.c.
Instruments, Musical (except action-work in separate pieces, including
Rails and Keys), including secondhand—
Pipe Organs and all parts thereof, including Pianoforte actions,
made up ... ... ... ... ... .. ad valorem 25 p.c.
rlfl irno n nr>i4- i _ „ ~
Pianos, upright ... each 5 0 0
~ Square, Grand, or Semi-Grand each 15 0 0
Harmoniums and Cabinet Organs, not otherwise enumerated
t , , ... each 3 0 0
Instruments or Appliances—Surgical (provided that such surgical in-
struments or appliances are enumerated in any order of the
Commissioner, and published in the Government Gazette
Jams and Jellies p er pint or lb. 0 0 3
Jewellery, viz. : Rings of gold, finished or unfinished, but without
cameos or precious stones set therein ... per dwt. troy 0 4 0
All other, whether manufactured wholly or in part, including
imitation jewellery, cases containing jewellery or imitation
jewellery, also pencil cases ad valorem 25 p.c.
Jewellery, being cameos and precious stones, unset ... ... Free.
Lamps, lampware, and lanterns (not including globes, shades, and
chimneys, otherwise dutiable as glassware and electroliers and
gasaliers, otherwise dutiable as manufactures of metals)
ad valorem 35 p. c.
Lead—lsheet and piping .. ... ... p er cw t. 02 6
Leather—Being crust or rough-tanned calf, goat, hogskin, sheep, or
kangaroo, when not exceeding seven pounds each skin; and
English bend (sometimes called butt) ... ... ... ... Free.
Kid, calf kid, mock kid, and patent calf ... ... ... ... Free.
Furniture, bootmaking, and bookbinding morocco (except
black), persian, sheep, roan, and skivers ... ad valorem 35 p.c.
Black morocco and goat levant ..., ... ... ~ 20 p.c.
Leather not otherwise enumerated ... ... ... per lb. 00 6
Leatherware, harness, saddles, or articles made up of leather, or any
manufacture of which leather is the most valuable part, includ-
ing trunks and portmanteaus, and leather cut into shapes, not
otherwise enumerated ad valorem 45 p.c.
Leather—Laces ... ... ... ... .. ... p er Jb. 0 1 0
Leaf, gold or silver ... ... ... ... ... ... a d valorem 20 p.c.
Luggage—Passengers’ (See Baggage)
Macaroni and Vermicelli ' ... per pint or lb.* 0 0 2
Marble and Stone—Wrought ad valorem 35 p.c.
Marble and Stone, Wrought, being lithographic stones, and
stones for milling and grinding purposes ... ... ... Free.
Matches and Vestas : Wax Vestas—
For every gross of metal boxes not otherwise specified, con-
taining in each box—
-100 vestas or under ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 13
Over 100 and not exceeding 200 vestas ... ... ... 0 2 6
And so on per gross of metal boxes for each additional
100 vestas or part thereof additional 0 13
For every gross of paper, small round tin, or other boxes con-
taining in each box—
-100 vestas or under ... ... .. ... ... ... 0 10
Over 100 and not exceeding 200 vestas ... ... ... 0 2 0
And so on per gross of boxes for each additional 100
vestas or part thereof additional 0 10
Wooden matches—
For every gross of boxes containing in each box—
-100 matches or under ... ... ... .... ... ... 0 0 6
Over 100 and not exceeding 200 matches ... ... ... 0 1 0
And so on per gross of boxes for each additional 100
matches or part thereof additional 0 0 6
Wood, Safety ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Free.
Mats and Rugs not otherwise enumerated.. ad valorem 35 p.c.
(See also Rugs.)
Matting—Coir and jute ad valorem 35 p.c.
Meats—Beef, Mutton, Veal, and Lamb per lOOlbs. 0 7 0
Pork ' „ 0 10 0
Meats and Fish—Potted ; and meats, fish, soups, and vegetables—ex-
tracts of or concentrated ad valorem 20 p. c.
Meats and Fish—Preserved, not salted or dried or preserved in brine
per pint or lb.* 0 0 2
Medicines—Consisting of two or more ingredients mixed ready for use,
not being in chemical combination; drugs and chemicals,
packed ready for retail sale or consumption, including medi-
cal compounds containing spirits not exceeding the strength of
proof by Sykes’ hydrometer; and all preparations recom-
mended as beneficial for any portion of the human or animal
body, or the cure or the treatment of any disease or affection
whatever, and medicine chests or cases, with or without
fittings ... ... ... ... ad valorem 25 p. c.
Metals, &c.—Manufactures of, machines, machinery and engines of all
kinds, not otherwise enumerated, including fittings for pipes
and tubes (but not including furniture otherwise dutiable)
ad valorem 35 p. c.
H rolled girder and channel iron per ton 3 0 0
Castings, viz. :
Bars (fire), cylinders (hydraulic), pipes and connections for
the same, plates (tank), weights (sash) ... per ton 3 0 0
Wire—Barbed per ton 3 0 0
Metals, Manufactures of, Machines and Machinery, viz.:—
Anchors .. .. .. .. .. .. v
Anvils .. .. .. .. .. .. I
Balances—Spring, to weigh up to 3 cwt. .. .. .. .. V Free.
Bands—Curtain .. .. .. ~ .. I
Bar, not machined and in the rough .. .. ..




Harness ... ... ... ... ... ... perdoz.
0
10
0
Riding
1
0
0
Salt (except Rock Salt) per ton
1
0
0
Sauces, packed in Bottles, Jars, or other vessels not exceeding one
gallon in size, as under, viz. :—
Quarts and over a pint ... per doz.
0
4
0
Pints and over half-a-pint... ... ... ... ,,
0
2
0
Half-pints and smaller sizes ... ,,
0
1
0
Over a quart and not exceeding a gallon ... ,,
0
12
0
All other ... ... ... ... ... ... ,,
10
p. c.
Seeds—Canary ... ad valorem
Shot ... ... ... ... ... ... ...per lb.
10
0
p.c.
0
1
Silks in the piece, or piece goods containing silk, and all materials in
the piece having silk worked or sewn thereon, whether cut
into lengths or shapes or not ... ... ... ad valorem
Silks, being hatters’ silk plush, umbrella silk, silk for flour
dressing, silk fags, oil silks, fringes, tassels, and gimp for
furniture, reps, damasks, and other material for covering
furniture
Soap, Perfumed and Toilet .. ... ... ...per lb.
25 p.c.
Free.
0 0
4
,, other ... ... ... ,,
0
0
2
Soda Crystals ... ... ... ... ... per ton
2
0
0
Spices, ground per pint or lb. *
0
0
2
Spirits or strong waters of any strength not exceeding the strength of
proof by Sykes’ hydrometer, and so on in proportion for any
greater strength than the strength of proof ... per gal.f
0
15
0
Spirits, Cordials, Liqueurs, or Strong Waters sweetened or
mixed with any article so that the degree of strength cannot
be ascertained by Sykes’ hydrometer (including all alcohol
diluted and undiluted with water or other menstruum, and
containing in solution any essence, essential oil, ether, or
other flavouring, or other substance, whether of natural or arti-
ficial origin) per gal.
0
15
0
Metals, Manufactures of, Machines and Machinery— continued.
Bell Fittings .. .. .. .. .. .. .. x
Bells—6 inches and under .. .. .. .. .. 1
Bits (for Harness;
Blocks and Types—Printers’ .. .. ~
Blowers, for Ventilating Mines
Boilers—Oval (Cast-iron)
Brassfoundry used in the Manufacture of Furniture
Bushes—Patent Koller, for Block-making
Buttons
•Caps—Percussion
Cast Iron, being Oval Boilers, Camp Ovens, Digesters, Kettles; Brazing,
Fry, Maslin, Preserving, Sauce, or Stew Pans; Danish, French, Glue,
Oval, Plumbers’, Stock, and Three-legged Pots; Tea Kitcheners or
Fountains .. ..
£ s. d.
Chaflcutter Knives
Chains
Chains - - Curtain
Cloth—Wire, over 36 mesh .. ..
Concentrators (for Mining purposes)
Conductors —Lightning .. .. .. .. ..
Copper and Copperware, being Prepared Plates for Engravers and Lith
graphers, Silver-plated Sheet, Perforated Sheet, Rivets, Washers
Cornices in piece ~
Crucibles
Detonators
Digesters (Cast-iron)
Door Fittings (except Handles and Plates and Latches —Cast)
Engines—Traction .. ..
Firearms
Eittings. (See Bell, Door, Meters, Pipes, Tubes, Window)
Fittings—Electric, viz.:—Arc Lamps without globes, Carbons, Incandescent
Lamps, Automatical Resisters, Transmitters or Transformers, and
Storage Batteries
Fountains—Tea (Cast iron)
Furniture—Brassfoundry used in the manufacture of ..
Hames
Handles—Trunk
Hinges (except Hook and Eye, Strap and T)
Hooks (Brass)
Hooks —Cornice
Hooks —Curtain
Hoop, not machined and in the rough
Instrument —Optical, Scientific
Iron —Angle and T
Iron—Sheet, Corrugated
Irons—Box and Sad
lions-Stirrup
Kettles (Cast-iron)
Kitcheners —Tea (Cast-iron)
Knives—Chaffcutter
Knives—Reaping Machine
Latches (except cast)
Locks
Lightning Conductors
Machinery for Carding, Spinning, Weaving, and Finishing the Manufacture
of Fibrous Material, and Cards for such Machinery
Machinery for Telegraphic purposes
Machinery used in the Manufacture of Paper, and for Felting, including !-
Wire-cloth and Felts .. .. .. .. ..
Machines, viz. : Button-making, Eyelet, Knitting, Sheep-shearing, Stitching,
Dairy Refrigerators and Separators
Machines—Printing and Presses ..
Machines —Sewing
Machines known as Centrifugal Cream Separators
Noth. —Exemption of Machines does not apply to the motive power thereof
(if any.)
Meters, Gas—lnternal fittings of, when imported in parts not put together...
Mortars and Pestles
Netting—Wire, Galvanized, Machine-made ..
Ovens-Camp (Cast-iron)
Pans (Cast-iron), viz. : Brazing, Fry, Maslin, Preserving, Sauce, Stew
Pestles and Mortars
Pig
Pins—Gimp
Pipes and Tubes, viz.: Brass-cased, Brazed, Solid-drawn, Welded and Fit-
tings—lron, screwed for wrought-iron Pipes
Plate, not machined and in the rough .. .. • ..
Plates—Circular, for the Manufacture of Saws
Plates—Prepared for Engravers and Lithographers
Plates —Decorated Tin, for manufacturing Tinware
Pots (Cast-iron), viz.: Danish, French, Glue, Oval, Plumbers’ Stock, Three-
Legged
Presses—Printing
Primers
Pulleys, under 4 inches..
Bails—Tram and Railway
Reaping Machine Knives
Rings—Curtain
Rivets (copper)
Bod, not machined and in the rough
Saws of all kinds, but not the machinery connected therewith (if any)
Scales to weigh up to 3 cwt.
Scrap
Screws —Cork, Galvanized, Hand, Table, Wood .. -
Sheet, not machined and in the rough
Sheet, viz.: Copper, Brass Zinc, Muntz and other mixed metals in circles not
less than 24 inches in diameter
Sheet (Copper) Silver-plated
Sheet (Copper) Perforated
Slides—Cornice
Spoke, not machined and in the rough
Spoons—lron or Steel ..
Springs—Buffer
Steelyards, to weigh up to 3 cwt. ..
Tacks, 1 inch and under
Tires of Steel, in the rough
Tools of Trade, not being Machinery (except Napping, Spalling, and Quartz
Hammers; Picks, Mattocks, Gas and Blacksmiths’ Tongs, Crowbars,
Mauls, Wedges, Soldering Irons)
Traps—Vermin
Tubes and Pipes, viz. : Brass-cased, Brazed, Solid-drawn, Welded and Fit-
tings-Iron, screwed for wrought-iron Pipes
Types—Printers’ and Brass
Washers (Copper)
W'indow Fittings (except Shutters, Blinds, Poles, and Cornices) ..
Wire, not machined and in the rough .. .. .. .. )
Metalware, plated and mixed (except furniture otherwise dutiable)
ad valorem 35 p.c.
Metalware, plated and mixed, being door-handles, locks, shaft-
tips, stump and finger joints, and slot irons used in carriage
building, harness mountings, and hames ... ... ... Free.
Milk, preserved ... ... ... ... ... per pint or lb. 00 2
Mustard ... per lb. 0 0 2
Nails —
Iron and steel ... ... ... ... ... per cwt. 0 7 6
Horseshoe .. ... ... ... ... ... per cwt. 014 0
Nails, for trunks and grindery ... Free.
Nuts (except Cocoanuts and Candle-nuts) ... ... ... ...per lb. 0 0 2
Oil and Paste — Furniture ... ... ... ... ... ad valorem 20 p.c.
Oils, in Bulk (except Cocoanut, Fish of all sorts, Mineral Refined of
which the point of ignition is below 80° Eahr. ; Kerosene,
Palm, Lubricating of which the chief component part is min-
eral; and Resin) ... ~ per gal. 0 0 6
Oils, packed in Bottles, Jars, or other Vessels, not exceeding one gallon
in size, as under ;
Quarts and over a pint ... ... per doz. 0 4 0
Pints and over half-a-pint ~ 020
Oils— continued. £
Half-pints and smaller sizes ... .. ... ~ 010
Over a quart and not exceeding a gallon ... ~ 0 12 0
Oilmen’s Stores (except Essential Oils and Essences not containing
Alcohol) packed in bottles or jars not exceeding one
reputed quart in size, or in canisters or vessels not exceed-
ing one quart in size ... ... ... .. ad valorem 20 p.c.
Oilmen’s Stores, not otherwise enumerated (except Isinglass,
uncut) 10 p.c.
Oleomargarine. (See Butterine.)
Onions ... . ... ... ... ... ... ... p er ton 10 0
Opium, including all goods, wares, and merchandise mixed or satu-
rated with opium, or with any preparation or solution
thereof, or steeped therein respectively ... per lb. 10 0
Packages in which goods are ordinarily imported, not otherwise
enumerated .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Free.
Packages, secondhand, in which Ships’ Stores have been imported ... Free.
Paints and Colors (except Artists’ Colors):
Ground in Oil, including Patent Dryers and Putty per ton 2 0 0
Mixed ready for use, from or of any substance ... ~ 4 0 0
Paper (except Writing and Printing, in original wrappers and uncut
edges, as it leaves the Mill; Paperhangings and Mill-
board) :
Cut ... ... .. ... ... ... ... per lb. 00 2
Advertising Matter, Printed or Lithographed, or any Printed
Plates, Lithographs, Pictures, Cards, or matter of a simi-
lar description used or capable of being used for advertis-
ing purposes per lb. 0 0 4
Paper, other ... ' ... ... ... ... ... per cwt. 06 0
.. Bags .. „ 015 0
~ Cardboard, Pasteboard ~ 0 4 0
Parasols, Sunshades, and Umbrellas, with or without Covers, made up
wholly or in part, viz. :
From materials not containing Silk ... ... ... each 0 10
From materials containing Silk ... ... ... ... ~ 0 2 6
Parasol, Sunshade, and Umbrella Sticks, when wholly or
partly fitted with Frames ... each 0 10
Paste—Furniture. (See Oil.)
Pattens. (See Clogs.)
Peel, Candied, Drained or Preserved ... ... ... per lb. 00 2
Perfumery ... ad valorem 20 p.c.
Pickles (packed in Bottles, Jars, or other vessels, not exceeding one
gallon in size) as under :
Quarts and over a pint per doz. 0 3 0
Pints and over half-a-pint ... ... ... ... ~ 026
Half-pints and smaller sizes ... ... ... ~ 010
Over a quart and not exceeding a gallon ... ~ 0 12 0
All other ... ... ... ... ... ... ad valorem 20 p.c.
Pipes—lron. (See Metals.)
Smoking, Clay ... ... ... ... ... per gross 0 10
~ All other, and Cigar and Cigarette Holders
ad valorem 25 p.c.
Cases for Pipes, Cigar and Cigarette Holders ~ 25 p.c.
Plaitings. (See Frillings.)
Plate of Gold ... ... ... ... ... ... ... per oz. troy 08 0
~ Silver „ 0 2 0
Potatoes .. ... ... ... ... ... ... per ton 10 0
Powders—Baking. Seidlitz, Washing ad valorem 20 p.c.
Provisions (including vegetables), salted, dried, or preserved in brine,
not otherwise enumerated (except Beef, Mutton, Veal,
Lamb and Pork otherwise dutiable) ... per cwt. 0 5 0
Quilts—Sewn, Cosies and Cushions ad valorem 30 p.c.
Rice ... ... ... ... ... ... ... per cental 06 0
Undressed, imported into any bonded warehouse and dressed
therein per cental 0 4 0
Paddy ~ 0 2 0
Rice imported into any bonded warehouse and manufactured into
starch therein ... ... ... Free.
Rolls—Ornamental, for Bookbinders ad valorem 10 p.c.
Ruchings. (See Frilling.)
Ruffling. (See Frilling.)
Rugs—Waterproof and Horse Clothing (including Saddle Cloths, also
Girths not otherwise dutiable.) See also Mats and Rugs
ad valorem 35 p.c.
Saddletrees —
* Per pint or lb. or reputed package of that quantity or weight, and so in proportion for any
such reputed quantity or weight.
t Or 30s. for each reputed 2-callon case, or 60s. for each reputed 4-gallon case, when the
said cases respectively do not contain more than the reputed contents, and so on for each reputed
gallon or part of a gallon.


The “ Lai Lai Falls ” are part of the head waters of the Moorabool River, and are situated amongst romantic surroundings about
12 miles from Ballarat. They have an almost perpendicular fall of 110 feet, and a great volume of water is discharged over them
daring the winter months, indeed they scarce ever cease running during the driest season. They form a never-failing attraction during the
summer season for picnic parties, fyc. A New Years Day race meeting is held on a pretty racecourse adjoining.
The “ Statuary House at the Ballarat Botanic Gardens is shown below. This octagonal building contains the celebrated heroic
group of marble statuary, “ The Flight from Pompeiiby Benzom, valued at £4OOO, together with fqur smaller works of art, the whole
being a bequest to the city by one of its pioneers, Mr. J. Russell Thomson. The Gardens also contain 12 other statues, all of marble,
presented by another patriotic citizen, Mr. Thos. Stoddart.


Spirits— continued. £ s . d.
Spirits—Methylated per liq. gal. 0 1 0
~ Perfumed per gal. 14 0
Spirits mixed with essential oils, so as to be unfit for human
consumption, to be used in the manufacture of soap,
under Commissioner’s permit, provided the mixing is
performed in the presence of an Officer of Customs
performed in the presence of an Officer of Customs ... Free.
Springs—Sofa, Chair, and other Furniture ad valorem 10 p.c.
Starch per lb. 0 0 2
Stationery, Manufactured, as under :
Albums of all sorts
Blotters, blotting-cases, blotting-pads, bill-heads, and all
other printed, ruled, or engraved forms of paper, bound
or unbound, including printed or lithographed adver-
tisements or posters of all kinds when framed...
Books—Account, betting, cheque, copy diary, drawing,
exercise, guard, letter, music, memo., pocket, receipt,
sketch...
Bill files and letter-clips...
Cards—Printers’, visiting, funeral, menu, programme, , ,
wedding, in sheet, or cut ... 'ad valorem
Card-cases, not being of silver or gold ... ... ... 00 p.c.
Date-cases, cards, calendars
Envelopes ...
Ink-bottles, inkstands, ink wells
Labels—Luggage and other
Memo, slates and tablets
Mounts or stands for pictures ...
Parchment—cut
Sketch blocks
Wrappers—Fancy, for writing-paper ...
Writing-cases, desks, and stationery cases ...
Stearine... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... r»er 1
per lb. 0 0 2
Stone, (See Marble.)
Sugar, the produce of Sugar Cane ... per cwt. 0 3 0
Sugar, the produce of Sugar Cane, bonded and refined in
Victoria, in a bonded warehouse, under regulations framed
by the Governor-in-Council per cwt. 0 2 0
Sugar, the produce of Beet-root, and all other sugar ~ 0 6 0
£)ee also Glucose.
Sugar—Candy ... ... per pint or lb.* 0 0 2
~ Molasses (except unrefined) per cwt. 0 3 0
Tea ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... .. per lb. 00 3
Tents and Tarpaulins ad valorem 20 p.c.
Tiles. (See Brownware.)
Timber and Building Material: —
Except/ S^ aves ’ sl } a P ed or dressed... \ Otherwise
. \Timber, finished, not otherwise enumerated ... / dutiable.
Architraves and mouldings, of all sorts, wholly or partly pre-
pared, under 3 inches in width ... per 100 ft. lin. 0 4 0
Architraves and mouldings, of all sorts, wholly or partly pre-
pared, 3 inches and over in width ... per 100 ft. lin. 0 7 0
Boards—Flooring, lining, weather, shelving (dressed or
planed) ... .. ... per 100 ft. sup. 0 16
Doors, not exceeding 1J inch in thickness each 0 5 0
~ over IJin. and not exceeding Ifin. in thickness ~ 0 7 6
~ over l|in. inch in thickness ~ 010 0
Frames, door and window... ... ... M 0 5 0
Hardwood per 100 ft. sup. 0 3 0
Baths ner 1.000 0 5 0
per 1,000 0 5 0
Palings per 100 0 0 9
Pickets—Dressed ... ... ... ... ... () 0 6 6
~ Undressed ... ... ... ... )( 0 0 6
Sashes —Window, unglazed per pair 0 2 0
glazed „ 0 3 0
Shingles per 1,000 0 0 9
Skirtings, wholly or partly prepared ... per 100 ft. lin, 0 7 0
Spokes and felloes in the rough (except hickory) per 100 0 0 6
Timber, of sizes less than 7in. by 2Jin. per 100 ft. sup. 0 4 0
Timber, bent (not otherwise enumerated) ... ad valorem 25 p.c.
~ cut into shapes for making into cases, boxes or similar
articles ... ... ... ... ... ... per cubic ft. 0 0 6
~ known as Oregon, of sizes less .than 7in. by 2 Jin.
per 100 ft. sup. 0 5 0
~ of the sizes of 7in. by 2Jin. and upwards, and less
than 12in. by 6in. ... per 100 ft. sup. 0 2 6
~ of the the sizes of 12in. by Gin. and upwards per
100 ft. sup 0 1 6
Timber and Building Materials, viz. : •,
Ash, Australian and New Zealand pine, blackwood,j
cedar, hickory, oak, posts and rails, staves, syca- -Undressed
iriore, walnut, whitewood, willow ... ... j
Hardwood—Undressed logs of the size of 9in. square or larger I „
California redwood, sugar pine, American white pine (undressed, ftree-
lin. and over in thickness)
Spokes and felloes of hickory in the rough
Spars, in the rough
Timber, known as Oregon (undressed logs of any size) J
Tobacco (except sheepwash, including tobacco soaked on the landing
thereof from the importing ship, or on delivery from the
warehouse, in turpentine, oil, or other fluid, in the presence
of some Officer of Customs, so as to render it unfit and useless
for human consumption):—
Manufactured per lb. 0 3 0
Unmanufactured ... ... ... ... ... M 0 10
Cigars 060
Snuff „ 0 3 0
Tubs. (See Buckets).
Twine (except sewing or seaming of hemp, cotton, or flax) ...per lb. 0 02J
Reaper and Binder Twine and Yarn made from jute, hemp or
flax per cwt. 0 8 0
... ... ... ... ... ... GWI. (J \J
Typeholders, for bookbinders ... . ... ad valorem 10 p.c.
Umbrellas. (See Parasols.)
Varnish, including lithographic per gallon 0 2 0
* Per pint or lb. or reputed package of that quantity or weight, and so in proportion for any
such reputed quantity or weight.
£ s. d
Vegetables (except salted, dried, or preserved in brine, otherwise
dutiable), dried and preservedfrom decay by any process per lb. 0 0 3
Vermicella. (See Macaroni.)
Vinegar, not being acetic acid or crude vinegar, aromatic, or raspberry
per gallon 0 0 G
Watches, and all parts thereof, wholly or partly made up ad valorem 20 p.c.
Waters, Aerated or Mineral 10 p.c.
Whips ” 45 p’g’
Wickerware (except furniture otherwise dutiable) ... ~ 45 pc.
Wine, sparkling per gallon 0 Jo’ 0
Other ... per gallon 012 0
\\ oodenware (except furniture otherwise dutiable), including beehives,
bellows, picture frames, and wooden hames, turnery, staves
shaped or dressed, and finished timber not otherwise enumer-
ated .. ... .. ... ... ... ... ad valorem 35 p.c.
Casks and shooks, new or secondhand, buckets and tubs ~ 35 p.c.
Woodenware, viz. :—Turnery being billiard balls in the rough,
engravers’ boxwood, shafts and poles in the rough, and ash
oars Free.
Woollen manufactures, or manufacturing containing wool, viz. :
Blankets, blanketing, rugs, and rugging ad valorem 35 p.c.
Piece goods, whether in the piece or cut into lengths or shapes,
being vestings, trouserings, coatings, shirtings, broadcloths,
witneys, naps, flannels, mantle cloths, cloakings, ulsterings,
kerseys, serges, costume cloths, Melton cloths, and tweeds
ad valorem 40 p.c.
Woollen manufactures, being printers’ blankets and collar
checks... . t , ... ... ... ... ... ... Free.
Woolpacks. (See Bags.)
EXPORT DUTIES.
Scrap Iron per ton 3 0 0
EXCISE.
Spirits distilled in Victoria—
From Malt, Grain, Grapes, or Wine ... ... per gal.* 011 0
From Sugar, Treacle, or Molasses, or from Wort Wash or
Spent Wash, with which Sugar, Treacle, or Molasses has
been made or mixed, or from Beer or A1e,... per gal.* 013 0
From Roots per gal.* 013 0
EXCISE DUTY ON BEER.
Act 1257-
Brewed from Malt and Hops exclusively ... ... ... per gal. 00 2
All other . per gal. 0 0 3
EXCISE DUTY ON TOBACCO, &c.
Act 1082.
Tobacco 'I Manufactured in any Tobacco Factory, on
Snuff J- being entered for home consumption
Cigars and Cigarettes J per lb. 0 0 6
TONNAGE DUES.
Act No. 1165, Secs. 88 and 89.
On all Ships arriving in any Port in Victoria ... per ton 0 0 6
Provided that no ship shall pay the said duty more than
once within any six months.
STAMP DUTY.
Act No. 1274.
Customs Entry Warrant, Locker’s Order, or any Certificate,
Receipt, or Acknowledgment issued by or on behalf of the
proprietor or occupier of any warehouse or store for any
goods stored therein ;
Customs Entry Warrant where the goods are under the
value of £5O ... ... ... ... 0 0 3
Of the value of £5O and upwards ... ... ... 0 0 6
For Samples only ... ... ... ... ... ... Free.
Locker’s Order, not including those for goods to be ex-
ported ... ... ... j... ... ... ... 006
Certificate, Receipt, or Acknowledgment ... ... 0 0 I
0 0 I
A Bill to the following effect has passed the Legislative Assembly, and will
without doubt be accepted by the Council :
That, on and after the 20th day of July, 1893, in addition to any duties now
collected under any Act of Parliament there shall be paid to Her Majesty her
heirs or successors a primage duty of 1 per cent, on the value of all goods
imported into Victoria by land or sea, such value to be estimated in accordance
with the provisions of the Customs Act 1890 for the valuation of ad valorem goods,
except the following, viz. -
1. Bullion and Coin.
2. Wool.
3. Hides, Green.
4. Sheepskins, Undressed.
5. Opossum, Rabbit, and other Undressed Skins.
6. Tallow.
7. Ores for Treatment.
8. Opals and other precious stones in the Rough.
9. Redgum in the Round, for sawing purposes.
10. Furniture, Secondhand, accompanying any passenger, exempt
from Customs duty.
11. Carriages and other Vehicles used in the conveyance of passengers
and goods across the Border.
12. Travellers’ Samples.
13. Baggage—Passengers’.
All goods imported into Victoria on and after the said 20th day of July, 1893,
and which before the 29th day of August, 1893, were delivered to the importer
thereof or his agent without the payment of the duty imposed by this Act.
All goods transhipped to be exported from Victoria, and all goods passing or
forwarded through Victoria under bond.
* ?uch duties on spirits respectively shall be paid on the gallon standard measure of spirits of
the strength of proof by Sykes’hydrometer, and so on in proportion for any greater or less strength
than proof.






Issued bv P. W. Niven & Co., under authority of the Government, with “ Victoria and Its Resources.”


