

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, MELBOURNE.




VICTORIA,
THE
Garden State
Australia,
Tj}H pamphlet s a ? f*££n compiled J-op t f}e
information and guidance of Intending pettier# on
Crown op Under t[?e provision# of t[?e
Closer Settlement and Small Improved
Holdings Keis.
666<3)$S)iS)
Issued by direction of The Hon. J. E. MACKEY,
Commissioner of Crown Lands and Survey.
Crown Lands Department,
Melbourne, Ist February, 1908.
By Authority : J. Kemp, Anting Government Printer, Melbourne.




Tf}c:
Tales of the pioneering days of Victoria always prove interesting
reading, stirring incidents occurred, not always without a tragic side,
and sometimes at frequent intervals, but, taken on the whole, the
settlement of the white man in Victoria was accompanied with but
little bloodshed as far as the natives were concerned.
The first settlement apart from whaling and sealing camps was
effected from the island of Tasmania, by a family named Henty, who
settled upon the site of the present town of Portland in the year 1834.
This, however, was not the point from which settlement spread, it was
in the year following that actual settlement started on the shores of
Port Phillip Bay.
A few items of interest will serve as stepping stones to exemplify
the growth of population from this handful of people who settled in
1835 to the fourteen people to the square mile of the present day.
At the opening of the Melbourne Exhibition in 1866, Mr. John
Pascoe Eawkner (one of the first of the pioneers) stated: —“ There were
only 33 persons in Melbourne in October, 1835, and this number included
the crew of The Enterprise; this was practically the first land
settlement in Victoria, and they were encamped on the present site
of Melbourne.
In June, 1836, there were thirteen buildings in existence, and the
European population numbered 142 males and 35 females, whilst the
stock consisted of 26,500 sheep, 57 horses, about 100 head of cattle,
and the area under cultivation did not exceed 60 acres.
Melbourne was laid out in 1837, in equal squares of 10 acres, each
of which was divided into twenty allotments of half-an-acre, and at
the time of the first sale it is understood that the population totalled
some 800 souls. This sale was held on Ist June, 1837, and the average
price realized was £35 for each half-acre lot. On the Ist November of
the same year a second sale was held, when the average price of each
allotment increased to £42.
The first suburban land was sold in Sydney, the purchasers being
nearly all from that town.
In 1841, encouragement was given to immigrants who were prepared
to settle on the land. The price of land in the then Port Phillip
district was fixed at £1 per acre, and the areas granted were 320 acres.
A free passage was given to one adult (children pro rata) for every
£2O paid in Great Britain for land taken up under these conditions.
The discovery of gold in 1851 solved once and for all the question
of population. Thousands streamed from the old world into the new
country, and, in consequence, production everywhere increased. Workers
of any kind were practically unobtainable, and whilst thousands were
delving for the precious metal, others were steadily acquiring large
tracts of fertile land, and stocking them with sheep and cattle.
With the decline of the gold fever, caused by the shallow alluvial
deposits becoming gradually more or less worked out, those wild had
been engaged in mining were forced to take up agriculture in some form
or other as a means of livelihood, and it was soon found that the soil
of Victoria was equal to that of any other country in the world.
Up to 1851 less than 400,000 acres of land were thrown open for
sale, and these areas were in the immediate vicinity of Melbourne.
Geelong, Portland, and Alberton. (At the present time, out of


56,245,760 acres, the total area of the State, 27,521,890 acres have been
disposed of, 5,333,609 acres are held under various kinds of leases, and
10,632,221 acres have been set apart for roads, reserves, townships, &c.,
leaving a balance of 12,758,040 acres of available Crown lands.)
1837. TFie: Ttipnlng Point in tf)£ oj Vletopia.
The year 1857 was a notable period in the annals of the infant
city of Melbourne, the fever of the gold rushes was fast dying out,
and from this year might be dated the beginning of Melbourne’s steady
growth in manufacture and commerce.
The Hobson’s Bay railway line, Melbourne to Sandridge, since re-
named Port Melbourne, had been running for some years prior to
1857, and the 13th May of that year saw the line from Melbourne to
St. Hilda opened, and the next month the line from Melbourne to
Geelong carried the first train to that centre of population.
Homestead and Silo on the Whitfield Closer Settlement Estate,
Up till the 10th August, 1857, only oil lamps were available for
street lighting, and that date saw the streets illuminated by gas sup-
plied from the Melbourne Gas Works.
On the 31st December, 1857, Major-General Macarthur opened the
valve that supplied the City of Melbourne with water from the Yan
Yean reservoir. This immense sheet of water has been enlarged, and
the natural storage so increased by numbers of aqueducts and other
supplies, that it is now one of the finest water supply systems in the
world. The reservoir itself holds 6,400,000,000 gallons of water, and is
being fed by numerous overflowing mountain streams. Eight storage
reservoirs are also in existence, which, added to the Yan Yean, make a
storage capacity of 6,508,000,000 gallons.
Mdßotipne: To-da^
Contrast the straggling Melbourne of 1857 with the magnificent city
rf to-day. At the present over 100 miles of streets are enclosed within
its boundaries, the principal ones, 99 feet wide, are paved with


Vessels entered —
1902.
1906.
Number
2,278 .
2,332
Tonnage
.. 3,366,485 .
. 4,066,442
Vessels cleared —
Number
2,286 .
2,343
Tonnage
. ; 3,372,555 .
. 4,070,549
wood blocks, and run at right angles; they are flanked on either side
with palatial buildings, utilized for banking, trade, and business pur-
poses, the architecture and structure of which compare favorably with
those of any other city in the world.
At the present the capital value of the ratable buildings of the
City of Melbourne proper is estimated at £35,000,000, representing an
annual value of over a million and a half sterling. The revenue of the
City Council is £288,016, and the expenditure £272,928.
Every suburb of Melbourne, as well as the city itself, is now well
supplied with trains and tramways, both cable and electric, and the
travelling public are well accommodated, wherever they are not avail-
able, by omnibuses, cabs, &c., the fares varying from One penny to Three-
pence per journey.
The improvement in street lighting is also most marked. As the oil
lamps were superseded by gas in the year 1857, so gas is, in its turn, fast
disappearing in favour of electric light. The electric mains of the City
Council are now supplying light and power over the whole of the suburban
area, the City proper having been electrified for a number of years.
Melbourne is the present seat of Government for the Commonwealth
of Australia as well as of the State of Victoria. It is also the largest
distributing centre of Australia, its geographical situation naturally
adapting it for this purpose, as it is practically the midway point between
the various other States.
The Eiver Yarra enables vessels from all parts of the world to come
right into the heart of the city and discharge their cargoes, whilst Port
Melbourne and Williamstown will accommodate the mammoth ocean
liners and permit them to berth within 3 miles of the metropolis.
There has been a considerable growth in the volume of shipping the
last few years. The number of vessels and their tonnage (excluding
coastal trade) entered and cleared, for the years 1902 and 1906, is as
follows: —
The total value of Victorian exports and imports for the years 1902 and
1906, and their respective values per head of population, is as follows: —
IMPORTS. EXPORTS.
Ypnr Value Per Head Year y alue Per Head
* ca ' • of Population. ' ' of Population.
£ I £ s. d. £ £ s. d.
1902 ... 18,270,215 'l5 2 8 1902 ... 18,210,523 15 I 8
1900 ... 25,234,402 j 20 11 4 1906 ... 28,917,992 23 11 4
Increase... 6,964,157 5 8 8 ... 10,707,469 8 9 8
The Savings Bank returns issued up to 30th June, 1906, show that
more than one person out of every three in the State have money on
deposit in the Savings Banks, the number of depositors being 380 per 1000,
and the amount on deposit £11,764,179, representing an average to each
depositor of £25 4s. Id.


Taking the average wealth per head of population as a basis, Victoria
ranks high in the list as compared with other countries, viz.:—
Wealth
Country. per head.
£
United Kingdom .. .. .. 302
Victoria .. .. .. .. 261
United States . . .. .. 234
Canada ~ .. .. ~ 196
Splendid Field jW Emigrant.
No other country can offer such opportunities as Victoria to the
farmer possessed of limited capital. The soil is rich and productive;
wheat, oats, and all other cereals, root crops, fruit, &c., may be grown
in abundance, whilst the experience already gained by those established
in all parts of the State will enable the newcomer to know what to do,
A Closer Settlement Homestead, Werneth Estate.
and how to do it, to make a success of whatever branch of the various
farming industries he may take up. He can practically reckon out
his chances before he starts. Agricultural chemistry and up-to-date
implements have uplifted farm life and methods from a weary drudgery
to a healthful science.
From the time a settler takes up his allotment, he has at command
the various branches of the Department of Agriculture. The Chemistry
branch analyzes the soil on his holding, points out what is lacking,
advises him as to the most suitable crops to put in, and brings to light
its possible vegetable and animal production. Expert instructors advise


liim what crop to sow and how to sow it, when to reap, and how to
harvest. The State railways then convey it at a minimum rate to the
various markets or to the seaboard for shipment oversea.
There are experts to advise him about his wheat, oats, fruit, vines,
tobacco, &e., and if he meets misfortune the State helps him still
further through the medium of the Savings Bank, and advances him
money on the security of his land and improvements at the lowest
possible rates of interest.
At the present time there are only 53,000 farms in Victoria, and
there is ample room for many thousands more. The average return per
farm last year reached £4ll. The present is an age of progression, and
the up-to-date farmer in Victoria progresses with it. Advanced methodsj
irrigation, intense culture, are being practised now, and must inevitably
epread over a far-reaching area, and with them a corresponding increase
of profit for the labour and money expended.
Situated south of the equator, as Victoria is, the reversal of the
seasons allows its steadily-increasing output to be passed across the
seas at the time when the markets of the old world are most in need
of replenishment. Then, again, India, China, and Japan want flour,
Victorian wheat and mills can supply it; South Africa wants maize
and compressed fodder in enormous quantities, Victoria is supplying it;
hundreds of thousands of pounds are spent in Great Britain on fruit
alone, Victoria can meet the demand with her thousands of acres of land,
eminently suitable for fruit growing, ideal country for this purpose, which
is only being opened up. Victorian wines and brandies are fast becoming
a staple article of export to the old world; whilst it is well known that
Victorian-grown wheat and wool are the finest the world can produce.
It is no empty boast to call Victoria “ The Garden State of Aus-
tralia.” Nature has made it so; it contains millions of acres of rich
agricultural lands. All the uplands are capable of producing, and im
many cases at the present do produce fruit of the highest quality. The
climate is mild and genial, closely resembling that of the south of
France. The rainfall is regular and sufficient for all needs, and where
at all uncertain the State is expending hundreds of thousands of pounds
on enormous irrigation systems, from which, as fast as they are
extended, the supplies of water they convey are available to settlers.
The railways, which are owned and controlled by the State, intersect
country like a vast network, rendering it difficult to get to a point more
than 15 miles distant from a railway line. The Municipal Councils do
their share in the construction and maintenance of good roads, making it
an easy matter for the settler to convey his produce to rail or market.
Under these circumstances, it is easily understood that agricultural
production has gone ahead by leaps and bounds, so much so, that not
only has Victoria a far greater area under cultivation than any other
Australian State, but it is now the leading dairying country in the
Southern Hemisphere.
Railway Concession# to Settle:?#.
Liberal concessions are made to settlers by the Railway Department.
Not only are excursion fares granted for the purpose of inspecting the
land and attending the Land Boards, but reduced rates for the convey-
ance of a lessee’s furniture, implements, and stock, and cheap fares for


himself and members of his family are available, These reductions in
fares and freights will be found of material assistance, enabling him
to transfer himself, his family, and his belongings from the old home
to the new at the lowest possible cost.
Fpee: oj’ Education.
The system of education in "Victoria is free, secular, and compulsory.
State schools are established in every town throughout the State, and
also throughout the country districts. The curriculum includes all
necessary subjects. Scholarships are open to every scholar, those
successful being enabled to obtain advanced instruction free of charge
at any of the various colleges, and through them a course of University
training to fit them for the medical, legal, or other professions.
Technical schools are established throughout the country, and also
agricultural and horticultural colleges, the fees for which are within
the means of every one.
LANDS ADMINISTRATION IN VICTORIA.
Inj’opmation to Intending on opown Eand^.
Any eligible person eighteen years of age may take up Crown lands.
Intending selectors should apply to the Crown Lands Office, Mel-
bourne, or at any country Land Office, for particulars of land available,
where plans and full information will be supplied free of charge.
Applications are dealt with at a local Land Board, and successful
applicants may receive a permit to occupy the land immediately after
the first rent has been paid.
Residence on the allotment is generally necessary, as is also the fulfil-
ment of certain improvement conditions.
Crown lands are divided into the following classes:—
Agricultural and grazing land (including Mallee lands)
Pastoral lands.
Swamp or reclaimed lands.
Sale of land by public auction.
Auriferous lands.
Agricultural and grazing selections.
The clauses of the Land Act provide for the selection of areas from
200 acres to 640 acres of agricultural and grazing land, and in the case
of Mallee lands from 640 acres to 1,280 acres, under a 20 or 40 years’
tenure, the annual rental charged being according to the valuation of the
land at the rate of Is. in the £1 for a 20 years ’ term, or 6d. in the £1 for
a 40 years’ term, when the freehold is obtained, or at any time after the
first six years. Improvements must be effected whether held under a
residential or non-residential licence.


Ktipifepotig laand£.
Auriferous lands may be taken up under licence at rental of Is. per
acre per annum, maximum area 20 acres. These areas can only be made
freehold if the mining reservation is removed from them, when all rents
paid may be credited.
tan cl j’OP Sale: Kuetion
Certain lands specially classed in various parts of the State, and any
isolated area not exceeding 50 acres in extent, may be sold by auction.
The terms are cash, or in instalments bearing 4 per cent, per annum
interest.
Swamp op Reclaimed Rand^.
These lands are disposed of under Conditional Purchase Lease, in
areas not exceeding .160 acres. The term of lease is 31% years and the
interest charged 4% per cent, per annum. The Crown grant may be
obtained after six years. Improvements are necessary.
Gapden, op Residential Sites.
Areas not exceeding 3 acres may be obtained for these purposes
under annual licence, and, after five years, if there are no objections to
alienation, the freehold may be obtained, credit being given for the rent
paid.
Bee: Fapm£.
Licences for Bee Farms not exceeding 10 acres may be obtained at
a rental of Is. per acre per annum, and a range area within a one-mile
radius at one half-penny per acre per annum.
Rieemees.
There is no limit of areas for these licences, and the rental charged
is according to the quality of the land and its value for grazing pur-
poses. These areas comprise reserves and any Crown lands not required
for other purposes.
Fp£e:f}olcl Fapm# Bpanef}. Pplvate RancU jW d£ale:»
This office has been established to afford information respecting
improved private lands for sale to persons coming from abroad, and
to encourage those wanting farms to remain in Victoria.
Particulars of such properties are collected from accredited local
and other agents, so that inquirers with a little capital may ascertain
without delay the localities where suitable land for their purpose can
be obtained, whether it be for wheat growing, lamb raising, dairying,
mixed farming, or otherwise, and the terms under which it may L©
acquired.


The object is to register only farms in working order that may be
regarded as “ living areas,” on which a settler could enter into occu-
pation at once, and, without unnecessary loss of time, obtain a return
sufficient to comfortably support himself and family.
Inquirers will be supplied with all information furnished by the
agents, and this will be supplemented by any knowledge that may be
at the disposal or that can reasonably be obtained by the Department.
Where satisfactory evidence is forthcoming of the bona /ides of
the applicant arrangements will be made by which he will be permitted
to travel on the railways at reduced rates in order to inspect the land.
Further information can be obtained by personal or written
application.
Good Grazing Country, Memsie Closer Settlement Estate.
§>mall Improved .Holding# Kct 1906.
This Act is destined to play a most important part in the question
of Land Settlement. Under its provisions the Government may spend
£150,000 a year in the purchase of properties, suitable for subdivision
into small holdings, close to centres of population, and in assisting the
settlers thereon with the necessary improvements.


Each allotment will contain land to the value of £2OO exclusive of
cost of survey, clearing, draining, and making roads thereto. In
addition to this, £l5O may be advanced to enable the settler to effect,
under proper supervision, the necessary improvements, such as buildings,
fencing, cultivation, and the purchase of live stock and implements.
Settlers must be over 21 years of age, and either natural born or
naturalized British subjects. Every settler must be a probationary tenant
of his block for a term not less than six, and not exceeding eighteen
months, and may be employed during that period, under qualified foremen,
in improving the holding, for which he may be advanced 20s. per week for
the first six months, 15s. per week for the second six months, and 10s.
per week for the third six months. From these weekly advances 5 per
cent, interest on the value of the holding and the amount advanced for
improvements will be deducted. At the end of six, twelve, or eighteen
months, the probationary tenant may select the block, obtaining
years to pay for the land, sixteen years to pay for the cost of improve-
ments, and three years to pay for the cost of implements and live stock,
with 5 per cent, interest added in each case. Residence is insisted on.
At the end of six years the settler may transfer his holding with the
approval of the Minister of Lands, and at the end of twelve years the
whole of the unpaid balance on land and improvements can be tendered,
and the holding made freehold property.
TF)e: Clo£e:p Settlement Kets,
The subdivision of land under the Closer Settlement Acts has become
an established policy of the Government, and at the present time is one
of the most vital adjuncts to the welfare of the State.
The initial steps in this class of legislation were made in 1898. In
an amending Land Act of that year, provision was made, enabling the
Government to purchase private estates in settled portions of the State,
for subdivision and sale on easy terms to settlers. Under this Act four
estates aggregating 33,571 acres were purchased for the sum of £208,288.
These estates were subdivided into 192 farm allotments, and now support
a population of over 1,000 persons.
The success of this practically experimental attempt showed the
necessity for sound legislation in this respect, and has resulted in the
passing of The Closer Settlement Acts 1904 and 1906.
Under the Closer Settlement Acts, the control of repurchased estates
is placed in the hands of a Board, called the Lands Purchase and
Management Board. The personnel of this Board is now;—J. M. Gillespie,
Esq., Chairman; the Hon. D. J. Duggan; J. M. Reed, Esq., 1.5.0., Surveyor-
General; and the Secretary, Captain J. E. Jenkins. It is empowered to
expend every year a sum of half-a-million sterling in the purchase of suit-
able properties for subdivision into farm allotments, agricultural
labourers’ allotments, and residential sites for working men.
Since the appointment of the Lands Purchase Board in January, 1905,
23 large estates, comprising an area of 171,012 acres, have been pur-
chased, at a primary cost of £1,228,134. Twenty-two of them have
been subdivided into 978 farm allotments, of which at the present time
879 have been taken up, and support a population of over 3,500 people.


The Werribee Park estate, at present in the hands of the Board,
comprises an area of 23,214 acres; it is situated from 10 to 20 miles
from Melbourne, and when subdivided will provide for the settlement
of at least 350 families. In connexion with the subdivision of this pro-
perty there is a large scheme of irrigation on hand, which, when com-
pleted, will place thousands of acres of this property under irrigable
conditions.
Whilst the Act has provided for farm allotments, as has already been
shown, the interests of the agricultural labourer and the city working
man have not been neglected. The former has been well provided for
in the farm areas already mentioned, and the latter has received special
consideration in having large areas near the City of Melbourne, and in
several provincial centres, thrown open. Under the original Act, one
estate was purchased and divided into 56 working men’s allotments, now
containing a population of 256; and under the present Acts, six additional
areas have been purchased, and 297 families, numbering 1,485 persons,
have been settled in healthy and congenial surroundings.
In addition to the settlement thus effected by means of subdividing
repurchased estates, six areas of Crown lands, aggregating 2,690 acres,
have been handed over to the Board. These have been subdivided as
follows: —Mortlake, 2,350 acres, into 28 farm allotments; Leongatha,
53 acres, into 4 farm allotments; Dowling Forest (near Ballarat),
225 acres, into 21 agricultural labourers’ allotments; Warrnambool,
46 acres, into 28 workmen’s homes allotments; and Maddingley (near
Bacchus Marsh), 13 acres, into 13 workmen’s homes allotments. These
areas support a population of 338 persons.
The Board has now on hand, ready for immediate settlement, a num-
ber of farms, close to railways, from 30 to 80 miles from Melbourne,
handy to schools, post-offices, churches, &c.
The passing of this amending Act has gone a long way towards
helping the farmer, with only limited capital, on to a holding. Provision
has been made for the suspension of instalments to an amount equal to
60 per cent, of the value of the improvements effected by the lessee.
The qmount so suspended may be paid up in three ways —either in a
lump sum, or spread over a definite period, or the amount may be added
to the capital value of the allotment, and so spread over the term of
the lease.
All lessees holding leases under the original sections of the Land Act
1898 may transfer their leases to the present Act, and obtain the benefits
and privileges the now legislation allows.
The Board is also empowered to assist lessees to erect dwelling houses
and outbuildings. The amount advanced for such improvements must
be repaid within sixteen years, with 5 per cent, interest added. Such
interest will be charged only on the balance of principal remaining
unpaid.
Provision is also made to enable the Board to set apart portions of
any estate purchased for exclusive application by residents of Great
Britain and Ireland desiring to emigrate to Victoria.




Tevm#, Condition#, die., tincLep wFiieF) Clo#e;p
Settlement Allotment# ape FielcL
Applications must be made on the prescribed forms and lodged with
the Secretary, Lands Purchase Board, Public Offices, Melbourne, accom-
panied by the registration fee of 55., and a deposit equal to the first
half-yearly instalment for the most valuable allotment applied for, and
the lease fee of £l.
The leases issued to successful applicants will be dated the first day
of the month in which the land is granted, and may be for such a term
of years not exceeding 31 % as may be agreed upon between the lessee
and the Board.
Applicants must be of the full age of 21 years. In the case of
Workmen’s Homes Allotments, any person who is engaged in any form
of manual, clerical, or other work for hire or reward, and is not possessed
of real or personal property to a value exceeding £250, may apply for
an allotment.
Only one allotment can be granted to any one person.
No conditional purchase lease of a farm allotment can be granted
to any person who is already the holder ot land of the value of £1,500
(township land excepted) or who would thereby become the holder of
land exceeding such value; in the case of Agricultural Labourers’
Allotments the maximum value which can be held is £2OO. In the case
of Workmen’s Home Allotments, no person who is directly or indirectly
the owner of any other land in the State, which if town or suburban
land, exceeds one-eighth of an acre, or if rural land, exceeds 50 acres
in area.
Improvements must be effected as follows: —
For a Farm Allotment, to the value of at least two instalments
of the purchase money before the end of the first year from
the date of the lease, to 10 per cent, of the purchase money
before the end of the third year, and to a further 10 per
cent, before the end of the sixth year.
For an Agricultural Labourers’ Allotment, a substantial dwelling-
house, of the value of at least £3O, must be erected within
one year of the date of the lease; and the allotment enclosed
by a substantial fence within two years of the date of the
lease.
For a Workmen’s Home Allotment, a substantial dwolbng-
house, to the value of at least £5O, must be erected within
one year from the date of the lease, and substantial improve-
ments, to the value of a further £25, before the end of the
second year.
The lessee must reside on the allotment. Personal residence by the
lessee’s wife, or any of his children over eighteen years of age, may,
with the approval of the Board, be considered personal residence by
the lessee.


Land, £200 at 4% per cent, for 31% years in 6
per
cent, payments
5
0
Advance of £50 for improvements at 5 per cent.
for
sixteen years in 10 per cent, payments
2
0
Total per week
7
0
The lessee cannot transfer, assign, mortgage, or sublet the whole
or any part of his allotment within the first six years of the lease.
The Crown grant may be issued to the lessee at the end of any
half-year after the first twelve years have expired, on payment of the
balance of purchase money.
Payments in advance may be made at any time at the option of
the lessee, and proportionate reduction of interest secured thereby.
The purchase money, with interest at 4% per cent., must be paid by
63 or a less number of half-yearly instalments (including deposit),
calculated according to any of the tables under Division 3 of Part I.
of the Savings Banks Act 1890 Amendment Act 1896. Each instalment
will include interest upon the balance of the purchase money remaining
unpaid.
Agricultural Labourers’ Allotments are provided on all Closer Settle-
ment estates suitable for the purpose, and with the increasing use of
irrigation and advanced methods of cultivation, employment near to the
holdings is practically assured. Under any circumstances the allotment
may be cultivated by the lessee in his spare time, and by his children
when he is engaged in other employment, thus adding materially to his
usual source of income.
The repayments for an agricultural labourers’ allotment and the
amount of advance would be as follows: —
Per week.
These terms are easy, and within the scope of practically every one,
the deposit is only 3 per cent, of the value of the allotment, and becomes
the first half-yearly instalment, and the only fees charged are £1 for
lease fee, and ss. for registration fee.
A Sfjopt to Wopklng Men.
Every man knows, or should know, the advantages of owning the
house and land he occupies. The principal one is that he is not in the
position of being dependent on the whims of a landlord. There is no
raising of rent or notice to quit, just when he is comfortably settled;
and he has the satisfaction of knowing that every little improvement
made for his own convenience or comfort does not make him liable to
either ef these risks.


Land, *4 acre, value £60, at 4% per cent.,
years, in 6 per cent, payments
for 3 li/a
1
6
Water rate, say, 10s. per annum . .
0
2
City rate, say ..
0
7
Advance of £50 for improvements at 5 per
sixteen years, in 10 per cent, payments
cent, for
2
0
Total ..
4
3
The low prices, large areas, and the exceptionally easy terms offered
by the Closer Settlement Board must appeal strongly to the man who
wishes to become independent in this respect; for instance, a payment
of 4s. 3d. per week will secure the following:—
Those terms have, so far, never been equalled in any respect; the light
improvement conditions are within the compass of every man, and past
experience shows that the holders of areas under these conditions, in
many cases, have far exceeded the necessary obligations. The mere
fact of living away from the congested areas of the city must have a
great beneficial effect on the health, as well as the minds, of settlers
and their children, and every facility to establish homes is offered, to
enable workmen to create for themselves, during their spare time,
comfortable homes under cheerful and healthy conditions.
For pamphlet, literature, or any other information in connexion with
the disposal of land in Victoria (Australia), write to or call on
The Agent-G-eneral for Victoria,
Queen Victoria-street,
LONDON, E.C.
By Authority: J. Kemp, Acting Government Printer, Melbourne.




THB LANDS DEPARTMENT. MELBOURNE.
