

VICTOR HUGO
A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY
BLBIN VILLEVHL
(Ex-Editor of T,e Neo-Zelandais and I' Ocean.an)
WITH AN
ODE TO VICTOR HUGO
FRET) J. BROOMFIELD.
-Sjjbnej) :
BATSON & CO., Ltd., PRINTERS, 146 CLARENCE STREET.
flOfylb


Prom an Bngraring.
Goupil & Cie, Paris.
VICTOR HUGO.


VICTOR HUGO
A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY
BLBIN YILLEVHL
(Ex-Editor of Le Neo-Zelandais and L’Oceanien).
WITH AN
ODE TO VICTOR HUGO
FRED J. BROOMFIELD.
<8 Jibuti)
BATSON & CO., Ltd,, PRINTERS, 146 CLARENCE STREET




DEDICATION.
To my friend, Madame Juliette Henry, this
opuscule is dedicated as a tribute of homage paid to
her enthusiasm and energy in founding in our midst
a Cercle Litteraire the only French institu-
tion in Sydney in which, under her able supervision,
the treasures of our literature are unfolded and our
language is diffused.
To make the young people of this land of sunshine
and gold understand and love our great thinkers is
a work of progress and patriotism, and I thought it a
fitting recognition of her efforts to offer this study of
the great modern genius of France to a lady who has
proved her love for her motherland by devoting her
high intellectual faculties to the task of introducing
to young Australia the great literary worthies of old
France. Pro Patria.
A. V ILLEVAL.
Sydney, 30th July, 1895.
jffls




VICTOR HUGO
A BIOGRAPHICAL STUDY.
INTRODUCTION.
Victor Hugo was inconstestably one of the greatest
men of our century. A seer, whose mother-country
was the whole world with all its diversities of race
and colour; whose sanctuary was the human heart
with all its weaknesses, desires, and 'impulses. The
name of Victor Hugo looms in the history of human
achievement as that of an apostle, as the name of one
more than universal in the sympathies of heart and of
intellect, for it shines forth as a symbol, and a symbol
that typifies the Universe.
In attempting a study of such a giant, the writer
feels perplexed as to how lie shall approach his sub-
ject. Shall he essay an analysis of the works of the
great poet ? Shall he cite ad infinitum the jewels with
which Hugo has studded the precious ceinture of
French literature ? Or shall he confine himself to
indicating a few of the great teachings of the Master,
while enumerating, at the same time, the salient in-
cidents of a long and beneficent life ?


Before all else, I love in the personality of Victor
Hugo those characteristics which gave an emphatic
distinction to everything he wrote —that sublime
spirit of tolerance, that noble principle of justice, and
that Godlike love for the oppressed and feeble, which
mark him as the world-wide sympathiser of all sects,
races, and castes ; the impeccable judge and unflinching
castigator of pusillanimity, faineantise, and tyranny ;
the righter of wrongs and great-souled lover of man-
kind. From his pen flowed love and consolation as a
soothing balm over a humanity often too prone to
punish and condemn unheard, whilst he, the kind-
hearted, kin-hearted, and mighty-hearted one had only
the divine desire to pardon, the god’s yearning to
rehabilitate.


BEFORE THE EXILE.
Victor Hugo was born on the 26th February, 1802
at a time when France, after a long and dolorous
struggle between the past and the future, had just
given herself a new master in the person of Napo-
leon the First; at a time when, after that sanguinary,
albeit regenerating, epoch known in the annals of the
civilised world as the French Revolution, France had
abdicated her will and placed her destinies in power-
ful and implacable hands whose fortune fell at
Moscow, whose doom was sealed by the catastrophe
of Waterloo, and whose Calvary commenced at the
rocky islet of St. Helena.
Our great poet’s father was a General of the first
Empire, his mother was a member of the old noblesse.
He was therefore brought up in the midst of a
family impregnated with monarchic traditions united
to the tragic but imposing remembrance of the revo-
lutionary era. The mind of the child was necessarily
influenced by that atmosphere, and there is there-
fore nothing strange that, with a poet’s heart, he
should, in the days of his adolescence, have vowed a
great admiration to the genius of Napoleon.
Someone has said that the nineteenth century is
the biography of Hugo and Edison; another, that
“ The nineteenth century in France is the century of
Victor Hugo.”
He has, indeed, been the most attentive and pas-
sionate witness of its developments. With his genius
he has followed all the evolutions of this century, so
full of contradictions, doubts, and aspirations, and


his works mirror the perfect image of the spirit of the
age.
A true poet, he was at first fascinated by the
glories of the first Empire. He was next attracted
by the prospect of the revival of liberty which the
old monarchy seemed to bring back with her, pro-
gressing towards democracy with the constitutional
monarchy of Louis Philippe. But, when the second
Empire imposed itself on France through murder
and ruse, he anathematised, implacably castigated, and
branded with an inexorable condemnation a regime
which, for the second time within a single century,
lifted its banal body to impede the great movement of
social reforms.
In this long and constant ascension of the human
mind his work accompanies him. A poet, let me
insist, he has understood everything: the beautiful as
the ugly, the good as the evil. The first he has lifted
to the summit of the soul’s ideal by the grandest of
thoughts; the second he has lashed with the autho-
rity of his mighty verb.
He has left us a monument, nay, a perennial foun-
tain of youth to which we go to refresh ourselves
whether we feel sad and in need of consolation, or
succumb beneath the crushing hand of Fate, whenever
we want a regenerating elixir to snatch back to us
our ebbing strength and courage.
When we feel disgusted in the midst of a humanity
full of selfishness and envy, we find in his beautiful
pages, in his wholesome philosophy, in his teachings,
not only a solace but also the means of becoming
better in making us bestow around us the beneficence
which his doctrines encourage.
His beautiful lyrics waft us into a region sacred to
the ideal; he moves us, he makes our hearts vibrate
to the rhythm of his harmonies. He transports us
with enthusiasm by his narration of great and noble
deeds; he arouses our indignation when relating


the history of the crimes of some Nero great or small.
His muse, now subtly soft and caressing woos us to
cherish the adored child whom he chants, the woman
he depicts, the whole of nature whose secrets and
radiant beauties were so familiar to him.
His heroes, moulded with a master-hand, lead us
with them to the achievement of great actions;
whilst his gentleness to the unfortunate, the fallen,
even the pariah, opens our heart to that supreme
kindness which he knew so well how to practise.
He did not confine himself to singing what other
poets sing. He was not contented with exclusively
celebrating the harmonies of nature ; he did not apply
his genius to solely dissect his heart in order to
express from it the enthusiasm and bitterness of
youth being a prey to passion and doubt. No ! His
work is more virile, more impersonal. It is not
within himself that he looks, it is around him. He
looks into the past, he restitutes to us the remem-
brance of the times which have preceded us, and
makes us live in the Paris of the Middle-Ages, in the
midst of its buildings and its streets, with the customs,
the fetes, the gaieties, the loves, and the angers of
our forefathers.
As an example, let us take “ Notre-Dame de Paris,”
better known to the English reader under the name
of “ The Hunchback of Notre-Dame.” We certainly
have in English literature, in Sir Walter Scott’s
“ Ivanhoe,” one of the most perfect romantic represen-
tations of the Middle-Ages ; but. in Victor Hugo’s
great novel what colour, what action, what soul-
absorbing interest, what play of human passion, what
an altogether colossal composition do we find !
This book, he tells us, is based on a simple Greek
word: Ananke, that is to say, fatality. “ Notre-
Dame ”is not, like “ Ivanhoe,” a simple exposition of
heroic incidents described in a beautiful language,
which appeals more to the artist’s taste than to that


of the thinker. No, it is a profound analysis, which,
in the middle of a frame resplendent with poetry,
dissects the human heart and uncovers it.
What mother has not shed tears and, with terror,
pressed in a closer embrace her smiling children when
reading the fine lines whicli relate to the recluse of
the Rat-Hole, Paquette la Chantefleurie, who, during
fifteen years, had wept over the loss of her little
daughter kidnapped by wandering Gypsies ?
What a beautiful and touching romance there is
of pure and innocent love in that charming and fated
heroine : Esmeralda!
Where have we ever seen types of the calibre of
Claude Frollo, of Quasimodo, that strange being,
deformed, beaten, ill-used, wicked, and perverse, but
who, nevertheless, finds sometimes that he has a soul
responsive to the influence of that immutable law,
of that prime treasure of humanity; that untarnished
and untarnishable jewel, which, as a light in the
midst of the ocean, shows to the outcast, even to the
infamous, the haven of redemption : Love' Oh !
powerful sentiment, unsoundable mystery around
which gravitates our poor humanity, leaving often the
substance for the shadow ! But for thee, what would
become of the world ?
And do you perceive in that artist’s study this pro-
found knowledge of archaeology, this perfect ethno-
logy, this precision of places and things which carries
us back to the time when old Lutece, following step
by step the great way of the evolution of the human
mind, was just beginning to march towards the great
Paris of the nineteenth century. That which we
know; full of faults, full of passions ; but also full of
generosity and abnegation : an incandescent torch
whence humanitarian ideas glow to living embers, and
thence spread themselves in the great crucible of the
Universe, where each nation, each race, fashion them
to their own way of thinking.


But, let us not digress, and let us come back to our
bard: He embraces everything he meets on his way —
the glory of*battles; the pomp of coronations; Liberty,
this goddess misunderstood by some, worshipped by
others, carried to excess by too excitable minds; the
love of right, of justice ; the hatred of wrong and
villainy, violence and perjury, together with the
triumphs and the reverses of his fatherland.
Nothing escapes his search into the dominions of
Nature. Just as his ancestor Homer, he admires its
marvels : “ The earth, eternal poem ” ; the ocean with
the grandeur of its immensity, its waves now undulat-
ing and calm in their blue reflex, now swelling and
angry, furrowed with deep wrinkles personifying the
tempests of the human heart with the splendour of a
sublime spectacle!
With Shakspeare he enters the portals of the
human soul and explores its inmost sanctuaries; he
experiences all its weaknesses, all its grandeurs, all
its defects, all its triumphs; and knows with the
supreme knowledge of him who has touched every
string of the wonderful instrument.
His poem constitutes a perfect Odyssey, and flies
from the Orient to the Occident; from “ Les Orien-
tals,” verses full of the fire of the Bosphorus, to “ Les
Feuilles d’Automne,” a book replete with colouring
and human feelings, in which the highest sentiment
hovers over the holiness of nature, whose deepest
secrets are revealed to us in verses of infinite beauty.
Then we have “ Les Chants du Crepuscule,” which
contain several masterpieces, among which may be
cited “ Napoleon II ” and “ Espoir en Dieu ” (“ The
Hope in God ”).
His muse proceeds, unfolding itself, from “ Les
Odes et Ballades,” Les Yoix Interieures,” “ Les Cha-
timents,” to culminate to “ La Legende des Siecles,”
this epopee of mankind, and to “ L’Annee Terrible,”
that outcry of filial pity.


It is on old England’s hospitable soil, in the Isle
of Jersey, upon a rock, surrounded by the mysterious
clamours of the sea, that he armed himself with the
lash of Juvenal, with which to pitilessly flog, and
scarify, and scar, and brand for ever a regime which
sprang from crime and the dead ashes of perjury, and
which was led by the hand of destiny to the catas-
trophe of Sedan —the Tarpcian Rock of Napoleon the
Little.
Hugo wrote his accusing verses in the midst of calm
and ocean’s solitude—a sombre picture, truly, but the
justiciary’s sword was flashing.
We find not petty hatred in these pages of high
lineage. No, it is the outcry of a conscience filled
with indignation, and which revolts against outrage
and perjury. It is the prophet’s voice which, whilst
describing, chastising crime in sublime lines, points
out the end to a people misled by a pantomimic
parody of the Napoleonic prowesses. The end, that
is to say, France, bound hand and foot, opened up to
foreign invasion.
There is a difference of opinion about this book.
Let it pass. But what cannot be denied to it is its
epic grandeur; the great love of the fatherland, nay,
of the whole of humanity, with which each of its
pages is impregnated, and it will remain in history as
a picture of the errors and misguidances of the ones,
as well as of the faults and crimes of the others.
Victor Hugo wrote this sentence, which can well be
made the epigraph of his drama :—“ God strikes a
man—that man utters a cry ; this cry is drama! ”
Yes, that is drama; Victor Hugo’s drama above all.
In no other country, in no other times, has a poet
reproduced with more strength this cry of human
suffering.
This admirable power of depicting the wounds of
humanity is but one of the merits of Victor Hugo as
a dramatist; he has another : a deep feeling of pity.


All these heroes, all these vanquished of Fatality; all
these despairers, all these martyrs, even these villains,
have upon their faces a stream of tears which falls
evermore like a torrent issuing from the cleft side of
a sombre mountain.
That is the reason why the poet glorifies the one
and absolves the other. He knows that every cry is
the germ of despair; and that the poet, like a god,
must mete out justice with one hand, while he
tempers it with mercy from the other.
“ Hernani ” was the first of his dramas performed
on the stage —his “ Oliver Cromwell,” a beautiful
picture of the Puritan and his time, having never been
performed on account of its great length.
The freedom, the boldness of the poet’s composition
had already made a revolution in the clan of the clas-
sical school, the conservatism of which dreaded the
results of this bold step of Hugo’s towards the eman-
cipation of letters. Feeling, therefore, that a new era
was dawning, and that a new school of poetry had
arisen which threatened to wrest from their senile
hands the sceptre of dramatic supremacy, they raised
the most bitter and determined opposition to the ini-
tial performance of “ Hernani.”
They even went to the king of France to ask him
to stop its rehearsals: but Charles X answered their
importunities by the following words:—“ln matter
of letters my place, gentlemen, is only among the
audience.”
Undaunted by the royal rebuke, the exponents of
the old school mustered in force at the theatre on the
evening of the first performance, determined to hiss
the piece to death ; but, despite the clamours of these
pulmonic aristarchs, the piece went on, and tins beau-
tiful drama, although meeting with the greatest oppo-
sition, kept the boards for some time. “ Hernani ”
was indeed the first standard of the freedom in art
planted on the crumbling bastion of routine.


“Le Roi s’amuse ” roused another storm and was
played but once, having been stopped by the censor-
ship of the government of Louis Philippe as seditious.
“ Lucrezia Borgia,” however, the next play in order of
production, was hailed with enthusiasm at once by
those who, discarding the polemics of scholasticism,
sought in art only the beautiful.
These two pieces represent two deformities : the
one is physical and hideous ; but Triboulet, wretched
as he is, has a soul, and in this soul exists the purest
feeling belonging to man : paternal love; a power
which transforms his degraded nature into something
approaching the sublime.
“ Lucrezia Borgia ” represents a deformity not less
complete, not less repulsive; but hers is a moral
deformity. It is, however, softened by the purest
feeling of which woman is capable : maternal love.
Physical deformity, sanctified by paternal love, is
depicted in the drama of “Le Roi s’amuse.” Moral
deformity, purified by maternal love, is what we find
in “ Lucrezia Borgia.”
“ Ruy Bias,” a drama replete with thrilling inci-
dents and expressive of grand and noble sentiment,
was Hugo’s next production, while the last piece
owning his authorship performed upon the stage
was “ Les Burgraves,” a work possessing the great-
ness of the trilogies of yEschilus.
It is impossible in a short essay like this to review
all the works of the great man, still less is it possible
to enter into all the phases of his life of nearly one
century. I must therefore confine myself to showing
him under his different aspects, without attempting
chronological order.
In f 849, a Peace Congress held its meeting in Paris,
and Victor Hugo was called upon to preside over
its deliberations. In his introductory address he
welcomes the delegates as apostles coming from all
parts of the world inspired by a great and holy


thought. He spoke to them as men who had met
together not to work for the benefit of one nation, but
for the happiness and the welfare of all nations.
“ You have come,” he said, to turn, if that can be
done, the last and the most august page of the Gos-
pel ; the page which decreed peace among all the
children of a sole Creator; and here, in this city which
rejoices in proclaiming fraternity to its own citizens,
you have met to proclaim the fraternity of all men.”
One morning, on the 24th of August, whilst the
Abbe Duquerry was delivering an address upon
Charity, one of the delegates reminded him that this
day was precisely the anniversary of the massacre of
St. Bartholomew. Victor Hugo put a stop to this
unfortunate interruption by the following words of
peace and forbearance :
“ Yes, this very day, two hundred and twenty-
seven years ago, this city of Paris was awakened in
terror in the midst of the darkness of night. The
silver bell was tolling at the Palais de Justice, and a
sanguinary act, without precedent in the annals of
crime, was consummated; and to-day, on the same
date, it has been God’s will to unite in an immense
concourse the representatives of this old antagonism
in telling them to change their feelings into feelings
of love. The sad significance of this lamentable anni-
versary has disappeared: every drop of blood has
been replaced by a ray of light Nearly
under the shade of that very tower whence the fatal
vespers of Saint Bartholomew were tolled, not only
Englishmen and Frenchmen, Germans and Italians,
Europeans and Americans, but also Papists and
Huguenots, have been willing to meet, happy, nay,
proud, to unite in an embrace as honorable as in-
dissoluble.”
After these noble words had been pronounced, the
Abbe Duquerry and M. Coquerel, the Protestant
pastor, fell into one another’s arms.


Two years later the Coup d’Etat sprung surrepti-
tiously from degradation and perjury, and the great
citizen who had sided with the cause of law and con-
stitutional right, had to seek a refuge on a foreign
land to escape the vindictiveness of the usurpers.
He has himself related the monstrosities of this
episode in the “ History of a Crime,” and it is useless
to deal here with a subject which belongs to history.
Here ends the first part of the great man’s trilogy,
which, as he said, was imposed upon him by the second
Empire. In the succeeding pages we shall follow him
on the land of exile.


DURING THE EXILE.
As I said before, it is in the Isle of Jersey, surrounded
by majestic rocks of pink granite, in the middle of
the ocean, that he wrote “ Les Chatiments,” that he
composed parts of “ Les Miserables.” But there also,
having gathered around him the martyrs of the crime
of December, he pursued the accomplishment of the
task he had imposed on himself, viz., the fight against
Napoleon 111. Although poor himself, he at the
same time applied his energies to the relief of all
those around him. To all the proscripts he opened
his house.
When a child he had seen his mother receive in the
paternal house those of the first Empire; when a
young man he sheltered in his modest home those of
the Restoration ; under the monarchy of July he dis-
puted victoriously the head of Barbes to the scaffold.
Here, in Jersey, it is to America that he appeals, and
if he did not save the life of John Brown, in defending
it, he at least made the victim immortal, and branded
for ever the defenders of slavery.
In his petition to the American Republic it seems
as if he had foreseen the great conflict which was
to end at Gettysburg in 1863.
“ Beware,” he said prophetically, “ lest, at a political
point of view, the execution of John Brown should
cause the American democracy to move. . . ,
“ At a moral point of view, it seems as if the light
of humanity were eclipsed and that the distinction
between justice and injustice had become obscure.


The day seems to have risen on Liberty assassinating
Deliverance !
“ I implore the illustrious American Republic to
preserve the sanctity of the universal moral law; I
plead with it to save the threatened life of John
Brown; to put down the scaffold and to prevent,
under its own eyes, I shall say almost through its own
fault, the perpetration of a crime as odious as the first
fratricide. . Yes, let America understand that
more terrible than Cain slaying Abel would be
Washington killing Spartacus !”
The States of the North rose, and some manifesta-
tions took place in the towns, but the State of Virginia
accomplished its crime, and, as a strange and fatidical
coincidence, it was Wilkes Booth, the miscreant who
shot Abraham Lincoln in 1865, who led John Brown
to the gallows.
Victor Hugo pleaded all his life for the abolition of
capital punishment. Long before Count Tolstoi, who,
in his admirable books “My Religion” and “The
Kingdom of God is within you,” tights theologically
against that Mosaic monstrosity “ tooth for tooth, eye
for eye,” he had sent the following letter to the
advanced republicans of Geneva, who had asked his
intervention to help the passing of a Bill abolishing
capital punishment in their Republic :
“ You ask for my help : lam at your service. The
question is the death penalty. I can only ask myself
when this rock of Sisyphus will cease to roll itself on
human society. When shall we substitute Education
for Penalty.
“ 'Phe law of reprisal, * eye for eye, tooth for tooth,’
this seems to be the sum and substance of our penal
code. . . When shall vengeance cease to impose
itself upon us in extending its hands on our judgment ?
When will felony stop boasting of being the proper
State business ? It is absolutely the same when Fra-
tricide puts on epaulets and calls itself War !


‘ What right has a man to make God justiciary
before His hour ? If that man is a believer, how can
he throw an immortal soul into eternity ? If he is an
infidel, how can he precipitate a living being into
annihilation ?”
After the publication of this letter, the people of the
Republic of Geneva voted the abolition of capital
punishment, and in 1867, Don Luis, king of Portugal,
signed a decree destroying the scaffold in his domi-
nions before going to the Paris International Exposi-
tion held during that year.
Let us not anticipate. Victor Hugo had gone to
Jersey in order to find a refuge against the persecutions
of the Empire, but the Empire pursued him even
there, and, as the outcome of certain events, the nar-
ration of which is outside the scope of my subject, he
was expelled from the Island of Jersey in company
with the other French exiles.
He proceeded to Guernsey, where he was received
with enthusiasm by the inhabitants. There, at
“ Hauteville House,” he completed his book “ Les
Miserables.” He had commenced it about 1846 and
had arranged to have it published in 1848, but the
political developments of that eventful period
retarded its publication. During his days of exile
the author, carried away by his powerful imagination,
augmented his work, being never tired to add fresh
incidents to it, and even whole chapters.
In 1862, the whole world could at last read that
masterpiece, which was rightly called “ the book of the
century,” and the various editions, translated in all the
modern languages, were simultaneously issued in
Paris, London, New York, Brussels, Leipsig, Madrid,
Rotterdam, Yarsovia, Perth, and Riode Janeiro. The
whole philosophy of the book is summed up in its
preface, which is as follows:
“ So long as there shall exist, by reason of law and
custom, a social condemnation, which, in the face of


civilisation, artificially creates hells on earth, and
complicates a destiny that is divine, with human
fatality; so long as three problems of the age —the
degradation of man by poverty, the ruin of woman by
starvation, and the dwarfing of childhood by physical
and spiritual night—are not solved; so long as in
certain regions social asphyxia shall be possible; in
other words, and from a more extented point of view
so long as ignorance and misery remain on earth,
books like this cannot be useless.” (Hauteville
House, 1862.)
It is hardly necessary to review here a book which
has been so extensively read and which has been
admired by all those who read it.
From Jean Yaljean to Gavroche, every character
plays a part in “ Les Miserables.” No one can prevent
himself from being touched by the grace of the des-
criptions, the clearness of the portraits, and the vigour
of the incidents. The grandeur of the ensemble, the
artistic richness of its style, the boldness of its com-
position, explain why it is not in France only, but
through the whole of the enlightened and educated
world that this book has found such a considerable
number of readers.
Among the critics of “ Les Miserables ” we find the
immortal author of “ Les Meditations.” Lamartine,
in a letter to the great exile, so to speak, asked him
permission to criticise his work, declaring that, while
being charmed with the fine colouring of its descrip-
tions, he had been shocked at the principles expressed
in the book; adding that its radicalism and its
denunciation of society were repugnant to him,
because, he said, society, although imperfect, was
human, was sacred, being a necessity. Victor Hugo
answered as follows:
“ If radicalism is the Ideal, ... I am a radical!
“ Yes, a society which admits misery, a humanity
which admits war, seems to me an inferior society,


a lowered humanity; it is to a nobler society, to a
more elevated humanity that I aspire : a society
without kings, a humanity without barriers !
“ I want to make property universal, not to abolish
it; I want to suppress parasitism; I want to see
every man his own landlord ; and that no man has a
master. This is my idea of true social economy. This
goal may be far distant yet, but is that a reason for
not trying to go towards it ?
“ Yes, as ardently as a man may wish for some-
thing, I wish to destroy human fatality. . . I con-
demn slavery; I teach ignorance ; I illuminate dark-
ness ; I reject wickedness. . . That is why I wrote
‘ Les Miserables.’
“To my mind, it is a book which has Fraternity as
a pedestal and Progress as a crown.”
It will not be out of place to say here that Victor
Hugo did not content himself with pleading the cause
of the miserables only in his book. From 1861, at
Guernsey, he applied himself to put his theories into
practice. Every week he invited to dinner the poor
children of the island which had extended its hospi-
tality to him. At first eight, then fifteen, twenty, and
later on forty children sat down to his table, where
they were served by himself and his family. There,
once a week, these unfortunate little ones, to whom
a substantial repast was an unknown thing before,
were treated with slices of roastbeef, and glasses of
invigorating wine. They were asked to laugh and to
be merry. It seemed to Victor Hugo that this idea
was worthy of his great thoughts, considering, as he
did, that it was not alms-giving, but fraternity; hold-
ing that this mixing of the poor families with his own
was as much advantageous to him as it was to them:
all that was in harmony with the spirit of the purest
democracy, and the result would be that, whilst we
learn how to serve those less fortunate than ourselves
they come unconsciously to love us the more.


The poet had the satisfaction of seeing that this fine
institution of his acted as an incentive for other
philanthropists to imitate his example. As the result
of his initiative hundreds of meals were given in
England and in America to the destitute children of
those two great nations. Hauteville House was the
starting point of this humanitarian movement which
has now spread all over the world.
In opening one of his Christmas fetes, Victor
Hugo made the following speech :
“ To succour the children is an act of emancipation.
In health as in education there is a real liberation.
In strengthening an enfeebled body and in developing
an uncultivated intelligence, we accomplish a grand
thing. We drive disease out of the body, and we
remove ignorance from the mind. My idea of giving
a substantial dinner to the poor has been well received
nearly everywhere. As an institution of fraternity,
it has been accepted by the Christians as being con-
formable to the Gospels, and by the democrats as being
in accord with the principles of the Revolution. Let
the fraternity of the present weigh on the fraternity
of the future ; let us lay all the foundations we can,
all that will be given back to our children. The child
is the field of the generation which follows us; what
will grow in that field will be the harvest of the new
era; he is the germ of the society to come. Let us
cultivate his mind, let us inspire him with principles
of justice and joy. In elevating the child we elevate
the people of the future.”
In 1866, he gives us “ Les Travailleurs de la Mer ”
(“ The Toilers of the Sea ”), which he dedicates to the
hospitable people of Guernsey. The author announced
the completion of this work in a letter published in
the newspapers.
“ My desire in these volumes,” he says, “ has been to
glorify work, will, devotion, and all that makes man
great. I made it a point to demonstrate that the most


insatiable abyss is the human heart, and that what
escapes the sea does not escape a woman.”
In this marvellous story his aim must have been to
complete his study of the struggles of the human race.
We are indeed crushed under a triple fatality : that is
to say, the fatal necessity of dogmas, of laws, and,
above all, of circumstances. In “ Notre-Dame de
Paris ”he has exposed the first; in “ Les Miserables ”
he has depicted the second, and here he applies him-
self to illustrate the third. To accomplish this he has
recourse in this book neither to the great pageants of
history nor to the turmoil and lustre of large cities.
He has chosen a much calmer field. He gives us the
spectacle of a people living on the sea-shore a happy
and tranquil life, unconscious of the strifes of the
modern Baby lons, and, in the middle of a majestic
frame, he places with one stroke a drama and an idyl.
Three years later, Victor Hugo published another
novel entitled “ L’Homme qui rit.” This work pre-
sents a strange mixture of the graceful and the
horrible, and is full of scenes of the most pathetic
interest. Following his predilection for antithesis, he
joins here moral beauty to physical deformity and
moral ugliness to physical grace.
Amongst the masterpieces he wrote during his exile
I must mention his essay on Shakspeare. This is
certainly the greatest tribute which posterity has ever
paid to the memory of the mighty bard of England,
whose spirit hovers and for ever will hover above his
brothers in letters as well as over humanity. In this
philosophic study he expresses the greatest veneration
for he who has said nearly everything worth saying
and who, like himself, had sounded all the depths of
the human heart.
In 1867, his two sons, with Auguste Vacquerie and
Paul Meurice, founded a daily newspaper called Le Rap-
pel which met with a considerable success and which
is now one of the leading political organs. As his con-


tribution to the first number, he sent the following
lines :
“Le Rappel, it is a call. I like this word in all its
various senses. It is a call to principles by con-
science, a call to truth by philosophy, a call to duty
by right, a call to death by respect, a call to punish-
ment by equity, a call to the past by history, a call to
the future by logic, a call to action by courage, a call
to idealism by thought, a call to science by experience,
a call to God in religion by the extirpation of idolatry,
a call to sovereignty by the manhood suffrage, a call
to liberty by the awakening of France and by the
sublime cry ; Fiat jus !
“ You say : ‘This is our aim’; I say : ‘ This must
be your work.’ ”
Now that the return of the great man to his native
land, after an absence of nineteen years, is close at
hand, it is necessary to pause and recapitulate his
actions during his period of exile.
After the campaign of Italy, in 1859, the Empire, at
the height of its power, granted a general amnesty to
all the political refugees, and a considerable number
of them returned to France. But, faithful to this line
of his in “ Les Chatiments,” “ If only one remains, I
shall be that one,” Victor Hugo was deaf to the many
entreaties of his friends, and refused any compromise
with the crime of December, preferring to await with
patience for the time when France, getting tired of the
man of Strasbourg and Boulogne, would send to obli-
vion the dynasty which sprung from Brumaire and
had twice proved fatal to her.
When at Jersey and Guernsey, he received appeals
from everywhere. All the afflicted came to him to
find a solace to their sorrows, to ask him to weep with
them over their dead, and he dehvered funeral ora-
tions over the tombs of Jean Bousquet, Louise Julien,
and Felix Bany, He was asked to use his pen to
condemn the scaffold, and he wrote remonstrances


against the executions of Tapner and of Bradley ; he
eulogised John Brown as the great liberator of the
blacks.
When, after the Mexican war, Maximilian fell into
the hands of Juarez, he, who had been expatriated by
an Emperor, implored the Mexican patriot to spare
the life of an Emperor.
He answered the appeal from the people of Crete;
he denounced as an act of brutality the suppression of
the revolt at Cuba, and took in hand the petition of
the three hundred women and children who had fled
to New York to seek a refuge. It is towards him
that Ireland turned her supplicating hands to ask
him to plead the cause of the convicted fenians.
“Not one of these appeals did he reject,” says
Auguste Vacquerie ; “ and this does not represent the
total sum of his work while in exile. He at the same
time gave to a world of admirers the numerous
master-pieces enumerated in the preceding pages.
“ There is also a thing worthy of notice: During
these nineteen years of incessant struggles, during
this duel with the Empire, this fight hand to hand
with tyranny under all its forms, Victor Hugo pre-
served continually his calm and his placity, his heart
being inaccessible to small resentment.
“ Expelled from France for having defended the
rights of the people, driven away from Brussels after
publishing ‘ Napoleon the Little,’ banished from
Jersey because he had written ‘ Les Chatiments,’ he
was as full of energy in Guernsey as he had ever
been in Paris in the midst of his greatest literary
triumphs.”
Surrounded by his family and his most devoted
friends, he found in his wife a noble consoler of his
exile. But, alas! it was not given to her to share
with her husband the joy of the return to the mother-
land. In 1868, she fell under the implacable scythe
of death on an hospitable but foreign land.


Many other bereavements have spread themselves
over the career of the great poet, but “ the hour of
justice was getting nearer and nearer, and it did come
at last.”
******
In the preceding pages I have endeavoured to
review as concisely as possible the first two periods of
Hugo’s illustrious life ; that is to say, the great literary
period before the Coup d’Etat, and the period of exile
when the whole entity of the man reveals itself in his
quadruple personality of historian, philosopher, phi-
lanthropist, and master in the republic of letters.
We shall now throw a glance in the third, which
may well be termed the period of the apotheosis.


AFTER THE EXILE.
The political events of 1869-70 in France, the return
of republican members to the Chamber of Deputies,
amongst whom were Gambetta, Jules Ferry, Bancel,
Cremieux, Henri Rochefort, etc., clearly indicated that
the nation was awakening from its long lethargy, and
that the rule of the Bonapartes was approaching its
end. Everyone could perceive in the blue horizon the
bright light of Liberty advancing and forcing its way
through the thorny path of prejudice and routine.
The Empire became alarmed on seeing this intruder
gain ground stride by stride, and, as a means of salva-
tion plunged the country into the fatal war which
was to lead its tottering steps into the abyss.
After our first disasters, Victor Hugo left Haute-
ville House and proceeded to Brussels in order to be
nearer France in her hour of distress.
The capitulation of Sedan having sealed the fate of
Napoleon and his dynasty, the Chamber of Deputies,
on the 4th of September. 1870, decreed the forfeiture
of the second Empire and proclaimed the Republic as
the government of France.
On the sth, in company with Jules Claretie, the
distinguished writer, Victor Hugo returned to his
native land.
When he had left France she was bleeding under
the law of reprisal enacted by the makers of the Coup
d’Etat; when he came back, her soil was trodden
upon by foreign invasion, both the work of the one
man, of the same ambition !
It was his sad experience to witness from the rail-


way carriage the French army retreating in a state of
disorder and confusion after the catastrophe of Sedan.
Tears fell from his eyes at this sight revealing the
misfortunes of the fatherland.
He arrived at Paris at ten o’clock in the evening.
The news of the great man’s return had spread like
lightning through the metropolis, and thousands were
awaiting him at the Gare du Nord, where he received
a grand ovation. But the people were as anxious to
see him as to hear him speak, and with a profound
emotion he thus addressed the great number of Pari-
sians who had assembled to welcome him; —
“ Words fail me, and I am incapable of saying how
much I am moved by the welcome which the generous
people of Paris have been pleased to extend to me.
Citizens, I have always said that when the Republic
should return I would return also. And here I am.
“ Thank you for your acclamations. But I attri-
bute them to your sense of the anguish which is rend-
ing all the hearts, and to the peril that is threatening
our land.
“ I have but one thing to ask you. I invite you to
union. By union you will conquer. Put aside all
ill-will. Check all resentment. Be united, and you
will be invincible. Rally round the Republic. Hold
fast brother to brother. Fraternity is the saviour of
Liberty ! ”
It is not my intention here to relate the sad epi-
sodes of the siege of Paris. It will be sufficient to
say that the poet was equal to the circumstance. His
mighty voice encouraged the Parisian population in
their heroic resistance, when, deprived of all the
necessaries of life and half starved, they were
trying to save the honour of their country.
His benevolence was felt by all. He published, for
the benefit of the wounded, an edition of [his “ Chati-
ments,” which realised about 1,000 francs. Under the
fire of the bombardment he organised numerous enter-


tainments for the relief of the poor, where recitations
from his principal works were given.
When having reached the last stage of starvation,
Paris was compelled to yield, preliminaries of peace
were signed, and the nation was invited to elect repre-
sentatives to the National Assembly in order to discuss
the articles of the treaty. Victor Hugo was returned
as one of the deputies of the Department of Seine by
214,169 votes.
The new legislature assembled at Bordeaux and
he took his seat on the left side of the President. In
the meantime Garibaldi, who had come to the help of
France in her hour of need, had just been elected one
of the representatives for Algiers.
The House, almost entirely composed of the parti-
sans of the peace at any price, saw that election with
disfavour, and it was proposed that it should be con-
sidered as null and void. On rising to combat the
motion Victor Hugo exclaimed :
“ France has passed through a tremendous ordeal;
she has emerged bleeding and vanquished. Of all the
powers of Europe not one has stirred itself to help a
country which always has been ready to take up the
cause of Europe. Not one state, not one sovereign
has raised in our behalf ; nay, with a single exception,
not one man. But one man there has been; and what
has he had wherewith to aid us ? Nothing but his
sword. That sword of his had already delivered a
nation, and he indulged in the hope that it might
contribute to the deliverance of another. And so he
came ; and so in our support he fought.”
He exhorted the Assembly not to recompense devo-
tion by ingratitude, but it was all in vain.
A few weeks after he himself had to leave the
National Assembly, and these were his parting words :
“Three weeks ago you have refused to listen to
Garibaldi, now you * refuse to listen to me. Very
well. I send in my resignation.”


When making the preparatives for his departure, a
new sorrow befel the great man. His son, Charles
Hugo, had suddenly died, and, with a broken heart,
lie hastened back to Paris where the revolution of the
Commune was just beginning. The funeral took
place on the 18th of March, and the hearse had to
pass through the barricades to reach the cemetery.
This sad picture of the civil war added considerably
to his great affliction.
He then returned to Brussels with his two grand-
children. From there he endeavoured to stop the
contest which was bringing face to face in hatred the
sons of the same land. “ Why,” he asks, “ why break
out into a conflict at such an hour as this ? Why
rush into a civil war when a foreign war is scarcely
at an end ? How unseemly to treat the Prussians to
the spectacle of Frenchmen fighting like wild beasts in
a circus, and that circus France itself.”
Without hesitation he condemned the Commune.
Some of its principles, however, he admitted, but he
thought the time was ill-chosen for such a quarrel.
As for the excesses committed during that period of
frenzy he reproved them in Le Rappel in condemna-
tory lines. But when the insurrection was subdued,
he was ready to pardon the vanquished. He exhorted
the victors to be magnanimous and to have mercy on
those who were at their feet, knowing well that there
were wrongs on both sides.
During the siege and the Commune he had kept
day by day a register of the sad history of these days
of mourning, and this formed the basis of “ L’Annee
Terrible.”
This poem was published in 1872, and we find in it,
related in Homeric style, a pathetic narrative of the
calamities that befel France during this terrible year,
when, after a merciless struggle which dismembered
her, she had to go through the awful ordeal of a # civil
war. It is the supreme expression of the filial loVe of


a man whose dear mother is agonising under a dual
fatality.
As I have already said he condemned the excesses
of the Commune, he tried everything to stop the com-
batants in that fratricidal contest, addressing in turn
the Government, who had thrown down the gauntlet,
and the people, who had taken it up. “ What,” he
exclaims, “we see France on the one side and on the
other also France! Stop; it is mourning which
comes out of each of your successes. Every cannon
shot from Frenchman to Frenchman while throwing
death in front of it leaves shame behind it.”
Then he describes Paris when a mass of flames.
He wants to know what madness has suddenly taken
hold of the mob. A man has just set fire to the
people’s edifice, the Free Public Library. “ What
hast thou done, man ; why hast thou perpetrated that
abominable crime ? But this treasure is thine, thy
children’s. The book is thy own richness: it is
knowledge, right, truth, virtue, duty ; reason dispel-
ling delirium ; and thou destroyest all that! ” The
man answered : “ I can’t read ! ”
In 1874, Victor Hugo’s last romance, “ Quatre-vingt-
treize,” was published. Like “ Les Miserables ” this
work was translated into several languages and met
with a considerable success. We feel here the touch
of a powerful hand in the dramatic incidents, whilst
in the sentimental ones all the charm and freshness of
the poet’s best manner are evinced in lines of great
beauty. The action is concentrated on the great
Vendean insurrection of 1793, and the events of that
other terrible year are recounted in a manner which
strikes the imagination, the aim being to demonstrate
how progress and humanity, emerging from that san-
guinary atmosphere, and the merciless struggle
between the past and the future, had elevated them-
selves and proved triumphant. The heroes of this
book are the representatives of all the passions,—


stoical virtue, indomitable courage, stern resistance,
—which characterised the men of the Revolutionary
period in France.
The philosopher afterwards gives us a magnificent
poem which he intitules “ The Pope.” In beautiful
verses he depicts the ideal pastor making clemency
the principle of his power; abandoning the palaces
and Vaticans, and teaching that great precept of
Christ: “ Love one another ”; endeavouring to be
always kind and sympathetic to every phase of human
suffering, attracting around him the outcast and the
despised; repudiating infallibility, denouncing war;
delivering the message of peace, and meriting the
Divine kindness.
I shall quote here, in prose, two short passages of
this great book, as, in their conciseness, they appear
to me to open a vast field to the meditations of the
thinker, of the reformer. I shall translate them nearly
word for word so as to preserve, as far as possible, all
their significance.
The first represents the Kings of the world who are
visiting the Pope, and takes the form of a dialogue.
The Kings.— Greetings to you, Pope; we are the
all-powerfuls, the Kings, the masters.
The Pope. —Be welcome, men.
The Kings.—Priest, we are Kings.
The Pope.—Why ?
The Kings.—You know that there are summits on
the earth.
The Pope.—From the height where God is, I can
only see a plain.
The Kings.—We are great, we are conquerors, we
are the strength.
The Pope.—Everything is but human shadow.
The Kings.—We are the chosen ones.
The Pope.—Men are equal.
The Kings.—We are what the Horeb and the
Galgal are; what the Sinai is over the valleys; we


are an august chain of mountains ; we are the hori-
zon built by God Himself !
The Pope.— The mounts have the dawn of day as
a crown, the Kings have the darkness of night.
The Kings. —But are you not a King yourself ?
The Pope.—l, to reign; oh, no !
The Kings. —What are you doing, then ?
The Pope,—l LOVE !
The other scene represents a garret where is a man
surrounded by his family starving and in rags. The
man, crushed down by destitution, exclaims :
“ I do not believe in God ! ”
The Pope {entering and giving him the half of his
bread). —You must be hungry, eat.
The Man. —And my child !
The Pope {giving the other half of his bread to the
child). —Take it all.
The Child. —Oh ! it is so good !
The Pope. —The child is an angel upon earth, allow
me to bless him. {He empties his purse on the pallet.)
Here is some money to buy sheets for your bed and
to clothe the child, the mother, and yourself, my
brother. Alas, times are hard just now. I shall try
to find some work for you. And now, let us speak of
God.
The Man.—l do believe in Him !
This book aroused the indignation of the Catholics,
and a M. de Brigny published a poem entitled “ Pope
against Pope ; or the Pope of Victor Hugo and the
Pope of the Church,” in which, as a matter of course,
the philosopher was torn into pieces.
In answer to those attacks, the great man wrote
“ The Supreme Pity,” an admirable poem, the gist of
which is to bestow pardon and pity on all those who
are tyrants only through their own ignorance and a


defective education. Retaliation engenders hatred,
forgiveness conduces to love, hence to redemption.
“ Ah! ” the poet says, “ above all let us be kind;
yes, kind even to monsters ! The wicked has a heart
tilled with bitterness. You are looking around you
seeking for sufferers to relieve ? He is a sufferer. Oh !
the cry of this guilty soul is the most lamentable one.
To be the healer, the good Samaritan of monsters,
those tenebrous martyrs of Destiny, to wash their
crime, is, amongst our sacred duties, the most sublime
of all. Is it to be said that it is impossible to succour,
to calm, to help, and to cause the holy pity to spread
out its vast wings ? Man, whenever evil has been done
to thee, what thou must return is good ; whilst going
through life, answerest hatred by love, this is the
whole dogma, the whole firmament! ”
Later on he published another poem, “ Religions
and Religion then “ L’Ane,” the aim of which is to
put down pedantry and to replace it by true know-
ledge. Louis Ulbach said of this book that it puts
the fool’s cap on false science, false wisdom, and false
pity.
His great love and admiration for children he
manifested in “ The Art of being a Grandfather,”
where all the freshness and subtileness of his earlier
muse are called back to chant the dawn of human life.
Whilst he was engaged in the production of the
works I have just mentioned, the theatrical mana-
gers had revived on the Parisian stage all his dramas
which met with an immense success.
“ Hernani ” had reappeared on the boards of the
Comedie Frangaise, and to Madame Sarah Bernhardt
had been entrusted the personation of the beautiful
character of Dona Sol. Coming after Mademoiselle
Mars (1830) and Madame Favart (1867), her task was
anything but an easy one, her predecessors having
left behind them great traditions. Yet the old critics,
whose privilege it had been to witness the two pre-


vious impersonations, were unanimous in saying that
never before had they seen such a refined, powerful,
and charming interpretation of that character; and
Victor Hugo, on the morning following the first per-
formance, sent her the following note, which may be
considered as one of the greatest compliments paid to
the talent of the great tragedienne: —
“ Madame, —You were both great and charming. I
am an old combatant, but, at the moment the enchanted
people were applauding you, I confess that I wept.
The tear drawn forth by yourself is yours; I lay it at
your feet.”
The poet now is at the zenith of his glory. The
days of struggles, literary and others, are things of
yore. The bards of all countries salute in him the
“ great inventor of harmonies,” and Tennyson joins in
this universal concert with these beautiful lines :
Victor in Drama, Victor in Romance,
Cloud-weaver of phantasmal hopes and fears,
French of the French and lord of human tears.
Child-lover ; Bard whose fame-lit laurels glance
Darkening the wreaths of all that would advance,
Beyond our strait, their claim to be thy peers.
The world of letters has hailed him as the literary
genius of this century. The Republic, that govern-
ment of his choice, is implanted in his beloved France
for ever, and, through its regenerating influence, he
sees the nation recovering herself from her disasters,
and education and light spread over all.
Under the iEgis of Liberty, France goes step by
step towards the solution of the great social problems.
True it is that sometimes a black cloud passes over
the azure of this beautiful sky, but it is only an ephe-
meral one, and reason soon overcomes passion and
violence.
The great man, surrounded by the love and grati-
tude of his country, having by his side his two grand-


children, Jeanne and George, is now witnessing the
harvesting of the magnificent crop, the seeds of which
he had so profusely sown.
On the fiftieth anniversary of his first drama,
“ Hernani,” he was awarded the highest recompense
ever bestowed on a dramatic author. This occasion
was considered by his contemporaries as the “ golden
wedding ” of his genius and his glory. This anniver-
sary was celebrated at the Comedie Frangaise on the
25th February, 1880.
As I said before, on the night of the initial perform-
ance, in 1830, the greatest literary opposition had been
offered to the production of this masterpiece, which
is to the modern stage what “ Le Cid ” of Corneille
was to the old one. But time, the great soother of
enemities, had passed over the spirit of petty jealousy
and rivalry which had greeted the poet at the begin-
ning of his career, and, on this memorable occasion,
instead of the protestations and the bitter criticisms of
a prejudiced assemblage, the audience, which included
the most illustrious men of the day, gave a great ova-
tion to “ Hernani,” which is incontestably one of the
most artistic productions with which the French stage
is adorned.
When the performance was over, the curtain rose
again over a beautiful spectacle. A bust of the master
had been placed on the stage decorated with wreaths
and palm leaves. Behind were all the afctors in the
play and the members of the Comedie Frangaise
wearing the costumes of all the characters of the great
man’s dramas. The back of the stage was crowded
with artistes belonging to the other theatres waving
banners.
Sarah Bernhardt stepped forward in the robe of
Dona Sol with a palm in her hand and recited a mag-
nificent poem written by Francois Coppee, one of
the most distinguished poets of France.
The great Sarah delivered her lines in that pure,


silvery voice it has been our good fortune to hear in
Sydney a few years hence, and with such a pathos
that the audience was carried away by her own en-
thusiasm.
At this stage of the proceedings, Francisque Sar-
cey, tire eminent critic and journalist, exclaimed :
“ Rise! ” and the whole house sprang to their feet
acclaiming the great man.
A few days after this ceremony, the Parisian press
gave a banquet to Victor Hugo at the Hotel Conti-
nental. The elite of journalism was present; the
poet himself presided. After the dinner, Emile
Augier, the great novelist and play-writer, proposed
the toast of the evening. From his address I shall
quote the following lines :
“ Time, O glorious master, takes no hold upon you ;
you know nothing of decline; you pass through every
stage of life without diminishing your virility; for
more than half a century your genius has covered the
world with the unceasing flow of its tide. The resist-
ance of the first period, the rebellion of the second,
have melted away into universal admiration, and the
last refractory spirits have yielded to your power.
“ When La Bruyere, before the Academy, hailed
Bossuet as the father of the Church, he was speaking
the language of posterity, and posterity itself, thou,
noble master, that surrounds you here, and hails you
as our father ! ”
The assembly rose and the room echoed the name
of Father.” It was a grateful homage of sons ren-
dered to the genius that overflowed with the love of
humanity.
Now we come to the apotheosis of a living being, to
the greatest fete in the annals of the history of the
world ever held in honor of a man. Never has a king,
a conqueror, a hero met with such a manifestation of
the love, the respect, and the admiration of a grateful
people. We do not see here the adulations of courtiers


or of a circle of disciples ; it is a concourse immense of
all the classes of society: from the learned, the magis-
trate, the artist, and the man of letters to the humblest
of artisans.
The initiative of this great demonstration was due
to Bazire, who, in Le Beaumarchais, suggested that
the people of Paris should celebrate the occasion of the
master’s entering his eightieth year by going to his
house to pay him their tribute of homage. Jeanin,
editor of the above-named newspaper, took up Bazire’s
idea with enthusiasm, and it is mainly through his
exertions that the fete was so promptly organised.
Deputations came from nearly everywhere, and Lon-
don, Vienna, Pesth, Brussels, etc., sent their represen-
tatives loaded with flowers which were rather scarce
at that time of the year.
The committee decided to hold the fete on the
Sunday, 27th February, 1881. On the Saturday
evening Victor Hugo’s drawing-room was filled with
his friends, and Jules Ferry, then Prime Minister,
came with his secretary, and, after a short speech, pre-
sented the poet, in the name of the Government of the
French Republic, with a Sevres vase.
At ten o’clock on the Sunday a long line of people
began to move towards the Avenue d’Eylau, where all
the windows were decorated with flags. A platform
had been erected in front of Hugo’s house, on which,
in the middle of heaps of flowers, the bust of the
Republic had been placed. The appearance of the
fagade was but a mass of bloom ornamented with
banners exhibiting the names of nearly all the works
of the great man. A procession of little girls entered
the salon with a bannerol bearing the inscription
“ L’Art d’etre Grandpere,” and one of the girls recited
some verses which had been composed by Camille
Mendes. Victor Hugo kissed one of the girls, saying:
“ In embracing one of you, I embrace you all.”
A little before noon the municipal cortege left the


Arch of Triumph, which had been chosen as the ren-
dezvous of all the corporations, trades societies, and
public bodies that were to pass in procession before the
house. The hero of the day was standing at his
window from where he delivered a short address,
from which I extract the following :
“ It is not in my own name, for I am nothing, but in
the name of every one who possesses life or reason, or
love, or hope, or power of thought that I give my
greetings to Paris. It is Paris that I hail with my
heart and my soul. From time to time history has
set upon certain cities a mark that is unique. And
during 4,000 years there have been three cities that
may claim to be signalised as the three headquarters
of civilisation. There have been Athens and Rome, and
now there is Paris. What Athens was to Grecian
antiquity, and what Rome was to Roman antiquity,
such is Paris to Europe, to America, nay, to the whole
civilised globe. Who speaks to Paris speaks to the
world ; he speaks urhi et orbi.
“ And what am I but a humble wayfarer among
you all ? I have only my own share in your lot, and
as one of yourselves, in the name of all the cities of
Europe and America, from Athens to New York, from
London to Moscow, I salute, and extol as I love, the
sacred city of Paris.”
The procession kept in motion whilst he was speak-
ing. Hail was falling and it was bitterly cold ; but in
their enthusiasm the immense crowds of people felt
neither the one nor the other. The octogenarian
stood bare-headed during all the time the cortege was
defiling. Fully 700,000 people passed under his
window saluting him with their acclamations. It was
quite dusk when the last file of the procession passed
the house. He retired then to his drawing-room, and
during the evening he said : “ 1 feel as if I were only
twenty to-day.”
He afterwards wrote/' Les Quatre vents del’esprit ”


and continued his work of progress and usefulness;
but age, though not touching his intellect, began to
tell on his body, and four years later his great life
came to an end.
CONCLUSION.
Tire month of May, which in France marks the
return of flowers and sunshine, was, in the year 1885,
one of national mourning. On the 23rd, France learnt
that she had lost one of her noblest sons, and huma-
nity one of its greatest benefactors.
Victor Hugo, after a life of nearly a century, had
passed away with the placidity of a spotless con-
science.
His death was felt everywhere, and the whole world
condoled with France in her great bereavement.
From England, Italy, Austria, Hungary, Bohemia,
Greece, Russia, Poland, Sweden, Spain, Portugal,
Switzerland, Belgium, Netherlands, the United States,
Canada, all the Republics of South America, Brazil,
Africa, etc., etc., letters and telegrams were sent to the
President of the French Republic and to the family of
the deceased, expressive of the deepest sympathy with
their great dolour.
On the 24th the French Legislature passed a law
awarding State funerals to the remains of the great
man, and on the 26th the President of the Republic
decreed that his body should be placed in the vaults
of the Pantheon, the last resting-place of the illus-
trious sons of France.
The whole nation set herself to the task of making
the funerals the grandest spectacle ever witnessed.
Wreaths came from the four corners of the earth.
Every nation, every caste, was there represented, and
among the numerous tributes coming from England


those sent by Tennyson, Robert Browning, the artists
of London, and the inhabitants of the Islands of Jersey
and Guernsey were conspicuous by their magnificence.
The poet-laureate and Robert Browning were repre-
sented at the funerals by Mr. Ralston.
The Arch of Triumph had been draped with black
crape, and an immense catafalque had been erected
under the arch to receive the coffin, which was placed
there early in the morning on the 31st. During the
day and all the night the people of France came in
countless numbers to pay their last tribute to their
departed idol.
The sight by night of this majestic edifice, stand-
ing all draped in black on the top of a hill command-
ing four of the principal arteries of the great city,
with the catafalque in its centre, surrounded by an
immense concourse of silent and meditative people,
and the numerous torches throwing their gloomy and
uncertain light on this national wake, was a spectacle
of impressive grandeur.
At eleven o’clock, the guns at the Hotel des Inva-
lides fired a salute, and the band of the Garde Repu-
blicans played Chopin’s “ Funeral March.” Speeches
eulogizing the life and works of the master were
delivered by the President of the Senate, the Speaker
of the House of Deputies, the Ministre de ITnterieur
(Home Secretary), Emile Augier (on behalf of the
Academic Fran9aise), etc., etc., and by delegates come
from all parts of Europe.
The procession was then formed headed by a
squadron of the Republican Guard and a regiment of
Cuirassiers, with General Saussier (Governor of Paris)
and his staff. Four Bataillons Scolaires (Cadets)
followed, preceding fourteen chariots loaded with
wreaths; after the chariots other battalions of Cadets
came, and then an immense number of wreaths carried
by delegates of the countries and institutions repre-
sented.


The artistes of the Comedie Frangaise, led by four
ushers in their official uniforms and carrying a crown
of gold on a cushion of crimson velvet, came after-
wards with the actors of the principal theatres.,
Immediately in front of the hearse marched the
representatives of the learned societies and of the
Press, with their floral offerings. The hearse was
of the simplest description and made a striking
contrast with all the floral tributes glowing with
purple and gold. In fact it was what is called in
Paris the hearse of the poor, Victor Hugo having
expressed the desire that he should be carried to his
last resting-place in that humble carriage of the
people. Behind the hearse, George Hugo, grandson of
the deceased, walks alone, followed by the relatives
and intimate friends of the great man. Next come
all the most illustrious men of France, —General
Pettie, representing the President of the French
Republic; the magistracy in their gowns of ermine
and scarlet; the members of the Senate and of the
House of Deputies, the delegates from the other
countries of the world, the army with its Generals
surrounded by their brilliant staffs, and the repre-
sentatives of all trades and professions, with their
emblematic banners draped with crape.
It is impossible to describe the magnitude of this
ceremony. The streets, the avenues through which
the procession was to pass to go to the Pantheon,
were thronged with enormous crowds; everywhere
the wondering eye could meet with nothing but the
waving of an immense sea of human heads anxiously
awaiting for the arrival of the cortege.
When the vanguard of the procession reached the
Pantheon, the rear was still at the bridge of Neuilly, a
distance of about 8 miles, and the last wreath arrived
at the Pantheon only at 7'30, the ceremony having
begun at 10 in the morning.
Hugo had said long ago : “ There is something in


common between me and the people; I cannot say
exactly what it is, but that something causes us to
understand one another.” Well, the people showed
by their sorrow and their attitude at the great man’s
funeral that he was not mistaken and that the people
not only “ understood” him, but also loved him.
And now it is all over; Victor Hugo has gone to
meet his ancestors, Homer, Socrates, JEschilus, Virgil,
Juvenal, Dante, Shakspeare, Corneille, Moliere, and
Racine; when there is some human suffering to soothe,
some wrong to redress, we shall hear his powerful
voice no more ; but he has left behind an imperishable
monument which he has entrusted to the care of
posterity, and which shall live for ever.
To accomplish his great work, he made his own
language, or rather he transformed our old Gallic
tongue. By keeping out of the beaten track, leaving
aside the old formulae, he, so to speak, democratised it
whilst giving to it a suppleness, a vigour, a magnifi-
cence unknown before him.
In art he has surpassed everything, his altruism
stands unequalled, whilst his pure philosophy opens
our heart to kindness, to forgiveness; and when in
the midst of a society happy and purified through
putting into practice the precepts of the great master,
our children shall read the beautiful pages I have so
imperfectly described here, they shall unite in an
immense concert to hail, to glorify the memory of the
defender of the feeble and the oppressed: of Victor
Hugo the Great, the Apostle of supreme pity !
♦ * * * *
With a few more lines I shall conclude this study.
It will be noticed that, although Victor Hugo played
an important role in the politics of his country, he
having been a member of the House of Peers under
the monarchy of July, a Representative of the People
under the Republic of 1848, a Deputy and a Senator,
after his return to France, I have scarcely touched his


political career. This I have done purposely, reserv-
ing for a subsecfhent book the task of reviewing his
political actions.
In the preceding pages I have endeavoured to gather
within a comparatively small compass all the principal
characteristics of a man who has devoted the whole of
his genius to soothing the various wounds of humanity,
to redressing many of its wrongs, to preaching the love
of justice and kindness to all, and who seems to have
taken this beautiful verse of Terence as his motto:
Homo sum; humani nihil ame alienum puto.
To unfold the phases of the life of such a man before
the eyes of a young country which is fast developing
into a nation ; to call her younger sons’ attention to
the acts and writings of the great benefactors of
mankind, to whatever nation they may belong,
appeared to me to be a work possessive of some use-
fulness. And if to that is coupled my legitimate
desire of glorifying the illustrious sons of my native
land, the reader will know why I wrote this book.


r V Victor Hugo,
FRED. J. BROOMFIELD.
Brave voice of battle lifted high
Above the craven peaks of fear,
That clashed and clang along the sky
And echoed o’er the wastelands drear !
O heart, and eye, and brain of fire !
O lyric lips and lightning tongue !
O soul of hope and high desire
With hourly rage and rapture wrung !
Thou warrior wielding pen of flame !
Thou scourge of slave, and prince, and priest
Thou hero of the conquering name !
Thou death’s-head at the tyrant’s feast!
Thee I salute, with homage due
To one who walked the earth a power,
Who loved alone the good and true,
And scorned the motes that crowd the hour.
Hail, poet of the god-like brow,
The lion head, the eagle eye,
Thy mighty notes resound e’en now,
’Mid Guernsey’s rocks and tempest sky ;
Among the Ocean’s clefts and caves,
With thunderous tones, they echo yet;
They mingle with the murmuring waves
In dirges of divine regret.


p/D6f2-
They chant the tyrant’s crimsom doom
1 n scathing words of flame and hate ;
They steal around thy vocal tomb—
The Delos of man’s god-like fate.
With sweetest music, soft and low,
They sing of love and woman fair;
They lure with life, and weep witli woe,
And torture with a fell despair.
Dare I believe that thou art gone,
Thou mighty master of the lyre ?
That thou art silent as the stone
Above the ashes of thy fire ?
Thy song is sung, thy tale is told,
And hushed the breathings of thy lute ?
Thy lyric lips are dumb and cold ?
Thy Battle’s valiant voice is mute ?
Ah no ! where Freedom lifts her head,
Where round her daring spirits throng,
Thy spirit there, with martial tread,
Shall raise again its fiery song.
Thy voice shall ring above the rout,
Thy soul shall forward to the fray,
Thy Victor voice with victors shout
And sing the triumphs of the day.
Batson & Co., Ltd,, Printers, 146 Clarence Street, Sydney
1508


BOOKS
Every
Department
Literature
received
by
Every Mail,
including
Biography,
History,
Poetry
Fiction,
Nautical
and
Mechanical
Works,
&c., &c., &c.
Latest
Magazines
always
in stock.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
T. LBMITH
BOOKSELLER
STATIONER,
406
GEORGE ST.
(Near King St),
SYDNEY.
Account
Books,
Stationery
Photographic
and
Stamp
Albums,
Leather
Writing
Cases,
Desks,
Purses,
&c., &c.,
great variety.
Birthday,
Wedding,
Condolence
Cards
a Speciality.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE FRENCH
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS DEPOT.
F. AENGENHEYSTER, Manager,
325 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH OF
Pleyel Wolff & Co. 4SD
Jerome Thibouville-Lamy & Co.,
PIANOFORTE MANUFACTURERS
Musical Instrument Manufacturers.
F>T AXSTOS SOLD ON TIME PAYMENT
Violins, ’Cellos, Double Basses, Flutes,
Clarionets, Oboes, Brass Instruments, &c.,
sold at Wholesale Prices.
ALL THE LATEST MUSIC BY EVERY MAIL.
INSPECTION INVITED.
The French Musical Instruments Depot,
325 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY, N.S.W.
