

TT(Vf p
ti l o
u u
Victor J. Daley.
Last week, in an unpretentious cottage
at Waitara, a poet passed away. His name
was Victor Daley. He had written songs
for five and twenty years; he had
brought light and sweetness and joy into
the hearts and minds of many an Austra-
lian ; he had lifted the intellectual level of
the community more than any other man
living contemporaneously with him within
the confines of the continent; and,, as a re-
ward, Australia permitted him to die poor.
He was brave to the end and poverty did
not trouble him. Honest poverty and he
had always been on more than a nodding
acquaintance, and Victor Daley was never
known to turn his back on an old friend.
He died as he had lived—rich in bright
thought, but lacking gold. It was a proper
and fitting end for one who never cared
much for money, and if he had not left a
widow and children to fight a precarious
battle, one would be inclined to raise up
one’s heart and thank God that Victor
Daley had been spared the last insult of
dying rich. In keeping with the life he had
lived, and the death he died, he was given
a quiet funeral at Waverley. He was not
buried as the merely rich person is buried—
with pomp and circumstance. But then the
rich man is entitled to a costly funeral be-
cause it is the end of all things with him.
But Victor Daley has only begun to live.
Those who followed the poet’s casket to
the grave, saw to the left and right of them
many fine monuments, written over with
legends perpetuating the virtues of forgotten
men and women, and one especially, a noble
tomb in marble, raised to the memory of a
successful digger, caused casual comment.
Someone said: “It cost one thousand
pounds,” and someone else asked, curiously,
“Who was he, and what did he do for
At the Last.
(BY RODERIC QUINN.)
humanity that he should be given such a cently prophetic. He said to me, ‘Cheer up,
noble monument/’ old man, you’ll pull through yet; you’ve got
It is also something to be thankful for a long way to go,’ ” Then a shadow fell
that the merely rich person was noticeably on the poet’s face, and he was in pain, and
absent from the poet’s graveside. Only he fought his suffering in silence, but when
those people whom the poet would have the ordeal was past he returned to the sub-
counted worth while in life came as ject with a smile. “Y r es, I said to him,”
mourners to his burial. The people who did Daley continued, “I’ve a long way to go
not matter, whom he never gared for, never —it is a long way from Waitara to Waver-
wrote for, who had not kinsliip with him, j ley.” This was Daley’s delicate way of in-
who did not appreciate or dwell in the timating where he wished his place of burial
beautiful world where he. moved’—t he world to be.
which is all consecration'■ and - dream —w'ere , , ~ , , ~ , , ~
at the races, or were playing golf or bowls. | Months ago he knew that the relentless-
They did not know, most of them, that a dls ® ase of consumption had gripped him
man named Daley had spent his life in an with unrelaxable hands but he seldom
endeavor to widen and deepen their sense of f alked of death - Tll <>se who came to console
beauty so that they might recognize the him he consoled. On the last
true worthiness of the human heart, and the OCCaslo , n 011 Tf“ h . I / lum ’ h . e ,, told
light and loveliness which nature is per- and a true-gold friend who was with me the
petually offering to them as a vision to of his meeting with PhUlip J. Holds-
their eyes, and as a song to their ears. worth after the death of Kendall. It is an
But as Victor Daley would say, with a ? ld stor - v ’ and 11 has been told with vana-
shrug, “Enough, let them be; they but live tmns. and if it needs re-telling there should
their lives ” > J be others to tell it. Others, probably, will
I had the singular privilege of talking with U var J in §’ the characters somewhat,
the poet two lavs before his death took dhe f’ too b e to ld us a story of Mirabeau
place I felt I was in the presence of one turned his face to the window- There,
of the greatest men that Australia has ever said Daley that is just the light I like-
known, but I also knew I was in the com- f ot to ,° lau ,? h ,; you ever hear how Mira-
mnv nf Vietnr D*W TJ,p nld bnmnr tW beaU dled > he Continued, his last words?
pany of Victor Daley. The old humor that ueau aieu ’ continued, ms iasre woias.
was his always was there still, somewhat We shook our heads—we had not heard,
darkened by the shadow of the nearing “Mirabeau said, ‘Open the window that I
Event, but still wanting to ripple through may smell the scent of the roses.’ ”
and make our talk a merriness. When the ...... .
wuu UICIAC UUI UCIi.IV CO XIICJL X. lUCoij . IT UCU. UUC nil 11 I 11 , "XT' i.
pain which he was suffering, and which he here was another story that Victor
had to lull to rest with morphia, gave him Dale J us ? d tell M^ abeau > 1 je-
an opportunity he became again the old numbered it, on the,, 29th of December
good-natured jester, at play with flashing when, in the Bulletin office, it was told
phrases and glittering words. He said: tae that he had passed away:—
“So-and-so came here the other day. He “It is a fine day . . . but Mirabeau
wanted to console me. He was magnifi- is dead.”—“North Sydney News.”
The Mein and His Work:.
(BY EDWIN J. BRADY.)
On Saturday last, to the solemn strains chord for suffering possessed by a true poet pearls of a precious intellect for mere
of the Dead March, was borne down the played upon by the constant wind of ad- bread, or set aside his singing crown for
aisle of St. Charles Church, Waverley, an versity, with every instinct for intellectual, cap and bells to live. Mayhap, last Friday
oaken casket containing the body of Victor social, and bodily enjoyment starved and morning, when he was forever relieved from
John Daley-—poet, philosopher, humorist, withered through weary days, entitle a man “dread of death or doubt,” and when, in
and friend. For 47 years that body had to deep and dreamless slumbers through his own words he had
been the dwelling place of one of earth’s all eternity, then Victor Daley will surely “Takon Inno- last
structkm of The Well ’ K Jk ° U th - e ° ther , band ’ SUch Fond look at earth, and from Ifar '
stinotion by the veige of the Pacific. The trials are but the passing prelude to some Wa.teherl the dear old ola.net dwindling to
Great Mother Sea croons her requiems ever
below, the Dawn in all her splendor rises up
before him, and, when the day is done, the
Dusk, with sandalled feet, softly draws the
curtains of darkness about his bed. But as
the oaken coffin passed me in the aisle I
thought of Heine, and irresistibly my hand
went up to the military salute. He, too,
was a soldier in the war of the emancipation
of humanity, who had won his meed of peace.
If thirty years of combat with the sordid,
the ignorant, and the inane, with every
trials are but the passing prelude to some Watched the d6ar ’ old p i ane t dwindling to
spirit life where the liberated Ego is no to a star ”
longer trammelled by the muddy considera- ’
tions of this commonplace life of flesh, then and the gates of the Marvellous swung open
the soul of Victor J. Daley soars high. Be- before him, John Keats, whose genius he
yond the blue empyrean he sits i most resembles, bade him welcome, and
among the eagles of song, and watches with I courtly Shakespeare nodded friendly recog-
fine indifference the vagaries of that world nition, and reckless Omar smiled. Doubt-
whose “guest he was, and a stranger.” He less Kendall—“who didst dwell in shadow
is no longer the slave of oafs or the sport for song’s sake”—took him tenderly by the
of fools. No longer like Giusti’s starving hand—Kendall, of whom he wrote so lov-
mountebank—“who to please the crowd must j ingly, and whose sad life-lot was so like his
try with gibe and grin”—need he barter the own. What shall I write of this man*
.'^l


whose work I have admired for more than
seventeen long and strident years, and
known and loved for seven? What shall I
say of my comrade and brother and friend?
One link in the chain is broken, one flower
has fallen from the stalk, one singing bird
has flown from the laurel tree!
What can I write to-day when but little
more than a week ago in that weatherboard
cottage at Waitara we said farewell, each of
us knowing full well that one was going
upon a journey from which there was never
return? What shall I say of him only that
as I left his bedside at length—unable to
speak—he bravely waved his hand to me—
Victor to the last.
What shall I say of him ! Only that when
a few days later, in the same room, reverent
hands drew aside the cere cloth, and I
looked upon his dead face, I saw there no
cause for grief or fear. Pale and firm as
marble, all the marks of care and suffering
gone, majestic, triumphant—victor to the
last.
He was born in the County Armagh on
August sth, 1858. The sad, singing soul of
Ireland looks out from all his serious lines;
the laughing heart of Ireland speaks in all
his humorous work. He has the pathos of
Moore, but he is a greater workman than
Moore. Moore has much music and little
art; Daley has much art and much music,
but it is the music more of the organ than
the harp, the magnificence of grand opera
rather than the mellifluence of cantata. If
it were possible to judge an intellect as
cosmopolitan as that of Daley’s from a
racial standpoint, it might be said that he
approaches nearer in poetic method to
James Clarence Mangan than to any of the
Celtic bards who have written in the Eng-
lish language. But even this comparison
must be qualified. Not only were the condi-
tions under which Daley worked different to
those of Mangan, Davis, Gerald Griffen,
and Moore, but his genius was unique and
singular, and his expression marked by a
charm and originality entirely peculiar to
himself. Apart from the natural imprint
of race—and with the Irish, like the Jews,
heredity is a living factor—there is a
curious special interpretive character in
Daley’s poetry, which probably owed its
origin to a close sympathetic study of Celtic
legendery and romance. The note of unde-
finable mystery, the chanting of weird
Druidical songs amid groves of mourning
oaks, the moonlight dancing of fairies, the
wind whispering in the recesses of the
round towers, whose builders have passed
into fable long ago; the mist on the Irish
hills, and the distant break of waves upon
the Westernmost shores of Europe—all these
echoes are in his verse. His muse at times
is an Aeolian harp of Celtic form, on which
the spirit shade of some Erse bard, long
buried in oblivion, plays a strange beauti-
ful music of recollection and romance. “The
Sunset Fantasy” is full of this spirit; the
story of Hy. Brasil breathes through its every
line, and every line is the most delightful
poetry and the most consummate art—
■“A melody that has no words
Of mortal speech a part.
Yet touching all the deepest chords
That tremble in the-heart;
■“A scented song blown oversea.
As though from bowers of bloom,
A wind harp in a lilac tree
Breathed music and perfume.”
This is the art of Keats and the soul
of Daley. It is contended by patriotic en-
thusiasts like Douglas Hyde that there is a
separate Gaelic poetry of the highest merit.
Such fragments as have been translated
from the original language do not justify
the contention. It may be that one must
have a profound knowledge of Gaelic to ap-
preciate them as they deserve. On the
other hand, it is more 'iikely that the Irish
gift of music and attendant musical verse
has in another land, under altered conditions,
at last reached the highest level of poetic
expression in the intellect of Victor Daley.
And in this connection it is a curious fact
that Daley, with an ear absolutely attuned
to rhythm was singularly deficient in musi-
cal qualities. With the finest appreciation
of instrumental music, of harmony of all
fashions, he was himself almost incapable of
singing or whistling a note in tune.
Daley was twenty before he saw Australia.
It is in youth that a poet’s impressions are
always formed. Age may bring form and
experience to his work, but the heart of the
poet through all vicissitudes must ever re-
main young. For this reason Daley’s muse
is not distinctly Australian, and much of
his poetry could have been written any-
where. It may be for this reason also that,
always admitted by the cultured few as the
peer of local bards, his verses have had less
popular acceptance than those of other con-
temporary writers on a much lower plane.
Australia has behaved badly to a genius,
and it may be that futurity, delivering a
dispassionate verdict, will acclaim him one
of the greatest men of his age. Last year
when he knew that his days were surely
numbered, a passing bitterness momentarily
entered his brave, great heart, and he wrote
in Sydney “Bulletin, under his nom de
plume of Creeve Roe; —
GELIMER.
Gelimer, King of the Vandals,
In mountain prison pent.
To P haras, the Roman captain,
A message of sorrow sent.
He had been Lord of Carthage,
The splendid daughter of Tyre,
And he wrote thus—“ Send me, O Pharas,
A loaf of bread and a lyre.”
He would comfort his heart that stifled
’Midst Moorish swine in a stye.
By singing of Genseric’s glories.
And his own good days gone by.
Gelimer, King of the Vandals,
Died in the ancient years;
Yet his words so quaint and simple
Have filled mine eyes with tears.
And I think I will send this message.
His case being nearly mine—
“l have a lyre—but send me
A loaf and a jar of wine.”
He had the lyre, and for twenty-five years
he
“Smote with songs like swords
The soul of man on its most sacred chords.
And made the heart of him a hahp to
smite,”
but those to whom he sent the message re-
sponded not with the loaf and the jar of
wine—and, as he lived, so, alas, he died. I
have before me a letter of his dated Sept.,
’9B, written on his return to Sydney from
the Victorian capital after an absence of
years. I was living without the city, and in
response to a treasured first note announcing
his arrival, had asked him to come and visit
me, deploring, in etiquette bound, the hum-
bleness of my own entourage. Laughing
my apologies to scorn, he says, “Don’t
speak of Oriential luxuries so far as I am
concerned. I have been living like a sort
of literary Laplander for years past. Any-
thing is good enough for me, and most
things too good.” And this was the spirit
of the man. Only those wh® have been
ground between the nether millstone and
the upper thoroughly understand the
amenities of poetic literature in Australia.
The poet’s lot is rarely a bed of roses in
any country, for he must learn in suffering
what he teaches in song; but in Australia
it is a veritable couch of flints.
Le Gallienue, in a recent review of Rod
Quinn’s verses, expressed the opinion that
Australia is probably the worst country in
the world for poets. To Daley it proved
particularly hard, inasmuch as Destiny had
fashioned him for a poet only, and outside
of his splendid verse and a purely literary
talent, for which this coimtry appears to
have small demand, his capacities for earn-
ing a livelihood were circumscribed. Conse-
quently life with him developed into a pa-
thetic struggle for bare existence, a strug-
gle in which—gallant soul that he was—he
displayed a philosophy and a heroism as
rare as they were beautiful. A measure of
adversity, which would have soured most
men, but served to perfect in him the
qualities of the poet, the sage, and the mar-
tyr. With fine nobility of soul he rose
above the littleness of earth, and even in
life his seat was with the gods. It is a
fact that no man ever heard him speak ill
of another, and although he used a pen like
a scalpel in dealing with the world’s shams
and displayed at times much of the sardonic
wit of Heine, he was never known to at-
tempt personal retaliation or to descend to
the worldly and the mean. When the shafts
of misfortune flew so thickly that, like a
flight of black arrows, they obscured the
light of the sun, he faced the battlements
with a quaint heroic humor and a philo-
sophic courage peculiarly his own. He died
at the comparatively youthful age of 47;
the wonder to those who knew him is that he
lived so long. To the very end his indomi-
table spirit burned like the wick of some
sacred vessel before an altar, even when the
oil that feeds it is exhausted. With lungs
ravaged by the devouring bacilli of cruel
phthisis, his voice fallen almost to a whis-
per, kept alive by medical skill on brandy
and opiates, in the intervals of his pain he
contrived a joke for visiting friends, and
too weak to laugh himself, watched with
evident satisfaction their answering smiles.
A brave man and a great one.
Of Daley the man I could write indefi-
nitely. In days to come stories and anec-
dotes will keep his memory green in Bo-
hemia. His tongue was almost as expres-
sive as his pen, and his wit flashed continu-
ously like sheet lightning upon a summer
night. Still I never knew him to utter a
coarse word or make a brutal jest. In the
winter of 1902, run down in health, he came
to Grafton. The three months he spent on
-the Clarence are among the brightest in my
memory. Under the genial influence of a
sub-tropical winter he improved rapidly,
and when he had grown strong enough we
would take boat and idle golden hours upon


■the magnificent Northern River, Nature
.gave us all that Australian Nature in her
kindliest mood is capable of, and we rowed
and fished and hunted, we discussed of
those things that lay nearest to our fancies
and our hearts. And now his heart, that
brave, sympathetic, kindly heart in which
all humanity had a place, is stilled forever.
The world could better have spared ten
thousand oafs—who live. His last consider-
able work in prose was specially written a
little over twelve months ago for The
Worker. It is a Christmas tale, entitled
“The House of Failures, 55 and is very much
the story of Daley’s own life. The charac-
ters were all men that he had known, and
he has weaved himself into the narrative.
It appeared to have cost him some effort,
and as the compositor cannot be denied, he
completed his manuscript at my house one
sadly memorable Sunday evening. When
the last slip was covered he laid down his
pen and turning to me spoke for the first
time seriously about his health. Alarmed
by his symptoms, I advised immediate medi-
cal advice —and next week he received the
verdict! There was no fear in the man.
While hope remained he battled for his life,
and when all hope was gone he folded his
mantle about him and waited like a Spartan
soldier for the sword thrust of death. Out
of the great mass of work which he accom-
plished, and of which I understand much
yet remains to be published, there has only
Keen printed in volume form “Dawn and
Dusk." This collection of incomparable
verse was issued by Angus and Robertson in
1898. and as far as intellectual criticism
and acceptance are concerned, is an unquali-
fied success. Of it one, whom I believe to
Ibe the greatest literary judge in this coun-
try, said to me, “I would rather have my
name on Daley's book than any book yet
published in Australia." Without doubt,
“Dawn and Dusk" represents the high-
water level of Australian literary effort,
and naturally the public—which crowds in
its thirty thousands to the funeral of a
champion swimmer, while in the same week
its greatest man goes almost unnoticed to
the grave —has not discovered the fact.
One's heart bleeds for the future of a people
so dead to all that makes a nation great;
and not without apprehension one considers
that the Australian literature of the future
may be printed in German or Japanese.
Until a complete edition of the dead poet's
works is published it will be impossible to
submit his genius to anything like ana-
lytical criticism. In literary affectation he
once wrote:—
“My songs and sonnets carven in fine gold
Have faded from me with the last day-beam
That purple lustre to the sea line lent.
And flushed the clouds with rose and chry-
solite—
So days and dreams in darkness pass away/ 5
But his mint of carven gold is there for all
time, and futurity will draw a priceless
store of intellectual enjoyment and culture
therefrom. Such poems as “Love Laurel, 55
“In a Wine Cellar, 55 “Years Ago, 55 “ The
Nightingale, 55 “Night, 55 and “A Sunset
Fantasy 55 must live in English or to me all
that I wot of in English literature is tran-
sient and futile. Will not such lines as these
bear his name, as a soul is borne onward on
shining pinions, into the splendid vistas of
immortality ?
“Ah mother dear! broad-bosomed Mother
Earth—
Mother of all our joy, grief, madness,
mirth !
Mother of flower and fruit, of stream and
sea!
We are thy children, and must cling to
thee.
“I lay my head upon they breast and hear —
Small, small, and faint, yet strangely sweet
and clear—
“The hum and clash of little worlds below.
Each on its own path moving, swift or
slow.
“And, listening, ever with intenter ear.
Through din of wars invisible I hear
“A Homer—genius is not gauged by mass—
Singing his Iliad on a blade of grass.
“And nations hearken; his great song re-
sounds
Unto the tussock's very utmost bounds.
“States rise and fall each blade of grass
upon.
But still his song from blade to blade rolls
“Through all the tussock world ”
Such thoughts and a thousand other beauti-
ful thoughts clothed in ail the beauty of
skilled and inspired expression, cannot be
uttered in vain, even if they were put forth
in a greater intellectual Sahara than this
golden land of glorified parochialism and
athleticism gone mad. Had Daley as a
young man found Boston or New York in-
stead of Sydney or Melbourne, his gain
would have been Australia's loss. Now that
he has gone beyond the hoping and the car-
ing—now that he lies with Kendall in that
beautiful Dead City by the Sea, where the
Dawn in robes of gold comes up to the
triumphant march of endless waves, where
the rain at Dusk falls softly on his grave,
perhaps Australia will, as a people, recog-
nize and be proud !
How well he knew ! Some months ago a
well-beloved friend brought to the sad
little cottage at Waitara a volume of
“Dawn and Dusk 55 from the English edition,
and begged him write a verse within it.
Time and time again, as his life ebbed
away, he spoke of doing this thing, but it
was not till the morning of that grey day on
which we said farewell that he asked for the
book and pen and ink. With tear-wet eyes
—ere I left the house—his daughter brought
me in silence the book with open page. And
this, written in a firm hand, was the in-
scription :
“Dusk!
Victor J. Daley, December, 1905. 55
It was the last word he wrote. The tongue
is silent, the pen is still. One link in the
chain is broken, one flower has fallen from
the stalk, one singing bird has flown from
the laurel tree —Victor is with the gods.
—“The Worker, 55 Sydney.
Those desirous of assisting the
Victor Daley Memorial Fund are
kindly requested to forward their sub=
scriptions to the Hon. Treasurer,
Wm. McLEOD, Esq.,
c/o “Bulletin,” Sydney, N.S.W.
Worker Trades Union Printery, 129 Bathurst-street, Sydney


