







VICTORIA IN 1898
LORD BEASSEY, D.0.L., KC.B.
COMMANDER OP THE LEG-lON OF HONOUR
Jlrinteb fag
SPOTTISWOODE & CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE, LONDON
1898


YIC T 0 EIA IN 1898
LORD BRASSEY, D.0.L., K. 0.8.
COMMANDER OF THE LEGION OP HONOUR
||rinteb It ji
SPOTTISWOODE & CO., NEW-STEEET SQUAEE, LONDON
1898




EECENT SOCIAL AND POLITICAL
PEOGEESS IN YICTOETA
By the Right Hon. LORD BRASSEY, K.C.B.
(Governor of the Colony)
Bead at a Meeting of the Boyal Colonial Institute, held at the
Whitehall Booms, Hotel Metropole, on Tuesday, June 14, General
Sir Henry W. Norman, G.C.8., G.0.M.G., C.1.E., in the Chair.
When a Governor on leave endeavours to give to
the people of the Old Country the impressions formed
during his residence in the colony to which he is
accredited, his first thoughts naturally turn to the
incidents connected with his landing and reception
by the Government and the people.
We arrived off Melbourne at the close of a stormy
day. Under steam and sail, and with a roaring tide
in our favour, we passed through Port Phillip Pleads
with an impetuous rush. As we reached the sheltered
waters inside, thankful that our long voyage was
ended, we w;ere quickly surrounded by a picturesque
flotilla of fishing boats under sail. As soon as the
anchor was let go a large party came on board from
Queenscliff with an address of welcome, a copious
wealth of flowers, and a hearty outpouring of the


kindest words. It was a fitting prelude to the cere-
mony of the morrow.
The day of our landing in Melbourne was favoured
with the most perfect Australian weather. More
than 100,000 persons were assembled on the line of
procession from the landing-place to the Exhibition
building, where the swearing-in ceremony took place.
There was little of pageantry or display ; the people
mustered to express their love for the Mother-country,
and their loyalty to the British Empire, by giving a
warm welcome to the Representative of the Crown.
On a smaller scale, the same demonstrations of
public feeling have been renewed again and again
during our residence in Victoria. They have been
as warm in the most secluded parts as in the great
cities.
During the celebrations on the occasion of the
Diamond Jubilee of the Queen, the spontaneous out-
bursts of loyalty were most gratifying. They had a
political significance of no mean importance. Ear
more interest attaches in such a case to things done
by the people themselves than to any ceremonies
organised under official direction. Viewed in this
light, viewed as an expression of what was felt in
the heart of the people, it is especially gratifying to
remember an inspection of 1,500 boys of the Cadet
Corps of our State School, whose lusty cheers in
honour of the 300 veterans of the navy and the army
who were present on the ground were an earnest
and a proof that in the next generation of men Old


England will not want defenders. We had another
O
gratifying incident in a procession, interminable in
its length, consisting of the members of the Trade
Societies and of the Irish Societies, the latter loyal
to the heart’s core when migrated from Ireland to
Australia. These were things done by the people
for the people, and with the people; and they give
the deep and confident assurance that, happen what
may, this old country will never be forsaken by her
sons across the seas
Come the three corners of the world in arms,
And we shall shock them; naught shall make us rue,
If England to itself do rest but true.
What is the secret of the success of the Empire
beyond the seas P It is, as the Lord Chief Justice
well said at the last South Australian dinner, that
the Mother-country has not attempted to keep the
Colonies in leading strings, but has given them a
free hand.
Having spoken of their loyal feeling, I may
appropriately say a few words in reference to the
co-operation of the Australian Colonies with the
Mother-country in the common responsibility of
providing for the defence of the Empire, Under
an agreement, recently renewed, Australasia makes
a certain contribution to the cost of the naval
force in local waters. In comparison with an
aggregate expenditure of 25,000,000/. sterling, the
Australasian subsidy is as a drop in the ocean.
Eegarded as an acknowdedgment of a principle, it


has a larger significance. The question, however,
remains for consideration whether the co-operation
of the Australian Colonies can most effectually be
offered in its present form. It is the duty of the
statesman to turn to the fullest account all the means
of defence that we possess. We must, therefore, look
at the local conditions and local resources. Australia
has no advantages for the construction of ships. It
possesses exceptional advantages for raising a force of
Mounted Eifles. In no part of the Empire, probably
in no part of the world, are horses so enduring,
especially in hot climates, and so cheap as in Australia:
in no part of the world do you find horsemanship so
universal an accomplishment as in the Australian Bush.
In the Jubilee Procession you saw, and you greatly
admired, those mounted men of Australia : they were
but average specimens of the force which it was their
privilege to represent. It may seem scarcely credible,
yet it is true, that the subsidy for a mounted man in
Australia does not exceed two guineas a year, I
desire to impress it on this audience, and the public
at large, that we have in Australia an unique military
resource, not utilised as yet, which should in some
form or other be made available for the defence of
the Empire, and especially for service, if the occasion
arose, at the Cape or in India. I cannot go further
into this question on the present occasion. It is the
less necessary or desirable to do so because the
subject is under the consideration of the responsible
authorities.
6
Recent Social and Political


And now I turn to give a public answer to
questions constantly put in private intercourse : How
do you like the life F How do you like your duties P
How do you like the people ? You will assume that
to such questions a Governor could hardly give an
independent answer. I have no wish to give an
independent answer : I am too well content to live
under the control of the public opinion of the Colony
of Victoria. I have to deal with a community o t
men and women in whom are embodied all the best
qualities of the Anglo-Saxon race, —the honour, the
honesty, the perseverance and the courage of its
men; the charm and the goodness of its women.
There are no kinder hearts anywhere in the world
than are to be found in Australia. For them it is a
privilege to be able to render services, and here I
speak for my wife as I speak for myself.
Ho doubt there are points which make a differ-
ence between life in Australia and life in this old
country. Here we have at the head of society
families of ancient lineage, and bearing their dignity I /
with ease and grace. In a new country there are y
not, and there could not be, a corresponding order of
men. In another part of the social scale, among the
mass of the middle class, and the cream of the artisan
class, we see in Australia, to the best advantage, the
results achieved by a most liberal system of State
education and the benefits to be derived from liberal
wages judiciously applied. At the annual dinner of*
the men employed on the railways, the stoker, who


has just descended from the footplate of the engine,
will turn out in an irreproachable evening suit, and
sing the newest song by a Sullivan or a Claribel
as well as the accomplished amateurs of our London
■a wing-rooms.
Nowhere does the Australian crowd appear to
more advantage, as compared with the Mother
country, than on the occasion of the great annual
carnival. The race for the Melbourne Cup generally
brings together 100,000 spectators. The contrast
between the Flemington Eacecourse and the Epsom
Hill on the Derby day is rather painful to an
English reader. There are no loafers, nor any
drunkards; nothing is seen of that seamier side of
human life which is so much in evidence on the
Epsom Downs, If we look to the more serious
side of life, to the training for the professions and
for business, excellent work is being done at the
Melbourne University. It is perhaps to be regretted
that the higher culture does not claim so many
votaries as with us, where the leisured classes are
more numerous, but all the teaching which helps on
the practical side of life is admirably given and
eagerly sought by thousands of earnest students of
both sexes.
The movement of the population is perhaps the
most decided indication of the relative progress of
a country. The rush to the goldfields of Western
Australia naturally attracted a larger number of
persons from Victoria than from any other Colony.
8
Recent Social and Political


Owing to this cause, the total population during /
the last two years shows a slight decrease of 5,513. \
If the aggregate numbers have remained stationary, '—
there are highly satisfactory evidences of the im-
proved condition of the people. No fewer than
thirty-one out of every 100 men, women and childrens
in the Colony have now deposits in the savings bank. 5
In the last two years the depositors have increased
by seven per cent.; the deposits show an increase of
two-thirds of a million sterling : the average amount
to the credit of each depositor is about 22 1.
The flourishing condition of the Friendly Socie-
ties affords further indication of the thrift which is
practised by the people. In 1897 more than one.,,
in every four men between the ages of 20 and 60
years was a member of some society, while the accu-
mulated funds amounted to over 1,000,000/. sterling.
In the two years ended with 1897 the member-
ship increased by nearly 1,500, and the funds by
75,000/. Their total amount at the present time is
1,155,408/. Further evidence of the exercise of pru-
dence and foresight is afforded by the fact that one
in every nine persons of all ages insure their lives.
In the two years ended with 1896 the number of
policies in force increased by nearly 1,500.
Impressed with the necessity, especially in a
country of universal sufirage, of giving the means
of education to every citizen, the expenditure on
the part of the Government on education has been
liberal and lavish. In 1891, the payments under the


Education Department amounted to 724,000/.; they
still exceed half a million sterling. Public schools have
been erected in every part of the Colony. In 1896,
as compared with 1894, the number of scholars in
average attendance in public and private schools
increased by over 10,000. In connection with the
improvement that has taken place in so many direc-
tions, it is satisfactory to find a substantial decrease
in the amount of crime.
The Parliament of Victoria is sedulous in its
endeavours to improve the condition of the people.
In the sessions of 1896 and 1897 a Factory Regula-
tion Bill was one of the measures most earnestly
debated. The Lower House was in favour of greater
stringency of regulation; the Upper House felt
strongly the objections to a system which deprives
the workers of their personal independence. The
measure, as finally passed, will have the effect of re-
stricting the competition of Chinese with Europeans,
and of domestic with factory labour. The principle
of fixing minimum wages by elective boards is ac-
cepted. As Mr. Henry de B. Walker, in his admirable
volume on 4 Australasian Democracy,’ observes, the
Act should be regarded as a humane attempt to
minimise the sufferings of the outworkers and to
improve the conditions of labour of the toiling
masses of the people. No legislation will provide
employment for the less efficient. The restrictions
as to the rates of wages now imposed have borne
hardly on the aged, who cannot do a full day’s work.


The law cannot compel an employer to pay wages
which the worker is unable to earn by an equivalent
in work done. This is an aspect of the case which it
will be necessary to keep in view.
This brings us to the consideration of the measures
taken in Victoria to provide relief for those in neces-
sitous circumstances. Though blessed with many
advantages in soil, in climate, in mineral resources,
no Colony, not even the most favoured, is without its
submerged tenth. In Victoria the sudden contraction
of all expenditure, both public and private, resulting
from the collapse which followed a period of inflation,
threw many thousands out of employment. We have
no Poor Law as in the Old Country. Extreme dis-
tress is sometimes relieved in the case of the able-
bodied by sending them to prison. The young and
the aged are received in asylums designated, for the
sake of euphony, as Emigrants 5 Homes. I will not
describe institutions which bear a close resemblance
to those existing elsewhere ; it will be more interest-
ing to refer to our Labour Colony, founded upon
German models. It is situated at Leongatha, eighty
miles east of Melbourne, in the hilly region of the
Dividing Eange. I had the opportunity of visiting
the Colony in company with our Minister of Lands,
Mr. Best, and under the guidance of the Honorary
Superintendent, Colonel Goldstein. The aim is to
give temporary work at low rates of wages, the
maximum being four shillings a week. The employ-
ment consists chiefly in clearing the heavy timber off


the land and in market gardening. When thirty
shillings has been accumulated to his credit, the
worker must seek employment elsewhere. In a large
number of cases men are successful; others return
again and again. I remember well the baker of the
establishment, a fine fellow physically, and with no
outward indications of mental or moral incapacity.
He cannot hold his own in the battle of life. He has
left and returned to the Colony again and again. All
the provision for feeding, housing, and clothing at
Leongatha is rude, but sufficient, and the cost is
surprisingly low—considerably below the expenditure
under the Poor Law at home. The men themselves
seem well satisfied with their treatment. I did not
see the sullen, dispirited, and dejected looks which
are common in our workhouses. In the course of
our visit we conversed freely with the men. I had a
long dialogue with an old fellow who was working
in the bottom of a deep ditch on a pouring wet day.
He was low in the world, but he had not lost the
spirit of independence. It was amusingly displayed
in an answer which he gave in reply to a leading
question ; £ Yes, sir, we are well satisfied at Leongatha ;
we think the Government is doing its best to deal
with the difficult question of the unemployed.’
Time will not permit of an extended reference to
experiences in other Colonies. I cannot, however,
pass from this subject without a brief word on the
institutions for the relief of the aged poor established
by the Government of Queensland on an island in


Moreton Bay. I visited this island with Sir Horace
Tozer and Sir Samuel Griffith. In a Colony where
land is to be had for the asking, where every
natural advantage is to the fullest degree enjoyed,
it was surprising to find 3,000 men gathered to-
gether passing a dreary old age in the condition
of paupers. The explanation is to be found in
the circumstance that in all the Colonies, in Aus-
tralia as in Canada, the employment on the land
is to a large extent of a temporary character. At
shearing time and at harvest time men are in full
work at high wages. A large part of the year is
unfortunately spent in idleness in the towns, where
the earnings of hard work in the country are freely
spent in dissipation. In this class too many have no
savings; they have no settled homes, and when old
age comes they are penniless. In Queensland, as in
Victoria, the relief of the poor is given at a sur-
prisingly low cost. This cheapness of living makes
it the more strange and the more regrettable that so
are unable to maintain themselves. There is
infinitely less extreme poverty among women than
men. In Moreton Bay not more than 200 women
were in the unhappy position that I have described.
I must not enlarge on the problem of poverty.
‘Ye have the poor with you always.’ That saying
of the Founder of our religion is only too truly
verified in the experience of modern days, whether
in new or old countries. I may set side by
side with the description which I have given of


Australian conditions an experience I once had in
Argentina. Twenty years ago, I visited that country,
in which my father’s firm had some years before com-
pleted a line of railway, the payment for which from
the Government had taken the form of a land grant.
To commence a settlement of the country, some
hundreds of families had been sent over to Argentina
from all parts of Europe. Their passages were paid,
and on their arrival a free grant of 80 acres of
fertile land was made to every family: for each a
house was built, a well was dug, tools and seeds
were provided gratis, and provisions were supplied
for one year. At the date of my visit, three years
had elapsed since the settlements were formed, and,
though all had started level in the race of life, and
all had had a good start, a third of the settlers were
being fed at soup-kitchens, while others had already
attained prosperity and were eager buyers of the
land allotted to those less fortunate. Inequality of
success seems inherent in human conditions. The
difference between sickness and health is, in the case
of those who have to work with their hands, a most
essential difference, and it is one which is indepen-
dent of human control. Eecognising that there will
always be more or less of poverty in our midst, it is V
an obvious duty to be sparing of no pains for its
mitigation and relief. In Australia we are doing
our best to correct the evils of a nomadic existence
by giving increased facilities for settlement in pastoral
districts in the form of grazing homesteads.


Federation is the last subject on which I shall
touch : it is the most important topic which has
been under discussion during my residence in Victoria.
The present movement for Federation had its origin
in the visit of a distinguished Imperial officer, Sir
Be van Edwards. In his able report he insisted that
the organisation of a common system of defence
could only be accomplished by a federation of the
military forces of Australia under the supreme
command of an officer of adequate rank. On re-
ceiving his report, the late Sir Henry Parkes sounded
the note of Federation, and addressed a formal in-
vitation to the Premiers of the six Colonies. This
invitation was followed by the Conferences which
have since been held, twice in Sydney, twice in
Melbourne, and once in Adelaide. It may be claimed
that Federation is approved by the best men and
the highest in Australia, by the leaders in politics,
the leaders in enterprise and commerce, and by the
ablest journalists. It has not roused popular interest
in the same degree. Questions of tariff, regulations
affecting labour, and other cognate subjects mono-
polise attention in the democratic constituencies of
Australia. They will see the advantages of Federa-
tion more clearly in the course of time. Two great
practical advantages should certainly be secured by
Federation. Union for defence is most desirable, and
there are no difficulties in the way. A Customs
Union of the Australian Colonies is equally desirable,
but mere difficult. In New South Wales a Free-trade


policy lias been adopted; Victoria remains Protec-
tionist, Between these antagonistic principles some
compromise is required. Happily, a great practical
experiment is actually under trial, under similar
conditions as to climate, natural resources, and the
price and efficiency of labour. It should certainly
be possible ere long to determine whether Victoria
or New South Wales has the advantage If it is
found that there are material differences, whether in
the cost of living, the average rates of wages, or the
regulation of employment, it will not be difficult to
decide how far those differences are traceable to
fiscal policy or to other causes. It may perhaps be
found that the effects of Protection on the one hand
and Pree-trade on the other, on the material and
social condition of the people, are less considerable
than some have anticipated. If such a view should
prevail, it will materially help the people concerned
to arrive at some compromise which may be mutually
satisfactory. Under the provisions of the Common-
wealth Bill a Federal Tariff must be framed within
two years.
Finance has been one of the greatest difficulties
in the way of Federation. Under the scheme as
approved at the first meeting of the Federal Conven-
tion at Sydney, it was proposed to provide the
Government with a revenue by the surrender of the
duties of Customs and Excise. The assigned revenues
would aggregate nine millions sterling, a sum enor-
mously in excess of the Federal expenditure on any


reasonable scale ; and all experience shows how hard
it is to resist the temptation to raise expenditure to
the level of income. The difficulty has been dealt
with by a clause in the Commonwealth Bill which
limits the expenditure of the Federal Government to
not exceeding a quarter of the revenue. None of the
States of Australia could afford to make the sacri-
fice which was demanded unless it were relieved of
its debt, or unless the surplus income were returned
after defraying the necessary payments for Federal
expenditure. On this point a writer in The Leader
newspaper has remarked that the problem to be solved
is to distribute the surplus in such a way that each
State shall receive back the amount it contributes,
less its proportionate share of Federal cost. Without
the experience only to be gained by actual experi-
ment, it is difficult to discover any safe plan of dis-
tribution. No one can foretell the exact results of
an uniform tariff, or say how it will operate as between
one Colony and another. The Treasurers of the
several Colonies, meeting as a special committee on
finance, devised a scheme which is embodied in the
Commonwealth Bill. The scheme is complicated, but
it has been generally admitted that it is the best that
can be contrived in the circumstances.
In the long discussions which have taken place,
many subjects were debated at great length which
would not excite deep interest outside the Federal
Convention. Briefly, the Commonwealth Bill may
be described as giving to Australia a Constitution


more liberal than any other Constitution in the
world. It provides a machinery for giving to the
popular will the most absolute control over the
course of legislation. It is a Constitution under
which it is inconceivable that there can be any
wrongs which are not easily and speedily redressed.
There is no reason to fear that the Federation of
Australia means disruption of the Empire. Canada
is more loyal since Federation than before; and
throughout the proceedings of the Australian Fede-
ration Convention, whenever an opportunity has been
afforded, the same loyal feeling has been warmly
displayed.
Speaking of my personal action, I may say that
I have never lost a chance of warmly advocating the
broad principle of Federation. I have done so with
not the less earnestness because I have recognised
that there are difficulties in framing a complete
scheme in the initial stage. It would certainly have
been easier to proceed in a more tentative fashion,
commencing with larger powers for the present
Federal Council, and enabling it to deal at once and
effectively with Federal defence. A scheme so partial
and imperfect would, however, have excited no in-
terest in Australia, You could not have got the best
men in the Colonies to meet in convention for an
object so limited.
Since I left Victoria, Federation has passed
through a further stage ; it has been the subject of a
popular vote. In three out of the five Colonies


that were represented in the Convention, the ma-
jorities in favour of Federation were, as we know,
considerable. In New South Wales the majority was
below the minimum number of 80,000 votes as fixed
under a special enactment of the local Parliament.
According to the latest advices, renewed efforts are
being made by Sir George Turner to bring New
South Wales into the Confederation.
A few words in conclusion. In their endeavours
to form a Federal Government for Australia, the
staunch advocates of the cause have been actuated
by no unworthy aims. They have looked not to the
baser considerations of mere selfish advantage, but
to those loftier conceptions which truly ennoble the
life of nations. These views have found expression
in many stirring utterances by the great statesmen
whom Australia has produced. Going back to an
early stage in the Federal movement, and to a Colony
which still hesitates to send representatives to a
Federal Convention, we find the manly and patriotic
sentiments of the Australian people vigorously and
forcibly proclaimed by Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, at
that time Premier of Queensland. ‘This,’ he said,
‘is no question of party politics. We are determined,
so far as we can, to act side by side ; we are deter-
mined to create an united Australia ; we are deter-
mined ultimately, and I believe before the present
generation has passed, to form ourselves into a great
nation —a nation which I believe will not have its
parallel, at any rate south of the Equator, It will


be a great southern power, a power for peace, not a
power for war. I look forward to that time with
perfect certainty, believing that the people of all the
Colonies are actuated by the same desire.’
Descending to the latest utterances of leading
members of the last Convention, Mr. Eeid thus
described the advantages of Federation; 4 Divided
strength, and varying, and sometimes intensely con-
flicting, purposes, now radiate from five or six centres
of political thought. Our government and legislation
must some day be united, and the whole manhood,
intellect and power of all the Colonies must be
crowned by an Act of Union. If there is written in
the book of destiny one fact clearer and more signifi-
cantly than any other in reference to these southern
lands, it is the fact that, sooner or later, by one sort
of contrivance or other, the whole of the boundaries
which separate Australian from Australian must come
down.’
I cannot close without paying my tribute of
admiration to the statesmen who have undertaken
the far from easy task of federating Australia. I
have seen them at their work, I have heard them in
debate, I have conferred with them in the confidences
of private life, and I desire to bear my testimony to
their parliamentary ability, their power in debate,
their skill in administration, to the wealth and fulness
of their information, and their patriotic aspirations.
The men who have sat in the Federal Convention of
Australia are statesmen of whom any country might


well be proud. They are, in a true sense, pillars of
the British Empire. It rebounds to the glory of the
local legislatures of Australia that such men have
been reared up for the great task upon which they
have been engaged, and which I am confident they
will bring, sooner or later, to completeness, for the
lasting advantage of the Australian people.


TRADE AND RESOURCES OF VICTORIA
Address delivered before the London Chamber of Commerce {in the
Hall of the Salters' Company), June 7, 1898
Ten years have elapsed since I last had the privilege
of addressing the London Chamber of Commerce
on a subject connected with the Colonies. On the
former occasion, on my return from an extended
cruise, I described the progress made in completing
the defences of our coaling stations. To-day I appear
before you as a Governor on leave deeply interested
in all that concerns the welfare of the Colony over
which he, in a constitutional sense, presides. I
come here full of solicitude for the good name and
credit of a young country which has passed through
many vicissitudes.
Victoria in the past has enjoyed periods of extra-
ordinary prosperity. In the early days labour was
cheap and vast areas of land could be taken up.
The price of wool, the principal product of Australia,
rose in 1860 to 25/. 15s. o d. per bale. In 1894 it had
fallen to 11/. 15s. o d. While the pastoral industry
was in the heyday of prosperity the goldfields were
discovered, and in the ten years 1851-60 no less than


23,932,000 ounces were raised. The sudden accession
of wealth from local resources made it perilously
easy to raise money in Lombard Street. Colonial
treasurers had but to ask in order to receive.
Millions of pounds flowed year by year into their
coffers, Customs receipts were swollen, wages rose
in all the skilled trades to 11. a day. Money was
flowing in every direction like water. No one
stayed to trace the source from which it came. As
in other parts of the world, so in all our Colonies,
and most conspicuously in Victoria, the general
inflation led to a prodigious boom in land values.
The boom subsided as quickly as it had arisen,
and the day—the inevitable day—of reckoning
followed. Adopting a rough estimate kindly made'
for the purpose of the present address by my friend
Mr. Keating, one of the ablest members of the
mercantile community of Melbourne, I put the pay-
ments or calls made by Victorian shareholders in our
local banks at little less than 5,000,000/. In addition
to calls, new issues have been made. By the two
methods it was proposed to obtain nearly 8,000,000/.,
and although, in some cases, shareholders have been
unable to pay, both the new issues and the calls have
been met in a manner which reflects the highest
credit on the many thousands of persons not in
affluent circumstances who have without hesitation
or a murmur practised self-denial in all its forms in
order to meet their liabilities in full. As for the calls
by Companies, it is difficult to frame an accurate


and comprehensive estimate. It is sufficient perhaps
to cite a few conspicuous cases. The shareholders
of the Goldsborough Company alone paid over a
million of hard cash in calls made by the Company
after it went into liquidation. The Hew Zealand
Loan and Mercantile Agency Company has a large
connection in Victoria. At a meeting held in
December 1896 it was stated by the Chairman that
the calls received, up to the date at which he
spoke, had brought in no less than 574,558/. Ee-
membering that the population numbers not more
than a million and a quarter, it must be acknowledged
that difficulties have been enormous. They have
been confronted and overcome with a courage, a self-
denial and fertility of resource well worthy of a
British ancestry. I am proud of what Victorians
have done to deliver themselves of burdens by which
they seemed not long ago to be almost overwhelmed.
Addressing the members of a Chamber of Com-
merce, I shall confine my observations to topics con-
nected with agriculture, mining industry, trade and
finance. Taking first those matters which are under
the control of the Government, I will briefly deal with
the financial position. In a recent statement, the
Premier, Sir George Turner, showed that, in the
short interval 1889-95, the net saving of expenditure
from revenue was no less than 3,455,775/., while
the expenditure of moneys raised on loan for rail-
ways, water and other works, had been reduced
from 4,189,000/. in 1889 to the relatively insignificant


amount of 215,000/. Including the payment of
250,000/. for the redemption of Treasury Bonds,
the expenditure of 1897-98 was estimated at
6,889,000/. The estimated revenue for 1897-98 is
6,803,196/. Comparing the revenue of the year
with the expenditure, it will be seen that after a
long interval a surplus has been secured. There
is now every prospect of a steady improve-
ment. This result has been attained by cutting
down estimates —as we all know a thankless task—
with an unsparing hand. It is the resolve of the
Government to meet every engagement, however
onerous. Universally a fortitude almost without
example has been shown in the practice of public and
private thrift. Once only during my residence in
Victoria has the word repudiation been breathed in
the Assembly, and the member who spoke the fatal
word has lost his seat.
In order to place the Colony on a sound financial
basis the borrowing policy, largely overdone in the
past, has been discontinued. No new loans will be
contracted unless they can be economically utilised
in developing the material resources of the Colony,
By the renewal of matured loans at a lower rate,
the annual interest has been reduced in the last two
years by over 15,000/. At the present time the debt
bears an average ratfe of interest of 3‘BB per cent., the
loans having an average currency still to run of six-
teen years. As the loans mature and are replaced by
Three or Two-and-a-Half per Cents., a saving will


eventually be obtained of over 483,000/. per annum.
The total amount of interest now payable is 1,823,827/.
Of the existing debt, amounting to 47,029,321/.,
nearly four-fifths was borrowed for the construction
of railways and three-fourths of the remainder for
waterworks. The balance represents expenditure
for school buildings, defences, docks and other public
works.
RAILWAYS
In Victoria, as indeed in all the Australian
Colonies, the railways constitute by far the most
important department of the public administration.
The length opened in Victoria is 3,112 miles and the
capital cost 38,325,000/. The present net return is
2f per cent,, being approximately 1 per cent, below
the average rate of interest payable on existing Govern-
ment loans, though only per cent, below the rate at
which the Government can now borrow. Railway
extension has been practically suspended in late years.
The Government are resolved to construct only those
lines which are likely to yield a fair return on the
cost. Strict economy is now exercised and every
effort is put forth to place the railways on a com-
mercial basis. The improvement which has recently
taken place in the receipts, though slight, must be
regarded as highly satisfactory, in view of the serious
loss of goods traffic consequent on the drought.
While the railways of Victoria have been a heavy


drain on the Treasury, they have aided most materially
in the development of the country. Expenditure in
the formation and maintenance of roads has been
saved, and the public have had the advantage of easy
communication at cheap rates.
EXPOETS AND IMPORTS
Turning to the exports and imports, the effect of
the cessation of borrowings and the general retrench-
ment of expenditure is significantly marked in the
altered relation between exports and imports. In
1892 the imports amounted to 17,174,545/. In 1895
they had fallen to 12,472,344/. In the former year
the imports showed an excess over the exports of
2,959,295/. In 1895 the exports showed an excess
over the imports of 2,675,388/.
The recent revival in Victoria is clearly shown in
the increase of imports in the last two years by nearly
3,000,000/., or 24 per cent., while the exports show
an increase of over 2,000,000/., or nearly 15 per cent.
Cotton piece goods and manufactures are by far the
largest item in our list of imports for consumption.
In Victoria, though the fiscal policy is strictly Pro-
tectionist, the cotton goods of the United Kingdom
are admitted duty free, the value in the year 1897
aggregating the considerable sum of 847,420/. Im-
ports of iron and steel advanced in 1897 by a long
stride to the second place in our list of imports.
The value was 562,000/., showing an increase of no


less than 168,885/. on the previous year. Of woollen
piece goods the imports from the United Kingdom
in 1897 were valued at 478,738/., being an increase
in two years of 39,411/.
TRADE WITH MOTHER-COUNTRY
In the import trade of Victoria the Mother-country
holds a most commanding position. In 1894 the
imports from the United Kingdom were 4,830,956/.;
in 1895, 4,759,546/.; in 1896, 5,923,417/. The cor-
responding figures for the imports from all foreign
countries, exclusive of the United States, were
905,714/., 951,363/. and 1,189,923/. The imports
from foreign countries mainly consist of produce
which could not be raised in the United Kingdom.
As bearing on the interesting problem of an
Imperial Customs Union, I may appropriately observe
that in the Session of 1895 a Bill for the reduction of
tariffs was the principal measure. In dealing with
the tariff, Ministers were rather followers than leaders
of public opinion. It was recognised that any changes
must be gradual. The Protectionists and tariff re-
formers fought a close battle, reductions being carried
after protracted discussion by insignificant majorities.
The party which favour a restrictive policy insist
on absolute protection for all industries which they
believe to be capable of producing goods equal- in
quality to those made elsewhere. Where such com-
petition is impossible, they accept Eree-trade. The


tariff of the Colony has been framed in accordance
with these principles. While duties on certain
descriptions of goods, and especially on woollens
and machinery, have been raised to an extreme
point, other manufactures of which the consumption
is large are admitted duty free. Among the principal
articles included in the free list are books, agricul-
tural, spinning, and several other descriptions of
machinery, dress goods, containing wool, cotton,
linens, paper, clothing, iron pipes, wire and gal-
vanised sheeting.
The discussions on the tariff in the Victorian
Parliament in 1895 were reviewed in the Argus in
the following passage : ‘ In the face of an unexampled
storm and stress the tariff reformers fought a suc-
cessful battle. The tariff reformers would have been
content with maximum ad valorem duties at 25 per
cent. A large number of ad valorem duties were
reduced 10, 15 and 20 per cent., and specific duties
were in some instances pulled down by one half.
These concessions were often material in themselves,
and their great importance is that they make a breach
in the wall.’
IMPEETAL CUSTOMS UNION
The discussions which have lately taken place on
the subject of an Imperial Customs Union have ful-
filled a great purpose in affording an opportunity for
the expression of a desire, mutually felt at home and


in the Colonies, to draw closer together. There are
obvious difficulties in any sudden change in the fiscal
policy as at present pursued in the Mother-country
and the Colonies. British manufacturers depend on
ample supplies of raw materials at a low price. In
the Colonies, and especially in Victoria, the Govern-
ment would be in a hopeless position if deprived of
the revenue at present drawn from the Customs,
although that revenue would doubtless be improved
if the scale of duties were reduced. Speaking on the
general question, the President of the Chamber of
Commerce of Melbourne, in a recent address, expressed
himself as follows: 4 1 am decidedly of opinion that
neither the Mother-country nor the Colonies can
gain any permanent benefit from measures tending
to restrict the general markets for their produce,
whilst giving them a questionable advantage for their
particular markets.’
EXPOETS
Turning from the imports to the exports, it is an
obvious remark that we are dealing with a subject of
profound importance for the creditors in the Mother-
country. The wealth of the United Kingdom is
largely drawn from investments abroad, and the
return on those investments comes to us in the form
of imports of commodities. Some years ago, the
amount of our foreign investments was estimated by
Mr. Gladstone, the illustrious statesman, whom we


have lately lost, at 2,000,000/. To-day the amount
must be put at a far higher figure. The in-
debtedness of Australia to the United Kingdom is
estimated at 300,000,000/., divided nearly equally
between public and private borrowings. Looking to
the limited number of population, it is satisfactory to
find that when retrenchment had become necessary
and the imports were largely reduced, they retained
unimpaired the capacity for raising commodities for
export.
WOOL
Until last year, wool had been for many years
the largest item in the trade of Victoria. In 1897,
as the result of the drought which affected our
Colony, though not in the same degree as Kew South
Wales, the exports of wool showed a serious decrease
from a value steadily maintained since 1893 of over
4,000,000/. to 2,530,594/. It is probable that the
policy of pastoral extension into the interior of the
continent has been carried too far. In the wool
stations of Victoria there is no reason to apprehend
a permanent failure. The maintenance of prices is
more doubtful. We have to face a strong com-
petition from Argentina and South Africa, and the
McKinley tariff hits our wool-growers hard.


GOLD
The deficiency in the export of wool was far more
than compensated by an increase in the export of
specie, from 3,274,617/. in 1896 to 6,278,507/. in
1897. To this should be added the export of bullion
to the amount of 228,000/. Rapid as is the progress
made in Western Australia, Victoria still holds its
position as the leading gold-producing colony in
Australasia. The quantity raised in 1897 was 812,715
ounces, being 10 per cent, more than in 1895. The
increased production in Western Australia has been
in many ways beneficial to Victorians. It has brought
valuable orders to Melbourne manufacturers, and it
is perhaps safe to say that half a million a year is
being remitted through the Post Office from the
wages earned by our miners employed in Western
Australia.
COAL
Victoria is rapidly developing its output of coal.
The quantity raised in 1897 was 236,227 tons, being
an increase in two years of 42,000 tons. At the
present time nearly one-third of the coal required is
raised in the Colony.
BUTTER
Turning from mineral to pastoral and agricultural
resources, among the articles produced by our
farmers, butter ranks next in importance to wool.


The industry has received a decided stimulus in the
last ten years, by the granting of State Bounties, and
by the steps taken by the Government to educate
farmers in the factory system. In 1888 a model
dairy in full work was shown at the Melbourne
Exhibition, and later in all the principal dairy
districts in the Colony. This practical instruction
has been followed up by grants, ranging from 200/.
to 300/., for the establishment of creameries, and by
a small bounty on exports of butter. The results
are attested in the expansion of the trade from an
export of 1,000,000 lbs. in 1889 to approximately
22,167,000 lbs. in 1897, the increase in value being
from 37,447/. in the former year to over 1,000,000/.
in the latter year. The progress of trade in Austral-
asian dairy produce in British markets has been
clearly indicated by Messrs. Weddel in their review
of the season 1897-8. The imports of Victorian
butter advanced from 2,379 tons in 1892 to 10,783
tons in 1895. The quantity fell in the following
year to 7,743 tons, advancing to 8,454 tons in 1897.
The prices in 1897 were unduly depressed by the
long-continued dispute in the engineering trades.
Our artizans being the largest consumers of imported
butters, their diminished purchasing power had the
effect of seriously reducing the prices obtainable. In
the case of Australasian butter, the average price
for the five months ending February 1898 was 9s. B d.
per cent, below that of the four previous seasons for
the same months. The exports from Victoria were


seriously diminished by the severe drought ex-
perienced in 1897. With a good season all over the
Colony the output of butter in 1897 would have
been 50 per cent, larger in quantity and value.
The butter trade has been an immense boon to
the farmers of Victoria. The establishment of a
creamery in a small country town or village, distri-
buting weekly in cash some hundreds of pounds, has
brought ease and prosperity where formerly life was
a hard and sometimes hopeless struggle. In the
moist, elevated, cool, and fertile districts of Victoria,
the dairying industry will be the mainstay of the
farmers. The net return per annum is higher than
can be obtained from any other product, nor is
grazing so exhausting to the soil as cultivation.
During the past year several large estates especially
adapted for dairying have been subdivided into
farms, for which the competition has been eager. In
the supply of butter for the English market, we are
at a disadvantage, as compared with Denmark and
Canada, in respect of distance. We have the
advantage of a summer supply in the season when
there is a falling off in the production in the Northern
Hemisphere. In this branch of trade there is a wide
opening for Australia.
WHEAT
In Victoria, arable cultivation has of late been
less flourishing than dairying. The virgin soil easily


accessible is becoming exhausted and requires more
careful cultivation. In the last two years we have
suffered seriously from drought. Comparing 1894-5
with 1896-7, the yield of wheat had fallen from
11,445,878 bushels to 7,076,022. The value, owing
to a protective tariff, had increased from 929,978/.
to 1,852,456/.
IRRIGATION
To enlarge the area of land available for arable
cultivation is the surest way to advance the prosperity
of Victoria. There is a means of attaining this object
as yet neglected, but destined, as I confidently believe,
in the near future to be successfully developed by
skilful engineering. I refer to the proposals under
consideration of the Government when I left Mel-
bourne, having for their object to irrigate the thirsty
lands of the Mallee country and other adjacent
districts in the North-west of the Colony from the
Murray when in flood. That brimming river, filled
with the rain of tropical Australia running to waste
into the sea, is the saddest sight which I have seen in
Australia. Poured over the land those copious waters
would convert parched deserts into tracts as fertile
as the Delta of Egypt. The scheme for tapping the
waters of the Murray as suggested by Mr. Cecchi,
the assistant to Mr. Stuart Murray, the chief engineer
of the water supply, embraces a canal from a point
below Swan Hill to Lake Tyrrell. The preliminary
surveys were very far from complete at the time of


nw departure. The hope was, however, entertained
that it might be possible to irrigate no less than
8,000,000 acres of land.
Another scheme is also under examination for
converting into catchment basins the lakes situated
at the foot of the Grampian Mountains where the
rainfall is unfailing. To the north of the Grampians
we have a large area of low-lying country which
could be irrigated in the summer from water stored
in the winter. If it can be shown that the returns
which might reasonably be looked for would pay
interest on the outlay, I can conceive of no object to
which the great resources of capital which we possess
in the United Kingdom could be more legitimately
directed than to the irrigation proposals I have briefly
indicated. I hold that opinion not the less strongly
because difficulties have been experienced at Mildura.
In the latter case a turning point seems now to be
near at hand; many settlers are already doing well.
In the schemes of which I have spoken, irrigation
would be accomplished by gravitation and not by
pumping.
The water supply of Melbourne is a splendid
instance of what can be accomplished by skilful
engineering. The supply is drawn from the dividing
range from streams which flowed northward into
the Goulburn Valley. By means of intercepting
channels the water is carried along the sides of the
hills in a southerly direction into the Yan-Yean
reservoir, a large lake having an area of 1,350 acres.


From this source and from the Maroondah system
(an equally clever piece of engineering) an average
supply is afforded to Melbourne of 35,000,000 to
40,000,000 gallons a day, and that supply is kept up
in seasons of extreme heat and severe drought.
The Weekly Times , published in Melbourne, in
its review of the agricultural and pastoral interests
for 1897, has some interesting observations which
have a direct bearing on the subject of irrigation.
In reviewing the position for the year 1897, it is
shown how broad is the line of demarcation which
must be drawn between the districts to the north and
those south of the dividing range. In 1897, when
the farmers to the north of the dividing range
suffered severely from drought, those to the south
were blessed with an abundant rainfall, and in con-
sequence enjoyed great prosperity. They obtained
highly remunerative prices for hay and fodder ; while
their butter was in such demand, not only in Victoria
but in New South Wales, that it was found profitable
to re-export from London to Melbourne, where is. 3 d.
per pound was realised in the open market. In so
far as it is possible by the skill of the engineer and
the judicious application of capital, we must en-
deavour to assimilate the conditions north of the
dividing range to those which nature, unassisted by
the art of man, has created in the districts lying
between the dividing range and the sea. There
seems reason to hope that this object can be attained
to a large extent by irrigation. Any effective scheme


must be comprehensive in its scope and based on the
ample experience which has been gained in India
and Egypt.
Time does not admit of entering into details with
reference to many other branches of cultivation in
Victoria. The trade in fresh fruit is full of promise
lor the future. The heavy charges for freight and
the difficulties of delivery in good condition are
obstacles still to be overcome. The subject well
merits the attention of the skilful dealers in Covent
Garden, who have already done so much to supply
London with the best produce from all parts of the
world. The Muscat grapes of Bendigo, of which I
have seen splendid specimens, and which are ripened
by the natural heat of the sun in our own inclement
mid-winter, would be certain to fetch most remunera-
tive prices if only they could be delivered here in
sound condition.
The wine trade of Australia promises to become
more important with the lapse of time. In the three
years 1891 to 1897 the British consumption of
Australian wine increased from 62,000 to 650,000
gallons. The demand is rapidly growing for the full-
bodied dry wines of a Burgundy character, now
widely recommended by medical men in England.
It is in wines of this quality that the trade of late
has been most active. A considerable consumption
may be expected in France for blending purposes.
Our Australian growers would gather many useful
hints if visits were more frequently paid to the


Colonies by competent experts in the trade in
Europe.
I will deal very briefly with the manufactures of
Victoria. Under the protection afforded by an ex-
clusive tariff they have made considerable progress.
More than 50,000 hands are employed, and the
approximate value of the land, buildings and plant,
distributed over nearly 3,000 establishments, is esti-
mated at twelve and a half millions sterling. The
mining machinery made in Victoria is sent to all
parts of Australia. In woollen manufactures of
many descriptions our productions leave little to be
desired.
It would be taking an imperfect view of the whole
resources of the people of Victoria if our examina-
tion were confined to the Colony in which they
reside. The men of Victoria have been pioneers
in every part of Australia. Our pastoralists have
established cattle stations in Queensland and sheep
runs in the Eiverina. It is largely by their capital,
science, and skill that the mining industry through-
out Australia has been developed. I will not give
figures to a weary auditory, but when you turn to
the collected statistics for Australia and trace the
growth in the production of gold, wool, sugar,
frozen meat, wine and fruit, be sure that whatever
success has been achieved is due in no small degree
to the vigorous energy of Victoria.
Prosperity in the early days had been reached
perhaps too quickly; it has been followed by


a long depression. It is reassuring to know that by
the strictest economy debts have been discharged;
that assets have been written down to bedrock
figures, that trade is sound, and the spirit of the
people unconquered and unconquerable. There is
every ground for confidence in the future, and I
who have received such abundant kindness at their
hands must, for the remainder of my days and from
the depth of my heart, wish all good things for the
people of the Colony which bears the Queen’s
auspicious name.


APPENDICES
ANGLO-AMERICAN BANQUET
At the Anglo-American Banquet held at the Hotel
Cecil on Friday, June 3, Lord Brassey, supporting the
toast, said:—
We have met together to give vent to feelings
which have been too often pent up, and that I
suppose is the reason—the only, but I hope you
will accept it as the sufficient reason—why the
main toast of the evening should be supported by
more than one speaker. For myself, I can truly
say I am no new recruit in the great and holy cause
which has brought us here this evening. I have
long done what in me lay in support of that cause,
and I have done so for the reasons so powerfully
stated by the last two speakers. My sympathies
in this cause have been greatly strengthened by the
experience I have gained in the two branches of the
public service in which I have had the honour to
be employed. I have been in office at the Admiralty,
and in that position I saw how other nationalities
w T ere gaining strength by closer union. I felt, and


deeply felt, that we English-speaking people should
do the same. In this connection it is very gratifying
to me to remember that the last Anglo-American
dinner at which I had the honour of being present
in London, was a dinner given by the Royal Navy
to Captain Mahan. On that occasion there was in-
scribed, and appropriately inscribed, upon the walls
of St, James’s Hall the motto, 4 Blood is thicker than
water.’ It was the note and the watchword of that
great gathering as of this.
At the present time I have the honour to hold
a Colonial appointment, and, speaking in the name
of the Colonies, I can most confidently say that
the sentiments which are finding expression at these
tables this evening will be warmly reciprocated by
those citizens of the British Empire who dwell
beneath the Southern Cross.
I heartily associate myself with the remarks that
have fallen from previous speakers to the effect
that it is not necessary at the present time that the
union—as I believe it to be, the close union—between
Great Britain and the United States should be
cemented by a formal treaty. Other bonds unite us
stronger than any merely formal treaty, and those
bonds are the sentiments we are met together to
kindle and to strengthen to-night. In the good work
in which we are engaged this evening we have had
an illustrious example in the highest place within
these realms. Ho you remember—could any of you
ever forget F—the touching letters which were


addressed by Queen Victoria to the widow of General
Garfield on the sad occasion of his death? Those
letters were warmly appreciated in the United States,
and it is encouraging to remember how, on the occa-
sion of the national celebration at Yorktown, at the
conclusion of the customary ceremonies, the British
flag was hoisted and reverently saluted by the
United States Army in the presence of the assembled
representatives of the foreign Powers of Europe.
The cause which we seek to promote is to be
pushed forward at the present time chiefly by avail-
ing ourselves of every opportunity for doing graceful
and kindly acts. Closer union is sure to come in
due time. Of this lam sure—the more closely our
old country and the United States are bound together,
the greater will be the influence of both nations in
the cause of peace and for the defence of civilisation.


MR. GLADSTONE
At the Encsenia or commemoration of benefactors
to Oxford University which took place on June 22
last, the Public Orator, Dr. Merry, delivered in Latin
a brilliant and moving speech full of sympathetic
admiration for Mr. Gladstone. It contained the
following passage:—
‘ Eecordari juvat quo successu ad summos honores
in hac Academia sit provectus ; quam impense inter
publicos labores litteris incubuerit, ita ut Scipionis
jactationem sibi ipsi assumpsisse videatur qui dicebat
nunquam minus otiosum se esse quam cum esset
otiosus. Tantam vero sui fiduciam tamque fixam
vel in re ancipiti opinionem habebat, tanta obstina-
tione adh®rebat proposito, ut dum compluribus per-
suadebat non posset non controversias excitare graves,
Quis autem est vel adversariorum quin vividam
ingeni vim et facundiam prsepotentem agnoscat, aut
incredibilem constantiam ac mentem sibi consciam
recti admiretur, quam neque minse neque pericula
neque sollicitationes neque ambitio possent corrum-
pere P Cum autem errare sit humanum, mihi per-
suasum est ipsis hujus viri erroribus nobilitatis


aliqnid nunquam non snbesse, qui, quicquid vel
publice ageret vel privatim, obversatam menti
baberet perfectam justitige virtutisque imaginem,
quam et ipse consequi et ceteris commendare
studeret: neque id tantnm philosophorum pneceptis
sed legi divine ac purge religioni obsecutus. Constat
enim in longo vitse curriculo quasi lumen aliquod
elucere sanctitatem viri, et certam spem in Dei pro-
videntia repositam, quge neque in morbi cruciatibus
neque ipsa in mortis bora deficeret.’
In an address delivered at Bournemouth this
oration was translated as follows by Lord Brassey :
4 It is pleasant to remember how he attained to
the highest honours which the University could
bestow, and with what diligence in the intervals of
public business he applied himself to the pursuit
of letters. Well might it be said of him, as Scipio
said of himself, that he was never less idle than
when he seemed to be at leisure. So confident was
he in his own judgment, so firm was his opinion,
even in doubtful cases, that while he brought con-
viction to very many, it was inevitable that he
should stir up keen controversy. Yet who is there,
even in the ranks of his political opponents, who
can refuse to recognise the living power of his great
intellect, and his commanding eloquence P Who
can withhold admiration for his marvellous fixity of
purpose, and his clear consciousness of right ? Yo
Mr. Gladstone


threats, no perils, no flattery, no allurements of
ambition could corrupt him. The gift of infalli-
bility has not indeed been given to man. It was
not given to Mr. Gladstone, but I am convinced
that in the very errors of the man there was infused
a truly lofty spirit. In whatever he did, whether in
public or in private life, he ever kept in view the
perfect image of justice and virtue. This it was
which was the guide and rule of all his actions.
This it was which he ever held up as the aim and
the rule of life in other men. In his efforts to reach
the high standard of duty which he had set up, he
did not seek to follow the rules of a cold philosophy,
but the guidance of divine law and of pure religion.
Certain it is that, all through the many years to
which his life was prolonged, there was ever a
sustained righteousness of character, and a sure
faith in the providence of God, which did not fail
him, even in the agony of suffering and in the hour
of death f
PRINTED BY
SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUAP.E
LONDON




■r - .V
