

VICTORIA
STATE RIVERS AND WATER SUPPLY
COMMISSION
WATER RESOURCES INVESTIGATION
VICTORIAN WATER LAW
PART 1
RIPARIAN RIGHTS
Extract from Evidence presented to
Victorian Parliamentary Public Works Committee
By
L. R. EAST, M.C.E.,
M. Inst. C.E., M.I.E. Aust., M.Am. Soc. C.E.
12th January, 1943
7253/43.




VICTORIA
STATE RIVERS AND WATER SUPPLY
COMMISSION
WATER RESOURCES INVESTIGATION
VICTORIAN WATER LAW
PART 1
RIPARIAN RIGHTS
Extract from Evidence presented to
Victorian Parliamentary Public Works Committee
By
L. R. EAST, M.C.E.,
M. Inst. C.E., M.I.E. Aust., M.Am. Soc. C.E.
1 2th January, 1943
7253/43.


STATE RIVERS AND WATER SUPPLY COMMISSION
WATER RESOURCES INVESTIGATION
VICTORIAN
WATER
LAW
PART I
RIPARIAN RIGHTS
Extract from Evidence presented, to
ate-««****-*mc*~ »«H»; ■n»»ar»- .tWrWJarjMminwif' n» • i—i'-Wi—an i ■ fliMi».-«TWi.cii' il'» i nil —■ » n i»
Victorian parliamentary Public Works Committee
BY
L. R. EAST. M.C.E.,
M. Inst. C.E., M.I.E. Aust., M. Am. Soc. C.E.
12 th January, 1943®


V.W.L.
STATE RIVERS AND WATER SUPPLY COMMISSION
WATER RESOURCES INVESTIGTION
VICTORIAN WATER LAW
PART I
RIPARIAN RIGHTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
Common Law and Riparian Rights' .. . .. . „ . ., 1
Common Law and Irrigation •« , 0 ♦ ♦ •* .. .« . # 2
Reservation of Streams, Etc*, for Public Purposes D , 5
Royal Commission 1884 ** *. ♦* ,„ .. ** 5
Royal Commission on Water Supply 1884 , » * * * * * * 6
The Irrigation Act 1886 ~ No. 898 «« *, p „ *, 0 * 7
Definition of Existing Rights .» .. . * . * «« 12
Water Act 1905 - No. 2016 , « *• .* <> « « e 06 13
Natural Flooding 0o •» « « <> * « • ** c a * * 15
Summary ox n a n & © © © a © »* © © © © © © © © s # p 15
APPENDIX
Acts Relating to Water Supply in Victoria 1858-1942 18 - 22


STATE RIVERS AND WATER SUPPLY COMMISSION
VICTORIAN WATER LAW
PART I
RIPARIAN RIGHTS
COMMON LAW and RIPARIAN RIGHTS
1® Prior to the passage of the Irrigation Act of 1886, the
us§ of water in this State was subject to principles of ’’Common
Lavi/ : * which recognised special ’’Riparian Rights” in the use of
water by proprietors of lands adjoining natural waters*
2o An interpretation of Common Law rights in water was
given by Wo Paul in a Memorandum prepared for the Attorney General
in 191 2 0
3o Under Common Law, the water right to the enjoyment of a
natural stream or water on the surface, ex jure naturae, belonged
to the proprietor ox the adjoining land* as a natural incident to
'Che right to the soil itself; and he was entitled to the benefit
of it, as he was to all the other advantages belonging to the land
of which he is the owner. He had the right to have the water of
the stream come to him, in its natural state, in flow, quantity,
and quality, and to go from him without obstruction.
bo The ownership of the bed of the river was not the
foundation of riparian rights®
5o By the general law applicable to running streams every
rj.paro.an own ex-' had a right to what may be called the ’’ordinary use”
ox che water flowing past his land - for instance, to the reason-
able use of the water for his domestic purposes and for his cattle;
and that, without regard to the effect which such use may have, in
case of a deficiency, upon proprietors lower down the streams
6* The riparian owner was entitled to the flow of the stream
uninterrupted, without diminution, deterioration or alteration of
the current of tho water e
7, A riparian owner was further entitled to a limited right
to the ’’extraordinary use” of water. For example, he might use
the water to drive a mill, or for purposes of manufacture, or to


some extent for the purpose of irrigation. But the right to use
the 'water for any such "extraordinary" purpose was strictly
limited by two conditions® First, the user must be for some
purpose connected with the tenement of the riparian user® Thus a
company, which became a riparian owner, by the purchase of a plot
oi ground abutting on a stream, was held clearly not to be entitled
to divert the water of the stream into a reservoir for the supply
of a neighbouring town o The second condition affecting the
"extraordinary user” is that the user must be reasonable® The
exercise ox the right must not interfere with the right of other
riparian owners above or below, and what is a reasonable user will
depend in most cases on the amount by which the volume of the
stream is diminished by the diversion made®
The Common Lav/ of England conferred riparian rights only
on riparian owners, and no such rights could extent to those whose
lands did not abut on streams or rivers#
It is obvious that the operation of this principle
restricted to the immediate vicinity of the banks of a river the
area in or on which the waters of the river might be used or
enjoyed.
9# lb might be mentioned that e.ll rivers and streams above
the flow and reflow of the tide are, in England, regarded as
Pglma,facie private# In England it is the law that, when a con-
veyance describes the premises conveyed as bounded by a river, the
presumption is that the grantor intended to convey the bed of the
river, usgue_ad medium filum aquae.
COMMON LAM AND IRRIGATION
10# The "Common Law" relating to riparian rights originated
in England, where the climate is temperate and relatively humid,
the soil generally fertile and the rainfall sufficient at all times
for the nourishment of all forms of plant life adapted to the
country# Irrigation there has never been to any considerable
extent a prevalent practice in agriculture.


11« It Is quite otherwise in Australia where, over wide
areas, rainfall is both unreliable and inadequate and where full
development of the agricultural or grazing potentialities of the
soil could be obtained only by the artificial application of
water for irrigation of crops or pastures*
12 0 The rivers and natural streams of this State provide a
fund of water out of which must be supplied all the water needed
ror the purposes of domestic and ordinary use, irrigation, manu-
facture, and minings Some provision must also be made for main-
taining, in navigable rivers, a flow of water for the due
maintenance of nagivation.
13® Of the purposes to which water may be applied, the most
important is the primary natural purpose of quenching the thirst
of mam and boast, washing and cooking, and the like* These wants
must in all events be first satisfied* The next purpose in order
of national importance is, in this State, that of irrigation*
The claims and needs of mining, manufacture, and even of navigation
must nere, as in many American States, be subordinated to those of
irrigation o
14* The fund of natural water in this State falls far short
of that which would be sufficient for the full development of all
lands suitable and available for irrigation, and it is not sur-
prising that very early in the history of the State close atten—
tion was given to the question of making the most beneficial use
of the limited water resources available.
MSEHVAI’ION Off STREAMS, ETC. , FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES
15c Probably the first step directed towards the conserva-
tion of water resources for public use, as distinct from
monopolization by riparian landowners as had occurred in England,
was taken when provision was made in the Land Act 1869 for the
permanent reservation of Crown lands for public purposes.
l6 e The Honorable James Mackenzie Grant, Minister for Lands,
in his second reading speech on the Bill stated, inter alia.:-
,f lt will also be admitted, I think, that a large
portion of our territory is, comparatively speaking,
waterless.


Great efforts are being put forth by the Legislature
ana the Government to supply this great defect in nature,
by the construction of reservoirs and aqueducts, and I
think it necessary that the Government should be empowered,
rrom time to time* to prohibit settlement within what may
be called the lines of these great irrigation works®
"lt is also necessary, I apprehend, that certain river
montages should be reserved in order that access to water
may be preserved to back country, the value of which is
entirely dependent on this accessibility to water® If
river xrontages are not so reserved, back country in time
will become perfectly valueless,, 55
17* A few years earlier, Mr* Peter Wright, Member for
Benambra, had endeavoured in 1862 to obtain Parliamentary approval
to a Bill to provide that
. "vi/hen. the water of any running stream shall be more
■chan sufficient for the supply of the household and live
stock of each and every proprietor of land bordering upon
such Soream, such excess shall be deemed to be public
property, and may be impounded or diverted by authorised
Government officers for the public service, or by persons
authorised as hereinafter mentioned,”
Ihe Bill, however, did not receive Parliamentary approval®
18c In 1881 at the suggestion of Mr® Wright, who, before
entering Parliament, had at one time been an engineer of the
Water Supply Department, the then Minister of Lands recommended to
ohe Governor that a large number of lakes, rivers, inlets and
watercourses should be permanently reserved under the provisions
of Section 6 of the Land Act 1869®
This Section provided thats-
- Governor may 6oq either by a general
or particular description reserve from
sale either temporarily or permanently
any Grown lands which, in his opinion,
rre required for any public purpose
whatsoever Ooti "
Section 7 of the Act provided that „* # „
"after any land has been permanently reserved
from sale every conveyance or alienation
thereof except for the purpose for which such
reservation has been made shall be absolutely
voia as well against Her Majesty as well as
all other persons whomsoever o 55
By Order in Council, d.ated 23 May, 1881, permanent
reservations were made of a very large number of lakes, rivers,
inlets and watercourses®


In accordance with the requirements of Section 8 of the
Land Act 1 869 notice of intention to reserve the lands in question
was published in the Government Gazette before the land was re-
served and in such notice the land was described and the purpose
for which it was reserved was stated,
19« As a consequence of this reservation of water frontages,
Common Law rights in the waters of the streams, etc,, listed in
the Orders in Council referred to were limited to such rights as
might have been enjoyed by the proprietors of lands alienated from
the Grown prior to that date*
ROYAL .COMMISSION. 1884
20c The position in regard to water utilization was, however,
far from satisfactory, and in 1884 a Royal Commission on Water
Supply was appointed under the Chairmanship of the Honorable
Alfred Deskin.
21, The investigations carried out by this Commission were
very extensive and thorough* The Chairman of the Commission
visited America and wrote a long and valuable report showing what
had been done in that country where climatic conditions in the
Western States were similar to those in Victoria and he drew
special attention to the question of water rights and to the
legal difficulties that had so greatly handicapped and retarded
the full utilization of its water resources. The water laws of
tae various American States were compared and attention was drawn
to the marked advantage enjoyed by the State of Colorado whose
Constitution embodied the provision that "All streams within its
boundaries were , Qc declared to be public property,"
22* The Royal Commission prepared and presented to the
Governor a number of very valuable Progress Reports - the third of
which was dated 31st August, 1 885, and contained £ large number of
very important recommendations for the future carrying out of
irrigation in the Colony of Victoria,, The comments end recom-
mendations of. the Royal Commission in regard to the ownership and
use of water were so important and have had such a far-reaching


effect on water supply development in Victoria, that they are
given below in some detcilo
ROYAL COMMISSION ON wRTK R SUPPLY 1884
EXTRACT PROM FURTHER PROGRESS REPORT DATED AUGUST 31, 1885
t! State proprietorship of water* Questions have arisen,
,f in the course of the evidence tendered before the Commission,
and of the inquiries instituted into the matters relegated to
” it for investigation, of the right of owners of land forming
the beds and banks of natural watercourses, or abutting
i; thereon, to obstruct such watercourses, and to divert and use
u for their exclusive profit the waters flowing therein« The
f? Commission has sought opinion, through the Crown Law Dcpert-
u monf, as to the state of the law of the colony upon these
H matters; and touching the right of water Trusts, constituted
under the Victorian v/ater Conservation .acts 1881-1 884, to
u prevent such obstruction and diversion o
"Recommendation iv. Meanwhile it is advised
that, in any future legislation “relating to 7. a ter
Supply or water rights, or to dealings with" laiids
the alienation of which might pre;judice the consid-
oration, of such questions, and in the administration
11 of existing Statutes pertaining thereto,." care to be'
taken for the maintenance and protectipig of the
lf public right In the waters of _all_ streams,
” end watercourses, and especially in the sources of
' with, under proper "legal "sanction
|) £gy.-th6_ diversion of their .waters., for the~pub lie "“pood »
It -is further dss ire&Jto _re c qrd the" opinion of the
Commission that,- »lt is essential"that the State
should exercise "the supreme control of ownership over
all rivers, lakes, streams* and sources of eater
' SuRPIZ^ 17
As water becomes more valued, one most important issue
,f will be its equitable and judicious distribution among the
various claimants, and for the various uses to which it may
H applied. In some districts continuously successful
‘ f cultivation will bo impossible without irrigation, in all it
!< will be found to be of great value; but, domestic and stock
supply is everywhere the first essential, Priwte enterprise
" has already accomplished something in the provision of water
" for both purposes; but, although the enterprise of individual


.Landholders has often proved sufficient for the construction
ox darns and tanks and the weiring e.nd diversion of minor
’* creeks, it will be inadvisable to give them control of our
larger rivers o Besides, it is certainly more conducive to
economy, end to the full utilization of our resources, that
artificial water supply should be regulated and controlled by
corporate authority, than that it should be left to the con-
n venience or caprice of each settles It may be laid down as
a general principle, in relation to all parts of the colony,
H and all sources of supply, that the domestic and stock wants
of a district constitute a prior claim to demands for irriga-
txon, or for other industrial purposes* Domestic supply
affects the public health, and is therefore of prime
,f importance to the whole community; and without a sufficiency
of wholesome drinking water for cattle, land cannot be
utilized for either agricultural or pastoral purposes*
XIV a In any distribution of
t , water under the authority of the State owners of
land must be deemed to have a preferential claim
Jf sources of supply for enough to meet every
reasonable domestic requirement, and for the water-
stock up to the full carrying capacity of
their pastures* Sf
THE IRRIGATION_AGT 1886 - No«_ 898
As a direct result of the recommendations of the Royal
Comnussion, Parliament passed the comprehensive Irrigation Act of
1880 which went a long way towards nationalising the water re-
sources of the Colony anc. made possible the remarkable development
of water supply and irrigation undertakings that has taken place
during the past 50 years*
24c The outstanding feature of Leakin's Act was its far-
reaching step towards the abolition of practically all riparian
rights and towards the nationalisation of all surface waters*
In introducing *;he Bill to Parliament on 24th June,
1886, Mr, Deakin dealt at length with the need for this action*
He said -


,s u And now I come to the crux of the sub.ject c . After all,
11 the propositions of the Government for the construction
of works for the purposes of water supply and irrigation
” would amount to nothing if it were not for another part
?{ of the Bill, It is all very ’well for the State to assume
” rights of ownership and to grant rights, and for the
” Government to lay plans on the table of this House, show-
t? ing the possibility of carrying out irrigation, but those
,r plans will not be worth the paper they are printed on
,f unless we are absolutely sure that they cannot be inter-
u fered with by the existence of any such thing as riparian
’• rightso The law of England, in regard to riparian
" rights* is much to the following effect:-
* There is no property, strictly so called,
in running water, either in the Crown or in any
person® But the right to use the water which
runs naturally through or past land is a natural
incident to property, passing with the property
in the land to whomsoever the land passesc That
right of use is, however, no more than a right to
use reasonably, that is to say, in such a manner
as not to appreciably interfere with the corres-
ponding rights of those persons who are using the
stream higher up or lower down* That is one class
of right, and belongs only to those who own the
land along the stream’s ba.nks* The Crown has
such a right only where and in so far as it is
the owner of land along the stream* ’
This statement of the riparian law of England places riparian
” rights even above those of the Crown* The Crown only has
” the same rights as private landowners in so far as it posses-
-11 ses land along the of any stream* The question, of
11 course, is - Does this law obtain in Victoria? It is under-
u stood that the late Mr* Justice Fellows, an eminent authority
" was of opinion that there was no such thing as riparian law
u in Victoria* He held that Parliament, by the way in which
it had framed the Mining Statute, the Land Act, and various
other Acts* has presumed that no riparian rights existed in
,f this but there is no clear and absolute legal enact-
,f ment to that effect, and other eminent lawyers hold a contrary
,f opinion® It may be all very well in England for every land-
1f owner to be entitled to a reasonable use of the water in any
| f river* or stream passing through his property, because there
the streams are large and perennial, ana the trouble is
u rather to get rid of the water than to get it.; but, without
M scanty water supply, it is perfectly plain that, if the
|| English riparian law prevails in Victoria, irrigation can
" hardly even be a '’reasonable use, if and we shall be absolutely
debarred from all irrigation worthy of the name®
if
9O©o£OCOOCfto€>rt«OotOo3®OC C? O V O <J O O O Q © O n o © 0 O t.» * ft
H
• t9eaoooooo4ooOou6«e«<)«Ofr»»o»<»»a«a«e>«o**o*(iai»ooe**»«Ce»«*i*e9
tf
OOOoeovo*oo<»o»c0»«<>c>9o*,)e<»aooo«»o<»»o»oe«a««oeeoo*ooco««'>oooo
” What I want to call the special attention of the honorable
u members to is that, if the riparian law of England obtains
,f in Victoria, much that we have done in the past in regard
w to water conservation and distribution is illegal, and all
H our proposals for the future may be entirely inoperative -
h in fact, it will be almost impossible to do anything® If
” that law was pushed to the extreme, a settler on the lowest
u portion of the Murray, could claim the right to prevent all
|| persons further up the river, or on its tributaries, from
11 using the water; in fact, any man could prevent every other
u man from using water for irrigation*


25« Mr* Deakin went on to describe the paralysing effect
of litigation in California where the riparian law prevailed at
that time, and he said that it was proposed to deal with the
uncertainty which existed in California on the subject of riparian
rights by a Bill introduced in the local Legislature with the
f oilowing clause:-
“Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed
os a recognition that any law now does exist, or
has ever existed in this State, which divested the
right of this State to allow, or otherwise
prevented the State from allowing, the appropria-
tion of the waters of this State to any and ail
useful and beneficial purposes* 15
The New South Wales Commission have seen the danger
!' just as clearly * In their report they say that -
*We are of the opinion that the doctrine of riparian
rights which obtains under the common law of
England is not applicable to the conditions of
Australia, and that it is calculated to be a very
serious obstacle to the progress of this colony,
insofar as that progress depends upon the conserva-
tion of water* In Victoria no such rights can
!l accrue, because the frontages to all rivers are
" reserved from sale; but, inasmuch as a different
” policy has been pursued here, and alienations have
taken place which involve the legal right of
,r ownership to the middle of the bed of a stream, it
" seemed desirable that we should obtain a clear
definition of what riparian rights are* ?
The report of the Commission goes on, in the strongest
” terms, 'Co denounce the doctrine of riparian rights as one
’ the most dangerous doctrines that can be established in
“ any country*
it
|* .The .New South Wales Commission, therefore, propose to
abolish if they exist, and to define if they do not exist,
'* riparian rights in New South 'Wales, by giving to the owner
of land on the banks of a stream or lake, a title to only so
'[ much water as will satisfy him for domestic ourposes, and
u satisfy his cattle*
u
2 ( Sir, the proposal in the Bill oi the Victorian Govern-
ment is closely analogous to the suggestion made- by the
■' New South Wales Commission* It seeks to declare the law
in regard to r-iparian rights in this colony* It declare©
that the only riparian right which shall appertain to the
'! Possession of land on the bank of any stream, water-course,
1 lake, or river, shall be the right to a sufficient supply
of water for domestic and stock purposes* In thus limit-
ing riparian rights, it enables the whole of the rest of
" ’ Gtlc water to be utilised for irrigation and other purposes*
It may be fairly shown to those who object to this
and who stand upon the British doctrine of riparian
rights, that the riparian owner in this colony has no right
to anything more than a domestic end stock supply, and that,
therefore, it is not the right to use any water which is
’ taken away from him, but only the right to prevent any other
person using it* it is upon this clear and definite state-
ment of the law that the whole Bill turns*


11 1 would now call the attention of honorable members
'■ to one fact which has been proved by the irrigation
” experience of California and the continent, and it is this -
if that, wherever the law with regard to the use of water has
,f become uncertain, and has become a matter only to be settled
by litigation in the law courts, and, perhaps, with appeal
M after appeal, the result of leaving the law in such a
15 condition is inevitably the creation and aggregation of great
H estateSo
} . H lt is only wealthy capitalists or syndicates with
)[ large resources, who can afford to fight cases through all
•' the courts, that can venture to undertake irrigation, if
'[ the) law is allowed to remain in an unsettled or insecure
’’ condition| and thus the effect of introducing irrigation,
] s -i accompanied by an imperfect law with regard to riparian
rights, _ be to bring about a result which I am sure
honorable members desire to avoid* On the other hand, the
. natural and inevitable result of irrigation, if the riparian
‘I law be distinctly stated, is by the most desirable means to
,f break up great estates*’ 1
26 0 The debate on the Bill was very protracted and no fewer
than 67 Members spoke at length on the sections dealing with
Riparian Rights the report of the debates on this question alone
occupying 80 pages of Hansard* Many amendments were made to the
relevant sections which were not carried in quite the way Mr*Deakin
desired©
R7o Nevertheless, the Act, which receives the Royal Assent
on loth December, 1886, marked a tremendous step forward by
declaring that -
right to the use of all water at any
uj.me in any river stream watercourse lake lagoon swamp or
marsh shall for the purposes of this Act in every case be
to be veste_d_jln_ the G_rowrgjint il _jthe contra,ry be
PP-RTipb. by establishing any other right than that of"~the
Grown to the use of such water, and save in the exercise
oj. any legal right existing at the time of such diversion
or appropriation no person shall divert or appropriate any
water from any river stream watercourse lake lagoon swamp
or marsh excepting under the provisions of this Act or of
some other Act already or hereafter to be passed, except
in of the general right of all persons to use
water for domestic and stock supply from any river stream
watercourse lake lagocn swamp or marsh vested in the
Grown, and to which there is access by a public road or
reserve*
Pjggbign 5o After the passing of this Act no right
to the permanent diversion or to the exclusive use of the
water in any river stream watercourse lake lagoon swamp
or marsh shall be acquired by any riparian owner or any
other person by length of use or otherwise than as the same
may be acquired or conferred under the provisions of this
Ant or some existing or future Act of Parliament*


jp-Q0M 91L..Z 120 Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore
contained, from and after the passing of this Act no
action claim or proceeding whatsoever shall be maintainable
except as hereinafter provided against any Trust or against
the Board or against any servants or agents of or con-
tractors under any Trust or the Board for or in respect
of any of the following matters (that is to say);—
(a) Any injury loss or damage caused by any
violation or infringement by such Trust
or by the Board their servants agents
or contractors of any riparian or other
rights to or easements over any water
constantly or intermittingly flowing in
or through any place whatsoever® \
§2£iiSH.2iLio Notwithstanding anything in the last
preceding section contained, any Trust or the Board shall
be liable to make compensation, subject to the conditions
and limitations. hereinafter in this Part contained, to any
person for any injury loss or damage caused by any violation
or infringement by such Trust or by the Board or the ser-
vants agents or contractors of either of any riparian or
other rights to or easements over any water constantly or
intermittingly flowing in or through any place whatsoever
or by flooding or by water in any sent on to property by
any Act of any Trust or of the Board or the servants
agents or contractors of either,, if such injury loss or
damage be such as would but for this Part have been a good
cause of action to such person against such Trust or
against the Board or against the servants agents or con-
tractors of either.
Section 22? 0 In determining whether any and what
compensation is to be made under this Part the police
magistrate or arbitrator or Judge of the Supreme Court
(as the case may be) shall in each case have regard to
and is hereby authorized and directed to apoly the follow-
ing principles (that is to say);-
(1 ) No compensation shall be awarded for any
diminution or deterioration of the supply
of water to which any person may be entitled
unless in the opinion of such police magis-
trate or arbitrator or Judge such diminution
or deterioration has so diminished or
deteriorated the supply previously legally
enjoyed by the claimant as to deprive him
of the use of sufficient water for domestic
purposes the watering of stock the carrying
on of any mill works for irrigation purposes
or works or improvements of any other king
for the beneficial carrying on of which a
supply of water is necessary and to which
supply he has at the time a legal right and
present enjoyment and is the direct and will
be the permanent result of the completed works,
(2) No QQfflJPi'fiss.tion shall be made for any injury
lgs_s_or damage occasioned by ThT~taking or
ikinoy'kipjg of surplus or flood water either
permanently or temporarily from any stream
creek watercourse lake or lagoon.


DEFINITION OF EXISTING RIGHTS
28* The defects in Section 4of this Act were obvious and
soon caused difficulties* Although the Act prevented the
acquisition of any riparian rights after the passage of the Act,
it did not define existing riparian rights? and Mr* Stuart Murray,
the Chi el Engineer of the Water Supply Department which had been
created to administer the new Act soon drew the attention of
Parliament to the need for further legislative action*
29c In the THIRD ANNUAL PJ3PORT of the Water Supply Depart-
ment, he wrote in 1889:-
,f Xt is strangely recommended that Parliament be
asked to give early consideration to the whole
subject of the riparian law of the colony, to define
thq limits and extents of the respective r
.landowners, and ol the State as represent-
ing the people at large* It is understand that, at
present, the riparian law of Dngl&nd, except in so
far as it has been modified by local enactments, is
the law of the colony* That it is utterly unsuited
to our cireurnsuances need not be matter for surprise,
when there are considered the vast difference in
physical conditions and in climate between Great
Britain and this colony* Nothing short of the ab-
solute supercession of this portion of the English
common law, by a comprehensive enactment dealing with
the whole subject, will meet the necessities of the
case* Accrued rights may be fully conserved; but
rights that were merely inchoate at the time of the
passing of "The Irrigation Act 1886" should be finally
and conclusively dealt with; -and a way should be
provided to ascertain and declare, once for all, what
the accrued rights really are* Unless the State be
invested with full power over all natural sources of
water supply, the Irrigation and water Conservation
Ac'cs cannot be satisfactorily administered nor will
it be wise or prudent to invest money in some of the
costly National works which have been asked for* u
30* No Legislative action, however, was taken in the direc-
tion until the Hon* George Swinburne took the question up in
1904, when he introduced a comprehensive Bill to amend and con-
solidate the v/a.ter Acts* After considerable discussion, during
which many improvements wore suggested by way of amendments, the
Bill reached the Legislative Council which did not finalise its
deliberations during the session, and, in order to permit dis- *
cussions to be resumed, agreed to a new Standing Order providing
for continuation of consideration df the Bill in the next session
of Parliament*


Next session? however? Mr© Swinburne re-introduced the
Bill in the Legislative Assembly after completely recasting many
sections to incorporate improvements suggested during the previous
session® This Bill ultimately became the Water Act 1905©
WATER J,GJj jj go p No ? 20i_6
31 o The Irrigation Act and subsequent amendments had been
consolidated as the Water Act 1890 No© 1156? but the sections
concerning rights in water remained unaltered until the passage
of the We cer Act 1905 No© 20f 6 9 which? in the Preamble was de-
scribed as -
!} An Act to consolidate and amend the Laws relating
to the Conservation and Supply of Water to
declare the Law relating to certain Rights in
Natural Waters the property in the bods and
banks containing the same and for other
purposes© u
32© By this Act? introduced by the Ko.nora.ble George Swinburne?
the common law principles relating to riparian rights were
fundamentally modified and the respective rights of the Grown
and private persons were clearly defined in the following sections -
The right to the use and flow and to
uhe control ox the water at any time in any river creek
stream or water-course and in any lake lagoon swamp or
marsh ahal 1 s übp[e onjjl vhg., re str let ions her elnax tcr
, cn(i until appropriated unaor the sanction of this
Act or of some existing or future Act of Parliament vest
ijs^tG^Cro wn© ~~—-
This section snail not operate so as to prevent any
person from draining any land or making any dam or tank
upon land of which he is the owner© Provided that the
of water in any river creek stream or water-course
lri f o r d r Take lagoon swamp or marsh is not
thereby sensibly diminished©
/'/here any river creek stream or water-
course or .any lake forms the boundary or part of the
boundary of an allotment of land *** the bad and banks thereof
x-*/? have remained the property "of the*"* ’~ J ~
Crown ana not to have passed with the land so alienated©
, lnrlQ . provided or except
or of some existing or future
J- 0x ai 1 a meat no_jpe rson _s_ha 11 divert or appropriate anv
from any river creek stream
laxe lagoon swamp or marsh save in the exercise of the
general rigive of ala persons to take water for domestic
ana ordinary use and for watering cattle or other stock
from any river creek stream or water-course and from any
lake lagoon swamp or marsh vested in the Crown and to which
tnere is access by a public road or reserve©


Sectioii No right to take and divert water from
any river creek stream or water-course or from" any ‘lake
lagoon sv;amp or marsh for use on any land adjacent to
the banks thereof shall be acquired by any owner of such
land and no right to The permanent diversion or to the
exclusive use of such water sha.ll be acquired by any
person whomsoever by length of use or otherwise than as
the same may be acquired o.r conferred under the provisions
of this Act or of some existing or future Act of Parliament*
And no such right sha.ll be deemed to have been acquired
otherwise than as aforesaid since the passing of The
Irrigation Act 1886 notwithstanding the repeal of the
said Act*
All owners of an allotment of land
alienated from the Grown through or contiguous to which
flows any river creek stream or water-course or within
or contiguous 7:0 which is wholly or partly situate any
j.ake lagoon swamp or marsh shall in respect of such
ownership have rights free of charge to'the water in
such river creek stream or water-course lake lagoon swamp
or marsh for__the r domestic and ordinary use of themselves
anu of their respective farnllies and servants and for
1 or other stock and every owner of an
allotment of land alienated from the Crown before the
fifteenth day of December One thousand eight hundred and
shall have a further right to such water for"”
the irrigation of a garden not exceeding three acres in
exuent being part of such land and used in connection
with 0 dwelling*
AQJL. Ufc N her ever the water of any river creek
stream or water-course or of any lake lagoon swamp or marsh
has been permanently diverted or at intervals during every
year exclusively taken and used by the owner or by the
successive owners of any allotment of land alienated from
Tj . 'tbe fifteenth &z.y of December One thousand
eight hundred and eighty-six and has from a date not less
•oban prior, to the said fifteenth day of December
—.LlPh.sen__e 1 ght hundred and cighty-s 1x to the date of
commencement of this Act been so taken and used by such
owner or owners for purposes and uses in respect of such
-Land other than domestic and ordinary use and watering
cattle or other stock and the irrigation or a garden not
exceeding three acres in extent being part of such land
ana used in connection with a dwelling such owner may at
any time within twelve months from the commencement of this
*° the Minister for a special licence to continue
manner to divert or take and use such water for a
-uruher period of fifteen years from the date of commence-
ment of this Act*
2Notwithstanding anything in the last
E" ece r ing contained any Authority shall be liable
subject to the conditions and limita-
tions m this Act contained to any person for any in jury
caused by any violation or infringement lay
uhe Authority or its servants agents or contractors of
to or casements over any water constantly or
m .ermittently flowing in or through any place whatsoever
if such injury loss or damage be such as would but for
the provisions of this Act have been a good cause of action
u ° P° r son against the Authority or against its servants
agents or contractors,,
in determining whether any and what
compensation is to be made under this Division the
arbitrator shall in each case have regard to and is hereby
empowered and directed to apply the following principles:-


—QQjjlPgjlsrulon shall be awarded fop an.v diminution or
or deterioration of the supply of water to which any
person may be entitled unless in the opinion of the
arbitrator such diminution or deterioration is such as
‘ to the claimant of a supply ol water previously
legally enjoyed by him and which supply was sufficient
ior domestic purposes for watering cattle or other stock
for carrying on any mill or work for irrigation or for
any other beneficial purpose for which a supply of water
is necessary | and uniess in the opinion of the arbitrator
such diminution or deteriorstion is the direct and will
be the permanent result of the completed works.
No compensation shall be made for the taking or diverting
of any water which the Authority is empowered by or
under this Act to take or divert either permanently
or temporarily from any river creek stream or water-
course lake lagoon swamp or marsh*
33* Although there have since been many amendments and two
consolidations of the water Acts, the provisions of the 1905 Act
in regard to rights in water have stood the test of time and have
remained unchanged.
NATURAL FLOODING
34* It is clear that, even under the 1836 Act, no one had
any legal right to receive floodwater, for Section 227 of that
Act provided that -
,r no compensation shall be mad© for any injury loss
or damage occasioned by the taking or diverting of
surplus or flood water either permanently or tem-
porarily from any stream creek watercourse lake or
lagoon. u
j.he 1905 water Act did not repeat this provision, as
it became unnecessary owing to the clear definition ol the rights
of riparian owners to certain specified quantities for domestic
and stock purposes, and, in some instances, for a garden of
three acres used in connection with a dwelling.
SUMMARY OF LAW
350 Summarizing the law, and referring to the latest consol-
idation, i*e., Water Act 1928, No. 3301, the position now is that
the right to the use, flow and control of natural streams is
vested in the Crown. An owner of land may nevertheless drain,
or make a dam or tank on his land; but in such case the analogy
of the common law principle of a "reasonable user" is followed in
the proviso, that the flow of any river, &c., must not thereby by
sensibly diminished. water Act 1923, Section 4.


s&p Where there is public access by a road or reserve to
a public stream any person may take the water for domestic and
ordinary use and for watering cattle, but otherwise the right to
divert or appropriate nature.l waters can arise only under the
Water Acts or some other Act of Parliament, (ibid*, Section 6) 0
Riparian rights cannot now arise from length ol user
or in any other way than as they may be conferred or acquired
under the Water Acts, (ibid,, Section 14),
38, A statutory riparian right is given to riparian owners,
but it is limited to the use.of natural waters for domestic and
ordinary use, and for watering cattle and other stock, (lbid o ,
Section 14)« This statutory riparian right fairly corresponds
to the riparian right at common low to "ordinary" as distinguished
from "extraordinary" use. And in some instances a further limited
right of irrigating a garden is granted, (ibid,, Section 14).
Amended by Water Act 1939* No, 4678, Section 5,
39* The Common law rules relating to property in the bed
and bonks of natural streams are replaced in the case of riparian
owners, (Water Act 1905, Sections 5-7),
Riparian rights in Victoria thus stand on a statutory
foundation,
4o© in order to safeguard the interests of riparian owners
wh© were, and had been for 2C years prior to 1886, "extraordinary"
users of the water from any creek river, etc,, contiguous to their
land, the dater Act 1905, Section 15, made provision in that these
users could apply for special licences for such use for a further
15 years from Ist May, 1906,
As a matter of fact, no claims were established for
special licences under this section, and no such licence for
"extraordinary" use was granted©
It ma.y, therefore, be presumed that the provisions of
the 1905 Act regarding riparian rights met all just claims that
any riparian owners may have had.


410 Some riparian ownurs arc of the opinion that they are
entitled to receive from upstream sufficient water to provide the
quantities specified in Section 14*
This is not correct* and this Section of the water Act
must not be construed in such a way as to amount to an assurance
ou x iparian owners ol a supply of water for s took and domestic
purposes; but that the water available for such purposes must be
such water as is available after the exercise by an authority of
the powers conferred upon it for storage or diversion* To
interpret the section as upon a riparian owner a
guaranteed supply* or at least the full natural supply would
suultixy if not destroy all the provisions of the Act authorising
the construction of headwords and storage basins and the grant of
licence to divert* The primary purpose of Section 14 is to confer
a right free of change*
42a It would also not be correct to say that no diversion
for any purpose whatsoever may be authorised or made if the
result of such diversion would reduce the water available to
owners ol lands with riparian rights below the quantities to which
they may be entitled under such rightso
That interference with the rights conferred by Section
14 18 contemplated will be seen by reference to Section 32 which
sets ouo certain powers and duties of the Commission* Amongst
uhese is the preparation from time to time of proposals for the
construction of works of water supply or reports upon proposed
woiks Ox water supply showing whether the same should in the
opinion ol the Commission be carried into effect,* the estimated
cost thereof the extent ana value of the property to be benefited
thereby and the effect they would be likely to have on the supply
oi water available for the use of the owners or occupiers of such
P- ope.'., oy, -ad ulso whether and if so what extent the co.rrying out
of such works would be likely to affect injuriously the supply of
avail,, ble for the use of the owners or occupiers of easy other
property and whether any further works should be carried out to
provide a compensation supply to such other property and whether
such further works or any part thereof should be free hoadworks* ,f
oOo


Year
No 9
- - - — — - .... - —
Act
1853
16 Viet.
An Act to establish a 'board of Commiss-
No o o9*
i ioners for the hotter sewerage and drain-
age of the City of Melbourne and for
supplying water thereto and to the
s uburb s thereof.
1858
21 Viet*
An Act to amend an Act intituled an Act
No. 59
to establish a Board of Commissioners
for better Sewerage and Drainage of the
Gity of Melbourne and for supplying
Water thereto and to the Suburbs thereof*
1860
101
An Act for supplying the District of the
Ovens with Water.
1860
105
An Act for enabling the Municipal Council
of Beechworth to construct Water Works
and supply their District with Water and
for other purposes.
1865
288
Waterworks Act 1865.
1865
289
The Public Works Statute 1865 (Water
Supply SS e 189-250)
1869
347
Waterworks Commissioners Act 1869. (An
Act for better carrying out the “Water-
works Act 1865.”)
1870
375
The Waterworks Commissioners Amended Act
1870. (An Act for amending ”The Water-
works Commissioners Act 1869.”)
1871
406
An Act to enable ”T'he Bendigo Waterworks
Company” to sell and alienate and the
Corporation of the City of Sandhurst to
purchase and be possessed of the Water-
works or other property of the said
Company and for other purposes.
1872
442
The Amending Waterworks Statute 1872.
(An Act to amend “The Waterworks Act
1865,” and ”The Waterworks Commissioners
Act 1869.”)
1872
448
The Local Governing Bodies Loan Act 1872.
1874
500
An Act to amend The Local Governing
Bodies Loan Act 1872.
1876
543
An Act to further amend ”The Local
Governing Bodies Loan Act 1872” and to
amend ”An Act to amend the Local Govern-
ing Bodies Loan Act 1872.”
1877
582
The Beechworth Waterworks Act “Amending
Act 0 ” (An Act to amend ”The Beechworth
Waterworks Act I860.”)
APPENDIX
V.W.L.
STATE RIVERS AND WATER SUPPLY COMMISSION
ACTS
RELATING TO
WATER SUPPLY IN VICTORIA
(Exclusive of Water Supply Loan Application Acts).
1877 No„ 589/


Year
No •
Act
3.877
■
589
The Waterworks Act Amendment Act 1877*
(An Act to extend the operation of "The
Waterworks Act 1865" and for other pur-
poses ©)
1880
651
An Act to provide for the compulsory
taking of Land for the Lunmunkle and St©
Arnaud Shires Waterworks*
1880
656
The Waterworks Act 1880* (An Act to
repeal the "Waterworks Commissioners Act
1869," and for other purposes#)
1881
716
The Victorian Water Conservation Act 1881*
(An Act to provide for the Conservation
and Distribution of Water throughout
Victoria •)
1885
778
The Victorian Water Conservation Act 1883©
1884
806
The Waterworks Act 1884*
1884
829
The Victorian Water Conservation Act 1884*
1885
859
The Victorian Water Conservation Act 1885.
1886
, 893
The Victorian Water Conservation Act 1886*
1886
898
The Irrigation Act 1886. (An Act to make
Letter provision for the supply of water
for Irrigation and also for Mining Manuf-
acturing and other purposes.)
1886
909
The River Goulhurn Weir Act, 1886* (An
Act to sanction the issue and application
of a certain sum of money for the con-
struction of a Weir in the River Goulhurn
and works in connection therewith*)
1886
910
The Waterworks Construction Encouragement
Act 1886* (An Act to encourage private
enterprise in the construction of works
for the Supply of Water for Irrigation and.
other purposes*)
1887
930
The Ballarat 'Waterworks Act 1887* (An
Act to further amend "The Waterworks Act
1880" and for other purposes*)
1887
946
The Water Conservation Act 1887* (An
Act to consolidate "The Victorian Water
Conservation Acts 1881-1886" and for other
purposes *)
1888
983
An Act to enable certain Lessees to Vote
at the Election of Commissioners of
Irrigation and Water Supply Trusts under
"The Irrigation Act 1886" and for other
purposes.)
1889
1047
The Irrigation Amendment Act 1889*
I
1889
1049
The Water Conservation Act 1889*
1890
j 1120
Mines Act 1890 (Sections 59,60,61,and 62*)
1890 No© 1156/


r
T"
i
Year j
No.
Act
1090 |
i
1156
Water Act 1390• (An Act to consolidate
the Lear relating to the Supply and Con-
serve tion of W 3 tG1' -)
1890 |
|
. j
1203
Waterworks Construction Encouragement Act
1890.
1891 j
|
1258
Wa terworks Cons true tion Encoura gernen t A c t
! 1891.
!
1895 i
j
i
i
j
1
1304
| Mildura Rating Act 1893. Act to
! facilitate the carrying out certain of
i the provisions of the Waterworks Construe-
| tion Encouragement Act 1886*)
i
1893 !
i
i
i
i
i
i
!
1327
j Water Supply Advances Act 1895* (An Act
! to apply temporarily out of the moneys
1 raised under the Victorian Government
5 Stock .act 1389 certain sums of money for
i Irrigation Works and Water Supply purposes*)
i 0
I
!
i
1895 |
1336
j ; j
I The Chaffey Brothers Limited Removal of
! Doubts Act 1895# !
1 1
1895
1342
i
1 Mil dura Rating Act 1893 (No. 2).
! ~ i
I
1 1893
1
i
134-5
j An Act to validate the Creation and Appoint- j
j nient of the Campaspe Irrigation and Water
| Supply Trust and for other purposes*
!
1895
!
1
1
'
j
!
i
1378
i Mallee Tanks Act 1895* (An Act to sanction
! the issue and application of certain sums of
| money as loans to certain Shire Councils to
Construct Tanks for. Water Supply in the Mallee
! Country.)
I
1895
1389
1 . !
! Mildura Rating Act 1895.
I : 1
! 1895
j
1396
! Mil dura Rating Act 1395 plWo. 2;.
j
j 1895
i
! v
1409
•
j Mildura Irrigation Trusts Act 1895.
! (An Act to constitute Irrigation Trusts
j within the Irrigation Colony of Mildura
| and to invest such Trusts with certain
j powers and for other purposes*
j ’
i
j 1896
i
j
i ■
i
!
}
±42 5
\
i
i
! Water Act 1896. (An Act relating to
the making and levying of Rates within
j an Unban District under the Water Act
j 1890 and for the abolition of Decs for
I Summonses to recover Rates and Charges
; under the said Act*)
i 1896
| 1477
1 Mildura Trust Loan Act 1896.
! 1397
!
! 1498
! Mildura Trust Loan Amendment Act 1897*
! 1398
1576
1
| Mildura Crown Grants Act 1898.
1
i
| 1899
1
j 1625
■j Water Supply Advances Relief Act 1899.
1
|
1900
L _ _
1651
| Water Act 1900 v (An Act to amend the
| Water Act 1890.)
1902 No. 1803/


T ' ' 1
Year 1
I'j 0 «■
. . - -- - *■"
Act
1902
i
1
j
i
i
1608
j
Long Lake Water Supply Act 1902* (An Act
to provide "by pumping for the supply of.
Water from Long Lake to Part of the Eastern
Mallee* j
-i
1903
:!
• 1832 !
l
j
i
Water Act 1903« (An Act to amend the
Water Acts so far as relates to the Condah
Swamp Lands *)
! 1903
i 1
1842 1
Mildura Irrigation Trusts Act 1903,
1 |
! 1904 |
1 \
1 1
i
i
! !
i i
! I
1912 1
!
.J
i
]
Garrum Advances Act 1904« (An Act to
enable Seed and Manure to "be advanced on
certain terms to Cultivators of Land with-
in the Garrum Irrigation and Water Supply
Trust®
!
j 1904 ;
i
i
!
.1
-
1942 j
it
1
ii
!
I
1
■ ! !
i
Ballarat Water Commission Mortgage Ratif-
ication Act 1904* (An Act to ratify an
Indenture made "between the Ballarat Water
Commissioners* the Governor of the State
of Victoria 7 and the Board of Land and
Works *)
• I
1905
j
J - : O 9
1
;
-
Surplus Revenue Act 1905, (An Act re-
lating to the Surplus Revenue of the
Financial Year ended 30*6*05 and to amend
the Surplus Revenue Acts No 0 1904 and No 0
1945«}
1905
1994
■
Garrum Drainage Works Act 1905* (An
Act relating to the Garrum Irrigation and
Water Supply Trust District*)
1905
1998
■
■
Surplus Revenue Act 1905 (No* 2)* (An
Act relating to the Surplus Revenue of
the Financial Year ended 30*6 *C 5 and other
Money s *)
1905
2016
■
Water Act 1905® (An Act to consolidate
and amend the Laws relating to the Con-
servation and Supply of Water to declare
the Law relating to certain Rights in
Natural Waters the property in the "beds and
banks containing the same and for other
purpos e s o)
1906
2054
Waterworks Land Sales Act 1906*
1907
2109
Geelong Municipal Waterworks Act 1907o
idec * 2* )
1907
2123
Murray Settlements Act 1907 (Sections 24
to 37 inc»)
1909
2176
Mildura Irrigation Trusts Act 1909*
1909
| 2226
1
Water Act 1909®
1911
2345
Flood Protection Act 1911*
1912
|
3359
Flood Protection Act 1912*
•i 9-1 4
i
! o/i on
1
j
j
An Act to authorize the issuing of Grown
Grants of certain Lands at Mildura*
1914 No * 2552/


Year
No 6
" - 1
Act
1914
2552
i
!
Transfer of Land Act 1890 Amendment Act 1914
(No. 3).
1915
2747
1
1
i
1
!
Water Act 1915© (An Act to consolidate the
Law relating to the Conservation and Supply
of Water to declare the Lav/ relating to cer-
tain Rights in Natural Waters the property
in the "beds and hanks containing the same and
for o ther purpos es ©)
1916
2842
An Act relating to certain Agricultural School
or College Lands situate at Mildura and for
o thor purp os e s a
1916
2852
Water Act 1916,
1913
2956
.
Water Act 1918 Q
1918
2959
Mildura Vineyards Protection Act 1918«
1920
'T r\
.
Mildura Irrigation Trust Act 1920,
1921
3132
Ballarat Water Commissioners Act 1921©
1921
5162
An Act to amend the Mildura Irrigation Trust
Ac to
! 1922
0 2 o 6
Closer Settlement Act 1922.
:
1928
3801
Water ri ct 1928o (An Act to consolidate the
Law relating to the Conservation and Supply
of Water and the Law relating to certain
Rights in Natural Waters and the Property in
beds and hanks containing the same©)
1955
Ai 7r,
fjrJ- i O
Avoca Water Trust Act 1933*
1S33
4176
i
Loddon United Waterworks Trust Act 1933*
1956
4371
Water Act 1936©
193V |
4511
Public Service (Transfer of Officers) Act
1937 ©
1937
4513
Water Act 1957®
1938
454-8
Snowy River Works «ct 1938*
1939 |
4657
Barwon River Improvement Act 1939©
i
1939 ;
4678
Water Act 1939©
i
1940
4740
Water (Rates and Charges) Act 1940.
1940 !
4761
Wa t er Ac t 1940©
1S41
4837
Water Act 1941 0






