

VICTORIAN JUNIOR
FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION.
f.'V.
gcc&u. m-j.
President : W. MENTIPLAY, Esq.
Vice-Presidents :
H. STEWART BALE, Esq., and D. SCOTT, Esq.
Hon. Secretary and Treasurer;
Mr. R. A. FITZGERALD (Star of Carlton), Kay-street, Carlton.
Auditors :
Messrs. DAVIS and WALKER.
CONSTITUTION.
1. —That an Association be formed, to be called the “Victorian Junior Football
Association,” which shall have the entire control and management of all Junior
Intercolonial and Associated Club Matches, and shall have power to settle all dis-
putes which may arise in connection therewith, or with matches played under its
patronage.
2. —That the Association shall consist of Delegates from all Junior Clubs de-
sirous of being represented, on the following conditions :
I. That no Club shall nominate more than one Delegate.
11. That country Clubs desirous of being represented on the Association
may appoint Delegates resident in Melbourne for that purpose.
3. —That each Club represented shall subscribe an annual fee of Half-a-Guinea,
payable in advance.
4. —That all Clubs represented on the Association mating a charge for admission
to their matches shall contribute to the Association £5 per cent, on the net amount of
their takings when playing against Juniors.
5. —That two-thirds of the profits of the Association shall be divided from time to
time as may be agreed upon by a majority of the whole Association amongst the Clubs
represented, and, if a loss should be sustained, each Club shall contribute thereto in like
proportion.
6. —This Association shall have the power of electing or rejecting any Club wishing
to join the Association. ■ _
FINANCIAL.
g— I.—No Club having once joined the Association shall be allowed to leave it without
o giving at least one month’s notice in writing intention of doing so to the Secre-
tary. - ’ V r
r\ 2. —The Treasurer shall not spend more than £3, unless with the consent of the
Association.
rc , 3- —Any Club represented on the Association neglecting to pay its declared share
of any loss that may arise (as provided in Article 5 of the Constitution), within one
' month after due notice of such loss shall have been given by the Secretary, shall cease to
be connected with the Association, and shall be disqualified from any future representa-
cr
r~


tion thereon j but it may be re-admitted at any time thereafter by payment of the said
loss and the annual fee.
4, —The accounts of the Association shall be audited by two members in April
in each year, and be submitted with a Report of the year’s proceedings to a meeting
of the Association to be held on some day during that month.
RULES.
I.—The Office-Bearers of the Association shall consist of a President, four Vice-
Presidents, a Treasurer, and a Secretary, who shall be elected annually, at the Annual
General Meeting of the Association. Any vacancy occurring in the Office-Bearers or
Match Committee shall be filled at any ordinary meeting of the Association. President
and Vice-President shall be members of the Association.
2. —The Annual Meeting of the Association shall be held on the last Thursday in
April, a fortnight’s notice of which shall be given by advertisement and circular. The
names of Delegates to be forwarded to the Secretary one week prior to the said
meeting.
3. —The Football Season shall commence on the first Saturday in May.
4. —That seven members, including the Secretary, shall form a quorum at any meet-
ing of the Association.
5, —That at each meeting of the Association a Chairman shall be elected, who shall,
in addition to his ordinary vote, have a casting vote.
6. —A Match Committee of five members shall be chosen at the Annual Meeting,
whose duties it shall be to watch the play from the commencement of the season, and
select the players for all Intercolonial Matches to be played under the management of
the Association. Provided that no Club shall be represented on such Committee by
more than one Delegate.
7. —No match shall be made on behalf of the Association except at a properly called
meeting, and through the Honorary Secretary.
B.—All disputes whatever, that may be referred to the Association, shall be finally
decided by that body, at a meeting to be called specially for that purpose, and any Club
refusing to abide by such decision shall cease to be represented on the Association, for
such time as the Association shall think fit.
9,—A1l Clubs referring disputes to the Association shall forward the matter in dis-
pute in writing, within three davs, to the Secretary of the Association, together with a
fee of 10s 6d. (to be returned if the decision be in favor of the Club referring the dis-
pute, or be not considered frivolous), and the Secretary shall call on the Club complained
of to reply to the matter in dispute ; but, in case of non-reply within seven days, that
Club shall be liable to a fine of 10s. 6d.
10. —The sense of every meeting of the Association shall be determined by show of
hands, unless a ballot be demanded.
*
11. —Any player complained of for disputing an umpire’s decision in the football
field during a match, or for otherwise misconducting himself, shall be liable to be dis-
qualified from taking part in any match played under the management of the Associa-
tion, for such time as may be decided upon.
12 —Up-country Clubs desirous of being represented on the Association, and em-
ploying Delegates resident in Melbourne for the purpose, may do so—provided that no
such Delegate shall be a member of a Club already represented, and any such Delegate
joining an Associated Club shall cease to be a member of the Association.
13. —Any Club which shall fail to be represented at three consecutive meetings of
the Association, without a valid written excuse, shall cease to be represented thereon.
14. —The Secretary shall give notice to any Club of the absence from two consecu-
tive meetings of its delegates. This rule shall not apply to country Clubs—unless their
Delegate resides in Melbourne.
15.—A1l meetings of the Association shall be called by notice from the Secretary,
to each Delegate.
16.—The Association shall meet on the Second and Fourth Thursday in each month
during the Football Season.


1 V'W A<\.
17.—The Secretary shall call by circular a Special General Meeting within seven
days after receiving a written requisition, signed by not less than seven Delegates, setting
forth the object of such meeting
18. —That each Club shall register its colors with the Association. Pee 2s. 6d.
19. —That the Association shall at the termination of each season appoint a Special J
Committee to bring up a report on the advisability or otherwise of effecting any altera-
tions in the laws of the game. '
20.—N0 Associated Club shall play for any money trophy.
21.—That no clause of the constitution, or rule of the Association, shall be rescinded
ox amended without the concurrence of an absolute majority of the whole Association,
at a Special Meeting to be called for the purpose.
22. —None but country players allowed to change their Club after 30th June.
23.—That any Associated Club not turning up to fulfil their engagement, within
three-quarters of an hour after the time appointed (3 o’clock), the match be con-
sidered to have been lost by the Club not fulfilling their engagement.
LAWS OF THE GAME.
1. —The distance between the goals should not be more than 200 yards, and the
width of the playing space not more than 150 yards, to be measured equally on each side
of the line drawn through the centre of the goals. The goal-posts shall be seven yards
apart, of not less than twelve feet in height. The ball to be used shall be No. 2 Eugby
(20 inches in circumference^).
2. —Two posts to be" called the “ kick-off posts,” shall be erected at a distance of
twenty yards on each side of the goal-posts, in a straight line with them ; the intervening
line between such kick-off posts shall constitute the “ goal-line.”
3.—Matches will be played with not more than twenty a-side, unless where
handicaps are conceded. Any Club found playing more than the number arranged for
shall have all goals kicked prior to the detection of same annulled.
4.—The captains of each side shall toss for choice of goal. The side losing the toss
or goal has the kick-off from the centre-point between the goals. When half the time
arranged for play has expired, the players shall change ends, and the ball be thrown in
the air by the field-umpire in the centre of the ground.
5. —The game shall be won by the side kicking the greatest number of goals.
6.—That all matches shall be played out to the time arranged, but should adverse
weather prevent this being done, and the game finally stopped by the field-umpire, in case
the captains disagree, such match shall be held as drawn.
7. —A goal must be kicked by one of the side playing for goal kicking the ball
between the posts, without touching either of them (flags excepted), or any player after
being kicked. Should any of the spectators, standing between or immediately in front of
the goal-poets, interfere with or stop the progress of the ball going through, a goal shall
be scored.
8 —The goal-umpires shall be sole judges of goals, and of cases of the ball going
behind goals; and in eases of doubt may appeal to the field-umpire. The field-umpire
shall decide in all matters during the progress of the game, and may appeal to a goal-
umpire.
9. —In case the hall is kicked behind the goal line by one of the opposite side
(except when a goal is kicked, in which ease the ball is kicked-off from the centre of the
ground) any one of the side behind whose goal it is kicked may bring it ten yards in
front of any portion of the space within the goal-line, and shall kick it towards the
opposite goal.
10.—In the event of a player kicking the ball wilfully behind his own goal-line, it
shall be thrown in by the field-umpire at right angles from the point where it crossed
the said goal line.
11. —Any player catching the ball directly from the foot of another player, may call
“ mark.” He then has a “ free kick” from any spot behind, and in a line with his mark,
and the centre of his opponents’ goal posts, no player being allowed to come inside the
spot marked, or within five yards in any other direction.


12. —The ball may be taken in hand at any time, but not carried further than is
necessary for a kick, unless the player strikes it against the ground at least once in every
seven yards. In the event of a player with the ball in hand trying to pass an adversary,
and being held by him, he must at once drop the ball.
13.—Tripping, Hacking, Babbitting, and Slinging are prohibited,* pushing with the
hands or body is allowed only when a player is in rapid motion within five or six yards
of the ball Holding a player is allowed only when such player has the ball in hand,
except in cases provided for in rules 9, 11, and 12.
14.—When the ball goes out of bounds, it shall be brought back to the spot where
it crossed the boundary line, and thrown in by the umpire at right angles with that line,
but shall not be playable until it touch the ground within bounds.
15. —The ball while in play, may under no circumstances be thrown or handed to a
player.
16. —The field umpire, on being appealed to, may either award a ix free kick,” call
“ play on,” or stop the play and throw the ball in the air, and stop all attempts at
scrimmages, enforce as strictly as possible the running, pushing, and holding clauses of
rules 12 and 13, and in evetry case his decision shall be final ; and the Club disputing
same shall lose the match. But in the event of an umpire refusing to decide upon any
matter in dispute, Clubs may, according to rule 8 of the Association, appeal to that body,
whose decision shall be final.
17. —No one wearing projecting nails, iron plates, or gutta-percha on any part of
his boots or shoes, shall be allowed to play in a match.
18.—In ease of infringement of any of the above rules, any player of the opposite
side may claim a “ free kick ” from the place where the breach of the rule was made, the
player nearest the place of infringement being the only one entitled to the kick.
19.—N0 player shall play with more than one Club during one season, except he per-
manently change his residence, and has first obtained the consent of the Association ;
but in the event of a member of one of the Associated Clubs, after playing in a match or
matches, being rejected by his Club in three successive matches, he shall be allowed, with
the approval of the Association, to join one other Club during the season.
20.—That any Club playing a member of another Club, shall for the first offence be
fined 10s. 6d., for the second £1 Is., and for the third shall be disqualified from playing
with any of the Associated Clubs during the remainder of the season.
21.—1 n the event of a Club disbanding, its members may be at liberty to play with
any other Club, with the consent of the Association. But no Club shall be considered to
have disbanded after the second Saturday in July.
22.—None of the above laws shall be altered or rescinded, nor shall any rule be re-
pealed, altered, amended, or adopted, without the concurrence of an absolute majority of
the Association, at a meeting specially called for that purpose.
3 1508 01036100 9
FORD & SON, Printers, 4 Faraday Street and lA University Street, Carlton.
