

CS .^2
\ ~:j
Jt |
t ( 1/ f\ / *




THE LECTURE.
A lecture was delivered on Monday evening, the
19th November, 1866, at the Old Exhibition Build-
ing, Melbourne, by the Hon. Archibald Michie,
entitled “Retrospects and Prospects of the Colony.”
The building was crowded, and the chair was occu-
pied by His Worship the Mayor (W. Williams,
Esq.) The lecture was given in aid of the Victoria
Royal Artillery (St. Kilda Battery), under the com-
mand of Captain F. T. Sargood.
Amongst those on the platform were—the Hon.
James M'Culloch, the Hon. S. H. Bindon, the Hon.
J. G. Francis, the Hon. Capt. Cole, the Hon. T. T.
A’Beckett, the Hon. C. J. Jenner, Mr. H. Henty,
M.L.A., Mr. J. Balfour, ML.A., Mr. W. Bayles,
M.L.A., Mr. E. Langton, M.L.A., Mr. J. M‘Kean,
M.L.A., the Rev. A. M. Henderson, the Rev. J. 0.
Dykes, &c., and in the body of the hall were—the
Hon. C. Gavan Duffy, Mr. M. O’Grady, M.L.A.,
Mr. P. Hanna, M.L.A., Mr. W. Wilson, M.L.A.,
and a large concourse of our most influential citi-
zens. Both on the platform and in the hall there
was a considerable number of ladies. Colonel
Anderson occupied a seat to the left of the chair.
The Mayor said that he had much pleasure in
introducing the lecturer to the meeting. He did so
in the character of president on that occasion, for
he felt sure that in the case of a gentleman of Mr.
Michie’s celebrity, an introduction could be nothing
more than a somewhat superfluous formality.
The Lecturer was received with several bursts
of applause, and after the cheering had subsided
Mr. Michie said : Mr Mayor, and Ladies and
Gentlemen, —In appearing before you in the in-
terests of our St. Kilda volunteers, permit me
at the outset to express my acknowledgments
to our citizen soldiers generally; for it is
now to be put to their credit that after up-
wards of seven years’ submission to the discipline
of the soldier’s profession, they can at any time
show us in round numbers some 3000 efficient men
in the field. An answer has thus been given to
those who, on the first organisation of this force,
insinuated that the movement would not last, and
that those who joined it were principally attracted
by the prospect of wearing a pretty uniform. In
the camp and in the field they have stood the test of
professional criticism ; and for myself I will
say that the value of this force extends beyond
that of its merely military character. It must be
obvious to the most superficial observer that in the
course, of the volunteer’s duty, every class of society
is brought into more intimate communion-and sym-
pathy with every other class, a result which as-
suredly is in itself a great good. Not until I first
took part as a spectator in one of our peaceful battles,
and saw even our High Sheriff lead on his own
company, among whom might have been not only
some of his own bailiffs, but even some with whom
he might have stood in still more tender relations, did
I adequately appreciate the civil, as well as the
military importance of this portion of our defences.
Seeing, then, that the volunteer does not merge
the citizen in the soldier, and that we are all—as an
ancient philosopher calls men—political animals
alike, it is not in the presence of s uch (
body that I need apologise either for the matter
or the manner of much that I am going to say. It
is pretty certain that—as on the occasion of my
last appearance in this place—in some points my
hearers will differ from me, as in other points they
will probably agree with me; but just as in their
own force, volunteers would not inquire into their
right or left hand comrade’s opinions, before acting
on an instruction to fire into an enemy about to land,
so, I hope they will accept me as a comrade to-night,
and fire away at me as hard as they like to-morrow
morning.
It cannot, I think, hut he a great comfort to
some of us, that —Mr Francis, and the Custom
House notwithstanding—the drapers’ windows make
as beautiful a show as ever; still throng the car-
riages between three and five in a certain part of
Collins-street; has not our worthy ex-mayor, Mr
Bayles, ridden the whirlwind, and directed the soft-
goods storm into that vast hall which has so lately
shown us of what great things drapery is still ca-
pable? And cannot those inexhaustible foun-
tains of honor, our excellent fellow-citizens, Mou-
bray and Lush, manufacture any number of
princes, and peers, and marchionesses, and
Madams on the shortest notice, and on the
most reasonable terms ? As these questions can be
only answered in the affirmative, I feel I may ap-
proach with becoming composure of spirit, and I
propose to talk about —-I trust with all possible good
humor—such interesting topics as free trade and
protection, the tariff, the land question, the press,
the people, and the mob ; about public opinion and
the modes of influencing it, and about the probable
future of the colony. I do not think I can select
any other equal number of topics as interesting as
these at the present time, and therefore I cannot
but hope a portion of our evening may be rationally
passed in temperately discussing them.
With the greatest deference to the analysis
of our Legislative Assembly given at a late
extra-Parliamentary utterance at Ballaarat, and
notwithstanding the alleged formed opinions of
various sections of jour representatives, I do
not think it superfluous to start with the
elementary question, “ What is the meaning of
free trade ? ” These two words represent for me
an idea which I endeavor to express to myself thus:
It is an operation by which all men enjoy the
unrestricted power of exchanging with each other
the fruits of their labors. The above few
words embody,"with sufficient clearness to my own
mind, the meaning I attach to the words “ free
trade,” when I use those words. What do I mean
when I use the word protection ? I mean the appli-
cation of a law, by the force of which the fruit of
the labor of one man, or set of men, is favored, and
made profitable in any particular market, by saving
it from competition with the labor of any other man,
or set of men, who, in the natural course of human
dealings, would otherwise resort to such market.
For all practical purposes the above definitions will
suffice. Assuming, then, that I have fairly ex


plained the proper meaning of the terms free trade
and protection, it may safely be averred that
there never can be free trade where there is
a custom house; and there never can be
protection which does not drive us to
buy of the protected industry. In other
words, there cannot be perfect free trade where
there is any restriction ; and that cannot be protec-
tion which does not protect. Duties, however
light, are, as far as they go, contradictory of, and in-
consistent with free trade. On the other hand, duties,
however heavy, never protect any industry whilst
that industry is still left exposed to, the successful
competition of the general industry of the world.
But, inasmuch as most countries are in the habit of
collecting a revenue through the Custom House, and
yet some countries—England, for instance—claim
to be considered free traders, it seems clear that
in the contemplation of many respectable authorities,
light duties, not amounting to prohibition of foreign
industries, are not deemed incompatible with a
reasonable compliance with the principle of free trade.
For instance, England is said to have free trade
in corn, although a shilling a quarter duty is im-
posed on the importation of foreign breadstuff's into
Great Britain. This slight and insignificant duty,
however, does not, and cannot, operate to exclude
foreign produce, for it yields from £BOO,OOO
to £900,000 a year to the general revenue.
This sum (assuming that England exports no
com) exactly measures the difference between
the quantity of com which England grows
and the quantity which England consumes.
The home grower is not protected; the foreign
grower is not excluded; and therefore it is that
English statesmen and journalists are justified in
saying that this shilling duty is for revenue, and
not for protection. At the same time, it is
demonstrable that, use what language you may, the
English grower derives whatever advantage arises
from the imposition on the foreign article
of that shilling a quarter, from which
the home grower is exempt. To this extent,
infinitesimal though it be, England at the present
moment is deprived of free trade in com ; and yet,
by reason of the deprivation being but infinitesimal,
we admit that substantially free trade in com exists
in the mother country. In the above cited instance,
we find that a slight duty on a commodity for pur-
poses of revenue is not incompatible with two
countries exchanging with all reasonable and
required freedom, their products against each other;
and this, too, although the fact is indisputable, that
the foreign grower of com cannot find a market in
England unless he can sell as cheap as England can
sell, after the payment by the foreign grower of
that shilling a quarter duty which is the nec'essary
passport to the English market.
Now, let us apply the above observations
to the new tariff, which we are told must,
next session, be made a protectionist one.
Notwithstanding the clamor which was at first got
up about this measure, I find it difficult to believe
that any real apprehension ever existed in the mind
of any man, that even the so-called protectionists
themselves ever desired the enforcement of prohi-
bit ive duties in this colony. Be that as it may, it
is not easy to understand the policy of that section
of our public men, who, being professed free traders,
are for what they call giving protection all round;
to the farmer as well as to the manufacturer.
These politicians apparently inculcate the policy,
“ A little fostering is a dangerous thing;
Drink deep, or taste not the protective spring,”
A policy which seems to imply their belief that a
thing bad in itself becomes good when you increase
the dose. This curious, and self-contradictory
policy affects to proceed on the belief that the pre-
sent tariff is protectionist, in the ordinary sense in
which that term is employed. Mere counter-asser-
tions as to the character of the tariff will prove
nothing, so we must go to evidence and proofs.
Fortunately, the tariff itself will help us to an
answer ; and perhaps an occasional importer will
be found an important witness on the same point.
For the tariff, being a sort of table of fixed
quantities, is, of course, a mere matter of
rithmetic. It shows either the amount, or the
means by which the amount may be calculated,
chargeable upon the various articles therein named.
These articles, so named, comprise scarcely a fifth
of the annual imports to this colony, the aggregate
of which, for the period between the beginning of
the year and the 10th of this present month of No-
vember, I find returned at £11,982,859, as against
£10,722,368 for the corresponding period last year.
Four-fifths of these imports are not brought under
any tariff at all, and piece goods of every description
also enter our ports free. Keeping these important
facts before our minds, now let us see what account
experience enables us to give of the new duties.
I find that the new duties down to the 31st October
last have brought in £115,273, falling short
of the estimate by upwards of £7OOO, which de-
ficiency is no matter for surprise, seeing that for
more than twelve months past, goods intended for
New South Wales have been carried up to the
Murray River in bond, and have there paid duty to
the sister colony. For the whole year, therefore,
we should have, on account of the new duties, a
sum under £150,000, which amount, taking the new
articles subject to the new tariff at two millions in
value, would represent only from 7 to 8 per cent, on
that value. Of course, the per centage is higher on
some few exceptionally cheap articles, such as dried
fruits, &c., but from 7 to 8 per cent, seems the
average. Now, in England 10 per cent, is regarded
as perfectly reasonable for purposes of revenue, and
as not in any way savoring of protective duties. It is
large enough to yield revenue; it is not large enough
to shut out foreign goods. Moreover, the rate of
duties leviable under this new tariff is less
than that of almost any other British co-
lony, and does not amount to one-third of
the duties levied under the Canadian tariff.
But here it is also necessary to remark that the
£150,000 collectable under the new tariff, is not an
addition to the previously existing burthens of the
country ; it is a substitution only for the reduced
duties on sugar, tea, gold, and opium. The new
imposts just about balance the old abolished imposts.
The gross amount of taxation through the Custom
House remains under the new tariff what it had been
under the old one. The opposition, therefore, when
cpposition arose in the first instance, had nothing
to fasten on with respect to the gross amount
of taxation ; that opposition could only assail the
alleged impolitic substitution. That substitution being
a substitution of duties on various manufactured
fabrics, in lieu of the previous higher duties on tea,
sugar, opium, and gold, it is important to ascertain
whether such substitution is, in the aggregate, a


greater burthen to the consumer than were the dis-
placed duties. If consumers pay no more in taxa-
tion, who is hurt ? If a man is to pay £5 a year
in taxation, what does it matter to him whether he
pays that £5 on sugar or on shoddy ? How, in the
main, has it appeared, as yet, that the new tariff is
more oppressive than were the displaced duties on
tea, sugar, opium, and gold ? It has been said that
no duties on tea and siigar can be protective, because
we cannot produce tea and sugar, but that duties
on hats, caps, and widows’ cap fronts, may be pro-
tective, because we can and do produce these and
similar articles. Let us examine this position, and
endeavor to ascertain what it is worth.
As I have said already, and as the fact
is, piece goods come in free. Why was this
distinction observed between piece goods and
goods worked up into slops ? Apparently,
because we cannot produce muslins, calicoes, silks,
and other fabrics, any more than we can produce
tea, coffee, or sugar; but we possess in abundance
the labor which can work up the untaxed fabrics
into shapes fit for human use. This, of course, will
not be denied. But then again, it may be said that
the purchasers and wearers of slops have a right to
buy in the cheapest market; that, if the labor be-
stowed in England, in converting these piece goods
into slops, is cheaper than similar labor here, the
consumers in Victoria have a right to buy that
English labor in preference to the Victorian labor.
Not disregarding such a position, what is the choice
before the colonists ? On the one hand, we have
before us, as proposed objects of taxation, the labor
involved in the production of tea and sugar; and,
on the other hand, the labor involved in the produc-
tion of English slops. Assuming—although Iby
no means admit the fact—that the tax necessarily
falls on the consumer, I ask, if I and other tax-
payers choose to say we will pay our tax on the
labor in the slops, rather than on the labor in the
tea and sugar, what is that to any one ? It will not
be denied that it is of the essence of freedom that
men should be entitled to choose how and
upon what particular product of labor they
should tax themselves. “ Oh,” but it may
be said, “by taxing the labor in the slops,
you encourage, or even foster the colonial labor !”
Well, if Jyou do so, what of that ? That colonial
labor will be as cheap as the imported labor, or it
will not. If as cheap, nobody has the color of a
right to complain. If, however, the colonial labor
be not so cheap, why have not the colonists a right
to say, as taxpayers, that they choose to hand over
to the Custom House £5, though it may ultimately
go into the pockets of the colonial laborer, rather
than pay £5 which is ultimately to go into the
pockets of the English or the American laborer ?
The £5 so expended will put in motion a corre-
sponding amount of labor here, it draws no capital
into channels into which that capital is not ready
almost of itself to flow ; and, if the aggregate of the
taxation be no more than before, what principle,
either of politics or political economy, forbids
us from saying, in plain terms, that we will,
through the Custom House (as is done in
so-called free trade England at the present
moment), offer a premium to domestic industry to
produce, if it can, the same sort of articles which
are produced elsewhere ? But at this stage of the
discussion, it is frequently interposed, that the two
objects of revenue and protection are incompatible ;
that the one negatives, or excludes the other. I
have already admitted as much, in the definition of
protection to which I have given in my adherence at
the outset of these observations. But does it fol-
low, or, having regard to our daily experience, is
it the fact, that the two objects, of revenue, and the
more rapid advancement of domestic manufactures,
are inconsistent and incompatible ? Certainly not.
To assert this would be to deny facts which are
daily taking place under our very eyes. In every
country which has a custom house we find foreign
articles taxed, andyet coming into the taxing country
concurrently with that taxing country producing in
large quantities the same description of articles as
the imported taxed article. I may give an instance
to be found in evidence presented to one of our own
Parliamentary committees. In the select committee
on manufactures, which sat, and took evidence
some two years back, Mr Aitkin, the brewer, was
called in. In question 240, he is asked “ With re-
ference to the duty on beer, will you give the benefit
of your experience ? Answer: The duty on beer is
6d a gallon. 241. How has that acted ? Has it
encouraged the brewer ? It has. In 1853 to 1861,
English ale averaged from £8 to £lO a hogshead.
Through all these years that was the
average. 242. How many brewers were there
in and around Melbourne then ? Four. M'Cracken’s,
Henderson’s, Murphy’s and my own. Since then
there are seventeen, in Melbourne and suburbs.
243. Has the fact of new breweries starting decreased
the price of the English article ? The price of
English ale from 1862 to the present time has
averaged from £4 to £6. 244. That is'good English
ale? Yes. You can buy good English ale in the
market at present at £5.” Now here we have cer-
tain facts, which, being facts, must be reconciled
with some theory or- other. In the first place, we see
that this duty is an encouragement pro tanto to Vic-
toria brewing. Secondly, it does not exclude English
beer, large quantities of which continue to be im-
ported; and thirdly, the most important consequence
of all is that the consumer can buy English beer
much cheaper since the imposition of the fid a gallon
duty, than he could do before the imposition of that
duty. Assuming that Mr Aitkin is not deceiving
us, as to the facts, how are they to be accounted
for but on the supposition either that competition
between the English and the colonial brewers has
brought down the produce of both, or that dimin-
ished cost of production in England has lowered the
price of the English article here ; and which is the
more reasonable supposition of the two ? Is it
likely, or does anyone suggest, that the cheaper pro-
duction of beer in England just occurred coinciden-
tally with the imposition of 6d a gallon duty on that
article when entering our port ? The duty, then,
has apparently operated to bring into ex-
istence many new breweries in the colony.
It does yield revenue, and the article is
cheaper to consumers, and we are properly told that
we are never to forget the consumers. That the
English article comes in in large quantities, simul-
taneously with the impulse given to the Victorian
trade, need not surprise us, as there is always a
more or less numerous class, in any community, who
cannot be deterred by a tax from the purchase of a
foreign article which is, upon any ground of
preference, real or imaginary, an object of desire to
the purchaser. So large a reliance, indeed, on this
principle of human nature, have the United States
Government manifested, even very recently, that
they, during the late war, imposed a tax of


50 per cent, on all foreign manufactured goods
imported into the States. This taxation was
avowedly for revenue, and declared to be necessary
for providing the means of paying the interest on
their then rapidly increasing national debt. Yet,
even this brought in revenue, nor need the weight
of that revenue (as is so frequently assumed) neces-
sarily fall on the consumer. It might fall on
either producer, importer, or consumer, or dis-
tributively among them, just as mercantile competi-
tion, or demand and supply at the time of the
particular transaction might determine; a position
distinctly admitted by Mr Mill himself in one of his
essays “ on some unsettled Questions of Political
Economy,” and also as distinctly asserted by a Mel-
bourne importer in a letter to the Argus of date
15th of June of this year, to the interesting matter
of which letter* I beg to refer my present audience.
But no one here is advocating, or proposing to
advocate, such taxation as that of America, on which
lam now commenting. I only refer to it as rather
remarkable evidence of the extent to which taxation
at the Custom House may both yield revenue, and
yet go on side by side with the home industry. In
short, some people buy the home made article and
others the imported article, and therefore it is in
the face of experience to say that revenue and en-
couragement of home industry are incompatible, oi
that 'there cannot he such a thing as incidental
encouragement of such an industry.
Now, it has often occurred to me on thinking
over this and related subjects, that on such
topics as this one we are discussing, new
communities may learn quite as much from the
actual experience of each other, as from the
closest speculations of economists. For econo-
mists generally have written of and from the
experience of old countries. But in old com-
munities, the country, for human use, is already
made, so to speak. In young communities we are
making the country, whilst we are applying to it as
well as we can the abstract truths of economical
science. In old countries which have reached their
utmost point of development, all new taxation is
simply a burthen and an almost unmitigated evil.
In a new country, on the other hand, new taxation,
if wisely imposed, and judiciously expended, may
be made the most direct and effective means of
cheapening goods to the consumer, and consequently
of extending commerce and promoting the prosperity
of the merchant, the tradesman, and the manufac-
turer. It is quite possible that to many this will
sound like a paradox. And yet, as you will see
from what I am about to read to you, it is truth
as capable of being worked out to de-
monstration as any theorem in Euclid.
To show this I invite your attention to
an extract from Mr Russell’s recently published
book on Canada. The writer reporting Mr Galt s
defence of the tariff of Canada—Mr Galt being the
Finance Minister of that colony—introduces the
passage as follows “Mr Galt argues that an in-
crease of customs duties does not necessarily in-
juriously affect foreign trade within certam limits,
and that those limits have not been exceeded in
Canada. Formerly, the cost of British goods in
Canada was much enhanced, owing to natural
causes, whilst Canadian producers obtained a
CdUoC/O) n nxiuw X -] ,
minimum price for their exports. The duty was
then generally two and a half per cent., but the
* See Appendix,
price of goods was enormous; and the Cana-
dian suffered pro tanto in his means to
purchase them. Suppose the duties increased
five per cent, were to produce a reduction of ten
per cent, on other charges, “ the benefit,” says
Mr Galt, “ would accrue equally to the British
manufacturer and to the consumer; the consumer
would pay five per cent, more to the Government,
but ten per cent, less to the merchant and for-
warder.” As Mr Galt considers the principle of
Canadian finance and customs to be misapprehended
in England as well as in the United States, it may
he as well to give his own words : —“ The Govern-
ment has increased the duties for the purpose of
enabling them to meet the interest on the public
works necessary to reduce all the various charges
upon the imports and exports of the country.
Lighthouses have been built, and steamships
subsidised to reduce the charges for freight
and insurance; the St. Lawrence has been
deepened, and the canals constructed, to
reduce the cost of inland navigation to a minimum ;
railways have been assisted to give speed, safety and
permanency to trade interrupted by the severity of
the winter. All these improvements have been un-
dertaken with the twofold object of diminishing the
cost to the consumer of what he imports, and of
increasing the net result of the labor of the coun-
try when realised in Great Britain. These great
improvements could not he effected without large
outlay; and the burthen necessarily had to be put
either through direct taxation, or by customs duties
on the goods imported, or upon the trade by exces-
sive tolls corresponding with the rates previously
charged. Direct taxation was the medium employed,
through the local municipalities, for the construction
o 0 all minor local works —roads, court-houses and gaols,
education and the vast variety of objects required,
in a newly settled country; and this source of taxa-
tion has thus been used to the full extent which is
believed practicable without producing serious dis-
content. No one can for a moment argue that, in
an enlightened age, any Government could adopt
such a clumsy mode of raising money as to maintain
excessive rates of tolls ; nor would it have attained
the object, as American channels of trade were
created simultaneously that would then have defied
competition. The only effect, therefore, of attempt-
ing such a course, would have been to give the
United States the complete control of our markets,
and virtually to exclude British goods. The only
other course was therefore adopted, and the producer
has been required to pay, through increased customs
duties, for the vastly greater deductions he secured
through the improvements referred to. What then
has been the result to the British manufacturer ?
His goods are, it is true, in many cases subjected to
20 per cent., instead of 2J per cent., but the cost to
the consumer has been diminished in a very much
greater degree; and the aggregate of cost, original
price, duty, freight, and charges are now very much
less than when the duty was 2£ per cent., and con-
sequently the legitimate protection to the home
( i.e ., the Canadian) manufacturer is to this extent
diminished. Nor is this all: the interest of the
British manufacturer is not merely tha the shall be
able to lay down his goods at the least cost to the
consumer, but equally is he interested in the ability
of the consumer to buy. Now this latter point is
attained precisely through the same means which
have cheapened the goods. The produce of Canada
is now increased in value exactly in proportion to


the saving on the cost of delivering it in the market
of consumption.” “If the aggregate of cost to the
consumer remained the same now as it was before the
era of canals and railroads in Canada, what possible
difference would it make to the British manufac-
turers whether the excess over the cost in Great
Britain were paid to the Government or to mer-
chants and forwarders ? It would certainly not in
any way affect the question of the protection to home
[i.e., Canadian) manufacturers; but when it can be
clearly shown that hy the action of the Government
in raising funds through increased customs duties,
the cost to the consumer is now very much less,
upon what ground can the British manufacturer
complain that these duties have been restrictive on
his trade ?” “ The undersigned might truly point
to the rapid increase in the population and wealth
of Canada arising from its policy of improvement,
whereby its ability of consumption has been so largely
increased. He might also show that these improve-
ments have, in a great degree, also tended to the
rapid advance of the Western States, and to their
increased ability to purchase British goods. He
might point to the fact that the grain supplied from
the Western States and Canada keeps down prices
in Great Britain, and therefore enables the British
manufacturer to produce still cheaper. But he
prefers resting his case as to the propriety of im-
posing increased customs duties solely on the one
point, that through that increase, the cost of
British manufactured goods, including duty, has
been reduced to the Canadian consumer, and that
consequently the increase has, in its results, tended
to an augmentation of the market for British
goods.”
Thus far, Mr Galt, and I venture to say that
there are very few lines of the above passage
which are not strictly applicable to the circum-
stances, past and present, of this colony. Have
not we incurred a vast outlay for lighthouses,
harbor accommodation, railways, clearing of rivers,
&c. ? Was there not a tifne when the cost of car-
riage of goods from Melbourne to Mount Alex-
ander (a distance of only 72 miles) was £l3O a ton!
Is not the cost now Bss a ton ? Does not this re-
duction cheapen the cost of imported goods to con-
sumers all over the colony, and give extra value to
our colonial produce in the English market ? Does
not this at once greatly benefit the merchant, the
manufacturer, and the squatter ? Is it too much
to say that we should make all contribute to the cost
of what so greatly benefits all ? Unless we do
this, how, as against colonial manufacturers and
artisans, are we to justify these great improvements
at all ? Upon our own principles of free trade,
might not colonial manufacturers and artisans have
said when these improvements were first projected,
“ why is our industry to be taxed for the purpose
of annihilating the natural protection we possess ?
In other words, why are we to provide the
means of bringing all foreign industries
more cheaply into competition with our own ?”
We are at present masters of the situation, and is it
consistent with the “ let alone ” principle we so
frequently hear advocated, that the State should
make lighthouses and railways, and improve rivers
for foreign merchants, and for our own colonial
importers and exporters, and charge nothing for
these advantages ? Is it free trade that such
bounties in such shapes should he provided for
foreign industries exclusively at our own ex-
pense ? It is idle to say that the State is paid for
providing these facilities to commerce, for we do
not get back in the harbor dues and railway fares
interest on the outlay, much less any profit on the
work. So also, if it he said that our artisan gets
the benefit of this cheapness in common with other
purchasers, he will tell you that the thing might as
well he dear if he cannot buy it at all; and that he
cannot buy it at all if cheapened English labor has
cut him out of employment altogether, or has
greatly reduced his purchasing power. It comes to
this, then, that, as Mr Galt puts the Canadian case,
so may we fairly put ours. We have by these vast
works greatly cheapened the way of fore gn im-
porters to our market. By thus reducing the cost,
we have increased the demand. If we charge
foreign importers nothing for this benefit either
in toll or in customs duty, we as effec-
tually provide them with a bounty on their
labor at the expense of our colonial labor, as if we
had made them a present of the money with which
the improvements have been made. On the other
hand, if we take from them, in the shape of duty,
only a fourth or a fifth of what is saved by reason
of these improvements, we charge them only for
less than the value received by them, we, at the
same time, provide ourselves with the means of
carrying out further improvements for our joint
further benefit. We do no violence in any direction
to any principle of political economy. We do not
allow the poor Brighton or St. Kilda market gar-
dener to bring his produce to the Eastern Market
without paying the St. Kilda toll. Why do we
impose this toll ? Because we have made a
good road, for which, we tell him, he must
pay. If this be a good answer for him, is
it a bad answer to the foreign manufacturer or
merchant, or his commission agent here ?
Ask the market gardener whether he would rather
be without either road or toll, or enjoying the one
as the consideration for the other. Ask the city ware-
houseman, in Cheapside, whether he would rather
have a free port here, and cost of carriage £lBO a
ton to Castlemaine, or pay 10 per cent, at our port
and see his goods whipped to Castlemaine in a few
hours and at a cost of a few shillings, where, in the
olden time, he paid many times more than as many
pounds. We know very well what the answer would
be.
Thus far, then, it will be seen that in the
above observations on Mr Russell’s statement of the
Canadian case, I have dealt merely with the position
that customs duties, apart from all considerations of
free trade or protection, can be made the most con-
venient and expeditions means of advancing the for-
tunes and prosperity of a new country. In such a
case, and in this view, taxation is raised and ex-
pended for the country, as we raise and expend it
for a municipality—namely, that Governments may
do those things which in new countries, by reason
of the scarcity of capital, can never be undertaken
by private enterprise. There is no absolute rule,
and there can be no absolute rule as to what things
shall be undertaken by a Government. The rule
must be flexible to circumstances. In England
private companies can make the railroads. In these
colonies we should as yet have had no railroads to
the interior had not Government undertaken the
work ; and I presume that no man now listening to
me would unmake the Ballaarat and Murray River
railways, and return the money they cost, even if
he could do so. Now, related to the subject of
taxation, is another topic which has often been


referred to by public men among us* and about
which I observe much misconception prevails. The
topic I refer to is Mr Mill’s so-called and miscalled
“ exceptional instance ” to the doctrine of free
trade. Before I offer a single observation on Mr
Mill’s words, allow me to read them to you :
“ The only case (writes Mr Mill), in which on mere
principles of political economy, protecting duties
can be defensible, is when they are imposed tem-
porarily, especially in a young and rising nation, in
hopes of naturalising a foreign industry, in itself
perfectly suitable to the circumstances of the coun-
try. The superiority of one country over another
in a branch of production often arises only from
having begun it sooner. There may be no inherent
advantage on one part, or disadvantage on the other,
but only a present superiority of acquired skill and
experience. A country which has this skill
and experience yet to acquire, may in other
respects be better adapted to the production than
those which were earlier in the field ; and, besides,
it is a just remark that nothing has a greater
tendency to promote improvements in any branch
of production than its trial under a new set of con-
ditions. But it cannot be expected that individuals
should, at their own risk, or rather to their certain
loss, introduce a new manufacture, and bear the
burden of carrying it on until the producers have
been educated up to the level of those with whom
the processes are traditional. A protecting duty,
continued for a reasonable time, will sometimes be
the least inconvenient mode in which the nation can
tax itself for the support of such an experiment.”
Now, in this passage we see that Mr Mill ignores
no economical principle, either precedently or sub-
sequently laid down in the same work. He rests his
suggestion—to use his own language—on “ the mere
principles of political economy.” He is in pursfiit
of the best means of securing the cheapest market.
With this object, he is of opinion that, on large and
long views of things, it may sometimes be wise in a
community to tax themselves for the purpose of
establishing manufactures among them which, with-
out such early fostering, might never be able to
struggle into existence at all. A protecting duty,
then, “on the mere principles of political economy,”
can be only, as it were, the present price where-
with we buy our way into a cheaper home
market, than any which we can command abroad.
Mr Mill, here, does no more than submit
an abstract proposition, leaving the application of it
to particular societies. Of course, it is for these
societies to consider the whole of the circumstances
of any proposed application of the proposition;
and, having balanced the present cost against the
presumed future advantage, then to determine how
far it will be ultimately advantageous to foster its
own industries. That Mr Mill’s proposition may be
unwisely, as well as wisely, acted upon, of course,
cannot affect the intrinsic soundness of the proposi-
tion itself. Why do I dwell on Mr Mill’s proposi-
tion on the present occasion ? For two reasons :
one personal to myself; another, purely in relation
to the public interest. I have been unjustly ac-
cused of having, on a former occasion, referred
“ derisively ” to this passage of Mr Mill. My
words stand, and they speak for themselves. I
said that Mr Mill’s equally eminent father—l speak
only from memory, as I have not any report of my
former lecture at hand —had not submitted, or relied
on such a proposition as the one under notice. I
certainly should feel pained, could I, by inadvertence,
have expressed myself in terms other than those of
deep respect towards a man whom I regard as. not
merely one of the wisest men of this or of any time,
but as one who has ever proved himself the intrepid
champion of moral truth, howsoever his champion-
ship may have brought him into collision with the
strongest and most intrenched prejudices of his day.
Craving pardon for thus obtruding my own humble
personality into this discussion, I proceed to my
second reason for calling attention to the so oft-
quoted passage I have read. It must be apparent to
any candid mind that, if Mr Mill’s proposition can
ever be properly applicable at all, it must be in young
countries; in countries of, it maybe, great and
peculiar, yet untried and undeveloped natural capa-
bilities. I do not say that Victoria is a country
where such experiments as Mr Mill suggests
should as yet be extensively entered upon;
but I will unhesitatingly say that, could clear
cases be made out for such experiments,
I would at once vote for them, and, in
doing so, I should not only not be violating any
sound principle, but I should be advancing the ulti-
mate objects of the science of political economy
itself. What are the probabilities of such experi-
ments ever becoming expedient in this country ? To
answer such a question, we must carefully study our
society, its component elements, and the circum-
stances by which our people are surrounded: I am
here to speak my own sincere thought, and if I tread
on the toes of colonial self-love, I apologise by
anticipation, and pass on. We so often indulge in
the pleasant exercise of praising ourselves, that, by
way of corrective, we may do no harm by standing
for a moment or two at the confessional. If it be
asserted that our colony is “ the brightest jewel in
the British Crown,” that our golden resources are
marvellous, that our progress has been wonderfully
rapid, and that we are entitled—-especially when
taken at our own valuation—to a good many notes
of admiration from tli|; world in general, I sup-
pose all this must, as usual, be admitted.
But there are other things which, I think,
must also be admitted. Our brightest
jewel has some very unpleasant spots upon it. What
do you think of that tarring and feathering busi-
ness, and of the occasion which led to
it, at the Adelaide Lead, the other day ?
Is it pleasant to find Christian miners trying
to smoke each other to death in their respective
claims? Are “ skull-bankers” an agreeable section
of our fellow-citizens ? Many of you do not know
what a skull-banker is. I did not myself know the
nature and attributes of a skull-banker, until they
were explained to me some time back by the hon.
W. J. T. Clarke. A skull-banker is afspecies of the
genus loafer, half-highwayman, half-beggar. He is
a haunter of stations, and lives on the squatters,
amongst whom he makes his circuit, affecting to
seek work, and determining not to find it. A dozen or
so of these skull-bankers were some time back congre-
gated on a run of Mr Clarke’s, and when I, in the
Supreme Court, asked a witness (a resident on the
station) who these men were, he justified their pre-
sence there by saying “ they were Mr Clarke’s
friends.” But the peculiarity of this friend-
ship was that whenever Mr Clarke made his
appearance at the station, the whole of these
guests used to acknowledge the arrival of their
patron and benefactor by taking to flight and hiding
themselves in a dry creek. Again, look at another
class of men among us, commonly called


“ bolters.” The most experienced police magis-
trate in this city, many months back, called upon
me to represent (and to consider the mode of dealing
with) the great and constantly growing evil of hus-
bands and fathers leaving their wives and helpless
children a burthen on the community at large.
Does not this state of things necessitate the
encouragement of reformatories, of industrial
schools, of benevolent asylums,.and of young ladies
hunting modest young gentlemen about at hospital
bazaars, on a scale which may be inevitable in an
old and population-burthened country, but which
surely ought not to be necessary in a young com-
munity like ours ? Does not this too
common disregard of the ties of blood pro-
duce much crime and demoralisation, the
necessary results of broken up families,
and of their consequent misery and destitution ?
These questions will only admit of one answer, for
the facts which prompt the questions are so patent
that our very familiarity with them dulls our appre-
hension of them, and causes us to overlook their
injurious effects on society at large. Independent of
these terrible evils, however, I do not consider that
he is a colonist whose years are spent in oscillating
backwards and forwards between Victoria and New
Zealand; between summer diggings in the one
colony, and winter diggings in the other. But would
he do this were he able to do anything better ?
Ought we not, therefore, to be astute to increase the
number, and to extend the variety of trades and
employments for our people, wherever we can do so
consistently with the general interests of the country ?
Mr Mill's doctrine becomes worthy of grave considera-
tion, when we are suffering under such anti-social
phenomena as I have here pointed out. To eradicate
these evils, if we could, were a work worthy indeed
of the wisest Parliaments and the most paternal
Governments.
I fear, however, that such evils are unavoid-
able whilst the elements of our com-
munity exist in their present proportions. We
have over 80,000 miners grubbing all the year
round for gold. These not being enough, we offer
rewards for the discovery of new gold-fields, that
we may take security, as well as we can, against
the commonly recurring flights of miners to other
countries, such as Port Curtis, New Zealand, or
Nova Scotia. At the same time, we have only
some 1100 pastoral tenants of the Crown. When
we contemplate these 1100 pastoral tenants side by
side with these 80,000 miners, can we fail to be
struck with the amazing disproportion of able-
bodied men devoted to a pursuit at once very
exciting to ordinary imaginations, and not very
much tending to fix any man’s affections
to any particular spot? A farmer may and
perhaps generally does more or less love the field
he has tilled ? Can the miner love his worked out
claim, still less the claim which has disappointed
his hopes ? The expression “ new rush ” goes a
great way towards describing this mining section of
our people. The calm, patient and provident house-
hold virtues have not here a very congenial home.
Gambling is so large an. element in the miner’s pur-
suit, that all the social vices and defects incident to
gambling naturally become prominent in such a
condition. The intense and morbid craving for
gold which appears to be generated of constantly
alternating success and failure, seems ir many men
altogether to deaden the moral sense. These are
too commonly the men who abandon wives and
children to inevitable starvation, but for the bounty
of society at large. Is it at “ Sailor’s Gully,” or
“ Murderer’s Flat ” that we can expect to find the
simple, pious, reverent life which may exist in the
poorest societies, and of which Bums gives us so ex-
quisite a picture in his “Cottar’s Saturday Night?” No.
The diggers’ and mining speculators’ Saturday night
will, I am afraid, seldom do for a companion
picture. Come even down to Melbourne, and inspect
the mining speculator there ; can you, without fear
and trembling, contemplate that special convocation
of politic dealers in scrip who seem to live their
active lives near the Chamber of Commerce, and who
blockade that part of the pavement, as they discuss
the live-long day at high pressure the last telegram
from Ballaarat, and incessantly give and take the
correctest information with high relish, and with an
appetite which is never sated. Have you ever been
to the Polytechnic, in Regent-street, London, and
seen in that instructive institution the drop of water
magnified, I forget how many thousands of times,
upon a large illuminated circular plane, by way of
giving you accurate and philosophical impressions of
what you are in the habit of swallowing every day of
your life, without suspecting it ? You remember
the myriads of monstrous things, almost all
stomach, and with any number of eyes, and legs,
and tails, and of all imaginable shapes and modes of
motion, and which seem to exist only for the great
purpose of swallowing each other whole all day
long in a distracting-no-system of society, in which
every body swallows who has the power,
and he remains unswallowed who can. If you
have ever seen all this, take another glance at the
outside of the Chamber of Commerce when next you
pass, and see what it reminds you of.
But, turning from the moral aspect of this
mining pursuit, is it at all clear that the phy-
sical benefit ultimately accruing to Victoria from
the business itself will afford compensation for
the evils I have referred to? I think that the
history of other auriferous countries will justify
many doubts on this point. Upon reflection, it
seems scarcely possible to understand how any
mere gold country can, for any long period
together, be a rich country. “ This yellow slave,
this ever fresh, young and delicate wooer, this visi-
ble god,” as Timon calls it, is after all only a
better sort of guano to the people among
whom it is found. Every ounce that is exported
leaves the country by so much less for ever, just as
if such ounce had never existed. It has been ex-
changed for so much brandy and slops. The digger
has lived his troubled and feverish life for the com-
fort of the Chamber of Commerce, the English mer-
chant, and the English manufacturer. When the
gold is gone the digger must go too, or turn to some-
thing else if he can find anything else to turn to.
For his so-called wealth is simply fugitive, and a
gold country worked out is, unless other interests
have sprung up during the operation, worse off than
a country which never had gold within its soil. Re-
garded in this light, Mr Carey, an eminent political
economist of America, would argue that nothing but
preliminary protection, pending the growth of new
interests, could save such a country from even-
tual bankruptcy and ruin. For Mr Carey con-
tends that even agriculture, by itself, in a
new country —and he instances some of the Eastern
States of America —cannot in the long run hold its
own against manufactures, in the open markets of
the vorld; and he puts his position in such away


as to elicit from Mr John Stuart Mill a very re-
spectful and well considered answer. Mr Carey
says this; that, inasmuch as all soils, even the
richest, sooner or later wear out, the American
farmer with each successive crop is deprived of a
certain proportion of his capital, viz., the produc-
tive power of his land; that the crop, therefore,
which he exchanges against foreign manufactures
represents not merely the annual income or revenue
from his land, hut comprises also portion of the
land itself; that, therefore, sooner or later, the
farmer will have nothing left to exchange against
foreign manufactures, and that in the case put,
foreign trade must some time or other cease. Mr
Mill appears to be somewhat pressed by
this case, and he meets it thus. He
contends that the alleged gradual deteriora-
tion of the land can be corrected by art;
that its exhaustive productiveness can he
renewed ; and that for the effecting this renewal the
farmer can import manure. In making this sugges-
tion, Mr Mill seems to be affected by a doubt whe-
ther it would pay a farmer to import a bulky article
of freight like manure, and he therefore endeavors
to vindicate the reasonableness of his suggestion by
remarking that all which is most potent and valu-
able in manures, viz., the phosphates, lie in nar-
row bulk, and may be inexpensively carried. This
suggested importation of manure is doubtless a
merely practical question, and some farmers may
give it for Mr Mill, some for Mr Carey. But it
must be observed that the above answer of Mr Mill
to Mr Carey’s case is the best answer with which
Mr Mill seems to be provided. If Mr Mill’s mode
of meeting Mr Carey’s position should, however,
fail in actual practice, it does not follow that Mr
Carey is right. In such extensive territories as
the States, land worked out, or partially worked,
might be allowed to lie fallow until it had recovered
the fertility of which man had deprived it, and thus
nature would as it were replace the exhausted capital
of which Mr Carey speaks.
But, whatever may be the result of this con-
troversy in relation to Mr Carey’s agricultural
instance, there can be no doubt whatsoever that
Mr Carey’s observation, that international trade
cannot be permanent where the actual capital of
one country is exchanged against the steady and
ever recurring industrial income of another country,
has much more, and even conclusive, force when
applied to gold. For gold is neither manu-
facture, nor is it an annually recurring product,
like the harvest, the wool-clip, or the vintage ; and
as, therefore, it cannot be denied that, sooner or
later, our gold-fields must he like a tale that is told,
it is a matter of public concern to offer the utmost
facilities for the miner to transfer himself to the
farm, the factory, and the workshop. At present he
is too frequently a wanderer on the face of the earth.
But the disciples of the “let alone school” may
exclaim, as indeed they have often exclaimed,
“ There is no cure for this. Diggers must and
mil continue to rush about, and they have no dis-
position, nor can you ever induce them to turn to
anything else.” This answer cannot be accepted as
satisfactory, until it can be shown that we have at
any time since the gold discoveries afforded
the miner any inducements, or even faci-
lities for turning from mining to any other
pursuit, or for dividing his energies between mining
and farming, or some other business more healthful
to mind and body than working in a drive. Among
BU,OOO miners, consisting of an infinite variety of
men, many of whom have merely temporarily trans-
ferred themselves from other pursuits to this of
mining, there must be, as among any other equal
number of persons, men of every possible variety of
tastes and capability. Have we ever sought to
fasten these men to the soil ? Have we offered them
facilities for becoming freeholders ? As the busi-
ness of gold-digging must at some time or other
come to an end, or become so unprofitable and
precarious as to he followed only in connection
with some other less uncertain pursuit, are
we wise in constantly regarding this industry as a
permanent one, when we know that in its very nature
it can be only temporary ? For years past our produce
of gold has been falling off, and therefore, should we
not at least, especially on free trade principles, re-
move all impediments in the way of the miner using
his present industry as the means of rising into
some other calling, which might give us a settled
citizen in exchange for a very hard working, and
frequently reckless wanderer ? What until very
lately has operated to prevent, not merely miners,
hut all other classes, from so changing their
occupations ? I answer, our entire land
system has thus steadily operated down to
the time of the passing of the new Land Act
now under administration, and which even
yet is on its trial. Therefore, it was that a few
moments hack I glanced at our extraordinary society,
composed, among other elements, of 80,000 miners,
alongside, as it were, of some 1100 squatters. I
have endeavored, in perfectly good faith, to give a
rapid sketch of the too common condition of the
digger; let us, with equal good faith, now turn our
attention to the squatter.
It cannot be denied with truth that for many
years our squatters have been a somewhat
privileged class. They have had vast tracts
of land at an almost nominal rent; some of
them have grown and powerful (that is,
powerful in that kind of power which riches confer) in
the enjoyment of these advantages. I believe that with
many of them the beau-ideal of a great country is
a country which begins by handing over the bulk of
its territory to eleven hundred persons, and ever
thereafter respectfully buys its beef and mutton
from these elevated eleven hundred. lam disposed
to think that we have a number of banks here which
devoutly believe this to be a highly satisfactory
arrangement. They have substantial reasons for so
believing. Much of their business consists of ad-
vancing on squatting properties, and in renewing,
and renewing, or abruptly putting up, accord-
ing to the position of the squatter; whose
position, in its turn, must depend upon times
and seasons, as upon his own industry and
prudence. There are no droughts in a
banker’s ledger. There, interest grows all the year
round, defiant of scab and foot-rot. The bright
consummate dividend of twenty per cent, is, in large
measure, made what it is out of our Australian soil.
It solaces the benevolent hearts of many absentee
gentlemen, living in elegant mansions in the polite
neighborhoods of Kensington and Tibumia. We are
told that all flesh is grass, and if this be so I am
very certain that a large quantity of London
flesh at this very moment is Australian grass. In
short, the squatter, in many instances, is the mere
bailiff of the banker, and the banker is squatter
in disguise. The Australian banker is fre-
quently a wolf in sheep’s clothing, without


prejudice to his becoming, whenever neces-
sary, good honest wolf. In so far as his
banking personality does its direful arithmetic be-
hind the bluff, smiling, pale-ale-consuming, and only
partially conscious squatter, the banker is genuine
wolf, and his clothing is the sheepskin of his ' pas-
toral friend. But when things go wrong, and when
drought-withered station on the one hand, and the
ledger on the other, will not balance, and the
squatter has his credit stopped, and tremblingly
calls for his account, and has it smilingly handed
to him and finds E.O.E.—venerated and cautious
capitals—that his account is closed, and himself
closed with it, then the banker at once appears and the
scene changes. Flocks and stations having gone
down the maw of banker, it is of course time for,,
squatter and banker to part. Squatter pays his ad-
dresses to Mr Noel—banker to Kaye and Butchart.-
Kaye and Butchart announce that “they have the
honor to be instructed, &c.,” and so the game goes
on—with a sort of everlasting fee-fa-fo-fum, banker
always smelling the blood of all sorts of English-
men (without prejudice to other nationalities) who,
be they alive, or be they dead, have their p i storal
bones perennially ground to make the banker’s bread.
In the reference I have thus made to the relations
between bankers and squatters, let it not be sup-
posed for a moment that I am for encouraging any
narrow jealousy of capital, or that I think English
money of itself more injurious in this colony
than any other money. But I am certainly
under a strong impression that this squatter and
banker relation involves some of the evils which
existed in Ireland before the passing of the Encum-
bered Estates Act. A largely mortgaged estate has
generally a sort of blight on it. A mortgagor can-
not improve if he would; a mortgagee will not im-
prove if he can. A mortgagor’s solicitude about
meeting “ interest,” confines his attention to fat
stock, and he has hardly a thought for bipeds ; a
banker-mortgagee thinks only of the accounts in
the ledger. You, therefore, see few indications
of civilisation on an Australian squatting sta-
tion. What you might see under more favorable
circumstances, you may find sketched by Sir
Philip Sydney in his “Arcadia.” Let me cut out
the delicious little picture, for the sake of the con-
trast. “ There were hills which garnished their
proud heights with stately trees ; humble valleys
whose base estate seemed comforted with refresh-
ing of silver rivers ; meadows, enamelled with all
sorts of eye pleasing flowers : thickets, which being
lined with most pleasant shade, were witnessed so
too by the cheerful disposition of many well tuned
birds : each pasture stored with sheep, feeding with
sober security, while the pretty lambs with bleating
oratory craved the dams’ comfort: here a shepherd’s
boy piping as though he should never be old : there
a young shepherdess knitting, and withal sing-
ing, and it seemed that her voice comforted her
hands to work, and her hands kept time to
her voice’s musick.” Put beside this sheep station
of Sir Philip Sydney one of our banker-nursed
stations, garnished with “ skullbankers.” In place
of the shepherd’s boy, piping, as though he should
never be old, most of our shepherds look as if
they had never been young. And as for a shep-
herdess, how much would a bank manager advance
upon her ? Of what use are shepherdesses in Aus-
tralia, when you cannot put them into an inventory
and hand them over with the rest of the stock on
the establishment; and how could shepherdesses
knit and sing here on damper and beef and Barrett’s
twist, and under the almost dog-like domicile of a
slab hut ?
I am unable, therefore, to feel any sort of regret
that the present state of things pastoral is likely
soon to .pass away. Equity, free trade, com-
mon sense, civilisation, the required variety of
human pursuits—nay, even religion and morality,
demands that that state of things shall cease. Equity
demands it on tolerably clear grounds. The squat-
ter and banker between them have had the land for
many years on almost their own . terms; and
it is my purpose to show that, according to
my apprehension, these terms are not only in-
consistent with equity, but that they do also
expressly violate that spontaneous develop-
ment of society, and those principles of free
trade about which we have lately heard so much.
When the advocates of free trade assert it to be so
very good a thing, they of course mean that it is a
very good thing all round—not a very good thing
merely for miners and mechanics, and a very bad
thing for bankers and squatters. Assuming that
they are thus far consistent, I assert,, and propose
to show, that there has never yet been any-
thing like free trade in land in this
colony If, further, it can be shown
that squatters and bankers have become, and propose
to continue, wealthy by reason of this violation of
the principle of free trade in their favor, is it
quite modest that the men in this position should be
so specially demonstrative in favor of enforcing free
trade on every other class but themselves ? That there
has never been free trade,in land in this colony the
short history of our land system will show. What
is that history ? As there are many new arrivals
among us unacquainted with the facts, they may be
given in few words. Before the year 1831,
free grants in New South Wales were made to
settlers in consideration of their taking charge
of convicts. This practice is commonly re-
ferred to as “ the assignment system.” The
grant was proportioned to the number of convicts
assigned. In the year 1831, Lord Ripon’s regula-
tions for the abolition of free grants, and for the
sale by auction of all Crown lands, were first pro-
mulgated. Until the year 1839, the minimum price
was 5s an acre for country lands, and in that year
this minimum price was raised from 5s to 12s an
acre, but the change did not extend to lands pre-
viously advertised at the lower price, of which there
was a large quantity at the time of the change. In
the year 1841, the system of sale at a fixed rate of
£1 an acre was introduced in the district of Port
Phillip, now Victoria. In 1842, the system of
sale by auction was resumed throughout the
colony at a minimum upset price of 12s an
acre for country lands, with liberty to select, at the
upset price, portions not bid for. In the year 1843
the minimum price was raised to £1 an acre by the
Act of the Imperial Parliament, sth and 6th of Viet.,
ch. 36, with liberty to select at the upset price
country portions put up to auction and not bid for,
or on which the deposit had been forfeited. Chrono-
logically, you have thus in a nutshell the successive
periods of the various changes, from the beginning
of our first land system down to the year 1843. It
would be beside my present purpose to show by
what influences, and with what objects, the present
upset price was first determined on. It is sufficient
to say that it effectually achieved the following re-
sults :—lt at once all but annihilated the land fund;


it secured to the squatters their runs for next to
nothing, as nobody gave, or thought of giving, £1
an acre for bad land in New South Wales,
16.000 miles from England, when at least equally
good land could be bought at the Cape of Good
Hope for 2s an acre, in Canada at 5s an acre, and
for 6d an acre in the territory ceded by the Indians
to the United States shortly before the adoption of
the £1 an acre price in Australia. What wonder,
then, that in the year 1844 the entire quantity of
country lands and town allotments in New South
Wales, inclusive of Port Phillip, sold was only 4259
acres, yielding the insignificant sura of £9174 15s
3d, whilst in 1837, when the population was only
85.000 persons (being less than half the population
in 1844) the amount of town and country lands sold
was 368,695 acres, bringing into the Treasury
£121,962 12s sd. In the year 1847 came out the
celebrated Orders in Council of which you have heard
so much, and which proposed (among other
curious arrangements, exhibiting remarkable
ignorance of the circumstances of the colony),
to confer on the pastoral tenants of the Crown four-
teen years leases, renewable until the land should
be bought for twenty shillings an acre. The net
result of this ridiculous system, the invention of the
perverse ingenuity of Earl Grey, was that the
squatters, practically, before the gold era, had free-
holds in vast tracts of country constituting their
runs. Outsiders never dreamt of giving £1 an acre
for unimproved land not worth 5s an acre, and of
course squatters themselves were not such fools as to
buy that which, in effect, they were already enjoying
for next to nothing. Emigration to Australia all but
ceased, agriculture was discouraged, class animosi-
ties sprang up at such an outrageous state of things,
the squatters strove to obtain the issuing of the
leases, the colonists generally opposing, when
in the year 1851 gold was discovered in Aus-
tralia. This great fact, of course, went a
long way towards practically settling a question
which is perhaps not finally settled yet.
Now, I have thus rapidly taken a retrospect
of our land history for this purpose. I
asserted a while ago that there had never
been free trade in land in Victoria. We
cannot have our common sense outraged by the
assertion that driblets of sales by auction constitute
free trade ; whilst principalities, altogether free
from auction, are occupied by the squatters at a
merely nominal rent. Free trade in land can only
obtain where there is one simple uniform system
for all lands, pastoral or arable, by auction or other-
wise, without partiality or special advantage to any
class of society whatsoever. Where do we find such
a system ? I answer in the United States. There,
the embryo of the future state was to be found in
the settlers of a new territory. The backwoods-
man marched into the forest, and cleared himself
a homestead with his axe. Government followed
him, surveyed, and sold him his land at a few
shllings an acre ; and as this kind of population in-
creased, the territory, in the fullness of time, became
a state, and a member of the Union. The importer
of goods, hard or soft, who said to such a settler,
“ I require you to buy my goods, untaxed at the
Custom House, as I bring them from London, the
cheapest market,” at least addressed a settler who
was allowed to draw from our common mother earth
the means wherewith to pay for such goods. But
when our Australian importer and our bankers and
squatters address in the same terms immigrants
generally, may the latter not reasonably, even as
honest free traders, retort, “ Free trade, if good as
you say it is, must be good for all persons, and should
prevail in all things.” When William the Norman dis-
tributed broad England among his companions
in arms, he did much as the British legislature did,
when it handed over our territory to some 1100
squatters. But the tenants in chief of Norman
William, at the least, sub-let the same land, so that
human creatures lived upon it after all; whereas
our barons people their acres only with cattle and
sheep. Are these barons exactly the authorities to
preach the beautiful simplicity of politico-economical
science ? What right has a six hundredth part of
the population first to appropriate almost the whole
of the land of a country, and then to require the
other five hundred and ninety-nine parts of the
community to buy in any particular market, when
they have never been allowed freely to grow produce
wherewith to pay for their purchases ?
These considerations are not urged in any
hostile spirit to the squatters, among whom
are many very sensible, just and reasonable
men. I desire only to call attention to the
inconsistency of the same men, in the same
society, calling out for what they term the
natural system, as applied to dealings with mer-
chandise, and as lustily advocating the artificial
system as respects land. It is certain, however,
that this artificial system has been allowed to attain
such proportions under the law that no statesman
can now deal with the land question exactly as he
might have dealt with it in the beginning. It is one
of the inevitable incidents of an artificial system
that it cannot suddenly be abolished without
injustice, not merely to those who have
dealt under the system, hut also to many
more than those directly interested in it.
But, without too roughly interfering with squatters’
runs, we may now hope soon to see the country
more rapidly settled than has been its experience
heretofore ; for the 42nd clause works so well. lam
rejoiced to find, not merely from official reports, but
from the interesting statements of the Age and the
Argus special correspondents, that settlement is
rapidly extending in many districts. New farm
buildings are going up; new fencing everywhere
appearing ; solitudes are becoming peopled; civili-
sation is reclaiming the wilderness; the sum of
human happiness is increasing in the land. But
the year 1870 draws nigh, and once again will the
squatters and their backers fight for a still longer
day. Can we be surprised, ought we even to
feel much disgusted, should they do this ? Every-
where, and in all times, we find class interests
striving to gain the ascendancy over the public
weal. There seems to have been always, at one
period or other, with special modifications, a
squatting question everywhere. The history of the
Gracchi, and of the Ager Puhlicus of ancient Rome,
is in many of its features not unlike our own land
question. Our own forefathers in England, nearly
three centuries back, had their anti-squatting agita-
tions. Mr Francis Bacon—afterwards the great chan-
cellor —brought two liberal land bills into the House
of Commons, and made pregnant speeches
against “ the Lords,” who, as he said, had
“ enclosed great grounds, and pulled down
even whole towns, and converted them to sheep
pastures.” “ For enclosure of grounds,” continues
he, “ brings depopulation, which brings forth first
idleness” —their squatting you see generated skull-


bankers, even as our squatting does, —“ secondly,
decay of tillage ; thirdly, subversion of houses, and
decrease of charity, and charge to the poor’s main-
tenance ; fourthly, the impoverishing the state of
the realm. A law for the taking away of which in-
conveniences is not to be thought ill or hurtful unto
the general state. And I should be sorry to see
within this kingdom that piece of Ovid’s verse prove
true, ‘ Jam seges est uhi Troja fait;' so in Eng-
land, instead of a whole town full of people, none
but green fields —but a shepherd and a dog.”
Not less distinct and emphatic on the same mono-
polising evil is Sir Thomas More in his “ Utopia.” I
quote from Bishop Burnet’s translation. Two of the
characters in this work, discussing the then dis-
tressing prevalence of wandering thieves in Eng-
land:—“ There is another cause of it (i.e., stealing)
that is more peculiar to England,” says one of the
speakers. “What is that ?” said the Cardinal. “ The
increase of pasture,” said I—here the author is
apparently speaking in his own person —“ by which
your sheep, that are naturally mild and easily kept
ip order, may be said to devour men, and unpeople
not only villages but towns; for wherever it is
found that the sheep of any soil yield a softer and a
richer wool than ordinary, there the nobility and
gentry, and even those holy men, the abbots, not
contented with the old rents which their farms
yielded, nor thinking it enough that they, living at
their ease, do no good to the public, resolve to do it
hurt instead of good. They stop the course of agri-
culture, enclose grounds, and destroy houses and
towns, reserving only the churches, that they may
lodge their sheep in them.” This must be a
winkle for some of our squatters, and perhaps
Geelong may tremble —“ and, as if forests and parks
had swallowrd up too little soil, those worthy
countrymen turn the best inhabited places into soli-
tudes ; for when any insatiable wretch who is a plague
to his country”—Sir Thomas More, who was a most
pious and conscientious man, had evidently
never heard of the heinous sin of “ setting
class against class ” —“ for when any insatiable
wretch who is a plague to his country resolves to
inclose many thousand acres of ground, the owners
as well as tenants are turned out by tricks—(were
there dummies in those days ?) —or by main force ;
or, being wearied out by ill usage, they are forced
to sell them. So those miserable people, both men
and women, married and unmarried, old and young,
with their poor but numerous families (since
country business requires many hands), are all
forced to change their seats, not knowing whither
to go; and they must sell for almost nothing their
household stuff, which could not bring them much
money, even though they might stay for a buyer.
When that little money is at an end —for it
will be soon spent —what is left for them to
do but either to steal, and so be hanged—God
knows how justly—or go about and beg 9 and if
they do this, they are put in prison as idle vaga-
bonds ; whereas they would willingly work, but can
find none that will hire them, for there is no more
occasion for country labor, to which they have been
bred, when there is no arable ground left. One
shepherd can look after a flock, which will stock an
extent of ground which would require many hands,
if it were to be ploughed and reaped
Since the increase of pasture, God has punished the
avarice of the owners by a rot among the sheep,
which has destroyed vast numbers of them,
but had been more justly laid upon the
owners themselves.” And so the writer pro-
ceeds in the same vein on the same theme,
like a mere Wilson Gray ; and notwithstanding the
fuss Sir James Macintosh and other critics have
made about the beautiful simplicity, and the unbend-
ing integrity, of Sir Thomas More’s character, and
despite the stories about Henry VIII. walking about
the garden with his arm round Sir Thomas’s neck,
I can hardly help thinking Sir Thomas More must
have been considered rather a disreputable charac-
ter in his own day, by the upper ten thousand.
Even as it was, he came at last to have his head
chopped off—perhaps a fitting finale for one who
held such singular, not to say disgustingly radical
views on the “ land question.”
But to come down from the days of Sir Thomas
More to those of the hou. W. J. T. Clarke. Of
course it will he said, as has been said many
thousands of times already, that agriculture will
not pay in Australia ; that sheep and cattle are the
best products for such a land as ours ; that nature
is not to he overruled by man, and that therefore we
ought to allow the squatters to remain in undisturbed
possession. I grant that nature is not to be over-
ruled by man, and that land fit only for pasture can-
not be profitably worked as arable land. But the
persons who stand up so stoutly for nature, on behalf
of the claims of squatters, begin by committing the
very offence they deprecate in others. They have
overruled nature. They commence by dedicating to a
600th part of the community the common heritage
of all, and then say to the rest of the popu-
lation buy in an open market, deprived in large
measure of the natural means of buying in
any market at all. We may be told that we
have no right to mix up such considerations with
the application of the principles of the economists to
our society. I answer that we find them mixed up
already in actual practice, coeval with the original
constitution of our society. We have an artificial
system to deal with, and we have no right to say
that an evil which human error has brought into ex-
istence is to be left to nature to cure, if art can assist
nature in effecting a cure. It is therefore idle
to repeat that such social disturbances of what
but for silch disturbances would have been the
natural current of our colonial industry are
not to be heeded by statesmen when called
upon to apply the principles of economi-
cal science. Special circumstances frequently
call for special treatment; and, in actual practice
applied political economy runs into politics, and
both into morals; a -truth of which Dr. Arnold, of
Rugby, had so clear a perception that I may be
excused for quoting his own words. In the life
and correspondence of this great and excellent
man will be found, in a letter of 23rd January, 1840,
the following passage : —“ I agree with Carlyle
in thinking that they (the Liberal party) greatly
overestimate Bentham, and also that they over-
estimate the political economists generally; not
i hat I doubt the ability of those writers, or
the truth of their conclusions as far as re-
gards their own science ; but I think that the
summum bonum of their science and of human
life are not identical; and, therefore, many ques-
tions in which free trade is involved, and the ad-
vantages of large capital, &c., although perfectly
simple in an economical point of view, become,
when considered politically, very complex ; and the
economical good is very often, from a neglect of
other points, made in»practice a direct evil.” Now,


it may be as well to keep the solid meaning of Dr.
Arnold’s words in mind, not merely on our own
political questions, but even when we come across
some of those impatient and bitter expressions of
disgusted and self-satisfied superiority, which oc-
casionally appear in the colonial press, at what
is denounced as the ignorant and retrograde
policy of Canada on the subject of taxation;
and of America, and other young countries,
on the subject of free trade. May it not be that the
Americans know perfectly well what they are about ?
Can they be so ignorant as not to know that a high
duty per se is worse than a low duty ? Judged by
mere politico-economical lights, a people taking to
protection for its own sake, deliberately will the
partial annihilation of their own productive powers.
I cannot easily conceive of such a case. I think it
less unreasonable to suppose that the Americans,
with full knowledge of the nature and cost of the
means they use, employ them as a mere purchasing
power for attracting as many people from the
old European communities as can be drawn
to the New World. The Americans apparently
imagine that it is not inexpedient to pay a high price
for population, frequently the weakness of an old
country, but always the strength of a new one. If
homestead bills and custom duties draw this popu-
lation to their shores, and if the authors of such
measures and those who are affected by them are
content, I am not aware that any other people have
any right to object. We ourselves buy population
by means which at least equally violate the first
principles of political economy, which should leave
labor, like capital, to flow into or out of a country,
according to the ordinary principle of supply and
demand.
Let all these points of policy and motives of
national conduct, however, be what they may,
every nation guides its affairs as best it can;
and in all countries fit for freedom even errors
ought to be turned to account, as the free play of
responsible government, guided by public opinion,
must always more or less gravitate towards the true
guidance and economising of a nation’s resources.
Have we a public opinion competent to pilot its
way through these intricacies, and among these
depths and shallows of human interests, shifting as
they do, or rather as they appear to do, from time
to time with the gusts of party prejudice or passion?
A momentous question, this ! “ Public opinion.”
What is it ?—where is it ? Who can answer
these questions ? How many even strive to
answer them to their own understandings ? With
difficulty, and only through the aid of statistics can
we attain to some knowledge even of the general
composition of our society as respects ranks and
callings. But when we strive to detect that im-
palpable essence called “ public opinion,” I suspect
we are all, more or less, perplexed, more or less at
fault, and more or less the creatures of prejudice,
and of imperfect, occasional, and seldom altogether
reliable observation. Unless always on our guard
against our own weakness and partial vision, we
are apt to erect our tastes and our dis-
gusts into opinions and principles of action.
Every man is more or less swayed by
mere fragmentary experience, and by isolated
phenomena of character and conduct. For instance,
to explain by an extreme example what I mean. Some
months back, walking home accompanied by a
neighbor, we suddenly came on a prostrate and
motionless human figure, all in white, coiled up in
an angle formed by the abutments of a railway
bridge. The recumbent figure might be dead, or in
a fit, or merely asleep. I and my companion drew
near him, and I exclaimed, judging from his loose
baggy cotton dress, ‘‘Why, he’s a Chinaman!”
The figure, without in the least altering its atti-
tude, returned with an imperfect pronunciation,
which explained his case at once, and set
our minds at ease, “ No, no, Oim not a Choina-
man, Oim an Oirishman.” Radiating alcohol into
the general atmosphere, as was this fellow-citizen of
ours, the indignant remnant of his consciousness
was stung into activity hy my too hasty judgment,
and his outraged nationality vindicated itself by his
claim of the Emerald Isle as the country of his
birth. We walked away, and I could not help
saying to myself, “ There lies a specimen of man-
hood suffrage ; there, with its lodging on the cold
ground, and looking uncomfortably like a houseless
and unregistered dog, is portion of the majesty of
the people—there is an enlightened discriminator
between protection and free trade!” This first
thought was a depressing one. The next thought,
whether a wise one or net, was, I think, but a fair and
just one. How much of this man’s character or
powers did or could I know from this transitory
glance ? The presumptions were against him, it is
true. But Sheridan was once roused up by the
watchman from a similar al fresco slumber, and,
when interrogated as to who he was, gave for an-
swer—the delicious humor of which almost re-
deemed its falsehood—that he was Mr Wilberforce.
Was Mr Sheridan unfit to exercise the franchise?
You will perhaps hesitate to answer this question
in the affirmative. But you may say that
every man who gets drunk, and soberises him-
self sub-Dio, is not a Sheridan. Granted. But,
all I am contending for is this; that mere
casual observations of men afford you next to
no means of ascertaining their general character.
For aught I or you could know, my recumbent Irish-
man might, in his soberer moods, be a man who
could draw nice distinctions. He might on this
occasion have been, for the first time in his life,
drinking too much colonial wine, and it might not
have agreed with him; and, in any view of his case,
we know that he must get sober some time or other,
and go about his business like any other man.
Such snatches and passages of observation as this
one of mine could never justify the conclusion that
the class to which the sleeper belonged was
unfit to be trusted with the power of voting
for one or the other of two parliamentary can-
didates. To come to just conclusions on
such a subject, we must have more extended
observations, and found our final judgments upon a
much wider experience.
Where or how are we to get this experience ?
Why, surely, by striving to take in all the
particulars of which our society is composed;
by giving to each of these particulars / its due
weight in our ultimate judgment, and no more.
To instance again. If your mind is depressed,
and very naturally and justly depressed, by
the sight of a drunkard sleeping off his debauch,
are your feelings not elevated and cheered in much
more than a corresponding degree by the sight of
that procession of healthy, sober, well dressed, stal-
wart men, who, in the pardonable pride of success,
celebrate annually, with banners and high
festival, the eight hours’ system ? Looking, as I
have looked, long and carefully, at the composition


of this procession; and, looking as I have looked,
long and carefully, at the assemblage on the grand
stand at one of our champion races, I am sure I am
unable—and so I suspect are you —to pronounce
which assemblage contains the greater amount of
political wisdom. At what point in the social scale,
going upwards, are we to begin to look for this sort
of wisdom ? The men of Collingwood are not sup-
posed to possess it, because they are so curiously
demonstrative at public meetings. But their whole
lives are not spent at public meetings. The
labor of their hands is perhaps the whole estate
of many of them; and we may feel assured that
they often think seriously enough about that. They
are not always singing of that everlasting march of
old John Brown’s soul. But whatever this general
public may be, and howsoever composed, it is cer-
tain that it is the public which must ultimately be
responsible for the efficient working of our repre-
sentative institutions, and for the general shaping of
our laws. This public may be taught, advised with,
guided; it can never be bullied or driven. It is
fitting that we should bear this in mind, whilst
endeavoring to acquire some clear insight into its
nature and composition.
In making this assertion, I must, in passing,
express my regret that the Argus so frequently
refers to some “ numerical majority,” as a sort of
terrible, blind, and unreasoning power, ever on the
alert to oppress and victimise a wise, rich, and vir-
tuous minority. Surely such a distinction is a mere
figment of the brain. Does anyone here seriously
believe that in Victoria we have any sufficiently
numerous section of the ignorant, the house-
less, or of the dwellers in garrets or cellars,
such as constitute in many old countries “ a
dangerous class?” Are our police cognisant of
such a class strong enough to be a disturbing
quantity in good government, or in society? I
venture to think not. Nor do I believe that
the numerical majority of any particular class
have any interest (although, like every class,
they have their prejudices) alien or antago-
nistic to the just and general interests of so-
ciety at large. How many little freeholders are
there throughout the length and breadth of this
colony all of whom it is certain are ex-
tremely conservative of their little freehold ?
How many thousands of careful working men
are month by month acquiring (despite of the long
locked up lands) dwellings through the numerous
building and benefit societies in operation amongst
us! Axe these people of the sans culotte stamp ?
Are they a likely class to cry out a la lanterns ! or
to throw up barricades against their own trustees ?
I can understand any one calling us all democrats
or all conservatives (excepting, of course, the
thieves), but the distinction insisted on by
the Argus is not easy to comprehend.
The above observations derive additional force
from the consideration that our representa-
tive institutions now rest on an electoral basis
of 110,000 men, of whom 70,000 are ratepayers ;
the residue of 40,000 are men who have a
right to vote under their manhood suffrages; and
many even of these have interests in mines or in
mining claims. We have thus two-thirds at least
who may be said to vote under a sort of property
qualification, which we may reasonably take as
some indication of steadiness, industry and fore-
thought in those who have attained to such a
position. I observe that even in England a tenant
of a house rented at £8 a year is regarded as a safe
man to be trusted with the franchise. There
are probably few, ratepayers here who are not
rated in respect of houses the rent of which is
at least double £B. Mr Archer’s last published
statistics tell us that 585,043 persons are
housed; that four-fifths of them above five
years old can read and write, and that ten-elevenths
of them can read. Both physically and intellec-
tually, then, this our community, as a body, is
made up of material very different from that which
goes to the composition of what is commonly called
“ a mob.” And yet we are told that there is a mob
here, and that it was a mob which, during the last
election, refused to hear Mr Graham Berry in his
defence at Collingwood. Now, I am not going to
attempt a defence of mobs, for, in the first place,
I am not very clear as to what constitutes a mob.
It is a word of rather vague meaning. Johnson
derives it, and no doubt rightly, from mobile, easily
to be moved; and he describes a mob as “ a crowd,
a tumultous rout,” which the buffi of a people
can hardly be. He also gives an extract from
Dryden, which shows how large an interpretation
even that great classic put on the word, in the ex-
pression he uses, “ a mob of kings.” The essence
of a thing called a mob would appear, then, to be its
moveableness, its excitability ; and therefore we
may have well-dressed mobs, and ill-dressed mobs—
moveableness, excitability, being essential to all of
them. When William the Fourth once went down
to the House of Lords to dissolve Parliament, he
was received by a tumultuous assemblage of vociferat-
ing angry peers, who for some moments were a mob.
There may be a mob, then, anywhere, and most
variously composed. There may be a Collingwood
mob who do the thing cheaply with good strong
lungs, and there may be an Exhibition Building mob
who sometimes do the thing more aristocratically
and expensively, with pepper and rotten eggs.
Neither of them, however, is the better for the
tumultuous and merely excitable element, and to be
impartial, we must censure both. But in our cen-
sure let us at any rate discriminate. This suscepti-
bility to being moved may be very various in char-
acter. An instructed mob can seldom, if ever, be
as mischievous as an ignorant mob. The gross and
savage mob of the Lord George Gordon riots was,
I take it, very different from any that could
be got together in our own day. Fun, rather
than malice, seems to be the principal char-
acteristic of our Victorian gatherings. Fun is cer-
tainly the principal characteristic of a Collingwood
convocation. Let us glance back at Mr Graham
Berry’s meeting, held, I think, during the late ge-
neral election. The comic element of that occasion
lay in Mr Berry’s proclaimed grievance that the
meeting were robbing him in not hearing him, in-
asmuch as he had paid for the room. I am inclined
to think that he was in a manner robbed ; and yet
I cannot but also think that the mass of the meeting
were actuated by a mere spirit of downright fun in
thus converting Mr Berry’s room into so rough a
temple for concerted music as it became that night.
Whenever Mr Berry’s own soul was for marching on
to its vindication, the perpetual motion of that old
John Brown’s soul seemed to be always in opposi-
tion. I have been in a few of these breezes myself,
and I think that there are few large bodies of men
in any rank, where not assembled on an
occasion which demands peculiar decorum, who
would be much more grave than a Collingwood


gathering, provided only the comic elements in each
case were the same. There is no malice in these
demonstrations, and it says much for our society
that violence to the person has been almost un-
known both in our parliamentary and our muni-
cipal elections. At the same time, before quitting
this part of my address, I would remind my hearers
of the words of a great statesman and philosopher—
words which may he quite as profitably pondered by
our higher classes as by the demonstrative men of
Collingwood :—“ Men are qualified for civil liberty
in exact proportion to their disposition to put moral
chains upon their own appetites. . . . Society
cannot exist unless a controlling power upon
will and appetite be placed somewhere, and the
less of it there is within the more there must be
without.”
Words full of wisdom, and worthy of being
learned by heart. How many of us can con-
scientiously say that we reach the standard of
moderation here suggested ? Can any one of us say*
so ? Amongst the various appetites by which we
find ourselves betrayed are the appetites for do-
minion, for detraction, for the subjugation of other
men’s wills and actions to our own. How often do
we assail the spirit of liberty in the very act of de-
fending it ? Are we not all more or less tyrants,
frequently without suspecting the fact ? Men
have been burned at the stake, their execu-
tioners believing they were discharging a re-
ligious duty, yvhen they were only feeding the
perverted pride of a crossed will, which by one of
those tricks men’s vanity and self-love can always
play, gets called zeal, enthusiasm, devotion to truth ;
i.e., the truth of the man who urges it on the ac-
ceptance of his fellows. Our civilisation has out-
grown the fires of Smithfield ; but does none of the
spirit which lighted those fires survive ? Can, or
do we all respect in others that liberty of thought we
fliiiin for ourselves ? The men of Collingwood were
rated for boo-booing the speaker who claimed to
address them, and I am not going to attempt to
defend what is plainly indefensible ; but are
there no symptoms of a more deliberate and
still less defensible tyranny among those
who probably claim to he the betters of
the men of Collingwood ? Are there not well
authenticated accounts (from Geelong and other
places) of tradesmen threatened with loss of custom
if they did not vote according to the dictation of the
threateners ? And still worse—have we not seen
this tyranny assailing the private lives of persons
politically obnoxious to the assailants ? And is not
this the worst tyranny of all—the attempted
tyranny over thought—that free thought to which
alone is due almost all the moral good we enjoy in
these latter days ? I think, before we are so hard on
the mote in the Collingwood eye, that some of us
may think a little on the beam in our own.
On what agencies are we to rely for the
holding in check this spirit of tyranny which
is never dead —which only sleeps until roused
up again by an adequate provocative ? We
have the press, the pulpit, the lecture-room, the
infinite talk of men in all the walks of life, the ever-
mutually correcting moral censures, and political
experience of an ever-widening world, brought home
to us by electricity and by steam. Of all these
agencies one of the most potent is the press —non vi
scd scepe cadendo. For it speaks to us daily, and
we hardly want Cowper’s assurance of the efficacy of
iteration in influencing men’s thoughts and actions.
How desirable, therefore, that in every civilised
country, and more especially in every free country,
we should see mirrored in its press the collective in-
telligence, convictions, and purposes of the entire com-
munity. Is the press of Victoria such a mirror? I think
not quite. It is hardly possible for it to be so, for
at the same time that it is only wanted to express
our immediate local necessities, the press of Victoria
must suffer, because it does not carry on its func-
tions under the same conditions which beset and
control the English press. Behind and around
the English newspaper press is a literature un-
surpassed in power and "variety in any age of the
world. And behind this again are many thousands
of men of much literature, who do not write, but
who have nevertheless a great influence over those
who do. The unwritten thought of a country,
with many learned men in it, must always largely
shape, and qualify, and keep within the bounds
of justice, decorum and fairplay, the class of
journalists, even if the latter in so large a
community could ever feel any temptation to abuse
their position. The English press, therefore, will
always mirror everything English, very much that
is imperial, and even cosmopolitan; and, on the
other hand, the English people as a nation, know
only and are influenced only by their own English
press. Press and people therefore grow together,
and each is ever being subdued to the quality of
the other. But here in Victoria, the local press is
not our only press; many of us could not feel
that we were living if the English press
did not come to us by every mail. For
our sympathies and our curiosity extend
beyond the sphere of our immediate interests ; we
would know the central world, though on the outer
part of it; and, therefore, it is not surprising that
Victorians, active and energetic, and congregated
here from the world at large, and most of them
owing fealty to early memories originating elsewhere,
should so frequently utterly ignore the exhortations
of our press, and refuse to recognise its authority.
Touching the general ability of our press, it is
perhaps not too much to say that, upon the whole, it
stands as high as any provincial press out of Eng-
land. As to its independence, its conscientiousness,
its regard for fairplay, I am afraid that no man who
has been much before the public is quite an im-
partial or trustworthy judge on these points, and,
therefore, I shall offer no opinion upon them. But as
I read English as well as Victorian newspapers, I
often fancy that I miss from the latter the nicely
balanced thought, the fine judicial spirit, and the
courtesy and moderation of expression, which, even
in the height of party struggles at home, are ge-
nerally displayed by first-class journals—qualities
which give these journals a certain air of authority
for all classes of readers. I will, however, candidly
admit that the Argus has one contributor, whose
originality and uniform courtesy, together with his
slashing and vigorous style (so like Burke’s in one
respect, as ever hovering between prose and poetry)
always command my respect, and enchain my atten-
tion to the end. Is it necessary for me to saf" that
I can refer to no other person than our much-re-
spected old friend, Tom Stubbs ?
I cannot quit the subject of the press with-
out adverting to an observation I have seen
more than once made in newspaper columns.
It has been said that most of the country
press, and also the press of the neighboring
colonies, have been found in opposition to the


present Government. It must be admitted that,
so far as this is genuine and honest expression of
local opinion, it affords, where the writei's have
mastered their subject—and not otherwise—an ad-
ditional authority against the Government. But I
take leave to question the genuineness of much of
this so-called opinion. It is matter almost of noto-
riety, that much country journalism is Melbourne
manufactui'e ; a manufacture of which you may have
as much as you have money to pay for. Ido not
think that all the members of the Victorian press
would like to make affidavit that even some of the
articles published in neighboring colonies have been
produced altogether independent of Melbourne au-
thorship. Opinions, like light, can be reflected back
upon us from distant surfaces, and a small political
party, under manifold disguises, can apparently mul-
tiply themselves and recruit their strength, as small
theatrical armies sometimes swell their ranks by
bringing across the stage over and over again, in
various garbs, everybody in the establishment, down
even to the money-takers, the carpenters and the call-
boy. If, however, it be true that a majority of our
press is on the one side, as most undoubtedly a very
large majority of the people are on the other side, the
spectacle is certainly an interesting one, for the ma-
jority of the people are, in the main, either right or
wrong. If right, they are wiser than the press
which assumes to instruct them; if wrong, there
is a noble opportunity for the press to convert
them. If wrong, and unconverted, our people are
either unteachable, or our press cannot teach. The
dilemma is one which deserves serious consideration.
One thing is certain, that those who desire to teach
must not exhibit from the judgment seat of journal-
ism too great an anxiety to effect the ends of party.
Let them candidly discuss the views of opponents ;
for, as Aristotle says, “ Among all the searchers for
truth, none completely succeed, and none completely
fail; those from whose conclusions we dissent do us
service, by exercising our intelligence.’’ Is not
this at once modest and true ? And do you not
feel that, could Aristotle come back to us and
edit a newspaper, he would do his work like a
gentleman, and, like a gentleman, too, not at all
confident that wisdom would die with him.
But as time admonishes me that I am trespassing
upon your patience greatly beyond the little hour per-
mitted by custom to the lecturer, it is fortunate
that but one subject remains on which I desire to
offer a few observations. That subject is our
parliamentary Constitution. I wish, and so I am
sure do you, to see that constitution work harmo-
niously and usefully for the public interests. It
may have been an oversight in the framers of our
Constitution to make no provision for the possibility
of a dead lock between the two Houses. But the ab-
sence of this provision entails on both Chambers
an additional necessity for mutual forbearance,
and a mutual endeavor to conciliate opposition. And
as Victoria must now depend entirely on herself for
whatever of political truth or wisdom there may be
in her future policy, I am sure that the honorable
gentlemen of the Council will allow me to assume
that they are not behind any of us in their desire to
advance the interests of a country which, as our
great Intercolonial Exhibition now shows us, has at
immediate command, and bounded by our own seas,
the profuse and various wealth of tropical and tem-
perate climes. To make such wealth available for
millions yet unborn, the works before us seem plain
and simple :—General and sound education for the
rising generation, and the elevation of their moral
character ; the facilitating, by bold and statesman-
like land legislation, the more rapid settlement of
the country; the providing that country with roads,
irrigation, and water supply; the wise promotion
and encouragement of new industries; the steady
subordination of mere sectional interests to the
great general interests of the public at large, seem
to be plain and peremptory duties lying in our path,
and, as man does not live by the material alone, I
would add the adorning and making attractive to
surrounding populations this our capital city of Mel-
bourne ; and last, although far from least, the federa-
tion of all these Australian colonies, and the conse-
quent economising and consolidation of their resources
and strength. On such subjects can there be irre-
concilable differences of opinion among reasonable
men ? On such subjects can there be permanently
one body of opinion for the Assembly, another for
the Coxmcil? I humbly think not. But if there
be such difference of opinion, it is all important
that it should be expressed in both Chambers. As
there must be give and take in politics, an English-
man can always bear being denied a thing, if sensible
and honest reasons only be given for the denial.
But no deliberative body in the woidd, call it by
whatsoever exalted title you may, can command
respect save by the intellectual manifestation of
the power it exercises. We are often told—and
it is a very trite truth after all—that political power,
uncontrolled by conscience and unguided by know-
ledge , is a terrible power for evil. But all history shows
—and our common human nature approves it—that
such power is quite as dangerous in the hands of the
rich as in the hands of the poor ; in the hands of
the pi’osperous few as in the hands of the struggling
many. Therefore, all political power, aristocratic
or democratic, must justify itself to the critical
intellect of the governed, or it will cease to be power.
When the Council checks hasty legislation, it must do
so as if really understanding its work; it must not do
so in still greater haste, and in solemn silence, as we
drink to the memory of departed friends. I am
aware that Mr Fellows, in his speech at the opening
of the Deaf and Dumb Institution, expressed an
opinion that the Council, as well as the Assembly,
might improve by still further approximating to
the deaf and dumb inmates at Prahran; but I think
he does the Council injustice in insinuatixxg that
they have too much to say. At any rate, one of
the most competent, and one of the best informed
among Mr Fellows’s own fellow councillors lately
held an opinion opposed to him on this
very subject; for .only some three years
back, the gentlemen to whom I refer, read to
his fellow legislators the following startling passage,
for the edification, I suppose, of the pastoral in-
terest as represented in that House :—“ They are
all ignorant; all dumb dogs ; they cannot bark ;
sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Yea, they
are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and
they are shepherds that cannot understand. They
all look to their own way, every one for his gain from
his quarter.” Non mens hie sermo. With my critical
and facetious friend (whose lively fancy has perhaps
a little exaggerated here), it seems as if
ordinary language broke down, under the
strong conviction, he did groan withal, and
nothing short of the nervous words, and the strong
colors of Isaiah, sufficed for the portrait. All I can
say is, that I should never have been permitted to
go to such a source for descriptive materials. But I


suppose that, in a bishop’s registrar, is but a choleric
word, which, in a poor outsider like me, would be fiat
blasphemy. In conclusion, I hope I need hardly say
that I have aimed only at one purpose, viz.—fair and
candid discussion in the views I have submitted.
I do not affect any particular devotion to “this
my adopted country,” as the phrase goes —a phrase
wldch is a common form in so many addresses, and
which seems to flow mechanically from so many
lips. But I think that we are all compelled to take
a peculiar interest •in a country which, although
never to be loved as our own until we can change
our nature with our skies, is yet very tenderly re-
garded as the native country of those who are
dearest to us. With his children about him, every
man is a Conservative, unless he proposes to
run away from them. I, therefore, by virtue
of the hostages I have given to fortune, claim
to be as good a Conservative as any one here.
But I mean the wise conservatism which can only
conserve even the good we have, by recognising
and discharging the duties which must ever devolve
on the first occupants of a new country, and the
first founders of a new nation. This distinguishes
our position "from that of any equal number of
people among any of the old populations of the
world. For 1 believe that in the order of Provi-
dence, which in its good time raises and depresses
dynasties and peoples, the legitimate office of
a young land like this is to be the refuge for
the weary and the heavy laden, as well as for
the resolute and the self-reliant, who from
among the crowded and struggling population of the
Old World may desire to cast in their fortunes with
ours. The interests of such a land, and the spirit
of its legislation, are, or ought to be, as large as
the interests of humanity itself; and in dealing with
them we should do so in the reverent spirit of the
old Puritan poet, who, counselling moderation to the
antagonist political forces of his day, pleads for the
solemn interests and the essential truth and
dignity of a human commonwealth, as paramount
to mere forms of its civil life, in the few
grandly simple lines with which, leaving you
to apply them, I bid you good night:—
“ Let not your King and Parliament in one,
Much less apart, mistake themselves for that
Which is most worthy to be thought upon:
Nor think they are essentially the State.
Let them not fancy, that th’ authority
And privileges upon them bestown,
Conferr’d, are to set up a Majesty,
A power, or a glory, of their own!
But let them know, ’twas for a deeper life
Which they but represent,—
That there’s on earth, a yet auguster thing,
Veil’d tho’ it be, than Parliament and King.”
Colonel Anderson rose to propose a cordial
vote of thanks to Mr. Michie for the magnificent
lecture which he had favoured them with.
Captain Saegood seconded the motion, and would
especially record the thanks of the battery on whose
behalf the proceeds of the lecture would be given.
Mr. Michie briefly responded.
The Hon. T. T. a’Beckett, M.L.C., observed, in
rising to move a vote of thanks to the Mayor, that
having expressed their thanks to the Lecturer, it
was fitting that they should also thank their Chief
Magistrate for presiding at the delivery of the
lecture. In doing so they might add to the expres-
sion of their thanks their congratulations on his
having, on the first occasion of his occupying the
chair at a public gathering since his election to the
mayoralty, enjoyed with them so great an intel-
lectual pleasure.
Mr. J. Balfour, M.L.A., said that he cheerfully
seconded the vote of thanks to the Mayor for doing
an act of kindness to a corps which he (Mr. Balfour)
for some time had the honor to command.
The large gathering then dispersed.
[appendix.]
The following is the Letter referred to by the
lecturer in page 4:—
EFFECTS OF THE TARIFF.
TG THE EDITOR OF THE ARGUS.
Sir, —As importers, and also conducting a large
retail trade, we cannot allow to pass unchallenged
the statements made by your special reporter relative
to the effects of the tariff on soft goods. We
altogether deny that the retail customer is paying
the advanced prices mentioned of the several items
given.
The great bulk of this season’s importations,
either entered duty free or paid duties which it was
known would have to be returned, so that in nearly
every case warehousemen were quite satisfied with
former rates ; and with reference to later arrivals, it
is well known to the trade, and felt unfortunately by
the warehouseman, that the unequal nature of the
present absurd tariff, and the competition for
business, prevented their exacting the duties paid,
or any equivalent, except in a few trifling instances.
In the matter of men’s wearing apparel, specially
alluded to, so much is now made in the colony, and
the colonial maker competes so successfully with the
London manufacturer, except in the lowest goods,
that it is impossible to advance the price of the im-
ported goods except at the certain risk of shutting
them out altogether.
Drapers’ stock-most affected by the present tariff
is of the description subject to the whim and caprice
of fashion, and practically it is found impossible to
obtain higher prices for such fancy goods unless
a very much higher duty were imposed. In plainer
and lower goods, where the tariff is felt by the
importer more severely, retail prices remain abou
the same, a sacrifice of profit being made to a cor-
responding extent either by the importer or the
retailer, arising from the unavoidable competition
and struggle for business.
As a proof of my statement, ask any warehouse-
man under which tariff—the past or the present—
he could make the largest profits, and you will see at
once the consumer is not being injured much.
I am, yours, &c.,
IMPORTER.
14th June.
W. FAIRFAX AND CO., PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.




