

VIEWS OF
CARLTON
Melbourne
1902
SQUIRE to VILLAGE INNKEEPER-
"will Reuben, hast thou any good ale?"
REUBEN: "Yea, Squire, some maim good gale."
SQUIRE: "Then bring us out a quart, Reuben."
[Reuben brings out quart-pot, and Squire drains
the pot] "yes, that be real good ale; bring us
another quart!" [Reuben brings another quart.]
SQUIRE [after a long pull, drains the pot ]: "Aye,
real good Stinge, Reuben; real good Stinge!—
I think i‘ll get down and ha'e some."
BREWERY
SANDS & MCDOUGALL LTD.


The Carlton Brewery,
MELBOURNE.
“Wine is but single broth;
Ale is meat, drink, and cloth.”
“Ale is the warmest lining of a naked man’s coat.”
—Sixteenth Century Proverbs.
is thought that a few facts as to the Carlton Brewery will be interesting to those who
* ts brewings to their liking, and that illustrations printed from photographs of the
Brewery will be seen with pleasure.
The principles of brewing are so well known, that detailed explanations are unnecessary.
Making beer is simply a matter of cooking malt, sugar, and hops. Just as one cook will grill a steak


to perfection, while another will utterly spoil its fellow, so one brewer will turn out a clear,
full-bodied, aromatic ale, from materials that another brewer shall convert into a muddy, evil-
smelling liquor. Skill —skill acquired by scientific training—combined with skill that comes by
natural adaptation, are essential to the making of good brewers and good beer.
The Carlton Brewery is of large dimensions, as may be seen from the illustration, Page 6,
taken in 1902, of its frontages to Victoria and Bouveric Streets. Compare this picture with that
on the opposite page, taken in 1867, and the growth of the establishment between those years
may be fairly measured.
The next illustration, on Page 8, shows the frontage to Ballarat Street of one of the
three-storey Fermenting Cellars, and the Engine House. The Chimney Stack is 168 feet high,
and considered to be one of the finest in Melbourne. The interior of the Boiler House is
shown on Pages 9 and 10.
Proceeding to the top of the Tower, which may be seen in the centre of the General
View of the Brewery on Page 6, we have, on Pages 11 and 12, a view of the two great Mash Tuns
in which the malt is infused with hot liquor. These are on different storeys, one immediately
above the other.


When the mash is completed, the wort descends to the Coppers, of which there are four,
each with a capacity of 150 barrels. Here the mash is boiled with sugar and hops. The
illustration on Page 13 depicts two of these large coppers in action.
When the boiling is over the wort descends to the Refrigerator—see Page 14. Through
the interior of the horizontal rows of pipes shown in the photo., a current of iced water is
circulated. The wort flows down over the outside of these pipes, and is thus rapidly cooled to
the required temperature. The illustrations on Pages 15 and 16 show the Refrigerating Machinery
for cooling the water. There are two machines, each having a refrigerating power equal to the
production of 50 tons of ice daily.
The wort then descends from the Refrigerators to the Fermenting Tuns. Page 17 shows
one of the Fermenting Rooms containing 8 Tuns, each of a capacity of 175 barrels. There
are 12 such Tuns in all. Yeast is here added to the wort, to produce fermentation ; and when
this has reached a certain stage the contents of the tuns are run down into the Cellars, where
fermentation is completed, and the finished beer is racked off into the casks which convey it to
the Hotels of the Brewery’s customers. There are 6 such Cellars, their capacity being as follows :
Two of 1,800 barrels each; one of 1,500 barrels; two of 450 barrels each. The illustrations
on Pages 18 and 19 give a fair idea of the spaciousness of each of the largest cellars.


The enormous number of casks used in the brewery necessitate large Cask Washing
accommodation, and the extent of this is well shown on Page 20,
We now come to the Bottling Department. In the Carlton Brewerv the greatest care is
taken that perfect purity shall be secured. The process of Washing is shown on Page 21 : and
of Bottling, Capsuling, &c., on Page 22 ; and of Packing on Page 23.
The Brewery employs its own Coopers. Carpenters. Painters, and Smiths. A view of the
Smithy is given on Page 24.
An output which in the height of the season runs well up to 5,000 barrels per week in
Summer, requires for its delivery many horses and lorries. On Pages 25 and 26 are illustrations
of two stables providing accommodation for 70 horses.
The Prints on Pages 27 and 28 show the Steamer Oscar conveying Carlton Ale across the.
Bay to Williamstown, and the pier on which it is delivered.
The Commercial branch of the business is represented by the Manager’s Room, Page 29,
and the Delivery Office, Page 30. The Counting House is spacious, and well appointed for the
transaction of a great business.






CARLTON BREWERY—FRONTAGE TO BALLARAT STREET.
8






11
CARLTON BREWERY—VIEW OF UPPER MASH TUN.








































STERLING FACTS.
MALT.— The Carlton Brewery in 1902 contracted for
251,000 Bushels of Malt. The barley is bought
in Australia when it can be got, but frequently the
quality" is inferior and the quantity short. Some of
the above Malt is, in consequence, made from Cali-
fornian barley. 251,000 Bushels of Malt
represent 313,750 Bushels of Barley. At a
yield of Twenty Bushels per Acre, this represents
the Production of 15,687 Acres.
HOPS. —The Carlton Brewery uses annually over
700 Bales of Hops. These are nearly all
Australian Hops, of which the Brewery is believed
to be the Largest consumer in the World.
BEER DUTY (Excise ). The Carlton Brewery
hands to the Commonwealth as Excise Duty on
Beer, about £63,000 per annum.
SUGAR DUTY (Customs). —The Carlton Brewery
pays Customs Duty on Sugar of about £15,000
per annum.
Of course it is the public, the Brewery’s patrons, who
pay these duties, which are a heavy tax on the drink of
the toiling masses. In their interest the Brewery
supported the agitation for the
FACTORIES ACT. Under that Act the Carlton
Brewery pays in Wages £ 16,000 per annum.
“Blessing of your heart, you brew good Ale.”
Two Gentlemen of Verona, Act Hi., Scene 1.
“Whoe’er has travelled life’s dull round,
Where’er his stages may have been,
May sigh to think he still has found
The warmest welcome at an inn.”
) Shenstone.


