



Village Council Notes.
Many years ago the British Government in
the British Islands heard about PAPUA and
other lands far away, and they sent men and
ships to these places. When these men came
to Papua they hoisted the British Flag. After-
wards the British King sent Governors, like
Governor Murray, to look after Papua and to
help the Papuans.
If the British Government had not done
this other Governments would have sent men
to Papua, and their flag would have been
hoisted in the land.
Now you know how and why the British
came to Papua.
But listen ! the British King and the British
Government do not now guide and look after
Papua and the Papuan people. They said:
‘ We are very far away from Papua, but our
own true kinsmen (relations) in the land called
Australia are very close to Papua.”
Therefore they gave Papua to Australia,
and the Government of Australia now guides
and looks after the Papuan people, for the
British King.
What is the Papuan Government—what
does it do ?
The Government Councillors now are white
men who make the Government laws.


Q. Who makes these men Councillors ?
A. The Governor of Papua selects (chooses)
them and the Government in Australia says
Yes ” or “ No;
Q. Who are the Council men now ?
A. Mr. Bunting is Councillor for Samarai
side; Mr. Nelsson is Councillor for Woodlark
side; Mr. Guttridge and Mr. Jewell are Coun-
cillors for Port Moresby side; Mr. Turner is
a Councillor for the Missions.
Besides these five men there are eight
Government men Councillors, and they all
help the Governor of Papua to make the laws
for Papua.
Q. Now, who or what is the Papuan Gov-
ernment ?
A. The Governor (Judge Murray) and his
Councillors.
Q. What do these Councillors do ?
A. They help the Governor to make the
laws for Papuans and white men.
Eemember the laws must be obeyed by all
white men and by all Papuans.
The Magistrates are men who see that
everyone—whether Papuan or white man —
obeys the law.
Q. Who makes the Magistrates ?
A. The Governor.
Village Councillors.
Q. Who makes or chooses the Village
Councillors ?
A. The village people choose them. The
Magistrate gives them the badge or mark.


Q. What is their work ?
A. They help the Papuans to understand
-the Government Laws.
They help the Magistrates to understand
the Papuan—their ways and customs.
They teach the people not to fear the
Government.
They teach them why they have to make
roads.
They teach them why they have to carry
for the Government.
They teach them why they have to pay
tax, and why they have to plant coconuts, etc
They teach them why the Government want
the people to grow more and better food.
The Village Councillors know that the
people all like good roads.
The Councillors also know that good roads
help the Magistrates to get about and look
after the people.
The Councillors know that the Govern-
ment want to help the people, and when the
people make good roads and carry for the
Government they are helping the Govern-
ment.
A father knows what is good for his children.
A good Village Councillor knows what is good
for his people.
Government money—where does it come
from?
Tools and clothes and tobacco and food,
timber and engines and a lot of other things
called cargo come to Papua in ships from other


lands across the sea. These things are put
ashore in Samarai and Port Moresby, and the
owners —the men who sent for them—must
pay to the Government a tax on these things
before they take them from the wharf. The
tax is not paid on everything that comes into
Papua; some things are taxed, some things
are not taxed.
The money the Government gets from this
tax on cargo is called IMPORT TAX money,
or COMING IN tax.
This money is put into the Banks at Samarai
and Port Moresby, and the Government uses
it. I will tell you presently how it is used.
Now some things that go OUT of Papua-
are also taxed, and the owners —the men who
send them away to other lands —pay the tax.
Some things that go OUT of Papua are taxed,,
and some things are not taxed. The Govern-
ment gets this tax money too, and because it-
is a tax on things GOING OUT of Papua it
is called EXPORT TAX.
This Export tax money is put into the-
Bank with the Import tax money.
Now you know about the taxes on cargo.
Q. What are they called ?
A. Import Tax and Export Tax.
Q. Why are they called Import Tax and!
Export Tax ?
A. Because IMPORT Tax means COMING
IN Tax and EXPORT Tax means GOING
OUT Tax.
These two taxes you may call Customs
taxes because they are paid to the Govern-
ment Customs men by the cargo owners —the-


Storekeepers, the Plantation men and other
men in Papua. The money from these taxes
is Government money and the Government
put it in the Banks at Port Moresby and Sama-
rai. It is called Government money or
REVENUE. But this money is not enough
for the Government of Papua. The Govern-
ment in Australia know it is not enough, so
■every year they send money to help Papua.
They do not ask the Papuan Government to
send it back; they send it as a gift to help
Papua.
What does the Government do with all
this money?
Answer: They pay the Governor, the
•magistrates, the office men, the surveyors,
and the engineers; they pay the doctors for
looking after the white men; they pay the
Commissioner for Native Affairs and the men
who help him (it is their business to look after
the signed-on labourers); and they pay the
rifle policemen, the village policemen, the
interpreters, the native clerks, the warders,
the boat crews and the carriers. All these
men, natives and white men, get their pay
from the Government money. The Govern-
ment money also pays for the Laurabada
and other Government boats and launches,
and the Government houses and wharves.
Food and clothes too for the police and the
prisoners are paid for out of this Government
money. Some of the money also pays for
the big roads.
Now you know how the Government gets
their money and how it is spent.


NATIVE TAX.
Many, many natives in Papua pay a tax.
You all know about this tax. You pay it
every year to the Magistrate, and the Magis-
trate sends it to Port Moresby where it is-
counted and kept apart from the Government
money.
Q. What does the Government do with
this Native Tax money ?
A. The Village Councillors know what the
Government does with this money. They
know it helps to pay for;—
Native Hospitals.
Medicine for village people.
Native Schools.
Doctors who look after natives.
Garden seeds and fruit trees.
Footballs for village natives.
Pumps that give you better water in your
villages.
Yes, and this native tax money also helps-
to pay for other things for the Papuans: it
pays the baby bonus to women with four or
more children, and it pays for the prizes given
for the best village and the best garden in the
district.
Now you know what happens to the Native-
Tax money. It is all spent on things for the
Papuans.
Assessors.
Assessor is the Government name for the
native who sits in the Court with the Magis-
trate. The Magistrates teach these Native
Assessors all about the laws for the Papuans.


They teach these Assessors how to make
Court.
Q. What is a Native Assessor?
A. An Assessor is a Papuan who is learn-
ing all about Court work.
Q. Why do the Magistrates teach these
Assessors ?
A. Because the Government wants natives
to be Magistrates in the Native Courts of
Papua.
There are no Native Magistrates now. You
have —
Native School Teachers,
Native Carpenters,
Native Priests,
Native Clerks,
and by and by in years to come —not soon —
you will have Native Magistrates.
If Papuan boys want to become good As-
sessors and in time good Magistrates they
must go always to school and learn to read
and write and understand the English lan-
guage because all the laws of Papua are written
in the English language.




VANUGA VELERA GERIA KILA
Rigolo voovagi ge aiki o Beritani Government
na Beritani Moura’i Papua e irau ano raurau ge
kamonagira o. E Jkapura’i aunilimalima botia’i ge
ugura o. E aura Papua’i ge veamai o lanina’i
Beritani pepe ge ugu lakai o. Muliwainai Beritani
YelenaKavana, Governor Murray veaina.ge ugura o,
Papua pene giaoa e Papua aura pene vakavara gena.
Pere Beritani Government na eia pare kalane,
irau Government na aunilimalima Papua’i pegere
ugura, ila geria pepe anoai pere ugu lakaia.
Bwagumona omi ripami rakaveaina e rakaau
gena Beritani aura Papua’i ge veamai o.
lo kamonagi venia wau! Beritani Yelena e
Beritani Government na ewagumonaPapua e Papua
aura ai ge giaorana. Ila na negeiwao “ Papua pe
raurau; ai walawalamai Australia anoai Papua
lana’i.”
Aurana Papua Australia ge venia o, e ewagumona
Australia Government na Papua aura ge giaorana e
vakavarana, Beritani Vele na gena.
Papua Government rakaau e rakaau ge kalana ?
Ewagumona Government Velera au kulokulo,
Government rovara ge kalarana.
Eaina Government Velera e valakaira o ?
Papua Kavana e virigirana, e Papua Govern-
ment e kilana ina pa aikina.
Eaira ewagumona Velera ?
Mr. Bunting Samarai kavana’i ia vele.
Mr. Nelsson Woodlark kavana’i ia vele.


Mr. Guttridge e Mr. Jewell Moupara kav-
ana’i ila ge velera.
Mr. Turner Misionari geria vele.
E imaima aura lara’i Government velera au
ria kaulavaivai. Ila maparara Papua Havana ge
vakavana, Papua rovara pie kala ra.
Rai pe Papua Government ?
Havana (Judge Murray) e ia gena Velera.
E Velera rakaau ge kalana ?
Havana ge vakavana Papua aura geria rova
e au kulokulo geria rova pie kala ra.
lo ugamagi aoa omi e au kulokulo maki rova
pio kamonagi venira. Magistrates ge giaoana
aunilimalima maparara, Papua aura e au kulokulo,
rova pie kamonagi venira.
Magistrates raina e valakaira o ?
Havana.
VANUGA VELERA.
Vanuga velera raina e valakaira o ?
Vanuga aurana ge virigirana; magistrates
vailia ge venirana.
Ila geria inagulu rakaau ?
Papua aura ge vakavarana Government
geria rova pie kamonagira;
Magistrates ge vakavarana Papua aura pie
kamonagira;
Papua aura ge variparana Government kali-
rana paie kali;
Papua aura ge variparana rakaau gena rao-
para ge kalarana;
Papua aura ge variparana rakaau gena Gov-
ernment aura geria ge vuana;


Papua aura ge variparana rakaau gena tax
ge vavoiana, rakaau gena mu ge varorana,
e maau rekea;
Papua aura ge variparana rakaau gena Gov-
ernment ge ririwana aunilimalima au ani-
ani voo e nanama pie varora.
Yanuga Yelera ripara aunilimalima maparara
raopara nama ge ririwana. Ila makina ripara
raopara nama magistrates ge vakavarana pie lakavo
e aunilimalima pie giaora.
Yanuga Yelera ripara Government ge ririwana
vanuga aura pie vakavara, e vanuga aura raopara
nama ge kalarana lanina’i ilana Government ge
vakavarana.
Amana ripana rakaau namana ia nauna geria.
Vanuga vele nama ripana rakaau namana ia gena
aura geria.
GOVERNMENT MONI RAKANA E
YE AM AIN A?
Kamuta aura, rapuga, kuku, au aniani, alavua
e engines maau rekea arara rinaa botiai Papua’i ge
veamai agirana irau anorana rawaparana ge vana-
giagirana. E aura Samaraiai e Moupara’i vuapo
ana’i ge aoalirana ge kila ugurana aura Government
geria tax pie vavoiagira, kapina’i pie apivagira.
Tax ae vavoina au maparara geria’i Papua’i ge
veamaina; au rekea tax e vavoina, au rekea aikina.
Wa moni Government ge apiana e tax gena’i
arana.
Import Tax monina, pa E Veamaina Tax.
E moni e aoana Government Bank aona’i
Samaraiai e Moupara’i, Government ge inagulu-.
agiana roo pana vakilami. Au rekea Papuana ge
aona e vavoirana, au rekea aikina. Government
e tax monina maki ge apiana, arana EXPORT TAX,


qalana rinaa e aona voina. E EXPORT TAX Bank
aona’i e aoana, IMPORT TAX monina ria.
Ewagumona omi ripami RINAA TAX,
Ilara arara rakaau ?
Import Tax e Export Tax,
Rakaau gena ila arara Import Tax e Export
Tax ?
Qalana Import Tax anina B Veamaina Tax,
e Export Tax anina E Uguana Tax.
B taxi luala arara CUSTOMS TAX, qalana
rinaa aura e tax Government Customs aura geria’i
ge vavoirana. Rinaa aura eraa:—
Store ge giaorana aura; Plantation ge giao-
rana aura ; e irau aura Papua’i.
B tax monira pe Government monira, e Gov-
ernment Moupara e Samarai Bankai ge aorana.
Ila arara Government money pa REVENUE. E
moni ai gelegele Papua Government geria. Aus-
tralia Government ripara ai gelegele, aurana rigolo
maparara’i moni ge ugurana.
Papua aura pie vakavara gena. liana Papua
Government ai ge renagirana pie uguwaikulera j ge
ugurana no venugagi vi auna Papua aura pie vaka-
vara gena.
Government e moni maparara raha ge kalagi
iwana ?
Kavana, magistrates, office aura, topea aura, e
engineers, doctor aura ge vavoirana au kulokulo pie
giaora, Commissioner for Native Affairs e gena
vakavara aura ge vavoirana; (ila geria inagulu
“ signed” aura ge giaorana); polisimani ma pitina,
vanuga polisimani, karo vavanagi aura, Papua aloalo
melora, warder aura, boti crew aura, e ge vuavuana
aura ge vavaoirana Aunilimalima Papua aura e au
kulokulo.


Government geria moniai aqara ge apirana.
Government moni Laurabada e irau Government
boti e lonisi makina, e Government numara e vuapo
e vavoirana. Polisimani e veligo numa aura aria
an aniani e rapuga. Government monina anana
ge vavoirana. Ewagumona omi ripami rakaveaina
Government geria moni ge apirana, e rakaveaina ge
vavoirana.
PAPUA AURA GERIA TAX.
Papua aura voovagi tax ge vavoirana. B tax
omi maparami ripami. Rigolo maparara magistrate
go vavoiana, e magistratena Moupara’i e uguana ;
wanai ge aiana, e Government monina ge ai kouana.
Government e Papua aura geria tax moni raka
ge kala’gi iwana ?
Vanuga velera ripara Government na e mon-
ina ge kala’gi iwana. Ila ripara aura
voovagi kiana ge vavoiagiana; aura
eraa: —
Papua aura geria Hospital.
Papua aura geria mulamula.
Papua School.
Doctor aura Papua aura ge giaorana.
Ara vuavuana e au upu vuara.
Football Papua aura geria.
Pump nanu namana omigemi vanuga’i
go rawalirana.
Ina, e Papua aura tax moni ma au rekea Papua
aura geria e vavoirana; aura eraa: —moni melo
vaivai pa voo vavinera geria’i e vavoirana ; vanuga
nama iwa e araa nama iwa voira ge apiagirana.
Ewagumona omi ripami tax moni raka ge
kala’gi iwana. Papua aura geria aura mo ge
apiagirana.


ASSESSORS (MAGISTRATE GBRIA
YKAYARA AURA).
Assessor pe Government arana Papua auna
Court aona’i magistrate ria e aluna. Magistrate
na e Papua aura Papua rovara ge variparana.
liana e assessors ge variparana Court pie kala’gi
iwa.
NATIVE ASSESSOR rai?
Assessor pe Papua auna Court inagulu e
varipagiana.
Rakaau gena magistrates e ASSESSOR ge
variparana ?
Qalana Government ge ririwana Papua aura
pie Magistrates Papua aura Court aora’i.
Ewagumona Papua magistrate aikina.
Magemi: —
Papua vevaripa aura;
Papua kamuta aura;
Papua venakau;
Papua aloalo melora,
e roo wau, rigolo kapira’i, Papua aura rekea pie
magistrates makina.
Pere Papua melora ge ririwana pie ASSESSORS
namara, e roo pie MAGISTRATES namara, laani
maparara’i schoolai pie laka English karona pie
aia e pie aloa e pie kamonagia pie varipagia, qalana
Papua rova maparara English karona’i ge alorana.
Port Moresby:
Edward George Baker, Government Printer.—674l^/2.34.
