

VINDICATION
OF
JAMES MUDIE AND JOHN LARNACH,
FROM CERTAIN REFLECTIONS ON THEIR CONDUCT
CONTAINED IN LETTERS ADDRESSED TO
THEM RESPECTIVELY,
THROUGH THE
COLONIAL SECRETARY
OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
BY ORDER OF
HIS EXCELLENCY GOVERNOR BOURKE,
RELATIVE TO THE TREATMENT BY THEM
OF THEIR
Convict Servants:
TOGETHER WITH THE MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE TWO COM-
MISSIONERS OF ENQUIRY APPOINTED BY HIS EXCELLENCY TO IN-
VESTIGATE THE CONDUCT OF THE BENCH OF MAGISTRATES
AT PATRICK'S PLAINS TOWARDS PRISONERS OF THE CROWN,
AND ALSO THAT OF MESSRS. MUDIE AND LARNACH,
ASSIGNEES OF PRISONERS.
BY JAMES MUDIE, ESQ.
Sydney
PRINTED BY E. S. HALL, GEORGE-STREET.
SEPTEMBER 1834.


DEDICATION.
To Tmfc Right Honourable Edward Standby, His
Majesty’s Principal Secretary op State ror
the Colonies, &c., &fc., &c.
Castle Forbes, Hunter's River,
New South Wales, Ist July, 1834.
Sm,
I take the liberty of dedicating to you, as the person to whom
His Majesty has more peculiarly entrusted the government of
this Colony, the following pages.
Their contents exhibit a most important branch of General
Bourke's administration, in an unfavourable light. My
object, however, is not to cast reflection on this adminis-
tration, but to vindicate my own character from a degree of
censure passed on it by His Excellency the Governor;
and to represent to you in a prominent manner, the obstructions
to the general prosperity, which, as it,appears to me, the policy
of His Excellency in the branch of his Government alluded to,
has raised, and will continue to raise, unless obviated by your
interposition.
The measures of the local Government as regard Agricul-
ture and Commerce, before they come into operation,
pass under the review of a Legislative Council of fifteen mem-
bers, (His Excellency included,) of whom five are experienced
men, personally interested in those portions of the public polity ;
while the management of the prison population is more parti-
cularly invested in His Excellency, as head of the Executive;
though in a variety of instances, the discipline of the
convicts comes also under the review of the Legislative
Council, when laws affecting them in conjunction with the free
and freed portion of the inhabitants of the Colony, arc framed
and passed.
I trust, therefore, that in laying before you the inconve-
niences, not to say grievances, arising from what appears to me
to be the deficient policy of Governor Bourke in the manage-
ment of our convict population, you will bs pleased to under-
■ * a


stand, I have a more reasonable if not legitimate cause for laying
before you my sentiments, than if I were a sufferer from laws
for which the Legislative Council was solely responsible.
In order to induce you to make enquiry into the nature of
the new penal discipline introduced by His Excellency Go-
vernor Bourke, and to remedy the evils which it appears to
■me to .have created in a variety of ways, affecting not only the
s Ivcncy of the Settlers, but also their domestic comfort and per-
sonal safety ; and involving also the morals and well-being of the
convicts themselves ; I have in the following pages laid before
you, a copy of the whole of the proceedings had before a
special Commission held at Pai rick's Plains, to enquire into the
conduct of the Bench of Magistrates, and of Mr. Larnach ami
myself as employers of convicts, together with a copy of the
subsequent correspondence on the subject between the Colonial
Secretary and myself. ■
As a circumstance on account of which I feel peculiarly
aggrieved, not only as 'a Magistrate, but also; as a sufferer
from outrage, 1 here beg leave to state, that persons
under the coercion' of the law, have been permitted by the
Government, to make the atrocities committed on ray Estate,
a mean of attack on the Magistracy', and on all those who desire
an efficient administration of the penal laws. In the course
of the proceedings attending the outrages in question, my name
and case were subjected to the ribald observations and coarse
abuse ot these individuals. lam convinced no prisoner would
be permitted to conduct, or to assist in conducting the Press
of this Colony, had the Home Government or the House
of Commons (if I may judge from the report of the Committee
on Secondary punishments) conceived the possibility of
such an occurrence. To illustrate this grievance, I have at
prge made some extracts from the Journal now complained
of. ' . ;
: In conclusion, permit me to' beg the favour of your calling on
His Excellency Governor Bourke, for a copy of the instructions
under which the Commission of Enquiry at Patrick's Plains
acted. ,
I have the honour to remain,
■Sir,
Your Must Obedient Humble .Servant,
' .Skr-ed,. . . JAMES MUDIEv


PRELIMINARY STATEMENT.
Mr. James Mudie arrived in New South Wales in
July 1822. In November, following, he had established
himself on a free grant of 2,560 Acres at Patrick’s Plains,
to which, in compliment to his friend Sir Charles Forbes,
he gave the name (ere there hadbeen erectedon it a solitary
hut) of. Castle Forbes. That part of the Colony was
fieri uninhabited, except by a few stockmen who had
arrived there overland with cattle from the neighbour-
hood of Windsor. The first horse and cart which made
its appearance at Patrick’s Plains, was Mr. Muclie’s.
No sheep had yet been taken there, and the few
horned cattle were not depastured outside the Plains.
It is beyond the object of this Pamphlet to detail
the risks and privations of the solitary life Mr. Mudie
had to live many years, so far as regards suitable
society. In his dealings with the Ab-origines, that
simple people amid all the quarrels and disturbances
between them and the stock-keepers from that time to
the present day, never injuredMrM either in Improperly
or in his person or family. Mr. M. commenced with
an establishment (1822) of fifteen .convict servants.
In 1833 the servants on the farm employed jointly by
himself and his relative Mr. Larnach, amounted, bond
and free, to nearly one hundred; the quantity of his arable
land increased in proportion.
So remote and insulated were St. Patrick’s Plains con-
sidered when Mr., Mudie settled there, that a few years
previously to his so doing, a gentleman received a pre-
sent of 700 acres of land for discovering them ; and the
removal of Mr. M’s family there, was considered a dan-
gerous experimentbysorne, andbyall as a very ad venturous
proceeding. There was of course no grain, grown there;
his seed wheat therefore had to be bought in Sydney;


it coat him twenty shillings a bushel. The meat con-
sumedbythe men and the family (for the male calves
of the small herds had not as yet grown into bul-
locks), had also to be brought from Sydney(at equally high
prices 5 and when after two years, a bullock was
slaughtered, it was looked upon by the few neighbours as
a matter of great interest. Working bullocks were then
201. a-piece; horses were unknown. These circum-
stances may appear trifling to some; but by the first set-
tlers at the Hunter, they were not felt to be such ; and if
claims to seniority be now out of fashion, those who
by personal privation and toil have earned them, will not
feel disposed to yield them up to novices who affect to
count them of no value. For many years therefore,
meat, and in short every thing (except wheat), had
to be bought in Sydney at enormous prices, yet
during that trying period, when stinted means and high
prices conspired to tempt to short allowance, in no instance,
if the records of the Magistrates be searched at the
Hunter, or Newcastle, or Sydney, will a single instance
be found, of Mr. Mudie’s men having lodged a complaint
against him on this head.
If then a Settler who in the days when he could least
afford it, when the cost of feeding his men was not
furnished by the produce of his own farm, but formed
part of the sinking of his capital, passed the ordeal
' of temptation with an untainted reputation, is it to be
considered a slight violation of such an one’s feelings,
to have placed him at the bar of his own ser-
vants, the friends and associates of those who had just
previously plotted against his life, and attempted
thatof his nearest relatives? One of the aecusershad'been
twice transported, namely, once to Bermuda for a felony,
and thence to New South Wales for mutiny. Why was not
the enquiry made accordingto law , sothattheaccusedmight
obtainfrom perjured witnesses legalredressl Themen would
have appeared before the Bench with equal wil-
lingness against their master in the ordinary way. Mr.


Hely could have sat at the Patrick’s Plains Bench as Ma-
gistrate in lieu of Commissioner, and in lieu of the
Solicitor General, Mr. Little, Mr. Lethbridge, Captain
Anley, Mr. Webber, Mr. Close, Mr. Wyndham, Captain
Dumaresq. Before such a tribunal, falsehoods would have
been perjury, andthewitnesses wouldhavebeenprosecuted
for their gross prevarications. But the Courtof [Enquiry be-
ing non-judicial, the oath the accusers took was also non-
judicial. And thus Mr. Mudie became divested of that
right to redress, which the laws of England have pro-
vided for the security of all the King’s subjects. But to
return to the narrative of Mr. Mudie’s first settlement at
the Hunter.
From November 1822 to November 1833, a period of
eleven years, no outrage or violence of any kind occurred
at Castle Forbes. Absconding was unknown on the
estate, except in trifling instances ; and those instances
took place in the persons of one or two men assigned
to a friend in Sydney, and who finding them troublesome
characters, had transferred them to Mr. Mudie. These
men sometimes gave trouble. Sydney seemed to have
spoiled them, for they were never contented like their
comrades who had known (in New South Wales at least)
no life other than a country life. The reason these men
were transferred to Mr. Mudie’s management, was, that
the gentleman in question had live-stock in the charge
of Mr, Mudie.
But while no outrage took place from 1822 to 1833, yet
very soon after the arrival of His Excellency General
Bourke (November 1831), a change took place in the
manners of the men on the farm. The prison population
partake equally with, perhaps are the subjects of greater ex-
citement than, the free population, on a change of Go-
vernors. General Bourke had not been long in the
Colony, before he obtained acharacter for that sort of hu-
manity whichfinds favour inthe eyes of a prison population.
This disposition in any Colony butN S Wales, might have
been attended with the pest consequences; but in this
Colony it is misapplied. The evils of the misapplication


have displayed themselves lu a variety of instances. The
most baneful has been, corresponding through Mr. Richard
Bourke theprivate Secretary, with the convicts, without the
intervention of their masters. Whether secrecy were in-
tended or not, the correspondence in question was not
always known to the employers of the convicts.
Nothing perhaps need be added to prepare the reader
for the consequences of this policy. The prison popula-
tion at the Hunter, became generally altered. First,
there was a restlessness ; then, a rude manner and tone
of voice ] next, idleness ; and finally, insolence, turbu-
lence, and impatience of all controul. The convicts
seemed to act as if they were impressed with the romantic
idea, that the Governor was their friend, if not their Jally;
and that the only allies of their employers and enemies, wer e
the Magistrates and the laws, which were then vigoi'ous,
and which so long as they remained unaltered, kept down
the seeds of mutiny from rancorous growth.
At length the Council passed a new Act as regarded
the discipline of convicts. Its promulgation ivas coupled
with a circular of counsel and advice to the Magistrates.
Whether that circular were just or superfluous, need not
here be discussedj connected as it .was with the new
Act, which reduced the powers of the Magistrates,'it had
the effect (as was natural, perhaps intended) of making
it a matter of apparent disrespect to the Executive for
Magistrates any longer to act with that vigour, which
from the departure of Governor Macquarie to the cle
parture of General Darling, had become the common
law of. the Colony.
The loss of any portion of the labour of a convict, is a
direct wholesale deduction from the nett profits of the
farmer. Supposing the profits of a convict’s labour to be
one third ; if he abate his labour by one third, there will
then remain no profits at all on husbandry,
. But great as is the loss of profit by a decrease of labour
on hfarm, it is not a loss so pregnant with alarm and,
anxiety, as the loss of sheep or cattle, which instantly'


accrues by a relapse into carelessness of convict
shepherds and stock-men. When this class of convict,
servants began to remit in their care of their flocks and
herds, the scattering of sheep became a common
occurrence,and was attended withgreat loss;, and (through
the depredations of the wilder native bush dog,) with" an
anxiety greater than that which occurred through the
remitted exertions of the farming or husbandry servants..
The loss of sheep is felt at once by the owner ; the
loss on binning is slow, and its contemplation is alle-
viated by the reflection, that a change for the better may
possibly take place ere it become ruinous.
It was therefore with feelings of great disappointment
that Mr. Mudie saw the commencement of the new
system of discipline, calculated as it was to blight his
prospects as an extensive grower of grain. Nevertheless,
though he foresaw his losses and annoyances, no gentle-
man on the Hunter felt or testified esteem for General
Bourke, both publicly and privately, more than Mr,
Mudie. He perceived, that the new Governor was not
aware, that during the last thirteen or fourteen months
of the administration of his predecessor, the latter having
introduced some Acts of great policy (for instance, the.
general Order of October, 1829, regulating the rations
and clothing of the Convicts), any great change in
the prison discipline of the Colony would be full
of risk. He therefore hoped, that His Excel-
lency would soon ascertain the real state of
things from those near his person and in his con-
fidence, and that His Excellency’s peculiar sentiments,,
ere they had time to do much harm, would experience a
change. But unfortunately for Mr. Mudie, the first per-
son on whom the new doctrines of convict discipline
came to be tried, was himself.
The manners of the convicts appear to attract little
superintending care from the present Government. The
outward manners of so coarse a class of men as transported
felons, afford about the only medium of reforming them.


If soldiers, when off duty, were allowed to treat their
officers with a sullen insolence of demeanour, what would
become of the morale of the army ? Next therefore to
performing their daily quantity of labour in the best way
they can, it should he held incumbent on employers of
convicts, on pain of being deprived of them , to maintain
among them order and propriety in their lleisurc
hours. But this cannot be accomplished if a Govern-
ment do not insist in its proclamations and cir-
culars, on a high degree of respect from such men to
their employers; a degree at least equal to that enforced
in the army. Let the reader imagine the soldiers of
New South Wales released from those external marks of
respect to their officers now in use,- and that inlieuof ap-
pealing for the redress of their grievances to the officers
in the garrison, they were permitted to complain in
writing to the Comraander-in-Chief, either at the Horse
Guards, or at the Government House, Sydney. The
Colonel Commandant, is to the soldiers of the Sydney
Garrison, what the Magistrates of the Colony are to the
convicts ; the commissioned officers may be compared
with the settlers 5 thenon-commissionedwith the overseers.
If in lieu of complaining to the officers, the soldier could
correspond privately with the Commander-in-Chief, un-
known to those officers, what would become of such a
Garrison ? Yet such has been the system introduced by
Governor Bourke among a prison population consisting of
20,000 adults, and in a country where the free and freed
population of both sexes and all ages, supposed not to
exceed 40,000.
An instance of the private correspondence alluded to
above, as subsisting between the assigned convicts and the
private Secretary, is the following. One Stevenson, an
assigned servant to the gentleman before alluded to,
under the superintendance of Messrs Mudie and Lar-
nach as his assignees, avery bad servant, suddenly
made his appearance at Government-house, Par-
ramatta. He represented to Mr. Bourke, the private


Secretary, that he had come the long journey, in
order to present’ a petition to the Governor, praying
for redress of certain grievances therein specified-
Mr. Bourke treated the man kindly, and advised him
to return home.
Mr. Bourke enclosed a note in an envelope, al«ng
with a petition which the man had previously pre-
sented to him. The marl went his way, broke open
the envelope, and taking the note out, presented it alone
to Mr. Mudie, who was then in Sydney. The latter
on reading it, asked for the petition ? The man said,
he knew nothing of any enclosure, and denied hav-
ing presented a petition to Mr. Bourke. Mr. Mudie
gave him in custody, and the Sydney Bench order-
ed him to be forwarded to the Bench at Patrick’s
Plains. By the Magistrates there, he was, for absconding
and ranging the bush several weeks without means of
subsistance (except by pilfering or robbing on the road to
Sydney, a distance of 140 miles), sent twelve months to an
ironed-gang. It is strange that this man could pass
so great a distance without being taking into custody,
having no pass .
According to an Act of Council passed by General
Darling, this man was a bushranger j and bushranging
is felony in New South Wales. If he had grievances to
complain of, his duty was to make them known to the
nearest Bench of Magistrates. His being placed in cus-
tody by Mr. Mudie, and afterwards punished by the
Bench at Patrick’s Plains, contrary to the apparent feel-
ings and recommendation of a gentleman so near the
Governor’s person as Mr. Richard Bourke, no doubt im-
pressed his mind and the minds of his comrades, that his
employer, and the Magistrates as well those of Patrick’s
Plains as Sydney, were all acting on a severer system
of discipline, than what the Governor either approved
or was aware of, But the report which crowned all the
rest, was, that orders had been brought from Home by
General Bourke;, and which would in due time make
* b


their appearance ; that all the prisoners in the Colony
were to become free, or at all events free to choose their
owii masters ! and that all prisoners on their disembarka-
tion, would in future become free in like manner. With
such reports, religiously believed by the sanguine ma-
jority's is it to be wondered at, that the convict population
at the Hunter should have become turbulent, idle, and
lawless ?
Things were in this situation as regarded the assigned
servants at Castle Forbes, and the farms on the Hunter
generally, when symptoms of a crisis began to display
themselves at the former estate in the restlessness andovert
acts of two men named Poole and Hitchcock, also of other
convictsnamed Riley, Nagle, James Brown, Henry Brown
(a re-transport from Bermuda for mutiny), Harvey, Pony
and Ryan (a boy). Several* of these had been pun-
ished by the Magistrates of Patrick’s Plains (Robert
Scott, Helenas ■ Scott, and James ; Glennie, Esquires.)
Thtese punishments seemed to exasperate rather than
subdue. At this time, one or more of the men at
Castle Forbes, were in private correspondence with
Mr. Bourke. Among the punishments, was a sen-
tence upon Perry, Parrot, and Hitchcock, to an ironed-
gang. During the examination, which was delayed for
want of evidence, Poole (who it has since been ascer-
tained was, concerned in the. same robbery, namely, plnn-
.dering a dray belonging to Mr. Singleton), from an insub-
ordinate, sullenness which had marked bis conduct some
.months previously, now broke forth into violent,invec-
tives and acts of disobedience.- (See Mr. Larnadc’s evi-
dence page 44;. Mr. Larnack was therefore compelled
to send Poole to the ;Bench for insolence and refusing to
work. He did not affect to make any complaint of bad
vsar/e at this time; he> merely threw down his tools,
and said in a bravado manner, CC FII now give you a
chance; f ake me to Court.” Poole, Hitchcock, Perry
and Parrot, were all sentenced on the same day, the
former to fifty lashes for disobedience; which being im-
mediately inflicted, he was allowed to return to the farm;


find the three latter (for the robbery), to an ironed-gang,
as before mentioned. But previously to bis return, Poole
had an interview with the others at the Courti Dur-
ing the same night, Poole, Riley, and Ryan (the boy),
absconded from the farm. They took arms and ammu-
nition with them, which it is supposed had been stolen
from the neighbours in some of their nightly depreda-
tions. They purposely fell in with Hitchcock, Parrot,
and Perry, in the morning, and released them, overawing
the single constable in whose charge they had been placed.
Parrot'however refused to join them; in consequence of
which, Poole and the rest chained him and the constable
together, and left them fastened to a tree. The six were
joined by a convict attached to a road-gang in the neigh-
bourhood (afterwards shot by Mr. Robert. Scott, when
the whole party was captured). After a consultation,
they proceeded to Castle Forbes, which they reached
about eleven o’clock in the day. They rushed into the
house, and seized several stand of loaded arms, also am-
munition ; they then went to the barn, where there were
seven or eight men, and ordering them out, put them in
the store, one of them standing sentry over them. The
others returned to the house, ransacked the apartments,
took away the plate, clothes, sugar, tea, hams, tobacco,
and flour. While some were packing up these - things,
• others ordered Mrs.Larnack and one of the two women
servants, to go into the store where the men were
confined, after having objected to Riley’s proposal to shoot
Mrs. L. They presently ordered Ryan to fetch the two
horses from the stable, saddled and bridled, leaving one
of the party as sentry over the store-room. One of the
two servant women was not put in the store. She was
a woman of very bad character. Before they departed,
they said to Mrs. Larnach, “we will bring back your hus-
band’s b y head, and stick it on the chimney; and
if your father had been at home, his head should have
been stuck on the other.” On the arrival of 'the party
at the water-side, where Mr. Larnach was engaged with
■ eight or nine men in, washing sheep, they halted on the


bank, and Hitchcock calling to the men, said, “ stand
still you b b s, or I’ll blow out all your brains
and then addressing Mr. Larnach, said, “ come up the
bank, you b .” Mr. Larnach asked the men if they
would stand by him ? They hesitated, and advised him
to run. Seeing Mr, L. hesitate to come up to them,
they commanded the men around him to stand on one
fcide. Mr. Larnach immediately jumped in the river,
and made across. He had noticed, that as they stood
on the bank presenting their pieces at him, they trem-
bled excessively, so that it was impossible for them to
take a steady aim. Three shots were fired at him
without effect, the slugs falling around him without
touching him. Hitchcock imagining Mr. L. was struck,
said, “ follow theb and let us settle him., he is nearly
done,” But Poole said “ no; save your ammunition.”
Mr. L. escaped to a neighbouring farm. The party
then left the place, and also the farm, and went away.
In a few days they visited Mr. George Sparke, son of
Mr. Sparke an emigrant of Newcastle, and after stripping
and tying him to a post, flogged him with acat-o’-ninc
tails which they bad made on purpose not only to flog
Mr. Sparke, but also (as they boasted to their comrades)
to flog Mr. Larnach., For when they ordered Mr. L. to
come up the bank to them, they had intended to tie him
to a tree previously to shooting him, and to give him 300
lashes with the same scourge with which they flogged
Mr. Sparke. This is what they boasted of being their
intention, if Mr. Larnach bad not fled across the river.
They had three scourges with them. In flogging Mr,
Sparke, they did not strike on the shoulder blade in one
place, as is customary in inflicting this punishment, but
cut him all over the back and loins, the lash reaching
. round to the abdomen. The hoy Ryan was the most
ferocious of the whole party, asking Mr. Sparke how he
liked it? and whether he would ever get another man
flogged ? It was at first proposed to shoot Mr. Sparke,
but Hitchcock said, he knew his father, and therefore they
would only flog him. The offence given them by Mr.


Sparke was, lie had lately had one of his men punished
by the Bench of Magistrates. After they had made the
servant secure as well as Mr. Sparke, they went their
way, threating to return and shoot Mr. S. if he attempted
to get loose. This was in the dead of the night. They
took away from Mr. Sparke’s, all the arms and ammuni-
tion they could find, and also a horse with saddle and
bridle. In a few days afterwards, they visited a Mr.
Dutton, a newly arrived emigrant, and robbed him of
arms, ammunition, tea, sugar, and clothing. They
left Mr. Dutton’s and proceeded to Lamb’s Valley. The
next day, -Messrs. Scott, Larnach, and Sparke, to-
gether with some faithful servants of Mr. Scott and
two of the Mounted Police, came up with them in
Lamb’s Valley. As soon as the banditti perceived the
advancing party, they seemed to lose all courage, for
they trembled exceedingly, particularly Poole and Hitch-
cock, the moat intelligent of the whole party. The
road-gang prisoner presented his piece at Mr. Scott.
The latter told him to lower his musket or he would fire
at him. The man persisted, and Mr. Scott and one of
the Mounted Police both fired at the same instant. The
man fell. The rest yielded without resistance. On in-
specting their quarters, some were frying meat at a file,
others casting bullets, one making bread, and one Avas
shaving himself. The wounded man was carried to the
next farm, and the next morning placed in a cart to be
conveyed to Maitland, but he died on the road. He
refused to answer any questions, saying, “ I am a dead
man.”
The whole of the party ivere soon afterwards tried
at Sydney, and found guilty of shooting at Mr. Lar-
nach, with intent to kill. They were then arraigned for
+ Mr. Mudit’s actual loss by the plunder taken and other positive expenses,
amounted to about .-6130. His loss was greater otherwise, namely, by his
farm, on which were about seventy convicts, who may he said_ to have
been ever since in a state of insubordinate idleness. A very favourite marc,
aVcsent to Mrs. Larnach, was taken away. The men boasted of haying
tied her to a tree and left her to perish. This was not believed. But the
remains of the animal were subsequently discovered half buried in the earth;
It is supposed Hie animal had scraped a hole to.obtain moisture.


one of the robberies. -They pleaded guilty. Further
amvgnment was considered superfluous, and. they were
sentenced to die.
Jones Avas subsequently reprieved, and sent to a
penal settlement for life. The public subsequently con-
trasted the commutation of this mum’s sentence Avith the
execution of numbers who suffered death for robberies
and conduct of far less atrocity, and they could see
no motives for the commutation, except two; Ist, that
the line of defence or apology set up' by their Counsel
(Mr. Therry, Commissioner of the Court of Requests),
had some basis on truth; namely, that their employers
had treated them harshly; or that six men Averc too
many to be executed at one time for any crimes, how-
ever great. Mr. Larnach did not see Jones at all. This
Avas the ostensible reason for his life being saved; but
he Avas there aiding and abetting, more effectually than
if he had added his shot to those of the three others?
for he stood sentry over a shepherd to prevent his run-
ning to give alarm. Among the men executed very
shortly after these banditti, Avas one Gill, a convict of good
character. He beat his master in a savage way, ond
the hitter swore, and also a surgeon, that he struck
him Avith an iron instrument. But the instrument Avas
never found, and the culprit denied having used any thing
but his fist to the last. Another surgeon made oath, that
in his opinion, the Avound might have been inflicted
with the fist only or by a fall on a dead tree. Yet this
man, notAvithstanding his general good character, suf-
fered death. It was not certain that the assault of
which he was guilty, Avas more than a common assault.
Jones, on the other hand, had been guilty of a series
of robberies and assaults.
Ryan, Perry, and Riley, suffered death in Sydney, and
Poole and Hitchcock at Patrick’s Plains. Jones’s sentence
was commuted to transportation for life, as before stated.
Poole, Hitchcock, and Perry, died devoutly. The rest,
particularly Ryan, seemed rather hardened, though they
behaved Avith decency. Ryan appeared to court the sym


pfithy of the spectators, affecting great courage, but be-
traying by his continual change of countenance, an
unconquerable fear of death. Poole was a man of rather
superior mind, and was, as he himself expressed it
after his sentence, the victim of his own unbridled
pasions. Pie destributed religious tracts among his com-
rades on his way to the place of execution, endorsed
with his name, and recommended his comrades to avoid
combining together, and to reject all advice of others
to the contrary. His deportment, as well as that of
Hitchcock, was exemplary during the whole of their pain-
ful passage to the fatal spot.
Previously to the capture of the party as related above,
Mr. Mudie transmitted to the private Secretary the
names of the men who figure in the subsequent pages
of this pamphlet, as accusers of Mr. Mudie before
Solicitor General Plunkett, and Principal Superiuten-
dant of convicts Hely, who' were sent by the Go-
vernor to Patrick’s Plains as a special Commisson, to
enquire into the conduct of the Bench of Magistrates there,
and of Messrs Mudie and Larnach. Mr. Mudie’slistof men
had been coupled with aletter to the Governor, beggingthey
might be exchanged for other convicts, as he Mr. M. had
good information that they were the men in particular
who had encouraged their comrades to commit the out-
rages detailed above. No reply being received, Mr. Mudie
wrote again and also a third time. No.reply was ever
received.
It was remarkable, that the very men contained in
Mr. Mudie’s list, proved to he those who were aubpeened
by their comrades on their trial to give evidence in their
favour as to their hard usage. After the trial, no ex-
change took place as had been requested, hut the men
were returned to Mr. Mudie at Castle Forbes, and
he was obliged to maintain these i nstigators to mutinyand
outrage for several days at Castle Forbes, although from
their previous conduct, he did not , feel safe either in his
own person, or the persons of his family, under the
alarm and excitement which he and they still con


tinned to be the subjects of. Mr. Mudie considered
this act of the Executive Government one of needless
disrespect, not to say, to betray want of feeling, es-
pecially after the accusations which had been made against
him and Mr. Larnach, by these very men on the trial
of their comrades. Why not have exchanged these men,
and ridded Mr. Mudie of their presence at once ? The
expense to the Crown of keeping them at Maitland, was
surely too small to be put in competition with the feelings
of any person, so situated as Messrs Mudie and Larnach
were; much more when one of them held a Commission
of the Peace. At all events, it was foreseen by all but
the Government, that these men on their return to the
farm, would bend their minds to nothing but to the
consideration, how they should best vent their malice
on their employers, by their evidence at the coining Com-
mission of Enquiry. They commenced propagating the
most absurd reports of Mr. Mudie, whom they repre-
sented as about to be taken into custody and tried for
cruelty to his servants. The turgid eloquence on the
trial of their comrades, Mr. Commissioner Therry in the
unprecedented mode of defence which he set up for the
prisoners, would,but for theexertionsof Mr. Mudie’scoun-
sel and the Solictor-general (prosecutor for the Crown),
virtually have placed Messrs. Mudie and Larnach on
their trial, in lieu of the prisoners at the bar. Such was
the very strange defence set up by the counsel for the
prisoners, that the Solicitor-general expressed his as-
tonishment at it, and said, “ that he should have
suspected, there was some great unknown behind the
curtain from the perseverance of Mr. Therry in his
illegal and unwarrantable defence,” or words to that
effect.
At the close of the Commission of Enquiry at
Patrick’s Plains, Mr. Mudie applied to* the Com-
missioners to take from him four of the accusers, as,
after the evidence they had given, and the temper of mind
which seemed to govern them in giving it, he should not
consider himself safe on his farm during a single night.


The request was complied with, and the men were for-
warded to Sydney, where (as will be seen in the subse-
quent pages) they were put to the lightest kinds of work,
and indulged with a great deal of liberty, even in the
day-time 3 and during which intervals, they often met
and insulted Mr. Mudie by their gesticulations and man-
ner of passing him in the street.
It might be supposed even in New South Wales ;
Init if not in the Colony (where the temper of the
prison population at the period in question was
well understood) at least in England, that the trial and
execution of the banditti, would have sobered, if not
dismayed their comrades at Castle Forbes. And it was
expected, by the least sanguine on this head, that some
change for the better would take place. But the reverse
■was experienced by their employers, Messrs. Mudie and
Larnach. The, singular' defence of the prisoners by one
of the Colonial Judges (Mr. Therry); the complaint of the
Solicitor-general, that there was an unseen influence work-
ing against his efforts to convict the prisoners at the Bar;
the Commission sent to Patrick’s Plains to hear the com-
plaints of the men as well against Messrs. Mudie and
Larnack, as against the Bench; the removal of the men
tit the special request of Mr. Mudie—not to a remote
district, but to the Elysium of the convicts, Sydney, to
light work, and abundance of liberty in the streets even
in the day-time; the whispers which got abroad in Syd-
ney, and which reached the huts of the men at the farm
of Castle Forbes, that Mr. Mudie had been reprimanded
by the Governor; coupled with a report, that his tempo-
rary retirement from the Bench was in consequence of
Iris having been put out of the Commission of the Peace;
the latent attempt of a man attached to the road-gang at
Patrick’s Plains to get his overseer dismissed, and his
affecting to shew the Bench by a handful of papers that he
wasin correspondence with one of .the Secretaries; all these
circumstances, trivial and even ludicrous as they may
appeal*, were weighty truths in the minds of the san-
c


guine prison population at Patrick’s Plains and the Hunter
generally,, and excited them- to "a spirit, not indeed of open
insolence and rebellion like that which had distinguished
the short career- of their executed comrades—but a
steady, quiet sort of insolence, which was irksome for
the settlers to bear, and destructive of the comfort
and prosperity of farmers in a country where droughts
and floods alternately destroy, or a superabundance and
consequent low prices render the labours of the plough
one of the least profitable avocations in New South
Wales.
In illustration of the temper of the prison population
at Patrick’s Plains and the Hunter at the period in ques-
tion, but particularly of the men at Castle Forbes, the
following incidents are worth notice.
The demeanour of the men as before stated, was, ge-
nerally speaking, a dogged sort of sullenness, short
answers, swinging of the head, shrugging of the slioul-
■ders, indicating contempt, &c. These seeds fructified
gradually into overt acts of idleness and disobedience
■When threatened to be taken to the Bench for losing
sheep, or for insolence to the remonstrances of the
overseer by the imitation of the bark of a dog (for every
reproof a bark), and other extraordinary means of annoy-
ance, they began to abscond. First one ran, and then an-
other. The message left behind them was, they were
•going to Sydney to complain to the Governor. One
man, named, Chitwood, on being captured, was taken to
the Bench. Mr. Larnach expressed to him, ere he was
examined, his surprise at his absconding, because, there-
tofore, he had considered him one of the few men on the
jarm, on whose good conduct he could depend. Chit-
wood replied with naivetd, that he certainly had nothing
to complain of as an assigned servant who could not
choose his own master and act as a free man, but that,
in as much as all the men were talking of going to the
Governor to mend their condition, he thought he might
as well take a turn early ; especially as several had
gone, of whom he had not heard any evil tidings, but


rather, that some of them had safely arrived at Syd-
ney, and were going on there as tvell as could .be expec-
ted. As Mr. Larnach considered him a harmless dupe,
he spoke in his favour to that effect before the Bench,
and he received a mitigated punishment. Seven men
were away in the bush at one time. They were
away shorter or longer. Three are not yet captured.
They have been living among their/Heracfe, either in the
country or in Sydney, several months. One was cap-
tured last week in Sydney. These men must all, from
necessity, pick, steal, or practice violence more or less to
get a living. It is the most probable surmise, that some
of them belong to the gangs who still occasionally in-
fest the roads, in divers parts of the Colony. The
judicious strictness with which the ironed-gangs
are now watched by the troops, renders it a happy cir-
cumstance, that they are not joined by many of that class
of the convicts.
, No single cause will account for the present temper of
the prison population. Many of the causes are explained
or alluded to in the course of these pages. The chief
cause, the root of the evil, is probably the notion, that
Governor Bourke is, “ the friend of poor prisoners.”
This in all probability is the tap-root of this, wide-
spreading evil. The great lateral roots, are the idle-
ness, insolence, and disobedience permitted in the ironed-
gangs, and the idleness and indulgencies obtained by,
if not granted to, the men in the road-gangs. The
men forming the ironed-gangs, are men whose mis-
demeanours border on , felony and are too nefari-
ous to be atoned for by scourging. When a man’s con-
duct is so infamous, that the Magistrate perceives 50
lashes would be disproportionate to his reiterated of-
fences, he is sent to an ironed-gang; and which latter
punishment has lately been demanded by prisoners
as a privilege f.
t Wc have to.call the attention of the public to an anecdote, which oc-
curred recently, and which shows the manner in which, the “ summary
punishment bill" (as it is somewhat absurdly called) works. Some runaways
from a respectable,settler’s establishment were brought before the Merton


When there, the convict finds himself associated with
•men of congenial dispositions. Their food is homely
and not abundant, but their work falls below their food.
It is notorious to all the Colony, that six free men will do,
and actually perform, more work than six score of them.
The ironed-gang as at present conducted, if not a'pre-
mium for crime, carries' with it no punishment to the
desperadoes; yet a considerable portion of their terms of
•transportation is often spent in them.
Worse things have to be told of the road-gangs. Men
do not dread going to an ironed-gang because by go-
ing there, they experience the pleasures of anticipa-
tion. They weekly witness theircomrades departing to the
road-gangs, with hearts full of vivacity, and still fuller of
giatitude to the Government which thus finally heals all
their troubles by a pleasant and profitable sojourn in the
road-gangs. In the road-gangs it has (since Governor
Darling left the Colony) become a common practice to let
the men hire themselves out to the settlers. No less than
from twenty to thirty men, inmates of a road-gang in
the Hunter District, were lately let or hired out by the
overseer to the settlers, at the rate of ten shillings a
week; for which indulgence the overseer received his
share of the spoil. Thus, men in the road-gangs be-
come fed and clothed better than those, assigned to the
cttlers. And hence it is, that at the present moment,
road-gangs are not only like the ironed-gangs, no terror
to misbehaved men , but they operate as a premium
for offences; they.arc the ultimate reward, as it were,
of the more audacious, who for the temporary incon-
venience of a very light pair of fetters on his legs in an
ironed-gang, without work, will endure that inconveni-
ence in. to terminate his well-concerted intrigues
in the pleasures of a roncf-party.
Bench; and, while their Worships were deliberating: on their indemenh, one
f the rogues called out, “ your Worships will recollect, OmtwSm tatiSS
to an iron-gang. lo the ummtmted wo mav explain, that having been
Uhe they “T °£ Ufsed * 6y the above-mentioned law,
lo be suit to aiuion-gang lor a second offence,—a prerogative which '* these
pom creatures did not wish to renounce. For the reason, vide tjm iron-
gang on Church-hill, and Olliers Herald.


On the present meeting of the Legislative Council, it
was hoped that measures would have been taken, at
least proposed, to remedy these evils,., with a recital of
which, the public journals have teemed; even the Sydney
Gazette , which boasts of its exclusive and unconditional
devotion to the Government, whatever be its measures';
and whence it has been designated by its . contemporaries
“the prisoners’ journal,” has condemned the system of
these gangs. (This is the journal complained of in the
dedicatory letter to Mr. Stanley, as having heaped on Mr.
Mudie the greatest calumnies, and as being conducted by
a person lately free by servitude, conjointly with a pri-
soner of the crown holding a ticket-of-leavc.)
In his opening, speech at the present sittings bf the
Legislative Council, His Excellency does not allude to
■the evils described above. The public of England there-
fore, may suppose the Governor never heard of them, or
hearing of them, had enquired into their correct-
ness, and found them erroneous, the pure inventions
of party-spirit and newspaper faction. Yet they have
been growing two years, and now bear fruit, which as-
tonishes, and at the same time dismays, by its size and
quantity. Whether the Council will attempt to stem
the prevailing misrule and vice which the management
of the convict gangs in question has generated through-
out the Colony, it is impossible to say. It is the more
probable conclusion, that a love of quietude, together,
with the weight of their private business will prevent the
least dependent members from doing more than giving ut-
terance to a few serious suggestions on the subject; and
that the majority being eight civil officers out of the fifteen
members, will not commit their salaries and implied
duty to the Executive, by venturing to speak on any
thing on which His Excellency has set them an Example
of silence and reserve.
To revert to the insubordination of the men at Castle
Forbes, after the execution of the banditti; —besides
seven runaways, six others wore lately taken to the Bench
for refusing to water the working oxen on a Sunday.


Among the censures contained in the letter of the
Colonial Secretary to Mr. Mudie (see correspondence
page 50) was one for his ordering a convict named
Nagle, to fetch on a Sunday a winnowing machine
from a neighbouring farm, ill order to commence clean-
ing some wheat early on the Monday morning. Mr;
Mudie was under a contract to deliver wheat in Sydney
on a certain day. The Steam-packet sailed on the fol-
lowing Wednesday. The distance of Castle Forbes to
the quay where the vessel lay, was 25 miles; so that, if not
a work of necessity,- it was at least one of great urgency.
Nagle was punished, not for refusing to go for the ma-
chine, but for his insolent mode of refusing to go, in the
hearing of a number of his comrades. Had he refused
with the civility which distinguishes the free servants of
England, the Bench would most certainly not have pun-
ished him, even if Mr. Mudie had had the folly to take
him there under such a charge only, namely, civilly
refusing to work on a Sunday.
In consequence however, of the Governor’s censure on
this head, the contents of the letter in which it was con-
tained transpired (as before explained) amongthe assigned
servants at Castle Forbes. It occasioned congratula-
tions. And on thestrength of it, when Mr. Larnaeh ordered
some half-dozen of them, one after another, to water the
working oxen, it being Sunday, they all refused, with
that cool civil impudence which now marked their
general behaviour. One of them turned round in a
grotesque way, saying “ not to-day; God Almighty has
given us this day to ourselves.”
They were all punished by the Bench, some with 25,
others with 50 lashes.
About a month hack, Nagle, whose name so often occurs
in thesc’pages, doubled his first in Mr. Mudie’s face, and
said, “by the Holy J—s I’ll make you suiferfor this !” Mr.
Mudie’s offence, which caused this specimen of convict
insubordination was, that he, Nagle, being insolent,
as the delegate of his comrades in coming up to the
the house to receive the weekly rations, where he gene


rally talked loudly in language most improper for any of
the* inmates of the house'to hear, particularly the chil-
dren and the females, Mr. M. had ordered him not
to act as messenger or delegate any more, hut to go
hack to his hut, and send up one of his comrades in
his place. The Bench, after an examination of four
hours, sentenced him to receive fifty lashes. As this
man had been repeatedly punished before, and was a
ring-leader in mutinous manners and behavour, he de-
served the maximum punishment of one hundred lashes.
If Nagle were in the army or navy, who had fought the
battles of his country, and had done by his officer what
he did by his master as above described (he not being
inebriated, nor in the least provoked by any harshness
of tone from Mr. Mudie, and of which he did not
even accuse Mr. Mudie before the Bench; for Nagle
was the accuser), what number of lashes would he
have received ? And when a man, who in lieu of
fighting his country’s battles, becomes by his crimes a
pest of society, so as to render his removal to a penal
Colony at great public expense necessary, why should he,
•so long as his work is light, his food equal to that of
the British soldier, and his clothing adequate to his
situation, receive less punishment than the latter ?
But the singularity of this incident will appear the
greater when the reader is informed, that Mr. Mudie
overlooked the threat and insolence of Nagle, so far, as
merely to stop his indulgence of milk and tobacco for four
days. This stoppage Nagle resented, and complained of it
to the Bench. He added to his complaint, that the flour
for that single week, was of a dark colour. He did not
complain of any other bad quality in the flour, Mr.
Mudie proved, that the flour that week would have been
as white as usual, if Nagle, to whom along with others
the cleaning of the wheat had been confided, had cleaned
it properly; and that it was by his own misconduct
in not cleaning it properly, that the grievance, was
caused, and yet he, made it a matter of accusation
against his master, On his own shewing in all res


poets, he was nevertheless sentenced to the, mitigated
punishment above, commonly administered for a first
offence.
The same man, Nagle, about two years ago, refused
tf) receive his indulgence of black tea, on the ground,
that he prefered green. He was punished by .having ho
tea allowed him at all until he altered his mind, and con-
descended, as■ a favour, to drink black. Tea at that time
was at an unusually high price, and the weekly ration to
the men at Castle Forbes, at two. ounces per man, was,
lOlbs for the whole, or 6041bs annually.
This is the sort of starvation for which the convicts
receive such unbounded sympathy. The amount of sugar
given the men, is lib per man weekly, or SOlbs a week, or
4,1 (iOlbs annually. The weekly amount of to bacco is, 2 oz.
per man, or lOlbs weekly, ors2olbs annually, Thereissomc-
tiincs no milk on. the farm, owing to the droughts which
so often affect the Colony. 'When milk is sufficiently
plentiful, one quart of new milk per man is given out in
lieu of sugar, with another quart of skimmed milk if re-
quired. The quantity of new milk given out (when
plentiful), is 140 gallons per week, or 7,280 gallons an-
nually, exclusive as above-mentioned of skimmcd-milk.
Vegetables, when the drought does not prevent their
growth, are given 6ut every Sunday, according to the
state of the garden. The weekly ration of beef or mut-
ton, is 71bs. (fresh) per man, with salt, delivered twice a
week in equal moieties. The weekly ration of seconds
flour, mixed with first flour, Is lOlbs. per man. The
annual amount of flour issued, is 41,6001b5. The an-
nual amount of beef or mutton, is 29,1201 b.
The prisoner mechanics receive other indulgences.
They get milk and tea and sugar weekly, and are in-
dulged with extra meat and flour on certain occasions.
The men often keep dogs (as will be seen in the minutes
of the Commission of Enquiry). Bread and milk are
often the food of these animals, besides refuse-meat.
The keeping of dogs by the men, is of itself a strong
presumption that their owners arc not starved.


Of the prisoners transported, the town-bred thieves,
(forgers, embezzlers, swindlers, &c.,) are generally men
some little education; a very few of superior educa-
tion j not many of these are used to manual labour, and
those who have been used to labour (mechanics, &c.),
detesting the lonely plodding life led by the settlers
of New South Wales, who are scattered abroad as neat-
herds and shepherds, covering a space equal to all Eng-
land, they instinctively’and silently combine together to
give effect to the lenity introduced by the present Local
Government.
. Town-bred prisoners are found to abscond in great
numbers. Absconding, is a term given to the first act
of departure from an assignee. When the convicts
have been absent a short time, they cease to be called
absentees-, they are then termed bushrangers . When
Sydney was a mere village, absentees did not harbour
there; they took up their abode in the bush—that is,
the wild forests of the Colony. They were there
harboured by their friends, such as convict stock-
men in lonely and remote parts, and settlers of bad
character (thieves themselves on every opportunity, and
receivers of stolen goods, such as cloth-
ing, tea, sugar, tobacco, and other settlers' stores), who
dwell in the more settled parts of the Colony on this
side the mountains near the townships, and who are there-
by enabled to keep up a rapid correspondence with the
greater Sydney receivers.
Although harboured, absentees or bushrangers have
to pay their friends very dearly for their board and lodg-
ing ; and having no other means (common labour not
being held by harbourers sufficient payment), they rob
travellers by day, and settlers' houses and out-offices by
night, to satisfy the insatiate demands of their hospitable
entertainers.
_ Tlie punishment for absconding, used to be, transporta-
tion to Moretpn Bay for one or more years ; but it began
to be calculated some years ago, by the politicians of the
* d


Colony, that the -expense of transportation to the penal
settlements was great, and that the Government of Eng-
land or the Colony, one or both, lost by the system two,
ways'; ’ first,: positively by the outlay ; and secondly,
negatively by the loss of the labour of some thousand
convicts; this number generally remaining .as a. sort of
balance in the hands of the respective Commandants of
the penal settlements in the account-current between
Sydney and the said settlements ; the men sent there
being - considered the debits of the account, and the
expirees received back in Sydney, the credits.
Governor Bourke therefore put a check upon trans-
portation to the penal settlements by his new Penal
Discipline Act (commonly called the Magistrates’ Act),,
and substituted working in irons on the public roads, for
transportation to a penal settlement, for-all offences short
of felony,.
Proofs have bcenglvenbyHis Excellency the present Go-
vernor, that his talents andtemperof mind, however fitted
forthe Cape of Good Hope, or any other colony not penal,
are not adapted for the administration of such a colony
as New , South Wales. The Legislative Council has given
evidence, ever since it had existence, of being the mere
tool of the Executive; the echo of its sentiments, and
the zealous supporter of its wishes. But it was not
contemplated by the Colonists when they applauded
the/ substituted punishment in question, that the
reins of discipline in the ironed-gangs would be slack-
ened contemporaneously. The only alteration for
the better in the ■management, of the ironed-gangs has
been, the guarding them more strictly by the military.
In consequence of a liberal addition of. soldiers to the
military guard at each, stockade, and the strengthening
of the latter, abscondings from the ironed-gangs, have
been very much reduced the last twelve months. So far
the present Government deserves praise.
But what has been 'the internal economy of - the
stockades? .The management has, been,bad, and bad
from contradictory causes. First, the men in one of


the gangs died from want of proper-food, clothing,
and medical attendance; secondly, in gangs where the
food and clothing Avere adequate and honestly dispensed,
the labour exacted of them has been about one twentieth
part (this is within compass) of that which is performed
by the u'nconvicted labourers of England.
The labour of the ironed-gangs, is not more valuable
than that performed at the penal settlements when
these pests of society were transported there. The
work done by them is, as just stated, about one
twentieth of that of free men ; and. about one quarter of
that which the Commandants of our penal settlements
compel them, by the scourge, inflicted on the spot
on view of the offence, to do. The fourth part of the
labour done in the Colony, may therefore in point of
value, be set against the four quarters formerly done at the
penal settlements; which Avere mere jails, and of no other
service to the United Kingdom than as jails; Avhile they
Avere excessively expensive.
The penal settlements were.however a terror to this har-
dened race of malefactors. The present ironed-gangs on
the contrary, with their remunerative denouement, the
pleasurable road-gangs, would be the derision of the con-
victs as a punishment, were it not, that the men view
the matter with too much satisfaction to make a jest of
it. .They consider the ironed-gangs now-a-days, as the
first step towards bettering their condition; that is to say,
bettering it as compared with the staid lonely do-
mestic habits of a farm in the interior, which, under
Generals Brisbane and Darling, they felt compelled
by wholesome discipline, to submit to with patience.
There Avas certainly a great remissness of duty
during the first five years of the' administration of
the latter Governor, in his omitting to fix by a ge-
neral order, the quantity and quality of the food, cloth-
ing, and bedding of the prison population. It was, hoiv-
cver, effectually remedied during the last year of his
administration; and hence the slackening of the reins
of the Police, and the abatement in vigour of the execu


tion of the penal hye-laws when revised and improved by
the Council, was an act of uncalled-for experiment on
the part of General Bourke, which may be palliated on
the plea of ignorance and well meaning j. hut cannot he
justified.
The present ironed-gangs, are no punish-
ment to the idle, reckless, and abandoned ruffians who
are weekly transferred to them- in, such great num-
bers. The jaals- of the Colony have been, and; still are,
crowded with these men. One of the Journals stated
lately, that the men confined in the Sydney Jail under sen-
tence to ironed-gangs, (and keptthere, because theironed-
gang stockades in every part of the territory were already
overflowing), were so excessive of the limits of the
sleeping rooms, that only one moiety of the inmates-
could lie down in the night at one and the same time.
That moiety was not of course an alternate moiety, but
consisted of the strongest men. They lay on damp
stone flags in one of the rooms, some with shreds of
blankets, others with none. And it was matter of as-
tonishment to every body, that one man only should
have died through this sort of imprisonment in an atmos-
phere of 85° (Fahrenheit) outside, and perhaps 110
withmsido the rooms.
But the ironed-gangs being no punishment in them-
selves, is not the only nor even chief evil. Being suc-
ceeded! by a pleasant sojourn in the road-gangs, where
sugar and tobacco, and a plentiful ration of animal food
and wheaten flour, with good slop clothing, together
with the practice of earning money in their own!
hours j these .great indulgences succeeding imprison-
ment in the ironed-gangs, render the latter no terror,
but rather a scource of pleasing anticipation; an
ironed-gang being considered as a sort of. vestibule or
anti-chamber, dull and irksome indeed in itself, but
pleasant so far, that it leads to the Jovial huts ahd fnefry
lives of the jolly road-men.
Let Mr, Stanley, and the Members of the House of
Commons who composed, the Committee on Secondary


Punishments, and all intelligent thinking.people of every
grade in the United Kingdom (for they are all interested
remotely in the consideration), reflect upon the means
now in use to prevent crime.
Ist.—Felons are tried, convicted, and transported, at an
enormous expense in the Mother Colony.
2nd.—They arrive in the Colony, where, notwithstanding
the labour of assigned servants is more moderate than
that of the unconvicted poor of England (while their
food is better both in quality and quantity), yet a still
more pleasureable life awaits them in the interior road-
parties of the Colony, provided they can be content to
' pass six or twelve months of previous dull idleness in
an ironed-gang, encumbered with very light fetters.
The road-parties, as at present conducted, are the
ftlysium of the prisoners, the ultimate end aim and object
l of the restless, the idle, and the drunken among them,
when, after repeated failures to get assigned in Sydney,
either to some Government establishment, or to private
friends, they find it necessary to look elsewhere to ac-
complish a change of masters. The habits of a farm
however, arc the only habits that can 'avail in effecting
reformation among the town-bred convictsi The con-'
victs from the country towns of the United Kingdom,
generally behave well. They are a class of convicts who
have qualities which render them respectable in the eyes
of their employers ; and in thousands of instances they
have kindled the gratitude of their masters, and com-
manded their good offices, when by patient servitude
they have at length become free, either by tieket-of-
leavb, or the expiration of their sentences of trans-
portation.
Two Petitions Were generally signed last year by the
Settlers of the Hunter, complaining Of the prison popula-
tion in that populous portion of the Colony; one proceeded
from Upperflunter, theotherfrom Lower. They werepre-
sentedto the Legislative Council the latter end of the sit-
tings of 1833. One of the had been drawn up
with too much Warmth, and was not therefore that sort


of Petition which could claim very favourable attention.
The Petition from the Lower Hunter, in which stood the
respectable name of Sir Edward Parry, was unexception-
able in style, and was replete with' important state-
ment and good sense.
They both fell dead on the Council Table.
■ Had His Excellency availed himself last Christmas of
these Petitions to change his policy on convict discipline,
by publishing a proclamation expressing his horror at
the outrage at Patrick’s Plains, as soon as tlie banditti
had suffered death and the Commission of Enquiry had
closed ; and had also transmitted circulars to the Benches
of Magistrates in every quarter, calling on them to put
the penal summary laws rigorously in force, and above
all, exculpating Messrs. Mudie and Larnach from
the charges of oppression and dishonesty alleged
against them on the Commission of Enquiry (but
not proved, but on the contrary contradicted by the
witnesses on their cross-examination), by the mutinous
associates and abettors of the men who had been ex-
ecuted, such a step would have been as happy for the
Colony as for the reputation of the Governor. But
such benefits were not to he the portion of a Colony so
notorious, for misrule as New South Wales.
The public silence of the Government on the occasion
in question, coupled with the mode of defence adopted
for the banditti on their trial by Mr; Commissioner
Therry (who in addition to his salary of £BOO a year as
Judge of the Court of Requests, has since been pre-
sented with the office of a Judge of the Court of Claims
to Land (£SOO a year), which, with his fees as a Bar-
rister, render his income larger than that of the Chief
Justice, and half as.much again as those of the Puisne
Judges); the silence of the Government, coupled with
Mr. Therry’s style of defence, and the silence also main-
tained on the result of the Commission of Enquiry, and on
the Petitions from Hunter’s River; all these incidents,
clinched and rivetted by the correspondence carried on
between Mr. Richard Bourkc, the Private Secretary, and


the convicts, unknown inmost instances to their assign-
ees,completed thedestruction of convict subordination at
the Hunter. The effects soon began to show themselves in
other portions of the Colony; but through the active part
taken by the public Press on this head, and the gradually
aroused lethargy of the Magistrates, the elder portion of
the Colony was saved from the contamination. In the
district of the Hunter, a sort of feeling among the convicts
prevailed, and continues at the present time, that the
Governor and the convicts united, are the stronger
party in our commonwealth; and that together, they
are more than a match for their assignees and the Ma-
gistrates. . And it must be admitted, that ■ the present
laws seem to be made to over-rnie the master as much
as the convicts ; and the latter .are shrewd enough to
perceive this temper in the Government, and to pre-
sume on it. ' . .
The censures passed ’on Messrs. Mudic and Larnach
in the letter of the Colonial Secretary at page 50, are
rais-placed, even allowing them to he correct in princi-
ple ; which is more than ■doubtful'. Part of them belong
to the Magistrates; for if the punishments which His
Excellency condemns ought not to have: been inflicted,
the party complaining was not, to blame,, but the Betich,
which believed the complaint to be just in itself, and that
it was lawful in them to punish it. And when it is
considered, that General Bourke was then a novice in
the Colony, it may still be considered doubtful, whether
His Excellency’s opinion in the case is equal to that
of the Bench of Magistrates, many years in the office,
and experienced in the difficult science of dispensing
summary law to such a class of men as British pick-
pockets, highwaymen, and burglars. ■’
His Excellency General Bemrke, has' not conformed to
the rule invariably adopted by his predecessors (except
it Were Governor. Macquarie, and whose deviations
from the rule were attended with most inconvenient
consequences),, namely,- the withholding from British
prisoners of the crown, pardons for their coldnial of


fences, unless accompanied with the recommendation of
the Judges and Magistrates before whom they were tried.
If the records of the pardons granted by His Excellency
be searched, and the circumstances of the trials be
inquired into, it will he found, that pardons have been
granted to colonial offenders of very bad character
(that is, prisoners who have been convicted and punished
since their arrival in New South Wales), and whose cases
have been reported upon by the Magistrates who tried
them, as being such as rendered a pardon improper.
In other cases, bad characters have been pardoned with-
out reference to the Judges or Magistrates who tried
them. This sort of lenity is of course attended with
this consequence ■, that the prisoners become further im-
pressed with the belief, that the Governor considers the
laws too severe; or that the laws are administered with a
rigour beyond their letter or spirit; and that His Excel-
lency by not supporting the laws nor the dignity of those
who administer them, sees in both something wrong.
If the Magistrates left in the Commission of the
Peace by General Darling, were considered by Governor
Bourke unfit to continue in the office, His Excellency
after waiting a year out of respect to his predecessor,
might have issued (as all Governors did before him) a
new Commission, selecting from the present Justices,
such has appeared to His Excellency, proper personsj
and adding to their number other gentlemen of equal or
greater talents and discretion.
In lieu of this, His Excellency has never issued a new
Commission j Ms additions to the Magistracy have been
scanty, not commensurate with the advancing years and
infirmities of the elderly men on the old list, nor with
the increase of our free population.
Governor Bourke therefore, has not shewn that dis-
position to uphold the credit and character of those
whom he has adopted or created as the conservators
of the public peace, and the administrators of the
laws, in his remissions of punishment. Hence the
convicts evince an impression, that the mercy ex


tended to them, has not been the result of mere grace, but
rather an act of a retributive character, which abated
from the undue rigour of the laws, or the severity of their
prosecutors, or the too rigorous zeal of the Judges and
Magistrates who passed sentence on them.
It is a singular circumstance, and illustrates the
statements'in this preliminary article, that while two of
the Journals have been boasting of the quietude of the
Colony, and of the peaceable and orderly conduct of the
prison population, the Legislative Council has resolved
to continue the law familarly, called the bushrauging act ;
which law gives to every free mart the right, on reasona-
ble suspicion, of any one he meets being a prisoner of
the crown (the party being the judge of what is “ reason-
ble suspicion”), of taking him into custody, and giving
him in charge of a constable to be locked up. Such a
law was probably never made in any country in Europe,
where martial iaW was not the law of the land. For
the free man who takes another free man into custody,
is by this act, equally liable himself to be taken into
custody by that other man, that is to say, both may
take each other into custody; and in that case, each may
kill the other with impunity, in case either be resisted by
the other in the execution of this unheard-of la\v.
The law, in principle, is therefore an inroad on the
natural rights of free men, in order to protect the free
portion of the community from the absconding and'plun-
dering habits of the prison population. That is to say,
such are the violent predatory and roving habits of the
assigned servants of the Colony, that the most dangerous
encroachments upon the personal liberty of all ranks of
free men, from the highest to the lowest, are in New South
Wales wow considered necessary. Such is the present
state of society here, according to the opinion and
solemn act at the this moment, of a majority of our
Legislative Council.
The circumstance is very striking; and all that has been
alleged in the proceeding pages ought to be true, unless
* e


this act be one of the most unjustifiable attacks on the
■personal liberty of Englishmen ever attempted by any
Government.
It has been alledgecl by the few who have felt dis-
posed from excessive commiseration or political feeling,
to extenuate the conduct of the assigned servants of
Messrs. Mudlc and Larnach in their mutinous and out-
rageous conduct, that the former ought to reside con-
stantly on his dstatc, in order to assist Mr. Larnach in
managing the men.
It is a proverb of the highest authority, that “no man
can serve two masters.” If therefore this objection had
•been made to Mr. Mudic’s residing on his estate at all,
seeing, that his relative and partner (Mr. Larnach) re-
sides almost constantly on the farm, and is a farmer by
profession, (whereas Mr. Mudie’s knowledge of agricul-
ture is purely colonial) it would have been plausible. Mr
Mudlc and Mr. Larnach arc never absent irom Castle
Forbes together; one is always on the spot; and the part -
nership between them, is productive of advantages in
that respect which single masters cannot obtain; so that
When the purchase of supplies, and those numerous calls
to Sydney as .the great market of the Colony (not to
mention business with the Executive Government which
ncccssaraly occurs to every large proprietor of land and
assignee of servants), imperiously require the presence - of
settlers in general in Sydney, their farms arc Unavoidably
left to their wives and the overseer. This disadvantage
is experienced by every settler in the Colony, excepting
the very few who have partners; which perhaps dbes not
occur with one settler in five hundred.
Mr. Mudiespendsabout halftheyear in Sydney, and the
other half at CastlePorbcs. If he were to reside at the farm
during the absence of Mr. Larnach only, which is very sel-
dom, still his estate wonldbe better managed than the farms
of othfcrs 5 at, least so far as the above objection extends.
Mr. Mudie’s establishment is certainly one of the
largest in the country in one spot; but there are a few


persons who have establishments equally-large, who are
nece&sarly absent in Sydney at numerous intervals
throughout the year. And then their farms are left to
the overseer. But there are great numbers of merchants
and civil officers, large agriculturists and stock holders,,
who never visit their farms except once a year; and
who rely cntirly on their overseers; a class of men (the
overseers) who cannot be considered superior to Mr.
Mudie in exercising a judicious authority over assign-
ed servants, though they may exceed the latter in farm-
ing skill; nor superior to Mr. Larnach either in skill as a
farmer, or as a master. The greater number of over-
seers in the Colony who never see their masters morn,
than once a year, are men who have been prisoners
themselves, and have become free by servitude or the
King’s pardon. It is not to he supposed these men
can he superior either to Mr. Larnach or Mr. Mudie
in exercing authority over prisoners. The objection
under consideration therefore, seems to be the result,
either of want of candour, or want of reflection.
These remarks may savour too much of detail, and
appear too domestic-like to be introduced in a pam-
phlet ; but the readers of these pages in London, may,
and doubtless will, hear of the objection to Mr. Mudie’s
conduct as an assignee absent for half the year; and it
is necessary therefore they he apprised, that probably
the very persons making thefn, never see their own ex-
tensive farming and grazing establishments more than
once in one, two, or three years, and that such estab-
lishments are under the management of a single
man who was once an assigned servant himself, and can
just read and write. A very large establishment at the
Hunter 11 belonging to a civil officer of great rank in
Sydney' is at the present moment, exclusively managed
by a convict.
It is not necessary perhaps to notice, that Messrs,
Mudie and Larnach employ two overseers, one an Emi-
grant, and one a freed man. The former overseer has just


left their service, after being nine years in their employ-
inont ; returning home to his family in the James Har-
ris, with the savings of his yearly salaries.
In concluding this preliminary statement, it is not in-
tended by the author to insinuate in any part, that
the class ol Colonists who have been impoliticly and
somewhat insidiously distinguished from the Emi-
grants, by the term of “ freed men,” and of “ Eman-
cipists, should come under any of the remarks made
by him on the prison population (including tho.se
prisoners who hold tickets-of-excmption and tickets-,
01-leave). Free and freed men are held by the Author
on a perfect equality as to civil rights; and to them
belongs doubtless equally, the inalienable right of
conducting their pursuits in business, science, and
literature, without molestation or detraction of any
kind. And he would further wish to explain, that the
xstoem in which any man ought to be held, should arise,
noton account of his being cither an Emigrant or an
Emancipist, but on account of his superior moral con-
duct ; and accordingly, the Author of these pages holds
a moral man, who is an Emancipist, in more esteem
both publicly and privately, then an Emigrant of less
claim to moral character. And whenever occasion may
call for it, he will cheerfully concede the superibr claim
to public consideration as well as private, of any Emanci-
pist who shall excel the Emigrants in good citizenship.
In proof, the Author with pleasure points to the cir-
cumstance of the most respectable of the Emancipists,
men of long standing in the Colony, nsociatiug publicly
with Emigrants of the first rank', as Committee-men on
political questions, as joint Bank Directors, and as joint
Trustees of our Colleges and public Institutions ; and
also as associates of the Emigrants of similar rank and
education to themselves in private life. So that by such
prudent and discreet conduct on the part of the old
ICmtmoipisls just mentioned, so becoming in the eyes of
those whose superior judgment and influence in our
society is worth having, great numbers of the Emancipists


of all ranks and classes of respectability (usning this
latter term as applicable to every moral man, no matter
whether a mechanic, a settler, or a merchant), arc not
known as Emancipists except (o the very old Colonists, but
are actuallybelievcdto hare arrived free in the Colony.
Note to page U— Extract from the trial of Mr. Mudie'i men for
shooting at Mr. Larnach, ,• taken from ' the Sydney Monitor of the Uth
December, 18?3,
Mr. Therry called for the. deposition of this witness, taken at the Police
office on commitment of the prisoners.
The Chief Justice was of opinion, that the learned gentleman could not de-
mand the document as a right; it was optional with the Crown Officer to
grant it. If however, there was any apparent contradiction in the deposition,
it could he handed np to the Bench, and the Court would take notice of it, in
its charge to the Jury.
The Solicitor-General declined furnishing Mr. Therry with the deposition.
Cross examination of Mr. Larnach continued,. —My back was towards the-
prisoners when the second shot was fired : I supposed from what they both
said and did, they intended to kill me; I think the prisoners have all been
flogged from Castle Forbes.
The Solicitor-General rose to object to this mode of cross-examination: ho
thought this point had been decided bv the Court on the trial yesterday; lie
felt convinced, that the learned counsel for the defence acted on the sugges-
tion, and under the advice, of some person not before the Court; he re-
sisted such aline of defence as Irregular.
Mr, Therry denied the imputation of the Solicitor-general with warmth - ,
he called upon that officer for an explanation; lie appeared there, as an ad-
vocate for the prisoners at the bar, by whom alone lie was instructed as to
the particulars of the defence. In hisjprofesskmnl capacity, lie would listen to
no persons whatever ; and he indignantly repelled the insinuation thrown
out, of acting for political purposes at the instance of some one behind the
curtain.
The Court was of opinion, it could not call upon the Solicitor-general to
enter into, the explanation sought for; the learned Judge had 1 heard, and
lamented, the expression alluded to; he considered it an unguarded one, but
honed it would rest there.
Cross-examination continued—l did not affix any particular meaning to the
words made use of by the prisoners respecting their,‘preventing my ever
getting another man flogged, except what I have before stated; I did not
charge the fowling piece* with duck, but buck shot; lam not aware of having
stated the transaction differently; I heard BUey’s voice; I should not be apt
to miss a man at the distance ol ten yards; what 1 have stated as having
dropt in the water and sand might have been peas or pebbles.


EXTRACTS FROM THE "SYDNEY GAZETTE.”
In has been alleged in the forgoing pages, that; the
Sydney Gazette is conducted by a frdqhnan, and by a pri-
soner of the crown holding a ticket-of-leavc,y‘om/I/y. The
latter was engaged at the Gazette office in the middle of
last March. The following extracts from the Journal in
question, will illustrate the single, as contra-distinguished
from the joint editorshihp, if the reader notice the change
of sentiment and of style after the middle of March.
The difference is great.
The " insubordination” among die prison population, which
is alleged by some individuals, to prevail generally through-
out the Colony, must, if it exist at all, have originated in some
cause,' We do not believe, that the peace of the Colony is in
the slightest danger from combinations among the prisoners,
notwithstanding the great stress that is laid, particularly by
one of our contemporaries, on those occasional outrages which
do, and will take, place here, so long as the country continues
to be a depot into which Great Britain may annually pour thou-
sands of the most depraved of her population. But we will
venture to assert, that let any respectable emigrant, after he
has resided a short time amongst us, be asked what is the re-
sult of his experience as compared with his anticipations, and
he will at once express his surprise at the general orderly, and
respectful behaviour of those persons, the dread of whom had
almost induced him to abandon Ills intention of emigrating
hither. We here speak of the prison population col-
lectively—that there are many, upon whom no lenity will
work a reformation, is unhappily too true. But, although we
will not admit the existence of “ insubordination" to the ex-
tent to which some state it is carried, we can easily believe that
a sort of saucy, dissatisfied spirit may prevail in some places
which did not prevail so generally during the administration of
the late Governor. There must have been a cause for this.
AVhat is that cause ? That is the true question to be investi-
gnted.
On the arrival of His Excellency General Bourke, as, indeed,
was the case on the, arrival of each of his predecessors, applica-
tions were made to him for various grades of indulgences,
founded, of course, upon a variety of claims, and supported by
the usual declarations of desert. The manner in which they


Were received—the humane, but (considering His Excellency’s
then inexperience in the Colony) precipitate acquiescence in the
wishes of the petitioners, had its natural effect upon the prison
population. They saw that a change had arrived, and they set
about taking advantage of that change. Shortly after -this,
followed the "Summary Punishment Act," which took from
the Magistrates, much of that authority which they had pre-
Viously exercised—the prisoners thought, that a New South
Wales millenium had arrived —they saw a disposition evinced
by the Government to protect them from possible injustice—
they beheld the authority of the Magistrates defined, and they
became what, among themselves is colloquially termed “ boun-
cible.” Now, then, here we have a cause for the manifestation
of a portion of that independence of bearing, which, by some,
is designated '* insubordination." —Sydney Gazette, 26th No-
vember.
From our personal knowledge of Mr. Mudie, we declare (and
We have so expressed ourselves to several gentlemen lately),
that we have always believed him lobe one of the very last
men in the colony who would use an assigned servant ill. This
is our opinion still—an opinion which we will not alter until it
ho proved to us, that we have been in error. But, then, it is
necessary, under all the peculiar circumstances of this particu-
lar case—occurring as it did at such a time —that an enquiry
Should take place, were it only in justice to Mr. Mudie. We do
not think, however, since an enquiry has been directed, that the
duties of the gentlemen who compose the Com mission, should be
confined to an investigation of what may, or may not, have oc-
curred at Castle Forbes. We know no two more really indepen-
dent men than Mr. Plankett and Mr. Hely j and we say, that
they ought to be instructed to make a general inquiry, and tore-
port upon the existence, or otherwise, of the alleged general
"insubordination’’ at the Hunter—Sydney Gazette, \ 7th De-
cember,
Wo have read so much of the evidence taken before the late
Commission of Enquiry at Patrick’s Plains, as has been pub-
lished in the Sydney Monitor. The impression on our minds is
still the same as it ever was. We never did believe that Mr.
Mudie was a hard master; we never did believe that he would
treat a servant ill. We have said so over and over again, in the
hearing of more than a dozen gentlemen, who will, we are sure,
testify, were it necessary, to the truth of our assertion. Still
we were anxious for an enquiry ; and, for many reasons, we re-
joice that an enquiry has been instituted. For the present we
forbear comment. When the evidence takeh before the Com-
mission is before the public in a complete shape, we purpose
entering fully into the subject. Strange things will come out
by and bye— Sydney Gazette, 2 2d January.


Wo know not whiu a correspondent of ike Australian may
think of the '• Muche Enquiry,” but we confess that, in our
opinion, it has terminated most creditably on the parties iutn-
ated Our contemporary wishes to k now when the publication
of the evidence will bo completed? We beg to inform him,
l int ills n°i intended to confine the publica'ion to the pages of
the Monitor. Bor many and good reasons, it is coming out in a
pamphlet.—Sydney Gaselte, 4Hi February.
No one can regret the necessity which existed for the enquiry
wnn h took place a' Castle Forbes more than we do ; but we
do insist, that under all the circumstances, it was necessary,
lue public mind was in a state of most unusual excitement—
the cry of “ insubordination” was wafted on every gale that
blew from the district of the Hunter-an act of during violence
was commuted by a party ol desperate ruffians, and was eaeerly
hud hold of to swell the b nst—they were enplined, brought to
trial, and convicted : but their defence was of such a nature,
that the Government could not, taking that defence in conjunc-
tion with many other circumstances which occurred about that
period, do otherwise than appoint a Commission of Enquiry—
it was culled for by the public yoice—it was recommended by
the public press as an act of justice towards Messrs. Mudte and
Earnnc h it was courted by those gentlemen, who congratulate
themselves, and are congratulated, on the result.— Sydnei
Gutette, Z7th February. ’
The editor was after this period, joined in his editorial
duties by a prisoner of the crown, holding a ticket-of-leave.
We, therefore, applaud the system adopted by General
Uourke*— man worthy the name must applaud it. The
law on tins subject, which has been passed under his auspices,
while it is a humane law, is also fully adequate to the main-
tenance of that proper discipline which none more than our-
selves desire to see upheld among the prison population of the
colony, A declaration that he would make “ transportation
worse than death” has been attributed to Mr. Stanley, the pre-
sent Secretary of State for the colonies. We know not
whether the authority upon which a declaration so indicative of
the statesman —so complimentary to the character of a member
or ‘ the noble house of D.rhy” as (we presume) a professional
Lhrislatn has been put foitli, is such an authority as should
induce us to place implicit reliance on its authenticity ;■ but the
tact is, that such an expression has been attainted to’ him, and
equally indisputable, that there are parties here, who ‘‘ hug the
thought and gloat over the anticipated possibility, that the im-
puted threat may not be numbered among the many professions
of men who, while armed with “a little brief authority," too
ulten “ keep the word of promise to the ear, and break it to the


hope.” > For onr parts, we cannot believe that so demoniac a
design: was ever entertained by .Mr. Stanley—-for base must be
that heart, which would exult at the sufferings of a fellow
creature. . . ,
We have expressed ourselves warmly upon this subject, be-
cause we feel indignant at the pitiful and malignant projects
which we know to be contemplated, for the express purpose of'
bringing into disgrace with the Home Government, the most
popular Governor which the colony has seen since the days of
Macquarie. But His Excellency and those who act with him,
may defy the puny efforts of their enemies, who are also
enemies to the best interest of the colony. He and bis supr
porters are fixed upon a rock —the rock ot public opinion. Let
them persevere in the good work which they have commenced ;
justice and humanity must triumph!— Sydney Gazette, 20f/t
March.
The real question at issue is—are the statements contained
in the pamphlet true ?—not who is the author ? Suppose Hu-
manizes should prove to be some philanthrophisl in are
his representations to be, on that account alone, utterly disre-
garded —thrown aside without enquiry ? What tyranny might
not be exercised—nay, what tyranny has not been exercised,
upon the principle, that wretched men so situated ought not
obtain, and, in fact, could not obtain, a'hearing- l—Sydney
Gagelte 32d March. 1
“ The constabulary of the Colony generally, have not'arms enew. Those
of the Hunter have scarcely any; those of Patrick’s Plains have none. This
omission, after all that has taken place, looks like intention, and Is actually
felt as such by the exasperated graziers and fanners ol the Hunter ; and we
roitret to give our aid to the loud complaints now making—spmo from proper
motives and natural feelings, and some from motives not quite so good, by
noticing such incomprehensible conduct. Some gentlemen are selling oil
their estates and live stock, and leaving the Colony, those evidently are not
mere partisans. No man carries his factious feelings so tar, as to force his
cattle and lauds into the market so suddenly, and exile himself as suddenly
from the land of his adoption, without feeling extremely sore as regards those
measures which have compelled him to take such steps, t hey arajnupable
s igns of the times, and ol the storm which is gathering '.—Monitor.
The above is an extract from the Monitor j and if ever an
instance was presented, of “ crooked politics” in a public
journal, that instance is now on record. Some of our intimate
friends .who may peruse this, will, we have no doubt, re-
member, that .within, the, last few weeks, we have more than
once predicted, that no very long space of time would elapse
before the Monitor would become an, Alarmist —‘before the
editor would stand forth a parodist of the boast of the noble
Greek,
I, too, am an Athenian! ... .
We will pass by the observations respecting.the inefficiency
of the police force at the Hunter s River district; because,
although the source from 'winch they spring, and thc motives
* f


\\ith which'they are now brought forward, are apparent upon
the face of them ; yet we not only agree in opinion with our
contemporary in this respect, but we also go further, and state
our belief, that in no part of the interior of the colony is the
.police force sufficiently : strong. We shall,- therefore,: not ad-
vert further to this portion of the Monitor’s remarks. But it is'
pur duty, as public writers—it is 'our duty, as warm admirers of
thfr-'-nuld sway”:of the present Government—if is our duty,;as
fweiids of humanity, and enemies of petty dispotism (the worst
of all dispotism, because the disposition to exercise it exists only
-in grovelling niinds)—it is our duty,; to declare; in the face of
thp colonists whom the Monitor's statement is daloiilated to de-'
is our duty to inform the British .public, who might be;
led astray; by such barefaced, misrepresentation, that the “ gen-
tlemen who are Said to be “ selling off their.estates,” are no
outlier than Mr. Mudie, the proprietor of a place called “ Castle
horbes (a “ castle ’ the name ot which will be handeddown in
the annals of the eolony) and.Mr, J. P. Webber, the'“ Sage of
the North - .the O.; P. Q. of the Hunter’s River i ; Mr. Muclie. ;
is understood to: he about tomrooeed to England; with ;a full cle-i
initiation to reform the whole: system of prison-discipline in
New South Wales ! he goes . charged with . -the evidence taken
by the .Commissioners at ‘the “ Castle !” and primed with the
©overflows letter thereupon—let-the liberates of the Colony
prepare for the. dreadful explosion<! • This gentleman has propa-
gated a report of his intention to sell off . his. property at
Hunter’s River : Mr. Wedbek has advertised his for sale ; but
the trick is “ plain as the sun at noon day';’.’ for why sho.ukl an
ipdividual dispose of pn improved .bst&te,.iuiidef : .ridibialfih.s
pretence that-property.in; .this, colony tamnsafe. owingDo’the
“ insubordination” of the prison popiilatlon, while, at the very
moment he expresses such desire, his' name appears in the
Official ’Qatelle as the would-be pai'chaser of large tract a;nf
unlocated land h|’ i; Does this gentleman, ‘with theaid of ,hiS !
jriepd pf-the Bfonitor,. ’ think to .Does’
he imagine that his advertisement W.ill deceive any but fools f
But, after all, we way be deceived—perhaps the gentleman is
about to take his departure—perhaps he thinks that his estates
here would be better managed were be away—perhaps he has
reflected, and arrived at the conclusion, that i\ change of , l System
would ailay much of that “ insubordination" of which he is so
much in dread; and, perhaps he is rightl It is our intention,
very shortly, to detail to the British Government many things 1
which Humanitas (whose pamphlet we have seen in its pro-‘
gress through the press) has either omitted or been ignorant
of. We have papers in our possession which shall yet see ! the
light; and OP Q shallfind, that we will “ take a decided part;”
and that our paper mil not “ go- to the devil" on account bf'our
■[' rho application was made long' before Mr. Webber came to the de-
termination to sell on and leave the Coloiiv, and afterwards Withdrawn.— The
Author. 4 ■ '


not so doing. We were doubtful of our course hitherto-r-we
haw since-taken soundings,” and the chart is before us,
■ But what does the Monitor. mean by saying, that the idle'
bombast ofi such men maybe viewed as the “signs of the-
times, and of the storm which is gathering ?” That “ signs of
the times” have: lately been manifested is quite obvious : but
they are “ signs” that the “-times are out of 'joint-and as,
for the “ storm, the enemies of General .Boub-kb will-find,
that it is merely what sailors call " a cap full of wind.” Rea-
der, did.you ever hear; of “ a storm-in a tea-pot,” or of “a
puddle in a storm ?” The effect of one sor the other of such
“ storms has General Bourse to-apprehend —and no more I*-.-
Sydney Gazette, April 5,1834. ;
Patrick’s Plains Justices.
“ A-young military- .officer, formed by nature to be a good soldier, and'a.
pleasant gentleman,'but by no means for a Police Magistrate, was after the-
famous “ Mndie Enquiry,” sent to Patrick’s Plains to take precedence of all
the old stagers there,” — Monitor.
Of this we are most happy, because the singular error in
judgment--—and the more rcm-tarkable opinions of the magis-
tracy at Patrick’s Plains, disclosed in the famous “ Mudie En-
quiry,” imperatively demanded a stipendiary public officer to
interlere and restrain the just and noble exercise of the judicial
functions by the “ old stagers there,” whose total incapacity
was agreeably manifested (if the published evidence taken
on the Enquiry may be credited) by the double flogging on one
day of a prisoner for the same offence ; and the Christian
scourging of another, for not profaning the Sabbath by work-
ing at his usual avocations on that day. It was at the tithe
when the “ famous Mudie Enquiry” took place, reported with
great assurance of sincerity, that the editorof the Monitor was
to, be offered: the appointment; and if the above are really his
sentiments,, then the “ old stagers” would have received him
t oith, open:arms. We are; serious when we assert, that such a
report prevailed 5. but had the fact taken: place, we should have;
been ,obliged to dispute'its propriety ;, because, for certain rea-
sons-which the, public cannot- fail to appreciate, there would-
have beenthe bug-bear '.friendship, and a number of other pe-
culiar association, of place and individuals to -restrain the inde-
pendent; exercise of ;Ms functions. If the editor smart under-
tills disappointment inflicted; upon,him, by the preferenc'e given,
to a military officer,-we can easily excuse his sneer,- —particu-
larly'at the present moment. fVe know that the proposition
of nominating stipendiary magistrates, in room of the factious,
and subordinate individuals- who now, in a majority of cases,
inefficiently enforce their authority, has been seriously enter-
tained by the Government and we do really believe, that the-
nomination of men.of no experience whatever in the politics-
of the colony, would be far less dangerous (especially, at the.


Hunter), than the present enlightened magistracy ; at least those
who have henignanlly been guilty of excesses in punishment.
The public have this guarrantee, at least, for the officer in ques-
tion, namely, that which is derived from the honour inherent in
a man robed with a commission in the army, and his character
and education as a' gentleman. He will not be swayed by
interest, nor intimidated by threats ; and when the comments
of our contemporary meet his eye, his energy will be doubled
to anticipate that system of annoyance he has a right to ex-
pect from the known proficiency in the agt of “ brave and ho-
nourable” traduction and cowardly inuendo, professed by those
whose pride has been hurt by the elevation of an unbiassed
individual to a post, calculated to abridge that authority they,
have been accustomed to exercise, with proierbud justness and
tenderness over their happy and prosperous district.— bjjduey
Gazette, April 5, 1834
Extracts from the " SYDNEY GA ZETTE" of 5th of
April, 1833.
Statements' and reasonings why insu-
bordination dees not exist among
, the prison population.
ROAD GANGS. '
Whilst a faction are extremely
active in proclaiming the existence
of relaxed' discipline and insolence
in the prison population assigned to
jnnaters j it is a singular fact, that
where the manifestation of rent im-
policy lnv> exhibited itself, thcrcthe
evil has either escaped-observation,
or been wilfully tolerated.
Thus the Settler, is mi anthoritjh
or at least, a dubious one in tins
question. He will cry up insubor-
dination, because the greater the
prejudice against the prisoner, the
more secure becomes he o his ser-
vices ; and even during ihe preva-
lence of such prejudice,: petty ty-
ranny is considered comparatively
unimportant, since the Settler can
always plead the spacious pretext i,t
regard for “ discipline, as a reason
for his oppression.
If we were persuaded (which wn
can not he in the teeth of fact to the
contrary) that there really is a spuit
of inanhordindalioii abroad, our duty
due to society, would cull us actively
forth to denounce the misgovern-
Statements and reasonings -why in-
subordination does exist among the
prison population.
Tims does it therefore become
highly necessary to act with singular
decisaion in any measure nlfecting
the joint interest of the master and
servant; and as we know the labour
in most of the rood parties is riot
equal to that'in the service of the
colonists, and ns we have heard it
asserted, that there is a tendency
to shew a derided, and indeed it na-
tural preference to the Government
mm its, some step slioiildbe resolved
on, in order to check a disposition, so
pernicious to the cause of subordin-
ation and discipline. , .
Unless the road- gangs are super-
intended with ■■■diligence, and their
present mild and inefficient nature is
remodelled (a rational severity being
(he groundwork of the stniituie),
there is no doubt that the i links of


mCnllljal. engendered snob evils.—
11 nl vy: know tliat no such insubor-
dination ever did exist.
. Our experience of this Colony,
extends over a number of years, and
witnessing the different views of dif-
ferent governments -; enabled by bur
peculiar avocations to bear both
sides-of a subject discussed .tern-
peralely.and ably; and afforded in
facta variety of means to know Ihe
actual state of every great question,
we feel no hesitation in : fearlessly
.asserting, that net/er were the pri-
soners under wore complete. sn!wr~
dhtalion, and instances of tumult so
vert/ rare.
In forming this deliberate,opinion,
wo .have the, happiness to be borne
put to llie amplest extent by some of
the most'distinguished & honourable
settlers—men who would feel them-
selves degraded if they allowed a
hitler ami jaundiced personal feeling
to the Governor, to operate on their,
judgments, and produce an associa-
tion with men factious frorii princi-
ple, and accustomed to,. political
trickery for years, and who consider
the abuse of an independent Go-
vernment quite as a matter of every
day business, and indeed of duty.
tlic gangs vvilr.be',swelled by,.,the
insol nl and lazy, and the command
by the colonist of .manual labour,
must buffer a coiTcspbtiding. and au-
titral diminution- / ...
State of H, M. Goat, Apuil 2
Under sentence 'of death, 2; for
trial, 118; in default of bail, 11 ;
coniines,!-19 ; for bard labour, 31!}
Under sentence foiron-gangs, 101 ;
fur the interior, to be dealt with, 5 ;
under examination, 1 , for tile fac-
tory, 8 ; debtors, 3 T ; malting a total
of 323. —Sydney Gazette —(,A r . B,
Tim Criminal Court closed the 22d of
hebruary last'.)
Of (be necessity of a different
mode of discipline as applicable to
road gangs, there can be no ques-
tion ; and although we are not ad-
vocates for remorseless and sweeping
cruelty, there is a certain degree of
command of insuperable importance
for the master to enforce.
-The settler must be protected —and
that protection can best be extended
by rendering the labour' in road-
gangs infinitely more severe than the
employment ordinarily allotted by
the settlers; .otherwise ■ the' punish-
ment ,contemplated by the practice
of turning persons into government,
becomes an inevitaldeU’jidK/g-nicc.,
This' subject seems to have been
■altogether; overlooked in chimerical
outcries about tbe.pbantom insubor-
dination t—and , we, are surprised,
that to the imaginary list Of grie-
vances laid hold of by the fiction,
this substaniiU One should have been
wholly neglected, ij: .i. '
, The political state .of the Colony, at present,. well deserves
the attention of the authorities at home. The all-important
question- is now nt issue, whether the public goo,d or private
interest shall prevail— whether a Government based upon prin-
ciples of liberality and even-handed justice, shall be over-
turned by the machinations of the handful of unprincipled men,
who > compose what is here familiarly. desianaietl the lac-
lion ?" i We .call them unprincipled wen, because we know
many of them to be so—their scheme, the motives which ac


thate'them; and ih'fe 'objects thtfy have iti view, are fumiliarito-
us. Why, then, should we;heaita(ie^o' : de&ignate tliern by
only applicable term that, occurs to us at the nioment? ' ’ ' y ■
That a change of/system ,in the management of public
affairs here would arouse the ire of those who ■“ grew fat" upon
that which, preceded-it, iSribst have' hik'd expectedi ■' That a Go-
vernor who : ha^,divested lii mpelf ,of mpch.'of ! ‘tlrat,,jpb#er by 1
the exercise: of which,'
gathered around him a band of greedy expectants, and, on
that accbulit—fawning sycophan ts,; fpdst have been-anticipated-.
That a Govcrnnor who evinced, a disposition to protect the
•weak. against the strong—to, take part with the oppressed
rather than the oppressor, should riot.'have found enemies in
the ranks of those Very oppressors, was riot to be hoped 1 for.
Here then (and we call the attention' of the Secretary of Sitate
to the indisputable fact), are to be found the motives which in-
fluence the nest of hornets which General Bourkb has dis-
turbed;, The insects endeavour to plague him with their buzz,,,
andthey would stvig if' iHey 'could. It is our bounden duty,
then, toward the iautiipritiep ;at (home,,,before they entertain-
petitions or representations from. this, colony, to look well, to
the source whence they- may emanate, 1 and not) suffer the cna.-
rticter bf a pbpular fhler to be Whispered away by -a bandmf
selfish intriguers—recipients of laird and convict servants under
the past dynasty, who l sigh.ifor the.retppn of those days .tybicli,
happily for the-colony, are now goneand for ever." • 1
No passioh more predominates in the minds of men whom
circumstances pave raisgd above the sphere in which they were
destined, by nature,, to move, than that.,'which, leads to-the exer-
cise of petty despotism towards those over whom they may
happen to possess a temporary power. This principal is gene-
ral; blit we are sure it Will be admitted by every man at air
conversant with this colony, to be particularly applicable here.
The great bulk of population has been for years under the ah--
sbliite ; government of. the magistracy. The history of the
cplbny 'does not; we believe, 1 afford a single instance till within
a few years, of iutcrfererice' by the executive with the barbar-
ous punishments' which. these magisterial Courts of tn-justice-
were in the constant practice of awarding. Good G d . wnat
disclosures have there not been from time to time ! And are-
there to .be found men who would desire to behold the per-
netuiitimv of a system under which isueh atrocities have
been committed ?, Would the “ bull-frog farmers on tie
Hunters clet'ire to ereCt triangles in their-stock yards, and to be
pertnitted to retain a scbufger i; as 1 part_ of their domestic es-
tahiisliments. ? Something /very like this hat 1 been; tolerated an
'fohner (lays’ 5 : db‘the ,f< bull-frogs* sigh for the return of those
liaiVpy timea" Lo6k, also; to the-ma<efte& of- winch n-ura-
bers bf the magistracy have hitherto been unavoidably com*
posed, find of which, for some time to come, t raany of them


mustconfintie, to be* composed.f Men of low
educationj . and without an atom of'that consideration for, the;
■frailties or- feelings of those- whom, oircun.stances;havfe‘reduced:
beneath them, whichalmdst in variably accompanies l a cultiifatecl:
mind—imeh; who; have never been humanized: . Is it :io such'
that unlimited* powers ought-,td.be'entrusted, Weiadmitythafr
the obdurate natures ' of .uiariyiof .the 1 degraded: beings who are:
subjected’.' to-magisterial ; contraulm dy.•; have: the. effect of >har«
dening:indi»idualswho, in other citcumstancesj mighty;pro«
bably be lenient; hut; even; admitting this tot be isoj the faet'it-.
self: makes for our argument, that! a-limitishould' be placed?to
power, because no 'magistrate: ought ,to;be from Amy
extraneous' reasons, to. allow.aiseverity ;o.f 'disposition, arising,
from whatever' cause, toi iniiucnco hi;n i:iho ,*uiims trati on of
justice. Actuated, by the!.desire: to place-the penal system of
the colony upon a footing:l so defined' as to prevent the recur-’
renoe of magisterial barbarity. General Boukke iutrodufefed the;
'■ Summary Punishment Act/’., when, alb at.once,, the lire which
had been only 'smouldering, burst into a blaze, and ,c insubor-
dination 1" was the cry. But this, also. His Excellency might
have anticipated, ‘f. What [ ait ? take ali t at one fell .swoop?? i
No more 'land—no- more .convict. 'mechanics—this was toad,
enough } 'butto take the pound' of flesh” also—to-restrict the
whippings and the torturings-—to manifest any regard for the
backs:i of rascally-oor;victs”t-*-was not 'to be borne. Hence
the outcry againsttheiGovernor,.' Not-ffom the colonists, as-a
body. No, for General Bourke is loved ,by the . .people '•, bub
from .men from whom- something has been taken; And what was
that something JouMrt Stanley! we l call-upon name
humanity; to-attend- to this notorious: fact, for we do not believe
the savage declaration attributed-to you; We ask you whether
you: cae pay. any attention-to .petitions' or representations ema-
nating from a faction, whose sole complaiut is, that they, cannot
punish men as they! please, but who. have not been enabled to
bring forward any one instance inproof, thatthelaw as it exists,
is: not fully adequate for all: just! purposes ?' We repeat, then *
thatthe political condition of the Colony at present* is well 1
Worthy the attention of the. authorities at home;” The ®olo--
nists are:gradually: recovering from that:state of disunion:hud
strife in: which.'they have- existed for eevdralyears’paat.: i»ho
object of the'.enemies of; the Goldhyis to embarrass the present
Government)-in the;(hope*■•of; bringing batik those*—good old
times’;- when mill was: law,' and magistrate^virtually irresponsU
blepand Wheii. no 'mnrhwas Jiltely-tooprosper in his: worldly af-
fairs, who did not bend his neck before.fever-petty‘dtespot: • But
let the Colonists rally round their Governor, and that hope will
be vain, —Sydney G-dihHe’;Bih April:.''xix ■
:f These Magistrates wove , in. the Commission /in.General.Davling’s.time.
The Sydney Gazette not ojily defended tlieiii against the attache of the .op-
position Journals, but eulogised l them for their talents ami patriotism',—(The
Author;) ■ - ; • .... . ■. •


■ We have several clerks and reporters in our' office, and we
certainly are indebted to cadi in turn for scraps of local intelli-
gence ; like all our contemporaries. If: the Monitor has asso-
ciated us with one of them, we plead- guilty to assistance in
our. “ light columns;” but not even the editor of that journal
fas, wo have already declared), clever as he may consider him-
self, shall ever have the honour of introducing any matter into
our paper, which has not, been previously approved of by its :
neither shall any individual influence us, in the slightest,degree,
as.to theiOiannef in which we,shall treat.any public subject.
We are rather obliged to the Monitor-for doing- this, because
it affords us an opportunity to explain the reason or, the change
of sen.tipieut which we now profess. -, We considered " insub-
ordination" among the prison population-—we still consider it
—a very btKlthing, and that it ought to be repressed by every
possible means. At one time we believed that this dangerous
principle was . spreading throughout l the Colony-; because we
never could,,suppose, that individuals, assuming the character;
and moving in the sphere of gentlemen, would deliberately en-
ter our study, sit down at our table,: and magnify or misrepre-
sentthe mbst frivolous,occurrences, in order, by imposing on
our credulity!: to swell the demand for a change; of men and
and measures, and thereby promote theirown selfish and party
views. But at length our eyes were opened; by degrees wo
found out the secret; we saw what was at work, and we blushed
to think that we could have so.long been hood-winked and un-
consciously made a political tool of by men whose intellects we
consider far inferior to our own. We found out the truth,,and
we have fearlessly, proclaimed it* Such is the history of our
alleged inconsistency. According, to the practice of some men,
consistency would seem to mean an obstinate adhearance even,
to an erroneous principle,, when once adopted.; We interpret
the phrase very differently. , ,
We learn (not with any great surprise) that other tnetf have;
lately fled to the bush from the farm of Major Mudie ; and’
with respect to the c ‘ Plains,” if the prisoners are getting more
“ insubordinate’’ there,(of which-we entertain some doubt) the
Commission", explains, in bold language, the real cause. Our
Contemporary says that. Argyle is quiet, and Campbell-town is
quiet;. but that Patrick’s Plains are in an. uprhar 1 The truth
Is, that Argyle and Campbell town are peaceable.dist icts-
masters there act with justice towards their assigned servants.
Hunter’s- Rivihr (combining Patrick’s Plains) have been proved
themselves to he - something which we will not name.—
Syd, Gqz,, IQth of April, 1834. , -1! -; J v v ,
Any thing but “the Major.”
Since the capture of Hitchcock and his companions, six more
pf Major Mouik’s men have taken to the hush, one of them
was Stephen Parrott, the- man who was tied to a tree with


Cooke the constable, for refusing to join the bushrangers, wh«u
on his way to be flogged. He has been flogged since, and ha*
frequently declared that he wished he had been hanged with the
others rather than remain in the Major’s service. In all pro-
bability the alternative he preferred awaits him. — Thursday,
\Olh April,
We beg to call the. particular attention of our readers to the
able letter from the editor of the Tasmanian to Lord Brougham,?
which we have inserted incur last pogeto-day. Ihe writer,
while he exposes the “ change of principle,” overthrows the
arguments of those who, dreading the appearance of
nitas, endeavour to prejudice his introduction to the world by
investing him with a character which he repudiates, but which,
were the identity established, would not, and ought not, to weigh
one jot against facts and argument. But we do not mean, at
present, to pursue this part of the subject. _ When occasion
serves, and necessity requires, the author will avow himself;
but he is not one to be driven from the incognito which it now
pleaseth him to assume, by misrepresentation and idle vapour-
ing. The invisibility he has chosen is warranted by the efforts
daily making to penetrate his secret. For what purpose is the
information so eagerly sought ? The pamphlet is not before
the public ? and yet are the pack in full cry, endeavouring to
hunt down the author ! Why should this be } Are some felka
conscience-stricken ?—Sydney Gexetle, 15 ih April.
The Sydney Herald of yesterday confirms the statement
contained in our last, that sir other of Mr. Mudiu’s men have
taken the bush ; and we may naturally anticipate intelligence,
that some fresh enormities have been committed—that some
fearful instances of crime have taken place, which will conduct
the wretched perpetrators to the gallows. Why is it, that dis-
content prevails solely at Patrick’s Plains 1 why is it in that
district alone, that the undefined thing called “ insubordination
exists ? tu/iu is it that almost every instance of taking to the
bush—is dated from the farm of Mr. Munio Ij: and mhy is it
information as will lead to.the apprehension, and bring to conviction the R-W,
of armed Bushrangers who feloniously , el > t s :rt j, d . ,*^ e n nt° U *Fur f
fantain Dumaresn, of St. Aubma, on the night of the Uth Instant. Fur-
,l J* if the nerson or persons giving such information, are prisoners of the
Crown, they will be recommended by the Bench of Magistrates to the Go-
vernment for a Conditional Pardon. By order of the Bench.
JOHN HIVING SCOTT.
Clerk to the Bench.
Court-houte, Invermoin, June 20tti, 1834. itm— Sfventy Pounds
it lias been represented
to the Government, that on the 19th ultimo, a Gang of Seven Armed Men,
nmoncat whoni were the undermentioned convicts, and an individual
name^Mactional fthe supposed leader), attacked the dwelling-house and os


that that gentleman., instead ,of “-.labouring in’ his avocation-’’ at
Sydney—playing’the part of a cunning-’- 1 Observer" —why is it
we ask, that he is not at his estate at the-Hunter ? Instead of
exercising his taste for the marvellous, at Head Quarters, ought
he pot to be engiiged in establishing-a proper -system of man-
agement on his farm ? instead of being up to the ears in the:
mire of petty political intrigue—emp'oyed in the worthy tusk of
whispering- away-the character, and attempting to injure the
prospects of an humble, unoffended individual— why is he’ not
in the midst of his assigned servants, engaged in the laudable
endeavour to induce content, as some trilling recoin pence for
ihmuhitdntiai’-benefits he ’enjoys. through their labour ? We
cati tell Mr, Mbniß; that vve are well acquainted-with the -whole
of the'notable projecf-which at present engages his attention
in Sydney 1 ; we can also tell him, that'his -paltry,-unmanly
scheme will : be- defeated ; : would-be-tyrants work in most
instances, with low tools; -and of such a nature is the present
dirty attempt to ; asSail (does the man think we cannot see his
-object -?)■ the highest personage in our community. We tell
him it;will not’do—the ; endeavours of the addle-patcd fools who
are associated with- him, -will not afford hinv a ■ momentary
triumph j an-di sfl fur -from, strengthening the position be as-
sumes, will, -in proportion to its inj-ustioej raise- up a host of
friends to the-aupport 6f the good cause , who might have been
indifferent to ’its result before. The trfith ia/that the thing
won’t do—we are awake—and the public are awake—we defy
the machinations of the Governor's enemies ; he shall not be
attacked in this journal, without cause ; neither shall his,chief
tablijhmeiit.of.-'Vyillijm Duinaresq, Esq., when, ,one of the, house servants
received the contents of a musket in the right arm, and after possessing
themselves of the establishiileht, they robbed the stores of slops, blue cloth,
livery waktcoatin'g;'gunpowder,; spirits, money from the overseer, and a Sur-
veyor’s cOmpass by Scalmander.; . Notice is hereby given, that a Reward of
TenPonmls will'be paid for each .of the offenders who maybe apprehended
arid lodged hr ahy of ilia Majesty's Gaol's; and as a'.further encouragement
for the apprehending 'and ‘ (ringing to justice the persons concerned in. the
above offence,’ His,Excellency the Governor in hereby pleased to promise, that
if any ,prisoner of the Crown shall apprehend or give such information as
rimy lead to the apprehension arid- conviction''of liny of the said offouderat'
application will be made to His Majesty for a Conditional Pardon.
The following are the descriptions of the convicts above alluded to
Joseph■hyriteh'or Roddy, pbi- /Vateiion (2), 27 years of , age, a native of the
County of DoWn,- a horse-breaker and soklifer,;s feet!) and three-quarter inches
' in height, ruddy freckled id complexion, light brown hair,' lighfhazel eyes, and
has a small diagonal scar between the evebrows ; he .was fonuerlly in the ser-
vice of Captain Dumaresq. 1 • ’ ... . ,
John Crawford, per Yorh, 29 years of age, a native of Down,- a draper ami,
soldier, 5 feet 7 and three-quarter inches, in height, sallow freckled conn
plerdon, dark hroWn liiiiiv light hazel eyes, and has a small blue murk on left
cheek ;, a runaway fi’oUi MivHugh Cameron.
’ James Feeny, per .Awe, 25 years of age, a native of Mayo, a spadesman, 5
fe*t 4 and a quarter inches in height, clafk. Vaddy freckled complexion, dark,
brown hair, hazel eyes, and ba-Wa'Scar at leftside Of mouth, J F and a cross
oh right arni, ami indistinct marks on the left;.a runaway from No. 13 Road.
Ratty., 1 ,
By His Excellency’s Command, ,
ALEXANDER Id’bEAy.


legal adviser be " slapped" at the dictation of any man. We
could “ a tale unfould and perhaps we will, ope of these days.
Sydney Gazette, 15th April,
The Magistrates have not power enooght under the'
“ Summary Punishment Act" —A few days ago, an assigned ser-
vant belonging to this establishment became intoxicated, and
absented himself (we believe) two days. He was apprehended,
brought before the Police Bench at Sydney, and sentenced to
receive seventy-five Joshes, Let those, who insist that the
Magistrates have not power enought to flog, come and look at
(his man's back. . We were persuaded to visit him as he lay on
his matrass —we were persuaded to look at his back, and—we
(yes, out with it!) turned sick. It presented to our eyes, a
heap of putrid flesh ! Gracious G—d ! what do the bloodhounds
want? Do they imagine that ■we will not denounce them ?
Aye that we will, so long, as our pulse beats.”-—Sydney. Gazette,
14th April.
There are individuals so blind to their own interests, that they
will not, in'the homely phrase, “let well alane.” The affair at
Castle Forbes, the “ Mudie Enquiry" and ail the angry feeling
which those transactions excited in the public mind, had nearly
faded away—a truce had been agreed to—it seemed to have been
left to the Home Government to decide upon,, the respective
merits .of the parties most interested in these transactions—and
yet some people cannot “ let wellalone.” As an illustration of
the truth of this remark, there appears, in Thursday’s Herald,
a communication from “ A Hunter's River Correspondent’' —a
most injudicious communication, as we shall presently shew,
from whatever quarter it may have emanated. We have no
desire again to rip up the: subjects of which the writer treats j
but as we have professed to take an opposite view of the case,
we cannot remain silent without suffering it to be presumed
that we admit the truth of the various allegations contained in
the communication to which ive allude. It is 1 not our fault that
the argument has been, re-mpened.
After briefly enumerating the facts of the outrage committed
at Castle Forbes, the writer goes on to state, that “a frothy
advocate endeavoured on the trial to palliate the attempt as
assassination, the roubery, the settler flogging by asserting, that
the perpetrators had been previously ill-treated;’ 1 and adds
that,, in his opinion, this was the "first time that such a de-
fence was' permitted -'in' a British court of justice.” We can
hardly quote the foregoing passage without a smile of conieqipt
for the writer. What 1 would this cold-blooded scribe—this
pander to a vile faction—this would-be advocate of tyranny—
prevent men, on trial for their lives,, from bringing forward the
only mitigating circumstances .upon which their desperate situ-
ation enabled them to rely ? : If a man is charged with an as-
sault—if he is charged with slaying another-'-shull he not be;


allowed to show, if be can, that provocation beyond human en-
durance drove him to the act ? The advocate of the desperate
men, whose case is thus again unnecessarily dragged before
the public, did no more ; he endeavoured to show, not in justi-
fication of their offences, but as a ground for a mitigation of
punishment, that they were driven to desperation by a series of
acts of ill usage and oppression, which, had they been proved
against .the alleged perpetrators, would have justly subjected
them to the execration of their fellow-colonists. They had a
right to resort to such a line of defence ; and had they suc-
ceeded in establishing it to the satisfaction of the court, they
had an, equal right, in common justice, in common humanity, to
the benefit of it. But it is said, that an “ ill-used convict had
aright to complain to the nearest Bench of Magistrates, and
not—attempt to kill his master," Granted, if the opportunity
were afforded, and experience had taught him that his complaint
would be attended to, and impartial justice dealt out between
him and his master granted, were he sure that punishment
would not fall upon the opp essed instead of the oppressor —
granted, if he could find, the nearest Bench of Magistrates”
not composed of men (is this writer a member of “ the nearest
Bench?") who open their eyes to the humiliating spectacle of a
‘ wager of battel' between two free emigrant inhabitants on the
one hand, and the convict allies on the other.” 01), what a cer-
tainty of justice an unfortunate wretch —worked, may be,
“ like a horse, and fed like a chamelion”—would have at the
hands of these humiliating spectaele-mun, in a remote part of the
country, to which the eye of the press—that terror to evii-doera
.—cannot reach ! ! The result of (he “ Commission of En-
quiry,” weare (old, has been, thatothers of the assigned servants
at Castle Forbes have taken to the bush, in hopes of being
enabled to join their fellows in a street-gang at Sydney. Does
this writer mean to say, that assigned prisoners, well fed, and
otherwise well treated on an extensive farm, would prefer the
comforts of a street-gang and the prisoners’ barrack ? A few
theremaybe; and we must eh her suppose that few, by
some unaccountable fatality, have been congregated at Castle
lorbes ; or we are led to the inevitable conclusion, that there
is something in the atmosphere which encompasses that, now
celebrated estate, which renders it unwholesome to breathe.
A -t Commission of Enquiry” indeed ! Let it come. The
Governor and his friends, who are also the friends of justice
and humanity, court it. The faction may bu%—they may, per-
haps, wound ; but let them remember, though a fly may sting a
stalely horse and make him wince, the one is but an insect, the
other is a horse still.— — Sydney Gaxeile 10 th May.
As we have already stated, we are not in any way answerable
for, or bound by, the political principles of our predecessors;
but, in justice to the absent, we flatly tell the Monitor, that he
published an untruth, when he stated, that this journal ever


■was ,f the Villifier and oppressor of the starved, naked convicts.”
On the contrary, it has ever been the vindicator of their just
rights ; and that, too, at a time when other journals were pur»
suing a course of conduct so subversive of all discipline as would
have justified the government in imposing additional restraint
upon the prison population. Equally false is it, that our journal
is now tlie upholder and apologiser of the well-fed, well-clad,
mutinous and idle among them. We ask for proof of the truth
of such an assertion—-if proof be not furthcoming, what can
the public think of the morality of him who makes it? We
are not the apologist of wellxfed, well-clad, mutinous and idle
convicts; but we'll tell the Monitor what we are. We are the
enemies, the open and determined enemies of men (thank G—d
they are but few !) who oppress those whom the chances of life
have placed within their power—we are the enemies of men
who, by ill treatment, bad, or insufficient food, goad their ser-
vants to take the bush, and then adduce the fact of their
having done so, as an illustration of the “ Convict System"- — 1
we are enemies to severe laws, when milder ones are equally
efficacious—we are enemies to all such as desire to have the
unrestricted power to flog, and we detest those who, because
such power has been humanely withheld from them, designedly
obstruct the strict execution of the law as it is, thereby ex-
citing disobedience and idleness, for the purpose of falsely re-
presenting to the Home Government, that the measures of
General BoUBKE,-and His Excellency’s disregard of their inso-
lent demand to have their own way, has excited the prison po-
pulation to insubordination. They well know, that no such thing
exists in thecolony. We hear no complaints of the ill-conduct
of assigned servants, except such as emanate from the Hunter—
yet even the two or three respectable settlers there whom we
have heard complain of idle or insolent servants, in every in-
stance attributed it in a great measure to the difference off
the magistrates, some of whom will award an offender a dozen
liishes, when the fellow ought to receive fifty. If this is not
the way to create “ insubordination," we know not what is.
The system of prison discipline in the colony is loudly denounced
as beihgtoo lax —the authority of the magistracy is represent-
ed as being most dangerously restricted—so much so, indeed,
that the consequence has been “ general insubordination'’
among the convict population. And yet we know some of those
individuals who have sent this notorious falsehood abroad;
are actually taking means the most likely to cause it to be-
come a truth ! Yes, the Arch-Agitators in this respect—the
very men who plot and plan to bring the Government into con-
tempt, and enervate the arm of the law, are some of the
very men who vapour through the streets of Sydney their de-
termination to repair to Downing-street, and there, over a
friendly glass with His Majesty’s Secretary of State for the
Colonies, to “ change the whole system of penal discipline in
New South Wales" ! Let them try—-but, at all events, let
them go,—Sydney Gesseile, 22 d May,


The Commission of the Peace has ceased to invest the
possessor with the power to trample on the necks of his fellow
creatures, degraded though they be. The duties of the ma-
gistracy are now as clearly defined as the obligation of those
over whom , those duties may be exercised; and they have
also been given to,understand, that.those who;participateln the
administration of the laws, enjoy privileges' in trust for the
benefit of the corfimunity rather than for purposes of their
own-—and are permitted to exercise .power for the.protection;
not oppression ofrthe subject,—no further than to promote the
happiness, security,! and, prosperity of the community, 1 not the
gratification of personal malice, hate, revenge, or eruely. The
exercise of excessive power, no matter who the sufferer may be,
is a direct invasion of the rights of all—the perpetration of
iniquity, no matter where or against; whom, is a positive attack
upon the: impunities of all j not indeed, as private individuals,
but as free men—not :as mere inhabitants of this or that
country, but as citizens of the world. The victim is identified
with society—his pains ate become our own— his feelings are
echoed in our own breasts. We maintain our rights while wts
condemn, the tyrannous proceedings against him—We mourn
opr own misfortune when,we!sympathise in his sufferings, :
* *.] •* , , ; . ! * * * . »
Such is an outline of the recently published pamphlet, by an
“.Unpaid Magistrate.” He has brought to his task, a com-
plete knowledge of his subject, and industry to make the most
of his,materials. His little work ought to be in the hands of
every friend to the administration off Governor Boukke—every
hater of wanton cruelty and oppression—every man who would
not desire to witness his fellow creatures (even those degraded)
spurned by and lashed in the pleasure of a band of tyrants—■
viushroom aristocrats, who owe'to: the sweat of the wretches
upon whom they would trample and whose flesh they would de-
sire to : laceratej even for a discontented look, the very
BW a BB whereby.they sustain, that bipated pride which renders
frl e m objects of contempt with every man who (unlike them-
selves) has : not been raised by one of Fortunes freaks, from
jooeritecl; obscurity ! -.These are the people who would punish
without mercy—who would make no allowance for human in*
firmity—who for, perhaps, a single offence, would, separate the
offender, as it were,, from society Tor the remainder of his day s;
and treat him; as an outcast for ever. 1 ' -
Fpr these remarks, which we could not repress, ours will,
most likely, he! again designated « the Prisoners’' Jouynal"—
ttS ti sQ.rrbyaney Gaxetie, %Bth August, - '


MINUTES, &c.
Court-house, Patrick’s Plains >
Decern,her 19, 1833.
Mr. Hely, and Mr. Plunkett, after cautioning the
witness to speak the truth,
First witness sworn.
Jambs Browne, Surry (4) ; arrived about twelve
years ago in the Colony. I was produced in Court, by
the prisoners, on the late trials, but was not examined;
I do not know to what point I was to be examined on,
except it was as to the treatment on the farm of Major
Mudie, in respect to the rations. In the first instance,
there was bad meat served out, on the farm, except
three or four times during two years ; I will say eight
times; I cannot say what particular times I got good
meat; I mean beef when 1 speak of meat. There was
good pork when I first went on the farm: and last har-
vest was a twelvemonth it was also good, but during
the last harvest it was bad; it was not storeable; I
mean by that, it was not sound; I never saw the
meat weighed; it is weighed before we come in in the
evening from work; the weights are not legible; they
are composed of brick-bats; there are several 561bs. of
metal weights; there are copper weights also at Castle
Forbes; cannot say whether the set is complete; I saw
Dick Nagle throw the leg of a bullock down to his dog;
I observed it black, in a state of mortification by ap-
pearance ; I don’t know how long the bullock was
dead then; I believe the bullock was bled; the remain-
der was served out as a ration; I know it was the
same: they had no other killed; the men used it the
first day as hunger compelled them, but the second day
it was thrown out; I understood each man to get of
this bullock 3§lbs. at first; the week’s ration is 71bs.;
the first was served on Wednesday or Thursday, the
second 3|lbs. on Saturday; it could not be eaten; it was
the same beast; the overseer’s name who gave it is
Paddy Crinane; I complained at the time to Paddy, it


Was not fit to be eaten ; he told me to go to the '
master and he’d send me to Court ; I did not complain
to the master about it, because I was in the habit of
making complaints, and he used to say I was a ring-
leader, and a grumbling spokesman ; Mr. Mudie told
me this several tiihps; pone of the men in my hut eat
any of this meat served the second time ; their names
are James Harvey, Edward Macarthy, George Frost,
Peter Ponspnby, and William Crisp ; I am hot certain
'Whether this last man was in the hut or not; about
foijr months ago, Mr. Mudie' exchanged some wheat
with Mr. Scott (as 1 was given to understand by Paddy,
the overseer) 5 the flour ground for Mr. Scott was not
considered good enough for Mm, and it was served out
to the men; I brought it to Mr. Larnaeh in a cake, and
asked him what I was to do 5 he asked if he was to be
a loser by-it ; I said I wished to be made some allow-
ance; he gave me a note, as an order for 4 or 61bs.
of flour at the mill ; I got 41bs., there was no more
dressed; it was better -than what was served out; we
generally get -the tailings ; what was served about four
months ago was the blackest, but -not the worst; I never
complained to the Magistrates ; he (Mr. M.) always told
me I’d get punished if I did; I have complained to Mr.
Mudie and Mr, Larnadh ; none of the other men com-
plained to the Magistrates 5 when any man was about to
complain, he was brought on another charge; but such
a case never occurred to myself; about three weeks
ago, from last Sunday, was the last issue of slops ; the
issue Of sjops before that was in August last; a shirt and
shoes then were given to me, and a full suit last time ;
there are no slops due; Nagle complained, on going to
Sydney, that he wanted shoes, also of not haying a
blanket or bedding ; William Sage, a shepherd, also
complained last Sunday night of want of bed and bed-
ding; before I got my suit of slops (about a week be-
fore), on asking for a pair of trowsers, Mr. Mudie said,
he expected a free pardon for me and Mr. Bill (William
Godk* a blacksmith), and that we eould net'expect, a suit
of clothing 5 I do not know -what a free pardon meant.
On Wednesday, a month or three weeks from yesterday,
Mr, Mudie told me, that he had -die.power to- keep any
man on the form during his life, or to send him to Nor-
folk Islahd; and that he bad received a letter from Go-
tbrhment to that effect, and to flraw the best mechanics
in tjieir stead. This occurred about 100,yards#om my


hut; it was after sun-down; it was outside the bouse*
at the hack of the kitchen I saw Mr. M. first; it was
the saw-pit he said this; X.think this was said o iuduce
me to take the bush , because Mr. Mudie thought that i
was implicated with the men that run away ; it is not a
practice to work the men on a Sunday, not latterly; I
have known wheat to be cleaned and bagged upon Sun-
day, about eighteen months ago, for which the men were
to be paid extra;, this occurred three or four tiroes ;do
not know whether they were paid or not; John hawyer
is one so employed; Culbert, alias Sweet Billy, is. another;
William Wilson, called Old Darby, is another; rho ™ a! *
Chitwood also; this was the time the Sophia Jane left
the Greenhills on Monday;_ Mr. Mudie or Mr. Larnach
are not in the habit of calling me out of my name
least, it was not their practice towards me; it it vas
their practice towards others I would have known _ i ,
when in a passion they might, The same gening,
Wednesday, that I had the conversation with Mi-
Mudie, before stated, but some time bef( n'ei,l\cau
Mr. Larnach say, “ that he had the name of yianl and
a tyrant he would be as long as he hved—and he d flog
a Government-man when he had one. No one made
any answer but Harvey, who sard, “it was a pity e
Should have a good man, 1 ' and Mr. L, called him a .con-
vict scoundrel, and ordered him home to his hut, he
appeared then in a passion; the men were reaping, and
it was about the work this conversation pccurred; vc
had the name by the week of 10 lbs. of flour, and 7 lbs-
of beef (mutton is not often served out), a fig pi tobacco,
a pint of new milk; this is what was given during the
last harvest; 2oz. of soap for a fortnight: as much a*
will shave and wash a man. I have known a quu t ot
milk served out; for six or eight months I got but a
pint Of milk; I might have got butter, m place of meat
but I don’t like it; the other men got it; 2 lbs. ol
butter in the week waSPthe allowance in lieu otjueat;
I was 3 years at Moreton Bay, for a robbery, in the ser
vice of John Town, Richmond; I was .at Sydney stoijs,,
in the gang there, under Commissary Wemyss ; au s
in private service with Captain Lethbridge, he lived at
Prospect then ; I was turned in by him about an entiic
horse; also in Andrew Scott’s _ service, and,lent by,him
to Mr. Town, a publican, at Richmond p i was flogged
in Mr. White’s service before I came to Mr. Mudie; got
25 lashes about. 2 years and a half ago,, for losing sheep;


Danfort!, acting overseer, swore against me;-Mr. Mudie
took it down in writing against me; I was brought up
better than 2 years ago by Mr. Mudie, for feigning sick-
ness, but a Doctor Sloane, I believe, certified that I was
able to work, and I was flogged—got 50 lashes, and I
was able to go to my work the following day; I was ob-
liged to go; I was not flogged since ; Ido not blame the
magistrates on that occasion. Big Jack (I believe his
name to be Boyle) was prescribed for by Mr, Larnach
himself, and not sent to Hospital; and also Edward
Dempsey. Dempsey was lying in the hut for four or five
w r eeks, ill; about the sheep-washing time he was sent to
hospital; and had an issue in the back of his neck, put in
by Dr. Glennie; Mr. Larnach was in the habit of blister-
ing him and giving him medicine. Doctor Carlisle has
been on the farm, and Doctor Little ; I have only been
told they were doctors; I have known men go to Mait-
land, to Doctor Column; I have often put in fresh cot-
ton in the issue of Dempsey; Cuthbert, Walter Mickle-
john, Joe Tanner, and Brian Lynch, were all in the hut
with Dempsey; he was speechless part of the time, on
account of the use of mercury; he (Dempsey) never was
refused cotton to dress his sore; about four or five
months ago there was no salt on the farm; fresh beef
was then used until Mr. Larnach bought some salt;
meat was served out twice a week always on the farm,
summer and winter; when the salt was wanting, it was
in winter time —’twas last winter. I have it not in my
power to state any thing as to any ill-treatment or ill-
usage received by the prisoners who were tried at Syd-
ney, of my own knowledge; I, was, I believe, the only
witness called into Court by the prisoners on the trial; I
heard from Reilly, that he got two* hundred lashes in
four weeks; Dick Nagle was in the same hut with
Reilly. All the witnesses that were in attendance at
Sydney on the part of the prisoners, were Richard Nagle,
William Cook, Peter Ponsonby, James Harvey, Henry
Brown, and myself; it was considered a disgrace on the
farm to deserve a while shirt, that is, to give information;
if I could, I would prevent any crime being committed
in the first instance—then, if I could not prevent it in any
other way, for my own preservation I would inform; Poole
told me he would take the bush, either on Wednesday or
Thursday before he was brought to Court; I advised
him against it; he complained more of Mr. Larnach
than Mr. Mudie, and wished for the arrival of Mr.


Mu die on the farm ; I advised him against taking the
hush, and told him it was the first step to the gallows;
what he complained of particularly then was, that his
tea and sugar were stopped from him, which he supposed
would not- be the case if Mr. Mudie was at home.
Cross-examined by Mr. Mudie—l stated that the meat
was storeable for two harvests; the harvest contains
five weeks; I was reaping one harvest, and bullock-
dnvmg another; in the harvest, this time twelvemonths,
we were allowed grog, sugar, and tea—sometimes two
and three glasses of grog; I spoke in my direct ex-
amination, of the present harvest. The men got New
Year s Day as a holiday; they got no dinner dressed,
but extra meat was served out on Christmas Day; -they
had Boxing-day, a holiday; that is, the day after Christ-
mas-day; I never had my dinner in the kitchen but
once; 1 have carried dinner out to the men that were
loading in harvest time; I cannot say what kind of meat
was brought out; for the last eight months I received
but a pint of milk daily, but before that I received a
quart every morning; besides the quart of milk, there
was also skim milk given among the men; I recollect Mr.
Mudie telling the men, in the beginning of winter, as
they had not much milk, that each man could only get
a pint, as that would be fairer than to give one a quart
and another a less quantity, but that as soon as it in-
creased, the original quantity would be given; once,
when flour was out, I recollect Mr. Mudie and his
overseer giving vegetables to the men, in lieu of flour;
spme took it, and some did not; I have seen vegetables
given as a compliment to some, but not generally; I
have known a pound of potatoes given to all the men
on Christmas-day, also cabbage and pot herbs, for soup;
men were allowed to take turnips when I first went on
the farm, but they were afterwards stopped; some were
allowed to take turnips this season, but not all the men;
I cannot say whether other men got any addition to their
ration, but I never got it myself; I have heard that
Mr. Mudie told the men, in the beginning of the pre-
sent harvest, that he regretted the extreme bad conduct
of the men prevented his giving the usual indulgences;
I heard this the day Mr. Mudie said it; Mr, Mudie
complained of the little work done by the men; Mr.
Mudie abused and browbeat myself about a bag of
wheat, supposed to be lost; I said it was pork that was
good in the harvest; I complained once to Mr, Mudie of


badness of meat and flour j he said it was good enough
for me ;. I never asked permission to make a complaint
to the Magistrates; Mr. Mudie told me, that if I had
cause to complain, to go to the Magistrates, but he told
me that I would got fifty lashes, if I went; I considered
myself oppressed and ill-treated by Mr. Mudie, in dif-
ferent ways; for instance, there was no allowance made
to me for breaking-in bullocks, and also that I was
starved, in consequence of the shortness of food; I
recollect being employed to break-in a colt; the colt
was found dead in the stable; I had been riding him
the day before, and did not consider him unwell the
night before; I never told Peter Ponsonhy that I was
afraid I would get one hundred lashes for that, and that
I had a mind’to take the bush; I heard Mr. Mudie say
it could' not be helped; it was an accident.
Crqss-emmined by Mr. Larnach— Mr. Larnach never
refused me permission to go to Court, but he always
said, when I complained, I was Mr. Mudie’s man; 1
complained of the weight of my rations, and had a
pound and two pounds added by Paddy, hut did not
complain of this to Mr. Larnach; George Frost Was' pre-
sent when my rations were weighed and added to; I have
known offal of oxen and pigs consisting of livers and
lights and sweetbreads given to the men, and the pigs
heart was the perquisite of the btitcher, besides rations;
does not know that the offal of a dozen pigs in the day
Was divided amongst the men; I think on an average
there were two bullocks killed in every three weeks
since I came on the farm ; I never objected to the weigh*
ing with brickbats; because I could not correct them;
the metal weights could be got, if I had called for
them'; the overseer, when I complained, said I ought to
be satisfied with them, as well as others; I have seen
small metal weights at Castle Foz’be's; if Mr, Larnach"
did not give me flour in addition to what I complained
of, I was determined to go that evening to Mr. Scott, to
make a complaint of it; 1 was brought once to. Court
since I "came to Mr. Mudie* hut not punished; the com-
plaint was about ploughing, and made to the Bench*
but I was acquitted; in feet I was- not ptmished since I
•came into the employment of Mr, Mudie; I heard, about
three weeks ago, from a woman, that Mr. Larnach was
determined to send, me to an iron-gang for twelve
months 5 shO was Mr. Larhach-s Government wOnianv ’
lie-examined—i olm Hart told me that) I had need to


be -cautious, as Mr. M-udie and Mr. Larnach would send
me to an iron-gang for twelve months, on suspicion; I
had no reason to suspect, if I made a complaint before
the Magistrates, that they would not hear it, and do me
justice; because I did not wish to make myself singular
among the men, I refrained from making any com-
plaint to the Magistrates, except in one instance, when
I intended to complain to Mr. Scott, J. P., about the
flour; I think Mr. Scott would see me done justice to, if
I had complained to him; I know nothing of a letter
written by Pool to Mr. Hely ; I never heard of it.
Cross-examination by Mr. Larnach continued —-Has seen
Pool better dressed than the other men ; does not recol-
lect any beast being drowned and served out to the
men • wheat has not been served out for the last eighteen
months or two years ; a peck was then served out, and
sometimes an extra quart given, during the harvest; I re-
collect when clergymen visited Castle Forbes and Patrick’s
Plains, that the men got notice of it, in order to attend
prayers; I heard prayers once only in the barn at Castle
Forbes on a Sunday.
Re-examined— Had no prayers on a Sunday, except
when a clergyman came.
Cross-examination continued —The men may have gar-
dens, and some of them have to cultivate for themselves;
but as the men are often removed, and other men put into
the huts, the gardens are transferred; this is a common
practice on farms; but they might all cultivate if they
pleased; Mr. Mudie has supplied them with seeds and
plants. h*
(Signed) JAMES X BROWN,
mark.
Sworn bqfore F. A . Hely , J. P.,
In the presence of John H, Plunkett ,
(A Copy.)
ALEXANDER M‘LEAY.
James Harvey sworn— (ship Phmix) —I am five
years in the colony last August; I was assigned to Mr.
Mudie on my arrival, and never was with another master;
the flour that has been issued within the last three
months was very bad; it is hardly fit to be called flour;
it is mixed with grass seed and smut; the best was
sent away, and the bad kept for the men; I never made
any complaint to the Magistrates; it was a dangerous
c


tiling to do; ari^bne:’that'found 'fault yvas considered ka
cliaracter; if any man spoke of it, Mr
.Mu die _ wdnß call him, an insubordinate character, ahti
Imnt hiin down ; I have seen men lay down their meat,
and refuse to take it, as not eatable, rather than coin-
nlain; I have been, before the Bench, on cotiiplamt of
Mr.,Mtidie, : .tw 1 o or three;times; I was flogged onlg oher
With 'fifty ’and ih'the irpn-gaug Mice ;■ fdl- the fast
twelve or eighteen months the'flour was inferior, but bail
for three months; it was issued ; by Patrick Crinahe, an
llcver ° u “7 occasion, when brought before
tM any cdinplgint of the bad treatirient
I received, and the bad flour, I got; I carinot 'say hdW
much floiirl got, but it Was' .'to, "be ten pounds
dor; a week.;, the meat is Served put in messes,, and
weighed before work; I alwajis
.savv the flour weighed ;we used:to get salt add soap; the
flatter once a fortnight; I have been weeks ‘without atilt
!at..a lime; I.liavc been without it within the last Six
months; we have had, at'times, a pint of milk alh'hVed,
at times a .quart; I got, the last- suit of clothing when
‘I was going td Sydney, three- weeks last Monday'; 1 got
Jf.^hirf.and, shoes, the Ist. of August last; there fire Vo
.slops dfle to me now; the pair of shoes'l got were kept
, ! b'y Mr. Larriach for me, in store, find he lias them still; 1
fluive'seen the overseer take meat, Within
'llie'last three months, but do no'tlaiow the exficttime;
ahe meat was served out ‘twice, a wedk; ‘ I Was 1 at%dricfy
•Aa'a-witxiess Mr flie'prisoriers tftfld &en ;' I did hdt'loidw
what I was brought for;. I knew them to be punished on
.the farm; I recollect .Reilly, and others, with myself,
"going (o Mr. Larnachks to edhfplain of the flour; we told
him we would complain .to the Magistrates; we got
koon aftbr > ‘Pi-xcd Vpl£h"'other flour; I have
‘Wdrlced’ oh 'Sunday, loading a tdUm, before the steamer
Was changed ;,wo used to set out on Sunday; I-knew
Win. "Crisp to bepuiiislled for refusing to work on Sun-
day 1,4 °?ly, heard this from hiinsplf; it was. three years
’N a gl c 'told'me hejgot'tWdhty-fiye'
4S;|P to Mr- Campbelps J lb ‘take amhdjiffre;
the time the-rabh diVay'fi‘6m
,W ’ form, I "heard ')yir. iMuHie 'tell ’bMMkK (ife
.‘last witness)'that'lie
'tb J lSforf6tk'l for
TO; fM . cphld' pipkMhc'beitt; frhdCKmdn •fri Sylhfdy’^dr
hmls'elf; rk'frew r l)dmpsey ; ! he Wa's 1


since I went til) the farm | dhl h'otreqpp'P f 1 djmtQJ.’ tyjdi
once, when I strained my ahHp,- hpd wen Dp-Gleppiq
was sent for 5 a doctor attended Dempsey, --and others on
the farm, as they required one; I never heard,p sppkcn'
of on thp.farm by PoplJ jar airy , one pise,* thab
a letter pf. complaint winch Mr. Larhach took, from
Fool was in the bush three years ago, .and'l heard P(pi
say then, that he had letters about him 5 Iw.as in thebarn
when “the house of Castle Forbes was attacked:;', there
Were seven or eight of us, in the barn together rye sapt
them all rush into, the yard, but Hitchcock put in a gup
and said he-would? blow out brains out; iwp would prpr
vent them from robbing the house if .we could; when I
was last punished, it was aftey the piep.yrhp were tried
Were iu the hnsh, : and after theyyyent. tO: Sythacy ; I lived
in the same hut with James Brown, hut I was absent
when the meat of the'hullocb that'had sds le! 8' »r«ke was
served, out; Fool, ‘Reilly, Ferry, and Henry Browne,
were all going with me to complain ahput the flour, to
Mr; Robert Scott, and others Ido _not recollect; I haye
often heard Mr. Larnaeh .bounce his mop, that, is, to .call
them out of their names; it is only occasionally that
hlessrs. Mndie and jdarnach honnee the men; pt is not
their constant habit fo do so; 1 never applied for a.
tickct-of-leavc, because I had heph in iron gangs ; I
allowed a garden yinth my hut, and the mon were sup-
plied',seeds and plants hy Mr. Mudic ; | .never did'
much in. the garden, but some of.the other nicn .did; 1
.muph advantage,,from the,cultivation of the g;ar T
dep a s those who had the trouble of ,it ; W c .pad mqt the,
same allowance this harvest, as. last; I heard Mr f
Mudic said, he would not give thepapie .indulgences as
fn other years; Mr. Larnaeh complained that a? much
work was not, done this year as other years; I told Mr.
harnacii that as . much eeuld not... he done, .from .the
Scarcity pf provisions this year; .tips was . after he com-
plained of little work being done; there .wag less work
done this year than any other year; until jharvcst-timp.
the men worked as well as usual, but not after that.
Cross-examined by M'Leod, !•,
senf me .to an iron gang first ; po other Magistrate was,
presept'but himself; two others vvere sentenced along
with pie at same, time ; the charge, thpt time, was
being absent from the hut:. Mr. Mujdip made it agampf
ipe;, I do ppfc yecollect that ,1 was., in Cpnrt
sijitb taking: PWSy a ; |jemalb prisons. ; of Crpwn ; I


Know Mr. Windhara, J. P. ; I have seen him different
times since I was tried at Mr, M'Leod’sj while
grain was taking to Maitland I was about the half each
-week absent from Castle Forbes ; Mr. Mudie sends a
■quantity of grain to Maitland; the drays are gene-
rally employed in that way, except in the midst of
the ploughing, and the harvest, but even then there
is some grain sent to Maitland; I have known Mr,
Mudie himself give out cabbage or cauliflower to the
men without distinction, on Sunday morning; the men
were allowed to take turnips from the field; they were
not allowed green peas; the men were in the habit of
haying melons and pumpkins served out to them—but not
this year; I have not seen any on the farm this year; I
do not recollect the men getting permission to fill their
bags with potatoes; I recollect potatoes being once or
bftener given to the men; since I have been on the
farm, I have received a quart of milk a day oftener
than a pint; sometimes we used to get skim-milk in the
morning, in addition to, the allowance; during the time
I said I had nothing to eat for two days, I received my
rations for the week; it is common on the farm for men
to complain of their being robbed of their rations by
their fellow prisoners, or some others; tea and sugar
have been served out to the bullock-drivers when setting
out to Maitland, but nOt always; I know the men have
been often without tea and sugar setting out, but I can-
not say how often. Being On the road more than half
the week, except during harvest and ploughing time, I
had tea and sugar more than half the year; I only got
dinner in the kitchen two or three times, but others
have got it more frequently there; I used to carry dinner
from the kitchen to the men loading drays in the field;
I don’t know what the dinners consisted of; my own din-
ner was meat and vegetables in the kitchen ; I got no
particular quantity, but could eat as much as I wished
for; I was also allowed grog, two glasses a day; I
got grog, tea, and sugar, during the harvest, except this
present harvest, when none of those indulgences were
given; I never recollect getting, on any day, more than
iwo glasses of grog; I was not sheep-washing this year,
■jut I was last year, and we got two glasses of grog—
sometimes it might be three; last Christmas the men
got some extra meat and grog, and other years be-
sides. On one Christmas Day, there was a dinner cooked,
and a rice pudding given to the men ; we have got the


harvest home above our allowance: last Christmas there
was a great deal of grog given: Mr. Mudie told the
men, as they behaved well, he would give them the in-
dulgence of another day, and they were allowed to re-
main in their huts the day after last Christmas-day; the
men got directions to turn out and receive the Gover-
nor, when he was at Castle Forbes; they got a holi-
day that day; I recollect, after His Excellency went
away, the men were ordered up to the house, and
they got a bottle of wine between every two men; it Was
distributed by Mr. Mudie himself; we might have com-
plained to the Governor, if we pleased, then; there
was no restraint; I cannot say what year General Dar-
ling visited Castle Forbes ; he slept all night there; I was'
frequently in Pool’s hut; never saw him get extra rations;
all the mechanics got tea and sugar; Pool had better
clothes than prisoners in general have: I believe Pool
was never punished but twice: once flogged and once
in the cells : William Cook and Peter Ponsonby stopped
in Pool’s hut: I have heard Pool say he used to work
on his own account occasionally : I never heard of Hitch-
cock being punished but once: he did not complain to
me of bad treatment.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Larnach —l did not complain
of the meat of the bullock that I heard broke his leg: it
was bad, but I did not complain: never was prevented
from going to the Bench to complain: never asked leave
to go: I was afraid to complain: I have no doubt the
Magistrates would do me justice, if I went, to complain:
it was of Mr. Larnach I was afraid, lest he should
punish me in another way: I have never seen men
punished on the farm for complaining, but they were
for trifling things, such as standing, for a few minutes
without working, and exchanging a word; that would
be called insolence: when Mr. Larnacli called me
tf convict. scoundrel,” Big Brown was present, also
George Clarke, and many others: he never called me
by that name but once: I cannot recollect his calling
any one else by that name: I have seen my rations
weighed by the overseer: I was never dissatisfied about
the weight of the meat, it was the quality that I found
fault with: in consequence of my taking four days
going to Maitland, instead of three, I was removed from
being bullock driver: I lost my bullocks, which caused
the delay : I have received notice that Divine Service
. was to be performed in the school-house at Patrick’s


Plains, once or twice, all the time I was at Castle Forbes;
■ twice' '"or three times I attended prayers in the barn;
the'men used to spend their Sundays in ■washing their
shirts-, and fetching woodfor their own uses never reaped
on Sunday but onoe, three years ago: I did it voluntarily,
it being supposed the harvest was In danger from being
over-ripe s the men- got grog at -night for it; they got;
What - they were promised ; when (die bushrangers were
at Castle Forbes they handed round the milk to all of us,
and we;partook of it: if the men had been all of one
mind We could: prevent their robbing the*house;.. I got
medicine from Mr. Lafnach myself, and at my own re-
quest was bled by him : I never was refused medicine,
and-if-I wanted % I would have got it.
Re-examined —The men were not-discontented when
the Governor was at Castle Forbes • it was after that, they
became so : within the last three or four months ; they
would not like to trouble the Governor, as there were
Magistrates to apply to. ' ; ,
Cross-examination continued —l know many who have
got tickets-of-leave, having served at Castle Forbes :
Cornelius Gokely, Paul .Harrison, John Callaghan, Tom,
Head, Sarah Chambers, Elizabeth Smith,
Cross-examined lay Mr. Mudie—Ahout six months ago
I was brought to Court by Mr, Mudie, on a charge of
ploughing badly, and eight others, on the same .charge ;
we were brought up before the Bench, and not punished,
but admonished by the;M’agistrates, on the intercession
of Mr. Mudie.
■ •' ' Ms-
(Signed) JAMES X HARVEY,
mark,
'Sworn before F. A. Rely, J. P.,
' ' In the presence of J. 11. Plunk ell.
' :: (A Copy.)
ALEXANDER M‘LEAY.
Peter Ponsonby sworn— (Elmw, Is#)—l am assigned
to Mr. Mudie for twenty months;: :I was first assigned to
Mr. Rumbker and Mr. Murdoch: secondly, I was lent to
Berry and Woolstonecraft in Sydney ; ■I wa.s at 'Moreton
Bay for three years: I was sent from the Barracks in
Sydney to ■an iron-gang, and to fMoretoir Bay' from that;
I got fifty dishes at Moreton Bay.: The rations have been
bad since I'came to Mr. Mudie : we got ten pounds of
flour,,seiefi pounds .of beef, two ounces of tobacco in


Week, also soap : the beef was bad always ; We used to
get four pounds of pork in harvest; it'was,morally inir
possible for any man to eat it: a heifer, was: killed and
served out on Wednesday last, it was better than we had
•for’ a long time : the beef was served twice a week, apd
•it was often bad for want of salt; we were often three
and four weeks without salt: it was about four months
'ago we had no salt: I never complained at:all: I was in
Pool’s hut until a month or six weeks before he took the
'bush : the hut wait then.-searched for something by Mr.
Larnach, and I was removed to -another : Pool got, tea
■and sugar, but he used to divide it with me : Cook used
r to get tea and sugar also: Pool had only a fustian
trowsers more than the other prisoners-: he had u fustian
■jacket When I'first went on the farm, -but it wore out
dong since : we had no garden to our but : I never asked
'for one, if I bad : it I should cultivate it: I often heard
•Pool say that he wished Mr. Mudie was at home : that
-he was afraid he’d be -hanged before became: he told
me that it was Mr. Laruach’s tyranising oyer him he
'Was afraid of:."I-have hoard Mr..Larnach blow him up :
die called Pool a damned scoundrel: Mr. -Mudie, -whew
die was at hohiG, die ’used to bring or send down .proyi-
hsious'to oilr hilt: we were better .off in that, hut while
'Mr. Mlidie was at home : our inilk Was increased-from
'a pintdo a qiikrt'bn Tuesday last: -Wegot orilyialpint of
"milk for the last five or six months daily: all fhefrades--
' men’but myself got tea-and sugar: I nevercOmplainetl
ipf : not getting- it: about a month orrsix weeks ago,the
;fea and stlgar Was stopped from - all except Pool; Tool
never‘got u present that I ’knew of, but a flute and U
diuiSifcfhbOk that Mr. Mudie bought for Tool in Sydney;
T liave'fyoi'ked onTunday, at the request of my master;
*1 did 1 not likefo refuse him; I only worked two or three
•Sundays; ; the hnen were then badly off for slops, then!
used to makc'tlirce pairs in the day; I always got din-
ner in the kitchen-when I worked on Sunday; I had the
•'beiififitofthetea dutl 'sitgar as long /as it lasted, as-well
•'&s; Pool and ■ Gbok; >Up l to the time I was removed from
-.Tool’s hut; 1 ! liad - the■privilege of earning something for
'thyself in flic 1 evenings-and on Sundays; Idiave heart!
dhliffom-ifig : ! a!ifrong The mew about‘the weights; I diave
■'keendttdfdl l Weights along With’ the’blick weights-; Trwent
-to Sydney*as : a witness I don’t know'-What II wasTo
"Mlyddr; 1 PkkdWt.that' the' men who -rWeve tried were-ise-
'We^el^fld^gScl'f^Perry’Was'ffoggedwery-'often; Lsawdhs


back, and he had a horrid back; he often complained
that he had not enough to eat; he used to call at my
hut for a bit of bread, and I used to give it to him ; the
flour was very bad; the men all went up to complain of
it; after that the flour became a little I think
Reilly had reason to complain; he had a horrid back,
and Mr. Larnach wanted him to go work, and for refus-
ing to work he was brought to Court again and flogged;
I heard Reilly and Pool say that they would not get jus-
tice at the Bench at Patrick’s Plains ; I heard the men in
conversation , amongst each other say, that the magis-
trates were so friendly to each other, no justice could be
done them; I have known two men ask for passes to
come to Court and were refused;’ Edward Burk is one
of them ; it was in the yard he asked Mr. Larnach for a
pass, and I heard him say that he wanted it to go to
Court to complain of the meat being bad; this was five
or six months ago; I was in the barn when the attack
was made at Castle Forbes; I drank some of the milk
they handed round to the mem
Cross-examined by Mr. Mudie —1 recollect Mr. Mudie
calling at my hut when I was ill; while I was sick I got
my dinner in the kitchen, and my rations besides; I
might have said Mr. Mudie made a man of me from
being a poor object, but I do not recollect positively; the
meat that Mr. Mudie used to bring to Pool’s hut was
from the kitchen; he used to do it twice a week; I have
known Mr. Mudie to get the blacksmith (Cook) to go
into the garden to collect pot herbs and vegetables, and
used to superintend the dressing of the meat himself;
I used to mend Pool’s deaths; Pool used to wear a white
shirt sometimes; what Mr. Mudie used to bring to the
hut was in addition to rations; they used to make stews
once or twice a week, when Mr. Mudie was at home; I
never knew the men to get additional meat when Mr.
Mudie was absent from the farm; Pool has made
ploughs for his own profit; Mr. Mudie once gave him
thirty shillings for a plough; Ido not know whether the
timber was got on the farm; I have known Pool to get
money from Mr. Mudie on account of building a mill,
but I don’t know the amount; the blacksmith got a pair
of trowsers from Mr, Mudie, above his slops; the men
were treated capital during Christmas; I had plenty of
grog; when Scotch Jack was ill I attended him, by di-
rections of Mr. Mudie; he got every thing from the
kitchen that he wanted, from Mrs. Larnach : another


man. (Stephens) was ill and treated in the same way that
Jack was; all the men could get vegetables in the garden,
and Mr. Mudie used to superintend it himself ; I never
said the men were better treated than on way-fsita-VH--
the country; Pool was well treated while Mm Mudie
was at home, but when he was absent, at the end of a
week he was not; I have got good advice from Mr.
Mudie, and never heard hint abuse or blackguard Ins
men; I never saw Mr. R. Scott, J. P. at Mr. Mudie’s, or
Mr; Glennie, J. P. either; I have not known any me-
chanics to be lent to the magistrates by Mi. Mudie.
Cross-examined by Mr. Larnach Mr. Larnach found
pork, and a bottle that had rum in it in Pool’s hut when
I was removed from it; some shoes belonging to other
men, and two pair of trowers that I had to make for my
own account; also a blue jacket of Cooks; when the
lard was found in the hut, it was four months ago; I did
not bring it there; handcuffs were put upon me, but I
was not taken to Court; Mr. Larnach never caught me
working for myself in my master’s time; I never knew
David Jones to be taken to Court; Hitchcock was
punished only once; Pool was never taken to Court but
the day before he took the bush; I never complained to
Mr Larnach of bad flour, or ever desired to go to Court
-to complain; I got word one Sunday that prayers were to
be at the Plains; there are no slops due me; I had
medicine whenever I asked for it; I knew James Brown
it Moreton Bay; I have often advised Brown to be
quiet; when the colt was killed, I heard Mr. Mudie say,
there was no help for accidents; he did not abuse
Brown, ..
his
(Signed) PETER * PONSONBY,
■ mark.
Sworn before F. A. Uely , J. P.,
In presence of John 11. PhtnJceii.
(A COPY.)
ALEXANDER M‘LEAY.
■ William Cook sworn — (Claudine ship)—-I am as *
signed to Mr. Mudie; the rations seven pounds of beet,
ten pounds of flour a week; in harvest we got four pounds
of pork in place of beef; since we returned from Syd-
ney we got a quart of milk, before that we got only a
pint- we got two ounces of tobacco: we got soap about
two ounces a week, and salt with fresh meat; there are
p


no Slops due but a pair of shoes; I did not ask for those
shoes as I did not want them ; 1 was' at Sydney to giVe
evidence I believe for the prisoners at the late trials; I
told Mr.. Mudie I had nothing to say for them before I
went to Sydney; I cannot say Mr. Mudie was a hard
master to me; Fool and I always lived in the same hut,
and on account of ' building a mill, we had tea and sugar,
and Were better oft - than the others on the farml was
only once brought to Court by Mr. Mudie, on a charge
of refusing to work, but Mr. Glennie would not punish
me until I was examined by a Doctor, as I pleaded that
I had the Rheumatism; but Doctor Sloane certified that
I was able to work and I got 50 lashes; Mr. Mudie was
an indulgent master to me and Pool; he never called me
a convict rascal or scoundrel, or any of the rest of them
to my knowledge; we had sometimes rations fit for any
one to use, and at other times very bad; we had it very
bad about six or eight weeks ago, for such a thing as a
month or more; the flour was particularly bad ; I,never
complained to Mr. Mudie, he was hot on the farm when
theflonr Was so bad; Pool along with the other men com-
plained to Mr. Larnach of the flour, and, he promised
them if they put up with it until Avhat was - then served
out was used, they should get better; It after that im-
proved, blit not,much; the men who' complained to Mr.
Larnach, intended to get passes to complain to the ma-
gistrates if the flour was not better in the future; I
think the men thought if they came to the Bench, they
Would get justice one way or other; by that,' I mean that
■the flour would be improved) or that they would be re-
turned to government from Mr. Mudie; Mr. Laruacli
has' called me a damned scoundrel several times; he
has often threatened to send me to Court when he had
no cause; Pool used to say, while Mr. : Mudie was at
•Sydney, that.he was afraid he would get himself into
trouble if Mr. Mudie did not soon come hack; he could
agree a .deal better-with Mr. Mudie than Mr. Larnach ;
I was not much with the other men;. I worked in my
shop ; ! recollect a bullock breaking his leg, and the
moat served out to the men; the meat was very bad, it
Was not fit for use the day after we got it; I dont
know whether any complaint vims made about it; Pool or
I made none; .we have good meat at times; some times
ithfere is a .bullock of four hundred weight killed,. and
other times of three hundred Aveight ; Mr. Medic's
cattle are not large; I cant say that we got beef as often


bad as good; \yc get,it passable oftener than bad; Pool
was allowed tea and sugar always, even when it was
stopped from me; we were hoth. allowed to do.jobs for
ourselves ; I never heard Pool, say he would not get
justice at the Bench; he had not occasion to say so ; he
was never there but once that he got punished, the day
before he took the bush, and once he was brought up to
Court for not attending divine service, but hot punished;
I know Big Brown; I never knew of his giving .any ad-
vice to me or anyone; Pool never spoke to me of taking
the bush; he was a close minded man, and would scarcely
tell his brother of any thing he was going to do ; Reilly
had got a deal of flogging, and 1 used to hear it said, he
could not stand it ; all the men used to complain of short-
ness of rations ; in our hut we would often be ip want,
but Mr. Mudie used to send some from the kitchen to us;
Pool was born in Dublin, but reared in Manchester; Hitch-
cock and Pool were not any particular friends on the farm;
I was due for my Ticket-of-leave the 7th of December,
and when Mr. ■ Mudie was going to Sydney, he promised
to forward my application; I have no reason to suppose
that the Bench would not grant me my Ticket, only I gqt
fifty lashes.
Cross-examined by Mr. Mudie—-I was cautioned by
Mr. Mudie before he went to Sydney to take care of my-
self, and not g'et into a scrape about a female prisoner;
Mr. Mudie used to give us pot-herbs and vegetables and
bring us down potatoes himself, and superintend the
making of stews, and taste it himself to see whether it
was good or not; this was in addition to rations, and
continued for the last two years'; Mrl Mudie promised
Poole five pounds when the mill was finished; I recollect
:Ms-getting a pound of it at one time, and ten shillings,
and a flute and a music book, and when Mr. Mudie was
going to Sydney the last time he told me to tell Pool if lie
wanted anything to put it down on a bit, of paper and
Mr. Larnach would send for it to Sydney, and that be
would get it; Mr. Mudie was absent at Sydney about
three months ; be did not return home until a few days
after Pool took the bush’; I delivered the message to Pool,
but he said lie was not in want of any thing, and he
would let it alone till his master returned; before be
done any thing to the mill he got a fustian jacket and
trowsers and waistcoat and white shift; I never heard
Mr. Mudie speak harshly to Pool ; Pool has made ploughs
for his own account; Mr, Mudie paid him one pound ten


shillings for one; Pool shewed me the money: he gave
the plough to Mr, Mudie, though another offered him the
same price, because he was afraid the other would not
pay him; I was allowed myself to do jobs on my own
account during the time I was bound to work for Mr.
Mudie; I have had medicine whenever I required it; Mr,
Mudie often gave Pool and me grog and wine; a bottle of
wine, and when it was finished. Pool used to get another
bottle sometimes by asking for it; this was at different
periods within the last two years; I got a duck jacket and
browsers from Mr. Mudie, about a year ago; a jacket
and a shirt were promised to me that I did not get ; this
was when Mr. Mudie went to Sydney last; if any person
swore that Pool was starved, I think he would not swear
the truth; (there were large cattle with little meat, killed
for the men;) the reason the men got but a pint of milk
latterly, was the scarcity of it; all the men were told to
come on Sunday morning to get vegetables in the garden;
cabbages, carrots, and some cauliflowers and pot herbs;
they had leave to take turnips iii the season.
Cross-examined by Mr. Larnach— Mr. Larnach always
found fault with my not doing enough of work, but I done
my best; he also found fault with the number of nails I
used to make; on these occasions he used to bounce me;
Mr. Larnach found tea and pork in my hut, but no
sugar; the day the tailor Ponsonby, was taken into cus-
tody he found fat, but I knew nothing of it; I never was
refused a pass from Mr. Larnach to go to Court; I never
asked one; I kept one dog and used to feed him with
some bread and milk; Pool also had a puppy; I cannot
say I broke off the connection Mr. Mudie cautioned me
about the woman; I have got notice whenever prayers
were in the barn or in the parlour; I never made any
complaints about light weights; (I never heard the men
name the word nagging or bagging;) I never heard of its
being complained of .on the farm that cattle that were
drowned, were given out to the men.
his
(Signed) WILLIAM X COOK,
•mark.
Sworn befare F. A. Hely, J.P.
In presence of John H. Plunket.
(A COPY.)
ALEXANDER M'LEAY.


Richard Nagle sworn — (Elisa,7 years.) —l am more
than five years in the Colony: I was six months on Dr.
Rutherford’s farm after I arrived, then I came to Mr.
Mudie: I was one of the witnesses summoned by the
prisoners on the late trials and that went to Sydney; I
supposed I was summoned to tell about the treatment of
the men on the farm; we used to get bad meat at times
and bad flour at times, but latterly until about a fortnight
before we went to Sydney, the flour and pork were very
bad; we got lOlbs of flour and 41bs of pork then, and a
pint of milk a day, and a fig of tobacco, and soap, (bet-
ter than two ounces a fortnight;) since we came from
Sydney, we got the same compliment of flour, but it is
very good, and fresh beef good; the beef served out
yesterday was not well cured ; we now get a quart of
milk a day; Mr. Mudie asked ms if the meat was good
yesterday; we said it was middling; the meat was good
but it was not well saved; there is part of it now in the
hut, and I think' part of it not fit to be eat; there are
no slops due to me but a pair of shoes, and I did not ask
for them because I did not want them ; I was only once
punished since I came to the country, then I got twenty-
five lashes; the Overseer of Mr. Mudie, reported to him
that I refused to go for a winnowing machine to Mr.
Campbell’s on a Sunday, and the same day that I refused
to drive bullocks, and I was brought to Court and flog-
ged ; I did refuse my master on that occasion; I applied
for my Tickct-of-leave about a fortnight or three weeks
before I was punished; I got no answer since; Ido not
know whether Mr. Mudie backed my application or not;
I sent in a second 'application about six weeks ago; Mr.
Glennie, the clerk of the Bench, drew the form forme,
and said he’d get my master to sign it; I do not know
whether he did or not; I never was asked to do any
work on any other Sunday, but to go to the mill for the
men, and to bring in water to the house; the flour that
I complain of being very bad, had smut balls it it; rye
grass seeds and garlic was in it; the best of the wheat
was sent to Sydney, and the tailings were left for the
use of the men; D. Jones and Reilly, both lived in the
same hut with me; Reilly got a deal of punishment;
there were better men on the farm than Reilly, because
he was reared in a town and not used to work; he once
took the bush and was punished for it; he was also sent
to an iron gang for striking Mr. Larnack; Jones was
twipe punished while on thq farm; he was a butcher; I


have seen one beast that had the thigh broken, stuck and
served out to the men; I heard Jones say, that blood
was drawn from the beast; it was he that.bled it; I
salted some of that beast myself; I saw the Overseer
throw away part of it that was bruised; he ordered the
butcher to cut out the bad parts of it, not thinking it fit
to be used; what was served out was not good; the flesh
was bruised in patches and would not take the salt; the
butcher did not cut out all the bad parts; the animal was
very poor; I am no great judge of meat; I am from
Limerick in Ireland; I am sure I know the difference
between good and bad meat; we were allowed a garden
to our hut; Mr. Mudie was not in the habit of calling
his men convicts, scoundrels, or any such names ; Mr.
Larnach struck me and kicked me on one occasion; I
did not complain, because the men told me if I com-
plained I would get flogged; that insolence would be
sworn against pie; Edward Dempsey, who is now in
Mr. Glennie’s hospital, was kicked by Mr. Larnach be-
fore harvest time; it was for milking a cow for James
Ryan, when he was ordered' on other business; Dempsey
was not insolent to Mr. Larnach; when Mr, Larnach
struck me, a man of Mr. Duguid’s, called black Brown
was present; I called to him at the time to witnees it,
saying, I would bring Mr. Larnach to Court for it; I did
not complain to the magistrates; Mr. Larnach spoke
pleasing to me after he beat me, and I forgave him; I did
not know that Reilly was going to take the bush the
night before he went off; he told me to make the bed,
and he walked off then; I never heard him threaten to
take the hush; he was a sulky temper, and would hardly
speak a word to any one; about a week or so before
Reilly took the bush, he made a complaint to Mr.Larnach,
that Ins rations were bad, and he brought some of the
bread with him to shew; we were getting bad flour for
three or four months before the complaint was made, that
flour continued to he given for some time after the com-
plaint ; It was about a month ago that we began to get
the good flour; I never was promised any thing for
extra work; I never got any thing extra since I came on
the farm.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Mudie—-I have been four years
and two months on the farm; I was employed as
pig-man for twelve or fourteen months ; others were
employed as pig-men; it was usual for the pig-man to
bring water to the house and chop wood on Sunday; I


asked Mr. Mudie to remove me from the care of the
pigs; I never said it Was degrading, but I wished to learn
some other work, as I knew only common labouring;
I used to assist the overseer in a different work, salting
and other matters about the store; I once got a pigs head
above my ration; I recollect on one occasion Jones took
a large piece of meat without bone, and Mr. Mudie or-
dered that it should be taken from him, and divided with
another mess ; Paddy was not kinder to me than to the
rest of the men ; I was called Paddy’s boy because I used
to be doing jobs for the overseer,; my master christened
me that; I never heard Paddy call me boy Nagle; after
the cows were milked, and the breakfast over, I used to
be sent to the mill on Sundays’; Mr. Mudie’s wheat
Used to be ground on Saturday night; the mill was en-
gaged grinding wheat for other settlers during the week,
when there was no other wheat to be ground, I have
known Mr. Mudie’s own wheat to be ground in the week
days; I heard the miller say so ; I never got more than
my ration, except what Mr. Mudie ordered me; when
the wheat was not good, I used to get two quarts more
than the peck of wheat; flour has been served out more
than a year on the farm; about a, year and a half since
flour was began to be given ; I have not seen wheat
given ; Reilly never got seven pounds of wheat for his
ration while he was on the farm; he got no wheat at all;
at the harvest home, the men used to be very well treated;
they had plenty of grog; it was once a year, they used
to get two glasses in the day; on Christmas day extra
meat used to be given; also a drop of grog, that is a
bottle among two or three in each hut; we used some-
times to ask for more grog, and it was given _ to us ; on
those occasions we used to dance to music in the yard;
we had the day after Christmas day to ourselves ; it is
usual to hang our beef in the chimney; we have nothing
to keep the meat in; we have a bucket to fetch water,
two tin dishes, large and a small one, an iron pot, no
frying pan in the camp but one, the blacksmith has that;
I have two quart pots in the hut, one pint pot; two of
us mess in the hut at present; I never asked Mr. Mudie
for a quart pot, but Tasked Mr. Larnach, and he told me
I was not due for it; I got one when I came on the
farm, but it was worn out; it lasted me' a year and a
half; Mr. Mudie is in the habit of going round the huts
on Sunday morning, and he used to find fault with them
for not cultivating their gardens; they might get seeds


or plants as they wanted them; Mr. Miulie told the-men
at the time of the flood, two years ago, to take potatoes
out of the field and cat them, but he was afraid they
would rot-, potatoes have been served, in addition to
rations at the house twice ; they were good potatoes,
but what we got at the time of the flood got the water,
and they were not fit to be eaten; they were two days
under water, and they were very young; we were get-
ting only a pint of new milk for six or seven months in
the hist, year; we used to get besides a pint of skim milk,
but it was sour; I rather have skim milk than sour milk,
some of the men preferred the sour milk; I have known
a bucket of milk to be brought down to the men, con-
taining nine or ten quarts, to be used as they liked; when
I was pig-man no.milk was given to the pigs, but within
the last year, the pigs used to get it; when I was pig-
man, now nearly three years ago, I used to see the milk
lying m buckets that the men might take; I have not
seen milk in buckets within the last six months; I was
never allowed any dxtra milk for milking the cows; I
speak for myself \ I don't think any of the milkers got
any extra milk; I heard them grumble about it; I used
to help myself while milking, but I had no leave to do so.
One year, I believe, two years ago, there were melons and
pumpkins on the farm, that the men used to get; when
the vegetables were in sufficient quantities in the garden,
Mr, Mudie had them given out to the men on Sunday
mornings; I never said I was starved, but 1 said the
rations were bad; I used to eat cabbage, that I had at the
back of ray hut with salt, when the meat would become
short; I used to throw the meat , away because it was
maggoty and itused to stinkthat it might be smelled at a
quarter of a mile from the hut; I mean by this, that it had
a very strong smell; Mr. Mudie was in Sydney when it
was so bad; X never complained to Mr. Mudie of getting
stinking meat, but I did to Mr. Larnach; I complained
twice to Mr. Larnach ; if a man went to complain, he whs
thought a ringleader; Mr.Larnach asked me if one pound
ot meatwould be enough inplaceofthe bad, andhegave me
anorder to the overseer to give itto me, and! got it; when
Lf, 0 mhe dogging for refusing to work on the Sunday.
Mi. Mudie did not ask me to go to the work quietly se-
eral times, or say any thing about a case of necessity;
the overseer swore to Mr. Mudie that I refused to go for
tic wmnowing machine, and my master turned round
and asked me if I refused, and 1 said I had my things to


wash, and he then told me to sit down and that"! should
have no liberty while I was on the farm ; I was not told
the winnowing machine was wanting early the next
morning (Mr. Campbell’s, where the machine was, was
distant five miles from Castle Forbes); I have three dogs
that follow the cattle; I have seen'the dogs fed with
some milk at the huts; I throw my own dogs a crust of
bread, and when a beast is killed I save some of the offal
for them ; there is a beast killed generally once a week
on the farm ; the livers were divided always among the
men, also the lights,' the , skirts, and other things of that
kind ; I have seen ten or a dozen pigs killed there in one
day in the winter time; it occurs repeatedly in that sea-
son; the livers, lights, and, I believe, the_ heart were
given to'the men, and some of'the fat to fry the liver
With this was hi addition to rations; I' never asked
Mr. Mudie for a pass to complain to the Bench, nor did
he refuse me permission to go to Court to apply for a
ticket-of-leave.
Cross-examined by Mr. Larnach —-We began to get pork
the week before the harvest began; _it began about ten
days before we went to Sydney; David Jones got no bad
treatment; Mr. Larnach'always behaved Well to David
Jones; he never took him to Court; when he was taken
to Court it was for robbery, and not prosecuted by Mr.
Larnach; I heard Jones say, when he was working at the
tobacco ground, he had a few pounds of meat more than
his mess", and Mr. Larnach had it weighed over again;
Mr. Larnach might have punished him for it if he liked ;
the broken leg of the bullock was given to me, and I
gave it to my dogs; it was not given, but it was thrown
out and I took:‘it; it was not served out; I made_ no
complaint of that meat to Mr. Larnach, but to Paddy the
overseer; I cannot say whether Mr. Mudie was on the
farm then; Mr. Larnach never took me to Court; he
never refused me permission to go there to complain;
Mr. Larnach never called me a convict scoundrel, but
he called me a brute and a scamp and a rascal; the cir-
cumstance of Mr. Larnach striking me, was about two
rails of' the fence that /were on the ground ; he told me
to put them up ; 1 did so, but I said there were some of
my pigs out and it was Bill Hall’s duty and not mine,
and he then struck me,; it was about sundmyn; I think
Mr. Larnach was hearty at the time, that is he took a
drop too much; it is not twelve months ago; it is about
ten or eleven months, about six or seven days before
E


Reilly absconded, he was punished with fifty lashes; I
never was unwed on the farm, hut if I wanted any
medicines I could get them; the last quart pot I got was
stolen put of my hut; meat and other provisions are
.stolen from the men by each other when they run short;
I never carried provisions to any one out in the bush; I
lost my slops the night before I went to Sydney, but they
Were all returned; I never had to complain of short
weights ; I don’t believe the overseer would wrong me
by giving short weights; I have got notice when the
clergyman came to the school-house to give prayers; I
think the Bench of Magistrates would have done me
justice if I complained; Pool, that suffered here the
other day, told Cook, the blacksmith, that all the men oh
.the farm would be returned to Government; I have
been allowed tea and sugar during the harvest, along
with milk; I think if I asked for extra provisions
during harvest .1 should get them ; Jones also got tea
and sugar.
his
(Signed) RICHARD X NAGLE.
mark.
Sworn before F. A. Hely , J. P.,
In the presence of J. H. Plunkett.
(A Copy.)
ALEXANDER M'LEAY.
Henry Brown sworn— (Royal Admiral) —I am three
years in the Colony; I was assigned to Mr. Larnach from
the ship; I was down as a groom; .I went to Sydney to
give evidence; I was one of the bullock drivers, and!
was in the habit of taking very bad wheat to Mr. Mudie’s
mill from the barn or stores; I have taken some good
wheat, but. the greater part was the sweepings and taih
jngs of it; the good used to be sent,to Sydney I believe;
I have seen two or three bags of good wheat brought up
when there was no tailings to send ; within two or three
months back, I took up thirty-six bushels to be ground
for Mr. Scott, and the miller complained of the flour being
so bad, and told me to send Mr. Larnach to him; it was
then served out as ration; we got ten pounds of it; it
Was black as a gentleman’s hat; there was a general
murmuring among the men, and they went up to Mr,
•Larnach, and he asked what he was to do, and said he
could not be at the loss; he said he would give us a
pass to the magistrate if we thought proper to complain,


as he Would give better flour by washing the wheat neit
time; he gave us better flour because the ,
washed; the men all believed if they to the
magistrates, they would be redressed, but as L
narch spoke to us in a fair way, we did not complain to
the Bench; I have seen very bad meat, but a great deal
Was owing to Paddy the Overseer ; we have been eight
weeks on” the farm without salt, while Mr. Mudie was
absent in Sydney; I think if the Overseer had salt
enough he would cure the meat better; the bullock
Punch lay in a hole a day and a half, and he was seived
out; he had his leg broke; he was bled; I know he was
that length of time in the hole, because an Overseei of
Mr, Cobb’s reported the day before, that he was fallen
in the hole, and it being two miles from the house, he
lay there so long; he was killed, and the flesh all bruised J
the thigh and the bruised part was thrown away ; it was
four or five months ago; it was served ou two mess
days, and the last mess day it was not fit to be eaten,
as it was not salted; it remained in the stores for tin ee
days ; a short time after there was an old cow lay along-
side a creek, and George Frost, one of tbe men on the
farm, reported it on a Sunday; she lay theie, and the
butcher stuck the beast on Monday morning, and it was
served out; it was old and-thin; the flesh of th^ cow
was also bruised and would not take the salt; Mr. Mudie
was then at home; there was a general murmur on the
farm, but no complaint, as they knew the meat would be
better the following week; this meat of the cow was
served out, but the greater part given to the dogs; I have
seen the Overseer take out this meat full of hnaggots, and
wash the meat and throw salt on it for the men, I don t
know that there is a fly in this country that deposits
maggots on sound meat; we never complained, as theie
were many men nearly due for their Tickets, and ofiiers
nearly free, and they thought it better to put up with it, be-
cause 7 Mr. Mudieand Mr.Larnach,were both very mistme,
and if we made a report we might be punished, Mr.
Larnach was in the habit of saying a man was insolent
for the slightest word, and he brought him to Court; it
was not any apprehension we had, that the magistrates
Would not do us justice, that prevented oiwcot^
Mr. Mudie has never been in the habit ofbounGmglis
anen, but Mr. Larnach is; he used to call them inso-
lent scoundrels” when ever they complamed , I ney
head him call them convict scoundrel?; I was twice pun


islied; the first time for stealing pork in July, 1832, one'-
hundred lashes; the second for neglect and killing a
sheep, 20th August, 1832, fifty lashes; I was up in No-
vember, 1832, for refusing to take butter instead of
meat, and the case was dismissed; I was brought up in.
June, 1833, for doing little work, repreraandecf and dis-
charged ; in July, 1833, for ill using bullocks, admonished
and, discharged; there are no slops due to me; I have
never worked on Sunday but once in harvest, and I was-'
paid; other Amen have also; they were promised to be
paid ; I'believe they have not been paid; there names
are John Sawyer, William Wilson, Chetwood and Ste-
phenson ; I saw Mr. Larnach in Junb last, beat a boy of-
the name of Duffy, who was in my hut, and is still; he
beat him cruelly with a stick for thatching when* 'neks,,
as thick as one of ray fingers; he gave him sever a clows,
four or five; the boy is sixteen or seventeen years old ;
on the following Monday Mr. Mudie brought him to
Court, and. be got fifty lashes; Big Brown was present
when Duffy was beaten ; I don’t recollect who else was
present; Mr. Larnach beat Dully lately when he had a
sore back; I have seen Mr, Larnach also strike Maurice
Stack, one of the men, before he beat Duffy; he beat
him on different days with a stick, and with a cuttingwhip,
and until his fists; he also beat Dempsy; I saw hiin beat
all these persons; Dempsy went from his own business to
fetch water fora man of the name of Cush in a constable,
and for this, it was, he was kicked by Mr. Larnach; I
have no other complaint.
Cross-examined by Mr. Mudie—l am three years at ■
Castle Forbes; Mr. Mudie never bounced me; he often
complained of my doing little work; he had no reason
to abuse me; we mostly made our complaints to the
overseer ; Mr. Mudie spoke mildly to me always ; I was
pig-man when .1 was punished for stealing pork: the
overseer never charged me with stealing pork before he.
detected me; in attending the,horses, I had access to
the store where the pork was kept; the overseer found the ■
porkltookin themainger; I never boasted "that I would ,
pitchy into Larnach, or that I was glad of the chance; I
was in the house as servant for some time; I desired a
man to take some extra milk, and for this I was turned
out of the house; I was never charged with stealing
wine or spirits while in the house; it is two years since
I was in the house; I used to serve a quart'of milk at
that time to the men every day; the milkers were


allowed a pint of milk extra, but it was stopped eight
months ago from shortness of grass; I believe there was
no skim milk given then with the quart, ■ but I have
known it given repeatedly; the men used to take it in
bucket fulls ; it was not in harvest or Christmas time I
was in the house; I was in it altogether but three weeks ;
I used to attend at table in the house; the beef and pork
at Mr. Mndic’s were very good, fresh as "well as salt; the
fresh beef at Mr. Mudie’s own table was supplied from'
the same beast killed for the men; the salt meat was
often left uncovered., and in consequence became bad ;
every week a bullock was killed; wc have had bad meat
continually; the fresh meat was generally very good and
sound, but the salt was badly cimed; I attended in'kil-
ling pigs, often seventeen and eighteen at a time; they
were large pigs, and. fat, and -good meat when fresh ; 1.
consider the bad salting was owing to the fault of the
overseer and those who assisted him to salt the meat;
David Jones was the principal, salter on all occasions ;
we complained to the overseer of the salting, but not to
Messrs Mudie or Larnacli; I now recollect once making
n complaint to Mr. Larnach, and my meat was changed
for butter; he said he was sorry the meat was bad, he’d
give blitter for it; I have no doubt Mr, Mudie would give
me redress if I complained; I never complained to Mr.
Mudie of getting bad flour ; I got tea and sugar one
harvest'twelve months ago, and grog and extra meat on
Christmas day and at harvest home ; they were up at the
honse and they had as much liquor as they chose to drink;
I have seen the men get all sorts of. vegetables from the
,garden several times; in last harvest two years, pump-
kins and melons were served out for months,, it used to
help us put on our rations; I said I had little to say
against Mr. Mudie, but I did not say that I had no com-
plaint to make ; I know that Perry was promised half a
orown for working that he did not get; I believe it was
the overseer that employed him, and said, if Mr. Mudie
did not pay it, he would' himself; Mr. Mudie was in Syd-
ney at the time ; I was transported to Bermuda and was
two and a half years there ; I was punished while I was
there once or twice for neglect of work; I was sent back
to England and from that here for a mutiny on board the
hulk at Bermuda; none of the officers were killed on
that occasion ; I never said “ I did not care a damn for
fifty lashes,” far from it; I got six dozen lashes at


Bermuda each time; the cats are lighter there than
here, but longer; I was flogged by a man-of-wars man.
Cross-examined by Mr. Larnach —I swear I never said
I did not care for fifty lashes to Mr. Larnach; I was
never reproved by him for cruelty to bullocks but once;
I admit I ill-used the bullock, but I was obliged to dp it;
I was not brought to Court for doing so the first time;.
the tailings I call wheat that comes out of the scrapings
of the barn; the wheat goes through the machine three
times, and the smut and dirt that remain the third time
are what I call tailings; I have known the tailings to be
washed; I have washed myself as much as two bags ap a
time, each bag containing three bushels; the thirty-six
bushels I alluded to in my formcrexaminatiou wasmarket-
able wheat; I don’t think the cake or flour brought up to
Mr. Larnack was intermixed with anything; I believe
lam not,a favourite ; I would not wish to be one; there
were more than half the thirty-six bushels served out;
Mr. Larnach said if he was aware of it, it should not be
sent to the mill in that state; 1 there were days that the
wheat could not be dried, but days that it could; some-
times when marketable wheat was not, cleaned well,
only through the machine once it was black; Mr. Mudic
was at home when the bullock Punch was served out; I
know an old cow from a young one by the appearance;
the cow killed was an pld milker, she belonged ,to'Mr.,
Sparke; we said amongWselves, that between the too
we had Punch and Judy; there were about two
•or three weeks between them; all the men remarked
them to be bad meat; I always got offal when
a beast was killed; I had no cause to complain of the
-weights; there are weights in the store, but they are
old ; I know a man cannot be sent to an irong gang if
his master wishes it; the magistrates here would not al-
low it;; the had rations have only been for the last seven
■or eight months ; I saw the Governor at Castle Forbes,
and the rations were bad at that time; we did not think
that a proper time to complain, and had not the late
trials taken place, there would be the same murmuring
on the farm still; I don’t think any complaint would be
•made to the Bench, because we were all afraid of Mr,
Larnach and Mr. Mudie to make our grievances known;
when any man complained, he was tei'med insolent ;
Blackburne was punished for insolence; when he was
brought before the Court he complained of the rations,


and the Bench gave him no redress; Blackburn told me
so; I cannot name an instance in which a man was
charged with insolence for making a complaint; at the
end of the orchard fence I saw Duffy beaten by Mr. Lar-
nach; it was not a strap of leather he was beaten with,
it was an oak stick; it was the end of the orchard op-
posite to the yoking of the bullocks ; I was about sixty
yards away; the fence is six or seven feet high; there
were two fences between me and the boy; I did not tell
him to complain at the Court of the beating he got from
Mr. Larnach; what Blackburne told me of the Bench was
in front of the hut, two or three nights ago, in presence
of Edward Payne, James Griffiths, Thomas James, and
Edward McCarthy; they all expected to be examined at
this Court of Enquiry; the boy was in the bush when
the pigs under his charge used to come home and pull
the stacks, I did not say the boy was neglectful Mr.
Larnach might have brought the boy to Court if he
pleased, for destroying the stacks ; I never was with the
boy in the stack-yard when the pigs were pulling the
stacks near us ; I don’t know what the boy was flogged
for, when brought to Court by Mr. Mudie; the boy could
have been at home without my knowledge; he used to
come home two hours before sun-down; I have known
Mr. Larnach to call him up_ frequently when the pigs
were destroying the stacks in the morning ; Maurice
Stack was beat by Mr. Larnach for neglecting his pigs ;
he beat Stack, kicked him, and knocked him down,
kicked him once when down; Stack was not brought to.
Court; Mr. Larnach was satisfied with flogging him-
himself; Stack made no complaint about it; he was.
twenty-one or twenty-two years old; the meat was good
the first part of the week, but bad the second, for want
of salting; no animal that was drowned was ever served,
out to the men ; I never was sick but one day since !,
came on the farm, and on that occasion I got an emetic-
from Mr. Larnach; I have never seen any man who was.
sick treated with wwkindness ; I have seen Jock treated
with kindness when he broke his leg; I have seen Mr.
Larnach attend him; I never heard the men complain of
bad treatment while they were ill; Jock and Stephens
were taken care of at the house when sick; I had a dog
once, I used to give him part of my mess, bits-of bread
and the entrails of the beasts ; there were ten or a dozen
dogs on the farm belonging to the men : they are fed on
bread and milk and bones; the dogs have been often


found fault with for worrying the cattle; Mr. Larnach 1
has shot some of the dogs; the men were ordered not to
keep dogs, and they kept them notwithstanding; they
were not brought to Court for it; Mr. Larnach might
have got them flogged for the disobedience of his orders
if he liked.
' . (Signed) HENRY BROWN.
' Sworn before F. A. Hely, J. P.,
In presence of John 11. Flunk'd,
(A COPY.)
ALEXANDER M‘LEAY.
John Edmund Burt sworn (per Ocean.) —I am as-
signed to Mr. Mudicbr Mr. Larnach; I refused beef on
Sunday last, because it was green and stunk; the beast
it was a part of, . was killed on Wednesday before
last Wednesday;, it. was salted the, day after it was
killedl brought it to Mr. Mudie, and he gave me the
same quantity that I brought; it was more than half
the rations of five men ; this is The beef that I refused
(the beef was produced and the Commissioners tasted it,
and several other persons in Court, and in their opinion
it is of excellent quality, of good taste and well-saved, fit
for any one to use): there was about a quarter of a
pound more than there now appears of it, when I re-
fused to take it.
(Signed) J. E. BURT.
. Sworn before F. A . Hely, J. P.,
Inpresence of John H. Plunkett.
(A COPY.)’
ALEXANDER M‘LEAY.;
Memo. —This witness was produced by Mr. Mudie at
this stage of the proceedings as one of his witnesses, and
on seeing that he was in a very delicate state of health,
and could not wait the regular course without great in-
convenience, we allowed his examination nunc proiune. '
Hugh Thompson sworn —I was engaged by Mr.
Mudie in February, 1832, as a Millwright and Engineer; I
remained eighteen months on his farni, during which time
I eat and at Mr. Mudie’s table and slept at Castle,
Forbes; I have often in the absence of Mr. Larnach served
out tea and sugar, and soap, tobacco also; to those who
got it, tea and sugar, and to all I gave soap; I was only
absent from Castle Forbes during the eighteen mouths
for a fortnight; I have been sometimes present at the


serving out of rations, but not generally; I used to give
one pound of sugar, two ounces of tea, two ounces ot
tobacco a week, about three ounces of soap for a fort-
night ; I know it was the same description of meat that
was used at Mr. Mudie’s table as was_ served out to the
men ; it was generally young meat; it was sometimes
very good, at other times thin owing to bad grass, but
always sound ; I never knew a beast used at Castle Forbes
that died a natural death; I knew one bullock that killed
itself on being yoked, but it was instantly bled and some
•of it was used in the house at Mr. Mudic’s table, and
the rest served out to the men as any other beast would
be; a beast was generally killed once 1 a week; I have
known two being killed in a week, and when there was
not sufficient beef for the half weeks mess, sheep were
killed: I have not heard the men complain of bad ra-
tions to Mr. Mudie or Mr. Larnach, but they complained
to myself of the flour; I recollect a bullock that had its
leg broken, and Mr. Mudie gave orders to the butcher to
go and fetch it in on a dray andkill it; this is not the same
bullock I already alluded to ; I saw the broken hmh; I
am certain some part of that,,bullock was used at Mr,
Mudie’s table; there was no bullock killed while I, was
on the farm, some part of which, was not used
at Mr. Mudie’s table ; I never heard Mr. Mudie or Mr.
Larnach bounce their men or make use of improper lan-
guage to them; when the men were sick they were treated
according to the best of Mr, Larnacli s judgment, and
if very bad they were sent to the hopital; I have heard
one express a wish rather to remain on the farm than go
to the hospital: he got a blow from Pool, and from its
effects he could hardly take any sustenance: I have
known several men, when sick, brought to the store next
to the kitchen, and treated with the greatest kindness
for weeks there: I have seen Mrs. Larnach herself take
in tea and bread and butter to them ; I have heard Peter
Ponsonby say, that Mr. Mudie had made a man of him,
meaning that he had recovered him from - ill health by
kind treatment: 'Edward Macarthy _ used to_ say, if the
family of the house were not so kind to him while he
was ill, he did not know what he would have done he was
in so bad a state: I was generally employed at the
Windmill on the hill, or in the workshop at the house :
I had only an opportunity of hearing the men under my
own charge speak of their treatment: their names weie
Pool, Cook, and William Blackburne: Cook and Pool
F


,were treated uncommonly well: besides their rations
• ftey were al owed cold meat from the house often'. M
■ f used to take dto then! himself very often, or se ( f
At down by the servant ! ,they.have also gut extra ,E
slurts, light duck jackets : I &
Mi.Mudic to pay Pool as much as a pound at one tin
lor jobs done tor him : thosejobs were done after r
down and on Sunday mornings *
4 know Mr. Mu die promised .Pool five pounds when the
mill would be finished ; I believe Pool'told me he um«
paid .the last of the live pounds; Mr. Muclie got afluti*
and piusic, book for Pool; he wLsnever S
by eithci Mr. Mudic or Mr. Larnach While he was under
my directions ; I have studied Pool’s temper and found
him so passionate and so revengeful, that I knew if ever
he was punished he would take the hush and I told Mr
Lanmch so; and I have heard Pool say, that if he was
ever forced to take the bush, h,e would make those re-
lihb r l9 m>ll C caus< i him to -take such'a step; it was
with Ins own companions .while working in the shoo
that he would speak in this way and not addresshw me*
but I used to, hear .it as I worked in the shop myrf!
■ Jj?say that he would do any 1 tiling for
WlSi T b,U f Use ? t 0 ex P ress kimself violently to-
dh m arnacb > and say, that he would not acknow-
ledge him for a master; T never saw Mr, Larnach give
Mm any cause to dislike him the whole time I wiS a
Castle Forbes;. Pool was hot punished while I was there ■
Jones was' generally treated well; he had charge of the
growing of tobacco and lived by himself; He was a good
deal about the yard; I have served out tea, mwar § S
tobacco to Jones; he often got spirits wine and,grog.
.Minps. was butcher ; I don’t recollect, the men under my
charge and the bptcher, the miller, the shoemaker the
blacksmith and the overseer of the shepherds and nH.it
.watch-men, ever being without those indulgences,; all!
the bullock drivers going to Maitland used to get tea and
sugaynd used to get cheese and cold meat'loo setting
off, (I was not on the farm tins last harvest, but I was
httetGv'mfMu 0^’1 ’ 0 5 i aH tllG “ ei j dm ’ in S' hai 'vest used to
wml-t, k liv g ’ aiKl ft r ° 8 ‘ to their abilities for
woiki g, . they were allowed an hour and a half for dim
ncri.the bullock drivers dined.in the kitchen ; the dray
lbr C Hm ?v >^ 0t dmaei ' m tl)c kitchen; the,weights useS
loi the weighing out of rations were cast iron weights; ,
,1 believe, stamped; .there wci;c no bricks or stones used


as I recollect; there was a fall set of the regular weights;
I know Big Brown, he was a close character and would
not let slip any thing against himself;, I have heard one
or two grumbling about their flour; I have seen the flour
they have complained of; it was the tailings of some
sent to market and there was nothing else to do with;,
It was too good to give to ,the pigs; there were only about
thirty bushels of that flour; the establishment required,
for its ‘consumption from eighteen to twenty bushels a
week; I have known the men employed on Sundays but
not often, only going to the mill; it was usual for Mr.
Mudie to order his own wheat to be ground first and the cus-
tomers afterl think, the feeding of the prisoners on the
farms generally in this country, that I have seen much
•superior to that of the labourers in Scotland; Icon-
aider Mr. Mudie’s farm during the time I was on it, as
well provided as any farm I have seen here, and from the
quantity and quality of the provisions equal to the farm-,
ing establishments in Scotland. >
Cross-examined by Commissioners —I have known tail-
ings of wheat served out on other farms, but perhaps
not with so much smut as Mr. Mudie’s; I don’t know
that it was a practice at any time to give any ration
above weight, hut at the end of the week men complain-
ing of their ration would get some,more; I know nothing
of a letter lately written to, Mr. Holy that Mr. Larnaeh
laid hold of; the general manner of Mr. Larnaeh was,
not friendly to those who were not willing workmen, but
not, harsh ; the had feeling of Pool towards Mr. Larnaeh
arose I believe from stopping him about three years ago,
on his way to Sydney; I never heard the men say they
doubted getting justice at the Patrick’s Plains Bench;
they always seemed to rely very much on getting every
justice from Mr. R. Scott particularly; it has been a
'practice in some harvests to work the men on Sunday in
a case of necessity, hut not in any, other case; I have
attended at the Bench here only once; I saw several cases
that day and think the -prisoners have every justice; I
told Mr. Larnaeh that if Pool was ever flogged he would
take the hush, because I knew him to be revengeful; .Reilly
was a slow stubborn man; Ryan was a boy spoiled, by.
the rest; I knew little of Hitchcock ; I believe he ex-
pected his ticket-of-leavc when he caine to Mr. Larnaeh
and. not getting it irritated him ; I think Mr. Larnaeh a
sober man in his habits, very much so,; I nhver heard,
Mr. Mudie boast ho the men that he had influence to do.


what he liked with them, but I have heard the men say
he was too much in with the Governor; Mr. Larnach's
manner to those men he had a good opinion of was free;
I am _an Emigrant; I am at present employed by Mr.
Sempill at Maitland, building a steam flourmill; I am
brother of Mr. Thompson the Scotch Clergyman at
Bathurst; I left Castle Forbes in July last, and have not
been there since.
(Signed) H. THOMSON,
Sworn before F. A. Hely,
In the presence of J. 11. Plunkett.
(A COPY)
ALEXANDER MEEAY.
26 ih December, 1833,
Henry Russel sworn, ship Parmelia, 14 years — l am
assigned to Mr. Larnach; lam a watchman now; I was
employed as a miller at Mr. Mudie’s for six months from
Christmas last; I have ground good and bad wheat; I
have ground tailings; the flour was the same used in
the house as on the farm by the men; I recollect when
the men complained to Mr. Larnach of the flour, about
eight months ago; the flour was changed in consequence
of the complaint; they complained of the flour being
blue and dark, it was smutty; Mr. M adie got a new
smut machine made by Mr. Thompson, and it did not
take the smut out of it; he has no other smut machine on
the farm but that one; Mr. Larnach ordered better
wheat to come up to the mill; it was washed wheat,
and it was not so dark as the other; I don’t think the
bad wheat was served out more than one mess; since I
left the mill there was bad flour served out once since,
about four months ago ; the men reported it again then,
and Mr. Larnach ordered it to be washed; Mr. Mudie
was not at home then; about a week this flour was
served out then; a couple of messes; I went up to the
yard with the men, but I did not join in complaining;
as I was a new hand, I left it to the others to complain;
I had no cause to find fault with the meat; we had in-
ferior meat sometimes, but I know from the state of the
country it was impossible to have it always good; when
the men at the house were making complaints, my meat
was very good; I was in the flats at the sheep station;
I was punished twice ; I was charged for not entering
two bushels of wheat in the books, and I first got fifty
lashes for that, and was sent to work on the farm; the


second was for allowing one of my own shepherds to
to come into my hut; Hitchcock got as good meat as I
did, it was all cooked together; none of the shepherds
complained, -or had cause to complain of their provi-
sions ; Hitchcock was charged with robbing of two men
going up the country; they were strangers.
Cross-examined by Mr. Mudie —I was Governor of the
County Gaol and House of Correction at Huntingdon,
before* I came out to this Colony; I was nearly five
years in that situation; before I became Governor of
Huntingdon Gaol, I was ten years principal Clerk and
Turnkey of Northampton Gaol; I often had four hun-
dred prisoners in my charge at Northampton; I ought
to be a good judge of the treatment of prisoners, I con-
sider we are much better treated than prisoners are in
gaols in England ; I don’t know what the Government
regulations are ; we get ten pounds of dressed flour ; I
believe there are seventeen per cent, deducted from the
flour issued by Mr. Mudie; ■ I got tobacco and tea and
sugar when I was at work at the mill; 1 was allowed to
keep poultry; we have had pumpkins and melonsrmd
plenty of turnips ; we were allowed to takp them from
the Held, we were allowed on the sheep station three
cows, and often four and five, for the use of six men,
and sometimes five men; that allowed us at least a
quart of milk a piece at breakfast, and the same at din-
ner ; we had all the milk of those cows to ourselves;
Hitchcock had the advantage of all this; he used to earn
a deal of money for himself; he used to make hats and
bonnets of straw; I have known him to get nine shil-
lings for a hat from Mr. Larnach’s mason, a freeman;
he never was without a dollar in his pocket; any man
with money might get what he diked by the drays from
Maitland; Big Brown is a great lawyer , and pretends to
know every thing; the men called him a good man ; I
suppose his master would consider him a bad man from
that; those men who are in favour with the master arc
not liked by the prisoners; if the other men got the
same meat that I got, they could not swear with truth
that they never got any good meat; I believe all the men
got the meat off the same beast, unless a piece of another
happened to be left from the week before; I never heard
either Mr. Mudie or Mr. Larnach abuse their men; I
only heard Mr. Larnach say, pointing to a man and
speaking to the overseer, “ Paddy, look at the idle
scoundrel;” a beast was killed once a .week; and 1 have


known nineteen pigs killed once ; the offal was given to
the men, in addition to their rations; while I was at the
mill Pool used to work there; Mr. Larnach nsed to come
np every day when he was at home, and Mr. Mndie oc-
casionally; 'Mr. Thompson was then there; Messrs.
Larnach * and Mndie used to speak to Pool ; I never
heard them give him a cross word; it is six months
since I left the mill; I looked on Pool to be as well off
as a free man on the farm; he nsed to work for himself;
he nsed to make ploughs for Mr. White and others on
his own account; tailings are what goes through the
cleaning machine; small wheat, garlick, drake, go
through with it; I. have not seen flour as black as a hat
bn the farm, hut it was blue, this might be once or twice,
I cannot recollect how often; he used to grind blue wheat
for other settlers ; it was hard to get any without smut
then, unless it was washed; I came out to the Colony
as accessary to a suicide; when I was flogged I thought
I' was hardiy used ; when I came ,to Court I expected to
lie punished, bnt I thought the last case a hard one; the
men used to say they would get flogged right or wrong ;
those who, had been punished used to say this; the
two Browns’ used to say so; no slop eloathing due to me
now; I never heard "the well-behaved men say they
would he punished'right or wrong; on the last occasion
1 pleaded ignorance of the regulations being a new hand ;
and I was told that was the reason I got only twelve
UU ' h(3h ‘ (Signed) HENRY RUSSEL.
Sworn before F. A. Ilely, J. P.,
In presence of John H. Plunkett.
(A COPY.)
ALEXANDER M‘LEAY.
26 December, 1823,
(Produced by Mr. Mndie.)
Robert Ronn sworn —I am a Settler in the District
of Patrick’s Plains about eight years; I have been sum-
moned here by Mr. Mndie; I have known Mr. Mudio s
family ten or eleven years in this country; during the
last eight years I have frequently _ paid occasional Visits
to Castle Forbes; I have accompanied Mr. Mudie several
times to see the farm in his rounds, visiting his men, to
look at his stacks and stroll into the blacksmiths shop,
and such matters, in fact to see the whole establishment;
1 saw nothing more than I would expect to see in any


other place; the men were always respectful-j I spent the
Christinas of 1831 at Castle Forbes ; I saw a great many
men regaling themselves a good deal, and I, thought
the men were treated with much kindness, particularly
on Christmas day.
By the Commissioners —l employ thirteen prisoners 1
give them a peck of wheat, seven pounds of beef a
Avcek, salt -when they ask for it, two ounces of soap a
week, two quarts of new milk they generally get, but I.
tell them they must be satisfied when they only"get three
pints : they can get some skim milk in the course of the
day; my residence is about eighteen miles from this
Court; 1. think the prisoners have confidence in the
Patrick’s Plains Bench; I have known prisoners request
to be sent here in preference to Maitland; I had no
opportunity of judging of the quantity or quality of the
rations served out at Castle Forbes but once; I recollect
seeing beef cutup in the store, I suppose for serving out,
and I remarked it to be very good; -I was at Castle
Forbes the last time about three months ago, I believe
before any of his men took the bush; I was two days
there; I seldom spoke to any of the men ; they appeared
to me to be going through their occupations as usual; I
did not perceive any discontent among themmy last
visit there was a week or so before Mr. Mudie went to
Sydney.
Re-examined by Mr. Mudie —I recollect Pool, he ap-
peared to me to be very well dressed and I should say, he
appeared to be well treated, but I know nothing particu-
larly of his treatment; when I have considered it ne-
cessary I have made my men work on Sunday, such as
tending cattle, minding pigs, and such cases, but it is not
usual for my men to work on Sunday except in urgent
cases; I speak only for myself; I have seen men
work on Sunday; 1 cannot say whether they were cases
of necessity.
At Mr. Larnach’s suggestion —T have served out smutty
wheat last year to my men; I made no increase to the
allowance ; I think after washing that wheat, there would
be about ten pounds of flour produced out of a peck ;
,1 imagine so from the circumstance that the ,men did not
complain of being short in their allowance.
(Signed) R. S. RODD,
Sivorn before F. A. Hely, J. P.
In presence of John H. Plunkett.
(A COPY)
ALEXANDER M'LEAY.


YNNP ' c VLB WIN- sworx— l am Agent to my fathers
property; I have thirteen men in my charge ; I had two
or three cases before this Court in the present year; I
think impartial justice is administered here; during my
attendance at the Court I think the punishments very
lenient; whenever my men have cause of complaint they
come to Court; my allowance to the men is a peck of
wheat and eight pounds of beef per week; tobacco about
two ounces weekly, salt and soap according to regulation;
two quarts of milk generally, some times three quarts •
in harvest they get tea and sugar, and at sheep shearing
grog; I never heard the prisoners complain of the
.Bench here ; I have heard the Bench ask the prisoners
what they had to say and allow them to ask questions; 1
never hail occasion to ask my men to work on Sunday.
(Signed) WYNNE BALDWIN.
Sworn before. F. A. Hdy, J. P.,
In presence of John H. Phmket.
(A COPY.)
ALEXANDER M'LEAY.
2 7th December, 1833.
Patrick Crinnane, sworn— -I a free man for nearly
eight years; I am Overseer to Mr. Mudie; it is my
business to see that the men all go to work in the morn-
ing, at snu-rise; I go about from one set of men to
. another ♦ I serve them out their rations twice in the
week; the ration is lOlbs of flour, Tibs of beef, and
.when they get pork instead, 41bs of it; last Wednes-
day I began to give of pork; some men at the
cud of the week if they ask for it, get a pigs face; they
get a quart of new milk now; about three weeks ago the
quart commenced to be given, until then a pint only was
given ; as the grass was bad the cows had not the milk;
it is my business to inspect the salting of the meat; in
the warm weather, it is hard to cure meat, but when-
ever the men have shewed me pieces not fit for use, I
always gave them other meat in place of it; they have
brought me meat to exchange which I refused to do, as
what they had was fit for use; some of the men grum-
ble about the meat; I always give the regular weight,
and the regular rations; about' six months ago in par-
ticular, grumbled about the flour; the wheat was smut-
ted then, they got but one half weeks ration of that,
when Mr. Larmieh ordered other wheat to be ground,
and both flours were mixed together, and it made fair
bread; T never told Big Brown, or any of the other men


when they grumbled, tc to go the master to complain
and he would get himself flogged;”-I had about fifty
men under my charge 7 or 8 months ago; before the
men lately took the bush, there were sixty-one in num-
ber, shepherds and all; mostly every week there was a
beast killed for the use of the establishment, the house .
as well as the men; the cattle Killed generally were
good sound beef, but neither fat nor lean, middling r
they ran from four hundred to six hundred in weight; I
weighed it all; there was no flour on the farm for the
lastfour months, that was not fit for any ones use;'l
was always alknved plenty of salt for the meat, and I
had the discretion of changing any of the,rations that
were bad, without asking my master; last winter in
June or July, we were scarce of salt, and I gave the
meat to the men fresh; I gave the full of my hand to
each mess of salt, about two ounces; I was one week
without salt at all; the men were grumbling when I had
none to give them; I gave some brine out of the cask
to them.
Cross-examined by Mr. Larnach —Big Brown was as
easy a man pleased, as ever came into the store; he
was a quiet man among the men, but was very discon-
tented ; he was never reconciled, to the farm or this part
of the country at all; he wished to get back to Sydney
or Parramatta, or Windsor, where he was before; I
never said he was a dangerous man on the farm; be
was a good working man, but discontented; I never
heard either Mr. Mudie or Mr. Larnach, call the men
Convict scoundrels, nor did I do it myself; I never saw
Mr. Larnach beat any one but a small boy Duffy, and
he struck him, as I would have struck a child of my own;
he is only fifteen or sixteen years old ; Pool had a dread-
ful temper, sulky and stubborn, but a fine workman ; I
gave him up; I could make nothing of him; the day
after the two .ploughs were stolen, he was going to strike
me, and he said I would carry the blow to the grave with
me; I said to one of his hut-mates who told it to Pool,
“ that there was too many of the men resorting to his
hut,” and for this he was going to strike me. Hitchcock
was a very well-behaved man while he was working on
the farm; I know nothing of him while he was on the
sheep-station; I never saw any ill-treatment to Hitchcocks
David Jones was a sulky stubborn fellow, but a good
working man; he was not treated severely, he had easy
treatment, extra rations, tea and sugar; the same kind
G


of meat was given to the men as was used iu the house;
they had pork , for the lust six weeks; the bullock that
had his thigh broken, was bled and was capital good
meat; the cattle slaughtered were picked out of the herd
an the fattest in it; I never weighed salt to the men; I
gave as much as done them ; I always use the rae.tnl
weights' in weighing out the rations ; I never used a
stone or .a brick, except us a balance in the scale for a
bag; the men never work on' Sunday .except in a. case of
necessity; I was iu the employ of MivMudie when 1
was a prisoner of the Crown for four months.
lixamined by the Commissioners —When Nagle was
sent to Mr. Campbell’s for the Winnowing Machine on
Sunday, I considered- it a case of necessity ; I employed
some men about six months ago to work on Sunday at,
cleaning wheat, and promised half a crown to each man ;
their names are Sawyer, Fanninc, Stephens, Darby,
William Wilson, Perry who took the bush, and Culbtiri;
I told my master that I promised them and he said
lie would pay them, but he had no change at the
time ; I used to hear the men in talking to each .other say
that they had no business to complain to. this Court, they
would get no redress.; I don’t recollect their names, it is
a good while ago ; I think it was necessary for the dis-
cipline of the farm to bring the men to Court as often as-
they were brought up ; I have heard the men say, until
of late, that they were better treated on Mr. Mudie’s
farm than, they would be on other farms in the country ;
the men on the farm were treated as well.in the present
year, as, in other years until the row; ,1 mean the time the
house was robbed ; this harvest they got no extras, ov in-
dulgences; “I never heard Mr. Mudie say, “that,ha
had interest with the Governor to send, any man- to
hi or folk Island, or to get the best Mechanicsthe hill-
ings of the wheat that comes out. at the back of the
machine where the dirt comes out were never given to
the men, hut the small wheat that came out, in the side
was ground into, flout:; the wheat was, not small that was
dark; it was marketable.
(Signed) PATT GRINNBN.
Sworn before F. A. He/y,. J. P,, ■
, " In the presence of J. 11. PlunkeU. \
(A Copy.)
;■ ■ ALEXANDER M‘EEAYv


2 Jih December, 1833,
John Larnacu sworn. —I reside at Castle Forbes; I
have about twenty assigned servants myself on the
Establishment; all the men work jointly for Mr. Mudie
and myself; my men for Mr. Mudie, and Mr. Mudie’s
for me; they are fed and cloathed alike; I spend more
time at home than Mr. Mudie, and in. his absence the-,
whole management is in my hands ; Mr. Mudie (even,
when at home) except in my absence, never interferes
with the sheep stations; a greater number of men are.
brought to Court for neglect of their flocks than tor airy
thing else, hi the proportion of three to one; I admit
that I, have corrected the boy Duffy, and also Stack, with
a strap of leather, and with a riding switch, not a stick ;
I never punished them more severely than I would a _
younger brother, and when 1, have done so, it was in
aggravated cases; for allowing the pigs in their charge
to destroy the stacks ; I never knocked them down 1 am,
sure, nor do I recollect kicking , them ; I deny ever hay-
ing struck Nagle; if I had done it, I must recollect it,
nor did I ever strike any, other of the men than Ryan ; I
found him ouq day plaiting straw which was previously
forbidden, and at the same time saw several eagle hawks
in the act of devouring two lambs close by him ; it was
his duty to prevent it; 1 took the straw from him and
he took up a stick and said he’d lay me low if I did not
give it back; he made a blow at me and ran, and on my
running after him, he struck me a second time and cut
me i.n the forehead; I then gave him a sound thrashing
with a stick I lifted at the time and brought him home ;
I took him to Court and he got flogged for it; I deny
that I ever struck William Crisp ; if a man was insolent
I might call him an “ insolent scoundrel,” or if lazy or a
scamp, I might call him so; lam not sensible of its
being my general habit to call the men such names, nor
do I think it occurs very frequently; I never called a
man a “ convict scoundrel;” lam not aware of brmging
a man to Court for any trifling fault; I do not think I
would be justified for bringing a man to Court for merely
resting from his work, unless he left bis work altogether
or went to sleep; Pool never was brought to this Court
until the time he received fifty lashes on my complaint
for disobedience and neglect of work ; I. ordered him to
paint the wind shaft of the mill, and he did not do it,
and said he would not do it; I heard hiny abuse a man,
of the name of Powell, whom I sent to him to deliver


orders, and when I r’eprerniuuled him for that, he said to
myself, that he did not care a damn for me, and damn
and b—r the b—y place ; this is the insolence I alluded
to in the first part of my deposition ; I recollect the cau-
tion Mr. Thompson gave me about him; he was pun-
ished on Monday and that night he absconded; I did not
deprive him of tea and sugar at. that period ; on Friday
or Saturday before I brought him to Court, I saw at the
mill that he had done little work, and on asking him to
shew what he had done, he said I wanted to know too
much, and that it was the likes of me that made men dis-
contcnded on the farm ; that I did not understand car-
penters work, and I might get some one else to shew me;
1 said it was as easy to give a civil answer as any other,
and he then said what is stated in the depositions, and
added, “ damn and b—r the farm and you “ that this
would not last long, that he knew something that would
soon pat an end to it, and that my bounce should not
continue long;” if he was not so insolent in the presence
of some of the other men, I would not have brought him
to Court, and it frequently took place before to myself, no
other person being present and I overlooked it; I was
examined on the late trials, touching a letter alledged to
have been written by Pool to the Principal Superinten-
dent of Convicts ; 1 stated that I took such a letter from
Pool, but I was not allowed on that occasion to explain
their contents or the circumstances; 1 now produce the
letters that I then alluded to; the circumstance occurred
nearly three years ago ; shortly after he was assigned to
Mr. Mudie he was discontented at not being able to live
in Sydney, and did every thing in his power to be re-
turned to Government; he said he was no carpenter and
he was sent out to work in the fields fora few days, and
I heard he absconded ; I followed him and I overtook
him between the two Wisemans on the Mountains; I was
informed on the road before I came up with him, that he
had a pass with my signature, and also two letters written
by me; when I Overtook him I asked him for the letters
as well as the pass he had ; I was armed and lie made no
resistance; he then delivered the letters I have now
handed in; they arc ail in the handwriting of Pool himself;
one letter is directed to Captain Wilson, Chief Engineer of
Public Works, signed John Pool; the other letter is di-
rected to Mr. Hely, Principal Superintendent of Con-
victs, and signed William M.‘Mackin, 38th Regiment;
■there was a person of that name, then on the farm,-but'


when I questioned him about it, he said he "knew nothing
of it, that Pool must have written in his . name without
'his knowledge; the date of both letters, as well as the
pass, is 2 Ird January, 1831; when I set off m search of
Pool I did not intend to go far, but I did not return until
the following day, he got so quick before me; General
Darling came to Castle Forbes the day of my return, and
I shewed him the letters as well as the pass, and he was
amused at the way in which my name'was signed to the-
pass, it being written “ John Larnach , Esquire.,’ and he
regretted there were not more efficient constables on the
road to.'.deteet the imposition; on my oath'*! never took
any letter directed to Mr. Hely, or any public officer,
from Pool or any other man on the farm, but those I now
produce; I took a love letter once_ from a servant girl;
these are the only letters I ever intercepted ; I would
have forwarded those letters to Mr. Hely and Captain
Wilson, only General Darling and Captain Dumaiesq
seemed to think lightly of it, as an ordinary occurrence;
I would consider it my duty to forward any letter ot
complaint that the prisoners might think proper to make
to Mr. Hely or any other public officer, but I most'likely
would open it first; I recollect the men on the farm
complaining to me of their flour , about foui 01 five
months ago; one of them produced some bread as a
sample of it; it appeared exceedingly dark; I did not
know the cause of its being bad and dark at that time,
but on examining the cake there appeared to me to be
ingredients mixed with the flour, with the of
making it appear bad; at the moment when I saw it I
was astonished, as I knew it to be marketable wheat, and
I went to the overseer and made enquiry, telling the
•men that as soon as I could grind other wheat they
should have better flour; it was the same flour that was
used in the kitchen at the time, and it had not the same*
appearance at all as that brought up by the men; 1 was
not satisfied until I brought the house servant to the
same bin that I knew the flour served out to the men to
be taken from, and took some out to bake a cake ; the
cake was not bad tasted, but it looked blue ; thcie was
a little smut in it; the smutting machine failed with us;
I don’t recollect any complaint made of the flour since
that; once before that they complained of the flora being
dark, but the weather was such that it could not be
helped; 1 have eaten as bad at settlers houses as my


men ever got; whenever the men complained' of their
meat being bad, I always gave orders to exchange it, if I
thought it was not fit for use, but if 1 thought "the com-
plaint was groundless, I told them to complain to the.
Magistrates p they never complained at any time to the
Bench of their rations; pork is generally given in harvest
time ; don’t know what quantity of pork was given, as
it was since 1 went to Sydney that pork was given out
this year; 1 know the (lovenimont regulation Is to give
four uml a half pounds of pork ; the. impression on my
mind is (hat this last harvest twelvemonth the men got
five pounds fif pork ; 1 euu’l swear they got that quan-
tify ; I have known men to get some extra pork at the
end of the week ; 1 heard they got only four pounds this
harvest, until last Wednesday; the only man’s form I,
ever refused to sign for an application for a tieket-of-leave
was named (hdlaghan; he was assigned to Mr. Mudie,
and he was from home ; I refused on the plea that, as
he was in the employ of Mr. Mudic long before I came
to Castle Forbes, unci his master was expected back la a
week; I hold in my hand a list of persons who got
tiekets-of-leave at Castle Forbes since the year 1830;
eight persons got their tickets in that time; this list also
contains the names of eleven persona not punished since
J82B; I pever refused to sign the application of any man
that I thought was due for his ticket; I never knew Mr.
Rhulie refusing in such ease either; the harvest did not
commence, this year until after the men who took the
bush absconded, and none of the usual indulgences were
withheld until the harvest began, except tea and sugar,
that was stopped from all but Pool, in consequence of its
becoming so very dear; they were two or three mouths
without ten and sugar; there are now on the farm,
twenty-eight men who have never been punished since
athe year 1831; all of this number lived on the farm since
that year; I employed three free men and two free
women for the last twelvemonth ; I supplied them with
rations, which they paid for; they were of the same
quality as those served out to the. prisoners; they got
any quantity they thought proper to call for, as they paid
for it out of their labour; they used much more than the
prisoners, because they were very extravagant; in the
harvest time we employ on the farm sometimes forty ad-
ditional men on the establishment; about a dozen of
those are tickot-oMeave men and free men, the rest jiri,-


•amors from road samp, lent by Government j they mere
,U treated in the nan* way » our own ™" Larnach ,
Sworn before F. A. Bely,
In ‘presence of John B. Plunkett .
(A C ° l ALEXANDER M'LEAY.
.rime, evidence for the Commission being now comedo a
.close, Mr. Mudie was called upon to make such remarks on.
it and the proceedings, as he might think proper. _ ,
Mr. Mudie replied, that his defence was contained m the
■cross-examination of his accusers, which then lay upon
the table; and trusted he would never _ see the day-,
when it became necessary for Mm to require a character
from any prisoner of the Crown; and if that day Mid at -
We, he lped he should cease to live. But at tU. same
■time, he wished to observe, that he spoke only for himself.
Eis relation Mr. Larnach, was a younger, man, and halt
been more virulently attacked by his servants and therefore,
Mr.-Larnach might choose to make some remarks on the
proceedings of the Court, and the evidence which had been
taken down. , „ ~
Mr. Larnach said, that he should not trouble ihe Lomt
with any observations in the way of defence, any mot e
■than his'relative Mr. Mudie; but he had to make a. request 5
which was, that as the Commissioners had been pleased to
.examine seven of his. worst and most insubordinate servants
they would now be pleased to examine a like number of ms
aood servants. 7 , 7 .
The Commissioners objected to this on the M° uncl _>
Mr. Larnach. was. bound, by. the decision of Mr. Mudie
Bui on Mr. Larnach insisting on his, re,quest being
on the score of its Justice and equity, it was rducten. J
complied with so far, as that in lieu of seven days bung
allowed for the examination of Messrs. Mudie and Lea-
metis seven men, as had been employed m examining the
seven disaffected servants, leas than an hour was employ ut
in examining the latter; for Mr. Larnach pen ceiving. '
impatience .of ihe Commissioners, and that they seemed .
hi acting-under the impression that they were travel.mff.tmt
>of ilidr Commission, relinquished. his mienhou oj gr J
through a regular set of interrogatories, the Com?
mmimers themselves confined their questions to. the
■mg-small number; —J ■■


December, 27, 1838.
Dandal Wright. —Lady Faversham; arrived in 1829;
with Mr. Mudie near six months; 1 have no complaint
to make.
William Cute bet. — Norfolk; nearly two years in
the Colony; assigned to Mr. Mudie from the ship; no
complaint; I worked on Sunday, but was paid extra
for it.
Thomas Gamble. — Hercules; arrived fourteen months
ago; was assigned to Mr. Larnach, from the ship; I
'have no complaint.
James^ Priestly.— Hercules; arrived fourteen months
ago ; assigned from the ship ; no complaint.
_ George FRosv—General Stewart; lam ten years with-
Mr. Mudie; I got into trouble and was sent five or six years'
ago to an Iron-gang, this is the reason I have not my
•iicket; I was only punished the once; no complaint.
■ William Wilson—Lady Harewood, 1831; assigned
irom the ship ; never punished ; no complaint; he worked
on Sunday but was paid extra for it.
Walter Micklejohn— Gertrude sth, 1822; came to
Castle Forbes three years ago; never punished since I
came there ; no complaint.
William Downing — lsabella, 1831 ; assigned from
the ship; never at Court or punished; no complaint.
All these men state, that all the other men on the
farm were apprized by the constable, sent for the pur-
pose by the Commissioners, and also by Mr, Mudie him-
self; if they had any complaints to make, to come to
the Court and do it,; they say they knew none have come
to complain, and none intended to do so.
Taken before us,
(Signed) F. A. Hely, ./, P.
(Signed) John H. PlunkeiL
(A COPY)
ALEXANDER M C LEAY.
. William Evbrness, Constable, Sworn—l have,
been at Castle Forbes yesterday and this morning, and
aT ™^ n , wore all ran ged up to the number of thirty;
Mr. Mudie asked them all in my presence if any of them
had any complaints to make, that if they had' this was
W e _ time, as the Solicitor General and Mr. Hely were
sitting to hear any complaints they had to make; it was
stated to them, that I was sent by the Comissioners to
make this known to them ; Mr. Mudie told them he '


would be obliged to any person wbo had a complaint to
make, to come forward and state it to the Commissioners,
none of 1 them bame forward.
Cross-examined by Mr. Mudie— ln my situation of con-
stable I had an opportunity of seeing Mr. Mudie’s Es-
tablishment ; I have always seen the men satisfied ; the
impression on my mind was, that the men were well
treated ; I never saw either Mr. Mudie or Mr. Larnach
ill-treat the men, though I have seen them among them ;
I asked Duffy in particular if he had any complaint, ha
said he had none, either against Mr. Mudie or Mr-
Larnach.
(Signed) WILLIAM EVERNESS,
Sworn before F. A. Hely, J. P.
In the presence of John H. Plunkett
(A COPY.)
ALEXANDER M £ LEAY.
William Downing sworn —I am farm constable j,
I was at the out stations this morning among Mr. Mudie’s
men, and I told them that if they had any complaints to
make, Mr. Mudie and Mr. Larnach requested they would
come - forward and state them to Mr. Hely and the
Solicitor General, that this was the time ; they said they
had mo complaints to make; I toM Mom'ice Stack this,,
and he said he had no complaints..
;. t!l , (Signed) WILLIAM DOWNING, ■
Sworn before F. A. Hely, J. P.
In the presence of John H, Plunkett,
: (A COPY.) .
ALEXANDER M‘LEAY,


• - :: • ' Colonial, Secretary’s Office, ,
Sydney, li3tii January, 1834,
.' Gentlemen, V, 1
I am directed by the Governor to inform yon, thatbc
has perused 'the deposition's taken before the Solicitor
General and the ; Principal : Superintendent of Convicts,
whp'wefe sent to/Patricks Plains to inquire into your
conduct towards yonr assigned servants, in consequence
of the complaints made by Poole, Hitchcock, and others
who were lately tried at Sydney-,'for an attack on yonr
dwelling hi that station, and. His Excellency has had
much- satisMetion'’ixi\ascertaining by the perusal of these
examinations, that the cothplaints are, for the most part
nnfouhdedpanel -that yotir general conduct towards your
assigned servants has not- been marked by harshness or
oppression. ■ upon some occasions,- indeed it appears,
that-su-ffifeient attention was not paid to the cpiality or
qu aiitity-: of the beef or fl our, 1 nor to the regulatio n for
tlife - allowanee- of pork and salt issued to your-servants;
but the occasion's calling for these remarks were but few,
dtiring a considerable period of time y and it does not
appear to have been any part of the system 5 laid, down ifor
the i management of your assigned servants, to detract
froiri>‘th& ratidn/wbien-the, Government has directed to
be either initS-q-Uantityoxv quality.
r‘kmy'li6wever,'T\irecfei;l^to'iffiserye, that His Excellency
cgimqt but, consider the condhcf of Mr. Larnach as im-
pMd'cht!'and‘urijPstiflab'le, in striking assigned servants,
for the punishment of whose misconduct the law has
Sufficiently provided; and that inbringing David Jones be-
fore the Bench at Patricks Plains, upon the 21st October
last, upon a charge of neglect, which he established by
his own evidence; and bringing afterwards the same person
forward a second time on the same day for the same
offence; which was established by the evidence of a man
named Brampton, so as to obtain two sentences of fifty
lashes each; Mr. Larnach adopted an unwarrantable and
reprehensible procedure.
The Governor is also called upon to notice the con-
duct of Mr. Mudie, in requiring Nagle to go on Sunday
for a winnowing machine, and subsequently bringing
him to the Bench to be punished for refusal; in doing


Winch Hd'acte'd in A 'Sia&nSir WhbUy.di’hjifstiflhbß;j Arid’l
hill; directed 1 to ' remark in iiliH pltfob- that' HW
does ’ not’ consider any inaSirferyahtlipriscd db require
assigned servants to work ed a’SuMky ggainSt their in-
clination, nor justified in allowing' tlidm";''to s ;work oft
that day’for his benefit, but oh occasions of the most
urgent necessity j such as 1 the 1: gathering in of cfopkiri
harvest in doubtful weather, br suchsimilar ehifei-gehcies;
mid he should feel it to beis ddty'fo reniove assigned
from any master who should be found to 'trans-
gress'.thiss regulation. 'lt will be easily understoodi; that
the necessary attention to cattle on Sundays is not in-
cluded in this prohibition. v ;
, His Excellency having thus remarked | upon such parts
of your conduct,; disclosed by 1 the ‘‘ exalhination, as.ap-
pear to call for animadversion p* is' gratified ‘tp find On
the other hand!, that a Considerable proportion 3f the
assigned servants Ofi ’your farms have Itad no cbihplaiuts
to makej and have never been punished ; and 1 am the'fer
fore directed-'to infOrnl' you, that instructions have been
given to the Assignment Beardy to furnish 'ydu'with the
same number of servants' as Were lately returned to Go-
vernment atpyour request, under the warrant' Of Mr.’
Holy, in consequence of the occurrence which had taken
place on your farms. ; ”' i!
I have the honour, to be,
' !| ' ' Gentlemen, 1 ;
■ |i! Your most obedient servant. :J
ALEXANDER MGjEAY.
•To ■ ■ :
• 11 Messrs James Mudie, and f /
! John Larnach, Patrick’s Plains.
Sydney — February, 1834.
! SIR, '
I have had the honor to receive your letter of the 13th'
ult., communicating to,me, that His Excellency the Go-'
vernor having perused the examinations taken before the:
late Commission of Enquiry at Stl Patrick’s Plains, hr
consequence of the charges of tyranny and oppression'
&c., made against me by Pool, Hitchcock, and others'
recently executed for their crimes, has had the satisfac-
tion of finding, that the complaints were for “ the most
part unfounded, and that my general conduct had not
been marked, by harshness or oppression.”
You then proceed, under the direction of His Excel-


Ipucy, .tp,,pas.s a censure on my conduct; and that of Mr.
Laimach, in issuing indifferent beef and flour, and short
Allowance of pork and,iplt at different times; together
with ,my having brought before the Bench my assigned
servant Nagle, for refusing to work on a Sunday.
In reply thereto, I do myself the honor to submit to
you, for the consideration of His Excellency the Go-
vernor, that such, parts of the extraordinary charges
which were brought before, the Commission of Enquiry
against Mr. Larnach and myself, as had any semblance of
truth, were at once admitted by us ; but as they have
led to censure, I hope I shall be able to give His Ex-
cellency satisfactory reasons for their occurrence. I pro-
test however, as well on my own account as that of every
respectable employer of assigned servants in the Colony,
against the evidence of. six of the worst conducted out
of the sixty men on my farm, being made, the basis of
any reflections on my conduct. I protest against their
evidence being countenanced at all, and beg leave to
draw His Excellency’s attention to the following facts.
That on the——December last, previously to any
charges being made against me, I submitted to His Ex-
cellency the names of eight of my assigned servants
whom I knew to be characters equally desperate With
the bushrangers Pool and his comrades, lately executed;
and requesting their removal. That four of these were
brought forward before the Commission, not to give
evidence in palliation of their own misconduct, but to
criminate their master. That these men grossly prevari-
cated on their cross-examination; and that their evidence,
if worth anything, was rebutted by the testimony of well-
behaved men, whom the Commissioners did not even
think it necessary to put on their oaths. And I therefore
contend, that on the very respectable testimony of Mr.
Hugh Thompson, and on that of my Overseer Patrick
Crenan, as well as on the cross-examination of the
witnesses themselves, I am fully exonerated from hav-
ing ever knowingly served out inferior provisions, or
failed to remedy those unforseen wants, which all farms,
distant from the means of speedy supplies, must ever
be subject to.
With reference to the beef issued by me, I take leave
to state, that though in the frequent seasons of drought
which we are subject to, it has been necessarily lean,
and consequently less beneficial to the master and to the
servant than if it had been fat; it has at all times:been


at 'least dqual," and in most discs to the
beef delivered by contract to the Deputy €6mmiSs|ty.
General for the supply of troops, gangs, &c.; and that
the whole of the weekly ration of food given by me to
my convict servants, is, as a whole , superior to the ra-
tions allowed to His Majesty’s sailors and soldiers, and
infinitely superior to what is allowed the laborious pea-
santry of Scotland, and of late years of England. How-
ever, apart from the quality of the beef altogether, it
appears from killing once a week, it was the same as
partaken of by my own family, and that I adopt on my
farm the unusual practice, of serving out beef hm.ee a
week, in order that it may he in good condition, and that
my servants may have it as fresh as possible. __
On the subject of flour, I content myself with this
single allegation; that the flour in general issued by me,
is greatly superior to that issued by the Deputy Com-
missary General; and that when through unfavouiable
Weather once or twice in a series of years, I have been
unable to'clean the wheat so well as I could Wish, it has
even then been equal to what is issued to the gangs by
that officer; I further submit; Ist, that the quality of the
provisions was not objected, to when issued. .
■ 2ndly, that whatever I gave to my servants, I ate of
the same quality at ray own table, and from necessity,,
having no other.
3rdly, that even if the flour had been worse than that
issued by the Deputy Commissary Geheral, the quantity •
issued Was greater; and consequently, in the worst
harvests, and during the most arid seasons, my servants
were always better fed as well as clothed, and received
more indulgence every way, than the prisoners in the
immediate employment of the Government.
• With respect to the pork, four pounds only were issued
for a few Weeks. Up to the 29th of June, 1831, four
pounds were the established ration. By the new re-
gulations (see Government Order, No. 18)_ it was in-
creased to four and a half pounds. I certainly was not
ignorant of this ; but I had as certainly forgotten it.
The promptness with Which the alteration was made,
betrayed no desire on my part to take any advantage. It
however was of very little consequence, as it occurred dur-
ingbarvest when thehien always receive extra rations; but
it serves to reveal 'the desire of the prisoners to omit
nothing which might affix a stigma on their master,,
however slight,


With, respect to the issue of salt, ,anarticle generally
given by rue without stint, it appears % the evidence of
Crinnanchuy, Oversee*-, that they were short om week, on
which occasion, the brine was taken from the casks and
given to the men. I epicstion if, there are,many farms
on the Hunter, of winch the same could have been said.
If it had come to my knowledge at any time, that so in-
dispensable an article as salt was wanting, I should cer-
tainly not have put into competition with the grumblings
Of sixty men, the expense or trouble of sending to Mait-
land for it; but I never heard, nor could 1 have suspected
such a charge, seeing, at all times the almost wasteful
liberality of my Overseer, whenever the issue of salt
attracted my' attention.
Before I take leave of the remarks made by His Ex]
ccllency on the subject of provisions, I beg to add, that
if any such inferior quality urns at any time issued, the
legal‘and proper redress was, by complaint to the Bench
of Magistrates at the time. This 'is well known among
prisoners generally, and was particularly notorious among
mine; and a lair presumption may be formed, from, the,
temper of many of my men, (who seem to have been
by no means scrupulous in their charges against nip),
that some one of them would not have let such an op-
portunity pass, had they felt real hardship from the de-
ficiencies they were pleased to bring forward before the
Commissioners, when encouraged by Government to do
so. Complaints of this nature, have been made by other
prisoners, and have been, listened to and substantiated
before the Bench of Magistrates at St. Patrick’s Plains;
and contradictory as the testimony on this point is in its
general nature, ’an unwilling and tardy assent is given
by some of the ■witnesses to the fact, that if they hud
made their complaints, they would have been attended to .
I therefore must be allowed to say, that I do not con-
sider it fair (seeing that there was a proper tribunal to
appeal to), that my conduct to my assigned servants,
extending over a period of nearly twelve years, should
have been subjected to the scrutiny of a Commission, of
Enquiry on the allegations of men, so notorious for their
insolent and mutinous conduct. If it be, it will then
follow, that I am to be considered guilty_ in part of
charges which have been founded on the principle, that
tha nonjudicial oaths of the very worst of our community,
arc to be held of equal or greater weight, than those of
such men as Mr. Thompson; or of my free Overseer,


xvhose length of service with me : (eight years) ought to
speak for his character. •
I now come to the refusal of the convict Nagle to g 6
for a winnowing machine on a Sunday, and of his being
taken before the Bench and punished for such refusal.
About this there is some little misapprehension, which if
explained, may serve to disencumber the charge of the
appearance to enfore labour on Sundays as a principle ;
winch I neither contend for as a master, nor" could.
sanction as a Magistrate. The act was one of thdsh em-
ergencies which I .at the time thought it desirable to pro-
yhie; against. The order, .to Nagle (Which partook mbrb
request) Was refused by him with the grossest in-
solence ;: which being; uttered in the presence of his
fellow servants;: had the appearance of putting ihy
.authority to the test; and it was for ihsolehte father tllah
disobedience, that I was provoked to take him before the
Bench. ■ . I.might have deprived him of certain indulgences
he enjoyed as the jobbing-man about the homestead j arid
r as Ido not appear to have again employed any of my sei-
vants, on. a ' Sunday contrary to their wish, dr to have
acted on the supposed sanction of the Bench so to do, it
will be manifest to His 'Excellency, that my object was
■by:up means to- enforce any description Of work' oh a
punclay as a general rule, f repudiate the principle of
wprking unnecessarily on a Sunday.
The charge ,of Jones (transported for life) having been
twice brought forward for the same offence/ proheHy be-
longs to Mr., Larnach to reply to. I cannot however,
help remarking, (though I never sat on ash Magistrate ahy
any case of his,) that it coihes within my ownknoWledgd,
that; the two offences charged, and entertained against that
iprispner.have occurred withdifferentshepherclS on my es-
tahlishraent; on which occasions they havebeen punished
for boJh pandas ameraber of the St. Patrick’s Plains Bench,
Xunayadd, that considering the disorderly state of tlib
district as to the prisoners, we have been anxious to pre-
vent a prisoner from supposing, that by an accumulation
of offences he would receive punishment'equivalent only
to one. ■ , ' ... • J
I cannot conclude without requesting His Excellency’s
reconsideration of the whole matter, on this my state-
ment;; and; I; should not be discharging my duty to His
Excellency, did I fail in putting - him in possession of my
sentiments regarding the four men returned by me to
the Government, r . \


These men have already been represented by me, as
of the very worst character. They went before the Court
of Enquiry after due caution ; and there they made many
false and malignant charges against their employers con-
fradictedby themselves ; charges affecting their well-being
in society. ," .., ■ ,
These men are now in Sydney, and will perhaps he
.assigned to persons of inexperience, and recommence a
new cqprse of villiany. By being discharged from my
service, they feel a sort of triumph; they consider their
object has been in a measure gamed 5 the better behaved
men who remain behind on my estate, will perceive but
sorry encouragement left them in beholding the partial
success of their comrades’ schemes, namely, the forcing
me to get rid of, them to indulge their love of change ';
a besetting sin of . the prison population ; and One’which,
though not criminal in itself, is attended by the perpe-
tration of half the robberies in this country, filling the
woods with bushrangers, and the towns with absentees.
In conclusion I must be permitted to say, that from
the general tenor of the evidence given before the
Court of Enquiry, ~J had expected from; His Excellency,
in lieu of a, cold acquittal of the charge of harshness
and , oppression, and a rebuke on the different poiift's
above replied to, that His Excellency would have made
it matter of public congratulation to the Colony, that the
foul charges made against me■ by the prisoners (since
executed) were not only substantively, and in their
spirit, totaly false, but that the criminals who made them
at the bar of the Supreme Court, had received better
treatment than they .I were entitled to, either by the practice of
ih,e Ipcql Government, or by the regulations presmbed by
the IgstGqvernment PTder in June, 1831, (OrderNo.lBJ; and
consequently, that to their other offerees, they had ad-
ded falsehood, pi&lioe, and ingratitude. I had expected,
that as the accusations had been made against me pub-
licly in the Supreme Court, and before a full assemblage
of all ranks of Colonists, that the Government would
have taken some method equally public, to have vindicated
my character as a Magistrate and Settler.
’ I have the honour to be,
Sir, ■'
Your most obedient servant. 1
(Signed) JAMES MUDIB,
To _, ■
Alexander M‘Leay, Esq., 1
Colonial Secretary , &;c, J


f ; . t ,S(ty ; pqMck[g : .sfains i r6i&
if i '-SIR.,-' ■ ■ •> •) ! •f.’n! .1‘- PC' •i • 'J 'f'iiii.
.I.hayc:: the: honour,to t%, ropeipl of youy
letter ol’ ; :13tli hit;, in whiglp'by diro<N:ipa-bf His Excel-
lency -the-,Governor you infprip. nie,;'that tils .Excelleppy
cannot. but, consider my condact.a? imprudeirbiandunt
justifiable in striking assigned senqyt's,, the.-punish-*
merit of whose misconduct: thelaw, pr.oi
vided ; and : that,in haying brought ;Dajnd Joj\esl\ before
the ; Ranch ,at Sf. . Patrick’s Plains, on the 2.1 at October
last,' .upon a charge of /neglect, which Lestabliphcdby. my
own evidence.;, upd afterwards.l?ripgiug the saipe, person
fojnyard a second time, on,, the same day, for-the‘same
offence, which was established ; h'y the evidence; of .a man
pained. Brampton, so as, to obtain two sentences of .fifty
lashes each;: I, adopted ap unwarrantable, and.reprehensit-
blu procedure. , : y’,..;.-. r....,
In explanation of the first* of these, charges,- .I beg dp
.observe, ;that 1 cannot; admit the term,“.striking, assigned
servants,’.' as,, applicable t'o me at all; I admit,..having
chastised ..three boys,, but have already denied.. on oath
ever striking an adult prisoner to my recollection, . , ;
.It is not to be presumed, but, that, in an investigation,
on,which :my servants .were not restricted in their testi-
pioiiy to any number of years , the whole number of times
.on which,.l.had-lifted.my hand against my assigned;ser-
vants wppld .not fail to lie: brought forward, this, was the
case. , In the course, of, my six .years residence with. Mr.
.Mudie, at,Patrick’s Plains as .a joint cultivator with: hiip
■of the, Estate of, Castle Porbcs,;. I never struck- any other
servants than thc;threc of. which ,IWas. accused, namely,
Michael D.vffy,- a boy,of .adopt, fourteen ,or fifteen .years
of. age ; Mauricestaclc, $ lad, of about eighteen years of
age, and James ,Ryaipuibout eighteen or nineteen years of
age. The circumstances under which I chastised them,
.are detailed in the, minutes of evidence taken by "the
late Coininissioners of Enquiry, andpf which .the' follow ; -
•ing is a copy.. , , , . . . , »
“ I admit that I have corrected the boy. T)vjfy, ail’d
also Stack, with a strap pf leather, .and with a riding
switch, not a stick; 1 never punished them more severely
than I would a younger brother, and when I have clone
so, it was in aggravated cases; for 'allowing ..the pigs in
their charge, to destroy the stacks ; 1 never knocked him
down I am sure, nor do 1 recollect kicking them; 1
X I-;.:.


dbny : ever having struck Nagle ;if I bad done it. I must
have recollected it, nor did I ever strike any other of the
men than Ryan ; I found hint one day plaiting straw
which was previously forbidden, and at the same time
saw Several eagle hawks in the acts of devouring two
lambs close by him - it Was his duty to prevent it; I took
the straw from him and he took up a stick and said
he d lay me low if I did not give it back; be made a blow
at me and run, and Oh my running after him, he struck
me a second time, and cut me in the forehead; I then
gave him a sound thrashing with a stick I lifted at the
time and brought him home; 1 took him to Court and
hegotfloggedforit; Ideny thatleverstruckWilliamGrisp.”
This statement Which Was made by me on oath , I again
affirm to be the truth, and I trust it is not savouring of
presumption to hope; that if I am at issue with prisoners
of the Crown even in such points as these, I shall believed
in preference to them. ■
Without meaning to justify it as a practice, I respect-
fully submit, that the absence of an indenture, is the only
difference between an apprentice boy and an assigned
convict boy ; the former is liable to moderate chastise-
ment, and except the very agravated case of the boy
Ryan, I have in no instance exceeded that, which a pari
cut would thank me for doing to his child, under similar
circumstances. In denying therefore as Ido most disi
tinctly, having ever lifted .my hand to any other assigned
•servants except a boy, I feel aggrieved at his Excellency’s
(having arrived at the conclusion, that my conduct has
either been unwarrantable'or reprehensible 'in “ striking '
assigned servants,” in the manner inwhichyou expressit.
: With regard to having brought two distinct charges
against David Jones, the watchman, arising out of the
same act, and which is termed “ unwarrantable and re-
prehensible.” .
■ _ I beg to submit to you for his Excellency’s con-
sideration, 1 the facts■ of the case. Jones as anight
watchman over a valuable stock of sheep-; he deserted
his post, which in a soldier would be death • and the
consequence was the loss of sixty by the' native, dogs.
Three of these had recently cost £3 JOs. each, and others
were descendants of pure sheep which cost £35 each.
This I consider, a distinct offence. "
Ist. Because other men have been punislird for the
siime—and, 2nd. had I visited his station during the
night and found him absent under these circumstances,


t should-have taken notice of, it as' a case of ■ gwss mgilect.
The other offence was that of absconding, and having
been found by a constable at a distant station in a state
©f intoxication, a mime, of itself.deenibd.worthy.of ,50
lashes. •. , ' .
:; I considered this perfectly on a par, with the practice
which has existed from time immemorial la the colony )
viz.; that of the Benches, punishing runaways. Ist. fry
running from his master j and 2nd. for being (if so found;)
in any other district at large without a,pass, or in the
■case of a prisoner who had committed an offence pre-
vious, to the absconding, a circumstance of very common
.occurrence. 1 1
The loss of the -sheep, had Jones been a free man,
would have been upon his shoulders and he must have
paid for them ; if therefore, he was merely to lie
punished for absconding, he is placed in a better situation
ttlxan ft free man, a most dangerous doctrine in a pastoral
■country) where the discipline maintained amongst the
,sh;epherds is interwoven with its prosperity. _
If I committed an error in preventing from Being
.blubbed together, what appeared -to me do he .two .of-
ifcnces, it was one of judgement, which the. verdict
■Of the Court completely relieved me of. If‘l had brought
•the charges on different days, it. would certainly have
borne a look of oppression, hut .asjt was only intended
for the maj.ntainence.pf due discipline) I feel aggrieved
aftfc the terms “ unwarrantable ai)4 .rfipreheasaWe,” being
.applied to my conduct, after it has received the. sane lion of
a Court of Justice*. . . , , . ... ■ ,>■■ •: ■
I must, farther draw His Excellency’s attention to the
dime when the charges was -made by me;; viz. at sheep
washing and shearing, to which my time was entirely
: given, and during which -’I, was constantly harrassed by
•grievous losses from neglect and -misconduct; and con-
sidering the men I had to deal with, ;it was my bounden
duty, to look over no offence at that time,- in order that
ithe evil example of the ill conducted might not lead to a
defection among the better behaved, and I appeal to
His Excellency, that if I had been guilty of an act of in-
discretion, nay even of unintentional oppression, that the
jeopardy in which my -own life and those of my family
have been placed, is of itself an ample atonement.
However, with a view of satisfying His Excellency,
that the facts I have stated, are of common occurrence.
I beg to submit a similar case to that of Jones, in which


■I am at a loss bocvte'proceed, without His -Excellent’S
commands thereon. 1 ' 1
■ On the 28th iilt., : I found a flock of sheepwithout a
shepherd; in proceeding further into the hush, I fomid
together the two prisoners, James Haywood and Win 1
lorter, who are shepherds on this establishment;
neither ot their floekg whs in'sight, ami consequently
they were of no protection to them, they seperated-ou
my coming up and I followed -the first named prisoner
who not only did not-'account for his absence from,his’
nock, but extremely insolent; he however, went
towards' his flock 'which! was the one J mot; it appears
tliat he immediately took them home and absconded,; and
he Ims not since been apprehended,'; , ,
.Hut tor the censure of His Excellency, I sbould-con-
suler inyselt bound toanake two distinct’charges l against
this prisoner wljepcverhc is apprehended; ncglectbeing
an dllchce against the 'master, and absconding ithat
against the crown, who by assignment places himVthe
custody of (lie master,: who is bo-mid by Jaw toreportdiis
•his absence. ' : , '■■■'-• m: .mitei-.;,;,, i u
, I ve w °bl hf .NeW ' South Wales is its great staple]-arid
is become even of importance,hi the eyes of the mother
country all our flbeks. are in the, hands of 1 convicts; iadd
if the butter are 1 to be allowed-to leave their shecp ;! and to
plait straw hats, or to go away and pilfer their neighbours
farm yards, or to visit the nearest ptiblic house or slyc'grog
.-shop; without severe punishment, the-great staplctefothe
colony -and -the welfare' of' the* mostibspeetableabd-iise-
Jnl portion of the free population would be destroyed.' -
i, - ; - I have the honour to he, ‘
V;'N ; i o; /■ nhi; Siri'him
;!: j,, (' '.; 1 , .p,, ■ YohrhiidsttobcdiClil 'servant; 'p '
■ h . -(Signed) ' JOHN LAHX-ACH.
, To (he TToiiMirnh/o
The- i#c. ' v " , : i '


CHARGES
MADE AGAINST
MESSRS. MUDIE AND LARNACH,
OF
PATRICK'S PLAINS, HUNTERS RIVER.
By fiveiprlsonars of -the '.croton') minted’- Pooled Hifclubfife,
■Reilly, Jones, and Ryan, in their defence on their -trials
'in the Buj»'eme>&ouri^ oh, the K )th ccnd I,2 ih December dust,
■■■< cfihr.shwtmy al.Mr.rLarnachwith ifddnt-to kill him,- dml-ftir
'- ■’ctartam butylames- committed-hi/ ihe-hi'.qfd&r 4hey ditidabr
: , sconded < front- his service ■ ‘ ; i ml: ■ *• * ■<)»:«
TO w6icl>,are, subjoined under each pever'pl chargh,
,extracts.ti’clm the evidenc'chd' certain,of their fcllbWlaef-
vauts,'named Nagle, Cook, "Hurt, 'iffafitty Pomotibsfidi(d
Harvey , wheft examined, at dire, 'Court‘of Enquiry, held,
Maitl.aud, Hilhtcr’a River, on the 1 _ : , Deqeinbcr fast, and
siiccfisfciye clays • • Solicitor. General’ Plunkett , ’anti, Supcf-
fnteiidaht'of Co'nvicts Helyf being 'the, Cbihndssibhcrs ,qf
dtupmyhptebially appointed -by His Excellency Oovcriior
Bourkc, to impure, into the coudnct.of tile abdVe-hibn'-
tioned gentlemen, towards their assigned servants since
their arrival in the colony/respCctively; and to take clown
the complaints in writing,, for the information of His
Excellency, of their convict servants, against their said
masters, without regard to the’ character of the said
convicts, and without adverting to the records of the
Police, to ascertain whether the complainants had been
sentenced or not to penal settlements and irouecl-gangs,
■ OiVotberwise: •tpunishcch formiscoiMuctdrefoidtlley Wche
assigned to. the' • service ■of the'said 'Messrs/ Mticlie and
. Larnaeh ;. several of. the men - whose evidence Was
,jtaken.by, the .Commissioners,, having been ,punished in
clivers av,ays, both before'and-after.,they had been assigned
:,to the; service. of. the said.• gentlemen"-;; and Whose con-
duct during , such service, had been-marked by an-ih-
: .subordinate and mutinous spirit,, highly destructive, of
...their ,pwp ..peace, the prosperity of the. farm in, which
u they were-, employed,: the, comfort ,;of their .employers,
; and subversive, of tall-discipline in .the •; neighbourhood/ 1
;. The: varioustchaiges.made in. their,defence at, the bar
.of the ;:supreiiiei,.Coa;Ft { (as; hel'drc mentioned), by Pool,


’Hitchcock, Reilly, Ryan, (since executed,,) '.'land by Jmes,
(since transported for life,) is placed first. Extracts
taken from - the evidence before the Commissioners
of their fellow servants, their aiders and abettors
in their disaffection) and by whom they were en-
couraged to commit the crimes for which they suf-
fered, will follow consecutively. The extracts will be con-
fined to such portions of the evidence as bear on
the charges or accusations made by the prisoners. Pool &c.
r ih their defence'Oil. fheir several trials, before they were
found guilty. ,
By. ‘this -mode of contrasting the charges of the men
■who have suffered for their crimes, with the testimony
given by their particular friends and comrades, (who had
aided and abetted the mutiny in every Way, except
joining the banditti ; in their violent outrage,) the
'reader both in New South Wales and the Mother Country
jVyill be able to judge of the truth or falsehood of the said
charges. (It ip.,to/be observed,, that the extracts quoted
,from the evidence .taken by the Coinmissioners, are made
chiefly .from thatportion of the testimony yyhicli was
elicited ‘by the cross-examination; and which, in
. the more essential points, contradicted the evidence
given in chief.J " ' , :
• ;_(i) : ;
CHARGES made by the prisoners at the bar with respect to
the condyet of the Magistrates at Hunter’s River, to-
wards convicts Hought before them, or going before them,
Hitchcock continued—that the men could not get
to a Magistrate to complain, if they desired to do so.
Mr. ( Mudie had 17 or IS tradesmen assigned to him, and
these were lent out to Magistrates and other gentlemen,
who obliged him in return. Thus, if a man complained
to a Magistrate, he could not get ahyredtess against Mr.
Mudie. ■ The Magistrates at Hunter’s River took down
the depositions Of masters in their private 'parlours, and
then sentenced the men, without allowing them to make
any defence. He (Hitchcock) had himself been served
CHARGES
AND
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE.


so: the complaint had been taken"down in a private
room, and he was merely called in arid h’^ard
plaint read over, and then received his sentence, if tire
gentlemen would not believe his wprd, he begged they
would look at his and his fellow prisoners backs, which
would convince them.” — (Hitchcock’ s defence.)
“ When taken to Court, a man is sure to receive what
punishment is promised him by Mr. Larnach or Mr.
Mudie ; and if a man attempt to make a defence, the
Magistrates immediately exclaim— ‘ Hold your, tongue
you d—-d pascal, or I’ll give you fifty for contempt of
Court.”— (Same.) .'•■■■
Extracts bearing on the above charges , selected from, the
evidence of the associates of the culprits, as taken down
by the Commissioners, l : . ■ :
“I have got notice when the clergyman came to the
school-house to give prayers 5 I think the Bench of
Magistrates would have done me justice if I had com-
plained .’’—(Nagle's evidence.) ; . • ' '■' , ;
“I cannot nanic an instance in which a man was
charged with insolence for making a complaint; I-know
a man cannot be sent to an iron-gang it his master
wishes it; the Magistrates would not allow it.
(Brown’s evidence.) _ , , A .
“ it was not any apprehension we had, that the Ma-
istrates would not do us justice, that prevented our com-
plaining.’ ’■— (Nagle’s evidence.),
(2)
CHABGES made by the prisoners at the bar 101 th respect to
the men being Refused their tickets-of-leave.
*‘l had' the ’ misfortune to go to Mr. Larnach, who
took every opportunity of keeping me from getting my
ticket-of-leave.”— (Hitchcock’s defence.) ,
■ “ Several men were kept from their,tickets to seive
their master’s purpose, and it was just the same whether
the men behaved well or ill, as it was well known they
would never get any indulgence.” — (Pool’s defence.)
Extract bearing on the last charge,
“ I applied for my ticket-of-leave about a fortnight or
three weeks before I was punished ; I got no answer
since; Ido not know whether Mr. Mudie backed my
application or not; I sent in a second application about


sifc, AYptplcs v ]\|r. r Glepntc,, { the,.clerk. f of r the Bench,
drew, the |p,rpV.fspr me,! and B^d;’,\fce , d;.^ey.iily i jntisi:ct' to
sign, it fqiv.in.h;^‘l'.’ jio 'no If khowihdiether' lie did or not. 1
Mr, feokine t(VC<mid; : lic ileyer refused me
lhU'h'J ss > ( ;)ii tp .go/there to'domphiin.”— (Nagle*# evidence.);
' k,«>d\ i i ■ I. 1 ■ ■ ■ • ’■
. . - -■ . vw.- ; ,
CHARGES‘niaelp by the prisoners tit the'bar with respect to
■ 'cruelty’‘ah#’’ tyranny *• of 1 their" tiftipUryers,- MeHrsl
''' Mhilie' dhd Lafit&cti. s. u • ; ‘ u - ■
.. e< If ‘a 1 man go ! to; the' ihaSl;cr'. ! to com fiMfi, ile 'gets his
dycS ’di— alid as ‘threatened fio “liehateirio Court and
flogged, which he is sure to be if taken'there.’.’— (littc/A
cock’s defence.) ■
’' EMfachbearing• hn ■ the last'charge,'fyc.'-fyc'.' ' '
I h ahe >go t good ad vide'(r oiri Mr Mudie, and 'never
heard him abuse or blackguard .his men ; I nevervsaw
Mr. ,R. Scott,; J. ;P. at Mr; Mudie’s, ..Or,Mr. Glennie, JrP.
ei.tll.or.; I have not known ; any mechanics tq be dent to the
Magistrates by. Mr., ;Mudie ’wlienotlje. colt was killed,
I hoard Mr. Mudie say, there, was' nq,.help for - deyidenii ,*
he did not fl&ysfi.BroWn.’’— tPcnsonby’s. evidence.), i ■
••■Mr. harnach never called .me : .'a.couvict.SohUndrclj but
he. called me ; a brute and a : scamp and a rascal,”; — (Nagle's
evidence.)
Cross-examined by Mr. Mudie —l am three years at
Castle.-li’qrbtts.i; Mr. -Mudie never bounced me ; lie ; often
complained. of ;my doing little work j, he .had no reason
to abuse me; we mostly made oulgcomplailitsfo.;tbe
•Overseer-; Mr. -Mudie - spoke mildly to me always. 1 ”
(Brown’s evidence.) i ;)
Mr, .Mudie eyas,an Indnlgciit master to,pic and Pool;
lie never called me. a cpnyict rascal or.‘.sconpdrqi; or any
of the rest of them, tq my knowledge.”— fCppk’s evidence.)
■ “ Pool, in like .ifignber, stated that tlid Starvation, had
treatment and coiVtlnual'flogging, drove him to the bush.’ 1
(Pool’s defence..)
’ " (t Mr. Mudie often gave Pool and nle grog and wine-;
a bottle of wine, and wlicrf.lt ; was finished, Pool used to
get another bottle sometimes by asking for it; this was
at different periods within the ‘ last two. years ; 1 got a
duck jacket ’and trowsers from Mr, Mudie, about a year
..ago ; a’jacket and shirt were promised to me that I did
not goi ; this was when Mr. Mudie when to Sydney last;
if any person swore that Pool .was'starved,’ I tlmilfhe


would not swear the truth ; (they were large cattle with
little meat, hilled for the men.;) the reason the men got
but a pint of milk latterly, was the scarcity of it; all the
men were told to come on Sunday morning to get ve-
getables in the garden; cabbages, carrots, and some
cauliflowers and pot-herbs; they had leave to take
turnips in the seasons.” — {Cook’s evidence.) f\
“ Mr. Mudie promised Pool five pounds when the mill
was finished ; I recollect his getting a pound of it at one
time, and ten shillings and a flute and a music bo,ok; and
when Mr. Mudie was going to Sydney the last time, he
told me to tell Pool if he wanted anything, to put it down
oil a bit of paper, and Mr. Larnach would send for it to
Sydney, and that he would get it; Mr. Mudie was absent'
at Sydney about three months;. he did not return home
until a few days after Pool took the bush; I delivered
the message,to Pool, but he said he was not in want of
any thing, and he would let it alone till his master re-,
turned; before he did any thing to the mill, he got a
fustian jacket and trowsers, and waistcoat and white shirt;
I never heard Mr. Mudie speak harshly to Pool; Pool
has made ploughs for his own account; Mr. Mudie.
paid him one pound ten shillings for one ; Pool shewed
me the money ; he gave the plough to Mr. Mudie, though
another offered him the same, because he w r as afraid the
other would not pay him ; I was allowed myself to do job/
on my own account during the time I was bound to worl
for Mr. Mudie; I have had medicine whenever Ire
quired it.”— (Cook’s evidence.)
“ Pool has made ploughs for his own profit; Mr.
Mudie once gave him thirty shillings for a plough ; I do
not know whether the timber was'got on the farm;
I have known Pool to get money from Mr. Mudie on
account of building a mill, but I don’t know the amount.”
(Ponsonhy’s evidence.)
“Mr. Mudie often said, that a man was never good
for anything until he had received three or four Hundred
lashes, which 'most of his men had received.” — (Pool’s
defence.)
“ Mr. Larnach found pork, and a bottle that had rum in
it in Pool’s hut when I was removed from it; some shoes be-
longingtoothermen,and twopairs of trowsers that I had to
make/omy owiiaccount; alsoabluejacketof Cook’s; when
the lard was found in the hut, it was four months ago :


I did not bring it there; handcuffs were put on me, but I
was not taken to Court.”— (Ponsonhy’s evidence,)
“ Brown was taken before the Magistrates for neglect
of duty with others, but was not punished, in conse-
quence of the intercession of Mr. Mudie; Mr. Larnach
never caught me working for myself in my master’s time;
I never knew David Jones to be taken to Court; Hitch-
cock was only punished once; Pool was never taken to
Court till the day before he took the bush; I never com-
plained to Mr. Larnach of bad flour, nor ever desired to
go to Court to complain ; I got word one Sunday that
prayers were to be at the Plains ; there are no slops due
to me; I had medicine whenever I asked for it; 1 knew
James Brown at Moreton Bay; I have often advised
Brown to be quiet; Twos transported to'Bermuda, and
was two years arid a half there; I was punished while
I was there once or twice for neglect of work; I was
sent, back to England and from that here, for a mutiny on
board the hulk at Bermuda; none of the officers were
killed on that occasion ; I never said “ I did not care a
damn for fifty lashes,” far from it; I got six dozen lashes
■at Bermuda each time ; the cats are lighter there than
here, but longer; I was flogged by a man-of-wars man,”
(Henry Brown’s evidence.)
"There were better men on the farm than Reilly, be-
cause he was reared in a town and not used to work; he
once took the bush and was punished for it; he was
also sent to an iron-gang for striking Mr. Banach.” —
( Nagle’s evidence.)
“ I can not say Mr. Mudie was a hard master to me;
Pool and I always lived in the same hut, and on account
of. building a mill, we had tea and sugar, and were
better off than the others on the farm; I was only once
brought to Court by Mr, Mudie, on a-charge of refusing
to work, but Mr. Glennie would not punishmeuntil I was'
examined by a Doctor, as I pleaded that I had the rheu-
matism ; but Doctor Sloane certified that I was able to
work, and I got 50lashes; "—{Cook’s evidence.)
“ I never was sick but one day since I came on the
farm, and on that occasion I got an emetic from Mr.
Larnach; I have never seen any man who was side,
treated with unkindness ; I have seen Jock treated with
kindness when he broke his leg ; I have seen Mr. Lar-
nach attend him ; I never heard the men complain of bad
. while they were 111; Jock and Stephens were


taken care of at the house 'when sick,” —( Henry
Brown’s evidence.)
“ Jones stated that he was a butcher, and had only to
add his testimony to that of the rest, as to tyranny and
oppression on the farm.” —( Jones’s defence.)
“David Jones got no bad treatment; Mr. Larnach
always behaved well to David Jones ; he never took him
to Court; when he was taken to Court it was for rob-
bery, and not prosecuted by Mr. Larnach; I heard Jones
say when he was working at the tobacco ground, that he
had a fewpoundsof meatmorethanhis mess, and that Mr.
Larnach had weighed it over again ; Mr. Larnach might
have punished him for it if he liked.”— {Nagle’s evidence.)
“ I had a dog once; I used to give him part of my mess,
bits of bread and the entrails of the beasts; there were
ten or a dozen dogs on the farm belonging to the men ;
they are fed on bread and milk and bones ; the dogs have
been often found fault with for worrying the cattle.”
(Same.) ■
“ I recollect Mr. Mudie calling at my hut when I was
ill; while I was sick I got my dinner in the kitchen, and
my rations besides; I might have said Mr. Mudie made a
man of me from being a poor object, but Ido not recol-
lect positively ; when Scotch Jack was ill, I attended him,
by directions of Mr. Mudie; he got every thing from the
kitchen that he wanted, from Mrs. Larnach; another
man (Stephens) was ill, and treated in the same way that
Jack was; all the men could get vegetables in the
garden, and Mr. Mudie used to superintend it himself;
I never said the men were better treated than on any
farm in the country.”— (Ponsonbi/s evidence.)
(4)
CHARGES made by the prisoners at the bar with respect to
the starvation of the convicts in the employ of Messrs.
Mudie and Larnach.
“Starvation had driven him to the act for which he
Was now being tried.” — (Jones’s defence .)
“ His men are flogged nearly to death, starved, and
badly clothed.” — (Pool’s defence)
“ Nothing but flogging and starvation made me take
the bush.”— (Hitchcock’s defence.)
Extracts bearing on the last charges.
“ I have been allowed ea and sugar during the harvest,


along withmilk ; I think if I had asked for extra provisions
during harvest, 1 should have got them ; Jones also got tea
and sugar.”— (Breton’s evidence.)
“The meat that Mr. Mudie used to bring to Pool’s hut
was from the kitchen ; he used to do it twice a week • 1
have known Mr. Mudie to get the blacksmith (Cook) to
go into the garden to collect herbs and vegetables, and
he used to superintend the dressing of the meat himself.”
{P.onsonhy’s evidence.)
“ I kept one dog, and used to feed him with some
bread ami milk; Pool also had a puppy.”— {Cook’s evi-
dence.)
“ Mr. Mudie, when he was at home, used to bring
or send down provisions to our hut; we were better oft' in
that hut while Mr. Mudie was at home; our milk was
increased from a pint to a quart on Tuesday last; we got
only a pint of milk for the last five or six months daily;
hll the .tradesmen but myself got tea and sugar; I never
complained of not getting it; about a month or six
weeks ago the tea and sugar were stopped from all except
Pool.”’— {Ponsonby’s evidence.)
_ “We had the .name by the week of 10 lbs. of flour, and
7 lbs. of beef (mutton is not often served out), a fig of
tobacco, and a pint of new milk ; this is what was given
during the last harvest; 2 oz. of soap for a fortnight; as
much as will shave and wash a man ; I have known a quart
of milk served out; for six or eight months I got but a
pint of milk ; I might have got butter in place of meat,
hut I don’t like it ; the other men got it; 2 Jbs. of but-
ter in the week, was the allowance in lieu of meat; I
used to serve a quart of milk at that time to the men
every day; the milkers'were allowed a pint of milk extra;
hut it \yas stopped eight months ago from shortness of
grass; I believe there was no skim milk given them with
the, quart, but I have known it given repeatedly; the men
used to take it in bucket /tills; I got tea and sugar one
harvest twelve months ago, and grog and extra meat on
Christmas day and at,harvest-home; we were up at the
house, and we had as much liquor as we chose to
drink; I have seen the men get all sorts of vegetables
from the garden several times;'' in last harvest two years,
pumpkins and melons were served out for months; it
used to help us out in our rations ; I said I had little to
say against Mr. Mudie, but I did not,say that I had no
complaint to make; .1 have known offal of oxen and
pigs (consisting oflivers and lights andsweetbreads) given


to the men, and the pigs’s heart was the perquisite of the
butcher, besides rations ; I do not know that the offal
of a dozen pigs in the daywas divided amongst the men ;
I think on the average, there were two bullocks killed in
every three weeks since I came on the farm.”—( Brown’s
evidence
“ Cross-examined by Mr. Mudie —l was cautioned by
Mr. Mudie before he went to Sydney to take care of my-
self and not get into a scrape about a female prisoner;
Mr. Mudie used to give us pot-herbs and vegetables and
bring us down potatoes himself, and superintend the
making of stews, and taste it himself to see whether it
was good or not] this was id addition to rations, and
continued for the last two years.” —( Cook’s evidence.)
“ What Mr. Mudie used to bring to the hut was in
addition to rations; they used to make sjews once or
twice a week, when Mr. Mudie was at home; I never
knew the men to get additional meat when-Mr. Mudie
was absent from the farm.”— (Ponsonby’s evidence.)
tc Being on the road more than half the week
(except during harvest and ploughing season) I had tea
and sugar more than half the year ; I only got dinner in
the kitchen two or three times, but others have got it
more frequently there:; I used to carry dinner from the
kitchen to the men loading drays in the fields; I don’t
know what the dinners consisted of; my own dinner was
meat and vegetables in the kitchen ; I got no particular
quantity, hut could eat as much as I liked; I was also
allowed grog ; two glasses a day; I got grog, tea and
sugar, during the harvest, except this present harvest,
when none of those indulgences were given; I never re-
collect getting, on any day, more than two glasses of
grog; I was not shfeep-washing this year, but I was last
year, and we got two glasses of grog —sometimes it might
be three; last Christmas the men got some extra meat
and grog, and other years besides. On one Christmas
Day, there was a dinner cooked, and a rice pudding given
to the men ;wc have got at the harvest home above our
allowance; last Christmas there was a great deal of grog
given; I haye. known Mr. Mudie give out cabbage or
cauliflower to the men without distinction, _ on Sunday
morning ; the men were allowed to take turnips from the
field ; they were not allowed green peas ; the men were
. in, the habit of having melons and pumpkins served out
to them—but not this year; I have not seen any on the
farm this year.; I do not recollect the men getting per


mission to fill their bags with potatoes ; I recollect po-
tatoes being once or oftener given to the men; since I
have been on the farm, I have received a quart of milk a
day oftener than a pint; sometimes we used to get skim
milk in the morning, in addition to the allowance ; during
the time I said 1 had nothing to eat for two days, I re-
ceived my rations for the week; it is common on the
farm for men to complain of their being robbed of their
rations by their fellow prisoners, or some others ; tea and
sugar have been served out to the bullock-drivers when
setting out to Maitland, but not always.” {Harvey’s evi-
dence.) .
" I have three dogs that follow the cattle; I have seen
the dogs led with some milk at the huts ; I throw my
own dogs a crust of bread, and when a beast is killed I
save some of the offal for them; there is a beast killed
generally once a week on the farm ; the livers were di-
videded always among the men, also the lights, the
skirts, and other things of that kind; I have seen ten or
a dozen pigs killed there in one day in the winter time;
it occurs repeatedly in that season; the livers,lights, and,
I believe, the hearts were given to the men, and some of
the fat to fry the liver with; this was in addition io ra-
tions ; I never asked Mr. Mudic for a pass to complain
to the Bench ; nor did he refuse me permission to go to
Oourtfor aticket-of-leave.” — {Nagle’s evidence.)
(6) • ■ :1
CHARGE made by the prisoners at the bar with respect to
the bad clothing of the said servants. —(See [Pool's
defence, page 67, No. 3, for this clpige.)
Extracts bearing on the last charge, fyc, fyc.
" I used to mend Pool’s deaths; Pool used to wear a
white shirt sometimes.”— {Ponsonby’s evidence.)
" The blacksmith got a pair of trowsers from Mr.
Mudie, above his slops.” — {Same.)
"There are no slops due to me but a pair'of shoes, and
I did not ask for them because I did not want them.” —
{Nagle’s evidence.)
“ There are no slops due to me now.”— {Harvey's evi-
dence.)
" The issue of slops before that was in August last;
a shirt and shoes then were given to me, and a full suit
last time; there are no slops due.”— {Brown's evidence.)


;• . (6)
CHARGE made by the prisoners at the bar with respect to
short iveights being used on the farm.
“ Resides the rations being bad, the weights were
short, and they did not get half a mess ; instead of 9 lbs.
of wheat, they got 7 lbs. and they could not live upon it.”
(Reilh/s defence.)
Extracts bearing on the last charge , fyc. fyc.
“I never objected to the weighing with brickbats,
because I could not correct them ; the metal weights
could be got, if I had called for them ; the Overseer,
when I complained, said I ought to be satisfied with
them, as well as others ; I have seen small metal weights
at Castle Forbes.”—( Brown’s evidence.)
“ I was never dissatisfied about the weight of the meat,
it was the quality that I found fault with.”— {Harvey's
evidence.)
“ I never had to complain of short weights ; I don’t
believe the Overseer would wrong me by giving short
weights.”— {Nagle’s’evidence.)
“ I had no cause to complain of the weights ; there
are weights in the store, but they are old.”— {Brown’s
evidence.)
(7)
CHARGE made by the prisoners at the bar with respect to
Mr. Larnach having intercepted letters of complaint
from his servants to the authorities.
“ He (Pool) had written a letter to Mr. Hely the Prin-
cipal Superintendaut of Convicts, three years ago, which
letter was intercepted and broken open by Mr. Larnach,
who suppressed it, and never said any thing about it.” —
{Pool’s defence.)
Extracts hearing on the last charge, Syc. Sf c.
“I produce the letter alluded to ; the _ circumstance
occurred nearly three years ago ; Pool was discontented at
not being able to live in Sydney, and did every thing in his
power to he returned to Government; as he said he was
no carpenter, he was sent to work in the fields for a
few days, and I heard he absconded 5 I followed him and
overtook Mm between the two Wisemans on the Moun-
tains ; I was informed on the road before I came up with
him, that he had a pass with my signature, and also two


letters as well as the pass ; I was armed, and he made
no resistance; he gave me the letters which I have
handed in; when I set off in search of Pool, I did
not intend to go far, but I did not return until the follow-
ing day, he got so quick before me ; General Darling
came to Castle Forbes the day of my return, and I
shewed him the letters as well as the pass, and he was
amused at the way in which my name was signed to the
pass, it being written “ John Larnach Esquire and he
regretted there were not more efficient constables on the
road to detect the imposition.”—(Mr. Larnach’s evidence.)
(8)
CHARGE made by the prisoners at the bar with respect to
Mr. Larnach’s beating the boy By'an.
“ Pool' stated, that there was a boy on the farm, who
was placed to mind pigs in the bush, which it was im-
possible to do, and that Mr. Larnach beat the boy several
times so dreadfully, that his back was in a state of morti-
fication ; the boy had been only ten months on the farm,
and had been shamefully beaten and knocked about dur-
ing that time.” — {Pool’s defences.)
Mr. Larnach had frequently beaten the boy Ryan,
and on one occasion, after giving him a good beating, had
taken him to Court and got him a hundred lashes for the
same offence; this was the usage they had all received,
and it was better to be out of the way than upon such a
farm.” —( Hitchcock’s defence.)
“Ryan stated, that he had been two years with Mr.
Larnach, during which time he had ocen frequently
beaten by his master, sent 6 months to an iron-gang,
and had received at times, 50, 75, and 100 lashes.”
{Ryan’s defence.)
Extracts bearing on the last charge, fyc. fyc.
found the hoy Ryan one day plaiting straw which
had been forbidden, and at the same time saw
several eagle-hawks in the act of devouring two lambs
close by him ; it was his duty to prevent this ; I took the
straw, from him and he took up a stick and said he’d lay
me low if I did not give it hack; he made a blow at me
and ran, and on my running after him, he struck me a
second* time and cut me in the forehead ; I then gave
ii;-„ t -"Wj thrashing with a stick I lifted at the time


iand brought him home; I took him to Court and he got
flogged for it; I deny that ever I struck William Crisp ;
if a man were insolent I might call him an “ insolent
•scoundrel,” or if lazy or a scamp, I might call him so;
I am not sensible of its being my general habit to call the
men such names, nor do 1 think it occurs very fre-
quently; I never called a man a“• convict scoundrel
I am not aware of having ever brought a man to Court
for a trifling fault; 1 do not: think I should be justified in
bringing a man to Court for merely resting from his
work, unless he left his work altogether or went to sleep ;
Pool never was brought to this Court until the time he
received fifty lashes on my complaint for disobedience and
neglect of work; I ordered him to paint the wind-shaft
Of the mill, and he did not do it, and said he would not
do it; I heard him abuse a man of the name of Powell,
whom I sent to him to deliver orders ; and when I repri-
manded him for that, he said to me, that he did not
care a damn for me, and damn and b—r the b y place
This is the insolence I alluded to in the first part of my
deposition.”—fJfr. Larnach's evidence,)
(9) '
CHARGES made by the prisoners at the bar, as to the
quality of the meat issued to them,
« Dying bullocks are served out to the men in a stinking
•state, and their wheat is the refuse of the grain. -
IHitchcock’s defence.)
“The meat that was served out to the men on some
occasions, was carrion, which had either died naturally;
been drowned in the creek, or otherwise. ■—(Jones*-de-
fence.)—N. B. Jones was the butcher, and his duty was
to help to salt the meat. • • ...
Extracts bearing on.-the last Charge, §c. isc. . <; _
« The broken leg of the bullock was given to me, and
I gave it to my dogs; it was not given, butthrowii
out, and I took it; I made no complaint of that meat toMi.
Larnach, but to Paddy the Overseer; I cannot say whether
Mr. Mudie was on the farm then.”—fNagle s evidence. )
“No annimal that was drowned was ever served out
to the men.^— (Brown’s evidence.) , • , ,
“Does not recollect any beast being drowned and
served out to the men ; wheat has not been served out toi
K


the last eigthteeh months or two years,; -a peck was, then
served -out;. and'.: sometimes an'extra quart during tile
harvest.”— {Harvey's evidence.)
“.The :beef and pork at Mr. Miadie’S were Very good,
fresh as well as ! salt; the fresh beef at Mr. Mndie’s-owu
■table-; was supplied ffoiri the same beast - killed for the
‘men; the, salt meat Was often left uncovered; slnd-ih con-
sequence became bad ■;; every week a bullock was. killed;
we have,had bald .meat continually > the fresh raeatwas
.generally yeiy godd and sotra'd, but the salt was badly
cured ; 1 attended inkilling pigs, often seventeen'and, eighr
teen at a tithe.’; they wei-e large pigs, and fat, and good meat
when fresh ; I consider the: bad' salting was owing, to the
lanlt, df the .Overseer and those Who assisted him to salt
the meat; David: Jones wasi-the- principal salter oh all
.occasions ; . we, complained to the . Overseer of the -salting;
hut not to Mebsrs . Mudie or Larnach; I now recollect
mce haaking. a complaint to Mr. Larhacli, and niy meat
was changed-for butteir;; he said heivas sdrry the meat
waslbad; heMgive mebuttter forit.-’—f'iJrcm’s evidence.J
“I have seen-.very bad meat, but ,a great deaiLvyaS
owing to Paddy the Overseer; we have been eight weeks
on the farm without salt, while Mr. Mudie was absent hi
Sydney ; I think if the Overseer had had salt enough he
would had cured the meat-better.” — (Nagle’s evidence.)
“ I am assigned to Mr. Mudie ol- Mr. Larnach ; I re-
fusefd beef rob, Bundat) last-,because it -teas, green andvtunlc;
the,beast; it-Was,part of, waswhat was killed onWedhesday
before last Wednesday; it was salted the day .after if , was
killed; I brought it;to-i Mr. Mudie; and he gave, asp -the
gaifae; quaiitipy, that-I,brought;, it ,waS, more than half the
rdtiohs df, fi-tfe :men; ’this is ! the beef,thati infused;
tJßMrfp’&sideMe.f - -.. m.; ~ ~ ~. . ; - , ,
(The beef was produced, and the, Commissioners; tasted
it)_ and several other persons-in Court, and in their
opinion it is of - excellent quality; of good . taste and well
Saved; .fitfor any-one, to‘use.)— (Rernark ofCofnmission^s.)
H.iiipi. iJiiiifjf* yd-JDiJ ..Mil.M'/ :nMi. r:
■■ : Vi:-' : V
CHMRQ!E.htade<dy the prisoners at the‘iarwith mfyteciM
■ titefbadgu&Utiy of ihev)keai:mtdissued .l..
“The bread made ftom the wheat ■Sbrvetl.fouti to the
fnt»i,kis;-as’b]aek;asfydnr Honour’s hatjsand so rank,;, that
tt *is! nofreatabl«;se*ldept-fey: liatdmng
defence.) ■ ■ "
74


: ■ ■Eetrapte ’-bearing. q» the last pfctpffej fyc. %c.
“ I have no doubt Mr. Mudie would give me.redress if
I complained; I never cppiplaiped, to Mr. Mudie of
getting bad floui:.”— evidence.) :
“ There was ixiurnnn*ing among the niep about. =thc
four,, and they went. up. 1° Mr. Larnach, and he asked
what he was 'to do, , and. said he. could not be at a joss ,;
he said he would give us a . to the Magistrates if we
thought proper’ to complain, as he would gite better flour
by washing, the wheafnext time j he gayeyu.S better flour
because the wheat was washed } the men all believed if
they complained, to the Magistrates, they would be re-
dressed, but us Mr. Larnach spobe to us in a fair way,
we,did .not complain to the Bench; when the wheat , was
not good,. I uaedto get two quarts in ore than thmpeck
of wheat.” — (JVagte’s evidence.)
. (11) . v .-m;
CHARGjEniade.-I >y the prisoners at the bar with respect to.
..being conwelled to work on Sundays gainst their consent
and wit houi being paid for it.
“It was,customary, togettheinen to work on,a Sunday,
wbigb .they were, induced : to do sometimes by offers of
payment; but yvhon. a demand was made for the pro-
mised reward, the dogs were set at them, and they were
threatened with - a .flogging. ”! —( Fool’s defei%ce.) ■ : ,
Extracts- bearing ■ on the. last charge, fya Sf(v.
“The men used to . spend their Sundays in washing;
their shirts, and fetching wood for their own use ;; never
reaped on Sunday but once, three years ago; I did it vo-
luntarily, it being supposed the harvest was_ in danger
from being oyer-ripe : ; the men got grog at night foy it ,;
they got what they were promised.”— {Harvey’s evidence.) (
. “.It is not a practice to, work' the nien on a Sunday; hut
not latterly; I have known wheat to he;Cleaned and bagged
upon a Sunday, about eighteen months ago, for , which the
men were to :be,paid extra,; this po.cprved three or four
times ; do not Icnow whether they were paid or not.”—■
(Brown’s evidence.) ~ , ; ' .
“Iliad ,the, benefit, of te.a and sugar as,Mug as it
lasted, as >y.qß ; ag .Pool and , Cook ; iip to, tfie time I was
removed ifroni Pool’s lint, I had the priviledgepf earning,
something for .myself in the evenings and,on Sundays.”
(Fonsonby’s evidcnce,)-r-(F!nd of the charges $ .expiantions .)


_ (COPY)’ Sydney, Uth AprU } im r
o J Kj
In 'the letter which I did myself the honour to write to
imu on the -Ist February last, I drew your attention to
■JP p Ctjl cer tain Prisoners of the Crown, permitted by
1 -Excellency the Governor to be (at my special request)
returned by me to the Government, in consequence of
cn insubordinate conduct and general bad character,
111 employed by the Government in light
and with the privelege, of 1 having the whole of
Saturday to’themselves, with the intention on the part
o ■ rovernment, of their earning on that day wages for
tlieir own benefit. In consequence of my not having
been honoured by any reply, I now deem it due to myself
and also to the Government, again to call your attention
to the circumstance.
■-p Jt .. is not he expected, that either you Sir, or His
'xcellency the Governor, should possess the same
knowledge of the character of the prison pppu-
latuxo, which I, who have employed such great numbers
ot them the last twelve years, may be supposed to have.
Whether however, your knowledge should extend to the
to lowing circumstances or not, it is a duty 1 owe to my-
sell and to the Government, as a Settler and Magistrate,
to point them out to you at this time for a particular
object.
A considerable portion of the prisoners, are contented,
■when assigned iu the Country ; and hundreds may even
prefer it. These are the country-bred portion of the
prison population, transported for their first offence, of
lor oliences of a less malignant character than others.
They were never thieves by profession •, and seeing the
Colony affords encouragement to industry and good con-
duct, such men do not yearn after the towns; and what-
ever their misbehavour may be, they do not intrigue and
behave ill in order to be removed to ironed-gangs and
road-gangs, merely to secure a chance, of getting assigned
ultimately, in one of the towns. - ,
. prisoners transported as regulary-bred thieves,
pick-pockets, swindlers &c., and persons guilty of em-
bezzlement, and all those who have been bred in towns
of every grade of character, earnestly desire to be as-
signed in the towns. This very numerous class, includes
n early all the mechanics; Pool, my late assigned servant,
who suffered death two mouths ago, was ever discon-
tented to I'clutun in the country j and the hopelessness of


being assigned in Sydney, was the latent and constant
motive, of all that disobedience, which notwithstanding
that he was skilful, .and at times industrious, was con-
stantly displaying itself; and I do not think, that proneness
to thieving or other vicious courses, caused him to give
me so much trouble, and finally to attempt the life of
Mr- Larnach, but a violent temper, and his extreme
vex a don at finding all his attempts to change his master
and be assigned in Sydney had proved abortive, and
would continue to do so; and that nothing but time and
patience could emancipate him from the thraldom of a
country life. And as he was a man who had understand-
ing, and knew how to behave himself when he thought
proper, Ido not doubt, but the disappointment he felt
at his plans not succeeding on this point, at length made
him desperate ; knowing the good fortune which has too
often attended the machinations and never-ending sub-
tilties of crafty men, to submit to every variety of
punishment rather than remain on a farm ; changing
their masters time after time through their bad conduct
of all kinds, until they Have either wormed themselves
into Sydney, or been tried for some offence and trans-
ported to one of the penal settlements, or suffered death
on the scaffold, as happened at length to Pool himself.
But while the unhappy state of prisoners of Pool’s
description, may excite some commiseration, yet as the
Government has laid down a rule, that no convict shall
he allowed to choose his own master, until by good con-
duct during a certain portion of his sentence he has
shewn himself deserving of such indulgence; in such
cases as that of Pool, amaster sees the necessity, or ought
to see it, of being more firm in resisting such an one’s
machinations; lest, by giving way, he should create a pre-
cedent which his men would for ever afterwards strive to
repeat, each in his own person.
'Phose who become bushrangers in this Colony, are
generally men of Pool’s chai'acter ; and so far as my
experience goes, such men will become banditti in pro-
portion as discipline is relaxed. And I attribute the
prevalence at Hunter’s River of bushranging at the present
moment, and the crowded state of the ironed-gang and
road-gang stockades, and the Jails, to this cause in a very
principal degree.
Deeply impressed with these sentiments, I trust His
Excellency will ■ attribute to right motives, (whether my
ideas-on this subject be in themselves correct or not,)


that 1 now beg leave to remonsthite with' the Govern-
ment on not having directed my late assigned servants to
be sent to Port Macquarie, where Prisoners of the Grown
of a certain description, without having committed any
offence, are sent immediately on their disembarkation in
the Colony. Three of the men returned: by me, were
formerly inironed-gangs, two at penal-settlements, and one
was transported to the Colony from Bermuda, for the
offence of mutiny . And if the career of James Brown
be ascertained, it will be found, that with every mas-
ter to whom he has been assigned, he invariably created
disaffection, by complaints on the score of bad provisions.
The transferring such characters as these to other set-
tlers in the more populous parts of the country, as far as
my particular wishes are concerned, would have ; satisfied
me. But I could not advise such a proceeding, be-
cause it is my opinion, that to whose service soever the
men in question be assigned, they will prove a gi-caf
detriment to their employer, by their crafty arts, and
their mutinous dispositions., ; ,
Brit the being assigned to light Government: labour
in Sydney, is to .such, areibard; it is felt by them, as a
triumph; and their comrades remaining on my Estate,
all consider it such. The execution of Pool, Hitchcock,,
lliclly. Parry, and Ryan, and the transportation of Jones,
seems to have had no effect upon the rest. The Commission
of Enquiry following, and the popular circumstances which
attended it, and which could perhaps not be avoided,
seem to have convinced them, that the Government saw
something in the conduct of the Magistrates of Patrick’s
Plains, and of -myself and Mr. Larnach, which was
mspimus. It is true, that with respect -to the. Enquiry,
the Government has not seen anything flagrant to dis-
approve in o.ur conduct; but it has seen too much
to disapprove, to enable me and Mr. Larnach and (he
Magistrates, to publish , with any prudence, the
letters transmitted to us and to the Bench res-
pectively. And the Government not, having, taken
means to convince, the prison population at the Hunter,
and elsewhere, that either our conduct, or that-,of the
Magistrates, has not. incurred its disple.a&ure, that
population -draw .the, conclusion ,(sp, patur ah to their
ignorant minds; sanguine to excess j) that spine dis-
pleasure :7m by us incurred at head-quarters. They
therefore • look upon the execution of their comrades,
as'the act of the law, over which the Executive-had up


pontroirl ; ■ while' the silence of'the latter on the result
of the Commission qf Enquiry, is considered By them*
■an act of deliberate prudence on the part of the
Government, which could not publicly condemn,
what nevertheless secretly incurred its disapproba-
tion. And the assignment of the bad characters returned
■By me to the Government,- (who by messages, verbal and
written, communicate to their comrades their pleasing
change, ) goes much to create and confirm all these bane-
ful, impressions. So that lam fully convinced, that no
inflicted by the Bench of Magistrates at
Patrick’s Plains, (where a new Superintendent has been
specially appointed,) nor any inflicted even by the Su-
preme Court, either of death or of transportation, will
-restore, my present, assigned servants to that state- of
subordination which existed on the farm, before the arrival
of His Excellency the present Governor.
. With the best intentions. His Excellency unwittingly
early sowed the Seeds of disorder on my Estate, and
>1 attribute all my dangers, losses, and trouble of mind
since His Excel: lency’s arrival, to this cause, more- than
to any other; but at the same time to have been
increased in its effects, by the subsequent policy of
the present: administration, lately rendered perfect
and complete by the assignment of my late ser-
vants, in tolight, work, with Saturday for assort
of holiday. .1 allude more particularly to the reception
which the Private 'Secretary'. (Mr. Richard Bourke) gave
to one of my men who had absconded from my farm, and
who presented himself at the Government House in Par-
ramatta about two, years ago, to complain of my conduct.
Mr, Bourke spoke kindly to the man, and advised him to
give himself: hp to fare, giving him a -letter addressed to
pie, in which Mr. Bourke stated, that perhaps I WOUld,
if: the man were of good character, forgive Mm his
present fault. The man was one of the worst characters
on the farm, Accordiiigly, I gave him in dhargh; I
(isked him for the .petition which he had presented-to hire
Private Secretary, ride denied that it hadheennotiumed
fo him. This was false, as Mr. B. assured medr e'-hetd
jcturlicd it to him. . It was, I understand, full of 'heavy
charges ajgainstme, but which the man was afraid to let
pierce. The 'Magistrates (George iFofbes and -James
Glennie .Esquires) heard what 'the mall had to say
in his, 4efence for hurining away under sudh • a prPteftee,
and 'SQntenced thhri itwhlve months to an iron-gang. After


Ms return to the farm, he behaved as badly as ever and I
at last got rid of him as an incorrigible IcnmS 5 d 1
the So “ °ftl J ,” ySel i f a '" ;1 of Settlers "i p«'* “f
not of ( h °T letter ? hehlg Messed to tim care
tidnnl 7 ■ er but of those to whom the no'
associates of the nmrmo-e \ , c laiactei j the friends and
men and nrr ° P V,? the early disaffection of mv
himself pSSy the G °veruor
The letters of SfT ° ther ci «tance.
were sent to me by the Demi tv p ie . tdiy to m y servants,
Wains, and were faftlSX of Patrick ’«
to whom they addSn Ve ? d r to the Pities
greatly mortified to hid my df X " X be
a correspondence; -° f SUch
charges thus secretlv m ,T • l fc pioof gainst the
Anal consequences ind wheTlT 1 . the
consequences, lam comnhltd [ t&ke ar ? view of those
continue to leave anal aiX ° f Sayj tlat while they
W I aT£ P “ mftll *■*"— «
f CXX SXrnLr* le “ Tefrom ■
solves ray fortune imd f 0Q a poinfc w hich in-
J must therefore observe thatSf lad< ? my life S a »d
the assignment of my late * “ rcums tance of
of the greatest injuries which w ,S Sydney, to be one
vernor could have inflictJ,t His Excellency the Go-
that exclusive and unarmealahfc 1 tbe exerc ise of
him by ffi s Majesty
had run into & Two ' ght b f clfj four of m y men
Their ostensible plea heflZ tW I baVe ™ n si «ce I
vice did not suit them, and Was > that m Y ser-
Sydney to complain to the Governor Were - to
ndicious to mention such a mnn’P a ? peai T S almosfc
icason to disbelieve it • and at „n port \ X 1 see no
w ocrasiol ’* «•


plaint, and thirteen or fourteen of them haveheen punished.
This apparently has had no effect, and I am of opinion, that
no quantity of punishment will have effect, until His Ex-
cellency shall be pleased to adopt a line of policy, the
reverse of that which I have in this letter had occasion
to describe and illustrate.
To shew you Sir, that my views of the feelings and
sentiments of my late assigned servants, now in Sydney,
and of their late comrades on my farm, is not mere im-
agination ; I beg to inform yon, that during a visit which
I made to Sydney in January and February last, I used
to meet some of them very often in the streets. They
took very ingenious means of shewing their disrespect
and contempt for me, hut with so ranch art, that if I
had complained of it, I should have found it very diffi-
cult to give the sitting Magistrate a clear apprehension
of the sort of contempt passed on me. It so happened,
however, that one of them was emboldened to repeat his
insolent demeanour, in a manner too plain for him to dis-
prove. Accordingly,' on the February, I appeared
against him, before the Magistrates of Hyde-Park Bar-
rack, and the man was convicted by the Bench, of in-
solent demeanour towards me as a Magistrate, and was
sentenced to the tread-mill ten days. In evidence,
it appeared he was attached to the gang of men who
work in the Government-house Domain ; and it further
appeared, that such men, by one means or other, spend a
good deal of their time in the town, even at mid-day.
The charges made by my late assigned servants before
the Commissioners of Enquiry, were very numerous, and
of an aggravated nature; so much so, as to have
destroyed my character as a Magistrate, and ren-
dered me unworthy of prisoners of the Crown being
assigned to me at all, if they had been true. The charges
made by them, which His Excellency considered sub-
stantiated against me, were few in number, and of little
importance as compared with the great bulk of the com-
plaints of my accusers. That His Excellency should
have taken no steps to punish, or even reprove the ac-
cusers, for their admitted falsehoods, is another chcum-
stance upon which I feel it my duty respectfully to re-
monstrate with the Government. ■’
Some conception of the evil effects of unchecked
falsehood on the part of prisoners of the Crown may be
formed by His Excellency, by his perusal of the deposition
n


5n a case of mutiny which lately occurred cm a farm be-
longing to Mr. Wiseman, (for the records of which, I
beg leave fo refer His Excellency to the Police Magistrate
of Maitland); but the injury which is done to the better
behaved portion of - the prison population, can be felt only
by those who employ tnem, and whose fortunes and
families are ht theirmerqy 5 while to the latter is committed
by the Government, (at the same time,) the very arduous
and difficult task, of managing and controuling a
class of men* who by their numbers and avocations have
been hot Unaptly termed, the peasantry of New South
Wales.
I beg to subjoin a correct copy of a deposition made
by Samuel Cook, of Patricks Plains, constable ; and of
William Goo’ke, keeper of the Lock-up. I beg to add, in
oorroheration. of their statements, that the Magistrates of
Patnok’s Plains, have often applied for a supply of arms,
and the applications not having been attended to, I have
often furnished arms and ammunition. at my own ex-
pense, And ,I cannot but observe, that while I ever de-
precated the in&ttdntion shown by the Government to
such applications, yet the continuance, of the neglect after
the late attack on Mr. Larnach and my family, and after
a reiteration of the demand on the part of the Bench,
appeared to me a disregard to my feelings and those of
the neighbourhood, very painful for us to reflect upon.
I have the honour to remain.
Sir,
Your most obedient humble servant.
.. . (Signed.) JAMES MUD 18,
4ks&ndw •
:Col!wW : ’Bemlaryy . ,■
Matrices Plains,
. PoMt.
'. ; ~ ' ’ (copy.) "
Samuel Cook, Constable at Patrick’s Plains, being
duly swofn, deposeth—l have been employed as. Const-
able ip this district, for hbput tytelye monthsl hare
ft'SSHdPtly tp. escort prisoners pn "the road during
that thud, soinetimes five at a time'; I have never Beau
supplied with frqm tiie Police cstablis'lunont since I
bpt ’I borrowed a pistol fj-om John
PiPWQrd, (Mr. White’s .Overseer)., yylifioh I generally gayry
when escorting prisoners bn;the road; t have never 1 re


cclved any ammunition from the Bench, but have
borrowed it from different persons; the pistol Which I
borrowed from Damford, is the only one on the Whole
establishment.
his
(Signed) SAMUEL X COOK.
mark
Sworn before me,
this I ilk March, 1834.
{Signed) CHARLES FORBES, J. P. ■
William Cooke, watch-house-keeper at Patrick's
Plains, being duly sworn, deposeth—l took charge of
the Lock-up in November, 1832; there were five un-
serviceable pistols for the use of the Police at that time,
and none have been supplied since; I have never known
any ammunition to be supplied by Government to this
establishment; the Constables have always borrowed
both pistols and ammunition since I have been there.
(Signed) WILLIAM COOK.
Sworn before me,
this March, 1834.
(Signed) CHARLES FORBES, J. P.
Colonial Secretary’ s Office,
Sydney, 6 th May, 1834.
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the 14th ultimo, representing, that the prisoners
of the Crown removed from your employ, at your own
request, have been detained in Government employ in
Sydney on light work, and allowed to have the whole of
Saturday to themselves; and in reply, lam directed by
His Excellency to inform you, that upon reference to the
Principal Superintendent of Convicts, the same course ap-
pears to have been adopted with regard to these men,
as has been the practice in similar cases, namely,* that
they have been assigned, separately, in different parts of
the Colony, with the exception of one whose period of
servitude being nearly expired on his return from your
service, it would have been inconvenient, and caused,
useless expence, to remove from Sydney. It also
appears, that the men for Assignment were discharged
to their respective Assignees on the 21st of February
last.


With regard to your observation, respecting the non-
supply of arms and ammunition for the constabulary at
Patrick’s Plains, I am further directed to inform you, that
reference having been made to the Ordnance Store-
keeper, it appears, that arms and ammunition for the
Police at that station, were forwarded by the Steamer to
Maitland, on the 18th November 1833, and a letter of
advice by that Post, addressed to the Bench. It should
seem by reference made to the Police Magistrate, that
the letter was not received, or that due enquiry was not
made for the arms, as the box which contained them was
found early in April, at the Steam Packet Office in Mait-
land, where it had lain since November, and whence
it has been recently taken to Patrick’s Plains.
I have the honor to be.
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
For the Colonial Secretary,
T. C. HARRINGTON.
James Mudie Esq., &c. &c. &.
Castle Forbes, May 26th, 1834.
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the sth Instant, in which you state, that the
same course was adopted with regard to the servants
allowed by His Excellency the Governor, to he by me
returned to Government, as had been the practice in
similar cases; and that with respect to the non-supply of
arms and ammunition for the constabulary at Patrick’s
Plains, a supply had been forwarded to Maitland by one
of the steam vessels on the 18th November last, and that
a letter of advice addressed to the Bench, had also been
transmitted by the same post: but that either in conse-
quence of the letter not being received, or due enquiry
for the arms not being made, the box which contained
them, had remained in the Steam-packet Office in Mait-
land, ever since November, but had lately been taken to
Patrick’s Plains.
In reply, I beg to observe, that as your letter appears
to me to notice only two of the subjects brought under
His Excellency’s consideration, I shall confine my ob-
servations to them. With respect to your remark, that
the same course had been adopted towards the four men
returned to the Government by me, as had been the
practice in similar Cases, 1 would suggest, that this may


be correct, if the Government ™iJj £okelat the
circumstance of my ende^!S f f l to that of settlers
ment of these men, as a case similar ditl not
returning their men in the ordinary , ti, a t the re-
Spiheh before £“e'been looke'd
liming of my men conM IJJJ acq nm„ted ;
unon as a case similar to anywicnwmui -A j ex _
Xch lea. Similar to c»esm The ‘ujl
ention of criminals, together mstftnces , the first.
Enquiry, were both tbe latte r, from its being
the first of the Kinder *tru “ that doubly and
also a most extraorchn y Crown at the bar of
trebly of crimes
the Supreme Couit tor a p ■ excuse, were
for which the laws of England iccogm aml
permitted to make cha g y Magistrates of
starvation against thgr a So-
the district, superintendent of Convicts
licitor General and aPI f the rest of the gang,
had to listen to the gi' em fro m the non-judi-
without being able .1 ~1 tno comment being
dal nature of the Euquuy; and thm ™ the Go _
made by the Bend.
vernment saw ht icpnn fcunity of marking .its
°f Magistrates, r 1 £ but assigned
abhorrence or the conuu , npr ; lirv mutiny, and con-
them in the usual way; as 1 j 7’ g can be over-
turned bad conduct amongs , ful effect amongst a
looked without an fdheeb Enquiry of the
prison population, -and deliberate villiany.
party who was subjected to __ 0 Government un-
* If the men were t but con-
dor such extraordinary c\iomn.sUmces g aWd
sider, that It was de irable* than that which
have been dealt with in soi the mutin-
may prove the means tlie sLants left be-
en s and insubordinate con , seV en or eight
hind on my estahhshraeii, y the Streets of
weeks’ 1
Sydney, was calculated to V wa . i s only justice to
f'mlyUeve haspr, pj portion of Sir
myself to observe, that * d b the whole of that of
Thomas Brisbane s Government, KJme f Cast ] c
General Darling, embraced a
Forbes was unknown; wlncn puw


space of upwards of nine years, during’ which 1
employed a considerable number of prisoners of the
Crown. I feel therefore that I have not met that protection
from the Government which I might fairly calculate upon,
against the infamious imputations of my convict servants ;
imputations which the Government admits, are, “ for the
most part, unfounded.”
Instead of receiving protection, I was repeatedly in-
sulted in the Streets of Sydney by these men, until the
15th February, when at the suggestion of Mr. Hely the
Principal Superintendent of Convicts, to whom 1 had
complained, I was induced to appear “against one of
them at Hyde Park Barrack Court, when he was convicted
and punished for “gross insolence” to me; after which it
appears by your letter to me dated the 15th instant,
that they were on the 21st February (six days after)
assigned in the usual way.
I am therefore in the situation of a settler, capable of
being intrusted with the difficult duty of managing con-
victs, yet allowed by the Governmentunintentionally to be
vilified by them to the detriment of his affairs, and to the
destruction of the discipline so necessary to be main-
tained amongst convict labourers. For the small pro-
fits of the agricultural settler, can ill afford the positive
loss arising from disorderly and indolent servants; and
the fact, that such conduct affects the well-being of the
settlers,, is the greatest guarantee the Government
possesses for the maintaining discipline among convict
servants (so necessary a part of the transportation laws);
for IknownoGovernment Order which inculcates strict dis-
cipline as the condition of assignment.
I now proceed to notice the other of the two subjects,
which in answering my letter of the 14th of April, you
have done me the honour to reply to; namely, the non-
supply of arms at St. Patrick’s Plains. Although it ap-
pears, that arms were 'sent up very early after the out-
rage was committed on my, establishment, (notwithstand-
ing they did not arrive at St. Patrick’s Plains through
casualty, until very lately), yet I would beg to observe,
it is a just subject of calculation with those who, like
me, have suffered from the absence of that essential of a
Police force, how far the peace of the Hunter, so greatly
disturbed for the last two years, might have been pre-
served, had that portion of the Colony beep supplied
with the number of well-appointed constables required
for so extensive a district; and it is matter of regret with


we to state, that the Government has been informed by
the repeated requisitions of the Bench at St. Patrick's
Plains during the last two years, of its deficiency of this
species of force ; and (as I have before made known,) I
have even been obliged at my own expense, to provide at
times, arms, ammunition, and handcuffs, for the use of
the Police, rather than wait any longer for the supply so
repeatedly sent for on requisition.
I have thus done myself the honor to reply to your
favour of the 5th instant, although the object of my last,
as to the removal of my men, had, it appears, been accom-
plished before I wrote. In this reply, I have wished to
express my sentiments to the Government as an old
inhabitant and as a Justice of Peace, rather than under any
expectation of obtaining an admission, that the com-
plaints made against me were, wholly unfounded, or,
that my whole conduct had been marked neither by harsh-
ness nor oppression; covert imputations which I utterly
disclaim. I am also perhaps unconsciously influenced to
give vent to my opinions, in hope, that such efficient
measures may be adopted by the Government with re-
gard to the management and discipline of the prison
population in future, as I, in common with all
-classes of Colonists, may participate in the benefit of.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your very obedient servant.
JAMBS MUDIE.
To the Honorable
ALEXANDER M‘LEAY, Esq.,
Colonial Secretary, fyc. fyc. $c.


ADDENA.
H. Scotland J;,^ complaint
Mr. J tun es _ Black, of KtUvar d Bourke, for mu-
against Ins assigned sciva t, i & Black being sworn
thious and disordeUy condi • d . the capacity of
stated, that the pnsonu wasting J thaton Sunday
night-watchman ov deponent got out of bed, and
night, the 2/th July, f or pm purpose of ascertaining
went to the shccp-tolJa, fox the. I£ £ tQ Ms duty. On
whether the P[ lS(^M^ nc l that some hurdles were
his arrival at the tohcs, h«-J? lL b 01lt and at some dis-
down, and part ot t ; ‘Deponent called to-the
tance from the Collecting them, after which,
prisoner, and a f lhLc , c l„“f„ 1 . , to be more attentive to Ins
he cautioned the pin bc more particular in fasten-
post, and ordered pin; following evening, de-
ng the hurdles m tkc floc k was about going m,
pmieutwcnttothcfolc , that seVeral hurdles
and observed to his S lLal . *nee of the careless manner
■were blown down, m constquc remonstrated
U which they that he
with the prisoner tor J“ ffi&Sty of taking hit* to
certainly shtmkl.be m*, neglect and disobedience
Court, -audbringing a chaig - s h onei . turned round to
of orders against hmi. J“P alld said «• he would
deponent in a vciy l ™’ anvthing more to do with his
be d —d if be would have p a ay^_J for Mnlj ” at the same
sheep, and he did not ca disgusting expressions ;
AnS Ung otto impropermd “ s fc"“‘ c | me iloseup to
So at leogfh became to leave your
Mr. Black, and B “ d > you shall send me to
#>rrm\ov, and now lam dcteinn y -jyj r _ B’s face),
an iron-gang, Q lfti ng his c enc if ycm do not send
i, v n d I’ll strike you, 1u SL u yf J’ , ..i f p e would not
me to a Government epo nent. Mr. Black told
Sy« l u*.


morning, Bourke would not get out of bed, and as Mr,
Black had to leave for Sydney the following day, he could
not bring on the charge sooner than the present time,
having only returned from Sydney last Tuesday. The
prisoner in defence addressed the Bench nearly to the
following effect:—“ Gentlemen, although I am here be-
fore your worships on a charge brought by my master,
for using improper and threatening language, 1 can, only,
assure your Worships it is all false, and instead of my
using the disgusting language alluded to, it was my mas-
ter ; he made use of expressions to me which I would
be ashamed to repeat before your Worships ; he called
me very bad names, amongst which, Gentlemen, ho called
me a rascal; I know ,myself better than to rise such
language ; I received a first-rate education, and was bred
in Dublin.” After some consultation, the Bench sentenced
him to receive one hundred lashes, and to be returned
to his master’s service, he being an old offender, and well
known at the Court. (It cannot be said that this man
committed this gross act of insubordination through
ignorance; for he is a man who has received a good
education, and is one of those who had the good Juck to
be a correspondent of a certain great man.)
At page iii, in the Preliminary Statement, it is said, no
outrage occurred on the Estate of Major Mudie during
eleven years. This is true, with the exception of the
crime of arson, which one of the assigned servants
named , attempted to commit by setting fire
•not to the stacks, but to the house. All the meh on the
.farm behaved well on that occasion. >
■, FINIS." ,
E, S. HALL, PEINTBB, OEOXIGB-STREET.


ERRATA.
Pag***, IUU “ SS**#?lteSoWf»T
P.itpi v*t. With lino—-fur lilß ■ f f illl T ,pliv"--P;P' !I,l ‘
1 - r “sr ;w , .3K-* - nr'.-
Bt*.: - ■■'■•
Magistrate on" -Pw »>’> utn
ongniae no ex-cuse."
