

VIOLET TOWN
CENTENARY
CELEBRATIONS
OFFICIAL SOUVENIR
PUBLICATION and PROGRAMME
Violet
Town
EASTER
1949
15th
to
23rd
APRIL
Authorised by The Violet Town Centenary Celebrations Committee
Published by Matthews Publishing Company
The Mercantile Exchange, 380 Collins Street, Melbourne
COPYRIGHT


ft#
With pleasure the National Bank congratulates
Violet Town upon reaching its Centenary and trusts
that the district will continue to thrive and prosper
during the ensuing 100 years. The Bank has a long
and close association with Violet Town for its local
branch was opened on 2nd October, 1873, since
when the "National" has provided a continuous
banking service. With full confidence in the
future, the National Bank looks forward to
0 rendering this service in the years to come.
THE NATIONAL BANK
of Australasia Limited


VIOLET TOWN CENTENARY CELEBRATIONS.
EASTER APRIL 15th TO APRIL 23rd, 1949.
SENATOR J. J. DEVLIN, President.
MR. R. G. HEWSON, Secretary.
Praqramme
Good Friday April 15th.
Sacred Concert in the Memorial Hall, at
8 p.m. Stainer's "Crucifixion." Presented
by the Benalla Methodist-Presbyterian Choir.
Easter Saturday April 16th.
Procession to start from the Shire Hall at
12 noon.
Centenary Sports in the Recreation Reserve
at 3 p.m. Senator The Hon. J. J. Devlin,
Shire President. The Hon. A. A. Calwell,
Minister for Information and Immigration.
Euchre end Dance in the Memorial Hall,
at 8.30 p.m. Dance in the Parish Hall, at
8.30 p.m.
Easter Sunday April 17th.
Church Services in the churches in the
morning.
St. Dunstan's Seventieth Anniversary
morning and evening.
Combined Church Service in Memorial
Hall, at 3 p.m. (Collection to be devoted
to New Civic Library).
Easter Monday April 18th.
Sporting Fixtures by local clubs.
Violet Town Bowling Club Rinks Tourna-
ment. Trophies of £4/4/- and £2/2/-.
Entry 2/6 a player.
Centenary Ball in Memorial Hall, at 8
p.m. Presentation to oldest former resident
returning to Violet Town. Belle of Belles
final.
Easter Tuesday April 19th.
Back to School, at 10 a.m.
Reunions of Lodges and R.S.S.A.I.L.A. in
the evening.
Wednesday April 20th.
Concert, at 8 p.m.
Completion of the Queen Competition and
Coronation of the Winning Queen, at 10 p.m.
Miss Patricia Gunn, Queen of the North.
Miss Lola Armstrong, Queen of the South.
Miss Margaret Hogan, Queen of the East.
Dance to follow in the Memorial Hall.
Thursday April 21st.
Public Holiday throughout the Shire of
Violet Town.
District Tours.
Combined School Children's Picnic at the
Weir.
Friday April 22nd.
Euchre and Dance in the Memorial Hall,
at 8 p.m.
Saturday April 23rd.
Centenary Horse Gymkhana at the Race
Course.
Musgrove's Screen Attractions, at 8 p.m.
"Mother Wore Tights." A splendid Musical
Show. All Star Cast. In Technicolour.
"Second Chance." Drama. Fox Inter-
national News.


WELCOME!
BACK TO VIOLET TOWN CELEBRATIONS, EASTER, 1949.
The Committee, Residents and Friends extend to you a very hearty welcome to our
"Back to Violet Town" Celebrations.
We invite you to join in all the entertainments which have been arranged. Mix among
your old acquaintances and recapture some of the old atmosphere and imbibe some of the
new l
We extend best wishes to all, Comebacks and Locals, and hope they will make these
celebrations the best and greatest in Violet Town's history.
SENATOR J. J. DEVLIN, President.
R. G. HEWSON, Secretary.
VIOLET TOWN CENTENARY COMMITTEE.
Front Row (left to right)—Mrs. L. Irwin, Mrs. S. Hoskin, Mr. R. G. Hewson
(secretary), Senator J. J. Devlin (president), Cr. J. Howell, Mrs. J. J. Devlin,
Mrs. T. Hoskin, Mrs. A. Peacock.
Back Row —A. Peacock, M. McEvitt (treasurer), T. Saxon, T. Blake, T. Hayes,
Cr. T. Giffin, K. Macklan, A. Ellis, D. Giffin, Cr. R. Wallace, F.E. Peacock,
Cr. J. J. Chanter, C. Walter, Cr. R. Ramage and V. Louden.


A REVIEW OF VIOLET TOWN'S HISTORY.
By T. R. Collis, Member R.A.H.S.,
R.H.S., Vic.
Dim ages ago, before the advent of the
white man, Violet Town lay sleeping at the
foot of the Strathbogie Ranges. Aborigines
roamed the countryside, making their homes
beside the ponds and creeks in the district.
The silent hills that surround the town could
tell a very interesting story if they could
speak, but even in their silence as they
change to misty blue, then deepen to a
COUNCILLORS AND OFFICERS.—SHIRE.
Front Row (left to right)—K. Macklan, Dr. Maxwell, R. G. Hewson (secretary),
Senator J. J. Devlin (president). Miss Grace Johnson (assistant secretary),
Cr. J. Howell (past president), M. McEvitt (treasurer).
Back Row Cr. O. Ramage, Cr. A. Ellis, Cr. R. Wallace, Cr. J.E. Chanter
Cr. A. Walter.
shadowy violet, they blow to us a message
of security and peace, whtch speaks of an
age gone by and of conditions known then
to men, but unknown to us who live in this
20th century. Feel the breeze that sweeps
toward us from the hills—a breeze which
has known the magic of many miles, and
played carelessly with lofty mountain snows,
and you will realise that it was no haphazard
choice that made men pause beside a creek
and decide to settle on a site known today as
Violet Town.
Violet Town has been known for the past
hundred years. It was originally named
Violet Ponds by the men of Major Mitchell's
party in 1836, because of the flowers grow-
ing about the margins of some ponds. Later,
when a settlement was established the napne
"Violet" was retained. Some three years
later, the Governor of Tasmania, Sir John
Franklin, accompanied by his wife, travel-
ling from Melbourne to Sydney, overland by
special horse drawn coaches, made this record
of their visit: "After passing on October
10th over various other chains of ponds, We
encamped at the miles near thb
bank of a running stream in which were also
deep pools, and which from some flowers
growing there, were named Violet Ponds." Sir
John asked the surveyor, who was then making
a survey of the town, the name of the creek,
and was told "Honeysuckle," so named be-
cause of the native honeysuckles that grew
there. Lady Franklin was invited to name
the streets, then being surveyed, and all with
one exception were named after flowers. It
is fitting to note that Her Excellency's
Christian name was Violet, so in keeping with


her visit, the violet flowers growing on the
pools, the town was named Violet Town.
Although surveyed in September, 1838,
by S. A. Perry, then by H. W. H. Smythe
in the following month, the first land sale
did not take place until 1840, a survey being
made of the area prior to the sale by I. G.
W. Wilmot. First township sales were made
on 9th January, 1840. (From Department
of Lands and Survey): Allot. 1 Section 1,
sold to David McLean, of Sydney, price
£6/6/8. Other names appearing on the list
are: G. W. Newcombe, A. E. Elyard, J. G.
Lennen, C. W. Roemer, J. T. Hughes and T.
Hocking, S. Emanuel, all of Sydney.
Six years later another sale was held dur-
ing the month of August, but it was not
until September, 1848, that the name Violet
Town is definitely affixed to the deeds, as
until then it is spoken of as either Violet
Creek, Ponds, or Honeysuckle. A title deed
in the bank, bearing the date of that year
reveals the fact in quaint language that this
portion of Victoria was known as part of
New South Wales, and was spoken of as
Port Phillip district. The signature of Sir
Charles Augustus Fitz Roy, then Governor
of New South Wales, appears on the deed
of the land, situated near the present railway
station. The purchase money was £4/15/-,
but the purchaser (and his assigns) coven-
anted to pay a "Quit-rent of one pepper-
corn per year for ever, if demanded."
Special tribute must be paid to the early
settlers and pioneers. The men and women
who blazed the trail, fought the trials of
wild bush, faced drought and flood, and made
a home for their children.
We owe a debt of gratitude to them for
their courage, perseverance and endurance
under almost insuperable hardships and diffi-
culties. Whilst we may not now be called
upon to face to the same extent the physical
conditions of those years, yet, even with a
century of effort and accomplishment behind
us, our country is still young.
With this in view, let us face the future
in the same spirit of adventure and deter-
mination which we admire so much in our
pioneers—our own fathers and grandfathers.
Then will our country which we love, and
our country's future be great!
One of the first settlers was Mr. W. Bond.
His sheep and cattle run extended for several
miles, the remains of which is to-day seen
in portion of a boundary fence and hut on
the Stoney Creek.
The following is an extract from the Lands
Department —Original Plans:—
Honeysuckle Creek run granted to Mitchell
Forbes Scoby in October, 1846. Area 64,000
acres. Sheep grazing run granted in Eng-
land—soo head cattle, 8,000 sheep. Trans-
ferred to Scoby and Mathieson, then to James
Mathieson. 1856, transferred to William
Furlonge; 1 867, transferred to Bank of Aus-
tralasia. Subdvided in 1861 into North and
South. North transferred to Turnbull 1853,
Sir James Mathieson applied for Pre-emptive
right of Honeysuckle South Run of 640 acres.
Granted, 1 856.
Another extract of interest supplied in re-
cords of the Victorian Historical Society is
as follows: —
"Honeysuckle Creek (including Stony
Creek), 64,000 acres with 500 cattle and
8,000 sheep in 1839, was taken up by
William Speid, John Birmey, Alex Anderson.
In March, 1842, the area was subdivided
into Honeysuckle Creek and Stony Creek.
Wm. Speid and John Hay are the names
mentioned in connection with Honeysuckle.
In 1842 Mitchell Forbes Scobie (note Scoby
above) and Sir James Mathieson were grant-
ed the run, and in 1853 Sir James acquired
Scobie's share, and he retained it until 1856
when William Furlonge had it transferred
to him."
In 1861 the run was subdivided into North
and South, the North being transferred to
Thomas Turnbull. April saw the transfer
of the run to Goldsbrough £r Co. William
Denning Crocker settled at Honeysuckle that
same year and became the owner before
twelve months had passed.
Early selectors in the Stony Creek run were
Messrs. G. Luscombe (who has Mr. Bond's
old pre-emptive right), R. G. McKay, C. Dic-
kens, R. White, A. White, J. Ramage and
McAuley, J. Johnstone, P. O. Halloran, A.
Luxford, J. Brennan and McArdle.
Both Caniambo and Gowangardie were
formerly part of cattle and sheep runs. The


Phone: 89
BROWNE'S
FARMERS' ARMS HOTEL
VIOLET TOWN
s*OW H t V PA 'Kh\ ms AR M $ HS. fit
-V. - ■ •
Ms
mm
-■>
i’'
.. •>•-
M
:■
Most Modern ond Up-to-date Refrigerating Plant in Violet Town.
Septic System Installed.
First-Class Accommodation.


Phone: 11
RIDDELL BROS.
(F. E. Cr M. A. PEACOCK)
VIOLET TOWN
Building Contractors, Timber and Iron Merchants,
Undertakers
Bricks, Lime and Cement.
Fowler's Outfits and Requisites.
Furniture and Ironmongery.
first land was taken up in Caniambo by
Thos. Graham in 1872. Upotipotpon was
part of the area owned by Mr. Bond. Later
it was transferred to L. A. Turnbull, Thos.
Ballantyne and P. Clarey. Moglonemby Pre-
emptive Right, 320 acres, was granted to
Charles Mullins in 1860. It is interesting to
note that, according to a Special Country
Lands Plan, the Parish of Boho was surveyed
by Thomas Nixon in 1861, and that the
selection of 80 acres on the south side of the
Sydney track was made by one Jonah Britnell
some three years later. The site is marked
to-day by the house where Mr. N. T. Wilson
lives.
As can be seen by the foregoing record
for many years the town was the centre of
large holdings, and the business people sought
to supply the needs of the settlers as well as
the requirements of the many travellers who
journeyed from Melbourne to Sydney to the
diggings at Beechworth and other places in
the North East. The Hume Highway was
known as the Beechworth Road for many
years, whilst the town itself was spoken of as
being on the Road to Port Phillip. The New
South Wales Government Gazette supplies
the following:—
"Village site fixed upon as Violet Creek,
on the Road to Port Phillip—Sydney, 9th
September, 1839. (Gaz. Sept. 11th. 1839,
p. 998).
"Violet Town, Sale of Town Allotments,
9th Jan., 1840. Section 1. Nos. 1-10, each
ian acre, £4 per acre. County unnamed,
Parish unnamed. 60 acres at £1 per acre.
Nine suburban allotments, Bth Jan., 1840."
From the same Gazette we learn that in
the year 1 890, the population was 300 souls.
In the old coaching days the road was more
tortuous through the town, and the chief
changing place was at Williams' on the Hume
Highway (Sydney Road). The road was such
that the horses coming from Balmattum, and
pulling for the 6-8 mile had to change, whilst
between the town and Baddaginnie in the
winter was nigh impassable, often horses and
coach sinking knee and axle deep in mud and
mire. Section of the road in those days was
constructed under convict labour, evidences
are still to be seen. The business centre was


on the Sydney road, many of the buildings
standing to this day, testifying that they
have known commercial activity and accom-
modation for travellers. When the Nalinga
road became the link between Violet Town
and Dookie, and later Shepparton, the busi-
ness centre removed to its present site as
the stopping place for the coach was at the
corner where Mr. Harcourt's business stands
to-day. When the railway was opened to
MEMBERS OF FIRST VIOLET TOWN COUNCIL.
Back Row —Cr. J. T. Hill, Cr. Wm. Brown, Cr. A. MacDonald, Cr. J. Underwood,
C. R. Anderson, Secretary, R. Horsfield, Engineer,
Front Row —Cr. J. W. Wilkins, Cr. J. McShane, Cr. J. Hammond, President,
Cr. Jas. Thorne, Cr. Wm. Lane.
Shepparton, a great deal of traffic was divert-
ed to that town with local repercussion.
The Victorian Gazette of 1865 has this
to say: "Violet Town, or Honeysuckle, is a
small township in the electoral district
of Murray; it is situated on the Honeysuckle
Creek, the Goulburn River lying about 20
miles away west, and the Strathbogie Ranges
on the east. It is on the Melbourne and
Beechworth road. The district is agricultural
and pastoral. It has 3 hotels named Com-
mercial, Union and the Violet Town."
The above makes no mention of The Royal
Mail Hotel, owned by Thos. Clarke, one of
the earliest townspeople. Local information
speaks of him, and his name is recorded in
the land sales report as having purchased
allotments 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21 in Sec-
tion 1. In each case he paid a deposit of £l,
and forfeited. With his name appears that
of James Lundy, who paid £ls and £22
for allotment 1 and 2 in Section 6, and who
fulfilled for many years the important posi-
tion of mailman betwen Seymour and Violet
Town.
Aboriginals were well represented in the
district, and whilst they found ample food of
fish, duck and kangaroo in Violet Town, Bad-
daginnie proved otherwise, so was shunned
by them, and carries the name which they
gave it, meaning "hunger/' It was extremely
poor, so provided no habitat for the nomadic
peoples of Australia. Many of the stone axes
made by the blacks have been found by


settlers and farmers in latter years when
ploughing. All these axes are made of stone,
but not of local origin, proving that the local
material was not hard enough for the black
folk. The stone used by them is to be found
in the Strathbogie Ranges.
Although considerable trouble arose with
the blacks on either side of Violet Town,
especially in Benalla, where a party led by
the Faithful Brothers were massacred on the
banks of the Broken River one April morn-
ing during the year 1838. Grim struggles
between the new comer and the native are
recorded in the area known today as Euroa;
with one exception, this town and early
settlers knew only the friendliest terms with
the aborigines.
Dr. Anderson, who settled on the Honey-
suckle Station on the Honeysuckle Creek,
seems to be the only person who had the
misfortune to suffer at the hands of the blacks.
It so happened that the Doctor's housekeeper
was approached by a black one day at the
kitchen, who on finding that she was alone
at the time, asked for food, but because
he did not get all he expected drove his
spear into her side and killed her. That was
in 1856. No longer do we know the black
man and his gin as neighbours or as travel-
lers asking for some small trifle that caught
their attention. Slowly but surely the white
army has pushed its van into their happy
hunting grounds, and they, themselves, are
pushed further and further back from the
centres of civilisation. Gone are the corro-
boree, the thrill of the hunt, and only a few
scattered remnants in reservations and mission
stations remind us of the kings of the land of
which we are so proud; yet even in our pride
of conquest we cannot but feel a pang for
the sacrifice to civilisation.
The year 1851 has a special significance
to Victoria, for the agitation for severance
culminated in the Port Phillip district of
New South Wales being proclaimed the sep-
arate Colony of Victoria on Ist July that year.
Bush fires raged that same year, and "Black
Thursday" will be remembered in our State
history as the day when the whole State was
ablaze. Many of the early settlers saw all
they had gathered around them perish in the
flames, but with great hearts they set to
work to build again—that heritage they have
handed down to us — their heirs and succes-
sors—but who can lift the veil from that
wonderful, yet toiling past, wherein is hidden
the story:—
"Where the hardy settlers battle, beaten back
to rise again,
And the brave bush wives their toil and silence
share."
Violet Town was part of the Benalla Shire
in those days which then included Longwood
in its boundary. Later Euroa made repre-
sentation, and was made a shire, induding
Violet Town, but it was not until 1895 that
Violet Town was made a separate shire. The
first Shire President was J. Hammond, Esq.
Although this part of the State is well
known for its associations with the bush-
rangers, and many a local man in those days
was sworn in as a special constable, there is
no record of any serious incident occurring
in the town, except for the robbery to the
gold escort in or about 1858. A box con-
taining 1,000 ozs. of gold was taken out of
the coach at Violet Town, but the robbers
were never captured, and rumour has it that
their spoil lies buried under the site of the
present township.
The eyes of all were turning toward the
south-western horizon during the years of
1 870-73, looking for the latest mode of trans-
port—the railway train. Considerable con-
troversy as to the site of the station was
engaged in, but a compromise eventually
was effected, and the station located at the
southern end of the present site.
Principal industries over the years have
been flour-milling to treat the wheat from
the surrounding district, and when the mill
closed down, the building was converted into
a creamery and butter factory, but that too
has passed. Nevertheless, firewood still is
an important factor in the life of the district.
Large quantities of wheat and wool are sent
away in the season. Good use is being made
of the land for dairying, and fat cattle and
fat lambs.
District wool has realised very high prices
on more than one season.
As Violet Town prepares to celebrate its
centenary, the past comes with its message
that history is never finished, that the yes-
terdays of to-day are the ashes from which
the to-morrows will arise, and the future will


pulsate with life and vitality only as the men.
and women of to-day realise their opportun-
ities and privileges. Hand on the torch with
confidence, and the cry'—
"God Save the King! God bless the people!"
T. R. COLLIS.
OUR CHURCHES.
Throughout the land, wherever settlement
has spread out, the Church has closely follow-
ed. In no other sphere of the country's early
activities has the pioneering spirit been more
keenly exemplified than by the various de-
nominations of the Christian Church in their
The pupils of Fisher's School.
eagerness to minister to the spiritual needs
of the people, and many stories of devotion
to duty could be told.
CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
During the year 1849 Bishop Perry came
through the North Eastern district and jour-
neyed as far as the Ovens, but there is no
record that he stopped between Jones Bros,
station at Avenel and a home on the Broken
River. The following year, he with Mrs. Perry
stayed overnight at the home of Mr. Turn-
bull in Violet Town, and conducted a house-
hold service there. Later in the same year,
the Rev. S. L. Chase, recently arrived from
England, was appointed by the Bishop of the
N.E., on an itinerating ministry. He minis-
tered in Violet Town, and with his colleague,
a Mr. Palmer, sold Testaments and Tracts.
Mr. Chase was followed in succeeding years
by other itinerant ministers. The Rev. E.
Puckle arrived in Benalla in 1856, and the
country round about came under his care,
which included this town. Later in 1878,
Violet Town was transferred to Euroa Parish,
and in the following year, on 12th February,
the Venerable Archdeacon Tucker, D.D , laid
the foundation stone of the present church.
The Church Hall and Rectory were erected
at a later date, the rectory being first used
by Rev. F. A. Scott, 1908-13.
In the year 1905 Violet Town became a
separate parochial district with a resident
clergyman, the Rev. F. Taton, and he was in
charge for about 3 years.
Before the present church was built, Public
Halls in Violet Town were used for worship,
and it is probable that the old building,
which stood opposite Mr. Underwood's pro-
perty, and used by other denominations was
also used by itinerant ministers and rectors
from Benalla.


ST. ANDREW'S PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.
The first minister to conduct a Presbyterian
service in Violet Town was the Rev. Geo.
Tait. These earliest services were held in
a slab building in Primrose Street, near Mr.
Palmer's residence. Later services were con-
ducted in a building near the then police
station, but as time passed the Friendly
Societies' Hall came into use for the same
purpose.
The Rev. J. Gilsennon was the first min-
ister appointed to the Violet Town charge.
That was in 1885, and the following year
saw the work of the church spread to the
surrounding districts; the home of the late
Mr. Isaac Wallace being used for that pur-
pose at Earlston. Services were commenced
at Marraweeny in 1 887, and at a later date
a mid-weekly service was conducted by the
late Rev. Chas. Attwood in the home of the
late Mr. Osbert Henderson at Harry's Creek,
pending permission to use the State School.
The site upon which St. Andrew's stands
to-day was purchased from the late Joseph
Stivey on 9th March, 1888, for the sum of
£50. The church building was erected in
1893, and the first service conducted in it
by the late Rev. J. J. Black, of Euroa.
The earliest marriages solemnised in the
church were those of Mr. Frank Wallace with
Miss Sarah Lane on 16th January, 1894,
and of Mr. John Lane with Miss Louisa Hen-
derson on August 17th, 1896.
At present there are four out-stations
grouped with the charge, Moglonemby, Kar-
ramomus, Baddaginnie and Strathbogie. In
each fortnightly services are conducted by
the present minister, Mr. M. Campbell.
METHODIST CHURCH.
In December, 1860, the Quarterly Meeting
—presumably of the Benalla Circuit—resolv-
ed "That Mr. Walton be allowed one Sunday
a month for Violet Town and Euroa." Whether
services began immediately, or whether they
began and were discontinued, is not clear.
In 1866 the records disclose, "That the Wes-
leyans also built a chapel in Crocus Street;
the land was presented by Mr. H i I lias." Cir-
cumstances were such that the Benalla
Quarterly Meeting lost interest and withdrew
its agent. However, with the appointment
of Mr. Mordecai Wilson as school teacher
in 1877, the position altered. He wrote to
the Benalla minister urging that some ar-
rangements be made for divine service. He
was told “that it would not pay for horse-
shoes. “ A letter was then sent to the min-
ister of the United Methodist Free Church
at Shepparton, to which a favourable reply
was received, a monthly service being ar-
ranged. The church of 1866 having been
shifted to Euroa, public worship was held in
the school house, until permission to use it
was withdrawn. The situation was met by
Mr. S. Fenton,a member of another denomin-
ation, offering his sitting room for worship.
On the arrival of the Rev. William Dixon,
who was an architect, a building was erected
in 1880, now known as the Friendly Societies'
Hall. The present church was erected in
Cowslip Street in 1908.
ROMAN CATHOLIC.
The first building in which Mass was said
in Violet Town was in a building erected on
the property of the late Mr. and Mrs. Under-
wood on the Hume Highway, the site to-day
is the home of the grandson, Mr. T. P. Under-
wood. The building, used by all denomina-
tions, was known as the Court House. The
Rev. Father Scanlon travelled per horseback
from Beechworth, and Mass was said 2 or 3
times a year, mostly on week days. That
was in the years 1 860-70. With the arrival
of the railway, the town shifted to its present
site in 1872. An old slab building, with
shingles on it and papered walls, known as
the National Bank, situated near the railway
line, close to the present site of the Police
Station, surrounded by gum scrub was the next
building used for the saying of Mass, the
priest travelling from Wangaratta per horse-
back. With the increase of worshippers a
meeting was called to discuss the erection
of a church. A site was procured and a
wooden building was erected thereon. This
chapel served upon a site near the present
church until sufficient funds were in hand
to erect the building near the station to-day.
Wtih careful planning and much hard work
the present church was opened free of debt
by the late Archbishop Revelle in October,
1898. The cost involved amounted to £I2OO.
The Rev. Dean Davey offered to marry the
first couple in the new church free of charge,
and Mr. and Mrs. Mac Hugh, of Benalla, who
have recently celebrated their golden wed-
ding anniversary availed themselves of the
offer. The old wooden church was removed
to Rothsey, and still serves as a place of wor-
ship in that district.


SHIRE OF VIOLET TOWN.
Shire was created by proclamation on 11th April, 1895, by severance of Warranbayne.
Riding from Shire of Benalla and parts of North and South Ridings of Shire of Euroa. Area
359 sq. miles.
First Shire President: John Hammond. Other Councillors were William Lane, Alexander
MacDonald, John McShane, 'John Underwood, John Hill, James Thorne, William Brown,
James William Wilkins.
First Secretary and Engineer: Richard Horsfield, C.E.
First meeting held in Mechanics 7 Institute Hall on 11th September, 1895.
Shire Offices erected in 1899. Contract let to Humphrey and Firth, of Footscray for
£4BO.
r' ' ♦
VIOLET TOWN WATERWORKS TRUST.
Constituted 13th June, 1892.
Members of Euroa Shire Council and one other nominee. William Lane was appointed
first chairman.
In 1895, after severance of North Riding from Euroa Shire to form part of newly con-
stituted Shire of Violet Town, the Councillors for the time being of the Central Riding of
the Shire of Violet Town and three other nominated persons were appointed Commissioners of
the Trust.
The first meeting was held in the Mechanics Institute Hall on 27th July, 1892. First
Commissioners were Councillors Thorne, Kernns and Nugent, and Government nominees, Dr.
Wilmott, William Lane and Isaac Wallace.
Also present were Mr. Henry Parkes, Secretary, and Mr. W. Howitt, Engineer, of Euroa.
Mr. Parkes was appointed first Trust Secretary and Mr. Howitt, C.E., first Consulting Engineer.
First water supply was by small pipe line from a low concrete weir on Honeysuckle Creek,
just above junction of Harry's Creek.
This was replaced by the concrete arch dam which now stands on the same site, though
the height of wall was increased by 3 feet in recent years. Capacity is now approximately
2,000,000 gallons.
GENERAL STORE, in the 1870's, owned by Mr. T. Hoskin.


For Best Quality Bread
Patronise
W. KONG
BAKERS AND PASTRYCOOKS
.*v ? *: ' t V •• > t . s
VIOLET TOWN V Phone 58
A Trial is Solicited
ITEMS OF INTEREST
The Welfare Centre established in 1947
replaced an effective voluntary service given
over a period of years by the Sister-in-Charge
of the Hospital.
The present Council Chambers were erect-
ed in 1 899.
The Memorial Hall, erected in honour of
the district's gallant dead, was opened during
the last "Back To" Celebrations, in April,
1925.
The Bush Nursing Hospital has served the
town and district over a period of 20 years.
The Recreation Reserve has seen vast
changes in its area and appointments during
the past 12 months. Steady progress has
been made through extensive efforts to ac-
quire money and materials for tasks ahead.
An Olympic Swimming Pool looms large on
the horizon.
The enrolment at the School is now 94
pupils. Many senior pupils take advantage
of the free school 'bus to the High School,
Benalla. Until this service was provided
those interested in the education of their
children and the children of other locals con-
veyed the young folk in private cars to
Benalla.
The local School Committee meets regu-
larly, and attends to matters affecting the
grounds and buildings.
The Mothers' Club also takes a keen in-
terest in the welfare of the School and plays
a worthy part in maintaining equipment for
the head teacher, his staff, and the children.
DO YOU KNOW THAT ?
The ."Lock Up" from the original police
camp, which was opposite Mr. T. P. Under-
wood's home, was made of logs, and is now
being used by Mr. Alex. Gordon for a shed.
In this "lock up" in 1880 were three bur-
glars, taken single-handed by Constable Mor-
mant whilst they were camped under the
Honeysuckle Bridge.
The gravestone of Dr. Clark can be seen
opposite the sale yards, a little off Mary Lane.
The Commercial Hotel, now residence of
Miss F. Williams, was the stopping place of


Cobb & Co. coaches on their way to Beech-
worth.
On the occasion of Queen Victoria's Jubi-
lee, when the then local brass band was on
parade, a small boy was picked up and
thrown through the bass drum. When the
band was to be re-formed it was found that
the secretary had "popped" the instruments!
The first Public Hall was situated on the
Railway Hotel premises. The first Race-
An Early Tennis Team.
course in the district was on the property be-
longing to the late J. Fields and situated on
the Murchison Road. The site is known
today as "the old racecourse paddock."
| The late Mr. W. Davis was "star" cricketer
in the 90's. He played against-the English
at Benalla, doing well with both bat and ball.
j Mr. Ireland built the present Roman Catho-
Ijic Church. It was his first venture as a con-
tractor.
! The first local school was built in 1879.
Children and teacher assembled in a private
house before the school Was opened. The
house was the home of Mr. H. Carter
Violet Town's earliest Sunday school was
one conducted by Mrs. Cochrane in the State
school for children of any denomination.
Dr. John Dunmore Lang—stormy politician
of 100 or more years ago—was in Violet
Town in 1843, and declared "Honeysuckle"
homestead, then owned by Mr. Scobie, to be
the finest "betwixt Sydney and Melbourne";
in fact, he burst into poetry about the dis-
trict; two lines run as follows—
" This is my rest here still I'll stay,
For I do like it well."
REMINISCENCES
The following is extracted from Mrs. Hos-
kin's reminiscences:—
We left England in the East Indian sailing
vessel, the "Hoogly," and landed at Port Ade-
laide in 1 856. My brother and a friend went
to the Ovens goldfield, travelling by an eight-
horse coach, fare £B, from Melbourne. We
left for Sydney and returned in '57 to Ade-
laide, thence to Melbourne, and reached
Violet Town per eight-horse waggon. My


YOU ARE SURE TO GET IT AT
WINGFIELD & DAVIS
General Merchants
VIOLET TOWN Cowslip Street
Phone 15
husband had built premises for a butchering
business, and we boarded at Underwood's
until our own home was built. Building ma-
terials were very expensive—70/- per 100
super ft. brought from the sawpits at Badda-
ginnie. Carting the timber was a very risky
business, as there were no bridges or culverts
on the road, and one of the carters narrowly
escaped drowning. Some of the residents
started a distillery and made very good
whisky, but the venture failed for want of
support. We had a general store, butchery
and bakery. Flour was £5 the 200 lb. bag,
salt 6d. lb., sugar 9d., tea 3/-, butter 3/-,
eggs 2/6 per dozen, jam 2/6 1 lb. jar,
candles 2/6, beef 4d. lb, by the quarter, joints
6d. lb., steak 6d. lb., mutton 6d., but very
scarce; Cross Gr Blackwell's bottled fruit 2/6
per bottle, tobacco 6d. lb., Epsom salts 3/-
Ib., and all other commodities in the same
proportion. There was a temporary iron
police station near where the State School
now stands, and later the new police station
was built opposite Underwood's in 1857. This
section of the Sydney-Melbourne telegraph
line was made about this time. The gold
escort from the Ovens goldfields stopped fort-
nightly at Mr. T. Clarke's (on the site of Mr.
I. Brown's house). A new bridge was built
over the Honeysuckle Creek in 1885, Mr. T.
Hoskin being the contractor. On the occa-
sion of the separation of Violet Town from
the Euroa Shire a fancy dress ball was held
in the Mechanics'. The clearing of the road
for the telegraph poles made the track more
suitable for traffic.
Copy taken from our first account book: —
Violet Town,
Sept. 16, 1857.
Mr. Snow,
Contractor for Melbourne-Sydney
Telegraph Line.
~ Dr. to THOMAS HOSKIN,
Butcher.
1857
Sept. 17. To 662 lbs. of beef at 4d. per lb.
1i bags flour at 90/- per bag.
Sept. 17 6 loaves bread, 1/6 per 4 lb.
loaf.
4 bags at 2/- each.
Mrs. J. Weaver writes: —
"My grandparents, Mr. and Mrs. James
Lundy, went to Violet Town in 1848. Their


first house was on the bank of the creek near
where the State School now stands. They
afterwards moved to where our old homestead
stood. Mr. and Mrs. T. Clarke and their
son Hugh, were the only residents before
them. They kept the old hotel near the creek,
where the coaches stopped and changed
horses. My father was married and brought
his wife to Violet Town in the year 1860,
and kept a store on the Sydney road for some
time. When my grand parents lived on the bank
of the creek, a Mr. Myers, a station holder
from N.S.W., stayed with them on his way
to Melbourne. He had a black boy with him,
and some members of another tribe followed
A view of the thriving wood industry.
him from Albury, and when he went out to
get the horses in the morning they killed him.
His master was in great distress about it. He
and my father buried him on the bank of the
creek. You will remember the old grave
with the post and rail fence around it. The
blacks came many times around the house
when grandma was there alone, and often
camped near the old homestead. I attended
the old school when Mr. George Berkley was
the teacher, and I was amongst the scholars on
the day of the opening of the present State
School. I can remember being at a tea-
meeting with my mother in Mr. Ryan's time.
I was also at a party given one New Year's
Eve, with the late Mr. and Mrs. N. Brown, at
the opening of the flour mills."
Recollections by C. L. Deßoos, Esq.:—
On the earliest maps the place was named
Violet Creek, near the Honeysuckle Creek,
and a township was surveyed in 1 849. The
pioneers were Messrs. Tom Clarke and Joseph
Underwood. Clarke had an hotel on the first
road to Sydney, near the bridge. This may
have been Major Mitchell's track. Moglo-
nemby was owned by Mr. Chas. Mullins,
Caniambo and Gowangardie by Mr. John
Vidler, who sold Gowongardie to Mr. Hum-
phrey Grattan. Honeysuckle was owned by
Mr. T. Turnbull and Warrenbayne by Mr.
Moore. Mr. Mullins sold to Mr. T. Beggs,
Turnbull to William Furlonge, followed by
Messrs. Ralston and William Crocker. Mr.
Bond owned Upotipotpon. The first stores
and hotels were opened by Messrs. Hobson,
Valiere and Underwood, the exact order of
precedence is doubtful. Mr. Geo. Pilgrim be-
came a partner with Hobson and Valiere. The
latter married the widow of Mr. T. Clark.
Mr. W. D. Crocker followed in the store, and


For the Right Spot go to the Right Spot!
VIOLET TOWN HOTEL
John J. F. Ramage Proprietor.
Phone 29
' ,11
•- • •
: : 'W- WSm
■
Cowslip St., Violet Town For the Best Accommodation
H. Williams in the hotel, and the coaches
changed horses there for many years. The
building still stands. Only four-horse coaches
were run by Bevan & Co. about 1 856, chang-
ing horses at each township. The first drivers
were Morton Stobie and Archie Hall. In win-
ter, when the creeks were flooded and the
roads bad, the coach would not arrive for
many hours after it was due. The first Court
of Petty Sessions was held in a room near
Underwood's hotel, and Mr. Carige, Clerk of
Courts, used to come from Benalla. The first
policeman I have knowledge of was P. Cros-
bie. The municipal district was the Benalla
Road Board, afterward Benalla Shire, Violet
Town being in the South-west Riding. This
Riding extended from the Broken River to
beyond Longwood. The Euroa Shire was
formed in 1879, Mr. McGuinness and myself
being the promoters of severance from
Benalla. Mr. McGuinness was the first presi-
dent of Euroa Shire, Mr. White secretary, and
Mr. W. T. Garrett, rate collector. Violet
Town was excised and became a separate
shire in 1895, and the first president was Mr.
J. J. Hammond. The railway was opened in
1873, and Mr. S. Fenton (father of the secre-
tary to "Back to Violet Town") was the first
porter at the Violet Town railway station. In
the early days the mails were carried from
Melbourne to Albury three days a week, by
springcart in summer and by pack horse in
winter. There were no post offices between
Benalla and Seymour. In some places the
mail-bag would be left in the hollow of a
tree, where people would collect their letters
and leave letters for the post. The first
mailmen were Jimmy Hilet and "Brandy"
Siddell.
Up to Ist January, 1873, the schools were
called Rural or Common Schools. From
School Board records in my possession, Mr.
Geo. Berkeley was the first State School
teacher in 1873, and he was succeeeded by
Messrs. M. Wilson and Cookson. Our Board
of Advice district comprised the whole of the
South-west Riding. We had some trouble in


Phone: 107
d. a. McDonald
Cartage Contractors —— General Carriers
VIOLET TOWN
■ ■ ■
■
Specialising in Local and Interstate Lire Stock Transport
fixing on a site for the Violet Town School,
after which the Department wrote that it
was intended to erect a W.B. building, 36 x
20, considering this of ample size, without
undue crowding, for 90 children, as facts
within their knowledge would not warrant a
larger building. Among the first members
of the Board of Advice were Messrs. Crocker
and Linard, who were also the first J/s P., and
Dr. Clarke. Sir Francis Murphy was the first
M.P. for Murray Boroughs, following Messrs.
P. Hanna, J. Orr, and Wm. Witt. Re
Churches. —Father Galen, from Wangaratta,
used to hold services occasionally, as did the
Protestant ministers from Benalla. Arch-
deacon Tucker visited occasionally; also min-
isters from Euroa. Mr. Deßoos, Snr., was a
lay reader, and conducted services in Violet
Town, and the writer assisted the Archdea-
con in getting the church built by getting
the bricks made by my brickmaker at Violet
Town, and giving long terms for payment.
Rev. Archibald will be remembered by some
in 1871. Church of England and Roman
Catholic services were held in the Court
House.
Among the early residents were: "Warri-
gal" Mullins (brother of Chas. Mullins) Jack
Hoskin, "Dr. Kingsford" Thos. Hoskin, G.
Whiting, Grogan, Tom Coghlan, Pat
McGeary, Pat Boyle, Tom Maher, T. Britnell,
Sanderson, Adam Dodd (coach-groom),
Eden White, T. Ramage, S. Block, Ben Howes,
W. Cochran, W. Croxford, Field,- Mrs. Cas-
tree, Mrs. Neil (later Mrs. Fivey), Bob
Mackay (famed for stock riding), McLellan,
Sherman, Wm. and Tom Bond, J. Stivey, Hill,
P. Keane, Luscombe, W. Allen, Fletcher,
Reilly, G. Bradford, James Croxford, Joe
Sheppard, W. Lansley, Paul O'Halloran,
Pickerin, D. White, Bill Garrett, "Nosey"
Clarke, Steve Hoskin, Schoolbred, Whelan,
"Lord" Raglan, Frank Beggs, Bob Craven,
Hugh Clarke, Johnny and Bob Ellis, P. Keane
(hotel and store on north side of creek, and
after Tom Clarke's hotel), Herman Meyer,
Riley, Eldridge, "Old Mog" Hart, Wm, Piper


(P.M. from Benalla), C. Witt (Crown Lands
bailiff), Geo. Fawkes (Rate Collector, fol-
lowed by Chandler).
Mrs. Coman writes:—
"I was born in High Street, Violet Town,
on 7th March, 1859. Father had a business,
and catered for carriers. Violet Town was so
called from the quantity of violets growing
everywhere. Our school was situated on the
block where Mr. Cunningham lives at pre-
sent. Mass used to be celebrated in the
The old National Bank of Australasia, with “Penny-Ha'penny" bicycle behind the
fence, taken about 1890.
Court House, and later in a little church near
the police station. Farming was a different
matter in those days, as the crops were cut
with reaping-hooks, the men getting 15/- to
£1 per acre; then it was threshed with a
flail, winnowed with a machine."
Memoirs by W. M. Crocker:—
Violet Town, in the early 1 870's, consisted
of a long line of houses widely separated,
well built, mainly in brick, and extending for
about a mile and a half along what was then
known as the Sydney road, now the Hume
Highway.
Commencing about i mile east of the 104
mile post there were: a blacksmith shop,
large hotel with post office on verandah,
coaching stables and large general store. Op-
posite these, on the north side, were the black-
smith's residence, a huge hay shed and steam
chaffcutting plant, and the postmaster's
residence. The telegraph line ran on the
south side of the road.
I do not remember the coaches running,
but there was some activity about the stables
and chaffcutting plant, probably connected
with the road waggons, which had not com-
pletely left the road, though the railway was
open—just opened, I should think, as the
little trains used to come in, do a bit of shunt-
ing and return towards Melbourne with the
engine running backwards. This, no doubt,
because there was no turn-table; or was it
because the line was not open as far as
BenallaP
Even now I clearly recollect the houses and
other buildings which straggled along each
side of the main road and through the town
as it then was. I remember the names of
most of the residents, where they lived, and
can vividly recall the scenes of those far-off
days.


LEN. IRWIN
PLUMBER
TINSMITH
OXYWELDER
Lendale VIOLET TOWN
Phone 80
The Bank was a slab hut, with a green
frosted window, in dense scrub and timber,
about where the police station now is.
Other buildings in the town were the flour
mill (now S. Godden's), miller's residence
(Harcourt's residence), a hotel in Tulip
Street about opposite Baird Street, a general
store and drapery about on the site of D.
McDiarmid's house. I don't remember the
school. Of the present main street there was
no sign—all was dense scrub and timber,
with a swampy watercourse with large natu-
ral waterholes a chain or so to the north of
Cowslip Street. I have seen the whole of the
rest of the town built.
The first to move towards the railway sta-
tion was probably the Railway Hotel, first a
small brick building standing back from the
building line. There was a hall almost at-
tached to the hotel, available for public meet-
ings, church services, etc.
The Church of England was built about
1879 and coins of the date and newspapers
were put under the foundation stone.
Mechanics' Institute (the rear portion of
Memorial Hall) appeared in 1887. Water
was laid on about 1890 from a small weir
just below the present one. It was soon dis-
covered that the creek could not be depended
on to run through the summer, and thus the
town was without water at the critical time,
so the present weir was later built and is still
not large enough.
The Shire was created in 1895, consisting
of parts of Euroa, Benalla and, I think, Shep-
parton shires.
This brings us to a date which plenty of
people remember as well as I do.
As far as the adjacent country is concerned,
in the early 1 870's most of the land was under
forest.
The whole area, 60,000 acres, was held by
my late father as Honeysuckle North and
South stations under squatter's licence, with
some areas of freehold land. The squatter's
licence gave no security of tenure—only
grazing rights, to the exclusion of anyone
not holding a better title. The Land Act


1869 gave anyone not already having done
so the right of free selection on a "run"
of up to 320 acres, for which, complying with
certain conditions, a freehold title issued.
The Honeysuckle run, being mostly poor and
unproductive because of the forest, did not
attract settlers till later. Some of the better
land in Baimattum and Boho and a few miles
west of the town had been bought direct from
the Government before 1 869, and was under
cultivation (wheat and oats). The area, 320
acres, was found to be too small, and most
of the settlers were forced to abandon their
holdings.
There are three graves of pioneers in and
around the town. One is the grave of Dr.
Clarke, who died, I should say, in the early
1 870's and is buried in the corner of an al-
lotment facing Mary Lane, opposite Watts.
Turnbull & Co.'s sale yards. The lone pine
still stands sentinel. Another is the grave of
Miss Scobie, daughter, I believe, of a station
manager (Honeysuckle). Her grave is beau-
tifully situated across the lake from Honey-
suckle homestead. Judging from the ap-
parent age of the enclosing fence as I first
knew it, it probably dates back to early
1840's. Another is without records, but it
was always known to be a grave and an orna-
mental tree grew at one end. Nothing is left
now but the raised earth with a depression
where the tree grew. It is situated on the
flat in the south-westerly portion of Honey-
suckle P.R.
In 1824 Hume and Hovell camped on the
banks of a creek not far above a junction.
They called it Barry's Creek, obviously the
creek now known as Harry's Creek.
COUNCIL CHAMBERS.


VIOLET TOWN-CENTENARY SONG
CENTENARY SONG
Words and Airby F.R. Howell.
Arrangement by Mesdames Tatterson Errey
Words and Air by F.R. Howell
Violet Town
—The years have come and gone!
A century now lies folded in your past;
And as those years have followed thro',
The Pioneers that founded you
Have each to well-earned rest been brought
at last.
Violet Town
—What mighty courage theirs!
What hopes did rise and kindle in their
hearts!
As over bridgeless streams they came,
O'er rugged hill, and trackless plain
Defying nature, in their bullock carts.


Phone 4
1903-1949
HARCOURT'S
GENERAL MERCHANTS AND NEWSAGENCY
FOR QUALITY GOODS AND SERVICE.
Full Stocks of—Groceries, Drapery, Footwear, Crockery and Fancy Goods.
Agents for
Dry Cleaning, Sheep Dip and Drench, Fire Insurance, Kerosene,
and Agricultural Oils.
Violet Town
—What scorn for ease or fear!
They vanquished every problem to arise.
Undaunted folk! with sweat and toil
They hewed rough homes, and tilled the
soil
Their niche to carve 'neath these north-
eastern skies. ’
Violet Town
—What virile stock they bred!
Their sons and daughters soon that filled
the land.
And they in turn with vision bright,
With in-bred grit and will to fight,
Established soon this town that had been
planned.
Violet Town
—What heritage is ours!
This gift of God that Pioneers have won.
It nestles 'neath the wooded slopes
A modest town —yet big with hopes
Its district blessed with ample rain and sun.
Violet Town
—What joys and pleasures now!
This lovely place—this pretty, well-planned
home.
A country town with modern joys
That cities give—yet free from noise;
With floral streets and tree-strewn park to
roam.
Violet Town
—What opportunities!
The future yet before us—ours to plan.
God make us also pioneers,
That we may for the hundred years
That follow, give our best to GOD and Man.
Words and Air by
F. R. HOWELL
oArrangement by SMesdames
TATTERSON & ERREY


zafilii




Specialists in District Publicity
for 30 Years
★
This Publication has been produced by the
MATTHEWS PUBLISHING COMPANY
THE MERCANTILE EXCHANGE
380 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE
The Principals of this organisation have published
Official Brochures for over 300 centres in the Common-
wealth, in connection with Celebrations of "Centenaries,"
"Back-to" Weeks, "Decentralisation" and "Tourist"
Activities.
If you are interested in District or Institutional Publicity of any description
Send for Samples and Details of our FREE Offer.


