

PFAHLERT'S
HOTEL.
Wynyard Square, Sydney.
VISITORS' GUIDE;
OR,
How to Spend a Week in Sydney.
HARDIE & GORMAN,
Property Auctioneers, Land and Estate Agents,
VALUATIONS MADE TOR PROBATE,
ADMINISTRATION, AND MORTGAGE PURPOSES.
Bell's Chambers, 175 Pitt Street, Sydney.
Gibbs, Shallard, & Co., Printers, Pitt Street, Sydney.




ADVERTISEMENTS.
riHlv *
*BOOK+7ip+3iI7ITIOPR¥*
WAREHOUSE.
EDWARD R. COLE,
CORNER OF GEORGE AND KING STS,
(LATE CITY BANK),
IMPORTER
Qf every description g£ Commercial
and! Fancy stationery and Books,
in every deportment o£ Literature*
A choice assortment of Portrait Albums, Desks,
Tourists’ Portable Desks, Portemonnaies, Memo-
randum and Pocket Books, Pocket Pencils and
Penholders, Playing Cards, Artists’ Colour
Boxes, &c., &c., &c.
Snglislo and {American Magazines and Newspapers
received ly every Mail.
A large assortment of Photographic Views of Sydney and
Harbour always in stock.
Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s Visiting Cards Engraved
and Printed in the best style.


fi r
WHOLESALE
Jewellers, Tobaeeo Merchants,
Importers of British, Continental, and
A merican Merchandise.
COLONIAL SADDLES & SADDLERY,
AQE'MQIE M i
Thos. Russell and Sons English Watches
T. B. Guest and Co ? s Prize Medal Biscuits
Beaver’s Rheumatic Fir Wool Oil
Southall and Barclay’s A 1 Cod Liver Oil.
AcMressjz $® Built of Street* Sydney
B MAiyCjEE S t
aUEEN STREET, MELBOURNE,
ELIZABETH STREET, BRISBANE,
GRENFELL STREET, ADELAIDE,
And 17 BURY STREET, St- Mary Axe, LONDON.




DUBLIN WHISKY
YVe, the undersigned, Distillers of the City of
Dublin, having ascertained that large quantities of
Scotch Patent Still Silent Spirit are constantly
blended with country-made Irish Whisky in the
Government Warehouses in this country, but par-
ticularly in Dublin and Belfast, exported to Eng-
land and sold there as Pure Dublin Whisky, most
strongly advise our Customers and all who wish to
purchase pure Dublin Whisky, to see first that the
casks bear the brand and trade mark as at foot of
the Distillery whose make they wish to buy, and
that they have not upon them the word
BLENDED.
Signed—
JOHN JAMESON & SON.
Trade Mark J. J. & SON.
Bow Street Distillery, Dublin.
WM. JAMESON & CO.
• Trade Mark
Marrowbonelan Distillery, Dublin.
JOHN POWER & SON.
Trade Mark
John’s Lane Distillery, Dublin.
GEORGE ROE & CO.
Trade Mark G. R
Thomas]Street Distillery, Dublin.
Dublin, April, 1876.


-Mccrre>fia¥afliriH-
fttsmjanq itmtjiamj, Jtiatiteir.
HEAD OFFICES:
WAfESLQC CIAMBIES, &EOESB ST., SHUT.
Capital - £500,000. Subscribed - £150,000.
DIEBOTOES:
Hon. M. Fitzpatrick, M.P., Chairman.
John See, Esq., J.P.
James P. Garvan, Esq.
John T. Toohey, Esq.
Patrick Stanley. Esq., J. P.
P. Hogan, Esq., J.P.
Thi is entirely a Colonial Company, and all moneys received will be
again circulated here.
Part of the Profits will he returned to Policy-holders, as a
Bonus every year.
All Damages by Lightning and Gas Explosions paid, whether set on
fire thereby or not. Eire risks of every description
accepted at Lowest Rates.
JAMES MURPHY, Manager.
B Y APPOINTMBB9
RUSSIAN
STEAM
BATHS
a:
HAIR
DRESSER
TO HIS EXCELLENCY,
THE EARL OF BELMORE.
\
8 MJtmU


Visitors to Sijiutrt}
F. LASSETTER& CO’S
'
Which are replete with a Large Assortment of Goods, com-
prised as under :
Bed-room.
Four-post brass and
tubular iron Bed-
steads ; Half-Tester,
French, and Stump
Bedsteads ; Chil-
dren’s Cots, Stretch-
ers, and Folding
Chairs.
Bath-room.
Shower, Plunge,
Sponge, Hip, and
Sitz Baths.
Laundry.
Mangles, Washing
and Wringing Ma-
chines ; Goffering,
Crimping, and Plait-
ing Machines; Mrs
Potts’ Sad Irons and
Charcoal Box Irons.
»
L ■ f;
m
Hall Lamps.
Gas Fittings.
Gasaliers in bronze,
crystal, or ormolu, of
new and elegant de-
signs ; also. Brackets
to match, in crystal
or bronze.
Dining and Draw-
ing Rooms.
Fenders, Fire-irons,
Coal Vases, Fire-
guards ; Register
Grates of every qua-
lity ; Ash Pans made
to order; Stove
Ornaments, &c. ;
Lampsjof elegant de-
signs, comprising
every newly-iriven ted
burner.
Hall.
Bronze Hat and Coat Stands, Chairs, Tables, Door Mats, Clocks,
Bronze Ornaments, &c.
Kitchen.
Cooking' Ranges, Gas Stoves; American Stoves and Colonial Ovens
all makes ; all kinds of Cooking Apparatus and Kitchen Utensils for
economising labour and ensuring comfort.
F. LASSETTER & CO. (Limited),
411


y*
&
r
Is Sydney’s Cheapest Market
& mi
All
who
wish to
effect a
large
saving
when pur-
chasing,
should visit
the
BON MARCUS
for
Manchester Goods,
Dress Materials, Silks,
Costumes, Velvets, Mil-
linery (trimmed and un
trimmed), Ribbons, laces
Corsets, Clouds, Hosi-
ery, Underclothing,
Baby Linen, Men’s
Clothing & Men’s
Mercery, Scarfs,
Collars, Bows,
Braces,
White
Shirts,
Merino
102 KINO STREET
Importers of General
Drapery &. Manufac-
turers of Ladies’
Underclothing
and Baby
Linen
£s>
San
n*
N
r 'i
Mpr
JW/ / Business
1L / adopted
The
system
of
Vests,
Drawers,
&c., &c.,
&c,
and strictly
carried out is
on the same
principles as the
Bon Marche of
London and the
Bon Marche of Paris,
also the flourishing
CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES
of the United
Kingdom of
Great Britain
and Ireland.
Smallest pos-
sible profits
on goods
with
quick
returns
The
immense
advantages
offered are Low-
ness or Prices, Ex-
cellent Qualities of
Goods, Fashionable, Re
liable, Good, and Cheap, to
be met with in very few houses
in the trade. Cheap articles must
not necessarily be Bad. Dress-
making under the supervision of a
First-class Artiste. Orders executed
with promptness at Moderate Prices, in
all the leading fashions.
102 KING STREET, TWO BOORS FROM PITT STREET.


HSriE'W SOUTH -WALES.
CENTRAL DEPOT-123 PITT ST., SYDNEY.
FIRST PRIZE MEDALS AWARDED AT
London International Exhibition, 1802; Paris Inter-
national Exhibition, 1864; Vienna International
Exhibition, 1873; Philadelphia International Ex-
hibition, 1876.
Also at the various Intercolonial Exhibitions of New South Wales,
Victoria, Queensland, &c. The Highest Awards have invariably been
given wherever J. T. Fallon’s Wines have been exhibited.
gsggp T. FALLON has pleasure in announcing that, with
afpljg'! a view to convenience in shipping, and to cultivate
flf? * and extend a taste for the well-matured Wines of
X his Vineyard, he has opened a Central Depot as
above, where will be found large stocks of the
leading Wines for which his Vineyard is famed, and in
the highest state of excellence, both in wood and bottle.
Especial care is taken to send out none but Wines
thoroughly matured, and the public is requested, for its
own protection, no less than for the credit of J. T. Fallon’s
Vineyard, to observe that all wines sent out by him have
th efac simile of his signature on the labels. This caution
is the more necessary, since the general term “ Albury
Wine ” (without any grower’s name) is made to cover wines
of very doubtful character.
J. T. Fallon invites attention to his list of RED AND
WHITE WINES, all guaranteed of good age, and will be
glad to be favoured with a call from connoisseurs and
others.
WHITE.
REISLING
VERDEILHO
TOKAY
ATJCAROT
MUSCAT
R E D.
SKIRAZ
CARBINET
MALBEC
HERMITAGE
BURGUNDY
CHAMPAGNE.
Wholesale buyers dealt liberally with.
Families supplied with choicest Wines at moderate prices.
Vineyard—ALßUßY, N.S.W.
Depot—l 23 PITT ST., SYDNEY N.S.W.


VlCTofflS Soif^,
PITT & GEORGE STS.
——
THE
MOST COMPLETE ESTABLISHMENT
IN THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
BEPAE TMEITT'S, -
SILKS
MANTLES
MILLINERY
DRESSES
PRINTS
DRAPERY
BLANKETS
FLANNELS
FAMILY
MOURNING
UNDERCLOTHING
COSTUMES
MUSLINS
LACES
PARASOLS
HOSIERY
PERFUMERY
WOOLLENS
MEN’S HOSE
MEN’S HATS
PORTMANTEAUS
READY-MADE
CLOTHING
FURNITURE '
FURNISHING
CARPETS
Visitors are invited to inspect our establishment, which
is undoubtedly one of the sights of Sydney.
FARMER ft COMPANY,
VICTORIA HOUSE,
Pi¥T & GsoS{Gfs{
SYDN BY.


PFAHLERT’S HOTEL,
WYNYARD SQUARE, SYDNEY.
T. CURRAN, PROPRIETOR.


PFAHLERT'S HOTEL,
SYDNEY.
T. Curran, Proprietor.
VISITORS’ GUIDE;
os,
HOW TO SPEND A WEEK IN SYDNEY.
ol¥** nc ¥ :
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., GENERAL PRINTERS,
108 Pitt Street, next Union Bank.
1879.


PEAPES & SHAW,
Importers and Manufacturers,
Silk Xmmh, Liiea ail Wodlm Bnpm,
TAILORS & HABIT MAKERS,
338, 340, and 342 GEORGE STREET,
AND
11 QUEEN VICTORIA ST., LONDON.
Mist &£ B&paiFtmmtsi z
*
Men’s Mercery
Hosiery and Gloves
Shirts and Collars
Hats and Caps
Gent.’s Umbrellas
Waterproof Clothing
Readymade Clothing
Portmanteaift
Travelling Bags
Travelling Rugs
Fancy Goods
Ribbons
Haberdashery
Trimmings
Parasols
Ladies’ Umbrellas
Ladies’ Gloves and
Hosiery
Real Laces
Imitation Laces
Muslin Embroidery
Millinery
Flowers'and Feathers
Costumes
Fancy Dresses
Black and Coloured
Silks
Shawls and Mantles
Ladies’ Under-
clothing
Children’s Under-
clothing
Stays and Corsets
Dressing Gowns and
Wraps.
PLAIN HOUSEHOLD DRAPERY.
Flannels, Calicoes, Sheetings, Towellings, Quilts,
Counterpanes, Irish Linens, Table Linens, Blankets,
Lace and Muslin Curtains, Cambrics, Prints, &o.
Note.— .AS WE IMPORT ALL OUR OWN GOODS DIRECT FROM
THE MANUFACTURERS, purchasers may rely on getting FIRST-
CLASS GOODS AT A MINIMUM RATE OF PROFIT, and we
are m receipt of a CONSTANT SUCCESSION OF NOVELTIES
per fast steamers, monthly, as they make their appearance either
in London or Paris.
PEAPES & SHAW,
38, 340, 343 GEORGE STREET.


CONTENTS.
Page.
Frontispiece—Pfaiilert’s Hotel.
Map of Sydney .. .. .. .. opposite 9
Introductory .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
Description of Hotel .. .. .. .. •. 15
Car, Cab, ’Bus, Boat, Steamer, and Tramway Regu-
lations and Fares .. .. .. .. 19
GUIDE TO SYDNEY :
First Day .. .. .. .. .. •• ' 24
Second Day .. .. .. .. .. 3 2
Third Day .. .. .. .. •. • • 3&
Fourth Day .. .. .. .. ••
Fifth Day .. .. .. .. •• •• 57
Sixth Day .. • • .. .. • • • • 60
Sunday .. .. .. .. • • • • 64


-IB
IftTt
At W, H, PAMNG'B*
CABINET ORGANS
AT W. H. PALING’S.
HARMONIUMS
AT W. H. PALING’S.
The largest; most varied, and best selected stock
of Instruments in the Colonies,
Now offering at Greatly Reduced Prices.
W. H. Paling would call special attention to his stock of
HARMONIUMS, which he is now selling at CLEARING
OUT RATES, also, a fine stock of good SECOND-
HAND PIANOS, at VERY LOW PRICES.
W. H. PALING,
Agent for Erard, Pleyel, Soufleto, Aucher, Hundt and
Son, Kirkman, Alexandre, Waters, Bell and Co.,
Clough and Warren, &e.,
366 GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE WYNYARD STREET.


fflgJJfitJltf
Fire and Guarantee.
»yoOO~§«
CAPITAL, £lOO,OOO, WITH POWER TO IN-
CREASE TO ONE MILLION.
REGISTERED UNDER THE COMPANIES’ ACT.
HEAD OFFICES:
168 Vitt Sydney.
——
EIEECTOES.
JOHN POPE, Esq., Chairman.
G. A. MANSFIELD, Esq.
GEORGE HARDIE, Esq.
JOHN BROOMFIELD, Esq.
C. C. SKARRATT, Esq.
The Policies cover all damages by Bush Eires,
Lightning, and Gas Explosion, in addition to
the ordinary risk by Fire, and the Profits are
divided equally with Insurers every year.
KELSO KING, Secretary


PLAN OF SYDNEY.




THE
Nj&w SjQiUth Wats*
LIMITED.
Producers, Sellers, and Exporters of
the Australian Boghead Mineral
KNOWS AS
KEROSENE SHALE
AND
HARTLEY MINERAL.
This Mineral is used largely by the Colonial
Gas Companies, and throughout the World,
as an Enricher of Coal Gao. For which pur-
pose it Surpasses all other Enrichers yet
discovered.
MANUFACTURERS OF
The celebrated “ COMET ” OIL,
Noted for its being the Best and Safest Kerosene sold.
MINES:—Hartley Yale, near Mount Victoria,
Great Western Railway.
WORKS : —Waterloo, near Sydney.
OFFICE OF THE COMPANY
Nq.j 3 Hunter Sydney,
JOHN MACDONALD, Junr.,
General Manager.


INTRODUCTION.
JHE object of the Proprietor in compiling this
little book is to be able to place in the hands of
his visitors a concise and convenient Guide to the
chief objects of interest in the City and Suburbs of
Sydney, as also to indicate briefly how pleasant trips
may be made to places of note in the interior, when
time permits.
It will be seen that in the arrangement it has been
contemplated that the visitor has but a week to stay ?
and therefore wishes to make the most of his time ;
but if his visit be of shorter duration, he will be able
to select those objects his taste prefers.
Should he be making a prolonged stay in New
South Wales, he will find in the list of places given
some of the chief attractive features of the Colony.
To thoroughly explore the public buildings of
Sydney, it is undoubtedly preferable to go leisurely
and on foot; but for trips to the Suburbs, there are


always available cabs, omnibuses, steamers, boats, &c.
The regulations, rates, and time tables will be found
given pretty fully herein.
Every care has been taken to render this Guide
reliable, but to have given fuller information upon
the varied attractions of the Colony would have
been to render the book too bulky for convenience.
Those who desire a larger and more compre-
hensive Guide Book to the Colony will find them-
selves admirably suited in the work issued by Messrs.
Gibbs, Shallard, & Co., under the sanction of the
Commissioners of the International Exhibition.


PFAHLERT'S HOTEL.
Popular as this hotel has been for many years under
its late management the establishment promises under
the greater experience and intelligent enterprise of its
present proprietor to supply to Sydney a want long
felt in the absence of a high-class hotel of the character
so noteworthy in the chief cities of the continents of
Europe and America.
Mr. Curran (who, previous to leaving on a long
visit to Europe, had the Oxford Hotel in King street)
has been able to carefully note the arrangements and
administration of the most successful establishments
in Great Britain and on the continent, and in taking
the proprietorship of Pfahlert’s, has at very great
expense, completely reorganised the establishment.
In this process it has been necessary to thoroughly
renovate the place from basement to attic, so that
visitors to the old hotel can scarcely realise that the
present is the same establishment. In place of the
usual “stuffy” and objectionable air perceptible in
and around the old style of Sydney hotels we have
here a sense of freshness, sweetness, and brightness
which constitutes the exact difference between comfort
and discomfort.
Pfahlert’s Hotel is situate at the corner of Wynyard
Square and Margaret Street. From the front a beauti-
ful view may be had over the well-kept lawn with its


border of shrubs and flowering plants—which consti-
tutes the chief ornamental square of the city; from the
balcony, too, glimpses may be had, across Darling
Harbour, of Pyrmont and the rising country beyond.
The chief entrance to the Hotel is from Wynyard
Square but there are also entrances from Margaret
Street and from Wynyard Street, and a second
entrance from the new Bar in the Square. On
the ground floor are situated the Gentlemen’s Coffee
Room, with lounges, writing tables, and the leading
newspapers of the day; a handsome and capacious
apartment, just added, is available as a Ladies’ Coffee
Room. The counting house and proprietor’s private
suite of rooms are also here, and at the extreme end
of the corridor is the large and well lighted Public
Dining Hall. This hall will seat about 150 guests,
and at 1 o’clock daily presents, perhaps, the best
ordered and busiest scene in Sydney.
On the basement floor, formed by the receding land
in Margaret Street, are situated the Lower Bar—a
cool, fresh-looking, well-appointed room—and the
Billiard Room, furnished with one of Alcock’s best
productions; further up Wynyard Street are the well-
stocked cellars and the third Bar.
The First floor is devoted largely to private suites of
apartments, of which the establishment has seven, all
fitted up regardless of expense, a good piano forming
an item in the furnishing of each sitting room.
The Second tier is devoted principally to bed
rooms, of which the establishment has forty, all of
which have been completely renovated and refur-
nished.


The Third floor is devoted to sleeping accommo-
dation to the servants and others engaged in the hotel.
Each tier is fitted with Bath Room, Lavatories,
Closets, and every convenience which travel and a
large experience in catering to the wants of the
travelling public can suggest.
The Hotel is very conveniently situated, being
within easy walking distance of the Botanical Gardens
and Domain, of the ferries, and within a hundred
yards or so of the termini of the chief lines of
omnibuses.
Pfahlert’s Hotel has been honoured on many occa-
sions in being selected as the resting-place of the
Governors of the neighbouring colonies, and of
members of the English aristocracy paying a visit to
Sydney.
Altogether, Sydney has cause of congratulation that
in Pfahlert’s Hotel it has the nearest approach to
the European model of what should constitute a
modern establishment of the kind.


TJI©PW 4 GIIiEg,
DENISON HOUSE,
376, 378, and 380 GEORGE ST.,
IMPORTERS & MANUFACTURERS.
Silks, Mantles, Millinery, Dress Materials, Shawls,
Laces, Muslins, Furs, Fancy Goods, Hosiery,
Gloves, Stays, Ladies’ Underclothing, Evening
Costumes, Ribbons, Ladies’ Umbrellas, Parasols.
FAMILY MOURNING.
Ci&.3E£3P£rrS AHD FLOOR CLOTHS.
Table Linen, Household Drapery, Blankets,
Furnishing, Cretonnes, Lace Curtains.
GENTLEMEN’S OUTFITTING DEPARTMENT.
Ready-made Clothing, Hats, Rugs, Boys’ and
Youths’ Clothing, Portmanteaus, Overland Trunks,
Bags, Men’s Mercery of all descriptions.
Patterns, descriptions, and information forwarded
post free.
Goods carefully packed and sent to all parts of
the colony.
Fashion Books and Plates sent every season]
post free.
'S


TRAMWAY.
Convenient Tram Cars run to and fro at short intervals
from near the Railway Station to Macquarie Street, near to the
Exhibition.
CAB AND HACKNEY CARRIAGE FARES.
Rates and Fares to be paid for any Public Carriage (not an
Omnibus'), within the limits of the City and
Police District of Sydney.
Cab. —Not exceeding one quarter of an hour, to carry two
passengers, if required by the hirer, is. ; for every subsequent
quarter of an hour, or part thereof, to one hour, is. ; but if
engaged for more than one hour, then to be paid at the rate of
qd. for every additional quarter of an hour, or part thereof.
Hackney Carriage. —Not exceeding half an hour, to carry
five passengers, if required by the hirer, 2s. 6d. ; for every sub-
sequent quarter of an hour, or part thereof, to one hour, is. 3d. ;
but if engaged for more than one hour, then to be paid at the
rate of is. i£d. for every additional quarter of an hour, or part
thereof.
Vehicles to travel at a speed of not less than six miles an
hour, except when otherwise ordered by the hirer; tolls to be
paid by the hirer ; half-fare, in addition to the ordinary fare,
between 10 p.m. and 5 a.m.
All persons having any dispute with the driver of any public
vehicle, or having left any article in any vehicle, are particularly
requested to communicate immediately to the Transit Commis-
sioners, 160 Phillip Street (near King Street), who will assist
them to punish the offender, or recover any lost article.


OMNIBUS INFORMATION.
The following omnibuses leave Wynyard Square, and traverse
George Street from King Street corner to their various destina-
tions :
Arncliffe* (blue and white), 6d. ; Botany (light blue and red),
return, is. 6d. ; Camperdown (green and white), 3d. ; Cook’s
River* (blue and white), 6d. ; Enmore (marine blue), 3d. ;
Forest Lodge (green and white), 3d. ; Glebe Point (green), 3d. ;
Marrickville* (white and brown), 6d. ; Newtown (marine blue),
3d; South Plead (green), is. ; Stanmore (brown), 6d. ; Straw-
berry Hills (green and black), 3d.
’Buses leave Circular Quay or Macquarie Place, and proceed
along Pitt Street to the following places :—Darlinghurst, via
Oxford Street and William Street alternately (green), 3d ;
Darling Point and Double Bay (red), 6d. ; Paddington (red),
3d. ; Railway (special ’buses), 3d. ; Rifle Butts (blue), 3d. ;
Surry Hills (blue), 3d ; Woolahra (red), 4d.
From Clarence and King Streets, along George Street: —
Ashfiekl (colour of lamps, red), fare, 6d ; Burwood (red), 9d. ;
Enfield (red), 9d. ; Five Dock Road (red and white), 9d. ;
Petersham (white), 4d. ; Potts’ Point (blue), 3d. ; Woollmooloo
(blue), 3d.
Circle line, via George and Margaret Streets, and via Wynyard
Square and George Street: —Redfern (colour of lamps, light
blue), fare 3d. ; Waterloo (light blue and white), 3d.
Via George and Fort Streets to Miller’s Point :—Glebe
(colour of lamps, lake or purple), fare, 3d.
From Exchange, Bridge Street, and proceed along Pitt Street,
up Park Street, along College and Oxford Streets to the follow-
ing places :—Bondi (colour of lamps, white), fare, 6d.
From General Post Office : —Bankstown (colour of lamps,
red), fare, is. 3d. ; Kogarah, is. ; Watson’s Bay (green), is.
Waggonettes now ply for hire to different parts of the city and
suburbs, carrying passengers for the same fares charged by the
omnibuses.
* (Passengers for places beyond Newtown are conveyed to the Newtown
Railway Bridge by the Enmore omnibuses (blue coloured lamps) and trans-
ferred to their respective ’buses, which are in attendance at the Newtown
Railway Bridge to proceed to Arncliffc, Cook’s River, Marrickvillc, and
Stanmore).


FERRIES AND STEAMBOATS.
Parramatta. —From Sydney daily —To Ryde, Ermington,
Newington, Subiaco, and Parramatta, at 7,9, and 11 a.m.; 1,
3, and 5 p.m. To Cockatoo, Fitzroy Dock, Hunter’s Hill, and
Gladesville, at 7,9, 10, and n a.m.; 12.30, 1,3, 4.15, 5, 6.15,
and 11 p.m. To Five Dock, Ashfield, and Burwood, at 7 and
10 a.m.; 12.30, 4.15, and 6.15 p.m. To Sydney daily—From
Parramatta, calling at Ryde, Ermington, and Newington, at 7,
9, and 11 a.m.; 1,3, and 5 p.m. From Five Dock, at 7.45,
8.30, and 11 a.m.; 2.45, 5.15, and 7.15 p.m. From Gladesville,
at 8, 8.45, 10, and 11.15 a - m G 12 noon > 2 > 3> 4> 5- 2 S> 6 > antl
7.30 p.m. From Hunter’s Hill, at 8.15, 9.5, io.is> 11, 2S
a.m.; 12.15, 2.15, 3.15, 4.15, 5.30, 6.15, and 7.30 p.m., calling
at Cockatoo. Extra trips to Gladesville on Monday, Wednes-
day, and Saturday. Sundays —Leaves Sydney for Parramatta,
calling at Balmain, Cockatoo, Fitzroy Dock, Hunter’s Hill,
Gladesville, Ryde, Ermington, Newington, and Subiaco, at 9.15
a.m.; 2.15 and 6.15 p.m. Leaves for Sydney —From Parra-
matta, at 7 a.m.; 12 noon, 4.30 and 7 p.m. From Ryde, at
7.40 a.m.; 12.40 and 5.10 p.m. From Gladesville, at 8 a.m.;
1 and 5.30 p.m. From Hunter’s Hill, at 8.15 a.m.; 1.15 and
5.45 p.m. From Cockatoo, at 8.25 a.m.; 1.35 and 5-55 P- m> >
and arrives in Sydney, at 8.35 a.m.; 1.35 and 4.15 p-ni.
Fares: Saloon, is. 6d.; return, 2s. 6d. Second Cabin, is.;
return, is. 6d.
Hunter’s Hill and Lane Cove. —To and from Lime
Street Wharf (near Erskine Street) and Hunter’s Hill, Lane
Cove side. The “Womerah.” —From Lime Street, at 9, 11
a.m.; 1,3, 5.5, and 7 p.m. From Lane Cove, at 8, 10 a.m.;
12 noon, 2,4, and 6 p.m. Saturdays —From Lime Street, at
9. 11 a.m.; 1.15, 3, 5.5, 7, 11.15 p.m. From Lane Cove, at 8,
10 a.m.; 12 noon, 2,4, 6, 10 p.m. Sundays— From Lime
Street, at 10 a.m.; 2.30 and 6 p.m. From Lane Cove, at 9 a.m.
1 and 5 p.m.—Fares : Saloon, is.; return, is. 6d. Second
cabin, 9d.; return, is. Children (Return or Single Fare), 6d.
Monthly Tickets issued to families at reduced rates.


Mossman’s Bay.—Leaves Circular Quay every alternate
hour from 9.15 a.m. to 5.15 p.m.; returning, 10.20, 12.30, 2.30,
4.30, and 5.45 p.m. Sundays —Special trips.
Pyrmont.—Leaves Lime Street Wharf, at 5.45, 6.10, 6.30,
6.50, 7.33, 8.7,8.20, 8.38, 8.53, 9.7, 9.22, 9.37, 9.53, 10.10,
10.30, 10.50, 11.10, 11.30, and 11.50a.m.; 12.10, 12.30, 12.50,
1.10, 1.25, 1.52, 2.10, 2.30, 2.50, 3.10, 3.30, 3.50, 4.10, 4.30,
4-55, 5-i5, 5-30, 5-45, 6, 6.15, 6.30, 6.53, 7.10, 7.30, 7.50,
8.10, 8.30, 8.50, 9.10, 9.30, and 10 p.m. Leaves Pyrmont, at
5.30, 6, 6.20, 6.40, 7.45, 8, 8.15, 8.30, 8.45, 9, 9.15, 9.30, 9.45,
10, 10.20, 10.40, 11, 11.20, 11.40, and 12 noon; 12.20, 12.40,
1, 1.20, 1.45, 2, 2.20, 2.40, 3, 3.20, 3.40, 4, 4.20, 4.40, 5,5,
5.20, 5.37, 5.50, 6.7, 6.23, 6.45, 7, 7.20, 7.40, 8, 8.20, 8.40, 9,
9.20, 9.45 p.m. Saturdays —Late trips till 12 midnight.—Fare,
id. each way.
North Shore and Lavender Bay.—Leaves Circular Quay,
at 5.45 a.m., and every half hour till 7.45 a.m., then every 15
minutes till 7 p.m., then every half-hour till midnight. Leaves
Dawes’ Point at 5.45 a.m., and every half-hour till 8 a.m., then
every 90 minutes till 10 p.m., then every half-hour till midnight.
Balmain, Dock. —Leaves Erskine Street (right side) at 5.35
and 5.50 a.m.; every half-hour from 6.20 to 7.5 a.m.; every 15
minutes from 8.5 a.m. to 12 p.m. Leaves Dry Dock every half-
hour from 5 a.m. to 7.30 a.m.; every 15 minutes from 7.45 a.m.
to 7.35 p.m.; half-hourly, 8.5 p.m. to II p.m. Saturdays —
Extra trips. Sundays —Leave Erskine Street every half-hour
from 9.35 a.m. to 10.5 p.m. Leaves Dry Dock every half-hour
from 9 a.m. to 9.30 p.m.
Bald Rock.—Leaves Erskine Street (left side) at 5.40, 6.15,
6.45, 7.15, and 8 a.m.; every 15 minutes from 8.15 a.m. to 7.50,
and then half-hourly to 11.10 p.m. Leaves Bald Rock every
half-hour from 5.20 to 7.20 a.m.; every 15 minutes from 7.35
a.m. to 11 p.m. Saturdays —Extra trips. Sundays —Leaves
Erskine Street half-hourly from 8.50 a.m. to 10.20 p.m. Leaves
Bald Rock every half-hour from 8.20 a.m. to 9.50 p.m.
• From Phcenix Wharf. —(All meals are included with
fares.) —Wollongong (Monday, Tuesday, and Friday; return


Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday).—Cabin, iis.;
Return, 16s. 6d.; Steerage, 7s. 6d. Horses, 10s. each.
KIAMA (Monday, Tuesday, and Friday; return Monday,
Tuesday, and Thursday).—Cabin, 165.; Return, 255.; Steerage,
10s. 6d. Horses, 12s. 6d. each. Shoalhaven (Tuesday
and Friday; return Thursday and Monday).—Cabin, 215.;
Return, 325. 6d.; Steerage, 15s. Horses, 15s. each. Ui.la-
DULLA (Friday; return Monday).—Cabin, 31s. 6d.; Return,
475. 6d.; Steerage, 21s. Horses, 30s. each. Merimbula,
Tathra, and Eden (Tuesday; return Friday).— 405.;
Return, 605.; Steerage, 20s. Horses,. 30s. each. Cx.ydf.
River (Friday ; return Monday).—Cabin, 355.; Return, 555.)
Steerage, 255. Horses, 30s. each.
Hunter River. —For Newcastle, at 11.30 p.ni. from
Patent Slip Wharf.—For Newcastle, Raymond Terrace,
and Morpeth.—Mondays and Thursdays, at 7 a.m.; other
day Sat n p.m., from A.S.N. Co.’s Wharf, Sussex Street, and
N.H.R. Co.’s Wharf, foot of Market Street.
MEMORANDA.


FIRST DAY.
THE DOMAIN AND BOTANICAL GARDENS—DRIVE
TO SOUTH HEAD.
After a general view of the Harbour of Port Jackson
—sometimes to be obtained on approaching Sydney
by steamer —perhaps the most interesting place to
visit is the Domain and the Botanical Gardens. In
any case the earliest acquaintance should be made
with this pleasant resort, as often when there is little
time for a prolonged stroll, odd half-hours may be
spent here; and a dozen visits will not exhaust the
wonders and beauties of the place. On warm moon-
light nights, too, when there will be little disposition
to visit the theatres and other places of amusement,
a quiet stroll in the Domain is at all times a treat.
Leaving the hotel by a cab, or walking (as the dis-
tance is not more than half-a-mile), the route lies
along Hunter Street to Macquarie Street, then turn-
ing to the left the gates of the Domain with Sir
Richard Bourke’s Statue will be seen to the right a little
further on, and exactly opposite the Public Library.
The handsome stone gate columns of the Gardens are
approached by an avenue of Moreton Bay Figs.
These trees are about twenty years old, and their
broad foliage yields a dense shade which is very
agreeable in the summer. This tree has the peculiar
habit of forming aerial roots, large clusters of which
may be observed hanging from the lower branches.
It is indeed a relative of the Indian Banyan tree
which, as the reader will know, sends down its aerial


INTERIOR OF ACADEMY OF ART.


MEMORANDA.


shoots till they take root and form future stems to the
spreading tree, which in time will cover several acres
of ground.
To the right of this avenue lies the well-kept, lawn-
like Domain Cricket Ground, the grass of which is
mainly that known as couch, or doub, it having been
introduced to Sydney many years ago from India. It
is, indeed, to this grass that the reserves and roadsides
of Sydney and suburbs are indebted for their lovely
green during summer and autumn, a time when the
surroundings of Melbourne and Adelaide are usually
scorched and brown looking. This reserve is tra-
versed by several thoroughfares leading from various
parts of the city to the Botanical Gardens and
Domain, and on Sunday or other holidays these paths
are thronged with visitors. This site is, however, to
be temporarily occupied by the Machinery Hall of the
Exhibition.
Entering the gates, the Gardens are approached by
an avenue of rather irregularly grown trees, among
which the Robinia or pseudo-acacia, the wild olive,
the Grevillea robusta, and a few conifers with clumps
of bamboo are noticeable.
One of the special attractions of the Gardens is the
magnificent collection of palms and cycads, and this
is reached by taking the left-hand walk on entering
through the gates at the end of the avenue.
Conspicuous features of the outer Garden are the
grand specimens of Norfolk Island pine Araucaria
( Altingea ) excelsa. To enumerate the many matters
of interest in these gardens would be to occupy far
more space than can be here afforded ; but the visitor


will doubtless be able to purchase the Handbook
which we understand is being prepared for sale.
The lower Gardens are devoted largely to lawns and
examples of mixed bedding of flowering and orna-
mental foliaged plants. There are also some fine
specimens of the Conifers, of many varieties of the
Ficus, and other decorative trees which have been
planted out singly in order to allow them to develop
their natural proportions. Sydney Botanical Gardens
are exceedingly rich in their collection of trees indi-
genous to Australia. The visitor will be much im-
pressed with the magnificence of the view of the
Harbour, and of Government House from the lower
ground. The Bay in front of the Gardens is the
rendezvous of the Men of War visiting the port, and
at times presents a most animated scene.
On certain days of the week during the summer
season the Head Quarter’s Band and other bands play
in the rotunda, and when the weather is fine —which
is the rule —the belles and beaux of Sydney with the
people of older and of younger growth throng the
walks and lawns. The picture at such times is a
very impressive one; quite vieing with that presented
by Kew Gardens or South Kensington on a gala
day. There is a very good collection of Birds in the
Aviary, and people young and old crowd the front of
the cages devoted to monkeys, of which there are
many of the well-known types represented.
Altogether the gardens are deservedly a most
popular place of resort, and the casual visitor will
carry away with him the pleasantest memories of the
place.




MEMORANDA.


South Head and the Gap. —Presuming that the
Gardens have been got through by mid-day, and
some refreshment in the way of luncheon taken at
one o’clock—the usual time of table d’hote at
Pfahlert’s —arrangements may be made for a drive to
the South Head. This is decidedly one of the most
picturesque drives out of Sydney. The visitor gets a
very good idea on the way of the villas, and surburban
residences of the merchant princes of Sydney ; and
there are some very pretty ocean peeps from many
points of the drive. The chief objects of interest on
arrival at the Heads, are the Lighthouse, the Forti-
fications, Watson’s Bay, the ever memorable Gap—the
scene of the wreck of the “ Dunbar.” The coast
scenery, hereabouts, is appallingly grand, and the
visitor will require all his nerve to explore the region
thoroughly. “ Jacob's Ladder ”is the name given to
a deep fissure in the rock, down which some adven-
turous spirits are occasionally known to descend to
the shore ; but the work is a hazardous one, and not to
be attempted by any whose presence of mind is apt
to fail them in danger.
Returning by daylight some sweetly pretty harbour
views may be seen, the setting sun bringing the
various distant headlands into bold relief. Our
engraving of Elizabeth Bay will give the reader an
idea of these pleasant retreats.


SECOND DAY.
THE HARBOUR.
Every visitor to Sydney should make a point
of devoting one day at least to realising the
beauties of the magnificent harbour of Port Jack-
son. Not that one day will suffice to exhaust the
interest of the scene; for several weeks might be
spent in exploring the numerous coves, inlets, and
bays with which it is fringed.
To do this thoroughly the most perfect arrangement
is to get a party of friends together and hire one of
the small steam launches which are available at about
a couple or three guineas a day; but as this is not
always practicable a series of trips by steamer may
be planned. Watson’s Bay, Manly Beach, Clontarf,
Middle Harbour, Chowder Bay, Athol Gardens, have
each their steamers, plying at stated times from Cir-
cular Quay, while from Darling Harbour steamboats
run, at regular intervals, to all the wharves on the
Parramatta and Lane Cove Rivers.
A very popular marine resort is that of Manly,
which has its usually calm harbour frontage and sub-
stantial pier—and near which it is proposed to con-
struct public baths; and the great ocean beach, which
after south-easterly gales presents a grand sight of
the huge Pacific rollers breaking on the beach.
Manly, which has been called the Brighton of New
South Wales, is a very progressive place, and evidences
of this are on every hand in the improvements being
pressed forward. Excellent steamers ply here at short


tJudef tl)e sk:qdtion of tfye Commissioqeis.
YIgITOKg’v(iUIDE
TO THE
a
* B * 14
u
srawißS,
And to Places of Interest or Resort in
New South Wales.
fVdsJ, OtfsJ
——
.l-
mprinters and PUBLISHERS,
im PITT STREET, BYMMET,


PROFESSOR STANICH AT WORD.


DEAFNESS.
oO « ♦
PROFESSOR STANICH,
THE EMINENT AURIST,
TT AS made the various diseases of
the ear and their cure the
special study of his life. He can
assert, without fear of contradiction,
that hundreds of cases deemed in-
curable have yielded to his treat-
ment.
Thousands of testimonials from
well-known citizens pronounce the
Professor’s mode of treatment the
most wonderful in the world, and
this can he verified at
Pf®ffegg@E Stales Cuuraltißg Soosaa,
AT ME. GUSTAVUS GABRIEL’S
(the dentist),
No. 6 CARLTON TERRACE,
YORK STREET SIDE,
W X-TTTTA3RI> SOXJA3R3S


lert's Sfotel
•»
WYNYARD SQUARE, SYDNEY.
THOMAS CURRAN Proprietor.
“fiat and sphtil «t|d
"l-HHH-t" —
T. C. begs to inform his Country friends and the public
generally, that during his recent trip to Europe he visited
all the great wine countries of the Continent, and made
arrangements for a continuous supply of the choicest vin-
tages.
T. C. is also a direct Importer of Messrs. John Jameson
and Sons’ and Messrs. William Jameson and Co.’s pure
Dublin Malt Whisky, which has been pronounced by the
first medical men in Europe, as well as by the greatest
connoisseurs in the trade, to be the purest and best spirit.
This Whisky is now used in all the Hospitals in London
and Dublin, instead of Old French Brandy.
T. Curran keeps constantly on hand the very finest
Wines of Colonial growth—the Old Wines of Mr. Fallon’s
Albury Vineyard being specially recommended to visitors.


FORT AT GEORGE’S HEAD.


MEMORANDA.


intervals. The work of constructing a sea-wall on
the eastern beach has just been commenced. There
is some fine rugged scenery to be found in following
round the coast. Scaling the rocky ascent to the
right a very pretty pathway leads to the once famed
“ Virgin’s Bower,” which, alas, is now shorn of its
chief beauty by the ruthless hands of heedless
visitors.
Clontarf — remembered as the scene of the
attempted assassination of the Duke of Edinburgh, is
reached by the steamers plying to Middle Harbour.
These usually land passengers at Clontarf, taking them
up on return. This is a popular picnic resort; and,
as it has a large dancing hall and dining room, with
plenty of space on the lawns for cricket and other
games, it is largely patronised by the various asso-
ciated trades as the scene of their periodical festive
gatherings.
Chowder Bay, Athol Gardens, and Moss-
man’s Bay, are resorted to in a similar way, at all of
which places there are conveniences for refreshment
and entertainment.
To see the Sydney workpeople intent on enjoyment
the visitor should attend one of the numerous picnics
held by the tradesmen, or on the occasion of an Eight-
hour demonstration.
North Shore is reached by Ferry from Circular
Quay: Blue’s Point, Milson’s Point, and Lavender
Bay being the landing places. From Milson’s Point
omnibuses and carriages ply some four miles in the
direction of Lane Cove on the Great Northern Road,
and another line of omnibuses runs to the Fortifica


tions. Hereabouts the scenery is very charming,
and an excellent road runs to the various batteries
and strongholds constructed on the northern shore
for the protection of Port Jackson. A half day may
be well spent in inspecting these works, as they are
considered amongst the finest defensive works of the
day, and have elicited the warmest encomiums from
the first military engineers of the age. Our sketch
gives a fair idea of the works at George’s Head, which
command the entrance to Port Jackson.
Lane Cove, which is reached by steamer from
Lime Street Wharf, is one of the prettiest examples of
river scenery near Sydney ; unlike the Parramatta its
waters are rarely disturbed much by traffic, as its
shores are but scantily settled. The northern shore
of Lane Cove is famed for the great wealth of
flowering plants, and the visitor can, within half a
mile of Longueville, make a very large collection of
the representative Australian flora. Steamers ply as
far as Fig Tree Wharf, but ordinary boats can at full
tide go up many miles, and the scenery well repays
such a visit.
Parramatta River. —Although it is not likely the
town can be visited on the same day as the places
before mentioned, yet a trip up the river may be accom-
plished. Steamers leave King Street every hour, and
call at Biloela Island, formerly known as Cockatoo
Island, where the fiercest desperadoes of convict times
were confined. Here is situated the Government
Dock, which is capable of taking in ships of any
capacity. Here also is the Reformatory for Girls, and
hard by is moored the training ship Vernon, where


the waifs and strays of our streets are taught to become
useful members of society. A visit to Biloela will be
remembered. Our artist has given a view of the place
on another page. Before reaching Hunter’s Hill,
the favourite resort of picnic parties known as Fern
Bay is passed, and the next wharf to Hunter’s Hill is
that of Gladesville, where is situated the very famed
Asylum for the Insane.
Ryde is the next wharf, and it is on the river from
Ryde to below Gladesville that the Champion Course
is taken for the great sculling contests which of late
years have had such an absorbing interest. The
course of the Parramatta from this up is very tor-
tuous, but the scenery is very pretty. As it is not
likely the town will be visited on this trip, we reserve
our description of it for another occasion.
The Islands noticeable in the Harbour are, Clarke’s,
Shark, Garden, Fort Denison or Pinchgut, Goat
Island (where gunpowder is stored), Biloela, and
Spectacle ; and perhaps mention ought to be made of
the “ Sow and Pigs,” a dangerous rocky formation
near to the Heads. As a rule deep water extends to
within a few yards of the coast line, and at low water
the rocks are covered with vast deposits of the oysters
for which Sydney Harbour is so remarkable.


THIRD DAY.
SYDNEY AND ITS BUILDINGS.
For the moment, doubtless, the Exhibition Building
will be the chief attraction, but, as useful and elabo-
rate guides to that extraordinary building and its con-
tents are available, we need not dwell at any length
upon it here.
Just as London has its two great arteries in Fleet
Street and Oxford Street, with their continuations, so
Sydney has its two main channels of traffic —Pitt
Street and George Street. A glance at the map will
shew that in travelling from north to south one of
these two streets must be utilized, and nearly all
other streets lead thereto.
As we propose to spend this day in town we will
enumerate briefly the chief objects of interest worthy
of a visit or deserving observation :
Statues. —Sydney is by no means rich in this
direction. Governor Bourke’s effigy in bronze stands
at the entrance to the Domain ; it is a fine piece
of work.
The monument erected by New South Wales in
token of its admiration for Prince Albert occupies a
position at the northern end of Hyde Park.
WoolneFs celebrated statue of Captain Cook stands
also in Hyde Park, opposite to the Museum. It has
a very commanding site, and overlooks the harbour
and its entrance.
The two principal ecclesiastical buildings are the
St. Andrew’s Cathedral (Protestant), situated in


MORT’S DOCK AND ENGINEERING WORKS, WATERVIEW BAY.


MEMORANDA.


George Street; and St. Mary’s Cathedral (Catholic),
in College Street; both are in an unfinished condition,
but promise to be great ornaments to the city when
completed. The Jews have a very beautiful place of
worship in Elizabeth Street, Hyde Park, the interior of
their Synagogue being well worthy of inspection, from
the elaborate finish and beauty of the decorations.
Other denominations are fairly furnished with suit-
able buildings.
The chief public institutions of an educational
character are the Free Library, Macquarie Street,
which is open every day, Sunday not excepted ; the
Museum, in College Street; the Academy of Art,
in Elizabeth Street—a sketch of which we give
on another page—and we may here include the
University, with its magnificent Hall and Museum of
Antiquities ; all these are worthy of a leisured visit.
The School of Arts, in Pitt Street, though main-
tained by subscribers, is open, by courtesy, to visitors
to Sydney. It has recently been renovated and
greatly improved by the addition of new rooms, and
is now one of the most creditable representative
institutions in Sydney. It has a large Hall, which is
devoted to entertainments of a suitable character ;
and there are other departments serving as the
Library, a Laboratory for experimental illustrations
in Chemistry and Physical Science, aGeneral Reading-
room, a Workmen’s College, and a Ladies Reading-
room.
The Observatory occupies a fine breezy position
at the northern end of the city. It is under the direc-
tion of the Government Astronomer, Mr. Russell


whose name is famed as having devoted a life to
meteorological and astronomical observation. There
are in constant telegraphic communication with this
establishment nearly a hundred observers in the
various coast and interior towns ; and a vast mass of
useful data is being collected on the important sub-
ject of meteorology. There are some very perfect
appliances here in the shape of apparatus for observing
and registering the various phenomena. The visitor
may inspect the establishment by procuring a card
from Mr. Russell or the attendant in charge.
The Museum, in College Street, is open to the
public from noon to five p.m. It was designed by
Mr. Barnet, the Colonial Architect, and will, when
completed, form a very imposing edifice. Much
information may be gleaned by a prolonged visit to
the Museum, as it is especially rich in specimens of
the fauna of Australia, and of instructive examples
of minerals and of geological features of the Conti-
nent. Collections of the birds of Australia and of
the fishes which inhabit its waters are being made,
and already number many hundred varieties. Other
features of the Museum are the collections of the
weapons of the aborigines of Australia and the Pacific
Islands.
The Mint, in Macquarie Street, may be visited on
obtaining a ticket from the Master, who is usually in
attendance when the place is open. This for many
years was the only Mint in the Australian colonies,
but there is now one in Melbourne also; gold alone
is coined here, but it is expected that in time the


INTERIOR OF FREE LIBRARY.


MEMORANDA.


silver and copper coin requirements will be met from
this institution.
The Free Public Library is opposite to the
Domain entrance, in Macquarie Street. It has, in
addition to the main permanent Library, a Lending
Branch, and visitors on satisfying the Librarian as to
their bona fides , will receive a ticket entitling them to
the privilege of getting any book in the collection.
The reading room is one of the most interesting sights
in Sydney, for here may be seen men of every degree
in the pursuit of knowledge, or that healthy form of
pleasure which books afford. The Reading Room is
open daily from xo a.m. to io p.m., and it contains
more than thirty thousand volumes. The establish-
ment is under the direction of Mr. Walker, who has
also arranged and issued the valuable and uniquely
classified catalogue of books for which the Institution
is famed. We give on another page a view of the
interior.
The chief architectural features of the city in the
way of buildings for public purposes, are the
following:—
The Chief Secretary’s Office and Treasury,
corner of Bridge and Gresham Streets.
Government House, a pretty castellated building,
picturesquely situate beyond the Botanical Gardens,
and facing the harbour, used as the residence of the
Governor of the colony.
The Office of Lands and Mines, corner of
Bridge and Gresham Streets.


The Exchange, at the corner of Pitt and Bridge
Streets.
The Town Hall, in George Street, where the civic
business of the city is administered.
The Darlinghurst Gaol need scarcely be mentioned
except as interesting such as may wish to investigate
its management.
The Railway Station is a plain, unpretending
structure of brick utterly inadequate to the wants of
the city.
The University famed for its magnificent Hall.
There are numerous fine Colleges devoted to the
education and training of aspirants to the Ministry of
various sections of religous belief; the Roman Catho-
lics, the Presbyterians, the Wesleyans, and others have
each their representative Institution, over which
visitors are conducted with due courtesy and attention.
The Chief Public Reserves and Recreation Grounds
of the City and suburbs are the Domain, and the
Botanic Gardens already described, Wynyard Square,
Hyde Park, Moore Park and the Association Cricket
Ground, Belmore Gardens, Prince Alfred Park with
the old Exhibition Building, Victoria Park, Randwick
Race-course, and the Observatory Grounds.
The Market Places of Sydney are three. The
George Street premises at the corner of Market
Street are very extensive, but not well planned or
administered, and the Belmore Markets in Pitt Street.
These present the usual busy features of such places,
and especially on a Saturday night.
There is also a Market for the the sale of Hay
and Agricultural Produce, known as the Haymarket,


and there is also one for the sale of Fish at Woolloo-
mooloo.
There are three Theatres in Sydney. The Queen’s
in York Street; the Royal, in Castlereagh Street,
and the Victoria, in Pitt Street. At all of these
places, there is usually a very good company of
actors, and at certain seasons, Italian Opera is put
very creditably upon the stage.
Other Halls of Entertainment are those of the
School of Arts, the Guild Hall, the Masonic Hall,
Spencer’s Varieties, and the Temperance Hall. One
or more of these are usually open with concerts,
readings, or lectures. Altogether, the seeker of an
evening’s amusement in Sydney will have plenty of
choice, and he must be very fastidious if he do not
find some form of entertainment suiting his taste.
Should the visitor like to see some of the busy
hives of industry in Sydney, the Engineering Works
of the Atlas Company and Mort’s Dock may be
inspected (of the latter we give an engraving).


FOURTH DAY.
After a busy day of sight-seeing amid the dust and
bustle of a city there is nothing so refreshing as a
good drive of some miles, or a trip by rail to some
pleasant country resort. Perhaps no place could offer
more suitable attractions in this direction than Par-
ramatta, which is pleasantly situated about fifteen
miles from Sydney, and which may be approached, as
we have before mentioned, by steamboat, or by rail
from Redfern. It is also a pleasant drive along the
road on fine warm days, when the dust is not too
lively ; by rail will, however, be the more convenient
mode for the majority of people.
The station may be reached by cab or by a three-
penny fare by any omnibus passing southwards along
George Street. The line of railway touches on the
suburban retreats of Newtown, Petersham, Ashfield,
Croydon, Burwood, Homebush, and Rookwood;
some of these places being exceedingly pretty with
bright looking villas, and gardens kept as trim as the
luxuriance of growth will permit.
Parramatta reached, the tourist will do well to take
a stroll in the old Government House Reserve and
in the Domain, one of the chief beauties of which is
the avenue of English oaks and fine specimens of
other British timber trees.
Next to Sydney, Parramatta is the oldest town of
the continent of Australia, Governor Phillip having
fixed upon the site soon after the settlement at the
head of Sydney Cove, in 1788. Attracted by the


BILOELA, OR COCKATOO ISLAND.


MEMORANDA.


general suitability of the soil for agriculture he
removed about eighty people to the head of the
river, and there formed the township of Rose Hill, the
name being subsequently changed to Parramatta, the
aboriginal term for the river and district.
It was at Parramatta the first grain was sown and
the first garden was planted, and this is the district
which has since attained world-wide celebrity as pro-
ducing in such abundance that excellent fruit the
orange. Indeed, the orange plantations of Parra-
matta may be said to be quite phenomenal, not alone
in their extent but in their marvellous productiveness
and the uniformly good quality of their fruit. To
those who have not seen the orange growing in a
congenial home, or who may but have seen it under
the rude culture of some of the growers of the Euro-
pean continent, a visit to the celebrated estate of Mr.
Pye, of Rocky Hall, is not likely to be soon forgotten.
Here may be seen growing every variety of the orange
and lemon, and other members of the citrus family—
from the tiny cumquat to the gigantic shaddock ;
and, as illustrating the capabilities of the climate
and the vast range of fruit-yielding trees that may be
grown to advantage hereabouts, the visitor may see
in Mr. Pye’s garden, and in close proximity to the
orange trees —the apple, pear, and plum of northern
latitudes; the peach, apricot, and nectarine of the
east; the locpiat of Japan; and almost every fruit-
yielding shrub and tree growing in the wildest luxu-
riance. It is a great treat to catch Mr. Pye on some
leisure day, and in a pleasant stroll,
“ Through leagues of garden flushed with fruit, ”


hear from him the life-history of some of the special
trees in his grove, —how many hundreds of dozens of
fruit this one tree yielded one season; how that group
of trees were planted fifty years ago, and still, like
their proprietor, seem ruddy with health. It must be
glorious to be the owner of an orchard, which, as a
lad, one has helped to plant, and grown old in
gathering the fruit from the trees. And then
there is the supreme satisfaction in knowing that the
industry has grown to be one of vast commercial
importance; for one has only to look at the piles of
cases of the fruit awaiting shipment at the Sydney
wharves and in transit at the railway stations, to realise
how great an element of wealth this product has
become.
In addition to jhis industry, Parramatta has long
been famed for the manufacture of woollen fabrics,
Sydney Tweed having for many years been deservedly
popular. The factories of Messrs. French Brothers
are still in Leather, too, is another pro-
duct of local manufacture.
For many years the large but somewhat antiquated
building within the Domain Reserve was known as
Government House, it being the country xesidence of
the Governors when Parramatta was considered well
“up the country.” It, however, no longer serves this
purpose, having been converted into a private hotel or
boarding-house; and the Domain is used by the
public as a park and recreation ground.
It was at Parramatta that Lady Mary Fitzroy lost
her life by a carriage accident. This lady had
endeared herself to all classes of the community,


and her death was in many ways very deplorable. She
may be truly said to have exhibited in her own person
all the best characteristics of an English gentle-
woman. A good story is told of her in relation to her
domestic qualities. A Sydney tradesman waited at
Government House early one morning for orders, and
seeing a neatly-dressed lady bustling about at such an
early hour, concerning herself with the domestic
arrangements of the household, he fancied she must
be the housekeeper, and, thinking to secure the lion’s
share of business of Government House, he
slipped into her hand a £$ note, evidently in that
spirit of gratitude for the past which Dr. Johnson was
apt to define as a “ lively hope of favours to come.”
It is said Lady Mary accepted the gift, but
presented it to some charitable institution.
Parramatta is well supplied with places of worship,
the Church of England being represented by St.
John’s and All Saints’, the Roman Catholic, Presby-
terian, Wesleyan, Independent, and Baptist having
each a substantially-built place of worship. There
are also public schools of great capacity. The court-
house is a neat structure in the main street, a view of
which is shown. The town is supplied with gas, but
as yet lacks that necessary adjunct, a regular water
supply.
Parramatta has an interest, too, of rather a painful
nature, for here are situate the penitentiary and the
asylum for the insane, both buildings of very large
dimensions, and dating far back into the earliest history
of the colony. Both were erected by the enforced


VIEW OF GOVETT’S LEAP, BLUE MOUNTAINS.


THE LION ROCK, GOVETT’S LEAP.


industry of a class which, as Barrington—himself one
of their class —sa
“ Left their country for their country’s good.”
Parramatta has about it an air of progress, and of
late years the district seems to have become more
and more the resort of the Sydney tradesman, who
here builds his suburban home, plants his orange and
lemon trees, and literally “ sits under his own vine
and fig-tree.”
If the visitor has done justice to his opportunities
at Parramatta, he will return to Sydney fairly fatigued,
and well able to enjoy his dinner and a good night’s
rest.
MEMORANDA.


FIFTH DAY.
As affording a striking contrast to the usual calm and
peaceful character of Parramatta, with its sylvan
scenes and its fruitful orchards, it is proposed to-day
to visit the wild, rugged scenery of the coast, and to
explore the district of Coogee Bay, of Bondi, and of
the historical district which for so many years was the
actual name of the new settlement—viz., Botany Bay.
All these may be hurriedly visited in a single day, but
a very long day would be necessary to thoroughly
exhaust the beauties of any one of the places
mentioned.
Omnibuses ply regularly to Coogee and Bondi from
the stand near Macquarie Place, corner of Gresham
and Bridge Streets. But, by taking a cab, or hiring a
buggy, a very pleasant drive may be had, and on the
way Randwick Racecourse and its picturesque heights,
Bondi, Coogee, and Long Bay may be visited. On
arriving at Botany the horse may be baited and a
rest taken for lunch, after which a few hours stroll on
the margin of the Bay will be well repaid. Close by
are situated the Water Supply Works of Sydney, the
whole of the rising sandy ground and the swamp
serving as filter beds and reservoirs for the water
which is pumped by the engines to a sufficient eleva-
tion for gravitation to the service pipes. If time
permit, these are worthy of inspection. Other objects
of interest are the tablet commemorating Captain
Cook’s entrance to Botany Bay, and a column erected
in memory of the unfortunate French explorer La
Perouse.


Excellent “ accommodation for man and beast ”is
to be had at the Sir Joseph Banks Hotel, which is a
sort of picnic retreat for the citizens of Sydney. There
is a large dancing pavilion, well-kept gardens, a quoit
ground, skittle alley, and other surroundings to the
“ Sir Joseph Banks and the hotel inside has its
billiard table and other attractions “ too numerous to
mention.” This place is a favourite resort in the
summer for business people anxious to escape from
the monotony and etinui of the city; and we may
mention that the spot appears to have peculiar
attractions for persons seeking leisure for repent-
ance on having tied the nuptial knot—a period
usually called the honeymoon by undiscerning people,
or by those who are given to grim jokes.
Botany Bay, as all the world knows, was discov-
ered by Captain Cook about a century ago, and its
name was conferred from the astonishing collection of
new plants the botanists of the expedition were able
to make on landing. The voyage had been made to
test the vexed question as to whether there existed, or
not, a great southern continent —a problem which
was haunting the minds of the savans of those days.
Cook having duly reported his discovery, it was deter-
mined, as the gaols of England were crowded to suffo-
cation, to devote the new land as a receptacle for the
worst form of criminals, who might there serve their
long sentences, and probably never again trouble the
Mother country. Thus, the visitor to Botany—as the
place is now called —will feel that he is standing on
historic ground, and should not fail to make himself


acquainted with the chief points of interest about the
place.
The drive home will be through the outstretching
townships of Waterloo, Alexandria, and Redfern —
none of which places call for remark. The mortuary
station at Redfern may be noticed as a very nice
example of a style of architecture suiting the sombre
purpose to which this is devoted.
MEMORANDA.


SIXTH DAY.
Presuming this to be a Saturday, the visitors will
usually have un embarras de nchesses in the way of
entertainments during the afternoon. The morning
may be devoted to a visit to Mort’s Dock, to the Aus-
tralian Steam Navigation Company’s Works, at
Pyrmont, or to the inspection of some of the mag-
nificent Mail Steamers which visit the port. There is
usually one of the American Mail Steamers anchored
in Neutral Bay, and the officers show great attention
and courtesy to visitors; and now that the Peninsular
and Oriental Company’s boats make Sydney their
terminus, these fine vessels will well repay a visit, dhe
works, too, of Messrs. Hudson Brothers, the builders of
the Exhibition Building, and the contractors for supply-
ing the Government with railway plant, are also inter-
esting. Another quiet stroll through the town will also
reveal many points of great beauty. The architectural
features of Pitt Street South, and of George Street,
cannot but strike the beholder. A visit may also be
made to the leading tradesmen’s premises, and this
will reveal the fact that there are in Sydney as fine
commercial buildings and as well-appointed shops as
in any part of the world. The Sydney Morning
Herald Office, the Mutual Provident Society’s Office,
Messrs. Dalton Brothers, and Messrs. S. Hoffnung
and Co.’s premises are noticeable in Pitt Street, from
their size and architectural merit. Circular Quay,
with the new wharves of the A.S.N, Co., should be in-
cluded in this stroll, and perhaps some of the other
extensive wharves of Darling Harbour may be
hurriedly visited before lunch time.


SUGAR CANE HARVEST, CLARENCE RIVER.


On Saturday afternoon there are usually many
events of interest, varying, of course, in their character
with the season. Cricket or Football Clubs have
their usual weekly match or practice. Regattas and
Races are not uncommon events on a Saturday after-
noon, and, in the season, fishing parties are made up
for a short cruise over the fishing grounds just outside
the Heads. Sport in the way of shooting is not often
to be got near Sydney, but sometimes the knowing
ones manage by going a little further a-field to get a
fair bag of snipe, quail, ducks, and in some districts
rabbits and wallaby may be had for the diligent seek-
ing. There are also occasional meetings on Saturday
afternoon of gentlemen fond of pigeon-shooting, the
shops of leading gunsmiths being usually the head-
quarters where information may be gleaned as to
place and time of such gatherings.
Sometimes the visitor may get away altogether
from town and go to see the Blue Mountains or the
Kurrajong. In this case, he will leave by the early
train on Saturday, and return by that of Monday. He
will reach Mount Victoria before mid-day, and will
thus have half that day and the Sunday following for
trips to the main features of the district—Govett’s Leap,
—of which we give two views on other pages—
Kenimbla Pass, and the Valley of the Grose River,
&c. If possible, he should extend his trip to Lith-
gow Valley, so as to personally inspect that modern
triumph of Railway engineering, the great Zig-Zag of
the Western Railway, some idea of which may be
gained from our engraving.


The Hawkesbury River, so graphically described
by Anthony Trollope; the Weatherboard Falls;
Hartley Kerosene Shale Mines ; Wallerawang Iron,
Coal and Lime deposits; Mount Wilson,the Kurrajong,
offer great atrractions, and are all within ready access
if the visitor can give the requisite time. The means
of compassing any or all of these trips may be gleaned
from a perusal of the larger Guide referred to.
We give several views of the most attractive points
of the mountain and other scenery, but really nothing
short of actual experience can convey to the mind any
adequate conception of the grandeur and picturesque-
ness of the scenes portrayed.
Should time permit, a visit to some of the Northern
Rivers of trie Co st, where maize and sugar are pro-
duced in such abundance, will prove very interesting.
Sugar-growing on the Clarence River is now a very
important industry, the cane growing with unexampled
vigour and luxuriance. As conveying some idea of
one of the cane-fields we give on another page an
engraving of the harvest.


SUNDAY.
Sydney presents the usual drawbacks of English
towns on this, which should be the brightest and
best day of the week.
There are, of course, the usual facilities for attending
Divine worship, nearly every demonination of Chris-
tians being well represented. The Church of England
Cathedral is near the Town Hall, the Roman Catholic
Cathedral, in College Street, and there are churches
belonging to the Presbyterians, Congregationalists,
Baptists, Wesleyans, Jews, and other bodies scattered
about the town.
Steamboats ply down the Harbour on Sunday, and
in the season one of the most exhilarating sights is the
crowded steamers loaded with people in holiday attire
bent on enjoying the afternoon at Manly, Watson’s
Bay, Middle Harbour, Chowder, or the score other
places of resort with which the Harbour is fringed.
To some people the Cemeteries are objects of
interest, and it is no uncommon thing to see crowds
thronging the Necropolis at Haslem’s Creek, and the
other “.Gardens of the Dead,” which are so well taken
care of, in the vicinity of the metropolis.


HFE*ffisgo(HpioN
Established 1869, and Incorporated by Act of
Parliament.
PRINCIPAL OFFICE:
610111 & WfIYABB STREETS,
SYDNEY.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS:
The Hon. S. D. GORDON, M.L.C., Chairman.
The Hon. SIR GEORGE WIGRAM ALLEN, M.L.A., Deputy Chairman
IL G. ALLEYNE, Esq., M.D. S. DICKINSON, Esq.
JOHN DAVIES, Esq., M.L.A. ALEX. STUART, Esq., M.L.A.
is?* Indefeasible Policies, Low Rates of Premiums,
Economical Management, and Undoubted Security are
leading features of this the Second Oldest Mutual
Life Office in these Colonies, and the First to Free
Assurance from Restrictions.
With a Branch Office at Auckland, and one hundred and
fifty Agencies throughout the Colonies.
J. C. REMINGTON,
Secretary.


BABY LINEN.
WED
DING OUTFITS.
E.WAY
261 to 267,’
i>ITT-STREET
THE
CHEAPEST HOUSE
IN
THE CITY
GENERAL DRAPERY
DRESSES,
* MANTLES, a
COSTUMES,
MILLIN ERY.
SILKS &c.
F A M I L Y
MOURNING.
UNDERCLOTHING


M&i
MANUFACTURERS OF
Boots, Shoes, Boot Uppers,
Leggings, ete., etc., etc.,
AND
of prunes’ dent's mtit
lioots Hiilj Julies,
Made at Paris, Vienna, Mayenee, Offenbach, Staf-
ford, Leicester, Stone, Norwich, Northampton,
and' London,
%m iiiiei ifiiif,
Opposite Margaret Street,
AND
i2B iIW@I BTRE2BT,
Between King St. and the Royal Hotel,
SYDNEY.


A. BECHET,
BAERACE STREET, SYDNEY ,
PROM EUROPE & AMERICA.
SOLE PATENTEE
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN PATENT SAFETY LAMP
AND OF THE
Regulator Punjier Check Gas Burner.
OF ALL SORTS
FROM EUROPE AND AMERICA
ALWAYS UPON HAND AND IMPORTED TO ORDER.


OP
p
E
.rXi
BARRACK STREET, SYDNEY.
Importer & Exporter of General Merchandise.
Sole Agent for Herring’s Patent Champion Safes
~ ~ Steinway and Sons, Pianos
„ „ J. L. Mote, Ironworks
„ „ Mitchell & Vance, Chandeliers & Candelabra
The above world-renowned Firms received Gold Medals at
the. Paris Exhibition, 1878.
All Merchandise Guaranteed Best Quality.


Johnston § Kingsbury,
92 <& 04 XCIHSTG- STEEET,
SILK MERCERS
MANTLEMEN
MILLINERS
HOSIERS
GLOVERS, and
GENERAL DRAPERS.
The latest Savelies by every Bail
DRESSMAKING in ALL ITS BRANCHES.
WEDDING AND MOURNING ORDERS
EXECUTED ON THE SHORTEST NOTICE.
All Parcels over £2 sent CARRIAGE FREE to
all parts of the Colony.
Johnston § Kingsbury,
92 & 94 KING STREET.


3BST-A.BI j XSK:3E!I3 1850.
QQJL&&MHTB&* BALL, IQ4 KINQ STREET,
B„. B B B fl LuflaUlllJ 8
"M
EJ. H &
_
F.J.HOLL INC DALE watchmaker Jeweller ft*
m E. J.HOLL!NCDfILL
GQJLB&MITIIN ,J BAKE, S&4 KING &TBEET*
e:j hollingdale, watchmaker & JEWELLER,
Receives every month a large assortment of Gold and Silver Watches,
Diamond Brooches, Ear-rings, Bracelets, Chains, Alberts, &c. Single
and Cluster Diamond Rings, &c. A good Silver Hunting English Patent
Lever Watch, £6 65., with a written guarantee for two years. An in-
spection is respectfully solicited. Watches and every description of
Jewellery made and repaired. Country orders punctually attended to.


HOLDSWORTH,
GARDYNE, and CO.,
FURNISHING
AND
458 GEORGE ST„
Beg to call the attention of parties visiting Sydney
to their new and extensive
SHOW ROOMS,
which are replete with every requirement in
HOUSE FURNISHING AND GENERAL
IRONMONGERY.
Electro-plate in the newest designs,
and from the best makers,
in great variety.


Largest stock of Marble MANTEL-
PIECES in Sydney.
NEWEST DESIGNS AND VARIETY OF COLOUR.
maz.
-*--r
'I
J»
SO
Minton’s patent Encaustic Hearth
and Hall Tiles in great variety.
INSPECTION INVITED.
458 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.


WILLIAM P. WELCH,
VENETIAN AND GAUZE WIRE
BLIND MAKER,
2821
Pitt Street,
SYDNEY,
OPPOSITE
School of Arts.
MADE TO ORDER,
Or REPAIRED AT LOWEST CHARGES.
Country Orders attended to with Despatch.
THE TRADE SUPPLIED.


J.
$319
T. MELLIDAY,
(Ekraraaaum gjijpte
AND
prate |tli[niknte,
82 SUSSEX STREET,
S'STID3SrE'Sr.
A large supply of
Received three times a week.
COUNTRY ORDERS
PUNCTUALLY ATTENDED TO.


JOHN STARKEY,
raier
ill
Sl «lil«WSl
MANUFACTURER,
fmiUf STREET,
y&fj mm
tind G'&FdMM supplied! QiilmF in T&vrn
&f QmmtFj &m ih@ &k&Fimi M&Uq@v
tiS”SOLE PROPRIETOR
OF
Coad’s Patent Soda-water Bottle
FOR
WEWISOUTt W7USS. QUSSVBIAWD,


HOBSON & WHITING
13 HUNTER STREET.
Just the thing I want! A good, sound, serviceable
IE 3 O KTZMI-AJSTTE-A.TX.
HOBSON AND WHITING have the largest stock of Port-
manteaux in the world, from 12s. 6d. to £3 3s. each.
Purchasers are invited to inspect our Immense Stock,
which will be found fully
50 PER CENT. BELOW BRITISH COST.
Made to order, and ready for immediate use. For quality,
durability, and elegance of fit they have no rival.
BMHIBJIMM F the ffmmt dgseriptigm-,
The prettiest Gift for a Lady is Six Pairs Hobson
and Whiting’s FRENCH KID GLOVES packed in
Elegant Scented Sachets, 255. the half doz.
HOBSON AND WHITING,
13 HUNTER STREET.


THE LABOUR BAZAAR,
285, 287, 289, 291, 293, & 295, PITT ST.,
TI7AS established 30 years ago, on the principle of
'' buying and selling for cash. The proprietors still
adhere to the same rule, and are always better satisfied
with a very light profit and quick returns, than hold
their goods for the market value.
They have now on view an enormous stock of new
and second-hand dining-room, drawing-room, bedroom,
library, hall, and kitchen requisites of every descrip-
tion, which they w T ant to dispose of to make room for
several houses of furniture which they have purchased,
and have not room to stow away until they make a
clearance.
Portable furniture of every description always on
hand to save packing and risk of breakage. Goods
carefully packed for the country.
ALEX. MOORE & C 0„
A UCTIQNEEMSt
Valuators, Furniture Brokers, Importers,
Cabinetmakers, Upholsterers, Ironmongers, and
General Commission Agents,
LABOUR BAZAAR,
285, 287, 289, 291, 293, & 295, Pitt St., Sydney.
Established 1840.
3000 Chairs and 100 Sofas, Card Tables, Drawing-
room Suites, and everything required for balls or
parties, to be LET ON HIRE at the Labour Bazaar.
Any quantity of new and second-hand furniture pur-
chased for cash.


THE CITY BANK,
S'YIDIDTIE'X"-
Paid-up Capital, £240,000; with power to increase to £500,000.
Reserve Fund, £50,000.
Directors *
Hon. JAMES WATSON, Esq.,'M.L.A., Chairman.
ROBERT GRAY, Esq.
Hon. GEORGE THORNTON, Esq., M.L.C.
JOHN ALGER, Esq.
EDWARD WRENCH, Esq.
H. C. D’Ardier, Esq.
Auditors
Robert Wisdom, Esq., M.L.A]
Manager : William Neill.
Secretary : Edmund Rouse.
Accountant : Thomas T. Orton.
Solicitor : W. W. Billyard, Esq.^
Head Office: Pitt Street, Sydney.
City Branches :
King and Sussex Streets. | 99 Oxford Street.
Country Branches:
Young. Bathurst. Kiama. Carcoar. Cootamundra.
Agents :
London—The London Joint Stock Bank.
Scotland—The Commercial Bank of Scotland.
Queensland —The Queensland National Bank.
Victoria—The National Bank of Australasia, and the City of Melbourne
Bank. , r ,
Tasmania—The Bank of Van Diemen’s Land.
New Zealand—The Bank of New Zealand.
South Australia—National Bank of Australasia, and the Commercial
Bank of South Australia. .
Western Australia-The National Bank of Australasia.
India—The Chartered Mercantile Bank of India, London, and China.
China—The Chartered Mercantile Bank of India, London, and China.
New York The Agents of the Bank of California, Laidlaw and Co.
San Francisco —The Bank of California.
Valparaiso—Banco de Valparaiso.
Batavia— Netherlands-India Commercial Bank.
Venice—S. A. Blumenthal and Co.
This Bank adopts and transacts all usual banking business within the
colony, and with any of the places above named, and elsewhere.


By Appointment, Purveyors to
H.R.H. the
Duke of
Edinburgh,
And
His Excellency
The Governor
f
GROCERS,
AND
WINE MERCHANTS,
258,260,262 GEORGE ST.
SYDNEY.
Importers of finest Ales, Wines,
Spirits, Liqueurs,
Teas, Coffees, Oilstores, and all kinds
of family and station supplies.


Established 1842.
"TXTIRISrZEIEi,
(Late CONSTABLE AND TURNER,)
COVENY’S BUILDINGS, 71 MARKET STREET, SYDNEY.
Improved Patent Gas Cooking Stoves in various sizes.—Exhibition First Prize.
a:
wﬁm “"5: I; If“?
\gm%ﬂm=w7 ..
BEEB-E&QINE MAEEFAQWUEBR*
Licensed Gasfitter and Plumber.
EXHIBITION FIRST PRIZE BEER-ENGINES, 1877 AND 1878
Importer of Chandeliers in Bronze and Glass, Gasfitting and Plumbing Materials, &c.


MOORE,
HENDERSON,
IBOWCHER,
AND
WAREHOUSEMEN,
217 PITT STREET,
gTDZISY.
2 GT. WINCHESTER ST. BUILDINGS,
LONDON, E.C.
BEPAMTMENTS i
HOSIERY
HABERDASHERY
STAYS
UMBRELLAS
MANTLES AND SHAWLS
HATS AND CAPS
SHIRTS AND COLLARS
CLOTHING
WOOLLENS
STUFFS
DRESSES
MERINOS
PLAIDS
MANCHESTER
LINENS AND DUNDEE
GOODS
SCOTCH GOODS
BLANKETS
FLANNELS


W. HUME,
sasing &hsmisi,<-
GEORGE AND HUNTER STREETS,
SYDNEY,
TyisHES to inform Visitors that he gives personal at-
tention to the Dispensing Department of the
business, and is continually receiving from England
the latest
Pharmaceutical Preparations, &c.
PRESCRIPTIONS AND ORDERS FROM THE COUNTRY
RECEIVE IMMEDIATE ATTENTION.
o o
SPONGES ; HAIR, NAIL, AND TOOTH
BRUSHES ; COMBS ;
And all necessary Toilet Requisites.
Specialities for the Hair—Euxeron, Moelline, Lime
Juice and Glycerine.
For the Teeth— Rose Dentifrice, PearlJDentifrice, Cherry
Tooth Paste, Salicylic Tooth Powder, &c., &c.


*y\. H - GRO T/f.
** IMPORTER OF J
Sheet Glass 16 oz. and 26 oz.,
White and Red Leads, Oils, Turpentine, Paints,
Colours, Varnishes, Brushware, Goldleaf,
Bronzes, Gold Mouldings, Paperhanging Canvas,
Taeks, Painters’ Tools, Liquid Gold, Artists’
Tube Colours, &e., &e.
N.B.—Mixed Paints made especially, for the Australian
climates, in 1,2, 4,7, and 14 lb. Tins.
INSPECTION INVITED.
PAmmmAM&mm,
H. H. G. desires to draw the attention of the public and
the trade to his
ORIGINAL BALES,
Consisting each of 300 Rolls of 10 Patterns, for Storekeepers,
from 3fd. per roll and upwards.
100,000 different patterns open stock to choose from—Golds,
Satins, Plain, and Browns.
10 per cent, under any other house in town.
INSPECTION INVITED.
H. H. GROTH,
PAPERHANGING, OIL, & COLOUR STORE,
344 QE&BQB SWBBBW,
SYIDHSTE-y.
N.B. Patterns and Price Lists sent to all parts of the
■’Colonies,


The Intercolonial Life Assurance,
Annuity, and General Association, Limited.
CAPITAL, £lOO,OOO.
President : P. A. JENNINGS, C.M.G.
Vice-President : Alderman J. YOUNG, J.P.
The Intercolonial Association transacts every description of business
dependent on LIFE contingences. Also FIRE business at the lowest
current rates.
The Company acts as Executor of Wills, Trustee, Administrator, or
Receiver, and as Attorney or Agent for those who, from absence, ill-
health, or other cause, are unable or unwilling to manage their own
affairs.
The advantages a Board, having perpetual succession, and a large
subscribed capital, gives over an individual acting as executor of a will
or other fiduciary are obvious, while the combined judgment and
enlarged experience which the Directors would bring to bear in dealing
with the custody and investment of their clients’ money would prove
of great value to those who availed themselves of such services.
W. H. ARCHER, Managing Director.
GEOEGE STEEET, SYDNEY.
JAMES MACGREGOR,
'll, WHOLESALE QBQGE
wipv^PißUvjaEßCflflim
All kinds of MACHINERY in stock
and imported to order.
OFFSOEB S—&2& QEQUQE EWEEEW /
WAEEHQ mE :—Q EEEWB PEAQE;j
s'TYDisrE'y.


o. H. SMITH,
PRACTICAL 3BEjSITT36I3R.,
G. H. SMITH,
MANUFACTURER & IMPORTER
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION OF
HATS AHB CAPS,
> NO. 316 CEORCEST.,
3 Doors South of Huuter-st.
A large and choice stock of
Goods always on hand.
316 GEORGE ST., 3 Doors South of Hunter St.
Hats and Caps made to order.
l/pited CJon|cp^qy.
o
CAPITAL - - £500,000.
With the unlimited liability of a large Colonial Proprietary.
o ■
SB AD OFnCI: 276 ilOlil 81., BYDIBY.
DIRECTORS:
Edward Flood, Esq., Chairman.
Richard Hill, Esq. James Ewan, Esq.
S. Dickinson, Esq. J. B. Bundle, Esq.
L. W. Levy, Esq.
13“ Fire and Marine Insurances effected on the most
favourable terms.
F. T. WATKINS, Manager.


City Bitial life Ass-arar.ee Sedety,
LIMITED.
Incorporated Pursuant to Act 37 Vic. No 19.
HEAD OFFICE
Waterloo Chambers, 470 George St., Sydney.
Executive Directors.
THOMAS O’NEILL, Esq., Chairman.
P. HOGAN, Esq., J. P. T. J. MURRAY, Esq. Wm. FAGAN, Esq.
P. STANLEY, Esq., J. P. J. F. HEALEY, Esq. J. P. GARYAN, Esq.
Solicitor : B. A. FREEHILL, Esq.
Medical Officer: Dr. POWER, 44 College Street.
Auditors: J. CROWLEY, Esq., C. J. M'CAFFREY, Esq.
Bank : AUSTRALIAN JOINT STOCK BANK.
This Society transacts the business of MUTUAL LIFE ASSUR-
ANCE in all its branches.
THE WHOLE OF THE PROFITS BELONG TO THE MEMBERS.
JAMES P. GARY AN, Managing Director.
ESTABLISHED 1852.
W, FOT.
WHOLESALE TIN & IRON-PLATE WORKER
AND JAPANNER,
MANUFACTURER OF TUBS, BUCKETS, GUTTER BEL-
LOWS, COLONIAL OVENS, and every description of
TIN, IRON, AND JAPANNED WARE.
Importer of Plain and Corrugated Galvanized Iron, Tin Plates, Black
Sheets, Hoop and Rod Iron, Tinsmiths’ Wire and Mountings, and
General Ironmongery.
IRON CURVED AND G TTERS MADE FOR THE TRADE.
Offices & Show Rooms:
278 & 280 GEORGE STREET,
W OR KS
HAMILTON ST., ROBINHOOD LANE, & BOND ST., SYDNEY.


STARKEY'S
-H{e 147
OASTLEREAGH STREET,
SYDNEY.
DALTON BROTHERS,
* MERCJOTWg *
AND
lUtPORTERS,
PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
Indents executed and Advances made on
Wool, Copper, or Tin, consigned to their
friends in London or New York.


SYDNEY BRANCH OF THE
TASMANIAN SEED STORE
The oldest established Seed Firm in the Australian Colonies.
C. F. CRFSWELL,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
SEED AND PLANT MERCHANT
IMPORTER OP
European and American Agricultural and
Garden Seeds, Bulbs, etc.
478 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY;
37 SWANSTON STREET, MELBOURNE;
AND
MURRAY STREET, HOBART TOWN.
A. THOMPSON I Co.
196 PITT STREET,
IMPORTERS OF
WINES, SPIRITS, BEERS, &c.


WM. WORMALL,
FAMILY GROCER
AND
ITALIAN WAREHOUSEMAN,
-296-
GEORaE ST. ? SYDNEY
Opposite Margaret Street.
Chrisr. Newton Bro. & Co.
IMPORTERS
AND
WAREHOUSEMEN,
118,120, 122,124,126
PITT STREET, SYDNEY,
AND AT
69 MOORGATE STREET, CITY,
LONDON.


HARDY BROS.,
Watchmakers aii Jewellers,
13 HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY;
And 7 THAVIES INN, HOLBORN, LONDON.
IMPORTERS
OS Qmt-eMssi Watehee f Psemmtatim Silver,,
Silver Plate,; Gl&ek& t Option c§ Jewellery*
N.B.—PRIVATE SHOWROOMS UPSTAIRS-
DINNER SETS
DESSERT SETS
BREAKFAST, TEAj AND
TOILET SETS
COFFEE SETS.
|jsaml |jkgg, & HjjtAjumj?|.
Very large stock of Fancy China Nic-nacs, kt, suitable for presents
FOUR LARGE SHOWROOMS.
YI8ITQB& BPBGM&&Y INVITED*
AVVVWWWWW
BRAY BROS.,
418 & 420 GEORGE ST., NEAR KING ST.


IMPORTER OF
STANDS© OoiD jEWEUEftY
F'imt--QMm Waitehm,j
PLATED-WARE, FANCY GOODS,
FIBS SIASSES & MEERSCHAUM' PIPES,
DIRECT FROM VIENNA, ETC.
■ ■»
WHOLESALE All EETAIL.
—« —
9 HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY.
PACIFIC
rill AID lAHII INSURANCE
COMPANY OF SYDNEY.
CA3PITAL - - £1,000,000.
DIRECTORS:
Hon. Saul Samuel, C.M.G., Chairman.
E Vickery, Esq.
R. S ADDINGTON, Esq.
Alfred C. Garrfck, Esq.
W. H. Eldred, Esq.
MELBOURNE BOARD:
Charles E. Bright, Esq. | Robt. Murray Smith, Esq. M.L.A.
AGENTS:
London : Messrs. Edward A. Levy & Co. Melbourne : W. Strachan,
Esq. Brisbane: Messrs. Bright Brothers & Co. Adelaide : J. G.
Boothby, Esq. Rockhampton : Messrs. J. Headrick & Co. Mauritius :
Messrs. Ireland, Fraser, & Co.
Marine and Fire Risks of every description accepted at current rates.
Marine Policies made payable in London, or at any of the Company’s
agencies when required.
E. L. MONTEFIORE, Manager.


J. B. NORTH,
STOCK AND SHARE BROKER,
E’XQHAISjQE! BEQEEB t
MINING AND ESTATE AGENT,
139 Pitt Street, opp. Union Bank, Sydney,
liwcstments in Bank Shares, Debentures, Steam, Insurance, Gas,
Coal, and Mining Shares bought or sold on Commission. ’
IMPORTERS OF
BEAE WAVAWIAM Am MAN'SEEA
TOBACCONISTS’ GOODS.
TOBACCO MERCHANTS,
80 YORK STREET.
CLARK’S BAZAAR,
MVEBY ABB 3LEW-QUW &TABEE®>
AND
CARRIAGE HIRING ESTABLISHMENT,
BROUGHAM STREET, WOOLLOOMOOLOO.
Established 20 Years.


Mark Atberv & Co.
(Late HODGSON & ALBERY),
mfwrms m
CABFITS, ILOOBCLOTHS,
HOUSEHOLD DRAPERY,
AND
Upholsterer’s Trimmings,
Ml GEORGE MTMMET,,
SYDNEY.
\ww\\\w\\\\\\v\\v\\\v\\\\\u\
ki\d
mm ah® toe®.


WMM VWWtPMi
Artificial Tsrro,
INIMITABLE,
PAINLESS DENTAL OPERATIONS.
—•3-oooH=> —
Teeth extracted without pain by aid of nitrous
oxide gas, chloroform, and all other known
anaesthetics.
Mr. GUSTAVUS GABRIEL
DENTIST,
6 CARLTON TERRACE,
York St. side, Wynyard Square.
CAUTION. —Having practised in the Colonies
twenty-six years and established a reputation
others try to trade upon, I have to request par-
ticular notice to my Christian Name and only
Address.


VISITORS TO SYDNEY.
The Best Place for a
Lady to Choose
A Fashionable Bonnet,
A Nicely-made Dress,
OR
A Stylish Mantle,
IS AT
1 0
(Late M. J. MURPHY)
Pi i!f Itreet, next Victoria Theatre,
IMPORTERS OF
(E]SCP+pmLipp,*DPj3jSEj3,*'
CogTOjaEfr-fP)S]WIiE&
fiEppif +D WEEY.JN-


RILEY BROTHERS,
Smnortns of Dr
Especially suited to the requirements of
Families in the Country.
Central Hqus,& q>£ Business:
and Celebrated £sj Bale Bw&t*
.a
bran cm s&umn-
-251 fit! Si, nr. fii
\m 1 163 Oxford Si, near Bowks Si
Alton
Packages of Drapery of the value of £5 .
and upwards forwarded, Carriage Paid,
all over the Australian Colonies.
RILEY BROTHERS.


y!
TAILORS,
vMEItCE^,^
FAMILY DRAPERS
AND
COSTUM IBRS.
Carpet & Furnishing Branch,
MS Y@ME BWBBEf,
