

VISITATION OF THE LORD BISHOP
AT CHRISTCHURCH, NORTH ADELAIDE.
On Wednesday, January 3rd, the Lord Bishop of Adelaide
held a visitation at Christchurch, North Adelaide, the
following clergymen being present The Rev. Messrs.
Wm. John Woodcock, James Pollitt, William Henry
Coombs, John Charles Bagshaw, Arthur Bernard Bur-
nett, John Fulford, Edward King Miller, Frederick
Edward Platts, John Whitstow Schoals, Edmund Jen-
kins, John Brisbane Titherington, Charles Marry at,
Robert Strong, William Hayden Burnett, Alexander
Russell Russell, George Henry Farr, Edward Bayfield,
William Wood.
The congregation was very large, the spacious and
handsome building being crowded in every part.
Several clergymen assisted in reading the morning
service; the choir, under the able direction of Mr. Green-
wood, organist of the church, giving every effect to the
musical and intoned portions. Nothing so nearly re-
sembling a Cathedral service had before been heard in
South Australia. Handel’s immortal recitative and
chorus “Comfort ye my people,” and “Every valley
.shall be exalted,” were introduced by Mr. Sanderson,
one of the choir. _ , ~ T !■>* v,
-The Communion service was read by the Lord Bishop,
after which a most impressive and appropriate sermon
was delivered by the Rev. W. H. Burnett, A.M., of Mit-
cham, from Acts xviii. 9, 10.
- - The Holy Sacrament was administered by the Bishop,
assisted by the Rev. Messrs. Woodcock and Marry at. A
very large number of members communicated.
His Lordship then delivered the following charge to the
clergy of the diocese :
Reverend Brethren—l have called you together at this
early period after my return, with the view of laying
before you the documents containing the constitutions
which I am about to propose for the regulation of this
Diocesan Church, and the trust-deed for the settlement
of the property given for its support. I have to entreat
your solemn and earnest attention to the im ters con-
tained in both, as upon the recognition of right prin-
ciples both in the organization of the Church and the
uses of ecclesiastical property, the future well-being and
vitality of our Church (so far as they result from human
arrangements) wiL in the main depend.
After the discussions which have taken place on these
. subjects, it cannot be unknown to you that the legal
. machinery by which ecclesiastical law is administered in
England has no practical existence in this colony ; and
while the obligations solemnly undertaken by the Clergy
at their ordination remain in full force, and are as
-binding upon the conscience as at the moment when
- they took on them their vows, yet the statutes by which
in England those obligations are protected, and the
judicial processes there in use, are incapable ot being
- put into action here. The Church of England, incorpo-
rated with the Constitution of the mother-country, has
no peculiar connection with the Local Government or
-Civil Courts of the colony beyond any other Christian
body. Nor are there special voluntary agreements be-
tween the Bishop, Clergy, and Laity, like the model
trust-deed prepared by John Wesley for the members of
-his society, which can be enforced by ordinary process
in the Civil Courts upon those who depart from their
engagements. Thus deprived of ecclesiastical, statute,
.and legal machinery, on the one hand; and with no
regulations or trust-deed defining the rights and duties
of the Bishop, Clergy, and Lay Members of our commu-
nion, on the other; we are left for whatever measure of
.order and discipline prevails among us, to the uncertain
rule of usage and habit; or, what is better, a conscien-
tious regard for the principles of the Church. It is
matter for thankful acknowledgment that this ecclesi-
astical condition, ah nor mis et exlex as it is, has not
produced more of disorder and unseemly contention
among us. Perhaps we have all in some measure felt
that if, like the Apostle, we were without law, yet that
we were under law to Christ, and so through grace have
been preserved from that besetting sin of the carnal
mind and mark of apostasy, which St. Paul, in
his Second Thessalonians, designates as anomia or law-
lessness.
In the absence, also, of a well-considered and legally-
drawn model trust-deed, each ecclesiastical district has
been comp lied to form its own, thus incurring far more
expense, and that for instruments defective in their pro-
visions, or of dissimilar usage, which at some future time
will probably result in great practical inconvenience to
the Church at large. Above ail, this ecclesiastical isola-
tion tends to weaken the ties which bind the various
congregations together, and to render common action
and general co-operation in Church objects less attain-
able. It introduces, in fact, Congregationalism in the
place of Church union. But if it is an object we all have
at heart that the Colonial Dioceses shall be one with the
Mother-Church in doctrine, in discipline, in liturgical
order, in tone, in mind, and spirit; not less nearly does it
concern the well-being of every Diocesan Church to con-
nect together its various parts by one general system of
regulations, and to be guided by the counsels of one cen-
tral duly-constituted governing body.
In order then, if possible, to effect the above objects in
a legal and satisfactory manner, I felt it desirable to pro-
ceed to England, where I could obtain the suggestions
and advice of those most experienced in ecclesiastical law
and in the principles of our Church. Placing, accordingly,
in such hands the resolutions framed at the several meet-
ings of our provisional Assembly, the document s which I
now lay before you are the result; in the establishment of
which as the constitutions and trust-deed of this Diocese
I desire your concurrence. No sooner had the need of
local regulations by the Colonial Dioceses began to be
felt, than difficulties were raised, which seemed to stand
in the way of any satisfactory conclusion. The legality of
any meeting of the Bishop, Clergy, and Laity of a Colonial
Diocese to agree upon Synodal constitutions and deed of
trust was questioned; the provisions _.of which conse-
quently would be invalidated by the illegality of such
meeting. Thus the relation of the Colonial Dioceses to
the Established Church hampered their powers of self-
regulation ; and while none of the advantages of being
exclusively a Church of the State appeared to be extended
to the colonies, the feebleness of Erastianism and the
odium of a dominant Church alone remained as our por-
tion.
With regard to the legal question, the doubt arose from
the construction put upon 25 Hen. VIII., c. 19, commonly
known as the Act of Submission, which was held to forbid
all synodal meetings whatever without licence from the
Crown. But the statute was plainly intended to restrain
meetings of Convocation, and the promulgating canons by
the Bishops and Clergy without the consent of the Crowm,
whieh therein acted as trustee for the laity and as deposi-
tory of the supreme civil authority, which might again
be, as it had been, encroached upon by such canons.
That this is the true construction of the statute which
applies to the National Synod of the Church of England
is now admitted by the ablest lawyers. It did not apply
even to Ireland, much less to dependencies of the realm
of England unknown and undreamt of in those days.
Diocesan Synods, indeed, stand on different grounds
from National or even Provincial Synods of the two
Provinces: of Canterbury and York. Diocesan Synods
have no power to make canons which shall bind Provin-
cial Synods or the Metropolitan as Judge of the Superior
Ecclesiastical Courts; but they have authority to adapt
provincial canons (such as the canons of 1603) to the
wants of the diocese; to make regulations in the nature
of by-laws, provided they do not overthrow or contra-
vene the principles of those canons.
That such Synods are legal was proved by the Synod
of his clergy lately summoned by the Bishop of Exeter,
and such synodal action is admitted by the Archbishop
of Canterbury in his latest charge to be legal. The
Synod of Exeter was no contravention of the statute
of Henry VIII. The best commentary, however, upon
that statute is supplied by the “ Reformatio Legum,”
begun under Archbishop Cranmer, with authority
of Act of Parliament passed in 154-9 by Henry VIII.,
continued in the reign of Edward VI., and finally ap-
proved of by Archbishop Matthew Parker in 1571, from
whose MSS. I now proceed to quote. In the portion of
the work entitled, “ De Ecclesia,” we find, c. 18, treating
of “ Provincial Synods,” the calling ol which by the
Archbishop is thus restrained by the Crown—-“ Sine
nostra voluntate ac jussu nunquam convocentur.”
But what say the next chapters (19 and 20) P The
former is entitled, “DeSynodo cujuslibet Episcopi in
sua diocoesi.” The latter commences thus Singulo
quoque anno Synodus ab Episcopo indicatur.” It is
absurd, then, to suppose that the previous Act of Sub-
mission was intended to forbid these Diocesan Synods,
which by the same King are commanded to be held,
while at the same time the most jealous care is taken to
rest>ain the meeting of the Provincial Synod of Canter-
bury or York without the commandment of the Crown !
But the history of the Church it self furnishes instances
of such Synods, held by prelates whose names throw a
lustre over our Church —Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore, the
great pr‘inoter ot the translation of the Scriptures into
Irish, held a Synod in the year 1638; and the Constitu-
tions there made may be found in the Appendix of his
Life by Bishop Burnett, who says “ When the news of
this was carried to Dublin, some said it was an illegal
assembly, and that his presuming to make canons was
against law, and brought him within the guilt of pres-
munire.” But nothing followed upon it, although the
arbitrary Strafford at that time was administering the
government of Ireland. Burnett adds, “ That Arch-
bishop Usher, who knew well how much Bedell could
say for himself upon this head, advised those that moved
that he might be brought up on it, to let him alone, lest
he should be provoked to say more for himself than any
of his accusers could say against him.” We have thus
the testimony of Usher in favour of Diocesan Synods,
added to that of Bedell; and we may adduce Archbishops
Leighton and Wake as witnesses to the same points, as
well as the more modern instances of the Bishop of
Exeter and the Archbishop of Canterbury. I did not,
however, rely solely upon the testimony of Bishops, how-
ever eminent, to the use, and need, and lawfulness of
such Diocesan Synods. In order to test the accuracy of
the opinion, I had further recourse to the highest legal
advice, and had the satisfaction of learning from Sir E.
Bethell, Sir F. Kelly, and Mr. Napier of the Irish bar, and
A. J. Stephens. Esq., whose compilation of the eelesiastical
statutes shows him to be intimately acquainted with
ecclesiastical law, that such Diocesan Synodal meetings
were strictly legal, and that within their competency
they might make by-laws or local constitutions to carry
out the ecclesiastical canons of the province of
which they form a part. They can, indeed, make no law
binding superior ecclesiastical authority, but they can
bind themselves to carry out existing ecclesiastical law.
Now this is precisely the power we want. Our object is
not to make a new or independant Church. We desire not
to change doctrines, liturgy, or canons, but simply to
adopt rules by which those usages and principles of om
Church may be effectually expressed, and which may be
sustained by the local Courts of the colony as in any
other case of simple contract.
Even were it not thus morally certain that in framing
Synodal constitutions we are about to follow a strictly
legal and ecclesiastical course, the respective Bills of the
Archbishop of Canterbury and of the present Ministry
remove all doubt as to the readiness of the Church and
Government at home to concede all necessary power.
The Archbishop’s Bill, indeed, lapsed on the ground that
self-government having been granted to the colonies it
was not for the Imperial Parliament to legislate posi-
tively for any portion of their inhabitants; and with re-
gard to the Solicitor-General’s Bill, the change of the
Secretary of State for the Colonies together with the
pressure of business at the close of last session, caused
its unexpected withdrawal, although with the lull
support of Her Majesty’s Government it is to
be brought forward again in the ensuing session.
Every doubt will then be set at rest. Acting,
therefore, on the conviction that I am proceeding
in accordance with the law of the Church and ol
the land, the example of the most approved of our
Bishops in each century since the Reformation, and the
consenting authority of our civil and ecclesistical rulers,
I propose to summon a Diocesan Synod to consider the
constitutions which I have caused to be framed, and a
trust-deed for the settlement of such property as may be
given for the support of this Diocesan Church.
I have already stated the powers and limitations of
such Diocesan Synods. They cannot make laws but only
by-laws and rules of proceeding, binding on those who
personally or by due representation agree to them.
But here a most important question arises, how
should such Synods be composed, and what the authority
respectively to be exercised by the several component
parts of that body ?
That the Church is the “ congregatio fideUum,*’ the
general body of professed believers,' and the clergy the
ministers arid servants of that great body for Christ’s
sake, no one will dispute. That the latter are to teach
and rule in the congregation, yet not as lords over_ God’s
heritage', nor possessing dominion over its faith, is
equally clear. St. Paul admonishes the Hebrew converts
to obey them that have the rule over them, and submit
themselves, and he himself excluded from communion
the incestuous Corinthian and other evildoers. This re-
lation ot teachers and disciples, pastors, and flock, spin-
tual rulers and those subject to them for conscience sake,
is based on the divine commission to bind and loose, given
to ministers on their ordination. This is a distinction
between the laity and clergy not to be obliterated,
and consequently not to be forgotten or laid aside
in any Diocesan regulations to be adopted. That


the laity have also their parts and duties in the runs in their name, as well as that of the Elders
Church is no less certain; but neither truth nor god- and Apostles, and above all, the Holy Ghost Himself. It
liness are likely to be subserved by confusing their is true that the point in question had already been decided
offices and responsibilities with those of the clergy, by the Holy Spirit, when St. Peter was instructed by his
The adjustment of this grave question turns upon the vision to go in and eat with Cornelius, who was also bap-
point wiere rests the responsibility of “feeding the tized by the Spirit without being b mnd to keep the whole
Church ol God” with true doctrine, and separating from law of circumcision. The concurrence, nevertheless, of
the congregation them that walk disorderly. Now, the Brethren, was invited and expressed in that decree.
Scripture, the history of the Church, and the ecclesias- and which consequently was issued in the name of the
tical laws of the Church of England, assign this re- whole Church of Jerusalem; and, doubtless, where the
sponsibility to the ministry alone, in the person of the Spirit of God is, there the like sameness of judgment will
Bishop, aided by his presbyters, and acting, so far as is be found in things pertaining to God between the clergy
possible, in concurrence with the lay members of his and laity, even to the end of the world,
flock. The Angel of the Apocalyptic is alone That the laity joined on that occasion in electing those
held responsible for the state of his people; and so St. who should be sent to promulgate their decrees, is certain;
Paul bids Timothy, sent by the Apostle to regulate the that they also nominated and set before the Apostles the
Church at Ephesus, “ hold fast the form of sound words, seven deacons, is equally plain. Here, indeed, they have
and commit the same to faithful men, who shall be able an undoubted right, as well as in the management of the
to teach others, to exercise jurisdiction over the elders, monetary concerns of the churches, a principal share,
and count those worthy of double honour who laboured And if injudicial matters and in questions of doctrine their
in the word and doctrine.” A man that was an heretic, advice and concurrence may fitly be sought, still the ulti-
after a first and second admonition, Titus was to reject mate responsibility, by the appointment of God, does not
from communion, and thus the power of the keys admit- rest with them, but with the Bishops and Presbyters act-
ting to the visible Church by baptism, and excluding ing under and with Him for the furtherance of the truth,
therefrom, by casting out of communion, clearly rests Keeping, then, in rniud thh leading principle, “that
with the commissioned ministers of God acting in each ministerial responsibility arising from the Divine com-
Church under the paramount authority of the chief or mission to teach and feed the liock, cannot be devolved on
presiding pastor, those who have no such calling;” admitting on the other
This responsibility cannot be devolved upon the laity, hand the wisdom and propriety of seeking the concurrence
The Bishop and clergy are separated to the preaching of of the laity injudicial sentences and doctrinal decisions ;
the Word, to be expositors of the law of Christ, above all, allowing their right in the administration
and are answerable to Him for its enforcement; but of the funds ofthe Church, and giving full liberty of ex-
to. guard against party or ill-considered acts of dis- pressing their opinion as to the eligibility of candidates
cipline, the verdict or concurrence of the laity as to tor the ministerial office, —1 have endeavoured so to frame
whether that law has been broken may fittingly be the constitutions and trust-deed as to meet these prin-
had. The appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy ciples and requirements. It is for you to consider how
Council is of this nature; yet even here cases might far the task has been successfully achieved. Much toil,
arise, if vital doctrine were directly or by implication and pains, and desire to arrive at the truth, have been ex-
impugned, when it would become the duty of the minis- pended on it.
ters of God to refuse obedience to the doctrines of men, Such as these documents are I place them in your
and to teach God’s truth rather than any human per- hands, reminding you of the very solemn responsibility
version of it. Such undivided responsibility was claimed now devolving upon us, namely, that of exercising the
and acted upon br more than 400 ministers in that dis- inherent rights and duties of the Church to the glory of
ruption which severed, a few years ago, the Kirk of God and furtherance of the Gospel, in accordance with
Scotland. The like authority is asserted by the Con- Primitive, Apostolic, and Scriptural rule.
Terence of the Wesleyan body, which is the supreme That in the absence of statute law and statute sup-
court of appeal; and such, too, the Church of England port we have need of recurring to the first principles of
claims for her national Sydnod in controversies of the that divine institution, no one who has been engaged in
faith. Yet in none of these cases is infallibilty claimed for Church extension in this colony can for a moment doubt,
the judicial or synodal decision, as in the Papal Church. Independent congregations; a disunited Presbytery; an
The Protestant laity have still the right of private Episcopate absolute in name, but weak in power; a
judgment. They may “ prove all things, but hold fast laity anxious to do their part, and yet ill instructed in
that which they find in their conscience to be good.” their rights and duties —how, with such untempered
They may take on themselves the responsibility of mortar, can we hope to raise a spiritual building, or
differing from the judgment of their pastors, nor plant a vigorous branch of the United Church of Eng-
can they be forced against their own will and land and Ireland in this soil, or how advance the king-
conscience to hearken and obey. Thus they exercise a dom of God by vital religion and mutual love P How
negative voice, and can refuse concurrence in ministerial shall we know the members of our Church, or provide
decisions. Personal freedom is thus secure—spiritual for their visited at their homes, or assembled in
liberty safe. the congregation, without a general parochial organiza-
The presence, at least, of the laity, in the first Synod tion? It is only by making full proof of your ministry,
at Jerusalem is undoubted; and in the provincial coun- by feeding the sheep, feeding the lambs of Christ, that
cils of the Cypriance age, their attendance is also you can work the work of (iod. But how can you sys-
acknowledged. That they ever voted on doctrinal tematically bring home the gospel to your flock, if you
questions is denied by the most accurate and know them not, nor enter them upon the register of the
learned writers. The superscription of the pastoral Church P And if no sympathy pervades the body of our
or synodical letter to the Gentile Churches is members, I know not how the weaker are to be cared for,
thus explained by a recent influential Wesleyan writer, or the ministry of the Word impartially secured to them,
the Rev. Alfred Barrett, whom I cite principally as How, without due organization, is it possible to fulfil
an unbiassed witness; “ The Brethren,” he says,“ were as- the precept that the members should have the same care
sociated with the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, as one for the other —the larger congregations assisting and
testifying to the truth and reality of the acts of these latter supporting the weaker ?
in council, and that this document was a faithful account Disjointed efforts are always feeble. Local affections
of those decisions.” 1 know that v. 6of that chapter narrow-minded, and disunited congregations jealous of
states that the Apostles and Elders came together to con- each other. To godliness we are first to add brotherly
sider of this matter, and v. 4of chap. 16 says that the de- kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity. The love
crees were ordained of the Apostles and Elders which of God in Christ is like the material sun. There is no-
were at Jerusalem, thus apparently excluding the laity thing hid from the heat thereof; and the Church, which
from doctrinal legislation. Vet, eomparingyerses 23 and is the spouse of Christ, is then most like the Bridegroom,
28, “The Apostles, Elders, and Brethren,” and then “it when His love is shed abroad in her heart, and she
seemed good unto the Holy Ghost and to us to lay upon loves all them that are His for His sake, who loved them,
you no greater burden, &c.,” it is evident that the decree and gave Himself for them.
If the plans I propose to you, and the regulations
which shall be adopted, result in a more diffusive charity
among our people, a closer union amongst ourselves,
more constant pastoral superintendence, more vital
religion, and deeper attachment to their spiritual
guides, the days and hours will not have been ill ex-
pended which have been devoted to their preparation.
Of one thing I am satisfied, that God will be with that
Church and those ministers who neither for ambition
nor lucre, nor by constraint, give themselves to the work ;
who, penetrated with the Jove of Goi in Christ for lost
and fallen man, seek to save souls from that eternal per-
dition which is bound up with alienation from God and
enmity to holiness of the carnal mind.
This is the true work of the Church and its ministers,
and, in so far as a proper organization may tend to foster
a vigorous inner life, so far may synods, and constitu-
tions, and trust-deeds, be lawful and expedient; but
they will never be a substitute for the living energy of
the spirit of Christ, or supersede the power of that love
which flows from Him who Himself is love, embracing
the whole of Ills intelligent creatures, is testilied also
by all His material works in all places of his dominion,
even to the verge of space itself.
Extract from Barrow. A Treatise of the Pope’s Su-
premacy. Vol. 7, p. 315. —At first each church was
settled apart under its own Bishop and Presbyters, so as
independently and separately to manage its own con-
cernments; each was fi gooerned by its own head , and had
its own laws." Every Bishop, as a Prince in his own
church, did act freely, according to his will and dis-
cretion, with the advice of his Ecclesiastical Senate, and
with the consent of his people (the which he did use to
consult), without being controllable by any other or ac-
countable to any, further than his obligation to uphold
the verity of Christian profession, and to maintain frater-
nal communion in charity and peace with neighbouring
churches, did require; in which regard, if he were notably
peccant, he was liable to be disclaimed by them as no
good Christian, and rejected from communion, together
with his church, if it did adhere to him in his misde-
meanours.
Extract from Bishop Sage. A Vindication of a
Treatise intituled The Principle of the Cypriance Ace.—
The Bishops of those times, upon many prudential con-
siderations, some perhaps common to all ages, others pe-
culiar to their own times and circumstances, were willing
to give all proper and reasonable satisfaction to the
people concerning sometimes the necessity, sometimes
the expediency, always the equity of whatever resolution
they took, or orders they appointed, or methods they
chose, or decrees they made, or canons they enacted, or
sentences they formed, or censures they inflicted, in a
word, of their whole administration of the Government.
Nay, it is very credible that they were very tender .of
doing anything that might cross the people’s inclinations.
It is credible they seldom or never did it but when the
people were notoriously unreasonable. They were will-
ing, and it was their wisdom to live in concord and good
correspondence with the people, not to offend them, not
to provoke them, not to embitter them. Whatever al-
lowances, therefore, could consist with the honour and
deference due to paternal authority, they were willing to
grant to the people. But it was very well consistent
with the honour and regard due to sut*h authority that
as many of the people as pleased, and was convenient,
even in provincial councils, to be ivitnesses of what was
done in them. It was no ways inconsistent with th® in-
terests and exigencies of authority even to allow such of
the people as pretended to hear them, to propose reason-
able overtures or reasonable objections. It was in many
cases necessary that from the people they should receive
informations and testimonies concerning matters of fact.
To be allowed to give advice is one thing, and to define is
another. There is a great diff rence between debating
and determining; and if the people were allowed to be
present they could not be hindered to judge unless their
natures had been changed, it being natural to men, as
they are men, to have their own judgment of everything
that comes to their knowledge. But to judge as a man ,
and to judge as a man in authority, are very different
things.


✓
✓


*
• X ■ . .
'■f '
h - „
■A
V-
**
%
**
.
#
-
■ v .*
%
1
