

Vlc. 5
2-I+l


Q/TJIE E nsr SO LX IE 1 IF 1 ,
M C&HilillffC&f, Proprietors*
(LATE OF THE ROYAL HOTEL.)
THIS HOTEL formerly known as the PALACE HOTEL, has b°en
considerably enlarged during the last few months, and now offers
Accomodation of a superior description to
VJSfrOJIS
SUITES OF ROOMS elegantly furnished for FAMILIES.
A LARGE DINING HALL WITH A LIBERAL BILL OF FARE AT A REASONABLE TARIFF.
SUPERIOR BH.X.XARD ROOM A33TD TABLE.
the best oe liquors only kept.
The situation of this HOTEL commends itself to all VISITORS whether
LAND or WATER.
It is the nearest Hotel to the Railway Station, Pier, Public Gardens & Baths.
NUGENT & GOSLING whilst thanking their Patrons for past favors,
solicit a continuation of the same in their NEW HOUSE, and assure them
that no effort will be wanting on their part to give the fullest satisfaction.
Til ALBERT HOH
OOFFII ROOMS,
CORNER OE
YARRA STREET & MARKET SQUARE, GEELONG,
In close proximity to the Baths, Shipping , the Parks, fyc.
MEALS. REFRESHMENTS, (Non-Intoxicating)
BOARD & RESIDENCE.
Separate luncheon Room for Ladies.
READING & RECREATION ROOMS, Free to Customers.
BAGATELLE. BILLIARDS.
SMOKING ROOM.
COMMUNICATIONS BY MAIL OR WIRE PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO,
SAMUEL MIDDLETON, Manager.
LARGE YARD AND STABLING FREE.


0 VSV/.69V0 80SI- 6
luiiiiiilllillllllll




VISITORS’
ILLUSTRATED GUIDE
GEELONG,
WITH A
J3rIEF OF J-/ORNE.
PENNED AND PENCILLED BY
“R. C. Q”
JfENRY /A.ALOP pTREET
1879.


■


CONI ENTS.
PASK
Geelong ......... 5
Industrial and Juvenile Exhibition .... 7
Special Railway Excursion 10
Joseph Henry Connor, Esq. 11
Botanical Gardens - 12
Johnstone Park 13
Jeffery’s Fernery 14
Geelong Racing Club 16
St. Alban’s 16
Pleasant Drives 17
Mineral Springs 19
Fishing Grounds 19
The Vineyards 21
The River Barwon 22
The Woollen Mills 22
Hotels, Restaurants, and Boarding Houses .... 24
Public Institutions 26
Cab Rates and Fares - 36
Railway Time Table 37
Queenscliff 37
Lome, (Loutit Bay) 38




Joseph Henry Connor, Esq
MAYOR OF GEELONG,




‘Bf XI ' L ; : L ■ Lj. uN ,u
(3- v(?w o *^3 ,! Cvl) ‘A
M|HE town of Geelong is distant, by railway, 45 miles
from Melbourne (fare 7s. 6d. and 55.) It is built
~ upon a range of hills running east and west, descending
on the north to the beautiful sheet of sea-water known as Corio
Bay, and on the south to the Barwon River, and is admitted to
be one of the healthiest towns in the colony. The population
of Geelong and suburbs is roughly estimated at 25,000. The
streets are broad, well paved and lighted, and there are many
handsome public buildings, parks, and gardens ; and the
woollen manufactories and tanneries on the River Barwon are
the most extensive in Australia. Geelong is the port of ship-
ment for most of the wool grown in the Western district.
During the season there are often as many as six or eight
vessels of from a thousand to fifteen hundred tons each, lying
alongside the Yarra-street and Railway Wharves, which
extend for a considerable distance into the sea. These
jetties form delightful summer evening promenades, when a
gorgeous sunset colors the distant You Yangswith a purple
tint, and makes the rippling waters of the Bay appear as
though countless gems sparkled upon its fair bosom. To the
left and right of the wharves named, are the Western and
Eastern Bathing-houses for ladies and gentlemen. They are
well protected by strong fencing, replete with conveniences for


bathers, and so clear is the water, and so clean the bottom,
that the smallest objects can generally be distinguished upon
old Ocean’s smooth sandy floor below. The steamboat wharf
is at the foot of Moorabool street, and the journey by the
“ Alert ” to and from Melbourne (daily) by sea route Is
very enjoyable, and costs a trifle less than the railway
ordinary rate. Almost within a stone’s throw of the Ladies’
Baths (Eastern) is the Beach entrance to the Botanical
Gardens, a description of which is given further on. It is
approached from the Beach by ascending the newly-made hill
near the Baths, and turning a little to the right. The gate
is at the corner of Garden-street. Keeping the extreme left
path in the Garden, a walk of about half-a-mile brings you
to the North-eastern gate, passing through which, and turning
to the left, you are close to Limeburners’ Point, and can either
return to town by the Beach, or along the newly-formed road
between the Beach and the hill summit. Near the Eastern
Beach bathing-houses is Blunt’s boat-shed. Here you may
get a boat for a mere trifle; usually in summer time,
there are sailing boats plying for hire at the Yarra-street
Wharf (the Barwon and the Ariel are the two best), and for
sixpence you may have a sail round the inner Bay, or for a
shilling a trip to Point Henry and back.
If you have sauntered to the left, or western side of the
Wharves, there is good beach walking for a long distance
North-west; and, if you are diligent in the search, you may
find in the hill sides, here and there, interesting fossils which
indicate that the spot was in ages past the resort of huge
animals, long since extinct. There are layers of shells far
above the present sea-level, showing that at one period the
ocean rolled, probably, over all but what are now the highest
parts of Geelong.


Perhaps, however, you have less taste for seas sceneryide
than for the meandering river, with its green fields on one
side, and manufacturing industries on the other. The visitor
to Geelong will, in this case, make his way to the Barwon,
which is about a mile from the Exhibition in Moorabool-
street, in a straight line South. On the way he will pass on
the left the Church of England Grammar School, a noble
pile of building; and crossing the Queenscliffe Kailway in
Kardinia Park, he will presently come to South Geelong.
Close to the Barwon bridge, on the left, is the younger
Blunt’s boat-house, and the Woollen Factories lie to
the east and west, easily approached. On the other side,
the Barrabool Hills rise gradually from the river, the waving
corn glistening in the sun, with, here and there, large green
patches denoting vineyards and orchards, a pretty picture upon
which the eye may rest long without wearying with men
who have been used daily to the feverish excitement and
high-pressure of city life.
This brief general description will enable the visitor to
become acquainted at once with the principal features of the
town, and having traversed east, west, and south (Corio
Bay lying north) he will readily find the places we will now
more particularly describe.
INDUSTRIAL AND JUVENILE EXHIBITION.
Reference is made elsewhere to the active part taken by
Mr. J. H. Connor, Mayor of Geelong, in the holding of a
local Exhibition, and the erection of a handsome building in
Market Square for that purpose. It may be pointed out
that his efforts have been ably seconded by the following
Executive Committee :—Messrs. William Bradley, T. N.
Couves, John Daniel, William Humble, William Haigh, G.
F. Link, William Mathews, Jas. Munday, G. M. Hitchcock,


J. D. Robinson, E. Sasse, James Scott, Robert Scott, James
Strong, W. G. Stephens, W. Sommers, J. M. Tulloch, C. A.
Van Den Houten, and John Hay; and by Mr. John Davison,
one of the vice-presidents. At an early stage of the work
they were successful in securing the services of Mr. Edward
Hurst, the able secretary of the Sandhurst Show, to whose
experience and judgment the Geelong public are largely
indebted for the rapid and successful completion of the
Exhibition, Mr. Hurst, it may be added, found good col-
leagues in Mr. Foster, the assistant secretary, and in Mr.
William Nicholas, late of the Mining Department. The
Exhibition building, with its annexes, has been erected at a
cost of about £4OOO, the sum of £3OOO having been raised
for that purpose by Corporation debentures, which were
taken up in the town, immediately, at par. The building
was designed, and its erection superintended by Mr. Robert
Balding, Corporation Surveyor, and the contractors for the
several works connected with it were Messrs. Reid, Neville,
Sadleir, and Holyoak. The foundation-stone was laid by
Mrs. J. H. Connor on the Ist September, 187$. The main
building is 156 feet in length by 63 feet in width, the height
to the main roof being 35 feet; the total wall and floor space
available being 30,000 feet. It is lighted along the whole
northern and southern sides by revolving glass sashes, and
at the western end by a large semi-circular window, of
ornamental design. There is a large arched opening at the
eastern end, leading to another spacious building, enclosing
the space between the main building and the Town Clock
Tower, the eastern end of which is an imposing mass
of rock-work, upon which a number of water-jets throw
a continuous spray of water. Below is a handsome por-
celain fountain, in full play, throwing its crystal drops
upon the majestic fronds of the ferns artistically grouped
by Mr. Raddenberry, curator of the Geelong public
gardens. In the centre of this exquisitely-arranged building
is a polished marble fountain from Sandhurst, throwing out
its silvery stream, cooling the atmosphere, and gladdening
the eye with its transparent brightness. In this building will
be found the Juvenile exhibits, comprising a vast quantity of
cleverly executed work in every trade and occupation peculiar
to Young Australia; and also the working machinery. To the


right, or on the south side of it, is an extensive annexe devoted
to the display of boats, carriages, stoves, cooking ranges, agri-
cultural implements, &c., &c. Returning to the main building
through the arched doorway (at which there is a pair of
splendid alabaster vases), the tout ensemble is strikingly pretty.
At the back of the gallery, designed for 200 choristers or
more, Mr. Smith, the postmaster of Batesford, has artistically
arranged his magnificent collection of Australian native war
weapons. In the centre of the great hall is a large fountain
with an ornamental base in rock-work. This throws a jet
nearly to the roof, and is designed, even upon the hottest
days, to maintain a cool temperature. There are four com-
paratively wide avenues running the full length of the
building, and there are large recesses in the centre (on the
north and south), to relieve anything like a crush. Along
the centre avenues are ranged cases that give an almost
continuous display of the jeweller’s art, of elegant apparel,
interesting exhibits of gems, and war trophies (sent by the
Government) captured from the Russians and others, in
various campaigns ; glorious collections of shells; wonderful
contrivances used in electric telegraphy, and in the lighting
of light-houses; the products of our woollen mills, rope-
works, founderies, cooperages, potteries, glass-works, and
the innumerable other industries and professions that have
profusely poured forth their best, in order to demonstrate to
visitors the rapid progress we are making in art, science, and
manufactures. Of our principal local exhibitors may be
mentioned, Messrs. Strong and Pearce, Brearley Brothers,
James Munday, Bright and Hitchcock, J. H. Smith (Bates-
ford), Humble and Nicholson, and a host of others too
numerous to particularise. The walls are covered with
pictures, a great number of which are valuable, and of great
interest. The latter are contributed by Messrs. Ibbotson,
Orchard, Davison, Charity, Austin, and others. There are,
of course, here and there some indifferently executed works;
but, on the whole, the Art collection may be pronounced a
very fine one. There is a large and interesting collection of
drawings, the work of the Geelong State Schools, which has
been arranged by Mr. Van den Houten. Valuable trophies
in silver are exhibited by John Tait, Esq., of Sydney, and
James Wilson, Esq., of St. Alban’s stables ; and the magni-


ficent “Clarke Cup,” won recently by the Corio Bay Rowing
Club, as well as other trophies won by the Barwon and Corio,
occupy a prominent place in the building. The total number
of exhibits is about 5000, including liberal contributions from
Queensland, New South Wales, South and Western Australia,
Tasmania, New Zealand, Great Britain, and America.
The Geelong Exhibition was formally opened by His
Excellency the Governor, (The Most Honorable the Marquis
of JNormanby,) on Thursday, the 18th December. A public
banquet was the same evening given by J. H. Connor, Esq.,
Mayor of Geelong, at the Town Hall, to His Excellency, the
Ministers, and three hundred guests, including all whose
assistance had contributed in a marked manner to the
successful completion of the undertaking.
SPECIAL RAILWAY EXCURSION FARES.
The following arrangements may be made with the
Railway Department for Excursion Trains to Geelong during
the opening of the Exhibition, from all parts of the Colony;—
Return Fares : School Children, under 16 years of age,
Is.; Senior Scholars from 16 to 20 years, and Teachers (one
to ten children), 2s. 6d.; Parents, 4s.
No application for less than 500 will be entertained.
Communications must be addressed to P. P. Labertouche,
Esq., Secretary of Railways.
Evening Performances.
Musical performances take place Nightly in the Exhibition
Building, Mr. Begley, Conductor.
Rates of Admission.
The following are the rates of Admission to the Geelong
Exhibition :—
Family Season Ticket
Gentlemen’s do.
... £3 3 0
110
Ladies’ do.
0 12 6
Adult Exhibitor’s do.
Juvenile Exhibitor’s do.
0 10 6
0 5 0
Opening Day.
Before 3 p.m., 2s. 6d.; children, Is.
After 3 p.m., Is.; children, 6d.


JOSEPH HENRY CONNOR, Esq.,
Mayor of Geelong,
And President of the Exhibition Committee.
The active part taken by Mr. Connor, in the matter of
the Geelong Exhibition, fully entitles him to a place in this
publication. Realising the importance of this town and
district as a manufacturing centre, Mr. Connor endeavoured
to move the Town Council to cordially co-operate with him
to establish an Industrial Exhibition here. In this he was,
for a time, only partially successful; nothing daunted how-
ever, by the opposition he met with, he continued to agitate
the question. He and Councillor Sommers made a canvass
of the town, and within a few hours they obtained subscriptions
to the extent of £3OO for the purpose. After a long struggle
in the Town Council, a motion was carried to issue debentures
to cover the cost of erecting an Exhibition Building, and the
result of Mr. Connor’s persistent efforts may be be seen in
the large and handsome structure that now stands in the
Market Square. Mr. Connor was elected a Councillor of the
Geelong Corporation, on the 18th November, 1872, an
Alderman for Barwon Ward on the 9th November, 1876,
and Mayor on the 9th October, 1878 ; he was re-elected on
the 9th November, with the general approval of the Burgesses.
During his tenure of office he has given abundant proof that
he is animated by a sincere desire to advance the interests of
this town and district. He has displayed rare energy, in all
public matters to that end, and has spared neither time nor
money to do credit to the high and honorable position he
occupies as Chief Magistrate of the Town of Geelong.
Mr. Connor was born at Stonyford, in the North of Ireland,
on the 6th April, 1834, his lather being a large farmer and
stock owner in the County of Antrim. He came to Melbourne
in August, 1852, worked successfully as a miner at Forest
Creek, and the following year settled at Colac, where, as a
general storekeeper, he carried on a profitable business for
many years. For nine years he was a member of the Colac
Road Board, and Colac Shire Council. In 1864 he was
elected member for Polwarth and South Grenville, and


represented that district up to the end of 1870. At the general
election in 1873, he was again elected, and continued to sit in
the Legislative Assembly up to the close of that Parliament.
He gave special attention to agricultural matters, and made
many important suggestions in reference to them, which
subsequently became law. He was banqueted by his constituents
in 1865, and again in 1873, and on both occasions was the
recipient of handsome presents in testimony of his attention
to the requirements of the district, Mr. Connor was mainly
instrumental in procuring a railway to Colac. He has for
some years been President of the Geelong and Western
District Agricultural and Horticultural Society. He took an
active part in establishing the Free Library, and has given
valuable assistance in acclimatising fish of different kinds in
the several water reserves, streams, and rivers of the district.
BOTANICAL GARDENS, (or Eastern Park.)
These gardens, which cover about two hundred acres, are
situated at the eastern end of the town, the principal entrance
facing Malop-street, (the first street to the left of the
Exhibition building). They are under the managenent of
Mr John Raddenberry and a staff of assistants. With the
exception of about five acres devoted to a nursery,
conservatory, hothouse, propagating house, fernery, camellia
shed, and aviary, the grounds are laid out as a park,
ornamented with forest trees and shrubs, and intersected
by broad paths, and miles of splendid carriage drives.
Near the main entrance, and within the park, are
the grounds of the Geelong and Western District Fish
Acclimatisation Society’s ponds, and complete apparatus
for hatching and distributing trout, &c. Bearing to the left,
and commanding a fine view of the Bay, is the Rotunda, a
large octagonal building, 90ft. in diameter, with water laid on
for the convenience of school, picnic, and other parties. The
use of the building may be obtained by giving two or three
days’ notice to the superintendent, Mr. Raddenberry, and by
undertaking, at the same time, that no damage shall be done
to trees and shrubs, and that all bottles, papers, and other
debris shall be cleared away. There are swings for juvenile


STEAMER DAILY BETWEEN GEELONG AND MELBOURNE.
THE HEW, FAST, AND COMMODIOUS STEAMEE
“.a. Xj ie m, t,”
Leaves Geelong, DAILY, at 8.45 a.m., returning from Queen’s
Wharf, Melbourne, at 4.15 p.m., (except on Saturdays, when she
returns at 3 p.m.)
PARES:—
Saloon, 45.; Return, 6s. Forecabin, 2s. 6d.; Return, 4s.
RETURN TICKETS AVAILABLE FOR ONE MONTH.
GEELONG OFFICE-.—FREE LIBRARY BUILDINGS.
J. TRAILL, Agent.
LITTLE MALOP STREET,
SQUARE.
Accommodation for Commercial travellers and other
§entlemen.
WINE, BEER, & SPIRITS OE THE BEST BRANDS
B OiXiIARD EO Q>:9i -
This Hotel is within easy distance of the Post Office,
Railway Station, Bay, and Public Gardens.
IAHEiS FIT 10W, Proprietor.


MACK’S HOTEL,
OORIO
GEELONG.
I—
jfSVO
IfILLIIM fOMMERS-
Patronised by His Excellency the Govenor.
Under the present Proprietorship this Hotel ,
which is regarded as the
FIRST IN THE WESTERN DISTRICT
HAS UNDERGONE
EXTENSIVE ALTERATIONS & ADDITIONS.
,The (Establishment commands a magnificent siew of
‘ J ' 5 * • : ■i- m
pORIO THE JoU JaNGS,
And is one of the most charming
SUMMER SEA-SIDE RESIDENCES
IN THE COLONY.


2 ■. te MibJi
ft I jr' 1
| f ~ Jl
* s
o '
Q \




amusement, a beautiful green sward, plenty of foliage to afford
protection from the sun, and the sea-view is perhaps one of
the prettiest to be found in the colony. Bearing south, and
almost in a direct line from the Rotunda is the. nursery, a
beautifully laid out garden of acres, at the end of which is
the conservatory and hothouse, containing a magnificent
collection of the choicest floricultural gems to be found in any
public garden in Australia.
JOHNSTONE PARK.
This is one of the prettiest park reserves in Geelong, and
being almost in the centre of the town, it is a favorite
resort. It covers not more than two or three acres,
and is immediately opposite the Railway Station, the Town
Hall, and Geelong Fire Brigade Station, abutting upon it on
the south-east It was named after Mr. R. de B. Johnstone,
M.L.A., who took an active part, as Mayor of the town, in
its conversion from an unsightly morass into a beautiful
reserve. It was laid out and planted by the late Mr. Daniel
Bunce, curator of the local Botanical Gardens. There is a
beautiful green sward, a fine row of ancient willows along the
line of Railway terrace, and, here and there, shrubs, pines and
other trees, that afford a pleasant shelter upon hot summer
days. It is plentifully supplied with seats, and there is a
well-built ornamental structure where the Artillery band plays
on summer evenings. The Geelong and Colac Railway line
passes through it; at the eastern end there is some pretty
rock-work, and a flag-staff, from which depends, upon holiday
occasions, the handsome Corporation banner. After a stroll
through the town, Johnstone Park furnishes the visitor with a
pleasant and convenient rest until he hears the railway signal,
at the distance of a stone’s throw, warning him that the time
has come to make the journey homeward.
THE BEACH.
There is no bay watering-place In the colony that presents
so many pleasant nooks and corners for picnic parties as
Geelong. Charming retreats are to be found, commanding


magnificent bay and land views, almost anywhere along the
shores of Corio Bay. Arriving by steamer, visitors after
leaving the wharf, turning to the left, and keeping along the
road, eastward, may “camp’' on the beach near the baths,
within sight of the steamer; or, ascending the hills, they will
find beautiful grassy slopes, supplied with comfortable seats,
where they may unpack the hamper, or less pretentious
family basket, and enjoy the vast expanse of salt water before
them, with the ever-charming You Yangs and Bellarine
Hills in the distance. If they are upon exploration bent, we
advise them to ascend the newly-formed Beach Road, and at
a comparatively short distance they will find to the left of
them (or on the seaward side), numerous pretty spots where
the camp kettle may be boiled, and they will be secluded from
all observation. Continuing along the road named, they will
come to Limeburners’ Point, of which we give a sketch
elsewhere.
Possibly, on leaving the steamboat wharf they may turn
to the right, or westward. If so, they will equally find
opportunities for enjoyment without being intruded upon.
The old jetty seen north-west is known as Hutton’s Wharf.
It is very shaky, and not safe for children to venture upon.
JEFFERY’S FERNERY.
This is one of the most charming places for a stranger to
visit. It is near the Scotch College, and about a mile from
the Post-office, in Ryrie-atreet, almost due west. It is
attached to a little rural hostelry, of which Host Jeffery is
also the presiding genius. Let no one imagine, however,
because this charming retreat is attached to a house with a
signboard indicating that “ fermented and spirituous liquors
are sold here,” that there is anything to deter the most
fastidious of the one sex, or the daintiest of the other, from
venturing within its portals. All that the stranger has to
do is to tell the genial proprietor that he desires to see his
fernery, where —
“ Fragrant waters, gushing with cool sound,
From many a jasper fount, are heard around.”


The fernery covers about an acre, and is laid out at right
angles in broad avenues, the longest being some 30 or 40
feet. There are some 200 specimens of ferns gathered from
all parts of the world. The fernery is “latticed lightly in,”
revealing through foliage of every hue and shade, the bright
blue sky above, rock-work below of fantastic shape on all
sides, and in the foreground what appears to be a huge satyr.
The fairy-like picture resembles nothing so much as the
transformation scene of a Christmas pantomime. The great
white figure, which looks like a satyr, is the “ counterfeit
presentment ” of Jove—the figure-head of the ship
“ Lightning,” which was burnt some years ago in Corio Bay.
Passing along the main walk may be seen one of the grandest
ferns in the world, the fronds being about 10ft. long and 4ft.
across. Here are ferns of strange shape, including the stag-
horn, coming out of the twisted weird-looking limbs of old
timber; there, again, relieving the more sombre green—
“ Bright-hued, frail-stemmed, climbing blossoms hang,
In vivid clusters.”
At the centre of the main walk or avenue is a very fine piece
of rock-work, covered with a pretty flowering creeper, “ the
Mother of Thousands.” Long walks stretch away from this
central point for nearly 30 yards in each direction, and the
tout ensemble is extremely pretty. The long rows of ferns
rising out of grotesque rock-work in the centre, are relieved
by side-beds of palms and camellias, the intermediate spaces
being cleanly pebbled paths. Water-pipes, finely perforated,
run the whole length of these avenues, and maintain a constant
moisture. Here the jet from the fountain throws out its cooling
spray, the drops sparkling like diamonds in the sun ; the great
majestic fronds bend gracefully to the sighing of the breeze,
and it is easy enough to indulge in
“ One of those passing rainbow dreams,
Half light, half shade, which Fancy’s beams
Paint on the fleeting mists that roll
In trance or slumber round the soul.”
And, then awakening suddenly you may realise as easily some
of the most terrible pictures of ruin and disaster that the mind
can conceive. Here is the ship’s wheel of the Sussex, wrecked
at the Barwon Heads ; here the compass of another ship, the
Hurricane, wrecked about the same time inside Port Phillip


Heads; and close to this a memento of one of the greatest
maritime disasters, and at the same of personal heroism, ever
recorded on this coast. It is the life-buoy which Tom Pearce
used when rescuing Miss Carmichael from an ocean grave. It
is marked “ Loch Ard, Glasgow.” This sad relic will be found
near an antique archway, built of some of the charred timbers
of the ship Lightning, which, with its ivy-covered freestone
adornment, is one of the features of the fernery. As a labour
of love, we should not weary of describing this charming place
at any length, if space would permit; its rockeries, its fish-
ponds, its innumerable quaint and curious features, its
many evidences of exceptional taste and rare ingenuity, its
hot-house, with specimens from every part of the world
whence ferns of rare beauty can be obtained, its garden of
fine phloxes, and lastly, but not least, its look-out tower,
40ft. high, commanding a view of Barwon Heads, Mounts
Buninyong and Macedon, and, in clear weather, even the
shipping at Williamstown and Sandrldge.
THE GEELONG RACING CLUB.
The Club’s course is situated on the flat south of the
Barwon River, and is distant from town about four miles by
road, and three miles by rail. It is one of the prettiest
courses in the colony, and possesses an excellent grand-
stand, and a compact and commodious saddling paddock.
The arrangements for weighing, &c., and the refreshment
and other booths are on a scale fully adequate to require-
ments, and the care and attention always bestowed upon the
condition of the ground and buildings merit great praise.
ST. ALBAN’S.
Mr. James Wilson’s training stables are worthy of notice in
connection with local turf matters. They are situated at St.
Alban’s, and are distant from Geelong about five miles, in a
south-easterly direction. The spirited proprietor has spared


no expense in the fitting up of the stables and training
courses, and the number and quality of the animals placed
under his charge, together with the success which he has
attained on the turf, and his well-known reputation as a
trainer, have made the “ St. Alban’s stables” familiar “house-
hold words,” and a synonyma for perfect condition and
victorious performances. The drive out is a very pleasant
one, passing the Emu Hotel on the road to Wallington, and
then down a good country road, due south for about a mile.
A stroll over the grounds will well repay a visitor for the loss
of an afternoon.
PLEASANT DRIVES.
The visitor can scarcely make a mistake in the direction
he shall take in driving out for a few hours’ pleasure, for
there is something to charm the eye everywhere in this
district, especially in the summer season. Eyansford is a
favorite trip—it is only about three miles from town, and a
good road the whole way. At the top of Eyansford Hill a
view is obtained of a magnificent expanse of country. In
front may be seen the bold outline of Mount Buninyong, to
the right the Anakies, to the left the Barrabools, at the foot
of which wind the Barwon and Moorabool rivers, which here
effect a junction. For miles around, the eye rests upon tilled
and pasture lands, with here and there pleasant green patches
of vineyard and orchard. Descending Eyansford Hill there
is a fine bridge crossing the river, and in the village are one
or two hotels, where refreshment may be obtained for man and
horse, at town rates. The Eyansford Paper Mill (referred to
elsewhere), lies to the left of the bridge, on the western side.
There is an excellent approach to it. There are a few good
vineyards in the neighborhood. Beyond Eyansford, westward,
there is very little in the shape of scenery to reward the
visitor for any expenditure of whipcord.
The Barrabool Hills (the village of Ceres being the outward
terminus) afford a pretty drive of about seven miles out and
home. The best route is by the lower road to the right, after
crossing the Barwon Bridge, At some points of the journey


a magnificent panoramic view is obtained of the town of
Geelong, and Corio Bay, with the Barwon Heads to the
right. Upon a clear day the sand hummocks may be
distinctly seen, and the blue waters of the Barwon stretching
away seaward, with its lakes and creeks, which give good
sport to the angler. There are one or two taverns at
Ceres, but the famous old Wheatsheaf, of many political
memories, is no longer a “ pub.,” and has long ceased to be
regarded as the centre of a Western coal-field. It was at
the Wheatsheaf, with its celebrated coal-shaft, where Sir
Charles Gavan Duffy (then Mr. Duffy) enunciated, in 1862,
that land policy which handed over the best lands of the
country to dummies and speculators; and it was at the
Wheatsheaf where many a speech was made that subse-
quently exercised an important influence upon the progress
or otherwise of the colony.
Another drive from which much pleasure may be derived
is to Coleman’s strawberry plantation on the Queenscliff
Road, which is situated nine miles from town, on the road to
Queenscliff, and is a favorite summer drive. Mr. Samuel
Coleman, proprietor of the Wallington Hotel, has made the
place attractive, for although the road thither is a good one,
the distance convenient, and a good view of the surrounding
country available all the way, his hotel is the chief induce-
ment to pleasure-seekers. He possesses well-laid-out straw-
berry grounds, and in the season purveys that fruit in
platefuls, with cream, in any quantity, at reasonable prices.
Opposite the hotel he has erected some summer-houses and a
commodious rotunda, where picnic and dancing parties may
make certain of enjoying themselves.
If, however, time will not allow of any of these trips being
made, give “cabby” a commission-to run you to Jeffery’s
Fernery, of which a full description is given elsewhere ; or
round the Botanical Gardens, or Eastern Park, and back by
the Beach Roadf or, across the Barwon, round by Prince’s
Bridge, and back by way of the Newtown Hill, Scotch
College, and Jeffery’s.
There are, of course, many other places to drive to, but
the visitor who has time to “do” those we have referred to,
will have no difficulty in finding his way to the remainder.


MINERAL SPRINGS.
The Clifton Hill Mineral Springs are situated about one
and a-half miles from the township of Drysdale, on Geelong
Bay. There are a number of springs, and they differ in their
mineral properties, viz. :—“ Seltzer, Iron, Magnesia, Soda
and Iron, and Sulphur.” The waters are bottled and put in
cylinders on the spot, and extra natural gas forced in by
steam power. The Drysdale Railway station is about two
miles distant, where there is a telegraph office. A cab meets
the train. Visitors may obtain board and residence in the
neighborhood.
FISHING GROUNDS.
The Lower Barwon, between the Barwon Bridge and the
Breakwater, and even beyond it, is studded on both banks
with numerous tanneries and fellmongeries, including Messrs.
Strachan, Murray, Shannon and Co.'s, Howarth’s, Munday’s,
and Brearley’s, The last-named is the Australian Tannery,
the most extensive establishment of its character in the
colony. Mr. James Munday’s works are also upon a large
scale, and bear a high reputation for the quality of leather
they produce. Beyond these works, and between them and
the Barwon Heads, are numerous creeks and lakes, which
abound in fish, and that are the resort of picnic and angling
parties in the summer season.
Bream Creek.
This is about nine miles from Geelong, with a good road
all the way. The best fishing spots are in the vicinity of Mr.
A. White’s paddock, near the Cemetery reserve, and also near
Mr. James Noble’s residence. Most of the bream are caught
at the mouth of the creek. Good sport may be had with the
salmon-trout and mullet. There are plenty of rabbits and
hares about, so that a day’s outing may be pleasantly varied
between gun and rod. It is no uncommon thing at holiday
time to find picnic parties numbering in the aggregate 200,
or more, enjoying a stroll on the ocean beach A favorite
pastime is to hunt for crayfish near the rocks. The Crustacea


are inveigled by a lump of meat, tied to the end of a string,
depending from a stout rod. When the fish bites, he is very
gently lifted, and a landing-net is dexterously thrust under-
neath the prey, which is thus easily captured. A landing-net
may be made with string or wire and a small hoop.
Spring Creek.
This is about sixteen miles from Geelong. It is reached
via Germantown and Mount Duneed. The surroundings are
very pretty, owing to the number of small farms about, but
the road for a long distance is sandy and heavy. There is
fair bream fishing here. At the mouth of the creek there are
good rocks to fish from at low tide. Rock cod, blue-
heads, parrot-fish, silver bream, crayfish, and not a few young
sharks, will reward the efforts of the angler. Along the
beach is a fine ocean cave, where interesting fossils may be
gathered. Hares and rabbits are plentiful. Persons are
often found camping in this neighborhood for days, the
abundance of wood and water, fish and game, supplying the
tourist with all that he requires to make life tolerable.
Swampy Creek.
This is twenty-eight miles from Geelong. It lies between
Queenschff and the Otway, and might properly be called a
river, for it is the largest creek on the coast. It is reached
by travelling the Colac Road for five miles, then turning off
to the left and taking the right-hand track up the hill, and
along to Gretna Green. From thence, crossing Freshwater
Creek, the left-hand track is taken, a German chapel being
passed on the left. Here the road commences to be sandy,
and continues so for about a mile. Arrived at the top of the
hill, a splendid valley lies stretched below, dotted with farms
and homesteads. The creek is very wide and deep. There
are beautiful ferns to be gathered in the neighborhood.
There is good bream fishing, and the fish run to a fair
weight. At the mouth, and away to Point Addis, the cliffs
are high, and almost perpendicular.
Point Roadknight.
Good sea fishing may be had here, crayfish being plentiful
in the crevices of the rocks. From the top of the hill, above


VICTORIA H
LOTEL.
MARKET SQ,TJjAE/E,
GEELONG.
Futpleltf • W* iilliii,
This Old Established
Is the most centrally situated in Geelong
being within
THREE 1IEHTES CAB DISTANCE OF BOAT & RAILWAY.


WALTER EXCELL & CO. \\ %
\\ tp
have spared no pains in making their \\


EXHIBITION BUILDING, MARKET SQUARE.




the Point, a grand view is obtained, on the one side as far as
Queenscliff, on the other beyond Lome. There are plenty of
rabbits, bears, and kangaroo in the neighborhood.
Airby’s Int.et.
This is seven miles beyond Swampy, a fine drive through
the forest. The creek is narrow, but the sport usually is
good. The residence of Mr. John Rout Hopkins, the liberal
President of the Corio Bay Rowing Club, is in this neighbor-
hood. Rabbits abound here, and at times there is good duck
shooting. Bears are plentiful, and the diligent searcher may
find ferns in great variety.
Bauwon Heads.
These are about seventeen miles from Geelong. The best
place to fish at is the Sheepwash, where salmon-trout, mullet,
and bream abound. Persons visiting this place usually go
by boat. Rabbit and duck shooting afford good sport.
THE VINEYARDS.
Within the compass of a little work of this character, it is
impossible to give in detail an account of the Vineyards and
Orchards of the Geelong District The visitor will, however,
experience no difficulty in finding them, for they exist in every
direction. Many of them are upon a comparatively large
scale, and the cellars and appliances for wine making vie
with some of the best appointed establishments in the
Colony. The wines produced in greatest perfection are the
Hermitage, or Shiraz, a dry red wine, and the Reisling and
Chasselas, dry white wines. Some good Tokay is produced,
and there are several other varieties which, according to the
soil and situation, are more or less to be appreciated.
The following are some of the principal vineyard proprietors
in the district, with the distances from Geelong ;—Of their
respective properties. Aeschliman, Mrs., Pollocksfoi’d, 15
miles; Deppeler, Frederick, Darriwill, 17; Evans, John,
Viaduct, 7 ; Gugger, Bros., Barrabool, 7 ; Hunt, William,
Barrabool, 7; Hopton, Edwin, Fyansford, 4; Hanson,
George, Waurn Ponds, 6; Haramersley, , Highton, 4;
Imer, Bros., Waurn Ponds, 6; Junod, Gus., Clyde Hill, 16 ;


Jampen, Frederick, Barrabool Hills, 6; Lemke, H.,
Germantown, 4 ; Maurer, Charles, Highton, 5 ; Kossack, J.,
Germantown, 4; Mulder, F., Germantown, 4; Martin, J.,
Darriwill, 16 ; Marendaz, Fritz, Waurn Ponds, 8; Ritchie,
Bros., Murgheboluc, 9 ; Rogniron, Charles, Darriwell, 16 ;
Schefferle, J., Darriwell, 16; Schultze, Wm., Duneed, 8;
Thomson, John, Lovely Banks, 7 ; Tetaz, Charles, Waurn
Ponds, 8; Weber, Jacob, Darriwill, 15; Winter, William,
Germantown, 4.
THE RIVER BARWON.
Blunt’s boat-shed lies to the left of the Barwon Bridge
(north, or town side), where, for a trifle, a boat may be hired
by the day or hoar. Pulling under the bridge, and up the river
a number of handsome villas are passed on the North bank,
including the residence of feir Charles Sladen ; on the South
side of the river, the Barrabool Hills rise gradually in some
places to a considerable height; at about two or three miles
distance up the river, passing Prince’s Bridge, a white wooden
structure, is the Queen’s Gardens, and Buckley’s Falls; a
romantic spot, which Buckley the wild white man, (found,
many years ago with the blacks,) is supposed to have made a
favorite resort. In close proximity are the Fyansford Paper
Mills, the largest manufactory of the kind in the colony. It
cost in construction about £40,000, and the plant and
machinery are capable of producing every description of
paper known. By the courtesy of the Manager, Mr. T. Easton,
visitors have no difficulty in obtaining access to the works.
THE WOOLLEN MILLS.
The manufacture of woollens was established here some
fourteen years ago, and has steadily increased in importance
until it has become one of the leading industries of the
district. The goods turned out by the Geelong mills have
become famous throughout the Australian colonies. We have
four mills at work, and the wages paid by them amounts to
over £30,000 per annum, and the value of the goods turned
out in a year represents the respectable sum of £150,000.


The most direct way of reaching them is to proceed up
Moorabool-street (where the Exhibition is situated), and,
passing the Church of England Grammar School on the left,
make in direct line for the Barwon Bridge, less than a mile
distant.
The Victorian Woollen and Cloth Manufacturing Company
(Limited), left of the Barwon Bridge, was the first established
here. iTheir paid-up capital amounts to between £50,000 and
£60,000, in £5 shares, James Scott, Esq., is the Chairman
of this company, and their works are at South Geelong, on the
banks of the Barwon River. Visitors are admitted by an order
from a director of the company. Manager, Mr. Wm. Haigh;
sub-manager, Mr. John Thorburn.
The Barwon Woollen Mill Company adjoins the Victorian.
This, although a limited liability company, is more of a private
undertaking than the Victorian Company. The capital is
£19,500, and the shares are held by nineteen of the principal
citizens of Geelong. Chas. Andrews, Esq., is the chairman.
The company’s warehouse is in Gheringhap-street, and the
works are situated in South Geelong, on the banks of the
river, next Mr. Munday’s tannery. Manager, Mr. J. F.
Denniston.
The Union Woollen Mill (right of the Barwon Bridge) is
the last establishment erected on the North side of the
Barwon, and has been started by W. H. Collins, Esq., and
fitted up with the best machinery and appliances for the
manufacture of the best class of Yorkshire goods that can be
made from Mungo and wools. The factory is situated at
Chilwell, and is managed by Mr. Collins and Sons, with the
assistance of Mr. E, Richardson.
The Albion Woollen Mill adjoining, is the next in
importance and was established eleven years ago, by the firm
of Alexander Gray and Co., for the manufacture of the finest
and best tweed cloths, and their energy and enterprise has
been rewarded by the success so well deserved. Their cloths
have obtained gold and silver medals for style, quality, and
manufacture, at exhibitions held in Sydney, Melbourne,
Vienna, Philadelphia and Paris. Warehouse, No. 44,
Elizabeth street, Melbourne. The factory is at the foot of
Latrobe Terrace, on the banks of the Barwon river, and is
managed by one of the partners, Mr. William Thackrah.


We cannot afford space to describe these several works,
which employ some five-hundred or more men hands. Suffice
is to say, that in no part of Australia, can the milling of
wools be witnessed upon so large a scale, or in such
perfection, as in Geelong, and no stranger having a day at
his disposal should omit therefrom to pay a visit to these
factories.
HOTELS, RESTAURANTS, AND BOARDING
HOUSES.
It is an invidious task to select particular places of this
character for approval, and we shall do so only within such
limits as appear to be legitimate, and without prejudice to
many excellent houses in the town.
Mack’s Hotel is, par excellence, the first hotel in the Western
District. It has always been patronized by the representatives
of Royalty, by the wool kings of the district, and the “ Upper
Ten ”of colonial society. It is beautifully situated on Corio
Terrace, overlooking the Bay. Under Mr. Sommers, its present
proprietor, some very charming additions have been made.
Extensive new suites of apartments have been built, and a
portion of the court yard has been converted into a lovely
garden, with rockeries, aviaries, and choice shrubs and flowers,
that make the place a charming summer residence, as it is
in every respect one of the best conducted establishments of
its character in Victoria.
The Victoria Hotel, corner of Market Square and Malop
Street, conducted by the sons of the owner of “ Mack’s,” is
the principal commercial house in Geelong. It is a roomy
and convenient establishment. Here, if you want a hard
or soft goods man, you may always depend upon finding
him if he is in Geelong. A considerable portion of the
premises is used for sample rooms, and the uninitiated entering
the precincts sacred to the trade, might imagin e he was in a
bazaar, and begin to feel apprehensive for the spare cash he
had in his pocket. This house is well managed and is very
popular.


The Union Club Hotel, in Malop Street, is a first-class
House, having extensive accommodation. Mr. T. F. Anderson
is the present proprietor. Cobb’s Coach Stables are at the
rear of the premises.
The Terminus Hotel, Mercer Street, (kept by Mrs.
Bedtord,) is an old established house of a high character. It
is largely patronised by the legal profession.
The Black Bull, Malop Street, (Mrs. Kelly, late of the
Crown Hotel, Proprietress), is a good house, and the charges
are moderate.
Fitton’s Albion Hotel, Market Square, is close to the
Exhibition building. It is an excellent house to stop at. The
charges are moderate, and the host spares no effort to give
satisfaction to his patrons.
The Phoenix Hotel (Mr. Simmonds, proprietor), corner of
Corio and Moorabool Streets, is patronised largely by steam-
boat passengers. The charges are moderate, and the house
is well conducted. Mr. Simmonds is the popular steward of
the steamer Alert.
The other principal hotels are:—Mrs. Gough’s, Little
Malop Street; the Royal Mail, Yarra Street; the National
and the Olive Branch, Moorabool Street; the Australian,
Ryrie Street; Miller’s, Market Square; the Golden Age,
Western Beach ; the Nelson and Botanical Gardens Hotels,
Malop Street; and McMahon’s, Mercer Street. There are
many other houses which, although less pretentious in appear-
ance, are equally deserving of public patronage. Living, at
the hotels mentioned, varies from 2s. 6d. to Is. per meal;
beds, the same rate. These charges do not, however, apply
to Mack’s Hotel.
Persons who object to stopping at hotels may find excellent
living and accommodation at Field’s Temperance Boarding-
house, corner of Corio and Bellarine Streets, overlooking the
Bay. Mr. and Mrs. Field are highly spoken of for studying
the comfort of their visitors.
The Albert Horae is a large temperance house. It is what
is known as a Coffee Tavern, and is a very handsome specimen
of its class. It is situated at the corner of Market Square


and Yarra Street, and is admirably conducted by Mr.
Middleton. Board and residence may be had at this house
on very reasonable terms.
Bennett’s Restaurant, in Market Square, supplies a good
dinner or tea at moderate rates.
Private board and residence is easily obtainable in the town,
at from 20s. to 80s. per week.
GEELONG PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS.
The Town is incorporated under the same acts as the City
of Melbourne. Estimated Area, 3,100 acres; Population,
12,800; Number of Ratepayers, 2,250; Estimated Annual
Value of Rateable Property, £70,392 ; Revenue, £10,990.
THE CORPORATION.
His Worship the Mayor, Joseph Henry Connor, Esq.
Barwon Ward.— Alderman, J. H. Connor; Councillors,
W. H. Hudson, William Haigh, and George Martin.
Bellerine Ward. —Alderman, E, J. Jones. Councillors,
W. Sommers, R. de Bruce Johnstone, and J. Longville Price,
Kardinia Ward. —Alderman, T. N, Couves. Councillors,
R. Davey, R. McL. Aitchison, and Robert Reeves.
Villamanta Ward. —Alderman, George Cunningham.
Councillors, John Traill, Henry Meakin, and Chas. Shannon.
John Davison, Ex-Officio.
Town Clerk, William Weire; Town Treasurer, Henry
Roebuck; Town Surveyor, Robert Balding.
BOROUGH OF NEWTOWN AND CHILWELL.
Estimated Area, 1,600 acres; Population, 5,000 ; Number
of Dwellings, 1,050; Number of Ratepayers,' 700; Net
Annual Value of Rateable Property, £23,317 ; Revenue,
£3OOO.
Mayor, Stephen Vine Buckland, Esq.
North Ward.— Councillors, S. V. Buckland, F. R.
Pincott, and Joshua Vines.


South Ward. —Councillors, H. Hawkesworth, W. W.
Miles, and William Batten.
West Ward. —Councillors, A. C. Ibbotson, Charles
Andrews, and F. G. Thomas.
Town Clerk, Valuer, Collector, and Inspector, Edward
Nicholls; Surveyor, R. S. Tuffs.
BOROUGH OF GEELONG WEST.
Estimated Area, 800 acres ; Population, 5,500; Number
of Dwellings, 1,100; Estimated Net Annual Value of
Rateable Property, £17,720 ; Revenue, £2,800.
Mayor, John Donaghy, Esq.
Councillors, J. J. Buckland, Isaac Boynton, W. S. Hobbs,
Dennis O’Brien, A. Dick, J. Donaghy, W, Doery, Henry
Bannister, Edwin Hopton.
Town Clerk, Valuer, &c., William Harris. Surveyor,
A. McWilliams.
POST AND TELEGRAPH OFFICE,
Office. Corner of Ryrie and Gberinghap Streets-
Business hours from 8.30 a.m. to 8 p.m. S. C. Vivian,
Manager.
THE CUSTOMS.
Collector of Customs and Assistant Immigration Agent,
H. B. Lane.
THE TREASURY.
Office—Custom-house.
Receiver, Paymaster... ... ... Charles A. Mount
DISTRICT SURVEY OFFICE.
Land Officer ... ... ... ... ... E. Shattock
SUPREME COURT.
Sheriff of the Southern Bailiwick, William H. Anderson ;
Governor of the Gaol, Peter Dwyer. Visiting Justice, T. D. S.
Heron.


COUNTY COURT OF GRANT.
Judge, His Honor Charles P. Hackett, Esq. ; Registrar,
George L. Hutchinson,
INSOLVENT COURT.
Judge and Commissioner, His Honor C. P. Hackett, Esq.
Chief Clerk, George L. Hutchinson. Official Assignee, Jas.
Simson. Office, Supreme Court House, Myers Street.
POLICE COURT.
Police Magistrate, T. D. S. Heron; Clerk of Petty Sessions,
G. L. Hutchinson; Superintendent of Police, H. M. Chomley;
Inspector, S. O. Burton. Court House, corner of Yarra and
McKillop streets. Criminal business commences at 10 o’clock
daily.
MAGISTRATES FOR GEELONG.
Police Magistrate, T D. S. Heron, Esq.; Andrews, Charles;
Burrow, William; Brown, George; Bullivant, W. H.; Belcher,
G. F.; Brady, W.; Campbell, A. M.; Cunningham, George;
Connor, J. H. ; Couves, T. N.; Clarke, H.; Day, J.;
Douglass, A ; Dennys, C. J.; Ducker, W, F.; Gillespie, R.;
Garratt, J. M.; Heath, R.; Ibbotson, Charles; Johnstone,
R. de B.; Kernot, Charles ; Noble, James; Parker, Richard ;
Pardey, W. E.; Roadknight, Thomas; Sladen, Sir Charles;
Shaw, Foster; Stodart, D. C.; Simson, James; Tracey,
Martin. *
GEELONG INFIRMARY AND BENEVOLENT ASYLUM.
Supported by voluntary contributions. President, S. V.
Buckland, Esq.; Secretary and Superintendent, Ed. Sharp;
Senior Surgeon, David Boswell Reid; Resident Surgeon,
Walter Scott. Patients are admitted daily, between y and
12 o’Clock only. Every Patient must have a subscriber’s
Admission Ticket, except in cases of accident.


GEELONG EXHIBITION.
Grand Exhibition of Millinery Bonnets at Shirra
& Moodie’s GLASGOW HOUSE, 76 Moorabool
Street (“under the Verandah.”)
SHIRRA & HOODIE
Have much pleasure in announcing that they have again been
successful in the Purchase of Three Cases of London and Paris
Bonnets, at less than half their original cost, and will offer the same
at the smallest possible advance. They will be sold as follow :
18s. 6d. Bonnets, for Bs. 6d ; 255. do., for 12s. 9d.; 305,, for 15s. 2d.;
405., for 215.; and 505., for 275. 6d.
s. & M. would further announce that their
TAXIiOHXSr@ BEPAETMESTT
Is Well Stocked with all the Newest Coatings, Tweeds, and Vestings.
Geelong Tweed Trousers and Vests Made to Order from 37*. 6d.
Do. Suits „ „ 63.
All kinds of Coatings and Tweeds made to Measure at the
Lowest Rates, and the best Fit and Workmanship guaranteed.
N.B.—A Splendid STOCK of EEADY-MADE CLOTHING always on hand.
LET GEELO3NG ELOTTRISH II I
THE! CLIFTON SPAS,
DRYSDALE, NEAR GEELONG.
THESE invaluable WATERS are now SUPPLIED in Splendid
Condition, bottled under Steam Pressure, and charged with
their own Natural Gas. On Sale at Druggists, Wine Merchants
and Hotels.
Central Depots : C. A. HODGSON, Market Square, Geelong;
E. Smythers, 41 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne; The Springs,
Drysdale, on the Bay.
J. G. REEVES, Manager.
The CLIFTON SPRINGS are situated about two miles from
Drysdale, and fourteen miles from Geelong. The Mail Coach leaves
Geelong daily at half-past two o’clock, arriving at Drysdale at half-
past four. A Special Coach, engaged to convey visitors to the
Springs, leaves Cobb and Co.’s office every Wednesday and Saturday
morning at nine o’clock, returning same evening, and arriving at
Geelong at eight o’clock. There is suitable accommodation for a
limited number of visitors at the Springs, both for such as come
only for the day, and also for those who desire to remain for a longer
period.


Grand Pacific Hotel
LORNE (Lioutit Bay).
■=
THIS new Hotel opens for the Summer Season, with
everything necessary in a Modern Hotel for the Comfort
of Visitors, including Pure Water, laid on from a high
position on the Erskine River.
Jerms ; Jwo puiNEAS JjVeek,
private (Sitting Rooms at Reasonable germs.
COBB & Co.’s Coaches meet the first train at Winchelsea
every morning from Geelong, and runs in connection with
the first trains from Melbourne and Ballarat, driving direct
to the Hotel.
TELEGRAMS and LETTERS Promptly attended
to, by
T- f- NDERSON,
(Proprietor.
ALSO OF THE
UNION CLUB HOTEL,
GEELONG.






GEELONG HOMOEOPATHIC DISPENSARY, RYRIE-STREET.
For the gratuitous Medical Relief of the sick poor. Open
from Quarter to Nine to a Quarter to Ten, for the reception
and treatment of patients, every Monday, Wednesday, and
Saturday mornings. S, R, Robertson, M.R C.S. and L.S.A.,
Honorary Medical Officer. J. Owen, Hon. Secretary.
LADIES’ BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION.
President, Mrs, Hitchcock ; Treasurer, Mrs. Mowbray;
Secretary, Mrs. Willis, Aphrasia Street, Newtown. The
Committee meet on the first Wednesday in every month, at
Three o’Clock p.m., at the Mechanics’ Institute, to hear
reports of necessitous cases, direct the distribution of funds
and apparel, and transact general business of the Association
ST. AUGUSTINE’S ORPHAN ASYLUM.
Patron, Right Rev. Dr. Goold, Bishop of Melbourne.
Chairman of Committee and Treasurer, The Yen. Arch-
deacon Slattery. Medical Attendant, Eustace J. Walshe,
Esq., M.D. The Orphanage is under the management of
the Christian Brothers, and stands on an elevated and healthy
site on Newtown Hill. It contains about 90 orphan children.
GEELONG PROTESTANT ORPHAN ASYLUM.
This Asylum is situated at Herne Hill, and overlooks one
of the most charming and picturesque views in the neighbour-
hood of Geelong—Fyansford and the junction of the Barwon
and Moorabool Rivers. The office is at 81 Moorabool Street,
Geelong, where all particulars concerning the admission of
children may be obtained, and where contributions will be
thankfully received. Secretary, Mr. James Campbell.
CONVENT OF OUR LADY OF MERCY.
The Convent is situated in the most pleasant and healthy
part of Newtown, and has, in connection with it, Our Lady’s
Orphanage, and St, Joseph’s Industrial School,


GEELONG FEMALE EBFUGB.
Secretary, Rev. A. J. Campbell; Treasurer, A. R, Reed,
Esq., Savings Bank. Refuge, Kildare. Matron, Mrs. Ridley.
GEELONG YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION.
Established, 1875. Objects—The Spiritual, intellectual,
and social improvement of all within its reach. President,
R. Gillespie. The Mission Branch holds services throughout
the Town ; the Sunday Evening service in the rooms, Ryrie
Street, is attended by large numbers of the non-church going
community. The Mutual Improvement Branch meet in the
rooms, opposite Post Office, every Friday evening, at 7.30 p.m.
MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE, GREAT RYRIE STREET.
The Institute has for its object the diffusion of Literary
Scientific, and other useful knowledge. The means employed
are—the delivery of Lectures ; a Library of Reference and
Circulation of upwards of 14,000 volumes ; a Reading-Room,
supplied with the principal Colonial and British Newspapers,
Magazines, Reviews, &c.; a Museum of Machines, Models,
Minerals, Natural History, &c.; and the formation of Classes.
A Special Reading-Room is provided for Lady-Subscribers.
Library Hours, Morning, from 9 to i ; Afternoon, 2 to 6 ;
Evening, 7 to 2 ; Saturdays—Morning, 9to 1; Evening, 7
to 9. Reading-Room open daily from 8.30 a.m. to 10 p.m.
Secretary, Mr. B. W. Wheatland.
THE FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY.
Is located in that fine building lately known as the
Chamber of Commerce, Moorabool Street. Open daily from
half-past 8 a.m. until 10 p.m. Any information respecting
the Libraiy can be obtained from the Librarian and Secretary,
Mr. J. Gardiner.
VOLUNTEER FIRE BRIGADES.
Geelong —Station, Little Malop Street, next the Town
Hall; Captain, A. Christy; Secretary, H. Montgomery.
Newtown and Chilwell. —Engine Station adjoining the
Borough Council Chambers, Town Hall, Pakington Street.
Captain, E. Nicholls; Secretary, J. S. Begley.


GEHLONG ARTILLERY ORDERLY ROOM, McKILLOP
STREET.
Major 0. Rashleigh, Major Commanding; Captains, J. L.
Price, G. Haigh and C. C. H. Swift; Surgeon, Major D. B.
Reid. Parade Wednesdays, at 8 p.m. Company drill every
Friday, at 8 p.m. Band Parade, first and third Wednesday
in each month.
BANKS IN GEELONG.
Bank of Australasia, Malop Street, Manager, John
Wighton. Union Bank of Australia, Yarra Street.
Manager, R. Stokes. Bank of Victoria, Malop Street.
Manager, Wm. Young. Bank of New South Wales, Malop
Street. Manager, R. Miller. National Bank of Australasia,
Malop Street. Manager, R. Gillespie. Colonial Bank of
Australasia, Malop Street. Manager, A. S. Park.
Commercial Bank of Australasia, Market Square, Manager,
C. Caldwell. London Chartered Bank, Malop Street.
Manager, G. A. Chalmers. Savings’ Bank, Moorabool St.
Actuary, Alfred R. Reed.
MASONIC.
Masonic Hall , Malop Street , next London Chartered Bank.
Lodge of Unity and Prudence , No. 545, late 801. The
regular Meetings are held on the Thursday nearest the full
moon in every month.
Lodge United Tradesmen, No. 336. The regular Meetings
are held on the Tuesday before the full moon in every month.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
These schools have been established by the Government
for the purpose of reclaiming destitute children of both sexes.
They are kept for various periods, until of such age as likely
to become useful members of society. The Geelong schools
are situated in Ryrie street.
PLACES OF WORSHIP.
Church of England.
Christ Church—Rev. G. Goodman, M.A. (incumbent).
St. Paul’s—Rev. W. Chalmers (incumbent). All Saint’s—
Rev. J. C. Love (incumbent).


Homan Catholic.
St. Mary’s, Yarra Street, and St. Peter and St. Paul’s,
Mercer Street—The Yen. Archdeacon Slattery, D.D. and
.Revs. D. Quinn and W. Finn.
Wesleyan.
Geelong East Circuit, including Yarra Street and South
Geelong :—Ministers, Rev. J. G. Millard and Rev. R. Pitcher.
Geelong West Circuit, including Chilwell, Newtown, and
.Ashby:—Ministers, Rev. J. tiarcourt and Rev. J. D.
Dodgson.
Presbyterian.
High Church, Gheringhap Street—Rev. T. McKenzie
Fraser. St. Andrew’s Church, Yarra Street—Rev. C. J.
Baird. St, George’s Church, Latrobe Terrace —Rev. A. J.
Campbell. Ryrie Street Church—Rev. A. Davidson.
Reformed Presbyterian Church, Fenwick Street—Rev. A.
M. Moore.
Congregational.
Gheringhap Street—Rev. C. S. Y. Price. Marshall St.,
Chilwell—Rev. Mr. Pawsey.
Baptist.
Aberdeen Street— Rev. W. C. Bunning. Fenwick
Street—Rev. E. F. Kingdom Little Ryrie Street—Rev. E.
Day. Saffron Street, Chilwell—Rev. Mr. Fullard.
Primitive Methodist.
Pakington Street, Ashby; Bond Street, Chilwell; West
Geelong—Revs. R. Allen and W. Moore.
United Methodist Free Church.
Pakington Street, North—Rev. J. W. Green.
Jewish Synagogue.
Yarra Street—Vacant.
SOCIETIES.
Geelong and Western District Agricultural and Horticultural
Society.
Patron, His Excellency the Governor; President, J. H.
Connor, Esq.; Secretary, Mr. Charles Craike. Office, Free
library.


Geelong Racing Cluh.
Stewards—Messrs. Josiah Austin, S. V. Bnckland, W.
Barrow, A. Chi inside, A. K. Finlay, Charles Ibbotsou,
James Noble, John Simson, and Dr. D. B. Reid ; Secretary
and Treasurer, J. D, Robinson ; Handicapper, E. T. Barnard;
Clerk of the Course, D. O’Toole. Meetings of Stewards,
held at Sommers’ Victoria Hotel.
Cor to Cricket Cricket Club.
Adjoins the Botanical Gardens. President, James
Wilson; Secretary, P. A. Cox.
Corio Bay Rowing Club.
President, J. R. Hopkins; Secretary and Treasurer, D.
Powers.
Barwon Rowing Club.
President, S. V. Buckland; Hon. Treasurer, J. M.
Gillespie; Hon. Secretary, Charles H. Swift.
Comunn na Feinne (Instituted 1856.)
For the cultivation of the Gaelic language and Highland
Nationality, Morality, Philanthrophy, Archasology, and what-
ever may interest or instruct. The Annual Grand Highland
Gathering is held at the Society’s Amphitheatre, South
Geelong, on Ist January in each year. Chief, Robert de
Bruce Johnstone, Esq., M.L.A.; President, Robert Shirra ;
Vice-President, J, M. Anderson.
Catholic Christian Doctrine Society.
Meets first Wednesday in each month, in St. Mary’s
School-room. President, The Ven. Archdeacon Slattery;
Secretary, J, Murphy.
Independent Order of Good Templars.
Geelong United Lodge meets in the Temperance Hall,
Little Malop Street, every Monday evening. R. J. Muncey,
Lodge Deputy,
Pride of the Valley Lodge meets in the Wesleyan School,
Chilwell, every alternate Tuesday evening. William Thomas,
Lodge Deputy; J. H. Watson, District Deputy,


Australiam Total Abstinence Alliance.
Corio Lodge, People’s Church, Yarra Street. Public
Meetings every Thursday evening at half-past seven to nine.
Addresses, Vocal and Instrumental Music, Recitations, &c.
Admission Free. Lodge Meeting after the Public Meeting.
W. H. Searle, Hon. Sec.
BENEFIT SOCIETIES.
Independent Order of Oddfellows.
Lodges of this Order are held at the undermentioned
places :
Loyal Phoenix Lodge, at Old Masonic Hall, Union Street,
Geelong.
Ancient Order of Foresters.
Lodges of the Order are held at the following places :
Court Barwon Rise, 3522, meets every alternate Tuesday,
at the Prince of Wales Hotel, Market Square.
Court Triumph, 3988, meets at the Retreat Hotel, South
Geelong, every alternate Tuesday.
Court Advance, 4714, meets every alternate Tuesday, at
the Sir William Wallace Hotel, Autumn Street, Ashby.
Manchester Unity Independent Order of Oddfellows in
(Victoria (Registered.)
The following Lodges are held in this district:—
Loyal Geelong Lodge, No. 4257, every alternate Tuesday, at
the Manchester Unity Hall, Moorabool Street.
Loyal Southern Star Lodge, No. 4499, every alternate
Tuesday, at Manchester Unity Hall, Moorabool Street.
Loyal Southern Star Lodge, No. 4499, every alternate
Tuesday, at the Manchester Unity Hall.
Loyal Rose of Denmark Lodge, No. 5130, every alternate
Thursday, at the Gold Diggers’ Hotel, Latrobe Terrace.
Loyal Ashby Lodge, No. 5621, every alternate Monday, Sir
William Wallace Hotel, Autumn Street, Ashby.
Geelong Lodge of the Order of St. Andrew.
The Lodge meets in the Manchester Unity Hall, Moorabool
street, on last Monday in each month. Secretary, W. Field.


By the day of 10 hours
£1
0
0
If exceeding 10 hours, every additional half-
tour ...
0
1
0
By the hour—First hour
0
3
0
Every subsequent hour
0
2
6
Every quarter of an hour, or portion thereof
beyond the hour ...
0
0
6
St. Patrick's Society.
President, P. O’Toole; Secretary, P. H. Hackett, Corio
Street. General Meeting, first Tuesday in each month, at
St. Mary’s School Room, Little Myers Street.
Independent Order of Rechabites.
Victoria Division, No. 82.
Self Reliance Tent, No. 58. Meets every every alternate
Tuesday, in the Temperance Hall, Little Malop Street, at
eight o’clock.
Prince Alfred Juvenile Tent, No. 10. Meets every alternate
Friday evening, in the Temperance Hall, at half-past seven.
NEWSPAPERS.
Geelong Advertiser (Price 2d.) Office, 38 Moorabool
Street. Published Daily.
News of the Week and Western District Advertiser (Price
6d.) Published Weekly. Office, 38 Moorabool Street.
Geelong Times Price Id.) Published Daily. Office, Clare
Street.
Evening Star (Price Id.) Published Daily. Office, Clare
Street.
CAB RATES AND FARES.
By an order of the Town Council, dated 13th November,
1872, the following are the rates and fares for cabs,
waggonettes, and other passenger vehicles, plying for hire in
the Town of Geelong:—


Fare (each person). From the Station to
Eastward, as far as Swanston Street
Westward, as far as the junction of Latrobe
0
0
6
Terrace with Mercer Street
0
0
6
South, as far as McKillop Street
0
0
6
North, as far as Emu Street
0
0
6
The foregoing fares coyer three passengers, if there are four
or more passengers :
First hour is ... ... ... 0 4 0
Every subsequent hour ... ... 0 3 6
Every quarter of an hour, or portion thereof
beyond the hour... ... ... 0 1 0
Waggonettes are at the Railway Station upon the arrival
and departure of each train.
Sixpenny Single Fares.
(The whole or any portion of these streets inclusive.)
Fares Beyond the Above Distances.
Fare (one person). From the Railway Station ;
Eastward, as far as Garden Street (the
Botanical Gardens) ... ... 0 10
Westward, as far as the whole line of
Pakington Street, from the River to
the West Melbourne Road... ... 0 1 0
South—The Barwon River ... ... 0 10
Church Street, from Pakington Street to
the Bay, thence by the Bay to Garden
Street on the north ... ... 0 1 0
(The whole or any portion of these streets inclusive.)
If there are two or more passengers for any
one of these routes, the fare for each is 0 0 9
(For any distance beyond those named it is better to make an
arrangement.)
Return Fares.
Full fare.
Half fare.
If the fare is under a shilling ~
If the fare is one shilling or over


THE G E H E E A E
Jilt, Ssife, anlJ |sariue Insurance
Offices: Nos. Ito 5, (ghambor of Commerce, <§2elong.
House, Land, Estate, and Financial Agents; Brokers,
Valuators, and Government Shire Auditors.
Secretaries and Agents for the following Companies :—
Colonial Mutual Fire and Guarantee Insurance Company (Limited.)
London and Lancashire Fire Insurance Company.
Standard Fire and Marine Insurance Company.
Manchester Fire Insurance Company.
Hanseatic Fire Insurance Company.
Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society (Limited).
London and Lancashire Life Assurance Company.
Australasian Plate Glass Insurance Company.
Stations, Wool-Sheds, Farms, Haystacks, Produce, Agricultural
Implements and Machines, Insured at Lowest Current Rates.
No Charge for Survey.
Wool, and Merchandise for Shipment, covered in transitu, by Rail
or Road, at Lowest Premiums, less a Liberal Discount if done
direct with principals.
Rents Collected, and Estates faithfully managed, at a Reduced
Rate of Commission,
Exhibits within the Geelong Industrial Exhibition
Insured for Short Periods at Low Rates.


G. BRADLEY,
WATC HMAKER,
Bright & Hitchcocks’ Hew Buildings,
MOORABOOL iSTBMIT, GEELONG.
Always in Stock —A splendid Assortment of best made
EMLISH, AMERICA! & SWISS WATCHES,
CLOCKS IN EVERY STYLE AND MAKE.
Particular attention given to every Branch of the REPAIRING Trade.
F. S. W. MAWSON,
DEHTIST,
MQQRJLIQQL STRKBT,
GEELONG.
First introducer of the “ Patent Celluloid,” the new
setting for Artificial Teeth. This material is the most
life-like imitation of the natural gums, and the strongest
material ever used for dental plates.
Teeth also inserted on Gold or Vulcanite, or on
combination of both.
MAWSON & BELL, 13 Lyons St. North, Ballarat
JOSEPH MAWSON, 18 Bank St., Emerald Hill,
Are also workers of the “ Patent Celluloid






Luggage Rates.
Under twenty-five pounds ... ... No charge.
Up to one hundred-weight ... ... 1 Fare of one
° J passenger.
Each additional hum!red-weight, or fraction )
thereof ... ... ... ] Do '
Calling a cab, and not employing the same, renders the
person liable for the full fare from the cab-stand.
Between 10 and 12 p.m. fares are increased by one-half;
from 12 p.m. till daylight, double the ordinary fares.
Vehicles can be detained ten minutes without extra charge.
For any subsequent quarter of an hour, or fraction thereof
(that is to say, for example, eleven minutes only) the charge
is sixpence.
RAILWAY TIME TABLE.
As the Railway Time Table is subject to monthly altera-
tion, it would be misleading to give it in a publication of this
character. It is published daily, however, at the top of the
first page of the Geelong Advertiser.
QUEENSCLIFF.
The connection by rail of this pretty watering-place with
Geelong, and thus with the metropolis, Ballarat, and other
large centres, ought to ensure it a rapid growth in popularity
and population. It is situated a little to the North of the
Western head of the entrance to Port Phillip Bay, and
is a thriving township, possessing some palatial hotels,
elegant private residences, and commodious boarding-houses
for the accommodation of visitors. It is a favorite resort of
the wealthier classes, and of invalids during the summer
season, and an invigorating dip in its ocean baths is not one
of its least enjoyable attractions. On a calm summer’s day,
the view through the Heads, and beyond into the open sea,
especially if any vessels are coming in or passing out, is one
rarely equalled. The batteries are well worth inspection, and
visitors, if they feel disposed, can be conveyed by boat to the
quarantine station at Point Nepean (the opposite headland),
which, however, can be viewed, at a safer distance, from the


Qneenscliff shore. The ’Cliff has its Mechanics’ Institute
and public hall for concert purposes, and rejoices in a Borough
Council, and a branch Volunteer corps. A life-boat is safely
housed, ready for service if needed, alongside the pier, and,
with its crew at their posts, can be lowered into the water at
a moment’s notice. The ’Cliff is distant from Geelong about
22 miles by rail, and 19 by road ; and a day could be less
pleasantly spent than by driving there in the morning,
passing a few hours by the seaside, and returning early in the
evening. The Railway arrangements are given elsewhere.
LORNE (LOUTIT BAY).
This charmingly-situated township is fast becoming one of
the most delightful resorts for persons in search of health
or recreation. It stands, unsurpassed for picturesque and
romantic scenery, at the very edge of the Bay. Its appearance
from the sea is singularly beautiful, particularly on approach-
ing the “ Bald” point, as it is termed, from which a strongly-
constructed jetty runs out about 300 feet in length, which
structure is about to be extended 160 feet further seaward, so
as to afford accommodation to steamers during the season,
and to coasting vessels at all times of the year. The Bay
itself is well sheltered from strong winds blowing from the
West and South-west, on account of the lofty forest ranges
that line the coast from Airey’s Inlet to Apollo Bay.
On landing at the jetty, the first object of interest to meet
the eye is the palatial edifice, but lately constructed, known
as the “Great Pacific Hotel.” It is situated at Point Grey,
one of the most prominent and healthy sites in the district;
is built of brick and freestone, having a frontage of about
100 feet by a similar depth, and contains upwards of 80
rooms, exclusive of pantries, bath rooms, &c.; it is three storeys
high, and built after the domestic Gothic style of architecture,
having a remarkably grand and pleasing effect. At each end
of the principal front there is an elegant bay window, forming
a rich, yet substantial, finish to each of the wings. In the
centre of the facade is the tower, with the principal entrances,
&c., to the building. The height of the tower is 60 feet from
the base, having at its summit a look-out, from which all the
vessels, inward or outward bound, on this coast may be seen,


besides the excellent view which this commands. This tower,
standing out as it does in just sufficient relief from the main
building, seems also in such harmony with the other parts of
the structure, that the whole, being surrounded with balconies
and verandah, forming cool and pleasant promenades, may be
considered as very suitable to this delightful watering-place.
On the ground-floor is the bar, with parlours and sitting-
rooms, reception-rooms, shades, &c.; while at the rear are
the kitchen, offices, pantries, sculleries, &c.; and a spacious
dining-room, 50 feet by 2(J feet, fitted up in such a manner
as to enable the whole to be cleared, and may be used either
for dancing or music hall, or other entertainments of a like
character. On the first floor there are private sitting-rooms,
bed-rooms, and bath-rooms, and at the back, above the dining-
room, is the billiard-room. The second floor is occupied
entirely with bed-rooms, sitting-rooms, library, and bath-
rooms. The building was designed by Messrs. Alexander
Davidson and Co., architects, Geelong, under whose super-
vision it was erected by Mr. J. A. Rennie, contractor, of
Melbourne.
Visitors to this fashionable resort may rely on having
every attention and comfort, under the personal management
of Mr. T. F. Anderson, the proprietor, whose American and
Continental experience will be a guarantee for the same.
A short stroll along the Marine Parade enables the visitor
to take a glance at three or four cottage residences, neatly
built and pleasantly situated, overlooking the Bay, until
arriving at the Lome Hotel, which is a commodious and well
managed establishment, combining comfort and moderate
charges. The large and well ventilated billiard saloon is
patronised extensively during the season. This hotel is
prettily situated on rising ground, with a broad slope to the
beach. The house is well sheltered in all weathers, and
commands a delightful view of the Bay and shore scenery to
the northward.
In proximity to the hotel is a large general store, where
provisions and the necessaries of life may be obtained at
Geelong and Melbourne prices.
The principal public building in Lome is the State-school,
recently erected, and at a short distance from the State-school
Erskine House opens to view. This establishment is the


property of Messrs. Mountjoy Brothers, and has been long
and favorably known to many hundreds of Adsitors, seeking
health and pleasure at Loutit Bay. It covers a large area of
ground, and contains more than 60 rooms. The dining hall
will accommodate about 120 persons. This hall is utilised
on two or three evenings in every week, during the visiting
season, for concerts and dancing. In addition to the general
comforts and accommodation afforded at this establishment,
there is a fine supply of pure water laid on from the Erskine
Ceeek at the Rapids, pipes conveying this luxury to all the
principal apartments in the house. Altogether, the arrange-
ments, carried out under the superintendence of Mr. and Mrs.
Mountjoy, may be considered first-class, and are fully appre-
ciated by the large throng of visitors who resort annually to
this favorite, homely spot, familiarly called “ Mountjoy’s.”
Another boarding establishment will shortly be opened for
visitors on the North side of the Erskine River. The house
is not large, but beautifully situated, commanding a splendid
view of the ocean, and scenery along the coast.
The cost of board and residence at the principal establish-
ments in Lome may be set down at the rate of 30s. to 40s.
per week, each person.
The best mode of getting to Lome, at present, is by coach,
from either the Winchelsea or Birregurra stations, on the
Geelong to Colac railway line, the former being distant 27,
and the latter place about 24 miles from Lome. Mountjoy
Brothers run a daily coach to and from Winchelsea, and the
Western Stage Company also provide a coach daily during
the season, conveying passengers to and from Winchelsea.
No permanent coaching arrangements have yet been made for
Birregurra passenger traffic, but a well-appointed four-horse
conveyance runs twice a week to and from Lambell’s Com-
mercial Hotel and Loutit Bay, in the summer months. The
fares from either place, to and from Lome, may be stated at
7s. 6d. for adults, and a proportionate lesser rate for children
under twelve years of age.
A very beautiful collection of photographs of scenery in
the neighborhood of Lome will be found in the vestibule, or
entrance hall, of the Geelong Exhibition building. There is
also a fine view of Anderson’s Great Pacific Hotel.


GEELONG SEA BATHING COMPANY
(LIMITED.)
BATHS, EASTERN BEACH
FRESH WATER LAID ON.
These Baths have undergone extensive repairs, and are
now in excellent condition for the Summer Season. The
most scrupulous care is paid to cleanliness in every particular.
The Baths are now under the superintendence of
mm. & mss. miuw.
whose aim will be to promote the comfort and convenience of Bathers.
The scale of charges are the same as last season.
Tickets may be obtained at the baths, or from
J. M. ANDERSON, Secretary.
Q 9. MALOP STREET WEST. GEELONG.
THOMAS WRIGHT,
WATCHMAKER,
m
EH
hH
I
9
8
MALOP ST., MARKET SQUARE, GEELONG,
Near the Bank of New South Wales.
A choice assortment of Superior Watches and Jewellery always in
stock, specially adapted for Colonial wear.
JEWELLERY MADE TO ORDER.
Watches % Clocks of every description accurately adjusted Sf repaired.
• SPECTACLES, OPTICAL GOODS, &c.
NOVELTIES IN ELECTRO-PLATE, SUITABLE FOB WEDDING PfiESKNTS
OPPOSITE NORTH SIDE OF EXHIBITION BUILDING,


HUMBLE & NICHOLSON,
¥llO4l fOUHDBT,
GEELONG,
BEG to call particular attention to the undermentioned
Machines, &c., of which they are the Sole Manufacturers :
D. TERRIER’S Patent Lever Wool Press. Worked
by a lever and chain from the ground. The top box turns down,
thus dispensing with staging,
“ Ballarat, 13th September, 1879.
“ Messrs. Humble & Nicholson, Vulcan Foundry, Geelong.
“ Dear Sirs, —I have much pleasure in stating that I have had two
Wool Presses from yon, of Perrier's Patent, and have
found them to be the cheapest and simplest in construction
of any Wool Presses I have seen. The one 1 had from you last
year, for the Fellmongery, I most approve of, as it had some little
improvements over the one I had for the Store, in 1877. These
Presses, if sent out with strong Lowmoor Iron Chains, I can strongly
recommend, as I believe that no Other make can surpass
them—l am Dear Sir, yours truly,
JOHU KELSALL”
Humble & Nicholson’s Improved Screw Wool Press,
Which is worked with hand-wheel and levers, that always remain
at the same height, the screw passing up through the wheel, and is
found to work with much greater advantage than the ordinary style
of screw leverage. From the entire satisfaction which there Presses
have given, they can be confidently recommended.
HUMBLE & NICHOLSON’S Pour-horse Threshing
Machines and Horse-powers, have taken Prizes at different
Shows for the last ten years, and still give satisfaction. To be
driven by horse or steam power, and capable of threshing, if worked
by horse power, 400 bushels, and if by steam, 600 bushels per day.
HUMBLE & NICHOLSON’S Strippers, and
Spike Roller Winnowing Machines. Eighty-one of the
latter were sent out last season, and gave the greatest satisfaction.
HUMBLE & NICHOLSON’S “Yankee Horse-
Treaders,” and Circular Horse Works.
Our one, two, and three horse-power Circular Horse Works are prize-
takers, and find general favor, being admirably adapted for Chaff-
cutting, and other purposes.
D- PERRIER’S Patent Wire Strainer, the simplest,
best, and most economical machine made for straining
old wire fences, or putting up new. Any ordinary laborer can easily
strain one mile per hour. No straining-posts required for new fences.


HMBM & m«WI
Sole Makers of “Taylor’s Rabbit Exterminator,” the
Original Invention for destroying Rabbits, and animal life,
in burrows, stone fences, &c.
E/SDTTCED PRICES
No. 1 Machine, with wheel £l2 10s.
2 ~ ~ ... ... ... £lO
8 „ without wheel £8
Material for Generating Poisonous Gases, los. per cwt.
HUMBLE &
NICHOLSON’S
Patent Self-acting
WASHING MACHINE,
“Is the best Invention
before the public.”
“ Its action is entirely
different from any other.
It is self-acting, and does
not destroy the clothes.”
“It saves money and labor, and produces no noise or dirt.”
“ It is impossible for it to get out of order.”
“ It is the quickest in its action. ”
“ It cleanses equally well partially soiled or very dirty clothes.”
“Its superiority is established beyond a doubt.”
(See Opinions of the Press, and other Testimonials),
Sold Wholesale by the Makers, and Retail by Agents, and the
principal Ironmongers and Storekeepers in all parts of the Australa-
sian Colonies.
C A UTI O Iff.
Several persons having made imitations of our Patent Washing Machines, we
beg to give noi ice that we will take legal proceedings against anyone making,
using, exercising, or vending our invention. Purchasers are therefore urged
to see that they get the real article, which bears our name.
HUMBLE & NICHOLSON , Sole Patentees , Geelong,
HUMBLE & NICHOLSON continue to manufacture all
Station Appliances, such as Pressure Pipes, Tanks, Soaks, Heating
Boilers, including Hamilton & Co.’s Patent Sheepwash Jets; also,
Engines, Boilers, Quartz Crushing and Mill Machinery, Flour and
Bark Mills, Saw Mill Gearing, Sinking platforms, Boiling-down
Apparatus, Windmills, Pumping and Wool Washing Connections,
Crab Winches, See., See.
All General Engineering, Millwright, and Founders’ Work Executed.
Full particulars of any of our Manufactures to be had on application.
HUMBLE & NICHOLSON,
patentees and (Manufacturers,
J/ULCAN JP OUNDRY, JorEELONG.


l, JA ALOP jGrEELONG.
OPPOSITE UNION CLUB HOTEL
(Sood accommodation foil gonrdcp & fisitocs
(NEXT DOOR TO Dr. DAYS,)
YARRA STREET, GEELONG.
(LATE OF THE GEELONG DINING ROOMS, MOORABOOL ST.)
GOOD YARD & STABLING.
if® wiiiwiii,
COACH IBUIIjIDIBIR/,
MOORABOOL STREET, GEELONG,
Next Chamber of Commerce.
All descriptions of Carriages and Buggies built to order. A
large assortment always on hand.
All kinds of REPAIRS EXECUTED with Despatch and at
... . Moderate Charges- ' '


ADVERTISEMENTS.
ME. EDMUND SASSE,
MASTS®.
TO THE
§nnripl ikiatioml ®steMisi|ntmi{s
Drawing from the Flat and the Round, Objects and Flowers.
Practical Geometry applied to Machinery, Perspective,
Oil Colors, Water Colors, and Sketching from Nature.
Ladies’ Class—Tuesday and Friday ... 3.30 p.m.
Gentlemen’s Class —Monday and Thursday 6.30 p.m.
LESSORS.
In connection with the Technological Commission.
WEDNESDAY, 3.0 p.m. SATURDAY, 9 a.m.
63. GREAT MYERS ST., GEELONG


jnaut’rtni'e {|ow pang,
FIRE AND LIFE.
CHIEF OFFICES: LIVERPOOL.
HEAD OFFICE IN AUSTRALIA:
QUEEN INSURANCE BUILDINGS, MELBOURNE,
CAPITAL - £2,000,000 STERLING.
Loans are Granted on the Security^ af the Policies alone
FIRE RISKS AT REDUCED RATES.
Melbourne office ; queen STREET.
Resident Secretary ; JOHN ROBERTS, Esq.
MEDICAL REFEREE FOR GEELONG:
J. G. CARSTAIRS, Esq., M.D.
RESIDENT AGENT, GEELONG :
JOHN M. GARRATT, J. P, 9
LTITLE MALOP STREET.
JOHN 3VL GARRATT,
land, (Maty and Jnsmiam*
Valuator , Arbitrator, and Loan Broker.
Properties Sold, Rent and Debts Collected, Valuations Made, Loans to
any amount Negotiated.
Advances made on Deposit of Deeds only. Advances on Leases.
CERTIFICATES OF IMPROVEMENTS AND CROWN GRANTS OBTAINED.
Deeds, Conveyances, Bills of Sale, Wills, Applications for Transfers
and dealings under the Real Property Act prepared and attended
to on the shortest notice, by a duly qualified Legal Practitioner.
Fidelity Guarantees issued ; Plans and Specifications of Works
Exhibited ; all kinds of General Agency Business attended to
with punctuality and care.
AGENT for the “Queen Insurance Company,”
„ „ “ London Guarantee and Accident Company.”
OFFICE OF THE NEW GENERAL CEMETERY.
OFFICES ; Corner of Little Malop Street (opposite
the Town Hall )
Charges for Business transacted at this office, Strictly Moderate.


ADCOCK ’S
KARDINIA
NURSERY,
GEELONG.
HIGHTON
ESTABLISHED 1851.
EVERY DESCRIPTION OF
ORNAMENTAL TREES & PLANTS,
FRUIT TREES, ROOTED YIRES, &c.
CULTIVATED FOR SALE.
The Stock comprises many thousands of the following, viz :
HARDY ORNAMENTAL & FLOWERING
TREES & SHRUBS,
NATIVE AND EUROPEAN FOREST TREES
For Embellishment or Shelter.
TREES ELIGIBLE FOR STREET OR PARK PLANTING.
FRUIT TREES IN EYERT VARIETY
TO MEET THE WANTS OF ALL.
ROSES, numbering some 300 of the best varieties
CAMELLIAS, CLIMBERS, FERNS,
FUCHSIAS, GERANIUMS, PENTSTEMONS,
RHODODENDRONS,
And every requisite for a first-class Nursery Estabishment,
Squatters, Shires, Borough Councils and others, requiring
large quantites, supplied with special quotations.
DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUES SUPPLIED GRATIS.
THOS. ADCOCK, Proprietor.


G-EELOITG-
INDUSTRIAL & JUVENILE EXHIBITION.
PIKE.MX IIuTKL
MOORABOOL STREET,
UNDER THE MANAGEMENT OF
JMIIR, S. SIIMIIMIOItTS
Visitors to Geelong will find this Hotel replete with
all the convenience of a quiet comfortable home,
combined with strictly reasonable charges, and being
centrally situated offers every facility to Visitors to the
Exhibition.
ANNIE SIMMONS,
IERCER STREET TUBER YARD.
(Opposite RAILWAY STATION,)
«- jk o i«r ,
TREYENA GUBBY,
TIMBER MERCHANTS,
BUILDEES AID GEIERAL COITEACTOB.S,
INVITE ATTENTION
To their large stock of Building Materials of
every description. Comprising :— Hardwood,
Tongued and Grooved Boards, Cedar, Kauri Pine ,
Boors , Sashes , Skirtings , Architraves , Mouldings,
&c , White Lead, Oils, Colors, Mixed Paints,
Hessians and Paperhangings, Galvanized corrug-
ated Iron, Spouting, Bidging, and Builders
Ironmongery.
Carpenters’ and Joiners’ Work done on the
Premises.


«cov€n: Hoiriii:
LUNCHEON AT ALL HOURS.
NEIL McCALLUM,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
PASTRYCOOK & CONFECTIONER,
70J, MOORABOOL STREET, &EE10I&.
Wedding, Christening and Birthday CAKES, Ornamented to
Order.
Confections, Lozenges, and every description of Sugar Goods on the
Shortest Notice.
TEA AND COFFEE, CHOPS, STEAKS AND HOT PIES, AT ALL HOURS-
I, 0. R.
Me. W. H. C. DARYALL,
Solicitor, Conveyancer & Proctor,
5, Collins Street, West,
(Over Edwards and Kaul’s, the Jewellers), three doors
from Elizabeth Street.
ESTABLISHED IN GEELONG, 1859.
6. E. iXßinii,
Maker, Tuner, and Regulator of
Pianos, Organs & Harmoniums
And all kinds of Musical Instruments.
Mr. S. has the Largest Stock in Geelong, of
PIANOS, HARMONIUMS. & AMERICAN
ORGANS, by Smith, Mason and Hamlin,
Waters, and Geo. Prince & Co., Buffalo, N.Y.
Instruments tuned or repaired by the year or per agreement, in
Town or Country. Agent for Smith’s American Organs.
Address :—G. H. STEEDMAN, Malop St-, Market Square,
GEELONG-


MESSRS. STRONG & PIERCE,
Cir ]2 JE JCi O JW Cr
iiif FACTORY,
MOORABOOL STREET-
The above is the most complete and efficient Boot and Shoe
Establishment in the Colony of Victoria, having the most Extensive
Machinery Plant and the largest variety of Boots and Shoes known.
INCLUDING
ENGLISH, FRENCH, GERMAN & AMERICAN.
If visitors to Geelong 1 would take the opportunity of making a
purchase this Establishment, tnere is little doubt but that they will
become continual customers.
OUR OWN MAKE
Nine Varieties of Gents’ Boots and Shoes ... 7s. 8d-
Fifteen do. Ladies’ do. do. ... 6s. 3d.
OF THE MOST RECENT STYLES.
egr PLEASE NOTE THE ADDRESS-
FRED. KRUGER,
ill
SKENE STREET, NEWTOWN,
GrIBIBXjOIUrGK
ADAMS’ LOTION,
HAMWAOf®®¥, 6EELONG.
The sale of this Invaluable Lotion, now exceeds
1000 Dozens Annually, with an increasing demand.
Half-ounce Bottle, Is.; One ounce Bottle, Is. 6d. Sent by Post,
6d. extra each Bottle all over Victoria.
How sad it is the loss of sight,
No more to see the blessed light;
And nature’s beauties of each kind,
Enjoyments gone from those who are
blind.
The eyes! the eyes! the blessed eyes.
That’s seen the beauties of the skies,
To lose that sight, life’s sweets are gone,
All darkness when abroad or home.
Blindness at times is through neglect;
If so, then what can you expect ;
For blight and dust, and the sand flies.
Such things we know destroy our eyes,
Adams, his Lotion such will cure
Those with sore eyes, why such endure t
The remedy will you surprise—
A bottle oft times will cure your eyes,


“ EXHIBITION MART,”
104-, 106, Moorabool Street.
WHOLESALE & RETAIL DRAPER
11. C. N. has always on hand a good supply
of GENERAL DRAPERY, selected with care
and judgment. The Motto of the Establishment
is “ small profits and guide returns
THE DEPARTMENTS COMPRISE:—
DRESSES,
MANTLES,
MILLINERY,
MANCHESTER,
CLOTHING,
WOOLLENS, See., &c.
Tailoring, Tress and Mantle-making, carefully
executed, and at Moderate Prices.
Patterns sent by Post to all parts of the Colony.
Mourning & Wedding Orders executed with promptness
Note the Address :
CORNER OF
MOORABOOL AND LITTLE RYRIE STREETS.
A CALL RESPECTFULLY SOLICITED.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
VISITORS TO THE GEELONG EXHIBITION
Will please note the
TEMPERANCE BOOK DEPOT,
84* MOORABOOL. STREET,
Next Mathews Bros., Butchers.
u jc i sl* u m □» «3C
Would call special attention to his Stock of Temperance Works, Recitations,
Dialogues, Melodists, Music, &c., suitable for Temperance Societies and
others. Also a supply of Toys and Fancy Goods on hand, suitable for
Christmas Presents and New Year’s Gifts.
B3T PLEASE REMEMBER THE ADDRESS.
LITTLE RYRIE STREET, GEELONG.
PORT & PETERS,
WHOLESALE & RETAIL
TIMBER MERCHANTS
LARGEST AND CHEAPEST STOCK OF
BTJIXjIDHsr Gf MATERIALS
IN WESTERN DISTRICT.
Cedar , Leals , Flooring , Kaurie , Loors ) Sashes ,
and Mantleyieces , Galvanized Iron , Spouting ,
Nails , Turnery , every description of Builder's
Ironmongery , Boom Papers . Oil White Lead ,
He iiliSi,
PASTRYCOOK & CONFECTIONER,
MOORABOOL STREET, GEELONG.
Tea Meetings, School Parties, &c., Catered for.
Wedding, Christening and Birthday Cakes, made
to order. LUNCHEON AT ALL HOURS.


James Munday,
Tanner, Currier, & Leather Merchant
MANUFACTURER OP MILL BELTS,
AND OF ALL THE
PURCHASER OF
Etoes, Calfskins, Kangaroo Skins &Watf(cEark
XiT -A-HST-ST QXJ^ITTIT^".
4 imm mmmm-
BOOT UPPERS
Are always kept on hand, which I am prepared to
offer at the Lowest Paying Prices.
Orders for all kinds of BELTS, executed at the
Shortest Notice.
N.B-ALL BELTS ARE MACHINE STRETCHED.
TAKKERT s—SOIiTR EEEEOA'G.
STORE:—77, Moorabool Street, GEELONG.


THE ADVANTAGES GAINED
DIRECT IMPORTS
Of Goods bought late in the HOME SEASON, despatched
ex Fastest Steamships, and arriving in Geelong in
39 to 60 MTS FROM LOSDOI,
ENABLE
TO OFFEii IDU'rRXUSra- THE
SXm®STS©H SIASOH
THE VERY
LATEST NOVELTIES
IN ALL THEIR DEPARTMENTS OF FASHION,
AT LARGE DISCOUNTS FROM THE FIRST PRICES.
Such a turn in Shipping arrangements, as contrasted with the old
style of slow sailing ships, is eminently in favor of the colonies.
THE MAGNIFICENT FLEET
Of powerful Auxiliary Steamships now laid on to Port
Phillip, acts as a
CONSTANT FEEDER FOR ALL THE DEPARTMENTS
IN THE VAST
DRAPERY, CLOTHING,
FURNISHING EMPORIUM
of MESSRS.
lllilf & HITCHCOCKS,
IMPORTERS & MANUFACTURERS,
Gr E EL O N Gr ,
HENRY PRANKS, PRINTER, 9, MALOP STREET, GEELONG.
