

. .. 00
r*
■ ,
•I




TO THE
BURRA BURRA MINES,
AND THE
GREAT SMELTING WORKS IN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
JANUARY, FEBRUARY, MARCH, AND APRIL, 1851.
By T. J. FISHER, Esq.,
BARRISTER-AT-LAW, OF SYDNEY.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY KEMP AND FAIRFAX,
LOWEB GEOE.GE SIBEEI.
1851.




in 3 3 sy^
XC 3
PREFACE.
The author of the following pages having become a shareholder in the
Burra Burra Mine, resolved, in January, 1851, to leave Sydney and visit
Adelaide, for the purpose of realizing his investment. On his arrival he
experienced the greatest kindness at the hands of many worthy South
Australians, among whom he desires gratefully to mention Captain Sturt,
Colonial Secretary; His Honor Judge Cooper; J. Smyllie, Esq., Advocate-
General; A. Macdonald, Esq., Manager of the Union Bank; J. B. Neales,
Esq. ; A. L. Elder, Esq.; George Elder, Esq.; Captain W. Elder; J. F.
Joubert, Esq.; J. Hector, Esq.; Captain Bagot; Mr. James Chambers, Mail
Contractor; Mr. Henry Ayers, Secretary of the Burra Company; G. S.
Walters, Esq.; J. H. Williams, Esq.; Captain Roach, Superintendent of the
Burra Burra Mine; Mr. Mann, Crown Solicitor ; and Dr. Forster, of Brighton,
an esteemed medical practitioner, and brother of Mr. Forster the Equity
Barrister of Lincoln’s Inn. The author of the following pages wrote them on his
return to Sydney on board the brig Phantom, and in writing them was actuated
by the one single motive (having no longer an interest in the Burra) of can-
didly and honestly communicating, as well as he could, to his
his own impressions, his own information, and his own views, of the probable
prospects of the far-famed Burra Burra Mine, and Great Smelting Establish-
ment of South Australia. In conclusion, he begs to notify that he is indebted
to the London Mining Journal, a paper of extraordinary ability and truthful-
ness, for the accounts of the Land Sales in July, 1850, and of the English
Burra, or Great Devon Consolidated Mining Company.
THOMAS JOHN FISHER.
Chambers, Elizabeth-street, Sydney,
22nd May, 1851.




YISIT TO THE BURRA BURRA MINES,
&C., &C.
THE ROAD.
The Burra Burra Mine is distant from Ade-
laide about one hundred miles, and the road to
it, although dusty and hot, is an excellent one
in the summer months. The stranger soon
ascertains that there is every facility for tra-
velling by the Great North or Burra Burra
Road. The mad, the fare of which is one
pound, leaves Adelaide at three o’clock in the
afternoon, reaches Gawler Town, a distance of
27 miles, about six in the evening, stops there
till six next morning, and arrives at the Burra
about six in the evening. The mail is an open
four-horsed omnibus, carrying about fifteen
passengers; the mail contractor, Mr. James
Chambers, furnishes to travellers every sort of
conveyance they require : a party is frequently
conveyed to the Burra in a spring cart, driven
tandem fashion, and supplied with fresh horses
from the stations along the road, belonging to
Mr. Chambers. A trip of this sort to and from
the Burra mine, costs about twelve or thirteen
pounds. The road from Adelaide to Gawler
Town traverses a flat open country along the
coast line of St. Vincent’s Gulf; on each side
of the road the country is subdivided
into small farms reaching on one side
to the Gulf, and on the other extending
to the long range of hills which intersects the
province of South Australia. The country
in February last presented a brown parched
appearance, owing to a long and unprecedented
drought. Very few objects of interest are met
on the road, being limited to the teams of the
German farmers, and the bullock-drays laden
with bars of refined copper, en route from the
smelting works to Adelaide. At Gawler
Town, a rapidly improving township, there are
two large inns with excellent accommodation.
About thirty miles from Gawler Town you
reach the Kapunda, the property of Captain
Bagot, M.L.C., and some proprietors in Eng-
land. This mine is in excellent working order,
and as productive as ever. The North Ka-
punda and the South Kapunda mines adjoin
the Kapunda; they are mineral sections of
land which were purchased in the expectation
of their containing a continuation of the rich
lodes found in the Kapunda, but although
much has been done with the scrip of the
North Kapunda and South Kapunda Com-
panies, but little profit or success has attended
the working of the mines themselves#
There are upwards of fifty mining companies,
which were formed in Adelaide, for working
mines situate in every part of the province, but
the false and exaggerated accounts given to the
world of the prospects of most of these mines,
the failure of the workings in general, and the
glaring frauds committed by scheming scrip-
sellers and brokers upon “ new chums” and
others of the South Australian public, have ge-
nerated a want of confidence in any mine but
the Burra. The road from the Kapunda, passes
through an undulating park-like country and
an extensive plain, across which in the dis-
tance the mirage is often plainly distinguishable.
About eight miles before arriving at the Burra
the country becomes remarkably barren and
hilly, and the eye is at once attracted by the
peculiar appearance of ridges which run north
and south along the ground at what seem to be
regular intervals of distance, suggesting the
natural inference of lodes of some kind or
other ; this inference is fortified by the multi-
tudinous out-croppings of lime and other de-
scriptions of stone which appear at the base and
along the brow of the hills. Most people,
whether they possess much or little geological
knowledge, or even none at all, are tempted to
exclaim, “ this must be a mining country,”
As you approach towards the Burra, a tall
white chimney rising from the summit
of one of the hills before you, an-
nounces that the mine is not far off, and then
your eye fixes upon a congeries of bald rounded
hills towards the north, looking like so many
tents crowded together upon raised
ground. Of course you do not gaze at them
with the same feelings that Mont Blanc is be-


held, but you experience an indescribable
emotion of admiration and novelty by which it
is remarkable many persons are affected on
each occasion they visit this spot.
THE BURRA BURRA TOWNSHIP.—
KOORINGA.
The Burra Hotel, which is situate at the
commencement of the Burra Burra township,
is a fine spacious stone building, furnishing
every accommodation to visitors, and unsur-
passed by any house of the khd, either in the
province or New South Wales. The stabling
and livery horses are under the superintend-
ence of James Fitzpatrick, coachman for
many years to R. J. Want, Esq., of Sydney.
Fitzpatrick spoke of his old master with grati-
tude, and although in the way of rapidly
making money, he said he yearned for the fine
climate and more advanced social condition of
Sydney. The township of Kooringa is well
laid out, comprising several very handsome
stone buildings, and a population of five
thous and inhabitants. When one reflects that five
years ago the whole of this place was a barren
wilderness, one is lost in astonishment at the
number of stores and shops and offices that
line the High-street, and the number of
trades and callings, apparently at full work
and in the most prosperous condition —Miss
Wills, milliner ; Fitzgerald, solicitor; Public
Subscription Library ; Saxon, carpenter and
undertaker; Bailey, hair-dresser; Doc or
Rule; Henderson, watch-maker; Eating-house;
Powell, chemist; Marks and Collin, linen-
drapers ; Auction Rooms, Truro House, Corn-
wall House, are a few of the names and trades
taken at random from the shop boards in pass-
ing down the street. There are four or five
hairdressers, three or four chemists and sur-
geons, and a proportionate number of shop-
keepers and mechanics. Several public houses
are to be met with, but in general good order
prevails in the town, owing partly to the in-
dustry and constant employment of the inha-
bitants, and partly to the exertions of
Mr. Lang, the Resident Magistrate, and of the
several ministers of religion who are located
here. Excellent accommodation is afforded to
the wives and families of miners, and workmen
belonging to the smelting works, in several well
laid out squares of comfortable cottages,
chiefly built of stone, and let at low rents.
The whole of the township is the freehold of
the Burra Company, who have let some of the
properties; such, for instance, as the Burra
Hotel, on long improving leases.
GENERAL APPEARANCE OF THE
MINE.
Leaving the Burra Hotel you pass down the
High-street, and proceed along a road, which
on one side winds round the base of a large
hill, and on the other side is skirted by a creek
that exhibits a very singular coup d’ceil. Along
the channel of the creek runs a thin stream of
water, and on each bank is a line of little de-
tached cottages or sheds, each of which has been
excavated out of the sides of the creek, and
faced with weather boards. The inside of each
house has a fire-place and a chimney or flue,
which, making its exit out of the surface ground,
is then capped either by a small beer barrel or
mound of earth with a hole in the centre, as a
substitute for the ordinary chimney-pot. In
these strange dwelling-places, which take up
two miles of the creek on each side, the great
bulk of the miners and their families reside,
being permitted by the Burra Company to do
so rent free. A busy hum pervades the creek,
swarms of children are at every door, here and
there a knot of gossips is collected, and every
now and then the scene is diversified by the chat-
ter of a tame magpie, the barking of quarrelsome
curs, the grunting of swine, the neighing of
horses stabled alongside the huts, or
the fluttering of red shirts and other
apparel drying in the open air.
Two minutes’ walk brings you to the mine.
Turning from the creek, and looking towards
the low but gently rising ground that lies be-
tween three hills, you observe an area of from
eighty to one hundred acres, crowded with
stone buildings, covered shafts leading under
ground, machinery and engine works, engine-
houses, store-houses, tanks and dams of water,
innumerable sheds of all sizes, and countless
piles of copper ore of various assorted qualities,
in different stages of dressing, lying almost in
every direction. If you arrive after six in the
evening expecting to find all quiet and the
business of the day over, great will be your
surprise at the bustling animated appearance
of the place. The first striking object
is the gigantic white chimney towering from
the summit of the middle hill, and carrying
the smoke from the different engine
flues which run under the surface of


the ground towards the middle hill.
At the summit of this same hill also you
observe a large well-finished stone warehouse,
used as a powder magazine. The eye is next
caught by a fine lofty stone building, situate
about the centre of the ground—the three-
storied pumping engine house, with the great
beam in front steadily working up and down.
Ascending the road, you pass the weigh-
bridge and an extensive square of stone-built
offices and stores adjoining a spacious yard,
enclosed by a stone wall; these premises are
used as depots for building timber, iron, work-
men’s tools, and various engineering stores. In
the back ground on the brow of the hill is a
row of well built stone cottages, two of them
the residences of Captain Roach and another
mine captain, and the third comprising the
consultation room, the changing rooms, and
the office of the Company’s accountant and his
clerk. On the right of these cottages is
another similar range, the residences of the
other captains of the mine and their
families. Still further to the right is a
pretty detached cottage and neat out-
offices, occupied by Dr, Chambers, the
principal surgeon at the mine. On th e brow
of the right hill is a long line of stabling and
sheds for carts, with adjoining yards and barns;
the stalls are roomy, floored with small stones,
and capable of receiving upwards of one hun-
dred horses. The neatness and cleanliness
of these out-offices, the order which one glance
recognised as pervading the whole arrangements,
the disposition of the carts side by side, the
sets of harness belonging to them similarly ar-
ranged, and the good working condition of the
horses themselves, indicated that a like order
and method must characterise the other depart-
ments at this great establishment. Near the
stabling is a substantial and capacious shed,
used as a timber store and saw-pit, and close
by a similar one was in the course of erection
for the further accommodation of the carpen-
ters. About eleven whims were at work at
the shafts. Most of these whims, as well
as the great pumping engine, are at
work day and night, which accounts
for the busy scene presented to the
eye, although long past six o’clock. The
whims are situate each of them close
to a shaft which communicates with one or
other of the different levels under ground.
The whim may be described as a large hori-
zontal wooden wheel, round which is a coil of
rope, each end being fastened to iron buckets
for bringing up alternately the ore from
underground ; two horses harnessed to
one end of a wooden beam running
through the large horizontal wheel are driven
by a boy at the other end of the beam round a
circle till one of the buckets is lowered, and
then the horses’ heads are turned, and they are
driven round again at the same pace till the
other bucket filled with ore is raised above
ground. The whirligig noisy movement of the
whims, the boys and the horses at the shafts
in the different parts of this eighty-acre area
all briskly trotting round and round, excite at
first sight a very lively, merry, and inspiriting
sensation. Connected with the pumping
engine shaft is a series of long wooden spout-
ing, elevated upon and supported by stands.
The spouts which receive the water drawn up
from the mine, run backward in several direc-
tions, and feed various tanks and dams and
other places where the operations of cleansing
and dressing the ore are carried on. The refuse
water is conducted to the head of the Burra
Creek, down which it makes its way for seven
miles, reaching the Princess lloyal Mine, and
ultimately running into tb e Murray flats. N ear
each shaft where the whim is at work are
ranges of sheds, in which parties of men and
boys are busily engaged in crushing and redu-
cing lumps of ore from one size to
another, and so facilitating the washing and se-
paration of the copper ore from the
earth and foreign matter with which
it is mixed. There are other sheds set
apart for tanks and various contrivances
by which parties of men and boys wash and
sift the copper ore, until prepared for sampling.
Collected near the sheds are numberless
square and oblong heaps of ore, about six feet
long, four feet broad, and two to three feet
deep. These heaps are composed of copper
ore of various qualities and in different stages
of dressing. When it is remembered
that in addition to the large heaps
of ore which cover the ground near
these sheds, and near the dams and tanks for
washing, there are innumerable piles of ore
ready for the samplers and smelters gathered
together in every available quarter of this
eighty-acre area, some faint idea may be
formed of the enormous masses of mineral
wealth thus collected at the Burra, A pleasing
aspect is imparted to them by the rich deep
blue of the carbonate, and by the greenish
hues which characterise, the malachite ore,
affording a striking contrast to the sombre ap-


pearance of the red oxide. The offices of the
clerk of the works, and of the assayers, and of
the samplers, form another range of buildings.
The workshops of the engineers and the dif-
ferent mechanics engaged on the ground, are
of course pretty numerous, but still each place
is so situate, and all the works are proceeding
in such a manner, as to impress even a super-
ficial spectator with the conviction that the
most thorough order and method is the prin-
ciple of the establishment throughout. A
stone engine-house has just been completed,
and fitted up with an engine of forty-five horse
power, from the Perran Foundry, Cornwall,
intended for crushing the ore, and so dispensing
■with a large amount of expensive manual
labour. A stamping machine for extracting
the leavings from the refuse copper ore which
has hitherto been thrown on one side, is also
very near completion. Workmen were also
engaged upon a new engine-house, in which
a winding-engine of 35 horse power,
already at the mine, is to be placed. When the
deeper levels of the mine are reached, this
winding-engine will be connected with the
ropes and iron buckets now worked by the
horse-whims, and thus save a large expendi-
ture, which is now necessary at the several
shafts. Of the extent of the operations
going on at the surface of the mine, some
notion may be obtained from the num-
ber of men who are employed by the
Burra Company at surface work. Most of
the buildings and engineering works are
erected by contract, and, reckoning exclusively
of the men working for the contractors, and
also of the officers of the mine, 383 men and
111 boys are employed by the Burra Com-
pany as ore dressers and labourers, and simi-
lar descriptions of surface work; 27 men are
employed as carters and stablemen, and 85
men as carpenters, masons, smiths, painters,
plasterers, engineers, and boiler-makers —total
600.
DESCENT UNDER GROUND.
A bird’s eye view of the surface operations
soon occasions anxiety to visit the interior of
the mine. No one is admitted without a let-
ter of introduction to Captain Roach from Mr.
Ayers, the Burra Company’s Secretary. By
appointment you arrive at the consultation-
room about eight or nine in the morning, and
then prepare to descend the mine, in com-
pany with Captain Roach or two of the
Captains of the mine. You are introduced
into the changing-room, where you divest
yourself of your coat, waistcoat, and
trousers, and put on a coarse red flannel
shirt, a pair of canvass trowsers, and a sub-
stantial Jim Crow hat. Sometimes, but very
rarely, ladies are found bold enough and
curious enough to make these excursions.
They are lowered down the shaft by the whim
ropes in a square box or “ gig,” the lady sitting
at one end and the captain of the mine at the
other. The descent is by a shaft leading to
some one of the old levels, say the six fathom or
ten fathoms level; that is, a depth of thirty-six
or sixty feet. On leaving the ladder, you light
the thick tallow candle with which you have
been provided, and traverse the levels or
galleries excavated for the purpose of coming
upon the lodes or veins of copper ore. The
shaft which strangers frequently descend is
called Waterhouse’s shaft, the different shafts
being distinguished by the names of
the Directors, Secretary, and Captains.
The four perpendicular sides of the shaft are
prevented from falling in by a stout substantial
framework, reaching from the opening at the
surface to its lowest depth. This framework is
boarded over, so as to present a smooth sur-
face on each side, and thereby prevent any
hitching of the iron buckets with the frame-
work. Every shaft in the mine is thus framed,
whether the shaft reach ten fathoms only, or
descend as low as the forty-fathom level.
Levels or galleries are excavated at the depth
of six fathoms, ten fathoms, fifteen fathoms,
twenty fathoms, thirty fathoms, and forty
fathoms. The descent to these levels is un-
attended with fatigue, and a matter of great
facility, as you stick your lighted candle, with its
candlestick of moist clay, upon the front of your
Jim Crow hat, and then avail yourself of both
hands while stepping down the rounds of the
ladder. The first thing that strikes you is the pro-
vision made to prevent the galleries giving way
either at the top or sides. Two uprights made
of strong gum-tree logs, into which a gum log
is inserted horizontally, are placed at regular
intervals along the gallery, and behind each of
these uprights a rough but substantial boarding
or wainscoting is worked against the walls, while
the horizontal gum logs support a longitudinal
ceiling, constructed after the same fashion as
the wainscot. Most of the “ ground,” with the
exception of portions in the thirty fathom and
forty fathom levels, is soft, which facilitates the
working of the lodes, but endangers the security


of the mine: however, the levels hitherto
have remained uninjured, and no loss of human
life has yet occurred. Similar precautions are
adopted with respect to the large concave open-
ings or caverns from which the copper ore has
been “stoped,” or picked out; stout logs are
jammed betwixt the sides of the roof in these
caverns, and the cavity is filled up with the
earth excavated from the levels and the rub-
bish which accumulates where the pitches or
lodes are worked. The next thing that strikes
you is the coolness and excellent ventilation of
every level you go through. A hot wind may
be blowing at the surface of the mine, while in
the levels the temperature is nearly the same as
usual. To ensure a perfect ventilation, various
expedients are resorted to; such as sinking
small shafts or winzes between two levels,
and running wooden pipes along other levels,
where doors are interposed to prevent the
natural current of the air and divert it into the
wooden channels. During yur progress, your
attention is claimed by the thundering noise
and reverberation of the pumps at work in the
pumping engine shaft. This din, intermingled
with the sound of streams of water gushing along
the wooden channels, and of water dropping
heavily from the upper parts of the engine-
shaft to the plats or landing places and the
bottom of the shaft, occasion at first a disagree-
able sensation of confusion The quantity of
water contained in the Burra mine is prodi-
gious. It exceeded out of all measure the
calculations made by men of the greatest ex-
perience in Cornish mines. As a proof, it
may be stated that at a consultation of
the Directors, the Secretary, the Engineers,
and mining Captains, previous to sending
to Cornwall for a pumping engine, it was
considered that one of eighty-three horse
power would be sufficiently powerful, but since
this eighty-three horse power engine has been
worked, it has proved to be far from sufficient
for the purpose, and accordingly the Directors
sent to England for an engine of3oo horsepower!
The working of the eighty-three horse power
engine until the forty-fathom level was
arrived at was watched with the greatest in-
terest by all who entertained doubts as to the
permanency of the mine. When the water
had been reduced considerably below the
thirty-fathom level, so as to allow the mine to
be worked without apprehensions of danger, a
valuable lode, composed of a compact green
malachite, producing upwards of forty per cent,
of copper, was cut forty fathoms below the
water level. The lode being clearly defined,
from ten to eleven feet wide, and dipping well
into the mine, enhanced materially the value
of the property. At the base of the forty
fathom level rich lodes of malachite are obvious
to the most inexperienced eye. There is every
reason to believe that these rich lodes
of malachite will continue, although, until the
water is reduced below the forty fathom
level there is no absolute certainty. It appears
that the forty-fathom level has been extended
south for twenty fathoms, through a magni-
ficent course of ore, principally malachite of
the best quality; and the same level north
fifteen fathoms, through another course of ore
equally good. In Ayers’s forty-fathom level,
twenty-five fathoms south have been driven
on the course of a lode twelve feet wide, yield-
ing malachite and red oxide of copper from
forty to forty-five per cent. In Ayers’s thirty
fathom level, the stopes or workings overhead,
twelve feet in width, produce red oxide of fifty
per cent. One instance of the extraordinary
abundance of rich ore in the mine is remark-
able. In excavating the foundation of the
house for the new winding engine, which has
been already referred to, a large and rich
lode of malachite was unexpectedly dis-
covered, from which, in a very few
weeks, during the latter part of the year
1850, nearly 100 tons of forty per cent, ore were
got out. Upwards of four hundred men are at
work under ground, although the ore is taken
principally from the thirty-fathom and forty-
fathom levels. The men work in parties of
two, four, six, and eight; they are engaged in
excavating the levels, blasting the hard ground
and ore, picking the ore from the walls, or
from the stopes or workings overhead, wheeling
the ore in barrows along the levels to the plats
or landing places next the shafts, where the
ore is transferred to the iron buckets drawn
upwards by the horse whims. The com-
munication between the men under ground
and the man who loads and empties the iron
bucket aboveground, close to the open-
ing of the shaft, is easily effected.
A rope is pulled which communicates with a
sort of iron clapper above ground, and the
whim-horses being stopped at this signal, a
slight elevation of the voice enables the men
below to be heard at the surface, and vice
versa. With respect to the general appearance
of the copper ore in this mine the visitor is
struck chiefly by the beautiful sparkle and
varied graining of the green malachite mixed


With blue carbonate, which the miners are
working from the slopes in Kingston s thirty-
fathom level. The specimens obtained from
such workings are sometimes retained and sold
by the miners. The specimens are cut and
polished, and then set as brooches and
bracelets in gold or steel, making appro-
priate presents for friends at home. The
red oxide in Ayers’s thirty-fathom level, and
having upwards of fifty per centage of copper,
has a pleasing appearance while the fracture
is fresh ; the reddish particles are almost pure
copper, and sharp enough to prick the finger
passing over the broken surface. In most
cases the natural beauty of the ore before it is
picked out is smoked over by the explosion
of the blasting powder. As the visitor tra-
verses the levels in many parts of the mine
where “ the ground” does not require boarding
or support, his eye is caught by the small
but multitudinous veins of ore with which the
walls of the galleries are impregnated; these
are termed by the miners, feeders to the lodes.
The merest tyro can observe the presence of
the same description of ore in the thirty fathom
and forty fathom levels, and that the ore is
richest at the lowest level ; the man of skill
ascertains that the malachite and red
oxides are traceable from one level to
the other, the ore becoming richer in
proportion as the depth of the lode increases,
while Captain Roach and the captains of the
mine certify that the champion or chief lode,
and another lode separated from it by a dis-
tance of forty fathoms, extend from the surface
of the mine down to the forty-fathom level,
and may go on extending to a depth of two
hundred fathoms and upwards, the depth of
many Cornish mines. During your passage
through the different parts of the mine the two
captains inspect the progress of the works, give
directions to the miners, and learn from them
how “the ground” works, what ore they have
picked, and whether any supports or repairs
are required. About three o’clock in the
afternoon you are ascending the ladder
of one of the shafts near the six-fathom level,
you leave your candle behind, and again
meeting the dazzling glare of day, you are
introduced to the changing-room, where you
find two or three tubs of water well filled, and
every thing necessary for a thorough ablution.
GENERAL ACCOUNT OF THE WORK-
INGS OF THE MINE.
There is no resident Director at the mine,
the sole superintendent being Captain Roach,
who has a salary of £350 a-year. Under him
are three mining captains, Captain Dick,
Captain Matthew, and Captain Mitchell,
at salaries of £l5O a-year, all men of
intelligence, who have been connected
with mining from their boyhood, and
who have worked their way upwards by
their own merit. The mine is inspected every
day by two of the captains, and during the
night the third captain goes through and
examines the works. The night duty is per-
formed by one captain for three weeks, when
his place is taken by another. In the morning
the three captains meet Captain Roach in the
consultation room, where the progress of the
work and the different operations of the mine
are discussed in connexion with the report of
the night captain. In the evening the same
consultation takes place in connexion with the
report of the day captains, and the personal
observations of Captain Roach, who visits the
mine nearly every day. The mine is worked
day and night by parties of men who con-
tinue at work eight hours, so that three
relays take place every twenty-four hours.
Smiths are also employed day and night in
sharpening the tools used by the miners. On
Sundays the works are stopped, the pumping
engine alone continuing at work, and two men
being kept below to traverse the mine and see
that nothing goes wrong. The miners, about
400 in number, are chiefly Cornishmen.
About eighty are Germans, many of whem
have worked in the Hartz mountains; they
are quiet and steady, but not such strong and
effective hands as the English. The miners
are employed either at tut work, ton work, or
tribute. Tut work consists of sinking the shafts
and excavating the levels, for which the Burra
Company pay them, on an average, thirty
shillings a week each. Ton work is
piece work, usually performed by the
miners at eighteen shillings per ton.
They can pick out two tons of copper ore a
week, for which they obtain thirty-six shillings
a week. The copper ore thus picked out may be
worth £3O a ton, but the Burra Company have
to pay the expense of raising and dressing the
ore. Tribute is work performed by the miners
in partnership with the Burra Company. If
the ore is very rich, say seventy per cent.,


they receive out of the value two shillings
in every pound sterling. If the ore is of the
ordinary yield, say thirty-five or forty per cent.,
they receive out of the value four or five shil-
lings in every pound sterling. Sometimes it
happens that they are deceived in their estimate
of the quantity and quality of ore contained
in particular parts of the level where the
pitches or places to work the ore are set,
In such cases they do not raise enough ore to
pay the outlay upon tools, gunpowder, &c.,
and their own living. Under such circum-
stances they receive fifteen shillings a week,
called subsistence money, w r ith which they are
debited in the Burra Company’s books, and
with which they remain debited until fortune
turns in their favour. Frequently they meet
with the greatest luck. Such was the case in
former times, when the captains were less
vigilant and less able than now. At present,
before the pitches are set, very good care is
taken by Captain Roach and his assistant
captains to ascertain the probable quantity and
quality of the copper ore contained in the
pitches, and then to fix such terms for working
upon tribute as will give the miners average
Wages of thirty-six shillings or £2 a week.
Still it is a lottery, and some men meet with
unexpected prizes. Captain Mitchell, before
his promotion, in company with three other
miners, took out from the thirty-fathom level
172 tons of forty per cent, malachite in the
space of four weeks ; and Captain Roach him-
self, in one of his reports, bearing date April,
1850, states that from one of the pitches in the
back of the thirty-fathom level, south of
Kingston’s shaft, “ the pair” broke in the pre-
ceding month of March 150 tons of ore of
forty-four per cent. The tributers have not
only to excavate the ore, but to raise, dress,
and arrange it according to quality, before they
can claim their proportion. Dressing the
ore properly is a matter of the utmost
importance, and it is under the continual
superintendence of experienced men, called
Surface Captains, Samples are taken of the
heaps by the miners as well as by the Com-
pany’s samplers, and the two are respectively
assayed and compared, and the per centage of
the ore having been arrived at, the quantity
raised by the party is weighed and entered in
the books, after which the balance due to the
miners is paid to them. When the ore is
dressed at the Company’s expense, it is
generally done by contract. The average
amount received by the ore dressers is from
twenty-five to thirty shillings a week. The
whim and other boys receive from eight to
fifteen shillings per week, and the landers
twenty-seven shilling per week It may be
observed here that the greatest good feeling
prevails between Captain Roach and the other
captains and the miners. The captains, having
been miners themselves, act fairly towards the
men, while, as servants of the Company, having
a high character to maintain, they never lose
sight of the Company’s interests. The only
interference with the private arrangements of
the men employed at the mine is the plan
adopted for procuring medical and temporary
relief in cases of accidents or illness. One
thousand men are employed at the mine, and
they are bound to contribute sixpence a week
each for the salaries of two surgeons resident at
the mine, and for the support of the sick club.
By this means £5OO a-year is raised for the
medical salaries, and upwards of £5OO for
the purposes of the sick club. The Cornish
miners and their families live comfortably,
and, moreover, lay by a good portion of their
earnings. A paper currency finds no favour
in their cautious eyes ; such dread have they of
the orders or promissory notes pretty generally
issued and circulated here, that they transmute
them at once into silver, of which it is cur-
rently reported they have a considerable hoard.
Of schools for young children there is no lack ;
and it would seem that in the rising genera-
tion at the Burra, there is some thirst for
knowledge ; placards on the walls of the town,
notifying that Mr. Joseph had arrived for the
of teaching writing and arithmetic
to the children of the miners and smelters in a
few lessons for ten shillings and sixpence, and
that for such as were engaged throughout the
day, an evening class would be formed. Dr.
Wyatt, recently appointed Inspector of Schools,
was about visiting the Burra in April, to report
upon the state of education there.
THE SMELTING WORKS AT THE
BURRA.
Wonderfol as the Burra mine is to the stranger,
still more wonderful appear the highly finished
and extensive smelting works erected at the
Burra by the Patent Smelting Company. A few
years since a new flux for smelting copper ore
was invented by a clever chemist named Napier,
and a patent having been taken out for it,
the wealthy firm of Messrs. Schneider and
Company, who have large smelting establish-


merits at Cuba, purchased the inventor's in-
terest in the patent, and in 1848 determined on
erecting smelting works in South Australia.
The ore of the Burra Burra and of most
other mines there is free from sulphur,
and capable of being reduced to fine copper by
two processes instead of eight, which is the
number required for smelting ore containing
sulphur. 'When two furnaces will do the
work of eight, thereby saving the fluxes, the
fuel, and the labour required for six
furnaces —it may easily be conceived what
a saving of expenditure was counted upon
by Messrs. Schneider and Company. In
1848, Mr. Gregory Seale Walters, formerly a
merchant of London, connected with the house
of Huth and Company, was selected by Messrs.
Schneider and Company to carry out their
plans, and at the latter end of the year that
gentleman arrived in South Australia, having
at his command a very large capital, and
accompanied by Mr. J. H. Williams, a gentle-
man of very great ability and intelligence as
general superintendent, and by a complete
staff of engineers, smelters, and other
officers. Shortly after Mr. Walters’ arrival
in Adelaide, the vessels chartered by Messrs,
Schneider and Co,, and having on board timber,
iron, fire bricks, and all the requisite materials
for erecting the proposed smelting works, also
arrived at Adelaide. Mr. Walters thereupon
immediately determined on building his works
within a stone’s throw of the Burra mine,
and on the other side of the Burra Creek, on
land belonging to the Burra Company, a spot
by many considered as injudiciously selected
on account of its distance from any timbered
country, and from the port for shipping the
copper. A lease of the land was obtained
from the Burra Company for 99 years, at a
peppercorn rent, and in less than six months
after the foundation stone had been laid,
the smelting works were in operation! ! !
The buildings containing the furnaces, which
are nineteen in number, are about
three stories high; they are constructed
of fire bricks and most elaborately finished,
perhaps too much so when compared with
similar buildings in Swansea ; and they boast
of a gigantic towering chimney, surpassing
everything of the kind in any of the Australa-
sian colonies. The flues connecting the fur-
naces and this chimney, run under the floor
of one of the buildings, and are so
spacious that a tandem can with
ease be driven through them. When
the furnaces are in full work, a thousand fire
bricks a-week are required for the purposes of
repair alone. Formerly these were imported,
but an excellent fire-brick clay being pretty
abundant in the neighbourhood, an engine-
house and other buildings have been put up
for the manufacture of fire-bricks on the spot.
An engine house, in which a circular saw is
driven by steam, the Superintendent’s house
and garden connected with a long range of
handsome offices, numerous stores and out-
buildings, about twenty cottages built for the
accommodation of the smelters, situate at the
rear of the furnace houses, comprise the
rest of this establishment. The quantities of
coal, patent fuel, and fire-wood, lying
about in the several squares or yards,
men at work in all quarters cutting
and drawing billet wood, loading drays with
copper, and unloading drays of ore, con-
stitute a busy scene, enhanced perhaps by the
contrast of the wilderness in the rear. About
one thousand men are employed in and about
the smelting works; and for the purposes of
draught no fewer than 4000 bullocks were until
lately yoked every day during at least eight
months of the year. About thirty smelters
are in the service of the Patent Smelting
Company,’ at average wages of from £lO to
£ls a month each, and most of them are under
agreement to serve for five years. Since the
Company has commenced operations, the
transport of fuel from the port, and the car-
riage of copper for shipment, have been greatly
facilitated by the formation of an establish,
ment at Port Wakefield, at the Gulf. Port
Wakefield is a creek at the head of
St. Vincent’s Gulf, forming the embouchure
of the river Wakefield, and having a depth of
water sufficient for barges of considerable
tonnage. The intervening country between
the Burra and Port Wakefield, a distance of
about thirty miles, is composed partly of un-
dulating hills, and partly of flat land well
adapted for heavy carriage. The traffic be-
tween Port Adelaide and Port Wakefield
is chiefly carried on by the barges belonging to
the Patent Smelting Company, but two or
three vessels from Newcastle and Sydney have
sailed right up the gulf, and discharged
their cargoes of coals at Wakefield, The
extent of the Smelting Company’s opera-
tions may be gathered from the amount of their
annual disbursement in wages, namely,
£BO,OOO, and the value of their exports, com.
prising copper ore and refined copper, for the


year, ending December, 1850, viz., £400,000.
But where and upon what terms does the
Patent Smelting Company procure its copper
ore ?It may seem strange that although there
was some kind of understanding between the
Burra Company and the Patent Smelting
Company, before the outlay of £200,000
upon the Burra Company’s land was
resolved upon, and although there is still
an understanding to be deduced from cor-
respondence, yet there is no signed agree-
ment between the two companies! Such
however, is the fact, and it is attributed to a
dispute respecting the details of the contract.
It is generally understood that the terms of the
agreement are, that the Burra Company shall
supply, and the Patent Smelting Company
receive 30,000 tons of copper ore, if raised,
the Burra Company being at liberty to dispose
of all ores above thirty-five per cent, to other
persons besides the Patent Smelting Company,
and the Burra Company to receive payment
from the Patent Smelting Company in
refined copper. The exact rate of
payment is not made public, but it is under-
stood that about three-fifths of the value of the
copper ore supplied by the Burra Company to
the Smelting Company, are returned in the
form of fine copper. It is alleged that
Mr. Walters, with his large capital,
his staff of officers and smelters, and his cargoes
of materials all upon his hands at once, and
with his instructions to commence operations
immediately, was driven into a corner, and
that the result was, not only an injudicious
selection of a site for smelting, but the hasty
acceptance of a bargain, of which the Burra
Company had the chief advantage. On the
one hand, it is said that the Company by their
agreement got rid of their ore on very favour-
able terms for seven years, and cast the trouble
and risk and expense of realizing the copper
ore upon the Smelting Company, while, at the
end of seven years, the Smelting Company,
with their capital of £200,000, fixed at the
mouth of the mine, must be at the mercy of
the Burra Company in making another bar-
gain. On the other hand, it is observed, that
the Smelting Company obtained the monopoly
of the Burra ore, with liberty to smelt what
ore they chose, and to export the remainder
with the certainty of securing an immediate
sale at Swansea of an article prized for many
important purposes, on account of its peculiar
richness. But why should the per-centage of
the ore supplied by the Burra Company be
limited to thirty-five per cent ? The richer
the ore, the more abundant must be the cop-
per refined, and the Burra now produces large
quantities of ore of from forty to eighty per cent,
of copper. It may be mentioned that the two
companies are at issue as to the construction
of this part of the agreement, but at the time
the contract was made, the Burra was not ex-
pected to turn out a large quantity of such
high-per centage ore. The Burra Company
relying upon their own construction of the
agreement have not hesitated to sell the rich
per-centage ore to Mr. Penny, whose smelting
works are situate on the Burra Burra Road, at
Apoinga, about thirty miles from the Burra
mine, in the heart of a well wooded country.
While the benefit derived by South Australia
from the large expenditure of the Patent Smelt-
ing Company in the province, coupled with their
establishment of an important trade with the
East, is generally admitted, yet many have for
some months past predicted that the difficulties
in the way of the Smelting Company must
ultimately overpower them. These predictions
were founded on the prospect of a continuous
drought, a consequent mortality among the
draught bullocks, and the impracticability of
procuring billet wood, which cannot be got for
thirty miles round the Burra, in order to supply
the furnaces, the consumption by which is
prodigious. There has been a partial verifi-
cation of these predictions, and at the com-
mencement of April last (1851) a panic was
caused at the Burra, by all the Smelting
Company’s furnaces being “blown out,”
except three —in other words out of the nineteen
furnaces only three were at work. The
return of £IOOO worth of copper run out daily
from the furnaces was reduced to a mere nothing
in comparison. This among other things, pro-
duced the rapid fall in the price of Burra
shares in the first week of April last, to which
reference will presently be made. Notwith-
standing this gloomy aspect of affairs, many
persons are confident that the energy and skill
of Messrs. Walters and Williams, aided by the
co-operation of the Burra Company, will, ere
long, enable them to resume their operations
with success. The competition for the Burra
ore lies principally between the Patent Smelt-
ing Company and Mr. Penny, of Apoinga,
Mr. Penny has four or five furnaces, which can
turn out about fifty tons a week of refined
copper from rich ores ; his expenses are great,
and he is, moreover, threatened with legal
proceedings by the Patent Smelting Company,


Shipped to —
Tons. cwt. qr.
,1b.
£
s.
d.
Singapore....
. . 722
4
1
27..
54,166
16
10
England ....
.. 541
13
1
9. .
40,624
19
10
Calcutta ....
.. 274
0
0
0
20,550
0
0
Bombay .. ..
.. 247
0
2
15..
18,527
7
6
Madras
.. 114
8
1
9..
8,581
4
9
Batavia
.. 20
0
0
0.,
1,500
0
0
Mauritius....
6
8
2
0.
481
17
6
for an alleged infringement of their patent.
The Yatala Smelting Works, situate about three
miles from the Port of Adelaide, and estab-
lished by the Messrs. Bunce, at a great expense)
have been stopped for some time in conse-
quence of the failure of those gentlemen; but
the plant having been purchased by a com-
pany of speculators, expectations are enter-
tained of their being shortly worked. The
other smelting establishment in South
Australia is an unimportant one, the Kan-
mantoo Works, in the district of Mount
Barker, belonging to Mr. Thomas, and
employed chiefly in smelting the ore of the
South Australian Company’s mine at Kanman-
too. Captain Bagot has a smelting furnace for
reducing copper ore to regulus, and his own
mine furnishes it constant employment. The
following table shows the value of the exports
of metallic copper during the year 1850 :
Value, £75 per ton.
The neighbour-
ing colonies,
chiefly for
transhipment.. 278 15 2 0.. 20,908 2 4
2204 10 3 4.. 165,340 8 9
SKETCH OF THE FORMATION OF THE
BURRA COMPANY, ITS PROGRESS
AND PRESENT PROSPECTS.
[1845,]
The promising indications of copper
ore in the Burra Burra district were pretty
generally known in South Australia so
far back as 1839, but it was not till 1845
that a special survey of 20,000 acres was
resolved upon, and a junction effected between
two parties, formed respectively of the princi-
pal men of Adelaide, sometimes called “ the
nobs,” and of the tradesmen and other less
nobby individuals in Adelaide, more commonly
designated “ the snobs.” The money having
been paid and the survey effected, it was a
matter altogether uncertain whether the
northem half was more valuable than the
other end, now known as the Princess Royal.
Indeed the magnificent outcroppings in the
hills of the Princess Royal led many to con-
sider that end as the preferable portion. Some
were desirous that no division should take place
between the nobs and snobs, but the amalga-
mation was generally disliked, and the division
was quickly disposed of by the toss up of a
halfpenny, the toss being won by the snobs,
who chose the Burra end, much no doubt to
the present regret of the Princess Royal share-
holders, whose £5O scrip is not saleable now at
£l2. The shares of the Burra Company were
divided into 2464 shares of £5 each, and a deed
of settlement was agreed upon, of which the
following are the principal provisions:—
DEED OF SETTLEMENT.
It is provided that the business of the Company
shall consist in working the mine or mines
in the lands which may belong to the Company,
and disposing of the ore and minerals
procured either in a raw or smelted state ;
that there shall be nine directors, the capital
to be considered of the nominal value of
£12,226, divided into 2464 shares of £5 each,
with liberty to increase the capital to £20,000 ;
the meetings of the shareholders to be held
twice a-year; that an extraordinary general
meeting may be convened at any time by
the Directors ; that at the general meeting
every shareholder may vote in respect of
his shares in the following proportion :
3to 5 Shares .. 1 Vote,
6 „ 10 „ .. 2
11 „ 15 „ ..3
16 „ 20 „ .. 4
21 „ 25 „ ..5
26 „ 30 „ ..6
31 „ 35 „ ..7
36 „ 40 „ .. 8
41 „ 45 „ ..9
46 „ 50 „ ..10
51 „ 60 „ ..11
61 „ 70 „ ..12
71 „ 80 „ ..13
81 „ 90 „ ..14
91 „ 100 „ ..15
And one vote for every 25 shares above 100,
That the qualification of a Director shall
be eleven shares, the directors to meet once
a-week, and one guinea to be paid to a
Director for each attendance; it shall be
lawful for the Directors to draw bills


Oh account of shipment of ore and dis-
count the same ; the names and residences of
Shareholders, and number of shares, shall be
entered in a book called the Register of Share-
holders ; certificates of shares shall be delivered
to each shareholder on their giving a receipt
for them, the shares to be transferred by a
deed of transfer, indorsed on the certificate of
share, or on a separate instrument ; upon the
transfer of a share the certificate of the former
proprietor to be given up to the Directors to be
cancelled; the certificate of share and regis-
tration book to be conclusive evidence of the
shareholder’s title ; if the certificate of share be
lost or destroyed, then, upon proof thereof,
satisfactory to the Directors, a similar cer-
tificate may be granted to the party entitled to
the certificate lost or destroyed. It shall be
lawful for the Directors, out of the profits, to
set apart any portion not being less than
one - twentieth, nor more than half of
such profit during any one year, and
therewith to form a fund to be called the Re-
serve Fund, such fund never at one time to
exceed £10,000; the Directors may take up
money on mortgage or other security.
It may be observed that the number of votes
given in respect of the number of shares held by
any one shareholder is considered objectionable,
inasmuch as a few leviathan shareholders may
easily swamp the small but more numerous
proprietors. Mr. Ayers, the secretary, is the
attorney of Mr. Graham the holder of 400
shares, and of other large proprietors, who are
absent in England. The choice of the Direc-
tors is almost entirely in the hands of a few
individuals. No power is given by the deed to
form a fresh distribution of the capital stock.
Were each of the shares split into three or
finir they would afford an easy mode of invest-
ment to persons having small sums to invest,
but on the other hand it may be doubted
whether a mining property is a very desirable
one for such investments.
PROGRESS OF THE BURRA COMPANY.
[1845 to 1846.]
The Burra Company commenced their ope-
rations in good earnest, and in one year, from
the 29th of September, 1845, to the 30th of
September, 1846, they raised 7200 tons of ore,
at a cost of £16,624, A very considerable im-
provement took place in the quality of the ore
as the depth of the workings increased; in-
stead of the blue carbonate, the red oxide,
malachite, and the richest descriptions of ore
became predominant. The account sales of
about 800 tons of ore, principally surface,
showed that the highest price realized £3l 9s.
per ton, and the lowest £lO 16s. per ton, and
the average about £l6 per ton gross, leaving
a clear profit to the Company of £3200. Fur-
ther account sales showed that two shipments
of 944 tons realized £l9 6s. per ton. The
prospects of the mine continued favorable, and
discoveries were frequently made tending to
increase its value. At Bunce’s shaft, a con-
siderable distance from the principal workings,
eighty tons of the blue and green carbonate of
copper was raised in the month of March,
1847.
[1847.]
During eighteen months ending the 31st
March, 1847, upwards of 9841 tons were
raised, at an expense of £32,943, and in the
months of June and July, 1847, the first and
second dividends of 50s, each per share were
paid to the shareholders. These dividends
were paid out of the net proceeds of 2959 tons
of ore, amounting to £35,678, out of which
also were paid the expenses of the association,
including the cost of producing the 2959 tons,
and amounting to £15,926, thereby leaving an
undivided balance or profit of £7584. The
- Directors encountered various difficulties in
the year 1847, and incurred great expense in
erecting smelting works ; finding that the ex-
pense of the smelting process was attended
with greater cost than the cartage and freight
of the ore, they abandoned further operations
of the kind. During the six months ending
30th of September, 1847, the workings of the
mine were successful, and 7264 tons were
raised within that period, the quantity so
raised being more than double that produced
in any corresponding period, and also superior
in quality.
[1848.]
During the six months ending the 31st of
March, 1848, 6068 tons were raised. The
large raisings of the whole year amounting
to 13,533 tons, were produced from within the
limits of the 20 fathom level. All the ore
discovered below that to the 30 fathoms was
left for future raising, there being plenty of
good ore ground above the 20 fathom level to
employ the miners for some time to come. The


wages and cost of working the mine, including
timber, fixed machinery, horses, tools, &c,,
now amounted to the large sum of £74,030,
and the cartage of the ore alone to £44,803.
Drafts were drawn against 5341 tons of ore,
shipped to England, and out of the proceeds
of the drafts, viz., £69,441, less £3OOO, for
discount and interest, and of sales of ore in
Adelaide, amounting to £83,106, not only were
the large expenses of working the mine and
carting the ore paid, but three further dividends
were declared. The third dividend of £5 a
share was paid on the 18th of August, 1847 ;
the fourth dividend of £lO a share was paid
on the Ist of December, 1847 ; the fifth divi-
dend of £lO a share was paid on the first of
March, 1848. At this time the prices of
shares in the market had advanced from £lOO
to £ 150, the Directors making a most glittering
report in March, 1848, and promising the pay-
ment of a £lO dividend on the first day of
every third month. On the first of June, 1848,
a sixth dividend of £lO was paid, and on the
Ist of September, 1848, a seventh dividend of
the like amount. At this time the prices of
shares ranged from £2OO to £2lO cash, and at
far more extravagant rates upon credit. Many
persons in the neighbouring colonies, dazzled by
high dividends, and the prospect of their con-
tinuance, sent orders to agents at Adelaide
to purchase at the current market prices.
A learned Judge in a colony not very distant
from Sydney is said to have eagerly commis-
sioned an agent at Adelaide to purchase two
Burras at any price, and he was in due course
favoured with intelligence that two had been
purchased for him at £225 cash each, which,
with commission, and premium on bank drafts,
involved an outlay of £460. Shortly after-
wards the fair weather broke up, the sky be-
came overcast, and ultimately a heavy storm
overwhelmed the Burra proprietary for a
time. On the 17th of October, 1848, the
Directors intimated that the depreciated state
of the copper market, caused by the recent dis-
turbances in Europe, would perhaps render a
reduction of the quarterly dividend expedient.
Ore of thirty-four per cent, sold at £6 per ton
less than ore of similar produce a month or
two previous, and afterwards the same ore sold
£9 per ton less than formerly. The workings
of the mine, however, continued favorable, and
an important discovery was made of a valuable
lode in the thirty-fathom level leading from
Kingston’s to Graham’s shaft. The lode was
cut four fathoms below the water level, was
solid, and from ten to eleven feet wide ; it was
composed of a compact green carbonate or ma-
lachite producing upwards of 40 per cent of cop-
per. The lode was described as clearly defined, in
easy working order, and dipping well into the
mine. The same lode was cut in the twenty-
fathom level, thereby affording ten fathoms of
the lode to work on when required. This dis-
covery added considerably to the confidence
beginning to be felt in the permanency of the
mine. The condition of the Company was
prosperous in other respects. In the half-year
ending the 30th of September, 1848, 10,163
tons were raised, making a sum total for the
ore raised during the first three years working
of the mine, of 33,386 tons, equal to upwards of
10,000 tons of fine copper ore, (at £7O per ton),
£700,000. The cost of the mine for the year
ending the 30th September, 1848, was £81,491,
and of the cartage of ore £31,445.
[1849.]
The latter end of the year 1848, and the com-
mencement of the year 1849, proved a severe
trial both for the mine and for those who had
speculated in shares. Not only did the copper
market continue to fall, but the miners struck
for wages ; the workings of the mine were sus-
pended, and this stoppage continued from
November till February, 1849. The share
market felt the effects of the panic, and shares
fell from £lBO down to £llO ; the prospects of
the mine and its shareholders were never so
discouraging. But in March, 1849, the miners
resumed work on the terms of the Company,
and in April, 1849, the Directors issued an en-
couraging report, intimating that should an
improvement take place in the copper
market, the payment of dividends would
be resumed. Further important discoveries
were made —one of a lode in the thirty fathom
level south-west from Graham’s shaft, con-
sisting of red oxide and malachite in great
abundance, and the other of a lode two
fathoms wide, in the same level east from
Kingston’s shaft, yelding malachite of high pro-
duce. Only two pitches were set on these
lodes, and the twelve men at work at them in
the first week of their workings produced 80
tons of the richest ores. About this time the
present pumping engine of 83 horse power
was safely carted to the mine, and expected to
be soon fixed at work. The copper market
exhibited an improvement, and the price of
Burra shares ranged from £l2O to £l3O. On
the sth of September, 1849, an eighth dividend
of £6 per share was declared. The copper


market haa now regained its former standard,
the mine looked better than ever, and the
prospect of a resumption of a £lO dividend
caused a gradual rise in the price of the shares.
[1850.]
In the year 1850, these £lO quarterly divi-
dends being regularly paid, the price of shares
rose gradually from £l3O to £2OO. During the
year 1850, two steam engines of thirty-five
horse power each, one for crushing the ore,
and the other for drawing from the shafts, ar-
rived at Adelaide, and the Directors in antici-
pation of the water increasing as the mine be-
came deeper, not only ordered seventy fathoms
of fifteen inch pumps to replace the eleven
inch lifts, then in work, but also sent for a
pumping engine of 300 horse power..
The quantity of ore raised in the year
ending September 1850, was 18,692 tons, and
the total raisings for five years amounted to
54,428 tons.
SUM TOTAL OF WORKINGS AND
PROFITS.
The workings of the mines at the close
of the year 1850 consisted of the fol-
lowing shafts, winzes, and levels, viz., 45
whim shafts, of an aggregate depth of 812
fathoms ; seven trial shafts, of an aggregate
depth of 34 fathoms ;35 winzes and ladder
roads, of an aggregate depth of 270 fathoms ;
3876 fathoms of levels, equal in length to four
and one-third British miles. The whole of the
transactions of the Company, from its forma-
tion to the 29th September, 1849, embracing
four years and-a-half, were, in the year 1850,
finally balanced, and the profits during that
period were found to amount to £229,535, of
which £221,760 were divided among the share-
holders in twelve dividends, the twelfth divi-
dend of £lO having been paid on the Ist Sep-
tember, 1850. The ore raised during this
period was 37,736 tons, at a cost of £309,825
3s. 6d., or £8 4s. 3d. per ton, and produced in
the province, free of freight and charges,
£536,486 13s. 4cL, or £l4 4s. 4d. per ton,
leaving a profit of £226,661 6s, 10d., or £6 os. Id.
per ton. During the year 1850, the Com-
pany, however, incurred the following ex-
penses.
£ s. d.
Wages 72,715 9 10
Stores, candles, timber.... 20,006 19 9
£ s. d.
Horses and fodder 3,074 18 7
Machinery 5,096 7 6
Buildings at the Burra.... 13,043 13 4
Cartage of Copper 2,394 16 6
Cartage of ore 14,344 1 0
Purchases of land ........ 15,458 5 3
Making, with other expenses, a sum total of
£169,611 2s. sd. After deducting these ex-
penses from the estimated value of ore on
hand, the Directors notified that £52,000 was
applicable to dividends, and a £lO dividend
was accordingly paid December, 1850, and
in March, 1851.
COMPETITION FOR MORE MINERAL
SECTIONS.—LAND SALES.
The purchases of land made by the Burra
Company in 1850 were not altogether approved
of by the shareholders or the public. The
principal purchases were 798 acres of a place
called Emu Flats, for £1419, and of the Kar-
kalto mine for £15,315 14s. Id, The Emu
Flats has for many years been reported to con-
tain rich mines. Governor Robe refused to
allow a special survey to be taken, and when
this prohibition was withdrawn and the land
put up for sale, everybody expected an im-
mense competition. It was said that the
Burra Company and the Royal Mining Com-
pany were determined each to become the for-
tunate purchaser. Before the sale in July,
1850, the contending parties, however, agreed
not to oppose each other, but to allow all the
land to be bought by one party, and then to
draw lots for first and second choice. The
Burra Company had the first choice, but it is
generally understood that the whole of the
land bought is utterly worthless—a complete
take-in. The Emu Springs, or Karkalto mine,
is situate twenty-four miles south-west of the
Burra, and about thirty miles east of Port
Wakefield. A lode cropped out at the surface
showing oxide of iron, and the Patent Smelting
Company were in the habit of sending their
drays to load with this iron ore, which was
used as a flux for the rich Burra ores. After
some excavations had taken place, strings of
copper ore were discovered, and as the exca-
vations deepened the per-centage increased.
The competitors for this treasure were the
Burra Company and the Royal Mining Com-
pany, and a new association of twenty-eight


capitalists, who subscribed from £SOO to £IOOO
each to a fund for purchasing the sections. An
accommodation was in vain attempted to be
arrived at. The Burra Company were deter-
mined to have the place, coute qui coute, and the
Royal Mining Company were determined to
make them pay for their whistle. The sale
was held in July, 1850, in the New Court House.
The Colonial Treasurer and his staff of officers
sat at a table in the body of the Court; the
Judges’ seat was occupied by the Burra Di-
rectors ; the reporters’ bench was taken pos-
session of by the Royal Mining Company, and
the remainder of the space was crowded by a
promiscuous assemblage. No one knew who
were the parties forming the new association,
or who was to bid on their account. The first
section was put up at £77. A few seconds of
intense silence followed, which was at length
broken by an advance of one shilling on the
bid. From this it rapidly went up to £SO,
£IOO, and £SOO at a time, and eventually it
was knocked down to the Burra Company for
£3OOO Is. The next section of eighty-three
acres was run up to £2OOO Is., and bought by
the Burra. Next came the two really valuable
sections. No. 2181, eighty-acre section, began
with the everlasting one shilling advance on the
upset price. The new association now ap-
peared, the previous biddings having been
confined to the Royal Mining Company and
the Burra Company. It soon became evident
that it was going to be serious work ; the bid-
ding becoming spirited, and the excitement of
the lookers on intense. The Secretary of the
Burra Company confined himself to the simple
bid of one shilling in advance of every £lO6
bid by the spokesman of the other party.
£IO,OOO bid by the latter was at length called
out by the Treasury Clerk, who acted as sales-
man. Every eye was now turned to the re-
doubtable Burra nabobs, who looked down
with unmoved features on the crowd below,
“ And one shilling ” quietly said Mr. Ayers !
Several heads were now seen bending together
in deep consultation round the spokesman of
the new association, and just as the hammer
was about to drop £SOO more was bid by the
latter. The magical “ and one shilling” again
broke the intense silence, and the other party
giving in, the section was knocked down to
the Burra Company for £10,500 Is. amidst
tremendous excitement. The next section,
with the great lode running into it from the
preceding sections, after a similar scene, was
knocked down to the Burra Company for
£6200 Is., and two more sections for £1750.
The Burra Company bought 480 acres for
£23,450 4s, A deposit of twenty per cent, was
paid the same afternoon, and, as the remainder
had to be paid within a month, an express was
sent down to try the properties, so as to judge
whether it would be expedient to forfeit any
of the purchased sections, some of which ac-
cordingly were forfeited. The public complain
of the Burra Company monopolizing every
good mine, and the Burra Company defend
themselves by alleging the detriment which
would be occasioned to them by the establish-
ment of a large mine belonging to a rival com-
pany too near their property. The improve-
ments and preliminary expenses at Karkalto
have already cost £IOOO, and one or two shafts
have been sunk. Two lodes composed of iron
and copper have been worked, but the ground
is hard, and nothing certain can yet be said
upon the subject.
PRESENT PROSPECTS OF THE
MINE.
The various opinions which are hazarded by
the Adelaide people as to the nature and pros-
pects of the Burra Burra mine are extremely
amusing to a stranger, and the more so when
he ascertains, as the fact is, that those who are
most positive in their opinions have not only
no practical knowledge, but have not even
paid a visit to, the locality. The usual pre-
diction of the croakers is that there is only a
mere boil of copper ore to be worked out,
while those who are more practically acquainted
with the mine point out that two well defined
lodes have been traced from the surface
of the ground to the forty-fathom level. This
last fact is admitted by others, who still express
doubts as to the permanency of the mine, on
account of there being no regular stratification,
as in most mines. That the mine will be
worked with great success, at a considerable
depth below the forty-fathom level, is ad-
mitted by many high authorities; but
they, at the same time, throw out hints
that the copper ore will at last be found
condensed or collected in a sort of jam be-
tween the three hills where the mine is at pre-
sent worked. Then, with respect to the general
management of the Company, many are dis-
satisfied with the large expenditure carried on
at the mine, and the non-appointment of a
General Superintendent or Resident Director,


as well as with the large influence exercised
over the affairs of the Company by Mr. Ayers,
the secretary. With respect to the expendi-
ture, it is admitted that everything at the mine
is in apple-pie order; but then it is contended
that the expenditure would be much less,
together with a similar result, were a practical
intelligent man continually supervising the
works. Captain Roach’s merits as a miner
are universally acknowledged, but the busi-
ness carried on is far too complicated and ex-
tensive even for h m to conduct with the utmost
possible efficiency and economy. With respect
to the general management of the Company,
the same complaint of extravagant ex-
penditure is made. Mr. Ayers, the Se-
cretary, who has a salary of £6OO a-year,
is the architect of his own fortune, has been
connected with the mine from the outset, and
is generally admitted to be an upright ‘ long-
headed’ man. Although educated as a lawyer,
and for many years assistant to Mr. J. H.
Fisher, the leading attorney and advocate of
Adelaide, he is, nevertheless, allowed to have
made himself thoroughly conversant with the
whole of the complicated details of working a
mine, and to be admirably fitted for the
duties cast upon him. Still it is said he has
too powerful a voice amongst the Directors,
who are composed of men educated as che-
mists, tanners, mariners, tea dealers, and sur-
veyors, and that many mistakes have been
the consequence. Especially, complaints are
made of the large expenditure resolved on by
the Directors in the purchase of mineral
sections of land, and of the mistake committed
by them in not having long since sent for a
powerful working engine. These observations,
however, are merely the current gossip of the
day, and certainly the stranger can only ad-
mire the excellent method, promptitude, and
foresight which appear to characterize the
operations both of the Directors and their Se-
cretary. All the Directors have large stakes in
the Company, and Mr. Ayers himself has
upwards of thirty shares. It is not surprising
then that these gentlemen devote their utmost
energies to the interests of the Company. The
more serious circumstances affecting the pro-
spects of the mine have yet to be adverted to.
It has long been a matter of difficulty to keep
the water down, so as to allow the miners to
work at the forty-fathom level, and then the
greatest caution was imperative, it being quite
unsafe to touch many parts of the ground ith
the pick. Although intelligence has been re-
ceived of the shipment of the great pumping
engine by the Joseph Weir, in December
1850, yet it is supposed that the engine cannot
be got up to the mine this winter, and that
more than twelve months must elapse before
the engine can be put up and set to work. The
consequences apprehended by even inexpe-
rienced persons who visited the mine in
February last, developed themselves unmis-
takebly in April. The water gained upon the
mine notwithstanding that the fifteen-inch
pumps took the place of the eleven-inch lifts ;
and the miners at last were ousted altogether
from the forty-fa thorn levels. The stop put to
the operations of the Patent Smelting Com-
pany rendered it probable that they would for
some time at least be disabled from carrying
out their contract with the Burra Company,
and the same causes which prevent the Smelt-
ing Company from obtaining supplies of fuel,
namely, the drought, and want of draught
bullocks, and the proximity of the winter
season, likely to be a very wet and a very
severe one, render it equally impracticable for
the Burra Company to despatch their copper
ore to the port. But although these circum-
stances, and the enormous expenditure required
at the mine, may place difficulties, and very great
ones, in the way of the Burra Company, it is
on the other hand to be remembered that they
have at grass upwards of £IOO,OOO worth of
ore, and that the only prejudice occasioned to
the shareholders will be the postponement of
„their dividends. By many the prospects of the
mine are considered to be better than ever,
the permanency of the mine being ascertained,
and any increase of expense in working at
lower levels being compensated by the superior
richness of the ore. The Directors, it is un-
derstood, are now devising plans for cheapen-
ing and facilitating the surface operations, such
as by introducing tramways to and from the
whim shafts and other parts of the ground,
thereby saving a good deal of horse power.
LATEST INTELLIGENCE FROM
ADELAIDE.
Since the foregoing was written, the Direc-
tors’ report presented to the shareholders,
towards the close of the month of April, 1-51,
has been received in Sydney, Making allow-
ances for the natural desire of the directors to
encourage the proprietary, it will be observed


that the opinions and anticipations of the fore-
going account, are home out by the report.
The following are the most material parts of
the report: —
“It is the pleasing duty of the Directors to
inform the Shareholders that the operations of
the Company for the past six months have
been attended with unparalleled success.
During that period, the produce of the mine
amounted to nearly thirteen thousand tons of
ore, which have been estimated to average at
least 21 per cent., being equal to two thousand
seven hundred and twenty-three tons of fine
copper ; and a still larger quantity of ore
would have been raised had not the occasional
influx of water in the forty-fathom levels pre-
vented the continuous working of the pitches.
“Part 111. of the Balance Sheet contains a
statement of the Company’s liabilities and
assets on the 31st March, 1851. Care has been
taken in compiling this statement that the
amounts estimated should not exceed the sums
which the ore and copper may reasonably be
expected to realize. The balance of profit
shown amounts to the large sum of
£128,605 16s. 7d.; and without interfering
with the Company’s land, buildings, and stock,
it ■will, on realization, leave a balance of divi-
sible profits of £61,000.
“ No better evidence of the prosperity of the
Company can be given than that, after paying
the sum of £98,560, in four dividends of £2OO
per cent, each —upwards of £17,000 in the
purchase of mineral and other landed proper-
ties —about £13,000 in buildings—£s,ooo in
machinery, and making a considerable addition
to the Company’s stores —the divisible profit
on the 31st ultimo is within £3,000 of that
shown on the 30th March, 1850. The Share-
holders will observe that the bulk of the Company’s
assets consist of ore and copper in stock, which
cannot so easily be converted into money during
the winter months as at other periods ; and at the
same time a large capital is absolutely necessary
for the successfid prosecution of the Company’s
operations. Under these circumstances, the
Directors feel that they cannot now fix the rate of
dividends for the next half year ; but at the usual
times for paying dividends they will consider it
their duty to declare as large an amount as the
Company’s position may safely warrant them in
doing.
‘The progress of the mine as regards the
work of exploration has been considerably
retarded by the difficulty of keeping the water
under; but by the use of larger lifts, which are
now being fixed to the pumping engine, the
occasional assistance of the crushing engine
and other appliances, the Directors trust that
this most important work will no longer
be impeded, and that by these means the water
will he kept ‘in fork’ until the eighty-inch
cylinder pumping engine and pitwork, now
hourly expected from England, can he erected.”
After the publication of this report the price
of shares rose to £l7O per share. On the 19th
of May, 1851, this still remained the market
price.
The South Australian Register has an article
upon the above report, from which the follow-
ing are interesting extracts :
“ How far the vitality of our limited com-
munity is dependant on the success of the
mine, may be inferred from the statement that
no less a sum than £170,780 17s. has been dis-
bursed during the year ending 31st March last;
so that, including dividends, more than a
quarter of a million has, by the instrumentality
of this Association, been thrown into circula-
tion among a population numbering 70,000 souls.
“ The report and accounts presented by the
Directors (on the 18th of April, 1851), if ac-
cepted by the Shareholders as satisfactory,
may well be received as such by the public.
Considerable excitement had been manifested
previous to the meeting, and men’s minds
were not unclouded by apprehension. It was
feared that the influx of water into the forty-
fathom level; the disastrous effects of the
season, which absolutely prevents the cartage
of ore, for it will be seen that there are only
seventy tons on the road; and the partial stop-
page of the Patent Copper Company’ Works,
where, owing to the present drought and the
consequent impossibility of procuring fuel,
only six furnaces out of nineteen are at work
—it was feared that the position of the Asso-
ciation was such that they could not continue
to pay their usual dividends. Whatever course
the Association may in future see good reason
to adopt, the public will balance against the
unfavourable circumstances we have enume-
rated the declaration of the Captain of the mine,
who declares ‘ that the prospects were never
more cheering than they now are,’ and the
fact that the balance of divisible profits is only
£3,000 less than that shown on the 30th
March, 1850.
“The colony has reason to be congratulated
on these statements. Whatever may be the imme-
diate or possible effect to shareholders, it is evi-
dent that the colony can fear no retrogression.


“ There have not been wanting many who
detected in the signs of the times the premoni-
tory symptoms of a financial crisis. The effects
of a glutted import market, and the stagnation
resulting from the season, had given things a
downward tendency, and it wanted but little
to give impulse to the movement. The accounts
which have now been submitted by the Burra
will dispel a portion of these fears.*’
THE SHAKE MARKET, AND THE
EXCHANGE.
The sale and purchase of Burra Burra shares,
and of the scrip of other mining companies, is
fomented by the opportunity which the Ex-
change Rooms of the city of Adelaide afford
for the concourse of speculators, merchants,
and other men of business. The building,
situated in the centre of Adelaide, and close by
the principal offices and banks, is about the
size of the great wool shed, on the Circular
Quay, Sydney. The Exchange is amply and
regularly supplied with newspapers of England
and the neighbouring colonies. The building
was erected by Mr. John Bentham Neales, for-
merly an eminent auctioneer, and now reputed to
be a man of considerable wealth. A subscrip-
tion of two guineas a year is paid by a large
number of persons who make the Exchange
their daily rendezvous. The rent of the
building, and the services of Mr. Parrott, the
Secretary, are thus provided for. Letters
addressed to the subscribers, at the Exchange
Rooms, are sure to reach them, and messages
are delivered with the same punctuality, by
Mr. Parrott, whose politeness and attention
are worthy of record. A stranger, when intro-
duced by a member, has the privilege, during
the period of his stay at Adelaide, of all the
facilities afforded by the Exchange. From 12
to 3, the place presents a very animated
appearance. Captain B —t, and other mem-
bers of council, may be seen in one spot,
discussing the forthcoming elections, and the
merits of the candidates. Mr. S y, the
great money lender, who arrived not long ago,
with a capital of £20,000, may be observed in
another corner, reluctantly consenting to dis-
count a bill at 40 per cent., through the
broker, Mr, J. F. Ross, formerly of Sydney.
A knot of merchants are canvassing the price
of flour, the probable consequences of the
Caffre war, and the general deficiency of the
crops in Adelaide and the neighbouring
colonies. At the tables are several slow coaches,
spelling over the daily newspapers, while
others are writing business letters and invita-
tions to dinner. One remarkable habit of the
frequenters of the Exchange generally strikes
a stranger. The room is redolent of to-
bacco smoke, and the majority of the sub-
scribers converse, and read, and write,
with a cigar in the mouth. The rumours
about the Burra and its prospects generally
originate here, and are thence carried
over the colony. An unwholesome spirit of
gambling and speculation is generally be-
lieved to pervade the Adelaide people, and
perhaps this is in some measure the case. The
public, however, have been so frequently
gulled by the mining bubbles, which are now
all “blown,” that there is no longer an
opening for imposing any more delusive
schemes upon the sanguine and credulous.
Of the thirty mining companies quoted
in the brokers' list, the scrip is alto-
gether unsaleable, and no business has been
done in such mines for some time past. The
only business done of late has been in the
Burra Burra scrip. The transfer of the Burra
scrip is usually effected by the registered
holder executing a blank transfer, which is in-
dorsed upon the certificate of share. The
scrip passes from hand to hand like a bank
note, and the blank for the name of the pur-
chaser or assignee is not filled up till the
'holder desires to get the certificate cancelled
and his owm name registered as the shareholder-
During the tightness of the money market
the purchase of Burras on credit, and
the re-sale of them for cash was a favorite
mode of borrowing money. Of course this has
been interrupted by the recent fall in the value
of the shares. Before this fall Burras were
held out as the consols of Adelaide. Some
people with a few hundreds lying idle acted
upon this opinion, thinking to get the dividend
which would give good interest for their
money, and sell out in time to be in funds
when desirous of a permanent investment.
The late fall proved disastrous to two or three
individuals thus circumstanced. The system
of selling on credit and delivering the scrip to
the purchaser is not likely to be acted upon
for the future, except in cases where the pur-
chaser is a man of undoubted credit. Not
long since a tradesman named Lavence
‘bolted,” after having purchased some Burras >
on credit and resold them for cash, with which


he decamped. No sympathy was expressed
for the victims, as they ought to have known
their “ mark” better, one being a Director of
a Bank, Mr. B r, and the other a cautious
money-lender, Mr. M n. By many persons
the Burra Scrip is considered to afford a large
field for speculation. But this is a mistake.
Out of the 2464 shares only 400 may be said to
float in the market, the residue being held by
very large proprietors, Mr. Graham, now of
London (holding four hundred), the Messrs.
Waterhouse, Captain Allen, the Messrs. Beck,
Mr. Penny, Mr. T. Sheppard, and a
few others. Although the price of the Burra
Burra shares has, from time to time, greatly
advanced, yet the fluctuations have not been
so frequent and so sudden as is generally sup-
posed, It is not surprising that, as the
astonishing richness of the Burra mine became
developed, the price of shares should have
gradually risen, as they did, from £5 to £35,
from £35 to £7O, and from £70 —after the pay-
ment of the £lO quarterly dividend, with the
Directors’ assurance of its continuance —to
£225. There was one occasion when the
shares suddenly fell from £l6O to £l2O, but
this is now well understood to have been
caused by a fraudulent conspiracy of some
individuals to get possession of a number of
shares at a very low figure, at the expense of
a rash and over sanguine speculator, Mr, B.
This individual being seized with a mania to
become a leviathan proprietor of Burra shares,
and not content with the possession of 125, but
coveting the ownership of 300, bought them
greedily, upon credit, at extravagant rates.
About the time that the bills became due, a
number were thrown into the market, by the
conspirators, so as to depress the market price.
This occasioned a considerable fall, which was
still further reduced by the necessity enforced
upon the ambitious Burra proprietor, of re-
alizing in order to take up his paper. A fall
to £ 125 per share, was the result of this move-
ment, and for a time a panic seized the market,
during which the designing few picked up
Burras at their own price. Another fall, at a
subsequent period, was occasioned by a strike
of the miners, and news of a depreciation in
the copper market at home, simultaneous with
the suspension of the £lO quarterly dividend,
The Burras fell to £llO, but afterwards
rallied, and remained firm at £l3O,
especially after the renewal of five pound divi-
dends, paid in September and December, 1849.
The rumour of a resumption of the £lO divi-
dend, which was declared in March, 1850,
created a rise, and the regular payment of the
£lO quarterly dividend being assured by the
Directors’ report, which assurance was re-
deemed in June, October, and December, 1850,
and March, 1851, caused a steady rise, from
£l3O to £2OO, cash, and £215 at three months.
The non-arrival of the large pumping engine,
the unprecedented drought, causing a mortality
among the draught bullocks, and a rise in the
price of hay, from £3 10s. to £lO a ton at the
Burra, —a difficulty in keeping down the water
at the forty-fathom level, and the gloomy
prospects of the Patent Smelting Company, in
the early part of 1851, led some cautious
persons who foresaw a considerable fall in the
price of shares to sell out. About fifty shares
changed hands after the declaration of the £lO
dividend, in March, 1851, at prices averaging
from £195 to £l9B, cash, and from
£205 to £206, at three months. At the
beginning of April, 1851, the smelting
works all but stopped, the rumours of the
water “jumping up” became authenticated; no
hopes were entertained of the pumping engine
arriving in time to render its conveyance to
the Burra practicable, and a panic seizing the
small holders, shares were thrown into the
market at £l7O cash. The panic was not
without reason, for although the take of ore in
the past three months of the year was richer
and more abundant than at any former period,
yet the ore at grass could not be turned into
dividends owing to the temporary stoppage of
the smelting works, and the impracticability
of sending the ore home, first, for want of
carriage to the port, and secondly, for want of
shipping in the harbour. Many are of opinion
that the Directors of the Burra Company
should never have declared so large a dividend
as £lO a quarter. All these dividends were
paid out of drafts against the ore and refined
copper shipped by the Burra Company, and
discounted by the Bank of Australasia at eight
per cent. The Directors defended this system
of declaring dividends by alleging that their
proprietors, in a place where money brought
an interest of twenty per cent., were benefitted
by obtaining their dividend money at a sacri-
fice of eight per cent. But their more cautious
critics contended that it was far better for the
Directors to provide a reserve fund, and to
declare the dividends out of net profits actually
received. It is generally understood that the
Directors will suspend the payment of a divi-
dend for one or two quarters, and even then


will declare a £5 dividend only, for the purpose
of obtaining a reserve fund, and paying divi-
dends without borrowing money. This view
is in accordance with the wholesome principles
of banking which have been acted upon for
some time in Adelaide, and to the introduction
of which Mr. Alexander Macdonald, the ac-
complished manager of the Union Bank, is
considered to have mainly contributed. An emi-
nently successful manager of the Union Bank
in New Zealand during the feverish excite-
ments and exhausted depressions of that settle-
ment, Mr. Macdonald, looked with a suspicious
eye upon the large amount of discounts and
hazardous mining speculations which charac-
terized South Australia on his arrival there at
the commencement of the year 1850. He is
said to have designated the scrip of the various
mining companies, even in the height of their
popularity, as so much rubbish, and resolutely
to have set his face against discounting any
paper which represented a mining bargain, or
any transaction not legitimately connected
with commerce. The amount of discounts at
the three banks —the Union Bank, the Bank of
Australasia, and the Bank of South Australia
is still very large, but yet no apprehensions of
“ a crash” are, nor need be entertained. There
is one admirable rule of the Supreme Court,
which will always prevent such a catastrophe as
shook New South Wales in 1843. No man sued
upon a bill or promissory note can put in a de-
fence either by one or many pleas unless he swear
to the truth of the defence , and unless the Judge
can see that the facts sworn to amount to a de-
fence in point of law. Failing this defence ,
execution goes in eight days from the issue of the
writ. It is feared that during the temporary
difficulties which beset the Burra Company
and the Patent Smelting Company, the shares
of the Burra will greatly fluctuate in price,
and it is to be hoped that the result will be
their settling down to a fair price in accordance
with the principle which regulates the price of
mining shares at home. Even in England,
where money is worth £3 per cent, only, in-
stead of £lO per cent, as in the colony, £2OO
would be considered too high a price for a
share which only sometimes produced a divi-
dend of £4O, or in other words an uncertain
return of £2O per cent. only. In England,
£3O per cent, is the return allowed for mining
shares, and the Great Devon Consols shares,
which pay £35 per share, and sometimes much
more, with great punctuality, have a market
price of £230 only ! ! !
THE ENGLISH BURRA.
In conclusion, we propose to give a brief
sketch of the English Burra, or Devonshire
Great Consolidated Copper Mining Company.
The mine is situate about five miles from Ta-
vistock, The land is the property of the Duke
of Bedford, A well-known miner, Mr, Josiah
Hitchins, in January, 1844, examined the
ground and reported his conviction that it
abounded to a dead certainty in copper ore.
Six gentlemen subscribed a thousand and
twenty-four pounds, and leased the land of the
Duke for twenty-one years, at one-fifteenth
dues, provided that as soon as a profit of
£20,000 was made the dues should be raised
to one-twelfth, an event which occurred sooner
than expected. Operations were commenced
in August, 1844, and in a few weeks Mr.
Hitchins assured the adventurers that it was
a magnificent mining property. The Company
was constituted in January, 1845, under the
Joint Stock Companies Act, with the title of
the Devonshire Great Consolidated Copper
Mining Company, the capital stock being
divided into 1024 shares. The £1 a share
was paid, and no more was ever called for or
required. The operations of the mine were
most successful. At the end of five years’
working, in December, 1849, it appears that
74,117 tons were procured, of the value of
£516,217, the average price per ton being
£6 19s. 3d. In five years £178,688 was
divided among the shareholders, and £40,000
paid to the Duke of Bedford, The expenses
of the mine for the year ending 31st January,
1846, were only £42,445, the receipts £116,068,
and the profits £73,622, out of which divi-
dends, amounting to £7l per share, were paid
from time to time in 1845. All the ore was
raised without any machinery, with a water-
wheel only. The necessity of a large expendi-
ture for machinery was lost sight of by specu-
lators, and the market value of the £ 1 share
rose to £BOO at one time. In the year ending
December, 1846, the Company disposed of
14,398 tons of ore for £93,610, but the ex-
penses were heavy, and dividends to the amount
of £25,600 or £25 per share only were paid.
In the year 1847 the Company disposed of
14,413 tons for £101,916, the average produce
of the ore being 10|, and the average price
per ton £6 14s. Still the heavy expenses of
machinery, and the difficulty of obtaining
discounts during the panic, induced the
Directors to withhold the payment of divi-


chine, tramroads, pumps
£4460
Wheal Fannv shaft, ditto
3290
Wheal Anna Maria shaft
3826
2nd-
—July 8th,
ft •
50
6,160
3rd-
-Aug. 18 th,
ft
100
12,320
4 th-
-Dec. 1st
ft
200
24,640
5th-
-March 1st,
1848 .
200
24,640
6th-
-June 1st,
tt
200
24,640
7th-
-Sept. 1st,
tt •
200
24,640
8 th-
-Sept. 5th,
1849
100
12,320
9th-
-Dec. 1st,
tt
100
12,320
10 th-
-March 6th,
1850 ..
200
24,640
11th-
-June 1st
tt
200
24,640
dends, and dividends to the amount of
£15,360, or £ls per share only, were paid.
In the year ending December, 1848, the Com-
pany paid dividends amounting to £30,720,
or £3O per share. In the year ending 31st
December, 1849, the Company disposed of
15,431 tons of copper, at £98,026, and dividends
to the amount of £34,304, or £33 10s. per share,
were paid. By the Report of the Company,
dated May, 1850, it appeared that the quantity
of ore in sight was 62,230 tons, which at an
average of £6 6s, per ton, would produce the
sum of £392,049. It must he borne in mind
that the Burra ore, being three times as rich as
the Devonshire ore, the Devonshire Company
is liable to expenses of raising and dressing
nearly three tons for every one the Burra Com-
pany prepares, in order to obtain the same value.
Then the Burra paid only £IO,OOO for their
freehold,—‘little more than the first year’s
dues paid by the Devonshire Company. On
the other hand, the Burra Company bear the
expenses of cartage to the port, and freight to
Swansea, and have to pay much higher wages.
The expenses of the Devonshire Company are
however great. The working of their mine,
from February to December, 1849, inclusive,
cost £45,397 (the working of the Burra amounted
to £70,000 and upwards); waterwheel, £SBOO ;
timber,£7B9; iron, £493; the commission of Mr.
Hitchins, the agent, remunerated by 2| per
cent, on the dividends paid, £857 ; salary of
Managing Director at Tavistock, £6OO ; poor’s
rates and taxes, £IOB4. Of the quantity and
expense of machinery used at the Devon mine,
an idea may be formed by running over the
following items, not included in the expense of
working the mine, inasmuch as the machinery
has been paid for, and is now classed as assets
of the Company:
Wheal Maria shaft: steam engine and
crusher, water wheel, hauling ma-
£235.
KEMP AND FAIRFAX, PRINTERS, LOWER GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
Wheal Josiah shaft, ditto £7798
"Wheal Emma shaft, ditto ditto 1956
Wheal Thomas 240
Wheal Trementon 773
Dividends paid by the Devon Mine. —Com-
menced 1845.
Per Share. Total.
Ist year, ending Dec., 1845 £7l £72,704
2nd year 1846 25 25,600
3rd year 1847 15 15,360
4th year 1848 30 30,720
sth year 1849 33 10s. 34,304
6th year (Probable) ..1850 33 10s. 34,304
Total £212,992
The price of the £1 share is from £230 to
Dividends paid by the Buera.—Commenced
Dividend. Paid. Pr. cent on Amount.
capital stock.
Ist —June 24th, 1847 .. £5O £6,160
Total £249,400
12th —Sept. 4th „ .. 200 24,640
13th—Dec. Ist „ .. 200 24,640
The price of the £5 share is now about £l7O.
Towards the end of May, 1851, the Burra
Directors declared a dividend of £5 per share,
but the market price continued at £l7O.




